
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 




ISNOT MY WORD LIKE FlREL? 
*SAITH THE LORD" 



^>^*J\ND LIKE A HAMMER THAT BREAK ETHV^-r^ 

V\A **THE ROCKIN PIECEST k/:> 

\! JER:XXI1L29. y 




ISiUsam 9«nt, ^Urtm |pres8, S^abcrn Street. 

STonbon : 

®ltrtferim, Pannlost, an& Sunt, 24, ^attrnouttr Jloby, 

23, Hoiks ^txttt, Cabenbb^ ^qtinrr. 



y4/. zh^. SIS' 



BRING yiSCKLLOEOUS ADDHESSECS AND TUACTS, 
B¥ run 

SSY, J. C. RYLE, B. A., 



AEIRANGED. REMSED, AND CQtlltECTED SrEClALLY 
ron THIS EDITION. 



SEVENTH BEBIES> 

hiPwi/to the battUf" {1 Cor. Jtiv. 8,) 



iriwicu: 

WILLIAM HU*VT. TlTEHf ftT»«tT. * 

WESTHEIH, lUCINTOSn. ITTD NUKT, 



CONTLsN IS. 



WHKRK AH?: YOl'R SINS? 
II. 



; IIKPKNT, OR PKUISH 



Iff:' 



I DO YOU CONFFSS? ■ ..^.Z n-> 

I HE >yHOM THOU LOVESJ IS SJCK ..' Ill 

i *■ V. 

i sCATTKR?]n. AND tiATHERKl) I'.VJ 

1 

;. VI. 

AHLE TO SAVE l.is 



VII. 



i 

j NO MORE CRYING VX, 

I Vlll. 

I THE TRUE CHURCH H)' 

I 

IX. 

NOT CORRUPTING THE WORD -i-.lO 

X. 

(JIVE THYSELF WHOLLY TO THEM 240 

XI. 
I WHAT IS OUR POSITION? 24^ 



W^txt %xt -^^nnr ^infif. 



^^Make me to know my transgression and my st'n,^' — Job 
XIII. 22. 

'* Cleanse me from my sin^ — ^Psalm li. 2. 

^^The blood of Jesus Christ His Son, cleanseth us from 
all sin.** — 1 John i. 7. 

" Christ Jesus, whom Ood hath set forth to he a propitia- 
tion, through faith in His hlood** — Rom. m. 25. 

Readeb, 

The question which heads the following 
pages ought to stir up many thoughts in your heart. 
It concerns every man and woman bom into the world. 
You ought never to rest till you can give it a satisfactory 
answer.— ''WHERE ARE YOUR SINS?" 

I ask you this day to look this question in the face. 
I ask you to give me your attention for a few minutes, 
while I try to enforce it on your conscience. A time 
draws nigh when the question must be answered. The 
hour cometh when all other questions shall seem like a 

* An Annual Address for the year 1858. 
B 



10 WHERE ABE TOUK SINS. 

drop of water in comparison with this. We shall not 
say, "Where is my money?" — or, "Where are my 
lands?"— or, "Where is my property?" Our only 
thought will be, " My sins ! my sins ! — Where are my 
sins?" 

Header, I am going to offer you a few remarks, 
which may help to throw light on the mighty question 
which is before your eyes. My heart's desire and 
prayer to God is, that this subject may be greatly 
useful to your soul. I entreat you to give it a fair 
reading. Do not put it on the fire. Do not tear it in 
pieces. Read it ! Read it ! Read it to the end ! Who 
can tell but the Holy Ghost may employ it for the 
saving of your soul ? 

I. My first remark is this. You have many sins. 

I say this boldly, and without the least hesitation. 
I know not who you are, or how the time past of your 
life has been spent. But I know from the word of God 
that every son and daughter of Adam is a great sinner 
in the sight of God. There is no exception. It is the 
common disease of the whole family of Adam, in every 
quarter of the globe. From the king on his throne,, to 
the beggar by the roadside, — from the landlord in his 
hall, to the labourer in his cottage, — from the fine lady 
in her drawing-room, to the humblest maid-servant in 
the kitchen, — from the clergyman in the pulpit, to the 
little child in the Sunday-school, — we are all by nature 
guilty, guilty, guilty in the sight of God. "In many 
things we offend all." — " There is none righteous, no 
not one." — "All have sinned." " If we say that we 



WUEUE ARE TOUR SINS. 11 

have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not 
in us." (James iii. 2; Rom. iii. 10; v. 12; 1 John i. 
8.) It is useless to deny it. We have all sinned many 
sins! 

Reader, do you doubt the truth of these words ? Then 
go and examine the law of God, as expounded by the 
Son of God Himself. Read with attention the fifth 
chapter of St Matthew's Gbspel. See how the com- 
mandments of God apply to our words as well as to our 
actions, and to our thoughts and motives, as well as to 
our words. Know that *' the Lord seeth not as man 
seeth : man looketh at the outward appearance, but the 
Lord looketh at the heart." In His sight the very 
" thought of foolishness is sin." (1 Sam. xvi. 7 ; Prov. 
xxiv. 9.) 

And now turn to the history of your own life, and 
try it by the standard of this holy law. Think of the 
days of your childhood, and all your waywardness, and 
selfishness, and evil tempers, and perversity, and back- 
wardness to that which is good. — Remember the days 
of your youth, — your self-will, your pride, your worldly 
inclinations, your impatience of control, your longing 
after forbidden things. — Call to mind your conduct since 
you came to man's estate, and the many departures 
from the right way, of which you have been guilty 
every year. — Surely in the face of your life's history, 
you will not stand up and say, ** I have not sinned ! " 

And then turn to the history of your oum heart. 
Consider how many evil things have gone through it, 
of which the world knows nothing at all. — Remember 
the thousands of sinful imaginations, and corrupt ideas. 



12 WHKEE ABE YODK SINS. 

which yolir heart has entertained, even while your 
outward conduct has been correct, moral, and respectable. 
— Think of the vile thoughts, and deceitful intentions, 
and false motives, and malicious, envious, spiteful 
feelings, which have walked up and down in your 
inward man, while those nearest to you never dreamed 
or guessed what was going on. — Surely in the face of 
your heart's history, you will not stand up and say, " I 
have not sinned ! " 

Reader, once more T ask you, Do you doubt what I 
am saying? Do you doubt whether you have sinned 
many sins? — Then go and examine the twenty-fifth 
chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel. Read the concluding 
portion of that chapter, which describes the proceedings 
of the judgment day, Note carefully the grounds on 
which the wicked, at the left hand, are condemned to 
everlasting fire. No mention is made of great open 
acts of wickedness which they have committed. They 
are not charged with having murdered, or stolen, or 
borne false witness, or committed adultery. They are 
condemned for sins of omission ! The mere fact that 
they have left undone things which they ought to have 
done, is sufficient to ruin their souls for ever. In short, 
a man's sins of omission alone are enough to sink him 
into hell ! 

And now look at yourself by the light of this won- 
derful passage of Scripture. Try to remember the 
countless things you have left undone, which you might 
have done, and have left unsaid, that you might have 
said. The acts of self-denying kindness, which you 
might have performed, but have neglected, — how many 



WHEBB ABE TOUB 8IKS. « 13 

they are! The good you might have done, and the 
happiness you might have caused, at very little trouble 
to yourself, — how vast is the amount of it ! Surely, in 
the face of our Lord's teaching about sins of omission, 
you will not stand up and say, " I have not sinned ! ** 

Eeader, once more I ask. Do you doubt the truth of 
what I am saying ? I think it quite possible that you 
do. I know something of man's exceeding blindness to 
his own natural state. Listen to me once more, whilst 
I ply your conscience with another argument. Oh! 
that God may open your eyes, and show you what you 
are ! 

Sit down, and take pen and paper, and count up the 
sins that you have probably sinned, since you first knew 
good from evil. Sit down, I say, and make a sum. 
Grant for a moment that there have been, on an average, 
fifteen hours in every twenty-four during which you 
have been awake, and an active and accountable being. 
— Grant for a moment that in each one of these fifteen 
hours you have sinned only two sins. — Surely you will 
not say that this is an unfair supposition. Remember, 
we may sin against God in thought, word, or deed. I 
repeat, it cannot be thought an extreme thing to suppose 
that in each waking hour you have, in thought, or word, 
or deed, sinned two , sins. And now add up the sins of 
your life, and see to what sum they will amount. 

At the rate of fifteen waking hours in a day, you 
have sinned every day thirty sins I — At the rate of seven 
days in a week, you have sinned two hundred and ten 
sins every week ! — At the rate of four weeks in every 
month, you have sinned eight hundred and forty sins 



14 WHEBE AEE YOUR SINS. 

every month ! — At the rate of twelve months in every 
year, you have sinned ten thousand and eighty sins 
every year ! — And, in short, not to go further with the 
calculation, every ten years of your life you have sinned, 
at the lowest computation, more than ONE HUNDEED 
THOUSAl^D SINS ! 

Eeader, I do beseech you to look calmly at this sum. 
I defy you to disprove its correctness. I ask you, on 
the contrary, whether I have not entirely understated 
your case? I appeal to you, as an honest person, 
whether it be not true, that many an hour, and many 
a day in your life, you have sinned incessantly ? I ask 
you confidently, whether the sum would not be far more 
correct, if the total number of your sins was multiplied 
ten-fold ? — Oh ! cease from your self-righteousness. Lay 
aside this proud affectation of "not being so very bad,*' 
in which you are trying to wrap yourself up. Ee bold 
enough to confess the truth. Listen not to that Old 
Liar, the devil. Surely in the face of that damning 
sum which I have just cast up, you will not dare to 
deny that " you have many sins." 

I leave this part of my subject here, and pass on. I 
sadly fear that many a reader will run his eye over 
what I have been saying, and remain unconvinced and 
unmoved. I have learned by mournful experience that 
the last thing a man finds out and understands, is his 
own state in the sight of God. Well saith the Holy 
Ghost that we are all by nature ''blind," and '*deaf," 
and "dumb," and "asleep," and "beside ourselves," 
and " dead ! " Nothing, nothing, nothing will ever 
convince man of sin but the power of the Holy Ghost. 



WnEEE ARE YOUR MN8. 15 

Show him hell, and he will not flee from it. Show him 
heaven, and he will not seek it. Silence him with 
warnings, and yet he will not stir. Prick his conscience, 
and yet he will remain hard. Power from on high 
must come down and do the work. To show man what 
he Teally is, needs the Holy Spirit of Gk)d. 

Eeader, if you have any feeling of your own sinful- 
ness, you ought to thank God for it. That very senee 
of weakness, wickedness, and corruption, which perhaps 
makes you uncomfortable, is in reality a token for good, 
and a cause for praise. The first step towards being 
really good, is to feel had. The first preparation for 
heaven, is to know that we deserve nothing but heJL 
Before we can be counted righteous we must know 
ourselves to be miserable sinners. Before we can have 
inward happiness and peace with God, we must learn to 
be ashamed and confounded because of our manifold 
transgressions. Before we can rejoice in a well-grounded 
hope, we must be taught to say, ** Unclean! Unclean! 
God be merciful to me a sinner.** 

Reader, if you love your soul, beware of checking 
and stifling this inward feeling of your own sinfulness. 
I beseech you, by the mercies of God, do not trample 
on it, do not crush it, do not take it by the throat and 
refuse to give it your attention. Beware of taking the 
advice of worldly men about it. Treat it not as a case 
of low-spirits, disordered health, or anything of the 
kind. Beware of listening to the devil's counsel about 
it. Do not try to drown it in drink and revelling. 
Do not try to drive over it with horses, and dogs, and 
carriages, and field-sports. Do not try to purge it away 



16 WEERE AKE yOUE SIN'S. 

by a course of card-parties, and balls, and concerts. 
Oh ! reader, if you love your soul, do not, do not treat 
the. first sense of sin in this miserable fashion. Do not 
commit spiritual suicide, — do not murder your soul. 

Go rather and pray God to show you what this feeling 
of sin means. Ask Him to send the Holy Spirit to 
teach you what you are, and what He would have you 
to do. Go and read your Bible, and see whether there 
is not just cause for your being uncomfortable, and 
whether this sense of being " wicked and bad " is not 
just what you have a right to expect. Who can tell 
but it is a seed from heaven which is one day to bear 
fruit in Paradise in your complete salvation ? "Who can 
tell but it is a spark from heaven which God means to 
blow up into a steady and shining light ? Who can tell 
but it is a little stone from above, before which the 
devil's kingdom in your heart is to go down, and a stone 
which shall prove the first foundation of a glorious 
temple of the Holy Ghost ? — Happy indeed is that man 
or woman who can go along with my first remark, and 
say, ''IT IS TRUE:— I HAVE MANY SINS." 

II. My second remark is this. It is of the utmost 
importance to have our sins cleansed away. 

I say this boldly and confidently. I am aware of the 
multitude of things which are thought "important" 
in the world, and receive the first and best of men's 
attention. But I know well what I am saying. I am 
bold to say that my Master's business deserves to be 
placed before all other business. And I learn from my 
Master's book that there is nothing of such importance 
to a man as to have his sins forgiven and cleansed away. 



WHEBB ABE TOUB Sllfs. 17 

Remember, reader, there is a God above you^ You 
see Him not in the city. Hurry and bustle, — trade and 
commerce, appear to swallow up men's minds. — ^Ton 
see Him not in the country. Farming and labouring 
go on in regular course, and seed-time and harvest never 
fail. But all this time there is an eternal Eye looking 
• down firom heaven and seeing all that men do, — an eye 
that never slumbers and never sleeps. Yes! there is 
not only a Queen, and a government, and a landlord, 
and a master, to be remembered. There is One higher, 
far higher than all these, who expects His dues to be 
paid. That one is the most high God. 

This God is a God of infinite holiness. He is of 
purer eyes than to look upon iniquity, and cannot bear 
that which is evil. He sees defects and infirmities 
where you see none. In His sight the very heavens 
are not clean. — He is a God of infinite knowledge. He 
knows every thought, and word, and action of every 
son of Adam's children. There are no secrets hid from 
Him. All that we think, and say, and do, is noted 
down and recorded in the book of His remembrance. — 
He is a God of infinite power. He made all things at 
the beginning. He orders all things according to His 
will. He casts down the kings of this world in a 
moment. I^one can stand against Him when He is 
angry. — Above all. He is a God in whose hands are our 
lives and all our concerns. He first gave us being. He 
has kept us alive since we were bom. He will remove 
us wLen He sees fit, and reckon with us according 
to our ways. Such is the God with whom we have 
to do. 



18 * WHEEE ABE TOUR SINS. 

Eeader, think of these things. Surely when you 
consider you will be afraid. Surely you will see it is 
of the utmost importance to have your sins cleansed 
away. Surely you will inquire, "How do matters 
stand between me and God ? " 

Remember, furthermore, that death is lefore you. 
You cannot live always. There must be an end, one 
day, of all your scheming and planning, and buying 
and selling, and working and toiling. A visitor will 
come to your house who w41l take no denial. The king 
of terrors will demand admission, and serve you with 
notice to quit. Where are the rulers and kings who 
governed millions a hundred years ago? "Where are 
the rich men who made fortunes and founded houses ? 
Where are the landlords who received rents, and added 
field to field ? Where are the labourers who ploughed 
the land and reaped the com ? Where are the clergymen 
who read services and preached sermons ? Where are 
the children who played in the sunshine as if they 
would never be old ? Where are the old men who leaned 
on their sticks and gossipped about the days when 
they were young ? There is but one answer. They are 
all dead, dead, dead ! Strong, and beautiful, and active 
as they once were, they are all dust and ashes now. 
Mighty and important as they all thought their business, 
it all came to an end. And we are travelling the same 
way ! A few more years, and we also shall be lying in 
our graves ! 

Reader, think of these things. Surely when you 
consider your latter end you will not think the cleansing 
away of sin a light matter. Surely you will see some- 



WHERE AEE TOUR SINS. 19 

thing in the question, ** Where are your sins?" Surely 
you will consider, ** How am I going to die ? " 

Remember, furthermore, that resurrection and judg- 
ment await you. All is not over when the last breath 
is drawn and your body becomes a lump of cold clay. 
No! all is not over! The realities of existence then 
begin. The shadows will have passed away for ever. 
The trumpet shall one day sound and call you forth 
from your narrow bed. The graves shall be rent asunder, 
and their tenants shall be summoned forth to meet God. 
The ears that would not obey the church-going bell 
shall be obliged to obey that summons. The proud 
wills that would not submit to listen to sermons, shall 
be compelled to listen to the judgment of God. The 
great white throne shall be set. The books shall be 
opened. Every man, woman, and child, shall be ar- 
raigned at that great assize. Every one shall be judged 
according to his works. The sins of every one shall be 
answered for. And every one shall receive his eternal 
portion either in heaven or in hell ! 

Reader, think of these things. Surely in remem- 
brance of that day you must allow that the subject I 
am upon deserves attention. Surely you must confess 
that it is of the utmost importance to have your sins 
cleansed away. Surely you will consider, "How am 
I going to be judged ? " 

I must speak out what is upon my mind. I feel 
great sorrow and trouble of heart about many men and 
women in the world. I fear for many who live in this 
so called Christian land. I fear for many who profess 
and call themselves Christians. I fear for many who 



20 WHEKE ABE TOUR SINS. 

go to church or chapel every Sunday and have a decent 
form of religion. I fear that they do not see the 
immense importance of having their sins cleansed away. 
I can see plainly that there are many other things 
which they think far more important. Money, and 
land, and farms, and horses, and carriages, and dogs, 
and meat, and drink, and clothes, and houses, and 
marriages, and families, and husiness, and pleasure, — 
these, these are the sort of things which many evidently 
think the " first things." And as for the forgiveness 
and cleansing away of their sins it is a matter which 
has only the second place in their thoughts. 

See the man of business as he pores over his ledger 
and account books, and runs his eye over the columns of 
figures. See the man of pleasure as he tears over the 
country with his horses and dogs, or rushes after excite- 
ment at the races, the theatre, the card party, or the 
ball. See the poor thoughtless labourer as he carries 
off his hard-earned wages to the public-house, and 
wastes them in ruining both body and soul. See them 
all, how thoroughly they are in earnest ! See them all, 
how they throw their hearts into what they are doing ! 
— ^And then mark them all at Church next Sunday, 
listless, careless, yawning, sleepy, and indifferent, as if 
there were no God, and no devil, and no Christ, and no 
heaven, and no hell ! Mark how evident it is that they 
have left their hearts outside the Church ! Mark how 
plain it is that they have no real interest in religion ! And 
then say whether it be not true that many know nothing 
of the importance of having their sins cleansed away. 
Oh ! reader, take heed lest this be the case with you. 



WHEBE AKE YOUR SINS. 21 

Reader, do you feel anything of the importance of 
being forgiven ? Then, in the name of Gk)d, I call upon 
you to encourage that feeling more and more. This is 
the point to which we desire to bring all people's souls. 
We want you to understand that religion does not 
consist in professing certain outward duties, and going 
through certain outward forms. It consists in being 
reconciled to Grod, and enjoying peace with Him. It 
consists in having our sins cleansed away, and knowing 
that they are cleansed. It consists in being brought 
back into friendship with the King of kings, and living 
in the sunshine of that friendship. — Listen not to those 
who would fain persuade you, that if you only " go to 
church" regularly, you will of course go to heaven. 
Settle it rather in your mind, that true saving religion, 
such as the Bible teaches, is another kind of thing 
altogether. The very foundation of real Christianity 
is to know that you have many sins, and deserve hell, — 
and to feel the importance of having these sins cleansed 
away, in order that you ^ay go to heaven. 

Happy, says the world, are they who have plenty 
of property and fine houses! Happy are they who 
have carriages, and horses, and servants, and large 
balances at their bankers, and great troops of friends! 
Happy are they who are clothed in purple and fine linen, 
and fare sumptuously every day, who have nothing to 
do but to spend their money and enjoy themselves ! — 
Yet what is the real value of such happiness ? It gives 
no solid, real satisfaction, even at the time of enjoyment. 
It endures but for a few years. It only lasts till death 
comes in, like the hand at Belshazzar*s feast, and breaks 



22 WELEKE ABE TOUR SK^S. 

up all. And then, in too many cases, this so-called 
happiness is exchanged for ETERJS'AL MISERY IN 
HELL. 

"Blessed," says the word of God, "are those whose 
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered! 
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not 
iniquity ! — Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven ! Blessed are they that mourn, 
for they shall be comforted! Blessed are they that 
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be 
filled!" (Psahn xxxii. 1, 2; Matt. v. 2. &c.)— Their 
blessedness shall never come to an end. Their happiness 
is no summer-dried fountain, just failing when need is 
the sorest. Their friends are no summer swallows, 
forsaking them, like Adonijah's guests, the first moment 
that the trumpet sounds. Their sun shall never go down. 
Their joy shall bud in time, and bloom in eternity. 
Theirs, in a word, is true happiness, for it is for ever- 
more. 

Reader, do you believe what* I am saying ? It is all 
true. You will see one day whose words shall stand, 
the words of man or the word of God. Be wise in 
time. Settle it in your heart this very hour, that the 
most important thing that man can attend to is the 
cleansing and forgiveness of his sins. 

III. My third remark is this. You cannot cleanse 
away your own sins, 

I make this statement boldly and confidently. Start- 
ling as it sounds to the natural heart, I lay it down as 
a piece of undeniable scriptural truth. In spite of all 



^ 



WHXEE AiiB YOUB SIKS. 23 

the Pharisees, and Roman Catholics, and Socinians, and 
Deists, and idolaters of human reason and human power, 
I unhesitatingly repeat my assertions. — Man's sins are 
many and great. It is of the utmost importance that 
these sins should he cleansed away. Man's guilt, in the 
sight of God, is enormous. Man's danger of hell, after 
he dies, is imminent and tremendous. And yet man 
cannot cleanse away his own sins. It is written, and 
it is true, "By deeds of the law shall no flesh he 
justified." (Rom. iii. 20.) 

It will not cleanse away your sins to he sorry for them. 
You may mourn over your past wickedness, and humhle 
yourself in sackcloth and ashes. You may shed floods 
of tears, and acknowledge your own guilt and danger. 
You may, — you must, — you ought to do this. But you 
will not hy so doing wipe out your transgressions 
from the hook of God. SORJROW CANNOT MAKE 
ATONEMENT FOR SIN. 

The convicted criminal in a court of justice is often 
sorry for his offiences. He sees the misery and ruin 
they have hrought upon him. He mourns over his folly 
in not listening to advice and in giving way to tempta- 
tion. But the judge does not let him off because he 
is sorry. The deed has been done. The law has 
been broken. The penalty has been incurred. The 
punishment must be inflict^, notwithstanding the 
criminal* s tears. — Reader, this is precisely your position 
in the sight of God. Your sorrow is right, and good, 
and proper. But your sorrow has no power whatever 
to cleanse away your sins. It needs something more 
than penitence to take the burden off your heart. 



24 WHERE AEE TOTTR 8INB. 

It will not cleanse away your sins to mend your life. 
You may reform your conduct, and turn over a new 
leaf. You may break off many evil habits, and take 
up many good ones. You may become, in short, an 
altered man in all your outward behaviour. You may, 
— you must, — you ought, to do so. Without such 
change no soul ever was saved. But you will not, by 
so doing, wipe away one particle of your guilt in God's 
sight. EEFORMATION MAKES NO ATONEMENT 
FOR SIN. 

The bankrupt tradesman who owes ten thousand 
pounds, and has not ten shillings to pay, may resolve 
to become a reformed character. After wasting his 
whole substance in riotous living, he may become steady, 
temperate, and respectable. It is right and proper that 
he should be so, but this will not satisfy the claims of 
those to whom he owes money. Once more I say, this 
is precisely your case by nature in the sight of God. 
You owe Him ten thousand talents, and have nothing 
to pay. To-day's amendments are all very well, but 
they do not wipe away yesterday's debts. — It requires 
something more than amendment and reformation to 
give you a light heart and to set your conscience free. 

It will not cleanse away your sins to become diligent 
in the use of the forms and ordinances of religion. You 
may alter your habits about Sunday, and attend services 
from morning to night. You may take pains to hear 
preaching on week-days, as well as on Sundays. You 
may receive the Lord's Supper on every possible occasion, 
and give alms, and keep fasts. It is all very well as far 
as it goes. It is a right and proper thing to attend to 



WHERB AEE TOCR SINS. 25 

your religious duties. But all the means of grace in 
the world will never do you any good, so long as you 
trust in them as saviours. They vnll not bind up the 
wounds of your heart, and give you inward peace. 
FORMALITY CAKNOT MAKE ATONEMENT FOR 
SIN. 

A lantern on a dark night is a very useful thing. It 
can help the traveller to find his way home. It can 
preserve him from losing his path, and keep him from 
falling into danger. But the lantern itself is not the 
traveller's fireside. The man who is content to sit down 
in the road by the side of his lantern, must never be 
surprised if he dies of cold. Reader, if you try to 
satisfy your conscience with a formal attendance on 
means of grace, you are no wiser than this traveller. 
It needs something more than formality to take the 
burden from your conscience, and to give you peace 
with Grod. 

It will not cleanse away your sins to look to man for 
help. It is not in the power of any child of Adam to 
save another's soul. No bishop, no priest, no ordained 
man of any church or denomination has power to 
forgive sins. No human absolution, however solemnly 
conferred, can purge that conscience which is not purged 
by God. It is well to ask the counsel of the ministers 
of the Gospel when the conscience is perplexed. It is 
their office to help the labouring and heavy-laden, and 
to show them the way of peace. But it is not in the 
power of any minister to deliver any man from his 
guilt. We can only show the path that must be 
followed. We can only point out the door at which 
c 



26 VHEBE AEE T0T7B SINS. 

every one must knock. It requires a hand far stronger 
than that of man to take the chains off conscience, and 
set the prisoner free. 

The bankrupt who asks a bankrupt to set him up in 
business again is only losing time. The pauper who 
travels off to a neighbour pauper, and begs him to help 
him out of difficulties, is only troubling himself in vain. 
The prisoner does not beg his fellow prisoner to set him 
free. The shipwrecked sailor does not call on his 
shipwrecked comrade to place him safe ashore. Help 
in all these cases must come J&om some other quarter. 
Belief in all these cases must be sought from some other 
hand. Eeader, it is just the same in the matter of 
cleansing away your sins. So long as you seek it from 
man, whether man ordained or man not ordained, you 
seek it where it cannot be found. You must go further. 
You must look higher. You must turn elsewhere for 
comfort. It is not in the power of any man on earth or 
in heaven to take the burden of sin from off a brother's 
soul. " None can by any means redeem his brother, nor 
give a ransom for him.'* (Psalm xlix. 7.) 

Eeader, thousands in every age have tried to cleanse 
themselves from their sins in the ways I have now 
described, and have tried in vain. Thousands, I doubt 
not, are trying at this very moment, and find themselves 
"nothing bettered, but rather worse." They are climb- 
ing up a steep precipice of ice, toiling hard and yet 
slipping backwards as fast as they climb. — They are 
pouring water into a cask full of holes, labouring busily, 
and yet no nearer the end of their work than when they 
began. — They are rowing a boat against a rapid stream. 



WOE&B ABE TOUB SINS. 27 

plying the oar diligently, and yet in reality losing ground 
every minute. — They are trying to build up a wall of 
loose sand, wearing themselves out with fatigue, and 
yet seeing their work roll down on them as fast as they 
throw it up. — They are striving to pump dry a sinking 
ship. The water gains on them and they will soon be 
drowned. — Such is the experience, in every part of the 
world, of all who think to cleemse themselves from their 
sins. Eeader, be warned to-day. Do not be one of 
them. 

Eeware, I do entreat you, of quack medicines in 
religion. Beware of supposing that penitence, and 
reformation, and formality, and priest-craft, can ever 
give you peace with God. They cannot do it. It is 
not in them. The man who says they can must be 
ignorant of two things. He cannot know the length 
and breadth of human sinfulness. He cannot under- 
stand the height and depth of the holiness of God. 
There never breathed the man or woman on earth who 
tried to cleanse himself from his sins and in so doing 
obtained relief. 

Header, if you have found out this truth by experi- 
ence, be diligent to impart it to others. Show them as 
plainly as you can their guilt and danger by nature. 
Tell them, with no less plainness, the immense impor- 
tance of having their sins forgiven and cleansed away. 
But then warn them not to waste time in seeking to be 
cleansed in unlawful fashions. Warn them against 
the specious advice of " Mr. Legality " and his com- 
panions, so vividly described in Pilgrim's Progress. 
Warn them against false remedies and sham medicines 



28 WHERE ARE YOUR E1U8. 

for the soul. Send them to the old wicket-gate described 
in Scripture, however hard and rough the way may 
seem. Tell them it is " the old path and the good way," 
and that, whatever men may say, it is the only way to 
obtain cleansing of our sins. 

IV. The fourth remark I have to make is this. Hie 
blood of Jesus Christ can cleanse away all your sins. 

Reader, I enter on this part of my subject with a 
thankful heart. I bless God that after setting before 
you the awful nature of your spiritual disease, I am able 
to set before you an almighty remedy. But I feel it 
needful to dwell upon this remedy, for a few minutes. 
A thing of such wonderous efficacy as this blood ought 
to be clearly understood. There should be no vagueness 
or mystery in your ideas about it. When you hear of 
the " blood of Christ " you ought thoroughly to compre- 
hend what' the expression means. 

The blood of Christ is that life-blood which Jesus shed 
when He died for sinners upon the cross. It is the 
blood which flowed so freely from His head pierced 
with thorns, and His hands and feet pierced with nails, 
and His side pierced with a spear, in the day when He 
was crucified and slain. The quantity of that blood 
may very likely have been small. The appearance of 
that blood was doubtless like that of our own. But 
never since the day when Adam was first formed out of 
the dust of the ground, has any blood been shed of such 
deep importance to the whole family of mankind. 

It was blood that had been long covenanted and pro- 
mised. In the day when sin came into the world, God 



WHSEB AHB T0X7K SDfS. 29 

meTcifolly engaged that ** the seed of the woman should 
bruise the serpent's head.*' One bom of woman should 
appear one day, and deliver the children of Adam from 
Satan's power. That seed of the woman was our Lord 
Jesus Christ. In the day that lie suffered on the cross. 
He triumphed over Satan and accomplished redemption 
for mankind. When Jesus shed His life-blood on the 
cross, the head of the serpent was bruised, and the 
ancient promise began to be fulHUed. 

It was blood that had been hnp typified and prefigured. 
Every sacrifice that was offered up by patriarchs, was 
a testimony of their faith in a greater sacrifice yet to 
come. Every shedding of the blood of lambs and goats 
under the Mosaic law was meant to foreshadow the 
dying of the true Lamb of God for the sin of the 
world. When Christ was crucified these sacrifices aod 
types received their full accomplishment. The true 
sacrifice for sin was at length offered. The real atoning 
blood was at length shed. From that day the offerings 
of the Mosaic law were no longer needed. Their work 
was done. They might be laid aside. 

It was blood which was of infinite merit and value ^m 
the sight of God. It was not the blood of one who was 
nothing more than a singularly holy man, but of one 
who was God's own fellow, very God of very God. It 
was not the blood of one who died involuntarily, as a 
martyr to truth, but of one who voluntarily undertook to 
be the Substitute and Proxy for mankind, to bear their 
sins and carry their iniquities. It made atonement for 
man's transgressions. It paid man's enormous debt to 
God. It provided a way of righteous reconciliation 



30 WHERE ABE TOITR SINS. 

between sinful man and his holy Maker. It made a 
road from heaven to earth, by which God could come 
down to man, and show mercy. It made a road from 
earth to heaven, by which man could draw near to God, 
and yet not feel afraid. Without it there could have 
been no remission of sin. Through it God can be just 
and yet the justifier of the ungodly. From it a fountain 
has been formed, wherein sinners can wash and be clean 
to all eternity. 

Eeader, this wonderous blood of Christ, applied to 
your conscience, can cleanse you from all sin. It matters 
nothing what your sins may have been. "Though 
they be as scarlet they may be made like snow. Though 
they be red like crimson they can be made like wool." 
(Isaiah i. 18.) From sins of youth and sins of age, — 
from sins of ignorance and sins of knowledge, — from 
sins of open profligacy and sins of secret vice, — from 
sins against law and sins against Gospel, — from sins of 
head, and heart, and tongue, and thought, and imagi- 
nation, — from sins against each and all of the ten 
commandments, from all these the blood of Christ can 
set us free. To this end was it appointed. For this 
cause it was shed. For this purpose it is still a fountain 
open to all mankind. That thing which you cannot do 
for yourself can be done in a moment by this precious 
fountain. YOTJ CAN HAVE ALL YOUR SINS 
CLEANSED AWAY. 

In this blood all the dead saints have been cleansed 
hitherto, who are now waiting the resurrection of the 
just. From Abel, the first of whom we read, down to 
the last who has fallen asleep to-day, they have all 



WHEBS ABS TOUB 81K8. 31 

** washed their rohes, and made them white in the 
Wood of the Lamb." (Rev. vii. 14.) Not one has 
entered into rest by his own works and deservings. Not 
one has made himself clean before Qtod by his own 
goodness and his own strength. They have all " over- 
come by the blood of the Lamb." (Rev. xii. 11.) And 
their testimony in Paradise is clear and distinct : " Thou 
wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, 
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and 
nation." (Rev. v. 9.) 

By this blood all the living saints of God have peace 
and hope now. By it they have boldness to enter into 
the holiest. By it they are justified and made nigh to 
God. By it their consciences are daily purged and 
filled with" holy confidence. About it all believers are 
agreed, however much they may differ on other matters. 
Episcopalians and Presbyterians, Baptists and Metho- 
dists, — all are agreed that the blood of Christ is that 
only thing that can cleanse the soul. — All are agreed 
that in ourselves we are "wretched and miserable, and 
poor, and blind, and naked." But all are agreed that in 
the blood of Christ the chief of sinners can be made clean. 

Reader, would you like to know what we ministers 
of the Gospel are ordained to do. "We are not set 
apart for no other end than to read services, and 
administer sacraments, and marry people, and bury the 
dead. "We are not meant to do nothing more than show 
you the Church, or ourselves, or our party. "We are 
set for the work of showing men the blood of Christ, 
and except we are continually showing it, we are no 
true ministers of the Gospel. 



S2 WHERE 4RE TOUE SINS. 

Header, would you like to know what is our heart's 
desire and prayer for the souls to whom we minister ? 
We want to bring them to the blood of Christ. "We 
are not content -^ to see our Churches filled, and our 
ordinances well attended, our congregations numerous, 
and our cause outwardly flourishing. We want to see 
men and women coming to the great fountain for sin 
and uncleannees, and washing their souls in it that they 
may be clean. Here only is rest for the conscience. 
Here only is peace for the inward man. Here only is 
a cure for spiiiiual diseases. Here only is the secret of 
a light and happy heart. No doubt we have within us 
a fountain of evil and corruption. But, blessed be God, 
there is another fountain of greater power still, even 
\ the precious blood of the Lamb, — and, washing daily in 
that other fountain, we are clean from all sin. 

V. The fifth and last remark I have to make is this. 
Faith is absolutely necessary, and the only thing necessary , 
in order to give you an interest in the cleansing blood of 
Christ. 

Reader, I ask your special attention to this point. 
A mistake here is often ruinous to a man's soul. It 
is a great leak at the bottom of your Christianity, if 
you do not clearly see the true way of union between 
Christ and the soul. — That way is faith. 

Church-membership and reception of the sacraments 
are no proof that you are washed in Christ's blood. 
Thousands attend a Christian place of worship, and 
receive the Lord's supper from the hands of Christian 
ministers, and yet show plainly that they are not cleans- 



^^HEBB ARE TOUB SdrS. 33 

ed £rom their sins. Bewace of despising means of grace, 
if you have any desire to be saved. Bat never, never 
forget that Church-membership is not faith. 

Faith is the one thing needful in order to give you 
the benefit of Christ's cleansing blood. He is called 
a ** propitiation through faith in his blood." " He thftt 
believeth on him hath everlasting life." "By him all 
that believe are justified from all things." ** Being 
justified by faith we have peace with God, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ." The wisdom of the whole world 
wiU never provide a better answer to an anxioss inqui- 
rer than that which Paul gave to the Philippian jailor : 
" Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved." — "Art thou convinced of sin?" says the Gospel. 
** Dost thou really see that thou hast many sins, and 
art deserving hell? Dost thou renounce all hope of 
cleansing thyself from thy sins by thine own power ? 
Then thou art just the man for whom the Gospel 
provides comfort. Behold the atoning blood of Christ • 
Only trust in it, and this day thou shalt be freely 
pardoned. Only believe, and this very moment thy 
sins shall be cleansed away." — It is only ** Believe and 
have." It is only " Believe and be clean." Let those 
who will call such doctrine rant and enthusiasm. I am 
bold to call it by another name. It is the " glorious 
Gospel " of the grace of God. 

Evader, I ask you not to misunderstand my meaning 
in thus speaking of faith. I do not tell you that faith 
is the onlj/ mark of the man whose sins are cleansed 
away. I do not say that the faith which gives a man 
an interest in Christ's atoning blood, is ever found alone. 



34 wdEEE ARE TOXTB SINS. 

Saving faith is no barren, solitary grace. It is always 
accompanied by repentance and personal holiness. — But 
this I say confidently, that in the matter of giving the 
soul an interest in Christ, faith is the only thing 
required. In the matter of justification before God, 
faith, I repeat emphatically, stands entirely alone, 
Faith is the hand that lays hold on Christ. Faith 
begins, faith carries on, faith keeps up the claim 
which the sinner makes on the Saviour. By faith we 
are justified. By faith we bathe our souls in the great 
fountain for sin. By faith we go on obtaining fresh 
supplies of pardoning mercy all through our journey. 
By faith we live, and by faith we stand. 

Header, nothing whatever besides this faith is required, 
in order to your complete justification and cleansing 
from all sin. Let this sink deeply into your mind. 
Where is the man that desires to enjoy real comfort 
from the Gospel ? Seek, I do entreat you, to have clear 
and simple views of the nature of saving faith. Beware 
of those dark, and confused, and muddy notions of 
faith, by which so many distress their souls. Dismiss 
from your mind the idea that faith is a mere act of the 
intellect. It is not assent to doctrines or articles. It is 
not belief of Paley's Evidences or Pearson on the Creed. 
It is simply the grasp of a contrite heart on the out- 
stretched hand of an Almighty Saviour, — the repose 
of a weary head on the bosom of an Almighty Friend. — 
Cast away all idea of work, or merit, or doing, or 
performing, or paying, or giving, or buying, or labouring, 
in the act of believing on Christ. Understand that 
feith is not giving, but taking,— not paying, but receiv- 



WHERR ABE TOUE SIlf«. 35 

ing, — not buying, but being enriched. It is the eye 
that looks to the brazen serpent, and looking obtains 
life and health. — It is the mouth that drinks down the 
reviving medicine, and drinking receives strength and 
vigour for the whole body. — It is the hand of the 
drowning man which lays hold on the rope thrown to 
him, and laying hold enables him to be drawn up from 
the deep water safe and sound. — This, and nothing more 
than this, is the true idea of saving faith. This, and 
this only, is the faith that is required to give you an 
interest in the blood of Christ. Believe in this way, 
and your sins are at once cleansed away ! 

Header, nothing whatever except this faith will ever 
give you any interest in Christ's atoning blood. You 
may go daily to Christ's Church. You may often use 
Christ's name. You may bow the head at the name of 
Jesus. You may eat of the bread and wine which 
Christ commanded to be received. But all this time, 
without faith, you have neither part nor lot in Christ. 
Without faith, so far as you are concerned, Christ's 
blood has been shed in vain. 

I desire to enter my solemn protest against the 
modern notions which prevail on this solemn subject. I 
protest against the opinion which many now maintain, 
that any are saved by Christ excepting those who believe. 
There is much vague talk in some quarters about the 
"Fatherhood of God " and the ** love of God," as if we 
who are called "Evangelical" denied these glorious 
truths. We do not deny them at all. We hold them 
as strongly as any. We give place to no man in this 
matter. But we utterly deny that Gk>d is the spiritual 



36 WH£EB ABE TOUB SINTS. 

father of any excepting those who are His children hy 
faith in- Christ Jesus. "We utterly deny that men have 
a right to take comfort in God's love, except they believe 
on Him through whom that love has heen manifested, 
even His dear Son. The atoning blood of the Son of 
God is the grand exhibition of God's love towards 
sinners. The sinner who desires to be saved, must have 
personal dealings with Him who shed that blood. By 
personal faith he must wash in it. By personal faith 
he must drink of it. By personal faith he must put in 
his own claim to all its blessings. Without this faith 
there can be no salvation. 

"Reader would you know the main objects that we 
ministers have in view in our preaching ? We preach 
that you may believe. Faith is the thing that we desire 
to see produced in your souls. Faith is the thing that, 
once produced, we desire to see growing. We rejoice 
to see you coming regularly to hear the Gospel. We 
rejoice to see an orderly, well-behaved congregation of 
worshippers. But faith, faith, faith, — is the grand 
result which we long to see in your souls. Without 
faith we cannot feel comfortable about you. Without 
faith you are in imminent danger of hell. — According 
to your faith will be the strength of your Christianity. 
According to the degree of your faith will be the increase 
of your peace and hope, and the closeness of your walk 
with God. Reader, you will not wonder that there is 
nothing we care for so much as your believing. 

I hasten to bring my remarks to a conclusion. I 
have tried to show you five things, and have endeavoured 
to set them before you in plain language. (1)1 have 



WHERE ABE YOUR SOTS. 37 

told you that you have many sins. (2) I have told you 
that it is of the utmost importance to have these sins 
cleansed away. (3) I have told you that you cannot 
cleanse away your own sins. (4) I have told you that 
the hlood of Christ cleanse th from all sin. (5)1 have 
told you that faith only is needful, but absolutely need- 
ful, to give you any interest in Christ's blood. I have 
told you what I am firmly persuaded is God's own 
truth, — ^the truth on which I desire myself to live and 
die. I pray God that the Holy Ghost may apply this 
truth with mighty power to many souls. 

Reader I will wind up all this subject by three words 
of parting application. Our years are passing quickly 
away. The night cometh, when no man can work. 
Yet a little time and our place in another world will be 
settled to all eternity. A few more years, and we 
shall all be either in heaven or in hell. Surely this 
fact alone ought to set us thinking. Bear with me 
while I try to turn your thoughts in a profitable 
direction. Bear with me, while as a friend and brother, 
I try to talk to you about your soul. 

1. My first word of application shall be a question. 
I address it to all into whose hands this book may fall, 
without distinction or exception. It is a question which 
concerns deeply every man, woman, and child in the 
world, whatever be their rank or station. It is the 
question which forms the title of these pages: — " Where 
are your sins f " 

Header, remember, I do not ask you what you call 
yourself in religion. I do not ask you where you go,- 



38 WHERE ABE TOUB SINS. 

whom you hear, — or to what party you belong,— or what 
are your peculiar opinions about church or dissent. I 
leave such matters alone. I am weary to see the 
enormous waste of time of which multitudes are yearly 
guilty in respect of these matters. I am for the realities 
and substance of Christianity. I want to fix your 
attention on the things which will look important in the 
hour of death and at the last day. And I say boldly, 
that one of the first questions which demand your notice, 
is the question I here put to you : — " Where are your 
stnsf" 

I am not asking what you intend, or mean, or hope, 
or resolve to aim at, at some future time. I leave all 
that to children and fools. To-morrow is the devil's 
day, but to-day is God's. And here, as in God's sight, 
this very day, while you are reading these pages, I ask 
you to find an answer to my question: " WTiere are 
your sins ? " 

Reader, I ask you to mark what I am going to say. 
I say it calmly, deliberately, advisedly, and with con- 
sideration. I tell you that at this moment there are 
only two places in which your sins can be, and I defy 
the wisdom of the woild to find out a third. — Either 
your sins are TJPOJ^ YOURSELF, unpardoned, unfor- 
given, uncleansed, unwashed away, — sinking you daily 
nearer to hell?— Or else your sins are UPON CHRIST, 
taken away, forgiyen, pardoned, blotted out and cleansed 
away by Christ's precious blood ! — I am utterly unable 
to see any third place in which a man's sins can 
possibly be. I am utterly unable to discover any third 
alternative. Forgiven or unforgiven, — ^pardoned or not 



WHEBE ABE TOUB SINS. 39 

pardoned, — cleansed away or not cleansed, — this, ac- 
cording to the Bible, is the exact position of every one's 
sins. Eeader, how is it with you ? " Where are your 

I do pray you to lay this question to heart, and never 
to rest till you can give it an answer. I do entreat you 
to examine your own state, — to prove your own spiritual 
condition, — and to find out how matters stand between 
you and God. Let the time past suffice for trifling and 
indecision about your soul. Give it up, — give it up, — 
give it up for ever. — Let the time past suffice for a mere 
formal, aimless, meaningless, comfortless religion. Lay 
it aside, — ^lay it aside, — lay it aside for ever. — Be real. 
Be thorough. Be in earnest. Deal with your soul as 
a reasonable being. Deal with it as one who feels that 
eternal interests are at stake. Deal with it as one who 
has made up his mind, and is determined to live in sus- 
pense no longer. Oh ! resolve this very day to find an 
answer to my question: — " Where are your simf* 
Are they on yourself, or are they on Christ f 

2. My second word of application shall be an invi- 
tation. I address it to all who feel unable to give 
a satisfactory answer to the question at issue. I 
address it to all who feel sinful, and lost, and con- 
demned, and unfit to die. It is that invitation which 
is the glory of the Gospel. I say to you, ** Come to 
Christ, and he cleansed in His blood without delay ^ 

I know not what you may have been in your past life. 
It matters nothing. You may have broken every com- 
mandment under heaven. You may have sinned with 



40 WHEEE ABE TOITE SINS. 

a high hand against light and knowledge. You maj 
have despised a father's warnings and a mother s tears. 
You may have run greedily into every excess of riot, 
and plunged into every kind of abominable profligacy. 
You may have turned your back entirely on God, Hie 
day, His house, His ministers, His word. I say again, 
it matters nothing. Do you feel your sins ? Are yon 
sick of them? Are you ashamed of them?- Are yon 
weary of them ? Then come to Christ just as you are, 
and Christ's blood shall make you clean. 

I see you lingering, and doubting, and fancying the 
news too good to be true. I hear the devil whispering 
in your ear, " You are too bad, — you are too wicked tc 
be saved." I charge you, in God's name, not to give 
way to such doubts. I remind you that Satan always 
was a liar. One time he told you it was "too soon" foi 
religion, — and now he tells you it is " too late." I tell 
you confidently, that Jesus Christ is able to save to the 
uttermost all who come to God by Him. I tell you con- 
fidently, that He has received, cleansed, and pardoned 
thousands as bad as you. He never changes. Onlj 
come to Him by £aith, and His blood shall cleanse yov 
from all sin. 

I can well fancy that you feel at a loss, and kno^ 
not what to do. I can well believe that you do not sei 
which way to turn, or what step to take, or in whai 
manner to follow out my counsel. / hid you go ant 
say 80 to the Lord Jesus Christ ! I bid you seek 8om< 
quiet solitary place, and pour out your heart before 
Him. Tell Him that you are a poor miserable sinner, 
Tell Him that you know not how to pray, or what to 



WHEBB ASS TOU£ SINS. 41 

say, or what to do. But tell Him that you have heard 
something about His blood cleansing a man from all sin, 
and entreat Him to think on you, and cleanse your soul. 
Oh! reader, take this advice, — and who can tell but 
you may say one day, " the blood of Christ does indeed 
cleanse a man £rom all sin." 

Eeader, for the last time I offer my invitation. I 
stand in a life-boat alongside the wreck to which you 
are clinging, and I entreat you to come in. The day is 
far spent. The night is coming on. The clouds are 
gathering. The waves are rising. Yet a little time 
and the old wreck of this world will go to pieces. Come 
into the life-boat. Come in and be safe. Come to the 
blood of Christ, wash, and be clean. Come with all 
your sins to Christ, and cast them on Him. He will 
bear them away. He will cleanse them. He will 
pardon them. — Only believe and be saved. 

3. My last word shall be an exhortation, I address 
it to all who have been taught by the Spirit to feel 
their sins, and have fled to the hope set before them in 
the Gospel. I address it to all who have discovered the 
grand truth that they are guilty sinners, and have 
washed in the blood of Christ in order to have their sins 
cleansed away. That exhortation shall be short and 
simple. I bid them " cling to Christ." 

Cling to Christ, I say, and never forget your debt to 
Him. Sinners you were, when you were first called by 
the Holy Ghost, and fled to Jesus. Sinners you have 
been, even at your best, from the day of your conversion. 
Sinners you will find yourselves to your dying hour» 



42 WHERE AUE Y0T7B SINS. 

having nothing to hoast of in yourselves. Then cling to 
Christ. 

Cling to Christ, I say, and make use of His atoning 
blood every day. Go to Him every morning as your 
morning sacrifice, and confess your need of His salvation. 
Go to Him every night, after the bustle of the day, and 
plead for fresh absolution. Wash in the great fountain- 
every evening after all the defilement of contact with 
the world. *' He that is washed, needeth not save to 
wash his feet." But his feet he needs to wash. (John 
xiii. 10.) 

Cling to Christ, I say, and show the world how you 
love Him. Show it by obedience to His command- 
ments. Show it by conformity to His image. Show it 
by following His example. Make your Master's cause 
lovely and beautiful before men, by your own holiness 
of temper and conversation. Let all the world see, that 
he who is much forgiven is the man who loves much, 
and that he who loves most is the man who does most 
for Christ. (Luke vii. 47.) 

Cling to Christ, I say, and have high thoughts of the 
atonement made by His blood upon the cross. Think 
highly of His incarnation and His example, — think 
highly of His miracles and His words, — think highly 
of His resurrection, and intercession, and coming again. 
But think highest of all of Christ's sacrifice and the 
propitiation made by His death. Contend earnestly for 
the old £uth concerning His atonement. See in the old 
doctrine that He died as a Substitue for sinners, — the 
only solution of a thousand passages in the Old Testa- 
ment, and a hundred passages in the New. Never, 



WHKBB ABE TOTJB SHTS. 43 

never be ashamed to let men know that you derive all 
your comfort from the atoning blood of Chrifiit, and 
fi*om His substitution for you on the cross. 

Cling to Christy I say lastly, and make much of the 
old foundation truths concerning salvation by His blood. 
These are the old Mends to which our souls will turn 
at last in the hour of our departure. These are the 
Ancient doctrines on which we shall lean back our 
aching heads, when life is ebbing away and death is in 
sight. We shall not ask ourselves then whether we 
have been Episcopalians or Presbyterians, Churchmen 
or Dissenters. We shall not find comfort then in new- 
fangled notions and human inventions, — in baptism and 
churchmembership, in sects and parties, — in ceremonies 
and forms. Nothing will do us good then but the 
blood of Christ. I^othing will support us then but the 
witness of the Spirit, that in the blood of Jesus we 
have washed, and by that blood have been made 
clean. 

Eeader, I commend these things to your notice. If 
you never knew these things before, may you soon be- 
come acquainted with them ! If you have known them 
in time past, may you know them better for time to 
come ! We can never know too well the right answer 
to the mighty question, — *' Where are your sins ? " 

HYMN. 

I thought upon my sins, and I was sad, 
My soul was troubled sore an^ fill'd with pain ; 

Bat then I thought on Jesus, and was glad, 
My heavy grief was tum'd to joy again. 



44 WHERE ABE YOITR SINS. 

I thought upon the law, the fiery law, 
Holy, and just, and good in its decree ; 

I look'd to Jesus, and in Him I saw 
That law fulfilled, its curse endured for me. 

I thought I saw an angry, frowning God, 
Sitting as Judge upon the great white throne ; 

My soul was overwhelm' d— then Jesus shew'd 
His gracious face, and all my dread was gone. 

I saw my sad estate, condemn'd to die ; 

Then terror seiz'd my heart, and dark despair ; 
But when to Calvary I turned my eye, 

I saw the cross, and read forgiveness there. 

I saw that I wa^ lost, far gone astray. 
No hope of safe return there seem'd to be ; 

But then I heard that Jesus was the way, 
A new and living way prepared for me. 

Then in that way, so free, so safe, so sure, 
Sprinkled all o'er with reconciling blood, 

Will I abide and never wander more. 
Walking along in fellowship with God. 

d. BONAR. 



%tfM, nr l^tm^y 



^^ Except ye repent , ye shall all^ likewise perish" — Luke 
xiii. 3. 

Ebadeb, 

Do yoTi see the words which head this 
page? Eead them carefully, and ponder them well. 
They are taken from that Book which is the only rule 
of faith and practice, — the Bible. Header, this little 
sentence contains matter of deepest importance to your 
soul. Give it the attention which it deserves. Turn 
not away from it. Sit down, and look it honestly in 
the face. 

I can well believe that at first sight these words look 
stem and severe, — "Repent or perish !" "Except ye 
repent, ye shall all perish." — I can fancy some one 
spying, "Is this the Gospel? Are these the glad 
tidings ? Are these the good news of which ministers 
speak ? This is a hard saying, who can hear it ? " 

But from whose lips did these words come ? They 

* The substance of this tract was originally delivered as a ser 
men, at Exeter Hall, in August, 1 858. 



46 BEPENT, OB PEBISH. 

came from the lips of One who loves us with a 
love that' passeth knowledge, even Jesus Christ the 
Son of God. They were spoken by One who so loved 
us that He left heaven for our sakes, — came down to 
earth for our sakes, — lived a poor, humble life, for 
three and thirty years on earth for our sakes, — went to 
the cross for us, went to the grave for us, and died for 
our sins. The words that come from lips like these, 
must surely be words of love. 

And, after all, what greater proof of love can be 
given than to warn a friend of coming danger ? That 
father who sees his son tottering toward the brink of 
a precipice, and, as he sees him, cries out sharply, 
" Stop, stop ! " — does not that father love his son ? — 
That tender mother who sees her infant on the point 
of eating some poisonous berry, and cries out sharply, 
" Stop, stop ! put it down ! *' — does not that mother 
love that child? — ^It is indifference that lets people 
alone, and allows them to go on every one in his own 
way. It is love, tender love, that warns and raises 
the cry of alarm. The cry of " Pire ! — fire ! " at mid- 
night may sometimes startle a man out of his sleep, 
rudely, harshly, unpleasantly. But who would com- 
plain if that cry was the means of saving his life ? 
The words, "Except ye repent, ye shall all perish,** 
may seem at first sight stem and severe. But they are 
words of love, and may be the means of delivering pre- 
cious souls from hell. 

Header there are three things to which I ask your 
attention in speaking to you about this text of Scrip- 
ture. 



XBPSNTy OR PSEIdH. 47 

I. First of all, I will speak of the nature of repen- 
tance — what is it f 

n. Secondly, I will speak of the neeeseity of repen- 
tance, — why is repentance needful ? 

III. Thirdly, I will speak of the eneourayementa to 
repentance, — what is there to lead men to repent f 

I First of all, what is repentance f 

I ask your attention to this point. The importance 
of the inquiry cannot be overrated. Repentance is 
one of the foundation-stones of Christianity. Sixty 
times, at least, we £nd repentance spoken of in the 
New Testament. "What was the first doctrine our Lord 
Jesus Christ preached? We are told, that He said, 
** Repent ye, and believe the Grospel." (Mark i. 15.) 
What did the apostles proclaim when the Lord sent 
them forth the first time ? They ''preached that men 
should repent." (Mark vi. 12.) What was the charge 
which Jesus gave His disciples when He left the world ? 
That "repentance and remission of sins should be 
preached in His name among all nations." (Luke xxiv. 
47.) What was the concluding appeal of the first 
sermons which Peter preached? "Repent, and be 
baptized." ** Repent ye, and be converted." (Acts ii. 
38 : iii. 19.) What was the summary of doctrine 
which Paid gave to the Ephesian elders, when he 
parted from them ? He told them that he had taught 
them publicly, and from house to house, "testifying 
both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance 



48 EEPENT, OB PERISH. 

toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." 
(Acts XX. 21.) What was the description which Paul 
gave of his own ministry, when he made his defence 
before Festus and Agrippa? He told them that he 
had showed all men that they should *' repent, and do 
works meet for repentance." (Acts xxvi. 20.) What 
was the account given by the believers at Jerusalem 
of the conversion of the Gentiles, when they heard 
of it ? They said, "Then hath God also to the Gentiles 
granted repentance unto life." (Acts xi. 18.) What is 
one of the first qualifications which the Church of 
England requires of all persons that would come to 
the Lord's table? They are to "examine themselves 
whether they repent them truly of their former sins." 
No impenitent person, according to the Church of 
England, ought ever to come to the Lord's table. 
Eeader, you will surely agree with me that these are 
serious considerations. They ought to show you the 
importance of the inquiry I am now making. A 
mistake about repentance is a most dangerous mistake. 
An error about repentance is an error that lies at the 
very roots of our religion. What, then, is repentance ? 
When can it be said of any man, that he repents ? 

Eepentance is a thorough change of man's natural 
heart upon the subject of sin. We are aU bom in 
sin. We naturally love sin. We take to sin, as soon 
as we can act and think, as the bird takes to flying, 
and the fish takes to swimming. There never was a 
child that required schooling or education in order to 
leam deceitfulness, sensuality, passion, self-will, glut- 
tony, pride, and foolishness. These things are not 



B£P£NT| OB PEBI8H. 49 

picked up from bad companionsy or gradually learned 
by a long coarse of tedious instruction. They spring 
up of themselves, even when boys and girls are brought 
up alone. The seeds of them are evidently the natural 
product of the heart The aptitude of all children to 
these things is an unanswerable proof of the corruption 
and fall of man. Now when this heart of ours is 
changed by the Holy Ghost, when this natural love of 
sin is cast out, then takes place that change which the 
word of (jod calls ** repentance." The man in whom 
the change is wrought is said to " repent." He may 
be called, in one word, a " penitent " man. 

But I dare not leave the subject here. It deserves a 
closer and more searching investigation. It is not safe 
to deal in general statements, when doctrines of this 
kind are handled. I will try to take repentance to 
pieces, and dissect and analyze it before your eyes. I 
will show you the parts and portions of which repen- 
tance is made up. I will endeavour to set before you 
something of the experience of every truly penitent 
man. 

True repentance begins with knowledge of sin. The 
eyes of the penitent man are opened. He sees with 
lUsmay and confusion the length and breadth of Gk>d'8 
holy Law, and the extent, the enormous extent, of his 
own transgressions. He discovers, to his surprise, 
that in thinking himself a ** good sort of man," and a 
man with a '' good heart," he has been under a huge 
delusion. He finds out that, in reality, he is wicked, 
and guilty, and corrupt, and bad in God's sight. His 
pride breaks down. His high thoughts melt away. 



50 UEPEin?, OR PERISH. 

He sees that he is neither more nor less than a great 
sinner. This is the first step in true repentance. 

True repentance goes on to work Borrow for sin. The 
heart of a penitent man is touched with deep remorse, 
hecause of his past transgressions. He is cut to the 
heart to think that he should have liyed so madly, and 
so wickedly. He mourns over time wasted, over talents 
misspent, over God dishonoured, over his own soul in- 
jured. The remembrance of these things is grievous 
to him. The burden of these things is sometimes 
almost intolerable. When a man so sorrows, you have 
the second step in true repentance. 

True repentance proceeds, further, to produce in a 
man confession of sin. The tongue of a penitent man 
is loosed. He feels he must speak to that God against 
whom he has sinned. Something within him tells him 
he must cry to God, and pray to God, and talk with 
God, about the state of his own soul. He must pour 
out his heart, and acknowledge his iniquities, at the 
throne of grace. They are a heavy burden within him, 
and he can no longer keep silence. He can keep nothing 
back. He will not hide anything. He goes before God, 
pleading nothing for himself, and willing to say, "I 
have sinned against heaven and before thee; — my 
iniquity is great ; — God be merciful to me a sinner ! " 
When a man goes thus to God in confession, you have 
the third step in true repentance. 

True repentance, furthermore, shows itself before the 
world in a thorough breaking off from sin. The life of 
a penitent man is altered. The course of his daily 
conduct is entirely changed. A new King reigns within 



XEPSITT, OB FEBISa. 51 

his heart He puts off the old man. What Ood com- 
mands, he now desires to practice; and what Ood 
forbids, he now desires to avoid. He strives in all 
ways to keep clear of sin, to fight with sin, to war with 
sin, to get the victory over sin. He ceases to do evil. 
He learns to do well. He breaks off sharp from bad 
ways, and bad companions. He labours, however feebly, 
to live a new life. When a man does this, you have 
the fourth step in true repentance. 

True repentance, in the last place, shows itself by 
producing in the heart a settled habit of deep hatred of 
aU sin. The mind of a penitent man becomes a mind 
habitually holy. He abhors that which is evil, and 
cleaves to that which is good. He delights in the law 
of God. He comes short of his own desires not unfre^ 
quently. He finds in himself an evil principle warring 
against the Spirit of Grod. He finds himself cold when 
he woidd be hot, backward when he would be forward, 
heavy when he would be lively, in Grod's service. He 
is deeply conscious of his own infirmities. He groans 
under a sense of indwelling corruption. But still, for 
all that, the general bias of his heart is towards God, 
and away from evil. He can say with David, "I count 
all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I 
hate every false way." (Psa. cxix. 128.) When a 
man can say this, you have the fifth, or crowning step, 
of true repentance. 

But now, is the picture of repentance complete ? Can 
I leave the subject here, and go on ? I cannot do it. 
There remains yet one thing behind that ought never to 
be forgotten. Were I not to mention this one thing, 



52 BEP£NTy OB PEBISH. 

I might make hearts sad that God would not have made 
sad, and raise seeming harriers hetween men's souls and 
heaven. 

True repentance, such as I have just described, is 
never alone in the heart of any man. It always has 
a companion — a blessed companion. It is always 
accompanied by lively faith in ojir Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. Wherever faith is, there is repentance ; 
wherever repentance is, there is always faith. I do not 
decide which comes first, — ^whether repentance comes 
before faith, or faith before repentance. But I am bold 
to say, that the two graces are never found separate, 
one from the other. Just as you cannot have the sun 
without light, or ice without cold, or fire without heat, 
or water without moisture, — so long you will never find 
true faith without true repentance, and you will never 
find true repentance without lively faith. The two 
things will always go side by side. 

And now, reader, before I go any further, search 
and try your own heart, and see what you know 
about true repentance. I do not tell you that the 
experience of all penitent people tallies exactly, pre- 
cisely, and minutely. I do not say that any man ever 
knows sin, or mourns for sin, or confesses sin, or forsakes 
sin, or hates sin, perfectly, thoroughly, completely, and 
as he ought. But this I do say, that all true Christiaiis 
will recognise something which they know and have 
felt, in the things which I have just been saying. 
Eepentance, such as I have described, will be, in the 
main, the experience of every true believer. Search, 
then, and see what you know of it in your own soul. 



SEPKNTy OR PERISH. 53 

Beware that you make no mistake about the nature 
of true repentance. The devil knows too well the value 
of that precious grace not to dress up spurious imitations 
of it. Wherever there is good coin there will always 
be bad money. Wherever there is a valuable grace, the 
devil will put in circulation counterfeits and shams of 
that grace, and try to palm them off on men's souls. 
Mako sure that you are not deceived. 

Take heed that your repentance be a business of 
your heart. It is not a grave face, or a sanctimonious 
countenance, or a round of self-imposed austerities, — it 
is not this alone that makes true repentance towards 
GKkL. The real grace is something far deeper than a 
mere affair of face, and clothes, and days, and forms. 
Ahab could put on sackcloth when it served his turn. 
But Ahab never repented. 

Take heed that your repentance be a repentance 
wherein you turn to God. Eoman Catholics can run to 
priests and confessionals when they are frightened. 
Felix could tremble when he heard the Apostle Paul 
preach. But all this is not true repentance. See that 
your repentance leads you unto God, and make you flee 
to Him as your best Priend. 

Take heed that your repentance be a repentance at- 
tended by a thorough forsaking of sin. Sentimental 
people can cry when they hear moving sermons on 
Sundays, and yet return to the ball, the theatre, and 
the opera in the week after. JSerod liked to hear John 
the Baptist preach, and " heard him gladly," and " did 
many things." But feelings in religion are worse than 
wortiiless, unless they are accompanied by practice. 



54 BEPENT, OB FEBISH. 

Mere sentimental excitement, without thorough break- 
ing off from sin, is not the repentance which God ap- 
proves. 

Take heed, above all things, that your repentance be 
closely bound up with faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. 
See that your convictions be convictions that never rest 
except at the foot of the cross whereon Jesus Christ died. 
Judas Iscariot could say, " I have sinned," but Judas 
never turned to Jesus. Judas never looked by faith to 
Jesus, and therefore Judas died in his sins. Give me 
that conviction of sin which makes a man flee to Christ, 
and mourn, because, by his sins, he has pierced the 
Lord who bought him. Give me that contrition of soul 
under which a man feels much about Christ, and grieves 
to think of the despite he has done to so gracious a 
Saviour. Going to Sinai, hearing about the ten com- 
mandments, looking at heU, thinking about the terrors 
of damnation — all this may make people afraid, and 
has its use. But no repentance ever lasts, in which a 
man does not look at Calvary more than at Sinai, and 
see in a bleeding Jesus the strongest motive for con- 
trition. Such repentance comes down from heaven. 
Such repentance is planted in man's heart by God the 
Holy Ghost. Eeader, see that such repentance be 
yours. 

II. I pass on now to the second point on which I 
purpose to speak. I will consider the necessity of re- 
pentance. Whf/ is repentance needful f 

The text which stands at the head of tbis subject, 
shows clearly the necessity of repentance. — The words 



BBPSHT, OB PEBISH. 55 

of our Lord Jesus Christ are distinct, express, and em- 
phatic, *' Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." 
All, all, without exception, need repentance toward God. 
It is not only necessary for thieves, murderers, drunk- 
ards, adulterers, fornicators, and the inmates of prisons 
and of jails. No ! all horn of the seed of Adam, all, 
without exception, need repentance toward God. The 
queen upon her throne and the pauper in the workhouse, 
the rich man in his drawing room, the servant maid in 
the kitchen, the professor of sciences at the university, 
the poor ignorant hoy that follows the plough — all hy 
nature need repentance. All are horn in sin, and all 
must repent and he converted, if they would be saved. 
AU must have their hearts changed about sin. All 
must repent, as well as believe the Gospel. ** Except 
ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall 
in no wise enter the kingdom of heaven." " Except ye 
repent, ye shall aU likewise perish." 

But wheqpe comes the necessity of repentance ? Why 
is such tremendously strong language used about this 
necessity? What are the reasons, what the causes, 
why rep^itance is so needful ? Keader, give me your 
attention again. Suffer me to show you, in a few 
words, the necessity of repentance. 

For one thing, without repentance there is no forgive- 
nesa of sins. In saying this, I must guard myself 
against misconstruction. I ask you emphatically not to 
misunderstand me. The tears of repentance wash away 
no sins. It is bad divinity to say that they do. That 
is the office, — ^that the work of the blood of Christ alone. 
— Contrition makes no atonement for transgression. It 



56 SEFENT^ OB PERISH. 

is wretched theology to say that it does. It can do 
nothing of the kind. Our best repentance is a poor, 
imperfect thing, and needs repenting over again. Our 
best contrition has defects enough about it to sink us 
into hell. — " We are counted righteous before Grod only 
for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, by faith, and not 
for our own works or deservings, — not for our repentance, 
holiness, almsgiving, sacrament-receiving, or anything 
of the kind. — All this is perfectly true. But still* it is 
no less true that justified people are always penitent 
people, and that a forgiven sinner will always be a man 
who mourns over, and loathes his sins. God in Christ 
is willing to receive rebellious man, and grant him 
peace, if he only comes to Him in Christ's name, how- 
ever wicked he may have been. But Qtod requires — 
and requires justly — that the rebel shall throw down 
his arms. The Lord Jesus Christ is ready to pity, 
pardon, relieve, cleanse, wash, sanctify, and fit for 
heaven. But the Lord Jesus Christ desiresito see a man 
hate the sins that he wishes to be forgiven. Let some 
men call this ** legality " if they will. — ^Let some call it 
"bondage" if they please. I take my stand on Scripture. 
The testimony of Good's Word is plain and unmistake- 
able. Justified people are always penitent people. 
Without repentance there is no foi^iveness of sins. 

For another thing, without repentance there is no 
hapj^neu in the life that now u. There may be high 
spirits, excitement, laughter, and merriment, so long as 
health is good, and money is in the pocket. But these 
things are not solid happiness. There is a conscience 
in all men, and that conscience must be satisfied. So 



SKPSNT, OB PSBISH. 57 

long as conscience feels that sin has not heen repented 
and forsaken, so long it will not be quiet, and will not 
let a man feel comfortable within. We all of us have 
an inner man, unknown to the world, — an inner man, 
with whom our companions and Mends have often no 
acquaintance. That inner man has a burden upon him, 
so long as sin is not repented ; and until that burden is 
taken off, that inner man has no real comfort. Can you 
and I be comfortable, when we are not in a right 
position ? It is impossible. And what is a man's true 
position? He is never in his right position till he 
has turned his back upon sin and turned his face 
towards God. — ^A man's house is never comfortable till 
all things are in order. And when is the house of the 
inward man in order ? Never, till God is King, and the 
world put down in the second place, — never, till God is 
upon the throne, and sin cast down and put out of 
doors. You might as well expect the solar system to 
go on well without the sun, as expect that heart of 
yours to be comfortable when God is not in His place. 
The great account with God must be settled. The King 
must be upon His throne. Then, and not till then, 
there will be peace within. Without repentance there 
can be no true happiness. We must repent if we want 
to be happy. 

Pot another thing, without repentance there can be 
no meUness for heaven in the world that ie yet to come. 
Heaven is a prepared place, and they who go to heaven 
must be a prepared people. Our hearts must be in tune 
for the employments of heaven, or else heaven itself 
would be a miserable abode. Our minds must be in 



58 ' SEPENT, OR FEHISH. 

harmony with those of the inhabitants of heaven, or else 
the society of heaven, would soon be intolerable to us. 
Gladly would I help every one to heaven into whose 
hands this book may fall. But I never would have you 
ignorant that if you went there with an impenitent 
heart, heaven would be no heaven to your soul. What 
could you possibly do in heaven, if you got there with 
a heart loving sin ? To which of all the saints would 
you speak? By whose side would you sit down? 
Surely the angels of God would make no sweet music to 
the heart of him who cannot bear saints upon earth, and 
never praised the Lamb for redeeming love ! Surely the 
company of patriarchs, and apostles, and prophets, would 
be no joy to that man who will not read his Bible 
now, and does not care to know what apostles and 
prophets wrote. Oh ! no ! no ! there can be no happi- 
ness in heaven, if we get there with an impenitent 
heart. The fish is not happy when it is out of water. 
The bird is not happy when it is confined in a cage. 
And why ? They are all out of their proper element 
and natural position. Aud man, unconverted man, im- 
penitent man, would not be happy if he got to heaven 
without a heart changed by the Holy Ghost. He would 
be a creature out of his proper element. He would 
have no feculties to enable him to enjoy his holy abode. 
"Without a penitent heart there is no ** meetness for the 
inheritance of the saints in light." We must repent, if 
we want to go to heaven. 

Beader, I beseech you by the mercies of God, to lay 
to heart the things which I have just been saying, and 
to ponder them well. You live in a world of cheating. 



^ BEFENT, OB PEBISH. 59 

imposition, and deception. Let no man deceive you 
about the necessity of repentance. Oh, that professing 
Christians would see, and know, and feel, more than 
they do, the necessity, the absolute necessity, of true 
repentance towards Gk)d ! There are many tilings that 
are not needful. Kiches are not needful. Health is 
not needful. Fine clothes are not needM. Noble 
friends are not needful. The favour of the world is not 
needful. (Hfts and learning are not needful. Millions 
have reached heaven without these things. Thousands 
are reaching heaven every year without them. But 
no one overreached heaven without "repentance toward 
Grod, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Header, let no man ever persuade you that any re- 
ligion deserves to be called the Gospel, in which repent- 
ance toward Gk)d has not a most prominent place. A 
Gospel, indeed ! That is no Gospel in which repentance 
is not a principal thing. A Gospel ! It is the Gospel 
of man, but not of God. A Gospel ! It comes from 
earth, but not from heaven. A Gospel ! It is not the 
Gospel at all; it is rank antinomianism, and nothing 
else. So long as you hug your sins, and cleave to your 
sins, and wiU have your sins, so long you may talk as 
you please about the Gospel, but your sins are not for- 
given. You may call that legal, if you like. You may 
say, if you please, you **hope it will be all right at 
last ; — God is merciful ; — God is love ; — Christ has died ; 
— I hope I shall go to heaven after all." No ! I tell 
you, it is not all right. It will never be all right, at 
that rate. You are trampling under foot the blood of 
atonement. You have as yet no part or lot in Christ. 



60 BEPEirr^ OB feaish. 

So long as you do not repent of sin, the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ is no GK)spel to your soul. Christ is 
a Saviour from sin, not a Saviour for man in sin. If a 
man will have his sins, the day will come when that 
merciful Saviour will say to him, "Depart fix)m me, 
thou worker of iniquity ! depart into everlasting fire, 
prepared for the devil and his angels." 

Eeader, let no man ever delude you into supposing 
that you can be happy in this world without repent- 
ance. Oh ! No ! You may laugh and dance, and go 
upon Sundays in excursion trains, and crack good jokes, 
and sing good songs, and say, *' Cheer boys cheer ! " 
and " There's a good time coming ; " — but all this is no 
proof that you are happy. So long as you do not 
quarrel with sin, you will never be a truly happy man. 
Thousands go on for a time in this way, and seem 
merry before the eyes of men, and yet in their heart 
carry about a lurking sorrow. When they are alone 
they are wretched. When they are not in jovial company 
they are low. Conscience makes cowards of them. 
They do not like being by themselves. They hate 
quiet thinking. They must have constantly some new 
excitement. Every year they must have more. Just 
as an opium-eater needs a larger dose every year he 
goes on eating opium, so does the man that seeks happi- 
ness in anything except in God need greater excitement 
every year that he lives, and after all is never happy. 

Yes ! reader, and worse than all, the longer you go 
on without repentance, the more imhappy will that 
heart of yours be. When old age creeps over you and 
grey hairs appear upon your head, — when you are un- 



SEP8NT, OB PERISH. 61 

able to go where you once went, and take pleasure 
where you once took pleasure, — your wretchedness and 
misery will break in upon you like an armed man. The 
more impenitent a man is, the more miserable he be- 
comes. Have you ever heard of the great clock of St. 
Paul's in London ? At midday, in the roar of business, 
when carriages, and carts, and waggons, and omnibuses, 
go rolling through the streets, how many never hear 
that great clock strike, imless they live very near it 
But when the work of the day is over, and the roar of 
business has passed away, — when men are gone to sleep, 
and silence reigns in London, — then at twelve, at one, 
at two, at three, at four, the sound of that clock may 
be heard for miles areund. — Twelve ! — One ! — Two ! — 
Three! — ^Four! — How that clock is heard by many a 
sleepless man ! That clock is just like the conscience of 
the impenitent man. While he has health and strength, 
and goes on in the whirl of business, he will not hear 
conscience. He drewns and silences its voice by plung- 
ing into the world. He will not allow the inner man to 
speak to him. But the day will come when conscience 
will be heard, whether he likes it or not. The day will 
come when its voice will sound in his ears, and pierce 
him like a sword. The time will come when he must 
retire from the world, and lie down on the sick bed, and 
look death in the face. And then the clock of conscience, 
that solemn dock, will sound in his heart, and if he has 
not repented, will bring wretchedness and misery to his 
soul. Oh ! no ! write it down in the tablets of your 
heart, — without repentance no peace ! 

Above all, let no man make you dream, that there is 



62 BEPENT, OR PERISH. 

a possibility of reaching heaven without repentance 
toward God. We all want to go to heaven. A man 
would be justly set down as a madman, if he said that 
he wanted to go to hell. But never let it be forgotten, 
that none go to heaven except those whom the Holy 
Ghost has prepared for it. I make my solemn protest 
against those modem delusions, that eill men shall go to 
heaven at last, — that it matters not how you live, — that 
whether you are holy or unholy, it does not signify, — 
that whether you are godless or God-fearing, it is all the 
same, — that all at length will get to heaven. I cannot 
find such teaching in the Bible. I find the Bible con- 
tradicting it flatly. However speciously this new idea 
may be propounded, and however plausibly it may be de- 
fended, it cannot stand the test of the Word of God. 
No ! reader, let God be true, and every man a liar. 
Heaven is no such place as some seem to fancy. The 
inhabitants of heaven are no such mixed multitude as 
many try to believe. They are all of one heart, and one 
mind. Heaven is a place to which God's people shall 
go. But for those who are impenitent and unbelieving, 
and will not come to Christ, for such the Bible says, 
plainly and unmistakeably, there remains nothing but 
hell. 

Oh, reader, it is a solemn thought that an impenitent 
man is unfit for heaven. He could not be happy in 
heaven, if he got there. I remember hearing of a clergy- 
man, who many years ago was travelling by coach. He 
sat by the coachman's side upon the box. The coach- 
man was one of those unhappy men who fancy nothing 
is to be done without swearing. He was cursing, 



BEPSNT, OR PEBISH. 63 

swearing, blaspheming, taking God's name in vain, for 
many a long mile together. On he drove, now flying 
into a passion, now beating his horses, now cursing and 
swearing again. Such were the coachman's ways. 
At last the clergyman said to him, quietly, ** Coachman, 
I am exceedingly afraid about you." " Sir," said the 
coachman, "what should you be afraid of? All is 
going on right, wo are not likely to be upset." "Coach- 
man," said the clergyman again, "I am exceedingly 
afr^d about you; because I cannot think what you 
would do in heaven, if you got there; there will be 
no cursing in heaven; there will be no swearing in 
heaven ; there will be no passion in heaven ; there will 
be no horses to beat in heaven." "Coachman," said 
the minister once more, "I cannot think what you 
would do in heaven;" — "Oh!" said the coachman, 
"that is your opinion; " — and no more was said. — 
Years passed away. A day came when a person told 
the clergyman a sick man desired to see him. He was 
a stranger. He had come into the parish, he said, 
because he wanted to die there. The clergyman went 
to see him. He entered a room and found a dying man, 
whose face he did not know. "Sir," said the dying 
man, "you do not remember me." "No," said the 
clergyman, " I do not." " Sir," said the man, " I re- 
member you. I am that coachman, to whom, many 
years ago, you said, * Coachman, I am afraid about you, 
because I do not know what you would do if you got to 
heaven.' Sir, those words laid hold upon me. I saw 
I was not fit to die. Those words worked, and worked, 
and worked in my heart, and I never rested till I had 



64 BEPENT, 0£ PEBISH. 

repented of sin, and fled to Christ, and found peace in 
Him, and became a new man." " And now," said he, 
"by the grace of God I trust I am prepared to meet 
my Maker, and am meet for the inheritance of the 
saints in light." 

Reader, once more I charge you to remember, — 
without repentance toward God, there can be no meet- 
ness for heaven. It woidd give pain to an impenitent 
man to place him there. It would be no mercy to him. 
— He would not be happy. He could not be happy. 
There could be no enjoyment in heaven to a man who 
got there, without a heart hating sin, and a heart loving 
God. I expect to see many wonders at the last day. 
I expect to see some at the right hand of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, whom I once feared I should see upon the 
left. I expect to see some at the left hand whom I 
supposed to be good Christians, and expected to see at 
the right. But there is one thing I am sure I shall not 
see. — I shall not see at the right hand of Jesus Christ 
one single impenitent man. I shall see Abraham there, 
who said, " I am dust and ashes." — I shall see Jacob 
there, who said, ** I am not worthy of the least of all 
thy mercies." — I shall see Job there, who said, " I am 
vile." — I shall see David there, who said, "I was 
shapen in iniquity : in sin did my mother conceive me." 
— I shall see Isaiah there, who said, ** I am a man of 
unclean lips." — I shall see Paul there, who said, "I 
am the chief of sinners." — I shall see the martyr, John 
Bradford there, who often signed himself at the end of 
his letters, "That wretched sinnner, that miserable 
sinner, John Bradford," — that same John Bradford who 



VEPEST, OH PBJU8V. 65 

said, whenever he saw a man going to be hanged, 
" There goes John Bradford, but for the grace of God." 
— I shall see Archbishop Usher there, whose last words 
were, "Pardon my many sins, especially my sins of 
omission." — I shall see Grimshaw there, whose last words 
were, " Here goes an unprofitable servant." — But they 
will all be of one heart, one mind, one experiei^e. 
They will all have hated sin. They will all have 
mourned for sin. They will all have confessed sin. 
They will all have forsaken sin. They will all have 
repented as well as believed, — repented toward God as 
well as believed in Jesus Christ. They will all say 
with one voice, "What hath God wrought!" They 
will all say, ** By the grace of God I am where I am," 
as well as " By the grace of God I am what I am." 

III. I come now to the third and last thing of which 
I promised to speak. I will speak of the encouragement 
there is to repentance. What is there to lead a man to 
repent? 

I feel it very important to say something on this 
point. I know that many difficulties arise in the way 
when the subject of repentance is brought before us. I 
know how slow man is to give up sin. You might as 
well tell him to cut off a right hand, or pluck out a 
right eye, or cut off a right foot, as tell him to part 
with his darling sins. — I know the strength of old 
habits and early ways of thinking about religion. At 
first they are like cobwebs. At last they are iron chains. 
— I know the power of pride, and that " fear of man 
that bringeth a snare." — I know the dislike there is in 



66 BEPBNT, OK PERISH. 

people to being thought a saint, and supposed to care 
about religion — I know that hundreds and thousands 
would never shrink from storming a Redan, a Malakoff, 
and yet cannot bear to be laughed at and thought 
ridiculous because they care for their souls. — And I 
know, too, the mtilice of our great enemy, the devil. 
"V^^ll he part with his ** lawful captives" without a 
conflict ? N"ever. "Will he give up his prey without a 
fight? N"ever. I once saw a lion at the Zoological 
Gardens being fed. I saw his meal cast down before 
him. I saw the keeper try to take that meal away. — I 
remember the lion's roar, his spring, his struggle to 
retain his food. And I remember the ** roaring lion 
that goeth about seeking whom he may devour." Will 
he give up a man, and let him repent without a struggle? 
Never, never, never ! Man wants many encouragements 
to make him repent. 

But there are encouragements, great, broad, wide, 
full, and free. There are things in the word of God 
which ought to nerve every heart and arouse every one 
to repent without delay. Reader, I desire to bring 
these things before you. I would not have one soul lay 
down this book and say, ** The thing cannot be done ; 
it is impossible." I should like all to say, "There is 
hope ! There is hope ! There is an open door ! It is 
possible ! The thing can be done ! By the grace of 
God a man may repent." 

Hear, for one thing, what a gracious Saviour the 
Lord Je8us Christ is. I place Him first and foremost as 
the great argument to encourage a man to repentance. 
I say to every doubting soul, — **Look at Christ, think 



ESPENT, OB PE&ISH. 67 

of Christ/' He is one ''able to save to the uttermost 
all that come unto Gk>d by him. He is one anointed 
"a Prince and a Saviour to give repentance as well as 
remission of sins." He is one that ** came to seek and 
to save that which was lost.'' He is one who said, '* I 
came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance." 
He is one who cries, " Come unto me, all ye that labour 
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." He is 
one who has pledged His royal word, "Him that cometh 
unto me, I will in no wise cast out." And He it is of 
whom it is written, "As many as received Him, to them 
gave He power to become the sons of God, even to 
them that believe on His name." I answer all doubts, 
and questions, and dificidties, and objections, and fears 
with this simple argument. I say to every one that 
wants encouragement, "Look at Christ, think of Christ. 
Consider Jesus Christ the Lord ; and then doubt about 
repentance no more." 

Hear, for another thing, tohat glorious promises the word 
of God contains. It is written, " Whosoever confesseth 
and forsaketh his sins shall find mercy." It is written 
again, "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just 
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from edl 
unrighteousness." It is written again, "Blessed are the 
poor in spirit, for their's is the kingdom of God. Blessed 
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. 
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteous- 
ness, for they shall be filled." Surely these promises 
are encouragements. Again, I say, dovht about repen- 
tance no more. 

Hear, for another thing, what gracious declarations 



68 EEPENT, OE PERI8H. 

the word of God contains, "When the wicked man 
tumeth away from his wickedness that he hath com- 
mitted, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he 
shall save his soul alive." " The sacrifices of God are 
a broken spirit ; a broken and a contrite heart, God, 
thou wilt not despise." ** God is not willing that any 
shoidd perish, but that all should come to repentance." 
"As I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death 
of him that dieth ; turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die ? " 
" There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over 
one sinner that repenteth." Surely these words are 
encouraging, if any words can be ! Again I say, doubt 
about repentance no more. 

Hear, for another thing, what marvellous parables our 
Lord Jesus spoke upon this subject. *' Two men went up 
into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the 
other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus 
with himself: God, I thank thee, that I am not as other 
men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this 
publican. I feist twice in the week, I give tithes of all 
that I possess. And the publican standing 2£ax off, 
would not lift up so much as his eyes imto heaven, but 
smote upon his breast," — as if his heart was so full of 
sorrow that he could not show it sufficiently — "he 
smote upon his breast," saying, God be merciful to me 
a sinner. — " I tell you, this man went down to his house 
justified rather than the other." Hear, again, that 
other marvellous parable, — the parable of the prodigal 
son. "A certain man had two sons : and the younger 
of them said to his father. Father, give me the portion 
of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto them 



BEPENT, OB PEBISH. 69 

his living. And not many days after, the younger son 
gathered all together, and took his journey into a far 
country, and there wasted his substance with riotous 
living. And when he had spent all, there arose a 
mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in 
want. And he went and joined himself to a citizen of 
that country : and he sent him into his fields to feed 
swine." And there, feeding swine, in his lowly case, 
he "came to himself, and said, 'How many hired 
servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, 
and I perish with hunger ! I will arise, and go to my 
father, and will say unto him, Father I have sinned 
against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy 
to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired 
servants.* And he arose, and came to his father. But 
when he was yet a great way off," — mark that, — " a 
great way off,*' — " his father saw him, and had compas- 
sion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. 
And the son said unto him. Father, I have sinned against 
heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be 
called thy son. But the father said to his servants, 
bring forth the best robe, and put it on him ; and put a 
ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. And bring 
hither the fatted calf, and kill it ; and let us eat and be 
merry : for this my son was dead, and is aUve again ; 
he was lost, and is found. And they began to be 
merry." Surely these are mighty encouragements to 
repentance. Again I say, doubt about repentance no 
more. 

Hear, lastly, what wonderful examples there are in the 
ward of Qod; of God^s mercy and kindness to pemtmt 



70 EEPENT, OB PEEISH. 

men. Bead the story of David. What sin can be 
greater than David's sin ? But when David turned to 
the Lord, and said, " I have sinned against the Lord," 
the answer came, " The Lord hath put away thy sin." 
— ^Kead the story of Manasseh. What wickedness could 
have been greater than his ? He killed his own children. 
He turned his back upon his father's God. He placed 
idols in the temple. And yet when Manasseh was in 
prison and humbled himself, and prayed to the Lord, the 
Lord heard his prayer, and brought him out of captivity. 
— Read the history of Peter. What apostacy could be 
greater than his? He denied his Master three times 
over with an oath ! And yet, when Peter wept, and 
mourned for his sin, there was mercy even for Peter, 
and penitent Peter was restored to his Master's favour. 
— ^Kead the story of the penitent thief. What case 
could be more desperate than his? He was a dying 
man on the brink of hell. Yet when he said to Jesus, 
" Lord remember me when thou comest into thy king- 
dom," at once the marvellous answer came, " Verily I 
say unto thee. To-day shalt thou," even thou, '*be with 
me in paradise." 

Oh, reader ! what greater encouragement to repentance 
can be imagined or conceived ? Why are all these cases 
recorded for our learning ? They are intended to lead 
men to repentance. They are all patterns of God's long- 
suffering — ^patterns of God's mercy — ^patterns of God's 
willingness to receive penitent sinners. They are proofs 
of trhat God's grace can do. They are a cloud of wit- 
nesses, proving that it is worth while for man to repent 
— that there is encouragement for man to turn to God, 



XBPENT, OB PEKISH. 71 

and that such an one as goeth on still in his sins is 
utterly without excuse. 

I remember hearing of a mother whose daughter ran 
away from her, and lived a life of sin. For a long time 
no one could teU where she was. — ^Yet that daughter 
came back and was reclaimed. She became a true 
penitent. She was taught to mourn for sin. She 
turned to Christ and believed in Him. Old things 
passed away, and all things became new. Her mother 
was asked one day to tell what she had done to bring 
her daughter back. — "J^at means had she used? — 
What steps had she taken? Her reply was a very 
striking one. She said, " I prayed for her night and 
day." But that was not all. She went on to say, " I 
never went to bed at night without leaving my front 
door unlocked, and the door on the latch. I thought if 
my daughter came back some night when I was in bed, 
she should never be able to say that she foimd the door 
shut. She should never be able to say that she came 
to her mother's home, but could not get in." And so 
it turned out. Her daughter came back one night, and 
tried the door, and found the door open, and at once 
came in, to go out and sin no more. That open door 
was the saving of her soul. — ^Eeader, that open door is 
a beautifcd illustration of the heart of God towards sin- 
ners ! The door of mercy is set open. The door is not 
yet locked. The door is always upon the latch. God's 
heart is full of love. Qt)d's heart is fiill of compassion. 
Whosoever a man may have been, and whatsoever a man 
may have been, at midnight, at any time, whenever he 
returns to God, he will find God willing to receive him. 



72 BEPENTy OB PERISH. 

ready to pardon him, and glad to have him at home. 
All things are ready. Whosoever wiU may come in. 

And, reader, ont of all the millions who have turned 
to God and repented, who ever repented of repentance ? 
I answer boldly, not one. Thousands every year re- 
pent of folly and unbelief. Thousands mourn over 
time misspent. Thousands regret their drunkenness, 
and gambling, and fornication, and adultery, and oaths, 
and neglected opportunities. But no one has ever risen 
up and declared to the world that he repents of repent- 
ing and turning towards God. The steps in the narrow 
way of life are all in one direction. You wiU never 
see in the narrow way the step of one who turned back 
because the narrow way was not good. 

I remember reading of a remarkable event that oc- 
curred in a place of worship where a Puritan minister, 
Mr. Doolittle, was preaching, two hundred years ago. 
Just as he was about to begin his sermon, he saw a 
young man, a stranger, coming into his church. He 
guessed by the young man's manner that he was anxious 
about his soul, and yet undecided about religion. He 
took a remarkable course with him. He tried a curious 
experiment, but God blessed it to the young man's soul. 
Before Mr. Doolittle gave out his text, he turned to an 
old Christian whom he saw on one side of his church. 
He addressed him by name, and said to him, " Brother, 
do you repent of having served God?'* The old 
Christian stood up manfully before the congregation, and 
said " Sir, I have served the Lord from my youth, and 
He has never done me anything but good." — He turned 
to the left hand, where he saw another Christian, and 



SIPBHT, OB PS1U8H. 73 

addressed him in the same way. " Brother/' said he, 
calling him hy his name, ''Do you repent of having 
served Christ ?'* That man also stood up manfully before 
the congregation, and said, ''Sir, I never was truly 
happy till I took up the cross, and served the Lord Jesus 
Christ." Then Mr. Doolittle turned to the young man, 
and said, " Young man, will you repent ? Young man, 
will you take up the cross ? Young man, will you this 
day begin to serve Christ ?" God sent power with these 
words. The yoimg man stood up before the congregation, 
and said in a humble tone, " Yes sir, I will." That 
very day was the beginning of eternal life in the young 
man's soul. Header, depend upon it, the two answers 
which Mr. Doolittle got that day are the experience of 
all true Christians. Depend upon it no man ever repents 
of repentance. No man was ever sorry that he served 
the Lord. "No man ever said at the end of his days, 
" I have read my Bible too much, I have thought of 
God too much, 1 have prayed too much, I have been 
too careful about my soul." Oh ! no. The people of 
God would always say, " Had I my life over again, I 
would walk far more closely with God than ever I have 
done. I am sorry that I have not served God better, 
but I am not sorry that I have served Him. The way 
of Christ may have its cross. But it is a way of plea- 
santness, and a path of peace." Surely that fact alone 
speaks volumes. It is a fact that clinches every argu- 
ment which I have already advanced. Surely it is 
worth while for a man to repent These are encourage- 
ments. The impenitent man is without excuse. 

And now» reader, I have brought before you, the three 



74 BEPSKT, OB PEBISE* 

points which I proposed at the outset of this tract to 
consider. I have shewn you the nature of repentance 
toward God — the necessity of repentance — and the 
encouragements to repentance. It only remains to con- 
clude the subject by a few words of practical affectionate 
application to the souls of all who read it. 

1. My first word shall be a word of warning, I 
offer an affectionate warning to every impenitent soul 
into whose hands this tract may fall. I cannot doubt 
for a moment that many a reader of this tract is not 
saved. I cannot for a moment suppose that all who 
read its pages are truly repentant toward God, and 
lively believers in Jesus Christ. I dare not think it. — 
I cannot think it. And my first word shall be a word 
of warning, — tender, affectionate warning, — to all im- 
penitent and unconverted people who may happen to 
to read, " Eepent or Perish." 

What stronger warning can I give you than that 
which my text contains ? What words can I use more 
solemn and more heart-searching than the words of my 
Lord and Master — '* Except ye repent, ye shall all like- 
wise perish ? " Yes ! you who are reading, and as you 
read know you are not yet at peace with God, — ^you 
who are halting, lingering, undecided, in religion, — you 
are the man to whom the words of the text should come 
with power, "Except thou repentest, thou," even thou, 
" shalt perish." 

Oh reader, think what awfiil words are these ! Who 
can measure out the full amount of what they contain ? 
<' Shall perish!" Perish in body, — ^perish in soul, — 



aXPEMT, OB PBBI8H. 75 

perish miserably at last in hell ! I dare^not attempt to 
paint the horrors of that thought. The worm that 
never dies, the fire that is not quenched, the blackness 
of darkness for ever, the hopeless prison; the bottomless 
pit, the lake that bums with fire and brimstone, — all, 
all are but feeble emblems of the reality of hell. And 
to this hell all impenitent people are daily travelling ! 
Yes! from churches and chapels, — from rich men's 
drawing rooms and poor men's cottages — from the midst 
of knowledge, wealth, and respectability, all who will 
not repent are certainly travelling toward hell. ** Ex- 
cept ye repent, ye shall all perish." 

Think how great is your danger y my dear reader! 
Where are your sins, your many sins ? You know you 
are a sinner. You must be aware of it. It is vain to 
pretend you have committed no sins. And where are 
your sins, if you have never yet repented, never mourned 
for sin, never confessed sin, never fled to Christ, and never 
found pardon through Christ's blood ? Oh, take heed 
to yourself. — ^The pit opens her mouth for you. The 
de^il is saying, of you, " He will be mine." Take heed 
to yourself: remember the words of the text, " Except 
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." They are not 
my words, but Christ's words. It is not my saying, 
but Christ's saying. Christ says — Christ the merciful, 
Christ the gracious, — "Except thou repentest, thou wilt 
certainly perish." 

Think again of your guilt — Yes, I say, deliberately, 
think of your guilt. It is guilt when a man does not 
repent. We are responsible and accountable to God for 
repentance. It is vain to say we are not. What does 



76 SEPBNT, OB PEBISH. 

St. Paul say to the Athenians, " God commandeth all 
men everywhere to repent.** (Acts xvii. 30.) "What 
does our Lord say of Chorazin and Bethsaida ? Why 
were they so guilty ? Why was their position in hell 
to he so intolerable ? Because they would not repent 
and believe. — It is the express testimony of the Son of 
God, that the impenitent man who has been called to 
repentance is more guilty than if he had never been 
urged to repent. 

Think again of the folly of remaining an impenitent 
man ! Yes, I say the folly. The world you cleave to 
is melting beneath your feet already. What will 
bank-notes do for you in the life to come ? What will 
your gold be worth to you a hundred years hence? 
When your last hour comes, what can all the gold in 
the globe do for you, if you die an impenitent man ? 
You live for the world, perhaps, now. You drive hard 
and furiously to be successful in business. You compass 
sea and land to add acre to acre, or accumulate stock in 
the funds. You do all you can to get money, to amass 
riches, to make yourself comfortable, to have pleasure, 
to leave something for wife and children when you die. 
But oh I remember, remember, if you have not got the 
grace of Grod and true repentance, you are a poor man, 
a pauper in the sight of God. 

I shall never forget the effect produced upon my own 
mind when I read some years ago of that fearful ship- 
wreck, the loss of the Central America, — a great steamer 
which was lost on the voyage from Havannah to New 
York. The steamer was bringing home from California 
three or four hundred gold-diggers. They had all got 



SXFENT, OR PERISH. 77 

their gold> and were coming home, proposing to spend 
their latter days in ease in their own country. But 
man proposes and God disposes. 

Ahout four-and- twenty hours after the Central America 
left Havannah, a mighty storm arose. Three or four 
heavy seas in succession struck the ship, and seriously 
damaged her. The engines hecame disabled and useless, 
and she feU off into the trough of the sea. She sprung 
a leak, and in spite of every effort the ship began to fill, 
and after a while, when all on board had pumped and 
baled, and baled and pumped, until they were exhausted, 
it became plain that the Central America, with her 
three or four hundred passengers and all her crew, was 
like to go down into the deep, deep sea, and carry 
nearly all on board with her. The crew launched the 
only boats they had. They placed the women passen- 
gers in these boats with just a suf&cient complement of 
sailors to manage them. All honour be to them for 
their kind feeling to the weak and defenceless at a time 
like that ! The boats put off from the vessel ; but there 
were left behind two or three hundred people, many of 
them gold-diggers, when the Central America went 
down. One who left the ship in one of the last boats 
that took the women, described what he saw in the 
cabin of the steamer, when aU hope was gone, and the 
great ship was about to go down. Men took out their 
gold. One said, holding his leather bag, containing his 
long- toiled- for accumulations, "Here; take it who will; 
take it who will. It is no more use to me : the ship is 
going down. Take it who will." Others took out 
their gold dust, and scattered it broadcast over the 



78 BEPENT, OB FEBI8H. 

cabin. " There," they said, '* take it ; take it who will. 
We are all going down. There is no more chance for 
us. The gold will do us no good." Oh, what a com- 
ment that is on the truly valueless nature of riches, 
when a man draws near to God ! " Eiches profit not in 
the day of wrath, but righteousness delivereth from 
death." Think of your folly, my beloved reader. 
Think of your folly as well as your danger, your folly 
as well as your guilt, if you will cleave to your sins. 
Think of your folly if you will not hear the warning 
that I give you this day. In my Master's name, I say 
to you once more, ** Except thou repentest," thou, even 
thou who art reading this book, " thou shalt likewise 
perish." 

2. My second word of application shall be an invi- 
tation to all who feel their sins and desire to repent, and 
yet know not what to do. I give it broadly and fully to 
all who ask me, *' What shall I do, this very day, if I am 
to take your advice ? " I answer that question without 
any hesitation. I say to you, in my Master's name, 
Repent, repent, repent this very day. Eepent without 
delay. 

Reader, I feel no difficulty in saying this. I cannot 
agree with those who say that unconverted people should 
not be told to repent or pray. I find the Apostle Peter 
saying to Simon Magus, " Repent of this thy wicked- 
ness." I find him saying, " Pray Gk)d, if perhaps the 
thought of thy heart may be forgiven." I am content 
to follow in the Apostle's wake. I say the same to 
every reader who is anxious about his soul. I say Be- 



BIFENTy OB PXRI8H. 79 

penty Bepent, Eepent, without delay. The time will 
soon come when you must be decided, if ever you mean 
to be. Why not this very day ? Why not to-night ? 
Sermon-hearing cannot go on for ever. Going to 
churches and chapels must have an end. Liking this 
man and liking that man, belonging to this church and 
belonging to that chapel, holding these views and 
holding those views, thinking this preacher sound and 
that preacher unsound, is not enough to save a soul. A 
man must act at last, as well as think, if he means to 
go to heaven. A man must break off from his sins, 
and flee to the Lord Jesus, if he does not intend to be 
damned. A man must come out from the world and 
take up the cross. A man must be decided, and repent, 
and believe. A man must show his colours, and be on 
the Lord Jesus Christ's side, if he means to be saved. 
And why not begin all this to-night? Oh! repent, 
repent, repent without delay. 

Do you ask me again what you ought to do ? Go, 
I tell you, and cry to the Lord Jesus Christ this very 
day. Go and pour out your heart before Him. Go and 
tell Him what you are, and teU Him what you desire. 
Tell Him you are sinner ; — ^He will not be ashamed of 
you. Tell Him you want to be saved ; — ^He will hear 
you. Tell Him you are a poor weak creature ; — He will 
listen to you. Tell Him you do not know what to do 
or how to repent ; — He will give you His grace. He 
will pour out His Spirit upon you. He will hear you. 
He will grant your prayer. He will save your soul. 
There is enough in Christ, and to spare, for all the wants 
of all the world, for all the wants of every heart that is 



80 B1EPEKT, OB PXBISH. 

unconverted, nnsanctified, unbelieving, impenitent, and 
unrenewed. " What is your hope ? " said a man to a 
poor Welsh boy, who could not speak much English, 
and was found dying in an inn one day. — "What is 
your hope about your soul?" What was his reply? 
He turned to the questioner, and said to him, in broken 
English, " Jesus Christ is plenty for everybody ! Jesus 
Christ is plenty for everybody ! " There was a mine of 
truth in those words. And well said another, — a navi- 
gator who died in the Lord at Beckenham : " Tell them 
all, — tell every man you meet, — Christ is for every 
man ! Jesus Chbist is fob every man ! " Go to that 
Savioor this day, and tell Him the wants of your soul. 
Go to Him, in the words of that beautiful hymn that 
says, — 

** Just as I ftxa, without one plea, 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 
And that Thou bid*st me come to Thee— > 
Lamb of God, I come ! 

Just as I am, and waiting not, 
To rid my soul of one dark blot, 
To Thee, whose blood can cleanse each spot, 
Lamb of God, I come ! " 

Go to the Lord Jesus in that spirit, and He will 
receive you. He will not refose you. He will not 
despise you. He will grant you pardon, peace, ever- 
lasting life, and give you the grace of the Holy Ghost. 

Do you ask me whether there is anything else you 
ought to do ? Yes ! I reply. Go and resolve to break 
off from every known sin. Let those who will, call such 



1UBPSNT, OB PERISH. 81 

advice 1^^. I trust I may never shrink from giving 
it. It can never be right to sit still in wickedness. It 
oan never be wrong to say with Isaiah, ** Cease to do 
eviL" Whatever be your sin, resolve, by God's help, 
that to-morrow morning you will rise an altered man, 
and break off from that sin. — Whether it be drinking, 
or swearing, or Sabbath-breaking, or passion, or lying, 
or cheating, or covetousness, — whatever your sin and 
fEiult, determine, by God's grace, that you will break off 
sharp from it. Give it up without delay, and turn from 
it, by God's help, for the rest of your days. Cast it 
from you: — it is a serpent that will bite you to death. 
Throw it from you : — it is useless lumber ; — it will sink 
the ship down to perdition. Cast away your besetting 
sin — give it up— turn from it — break it off. By God's 
help resolve that in that respect you will sin no more. 
Header, I think it just possible that you may be 
ashamed of repentance. I do beseech you to cast away 
such shame for ever. Xever be ashamed of repentance 
toward God. Of sin you might be ashamed. — Of lying, 
swearing, drunkenness, gambling, Sabbath-breaking — 
of these a man ought to be ashamed. But of repentance, 
of prayer, of faith in Christ, of seeking Gt)d, of caring 
for the soul — never, never, so long as you live, never be 
ashamed of such things as these. I remember fifteen 
or sixteen years ago, a thing that came imder my own 
knowledge, which gave me some idea of what shame 
can do. I was attending a dying man, who had been a 
sergeant in the 7th Dragoon Guards. He had ruined his 
health by drinking spirits. He had been a careless, 
thoughtless man about his soul. He told me upon Ms 



82 BEPSNT, OB FEBISH. 

death-bed that when he first began to pray, he was so 
ashamed of his wife knowing it, that when he went up- 
stairs to pray, he would take his shoes off, and creep up 
in his stockings, that his wife might not be aware how 
he was spending his time. Verily, I am afraid there 
are many like him ! Do not you be one of them. 
Whatever you are ashamed of, never be ashamed of 
seeking God. 

Reader, I think it just possible that you are afraid to 
repent. You think you are so bad and unworthy that 
Christ will not have you. I do beseech you once more, 
to cast away such fear for ever. Never, never be afraid 
to repent. The Lord Jesus Christ is very gracious. He 
will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking 
flax. Fear not to draw near to Him. — There is a con- 
fessional ready for you. You need none made by man. 
The throne of grace is the true confessional. — There is 
a confessor ready for you. You need no ordained man, 
no priest, no bishop, no minister, to stand between you 
and God. The Lord Jesus is the true High Priest. The 
Lord Jesus Christ is the real Confessor. None is so 
wise, and none so loving as He. None but He can give 
you absolution, and send you away with a light heart 
and in perfect peace — 0, take the invitation I bring 
you. Fear nothing. Christ is not an ** austere man." 
He despiseth not any. Arise this day, and flee to Him. 
Go to Christ and repent this night without delay. 

3. My last word of application shall be cm exhorta- 
tian to aU who have hnoum what repentance is hy experience* 
I address it to all who have, by God*s grace, felt their 



BSPENT, OB FSBISH. 83 

sins, sorrowed for their sins, confessed their sins, given 
np their sins, and found peace in the blood of Jesus 
Christ. What shall I say to you but this ? Keep up 
your Te^ntance^keep up your repmtanee. Let it be a 
habit of mind you watch over to the last day of your 
life. Let it be a fire you never allow to bum low or to 
become dull. Keep up your repentance, if you love life. 
I do not want you to make a Christ of repentance, or 
to turn it into a bondage for your soul. I do not bid 
you to measure the degree of your justification by your 
repentance, or to suppose that your sins are not forgiven 
because your repentance is imperfect. Justification is 
one thing, and repentance is another. You must not 
conftise things that differ. It is only faith that justifies. 
It is only faith that lays hold of Christ. But for all 
that, keep a jealous watch over your repentance. Keep 
it up — keep it up, and let not the fire bum low. 
Whenever you find a slackness coming over your soul, 
— whenever you feel slow, and dull, and heavy, and cold, 
and careless about little sins, look to your own heart 
then, and take heed lest you fall. Say to your soul, 
•' Oh, my soul, what art thou doing ? Hast thou 
forgotten David's fall? Hast thou forgotten Peter's 
backsliding? Hast thou forgotten David's subsequent 
misery ? Hast thou forgotten Peter's after tears ? 
Awake, my soul, awake once more. Heap on fuel, 
make the fire bum bright. Retum again to thy God, 
let thy repentance once more be lively. — Let thy repen- 
tance be repented over again." Alas! how few are the 
hours in a Christian's best days when he does not make 
work for repentance. 



84 BSPBNT, OS PERISH. 

Eeader, keep up your repentance till the last day of 
your life. There will always be sins to deplore, and 
infirmities to confess. Take them daily to the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and obtain from Him daily ^supplies of 
mercy and grace. Make confession daily to the Great 
High Priest, and receive from Him daily absolution. 
Feed daily on the passover Lamb. But never forget 
that it was to be eaten with bitter herbs. *' Sir," said 
a young man to Philip Henry, "how long should a 
man go on repenting ? How long, Mr. Henry, do you 
mean to go on repenting yourself?" What did old 
Philip Henry reply ? "Sir, I hope to carry my repentance 
to the very gates of heaven. Every day I find I am a 
sinner, and every day I need to repent. I mean to 
carry my repentance, by God's help, up to the very 
gates of heaven." 

Eeader, may this be our divinity, your divinity, my 
divinity; your theology, my theology! May repentance 
toward God and faith tpward our Lord Jesus Christ be 
Jachin and Boaz, — the two great pillars before the 
temple of our religion, the comer-stones in our system 
of Christianity! (2 Chron. iii. 17.) May the two 
never be disjoined ! May we, while we repent, believe; 
and while we believe, repent! And may repentance 
and faith, faith and repentance, be ever uppermost, 
foremost, the chief and principal articles in Uie creed 
of our souls ! 



I0n qnii €mfmt 



1 JOHN i. 9. 

" If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive 
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.** 

The question wliich forms the title of 
this tract is at all times deeply important. Among the 
foundation-stones of saving religion, few deserve more 
serious attention than ** confession of sins/' 

But there are occasions when circumstances give a 
particular importance to particular doctrines in religion. 
The assaults of enemies sometimes make it needful to 
exhihit some special truth with special distinctness. The 
plausible assertion of some error sometimes requires 
to be met by more than ordinary carefulness in showing 
" the thing as it is " in the word. A doctrine may per- 
haps be in the rear-rank to-day, and to-morrow may be 
thrust forward by the force of events into the very front 
of the battle. This is the case at the present time with 

* An Annual Address for the year 1859. 



86 DO YOU CONFESS. 

the subject of " confession." Many years have passed 
away since men thought and talked so much as they do 
now about " the confession of sins." 

Reader, I desire in this tract to lay down a few plain 
scriptural principles about " confession of sin." I would 
fain guide you to some clear and decided conclusions on 
this important subject. Let us beware, in the din of 
controversy and discussion, that we do not lose sight of 
the mind of the Spirit, and injure our own souls. — ^There 
is a confession which is needful to salvation, and there is 
a confession which is not needful at all. — There is a con- 
fessional to which all men and women ought to go, and 
there is a confessional which ought to be denounced, 
avoided, and abhorred. — ^Let us endeavour to separate the 
wheat from the chaff, and the precious from the vile. 
We shall do well if we learn to hold decided and Scrip- 
tural opinions about the vexed question of confession. 

There are two points to which I purpose to direct your 
attention, and two inquiries to which, by God's help, I 
will supply an answer. 

I. In the first place. Who are they that ought to 
confess sin? 

II. In the second place, To whom ought confession 
of sin to be made ? 

Once let a man have clear views on these two points, 
and he will never go fax wrong on the subject of confession. 

I. In the first place, TTho are they that tmght to con- 
feu iiiM ? 



]X> YOU CONFESS. 87 

I answer this question in one plain sentence. All men 
and women in tiie world! All are bom in sin and 
children of wrath. All have sinned and come short of 
the glory of Grod. Before God all are guilty. There is 
not a just man upon earth that doeth good and sinneth 
not. There is not a child of Adam that ought not to 
confess sin. (Ephes. ii. 3., Eom. iii. 23, 19. Eccles. 
vii. 20.) 

There is no exception to this rule. It does not apply 
only to murderers, and felons, and the inmates of prisons. 
It applies to all ranks, and classes, and orders of mankind. 
The highest are not too high to need confession. The 
lowest are not too low to be reached by God's require- 
ment. Kings in their palaces, and poor men in their 
cottages, — preachers and hearers, — teachers and scholars, 
—landlords and tenants, — masters and servants, — all, all 
are alike summoned in the Bible to confession. !N^one 
are so moral and respectable that they need not confess 
that they have sinned. All are sinners in thought, word, 
and deed, and all are commanded to acknowledge their 
transgressions. Every knee ought to bow, and every 
tongue ought to confess to God. " Behold," saith the 
Lord, " I will plead with thee because thou sayest, I 
have not sinned." (Jer. ii. 35.) " If we say that we have 
no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." 
(1 John i. 8.) 

Without confession there is no salvation. The love of 
God towards sinners is infinite. The readiness of Christ 
to receive sinners is unbounded. The blood of Christ 
can cleanse away all sin. But we must " plead guilty " 
l)efore God can declare us innocent. We must acknow- 



88 DO TOTT C0KPE8S. 

ledge that we surrender at discretion before we can be 
pardoned and let go free. Sins that are known and not 
confessed, are sins that are not forgiven. They are yet 
upon us, and daily sinking us nearer to hell. " He that 
covereth his sins shall not prosper : but whoso confesseth 
and forsaketh them shall find mercy." (Prov. xxviii. 
13.) 

Without confession there is no inward peace. Con- 
science will never be at rest, so long as it feels the burden 
of unacknowledged transgression. It is a load of which 
man must get rid if he means to be really happy. It is 
a worm at the root of all comfort. It is a blight on joy 
and mirth. The heart of the little child is not easy, 
when he stands in his parent's presence, and knows 
that he has done something wrong. He is never easy 
till he has confessed. — The heart of the grown-up man 
is never really easy, until he has unburdened himself before 
God, and obtained pardon and absolution. " When I 
kept silence," says David, " my bones waxed old through 
my roaring all the day long. For day and night thy 
hand was heavy upon me : my moisture is turned into 
the drought of summer. I acknowledged my sin unto 
thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said I will 
confess my transgression unto the Lord : and thou for- 
gavest the iniquity of my sin." (Psalm xxxii. 3 — 6.) 

Eeader, there is no gainsaying these things. They 
stand out plainly on the face of Scripture, as if they 
were written with a sunbeam. They are so clear that he 
who runs may read. Confession of sin is absolutely 
necessary to salvation. It is a habit which is an essential 
part of repentance unto life. Without it there is no going 



]X> TOV OOHVJ6S8. 89 

to heaven. Without it we have no part or lot in GhriBt. 
Without it we shall certainly go to hell. All this is un- 
doubtedly true. And yet in the face of all this, it is a 
melancholy and appalling fact, that few people confess 
iheir sins! 

Some people have no thought or feeling about their 
sins. The subject is one which hardly crosses their 
minds. They rise in the morning and go to bed at night. 
They eat, and drink, and sleep, and work, and get money, 
and spend money, as if they had no souls at all. They 
live on as if this world was tiie only thing worth thinking 
ot, They leave religion to parsons and old men and 
women. Their consciences seem asleep, if not dead. 
Of course they never confess. 

Some people are too proud to acknowledge themselves 
sinners. Like the Pharisee of old, they flatter themselves 
they are " not as other men." They do not get drunk 
like some, or swear like others, or live profligate lives 
like others. They are moral and respectable ! They 
perform the duties of their station ! They attend church 
regularly ! They are kind to the poor ! What more 
would you have ? If they are not good people and going 
to heaven, who can be saved ? — ^But as to habitual con- 
fession of sin, they do not see that they need it. It is 
all very well for wicked people, but not for them. Of 
course, when sin i&* not really felt,, sin will never be 
confessed. 

Some people are too- indolent and slothful to take any 
step in religion so decided as confession. Their Chris- 
tianity consists in meaning, and hoping, and intending, 
and resolving. They do not positively olject to any- 



90 DO YOTT COlTl^SS. 

thing that they hear upon spiritusd subjects. They can 
^yen approve of the Gospel. They hope one day to 
repent, and beKeve, and be converted, and become 
thorough Christians, and go to heaven after death. But 
they never get beyond ** hoping." They never come 
to the point of making a business of religion. Of course 
they never confess sin. 

In one or other of these ways thousands of persons 
on every side are ruining their souls. In one point they 
are all agreed. They may sometimes call themselves 
" sinners " in a vague general way, but they have no 
real sense, or sight, or understanding of sin. Its guilt, 
and vileness, and wickedness, and consequences, are 
utterly hid jfrom their eyes. And the result, in each 
case, is one and the same. They know nothing prac- 
tically of confession of sins. 

Eeader, shall I tell you the clearest proof that man is 
a fallen and corrupt creature ? It is not open vice or 
unblushing profligacy. It is not the crowded public 
house, or the murderer's cell in a jail. It is not avowed 
infidelity, or gross and foul idolatry. All these are 
proofs, and convinciiig proofs indeed, that man is fallen ; 
— but there is to my mind a stronger proof still. That 
proof is the wide-spread spirit of slumber in which the 
most of men lie chained and bound about their ^osils. 
When I see that multitudes of sensible men, and intel- 
ligent men, and decent-living men, can travel quietly 
towards the grave, and feel no concern about their sins, 
I want no more convincing evidence that man is '* bom 
in sin," and that his heart is alienated from God. — ^Theie 
is no avoiding the conclusion. Man is naturally asleep, 



DO TOTT COTSTFSSB. 91 

and must be awakened. He is blind, and must be made 
to see. He is dead, and must be made alive, df this 
irms not the case, there would be no need for our pressing 
the duty of confession. Scripture commands it. Itea« 
son assmits to it. Conscience, in its best moments, 
approves of it. And yet, notwithstanding this, the vast 
majority of men have no practical acquaintance with 
oonfession of sin ! — No disease of body is so desperate 
as mortification. No heart is in so bad a state as the 
heart that does not feel sin. 

Beader, shall I tell you my first and foremost wish for 
your soul, if you are yet unconverted ? I can wish you 
notihing better than thorough self-knowledge. I should 
like the veil to be taken from your heart. I should like 
you, to see yourself as you really are in the sight of God. 
Ignorance of self and sin is the root of all mischief to 
the soul. There is hardly a religious error or a false 
doctrine that may not be traced up to it. For want of 
seeing sin, men do not value salvation. Once let a man 
get a sight of his own heart, and he will begin to cry, 
" God be merciful to me a sinner." 

Header, if you have learned to feel and acknowledge 
your sinfulness, you have great reason to thank God. It 
is a real symptom of health in the inward man. It is a 
mighty token for good. To know your spiritual disease 
is one step towards a cure. To feel bad and wicked 
and hell-deserving, is the first beginning of being really 
good. Once more I say, you have great reason to thank 
God. 

What though you feel ashamed and confounded at the 
si^t of your own transgressions ! What though you 



92 DO TOTT C0KFES8. 

are humbled to the dust, and cry, " Lord, I am vile. 
Lord, I am the very chief of sinners ! " I tell you it is 
better a thousand times to have these feelings and be 
miserable under them, than to have no feelings at all. I 
tell you that anything is better than a dead conscience, 
and a cold heart, and a prayerless tongue ! 

Eeader, if you have learned to feel and confess sin, 
you may well thank God and take courage. Whence 
came those feelings that you find within ? Who told you 
that you were a guilty sinner ? What moved you to b^gin 
acknowledging your transgressions ? How was it that 
you first found sin a burden, and longed to be set f5ree 
from it ? — These feelings do not come from man's natural 
heart. The devil does not teach such lessons. The 
schools of this world have no power to impart them. 
Eeader, these feelings come down from above. They are 
the precious gift of God the Holy Ghost. It is His 
special office to convince of sin. Rejoice, I say again, 
and be exceeding glad. The man who has really learned 
to feel and confess his sins, has learned that which 
millions never learn, and for want of which millions die 
in their sins, and are lost to all eternity. 

II. I now turn to the second branch of my subject. 
To whom ought confession of sin to be made ? 

I enter on this branch of the subject with sorrowful 
feelings. I approach it as a sailor would approach some 
rock on which many gallant ships bave made shipwreck. 
I cannot forget that I have arrived at a point on wbidh 
millions of so-called Christians have erred greatly, and 
millions are erring at the present day. But I dare not 



DO YOU CONFESS. 98 

keep back anything that is Scriptural, for fear of giving 
offence. The errors of millions must not prevent a 
minister of the Gospel speaking the truth. If multitudes 
are hewing out broken cisterns that can hold no water, 
it becomes the more needful to point out the true foun- 
tain. If countless souls are turning aside irom the right 
way, it becomes the more important to show clearly to 
whom confession ought to be made. 

Sin, to speak generally, ought to be confessed to God. 
He it is whom we have chiefly offended. His are the 
laws which we have broken. To Him all men and 
women will one day give account. His displeasure 
is that which sinners have principally to fear. This is 
what David felt : ** Against thee, thee only have I sinned, 
and done this evil in thy sight." (Psalm li. 4.) This is 
what David practised : " I said I will confess my trans- 
gressions unto the Lord." (Psalm xxxii. 5.) This is what 
Joshua advised Achan to do : " My son, give glory to 
God, and make confession to Him." (Jos. vii. 19.) The 
Jews were right when they said, " Who can forgive sins 
but God only? " (Markii. 7.) 

But must we leave the matter here ? Can vile sinners 
like us ever dare to confess our sins to a holy God ? 
"Will not the thought of His infinite purity shut our 
mouths and make us afraid ? Must not the remembrance 
of His holiness make us afraid ? Is it not written of Gt)d, 
that He is ** of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can- 
not look on iniquity ? " (Hab. i. 13.) Is it not said, 
that He *' hates all workers of iniquity ? " (Psalm, v. 5.) 
Did He not say to Moses, " There shall no man see 
my fece and live ? " (Exodus xxxiii. 20.) Did not 



94 so YOU OOITFESS. 

Israel say of old, " Let not God speak with us, lest we 
die?" (Exod. xx. 19.) Did not Daniel say, "How 
can the servant of my Lord talk with this my Lord ? '' 
(Dan, X. 17.) Did not Job say, "When I consider I 
am afraid of Him ? '' (Job xxiii. 15.) Did not Isaiah 
say, " "Woe is me, for I am undone : — ^for mine eyes 
have seen the King, the Lord of hosts ? " (tsai. vi. 5.) 
Does not Elihu say, " Shall it be told Him that I speak? 
If a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up ? " 
(Job xxxvii. 20.) 

Eead^, these are serious questions. They are ques- 
tions which must and will occur to thoughtful minds. 
There are many who know what Luther meant, when 
he said, " I dare not have anything to do with an abso- 
lute God." But I thank God, they axe questions to 
which the Gospel supplies a full and satisfactory answer. 
The GK)spel reveals One who is exactly suited to the 
wants of souls which desire to confess sin. 

I say then that sin ought to be confessed to God in 
Christ. — I say that sin ought specially to be confessed 
to God manifest in the flesh, — to Christ Jesus the Lord, 
— ^to that Jesus who came into the world to save sinners, 
— to that Jesus who died for our sins, and rose again 
for our justification, and now lives at the right hand of 
God to intercede for all who come to God by Him. He 
that desires to confess sin, should apply direct to Christ. 

Christ is a great High Priest. Let that truth sink 
down into our hearts, and never be forgotten. He is 
sealed and appointed by God the Father for that v^y 
purpose. It^ is His peculiar office to receive and hear, 
and pardon and absolve sinners. It is His place to re- 



DO TOTT 0OKFJtC». 95 

eeiTe conf^ssioiis and to grant plenary abBolutions. 
It is written in Soripture, "Thou art a prieet for ever." 
'' We have a great high priest that is passed into the 
heavens." " Having an High Priest over the house of 
Ood, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assur- 
ance of faith." (Heb. iv. 14; vi. 20 ; x. 21, 22.) 

Christ is a High Priest of Almighty power. There is 
no sin that He cannot pardon, and no sinner that He 
cannot absolve. He is very Gk)d of very God. He is 
" over all, God blessed for ever." He says Himself, "I 
and my Father are one." He has ''all power in heaven 
and earth." He has "power on earth to forgive sins." 
He has oomplete authority to say to the chief of sinners, 
" Thy sins are forgiven. Go in peace." He has the 
keys of death and hell." When He opens, no man can 
shut. (Eom. ix. 5. John z. 30. Matt, xxviii. 18. 
Matt. ix. 6. Luke vii. 48 — 50. Eev. i. 18 ; iii. 7.) 

Christ is a High Priest of infinite mllingnesa to re- 
ceive confession of sin. He invites all who feel their 
guilt to come to Him for relief. '*Come unto me," He 
says," all ye that labour and are heavy-laden and I will 
give you rest" " If any man thirst, let him come unto 
me and drink." When the penitent thief cried to Him 
on the cross, He at once absolved him folly, and gave 
him an answer of peace. (Matt. xi. 28. John vii. 37.) 

Christ is a High Priest of perfect knowledge. He 
knows exactly the whole history of all who confess to 
Him. From Him no secrets are hid. He never errs in 
judgment. He makes no mistakes. It is written that 
" He is of quick imderstanding. He shall not judge 
after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the 



96 DO T0T7 CONTESS. 

hearing of his ears." (Isaiah xi. 8.) He can discern 
the difierence hetween the hypocritipal professor who is 
full .of words, and the hroken-hearted sinner who can 
scarce stammer out His confession. People may deceive 
ministers hy " good words and fair speeches," but they 
will never deceive Christ. 

Christ is a High Priest of matchless tenderness. He 
will not afflict willingly, or grieve any soul that comes 
to Him. He will handle delicately every wound that is 
exposed to Him. He will deal tenderly even with the 
vilest sinners, as he did with the Samaritan woman. 
Confidence reposed in Him is never abused. Secrets 
confided to Him are completely safe. Of Him it is 
written, that "He will not break the bruised reed, nor 
quench the smoking flax." He is one that " despiseth 
not any." (Isaiah xlii. 3. Job xxxvi. 5,) 

Christ is a High Priest who can sympathne with all 
that confess to Eim. He knows the heart of a man by 
experience, for He had a body like our own, and was 
made in the likeness of man. " "We have not a High 
Priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our in- 
firmities, but was in all points like as we are, yet with- 
out sin." (Heb iv. 15.) To Him the words can most 
truly be applied, which Elihu applied to himself, " Be- 
hold, I am according to thy wish in God's stead : I also 
am formed out of the clay. Behold, my terror shall not 
make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon 
thee." (Job xxxiii. 6, 7.) 

Header, this great High Priest is the person whom you 
and I ought specially to employ in our confession of sin. 
It is only through Him and by Him that we should 



DO TOTT CONFESS. 97 

make all our approaches to God. In Him we may draw 
near to God with boldness, and have access with con- 
fidence. (Ephes. iii. 12.) Laying our hand on Him and 
His atonement, we may '' c«me boldly to the throne 
of grace that we may obtain mercy, and find grace 
to help in time of need." (Eeb. iv. 16.) We need 
no other mediator or priest. We can find no better 
High Priest. To whom should the sick man disclose 
his ailment, but the physician ? To whom should the 
prisoner tell his story, but to his legal advocate ? To 
whom should the sinner open his heart and confess his 
sins but to Christ ? 

-Why should we confess our sins to angels and dead 
saints, while we have Christ for a High Priest ? Why 
should we confess to the Virgin Mary, Michael the arch- 
angel, John the Baptist, St. Paul, or any other creature 
in the imseen world? The Church of Rome enjoins 
such confession as this on her millions of members, and 
many members oi the Church of England seem half- 
disposed to think the Church of Rome is right. But 
when we ask a reason for the practice, we may ask 
long without getting an answer. 

There is no need for such a confession. Christ has not 
given up His office, and ceased to be a Priest. The saints 
and angels cannot possibly do more for us than Christ 
can. They certainly have not more pity or compassion, 
or goodwill towards our souls. 

There is no warrant of Scripture for such a confession. 
There is not a text in the Bible that bids us confess to 
dead saints and angels. There is not an instance in 
Scripture of any living believer taking his sins to them. 



98 DO TOTT OOHFBSS. 

There is not the slightest proof that there is ofiy 
use in such a confession. We do not even know that 
the saints in glory can hear what we say. Much less do 
we know that they could, help us if they heard. They 
we»e all sinners saved by grace themselves. "Where is 
the likelihood that they could do anything to aid our 
souls? 

Eeader, the man who turns away from Christ to con- 
fess to saints and angels, is a deluded robber of his own 
soul. He is following a shadow and forsaking the sub- 
stance. He is rejecting the bread of life and trying to 
satisfy his spiritual hunger with sand. 

But why, again, should we confess our sins to living 
priests and ministers, while we have Christ for a High 
Priest ? The Church of Eome commands her memb^^s 
to do so. A party within the Church of England ap- 
proves the practice as useful, helpful, and almost needfiil 
to the soul. But, again, when we ask for Scripture and 
reason in support of the practice, we receive no satis- 
factory answer.* 

* The only passages in the Prayer-hook of the Church of England 
which appear at first sight to favour the Romish yiew of eonfeasioa 
and absolution are to be found in the exhortation in the Com- 
munion service, and in the vintation of the Sick. 

In both these cases I am entirely satisfied that the Beformers 
neyer intended to give any countenance to the Bomish doctrine, 
and that the true and honest interpretation of the language uaed, 
affords no help to those who hold that doctrine. 

In the Exhortation in the Communion Service, the case is sop- 
posed of some person who " cannot quiet his conscience.** The 
advice then follows, '* Let him come to me, or to some other dis- 
crete and learned minister of God's holy word, and open his grief; 
that by the ministry of God's holy word he may receive the benefit 
of abflolutioii, tog«dier with ghostly counsel and advice.'* 



DO TOU OOITFESS. 99 

Ib there an^f need for oonfessing to priests or ministers? 
There is none. There is nothing they can do fot a sinner 
that Christ cannot do a thousand times better. When 
Christ has failed the soul that cried to Him, it may be 
time to turn to ministers. But that time will HATer 
oome. 

Is there any Scriptural warrant for confessing to 
priests or ministers ? There is none. There is not a 
passage in the l^ew Testament which commands it. St. 
Paul writes three epistles to Timothy and Titus about 
ministerial duty. But he says nothing about receiring 
confessions. — St. James bids us '' confess our faults to 
one another/' but he says nothing about confessing to 

K men are detprmined to twist this passage into a sanction of 
the "Romish doctnue of confession and absolution, it is useless to 
reason with them. To my own eyes the exhortation seems nothing 
more than advice to people who are troubled with difficulties, to 
go and speak to a minister in private about them, and to get them 
cleared up by texts £rom the Bible. 

But I can see nothing in the passage like Bomish auricular coa- 
iBsaion and priestly absolution. 

In the visitation of the sick, the language used about absolving 
the sick man, ** if he humbly and heartily desire it,'* is undoubt- 
edly very strong, and the direction to " move '* the sick person to 
*' make a special confession of his sins, if he feel his conscience 
troubled with any mighty matter," is unmistakeable. 

Yet, even here, it is hard to prove that this confession means 
more than any faithful minister of the Gospel would press on any 
sick and dying person, if he saw him *' troubled," or distressed 
i^ut *' some mighty matter.'* It is only in this case, be it re- 
membered, that he is to be " moved to make " it 

As to the absolution, the most that can be made of it, is that 
it is declaratory. It is a very strong and authoritative declaration 
of the forgiveness of the Grospel, addressed to a dying perscm, in 
seed of special comfort It is the custom of the Prayer-book to 



100 DO T0T7 CONFESS. 

ministers. — Above all there is not a single example in 
the Bible of any one confessing to a minister and receiv- 
ing absolution. We see the apostles often declaring 
plainly the way of forgiveness, and pointing men to 
Christ. But we nowhere find them telling men to con- 
fess to them, and offering to absolve them after confession. 
Finally, is any good likely to remit from confessing to 
priests or ministers ? I answer boldly, there is none. 
Ministers can never know that those who confess to 
them are telling the truth. Those who confess to them 
will never feel their consciences really satisfied, and will 
never feel certain that what they confess will not be 
improperly used. Above all, facts, stubborn facts, 

call any ministerial declaration of God's willingness to pardon 
those who repent and believe, an " absolution." We see this very 
plainly in the beginning of the morning and afternoon service. 
After the general confession, the minister reads what is called *' an 
absolution." 

The language of the absolution in the '* visitation of the sick *' 
is undoubtedly yery strong. But still it must be observed that it 
only declares a person absolved, who is already absolved by God. 
The very form itself says that the Church's absolution is to be 
given to " all sinners who truly repent and believe in Jesus 
Christ." Now all such are of course pardoned the very moment 
they repent and believe. When therefore the minister says " 1 
absolve thee," he can only mean, " I declare thee absolved," 

When I add to this explanation the striking fact that the Homily 
of Repentance contains a long passage most strongly condemning 
aurici^ar confession, I can see no fair ground for the charge that 
the Church of England sanctions auricular confession. At Uie 
same time I deeply regret that the formularies of the Church 
contain any expressions which are capable of being twisted into 
an argument in defence of the doctrine, and should rejoice to see 
them removed. 

Those who wish to examine the subject further, are referred to 
an extract from the Homily of Repentance at the end of this subject. 



]X> TOU COVPESS. 101 

abound to show that the practice of confessing to min- 
isters, has often led to the grossest and most disgusting 
immorality. A living writer has truly said, " There is 
no better school of wickedness on earth than the con- 
fessional. History testifies that for every offender whom 
the confessional has reclaimed, it has hardened thous- 
ands ; — for one it may have saved it has destroyed mil- 
lions." (Wylie on Popery, p. 329.) 

Header, the man who turns away from Christ to con- 
fess his sins to ministers, is like a man who chooses to 
live in prison when he may walk at liberty, or to starve 
and go in rags in the midst of riches and plenty, or to 
cringe for favours at the feet of a servant, when he may 
go boldly to the Master, and ask what he will. A 
mighty and sinless High Priest b provided for him, and 
yet he prefers to employ the aid of mere fellow sinners 
like himself ! He is trying to fill his purse with rubbish 
when he may have fine gold for the asking. He is 
insJBting on lighting a rush light, when he may enjoy 
the noon-day light of God's sun ! 

Header, if you love your soul, beware of giving to 
ministers the honour that belongs to Christ alone. 
He is the true High Priest of the Christian's profession. 
He ever lives to receive confessions, and to absolve 
sinners. Why should we turn away from Him to man ? 
Above all, beware of the whole system of the Romish 
confessional. Of all practices that were ever devised 
by man, in the name of religion, I firmly believe that 
none was ever devised so mischievous and objectionable 
as the confessional. It overthrows Christ's office, and 
places man in the seat which should only be occupied 



102 DO TOtr COITPESS. 

by the Son of God, — It puts two Binnere in a thoronghly 
wrong position. — It exalts the confessor far too high. 
It places those who confess far too low. — It gives the 
confessor a place which it is not safe for any child of 
Adam to occupy. It imposes on those who confess a 
bondage to which it is not safe for any child of Adam 
to submit. — It sinks one poor sinner into the degrading 
attitude of a serf. It raises another poor sinner into a 
dangerous mastery over his brother's soul. — ^It makes 
the confessor little less than a god. It makes those who 
confess little better than slaves. — If you love Christian 
liberty, if you value inward peace, remember the advice 
I give you this day. Beware, beware of the slightest 
approach to the Eromish confessional ! 

Listen not to those who tell you that Christian minis- 
ters were intended to receive confessions, and that Evan- 
gelical teaching makes light of the ministerial office, and 
strips it of all authority and power. Such assertions are 
more easily made than proved. We honour the minister's 
office highly, but we refiise to give it a hair's breadth 
more dignity than we find given in the Word of God, 
We honour ministers as Christ's ambassadors, Christ's 
messengers, Christ's watchmen, helpers of believers' joy, 
preachers of the "Word, and stewards of the mysteries 
of God. But we decline to regard them as priests, me- 
diators, confessors, and rulers over men's faith, both for 
the sake of their souls and of our own.* 



* It Bhonld always be remembered, that the word " priest " in 
the Prayer-book, was not intended to mean a sacrifioing priest, 
like the Old Testament priests. It signifies the same as presbyter 
or elder. 



BO TOV GOITFESS. 103 

IdBten not to those who tell yon that Evangelical 
teaching is opposed to the exercise of soul-discipline, or 
heart*examination, or self-hnmiliation, or mortification 
of the flesh, or true contrition. Opposed to it ! There 
never was a more baseless assertion. We are entirely 
fiivtnirable to it. This only we require, that it shall be 
carried on in the right way, "We approve of a con- 
fessional ; but it must be the only true one, the throne 
of grace. — ^We approve of going to a confessor ; but it 
most be the true One, Christ the Lord. — ^We approve 
of submitting consciences to a priest ; but it must be 
to the great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God. — ^We 
approve of unbosoming our secret sins, and seeking abso- 
lution ; but it must be at the feet of the great Head of 
the Church, and not at the feet of one of His weak 
members. — We approve of kneeling to receive ghostly 
counsel ; but it must be at the feet of Christ, and not at 
the feet of man. 

Header, beware of ever losing sight of Christ's priestly 
offioe. Glory in His atoning death. Honour Him as 
your substitute and surety on the cross. Follow Him as 
your Shepherd. Hear His voice as your prophet. Obey 
TTim as your King. But in all your thoughts about 
Christ, let it be often before your mind, that He alone is 
your High Priest, and that He has deputed His priestly 
office to no order of men in the world.* This is the office 



• The XMutsage, " Whosesoever eins ye remit they are remitted 
onto them; and whosesoeyer sins ye retain they are retained," 
(Jobsk xz. 23,) is often auoted in defence of the Itomiah view of 
priaaily ahsolution, but 1 am firmly persuaded, in entire contra- 
diotioa to our Lord's intention. 



104 DO YOU CONFESS. 

of Christ, which Satan labours above all to obscure. It is 
the neglect of this office which leads to every kind of 
error. It is the remembrance of this office which is the 
best safe-guard against the plausible teaching of the 
Church of Kome. Once right about this office you will 
never greatly err in the matter of the confession of sin. 
You will know to whom confession ought to be made ; — 
and to know that rightly is no slight thing. 

And now, reader,! shall conclude this subject with three 
words of practical application. You have seen who 
ought to confess sin. You have seen to whom confession 
ought to be- made. Give me your attention a little 
longer while I try to bring the matter nearer to your 
heart and conscience. Our years are rolling fast away. 
Time flies very quickly. Writing and preaching, — 
reading and working, — doubting and speculating, — dis- 
cussion and controversy, — all, all will soon be past and 
gone for ever. Yet a little while and there will remain 
nothing but certainties, realities, and eternity. Give 
me, I say again, your attention, while I plead with yon 
once more about your soul. I mean nothing but your 
good, — God is witness. Then take what I say in good 
part. 

I believe that our Lord conferrecl on His apostles, in these words 
the power of authoritatively declaring whose sins are forgiven, 

and whose sins are not forgiven, hut nothing more I believe 

moreover that from their peculiar gift of discerning spirits, the 
apostles were fitted and enabled to exercise this power of declaring, 
in a way that no minister, since the apostolic times, ever can or 
ever dii 

But that the apostles ever took on themselves to " remit or 
retain sins,'* in the wav that the Romish Church enjoins on her 
priests to do, is not to be traced out in any passage m the whole 
New Testament 



TX) T0X7 CONFESS. 105 

!• My first word of application shall bo a question. 
That question is neither more or less than the heading 
of the subject you are reading. I ask you, DO YOU 
CONFESS? 

You know my meaning in asking this question. I 
trust the pages you have already read make that suf- 
ficiently plain. I do not ask you now what your 
opinion is about matters controverted in the present day. 
I ask you a plain practical question, — Do you know 
anything of the daily habit of confessing sin to Ood ? 

You will not pretend to say you have no sins at all. 
Few, probably, are so blind and ignorant in the present 
day as to say that. But what do you do with your 
sins ? — ^What measures do you take about your sins ? — 
Do you use any steps to get rid of your sins ? — Do you 
ever speak to any one about your sins ? — Answer these 
questions, I do beseech you, to your own conscience. 
Whether you are rich or poor, old or young, church- 
man or dissenter, matters little. But it does matter a 
great deal whether you can reply to the inquiry of this 
subject, — Do you confess your sins ? 

Beader, if you know nothing of the habit of confessing 
sin, I have only one remark to make, — YOUB SOUL 
IS IN IMMINENT DANGER ! There is but a step 
between you and hell. If you die as you are, you will 
be lost for ever. The kingdom of Gk)d contains no silent 
subjects. The citizens of the heavenly city are a people 
who have all known, and felt, and confessed their sins. 

I give you one simple warning. You will have to 
confess your sins one day, whether you will or no. 
When the great white throne is set, and the books are 

H ' 



106 DO Y0X7 CONPESS. 

opened, your sins will at last be exposed before the 
whole world. The secrets of all hearts will be revealed. 
You will have to acknowledge your transgressions before 
the eyes of an assembled world, and an innumerable 
company of angels. Your confession at last will be 
most public ; and, worst of all, your confession will be 
too late ! 

Where is the man who would not shrink from the 
idea of such an exposure ? Where is the woman whose 
spirit would not fail at the very possibility of such a con- 
fession as this ? -s Eeader, this public confession will be 
the portion of millions. Take heed lest it be your's. 
Oh ! think, think, think upon the question before 
you. DO YOU CONFESS ? 

2. My second word of application shall be an trm- 
tation. I address it to all who have neglected con- 
fession of sin in time past, and are ashamed of their 
neglect. I invite you in my Master's name to BEGIN 
THE HABIT OF CONFESSION WITHOUT DE- 
LAY. 

Go this very day to the throne of grace, and speak to 
the great High Priest, the Lord Jesus Christy about 
your soul. Pour out your heart before Him. Keep 
nothing back from Him. Acknowledge your iniquitieB 
to Him, and entreat Him to cleanse them away. Say to 
Him, in David's words, "For thy name's sake pardon 
my iniquity, for it is great." — *' Hide thy face from 
my sins, and blot out all my iniquities." — Cry to TTinn as 
the publican did in the parable, " Gk)d be merciful to me 
a sinner." (Psalm xzv. 11 : li. 9. Luke zviii. 13.) 



DO TOU C0NPE88. 107 

Beader, are you afraid to do this ? Do you feel un- 
worthy and unlit to begin? I do entreat you to 
resiBt such feelings, and to begin without delay. There 
are glorious Bible examples to encourage you. There 
are rich Bible promises to lure you on. In all the 
volume of Scripture there are no passages so encour- 
i^ug as those which are about confession of sin. ** If 
we confess our sins, He is fedthful and just to forgive 
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 
(1 John i. 8.) ** If any say, I have sinned, and per- 
verted that which is right, and it profited me not ; He 
will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life 
shall see the light." (Job xxxiii. 27.) "Father," said 
the prodigal son, " I have sinned against heaven and in 
thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. 
But the father said to his servant. Bring forth the best 
robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, 
and shoes on his feet : and bring hither the fatted calf 
and kiU it, and let us eat and be merry." (Luke xv. 
21 — 23.) Arise, dear reader, and call upon God. If 
Christ had never died for sinners, there might be some 
excuse for doubting. But Christ having suffered for 
silly there is nothing that need keep you back. Only 
acknowledge your iniquity, and cast yourself wholly on 
Gk>d'8 mercy in Christ, and life, eternal life, shall be 
your own. " Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall 
be made white as snow: though they be red like 
crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isaiah i. 18.) But 
Oh! reader, begin, begin to confess without delay. 
This very day BEGIN TO CONFESS YOUR SIN. 



108 DO YOU CONFESS. 

3. My last word of application shall be an exhor- 
tation, I address it to all who have been taught by the 
Holy Ghost to confess their sins, and know the subject 
of this tract by inward experience. I exhort them TO 
KEEP UP THE HABIT OF CONEESSIOIS' to the last 
day of their lives. 

My believing brethren, we shall never cease to be 
sinners as long as we are in the body. Every day we 
shall find something to deplore in our thoughts, or 
motives, or words, or deeds. Every day we shall find 
that we need the blood of sprinkling, and the inter- 
cession of Christ. Then let us keep up daily transactions 
with the throne of grace. Let us daily confess our 
infirmities at the feet of our merciful and faithful High 
Priest, and seek fresh absolution. Let us daily cast 
ourselves under the shadow of His wings, and cry, 
'* Surely in me dwelleth no good thing : Thou art my 
hiding-place, Lamb of God ! " 

May every year find us more humble and yet more 
hopeful, — more sensible of our own unworthinesa and 
yet more ready to rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no 
confidence in the flesh ! — May our prayers become every 
year more fervent, and our confessions of sin more real ; 
— our eye more single, and our walk with God more 
close ; — our knowledge of Jesus more clear, and our love 
to Jesus more deep ; — our citizenship in heaven more 
manifest, and our separation from the world more 
distinct ! 

So living, we shall cross the waves of this trouble- 
some world with comfort, and have an abundant-entrance 
into God's kingdom. So living, we shall find that our 



DO TOU CONFESS. 109 

light affliction, which is hut for a moment, works for us 
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Yet 
a few more years and our prayers and confessions shall 
cease for ever ! "We shall begin an endless life of praise. 
We shall exchange our daily confessions for eternal 
thanksgiving.* 

* The attention of all members of the Charch of England is particularly 
requested to the following passages from the ' Homily of Kepextance :' 

" Whereas the adversaries [Roman Catholics] wrest this place [in St. 
James — (James v.) — ], for to maintain their aoricular confession withal, 
they are greatly deceived themselves, and do shamefully deceive others; 
for if this text ought to be understood of auricular confession, then the 
priests are as much bound to confess themselves unto the lay-people, as 
the lay-people are bound to confess themselves to them. And if to pray 
is to absolve, then the laity by this place hath as groat authority to 
absolve the priests, as the priests have to absolve the laity." 

** And where that they do allege this saying of our Saviour Jesus Christ 
onto the leper, to prove auricular confession to stand ou God's word. Qo 
thy way, and show thyself unto the priest ; Matt. viii. do they not see that 
the leper was cleansed from his leprosy before he was by Christ sent 
unto the priest, for to show himself unto him ? By the same reason we 
must be cleansed from our spiritual leprosy, I mean our sins must be 
forgiven us, before that we can come to confession. What need we then 
to tell forth our sins into the ear of the priest, silh that they be already 
taken away ? Therefore holy Ambrose, in his second sermon upon the 
hundred and nineteenth Psalm, doth say fiill well, Go shoic thyself unto 
the prieMt, Who is the true priest, but he which is the Priest for ever, 
after the order of Melchisedech ? Whereby this holy Father doth under- 
stand that both the priesthood and the law being changed, we ought to* 
asknowledge none other priest for deliverance from our sins but our 
Saviour Jesus Christ, who, being Sovereign Bishop, doth with the sacri- 
fice of his body and blood, offered once for ever upon the altar of the 
cross, most effectu^y cleanse the spiritual leprosy, and wash away the 
sins of all those that vdth true confession of the same do flee unto Uim. 

*' It is most evident and plain, that this auricular confession hath not 
the warrant of God's word, else it had not been lawful for Nectaiius, 
bishop of Constautinople, upon a just occasion to have put it down. 
(Nectarius Sozomen. Eccles. Hist. lib. vii. cap. 16.) For when anjrthiug 
ordained of God is by the lewdness of men abused, the abuse ought to be 
taken away, and the thing itself suffered to remain. Moreover, these are 
St. Augustine's words : Lib. x. Con/essionum^ cap. 3. ' What have I to do 
with men, that they should hear my confession, as though they were able 
to heal my diseases? A curious sort of men to know another man's life, 
and slothful to correct and amend their own. Why do they seek to hear 
of me what I am, which will not hear of thee what they are ? And how 
can they tell, when they hear by me of myself, whether I tell the truth or 
not; sith no mortal man knoweth what is in man, but the spirit of man 
which is in him ? ' Augustine would not have written thus, if auricular 
confession had been used in his time. 



110 DO YOU CONFESS, 

" Beinff, therefore, not led with the oonscience thereof, let ns with fear 
and trembling, and with a true contrite heart, use that kind of confession 
that God doth command in his word ; and then doubtless as he is faithful 
and righteous, he will forgive us our sins, and make us clean from all 
wickedness. I do not say, but that, if any do find themselves troubled in 
conscieuce, they may repair to their learned curate or pastor, or to some 
other godly learned man, and show the trouble and doubt of their con- 
science to them, that 1 hey may receive at their hand the comfortable salve 
of God's word : but it is against the true Christian liberty, that any man 
should be bound to the numbering of his sins, as it hath been used here- 
tofore in the time of blindness and ignorance." 



''J^t mlinm tljan tmsi m $i:kV'* 



JOHN XI. 3. 



Reabeb, 

A text of Scripture stands at the head of 
this page. 

The chapter from which the text is taken is well 
known to all readers of the Bible. In life-like des- 
cription, in touching interest, in sublime simplicity, 
there is no writing in existence that will bear comparison 
with that chapter. A narrative like this is to my own 
mind one of the great proofs of the inspiration of 
Scripture. When I read the story of Bethany, I feel 
* There is something here which the infidel can never 
account for.' — " This is nothing else but the finger of 
God." 

The words which I specially dwell upon in this 
chapter are singularly affecting and instructive. They 
record the message which Martha and Mary sent to 

• The following pagoB contain the substance of a Sermon 
originally preached at St Mary's, Nottingham, on behalf of the 
Oounty Hospital, in October, 1858. 



112 HE WHOM THOU LOVEST IS SICK. 

Jesus when their brother Lazarus was sick: — '*Lord, 
behold he whom thou lovest is sick." That message 
was short and simple. Yet almost every word is deeply 
suggestive. 

Mark the child-like faith of these holy women. They 
turned to the Lord Jesus in their hour of need, as the 
frightened infant turns to its mother, or the compass- 
needle turns to the pole. They turned to Him as their 
Master, their Physician, their Shepherd, their Almighty 
Friend, their Brother born for adversity. Different as 
they were in natural teqiperament, the two sisters in 
this matter were entirely agreed. Christ's help was 
their first thought in the day of trouble. Christ was 
the refuge to which they fled in the hour of need. 
Blessed are all they that do likewise ! 

Mark the simple humility of their language about 
Lazarus. They call him ** He whom thou lovest." 
They do not say * He who loves thee, — ^believes in thee, 
— serves thee,* but " He whom thou lovest." Martha 
and Mary were deeply taught of God. They had 
learned that Christ's love towards us, and not our love 
towarfis Christ, is the true ground of expectation, and 
the true foundation of hope. Blessed, again, are all 
they that are taught likewise ! To look inward to our 
love towards Christ is painfully unsatisfying. To look 
outward to Christ's love towards us is peace. 

Mark, lastly, the touching circumstance which the 
message of Martha and Mary reveals, " He whom thou 
lovest is sick." Lazarus was a good man, converted, 
believing, renewed, sanctified, a friend of Christ, and an 
heir of glory. And yet Lazarus was sick ! Then sick* 



HE WHOM THOU LOTEST IS SICK. 113 

ness is no sign that God is displeased. Sickness is 
intended to be a blessing to us, and not a curse. ** All 
things work together for good to them that love God, 
and are called according to His purpose." — " All things 
are jour's, — ^life, death, things present or things to 
come; for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." (Kom. 
viii. 28 ; 1 Cor. iii. 22.) Blessed, I say again, are they 
that have learned this ! Happy are they who can say, 
when they are ill, " This is my Father's doing. It must 
be well." 

Header, I invite your attention this day to the subject 
of sickness. The subject is one which we ought fre- 
quently to look in the face. We cannot avoid it. It 
needs no prophet's eye to see sickness coming to each 
of UJ3 in turn one day. ** In the midst of life we are in 
death." Let us turn aside for a few moments, and con- 
sider sickness as Christians. The consideration will not 
hasten its coming, and by God's blessing may teach us 
wisdom. 

In considering the subject of sickness, three points 
appear to me to demand attention. On each I shall say 
a few words. 

I. The universal prevalence of sickness and disease. 

II. The general benefits which sickness confers on 
mankind. 

m. The special duties to which sickness calls us. 

I. The universal prevalence of sickness. 



114 HE WHOM THOTJ L0VE8T 18 SICK. 

I need not dwell long on this point. To say much 
in proof of it would only be multiplying truisms and 
heaping up common-places which all allow. 

Sickness is every where. In Europe, in Asia, in Africa, 
in America, — ^in hot countries, and in cold, — ^in civilized 
nations, and in savage tribes, — men, women, and 
children sicken and die. 

Sickness is among all classes. Grace does not lift a 
believer above the reach of it. Kiches will not 
buy exemption from it. Bank cannot prevent its 
assaults. Kings and their subjects, masters and 
servants, rich men and poor, learned and unlearned, 
teachers and scholars, doctors and patients, ministers 
and hearers, all alike go down before this great foe. 
" The rich man's wealth is his strong city." (Prov. xviii. 
11.) The Englishman's house is called his castle. Eut 
there are no doors and bars which can keep out disease 
and death. 

Sickness is of every sort and description. From the 
crown of our head to the sole of our foot we are liable 
to disease. Our capacity of suffering is something fear- 
ful to contemplate. "Wlio can count up the ailments by 
which our bodily frame may be assailed? Who ever 
visited a museum of morbid anatomy without a shudder ? 
" Strange that a harp of thousand strings should keep 
in tune so long." It is not, to my mind, so wonderful 
that men shoidd die so soon, as it is that they should 
live so long. 

Sickness is often one of the most humbling and dis- 
tressing trials that can come upon man. It can turn 
the strongest into a little child, and make him feel *' the 



HK WHOM THOU LOYEST IS SICK. 115 

grasshopper a burden." (Eccles. zii. 5.) It can un- 
nerve the boldest, and make him tremble at the fall of 
a pin. "We are "fearftilly and wonderfully made." 
(Psalm cxxxix. 14.) The connection between body and 
mind is curiously close. The influence that some dis- 
eases can Exercise upon the temper and spirits is im- 
mensely great. There are ailments of brain, and liver, 
and nerves, which can bring down a Solomon in mind 
to a state little better than that of a babe. He that 
would know to what depths of humiliation poor man 
can fall, has only to attend for a short time on sick- 
beds. 

Sickness is not preventible by anything that man can 
do. The average duration of life may doubtless be 
somewhat lengthened. The skill of doctors may con- 
tinually discover new remedies, and effect surprising 
cures. The enforcement of wise sanitary regulations 
may greatly lower the death-rate in a land. But, after 
all, — whether in healthy or unhealthy localities, — 
whether in mild climates or in cold, — whether treated 
by homoeopathy or allopathy, — men will sicken and 
die. " The days of our years are three-score years and 
ten, and if by reason of strength they be four-score 
years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow ; for it is 
soon cut off, and we fly away." (Psalm xc. 10.) That 
witness is indeed true. It was true 3300 years ago. — 
It is true still. Now what can we make of this great 
feet, — ^the universal prevalence of sickness ? How shall 
we account for it ? What explanation can we give of 
it? What answer shall we give to our inquiring 
children, when they ask us, " Father, why do people 



116 HE WHOM THOU LOTEST 18 SICK. 

get ill and die ? " These are grave questions. A few 
words upon them will not be out of place. 

Can we suppose for a moment that God created sick- 
ness and disease at the beginning? Can we imagine 
that He who formed our world in such perfect order, 
was the former of needless suffering and pain? Can 
we think that He who made all things **very good/* 
made Adam's race to sicken and to die ? The idea is, 
to mind, revolting. It introduces a grand imperfection 
into the midst of God's perfect works. I must find 
another solution to satisfy my mind. 

The only explanation that satisfies me is that which 
the Bible gives. Something has come into the world 
which has dethroned man from his original position, and 
stripped him of his original privileges. Something has 
come in, which, like a handful of gravel in the midst of 
machinery, has marred the perfect order of God*s 
creation. And what is that something ? I answer, in 
one word, it is sin. " Sin has entered into the world, 
and death by sin." (Rom. v. 12.) Sin is the cause of 
all the sickness and disease and pain and suffering, which 
prevail on the earth. They are all a part of that curse 
which came into the world when Adam and Eve ate the 
forbidden fruit and fell. There would have been no 
sickness if there had been no fall. There would have 
been no disease, if there had been no sin. 

Eeader, I pause for a moment at this point, and yet, 
in pausing, I do not depart from my subject. I pause 
to remind you that there is no ground so untenable as 
that which is occupied by tiie Atheist, and Deist, or the 
unbeliever in the Bible. I advise every young reader 



HE WHOM THOU L0VE6T IS SICK. 117 

of this subject, who is puzzled by the bold and specious 
arguments of the infidel, to study well that most im- 
portant subject, — the Difficulties of infidelity. I say 
boldly that it requires far more credulity to be an infidel 
than to be a Christian. I say boldly, that there are 
great broad patent facts in the condition of mankind, 
which nothing but the Bible can explain, and that one 
of the most striking of these facts is the imiversal pre- 
valence of pain, sickness, and disease. In short, one of 
the mightiest difficulties in the way of Atheists and 
Deists, is the hody of man, 

Beader, you have doubtless heard of Atheists. An 
Atheist is one who professes to believe that there is no 
God, no Creator, no First Cause, and that all things 
came together in this world by mere chance. — Now shall 
we listen to such a doctrine as this ? Go, take an 
Atheist to one of the excellent surgical schools of our 
land, and ask him to study the wonderful structure of 
the human body. Show him the matchless skill with 
which every joint, and vein, and valve, and muscle, and 
sinew, and nerve, and bone, and limb, has been formed. 
Show him the perfect adaptation of every part of the 
human frame to the purpose which it serves. Show 
him the thousand delicate contrivances for meeting wear 
and tear, and supplying waste of daily vigour. And 
then ask this man who denies the being of a God, and 
a great First Cause, if all this wonderful mechanism is 
the result of chance ? . Ask him if it came together at 
first by luck and accident ? Ask him if he so thinks 
about the watch he looks at, the bread he eats, or the 
coat he wears? Oh, no! Design is an insuperable 
difficulty in the Atheist's way. Inhere is a God, 



118 HE WHOM THOU L0VE8T 18 SICK. 

Eeader, you have doubtless heard of Deists. A 
Deist is one who professes to believe that there is a 
Qtodj who made the world and all things therein. £ut 
he does not believe the Bible. ' A God, bat no Bible ! 
— a Creator, but no Christianity ! " This is the Deist's 
creed. — ^Now, shall we listen to this doctrine? Gto 
again, I say, and take a Deist to an hospital, and show 
him some of the awfiil handiwork of disease. Take 
him to the bed where lies some tender child, scarce 
knowing good from evil, with an incurable cancer. Send 
him to the ward where there is a loving mother of a 
large family in the last stage of some excruciating 
disease. Show him some of the racking pains and 
agonies to which flesh is heir, and ask him to account 
for them. Ask this man who believes there is a great 
and wise Gk)d, who made the world, but cannot believe 
the Bible, — ask him how he accounts for these traces of 
disorder and imperfection in his Gk)d's creation. Ask 
this man who sneers at Christian theology, and is too 
wise to believe the fall of Adam, — ask him upon his 
theory to explain the universal prevalence of pain and 
disease in the world. You may ask in vain ! You will 
get no satisfSsustory answer. Sickness and suffering are 
insuperable difficulties in the Deist's way. Man has 
Sinned, and therefore man suffers, Adam fell from his 
first estate, and therefore Adam's children sicken and 
die. 

The universal prevalence of sickness is one of the 
indirect evidences that the Bible is true. The Bible 
explains it. The Bible answers the questions about it 
which will arise in every inquiring mind. Ko other 



HZ ITHOM THOU L0TE8T IS SICK. 119 

syBtems of religion can do this. They all fail hero. 
They are silent. They are confounded. The Bible 
alone looks the subject in the face. It boldly proclaims 
the fjEUst that man is a fallen creature, and with equal 
boldness proclaims a vast remedial system to meet his 
wants. I feel shut up to the conclusion, that the Bible 
is from Gk)d. Christianity is a revelation from heaven. 
" Thy word is truth." (John xvii. 17.) 

Reader, stand fast on the old ground that the Bible, 
and the Bible only, is God's revelation of Himself to 
man. Be not moved by the many new assaults which 
modem scepticism is making on the inspired volume. 
Heed not the hard questions which the enemies of the 
£uth are fond of putting about Bible difficulties, and to 
which perhaps you often feel unable to give an answer. 
Anchor your soul firmly on this safe principle, that the 
whole book is Gk)d*s truth. Tell the enemies of the 
Bible that, in spite of all their arguments, there is no 
book in the world which will bear comparison with the 
Bible, — ^none that so thoroughly meets man's wants, — 
none that explains so much of the state of mankind. 
As to the hard things in the Bible, tell them you are 
content to wait. You find enough plain truth in the 
book to satisfy your conscience and to save your soul. 
The hard things will be cleared up one day. What you 
know not now, you will know hereafter. 

n. The second point I propose to consider is, the 
general benefits which sickness confers on mankind. 

Beader, I use that word "benefits" advisedly. I 
feel it of deep importance to see this part of our subject 



120 HE WHOM THOU LOVEST IS SICK. 

clearly. I know well that sickness is one of the 
supposed weak points in God's government of the world, 
on which sceptical minds love to dwell. — " Can God be 
a God of love, when He allows pain ? Can God be a 
God of mercy, when He permits disease ? He might 
prevent pain and disease ; but he does not. How can 
these things be ? " Such is the reasoning which often 
comes across the heart of man. 

I reply to all such reasoners, that their doubts and 
questionings are most unreasonable. They might as 
well doubt the existence of a Creator, because the order 
of the universe is disturbed by earthquakes, hurricanes, 
and storms. They might as well doubt the providence 
of God, because of the horrible massacres of Delhi and 
Cawnpore. All this would be just as reasonable as to 
doubt the mercy of God, because of the presence of 
sickness in the world. 

I ask all who find it hard to reconcile the prevalence 
of disease and pain with the love of God, to cast their 
eyes on the world around them, and mark what is going 
on. I ask them to observe the extent to which men 
constantly submit to present loss for the sake of future 
gain, — present sorrow for the sake of future joy, — 
present pain for the sake of future health. The seed is 
thrown into the ground, and rots : but we sow in the 
hope of a future harvest. The boy is sent to school 
amidst many tears : but we send him in the hope of his 
getting future wisdom. The father of a family under- 
goes some fearful surgical operation : but he bears it, in 
the hope of future health. — I ask men to apply this 
great principle to God*s government of the world. I 



( 



^flOK THOU 10TE8T 18 6ICI. 121 



^sk them tx> beBeve that God allows pain, sickness and 
disease, not because he loves to vex man, but because 
He desires to benefit man's heart, and mind, and con- 
science, and soul, to all eternity. 

Reader, once more I repeat, that I speak of the 
"benefits" of sickness on purpose and advisedly. I 
know the suffering and pain which sickness entails. I 
admit the misery and wretchedness which it often brings 
in its train. But I cannot regard it as an unmixed evil. 
I see in it a wise permission of God. I see in it a 
useful provision to check the ravages of sin and the 
devil among men's souls. If man had never sinned I 
should have been at a loss to discern the benefit of 
sickness. But since sin is in the world, I can see that 
sickness is a good. It is a blessing quite as much as 
a curse. It is a rough schoolmaster, I grant. But it is 
a jeal fdend to mans soul. 

Sickness helps to remind men of death. The most 
live as if they were never going to die. They follow 
business, or pleasure, or politics, or science, as if earth 
was their eternal home. They plan and scheme for the 
future, like the rich fool in the parable, as if they had 
a long lease of life, and were not tenants at will. A 
heavy illness sometimes goes far to dispel these delusions. 
It awakens men from their day-dreams and reminds 
them that they have to die as well as to live. ^ Kow 
this I say emphatically is a mighty good. 

Sickness helps to make men think seriously of God, 
and their souls and the world to come. The most in 
their days of health can find no time for such thoughts. 
Tbej dislike them. They put them away. They 



122 HE WHOM THOU LOYBST IS SICK. 

count them troublesome and disagreeable. N'ow a 
severe disease has sometimes a wonderful power of 
mustering and rallying these thoughts, and bringing 
them up before the eyes of a man's soul. Even a 
wicked king like Eenhadad, when sick, could think of 
Elisha. (2 Kings viii. 8.) Even heathen sailors, when 
death was in sight, were afraid, and '* cried every man 
to his god." (Jonah i. 5.) Surely anything that helps 
to make men think is a good. 

Sickness helps to soften msn^s hearts, and teach them 
wisdom. The natural heart is as hard as a stone about 
religion. It can see no good in anything which is not 
of this life, and no happiness excepting in this world. 
A long illness sometimes goes far to correct these ideas. 
It exposes the emptiness and hollowness of what the 
world calls ''good" things, and teaches us to hold them 
with a loose hand. The man of business finds that 
money alone is not everything the heart requires. The 
woman of the world finds that costly apparel, and 
novel-reading, and the reports of balls and operas, are 
miserable comforters in a sick room. Surely anything 
that obliges us to alter our weights and measures of 
earthly things is a real good. 

Sickness helps to level and huwMe us. We are all 
naturally proud and high-minded. Pew, even of the 
poorest, are free from the infection. Pew are to be 
fi>und who do not look down on somebody else, and 
secretly flatter themselves that they are ** not as other 
men." A sick bed is a mighty tamer of such thoughts 
as these. It forces on us the mighty truth that we are 
all poor worms^ that we '' dwell in houses of day," and 



HI WHOM THOU LOYEST 18 SICK. 123 

are ''crushed before the moth/' and that kings and 
sabjects, masters and servants, rich and poor, are all 
dying creatures, and will soon stand side by side at the 
bar of €k>d. In the sight of the coffin, and the grave, 
it is not easy to be proud. Surely anything that teaches 
that lesson is a good. 

Pinally, sickness helps to try men* a religion, of what 
sort it is. There are not many on earth who have no 
religion at all. Yet few have a religion that will bear 
inspection. Most are content with traditions received 
from their fathers, and can render no reason of the hope 
that is in them. Now disease is sometimes most useful 
to a man in exposing the utter worthlessness of his soul's 
foundation. It often shows him that he has nothing 
solid under his feet, and nothing firm under his hand. 
It makes him find out that, with all his form of religion, 
he has been all his life worshipping "an unknown 
God." Many a creed looks well on the smooth waters 
of health, which turns out utterly unsound and useless 
on the rough waves of the sick bed. The storms of 
winter often bring out the defects in a man's dwelling, 
and sickness often exposes the gracelessness of a man's 
souL Surely anything that makes us find out the real 
character of our faith is a good. 

Beader, I do not say that sickness confers these bene- 
fits on all to whom it comes. Alas ! I can say nothing 
of the kind. Myriads are yearly laid low by illness, 
and restored to health, who evidently learn no lesson 
from their sick beds, and return again to the world. 
Myriads are yearly passing through sickness to the 
grave, and yet receiving no more spiritual impression 



124 HE WHOH THOTT LOYEST IS SICK. 

from it tlian the beasts that perish. While they live 
they have no feeling, and when they die there are " no 
bands in their death." (Psalm Ixxiii. 4.) These are 
awful things to say. But they are true. The degree 
of deadness to which man's heart and conscience may 
attain, is a depth which I cannot pretend to fathom. 

But does sickness confer the benefits of which I have 
been speaking on only a few ? I will allow nothing of 
the kind. I believe that in a vast proportion of cases, 
sickness produces impressions more or less akin to those 
of which I have just been speaking. I believe that in 
many cases sickness is God*s day of visitation, and that 
feelings are continually aroused on a sick bed, which if 
improved might, by God's grace, result in salvation. I 
believe that in heathen lands sickness often paves the 
way for the missionary, and makes the poor idolater 
lend a willing ear to the glad tidings of the Gospel. I 
believe that in our own land sickness is one of the 
greatest aids to the minister of the gospel, and that 
sermons and counsels are often brought home in the day 
of disease which men have neglected in the day of 
health. I believe that sickness is one of God's most 
important subordinate instruments in the saving of men, 
and that though the feelings it calls forth are often tem- 
porary, it is also often a means whereby the Spirit works 
effectually on the heart. In short, I believe firmly that 
the sickness of men's bodies, has often led, in God's 
wonderful providence, to the conversion of men's souls. 

I leave this branch of my subject here. It needs no 
tother remark. If sickness can do the things of which 
I have been speaking, (and who wiU gainsay it?) if 



HX WHOM THOU LOYEST IS SICK. 125 

sickneflB in a wicked world can help to make men think 
of Gk>d and their souls, then sickness confers benefits on 
mankind. 

"We have no right to murmur at sickness, and to re- 
fine at its presence in the world. We ought rather to 
thank God for it. It is God's witness. It is the soul's 
adviser. It is an awakener to the conscience. It is a 
purifier to the heart. Surely I have a right to tell you 
that sickness is a blessing and not a curse, — a help and 
not an injury, — a gain and not a loss, — a friend, and 
not a foe to mankind. So long as we have a world 
wherein there is sin, it is a mercy that it is a world 
wherein there is sickness. 

m. The third and last point which I propose to 
consider, is thdjpeeial duties which the prevalence of sick* 
nesa entails on each one of ourselves, 

I should be sorry to leave the subject of sickness 
without saying something on this point. I hold it to 
be of cardinal importance not to be content with gener- 
alities in delivering God's message to souls. I am 
anzioas to impress on each one into whose hands this 
book may fall, his own personal responsibility in con- 
nection with the subject. I would fain have no one lay 
down this book, unable to answer the questions : What 
practical lesson have I learned ? What, in a world of 
dasease and death, what ought I to do ? 

One paramount duty which the prevalence of sick- 
ness entails on man, is that of living habitually prepared 
to meet God, Sickness is a remembrancer of death. 
Death is the door through which we must all pass to 



126 HE WHOM THOU L0VE8T IS SICK. 

judgment. Judgment is the time, when we must at 
last see God face to face. Surely the first lesson which 
the inhabitant of a sick and dying world should learn, 
should be to prepare to meet his God. 

Reader, when are you prepared to meet God ? Never 
till your iniquities are forgiven, and your sin covered ! 
Never till your heart is renewed, and your will taught 
to delight in the will of God ! You have many sins. 
If you go to church your own mouth is taught to con- 
fess thia every Sunday. The blood of Jesus Christ can 
alone cleanse those sins away. The righteousness of 
Christ can alone make you acceptable in the sight of 
God. Faith, simple child-like faith, can alone give you 
an interest in Christ and His benefits. "Would you 
know whether you are prepared to meet God ? Then 
where is your faith ? — Your heart is naturally unmeet 
for God's company. You have no real pleasure in doing 
His will. The Holy Ghost must transform you after 
the image of Christ. Old things must pass away. All 
things must become new. "Would you know whether 
you are prepared to meet Grod ? Then, where is your 
grace? Where are the evidences of your conversion 
and sanctification ? 

Eeader, I believe that this, and nothing less than this, 
is preparedness to meet God. Pardon of sin and meet- 
ness for God's presence, — justification by faith and 
sanctification of the heart, — the blood of Christ sprinkled 
on us, and the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, — ^these 
are the grand essentials of the Christian religion. These 
are no mere words and names to furnish bones of con- 
tention for wrangling theologians. These are sober, 



HI ITHOM THOir L0YE8T 18 8ICK. 127 

solid, substantial realities. To live in the actual 
possession of these things, in a world full of sickness 
and death, is the first duty which I press home upon 
your soul. 

Another paramount duty which the prevalence of 
sickness entails on you, is that of living habitually ready 
to hear it patiently. Sickness is no doubt a trying thing 
to flesh and blood. To feel our nerves unstrung, and 
our natural force abated, — to be obliged to sit still and 
be cut off from all our usual avocations, — to see our 
plans broken off and our purposes disappointed, — to 
endure long hours, and days, and nights of weariness 
and pain, — all this is a severe strain on poor siuM 
human nature. What wonder if peevishness and im- 
patience are brought out by disease ! Surely in such a 
dying world as this, we should study patience. How 
shall we learn to bear sickness patiently, when sickness 
comes to our turn ? We must lay up stores of grace in 
the time of health. We must seek for the sanctifying 
influence of the Holy Ghost over our unruly tempers 
and dispositions. We must make a real business of our 
prayers, and regularly ask for strength to endure God's 
will as well as to do it. Such strength is to be had for 
the asking : '' If ye shall ask anything in my name, I 
will do it for you." (John xiv. 14.) 

I cannot think it needless to dwell on this point. I 
believe tho passive graces of Christianity receive far less 
notice than they deserve. Meekness, gentleness, long 
suffering, faith, patience, are all mentioned in the word 
of God as "fruits of the Spirit.'* They are passive 
graces which specially glorify God. They often make 



128 HE WHOM THOU L0VE8T IS SICK. 

men think, who despise the active side of the Christian 
character. I^ever do these graces shine so hrightly as 
they do in the sick room. They enable many a sick 
person to preach a silent sermon, which those aronnd 
him never forget. Would you adorn the doctrine you 
profess 1 Would you make your ChristiMiity beautifol 
in the eyes of others } Then take the hint I give you 
this day. Lay up a store of patience against the time 
of illness. Then though your »ckness be not to death, 
it shall be for the " glory of God." (John xi. 4.) 

One more paramount duty which the prevalence of 
aickness entails on you, is that of habitual readineu to 
feel with and help yowr fellow men. Sickness is never 
very far from us. Few are the families who havB not 
some sick relative. Few are the parishes where you 
will not find some one ill. But wherever there is sick- 
ness, there is a call to duty. A little timely assiBtance 
in some cases, — a kindly visit in others, — a friendly 
inquiry, — a mere expression of sympathy, may do vast 
good. These are the sort of things which soften 
asperities, and bring men togetiier, and promote good 
feeling. These are ways by which you may ultimately 
lead men to Christ and save their souls. These are 
good works to which every professing Christian should 
be ready. In a worid full of sickness and disease we 
ought to "bear one another's burdens," and to be "kind 
one to another." (Gal. vi. 2; Ephes. iv. 32.) 

These things, I dare say, may appear to some little and 
trifling. They must needs be doing something great 
and grand, and striking, and heroic ! I take leave to 
say, that conscientious attention to these little acts of 



HI WHOM THOU LOYEST 18 SICK. 129 

brotherly-kindness, is one of the clearest evidences of 
having " the mind of Christ." They are acts in which 
our blessed Master Himself was abundant. He was 
ever going about doing good to the sick and sorrowful. 
They are acts to which He attaches great importance in 
that most solemn passage of Scripture, the description 
of the last judgment. He says there : ** I was sick, and 
ye visited me," (Matt. xxv. 36.) 

Header, have you any desire to prove the reality of 
your charity, that blessed grade which so many talk of, 
and so few practice ? If you have, beware of unfeeling 
seMshness, and neglect of your sick brethren. Search 
them out. Ajssbt them, if they need aid. Show your 
sympathy with them. Try to lighten their burdens. 
Above aU, strive to do good to their souls. It will do 
you good, if it does no good to them. It will keep your 
heart from murmuring. It may prove a blessing to 
your own soul. I firmly believe that God is testing 
and proving us by every case of sickness within our 
reach. By permitting suffering, He tries whether 
Christians have any feeling. Beware, lest you be 
weighed in the balances, and found wanting. If you 
can live in a sick and dying world, and not feel for 
others, you have yet much to learn. 

I leave this branch of my subject here. I throw out 
the points I have named as suggestions, and I pray God 
that they may work in your mind. I repeat, that habi- 
tual preparedness to meet God, — ^habitual readiness to 
suffer patiently, — ^habitual willingness to sympathize 
heartily, are plain duties which sickness entails on all. 
They are duties within the reach of every one. I ask 



130 HE WHOH THOU LOYESI IS SICK. 

nothing extravagant or unreasonable. I bid no man 
retire into a monastery and ignore the duties of his 
station. I only want men to realize that they live in a 
sick and dying world, and to live accordingly. And I 
say boldly, that the man who lives the life of faith, and 
holiness, and patience, and charity, is not only the most 
true Christian, but the most wise and reasonable man. 

And now, I conclude aU with four words of practical 
application. I want the subject of these pages to be 
turned to some spiritual use. My heart's desire and 
prayer to GK>d in sending it forth is, to do good to souls. 

1. In the first place, I offer a question to all who 
read this book, to which, as God*s ambassador, I entreat 
their serious attention. It is a question which grows 
naturally out of the subject on which I have been 
writing. It is a question which concerns all, of every 
rank, and class, and condition. I ask you. What will 
you do when you are ill ? 

The time must come when you, as well as others, 
must go down the dark valley of the shadow of death. 
The hour must come, when you, like all your fore- 
fathers, must sicken and die. The time may be near or 
far off. God only knows. But whenever the time may 
be, I ask again. What are you going to do ? Where 
do you mean to turn for eomfort } On what do you 
mean to rest your soul? On what do you mean to 
build your hope ? From whence will you fetch your 
consolations ? 

1 do entreat you not to put these questions away. 
So&r tiiem to work on your conscience, and rest not till 



HI WHOM THOU L0YS8T IS SICK. 131 

you can giye them a satisfactory answer. Trifle not 
with that precious gift, an immortal soul. Defer not 
the consideration of the matter to a more convenient 
season. Fresnme pot on a death-hed repentance. The 
greatest business ought surely not to be left to the last. 
One dying thief was saved that men might not despair, 
but only one that none might presume. I repeat the 
question. I am sure it deserves an answer. ''What 
will you do when you are ill ? " 

deader, if you were going to live for ever in this 
world I would not address you as I do. But it cannot 
be. There is no escaping the common lot of all man- 
kind. Nobody can die in our stead. The day must 
come when we must each go to our long home. Against 
that day I want you to be prepared. The body which 
now takes up so much of your attention — the body which 
you now clothe, and feed, and warm with so much care, 
— ^that body must return again to the dust. Oh ! think 
what an awfiil thing it would prove at last, to have pro- 
vided for everything except the one thing needful, — to 
have provided for the body, but to have neglected the 
soul, — ^to die, in short, and give no sign of being saved ! 
Once more I press my question on your conscience, — 
" "What will you do when you are ill ? " 

2. In the next place, I offer eoumel to aU who feel 
they need it and are willing to take it, — to all who feel 
they are not yet prepared to meet God. That counsel 
is short and simple. Acquaint yourself with the Lord 
Jesus Christ without delay. Eepent, be converted, flee 
to Christ, and be saved. 



132 HB WHOH IHOXr L0TE8T IS SICK. 

Eeader, either you have a eotil or you haye not You 
will surely never deny that you havd. Then if you 
have a soul, seek that soul's salvation. Of all gambling 
in the world, there is none so reckless as that of the 
man who lives imprepared to meet Gk)d, and yet puts 
off repentance. — ^Either you have sins or you have none. 
If you have (and who will dare to deny it?) break off from 
those sins, cast away your transgressions, and turn away 
from them without delay. — Either you need a Saviour 
or you do not. If you do, flee to the only Saviour this 
very day, and cry mightily to Him to save your soul. 
Apply to Christ at once. Seek Him by faith. Commit 
your soul into His keeping. Cry mightily to Him for 
pardon and peace with Qod. Ask Him to pour down 
the Holy Spirit upon you and make you a thorough 
Christian. He will hear you. No matter what you 
have been. He will not refuse your prayer. He has 
said, ''Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast 
out." (John vi. 37.) 

Beware, I beseech you, of a vague and indefinite 
Christianity. Be not content with a general hope that 
all is right, because you belong to the old Church of 
England, and that all will be well at last because God is 
merciful. Best not, rest not without personal union 
with Christ Himself. Best not, rest not till you have 
the witness of the Spirit in your heart, that you are 
washed and sanctified, and justified, and one with Christ, 
and Christ in you. Best not, till you can say with the 
apostle, " I know whom I have believed, and am per- 
suaded that He is able to keep that which I have oom- 
mitted to him against that day." (2 Tim. L 12.) 



HE -WHOM THOU 1X)YEST T8 SICK. 133 

Eeader, vague, and indefinite^ and indistinct religion 
may do very well in time of health.. It will never do 
in the day of sickness. A mere formal, perfunctory 
choichmemhership may carry a man through the sun- 
shine of youth and prosperity. It will break down 
entirely when death is in sight. Nothing will do then 
but real heart-union with Christ. Christ interceding 
for us at Gk)d*8 right hand, — Christ known and believed 
as our Priest, our Physician, our Friend, — Christ alone 
can rob death of its sting, and enable us to face sickness 
without fear. He alone can deliver those who "through 
fear of death are in bondage.*' I say to every one who 
wants advice. Be acquainted with Christ. As ever you 
would have hope and comfort on the bed of sickness, be 
acquainted with Christ. 

Take every care and trouble to Him when you are 
acquainted with Him. He will keep you and carry you 
through all. Pour out your heart before Him, when 
your conscience is burdened. He is the true confessor. 
He alone can absolve you and take the burden away. 
Turn to Him first in the day of sickness, like Martha 
and Mary. Keep on looking to Him to the last breath 
of your Mfe. Christ is worth knowing. The more you 
know Him the better you will love Him. Then be 
acquainted with Jesus Christ. 

3. In the third place, I exhort all true Christians 
who read this book to remember how much they may 
glorify Gknl in the time of sickness, and to lie quiet in 
€hd^s hand when they are ill. 

I &el it very important to touch on this point I 



134 HE WHOM IHOir LOYEST IS SICE. 

know how ready the heart of a believer is to faint, and 
how busy Satan is in suggesting doubts and questionings, 
when the body of a Christian is weak. I have seen 
something of the depression and melancholy which some- 
times comes upon the children of Gk)d when they are 
suddenly laid aside by disease, and obliged to sit still. 
I have marked how prone some good people are to 
torment themselves with morbid thoughts at sudi 
seasons, and to say in their heart, '' Gk)d has forsaken 
me : I am cast out of his sight." 

I earnestly entreat all sick believers to remember that 
they may honour God as much by patient suffering as 
they can by active work. It often shows more grace to 
sit still than it does to go to and fro, and perform great 
exploits. I entreat them to remember that Christ cares 
for them as much when they are sick as He does when 
they are well, and that the very chastisement they feel 
so acutely is sent in love, and not in anger. Above all, 
I entreat them to recollect the sympathy of Jesus for all 
His weak members. They are always tenderly cared 
for by Him, but never so much as in their time of need. 
Christ has had great experience of sickness. He knows 
the heart of a sick man. He used to see '' all manner 
of sickness, and all manner of disease " when He was 
upon earth. He felt specially for the sick in the days 
of His flesh. He feels for them specially still. Sick- 
ness and suffering, I often think, make believers more 
like their Lord in experience, than health. '^ Himself 
took our inflrmities, and bare our sicknesses." (Isaiah 
liii. 3; Matt. viii. 17.) The Lord Jesus was a <'man 
of 8orrow8| and acquainted with grie£" None have 



HB WHOK THOU LOT EST IS SICK. 135 

such an opportimity of learning the mind of a suffering 
Saviour as suffering disciples. 

4. I conclude with a word of exhortation to all 
belierers, which I heartily pray God to impress upon 
their souls. I exhort you to keep up a habit of close 
communion with Christ, and never to be afraid of "going 
too fer " in your religion. Remember this, if you wish 
to have ''great peace ** in your times of sickness. 

I observe with regret a tendency in some quarters to 
lower the standard of practical Christianity, and to 
denounce what are called "extreme views" about a 
Christian's daily walk in life. I remark with pain that 
even religious people will sometimes look coldly on 
those who withdraw from worldly society, and will 
censure them as "exclusive, narrow-minded, illiberal, 
uncharitable, sour-spirited," and the like. I warn every 
believer in Christ who reads this book to beware of 
being influenced by such censures. I entreat him, if he 
wants light in the valley of death, to " keep himself un- 
spotted from the world," to "follow the Lord very 
fblly," and to walk very closely with God. (James i. 
27; Num. xiv. 24.) 

I believe that the want of "thoroughness" about 
many people's Christianity is one secret of their little 
comfort, both in health and sickness. I believe that the 
" half-and-half," — " keep-in-with-everybody religion, 
which satisfies many in the present day, is offensive to 
God, and sows thorns in dying pillows, which hundreds 
never discover till too late. I believe that the weakness 
and feebleness of such a religion never comes out so 
much as it does upon a sick bed. 



136 HE WHOM THOU LOYEST IS SICT. 

Eeader, if you and I want " strong consolation" in 
our time of need, we must not be content with a bare 
union with Christ. We must seek to know something 
of heart-felt, experimental eommunion with Him. Never, 
never let us forget, that "union" is one thing, and ** com- 
munion ** another. Thousands, I fear, who know what 
"union" with Christ is, know nothing of "communion." 

The day may come when after a long fight with 
disease, we shall feel that medicine can do no more, and 
that nothing remains but to die. Priends will be stand- 
ing by, unable to help us. Hearing, eye-sight, even 
the power of praying, will be fast failing us. The 
world and its shadows will be melting beneath our feet. 
Eternity, with its realities, will be looming large before 
our minds. What shall support us in that trying hour? 
What shall enable us to feel, "I fear no evil?" 
Nothing, nothing can do it but close communion with 
Christ. Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, — Christ 
putting His right arm under our heads, — Christ felt to 
be sitting by our side, — Christ alone can give us the 
complete victory in the last struggle. 

Eeader, let us cleave to Christ more closely, love Him 
more heartily, live to Him more thoroughly, copy Him 
more exactly, confess Him more boldly, follow Him 
more fully. Beligion like this will always bring its own 
reward. Worldly people may laugh at it. Weak 
brethren may think it extreme. But it will wear well. 
At evening time it will bring us light In sickness it 
will bring us peace. In the world to come it will give 
us a crown of glory that fSstdeth not away. 

The time is short. The fitabion o£ this world pasaeth 
away. A lew more sicknesses, and all will be over. JL 



HI WHOK THOU LOTEST IS 8ICK. 137 

few more storms and tossings, and we shall be safe in 
harbour. We travel towards a world where there is no 
more sickness, — where parting, and pain, and crying, 
and mooming, are done with for evermore. Heaven is 
becoming every year more full, and earth more empty. 
The friends ahead are becoming more numerous than 
the Mends astern. Yet a little time He that shall come 
will come, and will not tarry. In His presence shall be 
fulness of joy. Christ shall wipe away all tears from 
His people's eyes. The last enemy that shall be des- 
troyed is death. But he shall be destroyed. Death 
himself shall one day die. (Eev. xx. 14.) 

In the meantime, let us live the life of faith in the 
Son of God. Let us lean all our weight on Christ, and 
rejoice in the thought that He lives for evermore. 

Yes ! blessed be God ! Chiist lives, though we may 
die. Christ lives, though friends and family are carried 
to the grave. He lives who abolished death, and 
brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel. 
He lives who said, "0 death, I will be thy plagues : 
grave, I will be thy destruction." (Hos. xiii. 14.) 
He lives who will one day change our vile body, and 
make it like unto His glorious body. In sickness and 
in health, in life and in death, let us lean confidently 
on Him. Surely we ought to say daily with one of 
old, " Blessed be God for Jesus Christ ! " 

HYMN. 

1 — One sweetly solemn thought 
Gomes to me o'er and o'er — 
I am nearer home to-day, 
Than 1 ever have been before. 



138 BZ WHOM THOU LOYEST IS 8ICK. 

2-^Nearer my Father's hoase, 

Where the many mansions he ; 
Nearer the great white throne; 
Nearer the crystal sea ; 

3 — Nearer the bound of life, 

Where we lay our burdens down ; 
Nearer leaving the cross ; 
Nearer gaining the crown. 

4 — But lying darkly between, 

Winding down through the night, 
• Is the deep and unknown stream, 
To be cross'd ere we reach the light. 

5— Jesus, perfect my trust, 

Strengthen the hand of my faith ; 

, Let me feel Thee near when I stand 

On the edge of the shore of death. 

6 — Feel Thee near when my feet 
Are slipping over the brink ; 
For it may be I'm nearer home — 
Nearer now than I think. 



ImtterA ani iatljtrrt/ 



JEREMIAH XXXI. 10. 

" Hmt the Word of the Lord, ye nations, and declare 
it in the isles afar off, and say. Re that scattered 
Israel wiU gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd 
doth his flock:* 

The text which heads this page is singularly full and 
comprehensiye. It contains both history and prophecy. 
— ^It speaks of the scattering of Israel ; this is history. — 
It speaks of the gathering of Israel ; this is prophecy. — 
It demands the attention both of the Jew and the Gentile. 
To the Jew it holds out a hope; — "Israel," it says, 
''shall be gathered." On the Gentile it lays a command : 
— ''Hear the Word of the Lord," it says, "0 ye 
nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, He that 
scattered Israel will gather him." 

Reader, the whole body of Gentile Christendom is 

« Origmally preached as the Annual Sermon on behalf of the 
London Society for promoting Christianity among the Jews, at 
ibe Bectory Church, Mary-le-hone, in May, 1858. 



140 SCATTEBED ASB GATHEBED. 

specially addressed in this text. There is no evading 
this conclusion on any fair interpretation of Scripture. 
"We ourselves are among the "nations" to whom 
Jeremiah speaks. Upon us devolves a portion of the 
duty which he here sets forth. The text is the Lord's 
voice to all the Churches of Christ among the Gentiles. 
It is a voice to the Churches of England, Scotland, and 
Ireland. It is a voice to the Churches of Germany, 
Switzerland, Sweden, Holland, Denmark, and America. 
It is a voice to all Christendom. And what does the 
voice say? It hids us proclaim far and wide the will of 
God concerning the Jewish nation. It hids us keep one 
another in memory of God's past and jftiture dealings 
with Israel. "He that scattered Israel will gather 
hun." 

Reader, I ask your serious attention for a few minutes, 
while I try to place the Jewish subject before you in a 
connected and condensed form. I propose in these pages 
to show you from Scripture the past, the present, and 
the future of Israel. I know few texts in the Bible 
which contain such a complete summary of the subject 
as the one before you. This text I shall endeavour to 
unfold. 

I entreat you not to dismiss the subject as speculative, 
fanciful, and unprofitable. The world is growing old. 
The last days are come upon us. The foundations of 
the earth are out of course. The ancient institutions 
of society are wearing out and going to pieces. The 
end of all things is at hand. Surely it becomes a wise 
man, at a time like this, to turn to the pages of prophecy, 
and inquire what is yet to come. At a time like tlds 



8GATTSBED AKD eATHBRBD. 141 

Uie declarations of Gk>d conoerning his people Israel 
ought to he carefully weighed and examined. ''At the 
time of the end/' says Daniel, ** the wise shall under- 
stand." (Dan. xii. 10.) 

There are four points on which I purpose to dwell in 
considering the words of Jeremiah which stand at the 
head of tlus suhject. 

I. The xeakino of the wobd Isbael, both herb 

AKD ELSEWHERE IS SCRIPTURE. 

U. The present coiimiTioK of Israel. 

III. The futttre prospects of Israel. 

IV. The dxjtt which GsirriLE Churches owe to 

Israel. 

I. I%e meaning of the word Israel, 

The definition of terms is of first importance in 
theology. Unless we explain the meaning of the words 
we use in our religious statements, our arguments are 
ofben wasted, and we seem like men heating the air. 

The word Israel is used nearly seven hundred times 
in the Bihle. I can only discover three senses in which 
it is used. Firstly, — It is one of the names of Jacob, 
the father of the twelve tribes ; a name specially given 
to him by God. Secondly, — It is a name given to the 
ten tribes which separated from Judah and Benjamin 
in the days of Behoboam, and became a distinct kingdom. 
This kingdom is often called Israel, in contradistinction 
to the kingdom of Judah. Thirdly and lastly, — It is a 
name given to the whole Jewish nation, to all members 



142 SCAITSBSD Airs eAIHSBEB. 

of the twelve tribes which sprang from Jacob, and were 
brought out of Egypt into the land of Canaan. This is 
by far the most common signification of the word in the 
Bible. It is the only signification in which I can find the 
word Israel used throughout the whole Kew Testament. 
It is the same in which the word is used in the text 
which I am considering this day. That Israel, which 
Gk)d has scattered and will yet gather again, is the 
whole Jewish nation. 

Kow, why do I dwell upon this point? To some 
readers it may appear mere waste of time and words to 
say so much about it. The things I have been saying 
sound to them like truisms. That ''Israel" means 
" Israel " is a matter on which they never felt a doubt. 
If this be the mind of any into whose hands this book 
has fallen, I am thankful for it. But unhappily there 
are many Christians who do not see the subject with 
your eyes. For their sakes I must dwell on this point 
a little longer. 

Por many centuries there has prevailed in the Churches 
of Christ a strange, and to my mind, an unwarrantable 
mode of dealing with this word '' Israel." It has been 
interpreted in many passages of the Psalms and Pro-* 
phets, as if it meant nothing more than Christian 
believers. Have promises been held out to Israel? 
Hen have been told continually that they are addressed 
to Gfentile saints. Have glorious things been described 
as laid up in store for Israel ? Men have been inceas- 
aatly told that they describe the victories and triumphs 
of the Gospel in Christian Churches. — ^The proofisi of 
these things are too many to require quotation* No 



SGAXTXBXD AKB 6ATHXBXD. 143 

man csa reid the immeiue majority of commentaries 
and popular hymns without seeing this system of inter- 
pretation to which I now refer. Against that system I 
bare long protested, and I hope I shall always protest 
aa loQg m I hre. 

I do not deny that Israel was a peculiar typical 
people, and that God's relations to Israel were meant to 
be a type of His relations to His beliering people all 
over the world. 

I do not forget that it is written, ''As face answer- 
eth to foce, so does the heart of man to man " (Prov. 
zxvii. 19), and that whatever spiritual truths are 
taught in prophecy concerning Israelitish hearts, are 
applicable to the hearts of Gentiles. 

I would have it most distinctly understood that God's 
dealings with individual Jews and Gentiles are precisely 
one and the same. Without repentance, faith in Christ, 
and holiness of heart, no individual Jew or Gentile shall 
ever be saved. 

What I protest against is, the habit of allegorizing 
plain sayings of the Word of God concerning the future 
history of the fMtion Israel, and explaining away the 
ftilness of their contents in order to accommodate them 
to the Gentile Church. I believe the habit to be 
unwarranted by anything in Scripture, and to draw 
after it a long train of evil consequences. 

Where, I would venture to ask, in the whole New 
Testament, shall we find any plain authority for apply- 
ing the word " Israel " to any but the nation Israel ? 
I can find none. On the contrary, I observe that when 
the Apostle Paul quotes Old Testament prophecies 



144 8CATTEBE0 AND 6ATHEBEB. 

about the privileges of the Gentiles in Gospel times, he 
is careful to quote texts which specially mention the 
"Gentiles" by name. The fifteenth chapter of the 
Epistle to the Bomans is a striking illustration of what 
I mean. We are often told in the "New Testament that, 
under the Gospel, believing Gentiles are " fellow-heirs 
and partakers of the same hope " with believing Jews. 
(Ephes. iii. 6.) But that believing Gentiles may be 
called " Israelites," I cannot see anywhere at all. 

To what may we attribute that loose system of 
interpreting the language of the Psalms and Prophets, 
and the extravagant expectations of universal conver- 
sion of the world by the preaching of the Gospel, 
which may be observed in many Christian writers ? To 
nothing so much, I believe, as to the habit of inaccurately 
interpreting the word "Israel," and the consequent 
application of promises to the Gentile Churches, with 
which they have nothing to do. The least errors in 
theology idways bear fruit. Never does man take up 
an incorrect principle of interpreting Scripture without 
that principle entailing awkward consequences, and 
colouring the whole tone of his religion. 

Header, I leave this part of my subject here. I am 
sure that its importance cannot be overrated. In fact, a 
right understanding of it lies at the very root of the 
whole Jewish subject, and of the prophecies concerning 
the Jews. The duty which Christians owe to Israel as 
a nation will never be clearly understood until Christians 
clearly see the place that Israel occupies in Scripture. 

Before going any further, I will ask all readers of 
this book one plain practical question. I ask you to 



8C4TTSR1D AKD eATHSUBD. 145 

consider calmly what sense yon put on such words as 
" Israel," " Jacob," and the like, when you meet with 
them in the Psalms and prophecies of the Old Testament. 
We live in a day when there are many readers of the 
Bible. There are many who search the Scriptures 
regularly, and read through the Psalms and the Prophets 
once, if not twice or thrice, every year they live. Of 
course you attach some meaning to the words I have 
just rderred to. You place some sense upon them. 
Now what is that sense ? What is that meaning ? Take 
heed that it is the right one. 

Header, accept a friendly exhortation this day. Cleave 
to the literal sense of Bible words, and beware of 
departing from it, except in cases of absolute necessity. 
Beware of that system of allegorizing, and spiritualizing, 
and accommodating, which the school of Origen first 
brought in, and which has found such an unfortunate 
d^ree of fayour in the Church. In reading the autho- 
rized version of the English Bible, do not put too much 
confidence in the '' headings " of pages and '' tables of 
contents" at beginnings of chapters, which I take 
leave to consider a most unhappy accompaniment of 
that admirable translation. Eemember that those head- 
ings and tables of contents were drawn up by uninspired 
hands. In reading the Prophets, they are sometimes 
not helps, but real hindrances, and less likely to assist 
a reader than to lead him astray. Settle it in your 
mind, in reading the Psalms and Prophets, that Israel 
means Israel, and Zion means Zion, and Jerusalem 
means Jerusalem. And, finally, whatever edification 
you derive from applying to your own soul the words 



146 8CATTXBBI> AKD OATHSRED. 

which God addresses to His ancient people, never lose 
Bght of the primary sense of the text. 

II. The second point in the text on which I proposed 
to dwell, is the present condition of Israel. 

The expression used hy Jeremiah describes exactly 
the state in which the Jews are at this day, and hayo 
been for nearly eighteen hundred years. They are a 
"scattered" people. The armies of Assyria, Babylon, 
and Eome, have, one after another, swept over the land 
of Israel, and carried its inhabitants into captivity. 
Few, if any, of the ten tribes appear to have returned 
from the Assyrian captivity. Not' fifty thousand of 
Judah and Benjamin came back from the captivity of 
Babylon. Prom the last and worst captivity, when the 
temple was burned, and Jerusalem destroyed, there has 
been no return at alL For eighteen hundred years 
Israel has been dispersed over the four quarters of the 
globe. Like the wreck of some goodly ship, the Jews 
have been tossed to and fro on all waters, and stranded 
in broken pieces on every shore. 

But though Israel has been ** scattered," Israel has 
not been destroyed. For eighteen hundred years the 
Jews have continued a separate people, without a king, 
without a land, without a territory, but never lost, 
never absorbed among other nations. — They have been 
often trampled under foot, but never shaken from the 
fftith of their fathers. They have often been persecuted, 
but never destroyed. At this very moment they are as 
distinct and peculiar a people as any people upon earth, 
an unanswerable argument in the way of the infidel^ a 



aOillSllD AMD OAIHBBXI>. 147 

pnzzliiig diffioalty in the way of politicianBy a standing 
lesson to all the world. Danes, Saxons, Konnans, 
Belgians, French, Germans^ have all in turn settled on 
English soil. All have in turn lost their national dis- 
tinctiyeness. All have in torn become part and parcel 
of the English nation after the lapse of a few hundred 
years. But it has never been so with the Jews. Dis* 
persed as they are, there is a principle of cohesion 
among them which no circumstances have been able to 
melt. Scattered as they are, there is a national vitality 
among them which is stronger than that of any nation 
on earth. Oo where you will, you always find them. 
Settle where you please, in hot countries or in cold, you . 
will find the Jews. But go where you will, and settle 
where you please, this wonderful people is always the 
same. Scattered as they are, few in number compared 
to those among whom they live, the Jews are always 
the Jews. Three thousand years ago Balaam said, 
''The people shall dwell alone, and not be reckoned 
among the nations." Eighteen hundred years ago our 
Lord said, '' This generation shall not pass away till all 
be fulfilled." We see these words made good before 
our eyes. (Kum. xxiii. 9 ; Luke xxi. 32.) 

But by whose hand was this scattering of Israel 
wrought ? The text before us to-day declares expressly 
that it was the hand of God. It was not the armies of 
Tiglath-Pileser or Shalmanezer, of Nebuchadnezzar or 
of Titos. They were only instruments in the hand of 
a fiur higher power. It was that Ood who ordereth all 
things in heaven and earth, who dispersed the twelve 
tribes over the face of the earth. It was the same God 



148 SCATTERED AND GATHERED. 

vho brought Israel out of Egypt with a high hand and 
mighty arm, and planted them in Canaan, who plucked 
them up by the roots, and made them "wanderers 
among the nations." (Hosea ix. 17.) 

And why did God send this heavy judgment upon 
Israel ? To what are we to attribute this marvelloas 
dispersion of a people so highly favoured ? The inquiry 
is a very useful one. Let us mark well the answer. 

The Jews are a " scattered " people because of their 
many sins. Their hardness and stifPheckedness, their 
impenitence and unbelief, their abuse of privileges and 
neglect of gifts, their rejection of prophets and messen- 
gers from heaven, and finally their refusal to receive 
the Lord Jesus Christ, the King's own Son, — ^these were 
the things which called down God*s wrath upon them. 
These were the causes of their present dispersion. The 
vine which was brought out of Egypt bore wild grapes. 
The husbandmen to whom the vineyard was let out 
rendered not of the fruit to the Lord of the vineyard. 
The people that were brought out of the house of bond- 
age rebelled against Him by whom they were set free. 
Hence the wrath of God rose until there was no remedy. 
Thus He says, " You only have I known among the 
inhabitants of the earth, therefore I will punish you, 
because of your iniquities." (Amos iii. 2.) "They 
killed the Lord Jesus and their own prophets: they 
persecuted the apostles : they pleased not Ood : they 
were enemies to all men : they forbade us to speak to 
the Gentiles ; and, therefore, the wrath is come upon 
them to the uttermost." (1 Thess. ii. 15.) 

Israel was " scattered " to be a perpetual warning to 



8GAITBBBD AITB eATHEBSD. 149 

the Gentile Churches of Christ. The Jews are Qod's 
beacon or pillar of salt to all Christendom, and a silent 
standing lesson which all who profess to know God 
ought never to forget. They proclaim to all Christians 
God's hatred of spiritual pride and self-righteousness, — 
(}od'8 high displeasure with those who exalt the tradi- 
tions of men, and depart from the Scripture, — God's 
hatred of formality and ceremonialism. If any man 
desires to know how much God hates these things, he 
has only to look at the present condition of the Jews. 
For eighteen hundred years God has held them up 
before the eyes of the world, and written His abhor- 
rence of their sins in letters which he who runs may read. 
Beader, I cannot pass away from this part of my 
subject without entreating all who read this book to 
learn a practical lesson from the scattering of Israel. I 
entreat you to remember the causes which led to their 
dispersion, and to beware of the slightest approach to 
their peculiar sins. I am sure the warning is needed 
in these latter days. I am sure that the opinions which 
are boldly broached and openly maintained by many 
religious teachers in all Churches of Christendom, call 
loudly on all Christians to stand upon their guard. It 
is not without good reason that our Lord said, *' Take 
heed and beware of the leaven of the Sadducees and 
Pharisees." (Matt. xvi. 6.) Look to your own heart. 
Beware of tampering with false doctrines. Churches 
are never safe unless their members know their indivi- 
dual responsibility. Let us each look to ourselves, and 
take heed to our own souls. The same God lives who scat- 
tered Israel because of Israel's sins. And what says 



150 SCATTERED AND OATHEBED. 

He to the Cliiirclies of Christ this day ? He says, " Be 
not high-minded, but fear. If Gk)d spared not the 
natural branches, take heed lest He also spare not thee." 
(Eom. xi. 20, 21.) 

III. The third part in the text on which I propose 
to dwell is, the future prospects of Israel. 

In taking up this branch of my subject, I feel that I 
am entering on the region of unfulfilled prophecy. I 
desire to do so with reverence, and with a deep 
sense of the many difficulties surrounding this depart- 
ment of theology, and the many diversities of opinion 
which prevail upon it. But the servant of Qtod must 
" call no man master " on earth. Truth is never likely 
to be attained, unless all ministers of Christ speak out 
their opinions fully, freely, and unreservedly, and give 
men an opportunity of weighing what they teach. 

Reader, however great the difficulties surrounding 
many parts of unfulfilled prophecy, two points appear 
to my own mind to stand out as plainly as if written 
by a sunbeam. One of these points is the second per- 
sonal advent of our Lord Jesus Christ before the Millen- 
nium. — The other of these points is the future literal 
gathering of the Jewish nation, and their restoration to 
their own land. — I tell no man that these two truths 
are essential to salvation, and that he cannot be saved 
except he sees them with my eyes. But I tell any man 
that these truths appear to me distinctly set down in 
holy Scripture, and that the denial of them is as aston- 
ishing and incomprehensible to my own mind as the 
denial of the divinity of Christ. 



BCkTTEBXD AVD GATHIBED. 151 

Now what says our text about the fdtore prospects 
of the Jews ? It says, '' He that scattered Israel will 
gather him." That gathering is an event which plainly 
is yet to come. It could not apply in any sense to the 
ten tribes of IsraeL They have never been " gathered " 
in any way. Their " scattering " has never come to an 
end. — ^It cannot be applied to a return of the remnant 
of Judah and Benjamin from the Babylonish captivity. 
The language of the text makes such an application 
impossible. The text is addressed to the Gentiles, '' the 
nations." The declaration they are commanded to make 
is, '' to the isles of the sea." In the days of the Baby* 
lonish captivity, the nations of the earth knew nothing 
of the Word of the Lord. They were sunk in dark- 
ness, and had not even heard the Lord's name. If Jere- 
miah had told them to proclaim the return of the Jews 
ftom Babylon under such circumstances it would have 
been useless and absurd. There is but one fair and 
legitimate interpretation of the promise of the text. 
The event it declares is yet future. The ** gathering " 
spoken of is a gathering which is yet to come. 

Header, I believe that the interpretation I have just 
given is in entire harmony with many other plain 
prophecies of Scripture. Time would fail me if I 
were to quote a tenth part of the texts which teach the 
same truth. Out of the sixteen prophets of the Old 
Testament, there are at least ten in which the gathering 
and restoration of the Jews in the latter days are ex- 
pressly mentioned. Prom each of these ten I will take 
one testimony. I say "one" testimony deliberately. 
I am anxious not to overload the subject with evidence. 



152 SGATTEBED AND eATHEKBD. 

I would only remind the reader that the texts I am 
about to quote are only a small portion of the evidence 
that might be brought forward. 

(1.) Hear what Isaiah says : Isaiah xi. 11, 12. "It 
shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set 
His hand again the second time to recover the remnant 
of His people, which shall be left, from A883rria, and 
from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and 
from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and 
from the islands of the sea. And He shall set up an 
ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of 
Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from 
the four comers of the earth." 

(2.) Hear what Eukiel says: Ezek. xxxviL 21. 
" Thus saith the Lord God : Behold, I will take the 
children of Israel from among the heathen, whither 
they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and 
bring them into their own land." 

(3.) Hear what Hosea says: Hosea i. 11 ; iii. 4, 5. 
** Then shall the children of Judah and the ehildren 
of Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves 
one head, and they shall come up out of the land : for 
great shall be the day of Jezreel." "Por the children 
of Israel shall abide many days without a kin^:, and 
without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and vnthout 
an image, and without an ephod, and vnthout teraphim : 
afterwards shall the children of Israel return, and 
seek the Lord their Qod, and David their king; 
and shall fear the Lord and His goodness in the latter 
ays." 

(4.) Hear what Joel says: Joel iii. 20. "But 



8GATTEBXD AVD 6ATIIEBED. 153 

Judah shall dwell fbr ever, and Jerusalem from gene- 
ration to generation." 

(5.) Hear what Amos Bays: Amos iz. 14, 15. 
*' And I will bring again, the captivity of my people 
of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and 
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and 
drink the wine thereof; they shall also make gardens, 
and eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them 
upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up 
out of their land, which I have given them, saith the 
Lord thy God." 

(6.) Hear what Ohadiah says : Obadiah i. 17. " But 
upon Mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall 
be holixieM : and the house of Jacob shall possess their 
ponewion." 

(7.) Hear what Mteah says : Micah iv. 6, 7. "In 
that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that 
halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and 
her that I have afOyicted : and I will make her that 
halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off a 
strong nation : and the Lord shall reign over them in 
Mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever." 

(8.) Hear what Zaphanuth says : Zeph. iii. 14 — 20. 
*' Bing, daughter of Zion ; shout, Israel ; be glad 
and rejoice with all the heart, daughter of Jerusalem. 
The Lord hath taken away thy judgments. He hath cast 
out thine enemy ; the king of Israel, even the Lord, is 
in the midst of thee : thou shalt not see evil any more. 
In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Pear thou 
not : and to Zion, let not thine hands be slack. The 
Lord thy Ood in the midst of thee is mighty ; He will 



154 8CATTEBED AND OATHEBED. 

save, He will rejoice over thee with joy ; He'will rest 
in His love, He will joy over thee with singing. I will 
gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assemhly, 
who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a 
harden. Behold, at that time I will undo all that 
afflict thee: and I will save her that halteth, and 
gather her that was driven out ; and I will get them 
praise and fame in every land where they have heen 
put to shame. At that time I will bring you again, 
even in the time that I gather you : for I will make 
you a name and a praise among all people of ihe earth, 
when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith 
the Lord." 

(9.) Hear what Zecha/riah says: Zech. x. 6 — 10. 
" And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will 
save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again 
to place them ; for I have mercy upon them : and they 
shall be as though I had not cast them off : for I am 
the Lord their God, and will hear them. And they of 
Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart 
shall rejoice as through wine: yea, their children 
shall see it and be glad; their heart shall rejoice in 
the Lord. I will hiss for them, and gather them; 
for I have redeemed them : and they shall increase 
as they have increased. And I will sow them among 
the people : and they shall remember me in far count- 
ries; and they shall live with their children, and 
turn again. I will bring them again also out of the 
land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria ; and I 
will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon ; 
and place shall not be found for them." 



SCATTERED AND OATHEBED. 155 

(10.) Hear, lastly, what Jeremiah says : Jer. xxx. 3 
and 11. "For, lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and 
Judah, saith the Lord : and I will cause them to return 
to l^e land which I gave to their fathers, and they shall 
possess it." " Por I am with thee, saith the Lord, to 
save thee: though I make a full end of all nations 
whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make 
a full end of thee ; but I will correct thee in measure, 
and will not leave thee altogether unpunished." 

Reader, I place these texts before you without note 
or comment. I only ask that they may be weighed and 
examined, and the several chapters from which they are 
taken read carefully. I believe there is one common 
remark that applies to them all. They all point to a 
time which is yet future. They all predict the final 
gathering of the Jewish nation from the four quarters of 
the globe, and their restoration to their own land. 

I request you to believe that the subject admits of 
being drawn out at far greater length than the limits of 
these pages allow. I am resolved, however, not to encum- 
ber it by entering on topics of comparatively subordinate 
importance. I will not complicate it by dwelling on 
the manner in which Israel shall be gathered, and the 
particular events which shall accompany the gathering. 
I might show you by Scriptural evidence that the Jews 
will probably first be gathered in an unconverted state, 
though humbled ; and will afterwards be taught to look 
to Him whom they have pierced, through much tribula- 
tion. I might speak of the future glory of Jerusalem 
after the Jews are restored, and the last siege which it 



156 8CATTEBEB AND GATHERED. 

shall endure, as described by Zechanah and by our 
Lord JesTis Christ. Bat I forbear. I will not travel 
beyond the bounds of my text. I think it better to 
present its weighty promise to you in its naked simpli- 
city. " Israel scattered shall yet be gathered." This 
is the future prospect of the Jew. 

Now is there anything contrary to this gathering in 
the New Testament ? I cannot find a single word. So far 
from this being the case, I find a chapter in the Epistle 
to the Komans where the subject is fully discussed. 
An inspired Apostle speaks there of Israel being once 
more "received" into God*s favour, "graffed in," 
and " saved." (See Eom. xi. 15—32.) 

Is there anything impossible in this gathering of Israel? 
Who talks of impossibilities? If an infidel, let him 
explain the present condition and past history of Israel, 
if he can ; — and when he has solved that mighty pro- 
blem, we may listen to him. If a Christian, let him 
think again before he t^alks of anything being impossible 
with God. Let him read the vision of the dry bones in 
Ezekiel, and mark to whom that vision applies. Let 
him look to his own conversion and resurrection firom 
the death of trespasses and sins, and recall the unwor- 
thy thought that anything is too hard for the Lord. 

Is there anything inconsistent with God's former deal* 
ings in the gathering of Israel ? Is there any extrar 
vagance in expecting such an event ? Why should we 
say so ? Reasoning from analogy, I can see no ground 
for refusing to believe that (jod may yet do wonderful 
things for the Jewish people. It would not be more 
manrellouf:to see them gathered once more into Pale^- 



8CATTXBED AJSTD GATHEBXl). 157 

tine, than it was to see them brought from Egypt into 
the promised land. What Qod has done once. He may 
surely do again. 

Is there anything improhahle in the gathering of 
Israel ? Alas ! reader, we are poor judges of probabil- 
ities. God's ways of carrying into effect His own pur- 
poses are not to be judged by man's standard, or mea- 
sured by the line and plummet of what man calls 
*' probable." In the day when the children of Israel 
went forth from Egjrpt, would any one have said it 
was prohahle that such a nation of serfs would ever pro- 
duce a book that should turn the world upside down ? 
Yet that nation has done it. From that nation has 
come the Bible. — ^Four thousand years ago, would any 
one have said it was probable that God's Son would 
come to earth, and suffer in the flesh on a cross, before 
He came to earth in glory to reign ? Yet so it has been. 
Christ has lived, and Christ has suffered, and Christ has 
died. Away with this talk about improbabilities 1 The 
ways of God are not our ways. 

Finally, is there anything fanatical or enthusiastic 
in this expectation that Israel shall be gathered ? Why 
should men say so ? Your own eyes tell you that the 
present order of things will never convert the world. 
There is not a church, or a parish, or a congregation, 
where the converted are more than a little flock. There 
is not a Mthful minister on earth, and never has been, 
who has ever seen more than the '' taking out of a peo- 
ple " to serve Christ. A change must come before the 
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. 
A new order of teachers must be raised up, and a new 



158 SCATTEBEO AND GATHEBED. 

dispensation ushered in. These teachers, I firmly be- 
lieve, shall be converted Jews. And then shall be seen 
the fulfilment of the remarkable words, "If the castiDg 
of them away be the reconciling of the world, what 
shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead ? *' 
(Eom. xi. 15.) 

I may not dwell longer on this branch of my subject. 
I leave it with one general remark, which may sound 
to some readers like a bald truism. Whether it be a 
truism or not, I believe the remark to be of vital im- 
portance, and I heartily wish that it was more deeply 
impressed on all our minds. 

I ask you, then, to settle it firmly in your mind, that 
when God says a thing shall be done, we ought to be- 
lieve it. We have no right to begin talking of probable 
or improbable — likely or unlikely — possible or impos- 
sible — reasonable or unreasonable. What is all this 
but veiled scepticism, and infidelity in disguise ? What 
hath the Lord said ? and what hath the Lord spoken ? 
What saith the Scripture ? What is written in the 
Word ? These are the only questions we have a right 
to ask ; aod when the answer to them is plain, we have 
nothing to do but to believe. Our reason may rebel. 
Our preconceived ideas of what God ought to do may 
receive a rude shock. Our private systems of prophe- 
tical interpretation may be shattered to pieces. Our 
secret prejudices may be grievously offended. But 
what are we to do ? We must abide by Scripture; or 
be of all men most miserable. At any cost let us cling 
to the Word. "Let God be true, and every man a liar.** 

In all matters of unfulfilled prophecy, I desire, for 



8CATTSRS0 AND OATHEBES. 159 

my own part, to fall back on this principle. I' see 
many things I cannot explain. I find many difficulties 
I cannot solve. But I dare not give up my principle. 
I am determined to believe everytiiing that God says. 
I know it will all prove true at the last day. I read 
that He says in the text before us this day, '*He that 
scattered Israel shall gather him." It must be true, 
I feel, whatever be the difficulties. That Israel shall 
be gathered I steadfastly believe. 

lY. The last point on which I propose to dwell is 
one purely practical. It is the duty which Gentile 
Churches owe to Israel. 

Header, in touching on this point, I would not have 
you for a moment suppose that the future gathering 
of Israel depends on anything that man can do. God's 
counsels and purposes are independent of human 
strength. The sun will set to-night at its appointed 
hour, and neither Queen, Lords nor Commons, — Pope, 
Presidents, nor Emperors, — can hasten, prevent, or 
put off its setting. — The tides of the sea will ebb and 
flow .this week in their regular course, and no scientific 
decree nor engineering skill can interfere with their 
motion. And just in like manner the promises of God 
concerning Israel will all be fulfilled in due season, 
whether we will hear or whether we will forbear. 
When the ** times and seasons " arrive which God has 
"put in His own power," Israel will be gathered ; — 
and all the alliances and combinations of statesmen, and 
and all the persecution and unbelief of apostate churches, 
shall not be able to prevent it. 



160 SCATTEBED ANB GATHSBSD. 

But seeing that we look for sncli things, it becomes 
us all to be found in the path of duty. It behoves 
us to consider gravely the solemn question. What 
manner of persons ought we to be ? and in what way 
can we testify our full assent to God's purposes about 
the Jews ? Can we in no sense be fellow- workers with 
Gk)d ? Should we not remember that remarkable say- 
ing of St. Paul, — "Through your mercy they shall 
obtain mercy." (Kom. xi. 31.) This is the question 
to which I now desire briefly to supply a practical 
answer. 

(1.) I believe, then, for one thing, that it is a duty 
incumbent on all Gentile Christians to take a special 
interest in the spiritual condition of the Jewish nation, 
and to give their conversion a special place in our 
prayers. I say, advisedly, their spiritual condition. 
I leave alone their civil and political position. I speak, 
exclusively, of our duty to Jewish souls. I say that 
we owe them a special debt, and that this debt ought 
to be carefully paid. 

We prize our Bibles, and we are right to do so. A 
heaven without a sun would not be more blank than 
a world without a Bible. But do we ever reflect that 
every page in that blessed book was written under 
Ghxi's inspiration by Israelitish hands? Bemember 
that every chapter and verse you read in your .Bible 
you owe, imder God, to Israel. There is not a leligions 
society that meets in London in the month of May 
which is not constantly working with Israelitush tools. 

We prize the glorioua Gospd of the gnMe.of God> 



SGATTEEBD AND OAIHSKU), 161 

and we aie right to do so. A land without the Gos- 
pely like Oude and China, is nothing better than a 
moral wilderness. See the vast difference between 
Europe and America with the Gospel, notwithstanding 
all their vices, and Africa and Asia without it. But 
do we ever reflect that the first preachers of that Gos- 
pel were all Jews ? The men who, at cost of their 
lives, first carried from town to town the blessed tid- 
ings of Christ crucified, were not Gentileft. The first 
to take up the lamp of truth, which was passed from 
hand to hand, till it reached our heathen forefathers, 
were all men of Israel. 

We rejoice in Christ Jesus, and glory in His person 
and work. Well may we do so ! Without a living 
Saviour, and the blood of His atonement once made 
on the cross, we should indeed be miserable. But do 
we ever reflect that when that Saviour became a man, 
in order that, as man's substitute, He might suffer and 
die. He was bom of a Jewish woman ? Yes ! let that 
never be forgotten. When *' God was manifest in the 
flesh,*' and was bom of a woman, that woman was a 
virgin of the house of David. When the promised 
Saviour took flesh and blood that He might bmise the 
serpent's head and redeem man, He took not flesh and 
blood of any royal house among the Gentiles, but of 
ooe of the twelve tribes of Israel. 

Beader, I know well that these are ancient things. 
They have been often urged, often alleged, often pressed 
(m the attention of the Churches. I am not ashamed 
to bring them forward again. I say, that if there be 
padh a thing as gratitude in the heart of man, it is the 



162 SCATTEBEI) AND GATHERED. 

duty of all Gentil'e Christians to take special interest in 
the work of doing good to the Jews. 

(2.) I believe, furthermore, that it is a duty in- 
cumbent on all Gentile Christians to be specially care- 
ful that they take tip stumbling blocks out of the way of 
Israely and to see that they do nothing to disgust them 
with Christianity, or hinder their conversion. This is 
a matter which is expressly mentioned in Scripture. 
There we find Isaiah bidding us, *' Take up the stum- 
bling blocks out of the way of God's people." (Isaiah 
Ivii. 14.) Truly the prophet might well speak of this. 
No man can look round the Gentile Churches and fail 
to see that he had cause. 

What shall we say of the glaring unholiness and 
neglect of God's Ten Commandments which prevail so 
widely in Christendom ? — What shall we say of the 
open unblushing idolatry which offends the eye in all 
Roman Catholic Churches? — What shall we say of 
the wide-spread habit of Sabbath breaking which is 
eating like a cancer into the heart of the Protestant 
Churches? — What shall we say of the rationalistic 
mode of interpreting Old Testament history, which 
has crept so extensively into modem commentaries, 
— the system of regarding the histories of Abraham, 
and Jacob, and Joseph, and the like, as so many myths, 
or ingenious fables, but not as narratives of facts which 
really took place ? — What shall we say of the tradi- 
tional mode of interpreting Old Testament prophecies, 
in which so many Christians indulge, — the system of 
appropriating all the blessings to the Church of Christ, 



SCATTSSED ASD GATHE&EB. 163 

and handing over all the bitter things to poor despised 
Israel, — the system of interpreting all prophecies about 
Christ's first advent literally, and all prophecies about 
His second advent figuratively, requiring the Jew to 
believe the first in the letter, and refusing in turn to 
believe the second, except in what is called, by a sad 
misnomer, a spiritual sense ? — What shall we say of all 
these things, but that they are stumbling blocks, — 
great stumbling blocks, — in the way of the conversion 
of the Jews? What are they all but great barriers 
between the Jew and Christ, and barriers cast up by 
Christian hands ? 

Header, we must all do our part in aiding to take 
these stumbling blocks away. Here at least all may 
help. Here, at any rate, every Gentile Christian can 
aid the Jewish cause. The more pure and lovely we 
can make our holy faith, the more we are likely to 
recommend it to Israel. The more we can check the 
progress of the Eoman apostacy, and protest against 
its idolatries and corruptions, the more likely is the 
Jew to believe there is something in Christianity. The 
more we can promote the habit of taking all Scripture in 
its plain literal sense, the more we are likely to remove 
prejudices in the minds of honest inquirers in Israel, 
and to make them ready to hear what we have to say. 

(3.) Finally, I believe it is a duty incumbent on 
all Gtentile Christians, to me special efforts in order to 
promote the conversion of the Jews, 1 say special efforts 
advisedly. The Jews are a peculiar people, and must 
be approached in a peculiar way. 



164 SCATTEBED AKD GATHERED. 

They are peculiar in their state of mind. They re- 
quire an entirely different treatment from the heathen. 
Their objections are not the heathen man's objections. 
Their difficulties are not the heathen man's difficulties. 
They believe many things which the heathen man 
never heard of. They have a standard of right and 
wrong with which the heathen man is utterly unac- 
quainted. Like the heathen they need to be converted. 
Like the heathen they need to be brought to Christ. 
But the lines of argument to be pursued with the Jew 
and the heathen are widely dissimilar. A faithful 
missionary might do admirably well among the heathen, 
who might find it difficult to reason with a Jew. 

They are peculiar in their position in the world. 
They are not to be found all assembled together, like 
the Africans at Sierra Leone, or the Hindoos, or New 
Zealanders, or Chinese. They are emphatically a 
scattered people, a few in one country, and a few in 
another. An effi)rt to get at them, must aim at noth- 
ing short of sending missionaries in search of them all 
over the world. 

Circumstances like these appear to me to point out 
clearly that nothing less than a special effort will ever 
enable Christians to discharge their debt to Israel. 
There must be a division of labour in the missionary 
field. There must be a special concentration of preach- 
ing, praying, and loving intercourse on the Jewish 
people, or the Churches of the Gentiles can never ex- 
pect to do them much spiritual good. Without Buch 
special effort the cause of Israel will inevitably be lost 
sight of in the cause of the whole heathen world. 



8CATTSBSD AND GATHERED. 165 

Without sndh special effort I cannot see how the com- 
mand of the text can he rightly oheyed. 

"Now here lies the claim which the Society for Pro- 
moting Christianity amongst the Jews makes on Eng- 
lish ChristianB in the present day for aid. It enables 
them to make a special effort on behalf of Israel. It 
supplies them with an outgate for their sympathy, and 
a £uthfiil instrumentality for sending the Gospel to 
Gbd's ancient people. It is in this light tbat I 
•unestly commend the Society to the support of all 
who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and desire 
to do good in the world. 

I. am quite aware that it is a common remark, that 
the Society does nothing. Its results appear to some 
mail and insignificant. I think, however, that those 
who make such an objection, have probably never con- 
lukned the very peculiar character of the work which 
the ^Society does. Its field is necessarily a singularly 
losttered one. Its agents are necessarily scattered 
widelj apart one from another. The work that they 
do, in the very nature of things, makes far less show 
than the work of a united band of missionaries at 
'Tinnevelley or Sierra Leone. Tried, I believe, by any 
fidr standard, the work of the Society for Promoting 
Christianity amongst the Jews has no cause to fear in- 
spection. Its agents are bearing a testimony in some 
places, and awakening in Israel thought, reflection, and 
inquiry. In others they are gradually softening pre- 
judices, and inclining Jews to hold discussions or listen 
to Gbspel statements. In others they are calling out a 
people, and leading them to the foot of the cross. 



166 SCATTEEEB AND GATHEBED. 

What more do we see going on at home ? What greater 
results than these can he found in any congregation on 
earth where the Gospel is preached ? And, after all, 
duties are ours, and results are God's. 

I leave the whole subject with three remarks, which 
I pray God to impress on the minds of all into whose 
hands this book may fall. 

For one thing, I charge every reader of this book to 
remember the special blessing which God has promised 
to all who care for Israel. Whatever a sneering world 
may say, the Jews are a people beloved for their fathers' 
sake. Of Jerusalem it is written, " They shall prosper 
that love thee." Psalm cxxii. 6. Of Israel it is written, 
" Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that 
curseth thee." Num. xxiv. 9. These promises are not 
yet exhausted. We see their fulfilment in the blessing 
granted to the Church of England since the day when 
the Jewish cause was first taken up. We see their 
fulfilment in the peculiar honour which God has put 
from time to time on individual Christians who have 
laboured especially for the Jewish cause. Charles 
Simeon, Edward Bickersteth, Robert M'Cheyne, and 
Haldane Stewart, are striking examples of what I 
mean. Is there any one that desires God's special 
blessing ? Then let him labour in the cause of Israel, 
and he shall not fail to find it. 

For another thing, I charge every reader of this 
book never to forget the close connection which Scrip- 
ture reveals between the time of Israel's gathering and 
the time of Christ's second advent to the world. In 
one Psalm it is expressly declared, "When the Lord 



BCATTERED AND GATHEBES. 167 

shall build up Zion, He shall appear in His glory." 
Psalm cii. 16. Where is the true belierer that does 
not long for that blessed day ? Where is the true 
Christian that does not cry from the bottom of his 
heart, "Thy kingdom come?" Let all such work, 
and give, and pray, so that the Gospel may have free 
course in Israel, and be glorified. The time to favour 
Zion is closely bound up with the restitution of all 
things. Blessed, indeed, is that work of which the 
completion shall usher in the second coming of the 
Lord! 

Finally, I charge every reader of this book to make 
sure work of his own salvation. Rest not in mere head- 
knowledge of prophetical subjects. Be not content with 
intellectual soundness in the faith. Give diligence to 
make your own calling and election sure. Seek to 
know that your repentance and faith are genuine and 
true. Seek to feel that you are one with Christ and 
Christ in you; and that you are washed, sanctified, 
and justified. Then, whether the completion of God*s 
promises to Israel be near or far off, your own portion 
will be sure. You will stand in your lot safely, when 
the kingdoms of this world are passing away. You 
will meet Christ without fear when He comes the 
second time to Zion. You will join boldly in the song, 
"Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." 
You will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 
in the kingdom of God, and go out no more. 



5lhh tn ^fltiE/ 



HEBREWS VII. 25. 

^^He is able to 8(we them to the uttermost that come unto 
God hy him, seeing that he ever liveth to make 
intercession for them,*^ 

Beadeb, 

There is one subject in religion, about 
which you can never know too much. That subject is 
Jesus Christ the Lord. This is the mighty subject 
which the text that heads this page unfolds, — ^Jesus 
Christ, and Jesus Christ's intercession. 

I have heard of a book entitled " The Story vrithout 
an End." I know no story deserving that titie so well 
as the everlasting Gospel. This is indeed and in truth 
the story without an end. There is an infinite "fulness" 
in Christ. There are in Him "unsearchable riches." 

* Originallv preached as a Sermon at St. Thomas's Church, 
Dublin, on behalf of the Irish Church Missions, in A^ril, 1869. 
It has been prepared by the Author for publication in its present 
form from the reportco^s notes. 



ABLE TO SATS. 169 

There is in Him a ''love which passeth knowledge.'' 
He is an " unspeakable gift.'' (Coloss. i. 19 : Ephes. 
iii. 8; iii. 19: 2 Cor. x. 15.) There is no end to all 
the riches that are treasured up in Him, in His person, 
in His work, in His offices, in His words, in His deeds, 
in His life, in His death, in His resurrection. I take 
but one branch of the great subject this day. I am 
going to speak to you about the intercession and priestly 
office of our Lord Jesus Christ. May God the Holy 
Ghost bless the consideration of this subject ! May He, 
without whom ministers preach and write in vain, 
apply the subject with power to your soul! If His 
blessing goes with this book, good will be done. If 
His blessing goes not with it, the words that I write 
will &11 to the ground. 

There are three points which I propose to consider, 
in opening the text which heads these pages. 

I. — ^You have here a description of all true Chris- 
tians — They are a people who come to God by 
Christ. 

II. — ^You have the work that Jesus Christ is ever 
carr3ang on on behalf of true Christians — He ever lives 
to niake intercession for them. 

III. — ^You have the comfortable conclusion built by 
St. Paul upon Christ's work of intercession. He says : 
— " He is able to save to the uttermost them that come 
unto God by Him, because He ever liveth to make 
intercessicm for them." 



170 ABLE TO SAVE. 

I. — You have first a description of all true Christians. 
It is most simple, most beautiful, and most true. Great 
is the contrast between the description given by the 
Holy Ghost of a Christian, and the description which is 
given by man. With man it is often enough to say 
that such a one " is a Churchman," or that such a one 
'* belongs to this body of Christians or to that." It is 
not so when the Holy Ghost draws the picture. The 
Holy Ghost describes a Christian as a man "who comes 
unto God by Christ." 

True Christians come unto God. They are not as 
many who turn their backs upon Him ; — who " go into 
a far country," like the prodigal son ; — who '* go out " 
like Cain "from the presence of the Lord; " — who are 
"alienated, strangers and enemies in their mind by 
wicked works." (Coloss. i.' 21.) They are reconciled 
to God and friends of God. — They are not as many who 
dislike everything that belongs to God, His word, His 
day. His ordinances. His people. His house. They love 
all that belongs to their master. The very footprints 
of His steps are dear unto them. His name is as 
ointment poured forth. — They are not as many who are 
content with coming to church, or with coming to 
chapel, or with coming to the Lord's table. They go 
farther than that. They " come unto God," and in 
communion with God they live. 

But more than this, true Christians come unto God 
in a certain peculiar way. They come unto God by 
Christ, pleading no other plea, mentioning no other 
name, trusting in no other righteousness, resting on 
no other foundation than this, that Jesus hath lived, 



ABI^B TO SAVE. 171 

Jesus hath died, Jesus hath risen again for their 
souls. 

" I the chief of sinners am, 
But Jesus died for me.** 

This is the way by which the true Christian draws near 
to God. 

Beader, the way of which I have been speaking is an 
old way. It is well nigh 6,000 years old. All that 
have ever been saved have drawn near to God by this 
way. From Abel, the first saint that entered Paradise, 
down to the last infant that died this morning, they 
have all come to God only by Jesus Christ. " No man 
Cometh unto the Father but by Christ." (John xiv. 6.) 

It is a ffood way. It is easy for the worldly-wise to 
sneer at and ridicule it. But all the wit and wisdom 
of man has never devised a way more perfect, more 
complete, and that will bear more thoroughly all fair 
and reasonable investigation. It has been to the Jew a 
stumbling-block ; it has been to the Greek foolishness. 
But aU who have known their hearts, and understand 
what God demands, have found the way made by Jesus 
Christ a good way, and a way that stands the fullest 
examination that can be made as to its wisdom. Therein 
they find justice and mercy met together; — righteousness 
and peace kissing one another ; — God a holy God, yet 
loving, kind, and merciful ; — man knowing himself a 
poor, weak, sinuer, yet drawing near to God with bold- 
ness, having access with confidence, looking up into his 
face without fear, seeing him in Christ his Father and 
his Friend. 



172 ABLR TO SAVE. 

Not least, it is a tried way. Thousands and tens of 
thousands have walked in it, and not one of all that 
numher has ever missed heaven. — Apostles, prophets, 
patriarchs, martyrs, early fathers, reformers, puritans, 
men of God in every age, and of every people and 
tongue ; — holy men of our own day — men like Simeon, 
Bickersteth, Havelock — have all walked in this way. 
They have had their battles to fight, and their enemies 
to contend with. They have had to carry the cross. 
They have found lions in their path. They have had 
to walk through the valley of the shadow of death. 
They have had to contend with Apolyon. They have 
had to cross at last the cold dark river. But they have 
walked safely through to the other side, and entered 
with joy into the celestial city. And now they are all 
waiting for you and me to walk in their steps, to follow 
them, and to share in their glory. 

Eeader, this is the way I want you to walk in. I 
want you to come unto God by Jesus Christ. Let there 
be no mistake as to the object which true ministers of 
the Gospel have in view. We are not set apart merely 
to perform a certain roimd of ordinances; to read 
prayers, to christen those that are christened, to bury 
those that are buried, to marry those that are married. 
We are set apart for the grand purpose of proclaiming 
the one true living way, and inviting you to walk in it. 
We ought to labour day and night, until we can 
persuade you, by God's blessing, to walk in that way — 
the tried way, the good way, the old way — and to know 
the peace which passeth all understanding, which in 
that way alone is to be found. 



ABLE TO SATE. 173 

II. — I pass on now to the second point which I 
purpose to consider. The text which heads these pages, 
speaks of the tcork whieh the Lord Jesus Christ is ever 
doing on behalf of true Christians. I ask your special 
attention to this point It is one of deep importance to 
our peace, and to the estahlishment of our souls in the 
Christian faith. 

There is one great work which the Lord Jesus Christ 
has done and finished completely. That work is the 
work of atonement, sacrifice, and suhstitution. It is 
the work which He did when He suffered for sin, the 
just for the unjust, that He might bring us unto God. 
He saw us ruined hy the fall, a world of poor, lost, 
shipwrecked sinners. He saw and He pitied us ; and 
in compliance with the everlasting counsels of the 
Eternal Trinity, He came down to the world, to suffer 
in our stead, and to save us. He did not sit in heaven 
pitying us from a distance. He did not stand upon the 
shore and see the wreck, and behold poor drowning 
sinners struggling in vain to get to shore. He plunged 
into the waters Himself. He came off to the wreck, 
and took part with us in our weakness and infirmity, 
becoming a man to save our souls. As mao, He bore 
our sins and carried our transgressions. As man, He 
endured all that men can endure, and went through 
everything in man's experience, sin only excepted. As 
man He lived. As man He went to the cross. As man 
He died. As man He shed His blood, in order that He 
might save us, poor shipwrecked sinners ! and establish 
a communication between earth and heaven. As man. 
He became a curse for us, in order that He might bridge 



174 ABLE TO SATE. 

the gulf, and make a way by which you and I might 
draw near to God with boldness, and have access to 
God without fear. In all this work of Christ, remember, 
there was infinite merit, because He who did it was not 
only man but God. Let that never be forgotten. He 
who wrought out our redemption was perfect man ; but 
He never ceased for a moment to be perfect God. 

But there is another great work which the Lord 
Jesus Christ is yet doing. That work is the work of 
intercession. — The first work He did once for all. 
Nothing can be added to it; nothing can be taken 
away from it. It was a finished, perfect work, when 
Christ oflfered up the sacrifice upon the cross. 'No other 
sacrifice need be offered, beside the sacrifice once made 
by the Lamb of God, when He shed His own blood 
at Calvary. But the second work He is ever carrying 
on at the right hand of God, where He makes inter- 
cession for His people. — The first work He did on earth 
when He died upon the cross. The second work He 
carries on in heaven, at the right hand of Otod the 
Father. — The first work He did for all mankind, and 
offers the benefit of it to all the world. The second 
work He carries on and accomplishes solely and entirely 
on behalf of His own elect. His people. His servants, 
and His children. 

Reader, How does our Lord Jesus Christ carry on 
this work ? How shall we comprehend and grasp what 
is the meaning of Christ's intercession ? We must not 
pry rashly into things unseen. We must not "rush 
in where angels fear to tread." Yet some idea we 
•oaa obtain of the nature of that eontinual intercession 



ABLE TO SATB. 175 

which Christ ever lives to make on behalf of His 
believing people. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ is doing for His people the 
work which the Jewish high-priest of old did on behalf 
of the Israelites. He is acting as the manager, the 
representative, the mediator in all things between His 
people and God. — He is ever presenting on their behalf 
His own perfect sacrifice, and His all-suficient merit, 
before God the Father. — He is ever obtaining daily- 
supplies of fresh mercy and of fresh grace for His poor, 
weak servants, who need daily mercy for daily sins, 
and daily grace for daily necessities. — He ever prays for 
them. As He prayed for Simon Peter upon earth, so I 
believe He prays for His people now. — He presents 
their names before God the Father. He carries their 
names upon His heart, the place of love, and upon His 
shoulders, the place of power, — as the high-priest 
carried the names of all the tribes of Israel, from the 
least to the greatest, when he wore his robes of office. 
He presents their prayers before God. They go up 
before God the Father mingled with Christ's all-pre- 
vailing intercession, and so are acceptable in God's sight. 
He lives, in one word, to be the friend, the advocate, 
the priest, the all-prevailing agent, of all who are His 
members here upon earth. As their elder brother He 
acts for them, and all that their souls require. He, in the 
eourt of heaven, is ever carrying on. 

Does any reader of this book need a friend ? In such 
a world as this, how many hearts there are which ought 
to respond to that appeal. How many there are who 
feel ** I stand alone." How many have found one idol 



176 ABLE TO SATE. 

broken after another, one staff failing after another, one 
fountain dried after another, is they have travelled 
through the wilderness of this world. If there is one 
%iio wants a Mend, let that one behold at the right 
hand of God an unfailing fiiend, the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Let that one repose his aching head and weary heart 
upon the bosom of that unfailing friend, Jesus Christ 
the Lord. There is one living at Gk)d's right hand of 
matchless tenderness. There is one who never dies. 
There is one who never fails, never disappoints, never 
forsakes, never changes His mind, never breaks off 
friendship. That One, the Lord Jesus, I commend to 
all who need a friend. I^o one in a world like this, a 
fallen world, a world which we find more and more 
barren, it may be, every year we live — ^no one ever need 
be friendless while the Lord Jesus Christ lives to inter- 
cede at the right hand of God. 

Does any reader of this book need a priest ? There 
can be no true religion without a priest, and no saving 
Christianity without a confessional. But who is the 
true priest ? Where is the true confessional ? There 
is only one true priest, — and that is Christ Jesus the 
Lord. There is only one real confessional, — and that is 
the throne of grace where the Lord Jesus waits to receive 
those who come to Him to unburden their hearts in His 
presence. We can find no better priest than Christ. 
We need no other priest. Why need we turn to any 
priest upon earth, while Jesus is sealed, anointed, ap- 
pointed, ordained, and commissioned by God the Father, 
and has an ear ever ready to hear, and a heart ever 
ready to feel for the poor sinful sons of men ? The 



ABLE TO SATB. 177 

priesthood is His lawful prerogative. He has deputed 
that office to none. Woe be to any one upon earth 
who dares to rob Christ of His prerogative ! Woe be 
to the man who takes upon himself the office whick 
Christ holds in £Qs own hands, and has never trEuisferred 
to any one bom of Adam upon the face of the globe ! 

Beader, I charge you solemnly, never to lose sight 
of this mighty truth of the GhMSpel — the intercession 
and priestly office of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
I believe that a firm grasp of this truth is one great 
safeguard against the errors of the Church of Borne. I 
believe that losing sight of this great truth is one prin- 
cipal reason why so many have fallen away from the faith 
in some quarters, have forsaken the creed of their Pro- 
testant forefathers, and have gone back to the darkness 
of Home. Once firmly established upon this mighty 
truth — that we have a priest, an altar, and a confessor, 
that we have an unfailing, never-dying, ever living 
Intercessor, who has deputed His office to none, — and 
we shall see that we need turn aside nowhere else. 
We need not hew for ourselves broken cisterns that can 
hold no water, when we have in the Lord Jesus Christ 
a fountain of living water, ever flowhig and free to all. 
We need not seek any human priest upon earth, when 
we have a divine Priest living for us in heaven. 

Beader, beware of regarding the Lord Jesus Christ 
only as one that is dead. Here, I believe, many greatly 
err. They think much of His death, and it is right 
that they should do so. But we ought not to stop short 
there. We ought to remember that He not only died, 
and went to the grave, but that ho rose again, and 



178 ABLE TO SATE. 

ascended up on high, leading captivity captive. We 
ought to remember that He is now sitting on the 
right hand of Grod, to do a work as real, as true, as 
important to our souls, as the work which He did 
when he shed His blood. Christ lives, £uid is not dead. 
He lives as truly as any one of ourselves. Christ sees 
us, hears us, knows us, and is acting as a Priest in 
heaven on behalf of His believing people. The thought 
of His life ought to have as great and important a place 
in our souls, as the thought of His death upon the cross. 

III. — I will now speak, in the third place, of the 
comfortable conclusions that the Apostle builds upon the 
everlasting intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ. We 
need much comfort and consolation in a wdrld like this. 
It is no easy matter for a man to carry the cross and 
reach heaven. There are many enemies to be encount- 
ered and overcome. We have often to stand alone. 
We have at the best times few with us and many 
against us.. We need cordials and strong consolation 
to sustain and cheer us, and to preserve us from fainting 
on the way as we travel from Egypt into Canaan. The 
Apostle appears deeply conscious of all this in the words 
he uses. He says — " He is able to save to the utter- 
most," — to save perfectly, to save completely, to save 
eternally, — ** all that come unto God by Him, because 
He ever liveth to make intercession for them." 

Reader, I might say much on the glorious expresmon 
which is before you. But I forbear. I will only point 
out a few of the thoughts which ought to arise in our 
minds when we hear of Christ's ability to save to the 



ABLE TO SAYB. 179 

nttennost. I have not space to dwell on them at length. 
I rather throw them out as suggestions to supply mat- 
ter for private meditation. 

1. Think for one thing, that Christ is able to tsve 
to the uttermost, notwithstanding the old sins of any be- 
liever. Those old sins shall never rise again, nor stand 
up to condemn the child of God. For what says the 
Scripture, — " Christ hath not entered into the holy 
place made with hands, but into heaven itself, to ap- 
pear in the presence of God for us." (Heb. ix. 24.) 
Christ, to use a legal phrase, is ever making an appear- 
ance in the court of heaven on behalf of them that 
believe in Him. There is not a year, nor a month, nor 
a day, nor an hour, nor a minute, but there is One 
living in the presence of God, to make an appearance 
there on behalf of all the saints. Christ is ever 
appearing before God the Father on behalf of the men 
and women that believe in*|Him. His blood and His 
sacrifice are ever in God's sight. His work, his death, 
his intercession, are always sounding in God the Father's 
ears. 

I remember reading a story in ancient history which 
may help to illustrate the truth on which I am now 
dwelling. It is the story of one who was put upon 
trial for a capital charge at Athens, shortly after the 
great battle of Marathon. In that famous battle the 
Athenians had preserved by their valour liberty for 
their little State, against the mighty hosts of the Per- 
sians; and among those who had distinguished them- 
selves greatly, the brother of the prisoner was one, and 
had been sorely wounded in the fight. The man was 



180 ABLE TO SATE. 

put upon his trial. The evidence against him wets 
strong and unanswerable. There seemed no chance of 
the prisoner escaping condemnation. Suddenly there 
came forward one who asked to be heard on his behalf. 
And who was this ? It was his own brother. When 
he was asked what evidence he had to give, or what 
reason he had to show why the prisoner at the bar 
ought not to be found guilty, he simply lifted up his 
mutilated arms — nothing but stumps — the hands com- 
pletely cut off, the wounded stumps alone remaining. 
He was recognized as a man who at the battle of 
Marathon, had done prodigies of valour, and in the 
service of the State had lost his hands. By those 
wounds he had helped to win the victory which was 
then ringing in Athenian ears. Those wounds were 
the only evidence he brought forward. Those wounds 
were the only plea he advanced why his brother ought 
to be let go free, and sentence ought not to be passed 
upon him. And the story states that for the sake of 
those wounds — for the sake of all his brother had 
suffered, the prisoner was acquitted. The case was 
dismissed at once, and the prisoner obtained his liberty. 
Eeader, in like manner the wounds of the Lord Jesus 
Christ are ever before God the Father. The nail-prints 
in His hands and feet — the marks of the spear in His 
side — the thorn-marks upon His forehead — the marks 
of all that He suffered as a Lamb slain, are ever before 
Q-od the Father in heaven. While Christ is in heaven, 
the believer's sins will never rise in judgment against 
him. Think not with fear upon those old sins of yours, 
my beUeving brother or sister. Christ lives, and those 



ABLE TO SAVE. 181 

old sins will not condemn yon. We have an ever-living, 
ever interceding Priest. Christ is not dead but alive. 

2. Think again, that Christ is able to save to 
the nttennost, notwithstanding all the present weakness of 
His believing people. How great that weakness is, 
time wonld fail me to show. There are many of Gk>d's 
children who know their heart's bitterness, who bewail 
with strong crying and tears their short-comings, their 
unprofitableness, and the scanty fnni they bring forth. 
But oh ! my beloved reader, take comfort in the words 
of St. John : "If any man sin, we have an advocate 
with the Father — ever present with the Father — " Jesus 
( Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our 
gins." (2 Johnii. 1.) Those weaknesses may well humble 
thee. Those infirmities may well make thee walk softly 
before thy Grod. But while the Lord Jesus Christ lives, 
those infirmities need not make thee entirely despair. 
We have an ever-living, ever-interceding Priest. Christ 
is not dead but alive. 

3. Think again, that Jesus Christ is able to save 
to the uttermost, notwithstanding all the trials that 
believers have to go through. Hear what the Apostle 

Paul says to Timothy : "I suffer nevertheless I 

am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, 
and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I 
have committed unto him against that day." (1 Tim. i. 
1.) So long as Jesus Christ lives, the believer in the 
Lord Jesus Christ may be assured that no affliction shall 
be allowed to break off the union between him and his 
risen Head. He may suffer greatly and be sorely tried. 
But while Christ lives he shall never be forsaken. 



182 ABLE TO SAYS. 

Neither poverty, nor sickness, nor bereavements, nor 
separations, shall ever separate Jesus and his believing 
people. We have an ever-living, ever-interceding 
Priest. Christ is not dead but alive. 

4. Think again, that Christ is able to save to the 
uttermost, notwithstanding all the persecutions that 
believers have to go through. See what is said of St. 
Paul, when he met with much opposition at Corinth. 
We are told that the Lord stood by him in the night, 
and said, '*Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy 
peace; for I am with thee, and no man shall set on 
thee to hurt thee, for I have much people in this city." 
(Acts xviii. 10.) Eemember what He said to St. Paul 
at a former time, when He met him on the way to 
Damascus, **Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou mef" 
(Acts ix. 4.) Every injury done to the believer, is 
an injury done to the living Head in heaven. And 
every persecution showered down upon the head of 
the poor child of God here, is known, felt, and, I 
may add, with all reverence, resented, by our Great 
Elder Brother, who is ever living to make intercession 
for us. Christ lives, and therefore believers, though 
persecuted, shall not be destroyed. " In all these things 
we are more than conquerors through him that loved 
us." (Rom. viii. 37.) We have an ever-living, ever 
interceding Priest. Christ is not dead but alive. 

5. Think again, that Christ is able to save to the 
uttermost, notwithstanding all the temptations of the 
devil. Eemember that famous passage in the Gospel 
of St. Luke, where our Lord, speaking to St. Peter, 
says, '' Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to 



ABLE TO SAVE. 183 

tave you, that he may sift you as wheat, but I have 
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not." (Luke xxii. 32.) 
Prayer like that is still carried on. Those words were 
spoken as an emblem of what the Lord is ever doing on 
behalf of His believing people. Satan, the prince of 
this world, is ever going about as a roaring lion seeking 
whom he may devour. But Christ lives, and blessed 
be God, while Christ lives Satan shall not be able to 
overcome the soul that believes on Him. We have 
an ever-living, ever-interceding Priest. Christ is not 
dead but alive. 

6. Think again, that Christ is able to save to the 
uttermost, notwithstanding the sting of death, and all 
that death brings with it. When David remembered 
that, he said, *' Though 1 walk through the valley of the 
shadow of Aeath, I will fear no evil, for thou art with 
me ; thy rod and thy staif they comfort me." (Psalm 
xxiii. 4.) You and I may die, but Christ still lives. 
The hour may come when friends can do us no more 
good, when faithful servants can no longer minister to 
our wants, when all that love, and kindness, and affection 
can do to alleviate pain and make the last journey 
pleasant, can no longer render any service to us. But 
then the thought that Christ lives — Christ interceding, 
Christ caring for us, Christ at the right hand of God for 
us— ought to cheer us. The sting of death will be taken 
away from the man that leans upon a dying and also a 
living Saviour. Christ never dies. Through faith in 
that living Saviour w« shall have a complete victory. 
We have an ever-living, ever-interceding Priest. Christ 
is not dead but alive. 



184 ABLE TO SATE. 

7. Think again, that Christ is able to save to the 
nttermost, notwithstanding the terrors of the judgment 
day. Mark how St. Paul rests upon that in the 8th 
chapter of the Epistle to the Komans, in that wonder- 
ful conclusion to that wonderful chapter — a chapter 
unrivalled in the Word of God for privilege, beginning 
with "no condemnation" and concluding with " no 
separation ! " Observe how he dwells upon Christ's 
intercession in connexion with the judgment of the last 
day. After saying, ** Who shall lay anything to the 
charge of God's elect ? It is God that justifieth," he 
goes on — ** Who is he that condemneth ? It is Christ 
that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even 
at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession 
for us. " The thought of Christ's intercession, no less 
than His dying and rising again, was one ground of the 
Apostle Paul's confidence in looking forward to the 
great day. His strong consolation was the recollection 
of a living Christ. That consolation is for us as well 
as for St. Paul. We have an ever-living, ever-interced- 
ing Priest. Christ is not dead but alive. 

8. Think, lastly, and above all, that Christ is able to 
save to the uttermost throughout all eternity, ** I am 
he," He says, " that liveth and was dead, and behold 
I am alive for evermore." (Rev. L 18.) The root of 
the believer never dies, and the branches, therefore, 
shall never die. Christ being " raised from the dead, 
dieth no more ; death hath no more dominion over Him." 
(Eom. vi. 9.) He lives, that all who trust in Him may 
receive honour and glory to all eternity ; and because 
He lives^ His believing people shall never die. "Because 



I 

y ABLE TO SAVE. 185 

h. live," to nse his own words, " ye shall live also. " 
(John xiv. 19.) "We have an ever-living, ever interceding 
I Priest. Christ is not dead but alive. 

Reader, would you know the security for the perse- 
verance of God's own people ? Would you know why it 
is that Christ's sheep shall never perish, and none shall 
ever pluck them out of His hand ? It is a miraculous 
thing. When you look at the believer's heart, listen to 
the believer's prayers, mark the believer's confessions — 
when you see how a just man may fall, sometimes seven 
times — when you see, with all this, the believer's per- 
severance, it is a marvel indeed. To carry a candle upon 
a stormy night, when winds and gusty blasts are blow- 
ing from every quarter — to carry it still burning, 
steadily burning, along the street — this is a wonderful 
achievement. — To go over a stormy sea in a little boat, 
to mount billow 'after billow, and not see the waves 
breaking over the boat, and overturning it, — this is well- 
nigh a miracle. — To see a little child tottering along the 
crowded street, a child some three or four years old — to 
see it tottering on and making its way in safety, from 
one end of a long street to the other — this is a mighty 
marvel. But after all, what is this but the life, and 
history, and experience of every true Christian? Though 
he falls, he rises again ; though he is cast down, he is 
not destroyed. He goes on from one position to another, 
like the moon upon a stormy night, plunging from one 
cloud into another, yet by and by shining out again and 
walking in brightness. What is the secret of it all ? It 
is the continual intercession of a mighty Friend at th e 
right hand of God — a Friend that never slumbers and 

IT 



186 ABLE TO SAVE. 

never sleeps — a Priend who cares for the believer mom 4 
ing, noon, and night. The intercession of Christ is the* 
secret of the perseverance of the Christian. . j 

Reader, you would do well to study the words of the 
Apostle in the 5th chapter of Romans: "Much more 
then,** he says, ** being now justified by his blood, we 
shall be saved from wrath through him ; for if when 
we were enemies we were reconciled by the death of 
his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved 
by his life." Mark the connexion: "Being already 
justified by his death, we shall be saved," — and 
saved by what ? " By his life," by His ever living to 
make intercession for us. Wise and beautiftd is the 
comparison made by that master of allegory, John 
Bunyan, in the " Pilgrim's Progress." He tells us how 
Christian was taken into the Interpreter's house, and 
how the Interpreter showed him many things wonder- 
ful and instructive. In one place he took him into a 
room where there was a fire burning, and showed him 
one ever pouring water upon that fire, and yet the 
water did not quench the fire. However much water 
he poured on, still the fire went on burning steadily. 
Then said the Interpreter, "Knowest thou what this 
means ? " When Christian did not know, he took him 
behind the fire, and showed him one pouring on oil out 
of a vessel. This oil fed the fire, and made it bum 
more fiercely, notwithstanding all the water that was 
poured upon it. Then the Interpreter told him that 
this was a picture of Jesus Christ's intercession. That 
fire was the fire of grace in the believer's heart. He that 
poured on the water was the enemy of souls, the devil. 



ilBLB TO SATE. 187 

But He that poured on the oil, standing behind the fire, 
was the Lord Jesns Christ, who by continual intercession 
and the supply of His Spirit, secretly and unseen by 
man, kept alive His own work in the believer's heart, 
and did not allow Satan and all his agents to get a 
victory over him. 

Would you know the secret of the believer's boldness 
in prayer ? It is a marvel how a man that feels his sin 
so deeply as the believer does, can speak with the confi- 
dence the believer frequently does. How one that acknow- 
ledges he is wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked, 
ruined, undone — who often does what he ought not to do, 
and leaves undone what he ought to do, and finds no 
health in him — how such a one as this can go before God 
with confidence, pour out his heart before Him freely, 
ask from Him what he requires day after day and not feel 
afraid, — this is wonderful indeed. What is the secret 
of it ? It is the intercession of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, whereby the true Christian knows His 
prayers axe made acceptable, and received in the court 
of heaven. What is the believer's prayer in itself? 
A poor, weak thing, unfit to rise above the ground. I 
know nothing it is more like than a bank-note without 
the signature in the comer. What is the value of that 
bank note without the signature? Nothing at all. 
Once get a few words, a very few letters, traced in ink 
upon the comer of that bank-note, and that which was 
a piece of waste paper a few moments before becomes 
worth, it may be, many hundred pounds, through the 
signature being attached to it. So it is with the inter- 
cession of Christ. He signs, endorses, and presents the 



188 ABLE TO SAVE. 

believer's petitions, and through His all-prevailing in- 
tercession they are heard on high, and bring down 
blessings upon the Christian's soul. 

Would you know the secret of daily comfort in all 
the toil, and business, and distractions we have to go 
through ? We all know that they who have to do work 
in any secular calling, find the work oftentimes a sore 
burden to their souls. Oftentimes in the morning they 
feel, ''How can I get through this day without a 
defiled conscience, without being sorely troubled and 
tempted to forget my Grod ? " How shall a man get 
through the day with comfort, fill his office in the 
world, do his duty in the position to which Grod has 
called him ? Let him lay hold upon the intercession of 
Jesus Christ. Let him grasp the great thought, that 
Christ not merely died for him, but rose again, and still 
lives for him. 

There is a story recorded of one who lived some 200 
years ago — a man well known in his day and generation 
— a man who left behind a character as pure and 
unsullied as any one who fell in the unhappy Common- 
wealth wars — I allude to the great Lord Falkland. It 
is recorded of Lord Falkland during the Commonwealth 
wars, when he was often engaged in duties from morning 
till night, that a common prayer of his before leaving 
his tent was something of this kind, " Lord, I am going 
this day to do the duty whereunto I am called. I may 
sometimes forget thee. I cannot have my thoughts at 
all times as fully fixed upon thee as I wish. But, 
Lord, if I this day forget thee, do not thou forget me." 
This is the thought that every believer should lay hold 



ABLE TO SATE. 189 

upon who has much to do in the business of this world. 
Rising from his bed in the morning, going from his 
room every morning, leaving his house every morning, 
let him bear in mind, ** There is One living in heaven 
who intercedes for me, while I am following my lawful 
calling. Although I may be absorbed in business, and 
obliged to give up all the powers of my poor weak mind 
to it, still there lives One who never forgets me." He 
may say, as Lord Falkland said, " Lord, if I this day 
forget thee, do not thou forget me.*' 

Last of all, would you know the secret of comfort in 
looking forward, to that heaven whereunto every believer 
desires to go ? I believe there are few children of God 
who do not sometimes feel anxious, troubled, and cast 
down, when they think quietly about the eternal habi- 
tation towards which they are travelling. The nature 
of it, the manner of it, the employments of it, their own 
apparent unfitness and unmeetness for it, will sometimes 
perplex their minds. These thoughts will sometimes 
come across the believer's mind, especially in times of 
sickness, filling him with heaviness, and making his 
heart sink. Now I know no remedy against these 
thoughts to be compared to the recollection of the con- 
tinual intercession of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
Christ is gone into heaven to be the forerunner of a peo- 
ple who are to follow after Him. He is gone to prepare 
a place for them : — and the place whereto He goes is the 
place whereto His people are to go by and by. "When 
they go there they will find all things made ready, a 
place for every one, and a fitting and proper place, too, 
through the intercession of their Lord and Saviour. 



190 ABLE TO SATE. 

There never will be a time when their company will not 
be liked in heaven. There never will be a time when 
their old sins — the sins of their youth and their back- 
slidings — their wickedness before conversion — their pro- 
fligacy, it may be, before the grace of God came into 
their hearts — there never will be a day when all these 
sins shall come up against them, and make them feel 
abashed and ashamed in heaven. Christ will be in the 
midst. Christ will ever stand interceding. Where 
Christ is, there His people will be. Where He lives, 
His perfect merit. His spotless righteousness, His inter- 
cession, will make them perfect in the sight of God the 
Father. They will stand in heaven seen in Christ, 
clothed in Christ, members of Christ, part of Christ, and 
so will possess a Arm and solid and eternal title to the 
eternal joys which shall be hereafter. 

I will now conclude this subject by a few words of 
application to all into whose hands it may fall. My 
heart's desire and prayer to Gt)d is, that the words I 
have been writing may yet bear fruit in your soul. In 
order that they may do so, I offer a few words of faith- 
ful and affectionate application. 

1. I would offer ooumel first to all who are anxious 
and troubled respecting their soul's salvation, and yet 
know not what to do. Eeader, if you are such a person, 
I charge you and entreat you, I beseech you and invite 
you to come into the way of which I have been speaking 
in these pages. I beseech you to come to God by the 
old and tried way, the way of faith in Jesus Christ. 
Draw near to God pleading the name of Jesus. Begin 



ABLE TO SATE. 191 

this very day to cry mightily unto God in the name of 
Jesus on behalf of your soul. Say not you have any- 
thing to plead for yourself. You have nothing to plead. 
Your life, your thoughts, your ways, all alike condemn 
you. Say nothing about yourself but this, That you are 
a sinner, a great sinner, a guilty sinner a condemned 
sinner ; but because you are a sinner, you turn to God. 
Come to Him in the name of Jesus, saying you have 
heard that through Jesus a sinner may come near Him. 
Tell Him that you are a sinner, a great sinner, and an 
unworthy one. But tell Him that you come in the faith 
of His promises, in the confidence of His own Bible 
invitation, and in the name of Jesus, and for the sake of 
Jesus, and on account of Jesus, you ask to be received, 
heard, pardoned, forgiven, and accepted.' Tell Him that 
you wish to have your name — even that name of yours 
connected hitherto with worldHness, thoughtlessness, 
carelessness, and sin — added to the list of God's dear 
children. 

"Will you say that you are afraid to come to God ? 
Your fear is needless. You shall not be cast out if you 
will but come in the way of faith in Christ. Our God 
is not " an austere man.'* Our Father in heaven is full 
of mercy, love, and grace. I yield to none in desire to 
exalt the love, mercy, and tenderness of God the Father. 
I will not concede, for one moment, that what is called 
an evangelical ministry, will not magnify the mercy, 
love, and compiHssion of God the Father as much as any 
ministry on earth. We know that God is holy. We 
know He is just. We believe that He can be angry 
with them that go on still in sin. But we also believe 



192 ABLE TO SAYE. 

that to those who draw near to Him in Christ Jesus, He 
is most merciful, most loving, and most tender, most 
compassionate. We tell you that the cross of Jesus 
Christ was the result and consequence of that love. The 
cross was not the cause and reason of God's mercy, but 
the result and consequence of the everlasting love of 
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, 
towards a poor, lost, and bankrupt world. Draw near 
in faith, dear reader, by that living way, Christ Jesus, 
to the Father. Think not for a moment — the unworthy 
thought shall never prove true — that so drawing near 
to God the Father by Christ, God the Father wiU not 
receive you. He will receive you gladly. As the 
father did to the prodigal son when he ran to meet him, 
fell on his neck and kissed him, so will God the Father 
do to that soul that draws near to Him in the name of 
Christ. 

2. In the next place, / would cheer those readers 
who have walked in the way of God, and yet are afraid 
of falling. Why should you be afraid ? What should 
make you fear ? What should make you suppose that 
you shall ever be allowed to fall away, while Jesus 
Christ lives at the right hand of God to make interces- 
sion for you ? All the power of the Lord Jesus Christ 
is pledged upon your behalf. He has undertaken to 
care for all the flock that God the Father has committed 
into His hand. He will care for it. He has cared for 
it. He went to the cross for it. He died for it. He 
is ever at the right hand of God, and has not ceased to 
care for it. Every member of that flock — the weakest, 



ABLE TO SAVE. 193 

the feeblest member of that flock — is equally dear to 
the Lord and Saviour, and none shall pluck the least of 
Christ's sheep out of God's hand. Can you stop the 
tides of the sea, and make them not rise at your com- 
mand ? Can you make the waters stay when the tide 
begins to fall? Can you prevent the sun in heaven 
going down in the west, or prevent the same sun from 
rising to-morrow morning in the east ? You cannot do 
it; the thing is impossible. And all the power of 
devils, all the power of the world, and all the enemies 
of the Christian, shall not be able to pluck out of the 
hand of Jesus Christ one single soul who has been 
brought by the Spirit's teaching to true union with 
Christ, and for whom Jesus Christ intercedes. The 
days of Christ's weakness have passed away. He was 
"crucified through weakness," and was weak on our 
account when He went to the cross. The days of His 
weakness are over. The days of His power have begun. 
Pilate shall no more condemn Him. He shall come to 
condemn Pilate. All power is His in heaven and earth, 
and all that power is engaged on behalf of His believing 
people. 

3. Finally, let me gladden all believers who read 
this book, by reminding them that Christ is yet to 
come again. The Great High Priest is yet to come 
forth from the Holy of Holies, to bless all the people 
who have believed on Him. One part of His work 
He did when He died upon the cross. Another part 
of His work He is still doing — interceding for us at 
God's right hand. But the third part of the High 



194 ABLE TO SAYE. 

Priest's office remains yet to be done. He has yet to 
come forth from the Holy of Holies as the high-priest 
did on the day of atonement — to come forth from within 
the vail to bless the people. That part of Christ's work 
is yet to come. He is now gone into heaven itself. He 
is within the Holy of Holies. He is gone behind the 
vail. But our Great High Priest — a greater one than 
Aaron — shall yet come forth one day. — He shall come 
in power and great glory. He shall come as He left the 
world, when He went up in the clouds of heaven. He 
shall come to gather from the north and from the south, 
from the east and from the west, all who have loved 
His name and confessed Him before men — all who have 
heard His voice and followed Him. He shall gather 
them together into one happy company. There shall be 
no more weakness, and no more sorrow, — no more part- 
ing, and no more separation, — no more sickness, and no 
more death, — no more disputing, and no more contro- 
versy, — no more fighting with the world, the flesh, and 
devil, — and, best of all, no more sin. That day shall be 
a happy day indeed, when the High Priest comes forth 
to do the third, last part of His work, to bless His be- 
lieving people. 

*' He that testifieth these things saith, Surely I come 
quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus." (Rev. 
xxii. 20.) 



fy J^nn Cnjing! 



REV. XXI. 4. 



" God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there 
shall he no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, 
neither shall there he any more pain'^ 

Beloyed Children, 

A Bible text stands at the top of this page. 
I should like you to read it twice over. I am going to 
tell you something which, I hope, will make you re- 
.member that text as long as you live. 

I am going to tell you about three places, of which 
the Bible says a great deal. It matters little what we 
know about some places. But it matters much to know 
something about the three places of which I am now 
going to speak. 

I. Firstly, — There is a place where there is a great 
deal of crying. 



196 NO MOEB CRYING. 

II. Secoudly, — There is a place where there is 
nothing else but crying. 

III. Thirdly, — There is a place where there is no 
crying at all. 

I. Eirst of all, there is a place where there is a 

GREAT DEAL OP CRYING. 

What is that place ? It is the world, in which you 
and I live. It is a world full of beautiful and pleasant 
things. The sun shining by day and the stars by 
night, — the blue hills looking up to heaven, and the 
rolling sea ebbing and flowing, — the broad quiet lakes, 
and the rushing restless rivers, — the flowers blooming 
in the spring, and the fields full of corn in autumn, — 
the birds singing in the woods, and the lambs playing 
in the meadows, — all, all are beautifal things. I could 
look at them for hours and say, " What a beautiful 
world it is ! *' But still it is a world where there is a 
great deal of crying. It is a world where there are 
many tears. 

There was "crying" in Bible times. Hagar wept 
when she thought Ishmael was dying. Abraham 
mourned when Sarah died. Joseph wept when his 
brothers sold him into Egypt. David wept when Ab- 
salom was killed. There was weeping at Jerusalem 
when good king Josiah was slain in battle. There was 
weeping at Bethlehem when Herod killed all the little 
children who were two years old. These things, and 
many like them, you will find in your Bibles. 

There is " crying " now all over the world. Little 



NO MOEE CUTING. 197 

babies cry when they want anything, or feel pain. Boys 
and girls cry when they arc hurt, or frightened, or cor- 
rected. Grown up people cry sometimes when they are 
in trouble, or when they see those die whom they love. 
In short, wherever there is sorrow and pain, there is 
" crying." 

I dare say you have seen people come to church all 
dressed in black. That is called being in mourning. 
Some relation or friend of these people is dead, and 
therefore they dress in black. Well! remember when you 
see people in mourning, somebody has been " crying.'* 

I dare say you have seen graves in churchyards, and 
have heard that when people die, they are buried there. 
Some of them are very little graves, not longer than 
you are. Well ! remember that when those graves 
were made, and little coffins were let down into them, 
there was ** crying." 

Children, did you ever think what all this crying 
came from ? Did you ever consider how it first began ? 
Did you ever hear how weeping and tears came into the 
world? God did not make crying; — that is certain. 
All that God made was "very good." Listen to me 
and I will teU you how " crying " began. 

Crying came into the world by reason of sin. Sin is 
the cause of all the weeping, and tears, and sorrow, and 
pain, which there are upon earth. All the crying began 
when Adam and Eve ate the forbidden fruit and became 
sinners. It was sin which brought into the world pain, 
and sickness, and death. It was sin which brought 
into the world selfishness, and illnature, and unkind- 
ness, and quarrelling, and stealing, and fighting. If 



198 NO MOKE CKTINO. 

there had been no wickedness, there would have been 
no weeping. If there had been no sin, there would 
have been no ^'crj-ing.'* 

See now, my beloved children, how much, you ought 
to hate sin. All the unhappiness in the world came 
from sin. How strange and wonderful it is that any 
one can take pleasure in sin ! Do not let that be the 
case with you. Watch against 8in. Fight with it. 
Avoid it. Listen not to it. Take the advice of St. 
Paul ; — " Abhor that which is evil." Take the advice 
of Solomon: — "When sinners entice thee, consent 
thou not." Say to yourself every morning, " Sin caused 
crying, and so I will hate sin." 

See again, my beloved children, how foolisb it is to 
expect perfect happiness in this world. It is expecting 
what you will not find. The world is a place where 
there is much "crying," and where things do not 
always go on pleasantly. I hear many boys and girls 
talking of the pleasures they will have when they are 
men and women, I am sorry for them when I hear 
them talking in this way. I know they are mistaken. 
I know they will be disappointed. They will find when 
they grow up, that they cannot get through the world 
without many troubles and cares. There are no roses 
without thorns. There are no years without dark and 
rainy days. There is no living on earth without *' cry- 
ing " and tears. 

II. I will now speak of tbe second place about 
which I promised to tell you something. Thebe is a 
pljlCE where these is nothing else but crying. 



HfO MOEE CKTING. 199 

What is this place ? It is the place to which all bad 
people go when they are dead. It is the place which 
the Bible calls hell. In hell there is no laughter and 
smiling. There is nothing but " weeping and wailing 
and gnashing of teeth." In hell there is no happiness. 
Those who go there cry on night and day without stop- 
ping. They have no rest. They never go to sleep and 
wake up happy. They never stop crying in hell. 

Beloved children, I am sorry to tell you that there 
are many people going to hell. *' Broad is the way that 
leadeth unto destruction, and many there be which go 
in it." I am afraid that many children are going to 
helL I see many boys and girls who are so naughty and 
ill-behaved, that I am sure they are not fit for heaven. 
And if they are not fit for heaven, where will they go 
if they die ? There is only one other place to which 
they can go. Thet must go to hell. 

Dear children, it makes me sad to say these things. 
I cannot bear the thought of boys and girls going to 
that dreadful place where there is nothing but crying. 
My heart's desire and prayer to God for you is, that 
you may not go to hell. But I want you to know some 
things which you must mind if you would not go to 
hell. Listen to me now while I ask you a few ques- 
tions. 

Por one thing I will ask you, — Do you love Jesus 
Christ ? You ought to love Him. He died for your 
sins upon the cross, that He might save you from hell. 
He allowed Himself to be shut up in the dark prison 
of the grave, that your sins might be forgiven, and that 
you might not be chained in hell for ever. Dear children, 



200 ^0 MOBB OBYIKO. 

think abont this ! If you love notlAg but play, and 
eating, and drinking, and fine clothes, and story-books, 
and do not love Christ, you are not in the right way. 
Take care. If you do not mind," you wiH go «t last to 
the place where there is nothiihi ^tjt " ceyingf.* 

I win ask you another thing. — ^Do you try to please 
Christ ? You ought to do so. I read in the Bible that 
Jesus Christ said, *' If ye love me, keep my command- 
ments.*' — *'Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I 
command you." Dear children, think about this ! 
If you are selfish, or passionate, or teU lies, or quarrel 
with one another, or do not do as you are bid, you are 
not Christ's friends. Take care. If you do not mind, 
you will go at last to the place where there is nothibto 

BUT "CEYING." 

I will ask you another thing. — Do you keep the Sun- 
day holy? You ought to do so. God commands it, 
and it is for your good. I once heard of a little boy 
who went to play upon the ice on Sunday instead of 
coming home straight from church. ** Tommy," said 
his mother, '*why did you do so?" — "Mother," said 
Tommy, "I did not remember that it was Sunday." 
— " Tommy," said his mother, *' that is the very thing 
God told you not to do. He said in the fourth com- 
mandment, — ' Remember, — remember to keep holy the 
Sabbath.' " Dear children, think about this ! If you do 
not like to give God one day in the week, your hearts are 
not right. Take care. If you do not mind, you will go at 
last to the place where there is nothing but *' ceting." 

I will ask you another thing. — Do you say your 
prayers ? You ought to do so, God will never be a 



NO MOBE CKTING. 201 

friend to yon if you do not speak to Him, and ask Him 
to take care of your soul and make you good. If you 
never pray, or say your prayers without thinking, your 
heart irill soon be filU- of mischief and sin. It will 
never be empty for a day. I once heard of a boy who 
had a little garden given to him all full of flowers. But 
he did nothing for it. He never raked it, or weeded it. 
And after a few weeks the weeds came up so thick that 
the flowers died. Dear children, think of this! If 
you do not ask God to put the Holy Spirit in your 
hearts, the devil will soon fill them with sin. Take 
care. If you do not mind, you will go at last to the 
place where there is nothing but " ceying.** 

I will ask you one more question. — Do you read your 
Bible ? You ought to do so. That beautiful book is 
able to keep you from hell and save your soul. If you 
use the Bible rightly, you will not be hurt by the devil. 
I once heard of a little boy in Africa who was sleeping 
with his father in the open air, near a fire. He awoke 
in the middle of the night, and saw a great lion close 
to him, looking at if he was going to seize him. The 
little boy took up a lighted stick out of the fire, and 
put it in the lion's face, and drove him away. Dear 
children, think of this ! The devil is " a roaring lion 
seeking whom he may devour." But he cannot harm 
you, if you make a right use of the Bible. If you 
would drive him from you, you must read your Bible. 
If you can read, and yet neglect your Bible, you are in 
great danger. Take care. If you do not mind, the 
devil will carry you off to the place where there is 

NOTHING BUT '* CRYING.'' 



202 NO MORE CRYING. 

Beloved children, remember my five questions. Think 
of them often, and try your own hearts by them. I 
am not afraid about children who love Jesus, and try to 
please Him, and keep the Sunday holy, and pray and read 
their Bibles. I am not afraid that they will go to hell if 
they die. But I am afraid about children who care noth- 
ing about these things. I think they are in great danger. 

III. I will now speak of the third place about 
which I promised to tell you something. There is a 

PLACE WHERE THERE IS NO CRYING AT ALL. 

What is this place ? It is heaven. It is the place to 
which all good people go when they are dead. There 
all is joy and happiness. There no tears are shed. 
There sorrow, and pain, and sickness, and death, can 
never enter in. There can be no crying in heaven, 
because there is nothing that can cause grief. 

Dear children, there will be no more lessons in heaven. 
All will have been learned. The school will be closed. 
The rod and correction will be laid aside for ever. 
There will be an eternal holiday. 

There will be no more work in heaven. Man will no 
longer need to labour for his bread. The head will no 
longer have to ache with thinking. The hands will no 
longer be stiff and brown with toiling. There will be 
an eternal rest for the people of God. 

There will be no sickness in heaven. Pain, and 
disease, and weakness, and death will not be known. 
The people who dwell there shall no more say, " I am 
sick." They will be always well. There will be 
nothing but health and strength for evermore. 



NO MOBE CRYING. 203 

There will be no sin in heaven. There will be no 
bad tempers, no unkind words, no spiteful actions. The 
great tempter, the Devil, will not be allowed to come in 
and spoil the happiness. There shall be nothing but 
holiness and love for evermore. 

Best of all, the Lord Jesus Christ Himself will be in 
the midst of heaven. His people shall at last see Him 
face to face, and go out from His presence no more. 
He shall gather His lambs into His bosom, and wipe 
away all tears from their eyes. Where He is will be 
fulness of joy, and at his right hand shall be pleasures 
for evermore. 

Dear children, would you not like to go to heaven ? 
We cannot live always in this world. A day will come 
when we must die, like the old people who have died 
already. Children, would you not like to go to heaven 
when you die ? Listen to me, and I will tell you some- 
thing about the way by which you must go. 

If you would go to heaven, you must have your sins 
forgiven, and your hearts made new and good. There 
is only one who can do this for you. That One is the 
Lord Jesus Christ. God has appointed Him to be the 
Friend of sinners. He can wash away your sins in His 
own precious blood. He can make your hearts new by 
putting the holy Spirit in them. He is the Way and 
the Door into heaven. He has the keys in His hand. 
Children, if you want to go to heaven, you must ask 
Jesus Christ to let you in. 

Ask Jesus in prayer to get ready a place for you in 
that world where there is no " crying." Ask Him to 
put your name in His book of life, and to make you 



204 NO MORE CRYING. 

one of His people. Ask Him to cleanse you from all 
your sins, and to put the Holy Ghost in your heart. 
Ask Him to give you power to fight His battle against 
sin, the world, and the devil. Ask Him to give you 
grace to make you good while you are young, and good 
when you grow up, that so you may be safe while you 
live, and happy for ever when you die. 

Children, Jesus Christ is ready to do all this, if you 
will only ask Him. He has done it for many people 
already. He is waiting to do it for you at this very 
time. Do not be afraid to ask Him. Tell Him you 
have heard that He was very kind to people when He 
was on earth, and ask Him to be kind to you. Remind 
Him how kind He was to the poor dying thief on the 
cross. Say to Him, "Lord Jesus, remember me; I 
want to go to heaven. Lord, think upon me. Lord 
give me the Holy Spirit. Lord, pardon my sins, and 
give me a new heart. Lord Jesus, save me." 

And now, children, I have kept my word. I have 
told you of three places. I have told you of a place 
where there is nothing but crying. I hope none of you 
will go there. — ^I have told you of a place where there 
is no crjdng. I hope you vnll all go there. — I have 
told you of a place where there is a great deal of crying. 
That place is the world in which you are living. Would 
you like, last of all, to know the best way to be happy 
in this world ? Listen to me, and I will tell you. 

The happiest people in this world are those who make 
the Bible the rule of their lives. They read their 
Bibles often. They believe what the Bible says. They 
love that Saviour Jesus Christ of whom the Bible speaks. 



NO MORE CBTING. 205 

They try to obey what the Bible commands. ITone are 
so happy as these people. They cannot prevent sickness 
and trouble coming to them sometimes. But they learn 
from the Bible to bear them patiently. Children, if 
you would get through the world happily, make the 
Bible your best Friend. 

Shall I tell you a story that I once heard about a 
little boy and the Bible ? Perhaps it will help you to 
remember what I have just been saying. I want the 
words I have just written to stick for ever in your 
minds. 

"Father," said this little boy one day, "I do not see 
any use in reading the Bible I do not see that it does 
people any good." — Little Johnny said this in a rather 
cross and pettish way, and his father thought it best 
not to begin reasoning with him. " Johnny," he said, 
" put on your hat, and come out, and take a walk with 
me. 

Johnny's father took him first to a house where there 
was an old woman who was very poor, and he talked to 
her about her poverty. — "Sir," said the old woman, 
'* I do not complain. I have read in the Bible these 
words, ' I have learned in whatsoever state I am there- 
with to be content.' " — "Johnny," said the little boy's 
father, "hear what the old woman says." 

They went on to another house, where there was a 
young woman who was very ill, and never likely to get 
better. Johnny's father asked her if she felt afraid to 
die. — " 1^0 ! " she said, " I find it written in the Bible, 
* Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me.' '> 



206 NO MOEE CRYING. 

''Johnny/' said the little hoy's father again, "hear 
what the young woman says." 

Children, when Johnny and his father came home 
that afternoon from their walk, his father asked him 
one question. "Johnny," he said, *'do you think 
it is of any use to read the Bihle ? Do you think 
reading the Bible does people any good? " 

And now what do you think Johnny said ? I will 
tell you. He held down his head, and said nothing. 
But his face got very red, and he looked very much 
ashamed. 

Children, from that very day Johnny was never heard 
again to say, '* It is of no use reading the Bible." 

Beloved children, remember my parting words. The 
way to get through the world with the least possible 
crying, is to read the Bible, believe the Bible, pray over 
the Bible, live by the Bible. 

He that goes through life in this way will have the 
least *' crying " in this world. And best of all, he will 
have NO ceying at all in the woeld to come. 



€^t €xm Cljiirrli/ 



MATT. XVI. 18. 



" Upon this rock I will build my churchy and the gatez oj 
hell shall not prevail against it,** 

"We live in a world in which all things are passing 
away. Kingdoms, empires, cities, ancient institutions, 
families, all are liable to change and corruption. One 
universal law seems to prevail everywhere. In all 
created things there is a tendency to decay. 

There is something saddening and depressing in this. 
"What profit hath a man in the labour of his hands ? 
Is there nothing that shall stand ? Is there nothing 
that shall last? Is there nothing that shall endure? 
Is there nothing of which we can say — This shall con- 
tinue for evermore? You have the answer to these 
questions in the words of our text. Our Lord Jesus 

* The following Sermon was preached at Weston-super-mere, 
in August 1858, on the occasion of the Aggregate Clerical Meeting, 
held there under the presidency of Archdeacon Law. 



208 THE TRUE CHT7BCH. 

• URrist speaks of something which shall continue, ani* 
not pass away. There is one created thing which is 
an exception to the universal rule to which I have 
referred. There is one thing which shall never perish 
and pass away. That thing is the huilding founded 
upon the rock — the church of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
He declares, in the words you have heard to night : 
** Upon this rock I will huild my church, and the gates 
of hell shall not prevail against it." 

There are five things in these words which demand 
your attention : — 

I. — You have a Building : " My church." 

II. — A Builder: Christ says, "I will huild My 

church." 

III. — A Foundation : " Upon this rock I will build 

My church." 

lY,— 'Perils Implied: " The gates of heU." 

Y. — Security Asserted : ** The gates of hell shall not 

prevail against it." 

May God bless the words that shall be spoken. May 
we all search our own hearts to-night, and know whether 
or not we belong to this one church. May we all go 
home to reflect and to pray ! 

I. — ^You have, firstly, a Building mentioned in the 
text. The Lord Jesus Christ speaks of " My church." 

Now what is this church? Few inquiries can be 
made of more importance than this. For want of due 
attention to this subject, the errors that have crept into 



THE TKUE CHUBCH. 209 

the church, and into the world, are neither few nd^ 
small. 

The church of our text is no material building. It 
is no temple made with hauds, of wood, or brick, or 
stone, or marble. It is a company of men and women. 
It is no particular visible church on earth. It is not 
the Eastern Church or the Western Church. It is not 
the Churob of England, or the Church of Scotland ; — 
much less is it the Church of Rome. The Church of 
our text is one that makes far less show in the eyes 
of man, but is of far more importance in the eyes of 
God. 

The church of our text is made up of all true believers 
in the Lord Jesus Christ. It comprehends all who 
have repented of sin, and fled to Christ by faith, and 
been made new creatures in Him. It comprises all 
Grod's elect, all who have received God's grace, all who 
have been washed in Christ's blood, all who have been 
clothed in Christ's righteousness, all who have been 
bom again and sanctified by Christ's Spirit. All such, 
of every nation, and people, and tongue, compose the 
church of our text. This is the body of Christ. This 
is the flock of Christ. This is the bride. This is the 
Lamb's wife. This is " the holy Catholic Church " of 
the Apostle's Creed. This is the '* blessed company of 
all faithful people," spoken of in the communion service 
of our Prayer-book. This is the church on the rock. 

The members of this church do not all worship 
God in the same way, or use the same form of govern- 
ment. Our own 34th Article declares, " It is not 
necessary that ceremonies should be in all places one 



210 THE TRUE CHTTRCn. 

twid alike." But they all worship with one heart. 
They are all led hy one Spirit. They are all really and 
truly holy. They can all say " Alleluia," and they can 
all reply "Amen." 

This is that church, to which all visible churches on 
earth are servants and handmaidens. Whether they are 
Episcopalian, Independent, or Presbyterian, they all serve 
the interests of the one true church. They are the 
scaffolding, behind which the great building is carried 
on. They are the husk, under which the living kernel 
grows. They have their various degrees of usefulness. 
The best and worthiest of them is that which trains up 
most members for Christ's true church. But no visible 
church has any right to say, '* "We are the only True 
Church. "We are the men, and wisdom shall die with 
us." "No visible church should ever dare to say, ""We 
shall stand for ever. The gates of hell shall not prevail 
against me." 

This is that church to which belong the Lord's precious 
promises of preservation, continuance, protection, and 
final glory. " Whatsoever," says Hooker, " we read in 
Scripture, concerning the endless love and saving mercy, 
which God showeth towards His churches, the only 
proper subject thereof is this church, which we properly 
term the mystical body of Christ." Small and despised 
as the true church may be in this world, it is precious 
and honourable in the sight of God. The temple of 
Solomon in all its glory was mean and contemptible, 
in comparison with that church which is built upon a 
rock. 

Men and brethren, see that you hold sound doo- 



THE TEFB CHT7KCH. 211 

trine upon the subject of "the church." A mistake 
here may lead on to dangerous and soul ruining errors. 
The church which is made up of true believers, is the 
church for which we, who are ministers, are specially 
ordained to preach. The church which comprises all 
who repent and believe the Gospel, is the church to 
which we desire you to belong. Our work is not done, 
and our hearts are not satisfied, until you are made new 
creatures, and are members of the one true church. 
Outside of this church there can be no salvation. 

II. — I pass on to the second point, to which I pro- 
posed to call your attention. Our text contains not 
merely a building, but a Builder. The Lord Jesus Christ 
declares, "/will build My church." 

The true church of Christ is tenderly cared for by all 
the three persons of the blessed Trinity. In the 
economy of redemption, beyond all doubt, Grod the 
Father chooses, and God the Holy Ghost sanctifies, 
every member of Christ's mystical body. God the Father, 
God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three Persons 
and one God, co-operate for the salvation of every saved 
soul. This is truth, which ought never to be forgotten. 
Nevertheless, there is a peculiar sense in which the help 
of the church is laid on the Lord Jesus Christ. He is 
peculiarly and pre-eminently the Kedeemer and the 
Saviour. Therefore it is, that we find Him saying in 
our text, " I wiU build, — the work of building is my 
special work." 

It is Christ who calls the members of the church in 
due time. They are " the called of Jesus Christ."(Kom. 



212 THE TEI7E CHUECH. 

i. 6.) It is Christ who qtiickens them. "The Son 
quickeneth whom He will." (John v. 21.) It is 
Christ who washes away their sins. He " has loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in His own Wood." (Eev. 
1,5.) It is Christ who gives them peace. "Peace I 
leave with you, My peace I give unto you." (John xiv. 
27.) It is Christ who gives them eternal life. " I give 
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish." 
(John X. 28.) It is Christ who grants them repent- 
ance. " Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a 
Saviour to give repentance." (Acts v. 31.) It is 
Christ who enables them to become God's dhildren. 
" To as many as received Him, to them gave He power 
to become the sons of God. " (John i. 12.) It is Christ 
who carries on the work within them when it is begun. 
"Because I live, ye shall live also." (John xiv. 19.) In 
short, it has "pleased the Father that in Christ should all 
fulness dwell." (Coloss. i. 19.) He is the author and 
finisher of faith. From Him every joint and member of the 
mystical body of Christians is supplied. Through Him 
they are strengthened for duty. By Him they are kept 
from falling. He shall preserve them to the end, and pre- 
sent them faultless before the Father's throne with exceed- 
ing great joy. He is all things, and all in all to believers. 
The mighty agent by whom the Lord Jesus Christ 
carries out this work in the number of His churches, is, 
without doubt, the Holy Ghost. He it is who applies 
Christ and His benefits to the soul. He it is who is 
ever renewing, awakening, convincing, leading to the 
cross, transforming, taking out of the world, stone after 
stone, and adding it to the mystical building. 



THE TRUE CHUBCH. 213 

But the great chief Builder, who has undertaken to 
execute the work of redemption and bring it to comple- 
tion, is the Son of God, the Word who was made flesh. 
It is Jesus Christ who ** builds." 

In building the true church, the Lord Jesus conde- 
scends to use many subordinate instruments. The 
ministry of the Gospel, the circulation of the Scrip- 
tures, the friendly rebuke, the word spoken in season, 
the drawing influence of afflictions — all, all are means 
and appliances by which His work is carried on. But 
Christ is the great superintending architect, ordering, 
guiding, directing all that is done. "What the sun is 
to the whole solar system, that Christ is to all the mem- 
bers of the true church. " Paul may plant, and Apollos 
water, but God giveth the increase." Ministers may 
preach, and writers may write, but the Lord Jesus Christ 
alone can build. And except He builds, the work stands 
still. 

Great is the wisdom wherewith the Lord Jesus Christ 
builds His church. All is done at the right time, and 
in the right way. Each stone in its turn is put in the 
right place. Sometimes He chooses great stones, and 
sometimes He chooses small stones. Sometimes the 
work goes on fast, and sometimes it goes on slowly. 
Man is frequently impatient, and thinks that nothing is 
doing. But man's time is not God's time. A thousand 
years in His sight are but as a single day. The great 
Builder makes no mistakes. He knows what He is 
doing. He sees the end from the beginning. He works 
by a perfect, unalterable and certain plan. The mightiest 
conceptions of architects, Hke Michael Angelo and Wren, 



214 THE TEXJB CHT7BCH. 

are mere trifling child's play, in comparison with Christ's 
wise counsels respecting His church. 

Great is the condescension and mercy, which Christ 
exhibits in building His church. He often chooses the 
most unlikely and roughest stones, and fits them into 
a most excellent work. He despises none, and rejects 
none, on account of former sins and past transgressions. 
He delights to show mercy. He often takes the most 
thoughtless and ungodly, and transforms them into 
polished comers of His spiritual temple. 

Great is the power which Christ displays in building 
His church. He carries on His work in spite of op- 
position from the world, the flesh, and the devil. In 
storm, in tempest, through troublous times, silently, 
quietly, without noise, without stir, without excitement, 
the building progresses, like Solomon's temple. ''I 
will work," He declares, " and none shall let it." 

Brethren, the children of this world take little or no 
interest in the building of this church. They care little 
for the conversion of souls. What are broken spirits 
and penitent hearts to them ? It is all foolishness in 
their eyes. But while the children of this world care 
nothing, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God. 
For the preserving of that church, the laws of nature 
have oftentimes been suspended. For the good of that 
church, all the providential dealings of God in this world 
are ordered and arranged. For the elect's sake, wars 
are brought to an end, and peace is given to a nation. 
Statesmen, rulers, emperors, kings, presidents, heads of 
governments, have their schemes and plans, and think 
them of vast importance. But there is another work 



THE TKUB CHUKCH. 215 

going on of infinitely greater moment, for which they 
are all but as the axes and saws in Grod's hands. That 
work is the gathering in of living stones into the one 
true church. How little are we told in Grod's word 
about unconverted men compared with what we are 
told about believers ! The history of Nimrod, the mighty 
hunter, is dismissed in a few words. The history of 
Abraham, the father of the faithful, occupies several 
chapters. Nothing in Scripture is so important as the 
concerns of the true church. The world takes up little 
of God's word. The church and its story take up 
much. 

Por ever let us thank God, my beloved brethren, that 
the building of the one true church is laid on the 
shoulders of One that is mighty. Let us bless God that 
it does not rest upon man. Let us bless God that it does 
not depend on missionaries, ministers, or committees. 
Christ is the almighty Builder. He will carry on His 
work, though nations and visible churches do not know 
their duty. Christ will never fail. That which He 
hath undertaken He will certainly accomplish. 

in. — I pass on to the third point, which I proposed 
to consider — The Foundation upon which this church 
is built. The Lord Jesus Christ tells us, " Upon this 
Eock will I build my church." 

"What did the Lord Jesus Christ mean, when He spoke 
of this foundation ? Did He mean the apostle Peter, to 
whom He was speaking? I think assuredly not. I 
can see no reason, if He meant Peter, why He did not 
say, " Upon thee " will I build My church. If He had 



216 THE TEUE CHURCH. 

meant Peter, He would have said, I will build My 
church on thee, as plainly as He said, " to thee will I 
give the keys." JSTo ! it was not the person of the 
apostle Peter, but the good confession which the 
apostle had just made. It was not Peter, the erring, 
unstable man; but the mighty truth which the 
Father had revealed to Peter. It was the truth con- 
cerning Jesus Christ himself which was the rock. It 
was Christ's Mediatorship, and Christ's Messiahship. 
It was the blessed truth, that Jesus was the promised 
Saviour, the true Surety, the real Intercessor between 
God and man. This was the rock, and this the foun- 
dation, upon which the church of Christ was to be built. 

My brethren, this foundation was laid at a mighty 
cost. It needed that the Son of God should take our 
nature upon Him, and in that nature live, suffer, and 
die, not for His own sins, but for ours. It needed that 
in that nature Christ should go to the grave, and rise 
again. It needed that in that nature Christ should go 
up to heaven, to sit at the right hand of God, having 
obtained eternal redemption for all His people. No 
other foundation but this could have borne the weight 
of that church of which our text speaks. No other 
foundation could have met the necessities of a world of 
sinners. 

That foundation once obtained, is very strong. It 
can bear the weight of the sin of all the world. It has 
borne the weight of all the sins of all the believers who 
have built on it. Sins of thought, sins of the imagination, 
sins of the heart, sins of the head, sins which every one 
has seen, and sins which no man knows, sins agaiiist 



THE TRTTE CHUBCH. 217 

Gtod, and Bins againBf man, sins of all kinds and de- 
scriptions, — that mighty rock can bear the weight of all 
these sins and not give way. The mediatorial office of 
Christ is a remedy sufficient for all the sins of all the 
world. 

To this one foundation every member of Christ's true 
church is joined. In many things believers are dis- 
united and disagreed. In the matter of their souVs 
foundation they are all of one mind. They are all 
built on the rock. Ask where they get their peace, and 
hope, and joyful expectation of good things to come. 
You would find that all flows from that one mighty 
truth, Christ the Mediator between God and man, and 
the office that Christ holds, as the High-priest and 
Surety of sinners. 

Here is the point which demands our personal at- 
tention. Are we upon the rock ? Are we really joined 
to the one foundation ? What says that good old divine, 
Archbishop Leighton ? " God has laid this precious stone 
for this very purpose, that weary sinners may rest upon 
it. The multitude of imaginary believers lie round 
about it, but they are none the better for that, any 
more than stones that lie loose in heaps, near a foun- 
dation, but not joined unto it. There is no benefit to 
us by Christ, without union with Him." 

Look to your foundation, my beloved brethren, if you 
would know whether or not you are members of the one 
true ohnrch. It is a point that may be known to your- 
selves. Your public worship we can see, but we cannot 
see whether you are personally built upon the rock. Your 
attendance at the Lord's table we can see, but we cannot 

p 



218 THE TEXJE CHUBCH. 

see whether you are joined to GBirist, and one with 
Christ, and Christ in you. But all shall come to light one 
day. The secrets of all hearts shall he exposed. Perhaps 
you go to church regularly, you love your Prayer-book, 
you are constant in attending on every means of grace 
your church supplies. All this is right and good, so far 
as it goes. But all this time, see that you make no 
mistake about your own personal salvation. See that 
your own soul is upon the rock. Without this, all else 
is nothing. Without this, you will never stand in the 
day of judgment. Better a thousand times in that day 
to be found in a cottage upon the rock, than in a palace 
upon the sand ! 

lY. — I proceed in the fourth place to speak of the 
Implied Trials of the church, to which our text refers. 
There is mention made of " the gates of hell." By that 
expression we are meant to understand the power of the 
devil! 

The history of Christ's true church has always been one 
of conflict and war. It has been constantly assailed by a 
deadly enemy, Satan, the prince of this world. The 
devil hates the true church of Christ with an undying 
hatred. He is ever stirring up opposition against all its 
members. He is ever urging the children of this world 
to do his will, and injure and harass the people of Gk)d. 
If he cannot bruise the head, he will bruise the heel. 
If he cannot rob believers of heaven, he will vex them 
by the way. 

Por six thousand years this enmity has gone on. 
Millions of the ungodly have been the devil's agents, 



THE TBUE CHUECH. 219 

and done the devil's work, thougli they knew it not. 
The Pharoahs, the Herods, the Neros, the Julians, the 
Dioclesians, the hloody Maries — what were they all but 
Satan's tools, when they persecuted the disciples of 
Jesus Christ. 

"Warfare with the powers of hell has been the ex- 
perience of the whole body of Christ. It has always 
been a bush burning, though not consumed — a woman 
fleeing into the wilderness, but not swallowed up. The 
visible churches have their times of prosperity and 
seasons of peace, but never has there been a time of 
peace for the true church. Its conflict is perpetual. 
Its battle never ends. 

"Warfare with the powers of hell is the experience of 
every individual member of the true church. Each has 
to fight. What are the lives of all the saints, but re- 
cords of battles ? What were such men as Paul, and 
James, and Peter, and John, and Polycarp, and Ignatius, 
and Augustine, and Luther, and Calvin, and Latimer, 
and Baxter, but soldiers engaged in a constant warfare ? 
Sometimes their persons have been assailed, and some- 
times their property. Sometimes they have been har- 
assed by calumnies and slanders, and sometimes by open 
persecution. But in one way or another the devil has 
been continually warring against the church. The 
*' gates of hell" have been continually assaulting the 
people of Christ. 

Men and brethren, we who preach the Gospel can 
hold out to all who come to Christ, exceeding great and 
precious promises. We can offer boldly to you in our 
Master's name, the peace of Gk)d which passeth all un- 



220 THE TBT7E CHTTBOH. 

derstanding. Mercy, free grace, and full salvation, are 
offered to every one who will come to Christ, and beliere 
on Him. But we promise you no peace with the world, 
or with the devil. We warn you, on the contrary, that 
there must be warfare, so long as you are in the body. 
We would not keep you back, or deter you from Christ's 
service. But we would have you "count the cost," and 
fully understand what Christ's service entails. Hell is 
behind you. Heaven is before you. Home lies on the 
other side of a troubled sea. Thousands, tens of thousands 
have crossed these stormy waters, and in spite of all op- 
position, have reached the haven where they would be. 
Hell has assailed them, but has not prevailed. Qo 
forward, beloved brethren, and fear not the adversary. 
Only abide in Christ, and the victory is sure. 

Marvel not at the enmity of the gates of hell. " If 
ye were of the world, the world would love his own.** 
So long as the world is the world, and the devil the 
devil, so long there must be warfare, and believers in 
Christ must be soldiers. The world hated Christ, and 
the world will hate true Christians, as long as the earth 
stands. As the great reformer, Luther, said, " Cain 
will go on murdering Abel so long as the church is on 
earth." 

Be prepared for the enmity of the gates of hell. Pat 
on the whole armour of God. The tower of David 
contains a thousand bucklers, all ready for the use of 
God's people. The weapons of our warfare have been 
tried by millions of poor sinners like ourselves, and have 
never been found to fail. 

Be patient under the enmity of the gates of helL It 



THE TBITE CHOBOH. 221 

is all working together for your good. It tends to 
sanctify. It keeps you awake. It makes you humble. 
It drives you nearer to the Lord Jesus Christ. It weans 
you from the world. It helps to make you pray more. 
Above all, it makes you long for heaven, and say with 
heart as well as lips, " Come, Lord Jesus." 

Be not cast down by the enmity of hell. The warfare 
of the true child of God is as much a mark of grace as 
the inward peace which he enjoys. JSTo cross, no crown! 
Wo conflict, no saving Christianity ! " Blessed are ye," 
said our Lord 'Jesus Christ, "when men shall revile you, 
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against 
you falsely, for My sake." 

Y. — There remains one thing more to be considered : 
the Security of the true church of Christ. There is a 
glorious promise given by the mighty Builder, "The 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it." He who 
cannot lie has pledged His royal word, that all the 
powers of hell shall never overthrow His church. It 
shall continue, and stand, in spite of every assault. 
It shall never be overcome. All other created things 
perish and pass away, but not the church of Christ. 
The hand of outward violence, or the moth of inward 
decay, prevail over everything else, but not over the 
temple that Christ builds. 

Empires have risen and fallen in rapid succession. 
Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Tyre, Carthage, Eome, 
Greece, Yenice — ^Where are all these now ? They were 
all the creations of man's hand, and have passed away. 
But the church of Christ lives on. 



222 THE TBUE CHXmCH. 

The mightiest cities have become heaps of ruins. 
The broad walls of Babylon are sunk to the ground. 
The palaces of Nineveh are mounds of dust. The 
hundred gates of Thebes are only matters of history. 
Tyre is a place where fishermen hang their nets. Car- 
thage is a desolation. Yet all this time the true church 
stands. The gates of hell do not prevail against it. 

The earliest visible churches have in many cases 
decayed and perished. "Where is the church of Ephesus 
and the church of Antioch ? "Where is the church of 
Alexandria and the church of Constantinople ? Where 
are the Corinthian, and Philippian, and Thessalonian 
churches ? Where, indeed, are they all ? They departed 
from the Word of God. They were proud of their 
bishops, and synods, and ceremonies, and learning, and 
antiquity. They did not glory in the true cross of 
Christ. They did not hold fast the Gospel. They did 
not give Jesus His rightful office, or faith its rightful 
place. They are now among the things that have been. 
Their candlestick has been taken away. But all this 
time the true church has lived on. 

Has the true church been oppressed in one country ? 
It has fied to another. Has it been trampled on and 
oppressed in one soil ? It has taken root and flourished 
in some other climate. Fire, sword, prisons, fines, 
penalties, have never been able to destroy its vitality. 
Its persecutors have died and gone to their own place, 
but the word of God has lived, and grown, and multi- 
plied. Weak as this true church may appear to the 
eye of man, it is an anvil which has broken many a 
hammer in times past, and perhaps will break many 



THE TBITE CHTJ&CH. 123 

more before the end. He that lays hands on it, is 
touching the apple of Good's eye. 

The promise of our text is true of the whole body of 
the true church. Christ will never be without a witness 
in the world. He has had a people in the worst of 
times. He had seven thousand in Israel even in the 
days of Ahab. There are some now, I believe, in the 
dark places of the Roman and Greek churches, who, in 
spite of much weakness, are serving Christ. The devil 
may rage horribly. The church may in some countries 
be brought exceedingly low. But the gates of hell shall 
never entirely prevail. 

The promise of our text is true of every individual 
member of the church. Some of God's people have 
been brought very low, so that they despaired of their 
safety. Some have fallen sadly, as David and Peter 
did. Some have departed from the faith for a time, like 
Cranmer and Jewell. Many have been tried by cruel 
doubts and fears. But all have got safe home at last, the 
youngest as well as the oldest, the weakest as well as 
the strongest. And so it will be to the end. Can you 
prevent to-morrow's sun from rising ? Can you prevent 
the tide in the Bristol Channel from ebbing and flowing? 
Can you prevent the planets moving in their respective 
orbits? Then, and then alone, can you prevent the 
salvation of any believer, however feeble, of any living 
stone in that church which is built upon the rock, 
however small or insignificant that stone may appear. 

The true church is Christ's body. Not one bone in 
that mystical body shall ever be broken. — The true 
church is Christ's bride. They whom God hath joined 



224 THE TBXnB CHTJBCH. 

in everlasting covenant, shall never be pnt asnnder. — 
The true church is Christ's flock. "When the lion came 
and took a lamb out of David's flock, David arose and 
delivered the lamb from his mouth. Christ will do the 
same. He is David's greater son. Not a single sick 
lamb in Christ's flock shall perish. He will say to His 
Pather in the last day, " Of those whom thou gavest 
me I have lost none." — The true church is the wheat 
of the earth. It may be sifted, winnowed, buffeted, 
tossed to and fro. But not one grain shall be lost. The 
tares and chaff shall be burned. The wheat shall be 
gathered into the barn. — The true church is Christ's 
army. The Captain of our salvation loses none of his 
soldiers. His plans are never defeated. His supplies 
never fail. His muster roll is the same at the end as it 
was at the beginning. Of the men that marched 
gallantly out of England a few years ago in the 
Crimean war, how many never came back ! Eegiments 
that went forth, strong and cheerful, with bands playing 
and banners flying, laid their bones in a foreign land, 
and never returned to their native country. But it is 
not so with Christ's army. Not one of His soldiers shall 
be missing at last. He Himself declares *' They shall 
never perish." 

The devil may cast some of the members of the true 
church into prison. He may kill, and bum, and torture, 
and hang. But after he has killed the body, there is 
nothing more that he can do. He cannot hurt the sonl. 
When the French troops took Eome a few years ago, 
they found on the walls of a prison cell, under the 
Inquisition, the words of a prisoner. "Who he was, we 



THE TBUE CHX7BCH. 225 

know not. But his words are worthy of remembrance. 
Though dead, he yet speaketh. He had written on the 
walls, very likely after an unjust trial, and a still more 
unjust excommunication, the following striking words : 
— "Blessed Jesus, they cannot cast me out of thy true 
church." That record is true. Not all the power of 
Satan can cast out of Christ's true church one single 
believer. 

The children of this world may wage fierce warfare 
against the church, but they cannot stop the work of 
conversion. What said the sneering Emperor Julian, 
in the early ages of the church — " What is the carpen- 
ter's son doing now ? " An aged Christian made answer, 
** He is making a coffin for Julian himself." But a few 
months passed away, when Julian, with all his pomp 
and power, died in battle. Where was Christ when the 
fires of Smithfield were lighted, and when Latimer and 
"Ridley were burnt at the stake.'* What was Christ 
doing then? He was still carrying on His work of 
building. That work will ever go on, even in troublous 
times. 

Pear not, beloved brethren, to begin serving Christ. 
He to whom you commit your souls has all power in 
heaven and earth, and He will keep you. He will 
never let you be cast away. Relatives may oppose. 
Neighbours may mock. The world may slander and 
sneer. Pear not ! Pear not ! The powers of hell shall 
never prevail against your soul. Greater is He that is 
for you, than all they that are against you. 

Pear not for the church of Christ, my brethren, when 
ministers die, and saints are taken away. Christ can 



226 THE TBT7E CHUACH. 

ever maintain His own cause. He will raise up better 
and brighter stars. The stars are all in His right hand. 
Leare off all anxious thought about the future. Cease 
to be cast down by the measures of statesmen, or the 
plots of wolves in sheep's clothing. Christ will ever 
provide for His own Church. Christ will take care that 
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. All is 
going on well, though our eyes may not see it. The 
kingdoms of this world shall yet become the kingdoms 
of our God and of His Christ. 

Suffer me now to say a few words of practical appli- 
cation of this sermon. I speak to many, whom I speak 
to for the first time. I speak, perhaps, to many whom 
I speak to for the last time. Let not this service con- 
clude without an effort to press home the sermon on 
each heart. 

1. My first word of application shall be a question. 
What shall that question be ? Wherewith shall I ap- 
proach you ? What shall I ask ? I ask you, whether 
you are a member of the one true church of Christ ? 
Are you in the highest, the best sense, a "churchman" 
in the sight of God ? You know what I mean. I look 
far beyond the Church of England. I speak of the 
church built upon the rock. I ask you, with all 
solemnity — Are you a member of that one church of 
Christ ? Are you joined to the great Foundation ? Have 
you received the Holy Ghost ? Does the Spirit witness 
with your spirit, that you are one with Christ, and 
Christ with you ? I beseech you, in the name of God, 
to lay to heart this question, and to ponder it weU. 



THE TBUE CHITRCH. 227 

Take heed to yourselves, dear brethren, if you cannot 
give a satisfactory answer to my inquiry. Take heed, 
take heed, that you do not make shipwreck of faith. 
Take heed, lest at last the gates of hell prevail against 
you, the devil claim you as his own, and you be cast 
away for ever. Take heed, lest you go down to the 
pit from the land of Bibles, and in the full light of 
Christ's Gospel. 

2. My second word of application shall be an in- 
vitation. I address it to all who are not yet true be- 
lievers. I say to you. Come and join the one true 
church without delay. Come and join yourselves to the 
Lord Jesus Christ in an everlasting covenant not to be 
forgotten. Come to Christ and be saved. The day of 
decision must come some time. Why not this very 
evening ? Why not to-day, while it is called to-day ? — 
Why not this very night, ere the sun rises to-morrow 
morning? — Come to Him, whose I am, and whom I 
serve. Come to my Master, Jesus Christ. Come, I say, 
for all things are now ready. Mercy is ready for you, 
heaven is ready for you, angels are ready to rejoice over 
you, Christ is ready to receive you. Christ will receive 
you gladly, and welcome you among his children. 
Come into the ark — the flood of God's wrath will soon 
break upon the earth — come into the ark and be safe. 

Come into the life-boat. The old world will soon 
break into pieces ! Hear you not the tremblings of it ? 
The world is but a wreck hard upon the sand-bank. 
The night is far-spent — ^the waves are beginning to rise 
— the winds are rising — the storm will soon shatter the 



228 THE TRUE CHURCH. 

old wreck. But the life-boat is launched, and we, the 
ministers of the Gospel, beseech you to come into the 
life-boat and be saved. 

Dost thou ask. How can I come, my sins are so 
many ? Dost thou ask how thou shalt come ? Hear 
the words of that beautiful hymn : — 

" Just as I am, without one plea, 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 
And that Thou bid*st me come to Ttiee, 
Lamb of God I come." 

That is the way to come to Christ. You should come, 
waiting for nothing, and tarrying for nothing. You 
should come, as a hungry sinner, to be filled, — as a poor 
sinner to be enriched, — as a bad, undeserving sinner to be 
clothed with righteousness. So coming, Christ would 
receive you. '* Him that cometh " to Christ, He " will 
in no wise cast out.*' Oh ! come, come to Jesus Christ 

3. Last of all, let me give a word of exhortation to 
my believing hearers. 

Live a holy life, my brethren. Walk worthy of the 
church to which you belong. Live like citizens of heaven. 
Let your light shine before men, so that the world may 
profit by your conduct. Let them know whose you are, 
and whom you serve. Be epistles of Christ, known and 
read of all men; written in such clear letters, that none 
can say, I know not whether he be a member of Christ 
or not. 

Live a courageous life, my brethren. Confess Christ 
before men. Whatever station you occupy, in that 



THE TBUE CJIUBCH. 229 

station confess Christ. Why should you be ashamed of 
Him ? He was not ashamed of you on the cross. He 
is i-eady to confess you now before His Father in heaven. 
Why should you be ashamed of Him ? Be bold. Be 
yery bold. The good soldier is not ashamed of his uni- 
form. The true believer ought never to be ashamed of 
Christ. 

Live a joyful life, my brethren. Live like men 
who look for that blessed hope — the second coming 
of Jesus Christ. This is the prospect to which we 
should aU. look forward. It is not so much the thought 
of going to heaven, as of heaven coming to us, that 
should fill our minds. There is a good time coming 
for all the people of God — a good time for all the 
church of Christ — a good time for all believers — a 
bad time for the impenitent and unbelieving — a bad 
time for them that will serve their own lusts, and turn 
their backs on the Lord, but a good time for true Chris- 
tians. Por that good time, let us wait, and watch, and 
pray. 

The scaffolding will soon be taken down — the last 
stone will soon be brought out — the top-stone will be 
placed upon the edifice. Yet a little time, and the full 
beauty of the building shall be clearly seen. 

The ^eat master Builder will soon come himself. A 
building shall be shown to assembled worlds, in which 
there shall be no imperfection. The Saviour and the 
saved shall rejoice together. The whole universe shall 
acknowledge, that in the building of Christ's church all 
was well done. 



''M Cnmijrting tlie Wml''* 



2 COE. 11. 17. 

" For we are not as many, which corrtcpt the word of God, 
hut as of sincerity/, hut as of God, in the sight of 
God speak we in Christ.** 

Mt Rev. Brethren, 

It is no light matter to speak to any 
assembly of immortal souls about the things of God. 
But the most serious of all responsibilities is, to speak to 
a gathering of ministers, such as that which I now see 
before me. The awful feeling will come across my 
mind, that one single word said wrong, sinking into 
some heart, and bearing fruit at some future time, in 
some pulpit, may lead to harm, of which we cannot 
know the extent. 

* This address wad the one which immediately follows it 
were delivered at an aggregate clerical meeting, held at Weston- 
Super-Mare, in August, 1858, imder the presidency of Arch- 
deacon Law. The reader will kindly remember that neither of 
these addresses were written, and that he has before him a re- 
porter's notes corrected. 



IfOT COERTTPTING THE WORD. 231 

But there are occasions when true humility is to be 
seen, not so much in loud professions of our weakness, as 
in forgetting ourselves altogether. I desire to forget 
self at this time, in turning my attention to this portion 
of Scripture. If I say little about my own sense of in- 
sufficiency, do me the justice to believe, that it is not 
because I do not feel it much. 

The Greek expression, which we have translated, 
" corrupt," is derived from a word, the etymology of 
which is not quite agreed on by lexicographers. It 
either means a tradesman, who does his business dis- 
honestly, or a vintner, who adulterates the wine which 
he exposes for sale. Wycliff renders it by an obsolete 
phrase — ** We are not of those who do avoutry the 
Word of God." Tyndal renders it — "We are not of 
those who chop and change the Word of God." The 
Ehemish version is — " We are not as many, who adul- 
terate the Word of God." In our margin we read — 
" We are not as many, who deal deceitfully with the 
Word of God." 

In the construction of the sentence, the Holy Ghost 
has inspired St. Paul to use both the negative and the 
positive way of stating the truth. This mode of con- 
struction adds clearness and unmistakableness to the 
meaning of the words, and intensity and strength to the 
assertion, which they contain. Instances of a similar 
construction occur in three other remarkable passages 
of Scripture, two on the subject of baptism, one on the 
subject of the new birth, (John i. 13 ; 1 Peter i. 23 ; 1 
Peter iii. 21.) It will be found, therefore, that there 
are contained in the text both negative and positive 



232 ^^0T coBAUPrnra thb wobd. 

lessons for the instruction of the ministers of Christ. 
Some things we ought to avoid. Others we ought to 
follow. 

The £rst of the negative lessons is, a plain warning 
against corrupting or dealing deceitfully with the Word 
of God. The Apostle says, ** many " do it, pointing 
out to us that even in his time there were those who did 
not deal faithfully and honestly with God*s truth. Here 
is a full answer to those who assert that the primitive 
church was one of unmixed purity. The mystery of 
iniquity had already hegun to work. The lesson which 
we are taught is, to heware of all dishonest statements 
of that Word of God which we are commissioned to 
preach. We are to add nothing to it. We are to take 
nothing away. 

Now when can it he said of us, that we corrupt the 
Word of God in the present day ? What are the rocks 
and shoals which we ought to shun, if we would not be 
of the "many" who deal deceitfully with God's truth? A 
few suggestions on this head may not be without use. 

We corrupt the Word of God most dangerously, when 
we throw any doubt on the plenary inspiration of any 
part of Holy Scripture. This is not merely corrupting 
the cup, but the whole fountain. This is not merely 
corrupting the bucket of living water, which we profess 
to present to our people, but poisoning the whole welL 
Once wrong on this point, the whole substance of our 
religion is in danger. It is a flaw in the foundation* 
It is a worm at the root of our theology. Once allow this 
worm to gnaw the root, and we must not be surprised 
if the branohes, the leaves, and the fruit, little by little 



irOT COBSTTPTINa THB IfOM). 238 

decaj. The whole subject of inspiration, I am well 
aware, is surrounded with difficulty. All I would say 
is, that, in my humble judgment, notwithstanding some 
difficulties which we may not be able now to solve, the 
only safe and tenable ground to maintain is this, that 
every chapter, and every verse, and every word in the 
Bible has been "given by inspiration of God," We 
should never desert a great principle in theology, any 
more than in science, because of apparent difficulties, 
which we are not able at present to remove. 

Suffer me to mention an illustration of this important 
axiom. Those conversant with astronomy know, that 
before the discovery of the planet Ifeptune, there were 
difficulties which greatly troubled the most scientific as- 
tronomers, respecting certain aberrations of the planet 
Uranus. These aberrations puzzled the minds of astrono- 
mers, and some of them suggested that they might possibly 
prove the whole JJ^ewtonian system to be untrue. But 
at that time a well-known French astronomer, named 
Leverrier, read before the Academy of Science a paper, 
in which he laid down this great axiom — that it did 
not become a scientific man to give up a principle because 
of difficulties, which could not be explained. He said 
in effect, " We cannot explain the aberrations of TJranus 
now ; but we may be sure that the Newtonian system 
will be proved to be right, sooner or later. Something 
may be discovered one day, which will prove that these 
aberrations may be accounted for, and yet the New- 
tonian system remain true and imshaken.'' A few 
years after, the anxious eyes of astronomers discovered 
the last great planet, If eptime. The planet was shown 



234 KOT COBRUPTIWG THE WORD. 

to be the true cause of all the aberrations of Uranus ; 
and what the French astronomer had laid down as a 
principle in science, was proved to be wise and true. 
The application of the anecdote is obvious. Let us be- 
ware of giving up any first principle in theology. Let 
us not give up the great principle of plenary inspiration 
because of difficulties. The day may come when they 
will all be solved. In the mean time we may rest 
assured, that the difficulties which beset any other 
theory of inspiration, are tenfold greater than any 
which beset our own. 

Secondly, we corrupt the word of God, when we 
make defective statements of doctrine. We do so, when 
we add to the Bible the opinions of the church, or of 
the fathers, as if they were of equal authority. "We do 
80, when we take away from the Bible, for the sake of 
pleasing men; — or, from a feeling of false liberality, keep 
back any statement which seems narrow, and harsh, or 
hard. We do so, when we try to soften down anything 
that is taught about eternal punishment, or the reality 
of hell. We do so, when we bring forward doctrines 
in their wrong proportions. We have all our favourite 
doctrines, and our minds are so constituted, that it is 
hard to see one truth very clearly, without forgetting 
that there are other truths equally important. We 
must not forget the exhortation of Paul, to minister 
"according to the proportion of faith." We do so, 
when we exhibit an excessive anxiety to fence, and 
guard, and qualify such doctrines as justification by 
faith without the deeds of the law, for fear of the chaige 
of antinomianism ; or when we flinch from strong state- 



NOT COBEUPTING THE WORD. 235 

ments about holiness, for fear of being thought legal. 
We do so not least when we shrink from the oise of 
Bible language in giving an account of doctrines. We 
are apt to keep back such expressions as "bom again," 
"election," "adoption, "conversion," "assurance," 
and to use a roundabout phraseology, as if we were 
ashamed of plain Bible words. I cannot expand these 
statements, for want of time. I content myself with 
mentioning them, and leave them to your private thought. 
In the third place, we corrupt the Word of God, 
when we make a defective practical application of it. 
We do so, when we do not discriminate between classes 
in our congregations — when we address all as being 
possessed of grace, by reason of their baptism or church- 
membership, and do not draw the line between those 
who have the Spirit and those who have not. Are we 
not apt to keep back plain home appeals to the uncon- 
verted? When we have eighteen hundred or two 
thousand persons before our pulpits, a vast proportion 
of whom we must know are unconverted, are we not 
apt to say, " Now if there be any one of you who does 
not know the things that are for his eternal peace " — 
when we ought rather to say, " If there be any of you 
who has not the grace of God in him ? " — And are we not 
in danger of defective handling of the Word in our 
practical exhortations, by not bringing home the state- 
ments of the Bible to the various classes in our congre- 
gations? We speak plainly to the poor; but do we 
also speak plainly to the rich ? Do we speak plainly 
in our dealings with the upper classes ? This is a point 
on which, I fear, we need to search our consciences. 



236 NOT ooKKUPrnrG the wobj). 

I now turn to tlie positive lessons which the text 
contains. "As of sincerity, as of Gbd, in the sight 
of God, speak we in Christ." A few words on each 
head must sufice. 

We should aim to speak '* as of sincerity *' — sincerity 
of aim, heart, and motive ; to speak as those who are 
thoroughly convinced of the truth of what they say; 
as those who have a deep feeling and tender love for 
those whom we address. 

We should aim to speak '* as of Gh>d." We ought 
to strive to feel like men commissioned to speak for 
God, and on His hehalf. In our dread of running into 
Bomanism, we too often forget the language of the 
apostle — "I magnify mine office." We forget how 
great is the responsihiHty of the New Testament minis- 
ter, and how awful the sin of those who, when a real 
messenger of Christ addresses them, refuse to receive 
his message, and harden their hearts against it. 

We should aim to speak as ** in the sight of (Jod." 
We are to ask ourselves, not. What did the people think 
of me ? but. What was I in the sight of God ? Latimer 
was once called upon to preach before Henry YIII., and 
begun his sermon in the following manner. I quote 
from memory, and do not pretend to verbal accuracy. 
He began: "Latimer, Latimer, dost thou remember 
thou art speaking before the high and mighty King 
Henry YIII. ; before him who has power to command 
thee to be sent to prison ; before him who can have thy 
head struck off, if it please him ? Wilt thou not take 
care to say nothing that will offend royal ears ? " Then, 
after a pause, he went on : " Latimer ! Latimer ! dost 



HOT COKBUPTIHG THE WOBD. 237 

not thou remember that thou art speaking before the 
King of kings and Lord of lords; before Him, at whose 
bar Henry VIII. will stand ; before Him, to whom one 
day thou wilt have to give account thyself? Latimer! 
Latimer! be faithful to thy Master, and declare all 
God's Word." 0, that this may be the spirit in which 
we may ever retire from our pulpits, not caring whether 
men are pleased or displeased ; not caring whether men 
say we were eloquent or feeble ; but going away with 
the witness of our conscience — I have spoken as in God's 
sight. 

Finally, we should aim to speak " as in Christ." The 
meaning of this phrase is doubtful. Grotius says, " We 
are to speak as in His name, as ambassadors." But 
Grotius is poor authority. — Beza says, "We are to 
speak about Christ, concerning Christ.'* This is good 
doctrine, but hardly the meaning of the words. — Others 
say, we are to speak as ourselves joined to Christ, as 
those who have received mercy from Christ, and whose 
only title to address others is from Christ alone. — Others 
say, we should speak as through Christ, in the strength 
of Christ. No meaning, perhaps, is better than this. 
The expression in the Greek exactly answers to Philipp. 
iv. 13 : "I can do all things through Christ, which 
•strengtheneth me." Whatever sense we ascribe to these 
words, one thing is clear : we should speak in Christ, as 
those who have themselves received mercy ; as those who 
desire to exalt, not themselves, but the Saviour ; and as 
those who care nothing what men think of them, so 
long as Christ is magnified in their ministry. 

In conclusion, we should all inquire, Do we ever 



£38 NOT COJftEXTPTING THE WOBD. 

handle the word of God deceitfully ? Do we realize 
what it is to speak as of God^ as in the sight of God, 
and in Christ ? Let me put to all one searching ques- 
tion. Is there any text in God's Word, which we shrink 
from expounding ? Is there any statement in the Bible 
which we avoid speaking about to our people, not be- 
cause we do not understand it, but because it contradicts 
some pet notion of ours as to what is truth ? If it be 
so, let us ask our consciences whether this be not very 
like handling the Word of God deceitftdly. 

Is there anything in the Bible we keep back for fear 
of seeming harsh, and of giving offence to some of our 
hearers ? Is there any statement, either doctrinal or 
practical, which we mangle, mutilate, or dismember? 
If so, are we dealing honestly with God's Word ? 

Let us pray to be kept from corrupting God's Word. 
Let neither fear or favour of man induce us to keep 
back, or avoid, or change, or mutilate, or qualify any 
text in the Bible. Surely we ought to have holy bold- 
ness, when we speak as ambassadors of God. We have 
no reason to be ashamed of any statement we make 
in our pulpits, so long as it is Scriptural. I have often 
thought, that one great secret of the marvellous honour 
which God has put on a man, who is not in our com- 
munion, (I allude to Mr. Spurgeon) — is, the extra-- 
ordinary boldness and confidence, with which he stands 
up in the pulpit to speak to people about their sins 
and their souls. It cannot be said he does it from fear 
of any, or to please any. He seems to give every class 
of hearers its portion, — to the rich and the poor, the high 
and the low, the peer and the peasant, the learned and 



NOT COBBUPTTNa THE WOBD. 239 

the illiterate He gives to eveiy one plain dealing, ac- 
* cording to God's Word. I believe that very boldness 
has much to do with the success which God is pleased 
to give to His ministry. Let us not be ashamed to 
learn a lesson from him in this respect. Let us go and 
do likewise. 



''(§m \^mlf tnjiallq ta tlieitt/'* 



1 TIM. lY. 15. 

'* Give thyself wholly to themy 

My Eev. Beetheen, 

I need hardly remind you, that the Greek 
expression which we have translated, "give thyself 
wholly to them," is somewhat remarkable. It would 
be more literally rendered, " Be in these things." It 
answers to the Latin phrases, "totus in illis," and 
" omnis in hoc sum." We have nothing exactly corres- 
ponding to the expression in our language, and the 
words which our translators have chosen are perhaps as 
well calculated as any to convey the idea which was 
put by the Holy Ghost in St. Paul's mind. 

When the apostle says, "give thyself whoUy to these 
things," he seems to look at the " things *' of which he 
had been speaking in the preceding verses, beginning 

♦ An address delivered at the aggregate clerical meeting, at 
Weston-Super-Mare, in August, 1869. 



OITB THYSELF WHOLLY TO THEM. 241 

with the words " Be thou an example of the believer, 
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, 
in purity." 

"We have here, a mark set before the ministers of the 
Kew Testament, at which we are all to aim, and of 
which we must all feel we come short. Yet it is an old 
saying, " He that aims high is the most likely to strike 
high ; and he that shoots at the moon, will shoot further 
than the man who shoots at the bush." 

The apostle appears to me to suggest, that the minis- 
ter must be a man of one thing — to use his own words, 
a ** man of God." We hear of men of business, and men 
of pleasure, and men of science. The aim of the minister 
should be, to be a "man of God; " or, to employ a phrase 
used in some heathen countries, to be "Jesus Christ's 
man." An expression is sometimes used with reference 
to the army, which we may apply to the soldiers of the 
Great Captain of our salvation. Some men are said to 
be "drawing-room soldiers," and "carpet knights." They 
are said to have entered the army for the sake of the 
uniform, and for no other cause. But there are many 
of whom public opinion says, such a man is " every 
inch a soldier." This should be. the aim which we 
should place before us; we should seek to be "every 
inch the minister of Jesus Christ." We should aim to 
be the same men at all times, in all positions, and 
places ; not on Sunday 'only, but on week days also ; 
not merely in the pulpit, but everywhere — in the 
drawing-room of the rich, by our own fire-side, and in 
the cottage of the poor man. There are those, of whom 
their congregations have said, that when they were in 



242 GIYS THYSELF WHOLLT TO THEM. 

the pulpit they never wished them to come out, and 
when they went out they never wished them to go in. 
May God give us all grace to lay that to heart ! May 
we seek so to live, so to preach, so to work, so to give 
ourselves wholly to the business of our calling, that 
this bitter remark may never be made upon us. Our 
profession is a very peculiar one. Others have their 
seasons of relaxation, when they can altogether lay 
aside their work. This can never be done by the 
faithfiil minister of Jesus Christ. Once put on, his 
office must never be put off. At home, abroad, taking 
relaxation, going to the sea side, he must ever carry his 
business with him. A great lawyer could say of his 
official robes, "Lie there. Lord Chancellor." Such 
ought never to be the mind of the minister of Christ. 

There are some things which the high demand of this 
text suggests, as needful to be followed after and 
practised. 

It demands, firstly, entire devotion to the great work 
to which we are ordained. When one was commanded 
by the Saviour to follow Him, he replied, " Suffer me 
first to bury my father;" but then there came that 
solemn saying, " Let the dead bury their dead; but go 
thou and preach the Gospel." — " Suffer me first to bid 
them farewell who are at my house," said another ; and 
to him there came the remarkable sentence, " No man 
having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is 
fit for the kingdom of God." — " Salute no man by the 
way," was Christ's charge to the seventy disciples. 
Surely these scriptural expressions teach us, that in 
all our dealings in our office, we must have a high 



GIVE THYSELF WHOLLY TO THKM. 243 

standard. We must strive to be men of one thing— 
that thing being the work of Jesus Christ. 

It demands, secondly, a thorough separation from the 
things of the worid. I hold it to be of the greatest 
importance to keep the ministerial office, so far as we 
can, distinct and separate from everything that is secular. 
I trust we shall hear every year of fewer and fewer 
ministers of the Gospel who are magistrates, and fewer 
and fewer ministers who take part in agricultural 
meetings, and win prizes for fat pigs, enormous bullocks, 
and large crops of turnips. There is no apostolical 
succession in such avocations. Nor yet is this all. We 
should be separated from the pleasures of the world, as 
well as from its business. There are many innocent 
and indifferent amusements, for which the minister of 
Christ ought to have no time. He ought to say, "I 
have no leisure for these things. I am doing a great 
work, and I cannot come down." 

It demands, thirdly, a jealous watchfulness over our 
own social conduct. We ought not to be always paying 
morning calls of courtesy and dining out, as others do. 
It will not do to say, that our Lord went to a marriage 
feast, and sat at meat in the pharisee's house, and there^ 
fore we may do the same. I only reply, let us go in 
His spirit, with His faithfulness and boldness, to say a 
word in season, and to give the conversation a profitable 
turn, and then we may go with safety. Unless we do 
this, we should be careful where we go, with whom we 
sit down, and where we spend our evenings. There 
was a quaint saying of John Wesley to his ministers, 
which Cecil quotes, as containing the germ of much 



244 GIVB THTSBLF WHOLLY TO THJBK. 

trath. ''Don't aim at being thonght gentlemen; yon 
have no more to do with being gentlemen, than with 
being dancing-masters." Our aim should be not to 
be regarded as agreeable persons at the dinner table, 
but to be known everywhere as faithful, consistent 
ministers of Jesus Christ. 

It demands, fourthly, a diligent redemption of time. 
We should give attention to reading, every day that we 
live* We should strive to bring all our reading to bear 
on our work. We ought to keep our eyes open con- 
tinually, and be ever picking up matter for our sermons, 
as we travel by the way, as we sit by the fire-side, as 
we are standing on the platform at the railway station. 
We should be keeping in our mind's eye our Master's 
busiQess, observing, noting, looking out, gathering up 
something that will throw fresh light on our work, and 
enable us to put the truth in a more striking way. He 
that looks out for something to learn, will always be 
able to learn something. 

Having suggested these things, I will next proceed to 
ask, what will be the consequence of our giving our- 
selves wholly to these things ? Bemember, we shall 
not receive the praise of men. We shall be thought 
extreme, and ascetic, aQd righteous over much. Those 
who want to serve God and serve mammon at the same 
time, will think our standard too high, our practice too 
stringent. They will say, that we are going too far 
and too fast for a world such as that in which we live. 
May we never care what men say of us, so long as we 
walk in the light of God's Word ! May we strive and 
pray to be wholly independent of, and indifferent to 



GITB THTSEUr WHOLLY TO THEM. 245 

man's opinion, so long as we please God ! May we re- 
member the woe pronounced by onr Master, when he 
said, "Woe be unto you, when all men shall speak 
weU of you," and the words of St. Paul, "If I yet 
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ." 

But though "giving ourselves wholly to these things" 
we shall not win the praise of men, we shall attain the 
far more important end of usefulness to souls. I ac- 
knowledge to the full, the doctrine of the sovereignty 
of God in the salvation of sinners. I acknowledge that 
those who preach best, and live nearest to God, have 
not always been honoured in their lives to the saving of 
many souls. But stiU, the man who is most entirely 
and wholly Jesus Christ's man — a man of one thing, 
who lives Sunday and week-day, everywhere, at home 
and abroad, as a man whose single endeavour is to give 
himself to the work of Jesus Christ — this is the man, 
this is the minister, who will generally, in the long run, 
do most good. The case of Mr. Simeon will apply here. 
You all know how he was persecuted, when he began 
to testify for Christ in Cambridge. You know how 
many there were who would not speak to him, how the 
finger of scorn was pointed at him continually. But 
we know how he went on persevering in the work, and 
how, when he died, all Cambridge came forth to give 
him honour, and how heads of houses, and fellows of 
colleges, and men who had scoffed at him while he lived, 
honoured him at his death. They testified, that the 
life he had lived had had its effect, and that they had 
seen and known that God was with him. I once saw 
in Dundee one who had known much of that godly man, 



246 GIVE THTSELP WHOLLY TO THEIC. 

Robert McChejme. She told me that those who read 
his letters and sermons had a very faint idea of what 
he was. She said to me, ** If you have read all his 
works, you just know nothing at all about him. You 
must have seen the man, and heard him, and known 
him, and have been in company with him, to know 
what a man of God he was." 

Furthermore, giving ourselves wholly to these things 
will bring happiness and peace to our consciences. I 
speak now amongst friends, and not amongst worldly 
people, where I should need to fence and guard and ex- 
plain what I mean. I shall not be suspected of holding 
justification by works by those I see before me. 
I speak of such a good conscience as the apostle refers 
to : We trust we have a " good conscience." (Heb. 
xiii. 18.) To have this good conscience is clearly 
bound up with high aims, high motives, a high standard 
of ministerial life and practice. I am quite sure, that 
the more we give ourselves wholly to the work of the 
ministry, the more inward happiness, the greater sense 
of the light of God's countenance, are we likely to 
enjoy. 

The subject is a deeply humbling one. Who does 
not feel, " My leanness, my leanness ! my unprofitable- 
ness! how far short I come of this high standard!" What 
reason have we, having received mercy, not to faint ! 
What reason have we, having been spared by God's long 
suffering, to abound in the work of the Lord, and to give 
ourselves wholly to our business ! The grand secret 
is, to be ever looking to Jesus, and living a life of close 
communion with him. At Cambridge, the other day, 



GIVE THYSELF WHOLLY TO THEM. 247 

I saw a picture of Henry Martyn, bequeathed by Mr. 
Simeon to the public library. A friend informed me 
that that picture used to hang in Mr. Simeon's room, 
and that when he was disposed to trifle in the work of 
the ministry, he used to stand before it and say, " It 
seems to say to me, Charles Simeon, don't trifle, don't 
trifle; Charles Simeon, remember whose you are, and 
whom you serve." And then the worthy man, in his 
own peculiar way, would bow respectfully, and say, " I 
will not trifle, I will not trifle ; I will not forget." 

May we, in conclusion, look to a far higher pattern 
than any man — Martyn, M'Cheyne, or any other. May 
we look to the Great Chief Shepherd, the great pattern, 
in whose steps we are to walk ! May we abide in Him, 
and never trifle ! May we hold on our way, looking to 
Jesus, keeping clear of the world, its pleasures, and its 
follies, — caring nothing for the world's frowns, and not 
much moved by the world's smiles, — looking forward to 
that day, when the Great Shepherd shall give to all who 
have done His work, and preached His gospel, a crown 
of glory that fadeth not away ! The more we have the 
mind of Christ, the more we shall understand what it 
is to " give ourselves wholly to these things." 



^!jat b (Dur l^miim f 



Mr Eeveeend Beethren, 

I trust that I may confidently 
bespeak your indulgence, and claim an interest in your 
prayers. I address you at the close of a meeting of 
unparalleled interest, which has now lasted for two days. 
Your minds are naturally wearied, after a continuous 
strain upon your powers of attention. The field of 
topics suitable to an occasion like the present has been 
already traversed by the three beloved brethren who 
have preceded me. Like strong reapers, they have 
swept that field clean, and have only left a few stray 
ears for me to glean behind them. Above all, I am 
anxious that the closing address at this meeting should 
in no wise mar the effect of all that has gone before. 
The last portion of the banquet ought to leave no ill 

♦ The following address was delivered to a large clerical 
meeting, held at Weston-Super-Mare, under the presidency of 
Archdeacon Law, in the month of August, 1858. It was origi- 
nally delivered from rough notes, and has been considerably 
abridged by the reporter. This must accoimt for the elliptical 
and fragmentary style which it in many parts assumes. 



WHAT IS OUR POSITION. 249 

savour on the palate. The last note of the music ought 
not to be out of harmony, and jar upon the ear. Onoe 
more, then, I say, help me by your prayers. 

In searching for a subject which may form a suitable 
conclusion to our meeting, I have naturally turned to what 
the Puritans would have called its "uses and application." 
I wish to put the question to your minds, — Where are 
we, as evangelical members of the Church of England ? 
"What is our present position ? What do the times in 
which we live especially demand of the evangelical 
clergy ? What are we going to do when we leave this 
meeting and return to our respective homes? What 
new thing are we going to take up ? To what practical 
point can we bring the whole of these proceedings ? — 
The profound remark of Bishop Butler will naturally 
occur to your minds. He tells us, that passive impres- 
sions, often repeated, gradually lose all their power. 
Actions, on the contrary, often repeated, finally produce 
habits in the character. I trust the result of this 
clerical meeting wUl be aetionSf and not merely impres- 
sions. What, then, are we going to do ? 

I am not ashamed to speak of the evangelical body 
as a distinct and clearly defined body in the Church of 
England. It is an historical fact, that there always 
has been such a body. It flourished in the days of 
our Reformers, and under Jewel and his brethren in 
Elizabeth's time. It maintained its existence in the 
early days of the Stuarts. It was weakened under 
Archbishop Laud. It almost expired in the times of 
the later Stuarts, William the iMrd, Ann, and the two 
first Georges. It revived in the times of William 



250 . WHAT IS OTJE POSITION. 

Komaine, Henry Venn, Berridge, Grimshaw, "Wesley, 
Whitfield, and others who laboured with them in the 
middle of the last century. From that time it has gone 
on growing, and I hope it will continue to grow a 
hundred and a thousand fold. 

What then is the position in which the evangelical body 
stands at the present day? I will begin by pointing 
out reasons which exist for thankfulness to God for our 
position. I desire to look first at the blue sky. 

We ought, for one thing, to be thankful for what God 
has done for us in the last hundred years as regards 
our numbers ! Eomaine used to say, that at one time • 
he did not think he knew more than twenty minis- 
ters in the Church of England who preached the 
whole Gospel. Now they are numbered, not by 
twenties, but by hundreds, and I hope I may add, 
by thousands. We cannot, at the same time, shut 
our eyes to the fact, that the influence of the evan- 
gelical body has increased together with its numbers. 
Some person has said, that Exeter Hall is one of the five 
great estates of the realm. There are Queens, Lords, 
Commons, and the TimeB newspaper, and the fifth estate 
is Exeter Hall. We may receive the saying for what 
it is worth. It has truth in it. It is a striking fact, 
that a powerful paper like the Times is frequently 
obliged to confess that the evangelical body in the 
church has a voice, and a weight, and some effect on 
the movements of such a country as ours. An evan- 
gelical clergyman is no longer proscribed as a contemp- 
tible, fanatical person, as he used to be seventy years 
ago. Great statesmen have thought it worth their 



WHAT IS OTTK POSITION. 251 

while to hold out their hand to evangelical men, and 
to raise them to the episcopal hench. Whatever their 
motives were, I believe, in so doing, they did wisely 
and well. It is matter for thankfulness to God, that at 
the present moment there are more evangelical bishops 
on the bench than there ever were at one time since the 
days of the Reformation. Acceptance with men, and 
increase in numbers, are specially the gifts of God. We 
should be thankless, indeed, if we did not see in the 
facts I have just mentioned a cause for gratitude. 

We ought, in the next place, to be thankful for the 
work which God has enabled the evangelical body to 
accomplish on behalf of His Gospel, by the agency 
of voluntary religious Societies. I refer especially 
to the work done at home and abroad by the Church 
Missionary Society, the Pastoral- Aid Society, the Jews 
Society, the Irish Church Missions, the Colonial Church 
Society, and other societies of a similar character. 
How much has God done by them within the last "fifty 
years! How wonderfully they have grown and gone 
forward in usefulness, and increased their incomes from 
hundreds to thousands, and tens of thousands, and, in one 
or two instances, to hundreds of thousands of pounds ! For 
all this we should thank God. He alone has power over 
the hearts of men. He alone can incline men to give 
their money in order to spread Christ's truth. He has 
proved, that He can raise up friends for His work 
notwithstanding the weakness, the infirmity, and the 
shortcomings of His people. 

We ought, in the next place, to thank God for the 
readiness which He has put into the hearts of men to 



252 WHAT IS OUB POSITIOir, 

devise new machinery ^ to meet the wants of the times. 
We should be thankful for the rise and progress of 
open air preaching. We should be thankful for the 
general confidence reposed in lay agency. I, for one, 
am glad to see the laity taking their proper place, 
and working side by side with the clergy, as coadjutors, 
not as rivals, in the cause of God. I regard any agency 
without the slightest feeling of jealousy. I would not 
check the zeal of any Christian fellow-workman, be- 
cause he is not ordained. I would rather say with 
Moses, *' Forbid him not. Would God that all the 
Lord's people" would come forward and work. There 
is work for all. Laymen, no doubt, in working for 
Christ, sometimes make mistakes, or overstep their 
province. Like their ministers, they are no more in- 
fallible than the Pope. But do their ministers never 
make mistakes, or overstep their proper province ? I 
verily believe the working clergy make more mistakes 
than* the working laity. For the agency of the laity — 
for the new boldness with which the laity have come 
forward to be the helpers and aiders of the clergy, we 
ought, indeed, to be thankful to God. 

We ought, in the next place, to thank Qt)d for the 
passing of the Religious Worship Act, This was a 
measure, which, having passed the house of Commons 
without opposition, met with fierce opposition in the 
Upper House, in a quarter where it was to be expected. 
Yet, having raised up the Protestant feeling of the 
country, it passed with acclamation. In spite of every 
prediction, it has hitherto done no harm to the Church 
of England. So far from doing harm it has strengthened 



WHAT IS OUE P08ITI0K. 253 

the Chtirch immensely. It has broken fetters which 
never ought to have been imposed on ministers of the 
Gospel. It has given us a liberty which an extreme 
caution had too long withheld, the glorious liberty of 
doing good in our parishes, no man making us afraid. 
I regard the Eeligious Worship Act as the greatest boon 
which our Church has received since the days of the 
Eeformation. 

One more feature in our position I cannot pass over. 
"We ought to be deeply thankful for the rise and progress 
of special services on behalf of the working classes. 
And here I may be allowed to bear testimony to the 
value of such meetings as those which we have now 
the privilege to attend. Many of my rev. brethren 
may not be aware of the origin of the special services 
of the last two years. They arose entirely and exclu- 
sively out of the last clerical meeting, held in this 
very room, in Weston-super-mare. If these clerical 
meetings had done no more good than that, they have 
at least done one thing which will stand as a monu- 
ment of their usefulness, in souls saved and God 
glorified, as long as the world endures. On the last 
day of that meeting, there met in one comer of the 
drawing-room of the Ven. Archdeacon, who presided, 
Br. M'Neile, Dr. MiUer, and myself, to talk over what 
should be the practical result of the meeting. I proposed 
the question. In what way are we to adjust the conflicting 
claims of duty ? I remarked that we could not preach 
or speak everywhere. I asked what was the best method 
of economizing our strength, and spending ourselves to 
the best purpose ? Dr. M'l^eile said, "Let every man find 



254 WHAT IS OUE POSITION. 

out his proper work, and that work let him do — preach- 
ing, speaking, or lecturing." — Dr. Miller said, "Why not 
attempt this ? Let us open some large church in one of 
our great towns, and have special sermons five or six 
nights running, throwing open the pews, and inviting the 
working-classes to come without distinction, simply to 
hear the Gospel of Christ ! " Dr. M'!N'eile at once agreed 
to it with all his heart. Dr. Miller said he would offer 
St. Martin's Church, Birmingham, for the occasion, and 
invited Dr. M'!N'eile and myself to assist in the work. 
The thing was attempted, within three months, in 
November, 1856, and I need hardly remind you that 
the success was complete. In spite of many a pre- 
diction of failure, it was clearly proved that when 
you go out of your routine path to meet the working- 
classes, they will come and meet you. For six successive 
nights, to the astonishment of many, the huge Church 
of St. Martin's, Birmingham, was filled with attentive, 
hearing congregations. That week, one of the most 
important movements of the last few years was set 
on foot. It went on from town to town, from Birming- 
ham to Ipswich, and from Ipswich to Islington, and 
from Islington to Exeter Hall. Nothing, to my mind, 
is a more convincing evidence that special services are 
a step in the right direction, than the fact that the 
prince of this world has sought in every way to mar the 
good effect of the movement, and to turn it into an 
instrument for doing harm. 

That these movements, which all began with the 
evangelical body, are not without their effect on the 
pubHc mind, the conduct of our adversaries is a plain 



WHA.T IS OUE POSITIOir. 255 

proof. The cry has often been raised in times gone by, 
that the ''Church was in danger." Lay agency, and open- 
air preaching, and special services, were to prove her ruin ! 
Such a cry has repeatedly been raised ; but the Church 
still survives. The dangers of the Church do not arise 
from the evangelical body, but from those who eat her 
bread and yet maintain doctrines contradictory to her 
Articles. But now we see the very things once con- 
demned taken up by those who opposed them. Lay 
agency is used even by our adversaries. Even in 
cathedrals and abbeys are to be heard sermons addressed 
to the working classes. Our movements are effective, 
even our enemies being judges. When all these things 
are remembered, there is indeed great cause of thank- 
fulness. We cannot look to these facts, and not feel 
that God has yet an elect people in the Church of Eng- 
land. Who can tell but there may be in store even 
greater mercies than these ? God seems to be saying, 
" Destroy her not, for a blessing is in her." Surely if 
we are not thankful for all these mercies, the very 
stones will cry out. 

I must next pass to the other side of the question. 
There are black clouds as well as blue sky in the posi- 
tion of the evangelical body in the Church of England. 
There are many dangers around us, as well as things 
for which to thank God and take courage. 

One of the chief dangers of the day is the finja hold 
which Tractariamsm has on a large portion of the 
clergy, and not a small portion of the laity. We must 
not suppose that Tractarianism is extinct. Kewman, 
and Manning, and Oakley, and Ward, have gone to 



256 "WHAT IS OUB POBinOW. 

Rome, but they have left behind a leaven which still 
works, and will work, in the hearts of many of the 
clergy and the laity. I believe that people do not suf- 
ficiently estimate the power which Tractarianism has 
over a large body in the Church of England. It does 
not come forward so prominently as it once did, but it 
is not the less dangerous. Its influeoce just now, is 
seen in the unscriptural doctrines put forth respecting 
the Lord's Supper, — in the secret efforts that are made in 
some quarters to introduce the Eomish confessional, and 
in the wide-spread taste for histrionic ceremonies, and 
Popish habiliments in the performance of public wor- 
ship. Its progress appears in the immense dif&culty 
there is in getting satisfactory curates when they are 
wanted. How rare and hard to find they are ! How 
often, after writing to friends, and advertising in the 
JRecord, evangelical clergymen are obliged to put up 
with curates not established in the faith, and not up to 
the mark, simply because no others are to be met with. 
The theological training of young men, preparing for 
orders in the present day, is often most unsatisfactory 
and dangerous. It does not build them up in the prin- 
ciples of the Eeformation, but places them on an inclined 
plane, of which the logical conclusion is neither more 
nor less than Romanism. 

One of the next dangers of the day arises. from the 
rise and progress of Neologian principles in the church. 
There are some who are called Church-of-England men, 
who publicly and privately put forward strange and 
unscriptural views about the atonement, about the vica- 
rious sacrifice of Christ, and about His substitution for 



WHAT 18 OJTR POSTTIOW. 257 

US on the cross. There are clergymen in England, who 
hold strange views about inspiration, and the eternity 
of punishment which Scripture speaks of as being the 
desert of unbelief. These men go on unrebuked. No 
effort is made to put them out of the Church. The 
sentimental, the semi-liberal, the would-be-called charit- 
able, say that there is something so loving, tender, and 
kind about the doctrine, that none can be lost, but that 
aU will be saved, that they cannot but admire it. The 
rise and spread of this school is indeed a great evil in 
the present day, and demands the most anxious atten- 
tion of the evangelical clergy. 

One of the next great dangers of the day arises from 
the spirit of false liberalism — a morbid love of unity, 
falsely so called, l^o doubt we all love unity ; but we 
must distinctly maintain, that true unity can only be 
built on God's truth, I^o doubt we must not withhold 
the right hand of fellowship from any faithful brother, 
because he does not think exactly like us ; but we must 
understand who the men are to whom we extend the right 
hand. Many are saying now a days, that " after all, there 
is no great difference between one clergyman and another. 
Some speak of a thing by one name, and some by another; 
but, after all, they mean the same." It is not uncom- 
mon now to hear of high churchmen saying to evan- 
gelical clergymen — as was said in the time of Ezra and 
Nehemiah, by Sanballat and Tobiah — "Let us build 
with you." But let us not be taken in by such sophistry. 
Better build by ourselves — ^better let the work go on 
slowly — than allow Sanballat and Tobiah to come and 
build by our side. I believe that all communion of that 



258 WHAT IS OTTR POSITIOir. 

sort, all interchange of pulpits with unsound men, is to 
be deprecated, as doing nothing but harm to the cause of 
God. I believe that, by so doing, we endorse the senti- 
ments of persons who have no real love of Christ's 
truth. We enable the high church party to manufac- 
ture ecclesiastical capital out of the evangelical clergy, 
and to make people believe that we are all one in heart, 
when, in reality,* we differ on first principles. From 
such unity and co-operation may we pray to be delivered. 
Another great danger in the present day arises from 
the proceedings of our rulers and legislators. Can there 
be any doubt in the mind of any intelligent observer of 
the times, that little by little we are casting off, as a 
nation, the religion of the Bible, the public national ac- 
knowledgment of the Lord Jesus Christ? There are' 
those who cannot see it; but I cannot read public 
events with their eyes. I have always strongly opposed 
the endowment of Maynooth. I deeply deplore the 
admission of the Jews in Parliament, and regard it as 
an insult to our Saviour. I see no force in the argu- 
ments brought forward in its favour. No public opinion 
can make that right, which is wrong in the sight of 
God. A thing may be politically right, and expedient, 
and popular, but if scripturally wrong, we ought not to 
touch it with the tip of our fingers. Once admit the 
Jew, and where are we to stop ? Admit the Jew, and 
I know not why some eminent Parsee, should not 
some day take his seat in the House of Commons side 
by side with Mr. Disraeli. Admit the Jew, and I 
do not see why some Hindoo Brahmin or Mahometan, 
who has done service to the state, should not take his 



WHAT IS ouE posrnoK. 259 

seat for some borough, as its representative in the 
British Parliament. I view with deep regret the assault 
made on the church in the matter of church-rates. 
The amount of money is not the question at stake. It 
is the principle which is involved. The principle is, that 
a nation ought to provide for the maintenance of God's 
worship, and that there should be a charge on property 
for this purpose. This principle many of our great men 
are disposed to give up. I am firmly convinced it is 
the thin edge of a wedge, which is to split in sunder 
the union of church and state in the land. 

I wish that I could conclude the catalogue of our 
national short-comings at this point. But unhappily I 
cannot. I observe with painful feelings the language 
used in both Houses of Parliament by eminent states- 
men about India, and the position we ought to occupy 
there. I see a disposition to regard all creeds as alike, 
and to speak of shasters and vedas as having the same 
authority as the Word of God. I see it questioned 
whether the Bible should be taught in schools main- 
tained by national money in India. "WTien I see all 
this, I think that coming events are casting their 
shadows before. There are unmistakeable premonitory 
symptoms of a great political crisis. There is a plain 
tendency to effect a separation between the church of 
Christ and the Government of England. The time is 
drawing near when the question will have to be decided, 
whether the country, as a country, and the government, 
as a government, shall recognize Christianity at all. 
There is in all this imminent danger. I say these 
things, not because I fear for the true Church of Christ, 



260 WHAT IS OTTE POSITIOIT. 

or for the Church of England, so long as she is faithM 
to her principles^ and so long as her clergy stand by the 
Word of God. But I say these things as an Englicdi- 
man who loves his country, and who sees in the separ- 
ation of Church and Etate evil to England, — no 
great harm to the true interests of Christ's cause, bat 
great harm to the land, as a land, and to the nation, as 
a nation. I believe that Qtod will be displeased ; and 
that when God is displeased with a nation, He has but 
to put forth His finger, and that nation shall pass away. 
To use the words of Dr. Owen, "If the rulers of a nation 
say, they have nothing to do with religion, God will 
quickly manifest that He has nothing to do with them." 
It is a solemn saying in God's word, " Amalek was the 
first among the nations, but his latter end shall be, that 
he perish for ever." 

Having now dwelt upon the position of the evangelical 
body, both as regards its reasons for thankfulness, and its 
reasons for alarm, I am desirous to impress upon my 
brethren the question, What use are we going to make of 
all that we have heard at the meeting of this week } 
What practical lessons are we going to carry away for 
our future conduct a* ministers of Christ ? I will first 
mention a few things which we ought to attend to 
individually, and then a few which we ought to attend 
to collectively. 

With respect to individual duty, I wiU first remark, 
that it is of great importance from time to time to recall to 
our minds the real nature of our work. We should re- 
member constantly the great ideal of what a Christian 
minister ought to be, sketched out in the sixth chapter 



WHAT 18 OUB posmoK. 261 

of the Acts : " We will give ourselyes to the Word of 
GK)d and to prayer." The preaching and expounding of 
the Word of God, with nothing added, and with nothing 
taken away, is beyond all doubt our principal business. 
But after that, we must never forget private prayer. It 
was said by an old writer that Luther's habits of private 
prayer, and John Bradford's habits of private prayer, 
were things more talked of than practised and imitated. 
Private prayer is one grand secret of the strength of the 
ministry. It is here that the roots of the ministry, 
practically speaking, are to be found. The ministry 
of the man who has gifts, however great, but who does 
not give the closet the principal place, must sooner or 
later become jejune and ineffective. At the same time 
we must take heed that we give due honour to the 
Word of God in our public ministrations. A thousand 
things continually call us away from this — committees, 
schools, lectures, visiting, and the like. But we must 
remember, that we are ministers of the Word of God — 
that our province is the Word of God — and that we 
must be very careM how we leave the Word of God to 
serve tables. 

I will remark, in the next place, that it is of im- 
mense importance that we should take heed to our own 
lives. I have been lately studying the lives and private 
habits of those men whom God raised up to be the re- 
vivers of the Church of England in the last century. 
I have been much struck with their self-denial, and 
entire devotedness to the work of the ministry. They 
were men who lived very plainly and simply, and 
did not seem to care much for anything bat their work. 



262 WHAT IS OTTR posmov. 

They were not diners out. They were not men who 
sought the entertainments of the great and the rich. 
"We should do well to consider whether we are living as 
near to God as they did. 

I will remark, in the next place, that we must take 
heed that we do not neglect own pulpit preparation. The 
matter and style of our sermons must he equal to the 
demands of the times. Ignorant and unlearned people 
may perhaps put up with anything in the way of preach- 
ing, but the more the people are trained by means of 
teachers and libraries, the more need there is to take 
heed to our preaching, in order that the pulpit of the 
Church of Englaad may not fall behind the times. 
There is danger on this point. Some may be ready to 
say at the end of the week, " I have been working for 
Gk)d the whole of the week. — I have been attending 
the school, visiting from house to house, distributing 
tracts, making speeches, delivering lectures ; and if my 
sermons on Sunday are not quite what they might be, 
at any rate I have not been idle." — ^We should remem- 
ber, that all work of this description, if it trenches on 
the preparation of our sermons, is work ill-spent. It 
is no excuse in the sight of God, if our sermons on 
Sundays are poor, because we have been working so 
hard all the week. What costs little is worth little. 
If a man comes to his Bible on the Saturday, takes the 
first text that occurs to him, puts a few thoughts to- 
gether, and then, trusting to his extempore powers, goes 
with that preparatijn only into the pulpit the next 
morning, we must not be surprised if the people com- 
plain of sameness in their pastor's ministrations. There 



WHAT IS OUB POSITION. 263 

never was a period when the pulpit demanded more 
preparation, more serious, hearty, studious preparation, 
at the hand of all God's faithful ministers. 

I will remark, in the next place, that we all need 
to be more careful in the emplojnnent of our time. 
There is a danger of trying to do too much. Some 
clergymen have so many irons in the fire that it is im- 
possible to keep them all hot. A few things well done are 
far better than twenty ill done. The man whose work 
will stand the longest, is the man who, whatever peo- 
ple may say, however lazy they may call him, deter- 
mines that he will not do more than he can do well, that 
he will not attempt more work than he can really do, 
and that he will not start more machinery than he can 
keep steadily going. 

I will remark, in the next place, that it deserves 
serious consideration, whether we give sufficient atten- 
tion to reading and study ^ in the present day. By all 
means let us put the Bible first, chief, and foremost, 
and make it our principal study. But I should be sorry 
if it came to be said that the ministers of the Church of 
England were ignorant men. I do not mean by the read- 
ing which I refer to, such reading as would lead us away 
from the Bible, but such as would help to the study and 
understanding of it. I do not mean that we ought to read 
things which do not throw light on the Word of Gbd. 
But I do say that, in the multiplicity of our engage- 
ments, there is great danger of forgetting that reading 
makes a " full man," and neglect of reading makes an 
empty one. Sorry should I be if the evangelical clergy 
of the Church of England were to get the character of 



264 WHAT IS otTBL posmoir. 

being men who read little, and took little pains to add 
new things to old. I am sure that Mr. Yenn will not 
say that his grandfather was not a reading man. No 
one will say that James Hervey was not a reading nmn. 
Of John Berridge, it was said, that there was no man 
in Cambridge who was better read on all subjects than 
he was; I must plainly give it as my opinion that 
clergymen who think there is no occasion for reading 
and study make a great mistake, and are likely to bring 
the ministry into great contempt. We ought to be 
familiar with books which throw light on our great 
work, and we ought to make time to read them. 

I wish, finally, to say a few words on our duty, not 
only individually, but collectively. For one thing, we 
ought, if possible, to keep up more union among onr- 
selves, from^one end of the kingdom to the other. Here 
is the great value of these clerical meetings. I hope 
that, ere long, there will not be a county where there 
is not such a meeting as that which we have attended 
this week. I do not see why we should not, in every 
county, collect together our little companies of ten, fif- 
teen, or twenty evangelical clergymen once every year, 
and take counsel together about the things of the com- 
mon Gospel in which we are concerned. I hope that 
the idea wiQ be taken up, and that we shall hear of the 
example set here, being carried out aU over the land. 

For another thing, we ought to try to improve, in 
some measure, the character and conduct of the meet- 
ings on behalf of religious societies. Persons are con- 
tinually complaining, on all sides, that such meetings 
are not what they used to be — that ihej are flailing 



WHAT 18 OUR POSITION. 265 

off in interest, in attendance, and in their results. 
Many are rising up in the Church of England — persons 
of knowledge, ftith, and grace — who say they never 
go to religious meetings, because they are so unprofi- 
table. Many say that our meetings consist of jokes 
about the ladies and the fair collectors, of references 
to thlB brother, and his usual eloquence, and to that 
speaker, with his ready facetiousness, and of compliments 
to everybody in turn. The upshot is, that many people 
are disgusted, and will not attend. This is a matter on 
which we ought to consider whether something cannot 
be done. Could there not be more solemnity, and 
vigour, and pith, and power about our meetings? 
Could there not be more co-operation and arrange- 
ment among speakers, one taking up this point, and 
another that ? Could not each bring something that 
costs something, and has taken time in the prepara- 
tion ? These things seem trifling to some. But they 
are not so. Public meetings supply the only opportunity 
when the evangelical clergy and many of the laity are 
brought together. The conduct of them is a matter 
that ought not to be overlooked. 

In the last place, I will urge you to do something 
towards bearing a public testimony on the important 
question, whether or not the state shall recognize Christi- 
anity, or cast it aside altogether. The India bill has 
forced the subject on us. A hundred and fifty millions 
of persons have been adopted and brought in as part 
of the British empire. On what principle are they 
to be ruled ? The East India Company being cast aside, 
and the Queen being now the governor of all that vast 



266 WHAT IS OUK POSITION. 

continent of Hindostan, are we to go among the people 
and say, practically, that we have left our Bibles 
and our Christianity at home ? It is ^ matter of great 
importance. I trust that none will fail to stir up their 
congregations and their parishes upon it, and to let 
the government know what a large body of the English 
people think respecting the future government of 
India. Surely we have a right to demand these^ three 
things : that the government shall not be ashamed to 
make the Bible an indispensable part of the instruction 
given in all schools maintained by them — that caste 
shall not be made a disqualification for having employ- 
ment under the state — that there shall be a thorough 
repudiation of any union between the government and 
idolatry in any form, directly or indirectly, in short 
that England shall have nothing to do with Indian 
idolatry. If government seems disposed to encourage 
neutrality, the ministers of the Church of England 
must not be guilty of the neutrality of being ashamed 
of Christianity. I hope that we shall be awake to the 
times in which we live, and shall endeavour to stir up 
the country, to make some public declaration about 
what we desire government to do, and what we protest 
against being done, in the new empire of Hindostan. 

We are living in troublous times. There are dangers 
ahead, which ought to turn every Christian heart to the 
sanctuary, crying, "0 Lord, spare us ; Lord, spare thy 
people, and give us thy blessing." These are not times 
in which men ought to get into their little parishes, 
and say they care not what goes on outside that ditch, 
or that wall, or that lane, which is the boundary of 



WHAT IS OTTE POSITION. 267 

their parish. We must have public feelings, and do 
our duty, and take our part against the common foes 
by which the Chjirch of England is in danger of being 
assailed. We must bear the kind of testimony which 
Jeremiah was called to bear in his time. We n^ust not sup< 
pose that anything will do except fighting, — ^not fighting 
with carnal weapons, but with the sword of the Spirit. — 
We nJtlst earnestly contend for the faith once delivered to 
the saints. All like peace and quietness. It is pleasant to 
sit under our own vine and fig-tree. But the times in 
which we live will not allow us to sit still. We must 
remember the Lord's word, " Think not that I come to 
send peace, but a sword ; " and the injunction which He 
once gave, ** He that hath no sword, let him sell his 
garment and buy one." It is hard to be ever fighting. 
But our forefathers won the Reformation through dangers, 
and we must strive to keep it, and hand it down to our 
descendants, whatever dangers we have to pass through. 
I will ask one favour in behalf of the brethren who 
have done the principal part of the labour in the meeting 
now nearly concluded. — We ask a special place in your 
intercessory prayers. You should consider the position 
in which we are placed. We are often put forward into 
positions which others perhaps would fill just as well, 
if they would but make the trial, and are deeply 
sensible of our own deficiencies. But still, being put 
forward in the forefront of the battle, we may surely 
ask for a special place in your prayers. We are only 
flesh and blood. We are men of like passions with 
yourselves. We have our private trials, and our special 
temptations. Often, while watering the vineyards of 



268 WHAT IS OUB POSITION. 

others, our own is comparatively neglected. Surely it is 
not too much to ask you to praj for us. Pray that we 
may be kept humble and sensible of our own weak- 
ness, and ever mindful that in the Lord alone can we 
be strong. — Pray that we may have wisdom to take the 
right step, to do the right thing in the right way, and 
to do nothing to cause the Gospel to be blamed. Pray, 
above aU, that we may go straight Oh, even unto the 
end — ^that we may never lose our first love, and go back 
from first principles, — that it may never be said of us, 
that we are not the men we once were, but that we 
may go on consistently and faithfully, die in harness, 
and " finish our course with joy, and the ministry which 
we have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel 
of the grace of God." 

In conclusion, I wiU remind you of the words which 
the Apostle addressed to the Ephesian elders : '* I com- 
mend you to God, and to the word of His grace." We 
are about to part, perhaps to meet no more in" this world. 
Let us solemnly commend one another to God, and to 
the word of His grace, as that which will never err, 
never fail us, never lead us astray. Guided by that 
word as our light and lamp, we shall at last receive an 
inheritance among them that are sanctified. Above all, 
let us never forget the advice which Whitefield gave in 
one of his letters, let us "make much of our Lord 
Jesus Christ." There are many things of which we 
may easily make too much in our ministry, give them 
too much attention, think about them too much. But 
we can never make too much of Christ. 



W. HUNT, STEAU PEE8S, IPSWICH. 



!AU the Publieationt in this Catalogue are 
at Ipswich. 



A CATALOGUE 



m Jtarfe k Mm MiimB, 



PUBLISHED BT 

TAVEKN STREET, IPSWICH. 



Bector qf Helminghamy Suffolk. 

Expository Thoufirlits on the Gospels. Designed 
especially for Family and Private Reading, with the Text 
complete. 

St. Hatthew. Extra cloth, price 6s. 

St. ICark. Uniform with the above. Price 58. 

St. Luke. Vol. I. Price 5s. 6d. 

St. liuke. Vol. n. Price 7s. 

St. John. Now in coarse of Pablication Monthly. 

The three former volnmes in Half Morocco, 78. 6d. ; Half 
Morocco extra, lOs. 6d. each volume. Vol. U. 8t. Luke, 98. 
and 12s. 6d. 



FublUhed by W, Munt^ JptwieK 



Home TratllS. B^ng miscdlaneons Addresses and Tracts, 
revised and corrected. 5th edition, Fcap 8to, extra cloth 
lettered. Illastrated with a fine Engraving of Helmingham 
Church and Vignette Title. Price 3e. 6d. 

Second Series. 2nd edition, enlarged. Illastrated with a 
view of Helmingham Bectory and emblematic Yignette. 
Price 3s. 6d. 

Third Series. 2nd edition. Dlnstrated with a view of the 

Interior of Hdmingham Church and l^gnette Title. Price 

3s. (id. 
Fourtil Series. With an Engraving of Helmingham Chnrch 

from the Park (North Side) and Yignette Title. Price 

3s. 6d. 
Fifth Series. With an Engraving of Hehningham Schools 

and Vignette Tide. Piice 38. 6d. 
Sixth Series. With an Engraving of Exbory Church and 

Vignette Title. Price Ss.ed. 
Seventh Series. With an Engraving of St. Thomas's Chnrch 

Winchester and Vignette Title. Price 3s. 6d. 

♦»• The above Work U also kept in Morocco^ Buttia, and other 
elegant Bindingt^/or present* : prices and specimens of which 
wiU be forwarded on application to the Publisher. 



Addresses to Children— in fancy Cover, each One Penny. 
Children Walking in Truth, 
liittle and Wise. 
No T/Lore Cxyinfir. 
Seekinsr the Lord Early. 
An Important Question. Are Ton Forflriven P 
Small paper edition with Notes. 48pp., fancy cover, gilt 
edges. Price 6d. 
Bishop Latimer. A Leotore delivered before the Chnrch 
of England Young Men's Society. In tinted wrapper. 
Price 4d. 
Baxter and his Times. A Lectnre delivered before 
the Yoong Men's Christian Association. In wrapper. 
Price 3d. 



Published by W. Sunt, Jpswieh, 



Expository Tracts. Twenty-four Eight-page Tracts, in 
large-type, — Selected from the Gospel of St. Matthew. Price 
Is. in packet assorted, or each Tract, Sixpence per dozen. 

CONTENTS. 

1. The Preaching that does 13. The Blind Men. 



Good. 

2. Who are Blessed ? 

3. The Law of God. 

4. What is the Lord's Prayer? 
6. The Sower and the Ground. 

6. The Wheat and the Tares. 

7. Walking on the Water. 

8. The Woman of Canaan. 

9. The Great Invitation. 

10. Christ's Transfignration. 

11. Forgiving One Another. 

12. The Bich Young Man. 



14. The Wedding Garment 

15. The Second Advent 

16. The Ten Virgins. 

17. The Talents. 

18. The Judgment Day ! 

19. Judas Iscariot 

20. The Lord's Supper. 

21. Peter's Fall. 

22. Christ's Sufferings. 

23. Christ's Resurrection. 

24. Some of Christ's Last 

Words. 



Faith's Choice. A Sermon on Heh. xi. 24—26. Price 6d. 
G-eorgre WhitefLeld. A Lecture delivered hefore the 

Church of England Young Men's Society. Price 3d. 
How should a Child be Trained P Being Thoughts 

on Proverbs xzii. 6. Neat wrapper. 5th edition. Price 3d. 

each, or 28. 6d. per dozen. 
Plain Speaking:. First Series. Being 40 short large-type 

tracts. Price Is. in Packet, or limp cloth. Is. 9d. 

CONTENTS. 

What is Man? 
What is God? 
Pardon 



Justification by Christ 

Hast Thou Faith? 

A Question of Life and Death 

A New Birth 

The Power of the Holy Ghost 

We Must be Holy 

The First Step 

What are You Waiting For? 

How was the Bible Written ? 

What is the Bible about? 

Saints are Sinners 

Faith and Assurance 

Are You Bom Again ? 

Caution about Baptism 

Think for Yourself 

Hold Fast 

No Gains without Pains 



The Bible way to Heaven 

Sincerity not Enough 

Useless kinds of Beligion 

Take Warning 

I Invite You 

The Happy Little Girl 

The Great Battle 

Be Armed 

The Cross of Christ 

How to Read the Bible 

Calvary 

Come and Rest 

Christ Crucified 

Encouragement to Pray 

The True Church 

Death 

Death-bed Evidences 

Fire! Fire! 

Heaven 

Thy Kingdom Gome. 





Plain Speakinsr. Second Series. Uniform with the above. 


Price Is. in packet, or limp cloth, Is. 9d. 


CONTENTS. 


A Christian i Fast Asleep 


An Apostle's Religion 


Needftd Knowledge 
What are we to Believe ? 


GuUty! Guilty! 


What is it to be Saved ? 


How do you use your Bible ? 


A Dead Man 


Have you an Appetite ? 


A Man Alive 


Prayer 


None bat Christ 


Do you belong to the True 
Church? 


Free Salvation 


Gospel Treasures 


Things in their Right Places 


The Royal Family 


Things that Differ 


Meetness for Heaven 


May we feel sure ? 

Is it Good to be Sure? 


The Man Christ Jesus 


The Power of Christ 


Marks of the Spirit 


The Gentleness of Christ 


Children of God 


How shall we Know ? 


Pardoned People 
Strong Consolation 


; Which Class? 


> Are There Few ? 


Privileges 


How Long Halt Ye? 


How to Meet Death 


Backsliders 


When will He Come ? 


Do not Linger 
Awake and Repent 


There's a Good Time Coming 




These Treats may he hcid separately, four page Tracts 3d. per 


dozen, eight page Tracts 6(2. per dozen,— but in quantities 


not less than I dozen of any Tract. 


Begreneratioii. A Tract for the Times. 104pp., Fcap 8vo. 


3rd ediUon. Price 6d. sewed; limp cloth. Is. 


Sabbatli Tracts. One dozen short Tracts on the Sabbath. 


In packet, containing two copies of each Tract Price 4d. 


CONTENTS. 


Why should we keep holy the 


When is God's Sabbath Pro 


Sabbath Day? 


faned? 


What is the Use of the Sabbath ? 


Read This 


How ought we to keep the Sab- 


Be not deceived. 


bath? 1 



Fubliahed by W. Hunt, Ipsuneh. 



Seed Com. Being an assorted Packet of One Hundred Hand- 
bills, containing 48 sorts. Price 8d. 

CONTENTS. 



Think 

Your Soul 

You are in Danger 

What are we ? 

What do we need ? 

What Sin has done 

In what do yon Trust? 

What is your Hope ? 

Are you in the Way? 

The Beginning 

Christ is Willing 

What is He like? 

Something for Everybody 

Found Dead 

The Great Change 

Who is your Father? 

What is Salvation? 

Are you a Saint? 

What must you do ? 

Have you heard the Good 

News? 
Are you Tired? 
Are you Converted? 
Shall you be One? 
You don't know 



Why not to day ? 

But when ? 

Only Try 

Give God His Day 

You must Pray 

Go and Pray 

Excuses 

Do yon Read it? 

Do you love your Bible ? 

Join the Church 

Come to Christ 

The Treasury 

The Ri^ht Way 

Seek Riches 

A Lasting Peace 

Hospitals and Asylums 

The Assizes 

The Eyes of God 

Little Sins 

The Two Systems 

Don't be Afraid 

Don't Laugh 

A Happy Man 

The Last Enemy 



Each Hand-bill may also be had separately , price Sixpence per 
Hundred. 

Spiritual Son^. Coloss. iii. 6. Being One Hundred Hymns 
not to be found in the Hymn Books most commonly used. 
Selected by the Rev. J. C. Byle. Eighth enlarged edition, 
glazed wrapper, 9d., fancy cloth, gift edges, la., or in Turkey 
Morocco, 2s. 6d. 

The Bishop, the Pastor, and the Preacher. In Three 
Biographical Lectures. With an Introductory Essay on 
some of the chief Wants of the Church of England in the 
present day. Extra cloth, price 28. 

What is Wanted P Being Thoughts and Suggestions on 
some of the chief Wants of the Church of England in the 
present day. Second revised edition. Price 4d. 

Toiinsr Hen Exhorted. A Sermon to Young Men. Fifth 
edition, 20th thousand. Foap 8vo, 68 pp. cloth extra, 1b.; 
neat wrapper, 6d. each. 



Published by W. Hunt, Jpawieh. 



TTNTFOBM SEBIES OF DUODECIMO TBAOT& 

At TWO SHILLINGS per Dozen, 

Are Tou an HeirP A Qaestion for Everybody. 6Ch 
edition, 30th thousand. 

Are ITou Forgriven P A Question for Everybody. 12ih edi- 
tion, 60th thousand. 

Are You Happy P A Question for Everybody. 4th edition, 
12th thousand. 

Are ITou Holy P A Question for Everybody. 12th edition, 
60th thousand. 

Are Ton Be^enerate P A Question for the Times. 6th edi- 
tion, 30th thousand. 

Be Zealons. Thoughts on Oal. iv. 18. 6th edition, 30th 

thousand. 
Beware I A Warning against Unsound Doctrine. Thoughts 

on Matthew xvi. 6. 3ra edition, 15th thousand. 

Consider ITonr Ways. A Pastor's Address to his Flock. 

9th edition, 45th thousand. 

Cross (the). 8th edition, 40th thousand. 

Do Yon Pray P A Question for Everybody. 22nd edition, 
110th thousand. 

Have Yon Peace P A Question for Everybody. 8th edi- 
tion, 40th thousand. 

Have Yon the Spirit P A Question for Everybody. 10th edi- 
tion, 50th thousand. 

Keep it Holy. A Tract on the Sabbath Day. 6th edition, 
30th thousand. 

liivinsr or Dead P A Question for Everybody. 20th edi- 
tion, 100th thousand. 

Lot's Wife. Being Thoughts on Luke xvii. 32. 4th edition, 
20th thousand. 

None of EOs I A Tract on the Work of the Holy Ghost. 
Thoughts on Rom. viii. 9. 3rd edition, 15th thousand. 

Ooonpy till I Come. A Tract for the Times. Thonghts 
on Luke xix. 11 — 13. 4th edition, 20th thousand. 

Peace ! be Still ! A page from our Lord's history. Thoughts 
on Mark iv. 37—40. 6th edition, 30th thousand. 

Bepent or Perish ! Thoughts on Luke xii. 3. 3rd edition, 
15th thousand. 

Blch and Poor. A Tract for the Times. 6th edition, 30th 
thousand. 



JPUbHshed by JF, Hunt, Ipswich, 



Shall ITou be Saved? A Christmas Qaestion. 12th edi- 
tion, 30th thousand. 

St. Peter at Antiooh. A Tract for the Times. 4th edi- 
tion, 20th thousand. 

Strive, llioughts on Luke xvi. 24. 4th edition, 20th thousand. 

The Beadinsr which is Blessed. Thoughts on Bev. i. 
1 — 3. 3rd edition, 15th thousand. 

Watch! Thoughts on the Parahle of the Ten Virgins. 
lOth edition, 50th thousand. 

Wheat or Chaif P A Question for Everyhody. Idth edi- 
tion, 65th thousand. 

What is IToiir Hope P A Question for Everyhody. 8th edi- 
tion, 40th thousand. 

Where are Your Sins P A Question for Everyhody. 6th 
edition, 30th thousand. 

At ONE SHILLING and SIXPENCE per Zhzen, 

A Word to the Churches. A Tract for the Times. 4th 
edition, 20th thousand. 

Able to Save. Thoughts on Heb. vii 25. 20th thousand. 

Christ and the Two Thieves. 11th edition, 55th thousand. 

Come I A Christmas Invitation. Thoughts on Matt. xi. 28. 

Do You Confess P A Question for Everybody. 4th edition, 
20th thousand. 

Is thy Heart Bigrht P A Question for 1860. 

'*He Whom Thou Lovest is Sick." A Tract for the 
Sick and Suffering. 3rd edition, 15th thousand. 

Only One Way. A Tract for the Times. Thoughts on 
Acts iv. 12. 8th edition. 40th thousand. 

Prove All Things. A Tract on Private Judgment. 8th edi- 
tion, 40th thousand. 

Remember Iiot. 12th edition, 60th thousand. 

Scattered and Gkithered. A Tract about the Jews. Being 
Thoughts on Jer. xxxi. 10. 

Where Art Thou P A Question for Everybody. 8th edi- 
tion, 40th thousand. 

At SIXPENCE per Dozen. 

Are Tou Asleep P 10th edition, 50th thousand. 
Are Tou Beady P 10th edition, 60th thousand. 
I Have Somewhat to Say unto Thee. 16th edition, 
80th thousand. 



JMaiahed by W. Hunt, Xptwieh. 



A Gxiide to Clmrohmeii about Baptism and Be- 
fireneration. 3d. each, or 28. 6d. per dozen. 

Asstixance. (2 Tim. iv. 6, 7, 8.) With Notes and Extracts 
from writers of the 17th century. 5th edition, revised and 
corrected. Ss. per dozen. 

Do Tou Want a Friend P A Question for Christmas. 

Is. per dozen. 4th edition, 20th thousand. 

How Beadest Thou P A Question for Everybody. 48pp. 
11th edition, 55th thousand. 3s. per dozen. 

Never Perish. Thoughts on Final Perseverance. (John x. 
28.) 4th edition, 20th thousand. 3d. each, or 2s. 6dperdoz. 

What is the Church P A Question for the Times. 6th edi- 
tion, 30th thousand. 3d. each, or 28. 6d. per dozen. 

TIU.NSLATI0NS. 

liivinsr or Dead P Rendered in French, by J. D. d2pp., 

Fcap 8vo, 3d. each or 2s. 6d. per dozen. 
liivinsr or DeCMl P Rendered into German. 3d. each or Ss. 

6d. per dozen. 
Only One Way. Rendered in French. 3d. each or Ss. 6d. 

per dozen. 

BT THE BEV. ERAITCIS STOBB, H. A., 

Vicar qf Brenchley^ Kent. 

The Christian Farmer. A Memoir of Mr. John Last, 

of Otley, Suflfolk. Cloth lettered, Is., or stiff cover, ftd. 
Scripture Characters. Practical Sermons for Home, ted 
thousand. Cloth lettered, 3s. 6d. 
Contents.— Balaam tampering with sin — Balaam reck- 
less in sin— Balaam's death— Micaiah the faithful prophet— 
Hiel the Bethelite — Naaman the leper— Naaman the healed— 
Naaman's doubt — Gehazi — Caleb — The misguided choice 
—Lot in Sodom— The intercession— The despised wamincr— 
Lot lingering— She looked back — Saul— Manasseh — Nehemiah 
—The fiery trial. 
Family Preacher. Short Practical Sermons for Home. 

Second edition. Cloth, 3s. 
Ghimall's Extracts. Comprising Illustrations, Pithy 

Sayings, &c. from " Gumall's Christian Armour." Is. 
Larffe Type Tracts for the Parish, 25 for 9d. 
Do as well as Hear. 30th thousand. 
Ood's Sabbriths Wasted. 135th thousand. 
The Bible is from God. 20th thousand. 
The Dregs of the Cup. 46th thousand. 
The Last Oath. 30th thousand. 



JPUblished by JF, Hunt, Jpnpich, 



On Confirmation. — Prove and Hold Fast, l^d. Hints to 
the Confirmed, with space for Name and Date of Confirma- 
tion, 25 for Is. 

Besponsibility, or Who Shed this Blood 7 Id. 

A Threefold Cord that Binds He to TSy Church. Id. 

Church Prayers— Heart Prayers, or. Forms not Formal. Id. 

Short Prayers for the Farm House. 2d. 



BT THE EEV. E. J. HOOB, H.A., 

Bector qf Great BecUings, Suffolk. 

David : Thoughts on his Character.lln a series of Seventeen 
Lectures. Foolscap 8vo., extra cloth, price 3s. 

Letters for the Poor, on Religions Subjects. Third edi- 
tion. Price 28. 

Six Village Sermons, On the Parable' of the Prodigal 
Son. Price Is. 6d. New Edition. 

The Wreck and the Bock; A Picture Parable. Illus> 
trated by thirteen Engravings. Cloth extra. Price 2s. Ad. 

The Harvest. Mowing— Reaping— Gleaning— and the Har- 
vest Supper. Extra cloth. Price Is. 6d. 

Twelve Plain Sermons, Preached in a Village Church. 
Third edition. Price 2s. cloth. 

Tracts on Common Things. Price 6d. in Packet assorted, 
or each tract 6d. per dozen. 



1. The House Clock 

2. The Candle 

3. The Looking Glass 

4. The Dwarf 

5. The Fire Place 

6. The Painted Post 



7. The Public Feast 

8. The Doctor 

9. The Babe 

10. The Kite String 

11. The Muddy Pond 

12. The Strong Shoes 



Prize Essays of the Suffolk Agricultural Association, on 
the Elevation, Improvement, and Education of the Working 
Glasses. By Mr. G. K. Cooper, and Mr. Robt Bond. Second 
edition. Is. 



10 JPuUuted by W. Hunt, Iptwieh. 



EXTRA CLOTH, PRICE 3b. 

THB 

"SCEIPTURE EXPOSITOR." 

VIR8T SBRIRS. 

Edited Yxy the Bev. 0. Holland, K. A., 

INCUMBENT OF SHIPLEY, SUSSEX. 

This Volume contains Expositions on important passttges qfScrip- 
ture, each concluding with a suitable Prayer, 



THE FOLLOWING CLEBGYMEN, WITH OTHBBS, ABE COMT&IBnTOBS 
TO THB WOBK. 

Bev. W. Gadman, m.a, Incmnbent of St. Geoi^e's, Southwark. 

Rev. F. Ganningham, Yicar of Lowestoft. 

Rev. W. Champneys, Rector of St. Mary's, WhitechapeL 

Rev. Oeorge Fisk, ll.b., Minister of Ghrist's Chapel, St. John's 

Wood, London. 
Rev. A. Hewlett, Incumbent of Astley. 
Rev. E. J. Moor, Rector of Great Healings. 
Rev. Montague Randall, Vicar of Langham, Norfolk. 
Rev. G. Shorting, Rector of Stonham Aspall. 
Rev. F. Storr, Vicar of Brenchley, Kent. 
Rev. C. B. Tayler, Rector of Odey, Suffolk, 



Contents :— The unfruitful fig tree spared another year 
— ^The judgment of Achan, a warning to sinners — ^Martha and 
Mary— The ships broken at Erion-Geber-Jacob wrestUng*- 
Onesiphorus— The widow of Nain— The passover— The Syro- 
phcenician's prayer— Sinners called to repentance— The cities 
of refuge— The day of pentecosfc— The brazen serpent— The 
Lord's Supper— Christ preaching at Nazareth— Elyah's request 
to Elisha— The separation day— The Christian's duty in trou- 
blous times— Gideon— Saints in glory— Manoah— The strong 
man of sin— Present soffBrings and fttture glory — The last 
words of David. 



FiMUhed hy W, Sunt, Ipswich, 11 



THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. I. bscond series. 
Contents : — Genesis — ^Tlie creatton — ^The Sabbath day — The first 
man's disobedience — ^The curse of the serpent — ^The jndgaoent of 
Adam and Ere — ^Man accepted by fldth — ^Ilie murder of Abel — 
Enoch walking with God — ^The world before the flood — ^Noah find- 
ing grace — ^Noah saved in the Ark — The rainbow — The building (rf 
Babel — ^The call of Abraham — ^Abraham a stranger in the Land of 
Promise — Abraham justified by &ith — ^Tbe covenant of circnmcisien 
— ^Abraham pleading for Sodom — ^Lot's son-in-law — ^Lot's wife — 
Just Lot delivered^— Abraham reproved by Abimelech — ^Abraham 
offering up Isaac. 

THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. II. 8Scoin> series. 

Contents: — Genesis — ^Hagar and Ishmael — ^Ataraham's servant-^ 
Jacob and Esau — Esau selling bis birth-right — Jacob's vision — 
Jacob serving Laban — Jacob preparing to meet Esau — Jacob 
returned to Bethel — Joseph hated by his brethren — Joseph in 
Egypt — Joseph exalted — Joseph declaring himself to his brethren 
— The last days of Jacob. 

Exodus. — ^The birth of Moses — Moses* choice — ^Moses and the 
burning bush — The return of Uoses to Egypt — ^Moses and Aaron 
before Pharaoh — The plagues of Egypt — The Passover — ^The pas- 
sage of the Israelites — The song of Moses — Manna in the wilderness 
— ^The rock that followed Israel. 

THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. III. second series. 
Contents : — ^Exodus — ^The uplifted hands — Jethro, priest of Midlan 
— ^The covenant of Sinai — ^The first commandment — ^The second 
commandment-— The third commandment-^The fourth command- 
ment — ^The fifth commandment — ^The sixth commandment — ^The 
seventh commandment — The eighth commandment — The ninth 
commandment— The tenth commandment — The altar of earth — 
The servant's ear bored — Capital crimes — Sundry laws — ^The 
angel of His presence — Offorings for the tabernacle — ^The Holy 
of Holies— -The golden candlestick — ^The altar of burnt offerings — 
The high Priest* s dreas— The golden eaiL 



12 Published by W, ffunt, Ipswich, 



THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. IV. second sbrixb. 
Contents : — Exodus. — ^Tlie Prayer of Moses — Show me thy glory. 
LEVincns. — ^The burnt offering — ^The meat offering — ^The peace 
ofliering — ^The sin and trespass offerings — Nadab and Abihn — 
The law of leprosy — ^The great day of atonement — ^The day of 
Jabilee — The cnrse and the blessing. 

NuMBEES. — The pillar of cloud and flre — ^Moses* invitation to 
Hobab— The mnrmarings of the Israelites — Miriam's envy and 
Moses' meekness — ^The good and evil report — ^The rebellion of 
Eorah — The brazen serpent — ^The way of Balaam — Balaam's 
prophecy. 

Deuteronomy. — The law repeated — ^The duty of reflection — 
The prophet like unto Moses — War. 

THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. V. second sebies. 
Contents: — Deuteeonomt. — The basket of flrst-fhiits — The 
curses of Israel fulfilled — ^The curse on Israel removed — ^Liffe and 
death, good and evil — ^Moses* last song — Moses blessing the twelve 
tribes — The blessings on the tribes — ^The death and character of 
Moses. 

Joshua. — Rahab the harlot — Crossing the Jordan — ^The taking 
of Jericho— The sin of Achan — The Gibeonites craft — The son 
standing still — The division of Canaan — The altar of the Renbenites 
— Joshua's last words. 

Judges. — ^The angel's visit to Bochim — Ehud and Eglon — 
Jael and Sisera — ^Thecall of Gideon — Gideon's victory — ^Abimelech 
— Jephthah's vow. 

THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. VI. second series. 
Contents: — Judges. — Manoah and the angel^^Samson — ^Micah 
and his gods — ^The Levite and his concubine. 
Ruth. — ^Ruth. 

1 Sahuel. — Hannah's prayer — Hannah's thanksgiving — Eli's 
sons — The call of Samuel — ^The ark of God and the Philistines 
— ^Ebenezer — ^The request for a king — Saul among the prophets 



JPublished by W. Sunt, Ipttoieh. 13 



— The good and the right way — Saul's first act of disobedience — 
Jonatlian and his armoar-bearer — Saul's second act of disobedience 
— ^The anoinUng of Darid — David and Goliath — Saul's Jealousy 
of David — David pursued by Saul — ^Nabal and Abigail — Saul and 
the witch of Endor — ^David greatly distressed. 

THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. Vn. bxcond sseixs. 

Ck)ntents: — 2 Sauuzl. — David lamenting Saul's death — David 
mourns for Abner — Uzzah and the ark of God — ^David desires to 
build a house to God — David's fall — ^David reproved by Nathan 
— David chastened — The bani^ed one restored — Absalom's rebel- 
lion — David's restoration — Satisfaction for the Gibeonites — ^Last 
words of David — David numbering the people. 

1 Kings. — The last days of David — Solomon's wisdom — ^The 
queen of Sheba — Solomon's fall — Rehoboam — Jeroboam — The 
disobedient man of God — Baasha and other kings. 

2 Cbboniclbs. — The temple of Solomon — ^Asa's reign, (Part 1.) 
Asa's reign, (Part 2.) 

THE SCRIPTURE EXPOSITOR. Vol. VIU. bbcond raaiBS. 
Contents: — 1 Kings. — Elijah and the Widow of Zarephath — 
Elijah and the Prophets of Baal — Go agahi seven times — El^ah's 
Request for Death — Ahab and Ben-hadad — Abab and Naboth's 
Vineyard — ^Ahab and Micalah. 

2 Kings. — Ely ah taken up to heaven — ^Miracles of Ellsha — 
Elisha and the Moabites — ^EUsha and the Shnnammite — ^Naaman 
the Syrian — ^The Siege of Samaria — Jezebel — Jehu's zeal tor the 
Lord — The Captivity of Israel — Josiah. 

2 Cbboniclbs. — Jehoshaphat— Joash and Jehoiadar— Amaziah 
— Hezekiah's good Reign — Hezekiah's Sickness and Prayer — 
Manasseh — ^The Captivity of Judah. 



Separate Volumes price 3s, each. The New Series of Eight 
Volumes in Cloth, 21s.,— or the Work cumpUte, Nine Vols. 24». 



14 



William Sunt, Ipswieh. 



SELECTION FROM THE PUBLICATIONS OF 
WEKTHEIM, MACINTOSH, AKD BJJWr, 

23, Hottes St., Cavendish Square ; ^ 34, Paternoster Bow, 

AND SOLD BY 

WTTiTiTAM HXTNT, 12, Tavern St., Ipswioh. 



PLTJCKLE Y TRACTS, On Scripture Characters, 

Nos. 1 to 18. Twenty.fiye for Is. 4d. 
fTo be continued.) 

BT THE BEV. ASHTOH OXEHDEN, K JL 



1. Adam; or, The Forfeited In- 

heritance. 

2. Gain and Abd; Infidel and 

Believer. 

3. Enoch; or, a close walk with 

God. 

4. Meihaselah ; or, Life's Pil- 

grimage. 

5. Noah ; or, the preaching 

Life. 

6. Abraham ; or Faith and 

Works. 

7. Lot ; or. The Unhappy 

Choice. 

8. Isaac ; or, the child of Pro- 

mise. 

9. Jacob ; or. The Wrestler 

with God. 

10. Joseph ; or. The Secret of 

True Prosperity. 

11. Job ; or, The Blessing of 

Affliction. 
13. Moses; or, the Faithftil 

Guide. 
13. Pharaoh ; or. The Gradaal 

Hardening of the Heart. 



14. Balaam; or. The Empty 

Wish. 

15. Joshua ; or, The Pious 

Officer. 

16. Samson; or, Man's Weak- 

ness and God's Strength. 

17. Bnth; or. The Moomer 

Comforted. 

18. £U ; or. Mistaken Kind- 

ness. 

19. Samuel; or. The Son of 

many Prayers. 

30. Saul; or. Misery in the 

midst of Greatness. 

31. David; or. The Man after 

God's own heart. (13 for 
Is. 4d.) 
23. Solomon ; or. The high one 
degraded. 

33. Elijah; or. The Fearless 

Man of God. 

34. Elisha; or, The lowly ex- 

alted. 

35. Hezekiah; or. The good 

King. 



*«^ The Tracts may also he assorted at the reduced ruU qf S 
/or l«.4rf. 



JFOiiam Sunt, Ipawich. 15 



By the same Author. 

Plain Prayers for Family Use. Second Edition. Fcap, 
cloth, 28. 6d. 

Pathway of Safety ; or, Counsel to the Awakened. Twenty- 
fourth thousand. 28. 6d. Morocco, 58. 6d. 

The Pastoral Office: Its Duties, Difficulties, Privileges, 
and Prospects. 3s. 6d. 

liabonrixLfir Man's Book. 158pp. cloth, price la. 6d. 

CONTENTS : 

The Labourer in his Tonth. 
„ Married. 

,. in the Management of his Children. 
„ at his Work. 
„ in his Home. 
„ in the World. 
„ in his Church. 
„ in Sickness. 
„ in old Age. 
„ ,, in Heaven, 

layers — For a Family. 
„ For Private Use. 
„ For a Sick Person. 

The Earnest Communicant. A Course of Preparation 
for the Lord's Table. Cloth, Is. ; morocco, 2s. 6d. 

Cottaere Sermons ; or, Plain Words to the Poor. In Two 
Series, each, 2s. 6d. 

Abridgrement of the Sunday Services: a Simple Plan 

for elt'ecting it. 6d» 
Short Services for School-Boom and Cottage Lectures. 2d., 

or cloth, 4d. 
Fourfold Picture of the Sinnec 4d. 

Cottasre Family Prayers. Eighth Edition. Price 3d. or 

2s. per dozen. 
Barham Tracts. Complete in 49 Nos. Price 3s. in packet. 
Oottagre Beadinfirs. The Barham Tracts complete. Nos. 1 

to 49. Bound in cloth. Price Ss. 6d. 



WOBKS BT 0. W. HTLNE. 

Plain Words for the Sick and Affed: being Nos.! to 
48 of ** Plain Tracts in Large Type." 2 vols. Cloth, 2s. each. 



16 William ffunt, Ipatvieh. 



By the same Author^ 

Ohildren of the Old Testament. 18mo. Cloth, 28., with 
Engrayings. 

Contents :— The Child Moses— The Child Samuel— The 
Child Mephiboshetb— The Child Ab^ah— The Children at 
Bethel— The Shunammite's Son— The Child Joash. 

Ecdlesiastes ; or Lessons for the Christian's Daily Walk. 
Second Edition. 2s. " The tone is healthy, the inferences 
are plain, and eminently practicaL" — Educational Mevieto. 
" A work of great practical yalae." — Christian Lady's 
Magazine. 

Prayers for Inquirers of all Classes, (see page 18.) 

'Fear Not.' Third edition. 3d. ; cloth, 6d. 

Intercessory Prayer : its Duties and Effects. Fourth edi- 
tion. Is. 

The Sick Boom : or. Meditations and Prayers, in the simp- 
lest form, for the use of Sick Persons. Specially adapted 

• for Patients in Hospitals. Second thousand. 12mo. Large 
type. Stiflf Covers. 6d. 

Family Prayers, in the Simplest Langnafire. Fourth 

edition. Large plain type. 3d. 
Thonsrhts for Spare Moments at Sea. A Series of 

Short and plain Tracts for Seamen. In Packet, price 4d., or 

cloth limp, 6d. 

By the same Author : Plain Tracts in Larse Tsrpe. 
In FacketSf price 9d. each. 

CONTENTS op PACKET I. Are you uot a siuuer ? Sinner, there's 
a Saviour. Do you know what you worship ? Praying in 
Spirit. The Tables of Stone, and Tables of Flesh. Bom 
again. " Where is he ? " Rising from the Dead. " The Books 
were opened." Prayers for those who are beginning to think. 
Believing with the Heart. The Bereans ; or. True Nobility. 

CONTENTS OF PACKET II. How do you bear your Trials? 
Which was happy? Prayers in Sickness for the Children 
of God. Helps to prayer. Godly sorrow Comforted. Filthy 
Garments taken away. A Few Thoughts about the Holy 
Spirit. The I^ord's Supper. The Lord's Day. Thou, God, 
Seest me. Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay. The Lost Axe-head. 



WUluim Sitntj Ipatcieh., 17 



CONTENTS OF PACKBT III. The Lord will Provide. How Long 
have you been Sick ? Is your Foot upon the Ladder ? The 
Candlestick and the Two Olivetrees. The Ethiopian Con- 
vert. Words from the heart I Hope you never Tell Lies. 
The Paralvtic Man. Jon^ in the Ship. Jonah inside the 
Great Fish. Jonah in Nineveh. Jonah in the Booth. 

CONTENTS OF PACKET IV. Christian Tempers ; or, the Meek- 
ness of Wisdom. Living Bread and Living Waters. Lying 
Vanities. The Young Man whose Eyes were Opened. The 
Flying RolL The Man whose Eyes were Put Out. Enoch ; 
or, Do you walk with God ? What Master do you serve ? The 
Eyes Twice Opened. The Two Crucified Thieves. Paul 
and Silas in Prison. The Man whom the King delighteth 
to Honour. 

CONTENTS OF PACKET V. What is your Burden 7 Vain Ex- 
cuses. Why is thy Countenance Sad 7 The day of Small 
Things. Lodging within Jerusalem. Daniel in the Lions' 
Den. The Works that God requires. Paul the Tent Maker. 
Wash you, and Make you clean. God Keeping Silence. The 
Death of Aaron. Manaen, Herod's Foster-brother. 

Each Tract can be had separately ^ in any quantity, Id. each ; 
or9d.per dozen. 

Also, by the same, in Packet, 6d. each. 

Scarlet Sins made White as Snow. She could not Bepent. 
The Serpent's Bite. Too Late after Death. Zaccheus in the 
Tree. Tne Shying Horse. She did not know she was a 
Sinner. What is Chance ? 

*«* Each Tract may be had separately, price Id. 

Also, by the same. Plain Words for Wayfiaringr 
Men. A Series of Short Papers. Nos. 1 to 24, in a packet, 
3d. ; or cloth, 6d. 
"I am a Working Man: I have no time to Pray." Do you 
know that you are a Sinner? Have you got a Bible' 
How do you begin the day ? Thoughts of Peace. Halt- 
ing between two opinions. Times of Ignorance. The 
Leper Cleansed. The Sabbath Breaker. The Drunkard 
Reformed. Good News from a Far Country. The Lep- 
rosy. The way to Read the Bible. " Have you a New 
Heart?" On Swearing. On Telling Lies. "I don't get 
on." "Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me?" Monday 
Morning. Toung Man beware of Drink ! Toung Woman 
beware of Dress. The Serpent of Brass. The Broad 
Boad. Do you wish to be Tacght ? 



18 WiXUam BwU, Iptwieh, 



i^vasetst. 



The Book of Pamily Prayer: A Goarae of Original 
Prayer for every Morning and Evening in the Tear : arranged 
in the Order of the Ecclesiastical Tear. By Clergymen of 
the Church of EngLmd. Edited by Bev. C. J. Goodhart and 
Bev. C. Holloway. Third edition. 4to. pp. 956. Cloth. 35s. 

Daily Devotions for Youngr Arsons ; consisting of 
Counsels on Prayer, with Morning and Evening Prayers 
for a Fortnight ; and others for special occasions. Is. 6d. cloth. 

Daily Prasrers for the Sick and Snfferinfir; with Oc- 
casional Prayers, Select portions of Scripture, and Hymns. 
8vo. 8d. 

Daily Prayers for Youner OhUdren, Written by a 
Father for his children. d2mo. Cloth limp. 6d. 

Eigrhteen Prayers, with Texts and Hymns for Private Use. 
6d. 

Family Prayers. By Bev. A. Oxenden and Bev. G. H. 
Bamsden. 2s. 6d. 

Family Prayers, in the Simplest Language. Large Type. 
By G.W. Mylne. 3d. 

Family Prayers fbr a Fortnight, with occasional Ad- 
ditions, a Selection of appropriate passages of Scripture, 
and an Index of Subjects. By H. N. Champney. Is. 

Family Prayers, with Meditations and Hymns, 
suitable to every Christian Family. By Bev. A. Toplady. 
Is. 6ct 

Family Prayers for a Week. 3d. 

Family Prayers for Passion Week. 6d. 

InfjEbnt Altar; or Hymns and Prayers, in exceedingly 
simple Language, intended for very young Children. Is. 

I ffa m ial of Short Prayers for Private Devotion. 
By Bev. Abner W. Brown. 6d. : cloth. Is. 

Plain Prayers for Everyday Use. Boyal 32mo. Cloth, 
Id. Paper, Id. 

Prayer (A). " O Ood give me grace," &c. 32mo. Card. Id. 

Prayer for Mominar and Evexiingr. Stiff cloth. Id. 

Prayer for Momingr and Evening. On a Card. Id. 

Prayer fbr 1860. By Bev. J. C. Btle. Is. per 100, or 2d. 
per dozen. 



WUliam Hunt^ IptwkK 19 



Prayers for Every Day in the Week; for the use 
of Week-day and Sanday Schools. By £. H. 4d. 

Prayers for India.— id. 

Prayers for Inanirers of all Classes : and for Be- 
lievers in Many States of Mind. By O. W. Mylnb. Cloth, 
2s. 6d. 

Prairers for the Chamber of SickneBS.>-By T. B. Y. 
8yo., cloth, Is. 6d. 

Prayers Selected firom the Ijiturgy of the Chnroh 
of Eziflrland. Designed for Family Worship. By Bey. 
Denis Browne. 4d., doth, 6d. 

Prajers for Little Children. By Bey. W. W. Ghampneys. 

Prayers for a Child, Morning and Evening. By the late 
Rev. John Fry. 2d. 

Private Devotions at the Psalmist's Honrs of 
Prayer. Designed chiefly fur seasons of triaL 3s. 

Private Prayers for the use of Children, with daily 
Texts for a Month. Id. 

Private Prayers for Cottagers. By Bev. A. Ozanden. 
ld.,or25for Is. 4d. 

Cottasre Family Prayers. By Bev. A. Ozenden. 2d., or 
Is. 4d. per dozen. 

Scriptural Prayers, Desigmed for Family Worship, 
with Introductory Remarks on Forms of Prayer, and an ex- 
hortation to more general Prayer. 9d. ; without the Exhor- 
tation, 4d. 

Short Prayers for Cottagers. Fcap. Id. 

Short Prayers for the Use of the Cottager and his Family. 
Square 18mo. 3d. 

Short Prayers fbr Bvery Day in the Week ; to he 

used either in the Family or in Rivate. By Bev. B. Shep- 
herd. 2d., or Is. 6d. per dozen. 
Ten Prayers for Children and Young Persons. Id. 



ON THE SABBATH, AlH) ATTENDANCE 
AT PUBUC WOBSHIP. 

Your Place in Church is Empty. A Word to my Neigh- 
hour, who neglects the Worship of Ood in his House. 
Price Id. 



20 William Sunt, Ipswich. 



By the same Author. 

Sabbath Sellinfir, and What is the End of it. id., 

or 25 for Is. 4d. 
Sabbath Buyingr, and What is Lost by it. Id., or 25 

for la. 4d. 
" O Yes ; I go to Ohnroh Sometimes." By the Aathor 

of " The Idle Comer." Id., or 25 for Is. 4d. 
Who are most to Blame, Buyers or Sellers 7 id. 
Why don't you come to Ohnrch in the Momingr 

as well as the Afternoon P 2d., or 12 for is. 9d. 
" They would not Come ; " or, a Word of Warning to 

Five Million Souls. Id., or 25 for is. 4d. ; or in quantities 

of not less than 100, 4s. 
Old Peter Fions; or, Go to Church Regularly, and you 

won't like to miss. Being Conversations taken from Beal 

Life. 2d. 
God's Sabbaths Wasted. 38. per 100. 
How shall I spend Sunday P id., or 25 for is. 9d. 
Next Sunday I How shall I Spend next Sunday ? Id. 
The liOrd's-Day; or. Christian Sahbath. Why it must he 

kept holy, and How. By the Rev. D. J. Patterson. Price 

3d., or 12 for 2s. 6d. 
Make the Most of it ; or, A Few words about Sunday. Id. 
Great Blches ; or. What we Get by Going to Church. Id., 

or 25 for is. 4d. 
Mary Dawson. "Remember that thou keep holy the 

Sabbath day." Id., or 25 for Is. 4d. 
A few Remarks on the Sabbath and Christian 

Ordinances. By a Clergyman. Id. 
What the Village Weathercock saw on Sunday 

Morning:. Id. or, 25 for Is. 4d. Also, 

The Villasre Weathercock's Lament over Com- 
munion Sunday. Id., or 25 for Is. gd. 

What the Villaere Weathercock likes to See and 
Hear in the Coneresation. id., or 25 for is. 9d. 
Hints on Public Worship, and the Observance of the 

Sabbath. From a Clergyman to his Parishioners. 2d. 
Sabbath in Piedmont, id. 
Holiness to the IjOrd; or Hints to Church-goers, from 

their Minister. New Edition in large type. 23rd thousand. 

4pp. 4s. per 100. On Card, Id. 



WiUiam Sunt, Ipswich. 21 



Common Prayer : An Address to the Silent Worshipper 

in the House of God. Id., or f s. per 100. 
The Sabbath a Day of Blessingnei. By the Bey. B. 

Shepherd, M.A. Id., or 25 for Is. 4d. 
A Call to the House of God, and a Word on the Sab- 
bath. By the same. Id., or 25 for Is. 4d. 
Come to Church, is. per 100. 
' The liOrd's Sigrn.' A Tract on the Sabbath for the People. 

2d. 
The Sabbath : Whose is it? By the Bev. G. A. Bogebs. 

Id., or 26 for Is. 4d. 
Sunday Bobberies I A Tract on Sunday Pleasure-taldng. 

Id. 
Keep it Holy I A Tract on the Sabbath-day. By the Bev. 

J. C. Byle, B.A. 2d. Also, 
One Dozen Short Tracts on the Sabbath, in packet. 

By the Bev. J. C. Byle, B.A. Price 4d. 
The Sunday Question considered in the Light of Holy 

Scripture. By the Bev. W. J. Eidd. 3d. 
The Sabbath made for Man. A Sermon. By the Bev. 

CD. Bell. 3d. 
Sunday Becreations ; a few Questions to be Considered 

before we begin them. By the Bev. D. Moore, M.A. 3d., 

or 28. 6d. per dozen. 
The Sabbath was Made fbr Man. The Substance of a 

Sermon. By the Bev. W. Webster, M.A. 4d., or 2s. 6d. per 

dozen. 
'Will a Man Bob Gk>dP' A Question for the Members 

of the National Sabbath League, and others. By the Bev. 

T. Pbeston, M.A. 2d. 
The Lord's Day and the Working: Classes. 6d. per 

dozen. 
Word's of Warning: on the Neglect of Public worship. 

Id., or 25 for Is. 4d. 
The Sabbath : a few thoughts on its Principle and Spirit. 

By the Bev. G. D. Mabstov. Id. 
A Word with you about your Sabbaths. An Ad- 
dress by Bev. L. Moobb. Id., or 6d. per 100. 



22 WiUum Bunty Ipauneh. 



ON BAPTISM. 

Hath this Child been already Baj^tised or NoP or, 

Friendly Instructions to Parents aboat to bring their 
Children to Baptism. By the Author of " Tour Place in 
Church is Empty." 2d., or Is. 6d. per dozen. 

Parents God's Nurses, a Gift at the Font By the Bev. F. 
Morse, M.A. 2d. 

" I Can't find it in the Bible." (Infant Baptism.) Id., 
or 25 for Is. 4d. 

A Short Catechism, explanatory of the Questions and Ans- 
wers on Baptism in the Catechism of the Church of Eng- 
land. By the Rev. B. Bichinos. Id., or 25 for Is. 6d. 

The PaithfOl Sponsor : a Village Dialogue concezning 
the Duties of God-Fathers and God-Mothers. Price l^d. 

A Sponsor's Duties; or, a Clergyman's Voice from the 
Baptismal Font On a Card. Id. 

Kind Words to the Flook about Infont BH»tism. Id., 
or 5s. per 100. 

IniSBtnt Baptism and Confirmation. Id. 



ON CONFIBMATION. 

Confirmation; or. Are yon ready to serve Christ? By the 
Bev. A. OxBNDEN. 3d., or, 2s. 6d. per dozen. 

Confirmation ; or, Whom will you serve. Id. 

Confirmation; — ^What is it? Some Conversation on the 
Subject between Plain People. Id. 

Confirmation ; or, a Scene from the Organ Gallery. Price Id. 

Confirmation ; or, thoughts for a Solemn Hour. Price Id. 

Confirmation ; or, the Citizen of Zion taking up his Free- 
dom. By Bev. Canon Champneys, M.A. Sd. 

Confirmation; or. What is your Motive? A Ministerial 
Letter to a Young Parishioner. Id. 

Confirmation. An Address to parents and Young Persons. 
By Bev. W. Habbison. Id. 

Confirmation. Seven Plain Paragraphs for Candidates. 
8d. per dozen. 

Confirmation. By Bev. G. Holland. Id. 

Confirmation Admission Cards, with spaces for the Church, 
Name of Candidate, &c., &c. 9d. per dozen. 



WUUam Eunt^ Ipstoieh, 23 



An Address on Confirmation. B7D.Mbrbdith,M.A. 
l^d, orlOs.perlOO. 

A Oateohlsm for Candidates. Compiled from Leotores. 
By Rev. T. Yobbs. 3d. 

Decision of Buth. ; An Example to the Toang. By Bev. 
G. CoLB. 18mo. 18. 

The New Covenant : or Self-dedication at Confirmation- 
Id. 

A Manual of Confirmation, with Explanations of the 
Church Catechism, the Confirmation Service, and the Arti- 
cles of Religion ; with Psalms and Hymns, Prayers, &c. By 
Rev. W. Stonb. 8d. 

Three Plain Seasons why you should be Confirmed. 
By the Aathor of " How shall I oome to the Table of the 
Lord?" &c. Id. 

A Short Catechism on Confirmation. By Rev. Arch. 
HoNB. 3s. per 100. 

Prove and Hold Fast ; or, The Rite of Confirmation. IJd. 

The SprinerinfiT Up of the Willows ; or, the Devotion 
of the Youthful Heart to God. By Rev. J. S. Sbbjbant. 2d. 

liectnres to Candidates for Confirmation. By Rev. 
G. R. MoNCRiEFF, M.A. 4d. 

Confirmation. A Dialogne. By the same Aathor. Price Id. 

Confirmation Questions. By the same. id. 

Confirmation Records. By the same. Is. 6d. 

A-n Instruction preparatory to Confirmation. By Rev. W. 
Meaba. 2d. 

Do yon intend to give yonrself to Ood P or, a Fas- 
tor's Appeal to the Young of his Flock at the Season of 
Confirmation. By the Rev. W. W. Woodhousb, M. A. 2d. 

The Soldier trained for the Confiict ; or Ten Scripture 
Lessons preparatory to Confirmation. With Preface, hy 
Rev. W. Maesh, D.D. 3d. 

Kind Words to the Flock ahont Confirmation. Id., or 
5s. per 100. 

Ati Address to a Young Person on the subject of Confirma- 
tion. By Rev. Canon Woodroofpb. Id. 

A Short Catechism on Confirmation. By Rev. J. K. 
Tucker. 2d. 

A Help to Persons preparing for Confirmation. By Bev. 
G. A. Sbtmoub. 2d. 



24 William Hunt, Ipameh, 



Questions and Answers. Intended to serve as a Text-book 

for the Use of Candidates, l^d. or Is. 4d. per dozen. 
Questions for Candidates to Answer on their Knees before 

God. 3d. per dozen, or Is. 9d. per 100. 
A Pastor's Advice after Oonfirmation. (Printed on 

fine paper, with space left to write the name of the person 

confirmed, the Church in which the confirmation was held, 

and the name of the Pastor.) Id. 
A Pastor's Letter after Confirmation. On fine paper, 

and with similar spaces. Id. 
The liOrd our Portion : an Address to Toong Persons 

lately Confirmed ; containing a Summary of Christian Faith 

and Duty. ByBev. W.J.Denman. 2d. 
A Short Address to those who have been Oonfirmed. 

By the Bev. J. Bickebsteth, M. A. Id. 
The Vow Oonflnned. A Plain Address to Tonng Persons 

before Confirmation. 2d. 
The Vow Performed. A Short and Plain Address to Tonng 

Persons after Confirmation. By the Bey. J. W. Berbyman, 

B.A. Price Id. 
Hints to the Confirmed, id. 

An Address to those who have been recently Con- 
firmed. By the Bey. J. 8. Sebjeant. 48. per 100. 



TBACTS ON THE LOBD'S STJPPEB. 

"How shall I come to the Table of the liOrd P" 

15th Edition. 2d. 
The Nefirlected Command. "This do in Bemembrance 

of Me." Id. 
The liord's Invitation to his Table. By the Author 

of " Your Place in Church is Empty." 2d. 
The liOrd's Supper. By the Bev. C. D. Mabstgn. Id. 
** This Do ; " or, a Command that few People obey. Id. 
" How often shall I come to the Table of my 

liOrdP" Price Id. 
The Lord's Table. By the Author of " What Aileth Thee ? " 

&c. 2d. 



William Sunt, Ipauneh, 25 



The Lord's Supper a Feast for the Weak Believer. 

Price Id. 
The liOrd's Supper; or, Who are the Welcome Oaests? 

Id., or 25 for Is. 4d. 
A Leaf firom the Prayer Book; or, Church of England 

Teaching on the Lord's Supper. Id. 
The Villaere Weathercock's Lament over Oom- 

munion Sunday, id., or 25 for Is. 9d. 
Friendly Advice on the Lord's Supper. By the 

Rev. Richard Shephebd. Id. 
Plain and Short Instructions on the Sacrament 

of the Lord's Supper; with an Address to Different 

Characters. By the Rev. J. B. Burnett. 3d. 
Charles Melbourne ; or. Am I fit to come to the Lord's 

Table? Id. 
The Christian Feast. By Henrietta M.Lutwidge. 2d. 
I am Not Fit; or, A Common Excuse for Neglecting 

the Lord's Supper. Price Id. 



ON PTJBITY. 

The Social Evil practically Considered. A paper 
read at a Meeting of the Lay and Clerical Union. By J. C. 
Whitehguse, Esq., B. A., of the Middle Temple. Price 3d. 

A Plain Tract on a too Common Sin, addressed to 
Parents and Masters, and to Youth and Servants. Id. 

Bitter as Worm'tirood. id. 

Flee firom It : A Caution, suggested by reading Oenises 
xxxiv. 2d., or Is. 9d. per dozen. 

Honest Advice to Young Englishmen, from a Friend. Id., 
or 9d. per dozen. 

Kind Words to the Young Women of England, on a yery 
Serious Subject. By a Lady. Id., or 9d. per dozen. 

Klatrimonial : being the Life of Jane Newhammer, of Man- 
chester. 3d. 

KCother's Care for her Daughter's Safety, id., or 9d. 
per dozen. 

New Grave, (The). A True Story. 25 for Is. 4d. 

Poor Mary. 32mo. 3d. per dozen. 

Transgressions of the Seventh Commandment 
condemned in the very Words of Scripture. Id. 



26 WUHam Sunt, Ipswieh. 



Who shall See GodP A Word of Warning, and a Word of 
Hope. Id. 

Words of WaminfiT addressed to Yoong Men jfrom the Cells 
of a Prison ! By a Prison Chaplain. IJd., or 10s. 6d. per 100. 

Zimri and Cozbi ; or, a Word of Warning against their Sin. 
By a Clergyman. Id. 

Oottagre Beadinfirs. The Barham Tracts complete. Nos. 
1 to 49. By Bev. A. Oxendbm. Bound in cloth. Ss. 6d. 

Clerical Beadingr : Being Suggestions on the Beading of 
the Liturgy, with Examples of Misplaced Emphasis in the 
Beading of the Scriptures, and on the Composition and De- 
livery of Sermons. By H. N. Champnet. Cloth. Is. 

The Hiflrh Priesthood of Ohrist. By the Author of "Eng- 
lish Synonymes." Dedicated by permission to tJbie Arch- 
bishop of Dublin. Fcap. cloth limp. Is. 

The Words She Wrote; or, The Blood-stained Leaf. A 
true story of two Highlanders at Lucknow. By the Bey. 
B. L. Witts. 18mo. 3nd edition. Is. 

Darkness and Ijifirht ; or, brief Memorials of two Blind 
Deaf Mutes ; with facts relating to the origin of Moore's 
System of Beading for the Blind. Illastrated with embossed 
specimens. By Mrs. W. Fison. 12mo. 6d. 

Why do the Servants of the 19th Century Dress as they 
do ? Illustrated by incidents from real life. 8yo. 6d. 

Why do the Ladies of the 19th Century Dress as they 
do ? Illustrated by incidents from real life. 18mo. 6d. 



MISCELLAITEOTJS ITEW WOBKS. ^. 

Memorials o^an TndiaTi Missionary; Or, A Memoir 
of the Bey. Michael Wilkinson, Missionary, C.M.S. Com- 
piled by a Member of his Family, with Selections from his 
Published Works, and Letters from Natiye Conyerts. With 
Introduction by Bey. B. Whytehead, m. a. Fcap. 48. 6d. 

My Counlary : The History of the British Isles. By £. S. A. 
Author of*^ The World in which I Liye," &o. 
Part I. The Early History of the British Isles. Is. 
Part n. The Dark Ages of the British Isles. Is. 
Part IIL The Beformation in the British Isles. In Feb- 
ruary. 



WUUam Munty Jpnoieh. 27 



History of a Yonnff Jew. Adapted for Children; by the 
Author of " The Peep of Day." New Edition, cloth. Is. 

Colportase : its History and Belation to Home and Foreign 
Evangeuzation, with some Remarks on the Wants and Pro- 
spects of our Country. By Mrs. William Fison. Crown 
8vo. 5s. 

Baiihby Hall : or, Memorial Sketches of BOBERT CARR 
BRACKENBURT, Esq., and of Sarah, his Wife ; throughout 
which are interspersed Short Notices of several Enunent 
and Pious Individuals, combining also a Selection from the 
correspondence of Mrs. Brackenbury. By Mrs. Richard 
Smith, Author of " A Memoir of Mrs. Adam Clarke," etc., 
etc. Crown Syo. Cloth. 2s. 6d. 

A Iffannal on the Ixuspiration of Seripture. By Rev. 
C. Dallas Marston, Incumbent of Christ Church, Dover. 
Cloth. 2s. 6d. 

'* Heaven our Home ; " or. Memorials of Sarah C. 
Gathered chiefly from her own Letters. 9d. 

Thouarhts in Verse for the Hard Working and Snf- 
farinfir. Price 2d., or 15s. per 100 ; and in Cloth, price 4d 

Memoir of tlie Life and Times of the Bey. Jere- 
miahL Horr<»c, Curate of Hoole, near Preston, 1639 ; to 
which is appended a Translation of his celebratsd Discourse 



upon the Transit of Venus across the Sun. By the Rev. A. 
B. Whatton. Crown 8vo. 38. 6d. 
Shadows of Jesus. Sunday Readings for Children on the 
Personal Types of the Lord Jesus Christ Fcap. cloth. 2s 6d. 

" I Will." Being the determinations of the man of Ood, as 
found in some of the '* I wills ' of the Psalms. By the Rev. 
P. B. Power, Incumbent of Christ Church, Worthing. 5s. 
Extra cloth. 

Beflected Truth; or. The Image of God, Lost in Adam, 
ilestored in Jesus Christ. By the Rev. Edward Girdle ■ 
STONE, M. A., Canon of Bristol, Reetor of Wapley, Glouces- 
tershire. Price 4s. 6d. 

Brook Farm : The amusing and memorable of American 
Country Life. By Rev. J. Bolton. Royall6mo. Cloth. 28. 6d. 

Children's Bible Lessons ; or. Type and Anti-type. By 
Harriet A. D. Thorn. 18mo. Cloth. Is. 6d. 

The Blind and their Books. With some account of 
Laura Gntzlaff. 16mo. Cloth. 6d. 

World in which I Ijive, and my Place in it. A 

Universal History, for Young Persons, from the Creation to 
the present time. By E.S. A. Edited by Rev. J. H. Bboomb. 
A new Edition. Revised and Improved. 78. 6d. 



28 William Sunt, Ipswich. 



Armageddon; or, A Warning Voice from the last Batfle- 
field of Nations, proclaiming by the Mouths of Prophets 
and Apostles, that the close of the Times of the Oentiles, 
the Second Personal Advent, and Millennial Beign of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, are nioh kt hand. In 
3 vols. 8vo, with Appendix. By a Mastbb of Asts of the 
University of Cambridge. £3. 

iThe Valour of Faith. ; or, the Gospel in the Life of Gideon. 
By the Rev. G. A. Rogers, Incumbent of St. Luke's, Hol- 
loway. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 2s. 6d. 

Popular Outlines of the Press ; Ancient and Modem; 
or, a Brief Sketch of the Origin and Progress of Printing, 
and its Introduction into this Country, with a Notice of the 
Newspaper Press. By Charles A. Macintosh. Cloth, Ss. 

Fragments of the Gbreat Diamond, Set for Toung 
Children: Being a variety of Addresses to Children. By 
Rev. J. Bolton, M.A., Kilburn. 2ud Edition, 18mo.*. 
cloth. ls.6d. 

Heavenward Thousrhts for Christian Households. Being 
Reflections for Daily Use, on a " Family's Texts for the 
Year." By D. O. H., with Preface by Rev. Canon Champ- 
neys. Rector of Whitechapel. 3s. 

The Way Home; or, the Gospel in the Parable. An 
Earthly Story with a Heavenly Meaning. By Rev. C. Bul- 
lock, M. a., Curate of Luton, Beds. Second edition, ds. 6d. 

Lovingr Counsels. Being Rollecections of Sermons 
preached by Rev. T. Vores, M. A., St. Mary's, Hastings. 
By a Member of the Congregation. Crown 8vo. Second 
edition. Revised by the Preacher. Cloth, 4s. 6d. 

Faith's Trial; or, Abraham's Trial Practically Applied. By 
the late Rev. £>. F. Jarman, Minister of Bedford Episcopal 
Chapel, Bloomsbury. 3rd Edition. Foolscap 8vo. Cloth, Is. 

lii^ht at Eventide. A Narrative of Lydia M., a Converted 
Jewess. Cloth, Is. 

liossons of liife for Female Domestics. By Grand- 
father Gray. Foolscap 8vo. Cloth, 4s. This volume abounds 
with suggestions for the moral guidance and encourage- 
ment of servants, is especially adapted for a present to young 
females about to leave school and home for service, and wiU 
be found an interesting addition to domestic libraries. 

liandmarks of Faith. Chapters intended for the Comfort 
of the Doubting, the Fearful, and the Bereaved. By Bev. 
W. S. Lewis, Incumbent of Trinity Church, Bipon. Small 
Svo., cloth, 3s. 6d. 

Gospel Unities. Practical Remarks on Eph. iv. 4—6, By 
Rev. J. Richardson, M. A., Incumbent of St Mary's, Bury 
St. Edmund's. 12mo. 2s. 



Wiliiam Hunt, Ipawieh, 29 



liife in Italy and France in the Olden Time. By J. Camp- 
BRLL CoLQUHouN, Esq. Svo., cloth. lOs. 6d. 

Contents :— I. Girolamo Savonaroa. II. Olympia Morata. 
ni. Marguerite d'Angooleme. lY. Jeanne d'Albret, Qneen 
of Navarre. 

The Christian Visitor's Companion. A Manual con- 
taining Scripture Readings, with Expositions, Prayers, 
and Hymns. Intended chiefly for those who visit where, 
through physical or other causes, the public means of grace 
are unattainable. By Bev. A. N. Beamish, B. A. Post 8vo., 
cloth, 4s. 6d. 

Dail3r Expositions of the Acts of the Apostles. With its 
Scripture Portion in ftill. (Adapted for the Use of Families, 
and of convenient length for use at Family Prayers.) By 
the Rev. Babton Bouchieb, A. M., Rector of Fonthill 
Bishop, Wilts. In 1 vol., cloth, 78. 6d. 

Scripture ninstrations. By an Eye Witness. 12mo., 
cloth. With Engravings. 

Contents :— The Covenant of Saltr— Mount Lebanon- 
Lebanon and its Cedars— The Olive Tree — "Lattices' — 
The "Khans"- The Heath in the Desert— The Roofed 
Houses— Water Wheels— The " Horn "— " Veils "—Feast of 
Tabernacles — Smyrna— Damascus — Patmos- " Water Bot- 
tles"— The Fig Tree —" Cisterns ' —The Dessert. Is. 6d. 

Christ is All. By the Venerable Abchdeacon Law. The 
Gospel of the Old Testament. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, 
Numbers, and Deuteronomy, each, 3s. 

Little Annie; or, Is Church Time a Happy Time? 18mo. 
Is. 6d. 

Scripture Portions, with Prayers for Invalids. By Eliza- 

V brth Mabia Lloyd. Is., cloth. 

Sunday School Addresses. By T. P. Ship, Superintend- 
ent of Kennington Sunday School. With a Preface by Rev. 
Chablton Lane. ISmo., cloth, with Engravings. 2s. 

Contents:— The Little Child. The Race. David and 
Goliath. The Gospel Net. Vineyard Work. The Four 
Little Things. Zaccheus. The Little Captive Maid. The 
Prodigal Son. The Gospel Feast. The Two Hearts. Little 
Samuel. 

Sunday School Addresses. By the same Author. 2nd 
Series. 2s. 

Contents :— The Young Soldier of Christ— The Child's 
Invitation — Idols — ^The History of Joseph — ^Ditto (continued) 
—Seed Time and Harvestr— The Palm Tree and its Lessons 
—Good News for Children— The Wonderful Present^The 
Way to be Happy— Youthful Hossannaa— The Gospel Lad. 
Witb Engravings. 



30 WUliam Hunt, Ipswich. 



Isaiah's Beport of the Messiah, as Bevealed in the 
Fifty-third Chapter of his Prophecy. Expomided upon a 
Publication by Bev. T. Manton. Revised and Edited by T. 
M. Macdonooh, Perpetaal Curate of Bransgore, Hants. 5s. 

Maxnzua's liessons about Jesus. By a Mother. 2s. 6d. 



Glizupses of Heaven ; or, Evening Meditations for every 
Sunday in the year. 32mo., cloth, gUt edges, Is. 6d. ; cloth, 
limp, Is. 

Qood out of Evil; or. The History of Adjai, the African 
Slave Boy: an Authentic Biography of the Bev. S. Cbow- 
THBB, Native Missionary in Abbeokuta. With a Map. 2s. 

The Book of Job. Translated from the Hebrew on the basis 
of the Authorised Version. Explained in a large body of 
Notes, and Illustrated by Extracts from various Works on 
Antiquities, Geography, Science, &o. ; also, by Eighty Wood- 
outs and a Map. By tiie Bev. 0. P. Caret. 8yo., cloth, IBs. 

Bible Cartoons for the School and the Cottage. 

A suitable Sunday Book. Consisting of Twenty-four well- 
executed Engravings, designed by John Franklin. En- 
graved by NicBOLLS. 4s. 6d., clotii, or paper cover, Ss. 

Eveningr Home Circle ; or. Social Study in the Gospel 
History of the Life of our Lord : consisting of forty-two 
cards, accompanied by Mimpriss's Chart of our Lord's* Life 
and Ministry. 48. 6d. 

Meditationes Hebraicse : a Doctrinal and Practical Ex- 
position of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews. By the 
Bev. W. Tait. 2 vols., 178. 

The Bible Student's Guide to the More Correct Un- 
derstanding of the English Translation of the Old Tor- 
ment, by reference to the Original Hebrew. By the Bev. W. 
Wilson, D.D. 4to., cloth, £2 2s. ; calf, interleaved, je3. 

A Choice Book for the People of Gk>d; or, Scrip- 
ture Collated with Scripture. 2nd Edition, with additional 
Texts and many Explanatory Notes. 18mo. Cloth limp. Is. 
Paper, 6d. Calf, gilt edges, 2s. 

The Two Brothers and the Two Paths. By the Bev. P. B. 
Power. Is. 6d. 

BreathinfiTS of the Soul. By the Bev. P. B. Power. 6d. ; 
cloth, Sd. 

Failure and Discipline. By the Bev. P. B.Power. Is. 6d. 

Protoplast. A Series of Papers. Second Edition. In 1 vol. 
Clotb, 9s. Ad. 

Contents : — The First Matter— The First Day — The 
First Man— The First Blessing— The First Sabbath— The 
First Law— The First Sleep, &c., &c. 



WilHam Hunt, Ipawieh, 31 



Our Infirmities. Matt viii. 17. 13mo. By the same Au- 
thor. Is. 

Snatolies of Sacred Songr. 18mo. By the eame Author. Is. 

Goads and Nails | or, Missionary Counsels and Encourage- 
ments for the Young. Selected and Edited by the Bev. 
J. Montagu Randall. Is. 6d. 

The liambs of Ghrist's Flock. With Engravings. 6d. 

The Folded Lamb : Memorials of an Infant Son. By his 
Mother. With a Preface by his Father, Bev. G. A. Bogbbs. 
With a Portrait. 28. 6d. 

The Shepherd Kingr; or, Jesus seen in the life of David. 
Designed for the Young. By the same Author. 3s. 6d. 

The Footprints of Jesus. By the same. Vols. 1 and 2, 
each, Is. 6d. 

Thirza ; or, the Attractive Power of the Cross. Translated 
from the German. Nineteenth Edition. 6d. Cloth, Is. 

Sermon Notes, by the late Bev. Professor Scbolrfield. Us. 

The Miracles of onr Lord and Saviour. With Notes 
and Reflections. By the Rev. J. W. Reynolds. Os. Od. 

Outline of English History in Verse. By H. L. 
Square 16mo. Is. 6d. cloth. 

The Catechism of the Church of Engrland Ex- 
plained and Illustrated by Scripture References and His- 
torical and other Anecdotes. By Bev. J. K. Tuckbb, b. a. 
Limp cloth. Is. 

Grumblers Look at Tour Uercies. 2d. 
By the same Author , 

Old Peter Pious ; or, Go to Church Regularly, and you 
won't like to miss. 2d. 

Sam Selfish; or, Charity begins at Home. By Author of 
" Old Peter Pious." 2d. 

Solomon Sobermind ; or, Look before you Leap. 3d. 

What shall I Wear P A word for Toung Women. 2d. 

Hiffh-Spirit) (Mrs.) or, My Mother said "I was bom with a 
Temper." 2d. 

We are all GK>od-Tempered Till we are Tried. 2d. 

City Thoufirhts : being Short Tracts on Common Things. 
IBmo. Id. each, or 0s. per 100. 



1. The Omnibus. 

2. The Royal Procession. 

3. The Book-stall 

4. The Dust-Heap. 

5. The London Shops. 

6. The Postman. 



7. The Railway Station. 

8. The Gas Lamp. 

9. The Picture Gallery. 

10. City Streets. 

11. London Fogs. 

12. The Market. 



32 William Sunt, Ipatoieh, 



Short Tracts for Uotliers. 18mo. 25 for Is. 4d.; or, 
in an assorted packet, 4d. 



1. " Give an Account of thy 

Stewardship." 

2. Fraying MotJiers. 

3. " In the Morning Sow thy 

Seed." 



4. Shine as Lights in your 

Families. 

5. Parental Affection. 

6. Cast thy burden upon the 

Lord. 



Perseverance and w^hat came of it : A Sketch of 
the Life of George Stephenson. Frice 2d. 

Village of Gnunbleton, and its Inhabitants. By 
Bey. C. H. Bahsden, M. A. 

By the Bev. James Bolton :— 

The Favoured Colt. 
Little Vessels. 
The Babe and His Friends. 
Our New and Better Home. 



The Fleet of Fishing Boats. 
The Troublesome Member. 
Happy Bhoda. 
Our Fathers and Mothers. 



Price Twopetice each, in fancy cover. 

Qospel Tracts by Mrs. P. H. Gosse. In Packets of 100 

assorted. Is. 6d. 
Scripture Stories for Children. By Miss Parbott. 

Two Packets, each containing Twelve Stories, with Dlustnu 

trations. Price Is. 

Forty-Eight Missionary Stories for Children. By 

Harriet d'Oyly Howe. In Packet, each Story Illustrated 
by an Engraving. Price Is. 

Twenty-Fonr Stories for Sunday Scholars. By 
Harriet d'Oyly Howe. In Packet, each book Illustrated. 
Price Is. 

Wertheim's Illnstrated Beward Cards. With Ques- 
tions on back. First, Second, and Third Series. Each 
Packet price 6d. 

Scripture Questioning Cards, for the use of private 
Families and Sunday Schools. The Questions in a distinct 
book and enclosed in Packet. Price Is. 6d. 

Seward Pictures, Illustrating the Book of Proverbs. In 
Packet. Price Is. 

Wertheim's Packets of Assorted Tracts. Series First, 
Second, and Third. Each 2s. 

Wertheim's Assorted Packets of Beward Books 

for Children. Containing 12 Two-penny Books. Is. 6d. 
12 Four-penny Books. 3s. 6d. 

Tracts for the Toungr. In Six Packets. Assorted. Price 
3d. each. 



