^Jamm  assocIateofDl,Jl{oody^3ible  scholar^ 
\Bible3istitutehuilden,  andBvanyelist  - 

! R.A^rreyD.D. 


GOIJLD  LIBRARY 
EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 


'f.Hstfrn  t 


/ 


'l^/?';'  'r.  ■ 


'.f 


•n-V 


/ 


r 


\; 


t 


How  to  Obtain 


FULLNESS  OF 
POWER 


r 

By  R.  A.  TORREY 
ff 


Author  of 

What  the  Bible  Teaches,  How  to  Work  for  Christ, 
How  to  Pray,  The  Holy  Spirit:  Who  He  Is, 
and  What  He  Does,  etc. 


'*God  hath  spoken  once;  twice  have  I heard  this; 
that  power  belongeth  unto  God.” — Psa.  62:11. 

”Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his 
might.” — Eph.  6:10. 

‘Ye  are  strong,  and  the  word  of  God  abideth  in 
you.” — I John  2:14. 

“Strengthened  with  power  through  his  Spirit  in 
the  inward  man.” — Eph.  3:16,  R.V. 


SWORD  OF  THE  LORD  PUBLISHERS 

Wheaton  Illinois 


Copyright  1897,  by 

FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 

This  edition  published  by  SWORD  OF  THE  LORD  PUBLISHERS, 
Wheaton,  Illinois,  by  agreement  with  Fleming  H.  Revell 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


From  many  earnest  hearts  there  is  rising  a cry  for  more 
power;  more  power  in  our  personal  conflict  with  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  Devil;  more  power  in  our  work  for  others. 
The  Bible  makes  the  way  to  obtain  this  longed-for  power  very 
plain.  There  is  no  presumption  in  undertaking  to  tell  "How 
to  Obtain  Fullness  of  Power  in  Christian  Life  and  Service”; 
for  the  Bible  itself  tells,  and  the  Bible  was  intended  to  be 
understood.  The  Bible  statement  of  the  way  is  not  mystical  nor 
mysterious;  it  is  very  plain  and  straightforward.  If  we  will 
only  make  personal  trial  of  "The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God,” 
"The  Power  of  the  Blood  of  Christ,”  "The  Power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,”  "The  Power  of  Prayer,”  "The  Power  of  a Surrendered 
Life,”  we  will  then  know  "The  Fullness  of  Power  in  Christian 
Life  and  Service.”  We  will  try  to  make  this  plain  in  the  fol- 
lowing chapters. 

The  present  volume  has  been  written  partly  in  response  to 
a request  from  some  who  have  used  the  author’s  book,  How 
to  Bring  Men  to  Christ,  that  he  would  write  another  book  for 
use  in  the  training  of  those  who  have  come  to  Christ.  But  the 
book  has  also  another  and  far  more  important  purpose.  There 
are  many  who  do  not  even  know  that  there  is  a life  of  abiding 
rest,  joy,  satisfaction,  and  power;  and  many  others  who,  while 
they  think  there  must  be  something  beyond  the  life  they  know, 
are  in  ignorance  as  to  how  to  obtain  it.  This  book  is  written 
to  help  them. 


3 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/howtoobtainfullnOOtorr 


CONTENTS 

Chapter  I.  The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God  7 

Chapter  II.  The  Power  of  the  Blood  of 

Christ 19 

Chapter  III.  The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  . 31 

Chapter  IV.  The  Power  of  Prayer 57 

Chapter  V.  The  Power  of  a Surrendered 

Life 69 


5 


•■  ■'  / ;• , 


:•'.  ■■■tv/ 


. ■'■  ■■  -i  ■ *■;- 


'■"’Wii 


CHAPTER  I 


The  Power  of  the  Word 
of  God 

Po]FER  BELONGETH  unto  God.”— Pss..  62:11. 
The  great  reservoir  of  the  power  that  belongs  to  God  is  His 
own  Word — the  Bible.  If  we  wish  to  make  it  ours,  we  must 
go  to  that  Book.  Yet  people  abound  in  the  church  who  are 
praying  for  power  and  neglecting  the  Bible.  Men  are  longing 
to  have  power  for  fruit-bearing  in  their  own  lives  and  yet  for- 
get that  Jesus  has  said:  "The  seed  is  the  word  of  God”  (Luke 
8:11).  They  are  longing  to  have  power  to  melt  the  cold  heart 
and  break  the  stubborn  will,  and  yet  forget  that  God  has  said: 
"Is  not  my  word  like  as  a fire?  . . . and  like  a hammer  that 
breaketh  the  rock  in  pieces?”  (Jer.  23:29).  If  we  are  to 
obtain  fullness  of  power  in  life  and  service,  we  must  feed  upon 
the  Word  of  God.  There  is  no  other  food  so  strengthening. 
If  we  will  not  take  time  to  study  the  Bible,  we  cannot  have 
power,  any  more  than  we  can  have  physical  power  if  we  will 
not  take  time  to  eat  nutritious  food. 

Let  us  see  what  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  do. 

1.  First  of  all,  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  convict  of 
sin.  In  Acts  2:37  we  read, 

"Now  when  they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their 
heart,  and  said  unto  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles, 
Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?” 


7 


8 


Fullness  of  Power 


If  we  look  back  and  see  what  it  was  they  heard  and  that 
produced  this  deep  conviction,  we  find  that  it  was  simply  the 
Word  of  God.  If  you  will  read  Peter’s  sermon,  you  will  find 
it  one  of  the  most  biblical  sermons  ever  preached.  It  was 
Scripture  from  beginning  to  end.  It  was,  then,  the  Word  of 
God,  carried  home  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  pricked  them  to 
their  heart.  If  you  wish  to  produce  conviction,  you  must  give 
men  the  Word  of  God.  I heard  a man  pray  some  time  ago 
this  prayer,  "O  God,  convict  us  of  sin,”  a very  good  prayer, 
but  unless  you  bring  your  soul  in  contact  with  that  instrument 
which  God  has  appointed  for  the  conviction  of  sin,  you  will 
not  have  conviction  of  sin.  If  you  wish  to  produce  conviction 
in  others,  you  must  use  the  Word  to  do  it. 

Not  long  ago  a fine-looking  young  man  came  into  our 
inquiry-room.  I said  to  him:  "Are  you  a Christian?” 

"No,  sir.” 

"Why  not?” 

"I  think  Christianity  is  a first-rate  thing,  but  I have  not  much 
feeling  about  this.” 

"But,”  I said,  "do  you  not  know  that  you  are  a sinner?” 

He  said:  "Yes,  sir,  I suppose  I am;  but  I am  not  very  much 
of  a sinner.  I am  a pretty  good  sort  of  a fellow.” 

I replied:  "So,  my  friend,  you  have  not  very  much  convic- 
tion of  sin.  I have  something  in  my  hand  that  is  a divinely- 
appointed  instrument  to  produce  conviction  of  sin.”  I opened 
my  Bible  to  Matthew  22:37,  38  and  asked  him  to  read  it.  He 
read,  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  ail  thy  mind.  This  is  the  first 
and  great  commandment.” 

"What  commandment  is  that?”  I asked. 

He  replied:  "The  first  and  great  commandment.” 

"In  the  light  of  that,  what  must  be  the  first  and  great  sin?” 
He  replied:  "It  must  be  to  neglect  to  keep  that  command- 
ment.” 


The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God 


9 


"Have  you  kept  it?” 

The  Spirit  of  God  took  it  home  to  his  heart  then  and  there. 
It  was  not  long  before  we  were  kneeling,  and  he  was  asking 
God  for  mercy  through  Christ. 

2.  In  the  next  place,  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  regen- 
erate. In  I Peter  1:23  we  read, 

"Being  bom  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incor- 
ruptible, by  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for 
ever.” 

In  James  1:18  we  read, 

"Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  tvith  the  word  of  truth, 
that  we  should  be  a kind  of  firstfruits  of  his  creatures.” 

If  you  wish  to  be  born  again,  the  way  is  very  simple.  Take 
the  Word  of  God  concerning  Christ  crucified  and  risen,  and 
drop  it  into  your  heart  by  meditation  upon  it.  Look  to  God 
by  His  Holy  Spirit  to  quicken  it,  believe  it  with  the  heart,  and 
the  work  is  done.  If  you  wish  to  see  someone  else  born  again, 
give  him  the  Word  of  God.  The  process  of  regeneration  on 
our  side  is  the  simplest  thing  in  the  world.  On  God’s  side  it  is 
mysterious,  but  with  that  we  have  nothing  to  do.  The  process 
is  simply  this:  the  human  heart  is  the  soil;  you  and  I are 
sowers;  the  Word  of  God  is  the  seed  which  we  drop  into  that 
soil.  God  quickens  it  by  His  Holy  Spirit  and  gives  the  increase 
(I  Cor.  3:6).  The  heart  closes  around  the  Word  by  faith, 
and  the  new  life  is  the  product.  The  new  birth  is  simply  the 
impartation  of  a new  nature,  the  impartation  of  God’s  nature. 

But  how  are  we  made  partakers  of  God’s  nature?  Read 
II  Peter  1:4  (R.V.)  and  the  context:  "That  through  these 
[exceeding  great  and  precious  promises]  ye  may  become  par- 
takers of  the  divine  nature.”  That  is  all  there  is  to  it.  The  Word 
of  God  is  the  seed  out  of  which  the  divine  nature  springs  up 
in  the  human  soul. 


10 


Fullness  of  Power 


3.  Again,  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  produce  faith. 
In  Romans  10:17  we  read, 

"So  then  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the 

word  of  God." 

You  can  never  get  faith  by  merely  praying;  you  can  never 
get  it  by  any  effort  of  the  will;  you  can  never  get  it  by  trying 
to  pump  it  up  in  any  way.  Faith  is  the  product  of  a certain 
cause,  and  that  cause  is  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  so,  for  example, 
with  saving  faith.  Suppose  you  want  a man  to  have  saving 
faith.  Simply  give  him  something  definite  from  God’s  Word 
upon  which  he  can  rest.  The  Philippian  jailer  asked,  "Sirs, 
what  must  I do  to  be  saved?”  (Acts  16:30),  and  Paul  an- 
swered, "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved,  and  thy  house”  (Acts  16:31).  But  Paul  did  not  stop 
there.  Read  verse  32,  "And  they  spake  unto  him  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  and  to  all  that  were  in  his  house.”  They  did  not 
merely  tell  the  Philippian  jailer  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  then  leave  him  there  floundering  in  the  dark  with- 
out giving  him  something  to  believe,  or  something  for  his  faith 
to  rest  upon.  They  gave  that  which  God  has  ordained  to 
produce  faith. 

It  is  at  this  point  that  we  often  make  a mistake.  We  tell 
people,  "Believe,  believe,  believe,”  but  do  not  show  them  how, 
do  not  give  them  anything  definite  to  believe.  The  biblical 
way  and  the  intelligent  way  is,  when  you  tell  a man  to  believe, 
to  give  him  something  to  believe.  Give  him,  for  example, 
Isaiah  53:6,  and  thus  hold  up  Christ  crucified;  or,  give  him 
I Peter  2:24.  Here  he  has  something  for  his  faith  to  rest  upon. 
Faith  must  have  a foundation.  Faith  cannot  float  in  thin  air. 
It  is  pitiable  to  see  men  told  to  believe,  to  believe,  to  believe — 
and  then  give  nothing  to  rest  their  faith  upon. 

Not  only  saving  faith  comes  through  the  Word  of  God,  but 
prevailing  faith  in  prayer  does  also.  Suppose  I read  Mark  11: 


The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God 


11 


24,  "What  things  soever  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  believe  that 
ye  receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have  them.”  I used  to  say,  "The 
way  to  get  anything  I want  is  to  believe  I am  going  to  get  it.” 
I would  kneel  down  and  pray  and  try  to  believe,  but  I did  not 
get  the  things  that  I asked  for.  I had  no  real  faith.  Real  faith 
must  have  a warrant.  Before  I can  truly  believe  I am  to  re- 
ceive what  I ask,  I must  have  a definite  promise  of  God’s  Word, 
or  a definite  leading  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  rest  my  faith  upon. 

What,  dien,  shall  we  do?  We  come  into  God’s  presence. 
There  is  something  we  desire.  Now  the  question  is.  Is  there 
any  promise  in  God’s  Word  regarding  this  which  we  desire? 
We  look  into  the  Word  of  God  and  find  the  promise.  All  we 
have  to  do  is  to  spread  that  promise  out  before  God.  For  ex- 
ample, we  say:  "Heavenly  Father,  we  desire  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Thou  hast  said  in  Thy  Word,  'If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how 
to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children:  how  much  more  shall 
your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
him?’  And  Thou  hast  said  again  in  Acts  2:39  that  'the  prom- 
ise is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar 
off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call.’  I am  a called 
man;  I am  a saved  man.  And  here  I have  Your  word  for  it. 
You  have  promised  it.  I ask  Thee  now  to  fill  me  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.”  We  then  take  I John  5:l4,  15,  and  say,  "Father,  this 
is  the  confidence  I have  in  Thee,  that,  if  I ask  anything  accord- 
ing to  Thy  will — and  I know  that  this  is  according  to  Thy  will 
— ^Thou  hearest  me,  and,  if  I know  that  Thou  hearest  me,  I 
know  that  I have  the  petition  that  I have  asked  of  Thee.”  Then 
I rise  up,  standing  upon  this  promise  of  God,  and  say,  "It  is 
mine.”  And  it  will  be  mine.  The  only  way  to  have  a faith  that 
prevails  in  prayer  is  to  study  your  Bible,  and  know  the  promises, 
and  lay  them  before  God  when  you  pray.  George  Mueller  is 
one  of  the  mightiest  men  of  prayer  in  this  century.  But  he 
always  prepares  for  prayer  by  studying  the  Word  (John  15:7). 

It  is  just  the  same  with  the  faith  that  we  desire  instead  of 


12 


Fullness  of  Power 


doubt.  This  also  comes  by  the  Word  of  God.  Suppose  you 
have  a skeptic  to  deal  with,  and  you  wish  that  man  to  have 
faith.  What  will  you  do  with  him?  Give  him  a book  on 
Christian  evidences?  I have  nothing  to  say  against  books  on 
Christian  evidences.  But  there  is  an  inspired  Book  on  Christian 
evidences,  and  it  is  worth  all  the  libraries  ever  written  on  this 
subject.  Turn  to  John  20:31,  "But  these  are  written,  that  ye 
might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God;  and 
that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name.”  Clearly, 
then,  this  Book  of  John  was  given  that,  through  what  is  "writ- 
ten” therein,  men  "might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God;  and  that  believing  they  might  have  life  through 
his  name.”  The  Gospel  of  John  is  an  inspired  book  on  Christian 
evidences.  What,  then,  shall  we  do  with  ourselves  if  we  are 
skeptics?  What  shall  we  do  with  others?  First,  find  out  whether 
their  will  is  surrendered  or  not.  "If  any  man  willeth  to  do  his 
will,  he  shall  know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  is  of  God,  or 
whether  I speak  from  myself”  (John  7:17,  R.V.).  After  the 
will  is  surrendered,  just  say,  "Take  this  book  and  read  it 
thoughtfully  and  honestly  and  come  back  and  tell  me  the  re- 
sult.” The  result  is  absolutely  sure. 

There  is  no  man,  agnostic,  infidel,  or  whatever  you  please, 
whose  will  is  surrendered  to  the  truth,  who  will  take  this  Book 
to  God  and  ask  Him  to  give  him  light,  who  will  not  come  out 
believing  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  I have  tried 
this  with  I know  not  how  many  men  and  women,  and  there 
has  never  been  one  exception  to  the  rule  laid  down  by  Christ. 
It  has  always  come  out  the  same  way. 

The  faith  that  gets  the  victory  over  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  Devil;  the  faith  that  wins  mighty  victories  for  God, 
is  also  through  the  Word.  (I  John  5:4;  Eph.  6:l6;  Heb.  11: 
33,  34). 

Very  early  in  my  ministry  I read  a sermon  by  Mr.  Moody. 
In  it  there  was  something  to  the  effect  that  a man  would  not 


The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God 


13 


amount  to  anything  if  he  had  not  faith.  I said,  "That  sermon 
is  true.  I must  have  faith.”  I went  to  work  and  tried  to  work 
up  faith.  I did  not  succeed  a bit.  The  more  I tried  to  work  up 
faith,  the  less  I had.  But  one  day  I ran  across  this  text,  "So 
then  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of 
God”  (Rom.  10:17),  and  I had  learned  the  great  secret  of 
faith,  one  of  the  greatest  secrets  I have  ever  learned.  I com- 
menced to  feed  my  faith  on  the  Word  of  God;  and  as  I have 
thus  fed  it,  it  has  kept  on  growing  from  that  day  to  this.  So  in 
every  aspect  we  see  that  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing 
by  the  Word  of  God.  If  we  are  to  have  faith — and  if  we  are 
to  have  power  for  God,  we  must  have  faith — we  must  feed 
steadily,  largely,  daily  upon  the  Word  of  God. 

4.  In  the  next  place,  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  cleanse. 
In  Ephesians  5:25,  26,  we  read, 

"Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  also  loved  the 
church,  and  gave  himself  for  it;  that  he  might  sanctify  and 
cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word.” 

The  Word  of  God  has  power  not  only  to  take  impurity  out 
of  the  heart,  but  to  cleanse  the  outward  life  as  well.  If  you 
wish  a clean  outward  life,  you  must  wash  often  by  bringing 
your  life  in  contact  with  the  Word  of  God.  If  one  lives  in  a 
city  whose  atmosphere  is  polluted  with  smoke,  when  he  goes 
into  the  street  his  hands  will  become  black.  He  must  wash 
frequently  if  he  wishes  to  keep  clean.  We  all  live  in  a world 
whose  atmosphere  is  polluted,  a very  dirty  world.  As  we  go 
out  from  day  to  day  and  come  in  contact  with  this  dirty  world, 
there  is  absolutely  only  one  way  to  keep  clean,  and  that  is  by 
taking  frequent  baths  in  the  Word  of  God.  You  must  bathe 
every  day,  and  take  plenty  of  time  to  do  it.  A daily,  prolonged, 
thoughtful  bath  in  the  Word  of  God  is  the  only  thing  that 
will  keep  a life  clean  (Psa.  119:9). 


14 


Fullness  of  Power 


5.  In  the  next  place,  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  build 
up.  In  Acts  20:32  we  read, 

"I  commend  you  to  God,,  and,  to  the  word  of  his  grace, 
which  is  able  to  build  you  up.” 

We  hear  a great  deal  in  these  days  about  character-building. 
The  Word  of  God  is  that  by  which  we  must  carry  it  on  if  it 
is  to  be  done  right.  In  II  Peter  1:5-7  we  have  a picture  of  a 
seven-story-and-basement  Christian.  The  great  trouble  today 
is  we  have  so  many  one-story  Christians,  and  the  reason  is 
neglect  of  the  Word. 

In  I Peter  2:2  we  have  a similar  thought  expressed  under  a 
different  figure,  "As  newborn  babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk 
of  the  word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby.”  If  we  are  to  grow, 
we  must  have  wholesome,  nutritious  food  and  plenty  of  it. 
The  only  spiritual  food  that  contains  all  the  elements  necessary 
for  symmetrical  Christian  growth  is  the  Word  of  God.  A 
Christian  can  no  more  grow  as  he  ought  without  feeding  fre- 
quently, regularly,  and  largely  upon  the  Word  of  God,  than 
a baby  can  grow  as  he  ought  without  proper  nutriment. 

6.  In  the  next  place,  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  make 
wise.  Psalm  119:130  is  worthy  of  the  most  careful  attention, 

"The  entrance  of  thy  words  giveth  light;  it  giveth  under- 
standing unto  the  simple.” 

There  is  more  wisdom  in  the  Bible  than  there  is  in  all  the 
other  literature  of  the  ages.  The  one  who  studies  the  Bible,  if 
he  does  not  study  any  other  book,  will  know  more  of  real  wis- 
dom— wisdom  that  counts  for  eternity  as  well  as  time,  wisdom 
that  this  perishing  world  needs  to  know,  wisdom  for  which 
hungry  hearts  are  starving  today — than  the  man  who  reads 
every  other  book  and  neglects  his  Bible.  The  man  who  studies 
the  Bible  and  neglects  all  other  books  will  be  wiser  than  the 
man  who  studies  all  other  books  and  neglects  the  Bible.  The 


The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God 


15 


man  who  studies  the  Bible  will  have  more  to  say  that  is  worth 
saying,  and  that  wise  people  wish  to  hear,  than  any  man  who 
studies  everything  else  and  neglects  the  one  Book. 

This  has  been  illustrated  over  and  over  again  in  the  history 
of  the  church.  The  men  who  have  greatly  affected  the  spiritual 
history  of  this  world,  the  men  who  have  brought  about  great 
reformations  in  morals  and  doctrine,  the  men  whom  others 
have  flocked  to  hear  and  upon  whose  words  people  have  hung, 
have  been  Bible  men  in  every  instance,  and  in  many  cases  they 
knew  little  beside  the  Bible.  I have  seen  men  and  women 
without  culture,  who  have  had  almost  no  advantages  in  school, 
but  who  knew  their  Bibles;  and  I would  rather  sit  at  their  feet 
and  learn  the  wisdom  that  falls  from  their  lips,  than  listen  to 
the  man  who  knows  much  about  philosophy  and  science  and 
theology  even,  and  does  not  know  anything  about  the  Word 
of  God.  There  is  wonderful  force  in  the  words  of  Paul  to 
Timothy,  "All  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is 
profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruc- 
tion in  righteousness:  That  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect, 
throughly  [the  Revised  Version  says  "completely”]  furnished 
unto  all  good  works”  (II  Tim.  3:16,  17).  Through  what? 
Through  the  study  of  the  Book. 

7.  The  Word  of  God  has  power  to  give  assurance  of  eternal 
life.  In  I John  5:13,  R.V.,  we  read, 

"These  things  have  I written  unto  you,  that  ye  may  know 
that  ye  have  eternal  life,  even  unto  you  that  believe  on  the 
name  of  the  Son  of  God.” 

That  is,  the  assurance  of  eternal  life  comes  through  what 
is  "written.”  Suppose  one  has  not  assurance  of  salvation,  what 
shall  we  do?  Tell  him  to  pray  until  he  gets  it?  Not  at  all. 
Take  him  to  some  such  passage  as  John  3:36:  "He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life.”  Hold  him  right  to 
that  point  until  he  takes  God’s  Word  for  it,  and  then  is  sure 


16 


Fullness  of  Power 


that  he  has  everlasting  life  because  he  believes  on  the  Son,  and 
because  God  says  that  "he  that  believeth  on  the  Son  HATH 
everlasting  life.” 

8.  The  Word  of  God  has  power  to  bring  peace  into  the 
heart.  In  Psalm  85:8  we  read, 

"I  will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak:  for  he  will 
speak  peace  unto  his  people,  and  to  his  saints." 

There  are  many  people  looking  for  peace  today,  longing  for 
peace,  praying  for  peace.  But  deep  peace  of  heart  comes  from 
the  study  of  the  Word  of  God.  There  is,  for  example,  one  pas- 
sage in  the  Bible  which,  if  we  feed  upon  it  daily  until  it  really 
gets  into  our  hearts  and  gets  hold  of  us,  will  banish  all  anxiety 
forever.  It  is  Romans  8:28,  "And  we  know  that  all  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who 
are  the  called  according  to  his  purpose.”  Nothing  can  come 
to  us  that  is  not  one  of  the  "all  things.”  If  we  really  believe 
this  passage,  and  it  really  takes  hold  upon  us,  whatever  comes, 
it  will  not  disturb  our  peace. 

9.  The  Word  of  God  has  power  to  produce  joy.  Jeremiah 
says  in  chapter  15,  verse  16, 

"Thy  words  were  found,  and  I did  eat  them;  and  thy 
word  was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart." 

And  Jesus  said  in  John  15:11, 

"These  things  have  1 spoken  unto  you,  that  my  joy  might 
remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  he  full." 

Clearly,  then,  fullness  of  joy  comes  through  the  Word  of 
God.  There  is  no  joy  on  this  earth  from  any  worldly  source 
like  the  joy  that  kindles  and  glows  in  the  heart  of  a believer 
in  Jesus  Christ  as  he  feeds  upon  the  Word  of  God,  and  as  the 
Word  of  God  is  brought  home  to  his  heart  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 


The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God 


17 


10.  Patience,  comfort,  and  hope  also  come  through  the  Word 
of  God.  Romans  15:4, 

"For  whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime  were  writ- 
ten for  our  learning,  that  we  through  patience  and  comfort 
of  the  scriptures  might  have  hope.” 

11.  Finally,  the  Word  of  God  has  power  to  protect  from 
error  and  sin.  In  Acts  20:29-32,  the  Apostle  Paul  warned  the 
elders  at  Ephesus  of  the  errors  that  would  creep  in  among  them, 
and  he  commended  them,  in  closing,  "to  God  and  to  the  word 
of  his  grace.”  In  a similar  way,  Paul,  writing  to  Timothy,  the 
bishop  of  the  same  church,  said: 

"But  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and  worse, 
deceiving,  and  being  deceived.  But  continue  thou  in  the 
things  which  thou  hast  learned  and  hast  been  assured  of, 
knowing  of  whom  thou  hast  learned  them;  And  that  from 
a child  thou  hast  known  the  holy  scriptures,  which  are  able 
to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation  through  faith  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.” — II  Tim.  3:13-15. 

The  one  who  feeds  constantly  on  the  Word  of  God  is  proof 
against  the  multiplying  errors  of  the  day.  It  is  simple  neglect 
of  the  Word  that  has  left  so  many  a prey  to  the  many  false 
doctrines  that  the  Devil,  in  his  subtlety,  is  endeavoring  to  in- 
sinuate into  the  church  of  Christ  today.  And  the  Word  of 
God  has  not  only  power  to  protect  from  error,  but  from  sin 
as  well.  In  Psalm  119:11  we  read:  "Thy  word  have  I hid 
in  mine  heart,  that  I might  not  sin  against  thee.”  The  man 
who  feeds  daily  on  the  Word  of  God  will  be  proof  against  the 
temptations  of  the  Devil.  Any  day  we  neglect  to  feed  on  the 
Word  of  God,  we  leave  an  open  door  through  which  Satan  is 
sure  to  enter  into  our  hearts  and  lives.  Even  the  Son  of  God 
Himself  met  and  overcame  the  temptations  of  the  adversary 
by  the  Scriptures.  To  each  of  Satan’s  temptations.  He  replied. 


18  Fullness  of  Power 

"It  is  written”  (Matt.  4:4,  7,  10).  Satan  left  the  field  com- 
pletely vanquished. 

It  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  first  step  toward 
obtaining  fullness  of  power  in  Christian  life  and  service  is  the 
smdy  of  the  Word.  There  can  be  no  fullness  of  power  in  life 
and  service  if  the  Bible  is  neglected.  In  much  that  is  now  writ- 
ten on  power,  also  in  much  that  is  said  in  conventions,  this 
fact  is  overlooked.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  magnified, 
but  the  instrument  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works  is 
largely  forgotten.  The  result  is  transient  enthusiasm  and  ac- 
tivity, but  no  steady  continuance  and  increase  in  power  and 
usefulness. 

We  cannot  obtain  power,  and  we  cannot  maintain  power, 
in  our  own  lives,  and  in  our  work  for  others,  unless  there  is 
deep  and  frequent  meditation  upon  the  Word  of  God.  If  our 
leaf  is  not  to  wither  and  whatsoever  we  do  is  to  prosper,  our 
delight  must  be  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  and  we  must  meditate 
therein  day  and  night  (Psa.  1:2,  3).  Of  course,  it  is  much 
easier,  and  therefore  much  more  agreeable  to  our  spiritual  lazi- 
ness, to  go  to  a convention  or  revival  meeting,  and  claim  a 
"filling  with  the  Holy  Spirit,”  than  it  is  to  peg  along  day  after 
day,  month  after  month,  year  after  year,  digging  into  the  Word 
of  God.  But  a "filling  with  the  Spirit”  that  is  not  maintained 
by  persistent  study  of  the  Word  will  soon  vanish.  It  is  well 
to  bear  in  mind  that  precisely  the  results  which  Paul  in  one 
place  ascribes  to  being  "filled  with  the  Spirit”  (Eph.  5:18-22), 
he  in  another  place  ascribes  to  letting  "the  word  of  Christ 
dwell  in  you  richly”  (Col.  3:16-18).  Evidently  Paul  knew  of 
no  filling  with  the  Holy  Spirit  divorced  from  deep  and  con- 
stant meditation  upon  the  Word.  To  sum  all  up,  anyone  who 
wishes  to  obtain  and  maintain  fullness  of  power  in  Christian 
life  and  service  must  feed  constantly  upon  the  Word  of  God. 


CHAPTER  II 


The  Power  of  the  Blood 
of  Christ 

Power  BELONGETH  amo  God.”  it  is  there- 
fore  at  man’s  disposal.  But  there  is  one  thing  that  separates 
between  man  and  God,  that  is,  sin.  We  read  in  Isaiah,  "Be- 
hold, the  Lord’s  hand  is  not  shortened,  that  it  cannot  save; 
neither  his  ear  heavy,  that  it  cannot  hear:  But  your  iniquities 
have  separated  between  you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins  have 
hid  his  face  from  you,  that  he  will  not  hear”  (Isa.  59:1,  2). 
Before  we  can  know  God’s  power  in  our  lives  and  service,  sin 
must  be  put  away  from  between  God  and  us.  It  is  the  blood 
that  puts  away  sin  (Heb.  9:26).  We  must  know  the  power 
of  the  blood  if  we  are  to  know  the  power  of  God.  Our  know- 
ing experimentally  the  power  of  the  Word,  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  the  power  of  prayer,  is  dependent  upon  our 
knowing  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  Let  us  see  what  the 
blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  do: 

1.  First  of  all,  the  blood  of  Christ  is  a propitiation  for  sin. 
In  Romans  3:25,  R.V.,  we  read, 

’'Whom  God  set  forth  to  be  a propitiation,  through  faith, 
in  his  blood,  to  show  his  righteousness  because  of  the  pass- 
ing over  of  the  sins  done  aforetime,  in  the  forbearance  of 
God.” 


19 


20 


Fullness  of  Power 


In  the  earlier  verses  of  this  chapter  Paul  has  proven  all  men 
to  be  sinners,  "every  mouth  is  stopped,”  all  the  world  is  seen 
to  be  "guilty  before  God.”  But  God  is  holy,  a God  who  hates 
sin.  God’s  hatred  of  sin  is  no  play  hatred.  It  is  real,  it  is  living, 
it  is  active.  It  must  make  itself  manifest  somehow.  God’s 
wrath  at  sin  must  strike  somewhere.  What  hope  then  is  there 
for  any  of  us;  for  we  "all  have  sinned,  and  come  short 
of  the  glory  of  God”?  In  verse  25,  God  gives  us  His  own 
answer  to  this  tremendously-important  question.  There  is  hope 
for  us  because  God  Himself  has  provided  a propitiation,  the 
shed  blood  of  Christ.  God  has  ’set  forth  Christ  to  be  a pro- 
pitiation, through  faith,  by  his  blood.’  The  wrath  of  God  at 
sin  strikes  on  Him  instead  of  striking  on  us.  Of  this  great 
truth  the  Prophet  Isaiah  got  a glimpse  several  hundred  years 
before  the  birth  of  Christ.  "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone 
astray;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  the 
Lord  hath  laid  [literally,  made  to  strike]  on  him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all”  (Isa.  53:6). 

The  first  power  of  Christ’s  blood  is  as  a propitiation  for  sin, 
affording  a mark  for  and  satisfying  God’s  holy  wrath  at  sin. 
He  is  "our  passover”  (I  Cor.  5:7)  and  when  God  sees  His 
blood,  He  will  pass  over  and  spare  us,  sinners  though  we  are. 
(Compare  Exod.  12:13,  23.) 

This  propitiation  is  chiefly  for  the  believer,  "a  propitiation, 
through  faith.”  All  of  God’s  wrath  at  the  believer’s  sins  is 
fully  appeased  or  satisfied  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  What  a 
wonderfully  comforting  thought  it  is,  when  we  think  how 
often  and  how  greatly  we  have  sinned,  and  then  think  how 
infinitely  holy  God  is,  how  He  hates  sin,  to  think  that  God’s 
wrath  has  already  been  fully  appeased  in  the  shed  blood  of 
His  own  Son,  the  propitiation  which  He  Himself  provided! 

The  blood  of  Christ  in  a certain  measure  avails  for  all,  for 
unbelievers  as  well  as  for  believers,  for  the  vilest  sinner  and 
the  most  stubborn  unbeliever  and  blasphemer.  In  I John  2:2, 


The  Power  of  the  Blood  of  Christ 


21 


R.V.,  we  read,  "And  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins;  and 
not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole  world.”  By  the  shed 
blood  of  Christ  a basis  is  provided  upon  which  God  can  deal 
in  mercy  with  the  whole  world.  All  of  God’s  dealings  in  mercy 
with  man  are  on  the  ground  of  the  shed  blood  of  Christ.  God’s 
dealings  with  those  who  ridicule  the  doctrine  of  the  Atonement, 
God’s  dealings  with  Voltaire,  Tom  Paine  and  Colonel  Inger- 
sol,  are  all  on  the  ground  of  that  shed  blood.  All  of  God’s 
dealings  in  mercy  with  any  man  since  the  fall  of  Adam  are  on 
the  ground  of  that  shed  blood.  If  it  had  not  been  for  the  shed 
blood,  God  could  never  have  dealt  in  mercy  with  a sinner,  but 
must  have  at  once  cut  him  off  in  his  sin. 

If  anyone  asks.  How  then  could  God  have  dealt  in  mercy 
with  sinners  before  Christ  came  and  died? — the  answer  is  sim- 
ple. Jesus  is  the  Lamb  that  hath  been  "slain  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world”  (Rev.  13:8).  From  the  moment  sin  en- 
tered into  the  world,  God  had  His  eyes  upon  that  sacrifice 
which  He  Himself  had  prepared  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  And  in  the  very  Garden  of  Eden  the  blood  of  sacrifices 
that  pointed  forward  as  types  to  the  true  sacrifice  began  to  flow. 
It  is  the  power  of  the  blood  which  has  secured  to  men  all  the 
merciful  things  God  has  wrought  for  them  since  sin  entered. 
The  most  determined  rejector  of  Christ  owes  all  he  has  that  is 
good  to  the  blood  of  Christ. 

2.  Again  in  Ephesians  1:7,  R.V.,  we  read, 

"...  We  have  our  redemption  through  his  blood,  the  for- 
giveness of  our  trespasses.  . . .” 

Through  the  blood  of  Christ  we  have  our  redemption,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins.  Forgiveness  of  sin  is  not  something  the  be- 
liever in  Christ  is  to  look  for  in  the  future;  it  is  something  he 
already  has.  "We  have’’  says  Paul,  "the  forgiveness  of  our 
trespasses.”  The  forgiveness  of  sin  is  not  something  we  are 
to  do  something  to  secure.  It  is  something  which  the  blood  of 


22 


Fullness  of  Power 


Christ  has  already  secured,  and  which  our  faith  simply  appro- 
priates and  enjoys.  Forgiveness  has  already  been  secured  for 
every  believer  in  Christ  by  the  power  of  the  blood. 

You  have  heard  of  the  old  woman  who  lay  dying.  Her 
rector  heard  of  it  and  called  upon  her.  “They  tell  me,”  he 
said,  “that  you  are  dying.” 

“Yes,”  she  replied. 

“And  have  you  made  your  peace  with  God?” 

“No,”  came  the  answer. 

“And  are  you  not  afraid  to  meet  God  without  making  your 
peace  with  Him?” 

“Not  at  all,”  was  the  answer  that  startled  the  minister. 

The  minister  grew  earnest.  “Woman,  do  you  realize  that 
you  have  but  a short  time  to  live  and  that  you  must  soon  meet 
a holy  God?” 

“Yes,  I realize  it  perfectly.” 

“And  you  are  not  afraid?” 

“Not  at  all.” 

“And  you  have  not  made  your  peace  with  God?” 

“No.” 

“What  do  you  mean?”  cried  the  astonished  rector. 

A smile  passed  over  the  features  of  the  dying  woman.  “I 
have  not  made  my  peace  with  God  because  I do  not  need  to. 
Christ  made  peace  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  by 
the  blood  of  His  cross  (Col.  1:20),  and  I am  simply  resting 
in  the  peace  He  made.” 

Oh,  blessed  is  the  one  who  has  learned  to  rest  in  the  peace 
Christ  made,  who  counts  his  sins  forgiven  because  Christ’s 
blood  was  shed  and  God  says  so!  . . We  have  our  redemp- 
tion through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  our  trespasses,  ac- 
cording to  the  riches  of  his  grace”  (Eph.  1:7,  R.V.). 

3.  There  is  a third  passage  very  closely  akin  to  this,  that 
brings  out  the  power  of  Christ’s  blood.  It  is  I John  1:7, 


The  Power  of  the  Blood  of  Christ  23 

"But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have 
fellowship  one  with  another,  and.  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.” 

This  brings  out  the  completeness  of  the  forgiveness  we  get 
through  the  blood.  The  blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  cleanse 
the  believer  from  all  sin.  It  continually  "cleanseth,”  is  cleans- 
ing, keeping  him  clean  every  day  and  hour,  and  every  minute. 
The  cleansing  here  is  from  the  guilt  of  sin.  When  cleansing 
is  mentioned  in  the  Bible  in  connection  with  the  blood,  it  is 
always  cleansing  from  guilt.  Cleansing  from  the  power  of  sin 
and  the  presence  of  sin  is  by  the  Word  of  God,  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  the  living  and  indwelling  Christ,  not  the  crucified  Christ. 
Christ  on  the  cross  saves  from  the  guilt  of  sin;  Christ  on  the 
throne  saves  from  the  power  of  sin;  and  Christ  coming  again 
will  save  from  the  presence  of  sin.  But  the  blood  of  Christ 
cleanses  from  all  the  guilt  of  sin,  when  one  is  walking  in  the 
light,  submitting  to  the  light,  and  walking  in  Christ  who  is 
the  light.  The  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  him  from  all  sin.  His 
past  may  be  as  bad  as  a past  can  be.  There  may  have  been 
countless  enormous  sins,  but  they  are  all,  every  one,  the  great- 
est and  the  smallest,  washed  away.  His  record  is  absolutely 
white  in  God’s  sight.  As  white  as  the  record  of  Jesus  Christ 
Himself.  His  sins  which  were  as  scarlet  are  as  white  as  snow, 
though  they  were  red  like  crimson,  they  are  as  wool  (Isa. 
1:18). 

The  blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  wash  the  blackest  record 
white.  Some  of  us  may  have  had  a black  past.  We  all  have 
had;  for  if  we  could  see  our  past  as  God  sees  it  before  it  is 
washed,  the  record  of  the  best  of  us  would  be  black,  black, 
black.  But  if  we  are  walking  in  the  light,  submitting  to  the 
truth  of  God,  believing  in  the  light,  in  Christ,  our  record  today 
is  white  as  Christ’s  garments  were  when  the  disciples  saw  Him 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  (Matt.  17:2,  Mark  9:3, 


24 


Fullness  of  Power 


Luke  9:29).  No  one  can  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God’s 
elect  (Rom.  8:33);  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who 
are  in  Christ  Jesus  (Rom.  8:1). 

4.  Again,  in  Romans  5:9,  we  read, 

"Much  more  then,  being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we 
shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him.” 

The  blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  justify.  Every  believer  in 
Christ  is  already  justified  in  Christ’s  blood.  Justified  means 
more  than  forgiven  and  cleansed.  Forgiveness,  as  glorious  as 
it  is,  is  a negative  thing.  It  means  merely  that  our  sins  are 
put  away  and  we  are  regarded  as  if  we  had  not  sinned.  But 
justification  is  positive.  It  means  that  we  are  reckoned  posi- 
tively righteous;  that  positive  and  perfect  righteousness,  even 
the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ,  is  put  to  our  account. 

It  is  a good  thing  to  be  stripped  of  vile  and  filthy  rags,  but 
it  is  far  better  to  be  clothed  with  garments  of  glory  and  beauty. 
In  forgiveness  we  are  stripped  of  the  vile  and  stinking  rags 
of  our  sins;  in  justification  we  are  clothed  upon  with  the  glory 
and  beauty  of  Christ.  It  is  the  power  of  the  blood  which  se- 
cures this.  In  shedding  His  blood  as  a penalty  for  sin,  Christ 
took  our  place,  and  when  we  believe  in  Him,  we  step  into  His 
place.  "Him  who  knew  no  sin  he  made  to  be  sin  on  our  be- 
half; that  we  might  become  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him” 
(II  Cor.  5:21,  R.V.). 

5.  Let  us  now  look  at  Hebrews  9:14,  R.V., 

"How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through 
the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  blemish  unto  God, 
cleanse  your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living 
God?” 

The  blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  cleanse  the  conscience 
from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God.  Do  you  understand 
what  that  means?  It  is  a glorious  truth  and  I will  try  to  make 


The  Power  of  the  Blood  of  Christ  25 

it  plain.  When  a man  is  wakened  up  to  the  fact  that  he  is 
a sinner  and  that  God  is  holy,  he  feels  that  he  must  do  some- 
thing to  please  God  and  atone  for  sin.  He  must  "do  penances,” 
"keep  Lent,”  or  give  away  money,  or  do  something  else,  to 
atone  for  his  sins.  Now  all  these  self-efforts  to  please  God  and 
atone  for  sins  are  "dead  works.”  They  can  never  accomplish 
what  they  aim  at,  and  can  never  bring  peace. 

How  many  weary  years  Martin  Luther  sought  peace  in  this 
way  and  found  it  not.  But  when  we  see  the  power  of  the  blood, 
how  it  has  already  perfectly  atoned  for  sin,  how  it  has  already 
washed  away  our  sins  and  justified  us  before  God,  how  we  are 
already  pleasing  and  acceptable  in  God’s  sight  by  reason  of 
that  shed  blood,  then  our  consciences  are  not  only  relieved  from 
the  burden  of  guilt,  but  also  from  the  burden  of  these  self- 
efforts, and  we  are  now  at  liberty  to  serve  the  living  God,  not 
in  the  slavery  of  fear,  but  in  the  liberty  of  the  freedom  and  joy 
of  those  who  know  they  are  accepted  and  beloved  sons.  It  is 
the  blood  which  delivers  us  from  the  awful  bondage  of  think- 
ing we  must  do  something  to  atone  for  sins  and  please  God. 
The  blood  shows  us  that  it  is  already  done. 

A friend  of  mine  once  said  to  another  who  was  seeking 
peace  by  doing,  "You  have  a religion  of  two  letters.  My  re- 
ligion is  a religion  of  four  letters.” 

"How  is  that?”  asked  the  other. 

"Your  religion  is  do.  My  religion  is  done.  You  are  trying 
to  rest  in  what  you  do.  I am  resting  in  what  Christ  has  done.” 
There  are  many  Christians  today  who  have  not  permitted 
the  blood  of  Christ  to  cleanse  their  consciences  from  dead 
works.  They  are  constantly  feeling  they  must  do  something  to 
atone  for  sin.  Oh,  my  brother,  my  sister,  look  at  what  God 
looks  at,  the  blood,  and  see  that  it  is  all  done,  already  done! 
God  is  satisfied,  sin  is  atoned  for,  you  are  justified.  Now  don’t 
do  dead  works  to  commend  yourself  to  God;  but,  realizing 
that  you  are  already  commended  by  the  blood,  serve  Him  in 


26 


Fullness  of  Power 


the  freedom  of  gratitude  and  love,  and  not  in  the  bondage  of 
fear. 

There  are  three  classes  of  men.  First,  those  who  are  not 
burdened  by  sin,  but  love  it.  That  is  wholly  bad.  Second,  those 
who  are  burdened  by  sin  and  seek  to  get  rid  of  it  by  self-efFort. 
That  is  better,  but  there  is  something  infinitely  better  yet.  Third, 
those  who  see  the  hideousness  of  sin,  and  were  burdened  for  it, 
but  who  have  been  brought  to  see  the  power  of  the  blood,  set- 
tling sin  forever,  putting  it  away  (Heb.  9:26),  and  so  are  no 
longer  burdened,  but  now  work  not  to  commend  themselves  to 
God,  but  out  of  joyous  gratitude  to  Him  who  perfealy  justifieth 
the  ungodly  through  the  shed  blood. 

6.  In  Acts  20:28,  we  read, 

"Take  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves,  and  to  all  the  flock, 
over  the  which  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  you  overseers,  to 
feed  the  church  of  God,  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his 
own  blood.” 

And  in  Revelation  5:9,  R.V., 

"And  they  sing  a new  song,  saying.  Worthy  art  thou  to 
take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof:  for  thou  wast 
slain,  and  didst  purchase  unto  God  with  thy  blood  men  of 
every  tribe,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation.” 

The  blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  purchase  us  unto  God,  to 
make  us  God’s  own.  The  blood  of  Christ  makes  me  God’s 
own  property.  That  thought  brings  to  me  a feeling  of  respon- 
sibility. If  I belong  to  God,  I must  serve  Him  wholly;  body, 
soul,  and  spirit,  must  be  surrendered  wholly  to  Him.  But  the 
thought  that  I am  God’s  property  brings  also  a feeling  of  se- 
curity. God  can  and  will  take  care  of  His  own  property.  The 
blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  make  me  eternally  secure. 

7.  We  learn  still  more  about  the  power  of  the  blood  in 
Hebrews  10:19,  20,  R.V., 


The  Power  of  the  Blood  of  Christ 


27 


"Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the 
holy  place  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  the  way  which  he  dedi- 
cated for  us,  a new  and  living  way,  through  the  veil,  that 
is  to  say,  his  flesh.” 

The  blood  of  Christ  has  power  to  give  the  believer  boldness 
to  enter  into  the  holy  place,  to  approach  into  the  very  presence 
of  God.  In  the  old  Jewish  days  of  the  tabernacle  and  temple 
God  manifested  Himself  in  the  most  holy  place.  This  was  the 
place  to  meet  God.  But  into  this  hallowed  place  only  one  Jew 
in  all  the  nation  was  allowed  to  enter,  the  high  priest;  and  he 
only  once  a year,  on  the  day  of  atonement;  and  then  only  with 
blood.  God  was  teaching  the  Jews,  and  through  them  the 
world,  three  great  truths — God’s  unapproachable  holiness, 
man’s  sinfulness,  and  that  sinful  man  could  approach  a holy 
God  only  through  atoning  blood,  that  "without  shedding  of 
blood”  there  could  be  "no  remission,”  and  consequently  no 
approach  to  God  (Heb.  9:22).  But  the  blood  of  the  Old 
Testament  sacrifices  was  only  a figure  of  the  true  sacrifice, 
Jesus  Christ;  and,  by  reason  of  His  shed  blood,  the  vilest  sin- 
ner who  believes  on  Him  has  the  right  to  approach  God — 
come  into  His  very  presence,  when  he  will,  without  fear,  "in 
full  assurance  of  faith,”  "with  boldness.” 

Oh,  the  wondrous  power  of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  take  all 
fear  away  when  I draw  near  to  that  God  who  is  holy  and  is  a 
"consuming  fire”!  God  is  holy?  Yes.  And  I am  a sinner? 
Yes — but  by  that  wondrous  offering  of  Christ  "once  for  all” 
my  sin  is  forever  put  away,  I am  "perfected”  and  "justified,” 
and,  on  the  ground  of  that  blood  so  precious  and  satisfying  to 
God,  I can  march  boldly  into  the  very  presence  of  God. 

8.  But  the  blood  of  Christ  has  still  further  power.  Read 
Revelation  22:14,  R.V., 


28 


Fullness  of  Power 


"Blessed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes,  that  they  may  have 
the  right  to  come  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  by 
the  gates  into  the  city.” 

By  comparing  this  verse  with  chapter  7 and  verse  14, 
we  see  that  it  is  in  the  blood  of  Christ  that  robes  are  washed. 
The  blood  of  Christ  then  has  power  to  give  those  who  believe 
in  Him  a right  to  the  tree  of  life  and  entrance  into  the  city  of 
God.  Sin  in  the  first  place  shut  men  away  from  the  tree  of 
life  and  out  of  Eden  (Gen.  3:22-24).  The  shed  blood  of 
Christ  opens  to  us  again  the  way  to  the  tree  of  life  and  to  the 
New  Jerusalem.  The  blood  of  Christ  regains  for  us  all  that 
Adam  lost  by  sin,  and  brings  us  much  more  than  was  lost. 

We  see  something  of  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  Have 
you  appreciated  that  blood?  Have  you  let  it  have  the  power 
in  your  life  that  it  ought  to  have?  There  are  some  today  who 
are  trying  to  devise  a theology  that  leaves  out  the  blood  of 
Christ.  Poor  fools!  Christianity  without  atoning  blood  is  a 
Christianity  without  mercy  for  the  sinner,  without  settled  peace 
for  the  conscience,  without  genuine  forgiveness,  without  justi- 
fication, without  cleansing,  without  boldness  in  approaching 
God,  without  power.  It  is  not  Christianity,  but  the  Devil’s  own 
counterfeit.  If  we  would  know  fullness  of  power  in  Christian 
life  and  service,  we  must  first  of  all  know  the  power  of  the 
blood  of  Christ,  for  it  is  that  which  brings  us  pardon,  justifica- 
tion, and  boldness  in  our  approach  to  God.  We  cannot  know 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  unless  we  first  know  the  power  of  the 
blood.  We  certainly  cannot  know  the  power  of  prayer  unless 
we  know  the  power  of  that  blood  by  which  alone  we  can  ap- 
proach unto  God. 

There  are  some  teachers  of  "the  higher  life”  who  ignore  the 
fundamental  truth  about  the  blood.  They  are  trying  to  build 
a lofty  superstructure  without  a firm  foundation.  It  is  bound 
to  tumble.  We  must  begin  with  the  blood,  if  we  are  to  go 


The  Power  of  the  Blood  of  Christ 


29 


on  to  the  "holy  of  holies.”  The  brazen  altar  where  blood  was 
shed  first  met  every  priest  who  would  enter  into  the  holy 
place.  There  is  no  other  way  of  entrance  there.  If  we  do  not 
learn  the  lesson  of  this  chapter,  it  is  vain  for  us  to  try  to  learn 
the  lessons  of  chapters  3 and  4.  To  everyone  who  wishes  to 
know  the  power  of  the  Spirit  we  first  put  the  question,  "Do 
you  know  the  power  of  the  blood?” 


CHAPTER  III 


The  Power  of  the  Holy 

Spirit 


P 0 WER  BELONGETH  unto  God."  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  the  person  who  imparts  to  the  individual  believer  the  power 
that  belongs  to  God.  This  is  the  Holy  Spirit’s  work  in  the 
believer,  to  take  what  belongs  to  God  and  make  it  ours.  All 
the  manifold  power  of  God  belongs  to  the  children  of  God 
as  their  birthright  in  Christ.  "All  things  are  your’s’’  (I  Cor. 
3:21).  But  all  that  belongs  to  us  as  our  birthright  in  Christ 
becomes  ours  in  actual  and  experimental  possession  through 
the  Holy  Spirit’s  work  in  us  as  individuals.  To  the  extent  that 
we  understand  and  claim  for  ourselves  the  Holy  Spirit’s  work, 
to  that  extent  do  we  obtain  for  ourselves  the  fullness  of  power 
in  Christian  life  and  service  that  God  has  provided  for  us  in 
Christ.  A very  large  portion  of  the  church  knows  and  claims 
for  itself  a very  small  part  of  that  which  God  has  made  pos- 
sible for  them  in  Christ,  because  they  know  so  little  of  what 
the  Holy  Spirit  can  do  for  us,  and  longs  to  do  for  us.  Let  us 
study  the  Word,  then,  to  find  out  what  the  Holy  Spirit  has 
power  to  do  in  men. 

We  shall  not  go  far  before  we  discover  that  the  same  work 
which  we  see  ascribed  in  one  place  to  the  power  of  the  Word 
of  God  is  in  other  places  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
explanation  of  this  is  simple.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  instru- 

31 


32 


Fullness  of  Power 


ment  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit  does  His  work.  The  Word 
of  God  is  "the  sword  of  the  Spirit”  (Eph.  6:17).  The  Word 
of  God  is  also  the  seed  the  Spirit  sows  and  quickens  (Luke 
8:11;  I Pet.  1:23).  The  Word  of  God  is  the  instrument  of 
all  the  manifold  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  seen  in 
Chapter  I. 

If,  therefore,  we  wish  the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  His  work  in  our 
hearts,  we  must  study  the  Word.  If  we  wish  Him  to  do  His 
work  in  the  hearts  of  others,  we  must  give  them  the  Word. 
But  the  bare  Word  will  not  do  the  work  alone.  The  Spirit 
must  Himself  use  the  Word.  It  is  when  the  Spirit  Himself 
uses  His  own  sword  that  it  manifests  its  real  temper,  keenness 
and  power.  God’s  work  is  accomplished  by  the  Word  and  the 
Spirit,  or  rather  the  Spirit  through  the  Word.  The  secret 
of  effectual  living  is  knowing  the  power  of  the  Spirit  through 
the  Word.  The  secret  of  effectual  service  is  using  the  Word 
in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  There  are  some  who  seek  to  mag- 
nify the  Spirit  but  neglect  the  Word.  This  will  not  do  at  all. 
Fanaticism,  baseless  enthusiasm,  wildfire  are  the  result.  Others 
seek  to  magnify  the  Word,  but  largely  ignore  the  Spirit. 
Neither  will  this  do.  It  leads  to  dead  orthodoxy,  truth  without 
life  and  power.  The  true  course  is  to  recognize  the  instru- 
mental power  of  the  Word  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
works,  and  the  living,  personal  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  who 
acts  through  the  Word. 

But  let  us  come  directly  to  the  consideration  of  our  subject: 
What  has  the  Holy  Spirit  power  to  do? 

1.  Turn  to  I Corinthians  12:3, 

"Wherefore  I give  you  to  understand,  that  no  man  speak- 
ing by  the  Spirit  of  God  calleth  Jesus  accursed:  and  that 
no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy 
Ghost." 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


33 


The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  reveal  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
glory  to  man.  When  Jesus  spoke  of  the  Spirit’s  coming,  He 
said:  "But  when  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom  I will  send 
unto  you  from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which  pro- 
ceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  shall  testify  of  me”  (John  15:26). 
And  it  is  only  as  He  does  testify  of  Christ  that  men  will  ever 
come  to  a true  knowledge  of  Christ.  You  send  men  to  the 
Word  to  get  a knowledge  of  Christ;  but  it  is  only  as  the  Holy 
Spirit  takes  the  Word  and  illuminates  it,  that  men  ever  get  a 
real  living  knowledge  of  Christ.  "No  man  can  say  that  Jesus 
is  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.”  If  you  wish  men  to  get 
a true  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  such  a view  that  they  will 
believe  on  Him  and  be  saved,  you  must  seek  for  them  the 
testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Neither  your  testimony  nor 
that  of  the  Word  alone,  will  suffice,  though  it  is  your  testi- 
mony, or  that  of  the  Word,  which  the  Spirit  uses. 

But  unless  your  testimony  is  taken  up  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
and  He  Himself  testifies,  they  will  not  believe.  It  was  not 
merely  Peter’s  words  about  Christ  that  convinced  the  Jews  at 
Pentecost.  It  was  the  Spirit  Himself  bearing  witness.  If  you 
wish  men  to  see  the  truth  about  Jesus,  do  not  depend  upon 
your  own  powers  of  exposition  and  persuasion,  but  cast  your- 
self upon  the  Holy  Ghost  and  seek  His  testimony.  If  you 
wish  yourself  to  know  Jesus  with  a true  and  living  knowl- 
edge, seek  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  through  the  Word.  Many 
a man  has  a correct  doctrinal  conception  of  Christ,  through  a 
study  of  the  Word,  long  before  he  has  a true  personal  knowl- 
edge of  Christ  through  the  testimony  of  the  living  Spirit. 

2.  Now  let  us  turn  to  John  16:8-11: 

''And  when  he  is  come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin, 
and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment:  Of  sin,  because  they 
believe  not  on  me;  Of  righteousness,  because  I go  to  my 
Father,  and  ye  see  m,e  no  more;  Of  judgment,  because  the 
prince  of  this  world  is  judged.” 


34 


Fullness  of  Power 


The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  convict  the  world  of  sin.  This 
is  closely  connected  with  the  preceding;  for,  it  is  by  showing 
Jesus  and  His  glory  and  His  righteousness,  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  convicts  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment. 
Note  the  sin  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  convicts,  "Of  sin,  be- 
cause they  believe  not  on  me.”  It  was  so  at  Pentecost,  as  we 
see  in  Acts  2:36,  37.  You  can  never  convict  any  man  of  sin 
because  that  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  You  can  reason 
and  reason,  and  you  will  fail.  The  Holy  Spirit  can  do  it  very 
quickly.  Did  you  never  have  this  experience?  You  have  shown 
a man  passage  after  passage  of  Scripture,  and  he  was  unmoved, 
and  you  have  wondered  why  the  man  did  not  break  down. 
Suddenly  it  has  occurred  to  you,  "Why,  I am  not  looking  in 
my  helplessness  to  the  mighty  Spirit  of  God  to  convict  this 
man  of  sin,  but  I am  trying  to  convince  the  man  of  sin  my- 
self.” Then  you  have  cast  yourself  upon  the  Spirit  of  God  for 
Him  to  do  the  work,  and  conviction  came.  The  Spirit  can 
convince  the  most  careless,  as  experience  has  proven  again  and 
again. 

But  it  is  through  us  that  the  Spirit  produces  conviction.  In 
John  16:7,  8,  we  read,  ".  . . I will  send  him  unto  you.  And 
when  he  is  come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment.”  It  was  the  Spirit  sent  to 
Peter  and  the  rest,  who  convicted  the  three  thousand  through 
Peter  and  the  others  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  It  is  ours  to 
preach  the  Word  and  to  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  produce 
conviction  (See  Acts  2:4-37). 

3.  In  Titus  3:5,  we  read, 

"Not  hy  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  hut 
according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  re- 
generation, and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  renew  men  or  make  men  new, 
to  regenerate.  Regeneration  is  the  Holy  Spirit’s  work.  He 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


35 


can  take  a man  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  make  him  alive. 
He  can  take  the  man  whose  mind  is  blind  to  the  truth  of  God, 
whose  will  is  at  enmity  with  God  and  set  on  sin,  whose  affec- 
tions are  corrupt  and  vile,  and  transform  that  man,  impart  to 
him  God’s  nature,  so  that  he  thinks  God’s  thoughts,  wills  what 
God  wills,  loves  what  God  loves,  and  hates  what  God  hates. 

I never  despair  of  any  man  when  I think  of  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  new,  as  I have  seen  it  manifested 
again  and  again  in  the  most  hardened  and  hopeless  cases.  It 
is  through  us  that  the  Holy  Spirit  regenerates  others  (I  Cor. 
4:15).  As  we  have  seen  in  Chapter  I,  the  Word  has  power  to 
regenerate;  but  it  is  not  the  bare  word,  but  the  word  made  a 
living  thing  in  the  heart  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  No 
amount  of  preaching,  no  matter  how  orthodox  it  is,  and  no 
amount  of  mere  study  of  the  Word  will  regenerate,  unless  the 
Holy  Spirit  works.  Just  as  we  are  utterly  dependent  on  the 
work  of  Christ  for  us  in  justification,  so  we  are  utterly  de- 
pendent upon  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  us  in  regeneration. 

When  one  is  born  of  the  Spirit,  the  Spirit  takes  up  His  own 
abode  in  him  (I  Cor.  3:16;  6:19).  The  Holy  Spirit  dwells 
in  everyone  who  belongs  to  Christ  (Rom.  8:9).  We  may  not 
have  surrendered  our  lives  very  fully  to  this  indwelling  Spirit; 
we  may  be  very  far  from  being  "full  of  the  Spirit’’;  we  may 
be  very  imperfect  Christians,  but,  if  we  have  been  born  again, 
the  Spirit  dwells  in  us,  just  as  Paul  said  to  the  Corinthians,  who 
were  certainly  very  far  from  perfect  Christians,  that  He  did 
in  them.  What  a glorious  thought  it  is  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwells  in  me!  But  it  is  also  a very  solemn  thought.  If  my  body 
is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  I certainly  ought  not  to  defile 
it,  as  many  professed  Christians  do.  Bearing  in  mind  that  our 
bodies  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Spirit  would  solve  many  prob- 
lems that  perplex  young  Christians. 

4.  We  find  a further  thought  about  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  John  4:l4, 


36 


Fullness  of  Power 


"But  whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I shall  give 
him  shall  never  thirst;  but  the  water  that  I shall  give  him 
shall  he  in  him  a well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlast- 
ing life." 

You  may  not  see  at  first  that  this  verse  has  anything  to  do 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  compare  John  7:37,  39,  and  it  will 
be  evident  that  the  water  here  means  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
Holy  Spirit,  then,  has  power  to  give  abiding  and  everlasting 
satisfaction.  The  world  can  never  satisfy.  Of  every  worldly 
joy  it  must  be  said,  "Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water  shall 
thirst  again.”  But  the  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  satisfy  every 
longing  of  the  soul.  The  Holy  Spirit  and  He  alone  can  satisfy 
the  human  heart.  If  you  give  yourself  up  to  the  Holy  Spirit’s 
inflowing,  or  rather  upspringing,  in  your  heart,  you  will  never 
thirst.  You  will  not  long  for  the  theater,  or  the  ballroom,  or 
the  card  party,  or  worldly  gain,  or  honor.  Oh,  with  what  joy 
unutterable  and  satisfaction  indescribable  the  Holy  Spirit  has 
poured  forth  His  living  water  in  many  souls!  Have  you  this 
living  fountain  within?  Is  the  spring  unchoked?  Is  it  spring- 
ing up  into  everlasting  life? 

5.  In  Romans  8:2,  we  read, 

"For  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath 
made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death." 

The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  set  us  free  from  the  law  of 
sin  and  death.  What  the  law  of  sin  and  death  is  we  see  in 
the  preceding  chapter  (Rom.  7:9-24).  Read  this  description 
carefully.  We  all  know  this  law  of  sin  and  death.  We  have 
all  been  in  bondage  to  it.  Some  of  us  are  still  in  bondage  to 
it,  but  we  do  not  need  to  be.  God  has  provided  a way  of  escape. 
That  way  is  by  the  Holy  Spirit’s  power.  When  we  give  up 
the  hopeless  struggle  of  trying  to  overcome  the  law  of  sin  and 
death,  of  trying  to  live  right  in  our  strength,  in  the  power  of 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


37 


the  flesh;  and  in  utter  helplessness  surrender  to  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  do  all  for  us;  when  we  live  after  Him  and  walk  in  His 
blessed  power;  then  He  sets  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and 
death. 

There  are  many  professed  Christians  today  living  in  Romans 
7.  Some  go  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  this  is  the  normal 
Christian  life,  that  one  must  live  this  life  of  constant  defeat. 
This  would  be  true,  if  we  were  left  to  ourselves;  for  in  our- 
selves we  are  "carnal,  sold  under  sin.”  But  we  are  not  left  to 
ourselves.  The  Holy  Spirit  undertakes  for  us  what  we  have 
failed  to  do  ourselves  (Rom.  8:2-4).  In  Romans  8 we  have 
the  picture  of  the  true  Christian  life,  the  life  that  is  possible  to 
us,  and  that  God  expects  from  each  one  of  us;  the  life  where 
not  merely  the  commandment  comes,  as  in  chapter  7,  but  where 
the  mighty  Spirit  comes  also,  and  works  obedience  and  victory. 
The  flesh  is  still  in  us,  but  we  are  not  in  the  flesh  (Rom.  8:12, 
13,  compare  vs.  9).  We  do  not  live  after  it.  We  "live  after 
the  Spirit.”  We,  "through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of 
the  body.”  We  "walk  in  the  Spirit,”  and  do  "not  fulfill  the 
lust  of  the  flesh”  (Gal.  5:16).  It  is  our  privilege,  in  the 
Spirit’s  power,  to  get  daily,  hourly,  and  constant  victory  over 
the  flesh  and  over  sin.  But  the  victory  is  not  in  ourselves, 
not  in  any  strength  of  our  own.  Left  to  ourselves,  deserted  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  we  would  be  as  helpless  as  ever.  It  is  all  in 
the  Spirit’s  power.  If  we  try  to  take  one  step  in  our  own 
strength,  we  shall  fail. 

Has  the  Holy  Spirit  set  you  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and 
death?  Will  you  let  Him  do  it  now?  Simply  give  up  all  self- 
effort to  be  free  from  "the  law  of  sin  and  death,”  to  give  up 
sinning;  believe  in  the  divine  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
set  you  free;  and  cast  yourself  upon  Him  to  do  it.  He  will  do 
it.  Then  you  can  triumphantly  cry  with  Paul,  "For  the  law 
of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  made  me  free  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  of  death”  (Rom.  8:2,  R.V.). 


38 


Fullness  of  Power 


6.  We  find  a closely  allied  but  larger  thought  about  the 
Holy  Spirit’s  power  in  Ephesians  3:l6,  R.V., 

"That  he  would  grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 
glory,  that  ye  may  be  strengthened  with  power  through  his 
Spirit  in  the  inward  man.” 

The  Holy  Spirit  strengthens  the  believer  with  power  in  the 
inward  man.  The  result  of  this  strengthening  is  seen  in  verses 
17  to  19.  Here  the  power  of  the  Spirit  manifests  itself  not 
merely  in  giving  us  victory  over  sin,  but  (a)  in  Christ’s  dwell- 
ing in  our  hearts;  (b)  our  being  "rooted  and  grounded  in 
love’’;  (c)  our  being  made  "strong  to  apprehend  with  all  the 
saints  what  is  the  breadth  and  length  and  height  and  depth, 
and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge  . . .” 
(Eph.  3:18,  19).  It  all  ultimates  in  our  being  "filled  unto 
all  the  fulness  of  God.” 

7.  We  find  a still  further  thought  about  the  Holy  Spirit’s 
power  in  Romans  8:l4,  R.V., 

"Tor  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  these  are 
sons  of  God.” 

The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  lead  us  into  a holy  life,  a life 
as  "sons  of  God,”  a godlike  life.  Not  merely  does  the  Holy 
Spirit  give  us  power  to  live  a holy  life,  a life  well-pleasing  to 
God  when  we  have  discovered  what  that  life  is:  He  takes  us 
by  the  hand,  as  it  were,  and  leads  us  into  that  life.  Our  whole 
part  is  simply  to  surrender  ourselves  utterly  to  Him  to  lead 
and  to  mould  us.  Those  who  do  this  are  not  merely  God’s 
offspring,  which  all  men  are  (Aas  17:28);  neither  are  we 
merely  God’s  children:  "These  are  sons  of  God.” 

8.  Further  down  in  the  chapter  there  is  a new  thought. 
Romans  8:16,  R.V., 

"The  Spirit  himself  heareth' witness  with  our  spirit,  that 
we  are  children  of  God.” 

The  Holy  Spirit  bears  witness  with  the  spirit  of  the  believer 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


39 


that  he  is  a child  of  God.  Note  that  Paul  does  not  say  that 
the  Spirit  bears  witness  to  our  spirit,  but  with  it — "together 
with  our  spirit,”  is  the  exact  force  of  the  words  used.  That  is, 
there  are  two  who  bear  witness  to  our  sonship:  First,  our  spirit 
bears  witness  that  we  are  children  of  God;  second,  the  Holy 
Spirit  bears  witness  together  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  chil- 
dren of  God. 

How  does  the  Holy  Spirit  bear  His  testimony  to  this  fact? 
Galatians  4:6  answers  this  question,  "And  because  ye  are  sons, 
God  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  our  hearts,  crying, 
Abba,  Father”  (R.V.).  The  Holy  Spirit  Himself  enters  into 
our  hearts  and  cries,  "Abba,  Father.”  Note  the  order  of  the 
Spirit’s  work  in  Romans  8:2,  4,  13,  14,  16.  It  is  only  when 
"the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free 
from  the  law  of  sin  and  death”  (v.  2),  and  so  "the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled”  in  me  "who  walk  not  after 
the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit”  (v.  4),  and  I "through  the 
Spirit  of  God  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body”  (v.  13),  and 
when  I am  surrendered  to  the  Spirit’s  leading  (v.  14),  it  is 
then,  and  only  then,  that  I can  expect  verse  16  to  be  realized 
in  my  experience,  and  that  I have  the  clear  assurance  of  son- 
ship  that  comes  from  the  Spirit  of  God  testifying  together  with 
my  spirit,  that  I am  a child  of  God.  There  are  many  seeking 
this  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  wrong  place;  namely, 
as  a condition  of  their  surrendering  wholly  to  God,  and  con- 
fessing the  crucified  and  risen  Lord  as  their  Saviour  and  Lord. 
The  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  our  sonship  comes  after 
all  this  is  done. 

9.  An  exceedingly  important  thought  about  the  Holy  Spirit’s 
power  is  found  in  Galatians  5:22,  23, 

”But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffer- 

ing,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith.  Meekness,  temperance: 

against  such  there  is  no  law” 


40 


Fullness  of  Power 


The  Holy  Spirit  brings  forth  in  the  believer  Christlike  graces 
of  character  (Compare  Rom.  5:5;  14:17;  15:13).  All  real 
beauty  of  character,  all  real  Christlikeness  in  us,  is  the  Holy 
Spirit’s  work.  It  is  His  "fruit.”  He  bears  it;  not  we.  Note  that 
these  graces  are  not  said  to  be  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit;  they  are 
the  "fruit.”  There  is  a unity  of  origin  running  all  through  the 
multiplicity  of  manifestation;  and  not  some  of  these  graces, 
but  all,  will  appear  in  everyone  in  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
given  full  control. 

It  is  a beautiful  life  that  is  set  forth  in  these  verses.  Every 
word  is  worthy  of  earnest  study  and  profound  meditation: 
"Love,”  "joy,”  "peace,”  "longsuffering,”  "gentleness,”  "good- 
ness,” "faith,”  "meekness,”  "self-control.”  Is  not  this  the  life 
we  all  long  for,  the  Christ  life?  It  is  not  natural  to  us,  and  it 
is  not  attainable  by  any  effort  of  "the  flesh,”  or  nature.  The 
life  that  is  natural  for  us  is  set  forth  in  the  three  preceding 
verses  (19-21).  But  when  the  indwelling  Spirit  is  given  full 
control  in  the  one  He  inhabits;  when  we  are  brought  to  realize 
the  utter  badness  of  the  flesh,  and  give  up  in  helpless  despair 
of  ever  attaining  to  anything  really  good  in  its  power;  when, 
in  other  words,  we  come  to  the  end  of  self,  and  just  give  over 
the  whole  work  of  making  us  what  we  ought  to  be  to  the 
indwelling  HOLY  SPIRIT,  then,  and  only  then,  these  holy 
graces  of  character  are  His  "fruit.” 

Do  you  wish  these  graces  in  your  character  and  life?  Re- 
nounce self  utterly,  and  all  its  strivings  after  holiness;  and  let 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  dwells  in  you,  take  full  control  and  bear 
His  own  glorious  fruit.  We  get  the  same  essential  truth  from 
another  point  of  view  in  Galatians  2:20  (R.V.,  Am.  App.), 
"I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ;  and  it  is  no  longer  I that 
live,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me:  and  that  life  which  I now  live 
in  the  flesh  I live  in  faith,  the  faith  which  is  in  the  Son  of  God, 
who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  up  for  me.” 

Settle  it  clearly  and  forever  that  the  flesh  can  never  bear 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


41 


this  fruit,  that  you  can  never  attain  these  things  by  your  own 
effort,  that  they  are  “the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.”  We  hear  a good 
deal  in  these  days  about  "ethical  culture,”  which  usually  means 
a cultivation  of  the  flesh  until  it  bears  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit. 
It  cannot  be  done,  until  thorns  can  be  made  to  bear  figs,  and  a 
bramblebush,  grapes  (Matt.  12:33;  Luke  6:44).  We  hear 
also  a good  deal  about  "character  building.”  That  is  ail  very 
well,  if  you  let  the  Holy  Spirit  do  the  building,  and  then  it  is 
not  so  much  building  as  fruit-bearing.  (See,  however,  II  Pet. 
1:5-7.)  We  hear  also  about  "cultivating  graces  of  character,” 
but  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  way  to  cultivate  true 
graces  of  character  is  by  submitting  ourselves  utterly  to  the 
Spirit  to  do  His  work.  This  is  "sanctification  of  the  Spirit” 
(I  Pet.  1:2;  II  Thess.  2:13). 

We  turn  now  to  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  a different 
direction. 

10.  John  16:13,  R.V.: 

"Hotobeit  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  shall 
guide  you  into  all  the  truth:  for  he  shall  not  speak  from 
himself;  but  what  things  soever  he  shall  hear,  these  shall  he 
speak:  and  he  shall  declare  unto  you  the  things  that  are  to 
come!’ 

The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  guide  the  believer  "into  ail 
the  truth.”  This  promise  was  made  in  the  first  instance  to  the 
apostles,  but  the  apostles  themselves  applied  it  to  all  believers 
(I  John  2:20,  27) . It  is  the  privilege  of  each  of  us  to  be  "taught 
of  God.”  Each  believer  is  independent  of  human  teachers.  "Ye 
need  not  that  any  man  teach  you.”  This  does  not  mean,  of 
course,  that  we  may  not  learn  much  from  others,  who  are  taught 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  John  had  thought  that,  he  would  never 
have  written  this  epistle  to  teach  others.  The  man  who  is  most 
fully  taught  of  God  is  the  very  one  who  will  be  most  ready  to 
listen  to  what  God  has  taught  others.  Much  less  does  it  mean 


42 


Fullness  of  Power 


that  when  we  are  taught  of  God  we  are  independent  of  the 
Word  of  God.  For  the  Word  is  the  very  place  to  which  the 
Spirit  leads  His  pupils,  and  the  instrument  through  which  He 
teaches  them  (John  6:63;  Eph.  6:17;  Eph.  5:18,  19;  Comp. 
Col.  3:16).  But,  while  we  may  learn  much  from  men,  we  are 
not  dependent  upon  them.  We  have  a divine  teacher,  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

We  shall  never  truly  know  the  truth  until  we  are  thus 
taught.  No  amount  of  mere  human  teaching,  no  matter  who 
our  teachers  may  be,  will  give  us  a correct  apprehension  of  the 
truth.  Not  even  a diligent  study  of  the  Word,  either  in  the 
English  or  original  languages,  will  give  us  a real  understand- 
ing of  the  truth.  We  must  be  taught  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And 
we  may  be  thus  taught,  each  one  of  us.  The  one  who  is  thus 
taught,  even  if  he  does  not  know  a word  of  Greek  or  Hebrew, 
will  understand  the  truth  of  God  better  than  the  one  who 
knows  the  Greek,  and  Hebrew,  and  all  "the  cognate  lan- 
guages,” and  is  not  taught  of  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  will  guide 
the  one  He  teaches  "into  all  the  truth,”  not  in  a day,  or  in  a 
week,  or  in  a year,  but  step  by  step. 

There  are  two  especial  lines  of  the  Spirit’s  teaching  men- 
tioned. (a)  "He  shall  declare  unto  you  the  things  that  are  to 
come.”  Many  say  we  can  know  nothing  of  the  future,  that  all 
our  thoughts  on  that  subject  are  guesswork.  Anyone  taught 
of  the  Spirit  knows  better  than  that,  (b)  "He  shall  glorify 
me  [i.e.,  Christ] : for  he  shall  take  of  mine,  and  shall  declare 
it  unto  you.”  This  is  the  Holy  Spirit’s  especial  line,  with  the 
believer  as  well  as  the  unbeliever,  to  declare  unto  them  the 
things  of  Christ  and  glorify  Him. 

Many  fear  to  emphasize  the  truth  about  the  Holy  Spirit,  lest 
Christ  be  disparaged.  But  no  one  magnifies  Christ  as  the  Holy 
Spirit  does.  We  will  never  understand  Christ,  nor  see  His  glory, 
until  the  Holy  Spirit  interprets  Him  to  us.  The  mere  listening 
to  sermons  and  lectures,  the  mere  study  of  the  Word  even. 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


43 


will  never  give  you  to  see  the  things  of  Christ.  The  Holy  Spirit 
must  show  you,  and  He  is  willing  to  do  it.  He  is  longing  to 
do  it.  I suppose  the  Holy  Spirit’s  inmost  desire  is  to  reveal 
Jesus  Christ  to  men.  Let  Him  do  it.  Christ  is  so  different  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  glorifies  Him  by  taking  of  the  things  of  Christ 
and  showing  them  unto  us. 

11.  Turning  to  John  14:26,  R.V.,  we  find  again  the  Holy 
Spirit’s  power  to  teach,  but  with  an  added  thought, 

"But  the  Comforter,  even  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  the 
Father  will  send  in  my  name,  he  shall  teach  you  all  things, 
and  bring  to  your  remembrance  all  that  I said  unto  you.” 

The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  bring  to  remembrance  the 
words  of  Christ.  This  promise  was  made  primarily  to  the 
apostles,  and  is  the  guarantee  of  the  accuracy  of  their  report 
of  what  Jesus  said.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  does  a similar  work 
with  each  believer  who  expects  it  of  Him  and  looks  to  Him 
to  do  it.  He  brings  to  mind  the  teachings  of  Christ,  and  the 
words  of  Christ,  just  when  we  need  them,  for  either  the  neces- 
sities of  our  own  life  or  of  our  service. 

How  many  of  us  could  tell  of  occasions  when  we  were  in 
great  distress  of  soul,  of  great  questioning  concerning  our  duty, 
or  great  extremity  as  to  what  to  say  to  one  whom  we  were  try- 
ing to  lead  to  Christ,  or  to  help;  and  just  the  Scripture  we 
needed,  some  passage  we  had  not  thought  of  for  a long  time, 
and,  perhaps,  never  thought  of  in  this  connection,  was  brought 
to  mind.  It  was  the  Holy  Spirit  who  did  this,  and  He  is  ready 
to  do  it  even  more,  when  we  expect  it  of  Him. 

Is  it  without  significance,  that  in  the  next  verse  after  making 
this  great  promise,  Jesus  says:  "Peace  I leave  with  you;  my 
peace  I give  unto  you’’?  Look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  bring  the 
right  words  to  remembrance  at  the  right  time,  and  you  will 
have  peace.  This  is  the  way  to  remember  Scripture,  just  when 
you  need  it,  and  just  the  Scripture  you  need. 


44 


Fullness  of  Power 


12.  Closely  akin  to  what  has  been  said  in  the  two  preceding 
sections  is  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  seen  in  I Corin- 
thians 2:10-14,  R.V.: 

'^But  unto  us  God  revealed  them  through  the  Spirit:  for 
the  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God. 
For  who  among  men  knoweth  the  things  of  a man,  save 
the  spirit  of  the  man,  which  is  in  him?  even  so  the  things 
of  God  none  knoweth,  save  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  we  re- 
ceived, not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  spirit  which  is  from 
God;  that  we  might  know  the  things  that  were  freely  given 
to  us  of  God.  Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in  words 
which  man’s  wisdom  teacheth,  hut  which  the  Spirit  teach- 
eth;  combining  spiritual  things  with  spiritual  words.  Now 
the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God:  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him;  and  he  cannot  know 
them,  because  they  are  spiritually  judged.” 

In  these  verses  we  have  a twofold  work  of  the  Spirit:  (a) 
The  Holy  Spirit  reveals  to  us  the  deep  things  of  God,  which  are 
hidden  from  and  foolishness  to  the  natural  man.  It  is  pre- 
eminently to  the  apostles  that  He  does  this,  but  we  cannot 
limit  this  work  of  the  Spirit  to  them,  (b)  The  Holy  Spirit 
interprets  His  own  revelation,  or  imparts  power  to  discern, 
know,  and  appreciate  what  He  has  taught. 

Not  only  is  the  Holy  Spirit  the  author  of  Revelation — the 
written  Word  of  God.  He  is  also  the  interpreter  of  what  He 
has  revealed.  How  much  more  interesting  and  helpful  any 
deep  book  becomes  when  we  have  the  author  of  the  book 
right  at  hand  to  interpret  it  to  us!  This  is  what  we  always 
may  have  when  we  study  the  Bible.  The  author — the  Holy 
Spirit — is  right  at  hand  to  interpret.  To  understand  the  book 
we  must  look  to  Him.  Then  the  darkest  places  become  clear. 
We  need  to  pray  often  with  the  psalmist,  "Open  thou  mine 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  45 

eyes,  that  I may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law”  (Psa. 

119:18). 

It  is  not  enough  that  we  have  the  objective  revelation  in 
the  written  word;  we  must  also  have  the  inward  illumination 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  us  to  comprehend  it.  It  is  a great 
mistake  to  try  to  comprehend  a spiritual  revelation  with  the 
natural  understanding.  It  is  the  foolish  attempt  to  do  this  that 
has  landed  so  many  in  the  bog  of  the  higher  criticism.  A man 
with  no  aesthetic  sense  might  as  well  expect  to  appreciate  the 
Sistine  Madonna,  because  he  is  not  color  blind,  as  an  un- 
spiritual man  to  understand  the  Bible,  simply  because  he  un- 
derstands the  laws  of  grammar  and  the  vocabulary  of  the  lan- 
guage in  which  the  Bible  was  written.  I would  as  soon  think 
of  setting  a man  to  teach  art  merely  because  he  understood 
paints,  as  to  set  him  to  teach  the  Bible  merely  because  he  un- 
derstood Greek  or  Hebrew. 

We  all  need  not  only  to  recognize  the  utter  insufficiency 
and  worthlessness  of  our  own  righteousness,  which  is  the  les- 
son of  the  opening  chapters  of  the  epistle  to  the  Romans,  but 
also  the  utter  insufficiency  and  worthlessness  in  the  things  of 
God,  of  our  own  wisdom,  which  is  the  lesson  of  the  first  epistle 
to  the  Corinthians,  especially  the  first  to  the  third  chapters 
(see  e.g.  I Cor.  1:19-21,  26,  27). 

The  Jews  had  a revelation  by  the  Spirit  but  they  failed  to 
depend  upon  Him  to  interpret  it  to  them,  so  they  went  astray. 
The  whole  evangelical  church  realizes  the  utter  insufficiency 
of  man’s  righteousness,  theoretically  at  least.  Now  it  needs 
to  be  taught,  and  made  to  feel,  the  utter  insufficiency  of  man’s 
wisdom.  That  is  perhaps  the  lesson  this  nineteenth  century 
of  overweening  intellectual  conceit  needs  most  of  any. 

To  understand  God’s  Word,  we  must  empty  ourselves  utterly 
of  our  own  wisdom  and  rest  in  utter  dependence  upon  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  interpret  it  to  us  (Matt.  11:25).  When  we 
put  away  our  own  righteousness,  then,  and  only  then,  we  get 


46 


Fullness  of  Power 


the  righteousness  of  God  (Phil.  3:4-7,  9;  Rom.  10:3).  When 
we  put  away  our  own  wisdom,  then,  and  only  then,  we  get 
the  wisdom  of  God  (Matt.  11:25;  I Gjr.  3:18;  I Cor.  1:25- 
28).  When  we  put  away  our  own  strength,  then,  and  only 
then,  we  get  the  strength  of  God  (Isa.  40:29;  II  Cor.  12:9; 
I Cor.  1:27,  28).  Emptying  must  precede  filling — self  poured 
out  that  Christ  may  be  poured  in.  We  must  be  daily  taught 
of  the  Spirit  to  understand  the  Word. 

I cannot  depend  today  on  the  fact  that  the  Spirit  taught  me 
yesterday.  Each  new  contact  with  the  Word  must  be  in  the 
power  of  the  Spirit.  That  the  Holy  Spirit  once  illumined  our 
mind  to  grasp  a certain  passage  is  not  enough.  He  must  do  so 
each  time  we  confront  that  passage. 

Andrew  Murray  has  put  this  truth  well.  He  says,  "Each 
time  you  come  to  the  Word  in  study,  in  hearing  a sermon  or 
reading  a religious  book,  there  ought  to  be  as  distinct  as  your 
intercourse  with  the  external  means,  a definite  act  of  self- 
abnegation,  denying  your  own  wisdom  and  yielding  yourself 
in  faith  to  the  divine  teacher”  {The  Spirit  of  Christ,  p.  221). 

13.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  not  only  power  to  teach  us  the 
truth,  but  also  to  impart  power  to  us  in  communicating  that 
truth  to  others.  We  see  this  brought  out  again  and  again. 

’’And  I,  brethren,  when  I came  unto  you,  came  not  with 
excellency  of  speech  or  of  wisdom,  proclaiming  to  you  the 
testimony  of  God.  For  I determined  not  to  know  anything 
among  you,  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified.  And  I was 
with  you  in  weakness,  and  in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling. 
And  my  speech  and  my  preaching  were  not  in  persuasive 
words  of  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of 
power:  that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of 
men,  but  in  the  power  of  God.” — I Cor.  2:1-5,  R.V. 

"Our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in 
power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost”  (I  Thess.  1:5).  "But  ye  shall 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


47 


receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you” 
(Acts  1:8) . The  Holy  Spirit  enables  the  believer  to  communi- 
cate to  others  in  "power”  the  truth  he  himself  has  been  taught. 
We  not  only  need  the  Holy  Spirit  to  reveal  the  truth  in  the 
first  place;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  second  place  to  interpret 
to  us  as  individuals  the  truth  He  has  revealed;  but  in  the  third 
place  we  also  need  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  us  to  effectually 
communicate  to  others  the  truth  He  Himself  has  interpreted 
to  us.  We  need  Him  all  along  the  line.  One  great  cause  of 
real  failure  in  the  ministry,  even  when  there  is  seeming  success, 
and  not  only  in  the  ministry  but  in  all  forms  of  service  by 
Christian  men  and  women,  is  from  the  attempt  to  teach  by 
"enticing  words  of  man’s  wisdom,”  i.e.,  by  the  arts  of  human 
logic,  rhetoric  or  eloquence,  what  the  Holy  Spirit  has  taught 
us.  What  is  needed  is  Holy  Ghost  power,  "demonstration  of 
the  Spirit  and  of  power.” 

There  are  three  causes  of  failure  in  Christian  work.  First, 
some  other  message  is  taught  than  the  message  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  revealed  in  the  Word.  Men  preach  science,  art, 
philosophy,  sociology,  history,  experience,  etc.,  etc.,  and  not 
the  simple  Word  of  God  as  found  in  the  Holy  Spirit’s  Book — 
the  Bible.  Second,  the  Spirit-taught  message,  the  Bible,  is 
studied  and  sought  to  be  comprehended  by  the  natural  under- 
standing, i.e.,  without  the  Spirit’s  illumination.  Third,  the 
Spirit-given  message,  the  Word,  the  Bible,  studied  and  com- 
prehended under  the  Holy  Spirit’s  illumination,  is  given  out  to 
others  with  "enticing  words  of  man’s  wisdom,”  and  not  "in 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power.”  We  need,  we  are 
absolutely  dependent  upon,  the  Holy  Spirit  all  along  the  line. 
He  must  teach  us  how  to  speak  as  well  as  what  to  speak.  He 
must  be  the  power  as  well  as  the  message. 

14.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  teach  us  how  to  pray.  In 
Jude  20,  R.V.,  we  read. 


48 


Fullness  of  Power 


"But  ye,  beloved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most 

holy  faith,  praying  in  the  Holy  Spirit.” 

Again  in  Ephesians,  6:18,  R.V., 

"Praying  at  all  seasons  in  the  Spirit.” 

The  Holy  Spirit  guides  the  believer  in  prayer.  The  disciples 
did  not  know  how  to  pray  as  they  ought,  so  they  came  to 
Jesus  and  said:  "Lord,  teach  us  to  pray”  (Luke  11:1).  "We 
know  not  how  to  pray  as  we  ought,”  but  we  have  another 
helper  right  at  hand  to  help  us  (John  14:16,  17).  "The 
Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmity”  (Rom.  8:26,  R.V.).  He 
teacheth  us  to  pray.  True  prayer  is  prayer  "in  the  Spirit,”  i.e., 
the  prayer  which  the  Spirit  inspires  and  directs.  When  we 
come  into  God’s  presence  to  pray,  we  should  recognize  our 
infirmity,  our  ignorance  of  what  we  should  pray  for  or  how  we 
should  pray,  and,  in  the  consciousness  of  our  utter  inability  to 
pray  aright,  look  up  to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  cast  ourselves 
utterly  upon  Him  to  direct  our  prayers,  to  lead  out  our  desires, 
and  guide  our  utterance  of  them.  Rushing  heedlessly  into 
God’s  presence,  and  asking  the  first  thing  that  comes  into  our 
minds,  or  that  some  thoughtless  one  asks  us  to  pray  for,  is  not 
"praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost,”  and  is  not  true  prayer.  We  must 
wait  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  surrender  ourselves  to  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  prayer  that  God  the  Holy  Spirit  inspires  is  the 
prayer  that  (jod  the  Father  answers.  From  Romans  8:26,  27, 
we  learn  that  the  longings  which  the  Holy  Spirit  begets  in  our 
hearts  are  often  too  deep  for  utterance;  too  deep,  apparently, 
for  clear  and  definite  comprehension  on  the  part  of  the  believer 
himself,  in  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  is  working.  God  Himself 
must  "search  the  heart,”  to  know  "what  is  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit”  in  these  unuttered  and  unutterable  longings.  But  God 
does  know  "what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.”  He  does  know 
what  those  Spirit-given  longings  mean,  even  if  we  do  not,  and 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


49 


these  longings  are  “according  to  the  will  of  God,”  and  He 
grants  them.  So  it  comes  that  He  is  "able  to  do  exceeding 
abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,  according  to  the 
power  that  worketh  in  us”  (Eph.  3:20).  There  are  other 
times  when  the  Spirit’s  leadings  in  prayer  are  so  plain  that  we 
'pray  with  the  Spirit  and  with  the  understanding  also’  (I  Cor. 
14:15). 

15.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  also  power  to  lead  out  our  hearts 
in  acceptable  thanksgiving  to  God.  Paul  says: 

".  . . Be  filled  with  the  Spirit;  speaking  one  to  another  in 
psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  and  making 
melody  with  your  heart  to  the  Lord;  giving  thanks  always 
for  all  things  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  God, 
even  the  Father.” — ^Eph.  5 : 18-20,  R.V. 

Not  only  does  the  Spirit  teach  us  to  pray.  He  also  teaches 
us  to  render  thanks.  One  of  the  most  prominent  characteristics 
of  the  “Spirit-filled  life”  is  thanksgiving.  True  thanksgiving 
is  “to  God,  even  the  Father,”  “in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,”  “in  the  Holy  Spirit.” 

16.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  inspire  in  the  heart  of  the 
believer  in  Christ  worship  that  is  acceptable  to  God. 

"For  we  are  the  circumcision,  who  worship  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  glory  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence 
in  the  flesh.”— Vh.il  3:3,  R.V. 

Prayer  is  not  worship,  thanksgiving  is  not  worship.  Worship 
is  a definite  act  of  the  creature  in  relation  to  God.  Worship 
is  bowing  before  God  in  adoring  acknowledgment  and  con- 
templation of  Himself.  Someone  has  said,  “In  our  prayers  we 
are  taken  up  with  our  needs;  in  our  thanksgivings  we  are 
taken  up  with  our  blessings;  in  our  worship  we  are  taken  up 
with  Himself.”  There  is  no  true  and  acceptable  worship  ex- 
cept that  which  the  Holy  Spirit  prompts  and  directs.  “Such 


50 


Fullness  of  Power 


doth  the  Father  seek  to  be  his  worshippers”  (John  4:23,  R.V.). 

The  flesh  seeks  to  enter  every  sphere  of  life.  It  has  its  wor- 
ship as  well  as  its  lust.  The  worship  which  the  flesh  prompts 
is  an  abomination  to  God.  Not  all  earnest  and  honest  worship 
is  worship  in  the  Spirit.  A man  may  be  very  honest  and  very 
earnest  in  his  worship,  and  still  not  have  submitted  himself 
to  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  matter,  and  so  his 
worship  is  in  the  flesh.  Even  where  there  is  great  loyalty  to 
the  letter  of  the  Word,  worship  may  not  be  "in  the  Spirit,” 
i.e.,  inspired  and  direaed  by  Him.  To  worship  aright  we  must 
"have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.”  We  must  recognize  the 
utter  inability  of  the  flesh,  i.e.,  our  natural  self  as  contrasted 
with  the  divine  Spirit  who  dwells  in  and  should  mould  every- 
thing in  the  believer,  to  worship  acceptably.  We  must  realize 
also  the  danger  there  is  that  the  flesh,  self,  intrude  itself  into 
our  worship.  In  utter  self -distrust  and  self-abnegation  we  must 
cast  ourselves  upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  lead  us  aright  in  our 
worship.  Just  as  we  must  renounce  any  merit  in  ourselves,  and 
cast  ourselves  utterly  upon  Christ  and  His  work  for  us  for 
justification;  just  so  we  must  renounce  any  capacity  for  good 
in  ourselves,  and  cast  ourselves  utterly  upon  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  His  work  in  us,  in  living,  praying,  thanking,  and  wor- 
shipping, and  all  else  that  we  are  to  do. 

17.  Let  us  next  consider  the  Holy  Spirit’s  power  as  a guide. 
In  Acts  13:2-4,  we  read: 

"As  they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted,  the  Holy 
Ghost  said.  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work 
whereunto  1 have  called  them.  And  when  they  had  fasted 
and  prayed,  and  laid  their  hands  on  them,  they  sent  them 
away.  So  they,  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  departed 
unto  Seleucia;  and  from  thence  they  sailed  to  Cyprus." 

The  Holy  Spirit  calls  men  and  sends  them  forth  to  definite 
lines  of  work.  The  Holy  Spirit  not  only  calls  men  in  a general 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


51 


way  into  Christian  work,  but  He  also  selects  the  specific  work 
and  points  it  out.  "Shall  I go  to  China,  to  Africa,  to  India?” 
many  a one  is  asking,  and  many  another  ought  to  ask.  You 
cannot  rightly  settle  that  question  for  yourselves,  neither  can 
any  other  man  settle-  it  rightly  for  you.  Not  every  Christian 
man  is  called  to  China  or  Africa  or  any  other  foreign  field. 
God  alone  knows  whether  He  wishes  you  to  go  to  any  of  these 
places.  He  is  willing  to  show  you. 

How  does  the  Holy  Spirit  call?  The  passage  before  us  does 
not  tell.  It  is  presumably  purposely  silent  on  this  point,  lest, 
perhaps,  we  think  that  He  must  always  call  in  precisely  the 
same  way.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  He  spoke  by  an 
audible  voice,  much  less  that  He  made  his  will  known  in  any 
of  the  fantastic  ways  in  which  some  profess  to  discern  His 
leading,  as,  e.g.,  by  some  twitching  of  the  body,  or  by  opening 
the  Bible  at  random,  and  putting  the  finger  on  a passage  that 
may  be  construed  into  some  entirely  different  meaning  than 
that  which  the  inspired  writer  intended  by  it.  But  the  impor- 
tant point  is  that  He  made  His  will  clearly  known.  He  is  as 
willing  to  make  His  will  clearly  known  to  us  today.  The  great 
need  in  Christian  work  today  is  men  and  women  whom  the 
Holy  Spirit  calls  and  sends  forth.  We  have  plenty  of  men  and 
women  whom  men  have  called  and  sent  forth;  we  have  far 
too  many  who  have  called  themselves.  There  are  many  today 
who  object  strenuously  to  being  sent  forth  by  men,  by  any 
organization  of  any  kind,  who  are,  what  is  immeasurably 
worse  than  that,  sent  forth  by  themselves,  not  by  God.  How 
shall  we  receive  the  Holy  Spirit’s  call?  By  desiring  it,  seeking 
it,  waiting  upon  the  Lord  for  it,  and  expecting  it.  "As  they 
ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted,”  the  record  reads. 

Many  a man  is  saying,  in  self-justification  for  staying  out  of 
the  ministry,  or  for  staying  home  from  the  foreign  field:  "I 
have  never  had  a call.”  How  do  you  know  that?  Have  you 
been  listening  for  it?  God  speaks  often  in  a still  small  voice. 


52 


Fullness  of  Power 


Only  the  listening  ear  can  catch  it.  Have  you  definitely  offered 
yourself  to  God  to  send  you  where  He  will?  While  no  man 
ought  to  go  to  China  or  Africa  unless  he  is  clearly  and  definitely 
called,  he  ought  to  definitely  offer  himself  to  God  for  this  work, 
and  be  ready  for  a call,  and  listening  sharply  that  he  may 
hear  it  when  it  comes.  No  educated  Christian  man  or  woman 
has  a right  to  rest  easy  out  of  the  foreign  field  until  they  have 
definitely  offered  themselves  to  God  for  that  work,  and  it  is 
clear  no  call  from  God  has  come.  Indeed,  a man  needs  no 
more  definite  call  to  Africa  than  to  Boston,  or  New  York, 
or  Chicago. 

18.  We  learn  something  further  about  the  Holy  Spirit’s 
power  to  guide  in  Acts  8:27-29.  First,  we  have  the  story  of 
Philip: 

” And  he  arose  and  went:  and,  behold,  a man  of  Ethiopia, 
an  eunuch  of  great  authority  under  Candace  queen  of  the 
Ethiopians,  who  had  the  charge  of  all  her  treasure,  and  had 
come  to  Jerusalem  for  to  worship.  Was  returning,  and  sitting 
in  his  chariot  read  Esaias  the  prophet.  Then  the  Spirit  said 
unto  Philip,  Go  near,  and  join  thyself  to  this  chariot.” 

Second,  the  second  word  is  about  Paul  and  his  missionary 
party: 

"And  they  went  through  the  region  of  Phrygia  and 
Galatia,  having  been  forbidden  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  speak 
the  word  in  Asia;  and  when  they  were  come  over  against 
Mysia,  they  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia;  and  the  Spirit  of 
Jesus  suffered  them  not.” — ^Acts  16:6,  7,  R.V. 

The  Holy  Spirit  guides  in  the  details  of  daily  life  and  serv- 
ice as  to  where  to  go  and  where  not  to  go,  what  to  do  and 
what  not  to  do.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  have  the  unerring  guid- 
ance of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  every  turn  in  our  lives.  For  exam- 
ple, in  personal  work  it  is  manifestly  not  God’s  intention  that 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


53 


we  speak  to  everyone  we  meet.  There  are  some  to  whom  we 
ought  not  to  speak.  Time  spent  on  them  would  be  time  taken 
from  work  which  would  be  more  to  the  glory  of  God.  Doubt- 
less Philip  met  many  as  he  journeyed  toward  Gaza,  before  he 
met  the  one  of  whom  the  Spirit  said:  "Go  near,  and  join  thy- 
self to  this  chariot.”  In  the  same  way  is  He  ready  to  guide  us 
in  our  personal  work.  He  is  ready  also  to  guide  us  in  all  the 
affairs  of  life:  business,  study,  social  life — everything.  We  can 
have  God’s  wisdom,  if  we  will,  at  every  turn  of  life.  There 
is  no  promise  more  plain  and  explicit  than  James  1:5:  "If 
any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to 
all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given 
him.”  How  shall  we  gain  this  wisdom?  James  1:5-7  answers. 
Here  are  really  five  steps. 

First:  That  we  "lack  wisdom.”  We  must  be  conscious  of 
and  fully  admit  our  own  inability  to  decide  wisely.  Not  only 
the  sinfulness  but  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh  must  be  renounced. 

Second:  We  must  really  desire  to  know  God’s  way,  and  be 
willing  to  do  God’s  will.  This  is  implied  in  the  asking,  if  the 
asking  be  sincere.  This  is  a point  of  fundamental  importance. 
Here  we  find  the  reason  why  men  ofttimes  do  not  know  God’s 
will,  and  have  not  the  Spirit’s  guidance.  They  are  not  really 
willing  to  do  whatever  the  Spirit  leads.  It  is  "the  meek”  whom 
He  guides  in  judgment,  and  the  meek  to  whom  "he  will  teach 
his  way”  (Psa.  25:9).  It  is  he  who  "willeth  to  do  his  will” 
who  "shall  know”  (John  7:17,  R.V.). 

third:  We  must  ask,  definitely  ask  guidance. 

Fourth:  We  must  confidently  expect  guidance. 

"Let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  doubting”  (vss.  6 and  7, 
R.V.). 

Fifth:  We  must  follow  step  by  step  as  the  guidance  comes. 
Just  how  it  will  come  no  one  can  tell.  But  it  will  come.  It 
may  come  with  only  a step  made  clear  at  a time.  That  is  all 
that  we  need  to  know — the  next  step.  Many  are  in  darkness 


54 


Fullness  of  Power 


because  they  do  not  know  what  God  will  have  them  to  do 
next  week,  or  next  month,  or  next  year.  Do  you  know  the 
next  step?  That  is  enough.  Take  it,  and  then  He  will  show 
you  the  next.  (See  Num.  9:17-23.)  God’s  guidance  is  clear 
guidance  (I  John  1:5).  Many  are  tortured  by  leadings  which 
they  fear  may  be  from  God,  but  which  they  are  not  sure  about. 
You  have  a right,  as  God’s  child,  to  be  sure.  Go  to  God  and 
say:  "Here  I am,  heavenly  Father;  I am  willing  to  do  Thy 
will,  but  make  it  clear.  If  this  is  Thy  will,  I will  do  it;  but 
make  it  clear  if  it  is.”  He  will  do  it,  if  it  is  His  will  and  you 
are  willing  to  do  it.  You  need  not  and  ought  not  to  do  that 
thing  until  He  does  make  it  clear.  We  have  no  right  to  dictate 
to  God  how  He  shall  give  His  guidance,  as,  e.g.,  by  "shutting 
up  every  other  way,”  or  by  a sign,  or  by  letting  us  put  our 
finger  on  a text.  It  is  ours  to  seek  and  expect  wisdom,  but  it 
is  not  ours  to  dictate  how  it  shall  be  given  (I  Cor.  12:11). 

19.  In  one  more  direction  has  the  Holy  Spirit  power.  Read 
Acts  4:31;  13:9,  10, 

’’And  when  they  had  prayed,  the  place  was  shaken  where 
they  were  assembled  together;  and  they  were  all  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  they  spake  the  word  of  God  with  bold- 
ness.” 

The  Holy  Spirit  has  power  to  give  us  boldness  in  testimony 
for  Christ.  Many  are  naturally  timid.  They  long  to  do  some- 
thing for  Christ,  but  they  are  afraid.  The  Holy  Spirit  can  make 
you  bold  if  you  will  look  to  Him  and  trust  Him  to  do  it.  It 
was  He  who  turned  the  craven  Peter  into  the  one  who  fear- 
lessly faced  the  Sanhedrin  and  rebuked  their  sin.  (See  Acts 
4:8-12.) 

Two  things  are  manifest  from  what  has  been  said  about  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  believer:  First,  how  utterly 
dependent  we  are  upon  the  Holy  Spirit  at  every  turn  of  Chris- 
tian life  and  service.  Second,  how  perfect  is  the  provision  for 


The  Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 


55 


life  and  service  that  God  has  made,  and  what  the  fullness  of 
privilege  that  is  open  to  the  humblest  believer,  through  the 
Holy  Spirit’s  work.  It  is  not  so  much  what  we  are  by  nature 
either  intelleaually,  morally,  spiritually,  or  even  physically  that 
is  important;  but  what  the  Holy  Spirit  can  do  for  us,  and  what 
we  will  let  Him  do.  The  Holy  Spirit  often  takes  the  one  who 
gives  the  least  natural  promise  and  uses  him  far  more  than 
those  who  give  the  greatest  natural  promise.  Christian  life  is 
not  to  be  lived  in  the  realm  of  natural  temperament,  and 
Christian  work  is  not  to  be  done  in  the  power  of  natural  en- 
dowment but  Christian  life  is  to  be  lived  in  the  realm  of  the 
Spirit,  and  Christian  work  is  to  be  done  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  eagerly  desirous  to  do  for 
each  of  us  His  whole  work.  He  will  do  for  each  of  us  all  we 
will  let  Him  do. 


I 


CHAPTER  IV 


Power  BELONGETH  unto  God,”  but  all  that 
belongs  to  God  we  can  have  for  the  asking.  God  holds  out 
His  full  hands  and  says:  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you.  . . . 
If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your 
children,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven 
give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him?”  (Matt.  7:7,  11).  The 
poverty  and  powerlessness  of  the  average  Christian  finds  its 
explanation  in  the  words  of  the  Apostle  James:  "Ye  have  not, 
because  ye  ask  not”  (Jas.  4:2). 

"Why  is  it,”  many  a Christian  is  asking,  "that  I make  such 
poor  progress  in  my  Christian  life?” 

"Neglect  of  prayer,”  God  answers.  "You  have  not  because 
you  ask  not.” 

"Why  is  it  there  is  so  little  fruit  in  my  ministry?”  asks 
many  a discouraged  minister. 

"Neglect  of  prayer,”  God  answers  again.  "You  have  not 
because  you  ask  not.” 

"Why  is  it,”  many,  both  ministers  and  laymen,  are  asking, 
"that  there  is  so  little  power  in  my  life  and  service?” 

And  again  God  answers:  "Neglect  of  prayer.  You  have  not 
because  you  ask  not.” 

God  has  provided  for  a life  of  power,  and  a work  of  power 
on  the  part  of  every  child  of  His.  He  has  put  His  own  infinite 
power  at  our  disposal,  and  has  proclaimed  over  and  over  again, 
in  a great  variety  of  ways  in  His  Word,  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  re- 

57 


58 


Fullness  of  Power 


ceive.”  Thousands  upon  thousands  have  taken  God  at  His 
word  in  this  matter,  and  have  always  found  it  true.  The  first 
Christians  were  men  of  tremendous  power.  What  power  Peter 
and  John,  for  example,  had  in  their  lives!  What  power  they 
had  in  their  work!  There  was  opposition  in  those  days — most 
determined,  bitter,  and  relentless  opposition;  opposition  in  com- 
parison with  which  that  which  we  encounter  is  but  as  child’s 
play — but  the  work  went  right  on. 

We  constantly  read  such  statements  as  these:  "And  the  Lord 
added  to  the  church  daily  such  as  should  be  saved”  (Acts  2:47). 
"Howbeit  many  of  them  which  heard  the  word  believed;  and 
the  number  of  the  men  was  about  five  thousand”  (Acts  4:4). 
"And  believers  were  the  more  added  to  the  Lord,  multitudes 
both  of  men  and  women”  (Acts  5:l4).  The  apostles  them- 
selves explain  the  secret  of  their  resistless  power  when  they 
say:  "But  we  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  prayer,  and  to 
the  ministry  of  the  word”  (Acts  6:4). 

But  it  was  not  only  the  leaders  who  had  power  in  life  and 
service;  so  had  the  rank  and  file  of  that  early  church.  What  a 
beautiful  picture  we  have  of  the  abounding  love  and  fruitful- 
ness of  that  early  church!  (Acts  2:44-47;  4:32-37;  8:4; 
11:19,  21).  The  secret  of  this  fullness  of  power  in  life  and 
service  is  found  in  Acts  2:42,  "They  continued  stedfastly  . . . 
in  prayers.”  God  delights  to  answer  prayer.  "Call  upon  me  . . . ,” 
He  cries,  "I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me”  (Psa. 
50:15).  There  is  a place  where  strength  can  always  be  re- 
newed; that  place  is  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  "But  they  that 
wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength;  they  shall 
mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles;  they  shall  run,  and  not  be 
weary;  and  they  shall  walk,  and  not  faint”  (Isa.  40:31). 

How  little  time  the  average  Christian  spends  in  prayer!  We 
are  too  busy  to  pray,  and  so  we  are  too  busy  to  have  power. 
We  have  a great  deal  of  activity  but  we  accomplish  little; 
many  services  but  few  conversions;  much  machinery  but  few 


The  Power  of  Prayer 


59 


results.  The  power  of  God  is  lacking  in  our  lives  and  in  our 
work.  We  have  not  because  we  ask  not.  Many  professed 
Christians  confessedly  do  not  believe  in  the  power  of  prayer. 
It  is  quite  the  fashion  with  some  to  contemptuously  contrast 
the  pray-ers  with  the  do-ers — forgetting  that  in  the  history  of 
the  church  the  real  do-ers  have  been  pray-ers,  that  the  men 
who  have  made  the  glorious  part  of  the  church’s  history  have 
been,  without  exception,  men  of  prayer.  Of  those  who  do 
believe  theoretically  in  the  power  of  prayer,  not  one  in  a thou- 
sand realizes  its  power. 

How  much  time  does  the  average  Christian  spend  daily  in 
prayer?  How  much  time  do  you  spend  daily  in  prayer?  It 
was  a master  stroke  of  the  Devil  when  he  got  the  church  and 
the  ministry  so  generally  to  lay  aside  the  mighty  weapon  of 
prayer.  The  Devil  is  perfectly  willing  that  the  church  should 
multiply  its  organizations  and  its  deftly-contrived  machinery 
for  the  conquest  of  the  world  for  Christ,  if  it  will  only  give 
up  praying.  He  laughs  softly,  as  he  looks  at  the  church  of 
today,  and  says  under  his  breath:  "You  can  have  your  Sunday 
Schools,  and  your  Y.M.C.A.’s,  and  your  Y.W.C.A.’s,  and  your 
Y.P.S.C.E.’s,  and  your  B.Y.P.U.’s,  and  your  Epworth  Leagues, 
and  your  W.C.T.U.’s,  and  your  Boys’  Brigades,  and  your 
Institutional  Churches,  and  your  Men’s  Clubs,  and  your  grand 
choirs,  and  your  fine  organs,  and  your  brilliant  preachers,  and 
your  revival  efforts,  even,  if  you  do  not  bring  into  them  the 
power  of  Almighty  God,  sought  and  obtained  by  earnest,  per- 
sistent, believing,  mighty  prayer.”  The  Devil  is  not  afraid  of 
machinery;  he  is  only  afraid  of  God,  and  machinery  without 
prayer  is  machinery  without  God. 

Our  day  is  characterized  by  the  multiplication  of  man’s 
machinery  and  the  diminution  of  God’s  power  sought  and  ob- 
tained by  prayer.  But  when  men  and  women  arise  who  believe 
in  prayer,  and  who  pray  in  the  way  the  Bible  teaches  us  to 
pray,  prayer  accomplishes  as  much  as  it  ever  did.  Prayer  can 


60 


Fullness  of  Power 


do  today  as  much  as  it  ever  could.  Prayer  can  do  anything  God 
can  do;  for  the  arm  of  God  responds  to  the  touch  of  prayer. 
All  the  infinite  resources  of  God  are  at  the  command  of  prayer. 
Prayer  is  the  key  that  opens  wide  the  inexhaustible  storehouses 
of  divine  grace  and  power.  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you,” 
cries  our  heavenly  Father  as  He  swings  wide  open  the  doors 
of  the  divine  treasure  house.  There  is  only  one  limit  to  what 
prayer  can  do;  that  is  what  God  can  do.  But  all  things  are 
possible  to  God;  therefore  prayer  is  omnipotent. 

Christian  history  and  Christian  biography  demonstrate  the 
truth  of  what  the  Word  of  God  teaches  about  prayer.  All 
through  the  history  of  the  Church,  men  and  women  have  arisen 
in  all  ranks  of  life  who  believed  with  simple,  childlike  faith 
what  the  Bible  teaches  about  prayer,  and  they  have  asked  and 
they  have  received  . But  what  are  some  of  the  definite  things 
that  prayer  has  power  to  do? 

1.  Prayer  has  power  to  bring  a true  knowledge  of  ourselves 
and  our  needs.  There  is  nothing  more  necessary  than  that  we 
know  ourselves,  our  weakness,  our  sinfulness,  our  selfishness; 
how  that  in  us,  that  is  to  say  in  our  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good 
thing  (Rom.  7:18).  Lives  of  power  have  usually  begun  with 
a revelation  of  the  utter  powerlessness  and  worthlessness  of 
self.  So  it  was  with  Isaiah.  In  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  died, 
he  was  brought  face  to  face  with  God,  and  saw  himself,  and 
cried  out:  "Woe  is  me!  for  I am  undone;  because  I am  a man 
of  unclean  lips”  (Isa.  6:5).  Then  a life  of  power  began  for 
Isaiah  and  God  sent  him  forth  to  a mighty  work  (Isa.  6:8,  9). 
It  was  so  with  Moses.  He  met  God  at  the  burning  bush,  and 
was  emptied  of  his  former  self-confidence,  saw  his  utter  unfit- 
ness for  the  Lord’s  work,  and  then  the  Lord  sent  him  as  a 
mighty  man  of  power  (Exod.  3:2,  5,  11.  Comp.  Exod.  2:11- 
15).  It  was  so  with  Job.  It  was  after  Job  met  God,  and  cried 
concerning  himself:  "I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
ashes,”  that  the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job,  and  that  he 


The  Power  of  Prayer 


61 


received  power  to  intercede  for  his  friends,  and  to  bear  abun- 
dant fruit  (Job  42:5,  6,  10,  12). 

It  is  needful,  if  we  are  to  have  fullness  of  power,  that  we 
get  a view  of  ourselves  as  we  are  by  nature.  It  is  in  prayer  that 
we  get  it.  If  we  sincerely  pray  the  psalmist’s  prayer:  "Search 
me,  O God,  and  know  my  heart:  try  me,  and  know  my 
thoughts”  (Psa.  139:23),  He  will  do  it.  There  will  come  a 
true  revelation  of  self  as  God  sees  us,  a consequent  utter  empty- 
ing of  self,  and  room  will  be  made  for  the  incoming  of  the 
power  of  God.  It  is  not  enough  to  pray  this  prayer  once  for 
all.  It  needs  to  be  repeated  daily. 

2.  Prayer  has  power  to  cleanse  our  hearts  from  sin;  from 
secret  sin  and  from  known  sin  (Psa.  19:12,  13).  In  answer  to 
David’s  prayer  after  his  disastrous  fall,  God  washed  him  thor- 
oughly from  his  iniquity,  and  cleansed  him  from  his  sin  (Psa. 
51:2).  Many  a man  has  fought  for  days  and  months  and  years 
against  some  sin  that  has  been  marring  his  life  and  sapping 
his  spiritual  power,  and  at  last  has  gone  unto  God  in  prayer, 
and  held  on  to  God,  and  would  not  let  Him  go  until  He 
blessed  him;  and  he  has  come  out  of  the  place  of  prayer  a 
victor.  In  this  way  sins  that  seem  unconquerable  have  been 
laid  in  the  dust.  In  this  way  the  secret  sin  that  the  sinner  him- 
self scarce  discerned,  but  that  has  robbed  him  of  power,  has 
been  discovered  in  all  its  real  hideousness,  and  rooted  out.  Of 
course,  as  seen  in  the  previous  chapter,  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit  who 
sets  us  free  from  sin’s  power,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  works  in  our 
lives  in  answer  to  our  prayers  ( Luke  11:13). 

3.  Prayer  has  power  to  hold  us  up  in  our  goings,  and  give 
us  victory  over  temptation.  "Hold  up  my  goings  in  thy  paths, 
that  my  footsteps  slip  not,”  cried  David  (Psa.  17:5).  That  is 
a prayer  God  is  ever  ready  to  hear.  Jesus  Himself  said  to  His 
disciples,  as  the  hour  of  trial  drew  nigh,  "Pray  that  ye  enter 
not  into  temptation”  (Luke  22:40).  But  the  disciples  did  not 
heed  the  warning.  They  slept  when  they  should  have  prayed. 


62 


Fullness  of  Power 


and  when  the  temptation  came  in  a few  hours,  they  failed 
utterly.  But  Jesus  Himself  spent  that  night  in  prayer,  and 
the  next  day  when  the  fiercest  temptations  that  ever  beset  a 
son  of  man  swept  down  upon  Him,  He  came  off  gloriously  tri- 
umphant. We  can  come  off  victorious  over  every  temptation  if 
we  will  prepare  for  it  and  meet  it  by  prayer.  Many  of  us  are 
led  into  defeat  and  denial  of  our  Lord,  as  Peter  was,  by  sleep- 
ing when  we  ought  to  be  praying. 

4.  Prayer  has  power  to  govern  our  tongues.  Many  a Chris- 
tian who  has  desired  fullness  of  power  in  Christian  life  and 
service,  has  found  himself  kept  from  it  by  an  unruly  tongue. 
He  has  learned  by  bitter  experience  the  truth  of  the  words 
of  James:  "The  tongue  can  no  man  tame”  (Jas.  3:8).  But 
while  no  man  can  tame  it,  God  can  and  will,  in  answer  to 
believing  prayer.  If  one  will  earnestly  and  believingly  pray 
with  David:  "Set  a watch,  O Lord,  before  my  mouth;  keep 
the  door  of  my  lips”  (Psa.  l4l:3),  God  will  do  it.  Many  and 
many  an  unruly  tongue  has  been  brought  into  subjertion  in 
this  way.  Tongues  that  were  as  sharp  as  the  piercings  of  a 
sword,  have  learned  to  speak  words  of  gentleness  and  grace. 
True  prayer  can  tame  the  unruliest  tongue  by  which  man  or 
woman  was  ever  cursed,  because  true  prayer  brings  into  play 
the  power  of  Him  with  whom  nothing  is  impossible. 

5.  Prayer  has  power  to  bring  us  wisdom.  The  Word  of  God 
is  very  explicit  on  this  point:  "If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let 
him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraid- 
eth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given  him”  (Jas.  1:5).  No  promise 
could  be  more  explicit  than  that.  We  can  have  wisdom,  the 
wisdom  of  God  Himself,  at  every  turn  of  life.  God  does  not 
intend  that  His  children  shall  grope  in  darkness.  He  puts  His 
own  infinite  wisdom  at  our  disposal.  All  He  asks  is  that  we 
ask,  and  ask  in  faith  (Jas.  1:6-7).  Many  of  us  are  stumbling 
on  in  our  own  foolishness,  instead  of  walking  on  in  His  wis- 
dom, simply  because  we  do  not  ask.  He  greatly  desires  us  to 


The  Power  of  Prayer 


63 


know  His  way,  and  is  willing  to  make  it  known  upon  our 
asking.  Oh,  the  joy  of  knowing  and  walking  in  God’s  way! 
And  we  can  all  have  this  joy  for  the  asking  (Psa.  86:11; 
25:4;  143:10;  119:33). 

6.  Prayer  has  power  to  open  our  eyes  to  behold  wondrous 
things  out  of  God’s  Word  (Psa.  119:18).  It  is  wonderful  how 
the  Bible  opens  up  to  one  who  looks  to  God  in  earnest,  be- 
lieving prayer  to  interpret  it  to  him.  Difficulties  vanish,  ob- 
scure passages  become  clear  as  day,  and  old  familiar  portions 
become  luminous  with  new  meaning,  and  living  with  new 
power.  Prayer  will  do  more  than  a theological  education  to 
make  the  Bible  an  open  book.  Only  the  man  of  prayer  can 
understand  the  Bible. 

7.  Prayer  has  power  to  bring  the  Holy  Spirit  in  all  His 
blessed  power  and  manifold  gracious  operations  into  our  hearts 
and  lives.  "If  ye  then,  being  evil,”  says  Jesus,  "know  how  to 
give  good  gifts  unto  your  children:  how  much  more  shall 
your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
him?”  (Luke  11:13).  It  was  after  the  first  disciples  had 
"continued  ...  in  prayer  and  supplication”  (Acts  1:14),  that 
"they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost”  (Acts  2:4).  On 
another  occasion  "when  they  had  prayed,  the  place  was  shaken 
where  they  were  assembled  together;  and  they  were  all  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost”  (Acts  4:31).  When  Peter  and  John 
came  down  to  Samaria  and  found  a company  of  young  converts 
who  had  not  yet  experienced  the  fullness  of  the  Holy  Spirit’s 
power,  "they  . . . prayed  for  them,  that  they  might  receive 
the  Holy  Ghost”  (Acts  8:15).  "And  they  received  the  Holy 
Ghost”  (Acts  8:17).  It  was  in  answer  to  prayer  that  Paul 
expected  the  saints  in  Ephesus  "to  be  strengthened  with  might 
by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man”  (Eph.  3:l6),  and  that  "the 
God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory,”  would 
give  them  "the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  knowl- 
edge of  him”  (Eph.  1:17).  It  is  manifestly  prayer  that  brings 


64 


Fullness  of  Power 


the  fullness  of  the  Spirit’s  power  into  our  hearts  and  lives. 
One  great  reason  why  so  many  of  us  have  so  little  of  the  Holy 
Spirit’s  power  in  our  lives  and  service  is  because  we  spend  so 
little  time  and  thought  in  prayer.  We  'have  not,  because  we 
ask  not.’ 

Every  precious  spiritual  blessing  in  our  own  lives  is  given 
by  our  heavenly  Father  in  answer  to  true  prayer.  Prayer  pro- 
motes our  own  spiritual  growth  and  our  likeness  to  Christ  as 
almost  nothing  else  can.  The  more  time  we  spend  in  real, 
true  prayer,  other  things  being  equal,  the  more  we  shall  grow 
in  likeness  to  our  Master. 

One  of  the  saintliest  and  most  Christlike  men  who  ever 
lived  was  John  Welch,  the  son-in-law  of  John  Knox,  the  great 
Scotch  reformer.  He  is  said  to  have  given  one-third  of  his  time 
to  prayer,  and  often  to  have  spent  a whole  night  in  prayer. 
One  who  knew  him  well,  speaking  of  him  after  his  departure 
to  be  with  Christ,  said  of  him:  "He  was  a type  of  Christ.” 

Many  illustrations  could  be  given  of  the  power  of  prayer  to 
bring  our  lives  into  conformity  with  Christ’s.  In  prayer  we 
gaze  into  the  face  of  God,  and  "beholding  as  in  a mirror  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  are  transformed  into  the  same  image  from 
glory  to  glory”  (II  Cor.  3:18,  R.V.). 

8.  But  prayer  has  not  only  power  to  promote  our  own  spir- 
itual growth  into  the  likeness  of  Christ;  prayer  has  also  power 
to  bring  the  fullness  of  God’s  power  into  our  work.  When  the 
apostolic  church  saw  themselves  confronted  by  obstacles  that 
they  could  not  surmount,  "they  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God 
with  one  accord”  (Acts  4:24).  "And  when  they  had  prayed,” 
the  power  came  that  swept  all  obstacles  before  it  (Acts  4:31- 
33;  5:14). 

Do  you  desire  the  power  of  God  in  your  Sunday  School  class, 
in  your  personal  work,  in  your  preaching,  in  your  training  of 
your  children?  Pray  for  it.  Hold  on  to  God  until  you  get  it. 
"Men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint”  (Luke  18:1). 


The  Power  of  Prayer 


65 


I shall  never  forget  a sight  I once  witnessed.  A woman  of 
limited  experience  in  public  speaking  was  called  upon  to  ad- 
dress an  audience  filling  the  old  Tremont  Temple  in  Boston. 
It  was  a notable  audience  in  its  make-up  as  well  as  in  numbers. 
Many  of  the  leading  clergymen  of  all  evangelical  denominations 
were  there,  also  many  men  prominent  in  philanthropic  and 
political  affairs.  As  the  woman  spoke,  the  audience  was  hushed, 
swayed,  melted,  and  molded.  Tears  coursed  down  cheeks  un- 
wonted to  them.  The  impression  made  upon  many  was  not 
only  salutary,  but  permanent.  It  was  an  address  of  marvelous 
power.  The  secret  of  it  all  lay  in  the  fact,  known  only  to  a 
few,  that  that  woman  had  spent  the  whole  of  the  previous 
night  on  her  face  before  God  in  prayer. 

It  is  related  of  John  Livingstone  that  he  spent  a night  with  a 
few  like-minded  in  prayer  and  religious  converse.  On  the  next 
day  he  preached  in  the  Kirk  of  Shorts  with  such  power  that  five 
hundred  persons  dated  their  conversion  or  some  definite  uplift 
in  their  spiritual  life  from  that  sermon. 

A mother  once  came  to  me  in  great  distress  about  her  boy, 
one  of  the  most  incorrigible  children  I ever  knew.  "What  shall 
I do?”  she  cried.  "Pray.”  She  did  with  a new  definiteness  and 
earnestness  and  faith.  The  change  came  soon,  if  not  immedi- 
ately, and  the  change  continues  to  this  day.  We  can  all  have 
power  in  our  work,  if  we  will  only  believe  God’s  promises 
regarding  prayer,  and  meet  the  conditions  of  prevailing  prayer, 
and  lay  hold  upon  God  with  an  importunity,  a holy  boldness, 
that  will  not  take  no  for  an  answer. 

9.  But  the  man  of  prayer  cannot  only  have  power  in  his  own 
life  and  service;  he  can  have  power  in  the  life  and  service  of 
others.  Prayer  has  power  to  bring  salvation  to  others.  "If  any 
man  see  his  brother  sin  a sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall 
ask,  and  he  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not  unto 
death”  (I  John  5 : 16) . Prayer  avails  for  the  salvation  of  others 
where  every  effort  for  their  salvation  fails.  There  is  little  doubt 


66 


Fullness  of  Power 


that  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  most  dangerous  human  enemy  the 
church  of  Christ  ever  had,  became  Paul  the  apostle  in  answer 
to  prayer.  There  have  been  countless  instances  where  men 
and  women  seemingly  past  all  hope  have  been  converted  in 
most  direct  and  unmistakable  answer  to  prayer. 

Prayer  will  bring  blessing  upon  a church.  It  will  settle 
church  quarrels,  allay  misunderstandings,  root  out  heresy  and 
bring  down  gracious  revivals  from  God. 

Dr.  Spencer  tells,  in  his  Pastor’s  Sketches,  how  a great  re- 
vival was  brought  down  upon  his  church  by  the  prayers  of  a 
godly  old  man  who  was  shut  up  in  his  room  by  lameness.  In 
Philadelphia  during  the  pastorate  of  Dr.  Thomas  Skinner, 
three  men  of  God  came  together  in  his  study  to  pray.  "They 
literally  wrestled  in  prayer.”  From  this  meeting  sprang  up  a 
powerful  revival  in  that  city.  One  of  the  most  notable,  wide- 
spread and  enduring  revivals  ever  known  in  this  land,  according 
to  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Finney,  arose  from  the  prayers 
of  a humble  woman  who  had  never  seen  a revival,  but  was 
led  to  lay  hold  of  God  for  this. 

One  of  the  greatest  needs  of  the  hour  is  that  some  of  God’s 
children  should  devote  themselves  to  calling  upon  God  until 
He  visits  this  land  again  with  a mighty  outpouring  of  His 
Spirit.  There  have  been  in  times  past  great  revivals  without 
very  much  preaching,  and  with  almost  no  machinery.  There 
has  never  been  a great  and  true  revival  without  much  prayer. 
Many  modern  so-called  revivals  are  gotten  up  by  man’s  ma- 
chinery. Genuine  revivals  are  brought  down  by  prayer. 

Prayer  will  bring  wisdom  and  power  to  ministers  of  the 
Gospel.  Paul  was  a matchless  preacher  and  worker,  but  he  so 
deeply  felt  the  need  of  the  prayers  of  God’s  people,  that  he 
asked  for  them  from  every  church  to  which  he  wrote  save 
one  (the  backslidden  church  in  Galatia).  It  has  been  demon- 
strated again  and  again  that  prayer  can  transform  a poor 
preacher  into  a good  one.  If  you  are  not  satisfied  with  your 


The  Power  of  Prayer 


67 


pastor,  pray  for  him.  Keep  on  praying  for  him  and  you  will 
soon  have  a better  minister.  If  you  think  your  present  minister 
a pretty  good  one,  you  can  make  him  far  better  by  more 
prayer.  Little  do  many  Christians  realize  how  much  they  have 
to  do  with  the  powerful  or  powerless  preaching  their  pastor 
gives  them  by  their  prayer  or  neglect  of  prayer. 

But  the  power  of  prayer  reaches  across  the  sea  and  around 
the  earth.  We  can  contribute  to  the  conversion  of  the  heathen 
and  the  evangelizatipn  of  the  world  by  our  prayers.  The 
prayers  of  believers  in  America  have  brought  down  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  in  India  and  China.  Doubtless  more  men  and 
more  money  are  needed  for  foreign  mission  work,  but  the 
greatest  need  of  foreign  mission  work  is  prayer.  It  is  a sad 
fact  that  much  money  given  to  foreign  mission  work  has  been 
largely  wasted.  There  has  not  been  enough  intelligent  prayer 
back  of  the  giving. 

There  is  mighty  power  in  prayer.  It  has  much  to  do  with 
our  obtaining  fullness  of  power  in  Christian  life  and  service. 
The  one  who  will  not  take  time  for  prayer  may  as  well  resign 
all  hope  of  obtaining  the  fullness  of  power  God  has  for  him. 
It  is  "they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord"  who  "shall  renew  their 
strength"  (Isa.  40:31).  Waiting  upon  the  Lord  means  some- 
thing more  than  spending  a few  minutes  at  the  beginning  and 
close  of  each  day  running  through  some  stereotyped  form  of 
request.  "WAIT  UPON  THE  LORD.”  True  prayer  takes 
time  and  thought,  but  it  is  the  great  timesaver.  At  all  events, 
if  we  are  to  know  fullness  of  power,  we  must  be  men  and 
women  of  prayer. 


CHAPTER  V 


The  Power  of  a 
Surrendered  Life 


Power  BELONGETH  mto  Goi,"  but  there  is 
one  condition  upon  which  that  power  is  bestowed  upon  us. 
That  condition  is  absolute  surrender  to  Him.  In  Romans  6:13, 
we  read, 

"Neither  yield  ye  your  members  as  instruments  of  un- 
righteousness unto  sin:  hut  yield  yourselves  unto  God,  as 
those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead,  and  your  members  as 
instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God.” 

Again  in  Romans  6:22,  we  read, 

"But  now  being  made  free  from  sin,  and  become  servants 
to  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  ever- 
lasting life.” 

The  great  secret  of  blessedness  and  power  is  found  in  these 
verses.  "Yield  yourselves  unto  God” — ^the  whole  secret  is  found 
in  those  words.  The  word  translated  "yield”  in  the  A.V.  is 
rendered  "present”  in  the  R.V.  It  means,  to  put  at  one’s  dis- 
posal. "Put  yourselves  at  God’s  disposal”  is  the  thought.  In 
other  words,  surrender  yourselves  absolutely  to  God,  to  be  His 
property,  for  Him  to  do  with  you  what  He  will,  and  use  you 
as  He  will.  That  is  the  wisest  thing  anyone  can  do  with  him- 

69 


70 


Fullness  of  Power 


self.  By  that  act  he  has  secured  all  the  blessedness  that  is  jx)s- 
sible  to  man,  and  day  by  day,  and  year  by  year,  it  will  be 
bestowed  upon  him  in  ever-increasing  measure. 

If  anyone  asks,  "What  is  the  one  thing  for  me  to  do  if  I 
wish  to  know  all  that  God  has  for  me?,”  the  answer  is  very 
simple.  Surrender  absolutely  to  God;  say  to  Him,  "Heavenly 
Father,  henceforth  I have  no  will  of  my  own;  Thy  will  be  done 
in  me,  through  me,  by  me,  and  regarding  me,  in  all  things,  I 
put  myself  unreservedly  in  Thy  hands;  now  do  with  me  just 
what  Thou  wilt,”  When  one  does  that,  God,  who  is  infinite 
love,  and  infinite  wisdom,  and  infinite  power,  does  the  very 
best  thing  with  that  one.  We  may  not  see  at  once  that  it  is 
the  best  thing,  but  it  is,  and  sooner  or  later  it  will  be  seen. 
Sooner  or  later  God  floods  the  heart  of  him  who  surrenders 
absolutely  to  Him  with  light,  and  joy,  and  fills  his  life  with 
power.  Absolute  surrender  to  God  is  the  secret  of  blessedness 
and  power.  Let  us  look  at  some  of  the  things  that  are  definitely 
said  in  the  Bible  to  come  from  absolute  surrender, 

1,  The  first  of  these  you  will  find  in  John  7:17,  R,V,: 

"If  any  man  willeth  to  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the 
teaching,  , . 

Knowledge  of  the  truth  comes  with  the  surrender  of  the 
will.  Nothing  so  clears  the  spirimal  vision  as  surrender  to  the 
will  of  God,  "God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all” 
(I  John  1:5),  Surrender  to  Him  opens  our  eyes  to  the  light 
which  He  Himself  is.  It  brings  us  at  once  into  harmony  with 
all  truth.  Nothing  so  blinds  the  spiritual  vision  as  self-will 
or  sin,  I have  seen  questions  which  bothered  men  for  years 
solved  in  a very  short  time  when  those  men  simply  surrendered 
to  God,  What  was  dark  as  night  before  has  become  as  light 
as  day. 

An  unsurrendered  will  lies  back  of  almost  all  the  skepticism 
in  the  world.  Oh  you  who  are  filled  with  doubts  and  ques- 


The  Power  of  a Surrendered  Life 


71 


tions,  would  you  have  certainty  instead  of  doubt?  Yield  your- 
selves to  God.  Oh  you  who  are  floundering  in  the  mire,  would 
you  get  your  feet  on  the  solid  rock?  Yield  yourselves  to  God. 
Oh  you  who  are  trying  to  feel  your  way  in  the  dark,  would 
you  see  your  path  plain  before  you?  Yield  yourselves  to  God. 
The  greatest  truths,  the  truths  of  most  significance  for  time 
and  for  eternity,  cannot  be  learned  by  mere  investigation  and 
study.  They  cannot  be  reasoned  out.  They  must  be  seen.  The 
only  one  who  can  see  them  is  the  one  whose  eye  is  cleared  by 
absolute  surrender  to  God.  "If  therefore  thine  eye  be  single,” 
says  Jesus,  "thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light.  But  if  thine 
eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  darkness  . . .”  (Matt. 
6:22,  23).  A surrendered  life  and  will  is  the  secret  of  light 
and  knowledge.  Many  a man  has  confided  to  me  how  he  was 
wandering  in  the  dark,  not  knowing  what  he  believed,  and  not 
quite  sure  if  he  believed  anything.  To  such  I have  put  the 
questions:  "Will  you  surrender  your  will  to  God?  Will  you 
give  yourself  up  to  God,  for  Him  to  do  what  He  will  with 
you?”  And  not  a single  one  who  has  done  it  but  has  soon 
said,  "My  doubts  are  gone,  my  uncertainties  have  gone,  my 
darkness  is  gone.  It  is  all  light  now.” 

2.  The  next  result  of  a surrendered  will  and  life  is  power 
in  prayer.  The  greatest  secret  of  prevailing  prayer  is  that 
which  John  records  from  his  own  joyous  experience  in  I John 
3:22, 

"And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  because  we 
keep  his  commandments,  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleas- 
ing in  his  sight." 

Just  note  those  wonderful  words  "whatsoever  we  ask,  we 
receive  of  him.”  Think  of  it!  not  one  prayer,  great  or  small, 
that  fails  to  get  what  is  sought.  Then  note  the  reason:  "Be- 
cause we  keep  his  commandments,  and  do  those  things  that  are 
pleasing  in  his  sight.”  A life  entirely  surrendered  to  the  doing 


72 


Fullness  of  Power 


of  God’s  will  as  revealed  in  His  Word,  and  to  doing  the  things 
that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight;  a life  wholly  surrendered  to 
God’s  will  and  pleasure,  a life  wholly  at  God’s  disposal,  this 
is  the  secret  of  prevailing  prayer. 

Do  you  ask  why  you  do  not  get  what  you  ask,  why  you 
cannot  say  like  John:  "Whatsoever  I ask  I get’’?  It  is  not  be- 
cause he  was  an  apostle  and  you  are  just  an  everyday  Christian. 
It  was  because  he  could  say,  "I  keep  his  commandments,  and 
do  those  things  [and  them  only]  which  are  pleasing  in  his 
sight,”  and  you  can’t  say  that.  It  was  because  his  life  was  en- 
tirely surrendered  to  God,  and  yours  isn’t.  There  are  many 
people  greatly  puzzled  because  their  prayers  never  seem  to 
reach  the  ear  of  God,  but  fall  back  powerless  to  the  earth. 
There  is  no  mystery  about  it.  It  is  because  you  have  not  met 
the  one  great  fundamental  condition  of  prevailing  prayer — 
a surrendered  will,  a surrendered  life.  It  is  when  we  make 
God’s  will  ours  that  He  makes  our  wills  His.  "Delight  thy- 
self also  in  the  Lord;  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of 
thine  heart”  (Psa.  37:4).  Jesus  said  to  the  Father,  "Thou 
hearest  me  always”  (John  11:42).  But  why?  "Oh,”  you  say, 
"because  He  was  His  only  begotten  Son.”  Not  at  all,  but  be- 
cause Jesus  could  say,  "I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do 
mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me”  (John  6:38) ; 
and  again,  "My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me” 
(John  4:34);  and  again,  "Lo,  I come  ...  to  do  thy  will, 
OGod”  (Heb.  10:7). 

A surrendered  will  and  a surrendered  life  is  the  great  secret 
of  prevailing  prayer.  George  Mueller,  perhaps,  stands  out  as 
the  one  man  of  our  generation  who,  above  all  others,  has 
wrought  things  by  prayer.  Why?  Because  many  years  ago  he 
set  out  to  be  and  do  just  what  God  would  have  him  to  be 
and  do,  and  to  daily  and  deeply  ponder  God’s  Word,  that  he 
might  know  His  will.  He  yielded  himself  to  God.  There  is 


The  Power  of  a Surrendered  Life  73 

not  one  of  us  who  cannot  become  a mighty  prince  of  God  if 
we  will  do  the  same  thing. 

3.  The  next  result  of  a surrendered  will  is  a heart  overflow- 
ing with  joy.  In  the  face  of  awful  trial  and  agony  through 
which  He  was  to  pass,  Jesus  said  to  His  disciples; 

"If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  my  love; 
even  as  I have  kept  my  Father’s  commandments,  and  abide 
in  his  love.  These  things  have  I spoken  unto  you,  that  my 
joy  may  be  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  full.” — ^John 
15:10,  11,  R.V. 

Jesus  had  found  joy  in  keeping  His  Father’s  commandments, 
by  complete  surrender  to  His  will,  and  now,  if  they  would 
follow  on  in  that  path.  His  joy  would  be  in  them,  and  their 
joy  would  be  "fulfilled,”  or  filled  full.  This  is  the  only  way 
to  find  fullness  of  joy — complete,  unconditional  surrender  to 
God.  "Yield  yourselves  unto  God.”  There  is  no  very  great 
measure  of  joy  in  a half-hearted  Christian  life.  Many  so-called 
Christians  have  just  enough  religion  to  make  them  miserable. 
They  can  no  longer  enjoy  the  world,  and  they  have  not  en- 
tered into  the  "joy  of  the  Lord.”  There  they  stand,  deprived 
of  the  "leeks  and  the  onions  and  the  garlic”  of  Egypt,  and 
without  the  milk  and  honey  and  the  finest  of  the  wheat  of 
Canaan.  That  is  a wretched  place  to  be  in.  The  way  out  is 
simple,  absolute  surrender  to  God.  Then  your  joy  will  be 
fulfilled. 

I have  known  so  many  who  have  entered  into  this  fullness 
of  joy.  Sometimes  it  has  been  after  a great  struggle.  They 
were  so  afraid  to  yield  absolutely  to  God,  so  afraid  to  say: 
"O  God,  I put  myself  unreservedly  into  thy  hands;  do  with 
me  what  you  please.”  They  were  afraid  God  would  ask  some 
hard  thing,  afraid  God  might  whisper  "China,”  "India,”  or 
"Africa,”  and  sometimes  He  has.  Sometimes  there  has  been 
what  to  the  world  seemed  great  sacrifice,  the  giving  up  of 


74 


Fullness  of  Power 


cherished  ambitions,  the  giving  up  of  those  dearly  loved,  the 
giving  up  of  very  much  money,  perhaps  all  one  had.  But  there 
has  been  joy,  joy  "fulfilled,”  joy  filled  full. 

In  one  case  I have  in  mind  there  was  great  pain,  as  one  lay 
upon  his  back  with  a broken  leg  in  a cast,  but  there  was  joy, 
such  overflowing  joy  that  the  sufferer  lay  there  with  dancing 
eyes  and  radiant  face  and  throbbing  heart  shouting,  "Glory, 
glory,  glory!” 

There  is  but  one  way  to  find  that  fullness  of  joy — a sur- 
rendered life.  A will  and  life  completely  surrendered  to  the 
God  of  love  will  bring  joy  under  all  circumstances.  In  the 
olden  days  one  who  was  thus  surrendered  to  God  was  led  out 
to  be  burned  at  the  stake,  and  he  threw  his  arms  around  the 
stake  and  cried  out,  "Welcome,  cross  of  Christ!  Welcome 
eternal  life!” 

4.  The  next  result  of  a surrendered  life  is  Christ  manifesting 
Himself  to  us.  On  the  night  in  which  Jesus  was  betrayed.  He 
said  to  His  disciples: 

"He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he 
it  is  that  loveth  me:  and  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved 
of  my  Father,  and  1 will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself 
to  him!' — ^John  14:21. 

A surrender  of  self  to  Christ  brings  Christ  to  us.  The  full 
manifestation  of  Jesus  lies,  it  is  true,  in  that  future  glad  day 
when  "the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump 
of  God  ...”  (I  Thess.  4:16).  But  there  is  a present  manifes- 
tation of  Jesus  to  us  now,  when  the  Son  and  the  Father  come 
unto  us  and  make  their  abode  with  us  (John  14:23).  He 
will  manifest  Himself  unto  us.  "I  don’t  know  what  that  means,” 
some  will  say.  Have  you  yielded  yourself  to  Him,  are  you 
keeping  His  commandments,  not  asking  which  commandment 
is  great  and  which  is  small,  which  is  important,  and  which  is 


The  Power  of  a Surrendered  Life 


75 


unimportant,  but  only  asking  which  commandment  is  His,  and 
keeping  that?  If  you  are,  you  will  know  what  it  is  to  have  Him 
manifest  Himself  unto  you,  and  that  is  joy.  We  are  told  in 
one  place,  "Then  were  the  disciples  glad,  when  they  saw  the 
Lord”  (John  20:20).  You  will  be  glad,  when  you  see  the 
Lord,  and  you  will  see  Him  when  you  go  to  Him  and  say: 
"I  surrender  my  life  absolutely  to  Thee;  now  show  me  Thy- 
self.” 

5.  One  more  result  of  the  surrendered  will  and  life.  Peter 
tells  it  in  Acts  5:32, 

..  The  Holy  Ghost,  whom  God  hath  given  to  them 

that  obey  him.” 

The  surrendered  will  and  life  is  the  great  secret  of  receiving 
the  Holy  Ghost.  All  turns  upon  this.  We  may  deal  with  indi- 
vidual sins,  and  we  may  cry  to  God  for  the  filling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  but  unless  there  is  total  surrender  to  God  at  the  center 
of  our  being,  unless  we  yield  ourselves  to  God,  nothing  is  likely 
to  come  of  it.  Oh,  how  many  have  longed,  and  prayed,  and 
agonized  that  the  Holy  Spirit  might  come  upon  them,  but  He 
came  not.  There  was  no  complete  surrender,  there  was  no 
yielding  of  self  to  God.  And  then  they  have  yielded  themselves 
to  God.  They  have  bowed  their  faces  and  said:  "O  God,  I 
yield,  I give  myself  up  utterly  to  Thee.  I place  myself  unre- 
servedly at  Thy  disposal.  I hold  nothing  back,  and  I hold  back 
from  nothing  that  Thou  biddest,”  and,  as  they  have  bowed, 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  fallen  upon  them.  Perhaps  it  was  with 
great  surging  waves  of  power  and  joy;  perhaps  in  a gentle 
calm  that  stole  over  their  whole  being;  perhaps  in  a still  small 
voice  that  whispered:  ".  . . If  we  ask  any  thing  according  to 
his  will,  he  heareth  us:  And  if  we  know  that  He  hear  us,  what- 
soever we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  that  we 
desired  of  him”  (I  John  5:l4,  15).  But  whatever  way  He 
came.  He  came;  and  when  He  came,  power  came.  The  great 


76 


Fullness  of  Power 


secret  of  power  for  God  is  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  us  (Acts  1:8). 
And  the  great  secret  of  the  Holy  Ghost  coming  upon  us  is 
the  surrendered  will,  a yielded  life.  Oh,  how  wondrous,  how 
blessed,  how  glorious  is  the  Holy  Spirit’s  power!  Will  you 
have  it,  my  brother?  Will  you  have  it,  my  sister?  ".  . . Yield 
yourselves  unto  God,  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead, 
and  your  members  as  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God” 
(Rom  6:13).  Will  you  do  it?  Will  you  do  it  now?  We  have 
seen  in  previous  chapters  the  Power  of  the  Word  of  God,  the 
Power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Power  of  Prayer,  but  the  one 
great  condition  of  obtaining  the  power  of  each  and  all  in  our 
own  life  and  service  is  a surrendered  will,  a life  surrendered 
absolutely,  unreservedly,  totally  to  God.  Will  you  yield? 

Oh,  how  foolish,  how  utterly  foolish,  are  those  who  will  not 
yield,  or  who  hesitate  to  yield  themselves  unto  God!  You  are 
robbing  yourself  of  all  that  makes  life  really  worth  living,  and 
that  makes  eternity  rosy  and  golden  with  gladness,  beauty,  and 
glory.  Will  you  yield  today? 


THE  POWER  OF  PENTECOST 

or  The  Fullness  of  the  Spirit 

By  JOHN  R.  RICE,  D.D.,  Litt.D. 

This  book  was  seventeen  years  In  preparation. 

It  Is  the  product  of  such  toll  and  tears  and 
prayer  and  such  years  of  Bible  searching  and 
waiting  on  God  as  must  surely  entitle  It  to  a 
hearing  among  honest  Christians. 

Here  is  a new  and  vigorous  Scriptural 
analysis  of  the  meaning  of  Pentecost. 

Here  is  scholarly  yet  simple  and  lucid 
discussion  of  the  terms  ‘‘filled  with  the 
Spirit,”  “baptized  with  the  Spirit,”  “the 
gift  of  the  Spirit,”  and  kindred  terms. 

You  will  find  here  the  most  kindly,  thor- 
ough, satisfying  discussion  of  the  tongues 
question,  basing  every  conclusion  on  the 
Scriptures. 

But  more  important  yet,  here  is  the  Bible  teaching  of  Spurgeon, 
Finney,  Moody,  Torrey,  Chapman  and  Sunday — the  great  soul  win- 
ners of  modern  times — on  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Going  back 
beyond  the  modern  fad  of  the  Darbyites  and  the  ultradispensational- 
ists.  Dr.  Rice  has  studied  all  the  Scriptures  anew  and  here  presents 
the  Bible  doctrine  on  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  it  has  been  held 
by  the  mightiest  men  of  God  in  all  ages.  Here  is  the  clearest  Bible 
teaching  in  any  book  since  Moody  and  Torrey  died,  on  how  to  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit,  how  to  have  the  mighty  power  of  God  for  soul  win- 
ning and  witnessing. 


CHAPTER  TITLES: 


1.  The  Lost  Secret — Power 

2.  The  Usual  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

3.  Jesus,  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

4.  Misunderstood  Pentecost 

5.  Spirit-Filled  Means  Empowered  Wit- 
nessing 

6.  Bible  Terminology  for  the  Power  of 
Pentecost 

7.  The  Fullness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
the  Ministry  Gifts  in  0.  T.  and  New 

8.  Speaking  with  Tongues 

9.  The  Power  of  Pentecost  for  Every 
Christian 


10.  How  to  Be  Filled  with  the  Holy 
Spirit:  Whole-hearted  Obedience  to 
Christ’s  Soul-Winning  Command 

11.  Prayer — A Condition  of  Holy  Spirit 
Fullness 

12.  Why  Prevailing,  Persistent  Praying 
Is  Necessary  for  Holy  Spirit  Power 

13.  Do  You  Really  Want  to  Bo  Spirit- 
Filled? 

14.  How  Great  Soul  Winners  Were  Filled 
with  the  Holy  Spirit 

15.  Claim  Your  Blessing! 


HOLLAND  EVANGELIST  BLESSED:  “7  thank  my  heavenly 
Father  for  such  a hook  ...  7 can  tell  you  it  was  the  answer  to  me, 
while  there  was  still  a cry  in  my  heart,  ^How  will  1 get  a life  by  the 
power  of  God?*  And  now  I can  tell  you,  during  reading  your  hook  I 
saw  the  way  and  now  really  have  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  my 


life,** — G.  Ernste. 

Order  today  1 441  pages,  beautifully  bound,  carefully  Indexed 


. $3.00 


Order  from  your  book  dealer  or 

SWORD  OF  THE  LORD  PUBLISHERS.  Wheaton,  Illinois 


IS  JESUS  GOD? 

BY  DR.  JOHN  R.  RICE 
205  PAGES.  PRICE  $2.00 

The  first  chapter,  'Ts  Jesus  God?"  was  written 
in  answer  to  a modernist  who  heard  Dr.  Rice  preach 
in  a tent  revival  campaign  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  A burn- 
ing, convicting  chapter  showing  how  no  one  has  a 
right  to  be  called  a Christian  or  even  claim  to  be 
a friend  of  Christ  except  as  he  accepts  Christ  as  the 
virgin-bom  Saviour  and  the  Bible  as  the  very  Word 
of  God. 

Chapter  two,  "A  Letter  to  a Modernist,"  is  a sec- 
ond letter  to  the  modernist,  dealing  with  the  com- 
plaints of  the  modernists  about  idolizing  the  Bible, 
about  narrowness,  about  being  slaves  to  the  letter 
of  the  Bible,  and  showing  how  Jesus  and  His  dis- 
ciples regarded  and  rebuked  infidels  and  un- 
believers. 

Chapter  three  is  "The  Virgin-Bom  Saviour."  Here  is  explicit  proof  that  the  Bible 
categorically  and  repeatedly  affirms  the  virgin  birth  of  Christ;  that  His  virgin  birth 
is  implied  throughout  the  Scriptures.  Here  the  five  principal  arguments  of  unbelievers 
against  the  virgin  birth  are  answered  conclusively,  convincingly,  thrillingly. 

Chapter  four  is  "Old  Testament  Prophecies  Miraculously  Fulfilled  in  Christ." 
From  these  clearly  stated  prophecies  we  have  infallible  proof  of  the  deity  of  Christ 
and  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible.  There  is  wonderful  strengthening  for  the  Christian's 
faith  and  powerful  ammunition  against  unbelievers. 

Chapter  five  is  "The  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  Possibly  the  strongest  in  the 
book,  this  will  convince  every  openrminded  reader,  we  believe,  that  the  resurrection 
is  the  most  easily  provable  fact  about  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  literally,  as  the  Bible 
soys,  "many  infallible  proofs;"  here  they  are  given. 

The  last  long,  tremendous  chapter  is  "What  Is  Wrong  With  a Modernist."  Shows 
he  is  an  infidel,  not  a believer;  a lost  sinner,  not  a Christian;  a fool,  not  a wise 
man;  an  insincere  hypocrite,  not  an  honest  doubter;  and  is  under  an  awful  curse 
of  God. 

Honest  scoffers  and  doubters  can  be  converted.  Word  has  already  come  from 
preachers  led  back  to  faith  in  Christ  and  the  Bible,  away  from  the  modernism  taught 
them  in  seminaries,  through  these  articles  when  published  in  THE  SWORD  OF  THE 
LORD.  We  believe  this  book  will  save  thousands  from  ship-wreck  of  the  faith. 
Ought  to  be  in  the  hands  of  every  ministerial  student,  every  modernist  preacher  and, 
in  fact,  every  earnest  Christian  worker. 

Beautifully  printed  and  bound;  large,  clear  type;  simple,  pungent  Christian 
language.  Irrefutable  proof,  a mighty  challenge!  Help  spread  this  book.  A A 

Price  


Newlyweds  . . . Engaged  Couples  . . . Mature  Parents 

Will  Welcome  This  Bible  Manual  of  22 
Chapters  on 

THE  HOME: 

COURTSHIP,  MARRIAGE  AND  CHILDREN 

By  EVANGELIST  JOHN  R.  RICE,  D.D.,  Litt.D 

This  is  a Christian  guide  showing  the  basis  of 
a happy  marriage  and  home.  In  the  most  deli- 
cate chapters  of  the  book  there  is  nothing  ques- 
tionable, nothing  unchaste  or  unchristian.  De- 
voted and  widely  known  pastors  and  other  Chris- 
tians, after  careful  examination,  all  insisted  that 
these  chapters  be  included,  since  nowhere  else 
could  Christian  people  find  in  print  reverent 
Bible  teaching  on  the  sacred  duties  and  privi- 
leges of  marriage  and  the  home.  READ  OVER 
THE  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  FOR  DE- 
TAILS OF  MATERIAL  COVERED. 

Destined  to  change  lives,  to  lead  many  to 
Christ,  to  cause  thousands  of  people  to  start  the 
family  altar.  Young  people  need  it.  Pastors 
and  Christian  workers  will  find  it  indispensable 
in  counselling  questioning  youth.  A striking 
insert  of  four  pages  in  the  front  of  the  book 
containing  a marriage  license,  a family  record, 
and  a Madonna-like  picture  of  Mrs.  Rice  and 
their  daughter,  Joy,  help  to  make  it  ideal  for 
a wedding  gift.  It  will  put  many  marriages  on 
a firmer  Christian  basis. 

. . Dr.  Rice,  without  fear  and  trembling, 
discusses  the  many  sex  problems  of  marriage 
sanely,  Scripturally,  reverently,  authoritatively 
and,  in  the  opinion  of  this  reviewer  has  given 
to  the  American  home  the  best  book  he  has  yet 
published." — Congregational  Beacon, 

381  pages,  22  long  chapters,  beauti-^^ 
fully  cloth  bound,  price ,,^2^50 

Order  any  or  all  of  these  books  from 
your  hookdealer  or  from 

SWORD  OF  THE  LORD  PUBLISHERS 

214  West  Wesley  Street 

WHEATON 


1.  Marriage  and  Home. 

2.  Courtship  and  the  Dan- 
ger of  Petting. 

3.  Principles  of  a Successful  | 
and  Happy  Marriage. 

4.  Some  Things  That  Should 
Delay  Marriage. 

5.  Some  Should  Never 
Marry. 

6.  Man,  God's  Deputy  as 
Head  of  the  Home. 

7.  Wives  Should  Be  Subject 
to  Husbands. 

8.  Letter  to  a Young  Hus- 
band. 

9.  Normal  Sex  Life  in 
Marriage. 

10.  The  Blessing  of  Children. 

n . Birth  Control. 

Correction  and  Discipline 
of  Children. 

"Honor  Thy  Father  and 
Thy  Mother." 

14.  Family  Worship  in  the 
Home. 

15.  Prayer  In  the  Home. 

16.  Teaching  Children  the 
Bible. 

17.  Winning  Children  to 
Christ. 

18.  Character  Building  In  the 
Home. 

19.  Cooperating  with  Church, 
School,  and  Community. 

20.  Adultery,  the  Ruin  of 
Marriage  and  Morals. 

21.  Divorce,  the  Wreck  of 
Marriage. 

22.  Making  Christ  the  Head 
of  Home. 


12 


13 


ILLINOIS 


DATE  DUE 

1 

1 

OEMCO  NO.  38-298 

GOULD  LIBRARY 
EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 

NEASE  LIBRARY  EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 

BV4501  .T65  GOULD 

Torrey,  R.  A./How  to  obtain  fullness  of 


3 2999  00024  6756 


Gould  BV  4501  T65  608 

Torrey,  Reuben. 

How  to  obtain  fullness  of 
I power  in  Christian  life... 

DATE 

ISSUED  TO 

Gould  BV  4501  T65  608 

Torrey,  Reuben. 

How  to  obtain  fullness  of 
power  in  Christian  life... 


OChCO 


READ  THIS  BOOK! 


Dr.  R.  A.  Torrey,  who  was  born  in  1856  and  died  in  1928, 
was  eminently  qualified  to  write  this  book.  He  received  both 
A.B.  and  Divinity  degrees  from  Yale  University,  studied  at 
Leipzig  and  Erlangen  in  Germany,  was  superintendent  of 
City  Missions  in  Minneapolis,  then  was  associated  with  D.  L. 
Moody  as  superintendent  of  Moody  Bible  Institute  for  nine- 
teen years.  Twelve  years  he  was  pastor  of  the  famous  Moody 
Church  in  Chicago.  God  called  him  out  after  Moody's  death 
into  world-wide  revival  services  in  principal  nations  of  the 
world  as  well  as  America.  He  was  one  of  the  greatest  evan- 
gelists who  ever  lived,  and  one  of  the  greatest  Bible  teachers. 
He  was  Dean  of  the  Bible  Institute  of  Los  Angeles  in  1912  to 
1924,  pastor  of  the  Church  of  the  Open  Door  of  Los  Angeles 
for  nine  years.  He  is  the  author  of  many  great  books  includ- 
ing How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ,  What  the  Bible  Teaches,  How 
to  Pray,  etc.  Torrey  knew  fullness  of  power! 

In  this  little  book  is  a life-transforming  blessing  for  you. 
READ  IT  AND  LEARN 

HOW  TO  OBTAIN  FULLNESS  OF  POWER 

$1.50 


SWORD  OF  THE  LORD  PUBLISHERS 
WHEATON ILLINOIS 


