Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



ieWWi . 1x^\crv. . ,So f 




I I IW I iMil* MM— A— 



t /^x«s«^| 



%MH ihU»SH^ f ''^' 



i-52.0 



WORKS BY R. A. TORREY 

Superintendent of the Moody BtoUTJnstttuU, Chicago 



Revival Addresses. 1* mo cloth, Net $1.00. 

New Revival Addresses* A second series. 12mo, 
cloth, net, $1.00. 

What the Bible Teaches. (Fifth edition.) A 
thorough and comprehensive study on what the 
Bible has to say concerning the great doctrines of 
which it treats. Large 8vo, 560 pages, $2.60. 

Bow to Work for Christ. A compendium of effec- 
tive methods. Uniform with *'What the Bible 
Teaches," 8vo, doth, $2.60, 

Bow to Promote and Conduct a Successful 
Revival. Edited by Mr. Torrey. 12mo, cloth, 858 
pages, gilt top. $1,60. 

Bow to Brinsr Men to Christ. (Nineteenth Thous- 
and.) 18mo, cloth, 76 cents. 

How to Study the Bible for Greatest Profit. 

(Fourth edition.) The methods and fundamental 
conditions of Bible study that yield the largest 
results. 12mo. cloth, 76 cents. 

Bow to Pray. (Twenty-second Thousand,) The 
need of prayer and the need of revival; their rela- 
tion and effect. 12mo, cloth, 60 cents; paper, 15 
cents. 

How to Obtain Fullness of Power in Christian 
Life and Service. (Second edition.) 12mo, cloth, 
60 cents. 

'She Divine Origin of the Bible. (Second edition.) 
Its authority and power demonstrated and difficul- 
ties solved . 12mo, cloth, 60 cents. 

She Gist of the Lesson (Annually.) A pest-pocket 
exposition of the Sunday-school lessons. Leather, 
net, 26 cents. Interleaved edition, gilt edges, net, 
60 cents. 

The Baptism with the Holy Spirit. (Fourth 
edition.) 12mo, cloth, 60 cents. 

A Test-Pocket Companion for Christian Workers* 

(Twenty-fifth Thousand.) Long 18mo, flexible 
feather, net, 26 cents; interleaved, gilt edges, net 60 
cents. 

TenBeasons Why I Believe the Bible is word of 
God. (Seventh Thousand.) lGmo, paper, 15 cents. 

Oug-ht Christians to Keep the Sabbath f (Second 

edition.) Paper, net, 10 cents. 



HOW TO OBTAIN 

FULNESS OF POWER 

IN CHRISTIAN LIFE AND SERVICE 






r/a/torrey 



Author of " How to Bring Men to 

Christ," "How to Study the Bible for Greatest Profit," "Tat 

Baptism with the Holy Spirit," etc 



•*i 



'God hath spoken once; twic$ have I heard this, that power 
belongeth unto God, "—A. 62: 11. 

"Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might >"—E ph. b: 10 

m 

" Ye are strong, and the Word of Godabideth in you*"—i J no. 2 : 14 

"Strengthened with power through His Spirit in the inward 
tnan."—Eph. j: /6, E. V. 



\ 



FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 

new York .\ Chicago .\ Toronto 

Publishers of Evangelical Literature, 



9tmi*g H. RtvtU Cto*M*V< 






PREFACE 

From many earnest hearts there is rising a 
cry for more power: more power in our personal 
conflict with the world, the flesh, and the devil, 
more power in our work for others. The Bible 
^ makes the way to obtain this longed*for power 

^ very plain. There is no presumption in under- 

rt* taking to tell " How to obtain Fulness of 

i Power in Christian Life and Service "; for the 

^ Bible itself tells, and the Bible was intended to 

be understood. The Bible statement of the way 
is not mystical nor mysterious, it is very plain 
and straightforward. If we will only make per- 
sonal trial of " The Power of the Word of God," 
"The Power of the Blood of Christ," "The 
Power of the Holy Spirit," "The Power of 
Prayer," "The Power of a Surrendered Life," 
we will then know " The Fulness of Power in 
Christian Life and Service." We will try to 
make this plain in the following chapters. 

The present volume has been written partly 
in response to a request from some who have 

6 



6 PREFACE 

used the author's book "How to Bring Men to 
Christ," that he would write another book for 
use in the training of those who have come to 
Christ. But the book has also another and far 
more important purpose. There are many who 
do not even know that there is a life of abiding- 
rest, joy, satisfaction, and power; and many 
others who, while they think there must be 
something beyond the life they know, are in 
ignorance as to how to obtain it. This book is 
written to help them. 



CONTENTS 



Ohaptbb I. The Poweb op the Wobd 

op God 7 

Ohapteb II. The Poweb op the Blood 

op Chbist . . . . . .27 

Ohapteb III. The Poweb op the Holy 

Spibit 42* 

Ohapteb IV. The Poweb of Pbayeb . 79 
Ohapteb V. The Poweb of a Subben- 

debed Life 96 



CHAPTER I 

THE POWER OP THE WOBD OP GOD 

"Power belongeth unto God." (Ps. 62: 11.) 
The great reservoir of the power that belongeth 
unto God, is His own Word — the Bible. If we 
wish to make it ours, we must go to that book. 
Yet people abound in the church who are pray- 
ing for power and neglecting the Bible. Men 
are longing to have power for fruit- bearing in 
their own lives and yet forget that Jesus has 
said: "The seed is the Word of God." (Luke 
8: 11.) They are longing to have power to 
melt the cold heart and break the stubborn will, 
and yet forget that God has said: "Is not my^ i 
word like as fire, and like a hammer that break- \ ^ 
eth the rock in pieces?" (Jer. 23: 29.) If we 
are to obtain fulness of power in life and service 
we must feed upon the Word of God. There is 
no other food so strengthening. If we will not 
take time to study the Bible we cannot have 
power, any more than we can have physical 
power if we will not take time to eat nutritious 

food, 

9 



>t 



10 FULNESS OF POWEB 

Let us see what the Word of God has power 
to do: 

!• . Firs t of all, the Word of God h as power 
to convict of sin. In Acts 2: 37 we read: "Now 



when they heard this, they were pricked in 
their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest 
of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we 
do?" If we look back and see what it was they 
heard and that produced this deep conviction, 
we find that it was simply the Word of God. If 
you will read Peter's sermon, you will find it 
one of the most Biblical sermons ever preached. 
It was Scripture from beginning to end. It 
was, then, the Word of God, carried home by 
the Spirit of God, that pricked them to their 
heart. If you wish to produce conviction, you 
must give men the Word of God. I heard a 
man pray some time ago this prayer: "O God, 
convict us of sin." A very good prayer, but un- 
less you bring your soul in contact with that in- 
strument which God has appointed for the con- 
viction of sin, you will not have conviction of 
sin. If you wish to produce conviction in 
others, you must use the Word to do it. 
Not long ago a fine-looking young man came 
into our inquiry*room. I said to him: "Are 
you a Christian?" "No, sir." "Why not?" 
"I think Christianity is a first-rate thing, but I 



an 



THE POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD 11 

have not much feeling about this." " But," I 
said, "do you not know that you are a sin- 
ner?" He said: "Yes, sir, I suppose I am; but 
I am not very much of a sinner. I am a pretty 
good sort of a fellow." I replied: "So, my 
friend, you have not very much conviction of 
sin. I have something in my hand that is a di- 
vinely appointed instrument to produce convic- 
tion of sin." I opened my Bible to Matt. 22: 
37, 38 and asked him to read it. He read, 
" Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
mind. This is the first and great command- 
ment." "What commandment is that?" I 
asked. He replied: "The first and great com- 
mandment." " In the light of that, what must 
be the first and great sin?" He replied: "It 
must be to neglect to keep that commandment." 
"Have you kept it?" The Spirit of God took 
it home to his heart then and there. It was not 
long before we were kneeling, and he asking 
God for mercy through Christ. 

2. In the next place, the Word of God has pow- 
er to regenerate. In 1 Peter 1: 23 we read: " Be- 
ing born again, not of corruptible seed, but of 
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth 
and abideth forever." In James 1: 18 we read: 
" Of his own will begat he us with the Word 



12 FULNESS OP POWER 

of Truth, that we should be a kind of first- 
fruits of his creatures." If you wish to be 
born again, the way is very simple. Take the 
Word of God concerning Christ crucified and 
risen, and drop it into your heart by meditation 
upon it. Look to God by His Holy Spirit to 
quicken it, believe it with the heart, and the 
work is done. If you wish to see someone else 
born again, give him the Word of God. The 

process of regeneration on our side is the sim- 
plest thing in the world. On God's side it is 
mysterious, but with that we have nothing to 
do. The process is simply this: the human heart 
is the soil; you and I are sowers; the Word of 
God is the seed which we drop into that soil; 
God quickens it by His Holy Spirit and gives 
the increase (1 Cor. 3:6); the heart closes 
around the Word by faith, and the new life is the 
product. The new birth is simply the imparta- 
tion of a new nature, the impartation of God's 
nature. But how are we made partakers 
of God's nature? Read 2 Pet. 1:4 (K. V.) 
and the context: "That through these (ex- 
ceeding great and precious promises) ye may 
become partakers of the divine nature." That 
is all there is to it. The Word of God is the 
seed out of which the divine nature springs 
up in the human soul. 



THE POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD 13 

3. Again, the Word of God ha s power to pro- 
duce faith. In Rom. 10: 17 we read: "Faith 
cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word of 
God." You can never get faith by merely pray- 
ing; you can never get it by any effort of the 
will; you can never get it by trying to pump it 
up in any way. Faith is the product of a cer- 
tain cause, and that cause is the Word of God 
It is so, for example, with saving faith. Sup- 
pose you want a man to have saving faith. 
Simply give him something definite from God's 
Word upon which he can rest. The Philippian 
jailor asked: " Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" 
(Acts 16:30) and Paul answered: "Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved and thy house." But Paul did not stop 
there. Read the 32d verse: "And they spake 
unto him the Word of the Lord and to all that 
were in his house." They did not merely tell 
the Philippian jailor to believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and then leave him there flounder- 
ing in the dark without giving him something 
to believe, or something for his faith to rest 
upon. They gave that which God has ordained 
to produce faith. It is at this point that we 
often make a mistake. ^_We tell people, "Jie^ 
lieve, believe, believe," but do not sh ow them 
how; do not giv e them anything defi nite to be- 



14 FULNESS OF POWER 

lieve. The Biblical way and the intelligent way 
is, when you tell a man to believe, to give him 
something to believe. Give him, for example, 
Is. 53:6, and thus hold up Christ crucified; or 
give him 1 Pet. 2: 24. Here he has something 
for his faith to rest upon. Faith must have a 
foundation. Faith can not float in thin air. 
It is pitiable to see men told to believe, to be- 
lieve, to believe, and then given nothing to rest 
their faith upon. 

Not only saving faith comes through the 
Word of God, but prevailing faith in prayer 
does also. Suppose I read Mark 11: 24: " What 
things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe 
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them." 
I used to say, " The way to get anything I want 
is to believe I am going to get it." I would 
kneel down and pray and try to believe, but I 
did not get the things that I asked for. I had 
no real faith. Real faith must have a warrant. 
Before I can truly believe I am to receive what 
I ask, I must have a definite promise of God's 
Word, or a definite leading of the Holy Spirit, to 
rest my faith upon. What, then, shall we do? 
We come into God's presence. There is some- 
thing we desirfc. Now the question is, Is there 
any promise in God's Word regarding this 




THE POWEB OF THE WORD OP GOD 15 

which we desire? We look into the Word of 
God and find the promise. All we have to do 
is to spread that promise out before God. For 
example, we say: "Heavenly Father, we desire 
the Holy Spirit. Thou hast said in Thy word, 
1 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good 
gifts unto your children, how much more shall 
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to 
them that ask him? ' and Thou hast said again in 
Acts 2: 39 that 'the promise is unto you and 
your children and to them that are afar off, even 
as many as the Lord our God shall call.' I am 
a called man; I am a saved man; and here I have 
your word for it. You have promised it. I ask 
Thee now to fill me with the Holy Spirit." 
We then take 1 John 5: 14: 15, and say :"Father, 
this is the confidence I have in Thee, that, if I 
ask anything according to Thy will — and I 
know that this is according to Thy will — 
Thou hearest me, and, if I know that Thou 
hearest me, I know that I have the petition 
that I have asked of Thee." Then I rise up, 
standing upon this promise of God, and say: 
" It is mine," and it will be mine. The only 
way to have a faith that prevails in prayer is to 
study your Bible, and know the promises, and 
lay them before God when you pray. George 



16 FULNESS OP POWEB 

Mflller is one of the mightiest men of prayer in 
this century. But he always prepares for prayer 
by studying the Word. (Jno. 15: 7.) 

It is just the same with the faith that we 
desire instead of doubt. This also comes by 
the Word of God. Suppose you have a sceptic 
to deal with, and you wish that man to have 
faith. What will you do with him? Give him 
a book on Christian evidences? I have nothing 
to say against books on Christian evidences, 
but there is an inspired book on Christian evi- 
dences, and it is worth all the libraries ever writ- 
ten on this subject. Turn to John 20: 31: " But 
these are written that ye might believe that 
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that 
believing ye might have life through his name." 
Clearly, then, this book of John was given that, 
through what is "written" therein, men, "might 
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; 
and that believing they might have life through 
his name." The Gospel of John is an inspired 
book on Christian evidences. What, then, shall 
we do with ourselves if we are sceptics? What 
shall we do with others? First, find out 
whether their will is surrendered or not. " If 
any man willeth to do his will, he shall know of 
the teaching, whether it be of God, or whether 
I speak from myself." (Jno. 7: 17, R. V.) At 



THE POWER OP THE WORD OP GOD 17 

ter the will is surrendered, just say, " Take this 
book and read it thoughtfully and honestly and 
come back and tell me the result." The result 
is absolutely sure. There is no man, agnostic, 
infidel, or whatever you please, whose will is 
surrendered to the truth, w ho will take this book 
to God and ask Him to give him light, who will 
not come out believing in Jesus as the Christ, 
the Son of God. I have tried this with I know 
not how many men and women, and there has 
never been one exception to the rule laid down 
by Christ. It has always come out the same way. 
The faith that gets the victory over the 
world, the flesh and the devil, the faith that 
wins mighty victories for God, is also through 
the Word. (1 Jno. 5: 4; Eph. 6: 16; Heb. 
11: 33, 34.) Very early in my ministry I read 
a sermon by Mr. Moody. In it there was 
something to the effect that a man would not 
amount to anything if he had not faith. I said: 
" That sermon is true. I must have faith." I 
went to work and tried to work up faith. I did 
not succeed a bit. The more I tried to work 
up faith, the less I had. But one day I ran 
across this text: " Faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the word of God" (Kom. 10: 17), and 
I had learned the great secret of faith, one of 
the greatest secrets I have ever learned. I com- 



18 PULNESS OP POWER 

menoed to feed my faith on the Word of God, 
and as I have thus fed it, it has kept on grow- 
ing from that day to this. So in every aspect 
we see that faith cometh by hearing, and hear- 
ing by the Word of God. If we are to have 
faith— and if we are to have power for God we 
must have faith — we must feed steadily, largely, 
daily upon the Word of God. 

4. In the next place, the Word of God has 
power to cleanse. In Eph. 5: 25, 26, we read: 
"Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ 
also loved the church, and gave himself for it; 
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the 
washing of water by the Word." The Word of 
God has power not only to take impurity out 
of the heart, but to cleanse the outward life as 
well. If you wish a clean outward life, you 
must wash often by bringing your life in con- 
tact with the Word of God. If one lives in a 
city whose atmosphere is polluted with smoke, 
when he goes into the street his hands will be- 
come black. He must wash frequently if he 
wishes to keep clean. We all live in a world 
whose atmosphere is polluted; a very dirty world. 
As we go out from day to day, and come in con- 
tact with this dirty world, there is absolutely 
only one way to keep clean, and that is by tak- 
ing frequent baths in the Word of God. You 



THE POWER OP THE WORD OP GOD 19 

must bathe every day, and take plenty of time 
to do it. A daily, prolonged, thoughtful bath 
in the Word of God is the only thing that will 
keep a life clean. (Ps. 119: 9.) 

5. In the next place, the Word of God has 
power to build up. In Acts 20: 32 we read: "I 



commend you to God, and to the word of his 
grace, which is able to build you up." We hear 
a great deal in these days about character* 
building. The Word of God is that by which 
we must carry it on if it is to be done right. In 2 
Pet. 1 : 5-7 we have a picture of a seven*story* 
and-basement Christian. The great trouble 
to-day is we have so many one-story Christians, 
and the reason is neglect of the Word. In 
Pet. 2: 2 we have a similar thought expressed 
under a different figure. " As new-born babes, 
desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye 
may grow thereby." If we are to grow, we 
must have wholesome, nutritious food and plenty 
of it. The only spiritual food that contains all 
the elements necessary for symmetrical Christian 
growth is the Word of God. A Christian can 
no more grow as he ought without feeding 
frequently, regularly, and largely upon the 
Word of God, than a baby can grow as he ought 
without proper nutriment. 
6. In the next place, the Word of God has 



20 FULNESS OF POWEB 

power to make wise. Ps. 119: 130 is worthy of 
the most careful attention: "The entrance of 
thy words giveth ligljt; it giveth understanding 
unto the simple." There is more wisdom in 
the Bible than there is in all the other lit- 
erature of the ages. The one who studies 
the Bible, if he does not study any other book, 
will know more of real wisdom — wisdom that 
counts for eternity as well as time, wisdom 
that this perishing world needs to know, wis- 
dom for which hungry hearts are starving 
to-day — than the man who reads every other 
book and neglects his Bible. The man who 
studies the Bible and neglects all other books, 
will be wiser than the man who studies 
all other books and neglects the Bible. The 
man who studies the Bible will have more to 
say that is worth saying, and that wise people 
wish to hear, than any man who studies 
everything else and neglects the one book. 
This has been illustrated over and over again 
in the history of the church. The men who 
have greatly affected the spiritual history of 
this world, the men who have brought about great 
reformations in morals and doctrine, the men 
that others have flocked to hear and upon whose 
words people have hung, have been Bible men 
in every instance, and in many cases they knew 



THE POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD 21 

little beside the Bible. I have seen men and 
women without culture, who have had almost 
no advantages in school, but who knew their 
Bibles, and I would rather sit at their feet and 
learn the wisdom that falls from their lips, than 
listen to the man who knows much about 
philosophy and science and theology even, and 
does not know anything about the Word of God. 
There is wonderful force in the words of Paul 
to Timothy: " All scripture is given by inspi- 
ration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for 
reproof, for correction, for instruction in right- 
eousness; that the man of God may be perfect, 
thoroughly (the Revised Version says " com- 
pletely") furnished unto all good works.* 
Through what? Through the study of the 
Book. 

7. The Word of God has power to give as- 
surance of eternal life. In 1 John 5: 13, R. V. 9 
we read: " These things have I written unto you, 
that ye may know that ye have eternal life, even 
unto you that believe on the name of the Son 
of God." That is, the assurance of eternal life 
comes through what is " written." Suppose one 
has not assurance of salvation, what shall we 
do? Tell him to pray until he gets it? Not at 
all. Take him to some such passage as John 
3: 36, "He that believeth on the Son hath ever- 



22 FULNESS OF POWER 

lasting life." Hold him right to that point un- 
til he takes God's word for it, and then is sure 
that he has everlasting life because he believes 
on the Son, and because God says that " He 
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life. 

8. The Word of God has power to bring 
.jreacejnto .theheari In Ps. 85: 8 we read: "I 

will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he 
will speak peace unto his people, and to his 
saints." There are many people looking for 
peace to-day; longing for peace; praying for 
peace. But deep peace of heart comes from the 
study of the Word of God. There is for exam- 
ple one passage in the Bible which, if we feed 
upon it daily until it really gets into our heartfc 
and gets hold of us, will banish all anxiety for- 
ever. It is Rom. 8: 28, "And we know that all 
things work together for good to them that love 
God, to them who are called according to his 
purpose." Nothing can come to us that is not 
one of the "all things." If we really believe 
this passage, and it really takes hold upon us, 
whatever comes it will not disturb our peace. 

9. The Word of God has power to pr oduce 
joy. Jeremiah says in the 15th chapter, the 
16th verse: "Thy words were found, and I did 
eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy 
and rejoicing of mine heart." And Jesus said 



THE POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD 23 

in John 15: 11: "These things have I spoken 
unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and 
that your joy might be full." Clearly, then, 
fulness of joy comes through the Word of God. 
There is no joy on this earth from any worldly 
source like the joy that kindles and glows in 
the heart of a believer in Jesus Christ as he 
feeds upon the Word of God, and as the Word 
of God is brought home to his heart by the 
power of the Holy Spirit. 

10. Patience, comfort and hope also come 
through the Word of God. Rom. 15: 4. "For 
whatsoever things were written aforetime were 
written for our learning, that we through pa- 
tience and comfort of the Scriptures might have 
hope." 

11. Finally, the Word of God has power to 
pr otect from error and sin. In Acts 20: 29-32 
the apostle Paul warned the elders at Ephesus 
of the errors that would creep in among them, 
and he commended them, in closing, " to God 
and to the Word of His grace." In a similar 
way, Paul, writing to Timothy, the bishop of 
the same church, said: "But evil men and se- 
ducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, 
and being deceived. But continue thou in the 
things which thou bast learned and hast been 
assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned 



24 FULNESS OF POWER 

them; and that from a child .thou hast known 
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee 
wise unto salvation through faith which is in 
Christ Jesus." (2 Tim. 3:13-15.) The one 
who feeds constantly on the Word of God is 
proof against the multiplying errors of the day. 
It is simple neglect of the Word that has left 
so many a prey to the many false doctrines that 
the devil, in his subtilty, is endeavoring to in- 
sinuate into the church of Christ to*day. And 
the Word of God has not only power to protect 
from error, but from sin as well, In Ps. 119: 11 
we read: "Thy word have I hid in my heart, 
that I might not sin against thee." The man 
who feeds daily on the Word of God will be 
proof against the temptations of the devil. Any 
day we neglect to feed on the Word of God we 
leave an open door through which Satan is sure 
to enter into our hearts and lives. Even the 
Son of God himself met and overcame the 
temptations of the adversary by the Scriptures. 
To each of Satan's temptations He replied: "It 
is written" (Matt. 4: 4, 7, 10). Satan left the 
field completely vanquished. 

It is evident from what has been said that the 
first step toward obtaining fulness of power in 
Christian life and service is the study of the 
Word. There can be no fulness of power in 



THE POWEE OF THE WOBD OF GOD 25 

life and service if the Bible is neglected. In much 
that is now written on power, also in much that 
is said in conventions, this fact is overlooked. 
The work of the Holy Spirit is magnified, but 
the instrument through which the Holy Spirit 
works is largely forgotten. The result is tran- 
sient enthusiasm and activity, but no steady 
continuance and increase in power and useful- 
ness, We cannot obtain power, and we cannot 
maintain power, in our own lives, and in our 
work for others, unless there is deep and fre- 
quent meditation upon the Word of God. If 
our leaf is not to wither and whatsoever we do 
is to prosper, our delight must be in the law of 
the Lord and we must meditate therein day and 
night. (Ps. 1: 2, 3.) Of course, it is much 
easier, and therefore much more agreeable to 
our spiritual laziness, to go to a convention or 
revival meeting, and claim a " filling with the 
Holy Spirit," than it is to peg along day after 
day, month after month, year after year digging 
into the Word of God. But a "filling with the 
Spirit" that is not maintained by persistent 
study of the Word will soon vanish. It is well 
to bear in mind that precisely the results which 
Paul in one place ascribes to being "filled with 
the Spirit " (Eph. 5: 18-22) he in another place 
ascribes to letting "the word of Christ dwell in 



26 FULNESS OF POWER 

you riclny." (Col. 3: 16-18.) Evidently Paul 
knew of no filling with the Holy Spirit divorced 
from deep and constant meditation upon the 
Word. To sum all up, anyone who wishes to 
obtain and maintain Fulness of Power in Chris- 
tian Life and Service must feed constantly upon 
the Word of God. 



CHAPTER II 

THE POWEB OF THE BLOOD OF OHBIST 

"Power belongeth unto God." It is there- 
fore at man's disposal. But there is one thing 
that separates between man and God, that is 
sin. We read in Isaiah, "Behold, the Lord's 
hand is not shortened that it cannot save; neith- 
er his ear heavy, that it cannot hear; but your 
iniquities have separated between you and your 
God, and your sins have hid his face from you 
that he will not hear." (Is. 59: 1 , 2.) Before 
we can know God's power in our lives and ser- 
vice, sin must be put away from between God 
and us. It is the blood that puts away sin. 
(Heb. 9: 26.) We must know the power of the 
blood, if we are to know the power of God. Our 
knowing experimentally the power of the 
Word, the power of the Holy Spirit and the 
power of prayer, is dependent upon our knowing 
the power of the blood of Christ. Let us see . 
what the blood of Christ has power to do: 

1. _First of all, the bl ood of Christ is a propi- 

Ration for sin. I n Rom 3: 25, R. V., we read: 

27 



28 FULNESS OF POWER 

"Whom God set forth to be a propitiation, 
through faith, by his blood, to show his right- 
eousness, because of the passing over of the sins 
done aforetime, in the forbearance of God." In 
the earlier verses of this chapter Paul has proven 
all men to be sinners, "every mouth is stopped," 
all the world is seen to be " guilty before God." 
But God is holy, a God who hates sin. God's 
hatred of sin is no play hatred. It is real, it is 
living, it is active. It must make itself manifest 
somehow. God's wrath at sin must strike some- 
where. What hope then is there for any of us; 
for we have " all sinned and come short of the 
glory of God?" In the 25th verse God gives us 
his own answer to this tremendously important 
question. There is hope for us because God 
himself has provided a propitiation, the shed 
blood of Christ. God has " set forth Christ to be 
a propitiation, through faith, by his blood." The 
wrath of God at sin strikes on Him instead of 
striking on us. Of this great truth the Prophet 
Isaiah got a glimpse several hundred years 
before the birth of Christ. " All we like sheep 
have gone astray, we have turned every one to 
his own way and the Lord hath laid (literally, 
made to strike) on him the iniquity of us all." 
(Is. 53: 6.) 
The first power of Christ's blood is as a propi- 



THE POWER OF THE BLOOD OF CHRIST 29 

tiation for sin, affording a mark for and satis- 
fying God's holy wrath at sin. He is "our 
passover" (1 Cor. 5: 7) and when God sees His 
blood He will pass over and spare us, sinners 
though we are. (Compare Ex. 12: 13, 23.) 

This propitiation is chiefly for the believer, 
"a propitiation through faith." All of God's 
wrath at the believer's sins is fully appeased or 
satisfied in the blood of Christ. What a won- 
derfully comforting thought it is, when we think 
how often and how greatly we have sinned, and 
then think how infinitely holy God is, how He 
hates sin, to think that God's wrath has already 
been fully appeased in the shed blood of His 
own Son, the propitiation which He himself 
provided! 

The blood of Christ in a certain measure 
avails for all, for unbelievers as well as for be- 
lievers, for the vilest sinner and the most stub- 
born unbeliever and blasphemer. In 1 John 
2: 2, R. V., we read: "And He is the propitia- 
tion for our sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the whole world." By the shed blood of 
Christ a basis is provided upon which God can 
deal in mercy with the whole world. All of 
God's dealings in mercy with man are on the 
ground of the shed blood of Christ. God's 
dealings with those who ridicule the doctrine 



30 PtJLNBSS OP POWEB 

of the atonement, God's dealings with Voltaire, 
Tom Paine and Col. Ingersol, are all on the 
ground of that shed blood. All of God's deal- 
ings in mercy with any man since the fall of 
Adam are on the ground of that shed blood. If 
it had not been for the shed blood, God could 
never have dealt in mercy with a sinner, but 
must have at once cut him off in his sin. If 
anyone asks, How then could God ha ve^ dealt in 
mercy with sinners before Christ came and died^ 
"the answer "is simple. Jesus is Jhe Lamb thai 
hath been " slain from the foundation of the^ 
world." (Rev. 13; 8.) F rom the moment sin 
entered into the world God had His eyes upon 
that sacrifice which He himself had prepared 
from the foundation of the world. And in the 
very Garden of Eden the blood of sacrifices that 
pointed forward as types to the true sacrifice 
began to flow. It is the power of the blood 
which has secured to men all the merciful 
things God has wrought for them since sin en- 
tered. The most determined rejector of Christ 
owes all he has that is good to the blood of 
Christ. 

2. Again in Eph. 1: 7: R. V., we read: "We 
have our redemption through his blood, the for- 
giveness of our trespasses." Through the blood of 
Christ we have our redemption, the forgiveness 



THE POWER OF THE BLOOD OF CHRIST 31 

of sins. Forgiveness of sin is not something 
the believer in Christ is to look for in the future, 
it is something he already has. " We have" says 
Paul, " the forgiveness of our trespasses." The 
forgiveness of sin is not something we are to do 
something to secure. It is something which the 
blood of Christ has already secured, and which 
our faith simply appropriates and enjoys. 
Forgiveness has already been secured for every 
believer in Christ by the power of the blood. 
You have heard of the old woman who lay 
dying. Her rector heard of it and called upon 
her. "They tell me," he said, "that you are 
dying." " Yes," she replied. " And have you 
made your peace with God? " " No," came the 
answer." " And are you not afraid to meet God 
without making your peace with Him ?" "Not 
at all," was the answer that startled the minis- 
ter. He grew earnest. " Woman, do you realize 
that you have but a short time to live and that 
you must soon meet a holy God?" "Yes, I 
realize it perfectly." "And you are not afraid?" 
" Not at all." " And you have not made your 
peace with God?" "No." "What do you 
mean?" cried the astonished rector. A smile 
passed over the features of the dying woman. 
" I have not made my peace with God because 
I do not need to. Christ made peace more than 



32 FULNESS OF POWEB 

1800 years ago by the blood of His cross (Col. 1: 
20) and I am simply resting in the peace He 
made." Oh, blessed is the one who has learned 
to rest in the peace Christ made, who counts his 
sins forgiven because Christ's blood was shed 
and God says so! "We have our redemption 
through his blood, the forgiveness of our tres- 
passes, according to his grace." 

3. There is a third passage very closely akin 
to this, that brings out the power of Christ's 
blood. It is 1 John 1:7. " But if we walk in 
the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship 
one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ 
his Son cleanseth us from all sin." This brings 
out the completeness of the forgiveness we get 
through the blood. The blood of Christ has pow- 
er to cleanse the believer from all sin. It con- 
tinually " cleanseth," is cleansing, keeping him 
clean every day and hour, and every minute. The 
cleansing here is from the guilt of sin. When 
cleansing is mentioned in the Bible in connec- 
tion with the blood, it is always cleansing from 
guilt. Cleansing from the power of sin and the 
presence of sin is by the Word of God, the Holy 
Spirit, and the living and indwelling Christ, 
not the crucified Christ. Christ on the cross 
saves from the guilt of sin, Christ on the throne 
saves from the power of sin, and Christ com- 



THE POWEB OP THE BLOOD OP OHBIST 33 

ing again will save from the presence of sin. 
But the blood of Christ cleanses from all the 
guilt of sin. when one is walking in the light, 
submitting to the light, and walking in Christ 
who is the light. The blood of Christ cleanseth 
him from all sin. His past may be as bbd as a 
past can be. There may have been countless 
enormous sins, but they are all, every one, the 
greatest and the smallest, washed away. His 
record is absolutely white in God's sight. As 
white as the record of Jesus Christ himself. 
His sins which were as scarlet are as white as 
snow, though they were red like crimson they 
are as wool. (Is. 1: 18. ) 

The blood of Christ has power to wash the 
blackest record white. Some of us may have 
had a black past. We all have had ; for if we could 
see our past as God sees it before it is washed, 
the record of the best of us would be black, 
black, black. But if we are walking in the light, 
submitting to the truth of God, believing in the 
light, in Christ, our record to-day is white as 
Christ's garments were when the disciples saw 
Him on the Mount of Transfiguration. (Matt. 
17: 2; Luke 9: 29; Mark 9: 3.) No one can lay 
anything to the charge of God's elect (Bern. 
8:33); there is no condemnation to them who 
are in Christ Jesus. ( Rom. 8:1.) 



34 FULNESS OF POWEB 

4. Again, in Bom. 5:9, we read: "Much 
more then, being now justified by his blood, we 
shall be saved from wrath through him." The 
blood of Christ has power to justify. Every be- 
liever in Christ is already justified in Christ's 
blood. Justified means more than forgiven and 
cleansed. Forgiveness, as glorious as it is, is a 
negative thing. It means merely that our sins 
are put away and we are regarded as if we had 
not sinned. But justification is positive. It 
means that we are reckoned positively righteous; 
that positive and perfect righteousness, even the 
perfect righteousness of Christ, is put to our 
account. 

It is a good thing to be stripped of vile and 
filthy rags, but it is far better to be clothed with 
garments of glory and beauty. In forgiveness 
we are stripped of the vile and stinking rags of 
our sins, in justification we are clothed upon 
with the glory and beauty of Christ. It is the 
power of the blood which secures this. In 
shedding His blood as a penalty for sin Christ 
took our place, and when we believe in Him 
we step into His place. "Him who knew 
no sin he made to be sin on our behalf, 
that we might become the righteousness of God 
in him." (2 Cor. 5: 21, R. V.) 

5. Let us now look at Heb. 9: 14, R. V: 



THE POWER OF THE BLOOD OF OHEIST 35 

"How much more shall the blood of Christ, 
who through the eternal spirit offered himself 
without blemish unto God, cleanse your con- 
science from dead works to serve the living 
God." The blood of Christ has power to 
cleanse the conscience from dead works to serve 
the living God. Do you understand what that 
means? It is a glorious truth and I will try to 
make it plain. When a man is waked up to the 
fact that he is a sinner and that God is holy, he 
feels that he must do something to please God 
and atone for sin. He must "do penances," 
" keep Lent," or give away money, or do some- 
thing else, to atone for his sins. Now all these 
self efforts to please God and atone for sins are 
" dead works." They can never accomplish 
what they aim at, and can never bring peace. 
How many weary years Martin Luther sought 
peace in this way and found it not. But when 
we see the power of the blood, how it has 
already perfectly atoned for sin, how it has 
already washed away our sins and justified us 
before God, how we are already pleasing and 
acceptable in God's sight by reason of that shed 
blood, then our consciences are not only relieved 
from the burden of guilt, but also from the 
burden of these self efforts, and we are now at 
liberty to serve the living God, not in the slavery 



36 FULNESS OF POWEB 

of fear, but in the liberty of the freedom and joy 
of those who know they are accepted and beloved 
sons. It is the blood which delivers us from the 
awful bondage of thinking we must do some- 
thing to atone for sins and please God. The 
blood shows us that it is already done. A 
friend of mine once said to another who was 
seeking peace by doing: "You have a religion 
of two letters. My religion is a religion of four 
letters." "How is that?" asked the other. 
"Your religion is do. My religion is done. 
You are trying to rest in what you do. I am 
resting in what Christ has done." There are 
many Christians to-day who have not permitted 
the blood of Christ to cleanse their consciences 
from dead works. They are constantly feeling 
they must do something to atone for sin. Oh, 
my brother, my sister, look at what God looks 
at, the blood, and see that it is all done, already 
done! God is satisfied, sin is atoned for, you 
are justified. Now don't do dead works to com- 
mend yourself to God; but, realizing that you 
are already commended by the blood, serve Him 
in the freedom of gratitude and love, and not 
in the bondage of fear. There are three classes 
of men. First, those who are not burdened 
by sin but love it. That is wholly bad. Second, 
those who are burdened by sin and seek to get 



THE POWER OF THE BLOOD OF CHRIST 37 

rid of it by self effort. That is better, but 
there is something infinitely better yet. Third, 
those who see the hideousness of sin, and were 
burdened for it, but who have been brought 
to see the power of the blood, settling sin for- 
ever, putting it away (Heb. 9: 26.), and so are no 
longer burdened, but now work not to commend 
themselves to God, but out of joyous gratitude 
to Him who perfectly justifieth the ungodly 
through the shed blood. 

6. In Acts 20: 28, we read: "Take heed 
therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, 
over the which the Holy Ghost hath made 
you overseers to feed the church of God, 
which he hath purchased with his own 
blood," and in Rev. 5: 9, R. V.: "And they 
sing a new song, saying, worthy art thou to 
take the book, and to open the seals thereof: 
for thou wast slain, and didst purchase unto 
God with thy blood men of every tribe and 
tongue and people and nation." The blood of 
Christ has power to purchase us unto God, to 
make us God's own. The blood of Christ 
makes me God's own property. That thought 
brings to me a feeling of responsibility. If I 
belong to God I must serve Him wholly; body, 
soul, and spirit, must be surrendered wholly to 
Him, But the thought that I am God's 



38 FULNESS OF POWER 

property brings also a feeling of security. 
God can and will take care of His own prop- 
erty. The blood of Christ has power to make 
me eternally secure. 

7. We learn still more about the power of 
the blood in Heb. 10: 19, 20, R. V.: "Having 
therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the 
holy place by the blood of Jesus, by the way 
He dedicated for us, a new and living way, 
through the veil, that is to say his flesh." The 
blood of Christ has power to give the believer 
boldness to en ter into the holy place, to ap- 
proach into the very presence of God. In the 
old Jewish days of the tabernacle and temple 
God manifested himself in the most holy place. 
This was the place to meet God. But into this 
hallowed place only one Jew in all the nation 
was allowed to enter, the high priest; and he 
only once a year, on the day of atonement; and 
then only with blood. God was teaching the 
Jews, and through them the world, three great 
truths — God's unapproachable holiness, man's 
sinfulness, and that sinful man could approach 
J a holy God only through atoning blood, that 

"without shedding of blood" there could be 
"no remission," and consequently no approach to 
God. (Heb. 9: 22.) But the blood of the Old 
Testament sacrifices was only a figure of the true 



i 



THE POWER OP THE BLOOD OP CHRIST 39 

sacrifice, Jesus Christ; and, by reason of His 
shed blood, the vilest sinner who believes on 
Him has the right to approach God — come into 
His very presence, when he will, " without fear, 
in full assurance of faith," "with boldness." 
Oh, the wondrous power of the blood of Christ 
to take all fear away when I draw near to that 
God who is holy and is a " consuming fire ! " God 
is holy? Yes. And I am a sinner? Yes — but by 
that wondrous offering of Christ " once for all " 
my sin is forever put away, I am "perfected" 
and "justified," and, on the ground of that 
blood so precious and satisfying to God, I can 
march boldly into the very presence of God- 

8. But the Blood of Christ has still further 
power. Read Rev. 22: 14, R. V.: "Blessed are 
those that wash their robes, that they may have 
the right to come to the tree of life, and may enter 
in by the gates into the city." By comparing 
this verse with the 7th chapter and 14th verse 
we see that it is in the blood of Christ that robes 
are washed. The blood of Christ then has power 
to give those who believe in Him a right to the 
tree of life and ^entrance into the city of God. 
Sin in the first place shut men away from the 
tree of life and out of Eden. (Gen. 3: 22-24.) 
The shed blood of Christ opens to us again the 
way to the tree of life and to the New Jerusa- 



40 FULNESS OF POWER 

lem. The blood of Christ regains for us all 
that Adam lost by sin, and brings us much more 
than was lost. 

We see something of the power of the blood 
of Christ. Have you appreciated that blood? 
Have you let it have the power in your life that 
it ought to have? There are some to-day who 
are trying to devise a theology that leaves out 
the blood of Christ. Poor fools! Christianity 
without atoning blood, is a Christianity with- 
out mercy for the sinner, without settled peace 
for the conscience, without genuine forgiveness, 
without justification, without cleansing, without 
boldness in approaching God, without power. 
It is not Christianity but the devil's own 
counterfeit. If we would know fulness of pow- 
er in Christian life and service, we must first of 
all know the power of the blood of Christ, for it 
is that which brings us pardon, justification, 
and boldness in our approach to God. We can- 
not know the power of the Spirit unless we first 
know the power of the blood. We certainly 
cannot know the power of prayer, unless we 
know the power of that blood by which alone 
we can approach unto God. There are some 
teachers of "the higher life" who ignore the 
fundamental truth about the blood. They are 
trying to build a lofty superstructure without a 



THE POWER OF THE BLOOD OF CHRIST 41 

firm foundation. It is bound to tumble. We 
must begin with the blood, if we are to go on 
to the "holy of holies." The brazen altar 
where blood was shed first met every priest who 
would enter into the holy place. There is no 
other way of entrance there. If we do not learn 
the lesson of this chapter, it is vain for us to try 
to learn the lessons of chapters three and four. 
To everyone who wishes to know the power of 
the Spirit we first put the question: "Do you 
know the power of the blood? " 



CHAPTER III 

THE POWEB OP THE HOLY SPIBIT 

"Power belongeth unto God." The Holy 
Spirit is the person who imparts to the individ- 
ual believer the power that belongs to God. 
This is the Holy Spirit's work in the believer, 
to take what belongs to God and make it ours. 
All the manifold power of God belongs to the 
children of God as their birthright in Christ, 
"All things are yours " (1 Cor. 3: 21.) But all 
that belongs to us as our birthright in Christ 
becomes ours in actual and experimental posses- 
sion through the Holy Spirit's work in us as in- 
dividuals. To the extent that we understand 
and claim for ourselves the Holy Spirit's work, 
to that extent do we obtain for ourselves the 
fulness of power in Christian life and service 
that God has provided for us in Christ. A very 
large portion of the Church know and claim for 
themselves a very small part of that which God 
has made possible for them in Christ, because 
they know so little of what the Holy Spirit can 
do for us, and longs to do for us. Let us study 

42 



THE POWEB OP T3E HOLY SPIBIT 43 

the Word, then, to find out what the Holy Spirit 
has power to do in men. 

We shall not go far before we discover that 
the same work which we see ascribed in one 
place to the power of the Word of God is in other 
places ascribed to the Holy Spirit. The explan- 
ation of this is simple. The Word of God is 
the instrument through which the Holy Spirit 
does His work. The Word of God is " the sword 
of the Spirit." (Eph. 6: 17.) The Word of 
God is also the seed the Spirit sows and quick- 
ens. (Luke 8: 11; 1 Pet. 1: 23.) The Word of 
God is the instrument of all the manifold oper- 
ations of the Holy Spirit, as seen in Chapter I. 
If therefore we wish the Holy Spirit to do His 
work in our hearts we must study the Word. 
If we wish Him to do His work in the hearts of 
others we must give them the Word. But the 
bare Word will not do the work alone. The 
Spirit must himself use the Word. It is when 
the Spirit himself uses His own sword that it 
manifests its real temper, keenness and power. 
God's work is accomplished by the Word and 
the Spirit, or rather by the Spirit through the 
Word. The secret of effectual living is know- 
ing the power of the Spirit through the Word. 
The secret of effectual service is using the 
Word in the power of the Spirit. There are 



44 FULNESS OF POWEB 

some who seek to magnify the Spirit but neg- 
lect the Word. This will not do at all. Fan- 
aticism, baseless enthusiasm, wifcUfire are the 
result. Others seek to magnify the Word, but 
largely ignore the Spirit. Neither will this do. 
It leads to dead orthodoxy, truth without life 
and power. The true course is to recognize the 
instrumental power of the Word through which 
the Holy Spirit works, and the living, personal 
power of the Holy Spirit who acts through the 
Word. 

But let us come directly to the consideration 
of our subject: What has the Holy Spirit pow-^ 
er to do? 

"1. Turn to 1 Cor. 12: 3. "Wherefore I 
give you to understand, that no man speaking 
by the spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed: 
and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, 
but by the Holy Ghost." 

The Holy Spirit has power to reveal Jesus 
Christ and His glory to man . When Jesus 
spoke of the Spirit's coming He said: "But 
when the Comforter is come, whom I will send 
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of 
truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall 
testify of me" ( Jno. 15: 26), and it is only as 
He does testify of Christ that men will ever 
come to a true knowledge of Christ. You send 



THE POWEB OP THE HOLY SPIRIT 45 

men to the Word to get a knowledge of Christ; 
but it is only as the Holy Spirit takes the word 
and illuminates it, that men ever get a real liv- 
ing knowledge of Christ. "No man can say 
that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost." 
If you wish men to get a true knowledge of 
Jesus Christ, such a view that they will be- 
lieve on Him and be saved, you must seek for 
them the testimony of the Holy Spirit. Nei- 
ther your testimony nor that of the Word alone, 
will suffice, though it is your testimony, or that of 
the Word, which the Spirit uses. 

But unless your testimony is taken up by the 
Holy Spirit, and He himself testifies, they 
will not believe, It was not merely Peter's 
words about Christ that convinced the Jews at 
Pentecost. It was the Spirit himself bearing 
witness. _If you wish men to see the truth about 
Jesus, do not depend upon your own powers of 



exposition and persuasion, but cast yourself 
upon the Holy Ghost and seek His testimony. 



If you wish yourself to know Jesus with a true 
and living knowledge, seek the witness of the 
Spirit through the Word. Many a man has a 
correct doctrinal conception of Christ, through 
a study of the Word, long before he has a true 
personal knowledge of Christ through the testi- 
mony of the living Spirit. 



46 FULNESS OF POWER 

2. Now let us turn to John 16: 8-11: " And 
when he is come, he will reprove the world of 
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of 
sin because they believe not on me. Of right- 
eousness, because I go to my Father, and ye 
see me no more. Of judgment, because the 
prince of this world is judged." 

The Holy Spirit has pow er, to convi ct the 
world of sin. This is closely connected with 
the preceding; for, it is by showing Jesus and 
His glory and His righteousness, that the Holy 
Spirit convicts of sin, and of righteousness, and 
of judgment. Note the sin of which the Holy 
Spirit convicts, " Of sin because they believe 
not on me." It was bo at Pentecost, as we see 
in Acts 2: 36, 37. You can never convict 
any man of sin because that is the work of the 
Holy Spirit. You can reason and reason, and 
you will fail. The Holy Spirit can do it very 
quickly. Did you never have this experience? 
You have shown a man passage after passage of 
Scripture, and he was unmoved, and you have 
wondered why the man did not break down, and 
suddenly it has occurred to you, " why, I am not 
looking in my helplessness to the mighty Spirit 
of God to convict this man of sin, but I am try- 
ing to convince the man of sin myself," and 
then you have cast yourself upon the Spirit of 



THE POWER OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 47 

God for Him to do the work, and conviction 
came. The Spirit can convince the most care- 
less, as experience has proven again and again. 

But it is through us that the Spirit produces 
conviction. In Jno. 16: 7,8, we read: "I will 
send him to you, and when he is come, he will 
reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, 
and of judgment." It was the Spirit sent to 
Peter and the rest, who convicted the 3,000 
through Peter and the others on the day of 
Pentecost. It is ours to preach the Word and 
to look to the Holy Spirit to p roduce convicti on. 
(See Acts 2: 4-37T)" 

3. In Tit. 3: 5, we read: "Not by works of 
righteousness which we have done, but accord- 
ing to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of 
regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy 
Ghost." 

The Holy Spirit has power to renew men or 
make men new, to regenerate. Regeneration is 
the Holy Spirit's work. He can take a man dead 
in trespasses and sins, and make him alive. He 
can take the man whose mind is blind to the 
truth of God, whose will is at enmity with God 
and set on sin, whose affections are corrupt and 
vile, and transform that man, impart to him 
God's nature, so that he thinks God's thoughts, 
wills what God wills, loves what God loves, and 



48 FULNESS OF POWER 

hates what God hates. I never despair of any 
man when I think of the power of the Holy 
Spirit to make new, as I have seen it manifested 
again and again in the most hardened and hope- 
less cases; It is through us that the Holy 
Spirit regenerates others. (1 Oor. 4: 15.) As 
we have seen in Chapter I, the Word has power to 
regenerate; but it is not the bare word, but the 
word made a living thing in the heart by the 
power of the Holy Spirit. No amount of 
preaching, no matter how orthodox it is, and no 
amount of mere study of the Word will regener- 
ate, unless the Holy Spirit works. Just as we are 
utterly dependent on the work of Ghrist for us 
in justification, so we are utterly dependent 
upon the work of the Holy Spirit in us in re- 
generation. 

When one is born of the Spirit the Spirit 
takes up His own abode in him. (1st Oor. 3: 16; 
6: 19.) The Holy Spirit dwells in every one 
who belongs to Christ. (Rom. 8:9.) We may 
not have surrendered our lives very fully to this 
indwelling Spirit, we may be very far from being 
"full of the Spirit," we may be very imperfect 
Christians, but, if we have been born again, the 
Spirit dwells in us, just as Paul said to the Cor- 
inthians, who were certainly very far from per- 
fect Christians, that He did in them. What a glo- 



THE P0WEB OF THE HOLY SPIBIT 49 

rious thought it is that the Holy Spirit dwells in 
me! But it is also a very solemn thought. If 
my body is the temple of the Holy Spirit, I cer- 
tainly ought not to defile it as many professed 
Christians do. Bearing in mind that our bodies 
are temples of the Holy Spirit, would solve 
many problems that perplex young Christians. 
4. We find a further thought about the pow- 
er of the Holy Spirit in Jno. 4: 14. "But who- 
soever drinketh of the water that I shall give 
him shall never thirst: but the water that I shall 
give him shall be in him a well of water spring- 
ing up into everlasting life." You may not see 
at first that this verse has anything to do with 
the Holy Spirit, but compare John 7: 37, 39. 
and it will be evident that the water here means 
the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit then has pow- 
er to give abiding and everlasting t satisfaction. 
The world can never satisfy. Of every worldly 
joy it must be said: "Whosoever drinketh of this 
water shall thirst again." But the Holy Spirit 
has power to satisfy every longing of the soul. 
The Holy Spirit and He alone can satisfy the 
human heart. If you give yourself up to the 
Holy Spirit's inflowing, or rather upspringing, 
in your heart, you will never thirst. You will 
not long for the theatre, or the ball-room or the 
card party, or worldly gain, or honor. Oh, with 



50 FULNESS OF POWER 

what joy unutterable and satisfaction indescrib- 
able the Holy Spirit has poured forth His living 
water in many souls. Have you this living 
fountain within? Is the spring unchoked? Is 
it springing up into everlasting life? 

5. In Rom. 8: 2, we read: "For the law of the 
Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, hath v made me 
free from the law of sin and death." The Holy 
Spirit has power to set us free fro m the law o f 
sin and death. What the law of sin and death 
is we see in the preceding chapter. (Rom. 7: 
9-24.) Read this description carefully. We 
all know this law of sin and death. We have 
all been in bondage to it. Some of us are still 
in bondage to it, but we do not need to be. God 
has provided a way of escape. That way is by 
the Holy Spirit's power. When we give up the 
hopeless struggle of trying to overcome the law 
of sin and death, of trying to live right in our 
strength, in the power of the flesh; and in utter 
helplessness surrender to the Holy Spirit to do 
all for us; when we live after Him and walk in 
His blessed power; then He sets us free from 
the law of sin and death. There are many pro- 
fessed Christians to-day living in Rom. 7. 
Some go so far as to maintain that this is the 
normal Christian life. That one must live this 
life of constant defeat. This would be true, if 



THE POWEB OP THE HOLY SPIRIT 51 

we were left to ourselves; for in ourselves we are 
" carnal sold under sin." But we are not left to 
ourselves. The Holy Spirit undertakes for us 
what we have failed to do ourselves. (Rom. 8: 
2-4.) In Bom. 8 we have the picture of the true 
Christian life, the life that is possible to us, and 
that God expects from each one of us; the life 
where not merely the commandment comes, 
as in Chapter VII, but where the mighty Spirit 
comes also, and works obedience and victory. 
The flesh is still in us, but we are not in the 
flesh. (Kom. 8: 12, 13, compare vs. 9.) We do 
not live after it. We "live after the Spirit." 
We, " through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of 
the body." We " walk after the Spirit," and do 
" not fulfill the lust of the flesh." (Gal. 5: 16.) 
It is our privilege, in the Spirit's power, to get 
daily, hourly, and constant victory over the 
flesh and over sin. But the victory is not in 
ourselves, not in any strength of our own. Left 
to ourselves, deserted of the Spirit of God, we 
would be as helpless as ever. It is all in the 
Spirit's power. If we try to take one step in our 
own strength we shall fail. Has the Holy Spirit 
set you free from the law of sin and death? 
Will you let Him do it now? Simply give up 
all self effort to be free from " the law of sin and 
death," to give up sinning; believe in the divine 



52 FULNESS OF POWEB 

power of the Holy Spirit to set you free; and 
cast yourself upon Him to do it. He will do it. 
Then you can triumphantly cry with Paul : " The 
law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus 
made me free from the law of sin and of death." 
(Bom. 8: 2, R. V.) 

6. We find a closely allied but larger thought 
about the Holy Spirit's power in Eph. 3: 16, R. 
V.: " That he would grant you, according to the 
riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthened 
with power through his Spirit in the inward 
man." 

The Holy Spiri t strengthens the believer wi th 
jpower in^ th e inward man. The result of this 
strengthening is seen in verses 17-19. Here the 
power of the Spirit manifests itself not merely 
in giving us victory over sin, but (a), in Christ's 
dwelling in our hearts; (6), our being "rooted 
and grounded in love;" (c), our being " made 
strong to apprehend with all the saints what is 
breadth and length and height and depth, and 
to know the love of Christ which passeth knowl- 
edge." It all ultimates in our being "filled 
unto all the fulness of God." 

7, We find a still further thought about the 
Holy Spirit's power in Rom. 8: 14, R. V.: "For 
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these 
are sons of God." 



THE POWER OF THE HOLT SPIRIT 53 

The Holy Spirit has power to lead us into a holy 
life, a life as " sons of God," a godlike life. Not 



merely does the Holy Spirit give us power to 
live a holy life, a life well pleasing to God when 
we have discovered what that life is: He takes 
us by the hand, as it were, and leads us into 
that life. Our whole part is simply to surren- 
der ourselves utterly to Him to lead and to 
mould us. Those who do this are not merely 
God's offspring, which all men are (Acts 17: 28), 
neither are we merely God's children: "These 
are sons of God." 

8. Further down in the chapter there is a 
new thought. Rom. 8:16, R. V.: "The Spirit 
himself beareth witness with our spirit that 
we are children of God." The Holy Spirit 
bears witness with the spirit of the believer that 
he is a child of God. Note that Paul does not 
say that the Spiri?~bears witness to our spirit, 
but with it — "together with our spirit," is the 
exact force of the words used. That is, there 
are two who bear witness to our sonship: First; 
our spirit bears witness that we are children of 
God; second, the Holy Spirit bears witness to- 
gether with our spirit that we are children of 
God. How does the Holy Spirit bear His tes- 
timony to this fact? Gal. 4: 6 answers this 
question: "Because ye are sons, God hath sent 



54 FULNESS OF POWER 

forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, cry- 
ing, Abba, Father." (K.V.) The Holy Spirit 
himself enters into our hearts and cries, " Abba, 
Father." Note the order of the Spirit's work in 
Bom. 8:2, 4, 13, 14, 16. It is only when "the 
law of the Spirit of life in Ohrist Jesus hath 
made me free from the law of sin and death" 
(v. 2), and so " the righteousness of the law is 
fulfilled" in me "who walk not after the flesh 
but after the Spirit" (v. 4), and I "through 
the Spirit of God do mortify the deeds of the 
body" (v. 13), and when I am surrendered to 
the Spirit's leading (v. 14), it is then, and only 
then, that I can expect verse 16 to be realized 
in my experience, and that I have the clear as- 
surance of sonship that comes from the Spirit 
of God testifying together with my spirit, that 
I am a child of God. There are many seeking 
this testimony of the Holy Spirit in the wrong 
place; namely, aa a condition of their eurren- 
dering wholly to God, and confessing the cruci- 
fied and risen Lord as their Savior and Lord. 
The testimony of the Holy Spirit to our son- 
ship comes after all this is done. 

9. An exceedingly important thought about 
the Holy Spirit's power is found in Gal. 5 : 22, 23. 
" But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meek- 



THE POWEB OF THE HOLY SPIBIT 55 

ness, temperance: against such there is no law." 
The H oly Spirit brings f orth in the believer 
Christlike graces of character. (Compare Bom. 
14: 17; 15: 13; 5:li>.) All real beauty of charac- 
ter, all real Christlikeness in us, is the Holy 
Spirit's work. It is His "fruit." He bears it; 
not we. Note that these graces are not said to 
be the fruits of the Spirit; they are the 
" fruit." There is a unity of origin running all 
through the multiplicity of manifestation, and 
not some of these graces, but all, will appear in 
every one in whom the Holy Spirit is given 
full control. It is a beautiful life that is set 
forth in these verses. Every word is worthy 
of earnest study and profound meditation: 
" Love," — " joy," — " peace," — " longsuffering," — 
" gentleness," — " goodness," — " faith," — " meek- 
ness," — " self-control." Is not this the life we 
all long for, the Christ life? It is not natural 
to us, and it is not attainable by any effort of 
" the flesh," or nature. The life that is natural 
for us is set forth in the three preceding verses. 
(19-21.) But when the indwelling Spirit is 
given full control in the one He inhabits; when 
we are brought to realize the utter badness of 
the flesh, and give up in helpless despair of 
ever attaining to anything really good in its pow- 
er; when, in other words, we come to the end of 






56 FULNESS OF POWER 

self, and just give over the whole work of making 
as what we ought to be to the indwelling Holy 
Spirit: then, and only then, these holy graces of 
character are His " fruit." Do you wish these 
graces in your character and life? Renounce 
self utterly, and all its strivings after holiness; 
and let the Holy Spirit, who dwells in you, take 
full control and bear His own glorious fruit. 
We get the same essential truth from another 
point of view in Gal. 2: 20. (K. V., Am. App.) 
"I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no 
longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me; and 
that life which I now live in the flesh I live in 
faith, the faith which is in the Son of God, who 
loved me, and gave himself up for me." 

Settle it clearly and forever that the flesh 
' can never bear this fruit, that you can nev er 
attain these things by your own effort. T hat 
they are " the fruit of the Spirit." We hear a 
good deal in these days about " ethical culture," 
which usually means a cultivation of the flesh 
until it bears the fruit of the Spirit. It cannot 
be done, until thorns can be made to bear figs, 
and a bramble-bush, grapes. (Luke 6:44; 
Matt. 12:33.) We hear also a good deal about 
" character-building." That is all very well, 
if you let the Holy Spirit do the building, and 
then U ie not eo much building as fruit*bear- 



THE POWEB OF THE HOLT SPIRIT 57 

ing. (See, however, 2 Peter 1:5-7.) We hear 
also about "cultivating graces of character," 
but we must always bear in mind that the way 
to cultivate true graces of character is by sub- 
mitting ourselves utterly to the Spirit to do His 
work. This is " sanctification of the Spirit." 
(1 Peter 1:2; 2 Thes. 2:13.) 

We turn now to the power of the Holy Spirit 
in a different direction. 

10. (Jno. 16:13, R. V.) "Howbeit when 
he, the spirit of truth, is come, he shall guide 
you into all the truth: for he shall not speak 
from himself; but what things soever he shall 
hear, these shall he speak: and he shall declare 
unto you the things that are to come." The 
Holy Spirit has power, to guide the believer " in- 
to all the truth." This promise was made in the 
first instance to the apostles, but the apostles 
themselves applied it to all believers. (1 Jno. 2: 
20, 27.) It is the privilege of each of us to be 
"taught of God." Each believer is independ- 
ent of human teachers. " Ye need not that any 
man teach you." This does not mean, of course, 
that we may not learn much from others, who 
are taught by the Holy Spirit. If John had 
thought that, he would never have written this 
epistle to teach others. The man who is most 
fully taught of God is the very one who will be 



58 FULNESS OF POWER 

most ready to listen to what God has taught 
others. Much less does it mean that when we 
are taught of God we are independent of the 
Word of God. For the Word is the very place 
to which the Spirit leads His pupils/and the 
instrument through which He teaches them. 
(Eph. 6: 17; Jno. 6: 63; Eph. 5: 18, 19; Comp. 
Col. 3: 16.) But, while we may learn much 
from men, we are not dependent upon them. 
We have a divine teacher, the Holy Spirit. 

We shall never truly know the truth until we 
are thus taught. No amount of mere human 
teaching, no matter who our teachers may be, 
will give us a correct apprehension of the truth. 
Not even a diligent study of the Word, either 
in the English or original languages, will give 
us a real understanding of the truth. We must 
be taught of the Holy Spirit. And we may be 
thus taught. Each one of us. The one who is 
thus taught, even if he does not know a word of 
Greek or Hebrew, will understand the truth of 
God better than the one who knows the Greek, 
and Hebrew, and all "the cognate languages," 
and is not taught of the Spirit. The Spirit 
will guide the one He teaches " into all the 
truth." Not in a day, or in a week, or in a 
year, but step by step. 

There are two especial lines of the Spirit's 



THE POWER OF THE HOLT SPIRIT 59 

teaching mentioned, (a) " He shall declare 
unto you the things that are to come." Many 
say we can know nothing of the future, that all 
our thoughts on that subject are guess work. 
Anyone taught of the Spirit knows better than 
that. (&) "He shall glorify me (i. e., Christ), 
for he shall take of mine and shall declare it 
unto you." This is the Holy Spirit's especial 
line, with the believer as well as the unbeliever, 
to declare unto them the things of Christ and 
glorify Him. Many fear to emphasize the 
truth about the Holy Spirit, lest Christ be dis- 
paraged. But no one magnifies Christ as the 
Holy Spirit does. We will never understand 
Christ, nor see His glory, until the Holy Spirit 
interprets Him to us. The mere listening to 
sermons and lectures, the mere study of the 
Word even, will never give you to see the things m 
of Christ. The. Holy Spirit must show you, 
and He is willing to do it. He is longing to do 
it. I suppose the Holy Spirit's inmost desire 
is to reveal Jesus Christ to men. Let Him do 
it. Christ is so different when the Holy Spirit 
glorifies Him by taking of the things of Christ 
and showing them unto us. 

11. Turning to John 14: 26, we find again 
the Holy Spirit's power to teach, but with an 
added thought: "But the comforter, even the 



60 FULNESS OF P0WE6 

holy spirit, whom the father will send in my 
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring 
to your remembrance all that I said unto you." 
(R. V.) The Holy Spirit has power to bring 
to remembrance the words of Christ. This 
promise was made primarily to the apostles, 
and is the guarantee of the accuracy of their re- 
port of what Jesus said. But the Holy Spirit 
does a similar work with each believer who ex- 
pects it of Him and looks to Him to do it. He 
brings to mind the teachings of Christ, and the 
words of Christ, just when we need them, for 
either the necessities of our own life or of our 
service. How many of us could tell of occa- 
sions when we were in great distress of soul, or 
great questioning concerning our duty, or great 
^extremity as to what to say to one whom we 
were trying to lead to Christ, or to help; and 
just the scripture we needed, some passage we 
had not thought of for a long time, and, per- 
haps, never thought of in this connection, was 
brought to mind. It was the Holy Spirit who 
did this, and He is ready to do it even more, 
when we expect it of Him. Is it without sig- 
nificance, that in the next verse after making 
this great promise, Jesus says: "Peace I leave 
with you, my peace I give unto you?" Look to 
the Holy Spirit to bring the right words to re- 



THE POWEB OP THE HOLY SPIBIT 61 

membrance at the right time, and you will have 
peace. This is the way to remember Scripture, 
just when you need it, and just the Scripture 
you need. 

12. Closely akin to what has been said in 
the two preceding sections is the power of the 
Holy Spirit as seen in 1 Cor. 2: 10-14. R. V. 

" But unto us God revealed them through the 
Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, 
the deep things of God. For who among men 
knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of 
the man, which is in him? Even so the things 
of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of God. 
But we received, not the spirit of the world, 
but the spirit which is of God; that we might 
know the things that are freely given to us by 
God. Which things also we speak, not in words 
which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the 
Spirit teacheth; comparing spiritual things with 
spiritual. Now the natural man receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit of God: for they are 
foolishness unto him; and he cannot know them, 
because they are spiritually judged." (R. V.) In 
these verses we have a twofold work of the Spirit: 
(a) The Holy Spi rit reveals to us the deep 
things of God, which are hidden from and fool- 
ishness to the natural man. It is pre-eminently 
to the apostles that He does this, but we cannot 



62 FULNESS OF POWER 

limit this work of the Spirit to them. (6) The 
Holy Spirit interprets His own revelation, or 
imparts power to discern, know, and appreciate 
what He has taught. 

Not only is the Holy Spirit the author of Rev- 
elation — the written Word of God. He is also 
the interpreter of what He has revealed. How 
much more interesting and helpful any deep 
book becomes when we have the author of the 
book right at hand to interpret it to us! This 
is what we always may have when we study the 
Bible. The author — the Holy Spirit — is right at 
hand to interpret. To understand the book we 
must look to Him. Then the darkest places be- 
come clear. We need to pray often with the 
Psalmist, "Open thou mine eyes, that I may be- 
hold wondrous things out of thy law." (Ps. 119: 
18.) 

It is not enough that we have the objective 
revelation in the written word, we must also 
have the inward illuminati on of th e Holy Spirit 
to enable us to comprehend it. It is a great 
mistake to try to comprehend ^ spiritual revela- 
tion with the natural understanding. It is the 
foolish attempt to do this that has landed so 
many in the bog of the higher criticism. A man 
with no aesthetic sense might as well expect 
to appreciate the Sistine Madonna, because he 



THE POWER OP THE HOLY SPIRIT 63 

is not color blind, as an unspiritual man to un- 
derstand the Bible, simply because he under- 
stands the laws of grammar, and the vocabulary 
of the language in which the Bible was written. 
; I would as soon think of setting a man to teach 
/ art merely because he understood paints, as to 
i set him to teach the Bible merely because he 
- understood Greek or Hebrew. 

We all need not only to recognize the utter 
insufficiency and worthlessness of our own right- 
eousness, which is the lesson of the opening chap- 
ters of the epistle to the Romans, but also the 
utter insufficiency and worthlessness in the 
things of God, of our own wisdom, which is the 
lesson of the first epistle to the Corinthians, 
especially the first to the third chapters, (see e. 
g. 1 Cor. 1: 19-21, 26, 27.) 

The Jews had a revelation by the Spirit but 
they failed to depend upon Him to interpret it 
to them, so they went astray. The whole evan- 
gelical chureh realizes the utter insufficiency of 
man's righteousness, theoretically at least. 
Now it needs to be taught, and made to feel, 
the utter insufficiency of man's wisdom. That 
is perhaps the lesson this 19th century of over- 
weening intellectual conceit needs most of any. 
To understand God's word we must empty 
ourselves utterly of our own wisdom, and rest 



64 FULNESS OF POWER 

in titter dependence upon the Spirit of God to 
interpret it to us. (Matt. 11: 25.) When we 
put away our own righteousness, then, and only 
then, we get the righteousness of God. (Phil. 
3: 4-7: 9; Rom. 10: 3.) When we put away 
our own wisdom, then, and only then, we get 
the wisdom of God, (1 Cor. 3: 18; Matt. 11: 
25; 1 Cor. 1; 25-28.) When we put away our 
own strength, then, and only then, we get the 
strength of God. (Is. 40: 29; 2 Oor. 12: 9; 
1 Oor. 1; 27, 28.) Emptying must precede fill- 
ing. Self poured out that Christ may be 
poured in, We must be daily taught of the 
Spirit to understand the Word. 

I cannot depend today on the fact that the 
Spirit taught me yesterday. Each new contact 
with the Word must be in the power of the 
Spirit. That the Holy Spirit once illumined our 
mind to grasp a certain passage is not enough. 
He must do so each time we confront that 
passage. Andrew Murray has put this truth 
well. He says: "Each time you come to the 
Word in study, in hearing a sermon or reading 
a religious book, there ought to be as distinct 
as your intercourse with the external means, a 
definite act of self-abnegation, denying your own 
wisdom ana yielding yourself in faith to the 
divine teacher." (The Spirit of Christ, p. 221.) 



THE POWER OP THE HOLT SPIRIT 65 

13. The Holy Spirit has not only power to 
teach us the truth, but also to impart power to 
us in communicating that truth to others. We 
see this brought out again and again. "And I, 
brethren, when I came unto you, came not with 
excellency of speech or of wisdom, proclaiming 
to you the mystery of God. For I determined 
not to know anything among you, save Jesus 
fJhrist, and him crucified. And I was with you 
in weakness, and in fear, and in much trem- 
bling. And my speech and my preaching were 
not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in dem- 
onstration of the Spirit and of power: that your 
faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, 
but in the power of God." (1 Cor. 2: 1-5, R. V.) 
" Our gospel came not unto you in word only, but 
also in power, and in the Holy Ghost." (1 
Thes. 1:5.) "But ye shall receive power after 
that the Holy Ghost is come upon you." (Acts 
1:8.) The Holy Spirit enables the believer to 
communicate to others in "power" the truth 
he himself has been taught. We not only need 
•the Holy Spirit to reveal the truth in the first 
place; and the Holy Spirit in the second place, 
to interpret to us as individuals the truth He 
has revealed, but in the third place we also 
need the Holy Spirit to enable us to effectually 
communicate toothers the trail. He himself has 



I 



66 FULNESS OP POWER 

interpreted to us. We need Him all along the 
line. One great cause of real failure in the minis- 
try, even when there is seeming success, and not 
only in the ministry but in all forms of service 
by Christian men and women, is from the attempt 
to teach by " enticing words of man's wisdom," 
i. e. 9 by the arts of human logic, rhetoric or 
eloquence, what the Holy Spirit has taught us. 
What is needed is Holy Ghost power, " demon- 
stration of the Spirit and of power." 

There ar e three cause s of failure in Christi an 
work . First, some other message is taught 
than the message which the Holy Spirit has re- 
vealed in the Word. Men preach science, art, 
philosophy, sociology, history, experience, etc., 
etc., and not the simple Word of God as found 
in the Holy Spirit's book — the Bible. Second, 
the Spirit-taught message, the Bible, is studied 
and sought to be comprehended by the 
natural understanding, t. e., without the 
Spirit's illumination. Third, the Spirit*given 
message, the Word, the Bible, studied and com- 
prehended under the Holy Spirit's illumination, 
is given out to others with " enticing words of 
man's wisdom," and not "in demonstration of 
the Spirit and of power." We need, we are ab- 
solutely dependent upon, the Holy Spirit all 
along the line. He must teach us how to speak 



THE POWEB OP THE HOLY SPIBIT 67 

as well as what to'speak. He must be the power 
as well as the message.* 

14. The Holy Spirit has power to teach us 
how to pray. In Jude 20 we read: "But ye, 
beloved, building up yourselves on your most 
holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit." (R. 
V.) Again in Eph. 6: 18: " Praying at all sea- 
sons in the Spirit." (R. V.) 

The Holy Spirit guides the believer in prayer. 
The disciples did not know how to pray as they 
ought so they came to Jesus, and said; " Lord, 
teach us to Pray." (Luke 11: 1.) "We know 
not how to pray as we ought," but we have 
another helper right at hand to help us. (John 
14:16, 17.) "The Spirit also helpeth our in- 
firmity." (Rom. 8:26, R. V.) He teacheth 
us to pray. True prayer is prayer "in the 
Spirit," i. e., the prayer which the Spirit inspires 
and directs. When we come into God's presence 
to pray, we should recognize our infirmity, our 
ignorance of what we should pray for or how we 
should pray, and, in the consciousness of our utter 
inability to pray aright, look up to the Holy Spir- 
it, and cast ourselves utterly upon Him to direct 
our prayers, to lead out our desires, and guide our 

* The subject of the Holy Spirit's power in communi- 
cating truth is fully considered in the author's book on 
"The Baptism with the Holy Spirit." 



/ 



68 FULNESS OF POWER 

utterance of them. Rushing heedlessly into 
God's presence, and asking the first thing that 
comes into our minds, or that some thoughtless 
one asks us to pray for, is not " praying in the 
Holy Ghost," and is not true prayer. We must 
wait for the Holy Spirit, and surrender our- 
selves to the Holy Spirit. The prayer that God 
the Holy Spirit inspires is the prayer that jGod 
the Father answers. From Rom. 8: 26, 27, we 
learn that the longings which the Holy Spirit 
begets in our hearts are often too deep for utter- 
ance; too deep, apparently, for clear and definite 
comprehension on the part of the believer him- 
self, in whom the Holy Spirit is working. God 
himself must " search the heart," to know "what 
is the mind of the Spirit" in these unuttered 
and unutterable longings. But God does know 
"what is the mind of the Spirit." He does 
know what those Spirit-given longings mean, 
even if we do not, and these longings are " ac- 
cording to the will of God," and He grants 
them. So it comes that He is " able to do ex- 
ceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or 
think, according to the power that worketh in 
us." (Eph. 3: 20.) There are other times 
when the Spirit's leadings in prayer are so plain 
that we " pray with the Spirit and with the un« 
derstanding also." (1 Cor. 14: 15.) 



THE POWEB OP THE HOLY SPIRIT 69 

15. The Holy Spirit has also power to lead 
out our hearts in acceptable thanksgi ving to 
God. " Be filled," says Paul, "with the Spirit; 
speaking one to another in psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs, singing and making melody 
with your heart to the Lord; giving thanks always 
for all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, to God, even the Father." (Eph. 5: 18- 
20, R. V.) Not only does the Spirit teach us 
to pray, He also teaches us to render thanks. 
One of the most prominent characteristics of the 
" Spirit-filled life" is thanksgiving. (Oomp. Acts 
2: 4, 11.) True thanksgiving is " to God, even the 
Father," "in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ," " in the Holy Spirit." 

16. The Holy Spirit has power to inspire in 
the heart of the believer in Christ worship that 
is acceptable to God. " For we are the circum- 
cision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and 
glory in Christ Jesua, and have no confidence 
in the flesh." (Phil. 3: 3, R. V.) Prayer is 
not worship, thanksgiving is not worship. Wor- 
ship is a definite act of the creature in relation 
to God. Worship is bowing before God in 
adoring acknowledgement and contemplation of 
Himself. Someone has said, "In our prayers 
we are taken up with our needs, in our thanks- 
givings we are taken up with our blessings, in 



70 FULNESS OP POWER 

oar worship we are taken up with Himself." 
There is no true and acceptable worship except 
that which the Holy Spirit prompts and directs. 
" Such doth the Father seek to be his worship- 
pers." (John 4: 23, R. V.) 

The flesh seeks to enter every sphere of 
life. It has its worship as well as its lust. 
The . worship which the flesh prompts is an 
abomination to God. Not all earnest and 
honest worship is worship in the Spirit. A 
man may be very honest and very earnest in his 
worship, and still not have submitted himself 
to the guidance of the Holy Spirit in the mat- 
ter, and so his worship is in the flesh. Even 
where there is great loyalty to the letter of 
the Word, worship may not be " in the Spirit," 
t. e., inspired and directed by Him. To wor- 
ship aright we must "have no confidence in the 
flesh." We must recognize the utter inability 
of the flesh, i. e., our natural self as contrasted 
with the divine Spirit who dwells in and 
should mould everything in the believer, to 
worship acceptably. We must realize also the 
danger there is that the flesh, self, intrude itself 
into our worship. In utter self -distrust and self* 
abnegation we must cast ourselves upon the 
Holy Spirit, to lead us aright in our worship. 
Just as we must renounce any merit in our- 



THE POWER OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 71 

selves, and cast ourselves utterly upon Christ 
and His work for us for justification; just so 
we must renounce any capacity for good in 
ourselves, and cast ourselves utterly upon the 
Holy Spirit, and His work in us, in living, 
praying, thanking, and worshipping, and all else 
that we are to do. 

17. Let us next consider the Holy Spirit's 
power as a guide. In Acts 13: 2-4, we read: "As 



they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy 
Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for 
the work whereunto I have called them. And 
when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their 
hands on them, they sent them away. So they, 
being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed 
into Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to 
Cyprus." 

The Holy Spirit calls men and sends them 
forth to definite lines of work. The Holy 
_ Spirit not only calls men in a general way into 
Christian work, but He also selects the speci- 
fic work and points it out. " Shall I go to China, 



to Africa, to India? " many a one is asking, and 
many another ought to ask. You cannot right- 
ly settle that question for yourselves, neither 
can any other man settle it rightly for you. 
Not every Christian man is called to China or 
Africa or any other foreign field. God alone 



72 FULNESS OP POWER 

knows whether He wishes you to go to any of 
these places. He is willing to show you. How 
does the Holy Spirit call? The passage before 
us does not tell. It is presumably purposely 
silent on this point, lest, perhaps, we think that 
He must always call in precisely the same way. 
There is nothing to indicate that He spoke by 
an audible voice, much less that He made his 
will known in any of the fantastic ways in which 
some profess to discern His leading, as, e. g., by 
some twitching of the body, or by opening the 
Bible at random, and putting the finger on a 
passage that may be construed into some entirely 
different meaning than that which the inspired 
writer intended by it. But the important point 
is that He made His will clearly known. He is 
as willing to make His will clearly known to us 
to-day. The great need in Christian work to* 
day is men and women whom the Holy Spirit 
calls and sends forth. We have plenty of men 
and women whom men have called and sent 
forth, we have far too many who have called 
themselves. There are many to-day who object 
strenuously to being sent forth by men, by any 
organization of any kind, who are, what is im- 
measurably worse than that, sent forth by them- 
selves, not by God. How shall we receive the 
Holy Spirit's call? Bj desiring it, seeking it, 



THE POWER OF THE HOLT SPIRIT 73 

waiting upon the Lord for it, and expecting it. 
" As they ministered to the Lord and fasted " 
the record reads. Many a man is saying, in 
self- justification for staying put of the ministry, 
or for staying home from the foreign field: " I 
have never had a call." How do you know that? 
Have you been listening' for it? God speaks 
often in a still small voice. Only the listening 
ear can catch it. Have you definitely offered 
yourself to God to send you where He will? 
While no man ought to go to China or Africa 
unless he is clearly and definitely called, he 
ought to definitely offer himself to God for this 
work, and be ready for a call, and listening 
sharply that he may hear it when it comes. No 
educated Christian man or woman has a right to 
rest easy out of the foreign field until they have 
definitely offered themselves to God for that 
work, and it is clear no call from God has come. 
Indeed, a man needs no more definite call to 
Africa than to Boston or New York or Chicago. 
18. We learn something further about the 
Holy Spirit's power to guide in Acts 8: 27-29; 
16: 6, 7. R. V. : "And he arose and went: and be- 
hold, a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great au- 
thority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, 
who had the charge of all her treasure, and had 
come to Jerusalem for to worship, was returning, 



74 FULNESS OF POWER 

and sitting in his chariot, read Esaias the 
prophet. Then the Spirit said onto Philip Go 
near, and join thyself to this chariot." 

"And they went through the regions of 
Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden of 
the Holy Ghost to speak the Word in Asia; 
and when they were come over against Mysia, 
they assayed to go into Bithynia, bnt the Spirit 
of Jesus suffered them not." 

The Holy Spirit guides in the details of daily 
life and service, as to where to go and where not 
to go, what to do and what not to do. It is pos- 
sible for us to have the unerring guidance of 
the Holy Spirit at every turn in our lives. For 
example, in personal work it is manifestly not 
God's intention that we speak to every one we 
meet. There are some to whom we ought not 
to speak. Time spent on them would be time 
taken from work which would be more to the 
glory of God. Doubtless Philip met many as he 
journeyed toward Gaza, before he met the one of 
whom the Spirit said: " Go near and join thy- 
self to this chariot." In the same way is He 
ready to guide us in our personal work. He is 
ready also to guide us in all the affairs of life: 
business, study, social life — everything. We can 
have God's wisdom if we will at every turn of life. 
There is no promise more plain and explicit than 



THE POWER OP THE HOLY SPIRIT 75 

Jas. 1: 5: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him 
ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, 
and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him." 
How shall we gai n this wis dom? Jas. 1: 5-7, 
answers. Here are really five steps. First: 
That we "lack wisdom." We must be conscious 
of and fully admit our own inability to decide 
wisely. Not only the sinfulness but the wisdom 
of the flesh must be renounced. Second: We 
must really desire to know God's way, and be 
willing to do God's will. This is implied in the 
asking, if the asking be sincere. This is a point 
of fundamental importance. Here we find the 
reason why men ofttimes do not know God's 
will, and have not the Spirit's guidance. They 
are not really willing to do whatever the Spirit 
leads. It is " the meek " whom he guides in 
judgment, and the meek to whom "he will teach 
his way." (Ps. 25: 9.) It is he who " willeth 
to do his will" who "shall know." (Jno. 7: 17, 
R. V.) ^ Third: We must ask, definitely ask 
guidance. Fourth: We must confidently expect 
guidance. "Let him ask in faith, nothing 
doubting." (Verses 6 and 7, R. V. ) Fifth: We 
must follow step by step as the guidance comes. 
Just how it will come no one can tell. But it 
will come. It may come with only a step made 
clear at a time. That is all that we need to 



76 FULNESS OF POWER 

know, — the next step. Many are in darkness be- 
cause they do not know what God will have 
them to do next week, or next month or next 
year. Do you know the next step? That is 
enough. Take it, and then he will show you the 
next. (See Num. 9: 17-23.) God's guidance 
is clear guidance. (1 John 1:5.) Many are tor- 
tured by leadings which they fear may be from 
God, but which they are not sure about. You 
have a right as God's child to be sure. Go to 
God, say: "Here I am, Heavenly Father, I am 
willing to do Thy will, but make it clear. If this 
is Thy will, I will do it; but make it clear if it 
is." He will do it, if it is His will and you are 
willing to do it. You need not and ought not 
to do that thing until He does make it clear. 
We have no right to dictate to God how He 
shall give His guidance, as, e. g. 9 by " shutting 
up every other way," or by a sign, or by letting 
us put our finger on a text. It is ours to seek 
and expect wisdom, but it is not ours to dictate 
how it shall be given. (1 Cor. 12: 11.) 

19. In one more direction has the Holy Spir- 
it power. Read Acts 4: 31; 13: 9-10: "And when 
they had prayed the place was shaken where 
they were assembled together; and they were all 
filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the 
word of God with boldness." The Holy Spir- 



THE POWEB OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 77 

it has power to give us boldness in testimony 
for Christ. Many are naturally timid. They 
long to do something for Christ, but they are 
afraid. The Holy Spirit can make you bold if 
you will look to Him and trust Him to do it. 
It was He who turned the craven Peter into the 
one who fearlessly faced the Sanhedrim and 
rebuked their sin. (See Acts 4: 8-12.) 

Two things are manifest from what has been 
said about the power of the Holy Spirit 
in the believer. First, how utterly dependent 
we are upon the Holy Spirit at every turn of 
Christian life and service. Second, how per- 
fect is the provision for life and service that 
God has made, and what the fulness of privilege 
that is open to the humblest believer, through 
the Holy Spirit's work. It is not so much what 
we are by nature either intellectually, morally, 
spiritually or even physically that is important; 
but what the Holy Spirit can do for us, and 
what we will let Him do. The Holy Spirit 
often takes the one who gives the least natural 
promise and uses him far more than those who 
give the greatest natural promise. Christian 
life is not to be lived in the realm of natural 
temperament, and Christian work is not to be 
done in the power of natural endowment; but 
Christian life is to be lived in the realm of the 



78 FULNESS OP POWER 

Spirit, and Christian work is to be done in the 
power of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Spirit 
is eagerly desirous to do for each of us His 
whole work. He will do for each of us all we 
will let Him do. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE POWER OP PBAYEB 

"Power belongeth unto God," but all that 
belongs to God we can have for the asking. 
God holds out His full hands and says: " Ask, 
and it shall be given unto you . . . if ye, 
being evil know how to give good gifts unto 
your children, how much more shall your Father 
which is in heaven give good things to them 
that ask him? " (Matt. 7: 7, 11.) The poverty 
and powerlessness of the average Christian finds 
its explanation in the words of the apostle 
James: ."Ye have not, because ye ask not." 
( Jas. 4: 2.) " Why is it," many a Christian is 
asking, " that I make such poor progress in my 
Christian life?" "Neglect of prayer," God 
answers. " You have not because you ask not." 
" Why is it there is so little fruit in my minis- 
try?" asks many a discouraged minister. , "Neg- 
lect of prayer," God answers again. " You have 
not because you ask not." " Why is it," many, 
both ministers and laymen, are asking, " that 
there is so little power in my life and service? " 

79 



80 FULNESS OP POWEB 

And again God answers: "Neglect of prayer. 
You have not because you ask not." God has 
provided for a life of power, and a work of pow- 
er on the part of every child of His. He has 
put His own infinite power at our disposal, and 
has proclaimed over and over again, in a great 
variety of ways in His Word, " Ask and ye shall 
receive." Thousands upon thousands have 
taken God at His word in this matter, and have 
always found it true. The first Christians were 
men of tremendous power. What power Peter 
and John, for example, had in their lives. What 
power they had in their work! There was op- 
position in those days, — most determined, bitter 
and relentless opposition; opposition in compar- 
ison with which that which we encounter is but 
as child's play, — but the work went right on. 
We constantly read such statements as these: 
"The Lord added to the church daily such as 
should be saved." (Acts 2: 47.) "Howbeit 
many of them which heard the word believed; 
and the number of the men was about five 
thousand." (Acts 4: 4.) "And believers were 
the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of 
men and women." (Acts 5: 14.) The apostles 
themselves explain the secret of their resistless 
power when they say: "We will give ourselves 
continually to prayer and to the ministry of the 



THE POWER OP PBAYEB 81 

Word." (Acts 6: 4.) But it was not only the 
leaders who had power in life and service; so 
had the rank and file of that early church. 
What a beautiful picture we have of the 
abounding love and fruitfulness of that 
early church! (Acts 2: 44-47; 4: 32-37; 8: 4; 
11: 19, 21.) The secret of this fulness of 
power in life and service is found ih Acts 2: 42: 
"They continued steadfastly . . . in prayers." 
God delights to answer prayer: "Call upon me," 
He cries, "I will deliver thee, and thou shalt 
glorify me. ,? (Ps. 50: 15.) There is a place 
where strength can always be renewed; that 
place is the presence of the Lord: "They that 
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; 
they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they 
shall run, and not be weary; and they shall 
walk, and not faint." (Is. 40: 31.) How little 
time the average Christian spends in prayer! 
We are too busy to pray, and s o we are too busy 
to have power. We have a great deal of activi- 
ty but we accomplish little; many services but 
few conversions; much machinery but few re- 
sults. The power of God is lacking in our lives 
and in our work. We have not because we ask 
not. Many professed Christians confessedly do 
not believe in the power of prayer. It is quite 
the fashion with some to contemptuously con- 



82 FULNESS OF POWEB 

trast the prayers with the doers — forgetting that 
in the history of the Church the real doers have 
been prayers, that the men who have made the 
glorious part of the Church's history have been 
without exception men of prayer. Of those who 
do believe theoretically in the power of prayer, 
not one in a thousand realizes its power. How 
much time "does the average Christian spend 
daily in prayer? How much time do you spend 
daily in prayer? It was a master-stroke of the 
devil when he got the Church and the ministry 
so generally to lay aside the mighty weapon of 
prayer. The devil is perfectly willing that the 
Church should multiply its organizations and 
its deftly contrived machinery for the conquest 
of the world for Christ, if it will only give up 
praying. He laughs softly, as he looks at the 
Church of to-day, and says under his breath: 
" You can have your Sunday-schools, and your 
Y. M. C. A's, and your Y. W. 0. A's, and your 
Y. P. 8. C. E's, and your B. Y. P. U's, and 
your Epworth Leagues, and your W. C. T. U's, 
and your Boys' Brigades, and your Institutional 
Churches, and your Men's Clubs, and your 
grand choirs, and your fine organs, and your 
brilliant preachers, and your revival efforts, 
even, if you do not bring into them the power 
of Almighty God, sought and obtained by earn- 



THE POWEB OF PRAYER 83 

est, persistent, believing, mighty prayer." The 
devil is not afraid of machinery; he is only 
afraid of God, and machinery without prayer is 
machinery without God. Our day is character- 
ized by the multiplication of man's machinery 
and the diminution of God's power sought and 
obtained by prayer. But when men and women 
arise who believe in prayer, and who pray in 
the way the Bible teaches us to pray, prayer ac- 
complishes as much as it ever did. Prayer can 
do to-day as much as it ever could. Prayer can 
do anything God can do; for the arm of God re- 
sponds to the touch of prayer. All the infinite 
resources of God are at the command of prayer. 
Prayer is the key that opens wide the inexhaust- 
ible storehouses of divine grace and power. 
"Ask and it shall be given you," cries our 
Heavenly Father, as He swings wide open the 
doors of the divine treasure-house. There is 
only one limit to what prayer can do; that is what 
God can do. But all things are possible to 
God; therefore prayer is omnipotent. 

Christian history and Christian biography 
demonstrate the truth of what the Word of God 
teaches about prayer. All through the history 
of the Church, men and women have arisen in 
all ranks of life who believed with simple, child* 
like faith what the Bible teaches about prayer 



84 FULNESS OF POWER 

and they have asked and they have received. 
But what are some of the definite things that 
, prayer has power to do? 

1. Prayer has power to bring a true knowl- 
edge of ourselves and our needs. T here is 
nothing more necessary than that we know our- 
selves, our weakness, our sinfulness, our selfish- 
ness; how that in us, that is to say in our flesh, 
dwelleth no good thing. (Rom. 7: 18.) Lives 
aa, of power have usually begun with a revelation ^ 

VV of the utter powerlessness and worthlessness of 

x self. So it was with Isaiah . In the year that 

king Uzziah died, he was brought face to face 
with God, and saw himself, and cried out: " Woe 
is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of 
unclean lips." (Is. 6: 1-5.) Then a life of 
power began for Isaiah and God sent him forth 
to a mighty work. (Is. 6: 8, 9.) It was so with 
Moses. He met God at the burning bush, and 
was emptied of his former self-confidence, saw 
his utter unfitness for the Lord's work, and then 
the Lord sent him as a mighty man of power. 
(Ex. 3: 2, 5, 11. Comp. Ex. 2: 11-15.) It was 
so with Job . It was after Job met God, and 
' cried concerning himself: " I abhor myself, and 
repent in dust and ashes," that the Lord turned 
the captivity of Job, and that he received power 
to intercede for his friends, and to bear abun- 



THE POWEB OF PBATEB 85 

dant fruit. (Job 42: 5, 6, 10, 12.) It is needful 
if we are to have fulness of power, that we get a 
view of ourselves as we are by nature. It is in 
prayer that we get it. If we sincerely pray the 
Psalmist's prayer: "Search me, O God, and 
know my heart; try me and know my thoughts " 
(Ps. 139: 23), He will do it. There will come 
a true revelation of self as God sees us, a conse- 
quent utter emptying of self, and room will be 
made for the incoming of the power of God. It 
is not enough to pray this prayer once for all. 
It needs to be repeated daily. 
, 2. Prayer has power to cleanse our hearts 
from sin; from secret sin and from known sin. 



(Ps. 19, 12, 13.) In answer to David's prayer 
after his disastrous fall, God washed him thor- 
oughly from his iniquity, and cleansed him 
from his sin. (Ps. 51 : 2.) Many a man has fought 
for days and, months and years against some 
sin that has been marring his life, and sapping 
his spiritual power, and at last has gone unto 
God in prayer, and held on to God, and would 
not let Him go until He blessed him; and ha 
has come out of the place of prayer a victor. 
In this way sins that seem unconquerable have 
been laid in the dust. In this way the secret 
sin that the sinner himself scarce discerned, 
but that has robbed him of power, has been dis- 



86 FULNESS OF POWER 

covered in all its real hideousness, and rooted 
out. Of course, as seen in the previous Chap- 
ter, it is the Holy Spirit who sets us free from 
sin's power, but the Holy Spirit works in our 
lives in answer to our prayers. (Luke 11: 13.) 

3. Prayer has power to hold us up in ou r 
goings, and give us victory over temptation . 
" Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my foot- 
steps slip not," cried David. (Ps. 17:5.) 
That is a prayer God is ever ready to hear. 
Jesus himself said to His disciples, as the hour 
of trial drew nigh: " Pray that ye enter not 
into temptation." ( Luke 22 : 40. ) But the dis- 
ciples did not heed the warning. They slept 
when they should have prayed, and when the 
temptation came in a few hours, they failed ut- 
terly. But Jesus Himself spent that night in 
prayer, and when the next day the fiercest temp- 
tations that ever beset a son of man swept down 
upon Him, He came off gloriously triumph- 
ant. We can come off victorious over every 
temptation, if we will prepare for it, and meet 
it by prayer. Many of us are led into defeat 
and denial of our Lord, as Peter was, by sleep- 
ing when we ought to be praying. 

4. Prayer has power to govern our tongues. 
Many a Christian who has desired fulness of 
power in Christian life and service, has found 



THE POWEB OP PBAYEB 87 

himself kept from it by an unruly tongue. He 
has learned by bitter experience the truth of 
the words of James: " The tongue can no man 
tame." (Jas. 3:8.) But while no man can 
tame it, God can and will, in answer to believ- 
ing prayer. If one will earnestly and believ- 
ingly pray with David: " Set a watch, O Lord, 
before my mouth; keep the door of my lips" (Ps. 
141 : 3 ) , God will do it. Many and many an unruly 
tongue has been brought into subjection in this 
way. Tongues that were as sharp as the pierc- 
ings of a sword, have learned to speak words of 
gentleness and grace. True prayer can tame 
the unruliest tongue by which man or woman 
was ever cursed, because true prayer brings 
into play the power of Him with whom nothing 
is impossible. 

5. Prayer has power to bring us wisdom. 
The word of God is very explicit on this point: 
" If any of you lac£ wisdom, let him ask of, 
God, that giveth to all men liberally, and up- 
braideth not; and it shall be given him." 
(Jas. 1:5.) No promise could be more explicit 
than that. We can have wisdom, the wisdom 
of God himself, at every turn of life. God 
does not intend that His children shall grope in 
darkness. He puts His own infinite wisdom at 
our disposal. All He asks is that we ask, and 



88 FULNESS OF POWER 

ask in faith. (Jas. 1: 6-7.) Many of us are 
stumbling on in our own foolishness, instead of 
walking on in His wisdom, simply because we 
do not ask. He greatly desires us to know Hid 
way, and is willing to make it known upon out 
asking. Oh, the joy of knowing and walking in 
God's way! And we can all have this joy for the 
asking. (Ps. 86: 11; 25: 4; 143: 10; 119: 33.) 
6. Prayer has power to open our eyes to 



behold wondrous things out of God's word . 
(Ps. 119:18.) It is wonderful how the Bible 
opens up to one who looks to God in earnest 
believing prayer to interpret it to him. Diffi- 
culties vanish, obscure passages become clear as 
day, and old familiar portions become luminous 
with new meaning, an" living with new power. 
Prayer will do more than a theological educa- 
tion to make the Bible an open book. Only 
the man of prayer can understand the Bible. 

7. Prayer has power to bring the Holy 
Spirit in all His blessed power and manifold 
gracious operations into our hearts and lives. 
" If ye then being evil," says Jesus, " know how 
to give good gifts unto your children: how 
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the 
Holy Spirit to them that ask him!" (Luke 
11:13.) It was after the first disciples had 
.^^tinued m jjrayer jand sup plication" (Ac ta 



THE POWER OF PBATEB 89 

1: 14), that " they were all filled with the Holy , 
Ghost." (Acts 2:4.) On another occasion 
" when they had prayed, the place was shaken 
where they were assembled together; and they 
were all filled with the Holy Ghost." (Acts 
4:31.) When Peter and John came down to 
Samaria and found a company of young con- 
verts who had not yet experienced the fulness 
of the Holy Spirit's power, " they prayed for 
them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost." 
"And they received the Holy Ghost." (Acts 
8:15, 17.) It was in answer to prayer that 
Paul expected the saints in Ephesus " to be 
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the 
inner man" (Eph. 3:14, 16), and that "the 
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
glory," would give them " the spirit of wisdom 
and revelation in the knowledge of him." 
(Eph. 1:16, 17.) It is manifestly prayer that 
brings the fulness of the Spirit's power into our 
hearts and lives. One great reason why so 
many of us have so little of the Holy Spirit's 
power in our lives and service, is because we 
spend so little time and thought in prayer. We 
" have not, because we ask not." 

Every precious spiritual blessing in our own 
lives is given by our Heavenly Father in answer 
to true prayer. Prayer promotes our own spir- 



90 FULNESS OF POWEB 

itual growth and our likeness to Christ as almost 
nothing else can. The more time we spend in 
real, true prayer, other things being equal, the 
more we shall grow in likeness to our Master. 
One of the saintliest, and most Christlike men 
that ever lived was John Welch, the son*in*law 
of John Knox, the great Scotch reformer. He 
is said to have given one-third of his time to 
prayer, and often to have spent a whole night 
in prayer. One who knew him well, speaking 
of him after his departure to be with Christ, 
said of him: " He was a type of Christ." Many 
illustrations could be given of the power of 
prayer to bring our lives into conformity with 
Christ's. In prayer we gaze into the face of 
God, and "reflecting as a mirror the glory of 
the Lord, are transformed into the same image 
from glory to glory." (2 Cor. 3: 18, R. V.) 

8. But prayer has not only power to pro- 
mote our own spiritual growth into the likenesd 
of Christ; prayer has also power to brin g the 
fulness o f God's power into our work. When 
the apostolic church saw themselves confronted 
by obstacles that they could not surmount 
"they lifted up their voice to God with one ac- 
cord." (Acts 4: 24.) "And when they had 
prayed " the power came that swept all obsta- 
cles before it. (Acts 4: 31-33; 5: 14.) Do you 



THB POWER OF PRAYER 91 

desire the power of God in your S. S. class, 
in your personal work, in your preaching, in 
your training of your children? Pray for it. 
Hold on to God until you get it. " Men ought 
always to pray, and not to faint." (Luke 18: 1.) 
I^hall never forget a sfght I once witnessed. 
A Woman of limited experience in public speak- 
ing was called upon to address an audience fill- 
ing the old Tremont ^Tepnple in Boston. It 
was a notable audience in its makeup as 
well as in numbers. Many of the leading 
clergymen of all evangelical denominations 
were there, also many men prominent in 
philanthropic and political affairs. As the wo- 
man spoke the audience was hushed, swayed, 
melted and moulded. Tears coursed down cheeks 
unwonted to them. The impression made upon 
many was not only salutary, but permanent. It 
was an address of marvelous power. The secret 
of it all lay in the fact, known only to a few, 
that that woman had spent the whole of the 
previous night on her face before God in pray- 
er. It is related of John Livingstone that he 
spent a night with a few like minded in prayer 
and religious converse. On the next day he 
preached in the Kirk of Shotts with such pow- 
er that 500 persons dated their conversion or 
some definite uplift in their spiritual life from 



92 FULNESS OF POWEB 

that sermon. A mother once came to me in 
great distress about hef boy, one of the most 
incorrigible children I ever knew. " What 
shall I do? " she cried. " Pray." She did with 
a new definiteness and earnestness and faith. 
The change came soon, if not immediately, and 
the change continues to this day. We can all 
have power in our work, if we will only believe 
God's promises regarding prayer, and meet the 
conditions of prevailing prayer, and lay hold 
upon God with an importunity, a holy boldness, 
that will not take no for an answer* 

9. But the man of prayer can not only have 
power in his own life and service, he can have 
power in the life and service of others . Prayer 
has power to bring salvation to others. " If any 
man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto 
death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life 
for them that sin not unto death." (1 Jno. 5: 
16.) Prayer avails for the salvation of others 
where every effort for their salvation fails. 
There is little doubt that Saul of Tarsus, the 
most dangerous human enemy the church of 
Christ ever had, became Paul the apostle in 
answer to prayer. There have been countless 
instances where men and women seemingly past 
all hope have been converted in most direct and 
unmistakable answer to prayer. 



THE POWEE OF PEATEB 93 

Prayer will bring blessing upon a church. It 
will settle church quarrels, allay misunderstand- 
ings, root out herely and bring down gracious 
revivals from God. Dr. Spencer tells, in his 
"Pastor's Sketches," how a great revival was 
brought down upon his church by the prayers 
of a godly old man who was shut up in his 
room by lameness. In Philadelphia during the 
pastorate of Dr. Thomas Skinner, three men of 
God came together in his study to pray. " They 
literally wrestled in prayer." From this meet- 
ing sprang up a powerful revival in that city. 
One of the most notable, widespread and en- 
during revivals ever known in this land, accord- 
ing to the account given by Mr. Finney, arose 
from the prayers of a humble woman who had 
never seen a revival, but was led to lay hold of 
God for this. One of the greatest needs of the 
hour is that some of God's children should de- 
vote themselves to calling upon God until He 
visits this land again with a mighty outpouring 
of His Spirit. There have been in times past 
great revivals without very much preaching, 
and with almost no machinery. There has never 
been a great and true revival without much pray- 
er. Many modern so-called revivals are gotten 
up by man's machinery. Genuine revivals are 
brought down by prayer. 



94 FULNESS OF POWER 

Prayer will bring wisdom and power to 
ministers of the gospel. Paul was a matchless 
preacher and worker, but he so deeply felt the 
need of the prayers of God's people, that he asked 
for them from every church to which he wrote 
save one (the backslidden church in Galatia). 
It has been demonstrated again and again that 
z prayer can transform a poor preacher into a 
good one. If you are not satisnea with your 
pastor, pray for him. Keep on praying for him 
and you will soon have a better minister. If 
you think your present minister a pretty good 
one, you can make him far better by more 
prayer. Little do many Christians realize how 
much they have to do with the powerful or pow- 
erless preaching their pastor gives them by their 
prayer or neglect of prayer. 

But the power of prayer reaches across the 
sea and around the earth. We can contribute 
to the conversion of the heathen and the 
evangelization of the world by our prayers. The 
prayers of believers in America have brought 
down the power of the Spirit in India and China. 
Doubtless more men and more money are 
needed for foreign mission work, but the greatest 
need of foreign mission work is prayer. It is a 
sad fact that, mu ch money given to foreign 
mission work has been largely wasted. There 



THE POWER OF PBAYEB 95 

has not been enough intelligent prayer back of 
the giving. 

There is mighty power in prayer. It has 
much to do with our obtaining fulness of 
power in Christian life and service. The one 
who will not take time for prayer may as well 
resign all hope of obtaining the fulness of 
power God has for him. It is "they that 
wait upon the Lord" who " shall renew their 
strength." (Is. 40: 31.) Waiting upon the Lord 
means something more than spending a few 
minutes at the beginning and close of each day 
running through some stereotyped form of 
request. " Wait upon the Lobd." True prayer 
takes time and thought, but it is the great time* 
saver At all events if we are to know fulness 
of power we must be men and women of prayer. 



CHAPTER V 

THB POWER OF A SURRENDERED LIFE 

"Power belongeth unto God," but there is 
one condition upon which that power is be- 
stowed upon us. That ^condition is absolute 
& surrender to Him. In Bom. 6: 13, we read: 
" Neither yield ye your members as instruments 
of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield yourselves 
unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and 
your members as instruments of righteousness 
unto God." Again in Kom. 6: 22, we read: 
11 Being now made free from sin, and become 
servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, 
and the end everlasting life." The great secret 
of blessedness and power is found in these 
verses. " Yield yourselves unto God" — the whole 
secret is found in those words. The word trans- 
lated " yield " in the A. V., is rendered " pre- 
sent " in the R. V. It means, to put at one's dis- 
posal. " Put yourselves at God's disposal " is 
the thought. In other words, surrender your- 
selves absolutely to God, to be His property, for 

96 



THB POWEB OF A SURRENDERED LIFE 97 

Him to do with you what He will, and use you 
as He will. That is the wisest thing anyone 
can do with himself. By that act he has 
secured all the blessedness that is possible 
to man, and day by day, and year by year, it 
will be bestowed upon him in eveMncreasing 
measure. If anyone asks "What is the one 
thing for me to do if I wish to know all that 
God has for me?" the answer is very simple. 
Surrender absolutely to God; say to Him, 
" Heavenly Father, henceforth I have no will of 
my own; Thy will be done in me, through me, 
by me, and regarding me, in all things. I put 
myself unreservedly in Thy hands; now do with 
me just what Thou wilt." When one does that, 
God, who is infinite love, and infinite wisdom, 
and infinite power, does the very best thing with 
that one. We may not see at once that it is the 
best thing, but it is, and sooner or later it will 
be seen. Sooner or later God floods the heart of 
him who surrenders absolutely to Him with 
light, and joy, and fills his life with power. 
Absolute surrender to God, is the secret of 
blessedness and power. Let us look at some of 
the things that are definitely said in the Bible 
to come from absolute surrender. 

1. The first of these you will find in Jno. 7: 
17, R. V.: "If any willeth to do his will he shall 



98 FULNESS OF POWBB 

know of the teaching." Knowledge of the truth 
^ comes with the surrender of the will. Nothing 
so clears the spiritual vision as surrender to the 
will of God. " God is light and in him is no 
darkness at all." (1 Jno. 1:5.) Surrender to 
Him opens our eyes to the light which He 
himself is. It brings us at once into harmony 
with all truth. Nothing so blinds the spiritual 
vision as self-will or sin. I have seen questions 
which bothered men for years solved in a very 
short time when those men simply surrendered 
to God. What was dark as night before has be- 
come as light as day. 

An unsurrendered will lies back of almost all 
the scepticism in the world. Oh yon who are 
^filled with doubts and questions, would you 
have certainty instead of doubt? Yield your- 
selves to God. Oh you who are floundering in 
the mire, would you get your feet on the solid 
rock? Yield yourselves to God. Oh you who 
are trying to feel your way in the dark, would 
you see your path plain before you? Yield 
yourselves to God. The greatest truths, the 
truths of most significance for time and for 
eternity, cannot be learned by mere investiga- 
tion and study. They cannot be reasoned out. 
They must be seen. The only one who can see 
them is the one whose eye is cleared by absolute 



THE POWER OF A SURRENDERED LIFE 99 

surrender to God. " If, therefore, thine eye be 
single," says Jesus, " thy whole body shall be 
full of light. But if thine eye be* evil, thy 
whole body shall be full of darkness." (Matt. 
6: 22, 23.) A surrendered life and will is the 
secret of light and knowledge. Many a man 
has confided to me how he was wandering in 
the dark, not knowing what he believed, and 
not quite sure if he believed anything. To 
such I have put the questions: " Will you surren- 
der your will to God? Will you give yourself up 
to God, for Him to do what He will with you?" 
And not a single one who has done it but has 
soon said: "My doubts are gone, my uncertain- 
ties have gone, my darkness is gone. It is all 
light now." 

2. The next result of a surrendered will and 
lif e is power in prayer. The greatest secret of 
prevailing prayer is that which John records 
from his own joyous experience^in 1 John 3: 
22: "Whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him, 
because we keep His commandments, and do 
those things which are pleasing in His sight." 
Just note those wonderful words "whatsoever 
we ask we receive of Him." Think of it! not 
one prayer, great or small, that fails to get what 
is sought. Then note the reason: "because we 
keep His commandments, and do those things 



j ■> - 



100 FULNESS OP POWEB 

that are pleasing in His sight." A life entirely 
surrendered to the doing of God's will as re- 
vealed in His word, and to doing the things that 
are pleasing in His sight; a life wholly surren- 
dered to God's will and pleasure, a life wholly 
at God's disposal, this is the secret of prevailing 
prayer. Do you ask why you do not get what 
you ask, why you cannot say like John: " What- 
soever I ask I get?" It is not because he was 
an apostle and you are just an every-day Chris- 
tian. It was because he could say, " I keep His 
commandments and do those things (and them 
only) which are pleasing in His sight, "and you 
can't say that. It was because his life was en- 
tirely surrendered to God, and yours isn't. 
There are many people greatly puzzled because 
their prayers never seem to reach the ear of 
God, but fall back powerless to the earth. 
There is no mystery about it. It is because 
you have not met the one great fundamental 
condition of prevailing prayer, — a surrendered 
will, a surrendered life. It is when we make 
God's will ours, that He makes our wills His. 
11 Delight thyself also in the Lord and He shall 
give thee the desires of thine heart." (Ps. 37: 
4.) Jesus said to the Father, "Thou hearest 
me always." (John 11: 42.) But why? "Oh, 1 
you say, "because He was His only begotten 



THE POWER OP A SURRENDERED LIFE 101 

Son." Not at all, but because Jesus could say: 
" I am come down from heaven, not to do 
mine own will, but the will of Him that sent 
me" (John 6: 38); and again, " My meat is to 
do the will of him that sent me" (John 6: 34); 
and again, " Lo, I come to do thy will, O God." 
(Heb. 10: 7.) 

A surrendered will and a surrendered life is 

the great secret of prevailing prayer. George 

^ Mailer , perhaps, stands out as the one man of our 

generation who, above all others, has wrought 

things by prayer. WhyJ Because many years 

ago he set out to be and <J,o just what God would 

have him to be and do, and to daily and deeply 

ponder God's word, that he might know His will. 

I He yielded himself to God. There is not one 

; of us who cannot become a mighty prince of 

God if we will do' the same thing. 

3. The next result of a surrendered will is a 
heart overflowing with joy . In the face of 
awful trial and agony through which He was to 
pass, Jesus said to His disciples: " If ye keep my 
commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even 
as I have kept my Father's commandments, and 
abide in his love. These things have I spoken 
unto you, that my joy may be in you, and that 
your joy may be fulfilled." (Jno. 15: 10, 11, 
R. Y.) Jesus had found joy in keeping His 



i 



102 FULNESS OF POWER 

Father's commandments, by complete surrender 
to His will, and now, if they would follow on in 
that path, His joy would be in them, and their 
joy would be " fulfilled," or filled full. This is 
the only way to find fulness of joy, — complete, 
unconditional surrender to God. " Yield your- 
selves unto God." There is no very great 
\ measure of joy in a half-hearted Christian life. 
Many so-called Christians have just "enough 
religion to make them miserable." They can 
no longer enjoy the world and they have not 
entered into the "joy of the Lord." There 
they stand, deprived of the " leeks and the onions 
and the garlic" of Egypt, and without the 
milk and honey and the finest of the wheat of 
Canaan. That is a wretched place to be in. 
The way out is simple, absolute surrender to 
God. Then your joy will be fulfilled. I have 
known so many who have entered into this ful- 
ness of joy. Sometimes it has been after a 
great struggle. They were so afraid to yield 
absolutely to GocL So afraid to say: "O God, 
I put myself unreservedly into thy hands; do 
with me what you please." They were afraid 
God would ask some hard thing. Afraid God 
might whisper " China," " India," or "Africa," 
and sometimes He has. Sometimes there has 
been what to the world seemed great sacrifice, 



THE POWER OF A SURRENDERED LIFE 103 

the giving up of cherished ambitions, the giving 
up of those dearly loved, the giving up of very 
much money, perhaps all one had. But there 
has been joy, joy " fulfilled," joy filled full. 

In one case I have in mind there was great 
pain, as one lay upon his back with a broken 
leg in a cast, but there was joy, such over- 
flowing joy that the sufferer lay there with 
danoing eyes and radiant face and throbbing 
heart shouting: "Glory, glory, glory!" 

There is but one way to find that fulness of joy, 
a surrendered life. A will and life completely 
surrendered to the God of love will bring joy 
under &U circumstances. In the olden days 
one who was thus surrendered to God was led 
out to be burned at the stake, and he threw his 
arms around the stake and cried out: "Welcome, 
cross of Christ! Welcome eternal life! " 

4. The next result of a surrendered life is 
Christ manifesting himself to us. On the night 
in which Jesus was betrayed, He said to His dis- 
ciples: "He that hath my commandments, and 
keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he 
that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and 
I will love him, and will manifest myself to 
him." (Jno., 14: 31.) A surrender of self to 
Christ brings Christ to us. The full manifes- 
tation of Jesus lies, it is true, in that future glad 



104 FULNESS OF POWER 

day when " the Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the voice of\ the 
archangel, and with the trump of God." (1 
Thes. 4: 16.) But there is a present manifes- 
tation of Jesus to us now, when the Son and the 
Father come unto us and make their abode 
with us. (Jno. 14: 23.) He will manifest 
himself unto us. "I don't know what that 
means," some will say. Have you yielded your- 
self to Him, are you keeping His commandments, 
not asking which commandment is great and 
which is small, which is important, and which 
is unimportant, but only asking which com- 
mandment is His, and keeping that? If you 
are, you will know what it is to have Him mani- 
fest himself unto you, and that is joy. We are 
told in one place " then were even the disciples 
glad, when they saw the Lord." (Jno. 20: 20.) 
You will be glad, when you see the Lord, and 
you will see Him when you go to Him and say: 
"I surrender my life absolutely to thee; now 
show me thyself." 

5. One more result of the surrendered will 
and life. Peter tells it in Acts 5: 32: "The 
Holy Ghost, which God hath given to them 
that obey him." The surrendered will and life 
is the great secret of receiving the Holy 
Ghost. All turns upon this. We may deal 



THE POWER OF A SURRENDERED LIFE 105 

with individual sins, and we may cry to God for 
the filling of the Holy Ghost, but unless there 
is total surrender to God at the center of our 
being, unless we yield ourselves to God, noth- 
ing is likely to come of it. Oh, how many have 
longed, and prayed, and agonized, that the Ho- 
ly Spirit might come upon them, but He came 
not. There was no complete surrender, there 
was no yielding of self to God. And then they 
have yielded themselves to God. They have 
bowed their faces and said: "O God, I yield, I 
give myself up utterly to Thee. I place myself 
unreservedly at Thy disposal. I hold nothing 
back, and I hold back from nothing that Thou 
biddest," and, as they have bowed, the Holy 
Ghost has fallen upon them. Perhaps it was 
with great surging waves of power and joy; per- 
haps in a gentle calm that stole over their 
whole being; perhaps in a still small voice that 
whispered: "If we ask anything according to 
His will, He heareth us, and if we know He hear- 
eth us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we 
have the petitions we desired of Him." (1 Jno. 
5: 14, 15.) But whatever way He came, He 
came, and when He came, power came. The 
great secret of power for God is the Holy Ghost 
upon us. (Acts 1:8.) And the great secret of 
the Holy Ghost coming upon us is the surren- 



106 FULNESS OF POWER 

dered will, a yielded life. Oh, how wondrous, 
how blessed, how glorious is the Holy Spirit's 
power! Will you have it, my brother? Will 
you have it, my sister? " Yield yourselves unto 
God, as those that are alive from the dead, and 
your members as instruments of righteousness 
unto God." Will you do it? Will you do it 
now? We have seen in previous chapters the 
Power of the Word of God, the Power of the 
Holy Spirit, the Power of Prayer, but the one 
great condition of obtaining the power of each 
and all in our own life and service is a surren- 
dered will, a life surrendered absolutely, unre- 
served, totally to God. Will you yield? 

Oh, how foolish, how utterly foolish, are 
those who will not yield, or who hesitate to 
yield themselves unto God! You are robbing 
yourself of all that makes life really worth liv- 
ing, and that makes eternity rosy and golden 
with gladness, beauty and glory. Will you 
yield to-day? 



\y^ 



>A3^0^vk - AVwXv\^oVd. 



Timely Helps for 
Forward Work 



PREPARATORY 



Worths on Prayer 

How to Pray. By R. A. Torrey. 43d thousand* 

i2mo, paper, 15 cents; cloth, 50 cents. 

"Written wisely, systematically in a clear, straightfor- 
ward style,without a suggestion of cant or egotism. There 
is a certain fresh earnestness of tone, which is a real 
earnestness. By all means procure this book and read it 
from time to time." — The Churchman^ N. Y. 

Prayer: Its Nature and Scope* By H. Clay 

Trumbull. i6mo, cloth, 60 cents. 

These thoughts about prayer were for the most part 
brought out in hours of earnest discussion. They are 
written primarily for the meeting of difficulties which 
trouble many minds with reference to the true basis of 
prayer, its scope and its limitations. 

"These thoughts about prayer were very obviously 
struck out amid the urgent needs and experiences of 
Christian life. In this best sense the book is a devotional 
one. The difficulties suggested are practical, not specu- 
lative. The answers suggested are practical, not theo- 
logical. The little book has light, comfort and inspira- 
tion in it and encouragement to pray."— The Indepenr 
dent. 

Illustrative Answers to Prayer* By H. Clay 

Trumbull. A record of personal experiences. Uniform 
with "Prayer: Its Nature and Scope/ 1 i6mo, cloth, 60 
cents. 

The Ministry of Intercession* A Plea for More 

Prayer. By Andrew Murray. i2mo, cloth, 75 cents. 

A continuation of "With Christ in the School of 
Prayer." With appendix, "Pray without Ceasing: Helps 
to Intercession," containing prayers for a month and 
other aids and guides to the life 01 prayer. 

"Those familiar with any of the author's previous writ- 
ings are in a position to appreciate the present volume, 
which like all the others, is deeply spiritual, wonderfully 
helpful, and well written. We trust it may find as great 
a channel of usefulness as did any of its forerunners."" 
The Cumberland Presbyterian, 



TIMELY HELPS 



Works Off Prayer — Continued 

Vtth Ghrfat in the School of Prayer: Thoughts 
on Ow Training for the Ministry of Intercession. By 
Andrew M array. i2mo, cloth, 75 cents. Cheaper 
edition, i6mo, cloth, 35 cents; paper, 2$ cents. 

Pray Without Ceasing, Helps to Intercession. 

With ruled blanks for notes, etc. Per dozen, net % Jg 
cents; per hundred, net, $2.50. 

Prevailing Prayer* What Hinders It ByD.U 

Moody. Piper, 15 cents; cloth, net, 50 cents. 
Twelve Sermons on Prayer. By C. H. Spurgeon, 

8?o, cloth, So cents. 

Praying in the Holy Ghost By Rev. G. H. C. 

Macgregor, M.A., anthor of "A Holy Life." Long 16 mo, 
cloth. So cents. 

"The greatest need of the Chnrch of Christ today is the 
need of prayer. . ..If we would have power with man we 
must have power with God. Bat to the work of prayer 
none of ns is equal. Here, if we are to prevail, we most 
have the mighty assistance of God the Holy Ghost."— 
From the Preface. 

The Wonders of Prayer. Enlarged edition, revised 

by Major D. W. Whittle, umo, cloth, $1.00. 

A compilation of well authenticated and wonderful 
answers to prayer, as narrated by George Mullcr, D. L. 
Moody, C. H. Spurgeon, Newman Hall, D. D.. Bishop T. 
Bowman, Charles G. Finney, W. W. Patton, D. D., S. I. 
Prime, D. D., P. Krummacher, Martin Luther. John 
Knox, and a host of others. 

Special Worf^f on the Holy Spirit 

The Spirit of God. By G. Campbell Morgan. 

izmo, cloth, $1.25. 

"We believe that such men have a mission for all 
branches of the Christian church. To others it may be 
given to lead the church out into the field of social prob- 
lems; to still others the duty falls of helping to elucidate 
the biblical and theological problems of our age; but 
surely no speakers and no writers can put Christians 
generally under greater obligations than those who bring 
a message to that which is deepest and best in our per- 
sonal life with Christ."— The Congregationalist. 

Through the Eternal Spirit A Comprehensive 

and Practical Study of the Holy Ghost. By Rev. J. 
Elder Cumming,D.D. Introduction by Rev. F. B. Meyer. 
2d edition, umo, cloth, $1.25. 

"It is most illuminating to have set forth in order each 
text in the Old Testament and then each one in the New 
Testament in which the Holy Spirit is directly mentioned. 
There is a classification of the passages under a half 
dozen heads. The object of the book is to present the 
whole teachings of Scripture in short compass and 
methodical order."— The N. Y. Christian Advocate, 



FOR FORWARD WORK 



On the Holy Spirit— Continue* 



The Things of the Spirit The Teachings of 

the Word of God, About the Spirit of God. Arranged by 
Rev. G. H. C. Macgregor, M. A. With an Introduction 
by Rev. F. B. Meyer, B. A. i6mo, paper, net, 20 cents; 



Power for Witnessing: On the Reception Work 

of the Holy Spirit. By A. F. Ballenger, Evangelist, 
iamo, cloth. 75 cents. 

This book will be found exceedingly helpful to the 
proper understanding of the part and place in the great 
plan of salvation that is filled by this important agency 
of the Godhead, enabling the reader bv its simple and 
interesting style to become acauaintea with ana grasp 
that power which vitalizes the Christian life and mates it 
one of acts instead of resolutions. 

The Spirit-Filled Life. By Rev. John Mac Neil. 

Introduction by Rev. Andrew Murray. 115th thousand. 
umo, paper, 15 cents; cloth, net, 30 cents. 

"A book of practical religion. It exhibits the high 
privileges of the believer and urges him on to the attain- 
ment.''— Lion's Herald. 

The Spirit of Christ Thoughts on the Indwell- 
ing of the Holy Spirit in the Believer and the Church. 
By Andrew Murray, i6mo,cloth, 35 cents; paper ,25 cents. 

The Acts of the Holy Spirit By Rev. A. T. 

Pierson, D.D. 2d edition, ismo, cloth, 75 cents. 

"A very important contribution to the literature of the 
subject."— Christian Work. 

The Baptism With the Holy Spirit By Rev. 

R. A. Torre v. 4th edition. i2mo, cloth, So cents. 

"Especially valuable because of its firm adherence to 
Scripture in all its directions regarding this most neces- 
sary and blessed of Christian experiences."— The Golden 
Rule. 

Plain Papers on the Holy Spirit By Rev. C. I. 

Scofield, D. D. i6mo, paper, net, 15 cents; cloth, net, 
35 cents. 

The Tongue of Fife; or, The True Power of 

Christianity. * By Rev. William Arthur, iamo, cloth, 60 
cents; paper, net, 35 cents. 

The Ministry of the Spirit By Rev. A. J. 

Gordon, D. D. With portrait. Introduction by Rev. F. 
B. Meyer, B.A. umo, cloth, gilt top, $1.00; i8mo, cloth, 
as cents; postpaid, 30 cents. 

Secret Power. By D. L. Moody. 117th thousand. 

Paper, is cents; cloth, net, 30 cents. 

Twelve Sermons on the Holy Spirit By C. H. 

Spurgeon. 8vo, cloth, So cents. 
A complete Itst of works en the Holy Spirit sent en 

explication. 



FOR FORWARD WORK 



EQ UIPM ENT 

*BooK* of Anecdote and Illus- 
tration 

Moody's Anecdotes* Anecdotes, incidents and 

illustrations from the addresses of D. L. Moody. Only 
authorized edition. i2mo, paper, is cts.; cloth,*;/, 30 cts. 
"It contains some of the anedotes, incidents, and illus- 
trations used by Mr. Moody. This collection gleams 
with the best of his rich treasure."— The Advance. 

Moody's Stories* A second series of Moody's 

^necdotes. i2mo, paper, is cents; cloth, net, 30 cents. 

One Thousand and One Thoughts from My 
Library* By D. L. Moody. I2mp, cloth, $1.00; 

paper, 50 cents. 

"It is so full of usable, quotable thoughts, and the 
whole indexed for ready reference, that it will be found 
very serviceable as a help for preparation for informal 
meetings."— The Evangelical. 

Notes from My Bible* Being the marginal notes* 

comments, illustrations, etc., copied from the author's 
Bible. By D.L.Moody. 13th thousand. I2mo,cloth,$i.oo. 
"This volume reveals one of the great evangelist's 
methods of equipping himself for bringing home to hit 
hearers the truths of God's Word. It illustrates the wis* 
use one may make of the margins and blank leaves of 
his Bible in garnering the fruits of reading and thought. 
It shows the great advantage to be reaped by the habit 
of making notes." — The Christian Intelligencer. 

Seed Corn for the Sower; or. Thoughts. Themes 

and Illustrations for Pulpit and Platform, and for Home 
Readings. By Rev. C. Perren. 4th edition. 8vo, 
cloth, $1.50. 

"To teachers and all engaged in Bible instruction it 
will prove a volume of great help and usefulness, and 
furnish ready to their hand many a nail with which to 
fasten in a sure place the truths they may desire to drive 
home." — Christian Work. 

The Gospel Worker's Treasury of Hymn and 

Revival Anecdotes, Texts, Subjects, Outlines and Scrip 
ture Readings. By Rev. £. S. Lorenz. Full and com- 
plete indexes. 8vo, cloth, $1.50 

"The selections have been carefully and judiciously 
made; the anecdotes are entirely free from flippancy and 
levity."— The Interior. 

By G. S. Bowes 

Scripture Itself the Illustrator. Gathered frail 

Scriptural Figures, Texts, etc. 12m o, cloth, $1.25. 

Information and Illustration for Preachers and 
Teachers* Gathered from Facts, Figures, Anec* 

dotes, etc. i2mo, cloth, $1.25. 



