LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 


......  §m 

Shelf 


m.. 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE 
FOR  GREATEST  PROFIT 


Works  by  the  same  Author. 


How  to  bring  Men  to  Christ 75 

The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  ..     .50 
Vest  Pocket  Companion  for  Christian 

Workers,    Leather 25 

The  sime,  interleaved,  gilt  edge 50 

Ten  Reasons  Why  I  believe  the  Bible 
is  the  word  of  God.    Paper 15 


FLEHING  H.  REVELL  COHPANY, 

Publishers. 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE 
FOR  GREATEST  PROFIT 


THE     METHODS     AND     FUNDAMENTAL     CONDITIONS 

OF   THE    BIBLE    STUDY   THAT    YIELDS 

THE    LARGEST    RESULTS. 


R.  A.  TORREY, 

Supt.  Chicago  Bible  Institute. 

Author  of  "How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ  "  "Baptism    With  the  Holy 

Spirit"  etc. 


"The  opening  of  thy  words  giveth  light;  it giveth  under- 
standing unto  the  simple." — Ps.  119,  130,  R.  V. 

$3X3         \  1 


u»4<|    ^ 


FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY, 

New  York,  Chicago,  Toronto, 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Lifer atur$% 


\^%  < 


\c      N~ 


~US<oOO 


Copyright  i8q6  by 
Fleming  H.  Revell  Company. 


PREFACE. 

This  book  has  been  written  for  two  reasons: 
first,  because  it  seemed  to  be  needed;  second, 
to  save  the  writer  time  and  labor.  Letters  are 
constantly  coming  in  from  all  quarters  asking 
how  to  study  the  Bible.  It  is  impossible  to 
refuse  to  answer  a  question  so  important  as  that, 
but  it  takes  much  time  to  answer  it  at  all  as  it 
should  be  answered.  This  book  is  written  as 
an  answer  to  those  who  have  asked  the  question, 
and  to  those  who  may  wish  to  ask  it.  Nothing 
is  more  important  for  our  own  mental,  moral 
and  spiritual  development,  or  for  our  increase  in 
usefulness,  than  Bible  study.  But  not  all  Bible 
study  is  equally  profitable.  Some  Bible  study  is 
absolutely  profitless.  "  How  to  study  the  Bible 
90  as  to  get  the  largest  profit  from  it,"  is  a  ques- 
tion of  immeasurable  importance.  The  answer 
to  the  question,  found  in  this  book,  has  been  for 
the  most  part  given  in  addresses  by  the  author, 
at  the  Chicago  Bible  Institute,  before  the  sum- 


6  PREFACE 

mer  gatherings  of  college  students,  at  minis- 
terial conferences  and  Y.  M.  C.  A.  conventions. 
Many,  especially  ministers,  who  have  heard 
these  addresses  have  asked  that  they  might  be 
put  in  a  permanent  shape.  I  have  promised  for 
two  years  to  comply  with  this  request,  but  have 
never  found  time  to  do  so  until  now. 


CONTENTS. 


Part  First. 
Methods  of  Profitable  Bible  Study. 


Chapter   I. 

Pags. 
Introductory  to  Methods  of  Bible  Study  -  u 

Chapter  II. 
Study  of  Individual  Books  14 

Chapter   III. 
Topical  Study  57 

Chapter   IV. 
Biographical  Study  •  79 

Chapter   V. 
Study  of  Types  -  -  -  -  82 

Chapter  VI. 
Study  of  the  Books  of  the  Bible  in  the  Order  Given 

in  the  Bible  and  in  Their  Chronological  Order  85 

Chapter  VII. 
The   Study  of  the  Bible  for  Practical  Usefulness   in 
Dealing  With  Men  -  88 


CONTENTS 

Part  Second. 
Fundamental  Conditions. 


Chapter   I. 

Fundamental  Conditions  of  the  Most  Profitable  Bible 

Study  ......  95 

Chapter   II. 
Final  Suggestions  -  116 


PART  I. 

THE  METHODS  OF  THE  MOST  PROF- 
ITABLE BIBLE  STUDY. 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE. 


CHAPTER  I. 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER    TO    METHODS    OF    BIBLE 
STUDY. 

We  shall  consider  the  most  profitable  Methods 
of  Bible  Study  before  we  consider  the  Funda- 
mental Conditions  of  Profitable  Bible  study.  Many 
readers  of  this  book  will  probably  be  frightened, 
at  first,  at  the  seeming  elaborateness  and  difficulty 
of  some  of  the  methods  of  study  suggested.  But 
they  are  not  as  difficult  as  they  appear.  Their 
practicability  and  fruitfulness  have  been  tested  in 
the  class-room,  and  that  not  with  classes  made  up 
altogether  of  college  graduates,  but  largely  com- 
posed of  persons  of  very  moderate  education;  in 
some  cases  of  almost  no  education.  They  do  re- 
quire time  and  hard  work.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered, however,  that  the  Bible  contains  gold,  and 
almost  any  one  is  willing  to  dig  for  gold,  es- 
pecially if  it  is  certain  that  he  will  find  it.  It  is 
certain  that  one  will  find  gold  in  the  Bible,  if  he 


12  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

digs.  As  one  uses  the  methods  here  recom- 
mended, he  will  find  his  ability  to  do  the  work 
rapidly  increasing  by  exercise,  until  he  can  soon 
do  more  in  fifteen  minutes  than  at  the  outset  he 
could  do  in  an  hour. 

The  first  method  of  study  suggested  will  be 
found  to  be  an  exceptionally  good  mental  train- 
ing. When  one  has  pursued  this  method  of  study 
for  a  time,  his  powers  of  observation  will  have 
been  so  quickened,  that  he  will  see  at  a  glance 
what,  at  first,  he  only  saw  upon  much  study  and 
reflection.  This  method  of  study  will  also  train 
the  logical  powers,  cultivating  habits  of  order,  sys- 
tem and  classification  in  one's  intellectual  pro- 
cesses. The  power  of  clear,  concise  and  strong 
expression  will  also  be  developed.  No  other 
book  affords  the  opportunity  for  intellectual  de- 
velopment by  its  study,  that  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Bible.  No  other  book,  and  no  other  subject,  will 
so  abundantly  repay  close  and  deep  study.  The 
Bible  is  much  read,  but  comparatively  little 
studied.  It  will  probably  be  noticed  by  some 
that  the  first  method  of  study  suggested  is  practi- 
cally the  method  now  pursued  in  the  study  of  na- 
ture; first,  careful  analysis  and  ascertainment  of 
facts;  second,  classification  of  facts.  But  the 
facts  of  revelation  far  transcend  those  of  nature 
in  sublimity,  suggestiveness,  helpfulness  and  prac- 
tical utility.     They  are  also  far  more  accessible. 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER  I  3 

We  cannot  all  be  profound  students  of  nature; 
we  can  all  be  profound  students  of  Scripture. 
Many  an  otherwise  illiterate  person  has  a  marvel- 
ous grasp  of  Bible  truth.  It  was  acquired  by 
study.  There  are  persons  who  have  studied  little 
else,  who  have  studied  the  Scriptures,  by  the 
hour,  daily,  and  their  consequent  wisdom  is  the 
astonishment  and  sometimes  the  dismay  of  schol- 
ars and  theologians. 


CHAPTER  1 1 . 

THE    STUDY   OF    INDIVIDUAL   BOOKS. 

The  first  method  of  Bible  study  that  we  shall 
consider  is  the  study  of  the  Bible  by  individual 
books.  This  method  of  study  is  the  most  thor- 
ough, the  most  difficult,  and  the  one  that  yields 
the  largest  and  most  permanent  results.  We 
take  it  up  first  because  in  the  author's  opinion  it 
should  occupy  the  greater  portion  of  our  time. 

I.  —  The  first  work  to  do,  is  to  select  the  book 
to  study.  This  is  a  very  important  matter.  If 
one  makes  an  unfortunate  selection  he  may  be- 
come discouraged  and  give  up  a  method  of  study 
that  might  have  been  most  fruitful. 

A  few  points  will  be  helpful  to  the  beginner: 
I .  For  your  first  book-study,  choose  a  short 
book.  The  choice  of  a  long  book  to  begin  with, 
will  lead  to  discouragement  in  any  one  but  a 
person  of  rare  perseverance.  It  will  be  so  long 
before  the  final  results,  which  far  more  than  pay 
for  all  the  labor  expended,  are  reached,  that  the 
ordinary  student  will  give  it  up. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  I  5 

2.  Choose  a  comparatively  easy  book.  Some 
books  of  the  Bible  present  grave  difficulties  not 
to  be  found  in  other  books.  One  will  wish  to 
meet  and  overcome  these  later,  but  it  is  not  the 
work  for  a  beginner  to  set  for  himself.  When 
his  powers  have  become  trained  by  reason  of 
use,  then  he  can  do  this  successfully  and  satisfac- 
torily, but,  if  he  attempts  it,  as  so  many  rashly 
do,  at  the  outset,  he  will  soon  find  himself 
floundering.  The  First  Epistle  of  Peter  is  an  ex- 
ceedingly precious  book,  but  a  few  of  the  most 
difficult  passages  in  the  Bible  are  in  it.  If  it 
were  not  for  these  difficult  passages,  it  would  be 
a  good  book  to  recommend  to  the  beginner,  but 
in  view  of  these  difficulties  it  is  not  wise  to 
undertake  to  make  it  a  subject  of  exhaustive 
study  until  later. 

3.  Choose  a  book  that  is  rich  enough  in  its 
teaching  to  illustrate  the  advantages  of  this 
method  of  study  and  thus  give  a  keen  appetite 
for  further  studies  of  the  same  kind.  When  one 
has  gone  through  one  reasonably  large  and  full 
book  by  the  method  of  study  about  to  be  de- 
scribed, he  will  have  an  eagerness  for  it,  that  will 
make  it  sure  that  he  will  somehow  find  time  for 
further  studies  of  the  same  sort. 

A  book  that  meets  all  the  conditions  stated  is 
the  First  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians. 
It  is   quite  short,   it  has  ng  great  difficulties  of 


1 6  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

interpretation,  meaning  or  doctrine,  and  it  is 
exceedingly  rich  in  its  teaching.  It  has  the  fur- 
ther advantage  of  being  the  first  in  point  of  time 
of  the  Pauline  Epistles.  The  First  Epistle  of 
John  is  not  in  most  respects  a  difficult  book,  and 
it  is  one  of  the  richest  books  in  the  Bible. 

II.  —  The  second  work  to  doy  is  to  master  the 
general  contents  of  the  book.  The  method  of 
doing  this  is  very  simple.  It  consists  in  merely 
reading  the  book  through  without  stopping  and 
then  reading  it  through  again,  and  then  again, 
say  a  dozen  times  in  all,  at  a  single  sitting.  To 
one  who  has  never  tried  it,  it  does  not  seem  as 
if  that  would  amount  to  much,  but  any  thought- 
ful man  who  has  ever  tried  it  will  tell  you  quite 
differently.  It  is  simply  ^wonderful  how  a  book 
takes  on  new  meaning  and  beauty  upon  this  sort 
of  an  acquaintance.  It  begins  to  open  up.  New 
relations  between  different  parts  of  the  book  be- 
gin to  disclose  themselves.  Fascinating  lines  of 
thought  running  through  the  book  appear.  The 
book  is  grasped  as  a  whole,  and  the  relation  of 
the  various  parts  to  one  another  apprehended, 
and  a  foundation  laid  for  an  intelligent  study  of 
those  parts  in  detail.  Rev.  James  M.  Gray  of 
Boston,  a  great  lover  of  the  Bible  and  prominent 
teacher  of  it,  says  that  for  many  years  of  his 
ministry  he  had  "  an  inadequate  and  unsatisfac- 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  I  7 

tory  knowledge  of  the  English  Bible. "  "The 
first  practical  idea  which  he  received  in  the  study 
of  the  English  Bible  was  from  a  layman.  The 
brother  possessed  an  unusual  serenity  and  joy  in 
his  Christian  experience,  which  he  attributed  to 
his  reading  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  Mr. 
Gray  asked  him  how  he  had  read  it,  and  he  said 
he  had  taken  a  pocket  copy  of  the  Epistle  into 
the  woods  one  Sunday  afternoon,  and  read  it 
through  at  a  single  sitting,  repeating  the  process 
as  many  as  a  dozen  times  before  stopping,  and 
when  he  arose  he  had  gotten  possession  of  the 
Epistle,  or  rather  its  wondrous  truths  had  gotten 
possession  of  him.  This  was  the  secret,  simple 
as  it  was,  for  which  Mr.  Gray  had  been  waiting 
and  praying. "  From  this  time  on  Mr.  Gray 
studied  his  Bible  through  in  this  way,  and  it  be- 
came to  him  a  new  book. 

Ill .  —  The  third  zvork  is  to  prepare  an  intro- 
duction to  the  Book.  Write  down  at  the  top  of 
separate  sheets  of  paper  or  cards  the  following 
questions:  (i)  Who  wrote  this  book  ?  (2) 
To  whom  did  he  write  ?  (3)  Where  did  he 
write  it  ?  (4)  When  did  he  write  it  ?  (5) 
What  was  the  occasion  of  his  writing?  (6) 
What  was  the  purpose  for  which  he  wrote  ?  (7) 
What  were  the  circumstances  of  the  author  when 
he   wrote  ?     (8)     What  were  the  circumstances 


1 8  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

of  those  to  whom  he  wrote  ?  (9)  What 
glimpses  does  the  book  give  into  the  life  and 
character  of  the  author  ?  (10)  What  are  the 
leading  ideas  of  the  book?  (11)  What  is  the 
central  truth  of  the  book?  (12)  What  are 
the  characteristics  of  the  book  ? 

Having  prepared  your  sheets  of  paper  with 
these  questions  at  the  head,  lay  them  side  by 
side  on  your  study  table  before  you,  and  go 
through  the  book  slowly,  and,  as  you  come  to  an 
answer  to  any  one  of  these  questions,  write  it 
down  on  the  appropriate  sheet  of  paper.  It  may 
be  necessary  to  go  through  the  book  several 
times  to  do  the  work  thoroughly  and  satisfacto- 
rily, but  you  will  be  amply  repaid.  When  you 
have  finished  your  own  work  in  this  line,  and  not 
until  then,  it  will  be  well,  if  possible,  to  com- 
pare your  results  with  those  reached  by  others. 
A  book  that  will  serve  as  a  good  illustration  of 
this  introductory  work  is  "  The  New  Testament 
and  Its  Writers/'  Rev.  J.  A.  McClymont. 

The  introduction  one  prepares  for  himself  will 
be  worth  many  times  more  to  him  than  any  that 
he  can  procure  from  others.  The  work  itself  is 
a  rare  education  of  the  facilities  of  perception, 
comparison  and  reasoning. 

The  answers  to  our  questions  will  sometimes 
be  found  in  some  related  book.  For  example, 
if  we  are  studying  one  of  the  Pauline  Epistles,  the 
answer  to  our  questions  may  be  found  in  the  Acts 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  1 9 

of  the  Apostles,  or  in  the  Epistle  written  to  the 
place  from  which  the  one  studied  was  written.  Of 
course,  all  the  questions  given  will  not  apply  to 
every  book  in  the  Bible. 

If  one  is  not  willing  to  give  the  time  and  labor 
necessary,  this  introductory  work  can  be  omitted, 
but  only  at  a  great  sacrifice.  Single  passages  in 
an  epistle  can  never  be  correctly  understood  un- 
less we  know  to  whom  they  were  written.  Much 
false  interpretation  of  the  Bible  arises  from  tak- 
ing some  direction  manifestly  intended  for  local 
application  to  be  of  universal  authority.  So, 
also,  oftentimes  false  interpretation  arises  from  ap- 
plying to  the  unbeliever  what  was  intended  for  the 
saint.  Noting  the  occasion  of  writing,  will  clear 
up  the  meaning  of  a  passage  that  would  be  other- 
wise obscure.  Bearing  in  mind  the  circumstances 
of  the  author  when  he  wrote,  will  frequently  give 
new  force  to  his  words.  When  we  remember 
that  the  jubilant  epistle  to  the  Philippians,  with 
its  oft-repeated  "rejoice  in  the  Lord"  and  its 
"  in  nothing  be  anxious;  but  in  everything  by 
prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let 
your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God.  And  the 
peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding, 
shall  guard  your  hearts  and  your  thoughts  in 
Christ  Jesus,"  was  written  by  a  prisoner  awaiting 
possible  sentence  of  death,  how  much  more 
meaningful    it  becomes.      Bearing    in    mind  the 


2G         HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE 

main  purpose  for  which  a  book  was  written,  will 
help  to  interpret  its  incidental  exhortations  in  their 
proper  relations.  In  fact,  the  answers  to  all  the 
questions  will  be  valuable  in  all  the  work  that 
follows,  as  well  as  valuable  in  themselves. 

I  V.  —  The  fourth  work  is  to  divide  the  book  into 
its  proper  sections.  This  work  is  not  indispensable, 
but  still  it  is  valuable.  Go  through  the  book  and 
notice  the  principal  divisions  in  the  thought,  and 
mark  these.  Then  go  through  these  divisions 
and  find  if  there  are  any  natural  subdivisions  and 
mark  these.  In  this  work  of  dividing  the  epistle, 
the  Revised  Version,  which  is  not  chopped  up  by 
by  a  purely  mechanical  and  irrational  verse  divis- 
ion, but  divided  according  to  a  logical  plan,  will 
be  of  great  help.  Having  discovered  the  divis- 
ions of  the  book,  proceed  to  give  to  each  section 
an  appropriate  caption.  Make  this  caption  as 
precise  a  statement  of  the  general  contents  of  the 
section  as  possible.  Make  it  also  as  terse  and 
striking  as  possible,  so  that  it  will  fix  itself  in  the 
mind.  As  far  as  possible  let  the  captions  of  the 
subdivisions  connect  themselves  with  the  general 
caption  of  the  division.  Do  not  attempt  too  elabo- 
rate a  division  at  first.  The  following  division  of 
ist  Peter,  without  many  marked  subdivisions,  will 
serve  as  a  simple  illustration  of  what  is  meant: 

I,     Chap,  i:  i,  2.      Introduction  and  saluta- 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  21 

tion  to  the  pilgrims   and  sojourners  in  Pontus, 
etc. 

2.  Chap,  i:  3-12.  The  Inheritance  reserved 
in  heaven  and  the  Salvation  ready  to  be  revealed 
for  those  pilgrims  who  in  the  midst  of  manifold 
temptations  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith. 

3.  Chap,  i:  13-25.  The  pilgrim's  conduct 
during  the  days  of  his  pilgrimage. 

4.  Chap,  ii:  1-10.  The  high  calling,  posi- 
tion and  destiny  of  the  pilgrim  people. 

5.  Chap,  ii:  11,  12.  The  pilgrim's  conduct 
during  the  days  of  his  pilgrimage. 

6.  Chap,  ii:  13-17.  The  pilgrim's  duty  to- 
ward the  human  governments  under  which  he 
lives. 

7.  Chap,  ii:  18;  hi:  7.  The  duty  of  various 
classes  of  pilgrims. 

a.  Chap,  ii:  18-25.  The  duty  of  servants  to- 
ward their  masters — enforced  by  an  appeal  to 
Christ's  conduct  under  injustice  and  reviling. 

b.  Chap,  iii:  1-6.  The  duty  of  wives  toward 
husbands. 

c.  Chap,  iii:  7.  The  duty* of  husbands  to- 
ward their  wives. 

8.  Chap,  iii:  8-12.  The  conduct  of  pilgrims 
toward  one  another. 

9.  Chap,  iii:  13-22.  The  pilgrim  suffering  for 
righteousness'  sake. 


22  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

io.  Chap,  iv:  1-6.  The  pilgrim's  separation 
from  the  practices  of  those  among  whom  he 
spends  the  days  of  his  pilgrimage. 

ii.  Chap,  iv:  7-1 1.  The  pilgrim's  sojourning 
drawing  to  a  close  and  his  conduct  during  the 
last  days. 

12.  Chap,  iv:  12-19.  The  pilgrim  suffering  for 
and  with  Christ. 

13.  Chap,  v:  1-4.  The  duty  and  reward  of 
elders. 

14.  Chap,  v:  5-1 1.  The  pilgrim's  walk — hum- 
ble and  trustful,  watchful  and  steadfast- — and  a 
doxology. 

15.  Chap,  v:  12-14.  Conclusion  and  benedic- 
tion. 

V.  —  The  fifth  work  is  to  take  up  each  verse  in 
order  and  study  it. 

1 .  The  first  thing  to  be  done  in  this  verse  by 
verse  study  of  the  book  is  to  get  the  exact  mean- 
ing of  the  verse.  How  is  this  to  be  done  ?  There 
are  three  steps  that  lead  into  the  meaning  of  a 
verse. 

a.  The  first  #step  is  to  get  the  exact  meaning 
of  the  words  used.  There  will  be  found  two 
classes  of  words:  those  whose  meaning  is  per- 
fectly apparent,  those  whose  meaning  is  doubtful. 
It  is  quite  possible  to  find  the  precise  meaning  of 
these  doubtful  words.  This  is  not  done  by  con- 
sulting a  dictionary.     That  is  an  easy  but  danger- 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  23 

ous  method  of  finding  the  scriptural  significance 
of  a  word.  The  only  safe  and  sure  method  is  to 
study  the  usage  of  the  word  in  the  Bible  itself, 
and  especially  in  that  particular  Bible-writer,  one 
of  whose  writings  we  are  studying.  To  study  the 
Bible  usage  of  words  one  must  have  a  Con- 
cordance. Altogether,  the  best  Concordance  is 
Strong's  "  Exhaustive  Concordance  of  the  Bible." 
The  next  best,  Young's  '  'Analytical  Concordance. " 
Cruden's  Complete  Concordance  will  do,  if  one 
cannot  afford  a  better.  But  the  student  should, 
as  soon  as  possible,  procure  Strong's  "  Ex- 
haustive Concordance."  All  the  passages  in 
which  the  word,  whose  meaning  is  being  sought, 
occurs  should  be  found  and  examined,  and  in  this 
way  the  precise  meaning  of  the  word  will  be  deter- 
mined. Many  an  important  Bible  doctrine  turns 
upon  the  meaning  of  a  word.  Thus,  for  ex- 
ample, two  schools  of  theology  divide  on  the 
meaning  of  the  word  "justify."  The  critical 
question  is,  does  the  word  "  justify  "  mean  "  to 
make  righteous,"  or  does  it  mean  "  to  count  or 
declare  righteous  "  ?  The  correct  interpretation 
of  many  passages  of  Scripture  turns  upon  the 
sense  which  we  give  to  this  word.  Let  one  look 
up  all  the  passages  in  the  Bible  in  which  the 
word  is  found,  and  there  will  be  no  doubt  as  to 
the  Bible  usage  and  meaning  of  the  word.  Deut. 
xxv:    i;    Ex.    xxiii:  7;    Is.   v:  23;    Luke  xvi:   15; 


tOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 


Rom.  ii:  13;  iii:  23,  24;  Luke  xviii:  14;  Rom. 
iv:  2-8,  R.  V.,  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  Biblical 
usage.  By  the  use  of  Strong's  Concordance,  or 
Young's,  the  student  will  see  that  the  same  word 
may  be  used  in  the  English  version  as  the  trans- 
lation of  several  Greek  or  Hebrew  words.  Of 
course,  in  determining  the  Biblical  usage,  we 
should  give  especial  weight  to  those  passages  in 
which  the  English  word  examined  is  the  trans- 
lation of  the  same  word  in  Greek  or  Hebrew. 
Either  of  the  Concordances  just  mentioned  will 
enable  us  to  do  this,  even  though  we  are  not  at 
all  acquainted  with  Greek  or  Hebrew.  It  will 
be  much  easier  to  do  it  with  Strong's  Concord- 
ance than  Young's.  It  is  surprising  how  many 
knotty  problems  in  the  interpretation  of  scripture 
are  solved  by  the  simple  examination  of  the  Bib- 
lical usage  of  words.  For  example,  one  of  the 
burning  questions  of  to-day  is  the  meaning  of 
I  Jno.  i:  7.  Does  this  verse  teach  that  "  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us "  from  all 
the  guilt  of  sin;  or  does  it  teach  us  that  "  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  "  cleanseth  us  from  the  very 
presence  of  sin,  so  that  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
indwelling  sin  is  itself  eradicated  ?  Many  of 
those  who  read  this  question  will  answer  it  off- 
hand at  once,  one  way  or  the  other.  But  the 
off-hand  way  of  answering  questions  of  this  kind, 
is  a  very  bad  way.      Take  your  concordance   and 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  25 

look  up  every  passage  in  the  Bible  in  which  the 
word  "  cleanse  "  is  used  in  connection  with 
blood,  and  the  question  will  be  answered  con- 
clusively and  forever.  Never  conclude  that  you 
have  the  right  meaning  of  a  verse  until  you  have 
carefully  determined  the  meaning  of  all  doubtful 
words  in  it  by  an  examination  of  Bible  usuage. 
Even  when  you  are  pretty  sure  you  know  the 
meaning  of  the  words,  it  is  well  not  to  be  too 
sure  until  you  have  looked  it  up. 

b.  The  second  step  in  ascertaining  the  mean- 
ing of  a  verse  is  to  carefully  notice  the  context 
(what  goes  before  and  what  comes  after).  Many 
verses,  if  they  stood  alone,  might  be  capable  of 
several  interpretations,  but  when  what  goes  be- 
fore and  what  comes  after  is  considered,  all  the 
interpretations  but  one  are  seen  to  be  impossible. 
Take  for  example  Jno.  xiv:  18,  "I  will  not  leave 
you  desolate:  I  come  unto  you."  (R.  V.)  To 
what  does  Jesus  refer  when  He  says  "  I  come 
unto  you"?  One  commentator  says,  He  refers 
to  His  reappearance  to  His  disciples  after  His  res- 
urrection to  comfort  them.  Another  says  that  He 
refers  to  His  second  coming,  as  it  is  called. 
Another  says  He  refers  to  His  coming  through  the 
Holy  Spirit's  work  to  manifest  Himself  to  His 
disciples  and  make  His  abode  with  them.  Which 
does  He  mean  ?  When  "  doctors  disagree, "  can 
an  ordinary  layman  decide  ?     Yes,   very   often. 


26         HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE 

Surely  in  this  case.  If  any  one  will  carefully 
note  what  Jesus  is  talking  about  in  the  verses 
immediately  preceding  (verses  15-17)  and  in  the 
verses  immediately  following  (verses  19-26),  he 
will  have  no  doubt  as  to  what  coming  Jesus  re- 
fers to  in  this  passage.  You  can  see  this  by  try- 
ing it  for  yourself. 

A  very  large  proportion  of  the  vexed  questions 
of  Biblical  interpretation,  can  be  settled  by  this 
very  simple  method  of  noticing  what  goes  before 
and  what  comes  after.  Many  of  the  sermons  one 
hears,  become  very  absurd  when  one  takes  the 
trouble  to  notice  the  setting  of  the  preacher's 
text  and  how  utterly  foreign  the  thought  of  the 
sermon  is  to  the  thought  of  the  text,  regarded  in 
the  light  t)f  the  context. 

c.  The  third  step  in  ascertaining  the  correct 
and  precise  meaning  of  a  verse,  is  the  examina- 
tion of  parallel  passages,  i.  e.}  passages  that 
treat  the  same  subject — passages,  for  example, 
that  give  another  account  of  the  same  address  or 
event,  or  passages  that  are  evidently  intended  as 
a  commentary  on  the  passage  in  hand.  Very 
often,  after  having  carefully  studied  the  words 
used  and  the  context,  we  will  still  be  in  doubt  as 
to  which  of  two  or  three  possible  interpretations 
of  a  verse  is  the  one  intended  by  the  writer  or 
speaker.  In  such  a  case  there  is  always  some- 
where else  in  the  Bible  a  passage  that  will  settle 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  2f 

this  question.  Take  for  example,  Jno.  xiv:  3, 
"  I  come  again  and  will  receive  you  unto  myself; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  (R.V.) 
A  careful  consideration  of  the  words  used  in  their 
relation  to  one  another,  will  go  far  in  determin- 
ing the  meaning  of  this  passage,  but  still  we  find 
among  commentators  whose  opinion  ought  to 
have  some  weight,  these  four  interpretations: 
First,  the  coming  here  referred  to  is  Christ's 
coming  at  death  to  receive  the  believer  unto 
himself,  as  in  the  case  of  Stephen.  Second,  the 
coming  again  at  the  resurrection.  Third,  the 
coming  again  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  Fourth, 
the  coming  again  of  Christ  when  He  returns  per- 
sonally and  gloriously  at  the  end  of  the  age. 
Which  of  these  four  interpretations  is  the  cor- 
rect one  ?  What  has  already  been  said  about 
verse  18  might  seem  to  settle  the  question,  but  it 
does  not;  for  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  the  coming 
in  verse  3  is  the  same  as  in  verse  18,  for  what  is 
said  in  connection  with  the  two  comings  is  al- 
together different.  In  the  one  case  it  is  a  com- 
ing of  Christ  to  "  receive  you  unto  myself,  that 
where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also  ";  in  the  other 
case  it  is  a  coming  of  Christ  to  manifest  Himself 
unto  us  and  make  His  abode  with  us.  But  for- 
tunately there  is  averse  that  settles  the  question, 
an  inspired  commentary  on  the  Words  of  Jesus. 
This  is  found  in  I  Thess.  iv:    16,  17.      This  will 


HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 


be  seen  clearly  if  we  arrange  the  two  passages  in 
parallel  columns. 

Jno.  xiv:  j. 
I  come  again 


and  will  receive   you  unto 
myself 

that  where   I  am  there  ye 
may  be  also. 


/  Thess.  iv:  16,  //. 
The   Lord  himself   shall 
descend 


we  .  .  .  shall  be  caught  up 
...    to  meet  the  Lord 

so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the 
Lord. 


The  two  passages  manifestly  match  exactly  in 
the  three  facts  stated,  and  beyond  a  doubt  refer 
to  the  same  event.  But  if  any  one  will  look  at 
all  closely  at  I  Thess.,  iv:  16,  17,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  as  to  what  coming  of  our  Lord  is  re- 
ferred to  there.  "  The  Treasury  of  Scripture 
Knowledge  "  will  be  of  great  assistance  in  find- 
ing parallel  passages.  These  are  the  three  steps 
that  lead  us  into  the  meaning  of  a  verse.  They 
require  work,  but  it  is  work  that  any  one  can  do, 
and  when  the  meaning  of  a  verse  is  thus  settled 
we  arrive  at  conclusions  that  are  correct  and 
fixed.  After  taking  these  steps  it  is  well  to  con- 
sult commentaries,  and  see  how  our  conclusions 
agree  with  those  of  others.  Before  we  proceed 
to  the  next  thing  to  be  done  with  a  verse  after  its 
meaning  has  been  determined,  let  it  be  said,  that 
God  intended  to  convey  some  definite  truth  in 
each  verse  of  scripture,  and  any  one  of  from  two 
to  a  dozen   interpretations  of  a  verse  is  not  as 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  29 

good  as  another.  With  every  verse  of  scripture 
we  should  ask,  not  What  can  this  be  made  to 
teach?  but  What  was  this  intended  to  teach?  and 
we  should  not  rest  satisfied  until  we  have  settled 
that.  Of  course,  it  is  admitted  a  verse  may 
have  a  primary  meaning  and  other  more  remote 
meanings.  For  example,  a  prophecy  may  have 
its  primary  fulfilment  in  some  personage  or  event 
near  at  hand,  e.g.,  Solomon,  and  a  more  remote 
and  complete  fulfilment  in  Christ. 

2.  We  are  not  through  with  a  verse  when  we 
have  determined  its  meaning.  The  next  thing 
to  do  is  to  analyze  the  verse.  This  is  most  inter- 
esting and  profitable  work.  It  is  also  a  rare 
education  of  the  various  faculties  of  the  intellect. 
The  way  to  do  it  isjthis:  Look  steadfastly  at  the 
verse  and  ask  yourself,  What  does  this  verse 
teach?  and  then  begin  to  write  down:  This  verse 

teaches,  1st, ;  2d, — - — ;  3d, ,  etc.     At 

the  first  glance  very  likely  you  will  see  but  one 
or  two  things  the  verse  teaches,  but,  as  you  look 
again  and  again,  the  teachings  will  begin  to  mul- 
tiply, and  you  will  wonder  how  one  verse  could 
teach  so  much,  and  you  will  have  an  ever  grow- 
ing sense  of  the  divine  authorship  of  the  Book. 
It  is  related  of  the  younger  Prof.  Agassiz  that  a 
young  man  came  to  him  to  study  ichthyology. 
The  Professor  gave  him  a  fish  to  study  and  told 
him  to  come  back  when  he  had  mastered  that 


30  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

fish  and  get  another  lesson.  In  time  the  young 
man  came  back  and  told  Prof.  A.  what  he  had 
observed  about  the  fish.  When  he  had  finished, 
to  his  surprise  he  was  given  the  same  fish  again, 
and  told  to  study  it  further.  He  came  back 
again,  having  observed  new  facts,  and,  as  he  sup- 
posed, all  the  facts  about  the  fish.  But  again  he 
was  given  the  same  fish  to  study,  and  so  it  went 
on,  lesson  after  lesson,  until  that  student  had 
been  taught  what  his  perceptive  faculties  were 
for,  and  also  taught  to  do  thorough  work.  In 
the  same  way  ought  we  to  study  the  Bible.  We 
ought  to  come  back  to  the  same  verse  of  the 
Bible  again  and  again,  until  we  have  gotten,  as 
far  as  it  is  possible  to  us,  all  that  is  in  the  verse. 
Then  the  probability  is  that  when  we  come  back  to 
the  same  verse  several  months  afterward  we  will 
find  something  we  did  not  see  before.  It  may 
be,  that  an  illustration  of  this  method  of  analysis 
will  be  helpful.  Let  us  take  I  Pet.  i:  I,  2. 
(Here  we  have  an  instance  in  which  the  verse  di- 
vision of  our  Authorized  version  is  so  manifestly 
illogical  and  absurd  that  in  our  analysis  we  can- 
not follow  it,  but  must  take  the  two  verses  to- 
gether.    This  will  often  be  the  case.) 

I  Pet.,  i:  i,  2.     These  verses  teach: 

(i.)     This  epistle  is  by  Peter. 

(2.)  The  Peter  who  wrote  this  epistle  was  an 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ. 


STUDY   OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  3 1 

(3.)  Peter  delighted  to  think  and  speak  of 
himself  as  one  sent  of  Jesus  Christ.  (Comp. 
II  Pet,  i:  1.) 

(Note — Apostle  is  Greek  for  Latin  Mission- 
ary.*) 

(4.)  The  name,  Jesus  Christ  (used  twice  in 
these  two  verses).      Significance:   * 

a.  Saviour. 

b.  Annointed  One. 

c.  Fulfiller  of  the  Messianic  predictions  of 
the  O.  T.  Has  especially  reference  to 
the  earthly  reign  of  Christ. 

(5.)  This  Epistle  was  written  to  the  elect,  es- 
pecially to  the  elect  who  are  sojourners  of  the 
dispersion  in  Pontus,  i.  e.,  Paul's  old  field  of 
labor. 

(Note — The  question  whether  speaking  of  the 
dispersion  implies  that  the  destination  of  this 
Epistle  was  to  Jewish  Christians  will  have  been 
taken  up  and  answered  in  the  introduction  to  the 
Epistle.) 

(6.)     Believers  are: 

a,  elect  or  chosen  of  God. 

b,  foreknown  of  God. 

c>  sanctified  of  the  Spirit. 

d>  sprinkled  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. 

<r,  sojourners  or  pilgrims  on  earth. 

/,  subjects  of  multiplied  grace. 

g>  possessors  of  multiplied  peace, 


32  HOW   TO   STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

(7.)     Election. 

a.  Who  are   the  elect  ?  Believers.      Comp. 
vs.  5. 

b.  To  what  are  they  elect  ? 
a>  obedience. 

by  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus. 

According  to  what  are  they  elect?  The  fore- 
knowledge of  God.      Comp.  Rom.  viii:  29,  30. 

In  what  are  they  elect?  Sanctification  of  the 
Spirit. 

The  test  of  election:  Obedience.  Comp.  II 
Pet.  i:  10. 

The  work  of  the  three  persons  of  the  Trinity 
in  election 

a.  The  Father  foreknows. 

b.  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  from  guilt  by  His 
blood. 

c.  The  Spirit  sanctifies. 

(8.)     God  is  the  Father  of  the  elect. 

(9.)  The  humanity  of  Christ:  seen  in  the  men- 
tion of  His  blood. 

(10.)  The  reality  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ: 
seen  in  the  mention  of  His  blood. 

(11.)  It  is  by  His  blood  and  not  by  His  ex- 
ample that  Jesus  Christ  delivers  from  sin. 

(12.)  Peter's  first  and  great  wish  and  prayer 
for  those  to  whom  he  wrote  was  that  grace  and 
peace  might  be  multiplied. 


STUDY   OF    INDIVIDUAL   BOOKS  33 

(13.)  It  is  not  enough  to  have  grace  and  peace. 
One  should  have  multiplied  grace  and  peace. 

(14.)  That  one  already  has  grace  and  peace  is 
no  reason  to  cease  praying  for  them,  but  rather 
an  incentive  to  prayer  that  they  may  have  more 
grace  and  peace. 

(15.)  Grace  precedes  peace.  Comp.  all  pas- 
sages where  these  words  are   found  together. 

This  is  simply  an  illustration  of  what  is  meant 
by  analysing  a  verse.  Th&  whole  book  should 
be  gone  through  in  this  way. 

There  are  three  rules  to  be  observed  in  this 
analytical  work.  1st.  Do  not  put  anything  into 
your  analysis  that  is  not  clearly  in  the  verse. 
One  of  the  greatest  faults  in  Bible  study  is  read- 
ing into  passages  what  God  never  put  into  them. 
Some  men  have  their  pet  doctrines,  and  see  them 
everywhere,  and  even  where  God  does  not  see 
them.  No  matter  how  true,  precious  or  scrip- 
tural a  doctrine  is,  do  not  put  it  into  your  analysis 
where  it  is  not  in  the  verse.  Considerable  ex- 
perience with  classes  in  this  kind  of  study  leads 
me  to  emphasize  this  rule.  2d.  Find  all  that 
is  in  the  verse.  This  rule  can  only  be  carried 
out  relatively.  Much  will  escape  you,  the  verses 
of  the  Bible  are  such  a  great  deep,  but  do  not 
rest  until  you  have  dug,  and  dug,  and  dug,  and 
there  seems  to  be  nothing  m  ore  to  find.  3d. 
State  what  you  do  find  just  as  accurately  and  ex- 


34  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

actly  as  possible.  Do  not  be  content  with  put- 
ting into  your  analysis  something  like  what  is  in 
the  verse,  but  state  in  your  analysis  precisely 
what  is  in  the  verse. 

VI. — The  sixth  work  in  the  study  of  the  book  is 
to  classify  the  results  obtained  by  the  verse  by 
verse  analysis.  By  your  verse  by  verse  analysis 
you  have  discovered  and  recorded  a  great  number 
of  facts.  The  work  now  is  to  get  these  facts  into 
an  orderly  shape.  To  do  this,  go  carefully 
through  your  analysis  and  note  the  subjects 
treated  of  in  the  Epistle.  Write  these  subjects 
down  as  fast  as  noted.  Having  made  a  complete 
list  of  the  subjects  treated  in  the  book,  write 
these  subjects  on  separate  cards  or  sheets  of  pa- 
per, and  then,  going  through  the  analysis  again, 
copy  each  point  in  the  analysis  upon  its  appro- 
priate sheet  of  paper,  e.  g. ,  every  point  regarding 
God  the  Father  upon  the  card  at  the  top  of 
which  this  subject  is  written.  This  general  class- 
ification should  be  followed  by  a  more  thorough 
and  minute  subdivision.  Suppose  that  we  are 
studying  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter.  Having  com- 
pleted our  analysis  of  the  Epistle,  and  gone  over 
it  carefully,  we  will  find  that  the  following  sub- 
jects, at  least,  are  treated  in  the  Epistle:  (i) 
God.  (2)  Jesus  Christ.  (3)  The  Holy  Spirit. 
(4)  The    Believer.       (5)  Wives   and    Husbands. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  35 

(6)  Servants.  (7)  The  New  Birth.  (8)  The 
Word  of  God.  (9)  Old  Testament  Scripture. 
(10)  The  Prophets.  (11)  Prayer.  (12)  Angels. 
(13)  The  Devil.  (14)  Baptism.  (15)  The  Gos- 
pel. (16)  Salvation.  (17)  The  World.  (18) 
Gospel  Preachers  and  Teachers.  (19)  Heaven. 
(20)  Humility.      (21)  Love. 

These  will  serve  for  general  headings.  But 
after  the  material  found  in  the  analysis  is  ar- 
ranged under  these  headings,  it  will  be  found  to 
subdivide  itself  naturally  into  numerous  subdi- 
visions. For  example,  the  material  under  the  head 
God  can  be  subdivided  into  these  subdivisions: 
1.  His  names.  (The  material  under  this  head  is 
quite  rich).  2.  His  Attributes.  (This  should  be 
subdivided  again:  (1)  His  Holiness.  (2)  His 
Power.  (3)  His  Foreknowledge.  (4)  His  Faith- 
fulness. (5)  His  Long-suffering.  (6)  His  Grace. 
There  are  twenty-five  or  more  points  on  God's 
Grace  in  the  Epistle.  (7)  His  Mercy.  (8)  His  Im- 
partiality. (9)  His  Severity.)  3.  God's  Judg- 
ments. 4.  God's  Will.  5.  What  is  Acceptable  to 
God.  6.  What  is  Due  to  God.  7.  God's  Dwelling 
Place.  8.  God's  Dominion.  9.  God's  Work. 
What  God  does.  10.  The  Things  of  God,  e.  g., 
"  The  mighty  hand  of  Gocf,"  "  the  house  of  God," 
"  the  gospel  of  God,"  "  the  flock  of  God,"  "  the 
people  of  God,"  "  the  bondservants  of  God,"  "  the 
Word  of  God,"  "  the  Oracles  of  God,"  etc.,  etc. 


36  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

An  illustration  in  full  of  the  classified  arrange- 
men  ot  the  teaching  of  a  book  on  one  doctrine, 
will  probably  show  better  how  to  do  this  work 
thar  any  abstract  statement,  and  it  will  also  il- 
lustrate in  part  how  fruitful  is  this  method  of 
study.  We  will  take  I  Peter  again — its  teach- 
ing regarding  the  Believer. 

What  the  Epistle  Teaches  About  the  Be- 
liever. 

I.— His  Privileges. 
i.     His  Election. 

a9  He  is  foreknown  of  the  Father,  i :  2. 
b,  He  is  elect  or  chosen  of  God,   i:  I. 
cy  He  is   chosen   of  God,    according  to  His 
foreknowledge,  i:  2. 

d,  He  is  chosen  unto  obedience,  1:2. 

e,  He  is  chosen  unto  the   sprinkling  of  the 

blood  of  Jesus,  1 :  2. 
/,  He  is  chosen  in  sanctification  of  the  Spirit, 
1:  2. 
2.      His  Calling, 
a,  By  whom  called: 
God,  1:15. 

The  God  of  all  grace,  5:  10. 
by  To  what  called: 

The  imitaticm  of  Christ  in  the  patient  tak- 
ing of  suffering  for  well  doing,  2:  20,  21. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  37 

To  render  blessings  for  reviling,  3 :  9. 
Out   of  darkness    into    God's    marvellous 

light,  2:  9. 
To  God's  eternal  glory,  5:  10. 
Cy  In  whom  called: 
In  Christ,  5:    10. 

d,  The  purpose  of  his  calling: 

That  he  may  show  forth  the  praises   of 

Him  who  called,  2:  9. 
That  he  may  inherit  a  blessing,  3:  9. 

3.  His  Regeneration. 

He  has  been  begotten  again 
a,  of  God,  1 :  3. 
by  unto  a  living  hope,   1:3. 
c}  unto  an  inheritance  incorruptible,    unde- 

filed,  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in 

heaven,   1 :  4. 
df  By  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  1:3. 

e,  Of  incorruptible    seed    by    the   word    of 

God  that  liveth,  etc.,  1:  23. 

4.  His  Redemption. 

He  has  been  redeemed, 

a,  not  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and 

gold,:  1  18. 

b,  with  precious  blood,   even  the  blood  of 

Christ,  1:  19. 
Cy  from  his  vain  manner  of  life,  handed  down 
from  his  fathers,  1:    18. 


38  HOW   TO   STUDY   THE   BIBLE 

d}  His  sins  have  been  borne  by  Christ,  in 
His  own  body,  on  the  tree,  2:  24. 

5.  His  Sanctiftcation. 

He  is  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  1:2. 

6.  His  Cleansing. 

He  is  cleansed  by  the  blood,  1;  2. 

7.  His  Seairity. 

a,  He  is  guarded  by  the  power  of  God,  1:5. 
by  He  is  guarded  unto  a  salvation  ready,  or 

prepared,    to    be  revealed  in   the    last 

time,  1:  5. 
c,  God  careth  for  him,  5 :  7. 
dy  He  can  cast  all  his  anxiety  upon  God,  5: 

7- 
e,  The  God  of  all  grace  will  perfect,  stablish, 

strengthen  him,    after   a  brief   trial  of 

suffering,  5:  10.      R.  V. 
/,  None  can  harm  him  if  he  is  zealous  of 

that  which  is  good,    3:13. 
gy  He  shall  not  be  put  to  shame,  2:  6. 

8.  His  Joy. 

ay  The  character  of  his  joy, 
(1)  ,  His  present  joy. 

A  great  joy,  1:8.      R.  V. 
An  unspeakable  joy,  1 :  8. 
A  joy  full  of  glory,  1 :  8. 
(Note — This  present  joy  cannot  be   hindered 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  39 

by  being  put  to  grief,  because  of  mani- 
fold temptations ,   i:  6.) 
(2)     His  future  joy:  exceeding,  4:    13. 

b,  In  what  he  rejoices: 

(1)  In  the  salvation  prepared  to  be  re- 
vealed in  the  last  time,  1 :  6. 

(2)  Because  of  his  faith  in  the    unseen 
Jesus  Christ,  i :  8. 

(3)  In  fellowship  in  Christ's    sufferings, 

4:  13. 

c,  In  what  he  shall  rejoice. 

(1)     In  the  revelation  of   Christ's  glory, 
4:  13. 
Note — Present  joy   in  fellowship   with  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  is  the  condition  of 
exceeding    joy    at    the     revelation    of 
Chris? s  glory,  4:  13. 

9.      His  Hope. 

a,  Its  character. 

(1)  A  living  hope,  1:  3. 

(2)  A  reasonable  hope,  3:  15. 

(3)  An  inward  hope,  "  in  you,"  3:   15. 

b,  In  whom  is  his  hope. 
(1)     In  God,  1:21. 

c,  The  foundation  of  his  hope. 

(1)     The    resurrection    of   Jesus   Christ, 
1:  3-21. 


40         HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE 

io.     His  Salvation. 

a,  A  past  salvation. 

(i)     Has  been  redeemed,  i:  18-19. 

(2)  Has  been  healed,  2:  24. 
Note — By  baptism,  after  a  true  likeness, 
the  Believer,  as  Noah  by  the  flood,  has 
passed  out  of  the  old  life  of  nature  into 
the  new  resurrection  life  of  grace, 
3:  21. 

b,  A  present  salvation. 

(1)     He  is  now  receiving  the  salvation  of 
his  soul,  1 :  9. 

c,  A  growing  salvation,  through   feeding  on 

His  word,  2:  2,  R.  V. 

d,  A  future  salvation:  ready  or  prepared  to 

be  revealed  in  the  last  time,  1:5. 
1 1 .      The  Believer  s  Possessions. 

a,  God  as  his  Father,  1:  17. 

b,  Christ  as  his 

(1)  Sin  bearer,  2:  24. 

(2)  Example,  2:21. 

(3)  Fellow  sufferer,  4:  13. 

c,  A  living  hope,   1:3. 

d,  An  incorruptible,   undefiled,  unfading  in- 

heritance reserved  in  heaven,  1 :  4. 
e>  Multiplied  grace  and  peace,  1 :  2. 
f  Spiritual  milk  without  guile  for  his  food, 

2:  2. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  4 1 

gy  Gifts  for  service — each  believer  has,  or 
may  have,  some  gift,  4:10. 

12.  What  Believers  Are. 
a,  An  elect  race,  2:  9. 

by  A  royal  priesthood,  2:  9. 

Cy  A  holy  priesthood,  2:5, 

dy  A  holy  nation,  2:  9. 

^,  A  people  for  God's  own  possession,  2:  9, 
R.  V. 

/)  Living  stones,  2:  5. 

£*,  The  House  of  God,  4:  17. 

//,  A  spiritual  House,  2:  5. 

t,  The  flock  of  God,  5:2. 

/,  Children  of  obedience,  1:  14,  R.  V. 

£,  Partakers  of,  or  partners  in,  Christ's  suf- 
ferings, 4:  13. 

/,  Partakers  of,  or  partners  in,  the  glory  to 
be  revealed,  5:1. 

mf  Sojourners  or  strangers,  1:1. 

riy  Foreigners  on  earth:  he  has  no  civil  rights 
here:  his  Citizenship  is  in  heaven,  2,  1 1, 
com.  Phil.  3:  20,  R.  V. 

Oy  A  sojourner  on  his  way  to  another  coun- 
try, 2:  1. 

/,  A  Christian:  representative  of  Christ,  4: 
16. 

13.  The  Believer  s  Possibilities. 
Uy  He  may  die  unto  sin,  2:  24. 


42  HOW   TO   STUDY   THE   BIBLE 

b,  He  may  live  unto  righteousness,  2:  24. 
Note — We  must   die    unto  sin  if  we  are  to 

live  unto  righteousness,  2:  24. 
cy  He  may  follow  in  Christ's  steps,  2:21. 
d,  He  may  cease  from  sin,  4:  1. 
•,  He  may  cease  from  living  to  the  lusts  of 

men,  4:  2. 
/,  He  may  live  unto  the  will  of  God,  4:  2. 
Note — It  is  through  suffering  in  the  flesh  that 

he  ceases  from  sin  and  living  to  the  lusts 

of  men,  and  lives  to  the  will  of  God. 

1 4.  What  was  for  the  Believer. 

a.  The  ministry  of  the  Prophets  was  in  his 

behalf,  1:  12. 

b,  The  preciousness  of  Jesus  is  for  him,  2:  7, 

R.  V. 

1 5 .  Unclassified. 

a,  Has  the  gospel  preached  to  him  in   the 

Holy  Ghost,  1:12. 

b,  Grace  is  to  be  brought  unto  him  at  the 

revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,    1:  3,   com. 
Eph.  3:  7. 
c}  Has  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  2:  3. 

II. — The  Believer's  Trial  and  Sufferings. 

1.      The  fact  of  the  Believer }s  sufferings  and 
trials,  1:   6. 


STUDY    OF   INDIVIDUAL   BOOKS  4$ 

The  nature  of  the  Believer ' s  sufferings  and 
trials. 

a,  He   endures  griefs,   suffering  wrongfully, 
2:  19. 

&,  He  suffers  for  righteousness'  sake,  3:  14. 

cy  He  suffers  for  well  doing,  3 :  17;  2 :  20. 

d>  He  suffers  as  a  Christian,  4:  16. 

ey  He  is  subjected  to  manifold  temptations, 
1:  6. 

/,  He  is  put  to  grief  in  manifold  temptations, 
1:  6. 

g%  He   is   spoken    against    as  an  evil  doer, 
2:  12. 

h,  His  good  manner  of  life  is  reviled,  3:  16. 

*,  He  is  spoken  evil  of  because  of  his  sepa- 
rated life;  4:  4. 

j\  He  is  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ, 
4,  14. 

ky  He  is  subjected  to  fiery  trials,  4:  12. 

Encouragements  for  believers  undergoing 
fiery  trials  and  suffering. 
af  It  is  better  to  suffer  for  well  doing  than 

for  evil  doing,  3:17. 
by  Judgment  must  begin  at  the  House  of 
God,  and  the  present  judgment  of  be- 
lievers through  trial,  is  not  comparable 
to  the  future  end  of  those  who  obey  not 
the  gospel,  4:  17. 


44  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

c,  Blessed  is  the  believer  who  does  suffer  for 
righteousness'  sake,  3:  14,  comp.  Matt. 
5:  10-12. 

dy  Blessed  is  the  believer  who  is  reproached 
for  the  name  of  Christ,  4:  14. 

e,  The    Spirit    of    Glory    and   the  Spirit    of 

God  rests  upon  the  believer  who  is  re- 
proached for  the  name  of  Christ,  4:  14. 

f,  The  believer's  grief  is  for  a  little  while,  1 : 

6,  R.  V. 

g,  The    believer's    suffering   is    for   a    little 

while,  5:  10,  R.  V. 

h,  Suffering  for  a  little  while  will  be  followed 
by  God's  glory  in  Christ,  which  is  eter- 
nal, 5:  10. 

/,  The  suffering  endured  for  a  little  while  is 
for  the  testing  of  faith,  1 :  7. 

/,  The  fiery  trial  is  for  a  test,  4:12. 

k,  The  faith  thus  proved  is  more  precious 
than  gold,   1 :  7. 

/,  Faith  proven  by  manifold  temptations  will 
be  found  unto  praise,  and  honor,  and 
glory,  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ, 
1:  7. 

m,  It  is  that  his  proved  faith  may  be  found 
unto  praise  and  glory  and  honor  at  the 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  the  be- 
liever is  for  a  little  while  subjected  to 
manifold  temptations,  1:  7. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  45 

n,  It  is  pleasing  to  God  when  a  believer,  for 
conscience  toward  God,  endures  grief, 
suffering  wrongfully,  2:  19,  R.  V. 

o,  It  is  pleasing  to  God  when  a  believer 
takes  it  patiently,  when  he  does  well 
and  suffers  for  it,  2:  20. 

/,  Through  suffering  in  the  flesh  we  cease 
from  sin,  4:  i. 

q,  Those  who  speak  evil  of  us  shall  give 
account  to  God,  4:  5. 

r ,  Sufferings  are  being  shared  by  fellow  be- 
lievers, 5:  9. 

s,  Christ  suffered  for  us,  2:  21. 

/,  Christ  suffered  for  sins  once  {or  once  for 
all),  the  righteous  for  the  unrighteous, 
that  He  might  bring  us  to  God,  being 
put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quick- 
ened in  the  spirit,  3:18. 

u,  Christ  left  the  believer  an  example  that 
he  should  follow  in  His  steps,  2:21. 

v.  In  our  fiery  trials  we  are  made  partakers 
of,  or  partakers  in,  Christ's  sufferings, 

4:  13. 
wy  When   His  glory  is   revealed  we  shall  be 
glad  also  with  exceeding  joy,  4:  13. 
How  the  believer  should  meet  his  trial  and 
sufferings, 
a,  The  believer  should  not  regard  his  fiery 
trial  as  a  strange  thing,  4:  12. 


46  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

b,  The  believer  should  should  expect  fiery 

trial,  4:  12. 
cy  When  the  believer  suffers  as  a  Christian 

let  him  not  be  ashamed,  4:  16. 

d,  When  the  believer  suffers  as  a  Christian 

let  him  glorify  God  in  this  name,  4:  16. 

e,  When  the  believer  suffers  fiery  trials  he 

should  rejoice,  insomuch  as  he  is  made 
partaker  of  Christ's  suffering,  4:  13, 
R.  V. 

/,  When  the  believer  suffers,  let  him  not 
return  reviling  with  reviling,  or  suffer- 
ing with  threatening;  but  commit  him- 
self to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously, 
2:  23. 

g.  When  the  believer  suffers,  he  should  in 
well-doing  commit  the  keeping  of  his 
soul  unto  God,  as  unto  a  faithful  Cre- 
ator, 4:  19. 

III. — The  Believer's  Dangers. 

1.  The  believer  may  fall  into  fleshly  lusts 
that  war  against  the  soul,  2:  11. 

2.  The  believer  may  sin,  2:  20,  R.  V. 

3.  The  believer  may  fall  into  sins  of  the 
gravest  character,  4:  15.  (Note  in  this 
verse  the  awful  possibilities  that  lie  dor- 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL   BOOKS  47 

mant  in  the  heart  of  at  least  a  sincere  pro- 
fessed believer. ) 

4.  The  believer's  prayers  may  be  hindered, 

5.  The  believer  is  in  danger  that  his  high 
calling  and  destiny  tempt  him  to  despise 
human  laws  and  authority,  2:    13. 

6.  The  believer  is  in  danger  that  his  high 
calling  lead  him  to  lose  sight  of  his  lowly 
obligations  to  human  masters,  2:18. 

7.  Young  believers  are  in  danger  of  disregard- 
ing the  will  and  authority  of  older  believ- 
ers.     5:15. 

IV. — The  Believer's  Responsibility. 

1 .  Each  believer  has  an  individual  responsi- 
bility, 4:   10,  R.  V. 

2.  Each  believer's  responsibility  is  for  the  gift 
he  has  received,  4;  10. 

V. — The  Believer's  Duties, 

1 .      What  the  believer  should  be. 
a,   Be  holy  in  all  manner  of  living. 

(1)  Because  God  is  holy,  1:  15. 

(2)  Because   it  is  written   "  ye  shall  be 

holy,"  1:   16,  R.  V. 
by   Be  like  Him  who  called  him,  1:  15-16. 


48  HOW   TO    STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

c9   Be    sober,     (or    of    a    calm,     collected, 
thoughtful  spirit,)  i :  13;  4:  7;  5:  8. 

d.  Be  sober,  or  of  a  calm,  etc.,  unto  prayer, 

4:7. 

e.  Be  of  a  sound  mind  :   because  the  end  of 

all  things  is  approaching,  4:  7. 
/.  Be  watchful,   5:  8. 
g.  Be  steadfast  in  the  faith,  5:  9. 
h.  Be  subject  to  every  ordinance  of  man. 

(1)  For  the  Lord's  sake,  2:  13. 

(2)  To  the  King,  as  supreme,  2:13. 

(3)  To  governors,  as  sent  by  the  King  for 
the  punishment  of  evil  doers,  and  for 
praise  to  them  that  do  well,  2:  14. 

(4)  Because  this  is  God's  will,  2:15. 
i.  Be  like  minded,  3:  8. 

j.  Be  sympathetic,  3:8. 
k.  Be  tenderhearted,  3:  8. 
/.  Be  humble  minded,  3:  8. 
m.  Be  ready. 

(1)  Always. 

(2)  To  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that 

asketh  a  reason   of  the   hope  that 
is  in  him. 

(3)  With  meekness  and  fear. 

(4)  In  order  to  put  to  shame  those  who 

revile  their  good  manner  of  life  in 
Christ,  3:  16. 
ny   Should  not  be  troubled,  3:  14. 


STUDY  OF  INDIVIDUAL  BOOKS        49 

What  the  Believer  should  not  do. 
ay   The  believer   should  not  fashion  himself 
according  to  the  lusts  of  the  old   life  of 
ignorance,  i:  14. 

b,  The   believer  should  not  render  evil  for 

evil,  3:  9. 

c,  The  believer  should  not  render  reviling 

for  reviling,  3:  9. 

dy   The  believer  should  not  fear  the  world's 
fear,  3:  14. 

e>   The  believer  should  not  live  his  remain- 
ing   time  in  the   flesh   to   the  lusts  of 
men,  4:  2. 
What  the  Believer  should  do. 

a,  He  should  live  as  a  child  of  obedience,  1 : 

14. 

b,  Pass  the  time  of  his  sojourning  here  in 

fear,  1:  17. 
c>  Abstain  from  fleshly  lusts  that  war  against 
the  soul,  2:  11. 

d,  Observe  God's  will  as  the  absolute  law  of 

life,  2:  15. 
tr,  Let   his    conscience    be  governed    by  the 

thought  of  God  and  not  by  the  conduct 

of  men,  2:  19. 
fy  Sanctify  Christ  in  his  heart  as  Lord,   3: 

15.     R.  V.  Comp.  Is.  8:  13. 
g,  Live  his  remaining  time  in  the  flesh  to  the 

will  of  God,  4:  2. 


50  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

hy  Put  away 

(i)     All  malice,  2:1. 

(2)  All  guile,  2:1. 

(3)  Hypocrisies,  2:1, 

(4)  Envies,  2:  1. 

(5)  All  evil  speaking,  2:1. 

1.  Come  unto  the  Lord  as  unto  a  living  stone, 

2:4. 
/,  Show  forth  the  excellencies  of  him  who 

called  him  out  of  darkness  into  His  mar- 
vellous light,  2:  9. 
k,  Arm  himself  with  the  mind  of  Christ  :  i.  e. 

to  suffer  in  the  flesh,  4:1. 
/,  Cast  all  his   care  upon  God  because   he 

careth  for  him,  5  :  7. 
my  Stand  fast  in  the  true  grace  of  God,  5  : 

12. 
ny  Withstand  the  devil,  5:  9. 
Oy  Humble  himself  under  the  mighty  hand  of 

God,  5  :  5. 

(1)  Because  God  resisteth  the  proud  and 

giveth  grace  unto  the  humble,  5  : 

5-6. 

(2)  That  God  may  exalt  him  in  due  time, 

s-.e. 

/,  Glorify  God  when  he  suffers  as  a  Christ- 
ian, 4:16. 

q.  See  to  it  that  he  does  not  suffer  as  a  thief 
or  as  an  evil  doer  or  as  a  meddler  in 
other  men's  matters,  4:15. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  5 1 

r>  Rejoice  in  fiery  trial,  4  :  13. 
sy  Toward  various  persons. 

(1)  Toward  God — fear,  2:17. 

(2)  Toward  the  King — honor,  2  :    17. 

(3)  Toward    Masters — be    in    subjection 

with  all  fear  (not  only  to  the  good 
and  gentle,  but  to  the  forward)  2  : 
18. 

(4)  Toward  the  Brotherhood, 
Love,  2:  17;  1 :  22;  4:  8. 

Love   from   the   heart,    1:  22,  R.  V. 
Love     fervently — intensely,     1:    22  \ 

4:8. 

Gird  themselves  with  humility  as 
with  a  slave's  apron  unto  one  an- 
other, t.  e. , 

1st,      Be  one  another's  slaves. 
2nd.      Wear   humility  as  a  token 
of  their  readiness   to   serve  one 
another,  5:5,  com.  Jno.  13:4-5. 

Minister  the  gift  he  has  received  from 
God  among  the  brethren  as  a  good 
steward  of  the  manifold  grace  of 
God,  4:  10. 

Use  hospitality  one  to  another  with- 
out murmuring,  4:  9. 

Salute  one  another  with  a  holy  kiss, 
5:  14. 


52  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

(5)  Toward  his  revilers. 

Render  blessing  for  reviling,  3:  9. 

(6)  Toward  the  Gentiles. 

Have  his  behavior  seemly  among  the 
Gentiles,  2:  12. 

Notes — 1st.  The  reason  why  he  should 
have  his  behavior  seemly  among  the 
Gentiles;  that  the  Gentiles  might  glo- 
rify God  in  the  day  of  visitation,  2:  12: 
2nd.  This  seemly  behavior  should  con- 
sist in  good  works  which  the  Gentiles 
could  behold,  2 :  12. 

(7)  Toward  foolish  men. 

By  well  doing  put   to  silence   their 
ignorance,  2:  15. 

(8)  Toward  all  men — honor,  2:  17, 

Note —  The  especial  duties  of  believing  hus- 
bands and  wives,  toward  one  another, 
comes  under  a  special  classification. 

t,  Long  for  the  sincere   milk   of  the  word, 

2:   2. 
u,  Gird  up  the  loins  of  his  mind,   1:13. 
v,  Grow,  2:   2. 
w,  Set  his  hope  perfectly  on  the  grace  to  be 

brought  unto  him   at   the  revelation  of 

Jesus  Christ,  1:   13,  R.  V. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  53 

VI. — The  Believer's  Characteristics. 

i.      His  faith  and  hope  is  in  God,  i:  21. 

2.  Believes  in  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  I : 
21. 

3.  Calls  on  God  as  Father,  1 :  17. 

4.  Believes  in  Christ,  though  he  has  never 
seen  Him,  1:8. 

Loves   Christ   though  he   has  never  seen 
Him,  1:   8. 

Is  returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop 
of  his  soul,  2:  25. 

Has  purified   his   soul  in  obedience  to  the 
truth,  1 :  22. 
Has    unfeigned    love    for    the    Brethren, 

1:  22. 

9.  Has  a  good  manner  of  life,  3:  16. 

10.  Does  not  run  with  the  Gentiles  among 
whom  he  lives,  to  the  same  excess  of 
riot,  (lives  a  separated  life),  4:  4. 

11.  Refrains  his  tongue  from  evil.  3:  10. 
Refrains    his    lips    that     they    speak    no 
guile,  3:  10. 

12.  Turns  away  from  evil,  3:  11. 

13.  Does  good,  3:  11. 

14.  Seeks  peace,  3:  11. 

15.  Pursues  peace,  3:11. 
Note — From  11  to  14.  would  very  properly 

come  under  duties. 


54  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

VII. — The  Believer's  Warfare. 

The  believer  has  a  warfare  before  him,  4:  1. 
The  mind  of  Christ  is  the  proper   armament 

for  this  warfare,  4:  1. 
The  warfare  is  with  the  devil,  5:  8-9. 
Victory  is  possible  for  the  believer,  5 :  9. 
Victory  is  won  through   steadfastness  in  the 

faith,  5:  9. 

VII.  —  We  come  now  to  the  seventh  and  last 
work.  This  is  simply  to  meditate  ttpon,  and  so 
digest,  the  results  obtained.  At  first  thought  it 
might  seem  that  when  we  had  completed  our 
classification  of  results  our  work  was 'finished,  but 
this  is  not  so.  These  results  are  for  use:  first, 
for  personal  enjoyment  and  appropriation,  and 
afterward  to  give  out  to  others.  The  appropria- 
tion of  results  is  effected  by  meditation  upon 
them.  We  are  no  more  through  with  a  book 
when  we  have  carefully  and  fully  classified  its 
contents  than  we  are  through  with  a  meal  when 
we  have  it  arranged  in  an  orderly  way  upon  the 
table.  It  is  there  to  eat,  digest  and  assimilate. 
One  of  the  great  failures  in  much  of  the  Bible 
study  of  the  day  is  just  at  this  point.  There  is  ob- 
servation, analysis,  classification,  but  no  medita- 
tion. There  is  perhaps  nothing  so  important  in 
Bible  study  as  meditation.       (See  Josh,  i:  8;  Ps. 


STUDY    OF    INDIVIDUAL    BOOKS  55 

i:  2,  3.)  Take  your  classified  teachings  and  go 
slowly  over  them,  and  ponder  them,  point  by 
point,  until  these  wonderful  truths  live  before 
you  and  sink  into  your  soul,  and  live  in  you,  and 
become  part  of  your  life.  Do  this  again  and 
again.  Nothing  will  go  further  than  meditation 
to  make  one  great  and  fresh  and  original  as  a 
thinker  and  speaker.  Very  few  people  in  this 
world  think. 

The  method  of  study  outlined  in  this  chapter 
can  be  shortened  to  suit  the  time  and  industry  of 
of  the  student.  For  example,  one  can  omit  the 
Fifth  work  (V.),  and  proceed  at  once  to  go  through 
the  Book  as  a  whole  and  note  down  its  teachings 
on  different  doctrines.  This  will  greatly  shorten 
and  lighten  the  work.  It  will  also  greatly  detract 
from  the  richness  of  the  results,  it  will  not  be  as 
thorough,  as  accurate  or  as  scholarly,  and  will 
not  be  nearly  so  good  a  mental  discipline.  But 
many  people  are  lazy,  and  everybody  is  in  a 
hurry.  So  if  you  will  not  follow7  out  the  fuller 
plan  the  shorter  is  suggested.  But  any  man  can 
be,  if  he  will,  a  scholar  at  least  in  the  most  im- 
portant line — that  of  Biblical  study. 

A  still  briefer  plan  of  Book  Study  and  yet  very 
profitable,  if  one  has  no  time  for  anything  better, 
is  to  do  the  Second  work  (I  I. )  and  then  go  through 
the  Epistle  verse  by  verse  looking  up  all  the  ref- 
erences   given   in    "  The   Treasury  of   Scripture 


56  HOW   TO   STUDY   THE   BIBLE 

Knowledge."  But  we  urge  every  reader  to  try 
the  full  method  described  in  this  chapter  with  at 
least  one  short  book  in  the  Bible. 


CHAPTER   III. 


TOPICAL    STUDY. 


A  second  method  of  Bible  study  is  the  Topical 
Method.  This  consists  in  searching  through  the 
Bible  to  find  out  what  its  teaching  is  on  various 
topics.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  fascinating 
method  of  Bible  study.  It  yields  the  largest 
immediate  results,  though  not  the  largest  ulti- 
mate results.  It  has  advantages.  The  only 
way  to  master  any  topic,  is  to  go  through  the 
Bible,  and  find  what  it  has  to  teach  on  that  topic. 
Almost  any  great  subject  will  take  a  remarkable 
hold  upon  the  heart  of  a  Christian  man,  if  he 
will  take  time  to  go  through  the  Bible,  from 
Genesis  to  Revelation,  and  note  what  it  has  to 
say  on  that  topic.  He  will  have  a  more  full  and 
more  correct  understanding  of  that  topic  than  he 
ever  had  before.  It  is  said  of  Mr.  Moody,  that 
many  years  ago  he  took  up  the  study  of  "  Grace  " 
in  this  way.  Day  after  day  he  went  through  the 
Bible,  studying  what  it  had  to  say  about  "  grace." 
As  the  Bible  doctrine  unfolded  before  his  mind  his 
heart  began  to  burn,  until  at  last,  full  of  the  sub- 

57 


58  HOW   TO    STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

ject  and  on  fire  with  the  subject,  he  ran  out  on  to 
the  street,  and,  taking  hold  of  the  first  man  he 
met,  he  said:  "  Do  you  know  grace  ?  "  "  Grace 
who  ?  "  was  the  reply.  "  The  grace  of  God  that 
bringeth  salvation."  Then  he  just  poured  out 
his  soul  on  that  subject.  If  any  child  of  God 
will  study  "  Grace,"  or  "  Love,"  or  "  Faith,"  or 
"  Prayer,"  or  any  other  great  Bible  doctrine,  in 
that  way,  his  soul  too  will  become  full  of  it. 
Jesus  evidently  studied  the  Old  Testament  script- 
ures in  this  way,  for  we  read  that  "  beginning  at 
Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  He  expounded  unto 
them  in  all  the  scriptures  the  things  concerning 
Himself."  (Luke,  xxiv:  27.)  This  method  of 
study  made  the  hearts  of  the  two  who  walked 
with  Him  to  burn  within  them.  (Luke  xxiv:  32.) 
Paul  seems  to  have  followed  his  Master  in  this 
method  of  study  and  teaching.  (Acts  xvii:  2,  3.) 
But  the  method  has  its  dangers.  Its  very  fas- 
cination is  a  danger.  Many  are  drawn  by  the 
fascination  of  this  method  of  study  to  give  up 
all  other  methods  of  study,  and  this  is  a  great 
misfortune.  A  well-rounded,  thorough-going 
knowledge  of  the  Bible  is  not  possible  by  this 
method  of  study.  No  one  method  of  study 
will  answer,  if  one  desires  to  be  a  well-rounded 
and  well-balanced  Bible  student.  But  the  great- 
est danger  lies  in  this,  that  every  man  is  almost 
certain  to  have  some   line  of  topics  in  which  he 


TOPICAL    STUDY  59 

is  especially  interested,  and  if  he  studies  his 
Bible  topically,  unless  he  is  warned,  he  is  more 
than  likely  to  go  over  certain  topics,  again  and 
again,  and  be  very  strong  in  this  line  of  truth,  but 
other  topics  of  equal  importance  he  neglects,  and 
thus  becomes  a  one-sided  man.  We  never  know 
one  truth  Correctly  until  we  know  it  in  its  proper 
relations  to  other  truths.  I  know  of  people,  for 
example,  who  are  interested  in  the  great  doc- 
trine of  the  Lord's  Second  Coming,  and  pretty 
much  all  their  Bible  studies  are  on  that  line. 
Now  this  is  a  precious  doctrine,  but  there  are  other 
doctrines  in  the  Bible  which  a  man  needs  to 
know,  and  it  is  folly  to  study  this  doctrine  alone. 
I  know  others  whose  whole  interest  and  study 
seems  to  center  in  the  subject  of  "  Divine  Heal- 
ing.' '  It  is  related  of  one  man  that  he  confided 
to  a  friend  that  he  had  devoted  his  time  for 
years  to  the  study  of  the  number  "  seven  "  in 
the  Bible.  This  last  is  doubtless  an  extreme 
case,  but  it  illustrates  the  danger  in  Topical 
Study.  It  is  certain  that  we  will  never  master 
the  whole  range  of  Bible  truth  if  we  pursue  the 
Topical  Method  alone.  A  few  rules  concerning 
topical  study  will  probably  be  helpful  to  most  of 
the  readers  of  this  book. 

I. — Be  systematic.  Do  not  follow  your  fancy 
in  the  choice  of  topics.  Do  not  take  up  any 
topic  that  happens  to#suggest  itself.      Make  a  list 


6o  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

of  all  the  subjects  that  you  can  think  of  that  are 
touched  upon  in  the  Bible.  Make  it  as  compre- 
hensive and  complete  as  possible.  Then  take 
these  topics  up  one  by  one  in  logical  order.  The 
following  list  of  subjects  is  given  as  a  suggestion. 
Each  one  can  add  to  the  list  for  himself  and  sub- 
divide the  general  subjects  into  proper  sub-divi- 
sions. 

List  of  Topics. 
God. 

God  as  a  Spirit. 

The  Unity  of  God- 

The  Eternity  of  God. 

The  Omnipresence  of  God. 

The  Personality  of  God. 

The  O  m?iipotence  of  God. 

The  Omniscience  of  God. 

The  Holiness  of  God. 

The  Love  of  God. 

The  Righteousness  of  God. 

The  Mercy  or  Loving  Kiiidness  of  God. 

The  Faithfulness  of  God. 

The  Grace  of  God. 
Jesus  Christ. 

The  Divinity  of  Christ. 

The    S?ibordination  of  Jesus   Christ   to   the 
Father. 

The  Human  Nature  of  Jesus  Christ. 


TOPICAL    STUDY  6 1 

The  Character  of  Jesus  Christ, 

His  Holiness. 

His  Love  to  God. 

His  Love  to  Man. 

His  Love  for  Souls. 

His  Compassion. 

His  Prayerfulness. 

His  Meekness  and  Humility. 
The  Death  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Purpose  of  Christ's  Death. 

Why  did  Christ  die  ? 

For  Whom  did  Christ  Die  ? 

The  Results  of  Christ's  Death. 
The  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Fact  of  the  Resurrection . 

The  Results  of  the  Resurrection. 

The  Importance  of  the  Resurrection. 

The  Manner  of  the  Resurrection. 
The   Ascension    and    Exaltation    of  Jesus 

Christ. 
The    Return    or    Coming  Again    of  Jesus 

Christ. 

The  Fact  of  His  Coming  Again. 

The  Manner  of  His  Coming  Again. 

The  Purpose  of  His  Coming  Again. 

The  Results  of  His  Coming  Again. 

The  Time  of  His  Coming  Again. 
The  Reign  of  Jesus  Christ. 


62  how  to  stuty  the  bible 

The  Holy  Spirit. 

Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Deity  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Distinction  of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  God 
the   Father,   and  the    Son,    Jesus   Christ. 

The  Subordination  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the 
Father  and  to  the  Son. 

Names  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit: 
In  the  Universe. 
In  Man  in  General. 
In  the  Believer. 
In  the  Prophet  and  Apostle. 
In  Jesus  Christ. 
Man. 

His  Original  Condition. 

His  Fall. 

The  Present  Standing  before  God  and  Pres- 
ent Condition  of  Man  outside  of  the  Re- 
demption that  is  in  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Future  Destiny  of  those  who  Reject  the 
Redemption  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Justification. 

The  New  Birth. 

Adoption. 

The  Believer's  Assurance  of  Salvation. 

The  Flesh. 

Sanctification. 


TOPICAL    STUDY  63 


Cleansing. 

Consecration. 

Faith. 

Repentance. 

Prayer. 

Thanksgiving. 

Praise. 

Worship. 

Love  to  God. 

Love  to  Jesus  Christ. 

Love  to  Man. 

The  Future  Destiny  of  Believers. 
Angels, 

Their  Nature  and  Position. 

Their  Number. 

Their  A  bode.  — 

Their  Character. 

Their  Work. 

Their  Destiny. 
Satan  or  the  Devil. 

His  Existence. 

His  Nature  and  Position. 

His  Abode. 

His  Work. 

Our  Duty  Regarding  Him. 

His  Destiny. 
Demons. 

Their  Existence, 


64  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

Their  Nature. 

Their  Work. 

Their  Destiny. 
For  a  student  who  has  the  perseverance  to 
carry  it  through,  it  might  be  recommended,  to 
begin  with  the  first  topic  on  a  list  like  this,  and 
go  right  through  it  to  the  end,  searching  for  every- 
thing the  Bible  has  to  say  on  these  topics.  This 
the  author  of  this  book  has  done,  and,  thereby, 
gained  a  fuller  knowledge  of  truth  along  these 
lines,  and  an  immeasurably  more  vital  grasp  of 
the  truth,  than  he  ever  obtained  by  somewhat 
extended  studies  in  systematic  Theology.  Many, 
however,  will  stagger  at  the  seeming  immensity  of 
the  undertaking.  To  such  it  is  recommended  to 
begin  by  selecting  those  topics  that  seem  more 
important.  But  sooner  or  later  settle  down  to  a 
thorough  study  of  what  the  Bible  has  to  teach 
about  God  and  Man.  The  "  Abstract  of  Sub- 
jects, Doctrinal  and  Practical,"  in  the  back  of 
"  The  Bible  Text  Cyclopedia  "  is  very  suggestive. 

II. — Be  thorough.  Whenever  you  are  study- 
ing any  topic,  do  not  be  content  with  examining 
some  of  the  passages  in  the  Bible  that  bear  upon 
the  subject,  but  find,  as  far  as  possible,  every 
passage  in  the  Bible  that  bears  on  this  subject. 
As  long  as  there  is  a  single  passage  in  the  Bible 
on   any  subject  that   you  have    not  considered, 


TOPICAL   STUDY  65 

you  have  not  yet  gotten  a  thoroughly  true  knowl- 
edge of  that  subject.  How  can  we  find  all  the 
passages  in  the  Bible  that  bear  on  any  subject  ? 
1st.  By  the  use  of  the  Concordance.  Look  up 
every  passage  that  has  the  word  in  it.  Then 
look  up  every  passage  that  has  synonymous 
words  in  it.  If,  for  example,  you  are  studying 
the  subject  of  prayer,  look  up  every  passage 
that  has  the  word  "  pray"  and  its  derivatives  in  it, 
and  also  every  passage  that  has  such  words  as 
"cry,"  "call,"  "ask,"  "supplication,"  "inter- 
cession," etc.,  in  it.  2nd.  By  the  use  of  a  Bible 
text  book.  A  text  book  arranges  the  passages 
of  Scripture,  not  by  the  words  used,  but  by 
the  subjects  treated,  and  there  is  many  a  verse, 
for  example  on  ^prayer,  that  does  not  have  the 
word  "prayer"  or  any  synonymous  word  in  it. 
Incomparably  the  best  Bible  text  book  is  Inglis' 
"  The  Bible  Text  Cyclopedia. "  3rd.  Passages  not 
discovered  by  the  use  of  either  concordance  or 
text  book  will  come  to  light  as  we  study  by 
books,  or  as  we  read  the  Bible  through  in  course, 
and  so  our  treatment  of  topics  will  be  ever 
broadening. 

III. — Be  exact.  Get  the  exact  meaning  of  each 
passage  considered.  Study  each  passage  in  its 
connection,  and  find  its  meaning  in  the  way  sug- 
gested in  the  chapter  on  "  Study  of  Individual 


66         HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE 

Books/ '  Topical  study  is  frequently  carried 
on  in  a  very  slip-shod  fashion.  Passages,  torn 
from  their  connection,  are  strung  or  huddled 
together  because  of  some  superficial  connec- 
tion with  one  another,  and  without  much 
regard  to  their  real  sense  and  teaching,  and 
this  is  called  "topical  study."  This  has 
brought  the  whole  method  of  topical  study 
into  disrepute.  But  is  possible  to  be  as  exact 
and  scholarly  in  topical  study  as  in  any  other 
method,  and  when  we  are  the  results  will  be  in- 
structive and  gratifying,  and  not  misleading. 
But  the  results  are  sure  to  be  misleading  and  un- 
satisfactory if  the  work  is  done  in  a  careless,  in- 
exact way. 

IV. — Classify  and  write  down  your  results.  In 
the  study  of  any  large  subject  one  will  get  together 
a  great  mass  of  matter.  Having  gotten  it,  it 
must  now  be  gotten  into  shape.  As  you  look  it 
over  carefully,  you  will  soon  see  the  facts  that 
belong  together.  Arrange  them  together  in  a 
logical  order.  An  illustrative  topical  study  is 
given  below.  What  the  Bible  teaches  concern- 
ing the  Deity  of  Jesus  Christ. 


topical  study  67 

Jesus  Christ:  His  Deity. 

Divine  names. 

a.  Luke,  22:  70. 

"  The  Son  of  God."  This  name  is  given 
to  Christ  forty  times.  Besides  this  the 
synonymous  expression  "liis  son,"  "  My 
son,"  are  of  frequent  occurrence.  That 
this  name  as  used  of  Christ  is  a  distinctly 
Divine  name  appears  from  Jno.  J:  18. 

b.  Jno.  1:  18. 

"The  only  begotten  Son."  This  occurs 
five  times.  It  is  evident  that  the  statement, 
that  "  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  only 
in  the  same  sense  that  all  men  are  sons  of 
God"  is  not  true.  Compare  Mark  xii:  6. 
Here  Jesus  Himself,  having  spoken  of  all 
the  prophets  as  servants  of  God,  speaks 
of  Himself  as  "  one,"  "  a  beloved  Son." 

c.  Rev.  i:  17. 

"  The  first  and  the  last. "  Comp.  Is.  xli:4; 
xliv:  6.  In  these  latter  passages  it  is 
"Jehovah,"  "Jehovah  of  hosts,"  who  is 
"the  first  and  the  last." 

d.  Rev.  xxii:  12,  13,  16. 

First,  "  the  Alpha  and  Omega." 
Second,  "  the  beginning  and  the  ending." 
In  Rev.  i:  8,  R.  V.     It  is  the  Lord  God 
who  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega. 


68  HOW   TO   STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

e.     Acts  iii:  14. 

"  The  Holy  One."  In  Hosea  xi:  9,  and 
many  other  passages,  it  is  God  who  is 
"the  Holy  One." 

/.     Mai.  iii:  1;  Lukeii:  11;  Acts  ix:  17;  Jno. 
xx:  28;  Heb.  i:  11. 

"  The  Lord."  This  name  or  title  is  used 
of  Jesus  several  hundred  times.  The 
word  translated  "Lord"  is  used  in  the 
N<ew  Testament  in  speaking  of  men  nine 
times,  e.  g.\  Acts  16:  30,  Eph.  iv:  1,  Jno. 
xii:  21,  but  not  at  all  in  the  way  in  which 
it  used  of  Christ.  He  is  spoken  of  as 
"  //^Lord"  just  as  God  is,  cf.  Acts  iv:  26 
with  iv:  33.  Note  also  Matt,  xxii:  43~45> 
Phil,  ii:  21,  Eph.  iv:  5.  If  any  one  doubts 
the  attitude  of  the  Apostles  of  Jesus  to- 
ward Him  as  Divine,  they  would  do  well 
to  read  one  after  another  the  passages 
which  speak  of  Him  as  Lord. 

g.     Acts  x:  36. 
"Lord  of  all." 

h.     I  Cor.  ii:  8. 

"  The  Lord  of  Glory."  In  Ps.  xxiv:  8-10, 
it  is  "the  Lord  of  Hosts"  who  is  the 
King  of  Glory. 

i.     Is.  ix:  6. 

(1)     "  Wonderful  "  (cf.  Judges  xiii:  18,  R. 

v.) 


TOPICAL   STUDY  69 

(2)  "Mighty  God." 

(3)  "Father  of  Eternity."      See   R    V. 

marg. 

/      Heb.  i:  8. 

"God."  In  Jno.  xx:  28,  Thomas  calls 
Jesus  "  my  God,"  and  is  gently  rebuked 
for  not  believing  it  before. 

k.     Matt,  i:  23. 
"  God  with  us." 

/,  Tit.  2:  13,  R.  V. 
"  Our  great  God." 

m%  Rom.  9:  5. 

"  God  blessed  forever." 

Proposition:  Sixteen  names  clearly  imply- 
ing Deity  are  used  of  Christ  in  the  Bible, 
some  of  them  over  and  over  again,  the 
total  number  of  passages  reaching  far  into 
the  hundreds. 
Divine  Attributes. 

a,  Omnipotence. 

(1)  Luke  4:  39.     Jesus  has  power  over 

disease,  it  is  subject  to  His  word. 

(2)  Luke  7:  14-15;  8:  54-55;  Jno.  5:25. 
The    Son    of    God    has    power   over 

death,  it  is  subject  to  His  word. 

(3)  Matt:  8:  26-27. 

Jesus  has  power  over  the  winds  and 
sea,  they  are  subject  to  His  word. 

(4)  Matt.  8:  16;  Luke  4:  35,  36,  41. 


yo  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

Jesus  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  has 
power  over  demons,  they  are  sub- 
ject to  His  word. 

(5)  Eph.  i:  20-23. 

Christ  is  far  above  all  principality  and 
power  and  might,  and  dominion 
and  every  name  that  is  named,  not 
only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that 
which  is  to  come.  All  things  are 
in  subjection  (R.  V.),  under  His 
feet.  All  the  hierarchies  of  the 
angelic  world  are  under  Him. 

(6)  Heb.   1 :  3. 

The  Son  of  God  upholds  all  things  by 
the  words  of  His  power. 
Proposition.      Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 

is  omnipotent. 
b,  Omniscience. 

(1)  Jno.  4:  16-19. 

Jesus  knows  men's  lives,  even  their 
secret  history. 

(2)  Mark  2:8;  Luke   5:  22;  Jno.  2:  24- 

25;  (Acts  1:  24.) 
Jesus  knows  the  secret  thoughts  of 
men.  He  knew  all  men.  He  knew 
what  was  in  man.  (cf.  2  Chron. 
6:3o;Jer.  17:9,  10.  Herewesee 
that  God  "  only  knoweth  the  hearts 
of  the  children  of  men/') 


TOPICAL   STUDY  7 1 

(3)  Jno.  6:  64. 

Jesus  knew  from  the  beginning  that 
Judas  would  betray  Him.  Not  only 
men's  present  thoughts  but  their 
future  choices  were  known  to  Him. 

(4)  Jno.  1:  48. 

Jesus  knew  what  men  were  doing  at 
a  distance. 

(5)  Luke  22:  10,    12;  Jno.    13:  1;  Luke 

5:  4-6. 
Jesus  knew  the  future  regarding  not 
only  God's  acts,  but  regarding  the 
minute   specific   acts   of  men,  and 
even  the  fishes  of  the  sea. 

Note — Many,  if  not  all,  of  these  items  of 
knowledge  up  to  this  point  could  possibly, 
if  they  stood  alone,  be  accounted  for  by 
saying  that  the  Oni7iiscient  God  revealed 
these  specific  things  to  Jesus, 

(6)  Jno.  21:  17;    16:  30;  Col.  2:  3. 
Jesus  knew  all  things,  in  Him  are  hid 

all    the    treasures    of  wisdom   and 
knowledge. 
Proposition.     Jesus  Christ  is  omniscient. 

Note —  There  was,  as  we  shall  see  when  zve 
study  the  Humanity  of  Christ,  a  voluntary 
veiling  and  abnegation  of  the  exercise  of 


72  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

His  inherent  Divine  omniscience,     (Mark 
n:  12-14;  Phil.  2:  7.) 

cy  Omnipresence. 

(1)  Matt.  18:  20. 

Jesus  Christ  is  present  in  every  place 
where  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  His  name. 

(2)  Matt.  28:  20. 

Jesus  Christ  is  present  with  ever)' 
one  who  goes  forth  into  any  part 
of  the  world  to  make  disciples,  etc. 

(3)  Jno.  3:  13. 

The  Son  of  man  was  in  heaven  while 
He  was  here  on  earth. 

Note — This  text  is  doubtful.     {See  R.    V. 
and  the  Variorum  Bible.) 

(4)  Jno.  14:  20;  II.  Cor.  13:  5. 
Jesus  Christ  is  in  each  believer. 

(5)  Eph.  1:  23. 

Jesus  Christ  filleth  all  in  all. 
Proposition.     Jesus  Christ  is  omnipresent. 
d.      Eternity. 
•  Jno.    1:    1;  Mic.    5:  2;  Col.    1:    17;    Is. 

9:  6;  Jno.   17:    5    (Jno.    6:   62;  Jno. 
8:  58;  I  Jno.   1:  1,    27);  Heb.   13:   8. 
Proposition.     The  Son  of  God  was  from  all 
eternity. 


TOPICAL   STUDY  73 

e.     Immutability. 

Heb.    13:   8;    1:    12.     Jesus   Christ    is 
unchangeable.     He  not  only  always 
is,  but  always  is  the  same. 
f     Phil.  2:  6. 

Jesus  Christ  before  His  incarnation  was 
in  the  form  of  God. 

Note — "  Morphe"  translated  "  form"  means 
"  the  form  by  which  a  person  or  thing 
strikes  the  vision;  the  external  appear- 
ance" {Thayer,  Grk-Eng.  Lexicon  of 
the  N.   T.) 

g.     Col.  2:  9. 

In  Christ  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  in  a  bodily  way. 
Proposition.  Five  or  more  distinctively  di- 
vine attributes  are  ascribed  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  is  said  to  dwell  in  Him. 

3.     Divine  Offices. 

a,  Creation. 

Heb.   1:  10;  Jno.  1:3;  Col.  1:  16. 

The  Son  of  God,  the  eternal  Word,   the 

Lord,  is  creator  of  all  created  things. 

&f  Preservation. 

Heb.   1:  3.     The  Son  of   God  is  the  pre- 
server of  all  things. 


74  HOW   TO    STUDY   THE   BIBLE 

c,  The  forgiveness  of  sin. 

Mark   2:    5-10;    Luke  7:  48-50. 

Jesus  Christ  had  power  on  earth  to  forgive 

sins. 

Note — He  taught  that  sins  were  sins 
against  Himself.  Luke  7;  40-4.7,  both 
Simon  and  the  woman  as  sinners  were 
debtors  to  Himy  but  in  Ps.  51 :  4  sin  is 
seen  to  ie  against  God  and  God  only,) 

dy  Raising  of  the  dead. 
Jno.  6:  39-44;   5:  28-29. 
It  is  Jesus  Christ  who  raises  the  dead. 
Ques.   Did  not  Elijah  and  Elisha  raise  the 
dead?     No;  God  raised  the  dead  in  an- 
swer to  their  prayer,  but  Jesus  Christ  will 
raise  the  dead  by  His  own  word.     Dur- 
ing the   days   of   His  humiliation    it  was 
by  prayer  that   Christ    raised  the    dead. 
Jno.  11:  41. 
e>  Transformation  of  bodies.       Phil.  3:  21, 
R.    V. 

Jesus  Christ  shall  fashion  anew  the  body  of 
our  humiliation  into  the  likeness  of  His  own 
glorious  body. 
/,  Judgment.      II  Tim.  4:  1,  R.  V. 

Christ  Jesus  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead. 


TOPICAL   STUDY  75 

Note — -Jesus  Himself  emphasized  the  Divine 
character  of  this  office.     Jno.  5:  22-23.) 

g,  The  bestowal  of  eternal  life. 

Jno.  10:  28;  17,  2. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  bestower  of  eternal  life. 
Proposition.  Seven  distinctively  Divine  of- 
fices are  predicated  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Statements  which  in  the  0.  T.  are  made  dis- 
tinctly of  Jehovah  God  taken  in  the  N.  T.  to 
refer  to  Jesus  Christ. 

a,  Ps.  102:  24-27,  comp.  Heb.  1:  10-12. 

b,  Is.  40,  3-4,  comp.  Matt.  3:  3,  Luke  1:  68, 
69,  76. 

r,  Jer.  11:  20;  17,  10,  comp.  Rev.  11:  23. 

d,  Is.  60:  19  (Zech.  2:  5)  comp.  Luke  2:  32. 

e,  Is.  6:  1;  3:  10,  comp.  Jno.   12:  37-41. 
/,  Is.  8:  13-14,  comp.  1  Pet.  2:  7-8. 

gy  Is.  8:  12-13,  comp.  1  Pet.  3:  14-15,  R.  V. 

k,  Num.  21:  6-7,  comp.  1   Cor.  10,  9.   (See 
R.  V.) 

i%  Ps.  23:  1;  Is.  40:  io-ii,  comp.  Jno.  10:  11. 

/,  Ez.  34:  11;  12:  16,  comp.  Luke  19:  10. 

ky  Lord  in  the  O.  T.  always  refers  to  God 
except  when  the  context  clearly  indicates 
otherwise:  Lord  in  the  N.  T.  always  re- 
fers to  Jesus  Christ  except  where  the  con- 
text clearly  indicates  otherwise. 
Proposition.     Many    statements   which  in  the 


j6  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

O.  T.  are  made  distinctly  of  Jehovah  God 
are  taken  in  the  N.  T.  to  refer  to  Jesus 
Christ,  i.  e. ,  in  N.  T.  thought  and  doctrine 
Jesus  Christ  occupies  the  place  that  Jeho- 
vah occupies  in  O.  T.  thought  and  doc- 
trine. 
5.  The  way  in  which  the  name  of  God  the 
Father  and  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  are  cou- 
pled together, 

II  Cor.  13:  14. 

Matt.  28:  19. 

I  Thess.  3:  11. 

1  Cor.  12:  4-6. 

Tit.  3:  4,5,  comp.  Tit.  2:  13. 

Rom.  1 :  7.      Many  instances  of  this  sort  (see 

all  the  Pauline  Epistles). 
Jas.  1:  1. 
Jno.  14:23,  "  we,"/.  e.y  God  the  Father  and  I. 

2  Pet.  1:1.      (Comp.  R.  V.) 
Col.  2:  2.      (See  R,  V.) 
Jno.    17:  3. 

Jno.  14:  1,  comp.  Jer.  17:  5-7. 

Rev.  7:  10. 

Rev.  5:  13;  comp.  Jno.  5:  23. 

Prop.  The  name  of  Jesus  Christ  is  coupled 
with  that  of  God  the  Father  in  numerous 
passages  in  a  way  in  which  it  would  be 
impossible  to  couple  the  name  of  any 
finite  being  with  that  of  the  Deity. 


TOPICAL    STUDY  77 

6.    Divine  Worship  to  be  given  to  Jesus  Christ. 

a.  Matt.  28:  9;  Luke  24:  52;  Matt.  14:  33, 
comp.  Acts  10:  25-26;  Rev.  22:  8-9; 
Matt.  4:  9-10. 

Jesus  Christ  accepted  without  hesitation  a 
worship  which  good  men  and  angels  de- 
clined with  fear  (horror). 

Ques.  Is  not  the  verb  translated  worship  in 
these  passages  used  of  reverence  paid  to 
men  in  high  position?  Yes;  but  not  in 
this  way  by  worshippers  of  Jehovah,  as  is 
seen  by  the  way  in  which  Peter  and  the 
angel  drew  back  with  horror  when  such 
worship  was  offered  to  them. 

b.  i  Cor.  1:  2;  2  Cor.  12:  8,  9;  Acts  7:  59. 
(R.  V.) 

Prayer  is  to  be  made  to  Christ. 

c,  Ps.  45:  11;  Jno.  5:  23;  comp.  Rev.  5:  8, 
9>  12,  13. 

It  is  God  the  Father's  will  that  all  men  pay 
the  same  divine  honor  to  the  Son  as  to 
Himself. 

d,  Heb.  1:  6;  Phil,  2:  10,  11.  (Comp.  Is. 
45:  21,  23.) 

The  Son  of  God*  Jesus,  is  to  be  worshiped 

as  God  by  angels  and  men. 
Proposition.     Jesus  Christ  is  a  person  to  be 
worshiped  by  angels  and  men  even  as 
God  the  Father  is  worshiped. 


78  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

General  Proposition.  By  the  use  of  numer- 
ous Divine  names,  by  the  ascription  of  all 
the  distinctively  divine  attributes,  by  the 
predication  of  several  divine  offices,  by 
referring  statements  which  in  the  O.  T. 
distinctly  name  Jehovah  God  as  their 
subject  to  Jesus  Christ  in  the  N.  T. , 
by  coupling  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
with  that  of  God  the  Father  in  a  way  in 
which  it  would  be  impossible  to  couple 
that  of  any  finite  being  with  that  of  the 
Deity,  and  by  the  clear  teaching  that 
Jesus  Christ  should  be  worshiped  even  as 
God  the  Father  is  worshiped — in  all 
these  unmistakable  ways,  God  in  His 
word  distinctly  proclaims  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  a  Divine  Being,  is  God. 
One  suggestion  remains  to  be  made  in  regard 

to  topical  study.     Get  further  topics  for  topical 

study  from  your  book  studies. 


CHAPTER  I V. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    STUDY. 


A  third  method  of  study  is  the  Biographical. 
This  needs  no  definition.  It  consists  in  taking 
up  the  various  persons  mentioned  in  Scripture 
and  studying  their  life,  work  and  character.  It 
is  really  a  special  form  of  Topical  Study.  It 
can  be  made  very  interesting  and  instructive. 
It  is  especially  useful  to  the  minister  with  a  view 
to  sermon  building,  but  is  profitable  for  all  Christ- 
ians. The  following  suggestions  will  help  those 
who  are  not  already  experienced  in  this  line  of 
work. 

1.  Collect  all  the  passages  in  the  Bible  in 
which  the  person  to  be  studied  is  mentioned. 
This  is  readily  done  by  turning  in  Strong's  Con- 
cordance to  the  person's  name,  and  you  will  find 
every  passage  in  which  he  is  mentioned  given. 

2.  Analyze  the  character  of  the  person.  This 
will  require  a  repeated  reading  of  the  passages 
in  which  he  is  mentioned.  This  should  be  done 
with  pencil  in  hand,  that  any  characteristic  may 
be  noted  down  at  once. 

79 


80  HOW   TO    STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

3.  Note  the  elements  of  power  and  success. 

4.  Note  the  elements  of  weakness  and  failure. 

5.  Note  the  difficulties  overcome. 

6.  Note  the  helps  to  success. 

7.  Note  the  privileges  abused. 

8.  Note  the  opportunities  neglected. 

9.  Note  the  opportunities  improved. 

10.  Note  the  mistakes  made. 

11.  Note  the  perils  avoided. 

12.  Make  a  sketch  of  the  life  in  hand.  Make 
it  as  vivid,  living  and  realistic  as  possible.  Try 
to  reproduce  the  subject  as  a  real,  living  man. 
Note  the  place  and  surroundings  of  the  dif- 
ferent events,  e.  g.y  Paul  in  Athens,  Corinth, 
Philippi.  Note  the  time  relations  of  the  different 
events.  Very  few  people  in  reading  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  for  example,  take  notice  of  the  rapid 
passage  of  time,  and  so  regard  events  separated 
by  years  as  following  one  another  in  close 
sequence.  In  this  connection  note  the  age  or 
approximate  age  of  the  subject  at  the  time  of  the 
events  recorded  of  him. 

13.  Summarize  the  lessons  we  should  learn 
from  the  story  of  this  person's  life. 

14.  Note  the  person  in  hand  in  his  relations 
to  Jesus,  e.  ^.,  as  a  type  of  Christ  (Joseph, 
David,  Solomon  and  others),  forerunner  of 
Christ,    believer    in    Christ,    enemy   of    Christ, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   STUDY  8 1 

servant  of  Christ,  brother  of  Christ  (James  and 
Jude),  friend,  etc.,  etc. 

It  will  be  well  to  begin  with  some  person  who 
does  not  occupy  too  much  space  in  the  Bible,  as, 
e.  g.,  Enoch  or  Stephen.  Of  course  many  of 
the  points  mentioned  above  cannot  be  taken  up 
with  some  characters. 

Suggestive  books  in  character  studies  are 
Stalker's  Lives  of  Christ  and  Paul,  and 
Stalker's  "Imago  Christi";  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer's 
"  Elijah,"  and  also  other  O.  T.  characters;  Mr. 
Moody's  "  Bible  Characters." 


CHAPTER  V. 


STUDY   OF   TYPES. 


A  fourth  method  of  study  is  the  Study  of  Types. 
We  have  illustrations  of  this  in  the  Bible  itself, 
as  for  example  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 
It  is  both  an  interesting  and  instructive  method 
of  study.  It  shows  us  the  most  precious  truths 
buried  away  in  what  once  seemed  to  us  a  very 
dry  and  meaningless  portion  of  the  Bible.  It 
need  scarcely  be  said  that  this  method  of  study 
is  greatly  abused  and  overdone  in  some  quarters. 
But  that  is  no  reason  why  we  should  neglect  it 
altogether,  especially  when  we  remember  that 
not  only  Paul  but  Jesus  were  fond  of  this  method' 
of  study.  The  following  may  serve  as  principles 
to  govern  us  in  this  method  of  study: 

I .  Be  sure  you  have  Bible  warrant  for  your 
supposed  type.  If  one  gives  free  rein  to  his 
fancyin  this  matter,  he  can  imagine  types  every- 
where, even  in  places  that  neither  the  human  or 
divine  author  of  the  book  had  any  intention  of  a 
typical  sense.  Never  say  this  is  a  type  unless 
you  can  point  to  some  dear  passage  of  Scripture 

82 


STUDY    OF    TYPES  83 

where  the   truth  said  to  be  typified  is  definitely 
taught. 

2.  Begin  with  the  more  simple  and  evident 
types,  eg.,  the  Passover  (comp.  Ex.  12  with  I 
Cor.  5:  7  etc.),  the  High  Priest,  the  Tabernacle. 

3.  Be  on  your  guard  against  the  fanciful  and 
overstrained.  Fancy  is  almost  sure  to  run 
away  with  any  man  who  is  blessed  with  any 
imagination  and  quickness  of  typical  discernment, 
unless  he  holds  it  in  check.  Our  typical  sensi- 
tiveness and  sensibleness  will  become  both 
quickened  and  chastened  by  careful  and  circum- 
spect exercise. 

4.  In  studying  any  passage  of  possible  typical 
suggestion,  look  up  all  the  Scripture  references. 
The  best  collection  of  references  is  that  given  in 
"  The  Treasury  of  Scripture  Knowledge." 

5.  Study  carefully  the  meaning  of  the  names 
of  persons  and  places  mentioned.  •  Bible  names 
often  have  a  very  deep  and  far  reaching  suggest- 
iveness.  Thus,  for  example,  ^Hebron,  which 
means  "  joining  together,"  "  union  "  or  "  fellow- 
ship," is  deeply  significant  when  taken  in  con- 
nection with  its  history,  as  are  all  the  names  of 
the  Cities  of  Refuge,  and  indeed  very  many 
Scripture  names.  Was  it  accidential  that  Beth- 
lehem, the  name  of  the  place  where  the  Bread 
of   Life  was  born,    means   "  House  of  bread  "  ? 


84 


HOW    UO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 


C.  H.  M.'s  notes  on  Genesis,  Exodus,  Leviticus, 
Numbers  and  Deuteronomy  are  suggestive  to  one 
who  has  had  little  experience  in  the  study  of 
types. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  STUDY  OF  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE  IN  THE 
ORDER  GIVEN  IN  THE  BIBLE  AND  IN  THEIR 
CHRONOLOGICAL  ORDER. 

A  fifth  method  of  Bible  study  is  the  old- 
fashioned  method  of  the  study  of  the  Bible  in 
course,  beginning  at  Genesis  and  going  right  on 
until  Revelation  is  finished.  This  method  of 
study  is  ridiculed  a  good  deal  in  these  days,  but 
it  has  some  advantages  which  no  other  method 
of  study  possesses.  It  is  sometimes  said,  you 
might  as  well  begin  at  the  top  shelf  of  your  library 
and  read  right  through,  as  to  begin  at  the  beginning 
of  this  library  of  sixty-six  books  and  read  right 
through.  To  this  it  is  a  sufficient  answer,  If  you 
had  a  library  that  it  was  important  to  master  as 
a  whole,  that  you  might  understand  the  separate 
books  in  it,  and  that  was  as  well  arranged  as  the 
Bible  is,  then  this  method  of  going  through  your 
library  would  be  excellent.  The  advantages  of 
studying  in  the  Bible  in  course  are:  First,  It  is  the 
only  method  by  which  you  will  get  an  idea  of  the 
Book  as  a  whole.     The    more  we   know  of  the 

85 


86  HOW   TO   STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

Bible  as  a  whole,  the  better  prepared  we  are  for 
the  understanding  of  any  individual  portion  of  it. 
Second,  It  is  the  only  method  by  which  you  are 
likely  to  cover  the  whole  Book,  and  so  take  in  the 
entire  scope  of  God's  revelation.  It  will  be  many  a 
long  year  before  any  man  covers. the  whole  Bible 
by  Book  studies,  or  even  by  Topical  studies.  Every 
part  of  God's  word  is  precious,  and  there  are 
gems  of  truth  hidden  away  in  most  unexpected 
places,  e.  g. ,  I  Chron,  iv:  10,  we  hit  upon  these 
priceless  gems  by  studying  the  Bible  in  course. 
Third,  It  is  the  best  method  to  enable  one  to  get 
hold  of  the  unity  of  the  Bible  and  its  organic 
character.  Fourth,  It  is  a  great  corrective  to 
one-sidedness  and  crankiness.  The  Bible  is  a 
many  sided  book,  it  is  Calvinistic  and  Arminian, 
it  is  Trinitarian  and  Unitarian,  it  clearly  teaches 
the  Deity  of  Christ  and  insists  on  His  real 
Humanity,  it  exalts  faith  and  demands  works,  it 
urges  to  victory  through  conflict  and  asserts  most 
vigorously  that  victory  is  won  by  faith,  etc.,  etc. 
If  we  become  too  much  taken  up  with  any  one 
line  of  truth  in  our  Book  or  Topical  studies,  and 
we  are  more  than  likely  to,  the  daily  study  of  the 
Bible  in  course  will  soon  bring  us  to  some  con- 
trasted line  of  truth,  and  bring  us  back  to  our 
proper  balance.  Some  people  go  insane  through 
becoming  too  much  occupied  with  a  single  line  of 
truth.     The  thoughtful  study  of  the  whole  Bible 


STUDY  IN  CHRONOLOGICAL  ORDER      87 

is  a  great  corrective  to  this  tendency.  It  would 
be  well  to  have  three  methods  of  study  in  progress 
at  the  same  time:  first,  the  study  of  some  book; 
second,  the  study  of  topics  (perhaps  topics  sug- 
gested by  the  book  studies);  third,  the  study  of 
the  Bible  in  course.  Every  other  method  of 
study  should  be  supplemented  by  studying  the 
Bible  in  course.  Some  years  ago  I  determined 
to  read  the  A.  V.  through  every  year,  the  R.  V. 
through  every  year,  and  the  N.  T.  in  Greek 
through  every  year.  It  has  proved  exceedingly 
profitable,  and  I  would  not  willingly  give  it  up. 

A  sixth  method  of  study  is  closely  related  to 
the  fifth  method  and  has  advantages  of  its  own 
that  will  appear  as  soon  as  the  method  is  de- 
scribed. It  is  studying  the  various  portions  of 
the  Bible  in  their  Chronological  Order.  In  this 
way  the  Psalms  are  read  in  their  historical  set- 
tings, as  are  prophecies,  epistles,  etc.  The 
whole  Bible  has  been  excellently  arranged  for 
Chronological  study  in  Miss  Petrie's  Clews  to  Holy 
Writ.  (American  Tract  Society.)  The  course 
as  outlined  by  Miss  Petrie  covers  three  years,  and 
there  are  questions  given  for  study  and  examina- 
tion. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  STUDY  OF  THE  BIBLE  FOR  PRACTICAL  USEFUL- 
NESS IN  DEALING  WITH  MEN. 

The  seventh  and  last  method  of  study  is  the 
Study  of  the  Bible  for  Practical  Usefulness  in 
Dealing  with  Men. 

To  study  the  Bible  in  this  way,  make  as  com- 
plete a  classification  as  possible  of  all  the  classes 
of  men  that  one  will  meet.  Write  the  names  of 
the  various  classes  at  the  head  of  separate  sheets 
of  paper  or  cards.  Then  begin  the  Bible  and 
read  it  through  slowly,  and  when  you  come  to  a 
passage  that  seems  likely  to  prove  useful  in  deal- 
ing with  any  class  write  it  down  upon  its  appro- 
priate sheet.  Go  through  the  Bible  in  this  way. 
It  would  be  well  to  have  a  special  Bible  for  this 
purpose,  and  have  different  colored  inks,  or  differ- 
ent letters  or  symbols,  to  represent  the  different 
classes,  and  underscore  the  texts  with  the  proper 
colored  ink,  or  mark  it  with  the  appropriate 
symbol.  The  results  of  the  labors  of  others  in 
this  line  can  be  found  in  a  number  of  books,  such 
as  Munhall's  Furnishing  for  Workers,  Alexander 

88 


FOR    PRACTICAL    USEFULNESS  89 

Paterson's  Bible  Manual  for  Christian  Workers, 
Drury's  Hand-Book  for  Workers,  and  the  Author's 
Vest  Pocket  Companion  for  Christian  Workers 
and  his  book  "  How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ." 
But  the  best  book  is  the  one  you  get  up  yourself. 
The  books  mentioned  will  give  you  suggestions 
how  to  do  it.  As  a  suggestion  for  beginning  in  the 
work  we  give  a  list  of  classes  of  men,  to  which 
you  can  add  for  yourself. 
The  careless  and  indifferent. 
Those  who  wish  to  be  saved  but  do  not  know 

how. 
Those  who  know  how  to  be  saved  but  have  diffi- 
culties 

11  I  am  too  great  a  sinner." 
11  My  heart  is  too  hard." 
44  I  must  become  better  before  I  become  a 

Christian." 
44  I  am  afraid  I  can't  hold  out." 
"  I  am  too  weak." 
44  I  have  tried  before  and  failed." 
44  I  can  not  give  up  my  evil  ways." 
44  I    will    be    persecuted     if     I     become    a 

Christian." 
44  It  will  hurt  my  business." 
44  There  is  too  much  to  give  up." 
44  The  Christian  life  is  too  hard." 
44  I  am  afraid  of  ridicule." 
44  I  will  lose  my  friends." 


90  HOW   TO    STUDY   THE   BIBLE 

"  I  have  no  feeling.' ' 

11  I  have  been  seeking  Christ,  but  can  not 

find  Him." 
"  I  have  sinned  away  the  day  of  grace." 
11  God  won't  receive  me." 
14  I  have  committed  the  unpardonable  sin." 
44  It  is  too  late." 

44  Christians  are  so  inconsistent." 
"  God  seems  to  me  unjust  and  cruel." 
44  There   are  so    many  things  in  the    Bible 

which  I  can't  understand." 
"  There  is  some  one  I  can't  forgive." 
Those  who  are  cherishing  false  hopes. 

The  Hope    of    being  saved  by  a  righteous 

life. 
The  Hope  that   "  God  is  too  good  to  damn 

anyone." 
The  Hope  of  being  saved  by  "  trying  to  be  a 

Christian." 
The  Hope  of  being  saved,  because   "  I  feel 

saved,"  or  "  I  feel  I  am  going  to  heaven." 
The  Hope  of  being  saved  by  a  profession  of 

religion,    or    church    membership,    or    a 

faith,  that  does  not  save  from  sin. 
Those  who  lack  assurance. 
Backsliders, 
Sceptics, 
Infidels, 


FOR    PRACTICAL    USEFULNESS  91 

Those  who  wish  to  put  off  the  decision, 

Roman  Catholics, 
Jews. 

Spiritualists. 

Christian  Scientists. 

Secret  Disciples. 

The  Sorrowing. 

The  Persecuted. 

The  Discouraged. 

The  Despondent. 

The  Morbid. 

Worldly  Christians. 

The  Stingy. 

The  results  of  this  work  will  be  of  incalculable 
value.  In  the  first  place,  you  will  get  a  new  view 
of  how  perfectly  the  Bible  is  adapted  to  every 
man's  need.  In  the  second  place,  familiar  pas- 
sages of  the  Bible  will  get  a  new  meaning  as  you 
see  their  relation  to  the  needs  of  men.  The 
Bible  will  become  a  very  living  book.  In  the 
third  place,  in  seeking  food  for  others  you  will  be 
fed  yourself.  And  in  the  fourth  place,  you  will 
get  a  vast  amount  of  material  to  use  in  sermons, 
Bible-readings,  prayer  meeting  talks  and  personal 
work.  You  will  acquire  a  rare  working  knowl- 
edge of  the  Bible. 


PART  II. 

FUNDAMENTAL   CONDITIONS   OF 
PROFITABLE  BIBLE  STUDY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE     FUNDAMENTAL     CONDITIONS     OF    THE      MOST 
PROFITABLE  BIBLE  STUDY. 

We  have  considered  seven  profitable  methods 
of  Bible  study.  There  is  something,  however, 
in  Bible  study  more  important  than  the  best 
methods,  that  is,  The  Fundamental  Conditions  of 
Profitable  Study.  The  one  who  meets  these  con- 
ditions will  get  more  out  of  the  Bible,  while  pur- 
suing the  poorest  method,  than  the  one  who  does 
not  meet  them  will,  while  pursuing  the  best 
method.  Many  a  one  who  is  eagerly  asking, 
"  What  method  shall  I  pursue  in  my  Bible  study  ?" 
needs  something  that  goes  far  deeper  than  a  new 
and  better  method. 

i .  The  first  of  the  fundamental  conditions  of  the 
most  profitable  Bible  study  is  the  student  must  be 
born  again.  The  Bible  is  a  spiritual  book,  it 
"  combines  spiritual  things  with  spiritual  words  " 
(I  Cor.  ii:  13,  R.  V.  Am.  Ap.),  and  only  a  spir- 
itual man  can  understand  its  deepest  and  most 
characteristic  and  most  precious  teachings.  "  The 
natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the 
.  95 


g6  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

Spirit  of  God:  for  they  are  foolishness  unto 
him;  and  he  cannot  know  them,  because  they 
are  spiritually  judged."  (I  Cor.  ii:  14,  R.  V.) 
Spiritual  discernment  can  be  obtained  in  but 
one  way,  by  being  born  again.  "  Except  a  man 
be  born  anew  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of 
God."  (John  hi:  3,  R.  V.)  No  mere  knowl- 
edge of  the  human  languages  in  which  the 
Bible  was  written,  however  extensive  and  accur- 
ate it  may  be,  will  qualify  one  to  understand  and 
appreciate  the  Bible.  One  must  understand  the 
divine  language  in  which  it  was  written  as  well, 
the  language  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  A  person  who 
understands  the  language  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but 
who  does  not  understand  a  word  of  Greek  or 
Hebrew  or  Aramiac,  will  get  more  out  of  the 
Bible,  than  one,  who  knows  all  about  Greek  and 
Hebrew  and  cognate  languages,  but  is  not  born 
again,  and,  consequently,  does  not  understand 
the  language  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  a  well 
demonstrated  fact  that  many  plain  men  and  wo- 
men who  are  entirely  innocent  of  any  knowledge 
of  the  original  tongues  in  which  the  Bible  was 
written,  have  a  knowledge  of  the  real  contents 
of  the  Bible,  its  actual  teaching,  in  its  depth 
and  fulness  and  beauty,  that  surpasses  that  of 
many  learned  professors  in  theological  facul- 
ties. One  of  the  greatest  follies  of  the  day, 
is  to  set  unregenerate  men  to  teaching  the  Bible, 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  97 

because  of  their  rare  knowledge  of  the  human 
forms  of  speech  in  which  the  book  was  written. 
It  would  be  as  reasonable  to  set  a  man  to  teach 
art  because  he  had  an  accurate  technical  knowl- 
edge of  paints.  It  requires  aesthetic  sense  to 
make  a  man  a  competent  teacher  of  art.  It  re- 
quires spiritual  sense  to  make  a  man  a  competent 
teacher  of  the  Bible.  The  man  who  had  aesthetic 
discernment,  but  little  or  no  technical  knowl- 
edge of  paint,  would  be  a  far  more  competent 
critic  of  works  of  art,  than  a  man,  who  had  a  great 
technical  knowledge  of  paint,  but  no  aesthetic 
discernment;  and  so  the  man  who  has  no  techni- 
cal knowledge  of  Greek  and  Hebrew,  but  who 
has  spiritual  discernment,  is  a  far  more  compe- 
tent critic  of  the  Bible  than  the  one  who  has  a 
rare  technical  knowledge  of  Greek  and  Hebrew, 
but  no  spiritual  discernment.  It  is  exceedingly 
unfortunate  that,  in  some  quarters,  more  emphasis 
is  laid  upon  a  knowledge  of  Greek  and  Hebrew, 
in  training  for  the  ministry,  than  is  laid  upon  spir- 
itual life  and  its  consequent  spiritual  discernment. 
Unregenerate  men  should  not  be  forbidden  to 
study  the  Bible;  for  the  Word  of  God  is  the  in- 
strument the  Holy  Spirit  uses  in  the  New  Birth 
(I  Pet.  i:  23;  James  i:  18):  but  it  should  be 
distinctly  understood,  that,  while  there  are  teach- 
ings in  the  Bible  that  the  natural  man  can  un- 
derstand,   and  beauties   which   he  can    see,    its 


98  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

most  distinctive  and  characteristic  teachings  are 
beyond  his  grasp,  and  its  highest  beauties  belong 
to  a  world  in  which  he  has  no  vision.  The  first 
fundamental  condition  of  the  most  profitable 
Bible  study,  is,  then,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again." 
You  cannot  study  the  Bible  to  the  greatest  profit 
if  you  have  not  been  born  again.  Its  best  treas- 
ures are  sealed  to  you. 

2.  The  second  condition  of  the  most  profitable 
study  is  a  love  for  the  Bible.  A  man  who  eats 
with  an  appetite,  will  get  far  more  good  out  of 
his  meal  than  a  man  who  eats  from  a  sense  of 
duty.  It  is  well  when  a  student  of  the  Bible  can 
say  with  Job,  "  I  have  treasured  up  the  words  of 
his  mouth  more  than  my  necessary  food,"  (Job, 
23:  12  R.  V.)  or  with  Jeremiah,  "  Thy  words 
were  found  and  I  did  eat  them;  and  thy  words 
were  unto  me  a  joy  -and  the  rejoicing  of  mine 
heart;  for  I  am  called  by  thy  name,  O,  Lord  God 
of  hosts."  (Jer.,  15:  16,  R.V.)  Many  come  to  the 
table  God  has  spread  in  His  word  with  no  appe- 
tite for  spiritual  food,  and  go  mincing  here  and 
there  and  grumbling  about  everything.  Spiritual 
indigestion  lies  at  the  bottom  of  much  modern 
criticism  of  the  Bible.  But  how  can  one  get  a 
love  for  the  Bible  ?  First  of  all  by  being  born 
again.  Where  there  is  life  there  is  likely  to  be 
appetite.  A  dead  man  never  hungers.  This 
brings  us  back  to  the  first  condition.     But  going 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  99 

beyond  this  the  more  there  is  of  vitality  the  more 
there  is  of  hunger.  Abounding  life  means  abound- 
ing hunger  for  the  Word.  Study  of  the  Word 
stimulates  love  for  the  Word.  The  author  can 
well  remember  the  time  when  he  had  more  appe- 
tite for  books  about  the  Bible  than  he  had  for 
the  Bible  itself,  but  with  increasing  study  there 
has  come  increasing  love  for  the  Book.  Bearing 
in  mind  who  the  author  of  the  Book  is,  what  its 
purpose  is,  what  its  power  is,  what  the  riches  of 
its  contents  are,  will  go  far  toward  stimulating 
a  love  and  appetite  for  the  Book. 

3.  The  third  condition  is  a  willingness  to  do 
hard  work.  Solomon  has  given  a  graphic  pic- 
ture of  the  Bible  student  who  gets  the  most 
profit  out  of  his  study,  "  My  son,  if  thou  wilt 
receive  my  words,  and  lay  up  my  commandments 
with  thee;  so  that  thou  incline  thine  ear  unto 
wisdom,  and  apply  thine  heart  to  understanding; 
yea,  if  thou  cry  after  discernment,  and  lift  up 
thy  voice  for  understanding;  if  thou  seek  her  as 
silver,  and  search  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures ; 
then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
and  find  the  knowledge  of  God."  (Prov.  ii:  1- 
5,  R.  V.)  Now,  seeking  for  silver  and  searching 
for  hid  treasures,  means  hard  work,  and  the  one 
who  wishes  to  get  not  only  the  silver  but  the 
gold  as  well  out  of  the  Bible,  and  find  its  "  hid 
treasures,  "  must  make  up  his  mind  to  dig.      It  is 


IOO  HOW   TO    STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

not  glancing  at  the  word,  or  reading  the  word,  but 
studying  the  word,  meditating  upon  the  word, 
pondering  the  word,  that  brings  the  richest  yields. 
The  reason  why  many  get  so  little  out  of  their 
Bible  reading  is  simply  because  they  are  not 
willing  to  think.  Intellectual  laziness  lies  at  the 
bottom  of  a  large  per  cent,  of  fruitless  Bible 
reading.  People  are  constantly  crying  for 
new  methods  of  Bible  study,  but  what 
many  of  them  wish  is  simply  some  method  of 
Bible  study  by  which  they  can  get  all  the  good 
out  of  the  Bible  without  work.  If  some  one 
could  tell  lazy  Christians  some  method  of  Bible 
study  whereby  they  could  put  the  sleepiest  ten 
minutes  of  the  day,  just  before  they  go  to  bed, 
into  Bible  study,  and  get  the  profit  out  of  it  that 
God  intends  His  children  shall  get  out  of  the 
study  of  His  Word,  that  would  be  just  what  they 
desire.  But  it  can't  be  done.  Men  must  be 
willing  to  work  and  work  hard,  if  they  wish  to  dig 
out  the  treasures  of  infinite  wisdom  and  knowl- 
edge and  blessing  which  He  has  stored  up  in 
His  Word.  A  business  friend  once  asked  me  in 
a  hurried  call  to  tell  him  "  in  a  word"  how  to 
study  his  Bible.  I  replied,  "  Think."  The  Psalm- 
ist pronounces  that  man  "  blessed  "  who  "  medi- 
tates in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  day  and  night." 
(Ps.  i:  2.)  The  Lord  commanded  Joshua  to 
"meditate  therein  day  and  night"  and  assured 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  10 1 

him  that  as  a  result  of  this  meditation  "  then 
thou  shalt  make  thy  way  prosperous,  and  then 
thou  shalt  have  good  success."  (Josh,  i:  8.) 
Of  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  we  read,  "  Mary 
kept  all  these  sayings,  pondering  them  in  her 
heart."  (Luke  ii:  19,  R.  V.)  In  this  way  alone 
can  one  study  the  Bible  to  the  greatest  profit. 
One  pound  of  beef  well  chewed  and  digested 
and  assimilated,  will  give  more  strength  than  tons 
of  beef  merely  glanced  at;  and  one  verse  of  script- 
ure chewed  and  digested  and  assimilated,  will 
give  more  strength  than  whole  chapters  simply 
skimmed.  Weigh  every  word  you  read  in  the 
Bible.  Look  at  it.  Turn  it  over  and  over.  The 
most  familiar  passages  get  a  new  meaning  in  this 
way.  Spend  fifteen  minutes  on  each  word  in  Ps. 
xxiii:  1,  or  Phil,  iv:  19,  and  see  if  it  is  not  so. 

4.  The  fourth  condition  is  a  will  wholly  sur- 
rendered to  God.  Jesus  said,  "  If  any  man  will- 
eth  to  do  his  will  he  shall  know  of  the  teaching." 
(Jno.  vii:  17,  R.  V.)  A  surrendered  will  gives 
that  clearness  of  spiritual  vision  which  is  neces- 
sary to  understand  God's  book.  Many  of  the 
difficulties  and  obscurities  of  the  Bible  rise  wholly 
from  the  fact  that  the  will  of  the  student  is  not 
surrendered  to  the  will  of  the  author  of  the  book. 
It  is  remarkable  how  clear  and  simple  and  beau- 
tiful passages,  that  once  puzzled  us,  become  when 
we  are  brought   to  that   place  where  we  say  to 


102  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

God,  "  I  surrender  my  will  unconditionally  to 
Thine.  I  have  no  will  but  Thine.  Teach  me 
Thy  will."  A  surrendered  will  will  do  more  to 
make  the  Bible  an  open  book  than  a  university 
education.  It  is  simply  impossible  to  get  the 
largest  profit  out  of  your  Bible  study  until  you 
do  surrender  your  will  to  God.  You  must  be 
very  definite  about  this.  There  are  many  who 
say,  "  Oh,  yes,  my  will,  I  think,  is  surrendered 
to  God,"  and  yet  it  is  not.  They  have  never 
gone  alone  with  God  and  said  intelligently  and 
definitely  to  him,  "  O  God,  I  here  and  now 
give  myself  up  to  Thee,  for  Thee  to  command  me, 
and  lead  me,  and  shape  me,  and  send  me,  and  do 
with  me,  absolutely  as  Thou  wilt."  Such  an  act 
is  a  wonderful  key  to  unlock  the  treasure  house 
of  God's  Word.  The  Bible  becomes  a  new  book 
when  a  man  does  that.  Doing  that  wrought  a 
complete  transformation  in  the  author's  theology 
and  life  and  ministry. 

5.  The  fifth  condition  is  very  closely  related 
to  the  fourth.  The  student  of  the  Bible  zv  ho  would 
get  the  greatest  profit  out  of  his  studies  must  be 
obedient  to  its  teachings  as  soon  as  he  sees  them. 
It  was  good  advice  James  gave  to  early  Christians, 
and  to  us,  "  Be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not 
hearers  only,  deceiving  your  ownselves. "  There 
are  a  good  many,  who  consider  themselves  Bible 
students,  who  are    deceiving  themselves  in  this 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  103 

way  to-day.  They  see  what  the  Bible  teaches, 
but  they  do  not  do  it,  and  they  soon  lose  their 
power  to  see  it.  Truth  obeyed  leads  to  more 
truth.  Truth  disobeyed  destroys  the  capacity 
for  discovering  truth.  There  must  be  not  only  a 
general  surrender  of  the  will,  but  specific  practi- 
cal obedience  to  each  new  word  of  God  discov- 
ered. There  is  no  place  where  the  law, "  unto 
every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall 
have  abundance;  but  from  him  that  hath  not 
shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath," 
is  more  joyously  certain  on  the  one  hand  and 
more  sternly  inexorable  on  the  other,  than  in  the 
matter  of  using  or  refusing  the  truth  revealed  in 
the  Bible.  Use,  and  you  get  more;  refuse,  and 
you  lose  all.  Do  not  study  the  Bible  for  the 
mere  gratification  of  intellectual  curiosity,  but  to 
find  out  how  to  live  and  to  please  God.  What- 
ever duty  you  find  commanded  in  the  Bible,  do 
it  at  once.  Whatever  good  you  see  in  any  Bible 
character,  imitate  it  immediately.  Whatever  mis- 
take you  note  in  the  actions  of  Bible  men  and 
women,  scrutinize  your  own  life  to  see  if  you  are 
making  the  same  mistake,  and  if  you  find  you 
are,  correct  it  forthwith.  James  compares  the 
Bible  to  a  looking  glass.  (Jas.  i:  23,  24).  The 
chief  good  of  a  looking  glass,  is  to  show  you  if 
there  is  anything  out  of  fix  about  you,  and,  if  you 
find  there  is,  you  can  set  it  right.      Use  the  Bible  in 


104  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

that  way.  Obeying  the  truth  you  already  see, 
will  solve  the  enigmas  in  the  verses  you  do  not 
as  yet  understand.  Disobeying  the  truth  you  see, 
darkens  the  whole  world  of  truth.  This  is  the 
secret  of  much  of  the  scepticism  and  error  of  the 
day.  Men  saw  the  truth,  but  did  not  do  it,  now 
it  is  gone.  I  knew  a  bright  and  promising  young 
minister.  He  made  rapid  advancement  in  the 
truth.  He  took  very  advanced  ground  upon  one 
point  especially,  and  the  storm  came.  One  day 
he  said  to  his  wife,  "  It  is  very  nice  to  believe 
this,  but  we  need  not  speak  so  much  about  it." 
They  began,  or  he,  at  least,  to  hide  their  testi- 
mony. The  wife  died  and  he  drifted.  The  Bible 
became  to  him  a  sealed  book.  Faith  reeled. 
He  publicly  renounced  his  faith  in  some  of  the 
fundamental  truths  of  the  Bible.  He  seemed  to 
lose  his  grip  even  on  the  doctrine  of  immortality. 
What  was  the  cause  of  it  all  ?  Truth  not  lived 
and  stood  for,  flees.  That  man  is  much  admired 
and  applauded  by  some  to-day,  but  daylight  has 
given  place  to  darkness  in  his  soul. 

6.  The  sixth  condition  is  a  child-like  mind. 
God  reveals  His  deepest  truths  to  babes.  No  age 
needs  more  than  our  own  to  lay  to  heart  the 
words  of  Jesus,  "  I  thank  thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of 
Heaven  and  earth,  because  Thou  hast  hid  these 
things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  has  re- 
vealed them  unto  babes. "  (Matt,  xi:  25.)    Where- 


FUNDAMENTAL   CONDITIONS  105 

in  must  we  be  babes  if  God  is  to  reveal  His  truth 
unto  us,  and  we  are  to  understand  His  Word? 
A  child  is  not  full  of  its  own  wisdom.  It  recog- 
nizes its  ignorance  and  is  ready  to  be  taught.  It 
does  not  oppose  its  own  notions  and  ideas  to  those 
of  its  teachers.  It  is  in  that  spirit  we  should 
come  to  the  Bible,  if  we  are  to  get  the  most  profit 
out  of  our  study.  Do  not  come  to  the  Bible  full 
of  your  own  ideas,  and  seeking  from  it  a  confirma- 
tion of  them.  Come  rather  to  find  out  what  are 
God's  ideas  as  He  has  revealed  them  there.  Come 
not  to  find  a  confirmation  of  your  own  opinion, 
but  to  be  taught  what  God  may  be  pleased  to 
teach.  If  a  man  comes  to  the  Bible  just  to  find 
his  notions  taught  there,  he  will  find  them;  but  if 
he  comes,  recognizing  his  own  ignorance,  just  as 
a  little  child,  to  be  taught,  he  will  find  something 
infinitely  better  than  his  own  notions,  even  the 
mind  of  God.  We  see  why  it  is  that  many  per- 
sons cannot  see  things  which  are  plainly  taught 
in  the  Bible.  The  doctrine  taught  is  not  their 
notion,  of  which  they  are  so  full  that  there  is  no 
room  left  for  that  which  the  Bible  actually 
teaches.  We  have  an  illustration  of  this  in  the 
apostles  themselves  at  one  stage  in  their  training. 
In  Mark  ix:  31  we  read  "  he  taught  his  disciples, 
and  said  unto  them,  The  Son  of  man  is  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  men,  and  they  shall  kill  Him; 
and    after   that  he   is   killed,  he   shall   rise    the 


106  HOW    TO    STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

third  day."  Now,  that  is  as  plain  and  definite  as 
language  can  make  it,  but  it  was  utterly  contrary 
to  the  notions  of  the  apostles  as  to  what  was  to 
happen  to  the  Christ.  So  we  read  in  the  next 
verse  "  they  understood  not  that  saying."  Is  not 
that  wonderful  ?  But  is  it  any  more  wonderful 
than  our  own  inability  to  comprehend  plain  state- 
ments in  the  Bible  when  they  run  counter  to 
our  preconceived  notions?  What  trouble  many 
Christians  find  with  portions  of  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount,  that  would  be  plain  enough,  if  we  just 
came  to  Christ  like  a  child  to  be  taught  what  to 
believe  and  do,  rather  rather  than  coming  as  full 
grown  men,  who  already  know  it  all,  and  who  must 
find  some  interpretations  of  Christ's  words  that 
will  fit  into  our  mature  and  infallible  philosophy. 
Many  a  man  is  so  full  of  an  unbiblical  the- 
ology he  has  been  taught,  that  it  takes  him 
a  lifetime  to  get  rid  of  it,  and  understand  the 
clear  teaching  of  the  Bible.  "  Oh,  what  can 
this  verse  mean?"  many  a  bewildered  man 
cries.  Why,  it  means  what  it  plainly  says;  but 
what  you  are  after  is  not  the  meaning  God  has 
manifestly  put  into  it,  but  the  meaning  you  can  by 
some  ingenious  trick  of  exegesis  twist  out  of  it, 
and  make  it  fit  into  your  scheme.  Don't  come 
to  the  Bible  to  find  out  what  you  can  make  it 
mean,  but  to  find  out  what  God  intended  it  to 
mean.      Men  often  miss  the  real  truth,  of  a  verse 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  IO7 

by  saying,  "  But  that  can  be  interpreted  this 
way. "  Oh,  yes,  so  it  can,  but  is  that  the  way 
God  intended  it  to  be  interpreted  ?  We  all  need 
to  pray  often,  if  we  would  get  the  most  profit  out 
of  our  Bible  study,  "  Oh,  God,  make  me  a  little 
child.  Empty  me  of  my  own  notions.  Teach 
me  thine  own  mind.  Make  me  ready  like  a  little 
child  to  receive  all  that  thou  hast  to  say,  no  mat- 
ter how  contrary  it  is  to  what  I  have  thought 
hitherto.'*  How  the  Bible  opens  up  to  one  who 
approaches  it  in  that  way!  How  it  closes  up  to 
the  wise  fool,  who  thinks  he  knows  everything, 
and  imagines  he  can  give  points  to  Peter  and 
Paul,  and  even  to  Jesus  Christ  and  to  God  Him- 
self! Some  one  has  well  said  the  best  method  of 
Bible  study  is  "  the  baby  method."  I  was  once 
talking  with  a  ministerial  friend  about  what 
seemed  to  be  the  clear  teaching  of  a  certain  pas- 
sage. "  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  but  that  doesn't  agree 
with  my  philosophy."  Alas  !  But  this  man  was 
sincere,  yet  he  did  not  have  the  child-like  spirit, 
which  is  an  essential  condition  of  the  most  profit- 
able Bible  study.  But  there  are  many  who  ap- 
proach the  Bible  in  the  same  way.  It  is  a  great 
point  gained  in  Bible  study  when  we  are  brought 
to  realize  that  an  infinite  God  knows  more  than 
we,  that  indeed  our  highest  wisdom  is  less  than 
the  knowledge  of  the  most  ignorant  babe  com- 
pared with  His,  and  when  we   come  to  Him  as 


108  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

babes,  just  to  be  taught  by  Him,  and  not  to  argue 
with  Him.  But  we  so  easily  and  so  constantly 
forget  this,  that  every  time  we  open  our  Bibles  we 
would  do  well  to  get  down  humbly  before  God 
and  say,   "  Father,  I  am  but  a  child,  teach  me." 

This  leads  to  the  seventh  condition. 

7.  The  seventh  condition  of  studying  the 
Bible  to  the  greatest  profit  is,  that  we  study  it  as 
the  word  of  God.  The  Apostle  Paul,  in  writing 
to  the  Church  of  the  Thessalonians,  thanked  God 
without  ceasing  that  when  they  received  the  word 
of  God  they  "  accepted  it  not  as  the  word  of  men, 
but  as  it  is  in  truth  the  word  of  God."  (IThess. 
ii:  13,  R.  V.)  Well  might  he  thank  God  for  that, 
and  well  may  we  thank  God  when  we  get  to  the 
place  where  we  receive  the  word  of  God  as  the 
word  of  God.  Not  that  the  one  who  does  not  be- 
lieve the  Bible  is  the  word  of  God  should  be  dis- 
couraged from  studying  it.  Indeed,  one  of  the 
best  things  that  one  who  does  not  believe 
that  the  Bible  is  the  word  of  God  can  do, 
if  he  is  honest,  is  to  study  it.  The  author 
of  this  book  once  doubted  utterly  that  the 
Bible  was  the  word  of  God,  and  the  firm 
confidence  that  he  has  to-day  that  the  Bible  is 
the  Word  of  God,  has  come  more  from  the  study 
of  the  book  itself  than  from  anything  else.  Those 
who  doubt  it  are  more  usually  those  who  study 
about  the  book,  than  those  who  dig  into  the  actual 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  IO9 

teachings  of  the  book  itself.  But  while  the  best 
book  of  Christian  evidences  is  the  Bible,  and 
while  the  most  utter  sceptic  should  be  encouraged 
to  study  it,  we  will  not  get  the  largest  measure 
of  profit  out  of  that  study  until  we  reach  the 
point  where  we  become  convinced  that  the  Bible 
is  God's  Word,  and  when  we  study  it  as  such. 
There  is  a  great  difference  between  believing 
theoretically  that  the  Bible  is  God's  Word  and 
studying  it  as  God's  Word.  Thousands  would 
tell  you  that  they  believed  the  Bible  is  God's 
Word,  who  do  not  study  it  as  God's  Word. 
Studying  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God  involves 
four  things.  (1)  First,  it  involves  the  unques- 
tioning acceptance  of  its  teachings  when  definitely 
ascertained,  even  when  they  may  appear  unreason- 
able or  impossible.  Reason  demands  that  we 
submit  our  judgment  and  reasonings  to  the  state- 
ments of  infinite  wisdom.  There  is  nothing  more 
irrational  than  rationalism,  which  makes  the  finite 
wisdom  the  test  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  submits  the 
teachings  of  God's  omniscience  to  the  approval 
of  man's  judgment.  It  is  the  sublimest  and 
absurdest  conceit  that  says,  "  This  cannot  be 
true,  though  God  says  it,  for  it  does  not  approve 
itself  to  my  reason."  "  Nay,  but,  O  man,  who 
art  thou  that  repliest  against  God  ? "  (Rom. 
ix:  20.)  Real  human  wisdom,  when  it  finds 
infinite      wisdom,     bows    before    it    and     says, 


IIO  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

"Speak  what  thou  wilt  and  I  will  believe. n 
When  we  have  once  became  convinced  that  the 
Bible  is  God's  Word,  its  teachings  must  be  the 
end  of  all  controversy  and  discussion.  A  "  thus 
saith  the  Lord  "  will  settle  every  question.  Yet 
there  are  many  who  profess  to  believe  that  the 
Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  if  you  show  them 
what  the  Bible  clearly  teaches  on  some  disputed 
point,  they  will  shake  their  heads  and  say,  "  Yes, 

but  I  think  so  and  so,"  or  "  Doctor ,   or 

Prof,  this,  or  our  church  don't  teach  that 
way."  There  is  little  profit  in  that  sort  of  Bible 
study.  (2)  Studying  the  Bible  as  the  word  of 
God  involves,  in  the  second  place,  absolute  reli- 
ance upon  all  its  promises  in  all  their  length  and 
breadth.  The  man  who  studies  the  Bible  as 
the  word  of  God,  will  not  discount  any  one  of  its 
promises  one  iota.  The  one  who  studies  the 
Bible  as  the  word  of  God  will  say,  "  God  who 
cannot  lie  has  promised,"  and  will  not  try  to 
make  God  a  liar  by  trying  to  make  one  of  his 
promises  mean  less  than  it  says.  The  one  who 
studies  the  Bible  as  the  word  of  God,  will  be  on 
the  lookout  for  promises,  and  as  soon  as  he  finds 
one  he  will  seek  to  ascertain  just  what  it  means, 
and,  as  soon  as  he  discovers,  he  will  step  right 
out  upon  that  promise,  and  risk  everything  upon 
its  full  import.  That  is  one  of  the  secrets  of 
profitable  Bible  study.      Be  hunting  for  promises 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  III 

and  appropriate  them  as  fast  as  you  find  them — 
this  is  done  by  meeting  the  conditions  and  risking 
all  upon  them.  That  is  the  way  to  mate  your 
own  all  the  fulness  of  blessing  God  has  for  you. 
This  is  the  key  to  all  the  treasures  of  God's  grace. 
Happy  is  the  man  who  has  so  learned  to  study 
the  Bible  as  God's  word,  that  he  is  ready  to 
claim  for  himself  every  new  promise  as  it  ap- 
pears, and  to  risk  everything  upon  it.  (3)  Study- 
ing the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God  involves,  in 
the  third  place,  obedience — prompt,  exact  obedi- 
ence, without  asking  any  questions — to  its  every 
precept.  Obedience  may  seem  hard,  it  may 
seem  impossible,  but  God  has  bidden  it  and  I 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  obey,  and  leave  the 
results  with  God.  If  you  would  get  the  very 
most  profit  out  of  your  Bible  study  resolve  that 
from  this  time  you  will  claim  every  clear  prom- 
ise and  obey  every  plain  command,  and  that  as 
to  the  promises  and  commands  whose  import  is 
not  yet  clear  you  will  try  to  get  their  meaning 
made  clear.  (4)  Studying  the  Bible  as  the 
word  of  God  involves,  in  the  fourth  place,  study- 
ing it  as  in  God's  presence.  When  you  read  a 
verse  of  scripture  hear  the  voice  of  the  living 
God  speaking  directly  to  you  in  these  written 
words.  There  is  new  power  and  attract- 
iveness in  the  Bible  when  you  have  learned  to 
hear  a  living,  present  person,  God,   our  Father, 


112  HOW    TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

Himself  talking  directly  to  you  in  these 
words.  One  of  the  most  fascinating  and  inspir- 
ing statements  in  the  Bible  is  "  Enoch  walked 
with  God."  (Gen.  v:  24.)  We  can  have  God's 
glorious  companionship  any  moment  we  please, 
by  simply  opening  His  Word  and  letting  the  living 
and  ever  present  God  speak  to  us  through  it. 
With  what  holy  awe  and  strange  and  unutterable 
joy  one  studies  the  Bible  if  he  studies  it  in  this 
way!     It  is  heaven  come  down  to  earth. 

8.  The  eighth  and  last  condition  of  the  most 
profitable  Bible  study  is  P  ray  erf  nines  s.  The 
Psalmist  prayed  "  Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I 
may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law." 
(Ps.  cxix:  18.)  Every  one  who  desires  to  get  the 
greatest  profit  out  of  his  Bible  study,  needs  to 
offer  that  or  a  similar  prayer  every  time  he  un- 
dertakes the  study  of  the  word.  Few  keys  open 
so  many  caskets  that  contain  hidden  treasure  as 
prayer.  Few  clews  unravel  so  many  difficulties. 
Few  microscopes  will  disclose  so  many  beauties 
hidden  from  the  eye  of  the  ordinary  observer. 
What  new  light  often  shines  from  an  old  familiar 
text  as  you  bend  over  it  in  prayer!  I  believe  in 
studying  the  Bible  a  good  deal  on  your  knees. 
When  one  reads  an  entire  book  through  upon  his 
knees — and  this  is  easily  done— that  book  has  a 
new  meaning  and  becomes  a  new  book.  One 
ought  never  to  open  the  Bible  to  read  it  without 


FUNDAMENTAL    CONDITIONS  1 1  3 

at  least  lifting  the  heart  to  God  in  silent  prayer 
that  He  will  interpret  it,  illumine  its  pages  by  the 
light  of  His  Spirit.  It  is  a  rare  privilege  to  study 
any  book  under  the  immediate  guidance  and  in- 
struction of  its  author,  and  this  is  the  privilege 
of  us  all  in  studying  the  Bible.  When  one  comes 
to  a  passage  that  is  difficult  to  understand  or 
difficult  to  interpret,  instead  of  giving  it  up,  or 
rushing  to  some  learned  friend,  or  to  some  com- 
mentary, he  should  lay  that  passage  before  God, 
and  ask  Him  to  explain  it  to  Him,  pleading  God's 
promise,  "  if  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask 
of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and 
upraideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given  him.  But 
let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  doubting."  (Jas.  i: 
5,  6,  R.  V.)  It  is  simply  wonderful  how  the 
seemingly  most  difficult  passages  become  plain 
by  this  treatment.  Harry  Morehouse,  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  Bible  scholars  among  unlearned 
men,  used  to  say,  that  whenever  he  came  to  a 
passage  in  the  Bible  which  he  could  not  under- 
stand, he  would  search  through  the  Bible  for 
some  other  passage  that  threw  light  upon  it,  and 
lay  it  before  God  in  prayer,  and  that  he  had 
never  found  a  passage  that  did  not  yield  to  this 
treatment.  The  author  of  this  book  has  had  a 
quite  similar  experience.  Some  years  ago  I  was 
making  with  a  friend  a  tour  afoot  of  the 
Franconian    Switzerland,    and   visiting   some  of 


114  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

the  more  famous  zoolithic  caves.  One 
day  the  country  letter-carrier  stopped  us, 
and  asked  if  we  would  not  like  to  see  a  cave  of 
rare  beauty  and  interest,  away  from  the  beaten 
tracks  of  travel.  Of  course,  we  said,  yes.  He 
led  us  through  the  woods  and  underbrush  to  the 
mouth  of  the  cave,  and  we  entered.  All  was  dark 
and  uncanny.  He  expatiated  greatly  on  the 
beauty  of  the  cave,  telling  us  of  altars  and  fan- 
tastic formations,  but  we  could  see  absolutely 
nothing.  Now  and  then  he  uttered  a  note  to 
warn  us  to  have  a  care,  as  near  our  feet  lay  a 
gulf  the  bottom  of  which  had  never  been  dis- 
covered. We  began  to  have  a  fear  that  we 
might  be  the  first  discoverers  of  the  bottom. 
There  was  nothing  pleasant  about  the  whole 
affair.  But  as  soon  as  a  magnesian  taper  was 
lighted,  all  became  different.  There  were  the 
stalagmites  rising  from  the  floor  to  meet  the 
stalactites  as  they  came  down  from  the  ceiling. 
There  was  the  great  altar  of  nature,  that  peasant 
fancy  ascribed  to  the  skill  of  ancient  worshipers, 
there  were  the  beautiful  and  fantastic  formations 
on  every  hand,  and  all  glistening  in  fairy-like 
beauty  in  the  brilliant  light.  So  I  have  often 
thought  it  was  with  many  a  passage  of  Scripture. 
Others  tell  you  of  its  beauty,  but  you  cannot  see 
it.  It  looks  dark  and  intricate  and  forbidding 
and  dangerous,    but  when   God's   own   light   is 


FUNDAMENTAL   CONDITIONS  1 1  5 

kindled  there  by  prayer,  how  different  all  be- 
comes in  an  instant.  You  see  a  beauty  that 
language  cannot  express,  and  that  those  alone  can 
appreciate  who  have  stood  there  in  the  same 
light.  He  who  would  understand  and  love  his 
Bible  must  be  much  in  prayer.  Prayer  will  do 
more  than  a  college  education  to  make  the  Bible 
an  open  and  a  glorious  book.  Perhaps  the  best 
lesson  I  learned  in  a  German  university,  where  I 
had  the  privilege  of  receiving  the  instruction  of 
one  of  the  most  noted  and  most  gifted  Bible 
teachers  of  any  age,  was  that  which  came  through 
the  statement  of  the  famulus  of  this  professor, 
that  Professor  Delitzsch  worked  out  much  of  his 
teaching  upon  his  knees. 


CHAPTER  1 1. 


FINAL  SUGGESTIONS. 


There  are  some  suggestions  that  remain,  to  be 
given  before  we  close  this  book. 

i.  Study  the  Bible  daily.  Regularity  counts 
for  more  in  Bible  study  than  most  people  fancy. 
The  spasmodic  student,  who  at  certain  seasons 
gives  a  great  deal  of  time  to  the  study  of  the 
Word,  and  at  other  seasons  quite  neglects  it,even 
for  days  at  a  time,  does  not  achieve  the  results 
that  he  does  who  plods  on  regularly  day  by  day., 
The  Bereans  were  wise  as  well  as  "  noble"  in 
that  they  "  searched  the  scriptures  daily.' '  (Acts, 
xvii:  n;  see  also  R.  V.)  A  man  who  is  well 
known  among  the  Christian  college  students  of 
America,  once  remarked  at  a  student  convention, 
that  he  had  been  at  many  conventions  and  had 
received  great  blessings  from  them,  but  the 
greatest  blessing  he  had  ever  received  was  from 
a  convention  where  there  were  only  four  persons 
gathered  together.  The  blessing  had  come  to 
him  in  this  way.  These  four  had  covenanted 
together  to  spend  a  certain  portion  of  every  day 

116 


FINAL   SUGGESTIONS  117 

in  Bible  study.  Since  that  day  much  of  his 
time  had  been  spent  on  the  cars  or  in  hotels  and 
at  conventions,  but  he  had  tried  to  keep  that 
covenant,  and  the  greatest  blessing  that  had 
come  to  him  in  his  Christian  life  had  come 
through  this  daily  study  of  the  Word.  No  one 
who  has  not  tried  it  realizes  how  much  can  be 
accomplished  by  setting  apart  a  fixed  portion  of 
each  day,  (it  may  not  be  more  than  fifteen  or 
thirty  minutes,  but  it  surely  should  be  an  hour) 
for  Bible  study,  and  keeping  it  sacredly  for  that 
purpose  under  all  circumstances.  Many  will  say 
I  cannot  spare  the  time.  It  will  be  time  saved. 
Lord  Cairnes,  one  of  the  busiest  as  well  as 
most  eminent  men  of  his  day,  before  his  death 
testified,  that  the  first  two  hours  of  every  day 
were  given  to  the  study  of  the  Bible  and  prayer, 
and  he  attributed  the  great  achievements  of  his 
life  to  that  fact.  It  will  not  do  to  study  the 
Bible  only  when  we  feel  like  it.  It  will  not  do  to 
study  the  Bible  only  when  we  have  leisure.  We 
must  have  fixed  principles  and  habits  in  this 
matter,  if  we  are  to  study  the  Bible  to  the  greatest 
profit.  Nothing  that  we  do  will  be  more  import- 
ant than  our  Bible  study,  and  it  cannot  give  way 
to  other  less  important  things.  What  regularity  in 
eating  is  to  physical  life,  regularity  in  Bible  study 
is  to  spiritual  life.  Fix  upon  some  time,  even  if 
it  is  no  more  than  fifteen  minutes  to  start  with, 


Il8  HOW   TO   STUDY   THE    BIBLE 

and  hold  to  it  until  you  are  ready  to  set  a  longer 
period. 

2.  Select  for  your  Bible  study  the  best  portion 
of  the  day  that  you  can  give  to  it.  Do  not  put 
your  Bible  study  off  until  nearly  bed-time,  when 
the  mind  is  drowsy.  It  is  well  to  take  a  parting 
verse  for  the  day  when  one  retires  for  the  night, 
but  this  is  not  the  time  for  study.  No  study  de- 
mands all  that  there  is  in  a  man  as  Bible  study 
does.  Do  not  take  the  time  immediately  after  a 
heavy  meal.  The  mind  is  more  or  less  torpid 
after  a  heavy  meal,  and  it  is  unwise  to  put  it  on 
the  stretch  then.  It  is  almost  the  unanimous 
opinion  of  those  who  have  given  this  subject 
careful  attention,  that  the  early  hours  of  the  day 
are  the  best  for  Bible  study,  if  they  can  be 
secured  free  from  interruption.  It  is  well, 
wherever  possible,  to  lock  yourself  in  and  lock 
the  world  out,  when  you  are  about  to  give  your- 
self up  to  the  study  of  the  Bible. 

3.  In  all  your  Bible  study  look  for  Christ  in 
the  passage  under  examination.  We  read  of 
Jesus  that  "  beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the 
prophets,  he  expounded  unto  them  in  all  the 
Scriptures  the  things  concerning  Himself.  " 
(Luke  xxiv:  27.)  Jesus  Christ  is  the  subject  of 
the  whole  Bible  and  the  subject  pervades  the 
book.  Some  of  the  seemingly  driest  portions  of 
the  Bible  became  instinct  with  a  new  life  when 


FINAL    SUGGESTIONS  I  IQ 

we  learn  to  see  Christ  in  them.  I  remember  in 
my  early  reading  of  the  Bible  what  a  stupid  book 
Leviticus  seemed,  but  it  all  became  different 
when  I  learned  to  see  Jesus  in  the  various  offer- 
ings and  sacrifices,  in  the  high-priest  and  his 
garments,  in  the  tabernacle  and  its  furniture, 
indeed  everywhere.  Look  for  Christ  in  every 
verse  you  study,  and  even  the  genealogies  and 
catalogues  of  the  names  of  towns  will  begin  to 
have  beauty  and  power. 

4.  Memorize  Scriptwe.  The  Psalmist  said, 
"  Thy  word  have  I  laid  up  in  mine  heart,  that  I 
might  not  sin  against  thee. "  (Ps.  cxix:  11,  R.V.) 
There  is  nothing  better  to  keep  one  from  sin- 
ning than  this.  By  the  word  of  God  laid  up  in 
His  heart  Jesus  overcame  the  tempter.  (Matt, 
iv:  4,  7,  10.)  But  the  word  of  God  laid  up  in 
the  heart  is  good  for  other  purposes  than  victory 
over  sin.  It  is  good  to  meet  and  expose  error;  it 
is  good  to  enable  one  "  to  speak  a  word  in  season 
to  him  that  is  weary,"  (Is.  1:  4.)  It  is  good  for 
manifold  uses,  even  "  that  the  man  of  God  may 
be  complete,  furnished  completely  unto  every 
good  work."  (II  Tim.  hi:  17,  R.  V.)  Memorize 
scripture  by  chapter  and  verse.  It  is  quite  as 
easy  as  merely  memorizing  the  words,  and  it  is 
immeasurably  more  useful  for  practical  purposes. 
Memorize  the  scripture  in  systematic  form.  Do 
not  have  a  chaotic  heap  of  texts  in  the  mind,  but 


120  HOW   TO    STUDY    THE    BIBLE 

pigeon-hole  under  appropriate  titles  the  scripture 
you  store  in  memory.  Then  you  can  bring  it  out 
when  you  need  it,  without  racking  your  brains. 
There  are  many  men  who  can  stand  up  without 
a  moment's  warning,  and  talk  coherently  and 
cogently  and  scripturally,  on  any  vital  theme; 
because  they  have  a  vast  fund  of  wisdom  in  the 
form  of  scripture  texts  stored  away  in  their  mind 
in  systematic  form. 

5.  Finally,  utilize  spare  moments  in  the  study 
of  the  Bible.  In  most  men's  lives  there  is  a  vast 
amount  of  wasted  time.  Time  spent  in  traveling 
on  the  street  cars  and  railroads;  time  spent  in 
waiting  for  persons  with  whom  they  have  engage- 
ments; time  spent  in  waiting  for  meals,  etc., 
etc.  Most  of  this  can  be  utilized  in  Bible  study, 
if  one  carries  with  him  a  pocket  Bible  or  pocket 
Testament.  Or  one  can  utilize  it  in  meditation 
upon  texts  stored  away  in  memory.  Many  of 
the  author's  sermons  and  addresses  are  worked 
out  in  that  way.  It  is  said  that  Henry  Ward 
Beecher  read  one  of  the  larger  histories  of 
England  through  while  waiting  day  after  day  for 
his  meals  to  be  brought  on  to  the  table.  How 
many  books  of  the  Bible  could  be  studied  in  the 
same  time  ?  A  friend  once  told  me  that  the  man 
who  had,  in  some  respects,  the  most  extraordi- 
nary knowledge  of  the  Bible  of  any  man  he 
knew,  was  a  junk  dealer  in  a  Canadian  city.  This 


FINAL   SUGGESTIONS  121 

man  had  a  Bible  open  on  his  shelves  and  in  in- 
tervals of  business  he  was  pondering  the  Book  of 
God.  The  book  became  very  black  by  handling 
in  such  surroundings,  but  I  have  little  doubt  his 
soul  became  correspondingly  white,  There  is  no 
economy  that  pays  as  does  economy  of  time, 
but  there  is  no  way  of  economizing  time  so  thriftily 
as  putting  the  moments  that  are  going  to  waste 
into  the  study  of  or  meditation  upon  the  word  of 
God. 


By  D wight  L.  Moody. 

"These  are  Popular  works  by  our  great  Evan* 
gelist ;  and  they  deserve  a  large  sale.  There  can 
be  no  need  for  us  10  comynend  the  living,  blazing 
speech  oJ  our  brother  Moody.  Who  &an  equal 
him  in  natural  simplicity  all  aglow  with  holy 
Passion  ?"  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 


Pleasure  and  Profit  in  Bible  Study,     42$ 

thousand. 

Sovereign  Grace,    48th  thousand. 

Bible  Characters,    27th  thousand. 

Prevailing   Prayer—  What   Hinders  It  ? 
70th  thousand. 

To  the  Work  !    To  the  Work  !     both  thou- 
sand. 

The  Way  to  God  and  How  to  Find  It,  385th 
thousand. 

Heaven,    170th  thousand. 

Secret  Power,    joolh  thousand. 

Twelve  Select  Sermons,    223th  thousand. 
***  Each  of  the  above,  paper,  25c;  cloth 50 

The  D,  It,  Moody  library,  comprising 
the  8  books  last  named  above,  bound  in 
fourvoiumts,  12  no,  cloth,  buxed  4.00 

The  Full  Assurance  of  Faith,  Paper, 
15c;  flexible  cloth .. 25 

How  to  Study  the  Bible,  Revised.  80th 
thousand.    Paper,  10c;  flexible  cloth 15 

The  Way  and  the  Word.  112th  thousand. 
Paper,  10c;  c'oin   ...  20 

The  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  65th 
thousand.     Paper..       10 

Gospel  Booklets,  Per  dozen,  35c;  per 
hundred,  net 2.50 

Inquiry  Meetings,  By  Moody  and  Whit- 
tle,   loino,  paper 15 

D.  It.  Moody  at  Home,  12mo,  paper,  50c; 
cloth 100 

Moody  in  Chicago,  World's  Fair  cam- 
paign, by  Rev.  E.B.  Hartzler.    Cloth 1.00 


Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer's  Works. 


The  Shepherd  Psalm.    New  Presentation  Edition,  with 

illustrations  on  every  page,  by  Mary  A.  Lathbury. 
Printed  in  two  colors.     i2mo,  cloth  covers  stamped  in 

ink  and  gold,  boxed $1.25 

The  Present  Tenses  and   The  Future  Tenses,    i6mo, 

white  vellum  cloth,  silk  inlaid,  gold  and  ink  stamping, 

per  set,  boxed ,. 1.50 

The  Bells  of  /s;  or,  Voices  of  Human  Need  and  Sorrow, 

Echoes  from  my   early   pastorates.      With   portrait. 

i2mo,  cloth 75 

Prayers  for  Heart  and  Home.    Morning  and  Evening 

Devotions  for  a  Month.    8vo,  flexible  cloth 75 

Old  Testament  Heroes,    wmo,  cloth,  each 1.00 

David:  Shepherd,  Psalmist,  King.    (Just  published.) 

Jeremiah:  Priest  and  Prophet.    (New.) 

Joshua  and  the  Land  of  Promise. 

Moses,  the  Servant  of  God. 

Joseph:  Beloved— Hated— Exhalted. 

Israel,  a  Prince  with  God. 

Abraham  ;  or,  The  Obedience  of  Faith. 

Elijah  and  the  Secret  of  His  Power. 
The  Expository  Series.    i2mo,  cloth,  each 1.00 

Christ  in   Isaiah.    Expositions  of  Isaiah,  XL.— -LV. 
(New.) 

The   Way  into  the  Holiest.    An  Exposition  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 

The  Lite  and  Light  of  Men.    Expositions  in  John's 
Gospel. 

Tried  by  Hire.    Expositions  of  First  Epistle  of  Peter. 
The  Christian  Life  Series.    i8mo,  cloth,  each  50c;  white 

cloth,  each ". 60 

Calvary  to  Pentecost.    (New.) 

Key  Words  to  the  Inner  Life. 

The  Future  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

The  Present  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

The  Shepherd  Psalm. 

Christian  Living. 
Envelope  Series  of  Booklets.    Packets  Nos.  1  and  2,  each 

containing  12  Tracts,  assorted net,     .20 

Choice  Extracts  from  the  Works  of  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.  By 

Rev.    B.  Fay    Mills.      24010,  paper,  each   5c;  per 

doz net,     .35 

Larger  edition,  x6mo,  paper. ...♦,.♦,,,..       .15 


Jev.   A.   J.    Gordon    D.D* 

**  ' In  Christ,''  k  The  Tivo  Fold  Life,''  and  k  Ti  Ministry  of  the 
Spirit,''  are  worthy  to  lie  on  the  table  by  any  dying  conch,  side  by 
sid#  with  Thomas  A'Kempis.  *  Imitation  of  Christy  and  Jeremy 
Taylor's  "Holy  Living  and  Dying.'  These  are  fit  to  be  placed 
among  the  religious  classics  approved  after  long  experience,  by 
Christians  of  every  name.  I  believe  they  will  live  as  such  and  in 
this  belief  I  am  not  singular.*' — Rev.  Joseph  Cook, 

The  Ministry  of  the  Spirit     Introduction  by  Rev.  F. 

B.  Meyer,  B.A.     i2mo,  cloth,  gilt  top $1.00 

"Dr.  Gordon's  last  book,  'The  Ministry  of  the  Spirit.'  was 
published  on  the  day  of  his  death.  It  fitly  completes  the  noble 
series  of  books  which  came  from  his  pen.  It  gives  his  mature  con- 
victions upon  a  matter  which  had  engrossed  his  thought  for  many 
years.  In  depth  of  spiritual  insight  we  doubt  if  it  is  surpassed  by 
any  work  on  this  topic." — The  Watchman, 

Risen  with  Christ;  or,  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  ana  of 
the  Believer,   ibmo,  decorated  antique  paper  covers.       .25 

The   Holy  Spirit  in  Missions.      i2mo,    cloth,    gilt 

top. 1.25 

"  Fervid  and  intense  in  its  style,  emphasizing  the  duty  of 

preaching  the  gospel  as   a    witness   among   all    nations." — The 

Missionary  Herald. 

Grace  and  Glory.  Sermons  for  the  Life  thai  Now  is  and 
That  which  is  to  Come.  i2mo,  paper,  net,  50c;  cloth, 
gilt  top 1 .  50 

Ecce  Venit;  or,  Behold  He  Cometh.  i2mo,  paper,  net, 
50c  ;  cloth,  gilt  top 1.25 

In  Christ;  or,  the  Believer's  Union  with  his  Lord.     i2mo, 

paper,  net,  35c. ;  cloth,  gilt  top  1 .00 

Pocket  Edition,  uniform  with  "  A  Gift  of  Love."    i8mo, 

cloth 1 .00 

M  To  realize  what  is  meant  by  being  in  Christ  is  the  believer's 

highest  happiness  in  this  life  :  a  book  which  helps  to  this  way  will 

find  a  wide  sale."—  The  N.  V.  Evangelist. 

The  Ministry  of  Healing;  or,  Miracles  of  Cures  in  all 
ages.  With  History  of  the  Doctrine  from  the  Earliest 
Time:.       i2mo,  paper,  net,  50c;  cloth,  gilt  top.    .      1.25 

The  Two  Fold  Life;  or,  Christ's  Work  for  Us,  and 
^hrist's  Work  in  Us.  i2mo,  paper,  net,  50c. ;  cloth, 
gilt  top , \J5 

J  he  First  Thing  in  the  World;  or,  The  Primacy  of 
Faith.  i6mo,  Popular  Vellum  Series,  20c;  Cheaper 
edition,  net,  10c. ;  per  doz net       uoo 


Rev.  Arthur  T.  Pierson,  D.  D. 

6S3fifiSb 

uln  the  front  rank  of  agitators  for  Foreign  Mission*." 

—The  Christian  Advocate  (N.  Y.) 
%tOne  of  the  foremost  living  homilists"— The  Golden  Rulb. 


Miny  Infallible  Proofs:  The  Evidences  of  Christianity. 
Revised  Edition.     i2mo,  paper,  net,  35c;  cloth. .  .$1.00 

11  Only  a  man  of  wide  and  of  broad  sympathies,  and  one  who 
had  himself  come  up  out  of  a  conflict  with  doubts,  could  have  so 
completely  covered  the  whole  battle-field  of  unbelief,  meeting 
the  doubter  at  every  point  with  a  candor  that  captivates,  and  a 
logic  that  conquers.  — The  Morning  Star. 

Life-Power;  or,  Character  Culture  and  Conduct.  Words 
of  counsel  for  young  men.     (Ingress.) 

A  Modern  Miracle;  or,  Seven  Years  in  Sierra  Leone. 
The  Life  of  William  A.  B.  Johnson.     {In press.) 

In  Full  Armor;  or,  the  Disciple  Equipped  for  Conflict 
with  the  Devil.     i2mo,  paper 25 

The  Bible  in  Private  and  Public.      i2mo,  paper 25 

The  Crisis  of  Missions;  or,  the  Voice  out  of  the 
Cloud.     i6mo,  paper,  350. ;  cloth,  gilt  top 1.25 

The  Greatest  Work  In  the  World:  The  Evangeliza- 
tion of  all  Peoples  in  the  Present  Century.  i2mo, 
leatherette,  gilt  top,  35c. ;  paper 15 

"No  one  can  read  this  production  without  being  thrilled 
through  his  whole  being.  We  doubt  not  but  that  it  will  prove  a 
mighty  inspiration  to  many  a  Christian  worker,  and  give  a  n»w 
impetus  to  missionary  work."—  The  Christian  at  Work. 

The  Dove  in  the  Heart;  or,  the  Perfect  Peace  of  God. 
i2mo,  embossed  paper 20 

The  Hand  on  the  Plow;  or,  Some  Secrets  of  Service. 
1 2Pio,  embossed  paper 20 

Hope:  The  Last  Thing  in  the  World.      i6mo.     Popular 

ellum  Series 20 

Oieaper  Edition,  10c. ;  per  dozen net,  1 .00 


Charles  H.  Spurgeon. 

A%e  best  of  the  literary  remains  of  England's  greed  preaehf*. 


«*y  Sermon  Notes.     A  Selection  from  Outlines  of  Dis- 
burses delivered  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.     4  vols, 

2mo,  cloth,  each  $1 .00  ;  the  set,  boxed $4.00 

Vol.  1.    Genesis  to  Proverbs. 
Vol.  2.    Ecclesiastes  to  Malachi. 
Vol.  3.    Matthew  to  Acts. 
Vol.  4.    Romans  to  Revelation, 

leathers  for  Arrows;  or,  Illustrations  for  Preacher  and 
Teachers.     1 2mo,  cloth 1.00 

"  The  work  covers  a  wide  range  of  subjects.  The  metaphors 
are  always  striking  and  frequently  brilliant,  while  the  truths 
that  they  illustrate  are  such  as  have  always  formed  the  staple  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  discourses.  A  choicer  collection  of  illustrations 
we  do  not  know." — The  Freeman. 

Spurgeon's    Gems.      Being   Brilliant  Passages  from  His 
Discourses.     1 2mo,  cloth 1.00 

A  series  of  earnest  thoughts  and  graphic  pictures,  all  of 
them  revealing  the  true  greatness  of  the  preacher's  conceptions, 
his  individuality  and  strength.  Gems  of  great  brilliancy,  whicn 
will  make  a  permanent  impression  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader 

The  Golden  Alphabet     Being  a  Devotional  Commentary 

on  CXIX.     Psalm.     i2mo,  cloth 1 .00 

Gleanings  Among  the  Sheaves.     i8mo,  cloth,  gilt 

top 60 

All   of   Grace.      For   those   seeking    salvation.      i6mo, 

cloth , 50 

According  to  Promise;  or,  The  Lord's  Method  of  Deal- 
ing with  His  Chosen  People.     i6mo,  cloth. 50 

Twelve  Christmas  Sermons.    8vo,  cloth .50 

Twelve  New  Year  Sermons.     8vo,  cloth 50 

Twelve    Sermons    on     the     Resurrection.       8vo, 

cloth 50 

Twelve  Striking  Sermons.    8vo,  cloth 50 

twelve  Soul  Winning  Sermons.    8vo,  cloth.. .     .50 

Charles  H.  Spurgeon.     Second  Edition.     By  Rev.  J.  J. 

Ellis,  a  graduate  of  the  Pastor's  College.   i2mo,  cloth.  1.00 

Charles  H.  Spurgeon.     His  Life  and  Ministry.     By  jesse 

Dage.     Illustrated.       2mo,  cloth , 7* 


By -Paths  of  Bible  Knowledge- 


il  The  volumes  which  are  being  issued  under  the  above  title  fully 
deserve  success.  They  have  been  entrusted  to  scholars  who  have  a 
special  acquaintance  with  the  subjects  about  which  they  severally 
speak." — The  Athkn^um. 


***   Each      iamo,     cloth, 
i.  Cleopatra's  Nadle.      By  the  Rev.  J.  King.      With  Illustra- 
tions  $1.00 

2.  Fresh   Light  from   the  Ancient  Monuments.     By  A.  H. 

Sayce,  LL.D.    With  Facsimiles  from  Photographs 1.20 

3.  Recent  Discoveries  on  the  Temple  Hill  at  Jerusalem.     By 

the  Rev.  j.  King,  M.A.      With  Maps,  Plans  and  other  Illus- 
trations   1 .00 

4.  Babylonian  Life  and  History.    By  E.  A.  Wal'is  Budge,  M.A. 

Illustrated      =  = . 1 .20 

5.  Galilee  in  the  Time  of  Christ.    By  Seiah  Merrill,  D.D.    With 

a  Map        .    .    ...... , .         .    1. 00 

6.  Egypt  and  Syria.     By  Sir  J.  W.  Dawson,   F.G.S.,  F.R.S. 

Second  Edition^  revised  and  enlarged.      Illustrated 1 .  20 

7.  Assyria:  its  Princes,  Priests,  and  People.    By  A.  H.  Sayce, 

M.  A.,  LL.D      Fully  Illustrated 1 .20 

8.  The  Dwellers  on  the  Nile.     By  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,  M.A. 

Fully  Illustrated ...       1 .20 

9.  The  Diseases  of  the  Bible.      By  Sir  J.  Risdon  Bennett  .  1.00 

10.  The  Trees  and  Plants  mentioned  In  the  Bible.    By  W.  H. 

Grosser,  B.Sc.     Illustrated 1 .20 

11.  Animals  of  the  Bible.      By  H.  Chichester  Hart.     With  Illus- 

trations     ..' 1.20 

12.  The  Hltlltes  ;  or,  The  Story  of  a  Forgotten  Empire.     By  A. 

H.  Sayce,  LL.D.     Illustrated 1.00 

13.  The  Times  of  Isaiah.    By  A.  H.  Sayce,  LL.D 80 

74.  Modern  Discoveries  on  the  Site  of  Ancient  Ephesus.      By 

the  late  J.  T.  Wood,  F  S. A.    Fully  Illustrated 1 .00 

15.  Early  Biblv  Songs.    By  A.  II .  Drysdale,  M.A 1  00 

16.  Races  of  the  Old  Testament.     By  A.  H.  Sayce,  M.A.,  LL.D. 

Illustrations  from  Photographs  by  Mr.  Flinders  Petrie,  1.20 

17.  Life  and  Times  01  Joseph  In  the  Light  of  Egyptian  Lore. 

By  Rev.  H.  G.  Tomkins,  M.A 1  00 

18.  Social  Life  Among  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians.     By 

A.  H.  Sayce,  M.A.   LL.D 1.00 

19.  The  Early  Spread  of  Religious  Ideas,  especially  In   the 

Far  East.     By  Dr.  Joseph  Edkins 1 .20 

ao.  The  Money  of  the  Bible.      Illustrated  by  Facsimiles  and 

Wood  Cuts.      By  G.  C.  Williamson,  D. Lit. .. , 1.00 

sx.  The  Sanitary  Code  of  the  Pentateuch.     By  Rev.  C.  G.  K. 

Gillespie.     (In  preparation.) 
r».    The  Growth   and  Development  of  the  English  Printed 

Bible.      By  Ricl  ard  Lovett,   M.A.      Illustrated   by  many 

Facsimiles.    (In preparation.} 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  May  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066 
(724)  779-21 1 1 


o 


