Ho u •  acq u  it  cd /  V  ice . 

PLEASE  READ,  REMEMBER   AND   RETURN.  ^ 


GIFT  OF  -  .  - 


til     , j 


HOW  TO  BRING 

MEN  TO  CHRIST 


BY 

R.  A.  TORREY 
ii 


Superintendent  Chicago  Bible  Institute 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company, 

CHICAGO:  I  NEW  YORK: 

148  and  150  Madison  St.  30  Union  Square,  East 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature. 


*** 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress  in  the  year  1893 

by  Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

In  the  office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington  D.  C. 


PREFACE 

This  book  is  written  because  it  seems  to  be 
needed.  The  author  has  been  repeatedly  re- 
quested by  Ministers,  Y.  M.  C.  A.  Secretaries, 
Christian  Workers,  and  his  own  students  to 
put  into  a  permanent  and  convenient  shape 
the  substance  of  what  he  has  said  at  Con- 
ventions, Summer  Schools  and  in  the  class- 
room on  personal  work.  The  time  has  come 
to  yield  to  these  requests.  Never  before  in 
the  history  of  the  Church  were  there  so  many 
who  desire  to  win  others  to  Christ.  The  good 
work  done  by  the  Young  People's  Society  of 
Christian  Endeavor  is  in  no  other  direction 
so  evident  as  in  the  many  thousands  of  young 
people  in  this  land  who  to-day  are  on  fire 
with  a  desire  to  win  souls.  But  while  they 
desire  to  do  this  work,  many  do  not  know 
how.  This  little  book  aims  to  tell  them. 
There  are  several  well-known  and  valuable 
manuals  of  texts  to  be  used  with  inquirers, 
but  this  book  is  intended  not  only  to  point 
out  passages  to  be  used  but  to  show  how  to 
use  them,  illustrating  this  use  by  cases  from 


371545 


4  PREFACE 

actual  experience.  It  is  hoped  that  from  a 
careful  study  of  these  pages  any  earnest  Chris- 
tian can  learn  how  to  do  efficient  work  in 
bringing  others  to  the  Saviour. 


CONTENTS. 


PREFACE. 

Chapter.  Page. 

I.    The    General    Conditions  of  Success 

in  Bringing  Men  to  Christ 7 

II.    How  to  Begin 14 

III.  Dealing  with  the  Indifferent  or  Care- 

less       20 

IV.  Dealing  with  those  who  are  Anxious 

to  be  Saved  but  do  not  Know  How    29 
V.    Dealing  with  those  who  are  Anxious 
to  be  Saved   and  Know  How,  but 
who  have  difficulties 36 

VI.  Dealing  with    those    who    entertain 

FALSE    HOPES 50 

VII.  Dealing  with  those  who  lack  Assur- 

ance, and  Backsliders 57 

VIII.    Dealing  with  Professed  Skeptics  and 

Infidels 65 

IX.    Dealing  with  the  complaining 77 

X.    Dealing  with  those   who  wish  to  put 

OFF  DECISION  UNTIL  SOME  OTHER  TIME.      83 

XI.    Dealing  with  the  Willful  and  the  De- 
luded       87 

XII.    Some  hints  and  suggestions 94 

XIII.    The  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit 104 


HOW  TO  BRING  MEN  TO  CHRIST 


CHAPTER  I 

THE    GENERAL  CONDITIONS  OF  SUCCESS  IN 
BRINGING  MEN  TO  CHRIST 

There  are  certain  general  conditions,  the 
fulfilment  of  which  is  absolutely  essential  to 
real  success  in  bringing  men  to  Christ.  These 
conditions,  fortunately,  are  few  and  simple 
and  such    as  any  one   can  meet. 

i .  The  one  who  would  have  real  success  in 
bringing  others  to  Christ  must  himself  be  A 

THOROUGHLY  CONVERTED  PERSON.       JeSUS    Said 

to  Peter,  "When  thou  art  converted  strengthen 
thy  brethren."  He  was  in  no  position  to  help 
his  brethren  until  he  himself,  after  his  coward- 
ly denial,  had  turned  again  to  his  Lord  with 
his  whole  heart.  If  we  would  bring  others  to 
Christ  we  must  turn  away  from  all  sin, 
and  worldliness  and  selfishness  with  our 
whole  heart,  yielding  to  Jesus  the  absolute 
lordship  over  our  thoughts,  purposes  and 
7 


8  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

actions.  If  there  is  any  direction  in  which 
we  are  seeking  to  have  our  own  way  and  not 
letting  Him  have  His  own  way  in  our  lives, 
our  power  will  be  crippled  and  men  lost  that 
we  might  have  saved.  The  application  of 
this  principle  to  the  numerous  questions  that 
come  up  in  the  life  of  every  young  Christian 
as  to  whether  he  should  do  this  or  tha£,  each 
individual  can  settle  for  himself  if  Christ's 
honor  and  not  his  own  pleasure  is  upper- 
most in  his  mind  and  if  he  looks  honestly  to 
God  to  guide  him. 

2.  The  one  who  would  have  real  success  in 
bringing  others  to  Christ  must  have  a  love 
for  souls,  i.  e.  a  longing  for  the  salvation  of 
the  lost.  If  we  have  no  love  for  souls,  our 
efforts  will  be  mechanical  and  powerless.  We 
may  know  how  to  approach  men  and  what 
to  say  to  them,  but  there  will  be  no  power  in 
what  we  say  and  it  will  not  touch  the  heart. 
But  if  like  Paul  we  have  "great  heaviness  and 
unceasing  pain  in  our  hearts"  for  the  unsaved, 
there  will  be  an  earnestness  in  our  tone  and 
manner  that  will  impress  the  most  careless. 
Furthermore  if  we  have  a  love  for  souls  we 
will  be  on  the  constant  watch  for  opportu- 
nities to  speak  with  the  unsaved  and  will  find 
opportunities   on   the  street,  in   the  store,  in 


GENERAL    CONDITIONS    OF    SUCCESS  ^ 

the  home,  on  the  cars  and  everywhere  that 
would  otherwise  have  entirely  escaped  our 
notice. 

But  how  is  one  to  get  a  love  for  souls?  This 
question  is  easily  answered.  First  of  all,  a 
love  for  souls  like  very  other  grace  of  Chris- 
tian character,  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
If  then  we  are  conscious  that  we  do  not  have 
that  love  for  souls  that  we  should  have,  the 
first  thing  to  do  is  to  go  to  God  and  humbly 
confess  this  lack  in  our  lives  and  ask  Him  by 
His  Holy  Spirit  to  supply  that  which  we  so 
sorely^  need^and  expect  Him  to  do  it  (i.  Jno. 
v.  14,  15;  Phil.  iv.  19).  In  the  second 
place  Jesus  Christ  had  an  intense  love  for 
souls  (Matt,  xxiii.  37;  Luke  xix.  10),  and 
intimate  and  constant  companionship  with 
Him  will  impart  to  our  lives  this  grace 
which  was  so  prominent  in  His.  In  the 
third  place  feelings  are  the  outcome  of 
thoughts.  If  we  desire  any  given  feeling  in 
our  lives  we  should  dwell  upon  the  thoughts 
which  are  adapted  to  produce  that  feeling. 
If  any  saved  person  will  dwell  long  enough 
upon  the  peril  and  wretchedness  of  any  man 
out  of  Christ  and  the  worth  of  his  soul  in 
God's  sight  as  seen  in  the  death  of  God's 
Son    to  save  him,  a  feeling  of  intense  desire 


IO  HOW   TO   BRING   MEN   TO    CHRIST 

for  that  man's  salvation  is  almost  certain  to 
follow.  In  the  fourth  place,  reflection  upon 
our  own  ruined  and  unhappy  condition  with- 
out Christ  and  the  great  sacrifice  that  Christ 
made  to  save  us,  is  sure  to  fill  our  hearts  with 
a  desire  to  bring  others  to  the  Saviour  we  have 
found. 

3.  The  one  who  would  have  real  success 
in  bringing  men  to  Christ,  must  have  a  work- 
ing KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  BIBLE.       The  Word  of 

God  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  (Eph  vi.  17). 
It  is  the  instrument  God  uses  to  convict  of 
sin,  to  reveal  Christ  and  to  regenerate  men. 
If  we  would  work  together  with  God, the  Bible 
is  the  instrument  upon  which  we  must  rely 
and  which  we  must  use  in  bringing  men  to 
Christ.  We  must  know  how  to  use  the  Bible 
so  as  (1 )  to  showmen  their  need  of  a  Saviour, 
(2)  to  show  them  Jesus  as  the  Saviour  they 
need  (3)  to  show  them  how  to  make  this 
Saviour  their  own  Saviour  (4)  to  meet  the 
difficulties  that  stand  in  the  way  of  their  ac- 
cepting Christ.  A  large  part  of  the  following 
pages  will  be  devoted  to  imparting  this  knowl- 
edge. 

4  The  one  who  would  have  real  success 
in  bringing  men  to  Christ  must  pray  much. 
Solid  work  in  soul   winning   must  be   accom- 


GENERAL    CONDITIONS    OF    SUCCESS  II 

panied  by  prayer  at  every  step.  (i).  We 
must  pray  God  to  lead  us  to  the  right  persons 
to  approach.  God  does  not  intend  that  we 
speak  to  every  one  we  meet.  If  we  try  to  do 
it,  we  will  waste  much  valuable  time  in  speak- 
ing to  those  whom  we  cannot  help,  nor 
do  good,  that  we  might  have  used  in  speak- 
ing to  those  to  whom  we  could  have  done 
much  good.  God  alone  knows  the  one  to 
whom  He  intends  us  to  speak,  and  we  must 
ask  Him  to  point  him  out  to  us,  and,  expect 
Him  to  do  it.  (Acts  viii.  29).  (2).  We 
must  pray  God  to  show  us  just  what  to  say 
to  those  to  whom  He  leads  us.  After  all  our 
study  of  the  passages  to  be  used  in  dealing 
with  the  various  classes  of  men,  we  shall 
need  God's  guidance  in  each  specific  case. 
Every  experienced  worker  will  testify  to  the 
many  instances  in  which  God  has  led  them 
to  use  some  text  of  Scripture  that  they  would 
not  otherwise  have  used  but  which  proved  to 
be  just  the  one  needed.  (3).  We  must  pray 
God  to  give  power  to  that  which  He  has  given 
us  to  say.  We  need  not  only  a  message  from 
God  but  power  from  God  to  send  the  message 
home.  Most  workers  have  to  learn  this  lesson 
by  humiliating  experiences.  They  sit  down 
beside  an  unsaved  man  and  reason  and  plead 


12  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN   TO   CHRIST 

and  bring  forth  texts  from  the  word  of  God, 
but  the  man  does  not  accept  Christ.  At  last 
it  dawns  upon  them  that  they  are  trying  to 
convert  the  man  in  their  own  strength  and 
then  they  lift  an  humble  and  earnest  prayer 
to  God  tor  his  strength,  and  God  hears  and  in 
a  short  time  this  "very  difficult  case"  has  set- 
tled the  matter  and  is  rejoicing  in  Christ.  (4). 
We  must  p^ay  God  to  carry  on  the  work  after 
our  work  has  come  to  an  end.  After  hav- 
ing done  that  which  seems  to  have  been  our 
whole  duty  in  any  given  instance,  whatever 
may  have  been  the  apparent  issue  of  our  work, 
whether  successful  or  unsuccessful,  we  should 
definitely  commit  the  case  to  God  in  prayer. 
If  there  is  anything  the  average  worker  in  this 
hurrying  age  needs  to  have  impressed  upon 
him,  it  is  the  necessity  of  more  prayer.  By 
praying  more  we  will  not  work  any  less  and 
we  will  accomplish  vastly  more. 

5.  The  one  who  would  have  real  success  in 
bringing  men  to  Christ  must  be  "baptized 
with  the  holy  ghost."  "Ye  shall  receive 
power  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  come 
upon  you,"  said  Jesus  to  his  disciples  after 
having  given  them  the  great  commission  to  go 
out  and  bring  men  to  Himself.  The  supreme 
condition  of  soul  winning  power  is  the  same 


GENERAL  CONDITIONS  OF  SUCCESS    1 3 

to-day:  "after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come 
upon  you."  A  later  chapter  will  be  given  to 
a  study  of  what  "the  Baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost"  is  and  how  any  Christian  can  obtain  it. 


CHAPTER  II 

HOW  TO  BEGIN 

When  God  has  led  us  to  think  that  He 
wishes  us  to  make  an  effort  to  lead  some  given 
individual  to  Christ,  the  first  question  that 
confronts  us  is,  "How  shall  I  begin?"  If  the 
person  has  gone  into  an  inquiry  room,  or  re- 
mained to  an  after-meeting,  or  even  if  they  are 
merely  present  at  prayer-meeting,  Sunday- 
school  or  other  ordinary  service  of  the  church, 
it  is  comparatively  easy.  You  can  then  ask 
him  if  he  is  a  Christian,  or  if  he  would  not 
like  to  be  a  Christian,  or  why  he  is  not  a 
Christian  or  some  other  direct  and  simple 
question  that  will  lead  inevitably  to  a  con- 
versation along  this  line.  But  if  the  person 
is  one  in  whom  you  have  become  interested 
outside  the  religious  meeting  and  who  is  per- 
haps an  entire  stranger,  it  does  not  at  first 
sight  appear  so  simple,  and  yet  it  is  not  so 
very  difficult.  The  person  can  be  engaged  in 
conversation  on  some  general  topic  or  on 
something  suggested  by  passing  events,  and 
14 


HOW    TO    BEGIN  15 

soon  brought  around  to  the  great  subject. 
Christ's  conversation  with  the  woman  of  Sa- 
maria in  the  4th  chapter  of  John  is  a  very  in- 
structive illustration  of  this.  Oftentimes  even 
in  dealing  with  entire  strangers  it  is  well  to 
broach  the  subject  at  once  and  ask  them  if 
they  are  Christians  or  if  they  are  saved  or 
some  similar  question.  If  this  is  done  courte- 
ously and  earnestly  it  will  frequently  set  even 
careless  people  to  thinking  and  result  in  their 
conversion.  It  is  astonishing  how  often  one 
who  undertakes  this  work  in  humble  depend- 
ence upon  God  and  under  His  direction,  finds 
the  way  prepared  and  how  seldom  he  receives 
any  rebuff.  One  day  the  writer  met  a  man 
on  one  of  the  most  crowded  streets  of  Chicago. 
As  I  passed  him  the  impulse  came  to  speak 
to  him  about  the  Saviour.  Stopping  a  moment 
and  asking  God  to  show  me  if  the  impulse  was 
from  Him,  I  turned  around  and  followed  the 
man.  I  overtook  him  in  the  middle  of  the 
street,  laid  my  hand  upon  his  shoulder  and 
said:  "My  friend,  are  you  a  Christian."  He 
started  and  said:  "That's  a  strange  question 
to  ask  a  man."  I  said,  "I  know  it,  and  I  do 
not  ask  that  question  of  every  stranger,  but 
God  put  it  into  my  heart  to  ask  it  of  you." 
He  then  told  me  that  his  cousin  was  a  minis- 


1 6  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

ter  and  had  been  urging  this  very  matter  upon 
him,  that  he  himself  was  a  graduate  of  Am- 
herst college,  but  had  been  ruined  by  drink. 
After  further  conversation  we  separated  but 
later  the  man  accepted  Christ  as  his  Saviour. 

It  is  often  best  to  win  a  person's  confidence 
and  affection  before  broaching  the  subject. 
It  is  well  to  select  some  one  and  then  lay 
your  plans  to  win  him  to  Christ.  Cultivate 
his  acquaintance,  show  him  many  atten- 
tions and  perform  many  acts  of  kindness  great 
and  small  and  at  last  when  the  fitting  moment 
arrives  take  up  the  great  question.  An  old 
and  thorough  going  infidel  in  Chicago  was  in 
this  way  won  to  Christ  by  a  young  woman, 
who  found  him  sick  and  alone.  She  called 
day  after  day  and  showed  him  many  kind- 
nesses and  as  the  consumption  fastened  itself 
more  firmly  upon  him  she  spoke  to  him  of 
the  Saviour  and  had  the  joy  of  seeing  him  ac- 
cept Christ. 

A  wisely  chosen  tract  placed  in  the  hand 
of  the  one  with  whom  you  wish  to  speak  will 
often  lead  easily  and  naturally  to  the  subject. 
One  day  I  was  riding  on  a  train  and  praying 
that  God  would  use  me  to  lead  some  one  to 
His  Son.  A  young  lady,  daughter  of  a  min- 
ister, with  whom  I  had  had  some  conversation 


HOW    TO    BEGIN  1 7 

on  this  subject  came  in  with  a  friend  and  took 
the  seat  immediately  in  front  of  me.  I  took 
out  a  little  bundle  of  tracts  and  selected  one 
that  seemed  adapted  for  the  purpose  and 
handed  it  to  her  and  asked  her  to  read  it.  As 
she  read,  I  prayed.  When  she  had  finished, 
I  leaned  over  and  asked  her  what  she 
thought  about  it.  She  was  deeply  moved  and 
I  asked  her  if  she  would  not  accept  Christ 
right  there.  Her  difficulties  were  soon  met 
and  answered  and  she  accepted  Christ.  As 
she  left  the  train  she  thanked  me  very  heartily 
for  what  I  had  done  for  her. 

You  will  often  meet  some  one  whose  face 
tells  the  story  of  unhappiness  or  discontent: 
in  such  a  case  it  is  easy  to  ask  the  person  if 
he  is  happy  and  when  he  answers  "no"  you 
can  say,  "I  can  tell  you  of  one  who  will  make 
you  happy  if  you  will  only  take  Him."  Skill 
in  beginning  a  conversation  will  come  with 
practice.  One  may  be  rather  awkward  about 
it  at  first  but  as  we  go  on  we  will  acquire 
facility. 

When  the  subject  is  once  opened  the  first 
thing  to  find  out  is  where  the  person  with 
whom  you  are  dealing  stands;  then  you  will 
know  how  to  wisely  treat  his  case.  In  the 
chapters  immediately  following  this   all   the 


1 8  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

classes  of  men  one  is  likely  to  meet  will  be 
given,  and  the  first  point  to  be  ascertained  is 
to  which  class  any  given  individual  belongs. 
But  how  can  we  find  out  to  which  class  any 
person  belongs?  First.  By  asking  him  ques- 
tions. Such  questions  as  "Are  you  a  Chris- 
tian?" "Are  you  saved?"  "Do  you  know 
that  your  sins  are  forgiven?"  "Have  you  eter- 
nal life?"  "Are  you  confessing  Christ  openly 
before  the  world?"  "Are  you  a  friend  of 
Jesus?"  "Have  you  been  born  again?"  One 
may  answer  these  questions  untruthfully, 
either  through  ignorance  or  a  desire  to  mis- 
lead you.  Nevertheless,  their  answers  and 
the  manner  of  them  will  show  you  a  great  deal 
about  their  real  state.  Second.  By  watch- 
ing his  face.  A  man's  face  will  often  reveal 
that  which  his  words  try  to  conceal.  Any  one 
who  cultivates  the  study  of  the  faces  of  those 
with  whom  he  deals  will  soon  be  able  to  tell 
in  many  instances  the  exact  state  of  those 
with  whom  they  are  dealing  irrespective  of 
anything  they  may  say.  Third.  By  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit  if  we  only  look 
to  Him  to  do  it  will  often  flash  into  our  minds 
a  view  of  the  man's  position,  and  just  the 
scripture  he  needs. 

When  we  have  learned   where   the   person 


HOW   TO   BEGIN  1 9 

with  whom  we  are  dealing  stands,  the  next 
thing  to  do  is  to  lead  him  as  directly  as  we 
can  to  accept  Jesus  Christ,  as  his  personal 
Savior  and  Master.  We  must  always  bear  in 
mind  that  the  primary  purpose  of  our  work, 
is  not  to  get  persons  to  join  the  church  or 
to  give  up  their  bad  habits  or  to  do  anything 
else  than  this,  to  accept  Jesus  Christ,  as  their 
Saviour — the  one  who  bore  their  sins  in  his 
own  body  on  the  tree  and  through  whom  they 
can  have  immediate  and  entire  forgiveness, — 
and  as  their  Master  to  whom  they  surrender 
absolutely  the  guidance  of  their  thoughts,  feel- 
ings, purposes  and  actions.  Having  led  any 
one  to  thus  accept  Christ  the  next  step  will 
be  to  show  him  from  God's  word  that  he  has 
forgiveness  of  sins  and  eternal  life.  Acts  x, 
43,  xiii,  39;  Jno.  iii,  36;  v.  24,  will  answer 
for  this  purpose.  The  next  step  will  be  to 
show  him  how  to  make  a  success  of  the 
Christian  life  upon  which  he  has  entered. 
How  to  do  this  will  be  told  later.  Each 
person  is  to  be  led  to  accept  Christ  through 
a  use  of  the  word  of  God.  In  the  chap- 
ters that  immediately  follow  this  we  will  try 
to  show  what  specific  portions  of  the  word  to 
use  in  given  cases  and  how  to  use  them. 


CHAPTER    III 

DEALING  WITH  THE  INDIFFERENT  OR  CARELESS 

One  of  the  classes  of  men  most  fre- 
quently met  with,  is  The  Indifferent,  or  Care- 
less. There  are  several  ways  of  dealing  with 
them.  One  is  to  show  them  their  need  of  a 
Saviour.  A  good  verse  to  use  for  this  pur- 
pose is  Romans  iii,  23.  Get  the  person  with 
whom  you  are  dealing  to  read  the  verse,  "For 
all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory 
of  God."  Then  say  to  him:  "Who  have 
sinned?"  "All".  "Who  does  that  include?" 
and  keep  up  the  questioning  until  he  says, 
"It  includes  me."  Then  ask  him  what  it  is 
that  he  has  done,  and  keep  at  it  until  he 
comes  out  plainly  and  says:  "I  have  sinned 
and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  This 
is  likely  to  make  him  feel  his  need  of  a 
Saviour.  Another  good  verse  to  use  is  Isaiah 
liii:  6.  After  the  verse  has  been  read,  ask 
him  who  it  is  that  has  gone  astray  and  by  a 
series  of  questions  bring  him  to  the  point 
where  he  will  say,  "I  have  gone  astray."  Then 
20 


DEALING    WITH    THE    INDIFFERENT  21 

ask  him  what  kind  of  a  sheep  one  is  that  has 
gone  astray"  and  hold  him  to  it  until  he  says 
"a  lost  sheep."  "What  are  you  then?"  "Lost." 
Then  ask  him  what  the  Lord  has  done  with 
his  sin,  and  hold  him  to  that  point  until  he 
sees  the  truth  of  the  verse,  that  God  has  laid 
his  sin  on  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  he  is  in  a 
position  for  you  to  put  to  him  the  direct  ques- 
tion: "Will  you  accept  this  Saviour  upon  whom 
the  Lord  has  laid  your  sin?"  Still  another 
verse  to  use  is  Psalms  cxxx.  3.  When  the 
verse  has  been  read,  ask  him,  "If  the  Lord 
marked  iniquities  could  you  stand?"  In  dealing 
with  this  class  of  men  I  use  Matthew  xxii. 
37,  38  more  frequently  than  any  other  pass- 
age of  Scripture.  Before  having  the  person 
read  the  verse,  it  is  well  to  ask  him,  "Do  you 
know  that  you  have  committed  the  greatest 
sin  that  a  man  can  commit."  In  all  probability 
he  will  answer,  "No,  I  have  not."  Then  ask 
him  what  he  thinks  the  greatest  sin  a  man  can 
commit.  When  he  has  answered,  say  to  him, 
Now  let  us  see  what  God  considers  the  greatest 
sin.  Read  the  verses  and  ask  him,  "What  is 
the  first  and  greatest  of  the  commandments." 
Then  ask  him,  "What  then  is  the  greatest 
sin."  He  will  soon  answer  that  the  violation 
of  the  first  and  greatest  of  the  commandments 


22  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

must  be  the  greatest  sin.  Ask  him  if  he  has 
kept  that  commandment  and  when  he  con- 
fesses, as  sooner  or  later  he  must,  that  he  has 
not,  ask  him  of  what  he  is  guilty  in  the  sight 
of  God,  and  hold  him  to  that  point  until  he 
admits  that  he  is  guilty  of  committing  the 
greatest  sin  that  a  man  can  commit.  An  il- 
lustration from  life  may  help  to  make  the  use 
of  this  verse  clear.  I  was  dealing  with  a 
very  bright  young  man  who  evidently  had  no 
deep  sense  of  sin  nor  of  his  need  of  a  Saviour. 
In  fact  when  I  asked  if  he  was  a  Christian  he 
said  promptly  that  he  always  had  been;  but 
there  was  something  in  his  manner  that  showed 
that  he  had  no  clear  understanding  of  what  it 
meant  to  be  a  Christian.  I  then  asked  if  he 
had  been  born  again  and  he  did  not  even  un- 
derstand what  I  was  talking  about.  I  next 
asked  if  he  knew  he  had  committed  the  great- 
est sin  that  a  man  could  possibly  commit  and 
he  at  once  answered,  "No,  I  never  did  in  my 
life."  I  asked  what  he  considered  the  great- 
est sin,  and  he  replied  "murder."  I  took  my 
Bible  and  opened  it  to  Matthew  xxii.  37, 
38,  and  asked  him  to  read  the  verses,  which 
he  did.  I  then  asked  him,  "If  this  is  the  first 
and  greatest  commandment,  what  must  be 
the  greatest  sin."     He  answered,  "I  suppose 


DEALING    WITH    THE    INDIFFERENT  23 

the  breaking  of  that  commandment."  I  then 
asked  if  he  had  always  kept  that  command- 
ment, if  he  had  always  loved  God  with 
all  his  heart,  with  all  his  soul,  and  with  all 
his  mind.  If  he  had  always  put  God  first  in 
everything.  He  replied  that  he  had  not.  I 
then  asked  him,  "Of  what  then  are  you  guilty?" 
The  Spirit  of  God  carried  the  text  home  and 
with  the  greatest  earnestness  he  replied,  "I 
have  committed  the  greatest  sin  that  a  man 
can  commit,  but  I  never  saw  it  before  in  my 
life."  Another  verse  that  can  be  used  with 
effect  is  John  viii.  34.  After  the  man  has 
read  the  verse,  "Whosoever  committeth  sin  is 
the  servant  of  sin,"  ask  him  "what  is  one  who 
commits  sin?"  Then  ask  him  if  he  commits  sin. 
Then  put  to  him  the  direct  question,  "What 
are  you  then,"  and  hold  him  to  it  until  he 
says  "the  servant  of  sin."  Then  ask  him  if  he 
does  not  desire  to  be  delivered  from  that  aw- 
ful bondage.  Hold  him  to  this  point  until 
he  sees  his  need  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Deliverer 
from  the  slavery  of  sin.  The  Holy  Spirit  has 
used  Isaiah  lvii.  21  to  the  salvation  of 
many  men  who  have  been  indifferent  to  the 
claims  of  the  Gospel.  After  the  verse,  "There 
is  no  peace  saith  my  God  to  the  wicked,"  has 
been  read  slowly,    thoughtfully,     and    earn- 


24  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

estly,  ask  him  who  it  is  that  says  this.  Then 
ask  him  if  it  is  true;  then  ask  him  if  it  is  true 
in  his  case.  "Have  you  peace?"  One  night 
a  careless  young  man  was  going  out  of  one  of 
our  tents  in  Chicago  and  as  he  passed  by  me 
I  took  him  by  the  hand  and  said  to  him,  "You 
need  the  Saviour."  He  wanted  to  know  why 
I  thought  so.  I  replied,  "Because  you  have 
no  peace."  He  said,  "Yes  I  have."  "No  you 
have  not."  He  then  asked  me  how  I  knew 
that.  I  told  him  God  said  so  and  quoted  the 
above  passage.  He  tried  to  laugh  it  off  and 
say  the  verse  was  not  true  in  his  case.  Then 
he  became  angry  and  went  out  of  the  tent  in 
a  rage,  but  the  next  night  I  saw  him  kneeling 
with  one  of  our  workers  in  prayer  and  when 
he  arose  from  his  knees,  the  worker  came  over 
and  said  he  wished  to  speak  with  me.  As  I 
approached  him  he  held  out  his  hand  and 
said,  "I  wanted  to  beg  your  pardon  for  what 
I  said  last  night;  what  you  said  was  true,  I 
didn't  have  peace."  I  asked  him  if  he  had 
now  accepted  the  Saviour.     He  said  he  had. 

Galations  iii.  10  is  a  verse  which  we  very 
frequently  use  in  our  work  in  dealing  with 
the  Indifferent.  After  the  one  with  whom 
you  are  dealing  has  read  the  verse,  "For 
as    many    as    are    of   the  works    of   the  law 


DEALING    WITH    THE    INDIFFERENT  25 

are  under  the  curse;  for  it  is  written  cursed 
is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to 
do  them"  ask  him  the  question,  "What  is 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to 
do  them?"  When  he  answers,  "Cursed," 
ask  him  if  he  has  continued  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to 
do  them  and  when  he  replies,  "No,  I  have 
not,"  put  to  him  the  direct  question,  "What 
are  you  then  ?"  and  hold  him  to  that  point 
until  he  says,  "I  am  under  the  curse."  In  very 
many  cases  the  inquirer  will  be  ready  at  once 
to  be  led  to  the  thirteenth  verse  of  the  same 
chapter  which  shows  how  he  may  be  saved 
from  that  curse  under  which  he  rests.  Romans 
vi.  23  can  often  be  used  with  good  effect. 
"For  the  wages  of  sin  is  death."  Ask  "what 
are  the  wages  of  sin?"  Then,  "who  earns 
those  wages?"  Then,  "Are  you  a  sinner?" 
"What  wages  then  have  you  earned?"  "Do 
you  wish  to  take  your  wages."  John  iii.  36  is 
a  verse  which  can  be  used  in  a  similar  way. 
Ask  the  question,  "Upon  whom  is  it  that  the 
wrath  of  God  abides?"  Then,  "Do  you  be- 
lieve on  the  Son?"  "What  then  abides  upon 
you?"     Then  put  the  decisive  question,  "Are 


26  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

you  willing  to  go  away  with  the  wrath  of 
God  abiding  upon  you?"  II  Thes.  i.  7-9, 
and  John  viii.  24,  Rev.  xx.  15;  xxi.  8;  xiv. 
io-ii,  set  forth  in  a  most  impressive  way  the 
awful  consequences  of  sin.  If  these  verses 
are  used  they  should  be  read  with  the  deepest 
earnestness  and  solemnity  and  dwelt  upon 
until  the  person  with  whom  you  are  dealing 
realizes  their  terrible  import. 

There  is  another  way  to  arouse  a  man  from 
his  indifference,  and  that  is  by  showing  what 
Jesus  has  done  for  him.  I  have  found  Isaiah 
liii.  5-6  more  effectual  for  this  purpose  then 
any  other  passage  in  the  Bible.  An  incident 
from  life  will  illustrate  its  use.  A  lady  had 
asked  prayers  for  her  daughter,  a  young 
woman  about  twenty  years  of  age.  At  the 
close  of  the  services  I  stepped  up  to  the 
daughter  and  asked  her  if  she  would  not  ac- 
cept Jesus  Christ  as  her  Saviour  at  once. 
She  stamped  her  foot  in  anger  and  said,  "My 
mother  should  have  known  better  than  to  do 
that;  she  knows  it  will  only  make  me  worse." 
I  asked  her  if  she  would  not  sit  down  for  a 
few  minutes  and  as  soon  as  we  were  seated  I 
opened  my  Bible  to  this  passage  and  began  to 
read,  "But  he  was  wounded  for  our  trans- 
gressions, he  was   bruised  for  our  iniquities; 


DEALING   WITH   THE    INDIFFERENT  2J 

the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him; 
and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.  All  we 
like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we  have  turned 
every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  the  Lord  hath 
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  I  made 
no  comment  upon  the  verses  whatever,  but 
the  Spirit  of  God  carried  them  home  and 
tears  began  to  roll  down  the  cheeks  of  the 
young  woman.  She  did  not  come  out  as  a 
Christian  that  night  but  did  shortly  afterward. 
It  is  well  in  using  these  verses,  whenever  it 
is  possible,  to  get  the  inquirer  to  change  the 
pronoun  from  the  plural  to  the  singular.  "He 
was  wounded  for  my  transgressions;  he  was 
bruised  for  my  iniquities,  etc."  John  iii.  16 
can  be  used  in  a  similar  way.  I  was  talking 
one  night  to  one  who  was  apparently  most 
indifferent  and  hardened.  She  told  me  the 
story  of  her  sin,  with  seemingly  very  little 
sense  of  shame,  and  when  I  urged  her  to 
accept  Christ,  she  simply  refused.  I  put  a 
Bible  in  her  hands  and  asked  her  to  read  this 
verse.  She  began  to  read,  "God  so  loved 
the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten 
Son,"  and  before  she  had  finished  reading  the 
verse  she  had  broken  into  tears,  softened  by 
the  thought  of  God's  wondrous  love  to  her. 
First  Peter  ii.  24  is  a  verse  of  similar  charac- 


28  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

ter.  Ask  the  inquirer  whose  sins  they  were 
that  Jesus  bore  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree, 
and  hold  him  to  it  until  he  says,  "My  sins." 
I  Peter  i.  18-19,  Luke  xxii.  44,  Matt, 
xxvii.  46,  are  useful  as  bringing  out  in  detail 
what  Christ  has  suffered  for  us. 

There  is  still  another  way  to  arouse  in- 
different persons,  and  that  is  by  showing  them 
that  the  one  damning  sin  is  that  of  which 
they  themselves  are  guilty — the  sin  of  reject- 
ing Jesus  Christ.  Heb  x.  28-29  is  very  effec- 
tive for  this  purpose.  John  xvi.  9;  iii.  18, 
19,  20,  and  Acts  ii.  36  can  also  be  used. 

Oftentimes  you  will  meet  one  who  is  not 
willing  to  sit  down  and  let  you  deal  with  him 
in  this  deliberate  way.  In  that  case  the  only 
thing  to  do  is  to  look  .up  to  God  for  guidance 
and  power  and  give  him  some  pointed  verse 
in  great  earnestness,  such  for  example  as 
Heb.  x.  28-29,  Romans  vi.  23,  John  iii.  36, 
Isaiah  lvii.  21,  and  leave  it  for  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  carry  the  truth  home  to  his  heart.  A 
passing  shot  of  this  kind  has  often  resulted 
in  the  salvation  of  a  soul.  The  passages  given 
above  can  be  wisely  used  with  one  who  is  not 
altogether  indifferent  or  careless  but  who  has 
not  a  sufficiently  deep  sense  of  sin  and  need 
to  be  ready  to  accept  the  Gospel. 


CHAPTER  IV 

DEALING  WITH  THOSE  WHO  ARE  ANXIOUS  TO  BE 
SAVED  BUT  DO  NOT  KNOW   HOW 

There  is  a  very  large  class  of  persons  who 
are  anxious  to  be  saved  but  simply  do  not 
know  how.  It  is  not  difficult  to  lead  this 
class  of  persons  to  Christ.  Perhaps  no  other 
passage  in  the  Bible  is  more  used  for  this  pur- 
pose than  Isaiah  liii.  6.  It  makes  the  way  of 
salvation  very  plain.  Read  the  first  part  of 
the  verse  to  the  inquirer,  "All  we  like  sheep 
have  gone  astray,  we  have  turned  every  one 
to  his  own  way."  Then  ask,  "Is  that  true  of 
you,"  and  when  he  has  thought  it  over  and 
said  "yes,"  then  say  to  him,  "Now  let  us  see 
what  God  has  done  with  your  sins,"  and  read 
the  remainder  of  the  verse,  "And  the  Lord 
hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
"What  then  is  it  necessary  for  you  to  do  to 
be  saved?"  Very  soon  he  can  be  led  to  see 
that  all  that  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  do  is  to 
accept  the  sin  bearer  whom  God  has  provided. 
Some  years  ago  I  noticed  in  a  meeting  a  white- 
29 


30  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

haired  man  who  did  not  stand  up  with  the 
Christians.  At  the  close  of  the  service  I 
walked  down  to  him  and  said^  "Are  you  not 
a  Christian?"  He  said  he  was  not.  I  was 
sure  he  was  interested,  so  I  put  to  him  the 
direct  question,  "Would  you  become  a  Chris- 
tian to-night  if  I  would  show  you  the  way?" 
and  he  replied  that  he  would.  We  sat  down 
together  and  I  opened  my  Bible  to  Isaiah  liii. 
6  and  read  the  first  part  of  the  verse,  "All  we 
like  sheep  have  gone  astray,  we  have  turned 
every  one  to  his  own  way."  I  then  said  to 
him,  "Is  that  true  of  you?"  and  he  answered 
"yes."  "Now,"  I  said,  "let  us  read  the  rest  of 
the  verse,  'And  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him 
the  iniquity  of  us  all.'"  "What  has  the  Lord 
done,"  I  said,  "with  your  sins?"  He  thought  a 
moment  and  said  "he  has  laid  them  on  Christ. " 
"What  then"  I  said  "is  all  that  you  have  to 
do  to  be  saved  ?"  and  he  replied  quite  promptly, 
"Accept  him."  "Well,"  I  said,  "will  you  accept 
him  to-night?"  He  said,  "I  will."  "Let  us 
then  kneel  down  and  tell  God  so."  We  knelt 
down  and  I  led  in  prayer  and  he  followed  in 
a  very  simple  way  telling  God  that  he  was  a 
sinner  but  that  he  believed  that  He  had  laid 
his  sins  upon  Jesus  Christ,  and  asked  God  for 
Christ's  sake  to  forgive    his  sins.     When  he 


THOSE    ANXIOUS    TO    BE    SAVED  3 1 

had  finished  I  asked  him  if  he  thought  God 
had  heard  his  prayer  and  that  his  sins  were 
forgiven,  and  he  said  "yes."  I  then  asked 
him  if  he  would  begin  to  lead  a  Christian  life 
at  once,  set  up  the  family  altar  and  open- 
ly confess  Christ  before  the  world,  and  he  re- 
plied that  he  would.  Some  months  after  I 
met  his  pastor  and  made  inquiries  about  him 
and  found  that  he  had  gone  to  his  home  in  a 
distant  village,  set  up  the  family  altar  and 
united  with  the  church  together  with  his 
son,  the  only  remaining  member  of  the 
family  out  of  Christ.  Apparently  all  that 
this  man  was  waiting  for  was  for  some 
one  to  make  the  way  of  salvation  plain  to 
him.  I  sometimes  put  it  this  way  in  using 
this  verse:  "There  are  two  things  which  a 
man  needs  to  know  and  one  thing  he  needs 
to  do  in  order  to  be  saved.  What  he  needs  to 
know  is,  first,  that  he  is  a  lost  sinner  and  this 
verse  tells  him  that;  second,  that  Christ  is 
an  all-sufficient  Saviour  and  this  verse  tells 
him  that.  What  he  needs  to  do  is  simply  to 
accept  this  all-sufficient  Saviour  whom  God 
has  provided."  John  i.  12  brings  out  this 
thought  very  clearly,  "As  many  as  received 
him  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God,  even   to   them    that    believe   on 


32  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

his  name."  After  the  verse  has  been  read 
you  can  ask  the  one  with  whom  you  are  deal- 
ing, "To  whom  is  it  that  God  gives  the  power 
to  become  the  sons  of  God."  "As  many  as 
receive  him."  What  must  you  then  do  to 
become  a  son  of  God?  "Receive  him."  Well, 
will  you  receive  him  as  your  Saviour  and  as 
your  master  now?  Isaiah  lv.  7,  Acts  xvi.  31, 
John  iii.  16  and  iii.  36  are  all  useful  in  mak- 
ing the  way  of  salvation  plain.  John  iii.  14 
compared  with  Numbers  xxi.  8  and  the  fol- 
lowing verses,  can  often  be  used  with  good 
effect.  When  they  are  used  you  should  lead 
the  inquirer  to  see  just  what  the  serpent-bit- 
ten Israelite  had  to  do  to  be  saved — that  he 
had  simply  to  look  at  the  brazen  serpent  lifted 
up  upon  the  pole — then  show  him  that  the 
sin-bitten  man  has  to  do  simply  the  same 
thing — look  at  Chirst  lifted  up  on  the  Cross 
for  his  sins.  Romans  I.  16  is  another  excel- 
lent verse  to  use.  It  makes  the  way  of  sal- 
vation very  clear.  You  can  ask  the  inquirer 
whom  it  is,  according  to  his  verse,  that  the 
Gospel  saves,  and  he  will  see  that  it  is  "every 
one  that  believeth."  Then  ask  him, "What  then 
is  all  that  is  necessary  for  one  to  do  in  order  to 
be  saved,"  and  he  will  see  that  it  is  simply  to 
believe.     Then  ask  him  "believe  what,"  and 


THOSE    ANXIOUS    TO    BE    SAVED  33 

the  answer  is  "the  Gospel."  The  next  ques- 
tion that  naturally  arises  is,  what  is  the  Gos- 
pel. This  is  answered  by  I  Cor.  xv ;  1-4.  These 
verses  show  what  the  Gospel  is,  "that  Christ 
died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures; 
that  he  was  buried  and  that  he  rose  the  third 
day  according  to  the  scriptures"  and  this  is 
what  he  must  believe  in  order  to  be  saved. 
He  must  believe  from  his  heart  that  Christ 
died  for  his  sins  and  that  he  rose  again.  Then 
ask  the  inquirer,  "do  you  believe  that  Christ 
died  for  your  sins?  do  you  believe  that  he 
rose  again?"  If  he  says  that  he  does,  ask 
him  if  he  will  make  this  a  heart  faith  and  get 
down  and  ask  God  for  Christ's  sake,  to  for- 
give his  sins  and  believe  he  does  it  because  he 
says  so,  and  then  trust  in  the  living  Saviour 
to  save  him  day  by  day  from  the  power  of  sin. 
Romans  x.  9-10  also  makes  the  way  of  sal- 
vation clear  to  many  minds  where  other  verses 
fail.  Romans  x.  13  makes  it,  if  possible, 
more  simple  still.  This  shows  that  all  that  a 
man  has  to  do  to  be  saved  is  to  call  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  You  can  ask  the  inquirer 
"Are  you  ready  now  and  here  to  get  down  and 
call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  for  salvation 
and  to  believe  that  God  saves  you  because 
he  says  he  will."   The  way  of  salvation  can  be 


34  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

made  plain  by  the  use  of  Exodus  xii.  7,  13, 
23.  These  verses  show  that  it  was  the  blood 
that  made  the  Israelites  safe  and  just  so  it  is 
to-day  the  blood  that  makes  us  safe,  and  when 
God  sees  the  blood  he  passes  over  us.  The 
only  thing  for  us  to  do  is  to  get  behind  the 
blood.  Then  show  the  inquirer  that  the  way 
to  be  behind  the  blood  is  by  simple  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ.  Luke  xviii.  10-14  is  exceed- 
ingly useful  in  showing  what  a  man  may  have 
and  yet  be  lost  (the  Pharisee)  and  what  a 
man  may  lack  and  yet  be  saved  (the  Publi- 
can) and  all  that  a  man  has  to  do  to  be  saved 
is  simply  to  do  as  the  Publican  did — that  is 
take  the  sinner's  place  and  cry  to  God  for 
mercy  and  then  he  will  go  down  to  his  house 
justified.  This  passage  can  be  used  in  the 
following  manner  to  make  the  meaning  more 
clear.  Ask  the  inquirer,  "Which  one  of  these 
two  (the  Pharisee  or  the  Publican)  went  down 
to  his  house  justified?"  Then  ask  him,  "What 
did  the  Publican  do  that  the  Pharisee  did  not 
do,  that  brought  him  the  forgiveness  of  his 
sins  while  the  Pharisee  went  out  of  the  Tem- 
ple unforgiven?"  When  he  studies  the  pas- 
sage he  will  soon  see  that  what  the  Publican 
did  was  simply  to  take  the  sinner's  place  before 
God  and  cry  for  mercy  and  that  as  soon  as  he 


THOSE  ANXIOUS  TO  BE  SAVED      35 

did  this  he  was  "justified"  or  forgiven.  Then 
you  can  ask  him,  "What  is  all  that  it  is  nec- 
essary for  you  to  do  to  find  forgiveness." 
Then  ask  him,  "Will  you  do  it  now  and  here," 
and  when  he  has  done  so  ask  him  if  he  believes 
God's  word  and  if  he  is  going  down  to  his 
house  justified.  What  saving  faith  is,  is  beau- 
tifully illustrated  by  Luke  vii.  48-50.  The 
fiftieth  verse  tells  us  that  this  woman  had 
saving  faith.  Now  ask  the  inquirer,  "What 
was  the  faith  she  had,"  and  show  him  that 
her  faith  was  simply  such  faith  that  Jesus 
could  and  would  forgive  her  sins,  that  she 
came  to  him  to  do  it.  This  is  saving  faith. 
Galations  iii.  10-13  also  makes  the  way  of 
salvation  very  simple.  The  tenth  verse  shows 
the  sinner's  position  before  accepting  Christ — 
under  the  curse.  The  thirteenth  verse  shows 
what  Christ  has  done — has  been  made  a  curse 
for  us  What  the  sinner  had  to  do  is,  evi- 
dently, simply  to  accept  Christ. 


CHAPTER   V 

DEALING  WITH  THOSE  WHO  ARE  ANXIOUS  TO  BE 

SAVED  AND  KNOW   HOW,   BUT  WHO   HAVE 

DIFFICULTIES 

A  very  large  number  of  persons  whom  we 
try  to  lead  to  Christ,  we  will  find  are  really 
anxious  to  be  saved  and  know  how,  but  are 
confronted  with  difficulties  which  they  deem 
insurmountable. 

I.  One  of  the  difficulties  is,  UI  am  too  great 
a  sinner."  I  Tim.,  I.  15  meets  this  fully. 
One  Sunday  morning  a  man  who  had  led  a 
wild  and  wandering  life  and  who  had  recently 
lost  $35,000  and  been  separated  from  his 
wife,  said  to  me  in  response  to  my  question, 
why  he  was  not  Christian,  "I  am  too  great  a 
sinner  to  be  saved."  I  turned  at  once  to 
Tim.  1:15.  "This  is  a  faithful  saying  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I 
am  chief."  He  quickly  replied,  "well,  I  am  the 
chief  of  sinners."  "Well,"  I  said,  "that  verse 
means  you  then."  He  replied,  "It  is  a  precious 
36 


THOSE    WHO   HAVE    DIFFICULTIES  37 

promise."  I  said,  "Will  youaccept  it  now  ?"  and 
he  said,  "I  will."  Then  I  said  let  us  kneel 
down  and  tell  God  so,  and  we  knelt  down  and 
he  confessed  to  God  his  sins,  and  asked  God 
for  Christ's  sake  to  forgive  him  his  sins.  I 
asked  him  if  he  had  really  accepted  Christ  and 
he  said  he  had.  I  asked  him  if  he  really  be- 
lieved that  he  was  saved  and  he  said  he  did. 
He  took  an  early  opportunity  of  confessing 
Christ.  He  left  the  city  in  a  short  time  but 
I  was  able  to  follow  him.  He  became  a  most 
active  Christian,  working  at  his  business  day 
times  but  engaged  in  some  form  of  Christian 
work  every  night  in  the  week.  He  was  re- 
united to  his  wife  and  adopted  a  little  child 
out  of  an  orphan  asylum  and  had  a  happy 
Christian  home.  Luke  xix,  10  is  also  a  very 
useful  passage  to  use  in  dealing  with  this 
class  of  men ;  especially  useful  when  a  man 
says,  "I  am  lost."  You  can  say,  "I  have  a  pas- 
sage intended  expressly  for  you.  If  you  really 
mean  what  you  say,  you  are  just  the  man 
Jesus  is  seeking.  "For  the  Son  of  man  is 
come  to  seek  and  save  that  which  was  lost." 
Romans  v:  6-8  is  a  very  effective  passage.  I 
stopped  a  man  one  night  as  he  was  hurrying 
out  of  a  meeting.  Laying  my  hand  on  his 
shoulder  I  said  "Did  you  not  hold  your  hand 


38  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN   TO   CHRIST 

up  to-night  for  prayers ?"  He  said  "yes."  I 
said,  "Why  then  are  you  hurrying  away?  Do 
you  know  God  loves  you?"  He  replied, 
"You  do  not  know  who  you  are  talking  to." 
"I  do  not  care  who  I  am  talking  to  but 
I  know  God  loves  you."  He  said:  "I  am 
the  meanest  thief  in  Minneapolis."  I  said  "If 
you  are  the  meanest  thief  in  Minneapolis, 
then  I  know  God  loves  you,"  and  I  opened 
my  Bible  to  Romans  v:  8.  "But  God  com- 
mendeth  his  love  toward  us  in  that  while  we 
were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  us."  "Now," 
I  said,  "If  you  are  the  meanest  thief  in  Minne- 
apolis, you  are  a  sinner,  and  this  verse  tells 
that  God  loves  sinners."  The  man  broke  down 
and  going  into  another  room  with  me  told  me 
his  story.  He  was  just  out  of  confinement 
for  crime;  had  started  out  that  very  night  to 
commit  what  he  said  would  have  been  one  of 
the  most  daring  burglaries  ever  committed  in 
the  city  of  Minneapolis;  with  his  two  com- 
panions in  crime  he  was  passing  a  corner  where 
he  happened  to  hear  an  open  air  meeting  go- 
ing on  and  stopped  a  few  minutes  to  hear 
and  in  spite  of  the  protests  and  oaths  of  his 
companions  stayed  through  the  meeting  and 
went  with  us  to  the  Mission.  After  telling 
me  his  story  we  kneeled  in  prayer.    Through 


THOSE   WHO   HAVE    DIFFICULTIES  39 

tears  he  cried  to  God  for  mercy,  having  been 
led  by  God's  precious  promise  to  believe  that 
God  loved  a  sinner  even  as  vile  as  he.  Matt, 
ix:  12, M3;  Romans  x:  13,  (Emphasize  "who- 
soever"); Johniii:  16  (Emphasize  the  "whoso- 
ever"); Isaiah  i:  18;  I  John  iv:  14;  John  ii:  1-2; 
Isaiah  xliv  22;  Isaiah  xliii:  25  are  also  useful 
passages  in  dealing  with  this  class  of  men. 
Isaiah  i:  18  and  Ps.  Ii:  14  are  especially  useful 
in  dealngwith  men  who  have  committed  mur- 
der. Never  tell  any  one  that  his  sins  are  not 
great.  It  is  well  sometimes  to  say  to  these 
men,  "Yes,  your  sins  are  great,  greater  than 
you  think,  but  they  have  all  been  settled" 
and  show  them  Isaiah  liii:  6;  I  Peter  ii:  24. 
A  woman  once  came  to  me  in  great  agitation. 
After  many  ineffectual  attempts  she  was  at  last 
able  to  unburden  her  heart.  Fourteen  years 
before  she  had  killed  a  man  and  had  borne 
the  memory  of  the  act  upon  her  conscience 
until  it  had  almost  driven  her  crazy.  When 
she  told  the  story  to  another  Christian  and 
myself,  we  turned  to  Isaiah  liii:  6.  After 
reading  the  verse  very  carefully  to  her,  I  asked 
her  what  the  Lord  had  done  with  her  sin. 
After  a  few  moments  deep  and  anxious 
thought  she  said,  "He  has  laid  it  on  Christ," 
I  took  a  book  in  my  hand.     "Now"  I  said  "let 


40  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN   TO   CHRIST 

my  right  hand  represent  you,  and  my  left 
hand  Christ,  and  this  book  your  sin.  I  laid 
the  book  upon  my  right  hand  and  I  said: 
"Where  is  your  sin  now?"  She  saftl  "On 
me."  "Now,"  I  said,  "what  has  God  done  with 
it?"  She  said  "Laid  it  on  Christ,"  and  I  laid  the 
book  over  on  the  other  hand.  "Where  is 
your  sin  now?"  I  asked.  It  was  long  before 
she  could  summon  courage  to  answer,  and 
then  with  a  desperate  effort  she  said,  "On 
Christ."  I  said,  "then  is  it  on  you  any  longer 
er?"  Slowly  the  light  came  into  her  face  and 
she  burst  out  with  a  cry,  "No,  it  is  on  Him, 
it  is  on  Christ."  John  i:  29.  Acts  x:  43, 
Heb.  vii:  25,  are  also  helpful  texts  in  dealing 
with  this  class  of  men. 

2.  Another  difficulty  we  frequently  meet 
with,  is  that  "/  can  t  hold  out"  or  "/  am 
afraid  of  failure."  I  Peter  i:  5  is  useful  in 
showing  that  we  are  not  to  keep  ourselves  but 
are  "kept  by  the  power  of  God."  John  x: 
28,  29  shows  that  the  safety  of  the  one  who 
accepts  Christ  does  not  depend  upon  his 
"holding  out"  but  upon  the  keeping  power  of 
the  Father  and  the  Son.  II  Tim.  i:  12  shows 
that  it  is  Christ's  business  and  not  ours  to 
keep  that  which  is  entrusted  to  him  and  that 
he  is  able  to  do  it.      Isaiah  xli:  10,  13  are  also 


THOSE   WHO   HAVE   DIFFICULTIES  4t 

helpful.  Jude  24  shows  that  whether  we  can 
keep  from  falling  or  not,  that  Christ  is  able 
to  keep  us  from  falling.  II  Chr.  xxxii:  7,  8; 
Romans  xiv:  4;  II  Thes.  iii:  3,  are  also  good 
texts  to  use.  I  Cor  x:  13  is  especially  useful 
when  one  is  afraid  that  some  great  temptation 
will  overtake  him  and  he  will  fall. 

3.  Another  difficulty  very  similar  to  the 
preceding  one,  is  "/  am  too  weak.11  With 
such  a  person,  use  II  Cor.  xii:  9,  10.  Ask  him 
"where  is  it  that  Christ's  strength  is  made 
perfect?"  When  he  answers  "in  weakness," 
tell  him  then  "the  weaker  you  are  in  your  own 
strength  the  better."  Philippians  iv:  13  shows 
that  however  weak  we  may  be,  we  can  do 
all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth 
us.  I  Cor.  x:  13  will  show  that  God 
knows  all  about  our  weakness  and  will  not 
permit  us  to  be  tempted  above  our  strength. 

4.  "/  cannot  give  up  my  evil  ways  or 
bad  habits11  Gal.  vi:  7,  8,  will  show  them 
that  they  must  give  them  up  or  perish.  Phil- 
ippians iv:  13  will  show  them  that  they  can 
give  them  up  in  Christ's  strength.  It  is  an 
excellent  plan  to  point  the  one  who  fears  that 
he  cannot  give  up  his  bad  habits  to  Christ, 
as  a  risen  Saviour,  I  Cor.  xv,  3,  4.  A  man 
once  came  to  me  and  said:  "I  come  to  you  to 


42  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN   TO   CHRIST 

know  if  there  is  any  way  I  can  get  power  to 
overcome  my  evil  habits."  He  told  me  his 
story;  he  had  been  converted  in  childhood  but 
had  come  to  Chicago,  fallen  in  with  evil  com- 
panions and  gone  down,  and  now  could  not 
breakaway  from  his  sins.  I  said  to  him:  "You 
know  only  half  the  gospel,  the  gospel  of  a 
crucified  Saviour.  Through  trusting  in  the 
crucified  Saviour  you  found  pardon.  But  Jesus 
Christ  is  also  arisen  Saviour,  i  Cor  xv,  4,  'All 
power  is  given  unto  Him,'  Matt,  xxviii:  18 
He  has  power  to  give  you  victory  over  your 
evil  habits.  Do  you  believe  that?"  He  said, 
"yes".  "You  trusted."  1  continued,  "in  the 
crucified  Christ  and  found  pardon,  did  you 
not."  "Yes,"  he  replied.  "Now,"  I  said,  "will 
you  trust  the  risen  Christ  to  save  you  from 
the  power  of  your  sins?"  "Yes,  1  will."  "Let 
us  kneel  down  then,  and  tell  him  so."  We 
knelt  and  talked  it  all  over  with  the  Saviour. 
When  he  arose  his  very  countenance  was 
changed.  "I  am  so  glad  I  came"  he  said. 
Some  time  after  I  received  a  letter  from  him 
telling  me  how  he  found  constant  victory 
through  trusting  in  the  risen  Christ. 

5.  "/  will  be  persecuted  if  1  become  a  Chris- 
tian." Never  tell  any  one  that  he  will  not  be 
persecuted,  but  show  him  from  such  passages 


THOSE    WHO    HAVE    DIFFICULTIES  43 

as  II  Tim.  ii:  12;  II  Tim.  iii:  12;  Matt  v:io, 
11,  12;  Mark  viii : 35 ;  Acts  xiv.22,  that  perse- 
cution is  the  only  path  to  Glory.  Show  them 
from  Romans  viii:  18  that  the  sufferings  of  this 
present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared 
with  the  Glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us. 
Show  them  from  Acts  v:4i,  1  Peter  ii:  20,  21, 
that  it  is  a  privilege  to  be  persecuted  for 
Christ's  sake.  Heb.  xii:  3,  3  is  useful  in  show- 
ing them  where  to  look  for  victory  in  persecu- 
tion. 

6.  "It  will  hurt  my  business  "  or  "/  can't 
be  a  Christian  in  my  present  business ."  Point 
such  an  one  to  Mark  viii:  36,  this  will  show  him 
that  it  is  better  to  lose  his  business  than  to 
lose  his  soul.  After  this  thought  has  been  suffi- 
ciently impressed  upon  his  mind,  show  him 
Matt  vi:32,  33  which  contains  God's  promise 
that  if  we  put  God  and  His  kingdom,  first, 
that  He  will  provide  for  all  our  real  temporal 
needs.  Matt  xvi:  24-27;  Luke  xii:  16-21 ;  16:24- 
26  are  also  very  effective  passages  to  use 
with  this  class. 

7.  "Too  much  to  give  up"  Mark  viii:  36 
will  show  them  that  they  had  better  give  up 
everything  than  to  lose  their  soul.  Philippians 
iii:  7,  8;  Ps.  xvi:  11  will  show  them  that  what 
they  give  up  is  nothing  compared  with  what 


44  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

they  get.  Ps. 'lxxxiv:  1 1 ;  Romans  viii:  32  will 
show  them  that  God  will  not  ask  them  to  give 
up  any  good  thing ;  in  other  words,  that  the  only 
things  God  asks  them  to  give  up  are  the  things 
that  are  hurting  them.  A  young  woman  once 
refused  to  come  to  the  Saviour  saying,  "There 
is  too  much  to  give  up."  "Do  you  think  God 
loves  you?"  I  answered.  "Certainly."  "How 
much  do  you  think  he  loves  you?"  She 
thought  a  moment  and  answered,  "Enough  to 
give  his  son  to  die  for  me."  "Do  you  think, 
if  God  loved  you  enough  to  give  his  son  to 
die  for  you,  he  will  ask  you  to  give  up  any- 
thing it  is  for  your  good  to  keep?"  "No."  "Do 
you  wish  to  keep  anything  that  it  is  not  for 
your  good  to  keep?"  "No."  "Then  you  had 
better  come  to  Christ  at  once."  And  she  did. 
IJohnii:i7,  Luke  xii:  16-21  will  show  them 
how  worthless  are  the  things  to  which  they 
are  trying  to  hold. 

8.  "  The  Christian  life  is  too  hard.11  Say 
to  the  inquirer,  "Let  me  show  you  from  God's 
word  that  you  are  mistaken  about  the  Chris- 
tian life  being  hard."  Then  turn  him  to  Matt, 
xi:  30;  Prov.  iii:  17;  Ps.  xvi:n;  I  John  v:  3, 
and  show  him  that  a  Christian  life  is  not  hard 
but  exceedingly  pleasant.  Then  turn  him  to 
Prov.  xiii:  5,  and  show  him  that  it  is  the  sin- 
ner's life  that  is  hard. 


THOSE   WHO    HAVE    DIFFICULTIES  45 

9.  "7  am  afraid  of  my  ungodly  compan- 
ions ;"  or  "I  will  lose  my  friends  if  I  take 
Christ. "  Pro  v.  xxix:  2  5  will  show  them  the  con- 
sequence of  yielding  to  the  fear  of  man  and  the 
security  of  the  one  who  trusts  in  the  Lord. 
Prov.  xiii:20  will  show  them  the  result  of  hold- 
ing on  to  their  companions,  and  Ps.  i:i  will 
show  the  blessedness  of  giving  up  evil  com- 
panions. I  John  1:3  shows  how  much  better 
companionship  one  gets  than  he  loses  by  com- 
ing to  Christ. 

10.  "My  heart  is  too  hard.11  Ezek.  xxxvi. 
26,27,  will  show  them  that  though  their  hearts 
are  hard  as  stone,  that  will  make  no  difference 
because  God  will  give  them  a  new  heart. 

11.  "I  have  no  feeling.'11  Ask  the  inquirer 
what  kind  of  feeling  he  thinks  he  must  have 
before  he  comes  to  Christ.  If  it  is  the  peace 
of  which  Christians  speak,  show  him  from 
Gal.  v.  22;  Eph.  i.  13;  Acts  v.  32;  I  Peter  i. 
8;  Matt.  x.  32,  that  this  feeling  is  the  result  of 
accepting  Christ  and  confessing  Him,  and 
that  he  cannot  expect  it  until  he  accepts  and 
confesses  Christ.  If  the  feeling  which  he 
thinks  he  must  have  is  the  feeling  that  he  is  a 
sinner,  then  show  him  by  Is.  lv.7  that  it  is  not 
the  feeling  that  we  are  sinners  that  God  de- 
mands,   but  a  turning  away  from   sin.     Or, 


46  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN   TO    CHRIST 

from  Acts  xvi:  31;  John  i:  12;  that  God  does 
not  ask  us  to  feel  that  we  are  sinners  but  to 
confess  that  we  are  sinners  and  trust  in 
Christ  as  a  Saviour.  Is.  lv.  1;  Rev.  xxii.  17, 
will  show  the  inquirer  that  all  the  feeling  he 
needs  is  a  desire  for  salvation. 

It  is  often,  times  well,  however,  with  this 
class  of  inquirers  to  show  them  the  passages 
for  "The  Indifferent"  until  they  do  feel  that 
they  are  sinners. 

12.  u I  am  seeking  Christ,  but  cannot  find 
Him.11 

Jer.  xxix.  13,  shows  that  when  we  seek  him 
with  the  whole  heart  we  shall  find  him. 
Speaking  with  a  woman  one  evening  in  an 
after-meeting  she  said  to  me,  "I  have  been 
seeking  Christ  two  years  and  cannot  find  Him." 
I  replied,  "I  can  tell  you  when  you  will  find 
him."  She  looked  at  me  in  surprise  and  I 
turned  to  Jer.  xxix.  13,  and  read  "And  ye  shall 
seek  me,  and  find  me,  when  ye  shall  search 
for  me  with  all  your  heart."  "There,"  I  said, 
"that  shows  you  when  you  will  find  Christ. 
You  will  find  him  when  you  search  for  him 
with  all  your  heart.  Have  you  done  that?" 
After  a  little  thought  she  answered  "No." 
"Well,  then,"  I  said,  "let  us  kneel  righr  down 
here  now."  She  did  this  and  in  a  few  moments 


THOSE   WHO   HAVE   DIFFICULTIES  47 

she  was  rejoicing  in  Christ.  You  can  point  one 
who  has  this  difficulty  to  Luke  xv.  i-io,  ;  xix. 
10.  These  passages  show  that  Jesus  is  seek- 
ing the  sinner  and  you  can  say,  "if  you  are 
really  seeking  Christ  it  will  not  take  a  seeking 
Saviour  and  a  seeking  sinner  very  long  to  find 
each  other." 

13.  "I  cannot  believe." 

In  most  cases  where  one  says  this  the  real 
difficulty  which  lies  back  of  their  inability  to 
believe  is  unwillingness  to  forsake  sin.  John 
v.  44,  is  a  good  passage  to  use  with  such  a 
one,  or  Is.  lv.  7.  In  the  use  of  the  latter 
passage,  hold  the  man's  attention  to  the  fact 
that  all  God  asks  of  him  is  that  he  turn  away 
from  sin  and  turn  to  Him. 

14.  "God  wont  receive  me"  or  " I have 
sinned  away  the  day  of  grace"  or  UI  am 
afraid  I  have  committed  the  unpardonable 
sin. " 

The  people  who  honestly  say  this,  are  as  a 
rule  about  the  most  difficult  class  to  deal 
with  of  any  that  you  will  meet.  John  vi.  37, 
is  the  great  text  to  use  with  them  for  it  shows 
that  Jesus  will  receive  any  one  who  will  come 
to  him.  Hold  him  continually  to  that  point, 
"Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out"  and  if  they  keep  saying  "He  won't 


48  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

receive  me"  repeat  the  text,  looking  to  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  carry  the  truth  home.  Many 
an'  utterly  despondent  soul  has  found  light 
and  peace  through  this  verse  in  God's  word. 
Rev.  xxii.  17,  is  also  useful  as  it  shows  that 
any  one  who  will  can  have  the  water  of  life 
freely.  Is.  lv.  1,  shows  that  any  one  who  de- 
sires salvation  can  have  it.  Is.  i.  18,  shows 
that  no  matter  how  great  a  man's  sins  may 
be  still  here  is  pardon.  Acts  x.  43,  and  John 
iii.  16,  that  "whosoever"  will  believe  upon 
Christ  will  find  pardon  and  eternal  life. 
Romans  x.  13,  shows  that  any  one,  no 
matter  who  or  what  he  is,  who  will  "call 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved." 
It  is  well  sometimes  to  turn  to  Heb.  vi.  4-6, 
and  Matt.  xii.  31-32,  and  show  the  inquirer 
just  what  the  unpardonable  sin  is  and  what 
its  results  are.  Matt.  xii.  31,  32,  shows  that 
it  is  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
put  it  squarely  to  him,  "have  you  ever  blas- 
phemed against  the  Holy  Ghost?"  Heb.  vi. 
4-6,  shows  that  the  difficulty  is  not  in  God's 
unwillingness  to  forgive,  but  in  the  man's 
unwillingness  to  repent  and  that  any  one  who 
is  concerned  about  his  salvation  evidently 
has  not  committed  the  unpardonable  sin  nor 
sinned   away  his  day  of  grace.     A  little  in- 


THOSE    WHO    HAVE    DIFFICULTIES  49 

struction  along  this  line  is  often  times  all  that 
is  needed. 

15.      "It  is  too  late.1' 

When  an  inquirer  says  this,  it  is  of  ten 
times  well  to  use  2  Cor.  vi.  2,  and  tell  him 
that  God  says,  it  is  just  the  time.  Luke  xxiii. 
39-43,  is  useful  as  showing  that  even  at  the 
last  hour  Jesus  will  harken  to"  the  sinner's 
cry.  II  Peter  iii.  9,  will  show  that  His  will  is 
that  none  should  perish,  but  that  He  is  delay- 
ing the  judgment  that  He  may  save  as  many 
as  will  come.  Deut.  iv.  30,  31,  is  an  espec- 
ially helpful  passage  as  it  says  "Even  in  the 
latter  days"  if  thou  turn  to  the  Lord  he  will 
be  merciful.  Is.  i.  18,  and  Rev.  xxii.  17,  can 
also  be  used  here. 


CHAPTER  VI 

DEALING  WITN    THOSE   WHO   ENTERTAIN    FALSE 
HOPES 

I.  Among  those  who  entertain  false  hopes, 
perhaps  the  largest  class  are  those  who  ex- 
pect to  be  saved  by  their  righteous  lives. 
These  persons  are  easily  known  by  such  say- 
ings as  these,  "I  am  doing  the  toes1  I  can." 
"I  do  more  good  than  evil."  ui  am  not  a 
great  sinner."  "I  have  never  dofftWtevthing 
very  bad."  Gal.  iii.  10,  is  an  excelW  pas- 
sage to  use,  for  it  shows  that  all  those  who 
are  trusting  in  their  works  are  under x1  -  curse 
of  the  law  and  that  there  is  no  hope  on  the 
ground  of  the  law  for  any  one  who  does  not 
"continue  in  all  things  which  are  written  in 
the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  James  ii. 
io  is  also  useful.  Gal.  ii.  16,  and  Romans 
iii.  19,  20  are  very  directive  by  showing  that 
by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be 
justified  in  God's  sight.  Matt.  v.  20 — All 
these  passages  show  the  kind  of  righteousness 
God  demands  and  that  no  man's  righteousness 
50 


THOSE  WHO  ENTERTAIN  FALSE  HOPES   5  I 

comes  up  to  God's  standard,  and  that  if  a  man 
wishes  to  be  saved  he  must  find  some  other 
means  of  salvation  than  by  his  own  deeds. 
It  is  sometimes  well  in  using  these  passages 
to  say  to  the  inquirer:  "You  do  not  under- 
stand the  kind  of  righteousness  that  God  de- 
mands or  you  would  not  talk  as  you  do.  Now 
let  us  turn  to  His  word  and  see  what  kind  of 
righteousness  it  is  that  God  demands."  There 
is  another  way  of  dealing  with  this  class,  by  the 
use  of  such  passages  as  Luke  xvi :  1 5 ;  Rom.  ii :  1 6, 
7;  I  Sam.xvi:/.  These  passages  show  that  God  L. 
looks  at  the  heart.  Hold  the  inquirer  right  to 
that  point.  Every  man  when  brought  face 
to  face  with  that,  must  tremble  because  he 
knows  that  whatever  his  outward  life  may 
be,  his  heart  will  not  stand  the  scrutiny  of 
God's  eye.  No  matter  how  selfrighteous  a 
man  is,  we  need  not  be  discouraged  for  some- 
where in  the  depths  of  every  man's  heart  is 
the  consciousness  of  sin  and  all  we  have  to 
do  is  to  work  away  until  we  touch  that  point. 
Every  man's  conscience  is  on  our  side.  Matt. » 
xxii.  37,  38  can  be  used  when  a  man  says  "I 
am  doing  the  best  I  can,  or  doing  more  good 
than  evil."  Say  to  him,  "You  are  greatly  mis- 
taken about  that;  so  far  from  doing  more 
good  than  evil,  do  you   know   that    you  have 


52  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

broken  the  first  and  greatest  of  God's  laws?" 
Then  show  him  the  passage.  Heb.  xi.  6, 
John  vi.  29,  show  that  the  one  thing  that  God 
demands  is  faith  and  that  without  that  it  is 
impossible  to  please  God,  and  John  xvi.  9, 
shows  that  unbelief  in  Christ  is  the  greatest 
sin.  John  iii.  36,  shows  that  the  question  of 
eternal  life  depends  solely  upon  a  man's  ac- 
cepting or  rejecting  Jesus  Christ,  and  Heb.  x. 
28,  29,  that  the  sin  which  brings  the  heaviest 
punishment  is  that  of  treading  under  foot  the 
Son  of  God.  Before  using  this  latter  passage,  it 
would  be  well  to  say,  "You  think  you  are  very 
good,  but  do  you  know  that  you  are  commit- 
ting the  most  awful  sin  in  God's  sight  which 
a  man  can  commit?"  If  he  replies,  "No",  then 
say  "Well  let  me  show  you  from  God's  word 
that  you  are;"  then  turn  to  this  passage  and 
read  it  with  great  solemnity  and  earnestness. 

2.  Another  class  of  those  who  entertain 
false  hopes,  are  those  who  think  "God  is  too 
good  to  damn  anyone, " 

When  any  one  says  this,  you  can  reply,  "We 
know  nothing  of  God's  goodness  but  what  we 
learn  from  the  Bible,  and  we  must  go  to  that 
book  to  find  out  the  character  of  God's  good- 
ness. Let  us  turn  to  Romans  ii.  2.  4,  5."  Hav- 
ing read  the   verses,  you   can  say  something 


THOSE  WHO  ENTERTAIN    FALSE  HOPES       53 

like  this,  "Now,  my  friend,  you  see  that  the 
purpose  of  God's  goodness  is  to  lead  you  to 
repentence,  not  to  encourage  you  in  sin  and 
when  we  trample  upon  his  goodness,  then 
we  are  treasuring  up  wrath  against  the  day  of 
wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God."  John  viii.  21,  24  and  iii.  36, 
will  show  the  man  that  however  good  God 
may  be  that  he  will  reject  all  who  reject  His 
Son.  Still  another  way  to  deal  with  these 
men  is  by  showing  them  from  John  v.  40,  II 
Peter  iii.  9- 11  or  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11,  that  it  is 
not  so  much  God  who  damns  men  as  men 
who  damn  themselves  in  spite  of  God's  good- 
ness because  they  will  not  come  to  Christ  and 
accept  the  life  freely  offered.  You  can  say 
"God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish 
and  he  offers  life  freely  to  you,  but  there  is 
one  difficulty  in  the  way.  Let  us  turn  to 
John  v.  40,  and  see  what  the  difficulty  is ." 
Then  read  the  passage:  "Ye  will  not  come  to 
me  that  ye  might  have  life,"  and  say,  "My 
friend  here  is  the  difficulty,  you  won't  come; 
life  is  freely  offered  to  you  but  if  you  will  not 
accept  it,  you  must  perish."  II  Peter  ii.4-6,9; 
Luke  xiii.  3,  show  how  the  "good"  God  deals 
with  persons  who  persist  in  sin.  Sometimes 
this  last  passage  can  be  effectively  used  in 


54  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN   TO    CHRIST 

this  way:  "You  say  God  is  too  good  to  damn 
any  one.  Now  let  us  see  what  God  Himself 
says  in  his  word."  Then  turn  to  the  passage 
and  read,  "Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  like- 
wise perish."  Repeat  the  passage  over  and 
over  again  until  it  has  been  driven  home. 

3.  A  third  class  of  those  who  entertain  false 
hopes,  are  those  who  say  "I  am  trying  to  be  a 
Christian.'''  Johni.  12,  will  show  them  that 
it  is  not  "trying"  to  be  a  Christian  or  "trying" 
to  live  a  better  life  or  "trying"  to  do  any- 
thing that  God  asks  of  us,  but  simply  to  receive 
Jesus  Christ,  who  did  it  all,  and  you  can  ask 
the  inquirer,  "will  you  now  stop  your  trying 
and  simply  receive  Jesus  as  Saviour?  Acts 
xvi.  31,  shows  that  God  does  not  ask  us  to 
try  what  we  can  do  but  trust  Jesus  and  what 
He  has  done  and  will  do.  Romans  iii.  23-25, 
shows  that  we  are  not  to  be  justified  by  trying 
to  do,  "but  freely  by  His  grace,  through  the 
redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus"  on  the  sim- 
ple condition  of  faith. 

4.  Still  another  class  of  those  who  enter- 
tain false  hopes  are  those  who  say,  " I  feel  I 
am  going  to  Heaven"  or  "/  feel  I  am  saved. " 
Show  them  from  John  iii,  36  that  it  is  not  a 
question  of  what  they  feel  but  what  God  says, 
and  what  God  says  distinctly  in  his  word  is 


THOSE  WHO  ENTERTAIN    FALSE  HOPES       55 

that,  "He  that  believeth  not  on  the  Son,  shall 
not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him."  One  afternoon  I  was  talking  with  a 
lady  who  a  few  weeks  before  had  lost  her  on- 
ly child.  At  the  time  of  the  child's  death  she 
had  been  deeply  interested,  but  her  serious  im- 
pressions had  largely  left  her.  I  put  to  her 
the  question,  "Do  you  not  wish  to  go  where 
your  little  one  has  gone?"  She  replied  at  once 
"I  expect  to."  "What  makes  you  think  you 
will?"  I  said.  She  replied,  "I  feel  so,  I  feel  that 
I  will  goto  heaven  when  I  die."  I  then  asked 
her,  if  there  was  anything  she  could  point  to 
in  the  word  of  God  which  gave  her  a  reason 
for  believing  that  she  was  going  to  heaven 
when  she  died.  "No,"  she  said,  "there  is  not." 
Then  she  turned  and  questioned  me,  saying, 
"Do  you  expect  to  go  to  heaven  when  you  die?" 
"Yes",  I  replied,  "I  know  I  shall."  How  do 
you  know  it?"  she  said.  "Have  you  any  word 
from  God  for  it  ?"  "Yes, "I  answered  and  turned 
her  to  John  iii.  36,  She  was  thus  led  to  see  the 
difference  between  a  faith  that  rested  upon 
her  feelings  and  a  faith  that  rested  upon  the 
word  of  God. 

Luke  xviii.  9-14,  can  also  be  used  in 
the  following  way;  you  can  say  "there  was 
a  man    in   the    Bible   who    felt   he   was   all 


$6  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN   TO   CHRIST 

right,  but  was  all  wrong.  Let  me  read 
you  about  him."  Then  read  about  the 
Pharisee  who  was  so  sure  that  he  was  all 
right,  but  who  was  all  the  time  an  unforgiven 
sinnerjand  make  the  inquirer  see  how  untrust- 
worthy our  feelings  are  and  what  the  ground 
of  assurance,  is  viz:  God's  word.  Prov.  xiv.  12 
can  also  be  used  as  showing  that  "there  is  a  way 
which  seemeth  right  unto  a  man  but  the  end 
thereof  are  the  ways  of  death." 

5.  The  last  class  of  those  who  entertain 
false  hopes,  are  those  who  say  they  are  saved 
though  they  are  leading  sinful  lives.  In  the 
case  of  many  forms  of  sin,  a  good  passage  to 
use  is  I  Cor.  vi:  9-10.  I  John  ii:  29  will  also 
in  many  cases  sweep  away  this  false  hope.  I 
John  v:  4-5  is  useful  as  showing  that  one  who 
is  really  born  of  God  overcomes  the  world  and 
the  fact  that  they  are  living  in  sin  and  are  not 
overcoming  the  world  is  evidence  that  they 
have  not  been  born  of  God. 


CHAPTER  VII 

Dealing  with  those  who  Lack  Assurance 
and  with  Backsliders 

i.     Those  who  Lack  Assurance. 

Those  who  lack  assurance  may  be  divided 
into  two  classes. 

I .  Those  who  lack  assurance  because  of  ig- 
norance. I  John  v:i3,  will  show  all  such  that 
we  may  know  that  we  have  eternal  life.  Often 
times  when  you  ask  people  if  they  know  they 
are  saved,  or  if  they  know  their  sins  are  for- 
given, or  if  they  know  they  have  eternal  life, 
they  will  reply,  "Why  no  one  knows  that." 
You  can  say  to  them,  "Yes  the  Bible  says  that 
all  who  believe  may  know  it,"  and  then  show 
them  I  John  v:i3.  John  i:i2  shows  that 
Christ  gives  to  as  many  as  receive  Him,  power 
to  become  the  Sons  of  God.  A  good  way  to 
use  this  verse  is  to  ask  the  inquirer  questions 
regarding  it.  "What  does  every  one  who  re- 
ceives Him  receive  power  to  become?"  The 
inquirer  if  he  is  attentively  looking  at  the 
verse  will  answer,  "A  son  of  God."  Then  ask 
57 


58  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

the  next  question,  "Have  you  received  Him? 
If  he  replies  "Yes,"  then  ask  him,  "What  are 
you  then  ?"  It  will  probably  be  necessary  to  go 
over  it  several  times  but  at  last  the  inquirer 
will  see  it  and  say  "I  am  a  son  of  God." 
John  iii: 36  can  be  used  in  a  similar  way.  Ask 
the  inquirer  "who  do  these  verses  say  has  ever- 
lasting life?"  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son." 
"Do  you  believe  on  the  Son?"  "What  have 
you  then?"  In  a  little  while  he  will  see  it  and 
say  "Everlasting  life."  Then  have  him  say 
over  and  over  again  "I  have  everlasting  life," 
and  have  him  kneel  down  and  thank  God  for 
giving  him  everlasting  life.  One  night  I  found 
a  young  man  upon  his  knees  at  the  close  of 
the  service  in  great  distress.  I  showed  him 
from  the  Bible  how  Jesus  Christ  had  borne 
his  sins  and  asked  him  if  he  would  accept 
Christ  as  his  Saviour;  he  said  he  would;  but 
he  seemed  to  get  no  light  and  went  out  of  the 
meeting  in  deep  distress.  The  next  night  he 
was  there  again,  professing  to  have  accepted 
Christ  but  with  no  assurance  that  his  sins 
were  forgiven.  I  tried  to  show  him  from  God's 
word  what  God  said  of  those  who  accepted 
the  Saviour,  but  the  light  did  not  come.  Finally 
he  rose  to  leave  the  meeting.  I  had  just 
shown  him   from  John   iii  136  that   God  said 


THOSE    WHO    LACK    ASSURANCE  59 

that  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  ever- 
lasting life."  As  he  turned  to  leave  me,  he 
said,  "Will  you  pray  for  me?"  I  said  "Yes." 
He  walked  a  little  way  down  the  aisle  and  I 
called  to  him  and  said,  "Do  you  believe  I  will 
pray  for  you?"  He  turned  with  a  look  of  as- 
tonishment and  replied,  "Yes,  of  course." 
"Why  do  you  think  I  will  pray  for  you?"  I 
then  asked.  "Because  you  said  so,"  he  replied. 
I  said  "Isn't  God's  word  as  good  as  mine?" 
He  saw  it  at  once,  that  while  he  had  been 
willing  to  believe  my  word,  he  had  not  been 
willing  to  believe  God's  word,  and  he  received 
assurance  on  the  spot  and  knew  that  he  had 
everlasting  life.  John  v:24  and  I  John  v:i2 
can  be  used  in  a  similar  way. 

Acts  xiii:  39  is  very  useful  in  dealing  with 
this  class  of  persons.  Ask  the  inquirer: 
"What  does  this  verse  say  that  all  who  believe 
are?"  "Justified".  Then  ask  him,  "Do  you 
believe?"  "What  are  you  then?"  It  will 
probably  take  two  or  three  times  going  over 
it  before  he  sees  it  and  when  he  answers  "I 
am  justified,"  tell  him  to  thank  God  for  justi- 
fying him  and  confess  Christ,  and  see  to  it 
that  he  does  so.  Many  inquirers  of  this  class 
stumble  over  the  fact  that  they  have  not  the 
witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Show  them  from 


60  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

I  John  v:  10  that  the  witness  of  the  word  to 
their  acceptance  is  sufficient,  and  that,  if  they 
believe  not  this  witness  of  God  in  His  word, 
they  make  Him  a  liar.  Show  them  further 
from  Eph.  i,  13.  that  it  is  after  we  believe  the 
testimony  of  the  word  that  we  are  "sealed 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise."  The  natur- 
al order  in  assurance  is  this:  First,  assurance 
of  our  justification,  resting  on  the  "  Word  of 
God."  Second,  public  confession  of  Christ, 
"with  the  mouth".  Romans  x,  10.  Third, 
the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  trouble 
with  many  is  that  they  wish  to  invert  this 
order  and  have  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
before  they  confess  Christ  with  the  mouth. 
From  Matt.  x.  32,  33,  we  learn  that  when  we 
confess  Christ  before  men,  then  He  confesses 
us  before  the  Father.  We  cannot  reasonably 
expect  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  from  the  Father 
until  we  are  confessed  before  the  Father.  So 
confession  of  Christ  logically  precedes  the 
witness  of  the  Spirit. 

It  is  very  important  in  using  these  texts  to 
make  clear  what  saving  faith  is;because  many 
may  say  that  they  believe  when  they  do  not,  in 
the  sense  of  these  texts,  and  so  get  a  false  as- 
surance and  entertain  false  hopes  and  never 
find  deliverance.    There  is  a  great  deal  of  care- 


THOSE   WHO    LACK   ASSURANCE  6 1 

less  dealing  with  those  who  lack  assurance. 
Workers  are  so  anxious  to  have  inquirers  come 
out  clearly  that  they  urge  them  on  to  assur- 
ance when  they  have  no  right  to  have  assur- 
ance of  salvation  as  they  have  not  really  ac- 
cepted Christ. 

John  i:  12,  and  II  Tim.  i:  12,  make  very 
clear  what  believing  is — receiving  Jesus  or 
committing  to  Jesus.  Romans  x:  10,  will  serve 
a  similar  purpose  by  showing  that  it  "is  with 
the  heart  man  believeth  unto   righteousness." 

2.  Those  who  lack  assurance  because  of 
sin.  The  trouble  often  with  those  who  lack 
assurance  is  that  there  is  some  sin  or  ques- 
tionable practice  which  they  ought  to  confess 
and  give  up.  John  viii:  12,  Is.  lv:  7,  Prov. 
xxviii:  13,  Ps.  xxxii:  1-5,  are  useful  passages 
in  dealing  with  this  class  of  men,  for  they 
show  that  it  is  when  sin  is  confessed  and 
forsaken  and  we  follow  Christ,  that  we  receive 
pardon,  light  and  assurance.  Often  times  it 
is  well  when  one  lacks  assurance  to  put  the 
question  squarely  to  him:  "Do  you  know  of 
any  sin  on  to  which  you  are  holding  or  any- 
thing in  your  life  which  your  conscience  trou- 
bles you  about?" 

II.  Back-sliders.  There  are  two  classes 
of  back-sliders  and  they  should  be  dealt  with 
in  different  ways. 


62  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

I.  Careless  back-sliders ;  those  who  have 
no  great  desire  to  come  back  to  the  Saviour. 
With  such  persons  use  Jer.  ii:  5 ,  drive  the 
question  right  home,  "What  iniquity  have  you 
found  in  the  Lord?"  Show  them  the  base 
ingratitude  and  folly  of  forsaking  such  a 
Saviour  and  Friend.  Very  likely  they  have 
wandered  away  because  of  unkind  treatment 
by  professed  Christians,  but  hold  them  right 
to  the  point  of  how  the  Lord  treated  them 
and  how  they  are  now  treating  Him.  Use 
also  Jer.  ii:  13,  and  show  them  what  they 
have  forsaken  and  for  what.  Have  them  read 
the  verse  and  ask  them,  "is  not  that  verse 
true?  When  you  forsook  the  Lord  did  you 
not  forsake  the  ' fountain  of  living  waters'  and 
turn  to  'broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no 
water?'"  Illustrate  the  text  by  showing  how 
foolish  it  would  be  to  turn  from  a  fountain  of 
pure  living  water  to  broken  cisterns  or  muddy 
pools.  God  has  greatly  honored  this  verse 
in  bringing  back  back-sliders  to  himself.  Use 
Jer.  ii.  19,  when  they  have  read  it  ask  them 
whether  they  have  not  found  it  "an  evil  thing 
and  bitter"  having  forsaken  the  Lord  their 
God.  Prov.  xiv:  14;  I  Kings  xi:9,  and  Luke 
xv:  13-17,  can  often  times  be  used  with  effect 
with  an  impenitent  back-slider,  showing  him 


THOSE   WHO    LACK   ASSURANCE  63 

the  result  of  his  wandering.  I  have  a  friend 
who  always  uses  Amos,  iv:  11,  12,  and  often 
times  with  good  results. 

2.  Back-sliders  who  are  sick  of  their  wan- 
derings and  sin  and  desire  to  come  back  to 
the  Lord.  These  are  perhaps  as  easy  a  class 
to  deal  with  as  we  ever  find.  Jer.  iii:  12,  13, 
and  22,  will  show  them  how  ready  the  Lord 
is  to  receive  them  back  and  that  all  he  asks 
of  them  is  that  they  acknowledge  their  sin 
and  return  to  him.  Hos.  xiv:  1-4,  is  full  of 
tender  invitation  to  penitent  back-sliders  and 
also  shows  the  way  back  to  God.  Is  xliii: 
22,  24,  25,  and  Is.  xliv:  20-22;  Jer.  xxix:  11- 
13,  Deut.  iv:  28-31;  II.  Chron.vii:  14;  I  John 
i:  9;  ii:  1-2,  set  forth  God's  unfailing  love  for 
the  back-slider  and  His  willingness  to  receive 
him  back.  Mark  xvi:  7;  II.  Chron.  xv:4; 
xxxiii:  1-9,  12,  13,  give  illustrations  of  great 
back-sliders  who  returned  to  the  Lord  and  how 
lovingly  He  received  them,  I  John  i:9,  Jer.  iii: 
12-13;  II  Chron.  xv:  12,15;  v^:  J4>  show  just 
what  steps  the  back-slider  must  take  to  come 
back  to  the  Lord  and  be  restored  to  his  favor, 
viz:  humble  himself,  confess  his  sins  and  turn 
from  his  sin.  Luke  xv:  11-24,  is  perhaps  the 
most  useful  passage  of  all  in  dealing  with  a 
backslider  who  wishes  to  return  for  it  has  both 


64  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

the  steps  which  the  back-slider  must  take  and 
the  kind  of  reception  he  will  receive. 

When  a  back-slider  has  returned  he  should 
always  be  given  instructions  as  to  how  to  live 
so  as  not  to  back-slide  again.  The  sort  of  in- 
struction to  be  given  will  be  found  in  Chap- 
ter xii.  sec.  1 6. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

DEALING   WITH     PROFESSED    SKEPTICS    AND   IN- 
FIDELS 

There  are  various  classes  of  sceptics  and 
the  same  methods  of  dealing  will  not  answer 
for  all 

i.  Skeptics  who  are  mere  triflers.  With 
such  use  I.  Cor.  i:  18.  If  a  man  says  the  Bible 
is  foolishness  to  him,  you  can  say  "Yes,  that 
is  just  what  the  Bible  itself  says."  He  will 
probably  be  surprised  at  this  reply  and  then 
you  can  show  him  I  Cor.  i:  18;  "the  preach- 
ing of  the  cross  is  to  them  that  perish  foolish- 
ness." Then  you  can  say  to  him,  "You  see 
that  the  Bible  says  that  it  is  foolishness  to 
some — them  that  perish — and  the  reason  it  is 
foolishness  to  you  is  because  you  are  perish- 
ing." I  Cor.  ii:  14,  can  be  used  in  a  similar 
way.  A  worker  was  one  night  dealing  with  a 
man  who  said  to  him  when  he  was  trying  to 
persuade  him  to  come  to  Christ,  "all  that 
you  are  saying  is  foolishness  to  me."  The 
worker  quickly  replied,  "Yes,  that  is  just  what 
65 


66  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

the  Bible  says."  The  man  looked  at  him  in 
astonishment  and  said:  "What?"  "You  said  all 
that  I  have  been  saying  to  you  was  foolishness 
to  you,  and  that  is  just  what  the  Bible  says." 
The  man  was  more  astonished  then  than  ever 
and  the  worker  turned  him  to  I  Cor. ii:  14, "But 
the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  Spirit  of  God;  for  they  are  foolishness 
unto  him;  neither  can  he  know  them  because 
they  are  spiritually  discerned."  The  man 
said  "I  never  saw  that  before;  I  never  thought 
of  it  in  that  light  before."  II  Cor.  iv:  3,  4,  is 
very  useful  in  showing  the  trifler  that  he  is 
lost  and  that  his  skepticism  arises  from  the 
fact  that  the  "god  of  this  world  hath  blinded 
his  mind."  II  Thes.  ii:  10-12,  is  useful  in 
showing  the  origin  of  skepticism,  "because 
they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth"  and 
the  consequences  of  skepticism — delusion  and 
damnation.  John  viii:  21,  24,  is  also  very 
searching  in  dealing  with  this  class  of  skeptics, 
showing  the  terrible  consequences  of  unbelief. 
Johnv:  44,  iii.  18,  19,  20  expose  the  origin  of 
scepticism.  Ps.  xiv:  1,  is  useful  in  some 
cases  though  one  needs  to  be  guarded  in  its 
use,  using  only  it  when  it  can  be  done  with 
earnestness  and  tenderness.  II  Thes.  i:  7,  8 
can   also   be  used  with  good  results. 


PROFESSED  SKEPTICS  AND  INFIDELS         67 

2.  Serious  minded  skeptics.  There  is  a 
large  class  of  men  and  women  in  our  day  who 
are  really  desirous  of  knowing  the  truth  but 
who  are  in  an  utter  fog  of  skepticism.  John 
vii:  17  is  a  very  helpful  passage  in  dealing  with 
such.  It  shows  the  way  out  of  skepticism  to 
faith.  Get  the  skeptic  to  act  along  the  line 
of  that  verse.  Put  to  him  the  question,  "Will 
you  surrender  your  will  to  God  and  promise 
to  search  honestly  and  earnestly  to  find  out 
what  God's  will  is  that  you  may  do  it,  to  ask 
God  to  show  you  whether  you  need  a  Saviour 
and  whether  Jesus  is  a  Divine  Saviour,  the 
Son  of  God;  and  will  you  promise  that,  if 
God  will  show  you  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God,  to  accept  Him  as  your  Saviour  and  con- 
fess Him  before  the  world  ?"  Have  him  make 
his  promise  definite,  by  putting  it  down  in 
black  and  white.  If  you  get  him  to  do  this, 
his  skepticism  will   soon   take  wings. 

One  evening  at  the  close  of  a  service 
I  asked  a  gentleman  why  he  was  not  a 
Christian.  He  replied:  "I  will  tell  you. 
I  do  not  talk  much  about  it;  for  I  am  not 
proud  of  it  as  some  are,  but  I  am  a  skeptic. 
I  have  lain  awake  nights  thinking  about  this 
matter."  "Do  you  believe  there  is  a  God?" 
"Yes,  I  never  gave  up  my  faith  that  there  was 


68  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

a  God."  "Well,  if  there  is  a  God  you  ought 
to  obey  him.  Will  you  to-night  take  your 
stand  upon  the  will  of  God  to  follow  it  wher- 
ever it  carries  you  even  if  it  carries  you  over 
the  Niagara  Falls?"  "I  try  to  do  as  near  right 
as  I  know  how."  "That  is  not  what  I  asked; 
will  you  take  your  stand  on  the  will  of  God 
to  follow  it  wherever  it  carries  you?"  "I 
have  never  put  it  that  way."  "Will  you  put 
it  that  way  to-night?"  "I  will."  "Do  you 
believe  God  answers  prayer?"  "I  don't  know; 
I  am  afraid  not."  "You  don't  know  that  he 
does  not?"  "No."  "Well,  here  is  a  possible 
clue  to  the  truth,  will  you  follow  it,  will  you 
ask  God  to  show  you  whether  Jesus  is  His 
Son;  and  what  your  duty  concerning  him 
is?"  "I  will."  Not  long  after  that  the 
man  came  into  a  meeting  with  a  new  look  in 
his  face.  He  arose  and  said:  "I  was  all  in  a 
mist.  I  believed  nothing."  Then  he  told  us 
what  he  had  done.  He  had  done  just  as  he 
promised.  "And  now,"  he  continued,  "my 
doubts  are  all  gone.  I  don't  know  where  they 
have  gone  but  they  are  gone."  If  the  skeptic 
will  not  act  in  this  way  you  can  "stop  his 
mouth"  by  showing  him  that  he  is  not  an  hon- 
est skeptic  and  that  the  trouble  with  him  is  not 
his  skepticism  but  his  sin.   If  the  man  does  not 


PROFESSED  SKEPTICS  AND  INFIDELS         69 

believe  there  is  a  God,  you  can  begin  one  step 
further  back.  Ask  him  if  he  belives  there  is 
an  absolute  difference  between  right  and  wrong 
(if  he  does  not  he  is  a  mere  trifler).  If  he  says 
he  does,  ask  him  if  he  will  take  his  stand 
upon  the  right  and  follow  it  wherever  it 
carries  him.  He  may  try  to  put  you  off  by 
saying  "What  is  right?"  or  that  he  is  doing  the 
right  as  nearly  as  he  knows  how.  Get  him  to 
promise  that  he  will  take  his  stand  upon  the 
right,  whatever  he  may  find  it  to  be  and  fol- 
low it  whatever  the  consequence  may  be. 
Then  show  him  that  if  he  is  honest  in  this 
promise,  he  will  try  to  find  out  what  the  right 
is.  Next  say  to  him.  "You  do  not  know 
whether  God  answers  prayer  or  not.  I  know 
He  does,  and  you  will  admit  that  here  is 
a  possible  clue  to  knowledge.  If  you  are 
honest  in  your  desire  to  know  the  truth,  you 
will  follow  this  possible  clue.  You  can 
get  down  and  at  least  pray,  'O  my  God,  if 
there  be  a  God,  teach  me  thy  will  and 
I  will  do  it.  Show  me  whether  Jesus  is 
thy  son  or  not.  If  you  show  that  he  is,  I 
will  accept  Him  as  my  Saviour  and  confess 
Him  before  the  world."  Then  tell  the  man 
to  begin  reading  the  Gospel  of  John,  reading 
slowly  and  thoughfully,  only  a  few  verses  at 


?0  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

a  time,  asking  God  for  light  each  time  before 
reading  and  promising  God  that  he  will  follow 
the  light  as  fast  as  He  makes  it  clear.  If  the 
man  will  follow  this  rational  course,  it  will  re- 
sult in  every  case  in  the  skeptic  coming  out 
into  the  clear  light  of  faith  in  the  Bible,  as 
the  word  of  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son 
of  God.  If  the  man  is  not  an  honest  skeptic, 
this  course  of  treatment  will  reveal  the  fact 
and  then  you  can  show  him  that  the  difficulty 
is  not  with  his  skepticism  but  with  his  rebel- 
lious heart. 

If  the  man  says  that  he  does  not  know 
whether  there  is  an  absolute  difference  be- 
tween right  and  wrong,  then  you  can  set  it 
down  at  once  that  he  is  bad  and  turn  upon 
him  kindly  and  earnestly  and  say  to  him, 
"My  friend,  there  is  something  wrong  in 
your  life;  no  man  that  is  living  right  doubts 
that  there  is  a  difference  between  right  and 
wrong.  Now  you  probably  know  what  is 
wrong  and  the  trouble  is  not  with  your  skep- 
ticism, but  with  you,  sin."  One  afternoon 
after  I  had  given  out  an  invitation  for  any 
skeptic  or  any  one  else  who  wished  to  talk 
with  me,  to  remain  after  the  meeting,  a  young 
man  with  whom  I  had  dealt  some  months  be- 
fore stayed.     I  asked  him  what  his  trouble  was. 


PROFESSED  SKEPTICS  AND  INFIDELS         7 1 

He  replied,  "The  same  trouble  that  I  told  you 
in  the  spring,  I  cannot  believe  that  there  is 
a  God."  I  asked  him  if  he  had  done  as  I 
had  advised  him  to  do  in  our  former  conver- 
sation; if  he  had  taken  his  stand  upon  the 
right  to  follow  it  wherever  it  carried  him.  He 
replied  that  he  did  not  know  that  there  was 
any  difference  between  right  and  wrong.  "I  do 
not  know  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  right." 
I  looked  him  right  in  the  eyes  and  said,  "Is 
there  some  sin  your  life  ?" 

He  said  "Yes."  I  said  "what  is  it?"  He  re- 
plied, "The  same  that  I  told  you  last  spring." 
I  said,  "You  promised  to  give  it  up,  have  you 
given  it  up?"  He  said  "No, I  have  not."  "Well," 
I  said,  "there  is  the  difficulty,  not  with  your 
skepticism.  Give  up  that  sin  and  your  skep- 
ticism will  take  care  of  itself."  In  some  con- 
fusion he  replied,  "I  guess  that  is  the  trouble." 

3.      Those  who  doubt  the  existence  of   God. 

The  passages  under  1  and  2  can  also  be 
used  with  this  class  and  generally  it  is  wise  to 
use  them  before  those  given  under  this  head. 
There  are  however,  three  passages  that  are 
often  times  effective  with  this  specific 
class  of  skeptics.  Ps.  xiv:  1;  before  using 
this  passage  you  can  say  to  the  man,  "Let  me 
read   you    from    God's    own    word    what   he 


72  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

says  about  those  who  deny  his  existence." 
Often  times  it  is  well  to  leave  the  passage 
to  do  its  own  work.  Sometimes,  however,  it 
is  wise  to  dwell  a  little  upon  it.  Call  the 
man's  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  is  "in  his 
heart"  that  the  fool  says  "there  is  no  God." 
He  does  not  believe  there  is  a  God  because  he 
does  not  wish  to.  You  can  add  that  the  folly 
of  saying  in  one's  heart  that  there  is  no  God 
is  seen  in  two  points;  first,  there  is  a  God  and 
it  is  folly  to  say  there  is  not  one,  and  second, 
the  doctrine  that  there  is  not  a  God  always 
brings  misery  and  wretchedness.  Put  it  right 
to  the  man,  and  ask  him  if  he  ever  knew  a 
happy  atheist.  Ps.  xix:  I,  2,  Romans  i:  19- 
22,  are  also  effective  passages. 

4.  Those  who  doubt  that  the  Bible  is  the 
word  of  God. 

Romans  iii:  3,  4,  is  useful  in  showing  that 
questioning  the  fact  does  not  alter  the  fact. 
Matt,  xxiv:  35,  is  often  used  by  the  Spirit  to 
carry  to  the  heart  of  the  skeptic  the  certainty 
and  immutability  of  God's  word.  Mark  vii: 
13;  Matt.  v:i8;  John  x:35;  Luke  xxiv:27,  44, 
are  useful  as  giving  Christ's  testimony  that 
the  Old  Testament  is  the  Word  of  God.  They 
are  especially  helpful  in  dealing  with  those 
who  say   that    they  accept    the   authority   of 


PROFESSED  SKEPTICS  AND  INFIDELS         73 

Christ  but  not  that  of  the' Old  Testament, 
for  in  them  Christ  sets  His  seal  to  the  Old 
Testament  Scriptures  and  they  show  conclu- 
sively that  if  we  accept  His  authority  we 
must  accept  that  of  the  Old  Testament  also. 
Along  the  same  line  John  xiv:26,  and  xvi:i2, 
13,  are  useful  as  containing  Christ's  indorse- 
ment of  the  New  Testament. 

I  Thes.  ii :  1 3,  can  be  used  with  good  effect 
to  meet  the  statement  which  is  often  made, 
that  Paul  nowhere  claims  that  his  teaching 
is  the  word  of  God.  II  Peter  i: 2 1 ,  John  viii: 
47;  Luke  xvi:30  31,  can  also  be  used  in  deal- 
ing with  this  class.  II  John  v:io,  is  very 
effective  in  showing  the  guilt  of  those  who 
believe  not  the  record  that  God  has*  given. 
Before  using  this  last  passage  you  can  say, 
"You  doubt,  do  you,  that  the  Bible  is  the 
Word  of  God?  Now  let  us  see  what  God  says 
about  those  that  believe  not  His  testimony;" 
then  turn  them  to  the  passage  and  have  them 
read  it. 

5.  Those  who    doubt   a  future    existence. 
I  Cor.  xv: 35-36;  Jno.  v: 28-29,  Dan.  xii:2. 

6.  Those  who  doubt  the  doctrine  of  future 
punishment,  or  the  conscious,  endless  suffer- 
ing of  the  lost.  Rev.  xxi:  8,  defines  what 
"death"  means  when    used    in   the   scriptures 


74  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN   TO    CHRIST 

Rev.  xvii:8,  compared  with  Rev.  xix:20, 
shows  what  perdition  or  destruction  means  in 
the  scriptures.  Rev.  xix:  20,  compared  with 
Rev.  xx:  10  shows  that  "the  lake  of  fire"  is  not 
a  place  where  those  consigned  to  it  cease  to 
exist,  for  we  find  in  the  latter  passage  the 
beast  and  false  prophet  are  still  there  at  the 
end  of  a  thousand  years  and  that  they,  so  far 
from  being  annihilated  or  losing  conscious  ex- 
istence are  tormented  night  and  day  forever 
and  ever.  Rev.  xiii:7-8  show  that  those  who 
are  subjected  to  the  terrible  retribution  here 
described  are  those  whose  names  are  not  writ- 
ten in  the  Book  of  Life.  Matt.  x:28  shows 
that  there  is  destruction  for  the  soul  apart 
from  the  destruction  of  the  body.  Luke 
xii:  5,  shows  that  after  one  is  killed  and  is  of 
course  dead,  there  is  a  punishment  in  "hell". 
Mark  iii:  28-29  (R.  V.)  shows  that  there  is  such 
a  thing  as  eternal  sin.  Luke  xvi:  23-26,  shows 
that  the  condition  of  the  wicked  dead  is  one 
of  conscious  torment.  Mark  xiv:2i,  shows 
that  the  retribution  visited  upon  the  wicked 
is  of  so  stern  a  character  that  it  would  be 
better  for  him  upon  whom  it  is  visited  if  he 
had  never  been  born. 

II  Peter   ii:4,  Jude     6,    show  that   hell   is 
not  a  place   where  the  inhabitants   cease  to 


PROFESSED  SKEPTICS  AND  INFIDELS         75 

exist,  but  where  they  are  reserved  alive,  for 
the  purpose  of  God.  Heb.  x: 28-29,  show 
that  while  the  punishment  of  transgression  of 
the  Mosaic  law  was  death,  that  sorer  punish- 
ment awaits  those  who  have  "trodden  un- 
der foot  the  Son  of  God."  Matt.  xxv:4i  gives 
further  light  upon  the  subject.  It  shows  that 
the  wicked  go  to  the  same  place  with  the 
Beast  and  False  Prophet  and  the  Devil  men- 
tioned in  Rev.  xix:20,  and  xx:io,  and  share 
the  same  endless,  conscious  torment. 

6  Those  who  doubt  the  divinity  of 
Christ. 

a.  In  Acts  x:$6,  I  Cor.  ii:8,  compare  Ps. 
xxiv:8-io,  Heb.  i:8,  John  xx:28,  Rom.  ix:  5, 
Rev.  i:  17,  compared  Is.  xliv: 6,  we  find  several 
divine  titles  applied  to  Christ,  the  same  titles 
being  applied  to  Christ  in  the  New  Testament 
that  are  applied  to  Jehovah  in  the  old. 

b.  In  Heb.  1:10,  13,  we  find  divine  offices 
attributed  to  Christ. 

c.  In  John  v: 22-23,  compare  Rev.  v.  13  : 
Heb.  i:6,  Phil,  ii:  10,  we  find  it  taught  that 
Jesus  Christ  should  be  worshiped  as  God. 

d.  In  John  v: 22-23  we  find  Jesus  claiming 
the  same  honor  as  his  Father,  and  either  He 
was  Divine  or  the  most  blasphemous  impos- 
tor that   ever  lived.    Drive  it  home   that  the 


y6  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

one  who  denies  Christ's  Divinity  puts  Him  in 
the  place  of  a  blasphemous  imposter.  Mark 
xiv:  61-62,  can  be  used  in  a  similar  way. 

e.  1  Jno.  ii:  22-23,  compared  with  I  Jno. 
v:i~5,  shows  that  the  one  who  denies  the 
Divinity  of  Christ,  no  matter  who  he  may  be, 
is  a  liar  and  an  antichrist.  I  Jno.  v:io-i2, 
shows  that  he  who  does  not  believe  that  Jesus 
is  divine  makes  God  a  liar,  "Because  he  be- 
lieveth  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of  His 
Son."  Heb.  x: 28-29,  shows  the  folly,  guilt 
and  punishment  of  rejecting  Christ  as  the 
Son  of  God.  John  viii:24,  shows  beyond  a 
question  that  no  one  who  does  not  believe  in 
the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  will  be  saved. 
Jno.  xx:3i,  shows  that  we  have  life  through 
believing  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  son  of 
God. 

(Note.  It  is  best  as  a  rule  before  taking  up 
specific  difficulties  to  deal  with  the  inquirer 
with  the  passage  under  the  head  of  "skeptics 
who  are  triflers,"  or  those  under  "Serious 
minded  skeptics.") 

Often  times  there  is  no  need  to  take  up 
specific  questions  as  for  example  about  future 
punishment  until  the  inquirer  has  first  settled 
the  matter  whether  he  will  accept  Christ  as 
his  Saviour. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

DEALING  WITH  THE  COMPLAINING. 

I.     Those  who  complain  of  god. 

Many  that  you  wish  to  lead  to  Christ  will 
say  something  to  the  effect  that  God  is  un- 
just and  cruel,  Job.  xl:2,  and  Romans  ix:20, 
are  very  pointed  passages  to  use  with  in- 
quirers of  this  class  and  need  no  comment.  It 
might  be  well  to  preface  the  reading  of  the 
passages  with  some  remark  like  this;  "Do 
you  know  of  how  enormous  a  sin  you  are 
guilty  in  accusing  God  of  being  unjust  and 
cruel?  Let  me  read  what  God  says  about  it 
in  His  Word."  Then  read  the  passages.  Ro- 
mans xi:33  will  serve  to  show  the  complain- 
ing that  the  reason  God'S  ways  seem  unjust 
and  cruel  is  because  they  are  so  deep  and 
unsearchable;  and  that  the  trouble  is  not  with 
God's  ways  but  the  limitation  of  their  under- 
standing. Heb.  xii:5-7-io-n  are  especially 
useful  in  cases  where  the.  inquirer  complains 
because  of  his  own  misfortunes  or  sorrows.  Is. 
lv.8-9  will  often  times  prove  helpful.  Not  in- 
77 


78  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

frequently  you  will  meet  with  one  who  will  say 
that  "God  is  unjust  to  create  men  and  then 
damn  them."  Turn  such  an  one  to  Ezek. 
xxxiiini.  This  passage  meets  this  complaint 
by  showing  that  God  has  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked,  but  desires  their  welfare 
and  that  the  wicked  bring  damnation  upon 
themselves  by  their  stubborn  refusal  to  repent. 

I  Tim.  ii:3~4,  shows  that  God,  so  far  from 
creating  man  to  damn  him,  desires  that  all 
men  be  saved.  II  Peter  iii:  9,  teaches  that 
God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish  and 
is  delaying  His  purposes  in  order  that  all  may 
come  to  repentance.  John  v:40,  and  Matt. 
xxiii: 37,  show  that  the  whole  cause  of  man's 
damnation  is  his  own  willful  and  persistent  re- 
fusal to  come  to  Christ.  John  iii: 36,  and  iii: 
16,  are  also  helpful  in  many  cases. 

2.  Those  who  complain  of  the  bible. 
Man  will  often  times  say,  "The  Bible  is  con- 
tradictory and  absurcl;"  or  "the  Bible  seems 
foolish  to  me."  Two  classes  of  passages  can 
be  used  in  dealing  with  such  inquirers. 

a.  I  Cor.  i:i8,  ii:  14,  II  Cor.  iv:3~4,  Dan. 
xii:io,  Rom.   xi: 33-34  and  in   extreme  cases 

II  Thes.  ii:  10-11-12. 

b.  Jno.  vii:  1 7,  Ps.  xxv.14,  Matt,  xi: 25, 
(see  remarks  under    Serious   Minded  Skeptics 


DEALING  WITH  THE  COMPLAINING  79 

and  Skeptics  who  areTriflers.)  Sometimes  the 
best  thing  to  do  with  a  man  who  says  the 
Bible  is  full  of  contradictions,  is  to  hand  him 
your  Bible  and  ask  him  to  show  you  one.  In 
most  cases  he  will  not  attempt  to  do  it;  as 
people  who  complain  about  the  Bible,  as  a  rule 
know  nothing  about  its  contents.  One  day 
a  man  was  brought  to  me  to  deal  with  and 
when  I  asked  him  why  he  was  not  a  Christian 
he  replied,  "The  Bible  is  full  of  contradic- 
tions."  I  at  once  asked  him  to  show  me  one. 
"Oh!"  he  said,  "it's  full  of  them."  I  said,  "If 
it  is  full  of  them  you  ought  to  be  able  to  show 
me  one."  He  said,  "Well,  there  is  one  in 
Psalms."  I  said,  "Show  it  to  me."  He  com- 
menced looking  in  the  back  of  the  New  Test- 
ament for  the  book  of  Psalms.  I  said,  "You 
are  not  looking  in  the  right  part  of  the  Bible 
for  Psalms.  Let  me  find  it  for  you."  I  found 
him  the  book  of  Psalms  and  handed  it  to  him. 
After  fumbling  around  he  said,  "I  could  find 
it,  if  I  had  my  own  Bible  here."  "Well,"  I 
said,  "Will  you  bring  your  Bible  to-night  ?"  He 
promised  he  would  and  agreed  to  meet  me  at 
a  certain  place  in  the  church.  The  appointed 
hour  came,  but  he  did  not.  Some  months 
afterwards  in  another  series  of  meetings  in 
the  same  church  one  of  the  workers  stopped 


80  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

me  and  said,  "Here's  a  man  I  wish  you  would 
deal  with;  he  is  a  skeptic."  I  looked  at  him 
and  recognized  him  as  the  same  man.  "Oh!" 
I  said,  "you  are  the  man  that  lied  to  me  here;" 
and  with  much  confusion  he  admitted  that 
he  was,  but  he  was  still  playing  his  old  game 
of  saying  that  the  Bible  was  full  of  contradic- 
tions. In  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  men  who 
say  this,  know  nothing  about  the  Bible,  and 
when  you  ask  them  to  show  you  a  contradic- 
tion in  the  Bible  they  are  filled  with  confu- 
sion. 

3.  Those  who  complain  of  God's  way  of 
Salvation. 

A  great  many  men  will  say,  "I  do  not  see 
why  God  could  not  save  men  in  some  other 
way  than  by  the  death  of  His  son."  Is.  lv: 
8,  9,  Romans  xi:33  are  useful  in  dealing  with 
such.  I  have  used  Romans  ix:  20  with  effect 
with  men  of  this  sort.  A  young  student  said  to 
me  one  night,  when  I  asked  why  he  was  not  a 
Christian,  that  he  did  not  see  why  it  was  nec- 
essary for  Christ  to  die  for  him;  why  God  did 
not  save  him  in  some  other  way.  I  opened 
my  Bible  and  read  to  him  Romans  ix:20, 
and  put  the  question  right  to  him,  "Who  art 
thou  that  repliest  against  God?"  and  then 
said  to  him,  "Do  you  realize  what  you  are 


DEALING  WITH  THE  COMPLAINING  8 1 

doing,  that  you  are  condemning  God?"  The 
young  man  very  much  confused  said  "I  did 
not  mean  to  do  that."  "Well,"  I  said;  "that  is 
what  you  are  doing."  "If  that  is  so,"  he  re- 
plied, "I  will  take  it  back."  A  good  way  to 
do  with  such  men  is  to  show  them  by  the  use 
of  passages  given  under  the  chapter  "Dealing 
with  the  Indifferent"  that  they  are  lost  sin- 
ners. When  any  one  is  led  to  see  this,  God's 
way  of  salvation  will  approve  itself  as  just  the 
thing. 

4.  Those  who  complain  of  Christians. 
Very  frequently  when  we  try  to  persuade  men 
to  accept  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  they  reply; 
"There  are  too  many  hypocrites  in  church." 
Romans  xiv:  4  and  12,  especially  the  latter 
verse,  are  exceedingly  effective  in  dealing  with 
such. 

Romans  ii:i,  and  Matt,  vii:  1-5,  are  also 
excellent.  Jno.  xxi:2i,22  is  useful  in  showing 
the  objector  that  he  is  solely  responsible  for 
his  own  relation  to  Christ  and  that  what  others 
do  is  none  of  his  affairs.  Sometimes  the  in- 
quirer will  complain  of  the  way  Christian 
people  have  treated  him.  In  such  a  case  turn 
the  attention  of  the  inquirer  from  the  way  in 
which  Christian  people  have  treated  him  to 
the  way  in  which  God  has  treated  him.     For 


82  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

this  purpose  use  Jer.  ii :  5 .  Is.  liii :  5 ;  Romans 
v:6-8.  Then  ask  him  if  the  fact  that  Chris- 
tians have  treated  him  badly  is  any  excuse  foi 
his  treatment  of  a  Heavenly  Father  who  has 
treated  him  so  well.  One  night  turning  to  an 
aged  man  I  asked  him  if  he  was  a  Christian. 
He  replied  that  he  was  not,  that  he  was  a 
back-slider.  I  asked  him  why  he  back-slid. 
He  replied  that  Christian  people  had  treated 
him  badly.  I  opened  my  Bible  and  read 
Jer.  ii :  5,  to  him,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  what 
iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  me,  that 
they  are  gone  far  from  me,  and  have  walked 
after  vanity  and  are  become  vain?"  I  said, 
"Did  you  find  any  iniquity  in  God?  Did  God 
not  use  you  well."  With  a  good  deal  of  feel- 
ing the  man  admitted  that  God  had  not 
treated  him  badly  and  I  held  him  right  to  this 
point  of  God's  treatment  of  him,  and  not 
man's  treatment,  and  his  treatment  of  God. 
Matt.  xviii:23-35,  Eph.  iv:  30-32,  Matt,  vi: 
14-15,  are  also  useful  as  showing  the  absolute 
necessity  of  our  forgiving  men. 


CHAPTER  X 

DEALING  WITH    THOSE  WHO  WISH    TO    PUT    OFF 
A  DECISION  UNTIL  SOME  OTHER  TIME. 

I.  There  are  several  classes  of  those  who 
wish  to  put  off  a  decision.  One  of  the  largest 
is  composed  of  those  who  say  UI  want  to 
wait,11  or  "Not  to-night.11  or  "I  will  think  about 
it"  or"  1  will  come  to-morrow  night"  or  some 
such  thing.  Use  Is.  lv:6.  The  inquirer  hav- 
ing read  the  passage,  ask  him  when  it  is  that 
he  is  to  seek  the  Lord,  and  when  he  answers 
"While  he  may  be  found,"  ask  him  when  that 
is  and  then  drive  it  home.  Ask  him  if  he  is 
sure  that  he  can  find  Him  to-morrow  if  he 
does  not  seek  Him  to-day.  Or  you  can  use 
Prov.  xxix:i.  It  is  well  after  he  has  read 
this  verse  to  ask  the  one  with  whom  you  are 
dealing  what  becomes  of  the  one  who  "being 
often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck"  and  when 
he  answers  "He  shall  be  destroyed,"  ask  him 
how  he  shall  be  destroyed,  and  when  he  an- 
swers "Suddenly,"  ask  him  if  he  is  willing  to 
run  the  risk.  Or  you  can  use  Matt,  xxv:  10-12. 
83 


84  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

Ask  him  who  it  was  that  went  into  the  mar- 
riage? and  when  he  answers  "They  that  were 
ready"  ask  him  if  he  is  ready.  Then  ask  him 
what  happened  after  those  who  were  ready 
went  in."  Then  ask  him  where  "those  who 
were  not  ready"  were.  Then  put  it  to  him, 
"Are  you  willing  to  be  on  the  out -side  ?"  Or  you 
can  use  Luke  xii:i9,  20.  Ask  the  inquirer  for 
how  long  a  time  this  man  thought  he  had  made 
provision.  Then  ask  him:  "If  God  should 
call  you  to-night  would  you  be  ready?"  Matt. 
xxiv:44,  is  especially  effective  in  deaing  with 
those  who  say  "I  am  not  ready."  I  Kings  xviii: 
21,  can  be  used  with  good  effect.  An  excel- 
lent way  to  use  this  verse  is  by  asking  the  per- 
son whether  he  would  be  willing  to  wait  a 
year  and  not  have  an  opportunity  under  any 
circumstances,  no  matter  what  came  up,  of 
accepting  Christ.  When  he  answers,  "No,  I 
might  die  within  a  year,"  ask  him  if  he  would 
be  willing  to  wait  a  month.  Then  bring  it 
down  to  a  week  and  finally  to  a  day,  and  ask 
him  if  he  would  like  God  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
and  all  Christians  to  leave  him  alone  for  a 
day  and  he  not  have  an  opportunity,  under  any 
circumstances  of  accepting  Christ?  Almost 
any  thoughtful  person  will  say,  "No."  Then 
tell  him  that  if  that  is  the  case  he  had  better 


THOSE  PUTTING  OFF  A  DECISION  85 

accept  Christ  at  once.  Dr.  Chalmers  was  the 
first  one  to  use  this  method  and  it  has  been 
followed  by  many  others  with  great  success. 
Prov.  xxviki,  James  iv:  13, 14;  Job.  xxxvi:  18; 
Luke  xiii:24-28;  xii:  19,20;  John  viii: 2 1 ;  xii: 
35;  vii:  33-34,  can  also  be  used  with  this  class. 

2.  Those  who  say  "/  must  get  fixed  in 
business  fir  sty  then  I will  become  a  Christian." 
or"I  must  do  something  else  first. "Matt.  vi:33, 
is  the  great  passage  to  use  in  such  cases;  for  it 
shows  that  we  must  seek  the  kingdom  of  God 
first. 

3.  Those  who  say  "/  am  waiting  God' s 
time."  If  one  says  this,  ask  him  if  he  will 
accept  Christ  in  God's  time  if  you  will  show 
him  when  God's  time  is.  Then  turn  to  n 
Cor.  vi:2,  or  Heb.  iii :  1 5- 

4.  Those  who  say  "I  am  too  young"  or  "I 
want  to  wait  until  I  am  older."  Ecc.  xii:  1,  is 
an  all  sufficient  answer  to  such.  Matt,  xix: 
14,  and  xviii:.3,  are  also  good  passages  to  use 
as  they  show  that  youth  is  the  best  time  to 
come  to  Christ  and  that  all  must  become 
children,  even  if  they  are  old,  before  they  can 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Heaven.  It  is  often 
times  wise  in  dealing  with  persons  who  wish 
to  put  off  a  decision  until  some  time  in  the 
future  to  use  the  passages  given  for  "The  Indif- 


86  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

ferent,"  until  such  a  deep  impression  is  made 
of  their  need  of  Christ  that  they  will  not  be 
willing  to  postpone  accepting  Christ. 

In  dealing  with  those  under  "i"  above,  it 
is  best  to  use  only  one  passage  and  drive  that 
home  by  constant  repetiton.  One  night  I  was 
dealing  with  a  man  who  was  quite  interested 
but  who  kept  sayng  "I  cannot  decide  to- 
night." I  quoted  Prov.  xxix:i.  To  every 
answer  he  made  I  would  come  back  to  this 
passage.  I  must  have  repeated  it  a  great  many 
times  in  the  course  of  the  talk  until  the  man 
was  made  to  feel  not  only  his  need  of  Christ 
but  the  danger  of  delaying  and  the  necessity 
of  a  prompt  decision.  He  tried  to  get  away 
from  the  passage  but  I  held  him  to  this  one 
point.  The  passage  lingered  with  him  and 
it  was  emphasized  by  the  providence  of  God; 
for  that  very  night  he  was  assaulted  and  quite 
seriously  injured,  and  he  came  the  next  night 
with  his  head  bandaged  and  accepted  Christ. 
The  pounding  which  he  received  from  his  as- 
sailant would  probably  have  done  him  little 
good  if  the  text  of  scripture  had  not  been 
pounded  into  his  mind. 


CHAPTER  XL 

DEALING    WITH     THE    WILLFUL     AND    THE   DE- 
LUDED. 

THE  WILLFUL. 

i.  There  are  several  varieties  of  the  Will- 
ful. There  are  those  for  example  who  say 
UI  do  not  wish  you  to  talk  to  me.11  In  such  a 
case  it  is  usually  best  to  give  some  pointed 
passage  of  scripture  and  let  it  talk  for  it- 
self and  then  leave  the  person  alone  to  re- 
flect upon  it.  Romans  vi:23;  Heb.  x:28,29 
Heb.  xi;25;  Mark  xvi:  16;  Prov.  xxix:i,  and 
Prov.  r.24, 33,  are  passages  which  are  good  for 
this  purpose. 

Then  there  are  those  who  say  " I  cannot  for- 
give." Matt.  vi:i5  and  xviii:  23-35,  are  good 
to  use  as  showing  that  they  must  forgive  or  be 
lost.  Phil.  iv:i3,  and  Ezek.  xxxvi:  26,  will 
show  how  them  they  can  forgive.  There  are 
a  great  many  people  who  are  kept  from 
Christ  by  an  unforgiving  spirit.  Some 
times  this  difficulty  can  be  removed  by  getting 

87 


88  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO   CHRIST 

the  person  to  kneel  in  prayer  and  ask  God 
to  take  away  their  unforgiving  spirit.  I  rea- 
soned a  long  time  once  with  an  inquirer  who 
was  under  deep  conviction,  but  was  held  back 
from  accepting  Christ  by  a  hatred  in  her  heart 
toward  some  one  who  had  wronged  her.  She 
kept  insisting  that  she  could  not  forgive. 
Finally  I  said,  "let  us  get  down  and  tell  God 
about  this  matter.  To  this  she  consented 
and  scarcely  had  we  knelt  when  she  burst  into 
a  flood  of  tears,  and  the  difficulty  was  removed 
and  she  accepted  Christ  immediately. 

There  are  those  again  who  say  UI  love  the 
world  too  mucky  Mark  viii: 36,  is  the  great 
text  to  use  with  this  class.  Luke  xiv:33,  will 
show  the  absolute  necessity  that  the  world  be 
given  up.  Luke  xii:  16-20.  1  Jno.  ii :  15,  16, 
17,  will  show  the  folly  of  holding  on  to  the 
world  and  Ps.  lxxxiv:ii,  Romans  viii:  32,  will 
show  that  the  Lord  will  hold  back  no  good 
thing  from  them. 

There  are  those  who  say  UI  cannot  acknowl- 
edge a  wrong  that  I  have  done."  Prov.  xxviii: 
13,  will  show  the  wretchedness  and  woe  that 
is  sure  to  follow  unless  the  wrong  is  acknowl- 
edged. Others  will  say  UI  do  not  want  to  make 
a  public  confession.'1''  Romans  x:io.  Matt.x: 
32,33,  will  show  that  God  will  accept  nothing 


THE  WILLFUL  AND  DELUDED  89 

else.  Mark  viii  138,  Jno.  xii  142,43,  and  Prov. 
xxix:25,  will  show  the  peril  of  not  making  it. 
There  are  those  who  say  U'I  want  to  have  my 
own  way."  Is.  lxv:8-9.  will  show  how  much 
better  God's  way  is,  and  Prov.  xiv:i2,  shows 
the  consequences  of  having  our  own  way. 
Finally  there  are  those  who  say  "/  neither 
accept  Christ  nor  reject  Him"  Matt.  xii:30, 
will  show  that  they  must  do  one  or  the  other. 
This  verse  has  been  to  the  conviction  of  a 
great  many. 

2.     The  Deluded 

a.  Under  this  head  come  the  Roman 
Catholics.  A  good  way  to  deal  with  a  Roman 
Catholic  is  to  show  him  the  necessity  of  the 
new  birth  and  what  the  new  birth  is.  Jno. 
iii:3,5,7,shows  the  necessity  of  the  new  birth. 
What  the  new  birth  is,  is  shown  in  Ezek 
xxxvi:2  5-27;  11  Cor.  v:i7;  11  Peter  i:4. 
Many  Roman  Catholics  understand  the  new 
birth  to  mean  baptism,  but  it  can  be  easily 
shown  them  that  the  language  used  does  not 
fit  baptism.  Further  than  this,  in  1  Cor. 
iv:i5,  Paul  says  to  the  Corinthian  Christians 
he  had  begotten  them  again  through  the  gos- 
pel. If  the  new  birth  meant  baptism  he  must 
have  baptized  them,  but  in  1  Cor.  i:  14,  he 
declares  he   had  not   baptized  them.       Acts 


90  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN   TO   CHRIST 

viii:  13,  21,  23,  shows  that  a  man  may  be 
baptized,  and  yet  his  heart  not  be  "right  in 
the  sight  of  God"  so  he  has  "neither  part 
nor  lot  in  this  matter."  It  is  well  to  take  a 
step  further  and  show  the  inquirer  what  the 
evidences  of  the  new  birth  are.  1  Jno.  ii: 29; 
iii.  9,14-17^:1-4,  give  the  Biblical  evidences 
of  the  new  birth.  The  next  question  that 
will  arise  is  "How  to  be  born  again."  This 
question  is  answered  in  Jno.  1:12;  1  Peter  i: 23; 
Jas.  i:  18. 

Acts  iii:  1 9,  is  a  good  text  to  use  with  Ro- 
man Catholics  as  it  shows  the  necessity  of  re- 
pentence  and  conversion.  What  repentance  is, 
will  be  shown  by  Is.  lv:7,  Jonah  iii:  10.  Still 
another  way  of  dealing  with  Roman  Catholics 
is  by  showing  them  that  it  is  the  believer's 
privilege  to  know  that  he  has  eternal  life.  Ro- 
man Catholics  almost  always  lack  assurance. 
They  do  not  know  that  they  are  forgiven,  but 
hope  to  be  forgiven  some  day.  If  you  can 
show  them  that  we  may  know  that  we  are 
forgiven  and  that  we  have  eternal  life,  it  will 
awaken  in  a  great  many  of  them  a  desire  for 
this  assurance.  1  John  v:  13,  shows  that  it 
is  the  believer's  privilege  to  know.  Acts,  xiii: 
38,39;  x:43,  John  iii:  36, are  very  useful  in  lead- 
ing them  into  this  assurance.  Still  another  way 


THE  WILLFUL  AND  DELUDED  91 

of  dealing  with  them  (but  it  is  not  best  to  use 
it  until  you  have  already  made  some  progress 
with  them)  is  to  show  them  the  advantage  of 
Bible  study.  Good  texts  for  this  purpose  are 
Johnv.39;  1  Peter  ii:  1,2;  11  Tim.  iir.13-17, 
Jas.  i:2i,22;  Ps.  i:  1,2;  Josh.  i:8;  Mark  vii: 
7,8,13,  Matt.  xxii:29.  These  texts,  except- 
ing the  one  in  1  Peter  ii:  1,2,  are  all  practically 
the  same  in  the"Douay"  or  Roman  Catholic 
Bible  as  they  are  in  the  Protestant  Bible  and 
it  is  well  oftentimes  in  dealing  with  a  Catholic 
to  use  the  Catholic  Bible. 

Still  another  way  of  dealing  with  a  Roman 
Catholic  is  to  use  the  same  method  that  you 
would  in  dealing  with  an  impenitent  sinner — 
that  is  to  awaken  a  sense  that  he  is  a  sinner 
and  needs  Christ.  For  this  purpose  use  Matt. 
xxii:37,38;  Gal.iii:  10, 13,  Is.  liii:6. 

Many  people  think  that  there  is  no  use  of 
talking  with  Roman  Catholics,  that  they  can- 
not be  brought  to  Christ.  This  is  a  great  mis- 
take. Many  of  them  are  longing  for  some- 
thing they  do  not  find  in  the  Roman  Catholic 
church,  and,  if  you  can  show  them  from  the 
word  of  God  how  to  find  it,  they  come  along 
very  easily  and  they  make  very  earnest  Chris- 
tians. Do  not  attack  the  Roman  Catholic 
church.     Give  them  the  truth,  and  the  errors 


92  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

in  time  will  take  care  of  themselves.  Often 
times  our  attacks  only  expose  our    ignorance. 

There  is  one  point  at  which  we  always  have 
the  advantage  in  dealing  with  a  Roman  Catho- 
lic; that  is  that  there  is  peace  and  power  in 
Christianity  as  we  know  it  that  there  is  not 
in  Christianity  as  they  know  it,  and  they  ap- 
preciate the  difference. 

b.     Jews. 

The  best  way  to  deal  with  a  Jew  is  to  show 
him  that  his  own  Bible  points  to  Christ.  The 
most  helpful  passages  to  use  are  Is.  liii; 
Dan.  ix:26;  Zech.  xii:io.  There  are  also 
useful  passages  in  the  New  Testament;  the 
whole  book  of  Hebrews,  especially  the  ninth 
and  tenth  chapters  and  the  seventh  chapter, 
25th  to  28th  verses,  and  the  whole  Gospel 
of  Matthew.  A  great  many  Jews  to-day  are 
inquiring  into  the  claims  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
and  are  open  to  approach  upon  this  subject. 
The  great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  Jew 
coming  out  as  a  Christian  is  the  terrific  perse- 
cution which  he  must  endure  if  he  does.  This 
difficulty  can  be  met  by  the  passages  already 
given  under  the  head  of  "Those  Who  are 
Afraid  of  Persecution." 

(Note.  There  are  a  number  of  good  tracts 
for  Jews  which  can  be  had  from  the  Mildmay 


THE  WILLFUL  AND  DELUDED  93 

Mission  to  the  Jews,  79  Mildmay  Road,  Lon- 
don.) 

c.  Spiritualists  Lev.  xix:3i;  xx:6;  Deut. 
xviii:  10-12;  11  Kings  xxi:  1,2,6;  1  Chron.  x: 
13;  Is.  viii:  19,20;  1  John  iv  11-3;  1 1  Thes.  ii: 
9-12,  are  passages  to  be  used  with  this  class. 

In  dealing  with  all  classes  of  deluded  peo- 
ple it  is  well  to  begin  by  using  Jno.  vii:  17,  and 
bring  them  to  a  place  where  they  heartily  de- 
sire to  know  the  truth.  There  is  no  hope  of 
bringing  a  man  out  of  his  delusion,  unless  he 
desires  to  know  the  truth. 


CHAPTER   XII. 

SOME  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

There  are  a  few  general  suggestions  to  be 
made  that  will  prove   helpful   to   the  worker. 

I.  As  a  rule  choose  persons  to  deal  with 
of  your  own  sex  and  about  your  own  age. 
There  are  exceptions  to  this  rule.  One  should 
be  always  looking  to  the  Holy  Spirit  for  his 
guidance  as  to  whom  to  approach,  and  He  may 
lead  us  to  one  of  the  opposite  sex,  but  unless 
there  is  clear  guidance  in  the  matter,  it  is 
quite  commonly  agreed  among  those  who  have 
had  large  experience  in  Christian  work  that 
men  do,  on  the  whole,  most  satisfactory  work 
with  men,  and  women  with  women.  Especially 
is  this  true  of  the  young.  Many  unfortunate 
complications  oftentimes  arise  when  young 
men  try  to  lead  young  women  to  Christ  or  vice 
versa.  Of  course,  an  elderly  motherly  woman 
may  do  excellent  work  with  a  young  man  or 
boy,  and  an  elderly,  fatherly  man  may  do  good 
work  with  a  young  woman  or  girl.  It  is  not 
94 


SOME  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS  95 

wise  ordinarily  for  a  young  and  inexperienced 
person  to  approach  one  very  much  older  and 
maturer  and  wiser  than  themselves  on  this 
subject. 

2.  Whenever  it  is  possible,  get  the  person 
with  whom  you  are  dealing  alone.  No  one 
likes  to  open  his  heart  freely  to  another  on 
this  most  personal  and  sacred  of  all  subjects 
when  there  are  others  present.  Many  will 
from  pride  defend  themselves  in  a  false  po- 
sition when  several  are  present,  who  would 
fully  admit  their  error  or  sin  or  need,  if  they 
were  alone  with  you.  As  a  rule  it  is  far  bet- 
ter for  a  single  worker  to  deal  with  a  single 
unconverted  person,  than  for  several  workers 
to  deal  with  a  single  inquirer  or  for  a  single 
worker  to  deal  with  several  inquirers  at  once. 
If  you  have  several  to  deal  with  take  them  one 
by  one.  Workers  often  find  that  when  they 
have  made  no  headway  while  talking  to  several 
at  once,  by  taking  individuals  off  by  them- 
selves they  soon  succeed  in  leading  them  one 
by  one  to  Christ. 

3.  Let  your  reliance  be  wholly  in  the  Spirit 
of  God  and  the   Word  of  God. 

4.  Do  not  content  yourself  with  merely 
reading  passages  from  the  Bible — much  less  in 
merely  quoting  themy  but   have  the  one    with 


96  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

whom  you  are  dealing  read  them  himself  that 
the  truth  may  find  entrance  into  the  heart 
through  the  eye  as  as  well  as  the  ear. 

5.  //  is  oft  times  well  to  use  but  a  single 
passage  of  scripture,  drive  that  home  and 
clinch  it  so  that  the  one  with  whom  you  have 
been  dealing  cannot  forget  it,  but  will  hear  it 
ringing  in  his  memory  long  after  you  have 
ceased  talking.  Dr.  Ichabod  Spencer  once  in 
dealing  with  a  young  man  who  had  many  diffi- 
culties kept  continually  quoting  the  passage 
"now  is  the  accepted  time,  behold  now  is  the 
day  of  salvation."  The  young  man  tried  to  get 
Dr.  Spencer  on  to  something  else,  but  over  and 
over  again  he  rang  out  the  words.  The  next 
day  the  young  man  returned  rejoicing  in 
Christ  and  thanking  the  doctor  that  he  had 
"hammered"  him  with  that  text.  The  words 
kept  ringing  in  his  ears  during  the  night  and 
he  could  not  rest  until  he  had  settled  the  mat- 
ter by  accepting  Christ.  It  is  a  good  thing  when 
a  person  can  point  to  some  definite  verse  in 
the  word  of  God  and  say  "I  know  on  the 
authority  of  that  verse  that  my  sins  are  for- 
given and  I  am  a  child  of  God."  There  are 
times,  however  when  a  powerful  effect  is  pro- 
duced by  a  piling  up  of  passages  along  some 
line  until  the  mind  is  convinced  and  the  heart 
conquered. 


SOME  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS  97 

6.  Always  hold  the  person  with  whom  you 
are  dealing  to  the  main  point  of  accepting 
Christ.  If  he  wishes  to  discuss  the  claims  of 
various  denominations,  or  the  question  of  bap- 
tism, or  theories  of  future  punishment  or  any 
other  question  other  than  the  central  one  of 
his  need  of  a  Saviour  and  Christ  the  Saviour  he 
needs;  tell  him  that  those  questions  are  prop- 
er to  take  up  in  their  right  place  and  time, 
but  the  time  to  settle  them  is  after  he  has 
settled  the  first  and  fundamental  question  of 
accepting  or  rejecting  Christ.  Many  a  case  has 
been  lost  by  an  inexperienced  worker  allowing 
himself  to  be  involved  in  a  discussion  of  some 
side  issue  which  it  is  utter  folly  to  discuss 
with  an  unregenerated  person. 

7.  Be  courteous.  Many  well-meaning  but 
indiscreet  Christians  by  their  rudeness  and  im- 
pertinence repel  those  whom  they  would  win 
to  Christ.  It  is  quite  possible  to  be  at  once 
perfectly  frank  and  perfectly  courteous.  You 
can  point  out  to  men  their  awful  sin  and  need 
without  insulting  them.  Your  words  may  be 
very  searching,  while  your  manner  is  very 
gentle  and  winning.  Indeed,  the  more 
gentle  and  winning  our  manner  is,  the  deeper 
our  words  will  go,  for  they  will  not  stir  up 
the  opposition  of   those  with  whom  we   deal. 


98  HOW   TO   BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

Some  zealous  workers  approach  those  with 
whom  they  wish  to  deal  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  latter  at  once  assume  the  defensive 
and  clothe  themselves  with  an  armor  that 
it  is  impossible  to  penetrate. 

8.  Be  dead  in  earnest.  Only  the  earnest 
man  can  make  the  unsaved  man  feel  the  truth 
of  God's  word.  It  is  well  to  let  the  passages 
that  we  would  use  with  others  first  sink  into 
our  own  souls.  I  know  of  a  very  successful 
worker  who  for  a  long  time  used  the  one  pass- 
age, "prepare  to  meet  thy  God,"  with  every 
one  with  whom  she  dealt,  but  that  passage  had 
taken  such  complete  possession  of  her  heart 
and  mind  that  she  used  it  with  tremendous 
effect.  A  few  passages  that  have  mastered  us 
are  better  than  many  passages  that  we  have 
mastered  from  some  text  book. 

The  reader  of  this  book  is  advised  to  pon- 
der, upon  his  knees,  such  of  the  passages  sug- 
gested in  it  as  he  decides  to  use  until  he 
himself  feels  their  power.  We  read  of 
Paul  that  he  "ceased  not  to  warn  every  one 
night  and  day,  with  tears."  (Acts  xx:3i,) 
Genuine  earnestness  will  go  farther  than  any 
skill  learned  in  a  training  class  or  from  the 
study  of  such  a  book  as  this. 

9.  Never  lose  your  temper  when  trying  to 


SOME  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS  99 

lead  a  soul  to  Christ.  Some  persons  are 
purposely  exasperating,  but  even  such  may  be 
won,  by  patience,  forbearance  and  gentleness. 
They  certainly  cannot  be  won  if  you  lose 
your  temper.  Nothing  delights  them  more, 
or  gives  them  more  comfort  in  their  sins. 
The  more  extremely  irritating  they  are  in 
their  words  and  actions  the  more  impressed 
they  will  be  if  you  return  insults  with  kind- 
ness. Often  times  the  one  who  has  been 
most  insufferable  will  come  back  in  penitence. 
One  of  the  most  insulting  men  I  ever  met 
afterwards  became  one  of  the  most  patient, 
persistent  and  effective  of  workers. 

10.  Never  have  a  heated  argument  with 
one  whom  you  would  lead  to  Christ.  This 
always  comes  from  the  flesh  and  not  from  the 
spirit.  (Gal.  v:20,  22,23.)  It  arises  from 
pride  and  unwillingness  to  let  the  other  person 
get  the  best  of  you  in  argument.  Refuse  to 
argue.  If  the  one  with  whom  you  are  talking 
has  mistaken  notions  that  must  be  removed 
before  they  can  be  led  to  Christ  quietly  and 
pleasantly  show  them  their  error.  If  the  error 
is  not  essential  refuse  to  dicuss  it  and  hold  the 
person  to  the  main  question. 

1 1 .  Never  interrupt  any  one  else  who  is 
dealing  with  a  soul.     You    may  think    he    is 


IOO         HOW    TO    BRING    MEM    TO    CHRIST 

not  doing  it  in  the  wisest  way,  but  if  you  can 
do  it  any  better,  bide  your  time  and  you  will 
have  the  opportunity.  Many  an  unskilled 
worker  has  had  some  one  at  the  very  point  of 
decision  when  some  meddler  has  broken  in  and 
upset  the  whole  work.  On  the  other  hand, 
do  not  let  others,  if  you  can  help  it,  interrupt 
you.  Just  a  litle  word  plainly  but  courteously 
spoken  will  usually  prevent  it. 

12.  Dont  be  in  a  hurry.  One  of  the 
great  faults  of  Christian  work  to-day  is  haste. 
We  are  too  anxious  for  immediate  results  and 
so  do  superficial  work.  It  is  very  noticeable 
how  many  of  those  with  whom  Christ  dealt 
came  out  slowly.  Nicodemus,  Joseph,  Peter 
and  even  Paul — though  the  final  step  in  his 
case  seems  very  sudden — are  cases  in  point. 
It  was  three  days  even  after  the  personal  ap- 
pearance of  Jesus  to  Paul  on  the  way  to  Da- 
mascus before  the  latter  came  out  into  the 
light  and  openly  confessed  Christ.  (Acts  xxii: 
1 6.)  One  man  with  whom  slow  but  thorough 
work  has  been  done,  and  who  at  last  has  been 
brought  out  clearly  for  Christ,  is  better  than 
a  dozen  with  whom  hasty  work  has  been  done, 
who  think  they  have  accepted  Christ  when 
in  reality  they  have  not.  It  is  often  a  wise 
policy  to  plant  a  truth  in  a  man's   heart   and 


SOME  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS  IOI 

leave  it  to  work.  The  seed  on  rocky  ground 
springs  up  quickly  but  withers  as  quickly. 

13.  Whenever  it  is  possible  and  wise,  get 
the  person  with  whom  you  are  dealing  on  his 
knees  before  God.  It  is  wonderful  how  many 
difficulties  disappear  in  prayer,  and  how  readily 
stubborn  people  yield  when  they  are  brought 
into  the  very  presence  of  God  himself.  I  re- 
member talking  with  a  young  woman,  in  an  in- 
quiry room,  for  perhapst  wo  hours  and  making 
no  apparent  headway;  but,  when  at  last  we 
knelt  in  prayer,  in  less  than  five  minutes  she 
was  rejoicing  in  her  Saviour. 

14  Whenever  you  seem  to  fail  in  any  given 
case  go  home  and  pray  over  it  and  study  it  to 
see  why  you  failed.  If  you  have  been  at  a  loss 
as  to  what  scripture  to  use,  study  that  portion 
of  this  book  that  describes  the  different  classes 
we  meet  and  how  to  deal  with  them  and  see 
where  this  case  belongs  and  how  you  ought  to 
have  treated  it.  Then  go  back  if  you  can  and 
try  again.  In  any  case  you  will  be  better 
prepared  next  time.  The  greatest  success 
in  this  work  comes  through  many  apparent 
defeats.  It  will  be  well  to  frequently  study 
these  hints  and  suggestions  to  see  if  your  fail- 
ures come  through  neglect  of  them. 

1 5 .      Before  parting  from   the  one  who  has 


102  HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

accepted  Christ,  be  sure  to  give  him  definite 
instructions  as  to  how  to  succeed  in  the 
Christian  life.  The  following  are  points  that 
should  be  always  insisted  upon,  (a.)  Confess 
Christ  with  the  mouth  before  men  every  op- 
portunity you  get.  Rom.  x:g,  10.  Matt,  x: 
32,33.  (b.)  Be  baptized  and  partake  regularly 
of  the  Lord's  supper,  (d.)  Acts  ii  138-42;  Luke 
xxii:i9;  1  Cor.  xi  124-26.  (c.)  Study  the  Word 
of  God  daily.  1  Pet  ii:2;  Acts  xx:32 ;  1 1  Tim. 
iii:  13-17.  Actsxvii:u.  (d.)  Pray  daily,  often 
and  in  every  time  of  temptation.  Luke  xi: 
9-13;  xxii:40.  1  Thes.  v:i7.  (e.)  Put  away 
out  of  your  life  every  sin,  even  the  smallest, 
and  everything  you  have  doubts  about,  and 
obey  every  word  of  Christ  1  Jno.  i:6, 7;  Rom. 
xiv:23;  Jno.  xiv:23.  (f.)  Seek  the  society  of 
Christians.  Eph.  iv:  12-16;  Acts  ii:  42,  47; 
Heb.  x:242,5;  (g.)  Go  to  work  for  Christ. 
Matt,  xxv :  14-29.  (h.)  When  you  fall  into 
sin  don't  be  discouraged,  but  confess  it  at 
once,  believe  it  is  forgiven  because  God  says 
so  and  get  up  and  go  on.  1  Jno.  i:  9;  Phil. 
iii:  13-14.  It  would  be  well  to  give  these  in- 
structions in  some  permanent  form  to  the  one 
whom  you  have  led  to  Christ.  You  can  write 
them  out  or  get  a  little  tract  called  the  "Chris- 
tian Life  Card"  published   by  Jno.  C.  Collins, 


ft 


SOME  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS  IO3 

ureau  of  Supplies,  New  Haven,  Conn.  This 
ontains  them  and  some  other  matter. 
16.  When  you  have  led  any  one  to  Christ, 
follow  him  up  and  help  him  in  the  develop- 
ment of  his  Christian  life.  Many  are  led  to 
Christ  and  then  neglected  and  get  on  very 
poorly.  This  is  a  great  mistake.  The  work 
of  following  up  those  who  are  converted  is  as 
important  as  the  work  of  leading  them  to 
Christ,  and  as  a  rule  no  one  can  do  it  so  well 
as  the  person  whom  God  used  in  their  conver- 
sion. 


& 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

THE    BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 

There  is  one  condition  of  success  in  bring- 
ing men  to  Christ  that  is  of  such  cardinal  im- 
portance, and  so  little  understood,  that  it  de- 
mands a  separate  chapter.  I  refer  to  the 
Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  Acts  i5  ;  Luke 
xxiv.49  (comp.  Acts  i. 8),  and  Acts  ii.4,  ws 
have  three  expressions;  "baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit",  "endured  with  power  from  on 
high"  and  "filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  By  a 
careful  comparison  of  these  and  related  pass- 
ages we  will  find  that  these  various  expres- 
sions refer  to  one  and  the  same  experience. 
This  experience  we  shall  see  as  we  proceed  in 
the  study  of  this  subject  is  an  absolutely  nec- 
essary condition  of  acceptable  and  effective 
service  for  Christ. 

1.  What  is  the  Baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit? 

1.  It  is  a  definite  and  distinct  operation  of 
tJie    Holy     Spirit    of  which   one    may     knozv 

whether  it  has   been    wrought    in  him  or  not. 
104 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT        IO5 

This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  Jesus  bade 
His  disciples  tarry  in  Jerusalem  until  they 
had  received  this  enduement,  (Luke  xxiv.49, 
comp.  Acts  i.  8),  and  if  it  was  not  a  definite  and 
distinct  operation  of  which  they  might  know 
whether  they  had  received  it  or  not,  of  course, 
they  would  not  know  when  this  command  of 
Christ  had  been  complied  with  and  when  they 
were  ready  to  begin  their  witnessing. 

2.  //  is  an  operation  of  The  Holy  Spirit 
separate  from  His  regenerating  work.  This 
appears  from  Acts  i.  5,  where  the  disciples  are 
told  "ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  not  many  days  hence."  But  from  Jno. 
xv.  3;  xiii:  10  we  learn  that  the  disciples  were 
already  regenerated.  It  appears  also  from 
Acts  viii;  15.  16  where  we  are  told  of  certain 
who  had  already  believed  and  were  bap- 
tized with  water,  but  upon  whom  the 
Holy  Spirit  had  not  yet  fallen.  The  same 
thing  is  shown  by  Acts  xix.  1-6,  where 
we  are  told  of  certain  who  were  disciples, 
but  who  had  not  received  the  Holy  Spirit 
since  they  believed.  One  may  then  be  re- 
generated by  the  Holy  Spirit  without  being 
baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Such  an  one 
is  saved  but  he  is  not  yet  'fitted  for  service. 
Every  believer  has  the  Holy  Spirit,  Rom.  viii. 


106         HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

9,  but  not  every  believer  has  the  Baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  (Acts  ;viiii2-i6;  xix;  1-2).  We 
shall  see  very  soon  that  every  believer  may 
have  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

3.  The  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  al- 
ways connected  with  testimony  or  service,  (see 
1  Cor.  xii.4-13;  Acts  i.  5-8;  Luke  xxiv.  49; 
Acts  ii.4;  iv;8,3i ;  vii  55;  i.  17,20;  x.45-46;x 
xix. 6.)  The  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  has 
no  direct  reference  to  cleansing  from  sin. 
This  is  an  important  point  to  bear  in  mind 
for  many  reasons.  There  is  a  line  of  teach- 
ing on  this  subject  that  leads  men  to  expect 
that  if  they  receive  the  Baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  old  carnal  nature  will  be  eradicated. 
There  is  not  a  line  of  scripture  to  support  this 
position.  As  said  above,  and  as  any  one  can 
learn  for  himself  if  he  will  examine  all  the 
passages  in  which  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  mentioned,  it  is  always  connected 
with  testimony  and  service.  It  is  indeed  ac- 
companied with  a  great  moral  and  spiritual  up- 
lifting and  pre-supposes,as  we  shall  see,  an  en- 
tire surrender  of  the  will  to  Christ,  but  its  pri- 
mary and  immediate  purpose  is  fitting  for  ser- 
vice. We  will  get  a  more  definite  idea  of  what 
the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is,  if  we  consider 
its  manifestations  and  results  as  stated  in  the 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT        IO7 

Bible,  (a.)  Let  us  look  first  at  the  passage  that 
goes  most  into  detail  on  this  subject,  1  Cor. 
xii.4-10.  We  see  at  once  that  the  manifes- 
tations or  results  of  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  are  not  precisely  the  same  in  all  per- 
sons.  For  example,  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  not  make  every  one  who  receives 
it  a  successful  evangelist  or  teacher.  Some 
quite  different  gift  may  be  imparted.  This 
fact  is  often  overlooked  and  much  disap- 
pointment and  doubt  are  the  result.  The 
manifestations  or  results  vary  with  the  lines 
of  service  to  which  God  has  called  different 
individuals.  One  receives  the  gift  of  an  evan- 
gelist, another  of  a  teacher,  another  of  govern- 
ment, another  of  a  helper,  another  of  a  mother, 
(1  Cor.  xii.28-31;  Eph.  iv.8,11.)  (b.)  1  Cor. 
xii.7-11.  There  will  be  some  gift  in  every 
case.  Not  the  same  gift  but  some  gift,  of  an 
evangelist,  or  a  pastor,  or  of  a  teacher  or  some 
other,  (c.)  1  Cor.  xii.  11.  The  Holy  Spirit  is 
Himself  the  one  who  decides  what  the  gift  or 
gifts  shall  be  which  he  will  impart  to  each 
individual.  It  is  not  for  us  to  select  some 
place  of  service  and  then  ask  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  qualify  us  for  that  service,  nor  for  us  to 
select  some  gift,  and  then  ask  the  Spirit  to 
impart  to  us  that  gift.    It  is  for  us  to  put  our- 


108  HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

selves  entirely  at  the  disposal  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  send  us  where  "He  will,"  into  what 
line  of  service  "He  will"  (Acts  xiii.2,)  and  to 
impart  what  gift  "He  will."  He  is  absolutely 
sovereign  and  our  rightful  position  is  that  of 
absolute  and  unconditional  surrender  to  Him. 
This  is  where  many  fail  of  a  blessing  and 
meet  with  disappointment.  I  know  a  most 
sincere  and  self-sacrificing  man  who  gave  up 
a  lucrative  business  and  took  up  the  work  of 
an  evangelist.  He  had  heard  of  the  Baptism 
of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  had  been  led  to  suppose 
that,  if  he  received  it,  it  would  qualify 
him  for  the  work  of  an  evangelist.  The  man 
came  more  than  four  thousand  miles  to  this 
country,  but  the  work  did  not  open  to  him. 
He  was  in  much  purplexity  and  doubt  until  he 
was  led  to  see  that  it  was  not  for  him  to  select 
the  work  of  an  evangelist,  as  good  as  that 
work  was,  and  then  expect  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  qualify  him  for  this  self-chosen  work.  He 
gave  himself  up  to  be  sent  into  whatever  work 
the  Spirit  might  will.  Into  the  work  in  which 
he  was  sent  the  power  of  the  Spirit  came 
upon  him  and  he  received  this  very  gift  of  an 
evangelist  which  he  had  coveted,  (d.)  Acts 
i.  5,8.  The  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  al- 
ways imparts  potver  for   service,  the  services 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT        IO9 

to  which  God  calls  us.  In  a  certain  city  was 
an  uneducated  boy  who  was  led  to  Christ. 
In  his  very  lowly  occupation  he  began  wit- 
nessing for  Jesus.  He  went  on  from  step  to 
step  in  Christ's  work.  My  attention  was 
called  to  him  by  a  gentleman  who  was  inter- 
ested in  him,  and  who  said  he  would  like  to 
have  me  meet  him.  The  gentleman"  brought 
him  to  Chicago,  and  I  invited  him  one  night 
to  speak  in  one  of  our  tents.  It  was  in  an 
exceedingly  hard  neighborhood.  Into  the 
same  tent  an  organized  mob  once  came  to 
break  up  the  meeting.  It  was  a  difficult  au- 
dience to  hold.  The  young  man  began  in 
what  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  very  common- 
place way,  and  I  was  afraid  I  had  made  a  mis- 
take in  asking  him  to  speak,  but  I  prayed  and 
watched  the  audience.  There  was  nothing 
remarkable  in  his  address  as  he  went  on — ex- 
cepting the  bad  grammar.  But  I  noticed  that 
all  the  people  were  listening.  They  contin- 
ued to  listen  to  the  end.  When  I  asked  if  there 
was  any  one  who  wished  to  accept  Christ, 
people  rose  in  different  parts  of  the  tent  to 
signify  that  they  did.  Thinking  it  all  over,  I 
told  the  facts  to  a  man  who  had  known  the 
speaker  before.  "It  is  just  so  wherever  he 
goes"  was  the  reply.      What   was  the   expla- 


IIO         HOW    TO    BRING    MEN     TO    CHRIST 

nation?  This  uneducated  boy  had  received 
the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  had  re- 
ceived power.  One  night  at  the  close  of  an 
address  on  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a 
minister  came  to  me  on  the  platform  and  said: 
"I  need  this  power,  won't  you  pray  for  me?" 
"Let  us  kneel  right  down  here  now,"  I  replied, 
and  we  did.  A  few  weeks  after  I  met  a  gen- 
tleman who  had  been  standing  by.  "Do  you 
remember,"  he  said  "the  minister  with  whom 
you  prayed  at  New  Britain.  He  went  back 
to  his  church;  his  church  is  packed  Sunday 
evenings,  a  large  part  of  the  audience  are 
young  men  and  he  is  having  conversions  right 
along."  He  had  received  the  Baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  and"power."(e.)Acts  iv.  29-31.  The 
Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  always  imparts 
boldness  in  testimony  and  service.  Peter  is 
a  notable  example  of  this.  Contrast  Peter  in 
Acts  iv.8-12  with  Peter  in  Mark  xiv. 66-72. 
Perhaps  some  one  who  reads  this  book  has  a 
great  desire  to  speak  to  others  and  win  them 
to  Christ,  but  an  insuperable  timidity  stands 
in  the  way.  If  you  will  only  get  the  Baptism 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  all  that  will  be  overcome. 
We  are  now  in  a  position  to  define  the 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Baptism  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  f  is  the  Spirit  of  God  falling  up- 


the  baptism  of  the  holy  spirit      i  i  i 

on  the  believer,  taking  possession  of  his  facul- 
ties, imparting  to  him  gifts  not  naturally  his 
own,  but  which  qualify  him  for  the  service 
to  which  God  has  called  him. 

2.  The  necessity  of  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  as  a  preparation  for  Chris- 
tian work. 

(i)  In  Luke  xxiv.  49.  Jesus  bade  the  apos- 
tles to  tarry  in  Jerusalem  until  they  were  "en- 
dued ivith  power  from  on  high. "  These  men 
had  been  appointed  to  be  witnesses  of  the  life, 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  (Luke  xxiv. 
45-48.  Acts,  i.22;  x.  39-41.)  They  had  re- 
ceived what  would  seem  to  be  a  splendid  and 
sufficient  training  for  this  work.  For  more 
than  three  years  they  had  been  to  school  to 
the  best  of  teachers,  Jesus  Himself.  They  had 
been  eye  witnesses  of  his  miracles,  death, 
burial,  resurrection  and  ascension.  But  there 
was  still  one  thing  needed.  And  this  need  was  of 
such  vital  importance  that  Jesus  would  not  per- 
mit them  to  enter  upon  their  appointed  work 
until  that  need  had  been  met.  That  need  was 
the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  the  apos- 
tles with  their  unparalleled  fitting  for  service, 
were  not  permitted  to  enter  that  service  until 
all  their  other  training  had  been  supple- 
mented  by  the    Baptism   of  the  Holy  Spirit. 


112         HOW   TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

what  daring  presumption  it  is  for  any  of  us  with 
our  inferior  training  to  dare  to  do  it.  But  this 
is  not  all,  even  Jesus  Himself  did  not  enter 
upon  his  ministry  until  specially  anointed 'with 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  with  poiver.  (Acts  x.  38, 
comp.  Luke  iii.  and  22  iv.  1 ,  14).  This  baptism  is 
an  absolutely  essential  preparation  for  Chris- 
tian work.  It  is  either  ignorance  of  the  plain 
requirements  of  God's  word  or  the  most  daring 
presumption  on  our  part  when  we  try  to  do 
work  for  Christ  until  we  know  we  have  been 
Baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

(2.)  //  is  the  privilege  of  every  believer  to  be 
baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  appears 
from  Acts  ii.  39,  R.  V.  "To  you  is  the  promise 
and  to  your  children  and  to  all  that  are  afar 
off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall 
call  unto  him."  The  context,  the  use  of  the 
word  "promise"  in  this  and  the  preceding 
chapter  (ch.  i.4;  ii.  16,33.)  and  the  use  of  the 
expression  "gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  throughout 
the  book,  all  prove  conclusively  that  "the 
promise"  of  this  verse  means  the  promise  of 
the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  the  verse 
tells  us  that  this  promise  is  for  all  in  all  ages 
of  the  church's  history  whom  God  shall  call 
unto  him,  i.  e.  for  every  believer.  If  we 
have  not   this  baptism   it   is   our   own    fault. 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT        I  I  3 

It  is  for  us  and  we  are  responsible  before  God 
for  all  the  work  we  might  have  done,  and  all 
the  souls  we  might  have  won  if  we  were  so 
baptized,  and  we  are  guilty  to  the  extent  that 
the  work  is  not  done  and  the  souls  not  won. 

(3)  how  can  we  obtain  the  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

We  now  come  to  the  practical  question:  how 
can  we  obtain  this  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
which  is  such  an  absolute  necessity  in  our 
work  for  Christ?  Fortunately  the  answer  to 
this  question  is  very  plainly  stated  in  the  Bi- 
ble. 

(1)  "Repent  ye  and  be  baptized  every  one  of 
you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  re- 
mission of  your  sins;  and  God  shall  receive 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (  Acts  ii.  38  R.  V.) 
The  first  step  tozvard  obtaining  this  Baptism 
is  repentance.  Repentance  means  "  a  change  of 
mind,"  a  change  of  mind  about  sin,  about 
God,  and  in  this  case  especially  (as  the  context 
shows)  a  change  of  mind  about  Christ.  A  real 
change  of  mind  such  as  leads  to  action — to  our 
turning  away  from  all  sin,  our  turning  to  God, 
our  turning  away  from  rejecting  Jesus  Christ 
to  accepting  Him.  The  second  step  is  the  con- 
fession of  our  renunciation  of  sin  and  accept- 
ance of  Jesus  Christ  in  God's    appointed  way 


114         HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

by  baptism  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  in  at  least  one  in- 
stance(Acts  x.44-48)preceded  the  baptism  with 
water  but  this  was  manifestly  an  exceptional 
case  and  God  says  "repent  ye  and  be  baptized 
every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
unto  the  remission  of  your  sins;  and  ye  shall 
receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  (Acts  ii. 
38,  R.  V.) 

(2)  "The  Holy  Spirit  whom  God  hath  given 
to  them  that  obey  him".  (Acts  v.  32).  The  con- 
dition of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  here  stated 
is  that  we  "obey  Him."  Obedience  means  more 
than  the  mere  performance  of  some  of  the 
things  that  God  bids  us  do.  It  means  the 
entire  surrender  of  our  wills,  ourselves  and  all 
we  have,  to  Him.  It  means  that  we  come  to 
Him  and  say  from  the  heart,  "here  I  am,  I  am 
thine,  thou  hast  bought  me  with  a  price,  I  ac- 
knowledge thine  ownership.  Take  me,  do  with 
me  what  thou  wilt,  send  me  where  thou  wilt, 
use  me  as  Thou  wilt."  This  entire  yielding 
of  ourselves  to  God  is  the  condition  of  our  re- 
ceiving the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  it 
is  at  this  point  that  many  fail  of  this  blessing. 
At  the,  close  of  a  convention  a  gentleman 
hurried  to  the  platform  and  said  there  was  a 
lady  in  great   distress   who  wished  to  speak 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT         I  I  5 

with  me.  It  was  an  hour  before  I  could  get 
to  her,  but  I  found  her  still  in  great  mental 
suffering  in  the  intensity  of  her  desire  for  the 
Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Others  had  talk- 
ed to  her  but  it  had  seemed  to  do  no  good. 
I  sat  down  behind  her  and  said  "Is  your  will 
wholly  surrendered?"  She  did  not  know.  "You 
wish  to  be  a  Christian  worker  do  you  not?" 
"Yes."  "Are  you  willing  to  go  back  to  Balti- 
more and  be  a  servant  girl  if  it  is  God's  will?" 
"No!"  "You  will  never  receive  this  blessing 
until  your  own  will  is  wholly  laid  down."  "I 
can't  lay  it  down,"  "Would  you  like  to  have 
God  lay  it  down  for  you."  "Yes."  "Well,  let 
us  ask  Him  to  do  it."  We  did,  he  heard  the 
prayer,  the  will  was  laid  down,  the  Baptism 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  received  and  she  went 
from  the  church  rejoicing. 

Obedience  means  also  the  doing  in  all  mat- 
ters great  and  small,  the  will  of  God  as  re- 
vealed in  His  Word  or  by  His  Spirit.  Any  re- 
fusal to  do  what  God  bids  us  do,  any  con- 
scious doing  of  what  he  bids  us  not  do,  even 
in  very  little  matters,  is  sufficient  to  shut  us 
out  of  this  blessing.  If  there  is  anything  no 
matter  how  little,  that  comes  up  before  us  to 
trouble  us  as  we  pray  over  this  matter,  we 
should  set  it   right   with  God    at   once.      Mr. 


Il6         HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

Finney  tells  of  one  who,  in  great  agony  prayed 
for  days  for  the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
but  received  no  answer.  At  last  as  she  was 
praying  one  night  she  put  her  hand  to  her 
head  and  took  off  some  little  adornment  that 
always  came  up  before  her  when  she  prayed 
and  cast  it  from  her.  Immediately  she  re- 
ceived the  long  desired  blessing.  It  seemed 
a  very  little  thing  but  it  was  a  matter  of  con- 
troversy with  God  and  hindered  the  blessing. 

(3.)  "How  much  more  shall  your  Heavenly 
Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
Him."  (Luke  ii :  1 3  )  (a.)  There  must  be 
definite  prayer  for  this  Baptism.  It  is  often 
said  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  already  here  and 
that  every  believer  has  the  Spirit  and  so  we 
ought  not  to  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  This 
argument  overlooks  the  distinction  between 
having  the  Holy  Spirit  and  having  this  specific 
preparation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  (see  1.2.)  It 
also  contradicts  the  plain  teaching  of  God's 
word  that  He  gives  "the  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  Him."  It  is  furthermore  shown  to  be 
fallacious  by  the  fact  that  the  Baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  book  of  Acts  was  constantly 
given  in  connection  with  and  in  answer  to 
prayer.     (Acts  i:  14;  ii:  1 -4 ;  iv: 3 1 ;  viii  15,17.) 

(b.)    Prayer  implies  desire.     There   is  no 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT        I  \J 

real  prayer  for  the  Baptism  of  the  Spirit  unless 
there  is  a  deep  desire  for  it.  As  long  as  a 
man  thinks  he  can  get  along  somehow  with- 
out this  blessing,  he  is  not  likely  to  get  it;  but 
when  a  man  reaches  the  place  where  he  feels 
he  must  have  this  no  matter  what  it  costs, 
he  is  far  on  the  way  toward  receiving  it. 
Many  a  minister  of  the  gospel  and  other  work- 
er has  been  brought  to  a  place  where  he  has 
felt  he  could  not  go  on  with  his  ministry  with- 
out this  gift  and  then  the  gift  has  soon  follow- 
ed and  the  character  of  his  work  has  been 
entirely  transformed. 

(c. )  The  prayer  to  be  effectual  must  be  in 
faith  {Mark  xi :  //..  James  says  in  regard  to 
the  prayer  for  wisdom.  "Let  him  ask  in  faith, 
nothing  wavering.  For  he  that  wavereth  is 
like  a  wave  of  sea  driven  with  the  wind  and 
tossed.  For  let  not  that  man  think  that  he 
shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord"  (J as.  i.6,7.) 
The  same  principle,  of  course,  holds  in  re- 
gard to  the  prayer  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is 
at  this  very  point  that  many  miss  the  bless- 
ing. How  to  approach  God  in  faith  is  clearly 
taught  by  1  Jno.  v.  14, 15.  "This  is  the  con- 
fidence that  we  have  in  Him,  that,  if  we  ask 
anything  according  to  his  will  He  heareth  us, 
and  if  we  know  that  he  hear  us  whatsoever 


I  18         HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions 
that  we  desired  of  him."  When  we  ask  Him 
for  the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  we  know 
that  we  have  asked  something  according  to 
His  will  for  it  is  definitely  promised  in  His 
word.  Therefore  we  know  that  "He  heareth 
us;  and  if  we  know  that  He  hear  us  we  know 
that  we  have  the  petition"  which  we  have 
asked  of  him.  As  soon  then  as  I  am  sure  I 
have  met  the  conditions  stated  above  of  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  asked  it  of  God 
I  have  a  right  to  count  this  blessing  mine — 
the  prayer  is  heard  and  I  have  the  petition  I 
asked  of  him — and  get  up  and  enter  into  my 
work  assured  that  in  my  work  will  be  seen 
the  Spirit's  power.  "But,"  some  one  will  say, 
"shall  we  expect  no  manifestations?"  Yes, 
but  where?  In  service.  When  I  know  on  the 
authority  of  God's  word  that  my  prayer  is 
heard,  I  have  the  right  to  enter  upon  any  ser- 
vice to  which  He  calls  me  and  confidently  ex- 
pect the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit's  power  in 
that  service.  It  is  a  mistake  to  wait  or  look 
for,  as  so  many  do,  the  manifestation  in  elec- 
tric shocks  or  peculiar  emotional  experiences. 
They  may  and  often  do  accompany  the  Bap- 
tism of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  the  Bible  clearly 
teaches  us  (i  Cor.  xii.4-1 1)    that  the  place  to 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT        119 

look  for  manifestations,  is  in  service  and  the 
most  important,  reliable  and  scriptural  mani- 
festations are  found  in  our  work.  "Must  we 
not  wait,"  it  may  be  asked,  "until  we  know 
that  we  have  received  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit."  Most  assuredly,  but  how  are 
we  to  know?  The  same  way  in  which  we 
know  we  are  saved,  by  the  testimony  of  God' s 
word.  When  I  know  I  have  met  the  condi- 
tions and  have  asked  this  gift  which  is  "ac- 
cording to  his  will"  I  know  by  God's  word(i 
Jno.v.  14, 15.)  that  my  prayer  is  heard,  and  that 
I  have  the  petition  I  desired  of  him.  I  have  a 
right  to  arise  with  no  other  evidence  than  the 
all-sufficient  evidence  of  God's  word,  and  enter 
into  the  service  to  which  God  calls  me.  "Did 
not  the  early  disciples  wait  ten  days?"  it  may 
again  be  asked,  Yes,  and  the  reason  why  is 
clearly  given  in  Acts  ii.  1. — "When  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  fully  come."  In  the  O.  T.  types 
the  day  of  Pentecost  had  been  appointed  as 
the  day  in  God's  economy  for  the  first  giving 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  offering  of  the  first- 
fruits  (the  church)  and  so  the  Holy  Spirit 
could  not  be  given  until  that  day.  (Lev.xxiii. 
9-17.)  But  after  the  Spirit  was  once  given 
we  find  no  protracted  period  of  waiting  on  the 
part  of  those  who  sought  this  blessing.     (Acts 


120         HOW    TO    BRING    MEN    TO    CHRIST 

iv.31;  viii.  15,17;  ix.  17,20;  xix.6.)  Men  are 
obliged  to  wait  to-day,  but  it  is  only  because 
they  have  not  met  the  conditions,  or  do  not 
believe  and  claim  the  blessing  simply  on  the 
Word  of  God.  The  moment  we  meet  the 
conditions  and  claim  the  blessing  it  is  ours. 
(Mark  xi.24  R.V.)  Any  child  of  God  may  lay 
down  this  book,  meet  the  conditions,  ask  the 
blessing,  claim  it  and  have  it.  In  a  Students' 
Summer  School  at  Lake  Geneva  after  a  talk 
by  F.  B.  Meyer  on  the  Baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  a  student  remained  to  talk  with  me. 
He  said  he  had  heard  of  this  before  and  had 
been  seeking  it  for  months  but  could  not  get 
it.  I  found  his  will  was  not  surrendered,  but 
that  was  soon  settled.  Then  I  said,  "Let  us 
kneel  down  and  ask  God  for  the  Baptism  of 
the  Holy  Spirit."  He  did  so.  Was  that  pe- 
tition "according  to  his  will?"  I  asked.  "Yes." 
"Was  the  prayer  heard?"  After  some  hesi- 
tation, "It  must  have  been."  "Have  you  what 
you  asked  of  Him?"  "I  don't  feel  it."  I  read 
1  Jno.  v.  15.  from  the  Bible  that  lay  open  be- 
fore us:  "If  we  know  that  he  hears  us,  whatso- 
ever we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  pe- 
tition we  desired  of  him."  "Was  the  prayer 
heard?"  "Yes."  "Have  you  what  you  asked?" 
"I  must  have;  for  God  says  so."  We  arose  and 


THE  BAPTISM  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT        121 

soon  separated.  Going  back  to  the  school  in 
a  few  days  I  met  the  young  man  again.  His 
face  was  now  all  aglow  and  he  knew  he  had 
received  what  at  first  he  took  upon  the  bare 
word  of  God. 

4.  The  Repetition  of  the  Baptism  of 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

One  more  thing  needs  to  be  said  before  we 
leave  this  subject.  The  Baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  an  experience  that  needs  frequent 
repeatings.  This  appears  from  a  comparison 
of  Acts  ii.4 — where  Peter  with  others  was 
filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit — with  Acts  iv. 
8. — where  Peter  was  filled  again, — and  with 
Acts  iv.  31  where  Peter  with  others  was 
filled  yet  again.  A  new  filling  is  needed  and 
should  be  sought  for  each  new  emergency  of 
Christian  service.  There  are  many  who  once 
knew  experimentally  what  the  Baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  meant  who  are  trying  to  work  to- 
day in  the  power  of  that  old  experience  and 
are  working  without  God.  They  need  and 
must  have  a  new  Baptism  before  God  can 
use  them. 


Popular  Missionary  Biographies 

12mo,  160  pages.     Fully  illustrated.    Cloth  extra,  75  cents  each. 


From  The  Missionary 
Herald. 

"  We  commended  this  ser- 
ies in  our  last  issue,  and  a 
further  examination  leads  us 
to  renew  our  commendation, 
and  to  urge  the  placing  of 
this  series  of  missionary 
books  in  all  our  Sabbath- 
school  libraries. 

These  books  are  handsome- 
ly printed  and  bound  and  are 
beautifully  illustrated,  and  we 
are  confident  that  they  will 
prove  attractive  to  all  young 
people." 


"  These  are  not  pans  of  milk,  but  little  pitchers  of  cream,  compact  and 
condensed  from  bulkier  volumes."— Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson. 

SAMUEL  CROWTHER,  the  Slave  Boy  who  became 
Bishop  of  the  Niger,  By  Jesse  Page,  author  of  "  Bishop 
Patteson." 

THOMAS  J.  COMBER,  Missionary  Pioneer  to  the 
Congo.  By  Rev.  J.  B.  Myers,  Association  Secretary  Baptist  Mis- 
sionary Society. 

BISHOP  PATTESON,  the  Martyr  of  Melanesia.  By 
Jesse  Page. 

GRIFFITH  JOHN,  Founder  of  the  Hankow  Mission, 
Central  China.  By  Wm.  Robson,  of  the  London  Missionary 
Society. 

ROBERT  MORRISON,  the  Pioneer  of  Chinese  Mis- 
sions. By  Wm.  J.  Townsend,  Sec.  Methodist  New  Connexion 
Missionary  Society. 

ROBERT  MOFFAT,  the  Missionary  Hero  of Kuruman, 
By  David  J.  Deane,  author  of  "  Martin  Luther,  the  Reformer,"  etc. 

WILLIAM  CAREY,  th<3  Shoemaker  who  became  a  Mis- 
sionary. By.  Rev.  J.  B.  Myers,  Association  Secretary  Baptist 
Missionary  Society. 

JAMES  CHALMERS,  Missionary  and  Explorer  of 
Rarotonga  and  New  Guinea.  By  Wm.  Robson,  of  the 
London  Missionary  Society. 

MISSIONARY  LADIES  IN  FOREIGN  LANDS.  By 
Mrs.  E.  R.  Pitman,  author  of  "  Heroines  of  the  Missionary  Fields," 
etc. 

JAMES  CALVERT;  or,  From  Dark  to  Dawn  in  Fiji. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  the  Martyr  of  Polynesia.  By  Rev. 
James  J.  Ellis. 

HENRY  MARTYN,  His  Life  and  Labors.  By  JES9B 
Page,  author  of  "  Bishop  Patterson,"  etc. 

DA  VID  BRAINERD :    Apostle  to  American  Indians. 

MADAGASCAR :    Its  Missionaries  and  Martyrs. 

DA  V ID  LIVINGSTONE;  By  Arthur  Montefiore,  F.  R.  G 


BOOKS  FOR  YOUNG  HEN 

Moral  Muscle  and  How  to  Use    It,  by  Frederick 

Atkins.  A  Brotherly  Chat  with  Young  Men $  .50 

"This  is  positively  the  best  book  for  young-  men  that  we 
have  seen.  It  looks  the  facts  of  young  men's  lives  full  in  the 
face,  and  proclaims  the  gospel  of  industry,  perseverance,  self- 
control,  and  manly  Christianity.  We  can  certify  that  no  one 
will  find  it  stupid."— St.  Andrew's  Cross. 

First  Battles  and  How  to  Fight  Them,  by  F.  A. 

Atkins.    Friendly  Chats  with  Young    Men. ..$.50 
"It  is  true  in  its  substance,  attractive   in   its  .style,  and  ad- 
mirable in  its  spirit.     I  heartily  commend  this  little  volume."— 
Rev.  John  Hall,  D.D. 

The  Spiritual  Athlete  and  How  He  Trains,  by  W. 

A.  Bodell.     Introduction  by  Rev.B.  Fay  Mills.. $  .50 
A  work  for  young  men,  pithy,  pointed  and  practical. 
"Its  power  and  value  lie  in  the  consistent  carrying  out  of 
the  comparison  between  physical  and  spiritual  training."—  The 
Independent. 

Brave  and  True,  by  J.  Thain    Davidson.        Talks 

to  Young  Men $  .50 

"This  is  one  of  the  books  the  wide  distribution  of  which 
can  not  be  too  greatly  desired."— Pi  esbyterian  Journal. 

Thoroughness,    by  Dr.  J.  Thain  Davidson.     Talks 

to  Young  Men.    i2mo.,  cloth $  .50 

"Dr.  Davidson  knows  young  men  and  how  to  talk  to  them. 

He  is  ever  racy,  fresh  and  practical  and  in  this,  his  latest  issue, 

no  less  so.     We  warmly  commend  the  book  to  workers  among 

young  men. "—The  Christian. 

The  Secret  of  Success;    or  Finger    Posts  on    the 
Highway  of  Life,  by  John  T.  Dale.    Introduction 

by  Hon.  John  V.  Farwell.      8vo.,  cloth $1.50 

"This  volume  is  a  perfect  thesaurus  of  maxims  and  of 
inspiriting  incidents  relating  to  attainment.  It  is  a  book  of 
counsels  to  young  men  and  women  who  desire  to  achieve  what 
their  generation  nas  a  right  to  expect  of  them.'' — Golden  Rule. 

Turn  Over  a  New  Leaf,  and  Other  Words  to  Young 

People    at  School,     by   B.    B.  Comegys $.50 

"These  talks  are  on  a  great  many  every-day  topics  of  great 
importance.  They  are  treated  so  sensibly  and  so  practically 
and  with  such  a  kindly  spirit,  that  it  would  be  well  if  a  copy 
might  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  every  one  of  the  young  people 
of  the  land."— Heiald  and  Presbyter. 

The  Fall  of  the  Staincliffes.    Prize  Story  on  the 
Evils    of     Gambling,      by    A.     Colbeck.    Paper, 

25  cents;    cloth 75 

"It  depicts  in  a  clear,  forcible  way  the  terrible  evils  of  intem- 
perance and  of  gambling  in  all  its  forms.  It  Is  not  a  'goody 
goody'  book  but  a  good  book."— Public  Opinion. 

Chicago.     Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,     new  yobk. 


Books  of  Illustration 


For  Pulpit  and  Platform;  for  Preachers  and  Teachers. 

Seed  Corn  for  the  Sower;  or,  Thoughts,  Themes 
and  Illustrations,  for  Pulpit  and  Platform  and  for 
Home  Readings,  by  Rev.  C.  Perrin,  Ph.  D.     i2tno., 

cloth $1.50 

Although  no  less  than  two  hundred  authors  have  been  drawn 

upon  to  supply  the  material  for  this  work,  it  is  believed  that  the 

f;reat  mass  of  "illustrative  matter  will  be  found  entirely  new  and 
resh— embracing  nearly  400  pages  of  original  and  carefully 
selected  illustrative  excerpts  covering  a  wide  range  of  subjects. 
"To  teachers  and  all  engaged  in  Bible  instruction,  it  will 
prove  a  volume  of  great  help  and  usefulness  and  furnish  ready 
to  their  hand  many  a  nail  with  which  to  fasten  in  a  sure  place 
the  truths  they  may  desire  to  drive  home." — The  Christian  at 
Work. 

Feathers  for  Arrows;  or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers 
and   Teachers,    by    Rev.     Charles    H.     Spurgeon. 

i2tno.,  cloth $1.00 

"The  work  covers  a  wide  range  of  subjects.  The  metaphors 
are  always  striking  and  frequently  brilliant,  while  the  truths 
that  they  illustrate  are  such  as  have  always  formed  the  staple 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  discourses.  A  choicer  collection  of  illustra- 
tions we  do  not  know." — The  Freeman. 

Spurgeon's  Gems.    Being  Brilliant  Passages  from 

his  Discourses.     i2mo.,  cloth $1  00 

A  series  of  earnest  thoughts  and  graphic  pictures,  all  of 
them  revealing  the  true  greatness  of  the  preacher's  concep- 
tions, his  individuality  and  strength.  Gems  of  great  brilliancy, 
which  will  make  a  permanent  impression  upon  the  mind  of  the 
reader. 

Gleanings  Among    the  Sheaves,  by  Rev.  C.   H. 

Spurgeon.     Cloth,  gilt  top $  .75 

"These  extracts  are  quite  Spurgeonic— racy,  rich  and  rare, 
both  as  to  style  and  matter;  full  of  exquisite  consolation,  faith- 


ful advice,    clear    analogies,   poetic  touches,    and  glorious  old 

>spel.    We  do  not  wonder  that 
sold  c 


gospel.  We  do  not  wonder  that  eight  thousand  copies  were 
sold  on  the  day  of  publication  and  trust  that  eight  times  eighty 
thousand  will  find  their  way  to  the  religious  ■public."— Weekly 
Review. 

Scripture  Itself  the  Illustrator:  A  manual  of  illus- 
trations gathered  from  scriptural  figures,  phrases, 
types,  derivations,  chronology,  texts,  etc.,  by  Rev. 
G.  S.  Bowes.     i2tno.,  cloth $1.25 

Information  and  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and 
Teachers.  Helps  gathered  from  facts,  figures,  anec- 
dotes and  books,  for  sermons,  lectures  and  ad- 
dresses, by  Rev.  G.  S.  Bowes.     i2mo.,  cloth.  .$1.25 

Chicago.     Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,     new  york. 


WORKS  BY  DR.  A.  J.  GORDON. 


Dr.  Gordon  is  a  writer  with  whom  to  differ  is  better  and  more 
suggestive  than  to  agree  with  some  others.  He  loves  the  truth, 
he  gives  his  readers  much  that  is  true  and  deeply  of  the  essence  oj 
Christianty.— The  Independent. 

The  Holy  Spirit  in  Missions.     i2mo.,    cloth,   gilt 
top $1.25 

A  new  volume  by  this  author  is  always  welcomed.  The 
theme  of  this  new  work,  as  treated  by  Dr.  Gordon,  is  sure  to  be 
full  of  deepest  interest. 

Ecce  Venit;  Behold  He  Cometh.     Paper,  net,  50c; 
cloth I1.25 

It  is  impossible  to  read  this  book  without  being  stimulated 
by  it  and  getting  higher  and  fresher  views  of  some  aspects  of 
Christianity  which  are  perhaps  dwelt  on  less  than  they  should 
be. ' ' — Indepen  den  t. 

In  Christ;  or,  The  Believer's  Union  With  His  Lord. 
Seventh  Edition.    Paper,  net,  35c;  cloth $100 

"We  do  not  remember  since  Thomas  a  Kempis  a  book  so 
thoroughly  imbued  with  a  great  personal  love  to  Christ.  It  is 
evidently  the  happy  result  of  hours  of  high  communion  with 
Him." — Boston  Courier. 

The  Ministry  of  Healing;  or,  Miracles  of  Cure  in 
All  Ages.  Third  Edition.  Paper,  net,  50c;  cloth  #1. 25 
"An  interesting  and  thoughtful  work.  Dr.  Gordon  mar- 
shals together  witnesses  from  all  ages  and  all  classes  in  favor  of 
his  belief  that  cures  may  still  be  wrought  through  prayer."— 
British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

The  Two-Fold  Life;  or,  Christ's  Work  for  Us,  and 
Christ's  Work  in  Us.  Paper,  net,  50c.;  cloth.  .$1.25 
"Distinguished  by  exquisite  purity  of  thought,  by  deep 
spiritual  insight,  and  by  great  strength  of  practical  argument. 
The  work  is  one  of  great  spiritual  beauty  and  helpfulness."— 
Baptist  Magazine. 

Grace  and  Glory;  Sermons  for  the  Life  That  Now 
Is  and  That  Which  Is  to  Come.     Paper,  net,  50c. ; 

cloth I150 

"Here  we  have  power  without  sensationalism;  calm  thought, 
living  and  earnest,  expressed  in  forcible  language;  the  doctrine 
orthodox,  evangelical,  practical.  We  shall  be  surprised  if  these 
discourses  are  not  reprinted  by  an  English  house." — C.  H. 
Spurgeon. 

The  First  Thing  in  the  World;   or,   The  Primacy 

of  Faith.     Vellum  paper  covers $  .20 

Cheaper  edition, popular  vellum  series 10 

"There  was  a  fear  lest  the  prominence  given  the  exceeding 
beauty  and  umbrageousness  ori'L,ove"  should  overshadow  the 
sister  grace  of  "Faith,"  but  Dr.  Gordon  has  rescued  us  from  the 
danger  of  forgetting  that  faith  in  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  our 
Christian  life."— Christian  at  Work. 

Chicago.     Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,     niwtou. 


WORKS  BY  REV.  F.  B.  MEYER. 

"Few  books  of  recent  years  are  better  adapted  to  instruct  and 
help  Christians  than  those  of  this  author.  He  is  a  man  'mighty 
in  the  Scriptures,'  saturated  with  Bible  facts  and  truths  and 
possessed  with  a  yearning  desire  to  help  others.'" — D.  I,.  Moody. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  HEROES. 

"His  subjects  are  treated  in  a  broad  and  scholarly  way,  and 
yet  a  reverent  and  religious  spirit  marks  his  whole  work. 

— Sunday  School  fournal. 

"We  have  learned  with  not  a  few  others  to  take  up  with 
eagerness  whatever  bears  the  name  of  this  author."— Standard. 

Abraham;  or,  the  Obedience  of  Faith $1.00 

Israel:  A  Prince  with  God i.oo 

Joseph:   Beloved— Hated— Exalted i.oo 

Hoses.    The  Man  of  God - i.oo 

Elijah  and  the  Secret  of  his  Power.- i.oo 


'No  writer  of  the  present  day  is  imbued  with  the  spirit  of 
jospel  more  completetely  than  Mr.  Meyer,  and  as  Spurgeon 
observed  'he  is  a  great  gain  to  the  armies  of  evangelical  truth. 


The  expositions  are  in  the  form  of  brief  discourses,  bright  in 
tone,  beautiful  in  rhetoric,  simple  in  style,  sound  in  doctrine, 
practical  in  aim  and  endued  with  spiritual  power." — Lutheran. 

THE  EXPOSITORY  SERIES. 
Tried  By  Fire.     Expositions  of  the  First  Epistle  of 

Peter $1.00 

The  Life   and  Light  of  Men.       Expositions  from 

the  Gospel  of  John $1.00 

THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  SERIES. 

"I  do  not  know  of  any  writer  whose  works  on  'The  Life 
More  Abundant'  I  could  more  heartily  recommend  than  those 
of  Mr.  Meyer."— Rev.  B.  Fay  Mills. 

Christian  Living $  .50 

"A  small  book,  but  mighty  in  power."— Interior. 

The  Present  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life $  .50 

"A  little  book  we  warmly  commend  to  all  Christian  people." 
—Frances  E.  Willard  in  The  Union  Signal. 

The  Shepherd  Psalm $  .50 

"Worth  its  weight  in  gold."— Central  Baptist. 

The  Future  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life $  .50 

ENVELOPE  SERIES  OF  BOOKLETS. 

Two  packets,  each  containing  twelve  different  book- 
lets.    Per  dozen,  20c. ;  per  hundred $i-5o 

CHOICE    EXTRACTS    from  writings  of  F.    B.  Meyer,    com- 
piled by  Rev.  B.  Fay  Mills.    48  pages,  5c.  each;  35c.  per  doz. 

Chicago.     Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,     newyobk. 


Books  of  Travel  and  Research 

Ten  Years'  Digging   in  Egypt,    1881-1891,  by  W. 

M.  Flinders  Petrie.     With  a  map  and    116  illustra- 
tions.    i2tno.,  cloth $i-5o 

"The  book  has  a  special  interest  in  the  confirmation  and  the 
illustration  it  affords  as  to  the  high  condition  of  civilization 
existing  in  a  land  so  intimately  interwoven  with  Biblical  history. 
The  narrative  is  pleasantly  written,  and  the  illustrations  are  not 
only  admirably  executed,  but  greatly  help  us  in  realizing  what 
they  represent."— N.  Y,  Observer. 
"Mr.  W.  M.  F.  Petrie,  the  well-known  Egyptologist,   has  pre- 

f>ared  a  concise  popularization  of  the  results  of  his  scholarly 
abors — its  clear  and  compact  pages  are  those  of  a  trustworthy 
authority— the  story  told  is  really  fascinating."— 5. 5.  Times, 

The  Ainu  of  Japan.  The  Religion,  Superstitions- 
and  General  History  of  the  Hairy  Aborigines  of 
Japan,  by  Rev.  John  Batchelor.  With  80  illustra- 
tions.    8vo.,   cloth $i-5o 

"The  author  has  a  subject  seldom  treated  in  our  literature  and 
he  communicates  his  rather  exclusive  information  in  fascinating 
and  instructive  fashion.  His  style  is  very  vivid." — Golden  Rule. 
"The  Ainu  are  the  aborigines  of  Japan,  and  now  number 
only  some  sixteen  or  seventeen  thousand.  This  record  of  their 
character  and  customs  is  effectively  given,  and  the  text  is  sup- 
plemented by  numerous  engravings," — N.  IV.  Christian  Advo- 
cate. 

A  Winter  in  North  China,  by  Rev.  T.  M.  Morris. 
With  introduction  by  Rev.  R.  Glover,  D.  D.,  and  a 

map.    i2mo.,  cloth |i-5o 

"Contains  much  matter  of  general  interest,  and  many 
pleasant  sketches  of  China  and  the  Chinese.  An  intelligent, 
recent  and  grandly  encouraging  report." — The  Independent. 

The  Story  of  Uganda,  and  the  Victoria  Nyanza 
Mission.  By  S.  G.  Stock.  With  a  map  and  illus- 
trations.    i2mo..  cloth  $1-25 

"The  Story  of  Mackay  is  given  with  fulness  and  power; 
there  are  adde'd  also  the  stories  of  the  martyr  Bishop  Hanning- 
ton  and  his  fateful  journey,  and  of  Bishops  Parker  and  Tucker, 
of  the  other  mission,  together  with  a  sketch  of  these  missions 
under  the  brutal  King  Mwauga  since  Mackay's  untimely 
death."—  The  Golden  Rule. 

The  Fifth  Gospel.  The  Land  where  Jesus  Lived. 
By  Rev.  J.  M.  P.  Otts,  LL.  D.  With  4  maps.    i2mo., 

cloth $1.25 

"Whatever  other  books  one  may  have  read  on  Palestine,  he 
will  find  new  pleasure  and  instruction  from  the  perusal  of  this 
one." — Central  Presbyterian. 

For  list  of  "By-Paths  of  Bible  Knowledge,"  see  special 
catalogue. 

Complete  list  of  Hissionary  Books  sent  free  on  application. 

chioago.     Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,    hew  tokk. 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW 


AN     INITIAL     FINE     OF     25     CENTS 

WILL  BE  ASSESSED  FOR  FAILURE  TO  RETURN 
THIS  BOOK  ON  THE  DATE  DUE.  THE  PENALTY 
WILL  INCREASE  TO  50  CENTS  ON  THE  FOURTH 
DAY  AND  TO  $1.00  ON  THE  SEVENTH  DAY 
OVERDUE- 


APR  14     1933 
APR  15  1933 

JW»    14  1933 


*y? 


\<&> 


D  LD 

SEP    5  1956 


REC'D  LD 
AUG  9    1957 

SENT  ON  ILL 

OCT  0  6  1394 

U.  C.  BERKELEY 


LD  21-50m-l, 


371543 

n 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


