RE. osven TO AND: 


i wows K 


4 


T E R M s. 
RISERS cu THEIR BSS KOM A 


FOR outst 
2 
of ‘subser 


g Volume a time a g0 
D Novels i% more (han Onet P ume are not aui lable yor “this class. 
TWO Volumes 

y Two Bs votes & ave “not ave abi 


$ For 
For FOUR 
“For six 
por SE ‘ 


s S e n 


HUMAN DESTINY 


Bie Digitized by the Internet Archive 
eoo g in 2025 


g 


HUMAN DESTINY. 


BY 


ROBERT ANDERSON, LL.D. 


Barrister-at-Law, 


London: 


HODDER AND STOUGHTON, 
27, PATERNOSTER ROW. 


MDCCCLXXXVI. 


/8 86 
[Ad Rights Reserved.) 


a a se A, 
Printed by Hazell, Watson, and Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury, 


Campus Crusade for Christ Library 


PRE PAGE: 


Most subjects appeal only to some special 
class, but the destiny of mankind is of 
interest to all. This consideration has 
been kept in view in framing the following 
chapters. In recent years the controversy 
to which the study of eschatology has 
given rise has become narrowed to certain 
definite issues. To state and discuss those 
issues fairly, simply, and briefly, is the 


purpose of these pages. 


39, LINDEN GARDENS, W. 


hogs 


Is 


II. 


III. 


Vil. 


VIII. 


XII. 


CON EEN TS. 


_ CHAPTER 


THE QUESTION STATED . 5 : 
GETERNAE HOPE” =, A : 6 
‘*SALVATOR MUNDI” ; 

“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS” 
‘“ THE WIDER HOPE” 

WHAT IS LIFE? . : ; à % 
ETERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST? 
ANNIHILATION . ; 

CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY . D 
THE QUESTION RESTATED . 

THE QUESTION DISCUSSED A 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED 


PAGE 


yili CONTENTS. 


APPENDIX, PART I. 
Acts iii. 21 
1 Corinthians xv. 22 - c ‘ 
Philippians ii. 10 
Revelation v. 13; xxi. 4, 5; XXI. 3. 
Romans v. . 
Ephesians i. 10 
Colossians i. 20 
John i. 29 
1 John ii. 2 : 
1 Timothy ii. 4; iv. 10 
Matthew v. 26 
ohne sexi 32 


Conclusion 


APPENDIX, PART IL. 


Words used in the New Testament to express endless 
duration 

Words rendered zmmortality or immortal 

Words rendered /e//, or which relate to the abode of 
the lost : 

Words rendered destruction 

Words rendered destroy . 


Words rendered torment or tormented 


PAGE 


181 
183 
186 
187 
187 
190 
IQI 
197 
198 
200 
201 
202 
204. 


207 
215 


216 
218 


219 
225 


Chapter I. 
THE QUESTION STATED. 


ACCORDING to the most careful estimate, 
the population of the world exceeds one 
thousand four hundred millions. Not one- 
trad eof these are. Christian even. in 
name; and of this small minority how 
few there are whose lives give proof 
that they are travelling heavenward! 
And what is the destiny of all the 
rest? Any estimate of their number 
must be inaccurate and fanciful; and 
‘accuracy, if attainable, would be prac- 
tically useless. As a matter of arithmetic, 
it is as easy to deal with millions as with 
tens; but when we come to realise that 
every unit is a human being, with a little 
world of joys and sorrows all his own, and 


an unbounded capacity for happiness or 
I 


2 HUMAN DESTINY. 


misery, the mind is utterly paralysed by 
the effort to realise the problem. 

And these fourteen hundred millions 
are but a single wave of the great tide 
of human life that breaks, generation after 
generation, upon the shore of the unknown 
world. What future then awaits these 
untold myriads of millions of mankind ? 
‘Most of us have been trained in the belief 
/ that their portion is an existence of endless, 
j hopeless torment. But few there are, 
surely, who have carried this belief to 
middle age unchallenged. Sometimes it 
is the vastness of the numbers whose 
fate is involved that startles us into scep- 
ticism. Sometimes it is the memory of 
friends now gone, who lived and died 
impenitent. As we think of an eternity in 
which they “shall be tormented day and 
night for ever and ever,” the mind grows 
weary and the heart grows sick, and we 
turn to ask ourselves, Is not God infinite- 


in love? Is not the great Atonement 


THE QUESTION STATED. 3 


infinite in value? Is it credible then that 
such a future is to be the sequel to a brief 
and sorely-tempted life of sin? Is it 
credible that for all eternity—that eternity 
in which the triumph of the Cross shall be 
complete, and God shall be all in all— 
there shall still remain an under-world of 
seething sin and misery and horror ? 

We can have no companionship with 
those who refuse to bring these questions 
to the test of Scripture. If such a hell be 
there revealed, faith must assert its supre- 
macy, and all our difficulties, whether 
intellectual or moral, must be put aside 
unsolved. But what is, in fact, the voice 
of Scripture on the subject? The voice 
of the Church, it is true, has been heard in 
every age in support of the doctrine of an 
endless hell; and in some sense the testimony 
gains in weight from the fact that a minority 
never has been wanting to protest against 
the dogma, thus keeping it unceasingly 
upon the open field of free discussion. 


4 HUMAN DESTINY. 


This affords sufficient proof, no doubt, that 
Scripture seems to teach the doctrine here 
in question. But more than this must by 
no means be conceded. On such a subject 
no appeal to authority will avail to silence 
doubt. The minority may, after all, be 
right. What men call heresy proves some- 
times to be the truth of God. 

But how is such an inquiry to be entered 
on? It needs some scholarship and not a 
little patient study, and yet it is of interest 
to thousands who have neither learning nor 
leisure. Common folk whose opportunities 
and talents are but few must take advan- 
tage of the labours of others more favoured 
than themselves. And we turn to their 
writings with the honest wish to find 
there an escape from the teaching of our 
childhood. Some, indeed, have used 
language which betokens pleasure at the 
thought of endless torment; but apart from 
the enthusiasm or the bitterness of contro- 
versy this would be impossible. Surely 


THE QUESTION STATED, 5 


there is no one unwilling to be convinced 
that hell itself shall share at last in the 
reconciliation God has wrought; or, if 
the lost of earth are lost for ever, that in 
the infinite mercy of God their misery 
shall end with a last great death that shall 
put a term to their existence. 

But here are two alternatives which are 
wholly inconsistent, two paths which diverge 
at the very threshold of the inquiry. Of 
which shall we make choice? If our 
instincts and prejudices are in the least to 
guide us, none will hesitate. We refuse 
to contemplate the annihilation of the lost 
save as an escape from something still 
more grievous. But what if Scripture 
warrants the belief that all the lost shall 
yet be saved, the banished ones brought 
home, and God’s great prison closed for 
ever as the crowning triumph of redemp- 
tion? This is indeed a hope that with 


eagerness Wwe would struggle to accept. 


Chapter II. 
“ETERNAL HOPE,” 


THERE is one volume which cannot be 
ignored in any inquiry as to the future 
of the lost. It has made more stir in 
this controversy than any other publica- 
tion in recent years, both here and in 
America; and according to a high 
authority, it “may fairly be looked on 
as an epoch-making book, both in the 
wide circulation it has attained, and the 
discussion of which it has been the 
starting-point.”* Its title, and a glance 
at its contents, will lead the inquirer to 
expect from its pages the light he is in 
search of. No sooner does he enter on 
the study of it than he finds himself 
carried away by a rushing, bubbling 


* Dr. Plumptre, Zhe Spirits in Prison, p. viii. 


8 HUMAN DESTINY. 


torrent of impassioned rhetoric, which 
leaves him at the last with a bewildered, 
vague impression that heaven is the 
final goal of all the human race, and 
that the conception of an endless hell 
is but a hateful dream. 

But though this is undoubtedly the 
lesson which superficial readers have 
generally extracted from the book, it 
is by no means the writers own con- 
clusion. The following is his scheme :— 
‘“There ‘are, im they maini (he teiseni 
“three” classes* of MCN ;there” aremthe 
saints; there are the reprobates; and 
there is that vast intermediate class 
lying between yet shading off by 
infinite gradations from these two ex- 
tremes.” Of the saints. he «declinesmite 
speak, They are “few,” he declares, 
‘and mostly poor.” He does not sug- 
gest the possibility that he himself or 
those whom he addresses could be 
of the number, and his description of 


ETERNAL HOPE.” 9 


them would preclude their venturing to 
claim so high a place. ‘ But” (he pro- 
ceeds), “if ¢hey be unassailably secure, 
eternally happy, what of the other ex- 
treme? what of the reprobates?” He 
indicates the slaves of brutal vice, the 
most depraved of our criminals, as falling 
within the category, and then proceeds: 
“Tf you ask me whether I must not 
believe in endless torments for these 
reprobates of earth, my answer is, Ay, 
for these, and for thee, and for me, 
too, unless we learn with all our hearts 
to love good, and not evil; but whether 
God for Christ’s sake may not enable 
us to do this even beyond the grave, 
if we have failed to do so in this 
life, I cannot say.” 

Other statements scattered through the 
volume throw further light on this. “I 
cannot preach the certainty of univer- 
salism,” he declares. “God has given 
us no clear and decisive revelation on 


IO HUMAN DESTINY. 


the final condition of those who have 
died in’ sin.” “My “hope miS ahane 
vast majority, at any rate, of the lost, 
may at length be found.” It thus ap- 
pears that this apostle of “the wider 
hope,” who seemed to us to exhaust the 
thunders of his rhetoric in denouncing 
all who believe in an endless hell, 
himself believes in an endless hell. Heç 
l thus admits that the conception of ‘end-, 
. less torments” is warranted by Scripture, 
; and therefore compatible with infinite, 
love. In a word, the chief difference 
in this respect between his own posi- 
tion and that of the so-called orthodox, 
is a mere question either of statistics 
or of words. Both he and they agree 
to believe in hell. Both he and they 
would admit that it is reserved for 
reprobates. But while they would give 
the term a wider scope, he would limit 
it to “a small but desperate minority.” 
Might they not retort upon him that 


“ELTERNAL HOPE.” pI 


a fuller and truer apprehension of the 
Gospel would teach him that, if indeed 
there be hope beyond the grave, Divine 
love will most surely reach forth to the 
very class which he has singled out as 
possible victims of the most hopeless 
doom. The wretched offspring of de- 
praved and vicious parents, this world 
“has been no better than a hell to them 
from cradled infancy. If there be after- 
) mercy for the pampered sinners of the 
synagogue, shall it be denied to these 
poor outcasts of humanity? 

But “the saints” are “ few, and mostly 
nome wand he -reprobates’”- are - “a 
small and desperate minority.” The 
“vast intermediate class” remains; the 
class, in fact, to which we all belong. 
What shall be said of these? There 
are thousands among us who, we know, 
cannot be “saints’”—for, as the writer 
tells us, there “is an Adam in them, 
and there is a Christ ”—but whose lives, 


R2 HUMAN DESTINY. 


though marred by blemishes and sins, 
are still set heavenward. Though deeply 
conscious that they deserve only judg- 
ment, they have learned to believe that 
Christ died for their sins, and that 
trusting in Him, their portion shall be 
life, and not judgment. They believe 
that God justifies “freely by His grace 
through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus,” and that being thus ‘‘justified 
by. His blood,” they “shall be ‘saved 
from wrath through Him.” They regard 
these great doctrines of the Reformation 
as Divine truths; and, living in the faith 
of Christ, they hope at death to pass into 
His presence in blessedness and joy. 

If our author shares in this belief he 
carefully conceals it. He admits, no 
doubt, that earth’s sinners can have no 
title to God's heaven, save through 
Christs redemption. But, according to 
his teaching, personal fitness ~for~ the 
scene does not depend on Christ at all, 


TN x 


“ETERNAL HOPEL.”’ 13 


but must be won either by a life of 
saintship, or, for the vast majority who 
never could attain to saintship as here 
defined, and are “incapable of any other 
redemption,” by being purified in “that 
Gehenna of ezonian fire” beyond the 
grave. And if we ask whether these 


) 


are “endless torments,” we are answered 
Yes, “unless we learn with all our hearts 
to love good and not evil.” This 
is our constant prayer and effort, 
but we know how utterly we fail of it; 
and in terror we inquire “whether God 
for Christ’s sake may not enable us to 
do this even beyond the grave, if we 
have failed to do so in this life.’ The 
author’s answer is “I cannot say.” “I 
cannot sAy!” We are to bury our 
dead in the sure and certain expecta- 
tion of “æonian fire,” but with a dim 
and distant hope that in the ‘“ uncove- 
nanted mercy” of God they shall reach 


f> 


heaven at last! lYomish 


f- < 
ET Fee A 


14 HUMAN DESTINY. 


The writers argument is wrapped in 
clouds of words, and his statements some- 
times seem contradictory, but on close 
analysis his scheme stands out consistent 
and clear. The future happiness of the 
“saints” is assured. They, however, 
are a minority so insignificant that for 
our present purpose we may ignore them. 
The rest of the departed (believers and 
unbelievers, regenerate and unregenerate 
alike, for these are distinctions of which 
the writer takes no account) are cast into 
Gehenna; but the torments of Gehenna 
are purgatorial, and sooner or later “ the 
vast majority ” will pass to heaven purified 
in “sonan fire.’ And mark, the awful 
discipline is @ouzan. Its duration will be 
measured, not as with us, by days or 
years, but by ages; and in the case of 
“a desperate minority,” ‘eternal hope” 
means a hope that will last eternally, only 
because it will be eternally unsatisfied. 

And if any one object that any part of 


EAL PRENA ERE LLORIA 15 


this scheme is opposed to Scripture, he 
will be told it is in accordance with “the 
broad unifying principles of Scripture,” 
and that the /etéer of the Scripture kills. 
That is to say, the effect of Holy Writ 
upon the minds of common men, who 
accept its statements in their plain and 
simple meaning, is absolutely mischievous 
and destructive.* Surely we may well 


* This is not the only feature of the writer’s 
scheme which savours of Rome. He implicitly 
bases his statement on 2 Cor. iii. 6; but surely no 
one who is not too absorbed by the study of “the 
broad unifying principles of Scripture” to give his 
attention to a particular passage, can fail to see that 
the Apostle is there contrasting, not the letter of 
Scripture with the spirit of it, but the old covenant 
with the new, law with grace. 

The texts to which the writer refers in support of 
his position shall be considered in the sequel. It is 
enough to say here that most of them have no special 
bearing on the question in dispute (see p. 41, and 
App. I., fost), and the rest are of no account for 
the author’s purpose, unless they be construed to 
teach the universalism which he himself repudiates. 
As for his remarks on the word aióvios, nothing further 


16 HUMAN DESTINY. 


exclaim, Is this what English theology 
is coming to? 


need be said than he himself has elsewhere said in 
answer to his critics: “Some of the greatest masters 
of Greek, both in classical times and among the 
fathers, saw quite clearly that though the word might 
connote endlessness, by being attributively added to 
endless things, it had in itself no such meaning.” 


Chapter II. 


“SALVATOR MUNDI.” J au lead 


Tue author referred to in the preceding 
chapter has publicly acknowledged that 
while preparing the sermons which form 
the basis of his book, he was “ largely 
indebted” to an earlier work on this 
same subject. The volume alluded to is 
from the pen of a noted expositor of 
Scripture, and it has obtained such a wide 
circulation, and is held in such high 
authority in the controversy, that it is 
impossible to pass it by unnoticed. 
“The Question Raised” is the title of 
the opening chapter. If, the writer asks, 
Tyre and Sidon and the cities of the 
plain would have repented had they seen 
the mighty works of Christ, are they 


never to see Him? Are- they to be 
2 


18 HUMAN DESTINY. 


damned for not having seen Him? 
Must there not be a ‘‘place of repent- 
ance” for such in the mader wordi 
Suffice it here to say that this question 
is altogether wide of the real issue in 
this controversy, which is not whether 
the destiny of all mankind is fixed at 
death, but whether all mankind shall yet 
be saved, including those who have re- 
jected the full revelation of the Gospel. 

~ The author then proceeds to fix the 
“limits of the argument.” The appeal 
is to the Bible; but before he will open 
the Bible he niust insist that reason and 
conscience are also to have a voice. 
That is to say, the question is what the 
lawgiver has decreed against the criminal, 
| and the criminal himself is practically to 
| formulate the answer. The next point 
is that the Old Testament, the Book 
of Revelation, and the parables of our 
Lord, are all to be eliminated from the 
inquiry. No one has a right to insist 


jl 


“ SAZVATOR MUNDI.” 19 


on such conditions, but yet they might 
be accepted without endangering the 
issue, provided always, first, that it is 
only the symbolic visions of the Apo- 
calypse which are to be excluded; and, 
secondly, that the Scriptures themselves, 
and not the critic, shall decide what is 
“parable” and what is not.* 

Next comes the inevitable protest 
against the use of the words “damna- 


j 


tion,” “hell,” and “everlasting.” Much 
of what is said about the first of these 
words is true, and would be helpful if 
written in any other connection. As 
for the second, he argues that whereas 
Hades and Gehenna both refer to the 
intermediate state, “our word ‘hell’ de- 
notes the final and everlasting torment 
of the wicked,” and therefore it should 
be banished from our language altogether. 


* He has no warrant for including in the category 
the closing passage of Matt. xxv. and the latter half 
of Luke xvi 


20 HUMAN DESTINY. 


The fact is, that so far from this being 
the only meaning of “hell,” it is a mean- 
ing which the word scarcely possesses 
at all in classical English. It is only) 
\they who believe that Gehenna indicates 
‘the final state who have any right to 
‘object that “hell” is a mistranslation. 
A word about this Gehenna. The 
writer tells us how the beautiful valley 
of Hinnom, under the south-western 
wall of Jerusalem, in time “became the 
common cesspool of the city, into which 
offal was cast, and the carcases of 
animals, and even the bodies of great 
criminals who had lived a life so vile 
as to be judged unworthy of decent 
burial. Worms preyed on their cor- 
rupting flesh, and fires were kept 
burning lest the pestilential infection 
should rise from the valley and float 
through the. streets of Jerusalem.” 
Such is the author’s own description. 
And what is the moral he would 


“SAZLVATOR MUNDI.”’ 24 


draw from it? That the offal and 
the carcases were thrown there to 
purify and fit them for some high and 
noble use! It is amazing how any one! 


‘canbe. so bind as not- to see in this 


a figure the most graphic and terrible 


(of utter and hopeless destruction. 


Two more chapters being thus ac- 
counted for, in the fifth and sixth the 
author takes up the words which are 
variously rendered in our English Bible 
to express infinite duration. “If (he 
pleads) these words really carried zz 
themselves the sense of eternity or 
everlastingness, they could not possibly 
have been applied,” as, in fact, they 
were applied, to what was material or 
transitory. Will the author specify 
any words which carry zz themselves 
this meaning, or indeed any meaning 
whatsoever ? 

What is true of most words is true 
in a special degree of these; chameleon- 


22 HUMAN DESTINY. 


like, they take a colour from what 
they touch, and their significance must 
in every case be settled by the subject- 
matter and the context. ‘Words are 
the counters of wise men, the money 
of fools:” these teachers one and_ all 
seem to take them for more than 
_counters. Every tyro in philology is; 
‘aware that it is the use of a word 
which decides its meaning; and to be 
guided only by its derivation is as 
unwise as it would be to accept a 
| man of sixty on a character given tol 
him when a schoolboy. But yes, the 
author tells us there is a word ‘ which 
unquestionably means ‘for ever.” This 
word, however, occurs only twice in the 
New Testament, and in one of these 
two passages, as he himself notices, it un- 
questionably does xo mean “ for ever.” * 


* didvos. Rom. i. 20, and Jude vi, where the 
“everlasting chains” are only “until the day of 
judgment.” i 


“SALVATOR MUNDY.” 23 


But the author’s disquisition upon the 
“Greek word azdz and its derivative 
atonios, must by no means be dismissed 
thus lightly. With other writers such a 
discussion is mere skirmishing; here it 
is vital to his scheme. These words, 
he declares, “so far from denoting either 
that which is above time, or that 
which will outlast time, are saturated 
through and through with the thought 
eu meclement’ of time.’ This. neéds 
looking into. The heathen philosophers 
and poets had probably no thought of 
“Eternity” as distinguished from time.* 
Their conception was limited to the 
zon which includes all time, but that 
these words were used to express that 
conception is admitted. It is further 
admitted that the New Testament un- 


* I do not stop to inquire whether such a concep- 
tion be possible apart from revelation. The inquiry 
would be most appropriate if my subject were the 
Kantian philosophy and not the destiny of mankind. 


24 HUMAN DESTINY. 


folds an ‘economy of times and 
seasons,’ many “ages” heading up in 
within which all the 
manifold purposes of God in relation 
to earth shall be fulfilled. Here again 
these same words are applicable and 


X) 


One (great iare 


are used. 

But revelation has taught men a 
higher conception of eternity than the 
heathen ever grasped. How then could 
such a conception be expressed in the 
language of ancient Greece, a language 
formed upon and moulded by the 
thoughts of a heathen nation? To 
invent a word is impossible, and yet 
words are but counters. Therefore 
when translating the sacred Hebrew into 
Greek the Rabbis could only take up 
some of the counters ready to their hand, 
and, as it were, ‘restamp them to mark 
a higher value than they had formerly 
possessed. Thus, when they came on 
statements such as that of the goth 


“ SALVATOR MUNDI.” 25 


Psalm, “From everlasting to everlast- 
ing, thou art God,” they could but fall 


back on this very word azon.* 

Now the New Testament is written 
in the language of the Septuagint version 
of the Old; not in the language of 
heathen Greece, but in that language 
as moulded and elevated by contact 
with the God-breathed Scriptures. Many 
a word had thus gained a fuller or a 
higher meaning than ordinarily pertained 
to it. The question here, therefore, is 
not what is the meaning of azz and 
atontos in the classics, but what was 
the thought of the inspired writers in 
such passages as that above quoted. 
The “æonian” scholarship of Christen- 
dom has recognised that they are used 
to express eternity in the fullest sense, 
‘and this conclusion is wholly unaffected 
by our author’s bold denial of it. 


* ard rod aldvos ews ToD aldvos où et, Psalm Ixxxix. 


(xc.) 2, (LXX), the Hebrew being Meolim adolim. 


26 HUMAN DESTINY. 


But let us for the moment accept the 
author’s theory, and see what it will 
lead to. Brushing aside all other con- 
siderations, let us come at once to the 
foundations of our faith, and see how 
they will bear this new “doctrine of the 
zons.” If it be true, the sacrifice of 
Calvary is no longer what we dreamed 
it was, the climax of a Divine purpose 
formed in a bygone eternity when the 
Word was alone with God, and the 
supreme and final display for all eternity 
to come of God’s great love to man. 
The author will tell us that ‘the his- 
torical cross of Christ was but a mani- 
festation within the bounds of time and 
space of the eternal passion of the 
Father ”—-a passion which ‘must con- 
tinue to manifest itself in appropriate 
forms through all the ages and changes 
of time.” And lest charity should put 
an innocent interpretation on this lan- 


guage, and thus destroy his argument, 


“SAZLVATOR MONDI? 27, 


he repeats his thought in still plainer 
words: “If God has once shown that 
He will make any sacrifice for the salva- 
tion of the guilty, must not that be 
always true of Him? Must He not 
continue to manifest His blended severity 
and mercy in the ages to come?” 

As we hear the Cross of Christ thus 
lowered and degraded, we cannot but 
demand, What part then can it have in 
man’s redemption? and as far as the 
author can enlighten us the answer must 
be, practically vone. He shall speak for 
himself. Here is his new Gospel of 
‘the larger hope.” 

“The Scriptures, then, have much to teach us of 
the future, though not much of the final, estate of 
men. And what they teach, in so far at least as we 
have been able to gather it up, comes to this. No 
man is wholly good, no man wholly bad. „Si? some 
men may fairly be called good on the whole, although 
much sin and imperfection still cleaves to them ; 
others may fairly be called bad on the whole, although 


there is still much in them that is good, and still 
more which is capable of becoming good. When 


28 HUMAN DESTINY. 


we die, we shall all receive the due recompense of 
our deeds, of all our deeds, whether they have been 
good or whether they have been bad. Zf by the 
grace of God we have been good on the whole, we 
may hope to rise into a large and happy spiritual 
kingdom, in which all that is pure and noble and 
kind in us will develop into new vigour and clothe 
itself with new beauty; in which also we shall find 
the very discipline we need in order that we may 
be wholly purged from sin and imperfection ; in which 
we may undo much that we have done wrongly, do 
again and with perfect grace that which we have 
done imperfectly, become what we have wished and 
aimed to be, achieve what we have longed to 
achieve, attain the wisdom, the gifts and powers and 
graces to which we have aspired; in which, above 
all, we may be engaged in errands of usefulness and 
compassion, by which the purpose of the Divine love 
and grace will be fully accomplished. Zf we have 
been bad on the whole we may hope—and we ought 
to hope for it—to pass into a painful discipline so 
keen and searching that we shall become conscious 
of our sins and feel that we are only receiving the 
due reward of them; but since there has been some 
good in us, and this good is capable of being drawn 
out and disentangled from the evil which clouded 
and marred it, we may also hope, by the very disci- 
pline and torment of our spirits, to be led to repent- 
ance, and, through repentance, unto life; we may 


“SALVATOR MUNDI.” 29 


hope that the disclosures of the spiritual world will 
take a spiritual effect upon us, gradually raising 
and renewing us till we too are prepared to enter 
the Paradise of God and behold the presence of the 
Lord and the glory of His power: we may hope 
that our friends who have already been redeemed 
will pity us and minister to us, bringing us not 
simply a cup of cold water to cool our tongue, but 
words of instruction and life. And as for the great 
mass of our fellow-men, we may hope and believe that 
those who have had no chance of salvation here will 
have one there; that those who have had a@ poor 
chance will get a better one; that those who have had 
a good chance and lost it will get a new but a severer 
chance, and even as they suffer the inevitable results 
of their folly and sin will feel ‘the hands that reach 
through darkness, moulding men.’ 

“ This, on the whole, I take to be the teaching of 
Scripture concerning the lot of men in the age to 
come,—a teaching which enables us to see ‘beneath 
the abyss of hell a bottomless abyss of love.’ And if 
it clash with some dogmas that we have held and 
some interpretations which are familiar to us, it never- 
theless accords, not with ‘the mind of Christ’ only, 
but also with the dictates of Reason and Conscience, 
the voices of God within the soul. It presents no 
such sudden break in our life as, in the teeth of all 
probability, we have been wont to conceive; no 
heaven for which we feel that even ¢He dest of us must 


30 HUMAN DESTINY. 


be unfit, no hell which is æ monstrous offence to our 
sense of justice. It promises to every man ¢he mercy of 
justice, of a due reward for all he has been and done ; 
and, while it impresses on us the utter hatefulness and 
misery of sin, itholds out to every one of us the 
prospect of being redeemed from all sin and unclean- 
ness by that just God Who is also a Saviour. Nor 
does it less accord with ¿4e demands of Science than 
with the dictates of Reason and the Moral Sense ; for 
it carries on the evolution of the human race through 
all the ages to come. And, therefore, let others think 
as they will, and cherish what trust they will: but as 
for us, with the Apostle of the Gentiles, our own 
Apostle, ‘we trust in the living God Who is the 
Saviour of all men.’” * 


* Throughout the quotation the italics are my own. 
I have reluctantly quoted at such length that the 
reader may be enabled to judge what this doctrine 
implies. To refute the errors, expressed and implied, 
of this book, would involve a treatise upon each 
one of the fundamental truths of Christianity. If any 
can read the above extract unshocked by the heathen 
darkness and contemptuous unbelief which characterise 
it, it is idle to discuss the matter with them within the 
limits of the present volume. If any one thinks this 
language too strong, let him turn back upon the 
quotation and seek to find where there is room for 
redemption in the writer’s scheme. It is a deliberate 
and systematic denial of Christianity. 


“SALVATOR MONDT.” 31 


This is not an isolated paragraph 
snatched from its context; it is the 
author’s recapitulation, the closing pas- 
sage of his book. We read it again 
and again, and study it with bewildered 
wonder. The question here is no longer 
of the doom of the lost, but of the truth 
of Christianity. Of the vital and charac- 
teristic truths of our religion there is 
not so much as oe which it does not 
ignore or deny. The righteousness ot 
God, the grace of God, man’s ruin, re- 
demption through the blood of Christ, 
the forgiveness of sins, the justification 
of the believer by grace through redemp- 
tion, eternal life as the free gift of God, 
the resurrection of the just in the image 
of the heavenly, and of the unjust to 
appear at the last great judgment— 
not a trace of one of these foundation 
doctrines of our faith remains. And 
what is offered us instead? The weak- 
ness of an easy-going deity who will 


32 HUMAN DESTINY. 


strike an average between good and 
evil, sending those who are “good on 
the whole” to a _ purgatorial paradise, 
and those who are “bad on the whole” 
to a purgatorial hell. A redemption “to 
be achieved in due time” for men with 
the aid of “the zonial fire, which alone 
could burn out their sins,” and ‘the 
zonial Spirit,’ who “will still be at work 
for the regeneration of the race.” In- 
stead of eternal life, we have ‘the 
spiritual life distinctive of the Christian 
zons”; and eternal punishment is but 
“the punishment which those zuflict on 
themselves who adjudge themselves un- 
worthy of that life.” * 

“This, on the whole,” he takes to be 
“the teaching of Scripture concerning 
the lot of men in the age to come.” 
“The teaching of -Seripture ly licens 


not thus the Church’s million martyrs 


* The words in inverted commas in the above 
paragraph are quoted from other parts of the book. 


“SALVATOR MUNDI” R 


read the mingled warnings and promises 
of God. Such views are utterly opposed 
to the great creeds of the Reformation 
and the older creeds of Christendom. 
' The author’s scheme renders due homage? 
doubtless to that miserable bantling of 
modern science, evolution; but whether 
it accords with “the dictates of reason” 
we are not concerned to discuss. It 
is enough to be assured that it is not 
Christianity*—it is not even a bastard 


* Finding, perhaps, that even in this infidel age 
the wnchristianity of his book was too pronounced, 
the author has published “a sequel,” in which he 
attempts to restate the question ‘as a part of the 
Christian doctrine of atonement.” But the “sequel” 
restates with increased definiteness his dogma of 
retribution, which denies “the Christian doctrine of 
atonement” altogether. It then offers as “a new 
argument” for his views, the theory that there is 
a “surface current” and a “deeper current” in 
Scripture, the former of which is false, as ex. gr. 
Israel’s hope of the promised messianic kingdom! 
Next comes a disquisition on 1 Cor. v. 5 (as proving 
that “destruction may be a condition of salvation”), 


3 


aa HUMAN DESTINY. 
dE Os ee eee 


Judaism ; it is the most utter heathenism, 
concealed by the thinnest possible veneer 
of Christian phraseology. 


and on demoniacal possession in connection there- 
with. As the result, the veneer is somewhat 
strengthened perhaps, but the heathenism remains. 


Chapter IV. 


‘“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 


Every step in this inquiry is discouraging, 
But a good cause may suffer from injudi: 
cious advocacy, and it must not be assumed 
that the “wider hope” is false, because 
its latest champions have thus discredited 
it. With a sense of relief we turn to 
another book, which both these writers 
have singled out for special commenda- 
tion. Here at last we find ourselves 
in the calm atmosphere of reverent and 
patient study of the Scriptures, to the 
sacredness and authority of which the 
author gives a noble testimony. The 
volume might with fairness be adopted 
as a handbook in the controversy; but 
it may be better, while giving it the 
attention it so well deserves, to pass on 


36 HUMAN DESTINY. 


to a discussion of the subject on a wider 
basis. The writer has the courage of 
his convictions. Taking his stand upon 
the great sacrifice of Calvary, he pro- 
claims the gospel of universal restora- 
tion. Not only fallen men, but fallen 
angels, shall share in it. Not even 
Satan shall be excluded. This is truly 
a glorious anticipation: this is indeed 
to “think noble things of God.’? Who 
is there who would not crave to find 
a warrant for accepting it as true? i 

Certain points in the writers argu- 
ment are peculiar, and claim special 
notice. ‘“ The letter of . Scripture” (he 
declares) “is a veil quite as much as a 
revelation, hiding while it reveals, and 
yet revealing while it hides ; presenting 
to the eye something very different 
from that which is within.” This 
naturally prepares the reader to find 
meanings he never thought of assigned 
to various passages of Scripture. And as 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 37 


a signal instance of this, to which con- 
tinued emphasis is given throughout the 
volume, the author points to the law of 
the firstborn and the law of the firstfruits 
as affording “the key to one part of the 
apparent contradiction between mercy 
‘upon all’ and yet ‘the election’ of 
a ‘little flock”” “The firstborn and 
the firstfruits are the ‘few’ and ‘little 
flock’; but these, though first delivered 
from the curse, have a relation to the 
whole creation, which shall be saved 
in the appointed times by the first- 
born seed, that is by Christ and His 
body, through those appointed baptisms, 
whether of fire or water, which are 
required to bring about ‘the restitu- 
tion of all things.” Passing by the 
extraordinary theory stated here and 
elsewhere in the book, that creation 
will be saved in part by the Church, 
this appeal to the types needs looking 
into. 


38 HUMAN DESTINY. 


It is admitted that the  firstfruits 
included the harvest of whzch zé was a 
part, and the redemption of the firstborn 
secured that of the families zo which 
they belonged. If then it can be proved 
from Scripture that the harvest of the 
saved shall include the whole Adamic 
race, and that “the elect” are ‘‘kins- 
men” to them, this type willl ‘serve 
to ¿lustrate the truth. But the frst 
fruits had no relation save to the 
harvest of the favoured land, and the 
redemption of the firstborn was side 
by side with judgment on the Egyp- 
tians, the tribes of the wilderness and 
the nations of Canaan. Therefore 
while these types are a real difficulty 
in the way of those who would limit 
redemption to “the Church of the 
firstborn,” they seem no less incon- 
sistent with the authors own position. 
If types can be thus used at all, they 
establish the views of those who hold 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 39 


a place between these two extremes. 
The sheaf of the firstfruits, the wave- 
loaves of Pentecost, and the great 
festival of harvest will have their dis- 
pensational fulfilment in the ever-widen- 
ing circle of blessing upon earth; but 
if the final harvest will include the lost 
of previous dispensations, this must be 
established from other scriptures, for 
there is nothing in the type to cor- 
respond with it. 

But further: our author here avers 
that the whole creation shall be saved 
through the appointed baptisms, whether 
Oeon water. So’ elsewhere he 
says the fearful and unbelieving must 
reach the new creation through the 
lake of fire. This is no flourish of 
rhetoric, but the sober statement of a 
doctrine repeated again and again 
throughout the volume, and vital to 
the writers argument, that death is 
the only way to life, judgment the 


40 HUMAN DESTINY. 


only means of deliverance. Not, be 
it observed, the death of the Sin-bearer, 
the judgment which He bore; but 
death and judgment absolutely. Death 
and judgment lead to life and deliver 
ance, so that the sinners doom becomes 
a pledge and means of his ultimate 
salvation. And this he assumes as 
an axiom of theology! Let us notwith- 
standing, refusing to be prejudiced 
against a cause which seems to need 
such arguments, turn with open mind 
to pursue the inquiry. 

No candid person will dispute that 
the revelation of Divine love creates 
a presumption against the possibility 
of eternal. punishment. On the other 
hand, it is still more dishonest to deny— 
and in fact it is admitted—that certain 
passages of Scripture support the doctrine. 
The fairest mode, therefore, in which 
this inquiry can possibly be entered 
on is to dismiss for the moment both 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 41 


the presumption against, and the texts 
in favour of, the “orthodox” belief, 
and to consider without any bias the 
passages which are used to prove 
universal reconciliation. If these should 
be found to teach that doctrine un- 
equivocally, the question is at an end, 
for in a seeming conflict of texts the 
presumption against endless misery 
must turn the scale. But more than 
this: even should these Scriptures seem i 
of doubtful meaning, we shall be pre- | 
pared to lean towards the broader 
interpretation, provided only that such 
a rendering will neither disturb founda- 
tion truths, nor land us in difficulties 
akin to those we seek escape from. 
We may at once dismiss from notice 
three classes of texts which are much 
in vogue with writers on this question. 
The first consists of passages which 
testify to the boundlessness of Divine 
mercy and love. It is impossible to 


42 HUMAN DESTINY. 


estimate too highly the love and grace 
of God; but it is the merest _ trifling 


to suppose that creatures like ourselves, | 


with minds so limited in capacity, and / 


/moreover so warped by sin, can decide 
what measure of punishment is incon- 
sistent with infinite love.* Then again, 
we must entirely ignore the numberless 
predictions of a reign of righteousness 
and peace on earth in days to come. 
These, though freely used in this con- 
troversy, have no bearing on it what- 
ever, unless indeed it be to indicate 
that at the last great harvest-home, the 
proportion of the blessed to the lost of 
earth may prove, perchance, to be vastly 
greater than a narrow theology sup- 


* Do not such arguments as are here alluded 
to remind us of a king’s baby children in the 
royal nursery discussing the fate of some notorious 
criminal, and deciding that they knew their father 
so well as to be assured he could not and would 
not sign a death-warrant ? 


ie RES TITO TION OF ALL THINGS.” A3 


poses.* And this suggests the third 
class of texts above referred to—namely, 
those which speak in general terms of 
the triumphs of redemption. A noted 
example will be found in the great Eden 
promise that the Seed of the woman 
should bruise the serpent’s head. Does 
the truth of this rest on the statistics 
of the Judgment Day? In Crhrist’s 
triumph over Satan does victory depend, 
as in some of the games of our child- 
hood, upon which side has the larger 
following? The suspicion is irresistible 
that they who argue thus have but a 
poor appreciation of the moral glories 
of redemption. 

It will be found, however, that the 
special texts which are the very founda- 
tion of universalism really come within 


* Therefore, these passages tell against the view 
they are cited in support of, by weakening the 
popular argument based on the supposition that 
the saved will be an insignificant minority. 


44 HUMAN DESTINY. 


neither of these categories. But, it will 
be asked, does not Scripture speak of 
the restitution of all? The answer is 
emphatically No. The passage which 
is thus perverted speaks of ‘the times 
of the restitution of all things,’ of which 
every prophet testified, from Moses to 
Malachi.* Was the burden of their 
prophecies the final state? The answer 
shall be given by one of the authors 
already quoted: “It is as certainly true 
as any such wide proposition can be, 
that the psalmists and prophets of old 
time never got more than momentary 
and partial glimpses of the life to 
come.” Therefore, he argues, the Old 
Testament “will be of no avail to us” 
in considering this question; and yet 
he cites and relies upon a quotation 
from the New Testament which is ex- 
pressly declared to refer to the very 


* Acts ili. 21—24. On this passage, see Appendix, 
p. 181 fost. 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 45 


prophecies that foretell a reign of 
righteousness and peace on earth. 

But does not St. Paul speak of the 
reconciliation of all things? Assuredly 
he does: not, however, as a hope to 
be realised in eternity to come, but as a 
present truth—a fact accomplished in the 
death of Christ.* In keeping with this, 
and as a part of it, God has revealed 
Himself as the Saviour of a// men; Christ 
has been manifested as “a ransom for @//,” 
the propitiation for the whole world.”+ 
But will these teachers tell us how men 
can be reconciled who refuse the recon 
ciliation; how sinners can be saved who. 
reject the Saviour; how the lost can | 
be restored who trample under foot) 
the propitiation? It is these very 
truths which make the  sinner’s doom | 
irreversible and hopeless. 


* See p. 195 post. 
+ On these and other passages of a like import, 


see Appendix, Part I., p. 181 gost 


46 HUMAN DESTINY. 


It would be unpardonable to attempt 
to write upon this question without 
having formed a deliberate judgment 
upon every text of Scripture relied on 
as teaching universal restoration; and the 
expression of such a judgment is offered 
ins. these u-pages.. But =heré= tarisesmaa 
formidable practical difficulty. If the 
progress of the argument is to depend 
on the reader’s accepting in every in- 
stance the proposed exposition, further 
advance must be impossible. To impose 
such a condition would be unreasonable 
and unjust. All that is essential here 
is to show that the passages in ques- 
tion bear an explanation wholly different 
from that which these writers put upon 
them; and this at least has been ac- 
complished.. Indeed, it is sufficiently 
established by the admitted fact that 
such an explanation has been given 
by the overwhelming majority of theo- 
logians in every age. The advocates of 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 47 


universalism have been content to plead 
that the surface teaching of these Scrip- 
tures is in favour of their views: they 
must go further, and oust the alternative 
meanings assigned to them by the 
scholarship of Christendom. But this 
they have never attempted to do. 

This position is not assumed to avoid 
the necessity of explaining the passages 
referred to. The reader will find in the 
Appendix a full exposition of every text 
on which the universalist relies to prove 
his doctrine. “This exegesis is offered in 
acknowledgment of the obligation to 
explain these Scriptures, but it is dis- 
missed to the Appendix as a protest 
against the assumption that the accept- 
ance of it is vital to the argument. 
It is not vital. On the contrary, having 
thus cleared the ground, we shall now 
suppose for the sake of argument,—and 
it is only on that ground the admission 
can be made,—that the meaning of 


48 HUMAN DESTINY. 


these passages is doubtful, and proceed 


on this assumption to discuss the 


question in the light of great founda- 
tion truths, 


Campus Crusade for Christ Library 


Chapter V. 
ETHE WIDER HOPE.” 


Tue volumes noticed in preceding 
pages have not been selected at 
random. Their respective authors are 
representative men, the acknowledged 
champions of “the wider hope”; and 
their books, when read together, may 
be taken as a full and exhaustive state- 
ment of the doctrine. The omissions 
therefore common to them all are 
ominously significant. Where, for ex- 
ample, do they offer us any reasonable 
explanation of such passages as the 
following? “The Lord Jesus shall be 
revealed from heaven with His mighty 
angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance 
on them that know not God, and that 
obey not the gospel of our Lord 
4 


50 HUMAN DESTINY. 


Jesus Christ; who shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord.’* How can 
such language be reconciled with the 
dogma of universal restoration? Is it 
credible that any one holding that 
dogma could use such words? T 

But there are other omissions of 
a still more serious kind, and, for our 
present purpose, far more embarrassing. 
We may agree to exclude from view 
any number of “isolated texts,” but how 
can common ground be reached save 
in the acknowledgment of truths such 
as the righteousness of God, the grace 
of God, the “resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and of the unjust,” and 
the great judgment which is to close 


* 2 “Thess; i. 7-9. 

+ The author last referred to, with the candour 
which characterises him, says, “I confess I cannot 
perfectly explain all these texts.” 


“THE WIDER HOPE.” SI 


the history of Adam’s race?* It is on 
this ground alone we can consent to 
discuss the question. 

It will, therefore, be taken as admitted 
that the many die unsaved, and that 
these shall be raised from the dead, 
and shall stand before God in judg- 
ment, and be remitted to punish- 
ment for their sins. The question here 
is not of what may be called the 


* The respective schemes of the first two writers 
seem inconsistent with belief in the ‘resurrection 
of judgment.” The third writer dismisses it thus: 
«Of the details of this resurrection, of the nature 
and state of the bodies of the judged,—#f indeed bodies 
in which there is any image of a man, and therefore 
of God, then are given to them,—and of the scene of 
judgment, very little is said in Scripture.” The 
meaning of this is clearly that the body given at 
the ‘resurrection of judgment” is merely a tem- 
porary clothing for the soul, and that the soul 
shall not be reunited to the heavenly and final 
body until after punishment shall have been en- 


dured. 


52 HUMAN DESTINY. 


providential consequences of sin, the 
results which in God’s moral govern- 
ment follow the violation of His laws. 
Neither is it a question of corrective 
discipline to purge and train the 
penitent. There is no need of a Day 
of Judgment to apportion punishment 
in either of these senses: the one follows 
the sin by unchanging law; the other 
belongs entirely to the Fathers house. 
The final punishment of the lost will 
be the consequence of a judicial 
sentence. 

Such punishment, therefore, must be 
the penalty due to their sins; else it 
were unrighteous to impose it. If, then, 
the lost are ultimately to be saved, it 
must be either because they shall have 
satisfied. the penalty; or else through 
redemption—that is, because Christ 
has borne that penalty for them. But 
if sinners can be saved by satisfying 
Divine justice in enduring the penalty 


“THE WIDER HOPE.” 53 


due to sin, Christ need not have 
died. nn on the other hand, the 
redeemed may yet be doomed, though 
ordained to eternal life in Christ, 
themselves to endure the penalty for 
sin, the foundations of our faith are 
destroyed. It is not, I repeat, the 
providential or disciplinary, but the 
penal consequences of sin, which follow 
the judgment. We can therefore 
understand how the sinner may escape 
his doom through his debt being paid 
vicariously, or we can (zz theory, at 
all events) admit that he may be 
discharged on payment personally of 
“the uttermost farthing”; but that the 
sinner should be made to pay a portion 
of his debt, and then released because 
some one else had paid the whole 
before he was remitted to punishment 
at all,—this is absolutely inconsistent 
with both righteousness and grace. 

But as the advocates of the “larger 


54 HUMAN DESTINY, 


hope” seem to ignore the penal element 
in punishment, they would probably 
urge that this is satisfied by redemption, 
and that the sufferings of the lost will 
be essentially of a disciplinary kind. 
All wke~know much of the darker side 
of human nature would probably agree 
that the poetry indulged in about 
sinners being purified in eonian fire 
would not bear translation into simple 
prose. The idea of reformation by 
punishment has been generally aban- 
doned by all who have had experience 
of criminals and crime. But passing 
that by, it may be answered, first, that 
such a view is incompatible with the 
language of Scripture. ‘ Wrath,” “ven- 
geance,” ‘‘destruction” are not words 
that express parental chastisement. But 
as these writers must be supposed to 
have some reasonable explanation of 
such Scriptures, it may be answered, 
secondly, that if their doctrines be 


“THE WIDER HOPE.’ 55 


sound, it is in the <zuxtermediate state 
that suffering would produce these 
results; and if a further non-penal 
“punishment” is to be inflicted after 
the resurrection and the judgment, this 
must be in order to coerce the sinner 
to submission. 

It might be asked, in passing, 
what value can possibly attach to a 
repentance wrung in this way from 
unwilling souls? and, moreover, if hell 
and the lake of fire shall produce results 
so blessed, how can it be evil to warn 
men of the coming horrors? If the 
reality shall be so beneficial, surely the 
fear of its terrors can work only good; 
and the more appalling the description, 
the greater will be the effect produced. 

Thirdly, the question arises whether 
regeneration, and the need of it, have 
any place in the theology of the advo- 
cates of these doctrines. Divine ‘chas- 
tening” may produce “the peaceable 


56 HUMAN DESTINY. 


fruit of righteousness” in those who 
are. already “sons”; but to hold—that 
punishment is necessary either as a 
preparation for, or a completion of, 
‘ithe ~new birth,” 2 is ito) ceny ie 
plainest teaching of Scripture. 

Again, it may be asked still more 
definitely, what room is there in this 
scheme for the day of judgment? The 
believer “cometh not into judgment,’ 
just because, for him, the penalty of 
sin has been borne, the judzczal question 
settled, in the death of Christ; and if 
this be true for all, the judgment of 
“the great assize” becomes an ana- 
chronism and an impossibility.* 


* The language of John v. 24 is explicit. It 
is not that the believer ‘‘shall not come into 
condemnation” as the A. V. renders it, but that he 
“cometh not into judgment” (es kpiow oùk &pxerar). 
This statement must not be made to clash 
with Rom. xiv. 10, and 2 Cor. v. 10, which 


relate to the judgment of the saved. At the 


EZE WIDER OPE.” 57 


This suggests another difficulty. The 
sceptice who demands, “How are the 
dead raised up, and with what body do 
they come?” is branded as a fool. But 
is it folly to inquire, How shall the lost 
be translated, and with what body shall 
they come? And let it be kept promi- 
nently in view that the resurrection 
precedes the judgment. They who have 
part in the “resurrection of life” shall 
bear ‘‘the image of the heavenly.” 
“When He shall appear we shall be 


resurrection the believer shall appear in “the 
image of the heavenly,”—“we shall be like Him.” 
That is to say, his destiny is not only fixed but 
declared at the resurrection. For him, therefore, 
the judgment will be on that basis: it will be 
a matter of reward or loss, not of life or death. 
As Heb. ix. 27, 28 teaches, the cross of Christ 
and His glorious advent are, for the believer, the 
correlatives of death and judgment. 

Matt. xxv. 31—46 describes a session of judgment 
for ving nations on earth, and has no bearing 


on the special point here raised, 


58 HUMAN DESTINY. 


like Him,” is the amazing statement of 
the Scripture. But in contrast with the 
‘resurrection of life” there is also the 
“resurrection of judgment.” Why then 
call up the evil body at all, unless it 
be the jal condition of the lost? It 
is not the dody that repents, or believes, 
or turns to God; and, as already urged, 
if torment could be remedial, it is in 
the intermediate state it would be effica- 
cious. The conclusion is inevitable that 
the body is reunited to the soul in order 
that the sinner may in the body in 
which he sinned endure the punishment 
his sins deserve. 

And this is the plain: teaching~ ‘of 
Scripture. But when we are asked to 
believe that, after the ages of his torment 
shall have passed, the sinner will be 
translated in a new and heavenly body,* 
to share the peace and blessedness of 


* See note, p. 51 ante, 


“THE WIDER HOPE.” 59 


the redeemed, we part company with 
Scripture altogether. It is not a question 
here of “isolated texts,” but of the great 
foundation truths of Christianity. If these 
torments be necessary, where are the 
triumphs of redemption through the 
Cross? If unnecessary, what becomes of 
the love of God? If sinners can reach 
heaven through the lake of fire, redemp- 
tion is but ‘‘a short cut” to the same 
goal to which the broad way ultimately 
leads. Christ need not have died, or, at 
all events, far too much has been said 
about His death. Will they who thus 
reach heaven through “æonian torments” 
have much appreciation of the brief 


agonies of Calvary ?* 


* I have already shown that of the books quoted 
supra two practically ignore redemption. I desire 
to be perfectly fair, and I have searched the volume 
last noticed (which was the first written, and inspired 
the other two) to find a warrant for clearing the 
author from this reproach; but I cannot. And if 
such an one as he is betrayed into such language 


60 HUMAN DESTINY. 


To recapitulate. The question is not 
whether the destiny of all be fixed at 
death, but whether the judgment of the 
great day be irreversible and final. Not 
whether God be a Saviour to all men, 


as the following, it may be taken as certain that the 
views he advocates are inconsistent with Christian 
doctrine. “What does he say here” (he writes, 
quoting Rev. xxi. 5-8), “but that all things shall be 
made new, though in the way to this the fearful and 
unbelieving must pass the lake of fire? ... Zhe 
saints have died with Christ, not only to the elements 
of this world, but also zo sem, that is the dark spirit 
world... . Zhe ungodly have not so died to sin. At 
the death of the body, therefore, and still more when 
they are raised to judgment, because their spirit yet 
lives, they are still within the limits of that dark and 
fiery world, the life of which has been and is the life 
of their spirit. Zo get out of this world there ts but 
one way, death. Not the first, for that is passed, but 
the second death.” 

The italics are my own. The extraordinary mysti- 
cism which pervades this makes it difficult to fix its 
meaning, but I am unable to understand it if it does 
not teach that che lake of fire (the second death) zs 
to the impenitent what the cross of Christ is to the 
believer, 


el tLe, WIDER HOPE.” 61 


but whether all men shall be saved, in- 
cluding those who reject the Saviour. 
Not whether Christ be a propitiation for 
the whole world, but whether the whole 
world shall share the pardon, including 
those who despise the  propitiation. 
There is not a single text of Scripture 
which unequivocally teaches that all men 
shall in fact be saved; there are many 
which declare in the plainest terms that 
the judgment-doom of the lost is final 
The dogma of universalism depends 
solely ‘on the assumption that the love 
of went is incompatible with the perdition 
‘of _ungodly men—an assumption which 
‘may rest entirely on our ignorance, and 
which, moreover, when worked out to its 
legitimate results, undermines Christianity 
altogether It is blind folly to abandon 
the doctrine of eternal punishment 
because of difficulties which surround 
it, and then to take refuge in a belief 
which is beset with difficulties far more 


62 HUMAN DESTINY. 


hopeless. If, then, there be no other 
escape, we fall back unhesitatingly upon 
the faith of the Church in all ages. But 
another alternative remains: punishment 
may be final, and yet it may not be 
endless. 


Chapter VI. 
WHAT IS LIFE? 


To some the doctrine of endless punish- 
ment seems to’ present no difficulty. 
Others again are so decided in rejecting 
it that if only the dogma of universal 
restoration be discredited, they are pre- 
pared at once to adopt what seems the 
only alternative, the extermination of 
the wicked. For the one class these 
pages can have but a speculative in- 
terest. For the other, their practical 
importance ceases at the point already 
reached. But it is only the superficial 
who can ignore the difficulties that beset 
the problem which still claims discus- 
sion. And, moreover, the rejection of 
the “wider hope,” just because it narrows 
the inquiry, deepens immensely its im- 


64 HUMAN DESTINY. 


portance and solemnity. When our 
escape from pressing difficulties depends 
upon a single door, more care is needed 
than when we supposed we had a 
choice. 

Two questions lie across the threshold 
of the inquiry: What is the meaning 
of the Greek word azduzos P and, Does 
man by nature possess immortality? If, 
to borrow a military term, we can mask 
these difficulties, instead of delaying to 
settle them, we shall avoid an almost 
interminable controversy. 

It is maintained by some that azduzos 
means age-long, and nothing else; but 
these admit that all men have an age-long 
existence.* Others, again, contend that 
the word means everlasting; but these 
insist that all men shall exist for ever. 
In either case, therefore, the solemn 


* Whether this be natural to the race, or the 
result of redemption, makes no difference to my 
argument, 


ee 


WHAT IS LIFE? 65 
a es ale e a LL 
language of Scripture, which declares 
eonian life to be the peculiar blessing 
of the believer, loses all its significance, 
unless we understand the word to de- 
scribe the guality of the life, and not 
duration merely.* We must conclude, 
then, that in all such passages the 
emphasis is upon /zfe, and it is here 
our attention should be concentrated. 
This brings in the second question. 
The word immortality occurs but thrice 
in the New Testament. In one of these 
passages St. Paul declares that God 
“only hath immortality”: in the other, 
the believer is twice described as a 


* I say advisedly, “not duration merely.” ‘Eternal 
life,” Dr. Westcott writes, “is not an endless duration 
of being in time, but being of which time is not a 
measure.” And again, it “is beyond the limitations 
of time; it belongs to the being of God.” (Epistles 
of St. John, pp. 205 and 207.) But surely endless 
duration is implied in this, though it is not the main 
element in it. I do not stop to discuss wherein the 
above statement differs from Mr, Maurice’s view. 


5 


66 HUMAN DESTINY. 


mortal who is destined to “put on im- 
mortality.”* It certainly seems strange, 
therefore, that any who profess to follow 
Holy Writ should contend for the ex- 
pression “the immortality of the soul” ; 
more especially as man’s spiritual con- 
dition by nature is described as death 
and not life? What then is life? 

Here science can tell us nothing. . If 
we seek the ovzgzx of life, Reason 
answers in one word, Gop. Let the 
existence of life be taken for granted, 
and then, no doubt, evolution will offer 
to account for all the varied forms of 
life. in the wordi But until: science 


* The passages in which St. Paul uses d@avacta 
are 1 Cor. xv. 53, 54, and 1 Tim. vi. 16. Ad@apoia 
(¢ncorruption) is rendered “immortality” in Rom. 
li. 7 and 2 Tim. i. 10, It occurs also in 1 Cor. 
XV. 42, 50, 53 and 54; Eph. vi. 24, and Titus ii. 7 
(sincerity). 

t “Of the causes which have led to the origi- 
nation of living matter, then, it may be said that 
we know absolutely nothing. But postulating the 


WHAT IS LIFE? 67 


can get rid of God, the theory is un- 
necessary, and therefore unphilosophical. 
It is the old question, Does the hen 
come from the egg, or the egg from 
the hen? If science could account for 
the egg, it would be entitled to put 
that first. But as we are shut up to 
believe in a Creator, it is more reason- 
able, and therefore more philosophical, 
to assume that He created the hen. 
This, of course, is apart from Revela- 
tion, which, for the Christian, puts the 


question at rest for ever. 


existence of living matter endowed with that power 
of hereditary transmission, and with that tendency to 
vary which is found in all such matter,Mr. Darwin 
has shown good reasons for believing that the inter- 
action between living matter and surrounding con- 
ditions, which results in the survival of the fittest, 
is sufficient to account for the gradual evolution 
of plants and animals from their simplest to their 
most complicated forms.”—Prof. Huxley, Æncyclo- 
pedia Britannica (gth ed.), ‘ Biology,” vol. iii., 


p. 687. 


68 HUMAN DESTINY. 


And science can tell as little about 
life itself as about its origin. It has 
its definitions, doubtless, but these either 
assume or ignore precisely what they 
profess to give us. “Correspondence 
with an environment” is the latest and 
most vaunted.* The table on which 


* Professor Drummond is enthusiastic over this 
definition of life in his charming book of parables 
—it is earnestly to be hoped that Natural Law 
will not be taken in any more serious light. The 
fact is, that having been betrayed into bracketing 
together Herbert Spencer and “Jesus Christ” as 
authors of rival definitions of “eternal life” 
(p. 203), his hobby ran away with him. “Through 
all these centuries” (he declares) “revealed religion 
had this doctrine to itself.” ‘It has been reserved 
for modern biology at once to defend and illumi- 
nate this central truth of the Christian faith.” 
This, although he has rightly : stated at p. 146 
that ‘no definition of life that has yet appeared 
can be said to be even approximately correct” ; 
and as he goes on to aver, at p. 228, that “to 
say that life is a correspondence, is only to express 
the partial truth . .. . there is a principle of 
life.” And yet he says, at p. 215, “All life con- 


WHAT IS LIFE ? 69 


this paper lies would soon be destroyed 
by the action of fire or water, but it 
corresponds with its actual environment. 
If however we infer that the table has 
life, we shall be told that a dead thing 
cannot correspond with an environment 
at all; it must have a principle of life 
to render correspondence possible. It 
appears, then, that the vaunted definition 
deals merely with phenomena; whereas 
it is life considered essentially, not in 
its manifestations, that concerns us here. 
The fact is, biology can tell us about 
bios, but about zoe it knows absolutely 


nothing. 


sists essentially in correspondence with various en- 
vironments.” Moreover, the words of our Blessed 
Lord in John xvii. 3, as read in the original, 
cannot be taken as a definition of life, any more 
than in John iv. 34 He gave a definition of 
His food. Without attempting to discuss that crux 
of the grammarians as to the telic force of iva, we 
may assume that the particle does not introduce 


a definition, 


7O HUMAN DESTINY. 


Some will be impatient at a disquisi- 
tion about life. To them it seems the 
simplest thing possible: life is the 
opposite of death, and thus the whole 
matter is settled. But this is to shelve 
the difficulty, not to settle it. And the 
question is of extreme importance here. 
If we are justified in taking life to 
mean existence, then death is the termi- 
nation of existence, and we are within 
reach of the goal we seek. But this 
must be proved, and not taken for 
granted. 

Our word “life” has to do duty 
for the two Greek words just cited. 
And each of these has several different 
meanings and shades of meaning. As 
already indicated, zoe is life in its prin- 
ciple, life intrinsic; 420s, life in its 
manifestations, life extrinsic. But there 
is more in it, than this. .27osmmay 
signify the period or duration of life; 
secondly, one’s ‘“‘living,’ or the means 


WHAT IS LIFE > Wil 


of life; and thirdly, the manner of life. 
An example of each of these phases of 
meaning will be found among the eleven 
passages in which the word is used in 
‘the New Testament.* From this last 
use of the word, as the manner of life, 
there is often an ethical sense attaching 
to it, and this is expressed in classical 
Greek exclusively by zos; in Scripture 
exclusively by 20¢e.f Z0e, again, is some- 
times the equivalent of dzos, as expressing 
the means of life; and our translators 
Pave taken at in) Luke xvi 25. .as 
meaning the perzod of life. It is also 
used to express the final blessedness of 
the redeemed, or the sphere in which 
imwill be enjoyed; the present Con 


palate xis 44> Luke viii, 14; 43, XV. 12,030, 
ae t Li. i, 2502. “Tim. il. 4 5 1 Peteriys, 35 
© john nE A 1. 17. 

yt Trench’s Synonyms. 

~ Matt. xvii. 8, 9, xxv. 46; Mark ix. 43, 45, 
xy OHA GA 


72 HUMAN DESTINY. 


dition of the believer, who, it is said, 
“is passed from death into life = and 
finally and emphatically, the prenczple 
of life. The often-repeated statement 
that the believer “hath life” does not_ 
mean merely that he is in a state of 
blessedness; he is zz fe, but more 
than this, he has life zz hzm. This is 
clear from the contrast, “ No murderer 
hath eternal life abiding in him;”+ or 
as the Lord said to the Jews, “ Ye. have 
no life in you.” t 

But it will be urged, in all this the 
simple and plain meaning of life as equi- 
valent to existence has been ignored. 
If life be a synonym for existence, then 
the table has life, for it certainly exists. 
But the definition will be amended by 
saying conscious existence: the table has 


* John \% (243 1 John Mian 
tar John iii.- 15. 
t John vi. 53. 


WHAT IS LIFE? 73 


not ¢hat. No; neither had the tree 
the table was made of, though it cer- 
tainly had life; neither has a man in a 
swoon. The fact is, and it must in 
fairness be conceded, that “life” does 
not admit of any such definition. If 
we want its ordinary meaning we must 
turn to a dictionary, and there we shall 
find that life is that state of an organised 
being in which its functions are or may 
be performed. Death, then, is the anti- 
thesis of this. An organism is dead 
when its vital functions have ceased 
absolutely and permanently. 

It has been denied that reason can tell 
us anything certainly of a life after death, 
and it will be here assumed that it 
cannot. As we have revelation to guide 
us, the admission may be freely made. 
Death came into the world by sin, and 
it is the penalty of sin. If, then, we 
might conclude that death puts an end 
to the existence of all save those who 


74 HUMAN DESTINY. 


receive eternal life in Christ, the whole 
question would be settled. But the 
teaching of Scripture is explicit, that 
while death is a great crisis in human 
existence, it is not, as with the brutes, 
its goal. “It is appointed unto men 
once to die, and after death the judg- 
ment.” Such is the testimony of Scrip- 
ture. But the penalty of sin must follow 
the judgment, and not precede it. The 
death, therefore, which is the penalty of 
sin, cannot be “natural death.” 

The same conclusion will be arrived 
at from considering the warning given to 
Adam in Eden. It was not merely that 
on eating of the tree of knowledge he 
should become mortal. The word was, 
“In the day that thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die.” Is it not clear, then, 
that the ordinary meaning of death is 
not its primary or its deepest meaning? 
And further, as the crisis which we call 


death is merely a change of condition, 


WHAT IS LIFE ? ae 


why should we suppose that the death 
which follows the judgment will be any- 
thing else? 

These difficulties are nothing to shallow 
declaimers against everlasting punish- 
ment, but every serious opponent of the 
doctrine has recognised that they are of 
vital moment. The advocate of ‘‘con- 
ditional immortality” is bound, not only 
to notice them, but to answer them fully 
and .completely. 


Chapter VII. 


ETERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 


In the wide and increasing field of 
literature on this question there is one 
volume which enjoys a_ well-deserved 
pre-eminence. It has now been forty 
years before the public, and during that 
time it has been subjected to the severest 
criticism. In the light of that criticism 
it was rewritten eleven years ago, and 
since then it has been again revised with 
the most scrupulous care. Its pages are 
characterised by reverent piety, compe- 
tent scholarship, and intellectual power 
of no mean order; and in fact it is 
justly deemed the standard work on the 
subject of which it treats. Every state- 
ment it contains has evidently been 
weighed, and seeming omissions will be 


78 HUMAN DESTINY. 


accounted for, not by the author’s ignor- 
ance of anything which others have 
written, but because in his judgment 
their arguments are either unfair or un- 
wise. To this book we turn for the 
most complete and favourable answer 
possible to the difficulties which have just 
been stated. 

The author frankly acknowledges that 
the views he opposes are ‘supported 
by the general authority of nearly all 
Christendom for at least fourteen cen- 
turies”; and that they have been accepted 
by “instructed divines who are to be 
counted by hundreds of thousands, 
belonging to all Churches, in every suc- 
cessive century of Christianity.” Never- 
theless he opposes them. ‘According to 
the Bible” (he declares) “ man is essentially 
a complex being, consisting of body and 
soul; not a soul without a body, any 
more than a body without a soul. Adam 
was such a being. The warning, “In 


“ETERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.”’ 79 


the day that thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die,” implied not ability to 
“temporal death,” still less to endless 
misery, but death itself, “the utter 
destruction of Adam’s nature as a man,” 
and that literally on the very day of his 
sin. The threatening ‘‘was intended to 
signify a literal, immediate, and final 
dissolution of the nature of Adam as a 
man; his death in the ordinary sense of 
the word, without any reference whatever 
to the state, or even to the survival, of 
the spirit beyond.” ‘The humanity is 
the living organism, including body and 
soul. When that complex organism is 
dissolved the man is no more.” The 
death, therefore, threatened to Adam, 
and which he was to suffer on the very 
day of his sin, was ¢he absolute extinction 
of his being. 

Such, moreover, the author maintains, 
as he is bound to maintain, is “death 
in the ordinary sense of the word.” 


80 HUMAN DESTINY. 


And further, “this death was ‘the 
curse of the law’; not merely of the 
Mosaic law, but of that law under 
which Adam was created at first, and 
of which the thunders of Sinai were a 
second manifestation.” 

But whatever may be doubtful, this 
at least is certain, that no such doom 
has in fact fallen upon the sinner. How 
can this enigma be explained? The 
author solves it by the one word 
Redemption. “From the moment of 
the sin” (he tells us) “the action of 
Redemption began at once to unfold 
itself.” ‘This survival of the soul we 
attribute exclusively (with Delitzsch) to 
the operation of Redemption.” Such 
a survival “is contrary to the original 
intention of God in the curse of death 
threatened at first to Adam in Para- 
dise;? it is “ef the “native sore. 
miraculous or abnormal provision, arising 
out of the economy of redemption, with 


CETERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 81 


a view to future resurrection.” And 
“the sentence of death is postponed, 
not repealed.” Absolute extinction of his 
being is therefore the sinner’s doom.* 

It is impossible to exaggerate the 
importance and solemnity of these 
statements. The whole controversy is 
thus narrowed to a single issue. If 
the death which is the penalty of sin 
be the extinction of the sinner’s being, 
the doctrine of conditional immortality 
is a Divine truth. If, on the other hand, 
that death be merely a changed con- 
dition of existence, the doctrine is a 
sheer delusion, and an error of the 


* T shall be told probably that the author does 
not speak of death as “extinction of being.” This 
is true, and it is a signal proof of the skill with 
which his argument is conducted. Other writers 
had used the expression, and their position had 
been easily stormed in consequence; so he avoids 
it. But his argument ¢plies it; and without it 
it has no force whatever. Therefore I have taken 


the liberty of expressing it. 
6 


82 HUMAN DESTINY. 


grossest and most dangerous kind. 
As, therefore, the result of our judgment 
on this question is so unspeakably 
solemn, no amount of earnestness or 
care can be excessive in considering it. 
First, then, as already shown, the 
definition here given of death cannot 
be accepted for a moment. The ex- 
tinction of being would certainly mpy 
death; but death itself, in its ordinary 
sense, means nothing but the change in 
which the performance of vital functions 
ceases, or else the condition of the 
organism which has suffered that 
change. The thought is the same 
whether the subject be a man or a 
brute. If it be asked whether in either 
case there is a soul that survives, this 
is a new question the answer to 
which is not involved in the thought 
of death. When the Roman soldiers, 
after breaking the legs of the crucified 
thieves, came to the body of the 


“ETERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 83 


Blessed Lord and pronounced Him 
dead, they meant precisely the same 
thing as if they had been dealing 
with a bullock or a sheep. 

The author is right, therefore, in 
asserting that in the thought of death 
there is no reference to the survival of 
a spirit beyond. But he is wholly 
wrong in assuming that death is in- 
consistent with such a survival. And 
yet this is implied in his statement 
that ‘“‘the man is no more”; for if it 
means merely that a disembodied soul 
ought not to be described as a Man, 
the proposition relates only to the use 
of words, and is of no practical im- 
portance here. 

The question may be stated thus: 
What has become of Balaam and of 
the beast he rode upon? The answer 
is, They are dead. But, it is again 
asked, was death the end of their 
existence? We have agreed to put 


84 HUMAN DESTINY. 


Reason out of court on this point, so 
we turn to Scripture, and Scripture 
tells us that death was the end of the 
beast, but not of the man. Does not 
this decide the matter, then? By no 
means, the author replies, because 
Balaam’s survival is “a miraculous or 
abnormal provision, arising out of the 
economy of redemption.” What grounds 
are there for this statement? Absolutely 
none; it is a mere theory put forward 
arbitrarily, and without a shadow of 
proof, in order to avoid a difficulty in 
which the author finds himself entangled 
by the view he takes of death, which 
again is equally arbitrary and baseless, 
and which, moreover, assumes the very 
thing he is attempting to prove. 

The controversy turns upon what is 
called the “natural immortality” of the 
soul—that is, that apart from Divine 
interference, and by the law of its 
being, the human soul will continue to 


“ETERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 85 


exist for ever. The advocate of con- 
ditional immortality undertakes to prove 
the opposite of this proposition. But 
how does he proceed? As the founda- 
tion of his argument he puts forward 
a definition of death which covertly 
implies, and that without proof, the 
precise conclusion which he is bound 
to establish; and then, finding himself 
confronted by plain facts of which 
Revelation testifies, he disposes of those 
facts by a new theory about redemption. 
Moreover, the necessity for this theory 
arises solely from the error of the 
position he has taken up; -and_ this 
being so, the silence of Scripture is a 
sufficient reason for rejecting it. If 
the survival of the soul depended on 
redemption, it is incredible that the 
doctrine would not be plainly revealed. 
And further, unless the sentence upon 
Adam was an arbitrary one, the 
theory fails to account for the facts, 


86 HUMAN DESTINY. 


If death is the consequence of sin, Satan 
and his angels had already come under 
death, and as they have no part in 
redemption, their survival cannot . be 
accounted for by redemption. 

Mark what all this involves. Accord- 
ing to the threatening, we are told, 
the judgment upon Adam was the 
extinction of his being, and that too 
upon the day of his sin. Yet he lived 
nine hundred and thirty years, and when 
at last death overtook him his soul 
survived. We must conclude, therefore, 
that God threatened him with a doom 
which He had no intention of inflicting. 
The only thing certain about it is that 
Satan was entirely in the right when 
he met the Divine warning by a flat 
denial, and declared, ‘Ye shall xo¢ 
surely die.” It behoves us peremptorily 
to reject such a supposition, no matter 
what the rejection of it ,may involve, 
and to insist that whatever the threatened 


“HIERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 87 


death implied, it came upon Adam in 
the day of his sin. 

Certain it is that a change took 
place in his condition and relationships 
with God. If even from the standpoint 
of fallen humanity the loss of virtue is 
deemed worse than death, how unspeak- 
ably terrible must have been that first 
plunge from innocence into sin! Death, 
we are told, is the dissolution of the 
complex organism which constitutes the 
human integer; in other words, it is 
the breaking up of the Man, the 
separation of soul and body. What 
word then can more fitly express that 
far ‘more awful crisis, the separation of 
the creature from his God? This and 
nothing less than this surely i is death in 
its fullest, deepest sense. 

This same conclusion may be rahe 
in another way. The believer ‘hath 
passed out of death into life” * The 


* John v. 24, R. V.; cf. 1 John iii. 14. 


88 HUMAN DESTINY. 


condition of the sinner, therefore, by 
nature is death. How and when did 
mankind come into this state? The 
answer is clear, By the fall of Adam. 
To urge that every sinner is dead by 
reason of his own trespasses and sins is 
only to confirm the correctness of the 
reply, by establishing that sin results in 
death. The word “death” expresses both 
the crisis and the condition into which 
it introduces the sinner. In the latter 
sense, natural death is a condition of 
existence in separation from the body, 
and spiritual death is a condition of 
existence in separation from God. 

But as this would be decisive, it is 
met again by a bold rejection of the 
whole doctrine of spiritual death. We 
are told that the expression is “without 
example in apostolic usage,” and that 
when Scripture describes the unregene- 
rate as dead, the language is figurative, 
and “the figure is in the ense,” mean- 


“ETERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 89 


ing “they are certain to die, because 
they are under sentence of destruction.” 
In answer to this, first, the need of 
the term spiritual death arises solely 
from using the term zatural death. It 
is adopted, not of necessity, but only for 
clearness and brevity. Secondly, it can- 
not be admitted that there is any figure 
here at all, for, as already urged, the 
ordinary meaning of death is not neces- 
sarily its primary meaning. And, thirdly, 
the author’s statement is only a repeti- 
tion of his invariable fetetzeo principu. 
He must prove, and not take for 
granted, that death means extinction of 
being. 

The last remark applies with full force 
to the authors argument on St. Paul’s 
reference to death in the 5th chapter 
of Romans. Allow him to assume what 
he undertakes to prove, and his argu- 
ment is unanswerable; but hold him to 
the proof of it, and it falls to pieces, 


gO HUMAN DESTINY. 


The apostle desires to prove that 
Adam sinned as federal head of the 
race, involving his posterity in the con- 
sequences of his sin; and to establish 
this, he appeals to the fact that death 
reigned even at a time when, and over 
persons in respect of whom, there was 
no question of actual transgression, death 
being admittedly one of the consequences 
ofathesHden> sin* 

Further, we are told that the death 
with which Adam was threatened was 
also the curse of the law, ‘literal 
death,” that is, implying destruction in 
the sense in which these writers use 
the word. To this it may be answered, 
first, that here again the argument moves 
in the usual vicious circle, that which is to 
be proved being taken for granted; and, 


* Some advocates of conditional immortality do 
mot admit this; but one must really draw a line 
somewhere as to turning aside to prove facts and 
truths accepted by all Christendom. 


EP PEEN AT LIFE IN CHRIST.” QI 


secondly, that the statement confounds the 
curse with the consequences of the curse. 
The same word, “cursed,” is applied 
to the law-breaker, to the serpent in 
Eden, and to the ground condemned 
to bring forth thorns and thistles.* 
Meno case was it “the end of. their 
existence, but the ban under which exist- 
ence was to continue.. True it is the 
law-breaker was put to death, because 
in the Commonwealth of Israel the 
sinner who came under the Divine curse 
was utterly outlawed. The death was 
inflicted by man, and therefore the 
offender might escape it. In fact, during 
the apostacy of the nation escape was 
the almost universal rule ; but the Divine 
curse upon the law-breaker was none 
the less certain and inexorable. 

One point more remains, and it is 


Cen il, 14,17 ; Deut. xxvil.-15, 16, 17, 18, 10, 
20, etc. The sanie word d/-var is used in all these 


passages. 


92 HUMAN DESTINY. 


incomparably the most important. What- 
ever be the death which is the penalty 
of sin, that death was endured by Christ. 
This at least is a statement which none 
will gainsay. If then death be ‘the 
destruction” (that is, the extinction) “of 
the life of humanity,” ‘death for ever, 
dissolution without hope of the resurrec- 
tion,’ did ¢hzs death befall the blessed 
Lord? One might have supposed that 
the mere statement of the question 
would have been enough; but it would 
seem that the advocate of ‘conditional 
immortality” is prepared to defend his 
position no matter what the cost. He not 
only meets the question, but answers it as 
follows, by an uncompromising affirmative : 
“When Christ died, He was, as a man, 
destroyed.” ‘When the curse had taken 
effect upon the manhood ”—of Jesus—“ it 
was still open to the Divine Inhabitant, 
absorbing the Spirit into His own 
essence, to restore the ‘destroyed temple’ 


TIOR NAY LAPLO IN CHRIST.” 93 


from its ruins, and taking possession 
of it in virtue of His Divinity (not 
legally, as a man), to raise it up on 
the third day.” Or, still more plainly 
in borrowed words which the author 
Beopts, “it ‘was the -life of man- a 
life common to Him with those He 
died to redeem, that expired on the 
tree: but the life He now enjoys is 
the life of God. Of justice He takes 
back no part of the penalty He had 
paid. It is to the power of His eternal 
Godhead alone that He owes His re- 
surrection from the dead.” 

Hitherto this argument has been con- 
ducted with calmness, but at this point the 
Christian may well exclaim, “ With such 
a theme twere treason to be calm.” 
What is the cost at which the advo- 


) 


cates of “conditional immortality” here 
defend their position? First, as to their 
own consistency. They begin by insisting 


that the body is so essentially ¢he man, 


94 HUMAN DESTINY. 


that when the human organism is 
dissolved ¢he man is no more;* but 
when driven to it by the exigencies of 
an argument based on error, and marked 
throughout by fallacy, they end by 
assuming that the body is no part of 
the man at all, so that when the blessed 
Lord gave up His human soul He 
perfectly satisfied the death which 
claimed ¢he man as its due. We are 
told that “if Jesus had been the Son 
of David only, He could not legally 
have risen from the dead.” But why 
not? If the resurrection was merely a 
transcendental trick, what did it matter 
whether the corpse which lay in Joseph’s 
tomb had formerly been animated by 
Divine life or not? The Auman life 
had been “destroyed,” and all claims of 


* According to the author already quoted, “ Both 
_ the law and the Gospel deal with man as an integer, 
consisting of body and soul. Zhe death incurred by 
sin was the destruction of this complex humanity.” 


“EIERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 95 


law having thus been met, God could 
of course reanimate that body. On this 
theory, indeed, what need was there for 
redemption at all? By a like piece of 
chicanery he who had the power of 
death might have been cheated of his 
due in every child of Adam.* 

But the question is not whether the 
Lord could have been raised from the 
dead had He been only the Son of 
David. The real question is, whether, 
in fact, He was raised from the dead 
only as Son of God. Perchance that 
strange admonition to Timothy had refer- 
ence to some such heresy as this, even 
in the infant Church, “Remember that 


* This same writer avers that the survival of the 
soul at death is to establish continuity of personality 
for judgment. “If no spirit survived, it might be 
truly said that a wholly zew being was then created to 
suffer for the offences of another long passed away.” 
So we say if the Man Christ Jesus did not rise from 
the dead a wholly mew being was called to life at the 
resurrection. 


96 HUMAN DESTINY. 


Jesus Christ was raised from the dead, 
of the seed of David, according to my 
gospel.”* The whole argument of the 
apostle in the fifteenth chapter of First 
Corinthians is based upon the fact that 
Christ was raised from the dead as man. 
The words are, “Since dy man came death, 
by man came also the resurrection of 
the dead.” Therefore. it is that in His 
resurrection He ‘became the firstfruits 
of them that slept.” The firstfruits 
must of necessity be a part of the 
harvest; and such was indeed “the last 
Adam,’ “the second man, the Lord 
from heaven.” 

Christianity is based upon the very 
truth which is here denied. Paradise 
regained is a poets dream, but it has 
no place in the theology of the New 
Testament. The scheme of redemption 
is not to restore the first Adam ‘to 
the place he lost by sin, as federal head 


uy iby (Mt ty es 


— = 


“EIERNAL LIFE IN CHRIST.” 97 


of the old creation; but, closing his 
history for ever in the Cross of Calvary, 
to unite the redeemed of the fallen race 
under the Second Adam as federal head 
of the new creation. The one Media- 
tor is THE MAN Christ Jesus.”* It is 
as Sox of Man He took His place at 
the right hand of God.t “When the 
Son of Man shall come in His glory, 
and all the holy angels with Him, then 
shall He sit upon the throne of His 
glory.” It is “because He is the Sox 
of Man” that the Father “has given 
Him authority to execute judgment.” § 


an Lu, i. 5. g Matt, xxv..31: 
7 Acts vil. 56. § John v. 27. 


A ` 


TAA, 
ma 


ý ga ià r 


ye i f Pa 
=) ak ee vt hata? le! 
É è ye 


(MEG 


Chapter VIII 
ANNIHILATION. 


THE natural immortality of man, we 
are told, is a theory of heathen philo- 
sophers, engrafted upon Christianity in 
post-apostolic days. Man is a dying 
creature, destined by the operation of 
natural laws to pass out of existence 
unless he receive eternal life in Christ. 
It is admitted, however, that the lost 
shall be raised from the dead by 
Divine power in order that in the body 
they may be judged and punished for 
their sins. In other words, creatures 
who are doomed by the law of their 
nature to decay and pass out of being 
altogether, are not only kept in exist- 
ence, but recalled to active life in 


I0O HUMAN DESTINY. 


resurrection, solely in order that increased 
capacities for enduring torment may be 
added to the horrors of their doom. 
Not even the coarse hell of medizeval 
ignorance is more revolting, more 
incredible than this; and yet these 
views are held and taught on the plea 
that God is a God of love! 

But Scripture plainly teaches that the 
destruction of the wicked—whatever 
destruction means—is the result, not 
of natural law, but of Divine judgment. 
When we read that ‘the wages of 
sin is death,’ we are to understand 
extinction of being. Now we know as 
a matter of experience and of fact that 
death often entails much antecedent 
suffering ; but on the same ground we 
know also that this is purely accidental. 
Death does not necessarily involve any 
suffering whatever. If human law 
sentences a criminal to imprisonment, 
it consigas him to misery in many 


ANNIHILATION. iôi 


forms; but if it decrees his death, it 
scrupulously guards him from every kind 
of suffering save the necessary rigour of 
confinement. Nor is it that he is dismissed 
to receive his punishment from God. 
Our English law at least is not so cruel. 
The conventional language of the death 
sentence concludes with a prayer for 
Divine mercy on the condemned, and 
a minister of religion is appointed to 
attend him in his cell and on the 
scaffold. The last words that fall upon 
his ears are words that tell of pardon 
and a life beyond the grave. If capital 
punishment were abolished the public 
would probably insist on the free use 
of the lash for grave and_ brutal 
crimes ; but how degraded would be 
the community which would decree a 
criminal’s death, and yet torture him up 
to the very hour of his execution!* 


* Some of the Italian tyrants in the Middle 
Ages did this very thing; and a reverend opponent 


102 HUMAN DESTINY. 


Now let us test the argument in the 
light of the inevitable admissions. If 
what we call death were the end of the 
sinner, all would be plain. But it is 
admitted that the lost dead are to 
be raised for judgment, and in their 
bodies subjected to punitive suffering 
for their sins; and that this suffering, 
though limited in duration, shall yet be 
temible ils net this) open’ toiamevery 
objection on the ground of reason and 
sentiment which is urged against the 
‘orthodox faith’? If there be some 
awful necessity, unexplained to us, why 
the sinner should continue to exist, we 
can understand that there may be a like 


necessity for future punishment; but if 


of eternal punishment has had the temerity to 
compare God to such a monster, if there be an 
endless hell. If the author were not given up to 
a reprobate mind, he would have seen as he wrote 
the blasphemy that a thirty days’ hell followed by 
extinction would more fully satisfy the analogy. 
His argument is against any hell whatever. 


ANNIHILATION. 103 


there be no such necessity, what is it 
but torturing helpless, hopeless victims 
who might at once be put out of misery, 
for extinction is their doom ? 

The author already quoted as the 
champion of conditional immortality is 
far too keen a reasoner to overlook this 
difficulty. He has met it boldly by 
“disclaiming the belief that ages of 
suffering are to precede that destruction,” 
thus parting company with Scripture 
altogether. In his view the sufferings of 
the lost in the final state will be merely 
such as shall necessarily accompany their 
“death”; and we must read this statement 
in the light of the undoubted fact that 
no suffering whatever is involved in death 
when inflicted without cruelty. Is there 
then to be zo suffering for sin? In 
reply the author will tell us . that 
“the spirit may suffer 7 Hades 
for the sins of a lifetime.” But what 
then becomes of the statement that at 


104 HUMAN DESTINY. 


death the man is no more? If “the 
spirit” carries with it the moral guilt of 
life's sins and a capacity of suffering for 
those sins, ¢zs is the personality, this 
is “the man.” Moreover, according to 
this theory, the amount of a Sinners 
punishment depends, not on the cha- 
racter of his sin, but om the<époch 
at which he lived on earth. In the 
antediluvian sinner it is measured by 
thousands of years: whereas for the 
awful Christ-rejecter of the last days 
it will be briefer than for all the rest; 
because Hades is to be cast into the 
lake of fire, and the lake of fire is 
absolute extinction of being. 

But the suffering in Hades precedes 
the judgment. What room is there then 
for judgment at all? The object of the 
day of judgment is to fix the guilt and 
apportion the punishment of each, and it 
becomes but an idle pageant if all alike 
are to be hurried to a swift and common 


ANNIHILATION. 105 


doom. To answer that its purpose will 
be to separate the redeemed from the 
impenitent is to ignore some of the 
plainest teaching of Scripture. That divi- 
sion will be manifested in and by the resur- 
rection, for the redeemed shall be raised 
in “the image of the heavenly,” and 
such are not to come into the judgment.* 
And what possible purpose can there be 
in this view for the resurrection of the 
lost? We are asked to believe that God 
not only maintains them in existence by 
miraculous interference, but that He puts 
forth His mighty power to raise them 
from the dead, solely and altogether for 
a magnificent display of wrath in anni- 
hilating them. 

But apart from the essential incredi- 
bility of such a theory, we must reject it 
as opposed to the plain testimony of 
Scripture. We turn, therefore, to seek 
the explanation from another writer, whose 


a See p.. 50 arie, 


106 HUMAN DESTINY. 


published sermons..on this subject are 
held in high repute by all believers in 
conditional immortality. He will tell “us 
that the doom of the impenitent “will 
not be a simple act of annihilation, but 
a process of destruction. The fire of 
God’s wrath will not consume them at 
once, but they will be tormented in it 
day and night for the ages of ages that 
they have yet to live.” ‘Many or few 
stripes will be inflicted, according to each 
one’s deserts, while in every case it will 
end in the final loss of life as the neces- 
sary consequence of not being in Christ.” 
In terms at least this is consistent with 
the language of Scripture, and therefore 
it claims consideration. 

Does not this suggest the inquiry how 
suicide is to be prevented in the lake of 
fire? God must put forth His miraculous 
power to keep in being the victims of 
His wrath, until the last of the “many 
or few stripes” which each one deserves 


ANNIHILATION. 107 


shall have been inflicted! Disguise it 
as we may, the fact is obvious that in 
this theory the annihilation of the lost 
is God’s act of mercy to close their 
suffering. It is impious to suppose that 
their release could be delayed wantonly 
and cruelly. The delay, therefore, must 
be due to the righteous necessity of 
exacting the full meed of punishment the 
sin of each deserves. Why then should 
a God “Who is willing that all men 
should be saved,” not let the damned 
pass from the scene of torment to some 
place of rest, instead of putting forth His 
power to annihilate them? 

Further, if annihilation be the penalty 
of sin, then, as already shown, Christ 
has not borne that penalty. If it be a 
term of suffering, from which annihilation 
gives release, redemption is seriously 
depreciated. This view is beset by 
difficulties akin to those which led us 
to abandon the “wider hope,” and in 


108 HUMAN DESTINY. 


addition to these it presents a difficulty 
of another and far graver kind. As the 
writer last quoted puts it, the punishment 
“will be inflicted according to each one’s 
deserts,” the annihilation will be “the 
necessary consequence of not being in 
Christ.” We are thus asked to believe 
in a God who puts forth His power solely 
to keep His creatures in existence until 
“the uttermost farthing” of penalty has 
been exacted, and who then, when every 
question of righteous claim is settled, and 
love might pity and save, turns away to 
leave them to their fate. And this, too, 
on the plea that God is a God of love! 

Either there exists a righteous necessity 
to punish sin, or there does not. If there’ 
be no such necessity, then all punitive 
suffering is inflicted wantonly and cruelly. 
If, on the other hand, sin must be 
punished, how and when is that punish- 
ment to cease? ‘The hell of the Bible 
is consistent with Divine love, but the 


ANNIHILATION. 109 


hell of the annihilationist is more horrible 
even than the conventional hell of popular 
theology. Is such a hell to make men 
righteous and holy—this awful pit of 
shrieking, cursing men, made desperate 
by despair, and maddened by the know- 
ledge that if God would only let them 
alone their torment would cease for ever? 
These sins of the lake of fire, are they 
to go unpunished? Does the quality of 
guilt depend on the atmosphere of earth, 
and not on the unchanging laws of God? 

The only difference between the hell 
of the annihilationist and the coarse 
hell of medieval theologians con- 
sists in the duration of the sinner’s 
misery. And yet, while we are told 
that reason and conscience and natural 
affection, and our apprehension of the 
character of God, revolt against the belief 
in eternal punishment, we are to be 
satisfied with belief in ages of torment 
for the sinner, albeit the only possible 


IIO HUMAN DESTINY. 
explanation of hell, consistently with 
Divine love, is no longer applicable. If 
there be some necessity of which we 
know nothing, why fallen beings should 
continue to exist, then we can under- 
stand the Devils presence in Eden and 
the fact of an eternal hell; but if the 
theories of conditional immortality be 
accepted, the continuance of evil in this 
world is no longer an intellectual diffi- 
culty only, but a moral difficulty of the 
gravest kind, and hell stands out as a 
hideous exhibition of wanton and re- 
morseless wrath. 

What then is the cost at which the 
theories of the annihilationist may be 
accepted as an article of the Christian 
faith? First, we must assume that 
death is extinction of being, which the 
Scripture unequivocally teaches it is zof. 
Next, we must believe that God’s first 
solemn warning against sin was an idle” 
threat, which He had no intention 


ANNIHILATION. eT 


of fulfilling; and that the truest word 
spoken to Adam was that which, for 
six thousand years, men have called 
“the Devil’s lie,” “Ye shall not surely 
die.” More than this, we must recog- 
nise that the death of Christ was the 
destruction of His humanity, and His 
resurrection a piece of transcendental 
jugglery to conceal the Devil’s triumph 
and deceive the saints of God, who for 
eighteen centuries have believed that the 
Blessed One Who wept at the grave of 
Lazarus, and sat travel-soiled and weary 
at Sychar’s well, was upon the Father’s 
throne as Man, whereas His manhood 
perished upon Calvary, and He is no 
longer Man but only God. And all 
this mingled folly and error must be 
accepted, forsooth, to screen the reputa- 
tion of Almighty God, now endangered 
by our belief in hell in the midst of 
nineteenth-century enlightenment ! 


Chapter IX. 
CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 


Tue ephemeral literature upon the sub- 
ject of conditional immortality gives 
prominence to statements of a kind 
which, though generally excluded from 
standard works, have no little influence 
with ordinary minds. It is urged, for 
example, that the judgment upon sin was 
the death of the soul; and, it is added, 
the meaning of this can be realised by 
analogy, for just as the body is dis- 
solved, and ceases to exist as a body, 
so shall it be with the soul. But this 
is to allow ourselves to be misled by 
using words in a loose and popular 
sense, unwarranted by Holy Writ. 
Scripture never speaks of the death of 


the soul. To quote in opposition to this 
8 


114 HUMAN DESTINY. 


the statement “The soul that sinneth, 
it shall die,” is to trade upon the lan- 
guage of our English Bible. The word 
in the original means merely the person, 
the individual; the father is not to suffer 
for the son, nor the son for the father, 
but the person who sins, Āe shall die.* 
Neither does the Scripture speak of 
the death of the dody. In our English 
version we read of “dead bodies,” but 
not in the original. If our thought be 
of “natural death,” the body comes into 
prominence; if of ‘spiritual death,” the 
soul, But in either case it is the man 
who dies—not his body or his soul.t 


* See the use of the same word in Lev. v. 
24, 192 “If a ‘soul toucha etei “tsa asoa 
swear,” etc., “If a soul commit a trespass.” In 
Lev. vii. 20 we have ‘The soul that eateth ;” 
and in xxi. 11 it is translated “ body.” 

t The word rendered “dead body” in Rey. xi. 
8, 9, is mraua, James li, 26 is the only seeming 
exception to the above statement. But the con- 
text shows that there the word dead is used in the 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. TI 5 


It is urged again that just as a branch 
may continue to live for a time after 
it has been severed from the tree, so 
the sinner may exist for a time apart 
from God ; but that when separated from 
Him Who is the fountain of life, he 
must, sooner or later, fade out of exist- 
ence. Now, this of course is a mere 
theory, without the slightest pretence of 
proof. Moreover, it abandons the rival 
theory that sinners are miraculously pre- 
served in existence with a view to 
punishment ; and it assumes that their ulti- 
mate annihilation will be the result of 
natural law, and not of a Divine judgment. 


same secondary or figurative sense as when we speak 
of a stone or a log being dead. And no English 
writer would use our word 47/7 as it is used in 
Matt. x. 28. The passage is explained by the 
elasticity which the word dzoxreivw possesses. Ac- 
cording to Liddell and Scott it means, first, to 
kill, slay ; secondly, to condemn to death ; thirdly, to 
weary to death, to torment. (And see note, p. 128 


post.) 


116 HUMAN DESTINY. 


If this theory be true, there must, of 
course, be an average length of life for 
the soul as for the body. What the period 
is we cannot tell, but it must be more 
than six thousand years, for we know 
that all who have ever lived on earth 
shall continue in existence till the judg- 
ment. But when the judgment comes, 
the antediluvian dead will of course be 
comparatively near the end of their 
sorrow, in contrast with the lost of the 
latter days. The amount of punishment 
to be suffered by the sinner will thus 
depend, not on the guilt of his sin, but 
on the age of his soul at the time of 
the judgment. It is not strange that 
this view of the matter is ignored by 
writers of repute. 
It would probably be found, however, 
that the large majority of those who 
refuse to believe in what they all 
“eternal evil” ignore all such arguments 
and theories as have been here discussed, 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 117 


They rest their convictions altogether 
on the indisputable fact that the Creator 
is able to put an end to the existence 
of His creatures. And such, they tell 
us, Scripture explicitly declares to be 
His purpose ; for ‘ Destruction,” “ Perdi- 
tion,’ lhe lake of fire,” and other 
words of kindred import, plainly teach 
the annihilation of the ungodly. This 
belief deserves, and shall receive, the 
fullest consideration. 

But let it be distinctly kept in view 
that this implies what is called the 
“natural immortality” of man. If by 
the law of his being he be destined to 
cease to exist, or if the death-penalty of 
sin imply extinction of being, the ques- 
tion here proposed cannot arise. They 
who raise it assume that but for the 
Divine interference in judgment man’s 
existence would continue indefinitely ; 
and they undertake to prove unequivo- 
cally from Scripture that the second 


118 HUMAN DESTINY. 


death, unlike the first, will put an end 
to him altogether. According to them 
the element of the miraculous is not in 
the preservation of the sinner for the 
judgment, but in his annihilation in 
and by the judgment. They thus 
entirely abandon the position taken up 
by the leading advocates of conditional 
immortality, and there must be no 
attempt to fall back on that position, if 
Scripture, when appealed to, should refuse 
the testimony they claim from it. The 
single issue now remaining is whether 
the Bible teaches the extermination of 
the wicked ; and the onus of proof rests 
entirely with those who maintain that it 
does. Man exists; and as no crisis or 
change of which we have any knowledge 
puts an end to that existence,* we must 
assume that it will continue indefinitely, 
unless the contrary be proved. But, we 


* Here I am dealing only with those who accept 
revelation. 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 119 


are assured, the Scriptures expressly teach 
that the wicked shall be put out of 
existence altogether. This is what has 
to be proved, and now we turn to 
examine the proofs. 

That it is to the New Testament Scrip- 
tures we must look for a decision upon 
this question is a statement so obvious 
that most people will deem it superfluous. 
We are told, however, that ‘in the 
Hebrew tongue there are no less than 
fifty roots, meaning, habitually or occa- 
sionally, to destroy; most of which are 
used in the Old Testament to specify the 
ultimate doom of the wicked.” A dectum 
of this kind is well fitted to overwhelm 
ordinary readers, who would never dream 
that an author of repute, writing on such 
solemn subjects, could make a statement 
wholly unfounded. But will the reader 
take up his Bible, and with the aid of 
a concordance seek out in the Hebrew 
Scriptures the more than fifty passages 


120 HUMAN DESTINY. 

in which “¢he ultimate doom of the 
wicked ” is “ specified.” His labours will 
lead to a startling result. Can he 
find éen such passages? Can he find 
FIVE? If his list should be a much 
longer one than is here anticipated, 
a glance at a Hebrew concordance 
will satisfy him that the same words 
which, as he supposes, describe 
eternal judgment, are elsewhere used 
of death, or of some other temporal 
judgment. And he will find further 
that the extremely rare passages (such 
as Daniel xii. 2), which admittedly 
relate to the final state, are precisely 
those which the advocates of eternal 
punishment lay stress upon to prove 
their doctrine. 


Daniel’s prophecy above referred to -is 


* Any one who has access to a good library 
will find in the ‘“Englishman’s Hebrew Concord- 
ance” all the materials necessary to enable him to 
settle this question for himself, 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 121 


the only passage in the Old Testament 
which plainly announces the resurrection 
of the wicked. And when in the 
Epistle of Jude the inspired writer seeks 
a prophecy of the great judgment to 
come, he finds it in the words of 
Enoch, outside the canon altogether. 
Account for it as we may, the silence of 
the Old Testament Scriptures as to the 
final state is one of the most striking 
features of the revelation. It is not 
merely ‘life and immortality” which 
have been brought to light by the 
gospel; it is there also that the dark 
alternative has been plainly revealed. 
But even those who would reject the 
position here assumed as regards the 
scope of the Old Testament, would freely 
admit that the ultimate appeal must be 
to the New. 

An admission which fairness demands 
may somewhat clear the ground. The 
language of the New Testament describing 


122 HUMAN DESTINY. 


the destruction of the lost is perfectly con- 
sistent with the doctrine of conditional 
immortality. And further, this is all 
that needs to be proved by authors 
such as those which have here been 
quoted, assuming always the validity 
and success of the arguments on which 
their position rests. But that is not 
the question here. These arguments 
have been examined, and they have 
been found, not only fallacious, but 
destructive of “the faith once) de- 
livered.” The question now is, whether 
those who reject these reasonings can 
apart from them altogether find proof 
in the Scripture that the doom of the 
wicked is annihilation. 

With some, this question will resolve 
itself into an inquiry whether the word 
destruction correctly expresses the Greek 
original in the passages where it is used. 
But this will not bear investigation. 


Extinction or annihilation is not 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 123 


necessarily implied in the word at all. So 
far from this being its primary meaning, 
it is a very remote signification. In 
the classical use of the word, to destroy 
a thing is to do it irreparable injury, 
to unfit it permanently for the purpose 
for which it was intended. Its meaning 
as used of a person may be illustrated 
by a quotation which ought to be 
familiar to all who speak the English 
tongue—‘ No freeman shall be taken 
or imprisoned, or be disseised of his 
freehold or liberties or free customs, 
or be outlawed or exiled or any other- 
wise destroyed, but by lawful judgment 
of his peers or by the law of the land.” 
According to Magna Charta, then, to 
drive a man from his home, to deprive 
him of his property, or to shut him 
up in prison, is to destroy him.* The 


* It is an interesting fact that among the 
peasantry of the west and south of Ireland, with 
whom English is an acquired language, this is the 


124 HUMAN DESTINY. 


thought that we would convey by ruin 
our ancestors expressed by destroy. The 
word, therefore, may be fitly used to 
describe the doom of the wicked, what- 
ever that doom may be. But the 
meaning of a word depends upon the 
use of it. Judged by this test, what is 
the force of the expression in the New 
Testament ? 

There are ten words rendered destroy 
in the Authorised Version, and three of 
these occur also in the substantive form 
as destruction. A _ full list of these 
words will be found in the Appendix ; 
but there are only three of them which 
need be noticed here, as these alone are 
used to describe the final state of the 
lost. 

We’ read in 2 Thessalonians aie: 
that at His coming the Lord shall destroy 


common meaning of destroy. Any one who is 
evicted, or robbed, or ill-treated, is said to be 
* destroyed.” 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 125 


the Lawless One, the Antichrist. The 
word here used (a¢argeo) occurs again 
in Hebrews ii. 14 of the destruction 
of the Devil at and by the death 
of Christ. It means to render power- 
less, or useless, or inoperative (Rom! 
ieg. 31, ea gr.)and hence “to: do 
away,” or “destroy,” in the Magna 
Charta sense. The same word is used 
of death in 1 Corinthians xv. 26 and 
2 timothy 1. to. For the believer, 
death was “destroyed” de jure at the 
cross, and will be ‘‘abolished” de facto in 
the glory. The thought of annihilation 
cannot be imported into this word at all. 

The next word, a very much stronger 
term for ‘destruction,’ is used for 
‘natural death” in the only passage 
where it occurs as a verb.” Four times 
only it is used as a noun (olethros), 


* Lest He that destroyed (ô ddoOpedwr) the firstborn 
should touch them” (Heb. xi. 28). 


126 HUMAN DESTINY. 


and in each of these the word vazx 
would exactly convey the thought 
intended. In 1 Corinthians v. 5, a 
certain person is delivered to Satan 
“for the destruction of the flesh,” albeit 
we find in 2 Corinthians ii. 6 that this 
same person, having profited by his 
“punishment,” was restored to the 
fellowship of the Church. In 1 Thessa- 
lonians v. 3 we are told that at the 
advent of Christ “sudden destruction’ 
shall come upon the ungodly. Is this 
annihilation? By no means, for, as 
Scripture elsewhere will tell us, they 
shall be “reserved to the day of judg- 
ment to be punished.” The same 
remark applies to the statement in 
2 Thessalonians i. 9. And, moreover, it 
is ‘everlasting destruction from the face 
of the Lord:” it is banishment Sand 
not annihilation which characterises the 
ruin, In the last remaining passage 
where this word occurs, St. Paul de- 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 127 


clares that the lusts begotten of money- 
worship “drown men in destruction 
and perdition.” Is this annihilation? 
And yet the Greek language contains 
no stronger terms to express the idea.* 

The word rendered “ perdition” in 
the verse just quoted is the last which 


* The champion of Conditional Immortality 
remarks on 1 Tim. vi. 9: “As the Greek language 
does not afford two stronger expressions than these 
for denoting the idea of literal death and extinction 
of being, it requires a large amount of evidence 
to prove that they were intended by St. Paul to 
convey the idea of indestructible existence in tor- 
ment.” No one whose mind was not thoroughly 
warped by dwelling on this controversy would 
imagine for a moment that the Apostle here in- 
tended to convey ether “ extinction of being” or 
“indestructible existence in torment.” 

But the admission above made is valuable. 
These are the strongest expressions possible to 
express annihilation. That the first does not 
express that thought is certain, for if it did the 
addition of the second would be mere verbiage. 
The only question, therefore, is whether dadAeo 
implies extinction. 


128 HUMAN DESTINY. 


claims mention here. It is perhaps 
the most important of all. The noun 
(apoleca) occurs twenty times, the verb 
(appollumz) ninety-two times, in the New 
Testament. A. reference to the’ Con- 
cordance will show that it is sometimes 
used as a synonym for death in the 
ordinary sense, and in several passages 
it describes the present state of the im- 
penitent. Christ came “to save that 
which was Jost.’ In the parables, the 
sheep was Jost, the piece of silver was 
Jost, the prodigal son was Jost. So in 
every passage where the subject or the 
context enables us to fix the meaning 
with certainty, the word means a condition 
of existence, not a ceasing to exist.* 


* See App. p. 219 fost. Matt. x. 28 demands 
special notice on account of the use which 
has been made of it: “Fear not them which 
kill the body, but are not able to kill the 
soul; but rather fear Him which is able to 
destroy both soul and body in hell.” Assume 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 129 


He who gives a cup of cold water 
to a disciple “shall in no wise Jose his 
reward.” Christ was “not sent but 
unto the J/ost sheep of the House of 
Israel.” If a man put new wine into 
old bottles “the bottles will be marred.” 
“The thief cometh not, but for to steal, 
and to kill, and to destroy.” In the 
Appendix * will be found a list in- 
cluding every passage where this word 
occurs, and the reader can judge for 
himself whether in its use in Scripture 
it means annihilation. And let it not 


that “death” and ‘‘destruction” imply extinc- 
tion, and this settles the whole question. But 
if, refusing to assume anything of the sort, we 
analyse the words here used and consider what they 
were intended to convey, the thought we shall take 
in is this: man’s power can reach the body only, 
not the soul; but God can destroy doth. If 
we want to know what ‘‘destroy” means, we 
must inquire how the Lord used the word else- 
where, and this is precisely what I am now 
investigating. 
* P, 218 post, 


130 HUMAN DESTINY. 


be forgotten that if the words here © 
noticed fail to convey that idea, the 
Greek language has none other to 
express if." 

But the lake of fire—is not that anni- 
hilation? How can any creature live 
in the midst of iire r The question 
need not be discussed; neither need 
we consider whether jive be here a 
figure, as elsewhere in Scripture, to ex- 
press fierce trouble and judgment. These 
are speculative inquiries. The practical 
question which concerns us is settled 


* Of the Antichrist it is written, ‘‘whom the 
Lord shall consume with the spirit of His mouth” 
(2 Thess. ii. 8). The meaning of the word may be 
gathered from the only other passage where St. 
Paul uses it: “If ye bite and devour one‘another 
take heed that ye be not consumed one of another ” 
(Gal. v. 15). This word àvaàískw occurs only once 
again—viz., in Luke ix. 54. 

Devour, in Heb. x. 27, is the common word 
for cating, here used in a figurative sense. In 
1 Peter v. 8, a like use is made of the word 
generally rendered Zo swallow. 


CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY. 131 


beyond dispute by the plain testimony 
of Scripture. In the judgment scene of 
the 25th chapter of Matthew the 


’ 


“eternal fire” is expressly called “ eter- 
nal punishment”; and though the word 
rendered “punishment” be denied its 
classical meaning of corrective discipline, 
it cannot possibly signify annihilation.* 

The Lord’s words in the narrative of 
Lazarus and Dives are plainer still. 
The sinner is there represented as in 
a condition of conscious and _ active 
existence in hell.f And still more 
definite is the language of the very 
Setipture where the lake. of fire 


* Matt. xxv. 41 and 46. This word xéAacus, used 
in v. 46, occurs again only in 1 John iv. 18; “fear 
hath zorment.” The kindred verb occurs Acts iv. 21 
and 2 Peter ii. 9, only. It means primarily to prune 
(trees), to curtail, or check ; and then to chastise or 
punish. Dr. Trench (Synonyms) denies to it in Scrip- 
ture the special sense it bears in classical Greek of 
corrective punishment. 

t Luke xvi. 19-31. Some perhaps may object that 


132 HUMAN DESTINY. 


is mentioned.* The Devil is to be 
cast into the lake of fire. This, 
therefore, must be the “fire prepared 
for the Devil,’ spoken of in Matthew 
xxv. 41. And it is declared that the 
Devil, the beast, and the false prophet 
shall be there “tormented for ever and 
ever.” If such language can be con- 
strued to signify sudden annihilation, 
words may mean anything. This, more- 
over, is what Scripture declares will be 
“the second death.” 


this is not the jiza/ state of the lost; but this question 
need not be discussed, for the sinner is in the flames 
of Gehenna (çf. vers. 23, 24), and therefore the fire, 
whatever it means, does not imply extinction. I really 
must decline to notice the view of the passage urged 
by one of the writers cited in an earlier chapter, which 
represents Dives as “one of the elect people.” 
Rev XIX. 20; XX. FO, TA 15, XXN 


Chapter X. 


THE QUESTION RESTATED. 


Tue results recorded in preceding chap- 
ters are doubtless a surprise. What 
then is to be the general conclusion? 
It was a revolt against the dogmas of 
certain schools of theology which led 
to this inquiry: Must we at last fall 
back on the very position we thus 
abandoned? Must we be content, after 
all, to accept the horrors of medieval 
eschatology, which try the faith of 
Christians, and not only deepen but 
embitter the unbelief of sceptics? Before 
resigning ourselves to this as a last 
alternative, surely it behoves us to turn 
back once more to Scripture, and with 
care and earnestness and patience 


134 HUMAN DESTINY. 


to inquire how far the difficulties which 
here perplex us may depend upon the 
ignorance of finite minds; how far upon 
excrescences, the growth of human 
teaching, by which the truth has been 
distorted or concealed. 

What are these difficulties? That God 
should tolerate the existence of evil for 
eternity. That the brief life-sin of finite 
creatures should lead to punishment of 
infinite duration. That no matter how 
dense and hopeless the darkness in which 
that life is spent, their destiny should 
be fixed irreversibly at death. That 
the overwhelming majority of the human 
race are doomed to exist for ever in a 
scene of unutterable horror. That while 
Christ shall have His thousands, the 
Devil shall boast of millions in his train. 
That these, the creatures of a God of 
love, shall be abandoned to the outer 
darkness, the gnashing of teeth, the 
torment day and night for ever and 


THE QUESTION RESTATED. 135 


ever. That banished from love and 
light and peace to their awful prison 
home, Satan shall reign over them for 
evermore, and his foul demons- shall 
revel in their anguish. And that this 
shall. be for all without distinction. 
That the myriad millions of the heathen 
who never heard of the God of Heaven 
shall know Him first and only and for 
ever as the God of /e//, That the good 
and pure of earth, and little children 
too, in countless hosts, whose life was 
quenched ere ever they had fairly 
launched upon the sea of sin, shall be 
herded with the vilest and the worst of 
men, and trampled on by devils; in 
time to grow like them, until at last 
all trace and memory of purity and good 
shall perish, and hell itself shall lose its 
power to make the damned more hate- 
ful, more corrupt, so hideous and awful 
shall be the depths of their depravity 
and guilt. 


136 HUMAN DESTINY. 


And that this shall be for ever, FOR 
EVER. That no moving shadow on the 
dial shall relieve despair by reminding 
the lost that every day of anguish brings 
them nearer to deliverance. Just as the 
tree is said to put forth its roots in 
exact proportion to its spreading branches, 
so we could understand if punishment in 
the under-world were measured by each 
sinner’s life on earth. This would silence 
unbelief ; all would freely own its equity. 
But that the doom of the lost shall be 
eternal punishment, this is a conception 
which paralyses human thought. With 
the great majority of Christians it is the 
chief, if not the only, difficulty. 

As already stated, a single wave of 
human life comprises over fourteen hundred 
millions of mankind. But none will dream 
that even one of these shall be forgotten. 
When the judgment comes, it will not be 
only the great of earth who shall stand 
before the throne. ‘The dead, smad/ 


THE QUESTION RESTATED. 137 


and great,’ shall be there. God’s great 
judgments in this world were awful in 
the suddenness with which all without 
distinction were engulfed in a common 
doom. The hoary sinner and the help- 
less infant perished together under the 
waters of the Flood. So was it again 
when fire from heaven consumed the Cities 
of the Plain. But this was just because 
there is a judgment to come, and another 
world beyond, in which perfect justice 
can be meted out to each. The glimpses 
afforded us behind the veil which hides 
that judgment and that world are few 
and partial; but this much is absolutely 
certain, that the lost will not be sent to 
their doom unheard. Twice in Scripture 
they are represented as parleying with 
their Judge.* Each one shall be fairly 
dealt with. The record of each life shall 
be laid bare. The books shall be opened, 
and the dead shall be judged, every man 


* Matt. xxv. 44; Luke xiii. 25, 26. 


138 HUMAN DESTINY. 


according to his works.* Every -sinner 
in the countless multitude to be arraigned 
at the great assize shall hear his indict- 
ment, and be heard in his defence. How 
long then shall be allowed to each? Take 
the estimated population of the world for 
this one century in which we live: sup- 
pose that for this purpose every human 
being is allotted less than a quarter of an 
hour—a brief quarter of an hour; assume 
that the session shall go on unceasingly, 
‘without a moment’s interval, hour after 
hour, day after day, year after year, till 
all has been concluded; and the judgment 
of this small section of the human race 
will last one hundred thousand years! 
And were we to estimate the number 
of those who have lived and died during 
the sixty centuries already past, and of 
those who are still to be born upon the 
earth, we should be forced to the con- 
clusion that the duration of the “day of 


* RETENAR. 


THE QUESTION RESTATED, 139 


judgment” shall be measured by milions 
of years ! 

Need a single word be added to 
emphasise the folly of measuring the 
events of that world by the calendars of 
time? That some fallacy underlies the 
problem the very statement of it proves; 
but wherein that fallacy consists we cannot 
tell. If human reason were under obliga- 
tions to solve the enigma, the solution 
might possibly be found in the theories 
of Kant. In the whole range of meta- 
physical inquiry no more philosophical 
suggestion was ever offered than his, 
that Time is nothing more than a law of 
human thought. And though neither he 
nor any of his disciples ever dreamt of his 
system being turned to such account, may 
it not be used as the basis of an appeal to 
Christians to trust God for the explanation 
of a difficulty which is purely intellectual ?* 


* I wish to guard against misrepresentation here. 
I appeal to the Transcendental philosophy, not as 


140 HUMAN DESTINY. 


To lay stress, therefore, upon eterna: 
evil is merely to conceal the real question 
which, if faith is to depend on the absence 
of difficulties, reason is bound to give 
some account of. If the theories of 
geologists be well founded, this earth 
must have been the grave of an earlier 
creation before it became the cradle and 
home of existing life. And if there was 
death, there must also have been sin. 
Some have conjectured that Satan was 
the federal head of that earlier creation, 
and that his peculiar enmity to man was 
because this earth had once been his own 
domain. At all events the fact is clear 
that sin and death had been active in the 
universe of God before the Adamic -age. 
Whether the interval since Satan’s fall 
had been a century or a million years, 


affording the true solution of the difficulty—nothing | 
is farther from my thought—but as a protest against 
allowing faith to waver in presence of a difficulty 
which can be so easily disposed of. 


THE QUESTION RESTATED, EAT 


the moral difficulty is just the same. 
Though infinite in power and goodness, 
God permitted a fallen being to exist, 
albeit the result was the ruin of Adam 
and his world. What possible explana- 
tion can be offered of this fact, if ‘‘the 
extermination of evil” be His plan and 
purpose? It is the existence of evil which 
is the real difficulty. To accept the fact 
of Satan’s existence during all the ages 
of our world, and to hold it incredible that 
he should continue to exist when his power 
for evil shall have ceased for ever—this 
is neither faith nor philosophy, but an 
ad captandum appeal to human ignorance 
and to the awe inspired in finite minds by 
the attempt to realise eternity. 

This last remark suggests another 
point in the popular travesty of truth 
respecting the final condition of the 


’ 


lost. The “everlasting fire’ is not to 
be the Devil’s kingdom. It will be his 


prison, not his palace. Amidst so much 


142 HUMAN DESTINY. 


that is doubtful, this at least is sure. 
“At the name of Jesus every knee shall 
bow,” in heaven, earth, and hell; every 
tongue shall own Him Lord.* “Ad 
things shall be subdued unto Him.” f 
Not until “ He shall have put down all 
rule and all authority and power” will 
He deliver up the kingdom to the 
Father i Every creature im the “ani- 
verse shall be in absolute subjection to 
Almighty God. The under-world is not 
to be a scene of Satanic carnival. The 
word-pictures which describe the shrieks 
and curses of the lost of earth, as 
demons mock their anguish or heap fuel 
on their torture fires, are relieved from 
the charge of folly only by the graver 
charge of profanity. There is no spot 
in all the Queen’s dominions in which 
the reign of order is so supreme as in 
a prison. So shall it be in hell. 


* Phil, ii rop 1254 f 1 Con xy. 28, sii Ne 


THE QUESTION RESTATED, 143 


To speak of this as producing an 
alleviation of the sinners doom betrays 
the lingering influence of the error here 
condemned. Obedience will be their 
normal condition there. To speculate 
how it will be brought about is idle. It 
may be that the recognition of the per- 
fect justice and goodness of God will 
lead the lost to accept their doom.’ 
Possibly, too, the poet’s dream may yet 
be realised, that Divine love shall shine 
out so clearly, even amid the fires of 
judgment, that when the anthem rises in 
the palace-home of God, even the prison- 
house shall join in the refrain, and praise 
shall issue forth from hell. Speculations 
such as these are perfectly legitimate in 
poetry, but they should have no place in 
the sober prose of theology. 

To plead that God will still own the 
bond which binds His creatures to 
Himself is to forget that the great 
revelation of Grace implies that all rela- 


144 HUMAN DESTINY. 


tionships were broken, all claims lost, 
by the murder of the Son. To argue 
that «the resurrection of judgment is 
one part of the redeeming work of 
Christ,” and that “the judgment of the 
lost is based on a present work of the Re- 


s] 


deemer,” is to confound redemption itself 
with the place and power which Christ 
has taken in connection with redemption. 
It was not the Cross which made Him 
either Son of God or Son of Man, albeit 
it was in view of our redemption that 
He was thus revealed. Yet it is as Son 
of God that He shall recall the dead 
to life. And it is ‘*because He ase the 
Son of Man” that all judgment is com- 


mitted to Him.* 


* John v. 25—27. The writer specially referred 
to in the above paragraph seeks to establish his 
point by assuming that Scripture statements on this 
subject are marked by a contradiction (“ anti- 
thesis,” he calls it), to be accounted for by the 
creature being viewed sometimes in a personal, 
sometimes in a federal aspect. Such a theory is 


THE QUESTION RESTATED. 145 


In considering the destiny of man- 
kind, it is of immense importance to 
vindicate the Bible from the reproach 
which medieval theology has brought on 
it. But if the statements of Scripture 
must needs be coloured or explained 
away by theories which eliminate all ele- 
ment of dread from the doom of the 
impenitent, fazth is of course impossible. 
If the reader will pursue the inquiry to 
the close, he will find that those state- 


always open to suspicion: here it seems wholly base- 
less. The passages he cites to illustrate it are 
1 Cor. xv. 22, as compared with Rom. ii. 7; and 
carayi 2,5. If the exposition of x Cor. ‘xv. 
offered at p. 183 fost, be accepted, that passage 
may not be used as he suggests. And the seeming 
contradiction in Gal. vi. 2, 5, depends on the 
poverty of our translation. Burden in that passage 
represents two words in the original. Bdpos denotes 
the pressure of a weight which may be transferred ; 
goptiov the load which each must carry for him- 
self. In this world every one has his own proper 
load to bear; but some are ‘burdened, and to 
relieve such is to fulfil the law of Christ. 

I0 


146 HUMAN DESTINY. 


ments, unspeakably solemn and awful 
though they be, present no difficulty 
which a reverent and believing heart will 
refuse to leave with a God Whose justice 
and goodness and love are beyond all 
question and all doubt. 


Chapter XI. 
THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 


Tue record of the Augustinian doctrine 
of the damnation of infants is one of the 
darkest chapters in theology.* If we 
distinguish between what is doubtful 
and what is doubted, the question is 
not open to discussion. No language 
can be plainer than that in which the 
Epistle to the Romans teaches that 
Christs redemption is as far-reaching in 
its effects as Adam’s sin. It is not 
that all shall be saved through the 
Geath. of Christ, but that, in virtue of 


* The more one studies the Fathers the wider 
appears to be the gulf which separates their writings 
from the inspired Scriptures. This remark applies 
with full force to Origen, whose writings are appealed 
to so confidently in this controversy. 


148 HUMAN DESTINY. 


that death, no one shall be lost save 
by reason of personal guilt." It is 
certain, therefore, that the infant dead, 
whether of heathen or of Christian 
lands, shall be reckoned among the 
number of the redeemed. 

And where does Scripture teach that 
those who live and die in heathen 
darkness shall not hear of Christ after 
they pass away from earth? Either to 
assert or to deny that such shall find a 
“place of repentance” in ithe mne 
world is the arrogance which springs 
from ignorance; and in this sphere all 
arrogance is profane. It may be urged 
that if the sinners of the days of Noah 
have since received a gospel message 
from the Lord Himself,t all others who 


* On Rom. v. see App., p. 187 fost. 

+ x Peter ili, 19, 20. I am here assuming that 
such is the meaning of the passage, although I own 
to having serious doubts upon the point. As Dean 
Alford says, the ‘literature of the passage is almost a 


THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 149 


have been denied a revelation upon 
earth shall have mercy offered them 
beyond. On the other hand, it may 
be argued that as “the exception proves 
the rule,’ so the special mention of the 
sinners who perished in the Flood im- 
plies that their case was peculiar, if not 
unique. The fact is, the Bible was not 
written to gratify curiosity in matters 
which in no way concern us. As regards 
the destiny of those it fails to reach, 
it is absolutely silent. The fate of the 
heathen is with God.* 

= There is one passage, indeed, which 


library in itself. His own note is an admirable 
summary of that library. Dean Plumptre’s book is 
somewhat disappointing on this particular passage, 
from which it derives its name. 

* Passages such as Psalm ix. 15—29, which may 
seem an exception, do not speak of the jiza/ state at 
all, but only of God’s providential judgments. The 
“hell” of the passage is hades. ‘The wicked shall 
be turned into seol, and all the nations that forget 
God,” 


150 HUMAN DESTINY. 


unfolds with definiteness the principles 
of judgment applicable to all mankind. 
The reference, of course, is to the second 
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, 
and the apostle’s statements are of such 
importance here that it may be well 
to quote them’ fully. He speaks of 
“the righteous judgment of God, Who 
will render to every one according to 
his deeds: to them who by patient 
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory 
and honour and immortality, eter- 
nal life; but to them’ that are con- 
tentious, and do not obey the truth, 
but obey unrighteousness, indignation 
and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon 
every soul of man that doeth evil, of 
the Jew first and also of the Gentile; 
but glory, honour, and peace to every 
one that worketh good, to the Jew 
first and also to the Gentile. For 
there is no respect of persons, with 
God. For as many as have sinned 


THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 151 


— 


without law shall also perish without 
law, and as many as have sinned 
under law shall be judged by law, in 
the day when God shall judge the 
secrets of men by Jesus Christ.” 

Here are principles of universal 
application : who will deny their equity ? 
Many seem to think that salvation 
by faith sets all this aside; but 
such thoughts are wholly false. When 
appealed) to’ «by = ‘these people: csrto 
give some clear light to guide them 
in the life of well-doing, the Lord’s 
answer was explicit, “ Z7hzs zs the work 
of God, that ye believe on Him Whom 
Freer hath’ sent: * >The. standardssef 
well-doing was changed by His advent, 
but the principle was-* the. same. 
Allegiance to a banished prince may 
show itself in many ways; but once 
he appears within the realm, personal 
homage becomes the test and touch- 


* John vi. 28, 29. 


152 HUMAN DESTINY. 


stone of loyalty. So is it as between 
God and men. Some live in nature’s 
darkness: some in the blaze of gospel 
light. But whether it be merely ‘the 
candle set up within them,” or the full 
revelation of . the Son of Godj=){to 
obey the truth” is to tread the path 
of blessing. The heathen will not be 
damned for ignorance of Christ; while, 
on the other hand, in Christendom no 
amount of seeming “well-doing” will 
avail, if personal loyalty to Christ be 
wanting. The word spoken retrospect- 
ively of His life on earth shall still 
hold good when He returns to judg- 
ment: “To as many as vecezved Him, 
to them gave He the right to become 
children of God.” * 

But, it will be answered, this is evading 
the real issue, which is as to the equity, 
not of the judgment, but of the sentence. 
If everlasting torment be the penalty of 


* Jonna: 


THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 153 


sin, such must be in fact the doom of the 
vast majority of the heathen. It is idle 
to theorise upon the supposed statistics of 
the Day of Judgment, though the popular 
belief is largely based upon wilful and de- 
liberate rejection of Scripture testimony 
about coming ages of blessing upon earth.* 
But where does Scripture teach that 
everlasting torment is the penalty of sin ? 
DEATH is the penalty of sin. Instead 
of absolute equality, Scripture  indi- 
cates an infinite inequality in punishment. 


* The Bible is full of promises and prophecies of a 
time to come when God shall be known and feared 
from pole to pole. For aught we know, the popula- 
tion of the world will then be ten, or perchance a 
hundred times greater than at present. If we take 
this into account, together with the facts and possi- 
bilities of redemption noticed in the last few pages, 
is it so clear on which side the majority of mankind 
shall ultimately be found? It may be said that this 
is an appeal to our ignorance. ‘True, but the pre- 
judice I seek thus to break down is based entirely on 
our ignorance. The one is a set-off against the other: 
faith will ignore both, and leave the issue with God, 


154 HUMAN DESTINY. 


There will be the “ few stripes” and the 
“many stripes.” God “will render to 
each according to his deeds.’ Surely the 
distinction is obvious and simple between 
the general penalty of sin, which depends 
on the essential character of a God Who 
cannot tolerate evil in His presence, and 
the special kind and measure of punish- 
ment which the Righteous Judge will 
impose on each, according to the degree 
and nature of his guilt. It is of the 
Antichrist and his adherents—the enemies 
of Christ in the awful days to come—that 
the Word declares they ‘shall be tor- 
mented day and night for ever and ever.” * 

And this disposes of a difficulty which 
has been used with such success in the 
interests. of error. Sin Se penalty apes 
indeed been borne by Christ. His resur- 
rection was the public proof that every 
claim of righteousness was satisfied k 


* Rev. xiv. IT, xx. ro! On the word “torment,” 
see App., p. 225 post. 


THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 155 


and all who by faith become identified 


with Him are justified from sin. But 
the sufferings of the Sin-bearer did not 
include the consequences of rejecting 
the atonement. When, therefore, it is 
demanded whether Christ endured “ ever- 
lasting torment,” the best reply is to 
expose the latent error in the question. 
To speak even of His bearing the punzsh- 
ment of sin is to use unscriptural language; 
and the statement is untrue, if punishment 
be intended to embrace all the conse- 
quences, both providential and penal, 
which follow upon transgression. 

The attempt to eliminate all element of 
mystery from the atonement is impious 
and vain. Redemption is, in fact, the 
crowning mystery of revelation. But it 
is mainly in the imputation of sin that the 
mystery consists. It is not, as so often 
stated, “the innocent dying for the guilty,” 
for that would be immoral, and impos- 
sible with God; but the innocent passing 


Meese 


156 HUMAN DESTINY. 


into the place of the guilty, and, as 
guilty, dying to expiate the guilt im- 
puted to Him. If any one still insists 
upon the inquiry, How could sin be 
so imputed to the sinless as to make a 
vicarious death justifiable? he may seek 
_ to reason out the answer; but, as Bishop 
Butler says, “ All conjectures about it must 
be, if not evidently absurd, yet at least 
uncertain.” ‘ Nor,” he adds, “has any 
one reason to complain for want of 
further information, unless he can show 
his claim to it.”* The fact-is plain= 
and this alone concerns us—that “ He 
Who knew no sin was made stn for 
us.” 

“During all His ministry on earth, 
albeit it was spent in humiliation and re- 
proach, no hand was ever laid upon the 
Blessed One, save in importunate supplica- 
tion or in devout and loving service. But 


* Lhe Analogy, part ii, ch. v., § 6. 


THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 157 


when at times His enemies would fain 
have seized Him, a mysterious hour to 
come was spoken of, in which their hate 
should be unhindered. ‘This is your 
hour, and the power of darkness,’ He 
exclaimed, as Judas and the impious 
companions in his guilt drew round Him 
in the garden. f7zs hour He called it 
when He thought of His mission upon 
earth; their hour, when, in the fulfil- 
ment of that mission, He found Himself 
within their grasp. 

“The agonies inflicted on Him by 
men have taken hold on the mind of 
Christendom ; but beyond and above all 
these the mystery of the Passion is that 
He was forsaken and accursed of God. 
In some sense, indeed, His sufferings 
from men were but a consequence of 
this; therefore His reply to Pilate, ‘Thou 
couldest have no power at all against Me, 
except it were given thee from above.’ 
If men seized and slew Him it was 


158 HUMAN DESTINY. 


because God had delivered Him up. 
When that destined hour had struck, 
the mighty hand drew back which till 
then had shielded Him from outrage. 
His death was not the beginning, but 
the close of His sufferings; in truth, it 
was the hour of His triumph.’* 

To be “forsaken and accursed of God”. 
—this is death in its deeper spiritual sig- 
nificance. And the fact is clear, however 
it be explained, that once the Lord had 
passed into that condition, the only way of ` 


* The Coming Prince (2nd ed.) pp. 116-17. The 
passage proceeds: “ The midnight agony in Geth- 
semane was thus the great antitype of that. midnight 
scene in Egypt, when the destroying angel flashed 
through the land. And as His death was the fulfil- 
ment of His people’s deliverance, so it took place 
upon the anniversary of ‘that self-same day that the 
Lord did bring the children of Israel out of Egypt 
And attention is also called to the’ 
fact that the crucifixion was likewise the anniversary 


by their armies.’ ” 


of the promise to Abraham. So the resurrection was 
the anniversary of the crossing of the Red Sea, and 
also of the resting of the ark on Mount Ararat. 


THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 159 


escape from it was by laying down His 
life. If the penalty of sin be “natural 
death” merely, the agony of Gethsemane 
and ‘“‘Immanuel’s orphan cry” upon the 
cross can in no way be accounted for. If 
it be annihilation, then the death of Christ 
was a defeat and not a triumph, and, as 
already shown,* His resurrection was a 
fraud. Faith grasps the fact that the 
death of the Sin-bearer, in all which it 
implies, is an equivalent to the sinner’s 
doom, but how it is so is a mystery which 
reason seeks in vain to solve. 

Experience teaches us that even in this 
world the consequences of sin are disas- 
trous and abiding. And Scripture leaves 
no doubt that in the world to come sin’s 
punishment shall be real and searching. 
We know that it will entail banishment 
from God; and further we know that 
infinite love and perfect justice shall 


* See p. 94 ante. 


160 HUMAN DESTINY. 


measure the cup which each must drink. 
But beyond this we know absolutely 
nothing. The pride of intellect which 
lured our first parents to their ruin is 
abnormally developed in their posterity ; 
but man’s vain boast of knowledge beyond 
what is revealed serves only to awaken 
echoes which proclaim his folly. 

What concerns us is not to theorise 
about the penalty of szz, but to take heed 
that we escape the “sorer punishment” 
of despising grace., It were otherwise if 
Christianity gave those who reject it the 
alternative of falling back on the position 
held by all whom the revelation has never 
reached. But no such choice is ours. The 
Gospel shuts men up either to accept the 
blessings it bestows, or else to await the 
doom of which those shall be ‘thought 
worthy” who have “trodden under foot 
the Son of God.” * = To ‘cease to exists 


REDEE; 


THE QUESTION DISCUSSED. 161 


SS ee een ee 


to become as though one had not been; 
but a fate worse than this awaits the 
Christ-rejector and the apostate—‘‘ Good 
were it for that man, if he had never 


been born.” 


II 


Chapter XII. 
THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 


To the reverent and refined there is 
something far more awful in the solemn 
measured language of Holy Writ upon 
the doom of the lost, than in all the 
word-pictures framed on it by facile pens 
or fluent tongues. These serve rather to 
repel, sometimes even to disgust. The 
outer darkness, the worm that never dies, 
the fire that is not quenched, the torment 
of the burning lake—all this may be but 
figurative language; but if so, the figures 
must represent realities still more terrible. 
It is easy to create a prejudice against the 
truth by giving prominence to human 
utterances, often foolish, sometimes coarse 
and profane, while studiously keeping out 
of view the great truth of Divine love toa 


164 HUMAN DESTINY. 


lost world. But it is the same gospel 
which reveals that love which also declares 
the coming wrath.* Just in proportion, 
therefore, as redemption is depreciated, 
the guilt of rejecting mercy will be ignored. 

Man claims to be the arbiter of his 
own destiny, and “reason and conscience ” 
tell him that “finite sin” shall have a 
finite punishment. But who will dare to 
call it “finite sin” to kill the Princemes 
Life? And such is the guilt of sinners 
who reject Him—‘“ they crucify to them- 
selves the Son of God, and put Him to an 
open shame.” + To strike a fellow-man 
might be an offence, though possibly a 
trivial one. To strike a parent would be, 
morally at least, a heinous crime. But to 
strike a king would be treason, punishable 
with death. In every case the guilt and 
penalty are measured, not by the act itself, 
but by the position of the outraged person 


K Rom i. E0 TS: 
t Heb. vi. 6. 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 165 


and his relationship to the offender. So 
is it as between God and men. “ Half 
measures are impossible in view of the 
cross of Christ. The day is past when 
God could plead with men about their 
sims. The controversy now is not about 
a broken law, but a rejected Christ. If 
judgment, therefore, be our portion, it 
must be measured by God’s estimate of 
the murder of His Son.” * 

But who are they who shall be held 
guilty of this direst sin? The answer is 
with God, and not with us. If any who 
have heard the gospel can prove that 
they are guiltless, we may be assured that 
“the Righteous Judge” will accept the 
plea. But let no one dare to trade upon 
a hope of mercy in that day, while putting 
mercy from him here and now. Men 
speak as though the gospel were nothing 
but a dogma which some may fairly doubt, 
and the many fail to understand, forgetting 


T $ The Gospel and its Ministry (4th Ed.), p. 15, 


166 HUMAN DESTINY. 


that the death of Christ is a great public 
fact which must bring either blessing or 
judgment to every soul to whom the testi- 
mony comes. The question is not of assent 
to a shibboleth, but of loyalty to a person ; 
not of belief in salvation, but of devotion 
to a Saviour. But all this is lost in the 
religious scepticism of the day, which is 
eating the very heart out of Christianity. 
“The Christ of ages past 
Is now the Christ no more ; 


Altar and fire are gone, 
The Victim but a dream!” 


Hence the deep and widespread conspiracy 
that exists to make light both of the guilt 
and the punishment of sin. Self and not 
God having become the test and touch- 
stone of all things, sin is palliated and 
judgment decried. Men speak as though 
the love of God were on its trial at the 
bar of “reason and conscience,’ and as if 
the verdict must needs be deferred till the 
sinners doom shall have been declared. 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 167 


But the love of God has been once and 
for ever vindicated by the great sacrifice 
of Calvary. It is measured by the gift 
of Christ, not by the lightness of their 
doom who reject Him. ‘Jz ¢his was 
manifested the love of God toward us, 
because that God sent His only begotten 
Son into the world that we might live 
through Him.” * ‘God so loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life.” t 

Here we have reached what is at once 
the real centre of the controversy and the 
climax of the argument. The preceding 
pages are the reflex of the struggle by 
which one inquirer has escaped from the 
difficulties set forth in the opening chapter. 
Perchance the record may prove helpful 
to others. The destiny of the lost is a 
great mystery, but it is only one phase of 


* t John iv. 9. 
t John ii. 16. 


168 HUMAN DESTINY. 


the crowning mystery of Evil. There 
must be some moral necessity why evil, 
once existing, should continue to exist. 
Otherwise, the presence of the Serpent in 
Eden, and all the dismal facts of human 
history, would be inexplicable. But if the 
existence of Evil be recognised, its punish- 
ment is, in the very nature of things, 
inevitable. The real question, there- 
fore, is not primarily as to the kind and 
duration of the punishment, but whether 
Divine love and equity have been placed 
beyond the shadow of a doubt. And that 
question will be answered by each accord- 
ing to his estimate of the gospel. 

There is no question as to the Creator’s 
power to extinguish creature existence ; 
and by redemption God has won the un- 
doubted right to restore the fallen race to 
blessing. But who. can tell what moral 
hindrances may. govern the exercise of 
that power and that right? Scripture 
assumes the continued existence of the 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 169 


Adam life. The resurrection is a proof 
of it. Judgment and hell are them- 
selves an overwhelming proof of it. 
The crowning proof of it is redemption 
achieved at a cost so priceless. But 
if the scepticism of the day could be 
forced to speak out plainly, it would 
declare that God is to blame for human 
sin, and therefore redemption is merely the 
natural outcome of Divine benevolence. 
Any good man who, through his own 
default, allowed ruin to overtake others 
dependent on him, would make any sacri- 
mee on repair the evil. Is man, then, 
better than God? Will not God make 
further and unceasing efforts to restore 
the lost whom love and grace shall have 
failed to win? Or, if that be impossible, 
will He not in mercy put an end to their 
existence ? 

The only answer to all such cavils is 
the cross of Christ. Behind that cross 
there is no concealed reserve of mercy 


170 HUMAN DESTINY. 


or love. Man has lost through sin the - 
paradise of earth ; God bids him welcome 
to the paradise of heaven. The sin was 
in spite of all that God had done for man. 
The blessing is in spite of all the return 
that man has made to God. Men plead 
that because of what they are they cannot 
be what they ought to be; but redemp- 
tion is for those who are all they ought 
not to be. Grace is as free as sunlight. 
God “will have all men to be saved and 
to come to the knowledge of the truth.” 
It is “for the Devil and his angels” that 
the “everlasting fire” is prepared ; God’s 
own heaven is thrown open to the lost of 
earth. The weakest or the worst of men 
has but to choose Christ, and not sin, and 
he will find in Christ a Saviour from sin, 
and attain to blessing such as unfallen 
Adam never dreamed of. But what if 
he choose sin and reject Christ? God 
declares that the alternative to. grace | is 
wrath ; but the religious scepticism of the 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 171 


day will tell him that he may despise 
grace and yet escape wrath; or, at all 
events, that the wrath will be tempered 
and limited according to his own esti- 
mate of his guilt. 3 

The possession of a single share in a 
commercial company is regarded by an 
English judge as a sufficient reason for 
leaving the bench if that company be 
sued; and yet, in rehearsing the Day of 
Judgment, men claim to sit as assessors 
with Almighty God, and to adjudicate 
upon their own destiny. 

We conclude, then, that the proclama- 
tion of grace in the gospel is final, and 
that the destiny of all who either receive 
or reject the message is fixed in this life. 
In the Lord’s own words, “He that be- 
lieveth on Him is not condemned; but i 
he that believeth not is already con- 
demned.”* At death, therefore, the 
unbeliever passes hence to await, not his 


* John ii. 18. 


172 HUMAN DESTINY. 


trial, but his sentence. Further, we con- 
clude that in the case of all mankind 
the judgment of the great day will be 
irreversible. But whether those who have 
been denied a revelation in this world 
shall find ‘a place of repentance” in 
the intermediate state, it is not for us to 
dogmatise. 

To deny that God can give blessing to 
those whom the voice of revelation has 
never reached, is to make the value of 
redemption depend on man’s appreciation 
of it. To assert that the testimony shall 
be granted to all mankind is to ignore 
the apostle’s statement that “as many as 
have sinned without law shall also perish 
without law.” What the fate of such 
will be we cannot tell. That they will 
reap what they have sown, the Scripture 
plainly states.* And this suggests that in 
one aspect of it, “future punishment may 


* Gal. vi. 7. 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 173 


follow wickedness in the way of natural 
consequence.”* Death is the wages of 
sin. But if there were nothing more in 
future punishment than this, then, as 
already urged,t there would be no need 
whatever of a day of judgment. Once 
we pass beyond the general statements of 
Scripture, we know absolutely nothing of 
the fate of the lost. 

Of course, we can launch out in specu- 
lations. There are no idlers in a well-dis- 
ciplined gaol: in God’s great prison-house 
is idleness to reign supreme? The tread- 
mill, which in former times served only to 
grind the air, is in our day used for good 
and needful purposes: are we to suppose 
that all the energies of the lost are to be 
consumed in tasks of aimless punishment ? 
God has told us of their punishment, for 
that is all we are concerned to know; but 
nowhere has He said that it is for punish- 


* Butler, Zhe Analogy, pt. v., ch. II., $ 2. 
Tt Page 52, ante. 


174 HUMAN DESTINY. 


ment alone they shall exist. If throughout 
creation, and even in the world which the 
microscope reveals to us, every creature 
seems to have its mission, why should we 
assume it will be otherwise in hell? It 
were but folly to press the matter further, 
and theorise about the possible employ- 
ments of the lost ; but may we not suppose 
that in the infinite wisdom of God there 
are purposes to the accomplishment of 
which even they will be made to minister? 
If heaven were the fools’ paradise of our 
hymnology, the conventional hell might 
well be accepted as its counterpart. If 
the redeemed are to sit in one vast sur- 
pliced choir, to spend eternity in song, 
why should not the lost be battened down 
in some huge dungeon, with no occupation 
save to bewail for evermore their doom? 
One of the commonest artifices in this 
controversy is to seize on the popular 
conception of hell, and then to demand 
whether existence in such a condition for 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 175 


millions of ages be not incredible. Let 
any one put his heaven to the same test, 
and he will be startled at reaching a 
like conclusion. That an eternal paradise 
will be eternal happiness the believer is 
assured. But it is entirely a matter of 
faith, Reason cannot grasp it. The mind 
is utterly overwhelmed by the attempt to 
realise eternity at all. 

On this whole subject “ orthodoxy ” has 
gone beyond what Scripture warrants, and 
“heresy” ignores or denies some of its 
plainest teaching. Our choice, however, 
does not lie between orthodoxy and 
heresy, as judged by creeds and Churches, 
but between revelation on the one hand, 
and the opinions of men on the other. 
In a sphere where reason can tell us 
nothing, we are bound to keep strictly 
to the very words of Scripture, neither 
enlarging their scope nor drawing infer- 
ences from them. But in contrast with 
this, the inspired words have been used in 


176 HUMAN DESTINY. 


such a way as to produce a mental revolt 
which endangers faith. Divine love is 
boundless. Christ's redemption is of in- 
finite value. Grace is supreme; and it is 
“salvation-bringing to all men ”—such is 
its scope and tendency. But even if it 
were certain that in the under-world God 
will reveal Himself as a Saviour to those 
who fail to hear of Him thus on earth, 
this would only emphasize the truth which 
is as plain on the page of Scripture as 
words can make it, that the gospel of 
His grace is a jmad revelation to those 
it reaches. 

Man boasts of the proud but perilous 
dignity of an independent will. He used 
it in turning away from God. He may 
use it again in refusing to turn back to 
God. And what then? The gospel of 
a free pardon through the death of 
Christ is “ preached in the whole creation 
under heaven.” The amnesty has been 
proclaimed; and, because God is un- 


THE QUESTION ANSWERED. 177 


willing that any should perish, judgment 
waits. But if men despise the grace and 
reject the Saviour, the sure and inevit- 
able alternative is PERDITION. 

Strange it is that they who are most 
emphatic in asserting that God must give 
salvation to a/Z men in the next world, 
are precisely those who dismiss as fanati- 
cism the truth that He gives salvation 
here and now to those who seek Him. 

The Church of Rome denies grace alto- 
gether, and represents Divine love as 
dependent for its display on the human 
weakness of a traditional Jesus and the 
womanly tenderness of a traditional Mary. 
This conception of God has produced the 
coarse conventional hell of theology, which 
again has led to the creation of purgatory 
and masses for the dead, to alleviate the 
horrors of the system. In asserting the 
doctrine of justification by faith, the Refor- 
mation in great measure restored the lost 


truth of grace Mariolatry and purgatory 
12 


178 HUMAN DESTINY. 


disappeared with the darkness which 
produced them, but the medizval hell 
remained. Protestantism, however, when 
separated from spiritual life, is a mere 
soulless body; and while the religious 
movement of the present century has 
deepened faith in the doctrines of the 
Reformation, those who have resisted its 
influences are either turning back to 
Rome or lapsing to infidelity. On the 
one side, we see a revival of the old 
errors of intercession for the dead 
and the power of ‘“zonian fire” to 
purify the soul. On the other side, the 
great truths of Christianity are dismissed 
as narrow cant; the mystery of Divine 
love to a lost world is degraded to the 
level of good-natured benevolence to 
erring creatures ; sin is but human frailty, 
righteousness a myth, and judgment but 
the appointed means by which the lost of 
earth shall be fitted for the heaven to 
which their relationship to God entitles 


LHE QUESTION ANSWERED, 179 


them. In a shallow, and, therefore, a 
sceptical age, this is the most popular 
religion. It vaunts itself as the outcome 
of increased enlightenment; in fact it is 
but the mingled ignorance and insolence 


of unbelief. 


( 


ae ` 
ASAI 
7 D 


an 


T 


ARPE NDUN, 
— şe 


PARDAI. 


THE following are the passages of the New 
Testament principally relied on to prove the 
doctrines of universalism. The exposition here 
offered is commended to the consideration of 
the reader. 

Acts iii, 21. 

“Whom the heaven must receive until the 
times of restitution of all things, which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all His holy 
prophets since the world began.” —The word 
here rendered “restitution” * occurs nowhere 
else in the New Testament, but the kindred 
verb is used in eight passages,t two of which 
throw light on this one. The prophetic 
Scriptures abound in predictions of a coming 
period of mingled blessing and judgment upon 


* dmokatdoTacls. 
mec Slice ko, XVAl a Wise Mark 11.95) Vill, 25, 1X. 12% 
Luke vi. 10; Actsi. 6; Heb. xiii. 19. 


182 APPENDIX. 


earth, and the Old Testament closes with the 
statement that its advent will be heralded by 
the return of Elijah.* This was used by the 
Scribes to disprove the claims of Jesus to 
Messiahship, and in Matt. xvii. 10 the dis- 
ciples referred the difficulty to their Master. 
The Lord in reply expressly confirmed the 
prophecy, declaring that “Elias truly shall 
come first and restore all things.” t 

So again in Mark ix. 12, “Elias verily 
cometh first and vrestoreth all things.” St. 
Peters words, in Acts iii. 21, unmistakably 
refer to this the common hope of the people 
he was addressing,—a hope confirmed by Christ 
Himself. If, even then, Israel would but re- 
pent, God would send them the Messiah 
appointed for them, even Jesus;{ whom the 
heaven must receive until the times of restora- 
tion of all things, of which (times) God spake 
by the mouth of all His holy prophets since the 


* Mal. iy. 5. 

+ “Our Lord speaks here plainly in the future, and 
uses the very word of the prophecy (Mal. iv. 6). The 
double allusion is only the assertion that the Elias 
(in spirit and power) who foreran our Lord’s first coming 
was a partial fulfilment of the great prophecy which 
announces the real Aizas.’’—Alford, on Matt. xvii. 11. 

tł The Authorised Version fails to give the meaning of 
the original. 


APPENDIX. 183 


world began. He goes on to assert emphati- 
cally that every prophet, from Samuel onwards, 
foretold of those days, and he ends by con- 
necting with these same prophecies the promise 
to Abraham that in his Seed all the kindreds 
of the earth shall be blessed. It is as clear 
as light, therefore, that “the times of restoration 
of all things” are no other than “the times 
of refreshing” of the 19th verse, “the great 
season of joy and rest on earth, which it was 
understood the coming of Messiah in His glory 
was to bring with it.” * 

Moreover, “all the prophets” “have foretold 
of these days,’ and their voice is almost, if not 
entirely, silent, about events beyond the last 
great judgment of “the quick and dead.” We 
are forced to the conclusion, therefore, that the 
use which has been made of the apostle’s words 
is a perversion of the Scripture. It must not be 
overlooked that “the times of restoration of 
all things” will be marked by the destruction 
of the obdurate and disobedient. 


I Corinthians xv. 22. 
“For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ 
shall all be made alive.”»—Does this teach 


* Alford, 272 loco. 
+ Compare ver. 23 with what goes before. 


184 APPENDIX. 


universal blessing? The words can be read in 
two ways. Either “death” may be taken to 
mean no more than physical death, and “life” 
as implying only the resurrection; or else the 
words may be understood in their deeper 
spiritual significance. If we adopt the former 
reading, then the passage means that as death 
is the lot of every human being, so every 
human being shall be raised from the dead by 
Christ’s power. But who disputes this? It is 
the common faith of Christendom !* 

But, it will be urged, the words mean more 
than this: “life” means. salvation in the 
highest sense. Then “death” must be con- 
strued on the same principle, for the words are 
correlatives. How then shall we read the 
verse? As every human being dies, ze. shall 
be finally lost, so every human being shall 
live, ze. shall be finally saved. But these 
propositions are contradictory and absurd. We 
must either be content, therefore, to take the 
words as asserting merely the universality of 
death and resurrection, or else we must adopt 
a second possible rendering,+ and construe them 


* I pass by special questions which might be raised as 
to whether death be 27 fact the lot ofall. It certainly 
is not, as ver. 51 expressly states. 

t The passage might, no doubt, be read that just as the 


APPENDIX. 185 


thus: As in Adam all who belong to Adam 
die, so in Christ all who belong to Christ shall 
be" made alive. “That this is in fact the 
apostle’s meaning the immediate sequel proves. 
He adds, “But each in his own order; Christ, 
the firstfruits, afterwards they that are Christ’s 
(ze. who belong to Christ) at His coming.” 
That there will be beyond that “resurrection 
to life” a resurrection to judgment, we know 
from other Scriptures; but this is outside the 
scope of the apostle’s argument, and he makes 
no mention of it here. If the 22nd verse be 
bracketed with the 21st, it will be read on the 
first principle above suggested ; if with the 23rd, 
it will be pregnant with higher truth. But 
in neither case can it have the slightest bearing 
on the present controversy. 

In the passage under consideration the climax 
is reached in the statement of the 28th verse 
that the great end of the “ mediatorial king- 
dom” is “that God may be allin all.” These 
words are held to imply universal restoration. 


sin of Adam, if left to work out its results unhindered, 
would lead to the perdition of all men, so, on the same 
principle, the death of Christ would lead to their salva- 
tion. But this would not advance the argument the 
least, and it is not pretended that it is the meaning of 
the passage, 


186 APPENDIX. 


But this result is declared to be “when He shall 
have put down all rule, and all authority, and 
power.” It is not attained “till He hath put all 
enemies under His feet,” till “all things shall be 
subdued unto Him”; and this is not the sort of 
language in which Scripture speaks of winning 
back the lost to God. Moreover, the absolute 
and acknowleged supremacy of the Almighty is 
all that is involved in the words “ that God may 
be all in all.” 

The gloss “all things zz all men” betrays 
either dishonesty or levity in handling Scripture. 
The supremacy is universal, and if it be brought 
about by reconciliation, the blessing must be 
shared by all the hosts of darkness. 


Philippians ii. 10. 
This last remark applies with equal force to ~ 
the statement of the Divine purpose “that at 
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of 
things in heaven, and things on earth, and things 
under the earth.” Not merely angels and saints 
and men on earth shall own Him Lord, but also 
the dwellers in the under-world. But till it has 
been proved that this acknowledgment shall be 
obtained from all by reconciliation, it must not 
be assumed that it will not be,in the case of 
some, by judgment, 


APPENDIX. 187 


Revelation v.13; xxi. 4,53 xxii. 3. 

With this statement in Philippians the vision 
of Rev. v. 13 appears to be connected. But 
this perhaps has been assumed too easily. The 
language seerns to be figurative, for it is not in- 
telligent beings only, but all animated creation, 
that join-in the anthem of praise. No argument 
can fairly be based on it.* 

The use made in this controversy of the 
description of the blessedness of the redeemed 
in the new creation must excite surprise in the 
mind of any one who studies the context. For 
the redeemed there is to be no more curse or 
death or sorrow, “ but” (in awful contrast with 
this) “the fearful and unbelieving. . . shall have 
theiy part in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone.” 

Romans v. 

It is idle to ignore the fact that theologians 
widely differ in their exegesis of the 5th chapter 
of Romans. But all that is essential here is to 
determine whether the meaning put upon the 
passage by the advocates of universalism be the 


*Is it certain that úrokáræ rijs yns is equivalent to the 
karayOdvios of Phil. ii. 10 ? The latter is a classic term for 
hades; the former is used by the LXX. in Exod. xx. 4 
(“the water under the earth”). Why should hades 
_ be brought in between the earth and the sea ? 


188 APPENDIX. 


true interpretation of it. The difficulty of the 
passage is centred in the statement of the 18th 
verse, that “as through one trespass [the judg- 
ment came] unto all men to condemnation; even 
so through one act of righteousness [the free gift 
came] unto all men to justification of life.”* 

Verses 13 to 17 are parenthetical, and in the 
apostle’s argument the words just quoted follow 
upon the statement of the 12th verse, that, by 
reason of Adam’s sin, “death passed upon all 
men.” Therefore, he concludes, as the result of 
that one trespass was unto all men to condem- 
nation, even so the result of Christ’s one act of 
righteousnesst was unto all men to justification. 
But surely the second of these correlative clauses 
is governed by the first. Men have “many 
trespasses,” as the 16th verse declares, and the 
yapiopa is “unto justification” from them all. 
But here he is speaking only of the “one tres- 
pass,” and establishing that the death of Christ 
has cancelled the effects of Adam’s sin. 

No one will deny that this is a fair and 
natural rendering of the passage ; and this being 
so, I might pass on, leaving it to those who insist 


* The words in square brackets are not expressed in 
the original. 

+ “The death of Christ viewed as the acme of His 
obedience.” See Alford on Phil. ii. 8. 


APPENDIX. 189 


upon giving it a wider meaning to prove the 
correctness of their view. But let us pursue the 
matter further. As the condemnation included 
“all men,” so also does the justification which 
tends to life. That the saved will be freed from 
the guilt of original sin isa mere truism. The 
apostles statement is that the benefit is for az. 
Christ has won for mankind immunity from 
judgment for Adam’s sin. So far as regards 
that sin every human being is “ justified.’ 

But we are told we must not thus limit it. 
What then is the alternative? That just as that 
“ one trespass ” brought condemnation upon 
every human being, even so the death of Christ 
brought him justification, not from Adam’s sin 
only, but from a@// sin. There is no question 
here of the penitent believer’s blessing, but of 
the condition of man as man in virtue of the 
death of Christ. “ All men,” penitent and im- 
penitent alike, are “justified from all things.” 
All sins are thus wiped out for ever; and yet 
these same teachers tell us that for these very 


* Tf any should shrink from the use of the word “ justi- 
fication’’ in respect of any but the saved, will they con- 
sider what other word would convey the truth involved ? 
Forgiveness would be a faulty substitute, and clearly 
inaccurate, and with God immunity from punishment 
assumes the absence of guilt, 


190 APPENDIX. 


sins the sinner shall be punished “in æonian fire 
1 1 
beyond the grave ” ! 


Ephesians i. 10. 

The Epistle to the Ephesians announces the 
purpose of God “that in the dispensation of 
the fulness of times He might gather together 
in one all things in Christ, the things in 
the heavens and the things on the earth.” 
The words “all things” (rà mdvta) shall be 
further considered under the next passage 
cited. Suffice it here to admit that they are 
wide enough to include the universe, and if 
explanatory words of as wide signification be 
added, no other meaning can fairly be put 
on them. But is it clear that the; -words 
here added are not words of limitation? In 
the passage already noticed in Philippians,* 
where the supremacy of Christ is in question, 
the apostle includes, with heaven and earth, 
the under-world,; and that “the heavens” 
include the abode of fallen angels and lost 
men is a startling assumption which cannot 
be conceded. Moreover, it is admitted by all 
that the lost will be sent to their punish- 
ment after the last great judgment. Therefore 


* See p. 186 azzze. 


APPENDIX. IQI 


if they are to be included in the “ gathering 
together,” “ the economy of the fulness of times ” 
must be explained on a principle unknown to 
theologians. Further, the rendering “gather 
together in one” gives to the word here 
used a colour which scarcely belongs to it. 
It occurs once again—viz., in Rom. xiii. 9., 
where the apostle says the law is briefly 
comprehended in the one word which enjoins 
love. The word means to head up or sum 
Wpenas) ez; gr. at the close of .a speech iTe 
universe shall yet be headed up in Christ. 
He shall regain the place from which sin 
has sought to dethrone Him. But whether 
this shall be accomplished by the restoration 
of all, or by the subjection of all, we must 
turn to other scriptures to decide. 


Colossians i, 20. 

The most important passage still remains. 
To the Colossians St. Paul writes thus: “For 
in Him” (Christ) “God was pleased that the 
whole fulness should dwell, and by Him to 
reconcile again all things to Him, having 
made peace by means of the blood of His 
cross—through Him—whether the things on the 
earth or the things in the heavens.” (I have 
followed the translation given in Alford’s Com- 


192 APPENDIX. 


mentary.) Here at last we have a statement 
which, it ought to be admitted, seems to teach 
universal restoration. To attempt a critical 
analysis of the somewhat conflicting views of 
commentators on the passage would involve 
too serious a digression. But in accordance 
with the scheme of my argument, the fol- 
lowing suggestions are offered for the con- 
sideration of the thoughtful. 

First, then, the remark already made on 
the words “all things” applies here with 
increased force. It cannot be questioned that 
in the 16th verse these words have no 
limitation whatever; for in speaking of 
creation, “the heavens and the earth” include 
the universe in every part and to its utmost 
limits. But sin has produced an apostasy 
from “the heavens ‘and the earth,” and was 
already noticed, the apostle when asserting 
Christs supremacy enumerates the heavens, 
the earth, and the wnder-world, Further; 
there is sometimes a good deal of theology 
in- the use: of the Greek article, “and sits 
presence here indicates that the prominent 
thought in the passage is not every part of the 
universe, but the universe regarded as a whole. 
May not the lapsed portion of it be ignored 


APPENDIX. 193 


here, as it is ignored in the closing words 
of the first chapter of the Bible, where every- 
thing* that God had made was declared to 
be very good, albeit the Serpent and his 
angels -had already marred the unity of 
creation ? 

But it is the word “reconcile” upon which 
attention must be centred in considering this 
passage. It is used only by St. Paul, and the 
passages in which it occurs are so few and so 
important that it will be well to quote them 
here. 

Rom. v. 10.—“ For if, when we were enemies, 
we were veconciledt to God by the death of His 
Son, much more, being reconciled,* we shall be 
saved by His life.” 

Rom. v. 11.—“ Christ, by whom we have now 
received the atonement.” 1 

Rom. xi. 15.—“ If the casting away of them” 
(Israel) “be the reconciling $} of the world.” 

1 Cor, vii. 11.—“ Let her . . be veconciled+ to her 
husband.” 

2 Cor. v. 18-20.—“ All things are of God, Who 
hath reconciledt us to Himself by Jesus Christ, and 
hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation, t 


* rà mávra: Gen. i. 31 (LXX). 
+ xata\\dooo. f karad\ayn. 


=) 


194 APE RINDIX, 


to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling* the 
world unto Himself, .. . and hath committed 
unto us the word of reconciliation. t .. We pray 
in Christ’s stead be ye reconciled to God.” 

Eph. ii. 16.—“‘ That He might reconcile t both” 
(Jew and Gentile) “ unto God in one body by the 
cross.” 

Col. i. 20, 21.—“ Having made peace through 
the blood of His cross, by Him zo reconcile} all 
things unto Himself: by Him, whether they be 
things on earth or things in heaven. And you 
that were sometimes alienated and enemies in 
your mind by wicked works, yet now ath He 
reconciled t in the body of His flesh through 
death.” 

This word translated “ reconcile” means, first, 
to change one thing for another ; and, secondly, 
as here, to change a person from enmity to friend- 
ship. The question at once suggests itself, On 
which side is the change? Is it in God’s attitude 
towards the creature, or in the creature’s attitude 
towards God? Does the creature receive God 
into his favour, or is it God Who receives the 
creature? The mere statement of the question 
seems to prejudge the answer. In a case like 


* kaTadAdooo. T Karad\ayn. 
| arokarad\Xdrro. 


APPENDIX. 195 


this there is no safer clue to the meaning of any 
word in the New Testament than its use in the 
Septuagint. Dean Alford quotes the following 
as the places where it occurs :— 

Jer. xxxi. (xlviii.) 39 (a mistranslation). 

2 Macc. i. 5, “God... hear your prayers and 
be reconciled unto you;” vii. 33, “ Though the 
living Lord be angry with us... yet shall He 
be reconciled unto His servants” ; viii. 29, “ They 
besought the merciful Lord zo be reconciled unto 
His servants for ever.” 

As regards the noun (cataddayn), Archbishop 
Trench* says it only occurs twice in the Septua- 

gint, and in one of these passages it means simply 
exchange. In the other passage, 2 Macc. v. 20, 
“it is employed in the New Testament sense.” 
There the writer says, speaking of the Temple, 
«“ As it was forsaken in the wrath of the Almighty, 
so again, on the reconciliation of the great Lord, 
it was set up with all glory.” Dr. Trench goes 
on to say that the Christian reconciliation is, 
first, “a reconciliation effected once for all for 
us by Christ upon His cross;” though it is, 
“secondly and subordinately,” “the daily depo- 
sition under the operation of the Holy Spirit of 
the enmity of the old man toward God.” And 


* Synonyms (second series). 


196 APPENDIX. 


the writer adds, “ All attempt to make this, the 
secondary meaning of the word, to be the prim- 
ary, rests not on an unprejudiced exegesis, but on 
a foregone determination to get rid of the reality 
of God’s anger against sin.” These are weighty 
words, of special moment here. 

In all these passages from the Septuagint 
reconciliation is from God to man; and if with 
the light they give we turn back to the scriptures 
above set forth, this same conclusion will be 
established. “We were reconciled to God by 
the death of His Son.” On conversion the 
sinner did not produce, he only “received the 
reconciliation.” Is it not clear as light that it 
is this accomplished reconciliation which has 
dethroned sin and ushered in the reign of 
grace? 

The next passage is still more unmistakable. 
The setting aside of Israel was “the reconcilia- 
tion of the world.”* When Israel rejected 
Messiah, God set the nation aside and 
turned toward the world. Again, “God 
was in Christ reconciling the world to 
Himself.” “It is not a present work, but a 


* The A.V., in translating the word by a verb, 


suggests a gradual reconciling; but this is mis- 
leading. 


APPENDIX. 197 


work past and finished. By that death we who 
were enemies were reconciled. The appeal of the 
Gospel is now that men would receive the recon- 
ciliation. =~ Be reconciled to God’ is not an‘ 
entreaty to the sinner to forgive his God, but an 
appeal to him to come within the reconciliation 
God has wrought.”* _ 

All this leads unmistakably to the conclusion 
that “the reconciliation of all things” is not a 
hope to be fulfilled in the coming eternity, but a 
fact accomplished in the death of Christ. It is 
impossible that the way of life ever can become 
more free than that death has made it; and if 
men refuse the proffered mercy, if they reject the 
reconciliation, what alternative can there be but 
wrath ? 

Fohn i, 29. 

“Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the world.”—The only question 
we have to consider here is whether the record 
of this utterance of the Baptist is to be taken 
as a doctrinal statement proving universal ex- 
piation. It is unnecessary, therefore, to discuss 
the views of rival commentators upon the text, 
especially as, apart from controversy, no one 
probably would question its reference to Isaiah 


* The Gospel and ws Ministry, p. 131. 


I 98 APPENDIX. 


liii. 6, 7, which again contains an allusion to the 
“scape goat” of Lev. xvi. 21, 22. It is as though 
the Baptist had exclaimed, “Behold Him Who 
is the fulfilment of the 53rd chapter of Isaiah.” 
It was a testimony to the Messiahship of Jesus ; 
and it is unwarrantable to read it as though 
it were designed to settle in advance the con- 
troversy between the Calvinist and the Uni- 
versalist. The one, no doubt, is bound to 
reconcile the words with his narrow views of 
redemption, and the other must account for 
the fact of judgment to come, consistently with 
universal expiation. But they who refuse to take 
either side in that controversy will be content to 
mark that while the work of Christ has a relation 
to the world,* it has not brought the world 
deliverance from judgment. The question here 
involved is not the duration of future punish- 
ment, but whether future punishment is possible 
aval, 
I Fohn ii. 2. 

“And He is the propitiation for our sins, and 

not for ours only, but also for [the sins of] the 


* Seep: AS CL 

+ Having learned to trust the absolute accuracy of 
Scripture, I have no doubt there is a designed distinction 
between ‘‘the szz of the world” and ‘‘the szzs of the 
world.” Butas I do not pretend to write a commentary 


APPENDIX. 199 


whole world.’—The apparent difficulty of this 
passage depends in part on carelessness in reading 
it, and in part upon ignoring the teaching of the 
type on which such statements in the New 
Testament are based. This word iracpos 
occurs again in I John iv. 10, and nowhere 
else in the New Testament. Dean Alford refers 
to the following passages where it is used in 
the Septuagint—viz. Num. v. 8, Psalm cxxix. 4, 
and Ezek. xliv. 27. It expresses not what 
Christ accomplished through His death on 
the cross, but what He zs in virtue of that 
death. The former is cataddaryy (see p. 195 ante) 
the latter is (ANacuds. The kindred word iña- 
aTnptov also occurs twice—viz., Rom. iii. 25 (fro- 
pitiation), and Heb. ix. 5 (mercy seat); and the 
verb iAdoxowat is likewise used in two passages 
—Luke xviii. 13 (de merciful), and Heb. ii. 17, 
(to make reconciliation for). Grace is reigning. 
But if the grant of pardon were compulsory 
with God, or if it were impossible, grace would 
be in bondage. Because Christ is the propi- 
tiation for the whole world, God can have mercy 


on these passages, the above exposition is carried no 
further than the subject requires. Let it not be for- 
gotten that they who deny the verbal inspiration of 
Scripture are merely quibbling when they rely on any 
such statement as the Baptist’s to prove anything. 


200 APPENDIX. 


upon whom He will; but to assert that His 
death renders judgment and punishment for 
sin unrighteous and impossible, is a wanton 
denial of Scripture.~ And if, in fact, there be, 
| “wrath to come,” the duration of that wrath ) 
may be infinite as far as this passage is con- | 
cerned, j 


1 Timothy ii. 4, 63 iv. 10. 

God “will have all men to be saved.” Christ 
“eave Himself a ransom for all.” God “is the 
Saviour of all men, specially of those that 
believe.” 

The exposition of previous passages renders 
it almost unnecessary to say anything about 
these. Judgment and hell are facts which all 
admit. Whatever these verses mean, therefore, 
they are consistent with the perdition of the - 
ungodly. If Christ were not a ransom for al, 
there would be those on earth whom God could 
not save. Grace, therefore, would be in chains, 
and not enthroned. This word ransom (ayvti- 
Avtpov) occurs here only. The kindred word 
AUTpov is used in Matt. xx. 28 and Mark x. 45. 

The 4th verse, as it reads in the English, 
may mean either that God intends to save all 
men, or else that He is willing that all should 
be saved. There is no such ambiguity in the 


APPENDIX. 201 


Greek. The statement is akin to that of 2 Peter 
ili, 9, “The Lord is ... not willing that any 
should perish, but that all should come to 
repentance.” God has revealed Himself as 
“the Saviour of all men.” But if He be zx the 
same sense the Saviour of all, what possible 
meaning can there be in the words of limitation, 
“specially of those that believe.” As it has 
been well put, As far as salvation stands in 
Him, He is the Saviour of all men; but it is 
only in those who believe that the salvation 
becomes actual. 


Matthew v. 26. 


“Thou shalt by no means come out thence 
till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.” —As 
Dean Alford remarks, “These words, which 
in the earthly example imply future liberation, 
because an earthly debt can be paid in most 
cases, so in the spiritual counterpart amount 
to a negation of it, because the debt can never 
be discharged.” Indeed, the use of this text 
in support of universalism only betokens the 
weakness of the cause; for imprisonment for 
debt is the basis of the parable, and this neces- 
sarily implies discharge when the debt is paid. 
The only possible way in which the idea of 
discharge on payment could be negatived 


202 G APPENDIX. 


would be by fixing the debt at a sum entirely 
beyond the power of any man to pay. And 
this is precisely what the Lord has done in the 
kindred passage, Matt. xviii. 24. There, again, 
the debtor was committed “till he should pay 
all that was due”; but the sum due was so 
enormous that payment was impossible. If 
the 10,000 talents were of go/d, the amount was 
fabulous. But even if of silver, the mention 
of such an amount would have impressed, and 
was clearly intended to impress, the hearers with 
the idea of hopeless ruin. It was the sum at 
which Haman reckoned the revenue derivable 
from the destruction of the entire Jewish people 
(Esther iii. 9). 
FOU Wis EZ exten, 

“God sent not His Son into the world to 
condemn the world, but that the world through 
Him might be saved.’—This may express 
either the desire that all may be saved, or 
the intention that all shall be saved. Does 
the context leave it doubtful which is meant ? 
The preceding verse expressly limits the actual 
blessing to the believer; and the verse which 
follows declares in the plainest terms not 
merely that the rejecter of Christ shall be 
condemned—which is the antithesis of being 


APPENDIX. 203 


saved,—but that “he is condemned already.” 
And the chapter closes with the words, “He 
that believeth not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him.” The 
use made of the passage, therefore, to prove 
universalism can only avail to suggest the 
sad inquiry whether any honesty is to be 
looked for in religious controversy. * 

The last passage which claims attention is 
the record of words spoken by the Blessed 
Lord shortly before His crucifixion, “And I, 
if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw 
all unto Me.” “ This He said” (the univer- 
salist declares) “signifying that all men are 
ultimately to be saved.” “This He said” (the 
inspired evangelist adds) “ signifying what death 
He should die.” The statement, in fact, has 
no bearing on the controversy. In the days 
of His humiliation the Lord declared that 
no one could come to Him ‘unless drawn 
by the Father Who had sent Him: in view 
of His cross He announced the time was 
coming when He would draw all to Himself. 
But the question before us now is the future 


* The above remarks apply also to John xii. 47, 
«T came not to judge the world, but to save the 


world.’’ 


204 APPENDIX. 


of those who resist the influence; and on 
this the testimony of Scripture is given in 
no doubtful terms. 


CONCLUSION. 


THE list of texts given by the author first 
quoted in these pages is swelled by several from 
the Old Testament. Most of these fall within 
the general remarks made at pp. 41—43 supra, 
the exceptions being passages which the reader 
will study in vain to discover how they bear 
upon the question at all.* Indeed, this writer’s 
appeal to Scripture is an enigma, consider- 
ing that he distinctly repudiates belief in uni- 
versalism. 

There are many other passages, of course, 
freely used by universalists, which have not been 
noticed here. Romans xi. 26 is an example. 
“ All Israel shall be saved.” This means either 
that every Israelite, from Patriarchal times to 
the end of the world, will ultimately be saved, 
or else that in days to come Israel as a nation 
shall be saved. Can any one doubt which is 


* The following is the list:—Gen. iii. 15, xii. 3; 
Psalm, ciii. 9, cxxxix. 8; Lam. iii. 31-3; Isa. lvii. 16, 
xlv. 21, xlix. 9, lin, 11; Hos. vil 1, xiv. 4;¢Micah 
vii. 18, 19. 


APPENDIX. 205 


the true interpretation? In the context it is 
_ expressly stated that in the Divine intention 
Israel does not embrace every Israelite (ix. 6) ; 
and this same apostle’s testimony to the Jews 
included a warning that perdition was the doom 
of despisers (Acts xiii. 41). 

As a typical instance of passages which are 
not quoted by writers of this school may be cited 
Luke xiii. 23-8. “Said one unto Him, Lord, 
are there few that be saved? And He said unto 
them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for 
many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in and 
shall not be able.” When will that be? He 
goes on to explain that the day is coming when 
the door which now stands open shall be closed, 
and then the sinner will knock at it in vain. At 
the very epoch when, these teachers tell us, the 
door will be flung open for a//, the Lord Himself 
declares it will be closed even against those who 
seek an entrance. 


PARESI 


THE author quoted in the second chapter of this 
book has asserted in an outburst of passionate 
rhetoric that the words used in our Authorised 
Version of the New Testament to express endless 
duration are “simply mistranslations,’ which 
“ought not to stand any longer in our English 
Bibles.” Such statements are made so often 
and so boldly, and they are so calculated to 
mislead “the unlearned and unstable,” that it 
may be well to give them a more definite reply 
than has been already offered in these pages. 
Their only foundation is in the transparent 
fallacy that the meaning of a word is governed 
solely by etymology. They who take this ground 
would doubtless resent being called “idiots,” 
and yet by their own test the word means merely 
a person without official position, and it is thus 
used in our English classics. Neither would they 
like to hear their sons described as “knaves,” 
albeit the term means etymologically no more 
than a “lad.” To seek out the derivation of a 
word is always interesting and generally helpful, 


208 APPENDIX. 


but the meaning of a word depends entirely on 
its use. 

Here then is a simple test by which the 
present controversy can be solved. My pur- 
pose is not to enter on a lengthened dissertation 
on this subject, nor yet to appeal to the scholar- 
ship of Christendom to refute the dictum I have 
quoted, but simply to lay before the reader a 
list of the passages in question, and, subject to a 
very few remarks, to leave him to decide the 
matter for himself.* Any person of common 
intelligence is competent to undertake the task, 
and the immense importance of the issue makes 
it a duty to do so. 

The question, remember, is not at all, as is so 
often stated, whether the words mean necessarily 
and always infinite duration, but whether as 
used in Scripture they usually bear that meaning. 
Even our own word “everlasting” is at times 
applied to the hills of earth, and even to 
perennial flowers; and so in every language 
such words are used sometimes in a wide and 
sometimes in a restricted sense, and that, too, 
without any regard to their derivation. 


* In the following ‘‘ concordance’’ the words used in 
the Authorised Version to represent the Greek words 
specified are printed in italics. 


APPENDIX. 209 


The word aiwwos occurs seventy-one times 
in the New Testament, and, excepting in only 
four passages, it is invariably rendered by “ ever- 
lasting” or “eternal.” To deal with the four 
exceptional passages first: it is rendered “ for 
ever” in Philemon 15; and in Romans xvi. 25, 
2 Timothy i. 9, and Titus i. 2, it is used in its 
primary sense, and by the paraphrase used by 
the translators this is admirably conveyed to 
the English reader. The words are literally 
“since, or before, æonian times”; and the trans- 
lation is “since, or before, the world began.” 
Probably no other rendering could convey as 
accurately the sense of the original. In these 
three passages the revisers render it “ eternal ” ; 
which is intolerable pedantry if by “eternal” they 
mean limited in duration; or obvious error if 
they use the word in its proper sense. 

Of the sixty-seven remaining instances where 
the word occurs it is used forty-four times of 
the life of the saved. It is also used of God, 
of the glory, of the kingdom, of salvation, of 
redemption, and of the gospel. In all these 
passages it is rendered by “everlasting” or 
“ eternal,” and the ony question here is, whether 
the translators erred in regarding these words, as 
in fact they did,assynonyms. Upon this it may 
be remarked without offence that the question 

14 


210 APPENDIX. 


is one, not of theology, but of philology, and here 
the authority of the translators stands far higher 
than that of their “revisers” and critics. All 
are agreed that “eternal” is a correct rendering 
in all these passages, and the Authorised Version 
is itself a sufficient authority for the assertion 
that the words “ eternal” and “everlasting” may 
be used interchangeably. 

But the author above quoted tells us that 
aiwvios “is in its second sense something 
spiritual, something above and beyond time.” 
Mark what this involves. It is admitted that 
in Scripture the word is generally used in its 
secondary sense. Therefore the things of which 
it is predicated are “above and beyond time.” 
But the mind is by transcendental law incapable 
of conceiving any existence apart from duration 
in time. The only possible conception, therefore, 
of “something above and.beyond time” is that 
of something which never had a beginning and 
never will have an end: in other words, of 
endless existence both in the past and in the 
future. We conclude then that with these 
teachers, “ eternal” means, not less, but a great 
deal more than we usually understand by “ever- 
lasting.” For instance, both the Adam life and 
the Christ life are “everlasting,” for they shall 
never cease to exist; but the Christ life is not 


APPENDIX. 2AN 


only everlasting, but “eternal,” for it never began 
to exist. It was with the Father; it has been 
manifested to men; and they who believe in 
Christ now possess it. 
The following are the passages where aiwvios 
is used, omitting the four texts already men- 
tioned, and the forty-four in which it is applied 
to fife. Two are specially noteworthy. In 
Matthew xxv. 46 the word is used in the same 
sentence of the punishment of the lost, and the 
life of the saved; and in 2 Corinthians iv. 18 it 
is used in contrast with “temporal,’”—a sufficient 
answer to those who tell us that “temporal” is 
its essential meaning. 


Matt. xviii. 8. To be cast into everlasting fire. 
», xxv. 41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire. 
Fe xxy. 46. Go away into everlasting punishment. 
Mark iii. 29. In danger of efernal damnation. 
Luke xvi. g. Receive you into everlasting habi- 


tations. 
Rom. xvi. 26. The commandment of the everlasting 
God. 
2 Cor. iv. 17. Exceeding and efernal weight of glory. 
eA iv. 18. The things which are not seen are 
eternal, 
re v. 1. House not made with hands eternal 


in the heavens. 
2 Thess. i. g. Punished with everlasting destruction. 
af ii. 16. Hath given us everlasting consolation. 
1 Tim. vi. 16. To Whom be honour and power ever- 
lasting. 


212 APPENDIX. 


2Tim. ii. 10. In Christ Jesus with e¢erzaZ glory. 

Heb. v. g. The author of e¢erza/ salvation. 

vi. 2. And of eternal judgment. 

ix. 12. Having obtained ezernal redemption. 

ix. 14. Who through the efernad Spirit offered 
Himself. 

ix. 15. The promise of e¢ernad inheritance. 

ae xiii. 20. Blood of the everlasting covenant. 

Peter v. 10. Called us unto his eferzaZ glory. 

2 Peter i. 11. The everlasting kingdom of our Lord. 

Jude 7. Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. 

Rev. xiv. 6. Having the everlasting gospel. 


| 


The meaning of aiwv has been discussed at 
pp. 23—25 ante. It is unnecessary to set out all 
the passages where it occurs, but the following 
list includes all the passages where it is used 
in the three several phrases which in the New 
Testament ordinarily express endless future 
duration. That such is unmistakably the 
meaning of these phrases the reader can judge 
for himself. To urge that the first of these 
expressions cannot really mean “for ever,” 
because the other and stronger expressions can 
mean no more, is to trade both upon popular 
ignorance of the science of words, and upon an 
untenable theory of inspiration.* Moreover, the 
argument may be turned against those who use 
it, for it only confirms the obvious conclusion 


* Compare, ex. gr., Rev. xiv. 11 with xix. 3 and xx. 10, 


APPENDIX. 213 


that the last and strongest of these phrases 
must mean all time to come. And it will be 
noticed that this same phrase is used both of 
the life of God and of the existence of the lost. 


MASI 
Mark ii: 
”? Al 
Luke i 
John iv 
x Vi. 
i vi 
A viii 
S viii 
r viii 
” X. 
5 Zi. 
RA xil 
y xiii. 
a6 Xiv. 
WECO Vill. 
eC OrmeeixX 


\ A 
ceis TOV alova. 


. Grow on thee henceforward for ever. 
. Against the Holy Ghost hath never 


forgiveness (lit. not for ever). 


. No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for 


ever. 


. To Abraham, and to his seed for ever. 
. Whosoever drinketh shall never thirst 


(lit. not for ever). 


. If any man eat of this bread, he shall 


live for ever. 


. Eateth of this bread shall live for ever. 
. The servant abideth not in the house for 


ever, (but) the Son abideth for ever. 


. If a man keep My saying, he shall 


never see death (lit. not for ever). 


. Keep My saying, he shall never taste of 


death (lit. not for ever). 


. They shall never perish (lit. not for 


ever). 


. Whosoever liveth and believeth in Me 


shall never die (lit. not for ever). 


. That Christ abideth for ever. 
. Thou shalt never wash my feet (lit. not 


Jor ever). 


. He may abide with you for ever. 
. I will eat no flesh whzle the world 


standeth (lit. not for ever). 


. His righteousness remaineth for ever. 


bo 


Dm WN Oo 


8. 


6. 
53 AQ: 
. Thou art a priest for ever. 
. Thou art a priest for ever. 
. This (man) because he continueth ever. 


. Son, who is consecrated for evermore. 
. The word of God which liveth and 


Go m 
(SS) 


Ww n Ww 
COHN 


bo 
on 


p} 
ELS 


APPENDIX. 


Thy throne, O God, is for ever and 
ever (eis Tov aiéva Tov aidvos). 

Thou art a priest for ever. 

Made an high priest for ever. 


abideth for ever. 


. The word of the Lord endureth for ever. 
. Doeth the will of God abideth for ever. 
. Shall be with us for ever. 

. The blackness of darkness for ever. 


cis TOUS alavas. 


. The power and the glory for ever. 
. Over the house of Jacob for ever, and... 


The Creator, who is blessed for ever. 
Who is over all, God blessed for ever. 
To whom be glory for ever. 


. Be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. 
. Christ, which is blessed for evermore. 


Yesterday, and to-day, and for ever. 


. Dominion and power both now and 


ever (eis mávras Tovs aidvas). 


Tovs ALVAS TOV alwvav. 


. To whom be glory for ever and ever. 
. Throughout all ages, world without 


end (ras yeveds Tod aldvos Tov ai@ver). 


. Our Father be glory for ever and ever. 
. Be honour and glory for ever and ever. 
. To whom be glory for ever and ever. 
. To whom be glory for ever and ever. 


APPENDIX. 215 


. Praise and dominion for ever and ever. 
. Glory and dominion for ever and ever. 
. Glory and dominion for ever and ever. 


. Behold, I am alive for evermore. 


. Who liveth for ever and ever. 
. Worship Him that liveth for ever and 
ever. 


. Unto the Lamb for ever and ever. 
. Worshipped Him that liveth for ever 


and ever. 

. Unto our God for ever and ever. 

. Sware by Him that liveth for ever and 
ever. 

. He shall reign for ever and ever. 

. Their torment ascendeth up Jor ever 
and ever (eis aidvas aiwver). 


. God, Who liveth for ever and ever. 


. Her smoke rose up for ever and ever. 

. Tormented day and night for ever and 
ever. 

. They shall reign for ever and ever. 


The following are the passages where the 
words are used which are rendered immortality 
or zmmortal in the Authorised Version :— 


TC or. 


>? 


t Tim. 


Rom. 


TaiGor, 


XV. 


7. 


42 


àlÎavacía (athanasia). 


. 53. This mortal must put on immortality. 
xv. 54. Shall have put on zmmortality. 
. 16. (God) Who only hath z#mortality. 


apGapoia (aphtharsia). 
Seek for glory and honour and zamor- 
tality. 


. It is raised in zxcorruption. 


APPENDIX. 


2 Tim. 


Titus 


Rom. 

it COn 
a) 

i Tim. 

1 Peter 
» 


2A. 


XV. 


il. 


ill. 


50. 


V. 53. 


TSA: 
524. 


- IO. 


7- 


123: 
25; 
Vo SA 
ais 


4. 


T23: 


4. 


Neither doth corruption inherit zzcor- 
ruption. 

This corruptible must put on zzcor- 
ruption. 

Shall have put on zzcorrupiion. 

That love our Lord Jesus Christ in 
Sincerity. 

Hath brought life and zmmortality to 
light. 

Uncorruptness, gravity, szcerzty. 


apOaptos (aphthartos). 


The glory of the zzcorruptible God. 
But we an zzcorrwuptrble (crown). 

The dead shall be raised zxcorruptible. 
Unto the King eternal, zvzmortal. 

To an inheritance zzcorruptible. 

Born again .. . of zzcorrupiible (seed). 
In that which is not corruptible. 


The following are the passages in which the 
several words are used which are sometimes 
rendered fell in the Authorised Version, or 
which relate to the abode of the lost :— 


Matt. 


7) 


Luke 


” 


Acts 


2? 


FI 


dons (hadés). 


. (Capernaum) shalt be brought down 


to hell. 


. The gates of edz shall not prevail 


against it. 


. Shalt be thrust down to eZ/. 

. In hedZ he lift up his eyes. 

. Thou wilt not leave my soul in AeZZ. 
. His soul was not left in ZeZZ. 


APPENDIX. 217 


TACO. XY 
Rev i 
a vi 

” XX 
” XX 
Matt. Vv. 
” V. 

a) V. 
” X. 

ea VAJI 

PRX HI 

ao SUT 
Mark IX. 
i 1X 

p ix. 
Luke Xii 
James iii. 
2 Peter ii. 
Luke vii 
Rom X. 
Rev. 1X. 
De 


ry alt 


aE: 


7. 
I. 
2. 
I. 


. O grave, where is thy victory ? 

. And have the keys of ZeZZ and of death. 
. Death, and že% followed with him. 

. Death and edz delivered up the dead. 
. Death and /eZZ were cast into the lake 


of fire. 


yéevva (ge-enna). 


. Shall be in danger of eZ fire. 

. Whole body should be cast into edd. 

. Whole body should be cast into “ed/. 

. Able to destroy both soul and body in 


hell. 


. Having two eyes to be cast into ell 


fire. 


. More the child of ZeZZ than yourselves. 
. How can ye escape the damnation of 


hell? 


. Having two hands to go into feZZ. 

. Having two feet to be cast into edz. 

. Having two eyes to be cast into e/i fire. 
. Hath power to cast into Zez. 

. (The tongue) is set on fire of ZeZZ. 


TapTapow (tartarod). 


. But cast (them) down fo heli (2.e., the 


angels that sinned). 


avacos (abussos). 
Would not command them (the demons) 
to go out into the deep. 
Who shall descend into the deep P? 
The key of the do¢tomiless pit. 
He opened the dofdomless pit. 
The angel of the bottomless pit. 


7. That ascendeth out of the dottomless pit. 


APPENDIX. 


Rey. xvii 
39) XX 
29) XX 

Luke xiv. 

John iv. 
A iv. 

Rev IX 
y IX 
K3 ix. 
Ps 1x 


UO HH æ 


2. 
2. 


. Shall ascend out of the doftomless pit. 
. Having the key of the dotdomless fit. 
. Cast him into the dottomiless pit. 


gpéap (phrear). 


. An ass or an ox fallen into a Z?. 

. The weZZ is deep. 

. Jacob, which gave us the wed/. 

. The key of the bottomless øzź (lit. the 


fit of the abyss). 


. He opened the bottomless øzź (lit. the 


pit of the abyss). 
There arose a smoke out of the Zzz. 
The smoke of the Zzv. 


The following are the words rendered destruc- 
tion in the Authorised Version, with a complete 


list of the passages where they severally occur 


(see pp. 122—128 ante). 


Matt. vii. 
Sy Nal 
Mark xiv. 
Johu xvii. 
Acts viii. 
4 XXV. 
Rom. ix 
Phil. i. 
ES ili. 
2 Thess. ii. 
im Abra, Aiia 
Heb. X 
2 Peter 1i. 
a il. 

Bs ii. 


am@Ae.a (apoleia), 


. The way that leadeth to destruction. 

. To what purpose is this waste ? 

. Why was this zwasze of the ointment ? 

. The son of Jerdztion (Judas). 

. Thy money perish (lit. be to destruction). 
. Romans to deliver any man to de. 

. Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. 

. An evident token of perdition. 

. Whose end is destruction. 

. The son of Jerdztion (the Antichrist). 

. Drown men in destruction and perdition. 
. Who draw back unto perditron. 

. Shall bring in damnable heresies. 

. Bring upon themselves swift destruction. 
. Shall follow their pernzcrous ways. 


APPENDIX. 219 


2 Peter ii. 3. Their damnation slumbereth not. 
i ili. 7. Judgmentand perdzźíonofungodly men. 
N iii. 16. Unto their own destruction. 
Rev. xvii. 8. And go into perdition. 
z xvii. 11. And goeth into perdition. 


kaÎaíipesıs (kathairesis). 
2 Cor. x. 4. The pulling down of strong holds. 

pA x. 8. And not for your destruction. 

n xiii. 10. To edification and not to destruction, 

6r€Opos (olethros). 
1 Cor. v. 5. For the destruction of the flesh. 
1 Thess. v. 3. Then sudden destruction cometh. 
2 Thess. i. g. With everlasting destruction from. 
1 Tim. vi. g. Which drown men in destruction and 
perdition. 
cúvtrpiupa (suntrimma). 
Rom. ui. 16. Destruction and misery are in their 
ways. 

The following are the words which are 
rendered destroy in the Authorised Version, 
with a complete list of the passages where 
those terms are used which are held in this 
controversy to imply annihilation. Whether 
such a meaning attaches to these words the 
reader can judge for himself (see pp. 124—5 
ante) :— 

aTrodAupee (apollumi). 
Matt. ii. 13. Seek the young child to destroy him. 
v. 29. That one of thy members should Zerzsh. 


v. 30. That one of thy members should Zerzsh 
viii. 25. Lord, save us: we ferzsh. 


1X. 


xvi. 


xii. 


Ta 


APPENDIX. 


The wine runneth out, and the bottles 
perish. 


. Go rather to the Zos¢ sheep of the house 


of Israel. 


. Able Zo destroy both soul and body in 


hell. 


. He that findeth his life salZ lose it; 


and he ¢hat loseth his life for My 
sake shall find it. 


. Shall in no wise dose his reward. 
. How they mzght destroy Him. 
.. Unto the dost sheep of the house of 


Israel. 


. Whosoever will save his life sadZ lose 


it; and whosoever wz/Z lose his life 
for My sake shall find it. 


. Is come to save that whzch was lost. 
. That one of these little ones shozld 


perish. 


. He wzlZ miserably destroy those wicked 


men. 


. (The king) destroyed those murderers. 

. Shall perish with the sword. 

. Should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. 
. Art Thou come Zo destroy us ? 

. The bottles wz? be marred. 

. How they mzght destroy Him. 

. Carest Thou not that we perish ? 

. Whosoever will save his life skadZ lose 


it; whosoever shadd lose his life. 


. Into the waters, Zo destroy him. 

. He sali not lose his reward. 

. Sought how they might destroy Him. 

. He will come and desfroy the husband- 


men, 


APPENDIX. 221 


. Art Thou come Zo destroy us? 

. And the bottles shall perish. 

. To save life or Zo destroy (it) ? 

. Saying, Master, master, we perish. 

. Whosoever will save his life shadZ lose 


it; but whosoever zvz2Z lose his life. 


5. And lose himself, or be cast away. 

56. Is not come Zo destroy men’s lives. 

1. Which perished between the altar and. 
. Ye shadZ all likewise ferzsh. 

. Ye skali all likewise perish. 

. That a prophet perts% out of Jerusalem. 
. Zf he dose one of them, doth not go 


after that whzch zs lost, until. 


. Found my sheep whzch was lost. 

. If she Zose one piece, doth not. 

. Found the piece which I had dost. 

. And I perish% with hunger. 

. He was Zos#, and is found. 

. And was /osf, and is found. 

. The flood came, and destroyed them all. 
. From heaven, and destroyed (them) all. 
. To save his life shalZ lose it; and who- 


soever Shall lose his life. 


. To save that whzch was lost. 

. People sought zo destroy Him. 

. Come and destroy these husbandmen. 

. Not an hair of your head Zerzsh. 

. Believeth in Him shozld not pertsh. 

. Believeth in Him sould not perish. 

. That remain, that nothing de Zost. 

. For the meat which perisheth. 

. Given Me, I should lose nothing. 

. The thief cometh not but for to steal, 


and to kill, and to destroy, 


222 A ERANDIX: 
John x. 28. They shal/ never Perish, neither. 
aA xi. 50. That the whole nation erts% not. 
A xii. 25. He that loveth his life szadZ zose it. 
> xvii. 12. I have kept, and none of them zs /osć. 

» xviii. ọ. Thou gavest Me Aave I dost none. 

„  Xvili. 14. One man should gze for the people. 
Acts v. 37. He also perzshed (i.e. Judas of Galilee). 
Rom ii. 12. Shall also perish without law. 

D xiv. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat. 

1 Cor i. 18. To them ¢hat perzsh foolishness. 

J i. 19. I wz% destroy the wisdom of the wise. 

A viii. 11. SAaZ/Z the weak brother perzs%. 

5 x. 9. And were destroyed of serpents. 

He x. 10. Were destroyed of the destroyer. 

5 xv. 18. Fallen asleep in Christ ave perished. 
2 Cor ii. 15. Are saved, and in them ¢hat pertsh. 

on iv. 3. Itis hid to them ¢hat are Jost. 

a iv. g. Cast down, but not destroyed. 

2 Thess. ii. 10. Unrighteousness in them ¢hat perish. 
Heb. i. 11. They shall perish, but thou remainest. 
James i. 11. The fashion of it Zerzsheth. 
i iv. 12. Is able to save and Zo destroy. 
1 Peter i. 7. Precious than of gold fhat ferisheth. 
2 Peter iii. 6. Being overflowed with water, perished. 
a iii. g. Not willing that any should Zerzsh. 
2 John 8. That we Zose not these things. 
Jude 5. Destroyed them that believed not. 
ve 11. Lerished in the gainsaying of Core. 
SiapGeipw (diaphtheirs). 
Luke xii. 33. Neither moth corrupteth. 
2 Cor. iv. 16. Though our outward man perish. 
1 Tim. vi. 5. Disputings of men of corrupt minds. 
Rev. viii. g. Third part of ships were destroyed. 
j5 xi. 18 


. Destroy them which destroy the earth. 


APPHNDTIX, 22 


Kabatpéw (kathaired), 
to take down, or pull down. Used nine times in the 
New Testament. Translated destroy in Acts xiii. 19 
and xix. 27. 


Katadvo (katalud), 
to undo or throw down, occurs seventeen times in 
the New Testament. Translated destroy nine times— 
viz., Matt. v. 17 (twice), xxvi> 61, xxvii. 40; Mark 
ive Fo xve2a); Acts vi. 14.4 Rom. xiv. 20; Gals ii. 18. 


Katapyéw (katarged). 

Luke xiii. 7. Why cumbereth it the ground ? 
Rom. i. 3. S%all their unbelief zake the faith of 

God wzthout effect ? 
iii. 31. Yo we then make void the law. 
iv. 14. And the promise made of none effect. 
vi. 6. That the body of sin mzght be destroyed. 
vii. 2. She zs loosed from the law of her 


husband. 
+ vii. 6. Now we are delivered from the law. 
1 Cor. i. 28. To bring to nought things that are. 
= ii. 6. The princes of this world ¢hazt come to 
nought. 


A vi. 13. God shall destroy both it and them. 
xiii. 8. Prophecies, they szal/ fatl; knowledge, 
it shall vanish away. 
xiii. 10. That which is in part shad/ be done away. 
xiii. 11. I fut away childish things. 
xv. 24. When he shall have put down all rule. 
xv. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death. 
2 Cor. iii. 7. Which glory was fo be done away. 
iii. 11. That whzch ts done away. 
3 iii. 13. To the end of that whzch zs abolished. 


224 APPENDIX. 


2 Cor. ii. 14. Which vail zs done away in Christ. 

Gal. iii. 17. Make the promise of none effect, 

v. 4. Christ is decome of no effect unto you. 

R v. 11. Then is the offence of the cross ceased. 

Eph. ii. 15. Having abolished in his flesh the 
enmity. 

2 Thess. ii. 8. And skall destroy [the Antichrist] with 
the brightness of His coming. 

2 Tim. i. 10. Christ, Who “ath abolished death. 

Heb. ii. 14. He mzght destroy him that had the 
power of death. 


39) 


avo (luo), 
to loosen, dissolve, undo. Occurs forty-three times 
in the New Testament, and is translated destroy in 
John ii. 19 (destroy this temple), and 1 John iii. 8 (that 
He might destroy the works of the devil). 


oroOpeve (olothreud). 

Heb. xi. 28. Lest he that destroyed the firstborn. 
(ddoOpeurns, destroyer, occurs 1 Cor. x. 10; and é£odo- 
Opevouat is used Acts iii. 23.) 

mopléw (porthed), 
to lay waste, harass. Is used three times in the 
New Testament—viz., Acts ix. 21; Gal. i. 13 and 23. 


Geipw (phtheird), 
to corrupt. Used eight times in the New Testa- 
ment—viz., 1 Cor. iii. 17 (If any man defile the temple 
of God, him will God destroy); 1 Cor. xv. 33; 2 Cor. 
Vile 2) x1, 3); Hiphstva22s) = udeTon IREI 


8opa (phthora), 


corruption. Occurs nine times in the New Testa- 
ment—viz., Rom. viii. 21; 1 Cor, xv. 42,50; Gal. vi. 8; 


APPENDIX. 225 


Col. ii. 22 ( ferzsh); 2 Peter i. 4, ii. 12 (beasts made to 
be taken and destroyed . . . shall utterly perish in their 
own corruption), and ii. 19. 


The following are the words rendered torment 
or tormented in the Authorised Version, with 
a complete list of the passages where they 
occur :— 

Bacavos* (basanos). 


Matt. iv. 24. With divers diseases and torments. 
Luke xvi. 23. He lift up his eyes, being in torments. 
= xvi. 28. Lest they also come into this place of 
tor ment. 


we 


Bacavicmos (basanismos). 


Rey. ix. 5. Their torment was as the torment of 
a scorpion. 
j xiv. 11. The smoke of their zormenźć ascendeth. 


r xviii. 7. So much forment and sorrow give her. 
P N 

»,  Xviii. 10. For the fear of her ærment. 

», xyi. 15. For the fear of her forment. 


Bacavitw (basanizo). 


Matt. viii. 6. Sick of the palsy, grievously Zormented. 
a viii. 29. Art Thou come hither to torment us? 
a xiv. 24. Midst of the sea Zossed with waves. 

Mark v. 7. That Thou forment me not. 

P vi. 48. He saw them Zoz/izg in rowing. 

Luke viii. 28. I beseech Thee forment me not. 

2 Peter ii. 8. Vexed his righteous soul. 


* Bacavos is literally the touch-stone; then, a test, 
a trial whether a thing is genuine; then torture, tor- 
menting disease, etc. 


15 


226 APPENDIX. 


Rev. ix. 5. Should be tormented five months. 
5, Xi. 10. These two prophets zormented them. 
» xii. 2. In birth, and Zazzed to be delivered. 
», xiv. 10. He shall be tormented with fire. 
» xx. 10. Skall be tormented day and night. 


Bacanorns (basanistés). 


Matt. xviii. 34. Delivered him to the Zormentors. 


Konaats (kolasis). 


Matt. xxv. 46. Into everlasting punzshment. 
1 John iv. 18. Because fear hath Zorment. 


odvvdowat (odunaomai). 


Luke ii. 48. I have sought thee sorrowing. 
Ys xvi. 24. For I am tormented in this flame. 
N xvi. 25. And thou art tormented. 
Acts xx. 38. Sorrowrng most of all for the words. 


Kakovyovpevos (kakoukoumenos), 


Heb. xi. 37. Being destitute, afflicted, Zormenfed. 
A. xiii. 3. Them which suffer adversity, 


Printed by Hazell, Watson, and Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury. 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


THE COMING PRINCE: 
The Last Great Monarch of Christendom. 


Second Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 55. 


SOME PRESS NOTICES OF THE FIRST EDITION. 


“Tt adheres to the broad line of Divine prediction. The 
result of close study and diligent research are so clearly stated 
as to be within the easy apprehension of any intelligent reader 
who gives his mind to the subject ; and there are few books on 
prophecy written in so fair and impartial a spirit, with the 
evident intention not to advocate a system or a theory, but to 
expound the Word of God.”— Christian. 


“We cordially commend Dr. Anderson’s book. .. . For our 
part, we were unable to lay down the book until we had read 
it to the last page. . . . In pointing out the various excellences 
of this book, we have not mentioned the very wide reading, 
both historically and scriptural, which the writer gives evidence 
of.” — Daily Express. 


“Dr. Anderson belongs, on the whole, to the Futurist school. 
He writes with self-restraint and moderation as well as with 
competent knowledge of the literature of the subject.” — Church 
Beils. 


«As a study in prophecy, characterized by strong common- 
sense and remarkable subtlety of judgment, we cordially 
commend this volume to our readers.” —British and Foreign 
Evangelical Review, 


“Jt is a valuable contribution to a department of Biblical 
exposition which deserves more attention than it has hitherto 
received.”—Watchman, 


“This book is well written, forcible and clever throughout, 
and gives much valuable information on prophetical subjects.” 
—Church Advocate. 


“This book is written with great ability, and bears evidence 
of diligent study.”—London Quarterly Review. 


“Dr. Anderson’s valuable and suggestive work.”—Rock. 
foto} 


“It is the clearest exposition of prophecy of the Seventy 
Weeks of Daniel that we have ever read, and Dr. Anderson has 
done good service in opening up the mystery of this much 
controverted part of the Word of God.”— Gospel Watchman. 


Lonpoxn: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, PATERNOSTER Row. 


WORKS BY G. H PEMBER, MA 


I. 
Second Edition. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d. 


THE GREAT PROPHECIES concerning 
the Gentiles, the Jews, and the Church of God. 


“The Author, Mr, Pember, writes with great clearness ; his method 
of arrangement is distinct ; and throughout he seems to us to write 
with more attention to logical rules than writers in this department 
sometimes do. Not the least of his merits is the modesty and lack 
of tendency to dogmatise upon the mysterious subjects which mark 
his book. But his work is well worthy of careful perusal by all 
students of prophecy.”—British and Foreign Evangelical Review. 

‘One of the most valuable expositions of prophecy ever published. 
It is written in a popular and interesting style, and handles with 
masterly discrimination, scholarly research, and eloquent description 
the principal prophecies of the Bible.” —Prophetic News. d 

“Tt is written on Futurist lines, but it avoids extreme and dogmatic 
statements, and will well repay the study which may be bestowed upon 
it.”—Christian. 

“This is a book of distinct and conspicuous mark on the exhaustless 
theme of Scripture Prophecy. It is evident that the conscientious 
labour and thought of years are embodied in the volume. While the 
author shows that he has studied with care the literature of his subject, 
and industriously gathered'relevant information from many quarters, 
he has at the same time wrought out an independent scheme of inter- 
pretation marked by great comprehensiveness and :self-consistency.” 
—United Presbyterian Magazine. 


Il. 
Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 


EARTH’S EARLIEST AGES, and their 


Connection with Modern Spiritualism and Theo- 
sophy. 


“ït is quite a book that deserves careful reading.” —Literary Church- 
man. 

“There is very much to learn in these pages. The whole of the 
book is stimulating to serious thought and inquiry.” —Clergyman’s 
Magazine. 

“í The 220 pages of the book on spiritualism and the modern move- 
ment of an occult theosophy are very remarkable and startling.” 
—Christian. 

“This is a singular book, wonderfully instructive in its own line, 
and strongly upon the orthodox side. We would not willingly have 
missed the reading of such a book.” — Sword and Trowel. 
oe An interesting book on an important subject.”—Jrish Ecclesiastical 

azette. 

“An able, seasonable, and sagacious book. His knowledge of the 
Hebrew Scriptures is exact and scholarly, and his interpretation trust- 
worthy and brilliant, while his acquaintance with the phenomena of 
elem and theosophy is wide and accurate.” —Edinburgh Daily 

eview. 

“The book is full of curious and interesting speculations, and is not 
without very important practical lessons.”—Ba fist. 


Lonpvon: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, PATERNO TER Row. 


HODDER & STOUGHTON’S 
NEW & RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 


RECENT EVENTS and a Clue to their 
Solution. 
BY THE RIGHT HON. LORD ROBERT MONTAGU, 
Demy Svo, cloth, 12s. 


“THE VALLEY OF WEEPING a Place 
of Springs.” A Practical Exposition of the Thirty- 
second Psalm. 

BY THE REV. CHARLES D. BELL, D.D., Hon. Canon 
of Carlisle Cathedral, Rector of Cheltenham, Author of “Our 
Daily Life,” etc. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 


THE TRINITY OF EVIL. I. Infidelity. 
II. Impurity. III. Intemperance. 
BY THE REV. CANON WILBERFORCE, M.A. 
Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 


Bont SPIRIT OF THE LORD 
Straitened? A Call to Prayer. 
BY WILLIAM CROSBIE, M.A., LL.B. 
Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 


Contents.—Life Abundantly—Filled with the Holy Ghost— 
Many gathered together Praying—The Everlasting Gospel— 
The Spirit Straitened. 

“We would earnestly commend to the best attention of our 
readers the great historical argument on which Mr. Crosbie 
has wisely founded his deeply impressive call to prayer.”—- 
Christian Leader. 

“Every Christian heart must sympathize with the high 
purpose and fervent feelings that inspire these sermons.”— 
Sunday School Chronicle. 


Lonpon: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, PATERNOSTER Row. 


TEACHING AND TEACHERS; or, The 
Sunday School Teacher’s Teaching Work, and the 
other Work of the Sunday School Teacher. 

BY H. CLAY TRUMBULL, D.D. Editor of the “American 

Sunday School Times,” Author of “ Kadesh-Barnea,” etc. 


Cheaper edition, crown Svo, cloth, 5s. 


“In this handsome volume lies a mine of wealth for the teacher. 
Such a book as this will almost make a teacher, so comprehensive is it, 
not only as to detail, but the possibilities of his work. Dr. Trumbull 
speaks truly when he says that the responsibilities of this great work 
of Sunday School teaching are infinite. Surely his splendid book will 
stir up many to more thoroughness, prayer, and consecratlon.”— 
Christian. 


RAYS OF MESSIAH’S GLORY : or, Christ 
in the Old Testament. 
BY DAVID BARON. 
Crown vo, cloth, 6s. 

Contents.—In the Scroll of the Book, or Foretold and Ful- 
filled—Messiah as Priest and King—The Branch, or Four 
Aspects of Messiah’s Character—The Branch and the Branches, 
or a Symbol of Christ and His Church—Four Precious Titles 


of the Messiah— Moses and Christ : an Analogy and Contrast— 
Isaiah liii.: Messianic or not ? 


NEW EDITIONS OF DR. GODET’S BIBLE STUDIES. 
iE 

STUDIES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

BY F. GODET, D.D., Professor of Theology, Neuchatel. 


Edited by the Hon. and Rev. W. H. LYTTELTON, M.A. 
Canon of Gloucester. 


Seventh Edition, Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 


Conrents.—The Origin of the Four Gospels—Jesus Christ— 
The Work of Christ—The Four Chief Apostles—The Apoca- 
lypse. 

Il 


STUDIES ON THE OLD TESTAMENT. 
Fourth Edition, crown Svo, 7s. 6d. 


Contents.—Angels—The Plan of the Development of Life 
on our Earth—-The Six Days of Creation—The Four Greater 
Prophets—The Book of Job—The Song of Songs. 

“Unquestionably M. Godet is one of the first, if not the very first, of 
contemporary commentators. We have no hesitation in advising all 


students of the Scripture to procure and to read with careful attention 
these luminous essays.”—Literary Churchman. 


Lonpon: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, PATERNOSTER Row. 


THE PENTATEUCH: Its Origin and 
Structure. An Examination of Recent Theories. 


BY PROFESSOR C C. BISSELL, D.D., Author of “The 
Apocrypha,” in Lange’s Commentary, “ The Historic Origin 
of the Bible,” etc. 

Crown 8vo, cloth, price 9s. 
“In every respect, this work is a very complete and satisfactory 


handbook to the important subject with which it deals.” —Presbyterian 
Messenger. 
“ A very thoroughgoing and masterly work.” —Ecclesiastical Gazette. 
“ A complete and valuable contribution to a very important subject.” 


—Methodist Times. 
GESTA CHRISTA: A History of Humane 


Progress under Christianity. 


BY C. LORING BRACE, Author of “Races of the Old 
World,” etc. 


Cheaper Edition. Large crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 


“ This really valuable book. The author has already acquired a 
reputation as a student of ethnology. In the present instance he has 
made admirable use of a long and wide course of study and research, 
of an intimate acquaintance with the races and civilizations of the 
Old World, of a thoughtful investigation of the most difficult and 
painful social questions.”—Daily News. 

“ A really earnest and noble book.” —Academy. 


THE DIVINE ORIGIN OF CHRISTI- 


anity Indicated by its Historical Effects. 
BY RICHARD S. STORRS, D.D., LL.D. 
Cheaper Edition, royal 8vo, 6s. 


“ These facts are arranged in luminous order, and set forth with 
fervour and eloquence. The union of close cogent reasoning and 
eloquent speech is remarkable.” —The Spectator. 


THE GROUNDS OF THEISTIC AND 
Christian Belief. 


BY GEORGE P. FISHER, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Ecclesi- 
astical History in Yale College, Author of “The Reforma- 


tion,” etc. 
8vo, 10s. 6d. 


“ He has executed his task with much ability, learning, tact, and judg- 
ment. The style is fluent, clear, and easy throughout, so that this 
volume is absolutely pleasant reading. We repeat, that Dr. Fisher has 
produced what we think the most convenient handbook of the whole 
subject we have seen.”—Lilervary Churchman. 

«Very able and opportune book. Professor Fisher is as qualified by 
his moral as he is by his intellectual ability. His book, while master] 
in its grasp and thorough in its contention, derives its chief strengt 
from its candour, and from its fearless acceptance of all conclusive 
results of modern science. A wiser and better guide to those who are 
perplexed by modern questionings could scarcely be found.’”—British 
Quarterly Review. 


Lonpon: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, -PATERNOSTER Row. 


BY DR. W. P. MACKAY, Author of “Grace and Truth.” 


THE SEEKING SAVIOUR, and other 
Bible Themes. 


Crown 8vo, paper covers, 1s. 6d. ; cloth, 2s. 6d. 


“The sermons are thoroughly evangelical, in many places truly 
original, and cannot be read without a feeling of deep regret that the 
preacher had not been longer spared for the good of his country.”— 
Ecclesiastical Gazette. 


“ We are glad the publishers have seen their way to issue promptly 
a cheap edition of this volume. Many will be thankful that such a 
valuable souvenir of one greatly loved and much honoured of God 
should be brought within their reach.”—Word and Work. 


NEW EDITIONS OF DR. GORDON’S BOOKS. 
I 


THE TWO-FOLD LIFE;; or, Christ’s Work 


for us and Christ’s Work in us. 


BY A, J. GORDON, DD., Author of “In Christ; or, The 
Believer’s Union with His Lord,” etc. 


Second Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. 


“ The author illustrates/his theme by reference to the lives of saints 
of all ages, skilfully blending Scripture with religious incident, It is 
sure to bea favourite book with spiritually minded readers.”—Chris- 
tian. : 


“Earnest, spiritual, and quickening.”—Leeds Mercury. 


“Another excellent book on ‘the higher, or rather the moral Chris- 
tian life, showing the connection between ‘Christ’s work for us, and 
‘Christ’s work in us.’ It abounds in apt illustrations and quotations, 
and is clearly written, in_a pleasant as well as a most devout style.”— 
Rev. C. H. Spurgeon in Sword and Trowel. 


Il. 
THE MINISTRY OF HEALING; or, 


Miracles of Cure in all Ages. 
Second Edition, crown Svo, cloth, 5s. 


“ The fullest examination of Faith Healing yet given to the public. 
Itis a candid, thorough and highly intelligent inquiry, in which the 
author considers, in successive chapters. ‘The Testimony of Scrip- 
ture,’ ‘of Reason,’ ‘of the Church,’ ‘of Theologians,’ ‘of Missions,’ 
“of the Adversary,’ ‘ of Experience,’ and ‘of the Healed.’ The chapter 
on the testimony of the Church is specially remarkable, as furnishing 
evidence which will be new and surprising to most of the presence of 
Faith cures throughout the first three centuries, and in connection with 
all the great revivals of evangelical faith afterwards.”—Christian. 


“A very interesting book, well and calmly written. It strikes us as the 
best yet written on the subject.”—Wesleyan Methodist Magazine. 


Lonpon : HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, PATERNOSTER Row. 


Date Due 


Anderson 
Human destiny 


mare ISSUED TO 


9777 


Anderson 
Human destiny 


mine 


