Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



■ (•^ ■»' 



3o.^"fa 



^ 




HUMAN NATURE, 



IN ITS 



FOUBFOIiD STATE, 



OF 



Primitive Integrity, \ ^^ /^The Parents of Man- 



M { 



KIND in Parudisc. 



Entire Depravation, F £ 1 The Unregenerate. 
Begun Recovery, f^\ '^^^ Regenerate. 

AND t 5 I 

Consummate Happiness 1 p I All Mankind in iS^t 
or Misery, ^ ** V Future State. 

IN SEVERAL 

PRACTICAL DISCOURSES, 

BY THE EMINENTLY PIOU^ AND LEARNED 

MR. THOMAS BOSTOJV, -f 

XATE MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL AT ETTRICK. 



John ii. 24, 25. But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, be- 
cause he knew all men ; and needed not that any should testify 
of man ; for he knew what was in man, 

LuKC ix. 19. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. 

Pro V. xxvii. 19. As in water face answereth to face j so tlic heart 
of man to man. 

FIRST NEW-YORK EDITION, 

PUBLISHED BY EVERT DUYCKINCK, PEARL-STREET. 

B. CROOKBBy PRIIf*tER, 

1811. 



I.I — ■ -"^ ■ — 1-~- -^~-^^ ^_^.„>.»M.i^ 

TRE NEW YOKK 

POBLIC LIBRARY 

744106 A 

ABTOH, LET^OX AHD 
TIU>BM foundation:^ 



tk^ 



The Late Rer. Mr. James HeRvXTy in his Dialogue$i 
Vol. I9 fiage 343, giycs the following reconunendatioa 
of this Book. 

^ Seb this work of grace, and procedure of conversion) 

<^ more copiously di8pla3red, in a valuable little piece, en- 

tf dtled, Human JVature in Us Four/old States by Mr. 

tt Thomas Boston^ which, in my opinion, is one of our 

tt best books for common readers. The sentences are 

tt short, and the comparlo^cm utiikine ; the language it 

^ easy, and the doctrine evangelical ; the method. propery 

I « the plan comprehensive, the manner searching, yet 

I ^ con8olatory.*-If another celebrated treatise is styledf 

f' « 7%^ Whole Duty ofMan^ I would call this, The wholk 

6 tf Man ; as it comprises*— -what he vtas^ originally :— • 

^ what he should be^ through grace s-^KOxd, ^en^ vrhat 

<§[ ho viiU b€ in glory.'* 



I 



r 



• .•'•! 



PREFACE. 



IT is maxim among wise men, that the knowledge 
of persons is of as great use, in the conduct of hu- 
man life, as the knowledge of things ; and it is most 
certain, that he who knows the various tempers, humours^ 
and dispositions of men, who can find out their turn of 
thought, and penetrate into the secret springs and prin- 
ciples of their actings, will not be at a loss to find out pro- 
per means for compassing his aims, will easily preserve 
iiimself from snares, and either evite or overcome difiicul- 
ties. But the knowledge of human nature, morally con- 
sidered, or, in other words, of the temper and disposition, 
of the soul in its moral powers, is of much greater value ; 
as it is of use in the roncRms ^ an unchangeable life and 
world : he who is possessed of such a valuable branch o§ 
knowledge, is thereby capacitated to judge aright of him- 
self, to understand true Christianity, and to conceive just- 
ly of perfect happiness and consummate misery. 

The depravity of human nature is so plainly taught, 
yea, inculcated in sacred Scripture, and is so obvious to 
every thinking man's observation, who searches his own 
breast, and reflects duly on his temper and actings, thut it 
is surprisingly strange and wonderful, how it comes to pass, 
that this important truth is so little understood, yea, so 
much disbelieved, by men who be^r the name of Gospel- 
Ministers. Are th^re not persons to be found in a neigh- 
bouring nation, in the character of preachers, appearing^ 
daily in pulpits, who are so unacquainted with their 
Bibles and themselves, that they ridicule the doctrine of 
original sin as unintelligible jargon ? If they are persons 
of a moral life and conversation, they seem to imagine, 
they cannot become better than they are ; if they are im- 
moral, they seem to indulge a conceit, that they can be- 
come virtuous, yea religious, when they please. These n 
are the men who talk of the dignity of human nature, 
of greatness of mind, nobleness of soul, and generosity of 
spirit ; as if they intended to persuade themselves and 
Ittlhers that pride is a good principle^ and do not know 



«« 



that pride and selfishness are the bane of mankind, pro- 
iluctive of ull the wickedness, and much of the miscry 
to be found in tliis and in tlie other Vorld ; and is indeed 
iKat wherein the depravity of human nature properly con?- 
sists. 

Upright Adam's nature faintly adumbrated the divine, 
in a moderated self-esteem, an adequate self-love, and de- 
lightful reflection on his own borrowed excellercy, regu- 
lated by a just esteem of, and supreme love to his adored 
Creator ; whence a peaceful serenity of mind, a loving, 
compassionate, and benevolent disposition of soul, a depth 
of thought, and brightness of imagination, delightfully 
employed in the rapturous contemplation of his beloved 
Maker's infinite perfections ; thus bearing the divine 
image, and resembling (fod that made him. But he no 
sooner disobeyed the divine probatory command, than the 
scales were cast, his moderated self-esteem degenerated 
into p'ride, his adequate self-love shrunk into mere selfish- 
ness, and his delightful reflections on his own excellency, 
varied into the tickling pleasures of vanity and conceit ; he 
lost view of the Author of his being, and thenceforth, in- 
stead of delighting in him, first dreaded, and then despised 
him. 

The modest, and therefore hitherto anonymous, aiiti;or 
of the following discourses, Mr. Thomas Bostox, huvin^^ 
handled this subject, in preaching to his own obscure pa- 
rochial congregation of Ettrick, in the Sheriffdom of Sel- 
kirk, had a particular view to their benefit, in priiuini^ and 
pul)lishing them ; and therefore the style and method is 
. pliiin and simple, and the first edition printed on coiirsc 
paper ; but the subject is so comprehensive and in por- 
tant, so well managed, and the book has been so well re- 
ceived, thut it now appears in the world more embtlUslied, 
as well as better corrected than formerly. 

Let it suffice, to rcommend it to those who have a 
right taste of genuine Christianity, that all the Author's 
notions flow so directly from the sacred fountain, tl at it 
is to be doubted, if he has had much recourse to any other 
helps, than the Bible and his God foi assistance. Mean- 
time, I am aware of an exception from these, who ic:nk 
themselves among the polite part of mviukiwd, w?» \.W\. 
there is the sumc harsh /Peculiarity of diakct n^ \V^\A\\Oa 



is commonly to be found in books of practical divinity. 
But I beg leave to observe, that the dialect they except 
against is borrowed from sacred scripture ; and like as 
it has pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching to save 
them that believe ; so also, to countenance what they 
are displeased with, by the operations of his Spirit, on the 
minds of true Christians, as their common experience 
witnesseth. However, I heartily wish the exception were 
altogether removed, by some person's digesting into a 
methodical treatise, the views of human nature in its prim- 
itive perfection, in its depraved condition, and in its re- 
trieved state, who is master of modem style, and tho- 
roughly understands the subjects discoursed in this book> 
that by becoming all things to all men, some, viz. of all 
ranks and kinds of men, may be gained. 

I am not to declaini at large in favour of religion ^ 
this were to write a book by way of preface. Many able 
pens have been employed in recommending it to the 
world, by strong arguments drawn from its usefulness to 
society, its suitableness to the dignity of the rational na- 
ture, and the advantages arising to men from it, in thic^ 
and the other world. But, after all, may not one be al- 
lowed to doubt, if religion be rightly understood by all 
its patrons ? May not the beauties and excellencies of a 
precious gem be elegantly described by a naturalist, or 
jeweller, who never saw the particular one he talked o^ 
and knows little of its nature, less of the construction of 
its parts, and nothing of its proper use ? Are there not 
men of bright parts, who reason finely in defence of reli- 
gion, and yet ai*e so niuch strangers to it, that they brsoid 
these who are so happy as to be possessed of it, with the 
hard name of Spiritualists, reckoning them a kind of £n-. 
thusiasts, unworthy of their regard. The truth is, Chris- 
tianity is a mystery ; mere reason does not comprehend 
it. There is a spiritual discerning necessary to its being 
rightly understood ; whence it comes to pass, that men of 
great learning and abilities, though they read the Scrip- 
tures with attention, and comment learnedly upoa 
them 2 yet do not, yea cannot, enter into the vein of 
thought peculiai' to the inspired penman, because they 
share not of tlie same Spirit ; wherefore it is, that the A- 
*^8tle Paul asserts, the natural) that is, unregeneratc 



>&£FACE. Til 

Maiii not to know the things of God, neither indeed 
to be capable of knowing them> because they are spiritual- 
ly discerned. 

From what has been said, it is easy to conclude, that 
no pedantic apology, on the part of the author, for ap- 
pearing in print, or fawning compliments to the cour- 
teous reader, on ^e part of the prefucer, are to be ex- 
pected. The tr\itfi is, both the one and the other ai*e 
rather little arts, vailing pedantry and conceit, than 
evidences of modesty and good sense. It is of more 
use to recommend the perusal of the book to persons of 
all ranks and degrees, from a few suitable topics, than to 
%hew wherein this edition differs from the first. 

That all mankind, however differenced by their rank 

^okd station in the If orld, have an equal concern in what 

was revealed conpqr/ipg another and future world, will 

be readily owned ; ahd it must be as readily granted, that 

however allowable it may be for men of learning and parts, 

^please themselves with fineness of language, justness of 

thought, and e;xact connection in writings upon other 

subjects ; yet they ought not to indulge themselves in 

^® Same taste in discourses on divine things, lest they 

•xpose themselves to tlie just censure of acting with the 

f^e indiscretion, as a person in danger of famishhig by 

*^^§cr, would be guilty of, if he perversely rejected plain 

^'^cjlesome food when offered to him, for no other reason 

*"^ the want of palatable sauce, or order and splendour iji 

•^IJIjing it up. 

.. V^c sacred book we call the Bible, has a peculiar sub- 

nix^y jjj j^ vailed with unusual dialect and seeming 

rJ^^Hnection : but it is not therefore to be rejected by 

I ^ who bear the name of Christians, as uncoutli or un- 

. ^^lligible: true wisdom dictates quite another thing; 

^Ounsels us, by frequent reading, to acquaint ourselves 

^^ jl with it, become accustomed to its peculiar phrases, 

J?^ search into its sublimities upon this ground, that 

•"^ matters contained in it are of the utmost consequence 

*? ^3, and, when rightly understood, yield a refined de- 

♦T?^^ much superior to what is to be found in reading 

~^ best written books, on the most entertaining subjects. 

'^ Viat pleads for the parent, is a plea for the progeny ; 

"P^mctica^ discourses upon divine subjects^ are the g^ixTivcvv; 



,«)flr8priBg of the sacred text^ and ought therefcH^ to h& 
read carefully and witli attention, by ptrsons of all 
ranks and degrees, though they are indeed calculated 
for, and peculiarly adapted to, such as move in low spheres 
of life. 

Let it, however, be a preyailing argument with persons 
of all dejiominationb, carefully to read books of practical 
divinity, tha^nany of them are not Written on the sumo 
motives and principles as other books are ; the authors 
liave often a peculiar divine call to publish them, and 
well-founded hope of their being useful to advance Chris« 
tianity in the world. In consequence whereof it is, that 
great numbers have reaped benefit by reading them, e8« 
peciully in childhood and youth ; many have been con* 
verted by them ; and it may be questioned, if ever there 
was a true Christian, since the art dFbrinting made these 
books common, who has not, in soifie stage of life, reap- 
ed considerable advantage from them. This book re- 
commends itself in a particular manner, by its being m 
short, substantial system of practical divinity, in so much 
liiat it hiay with truth be asserted, that a person who is 
thoroughly acquainted with all that is here taught, may, 
without danger to his eternal interest, remain ignorant of 
Other things which pertain to the science called divinity* 
it is therefore earnestly recommended to the serious and 
frequent perusal of all, but especially of such as are in 
that stage of life called youth, and are so stationed in 
the world, as not to be frequently opportuned to hear 
^ermons, and read commentaries on the sacred text. 

It is doubtless incumbent on masters of families, tO 
snake some provision of spiritual as well as bodily food 
for their children and servants ; this is effectually done bj 
putting practical books in their hands : and therefore thi^ 
Ibook is humbly and eamesUy recommended as a family* 
book, which all the members of it are not only allowed^ 
J^ut desired to peruse. 

As to the difference betwixt this and the former edi- 
^on, which gives it preference, it lies chiefly in the au- 
thor's not only having revised the style, but the thought* 
in many places ; and corrected both, so as to set several 
important truths in a clearer light, and make the style 
^ tftiie luook now uniform; which formerly was not so> be- 



cause of the explications of peculiar words and phrases 
in use amongst practical divines, especially of the Church 
of Scotland, wluah were ioferfpersed throughout the ibr* 
mer edition, and introduced by another hand, for the 
sake of such persons as are not accustomed to them. It re- 
mams that the prefacer not only subjoin his name, which 
was concealed in the first e(tition, as a testimony that he 
esteems the author, and values the book, but that he 
may thereby fecoihitiend it in a particular manner to the 
perusal of persons of his own acquaintance. If, in his as* 
' Btsting towards its being published, and in prefacing both 
«ditioD8, he has not run unsent, he has what will bear him 
up under all censures : the charitable will think no evil, 
sid others will do as they please. 

Robert Wx&stmait, M. D. G. E\ 



CONTENTS. 



I. The State of Ikkocence, or Primitive lKTEOBti;ry 
discoursed from Eccles. viL 29. 

Of man's original righteousness, - - fiage 19 

His understanding a lamp of light, - - 20 

His will straight with the will of God, - - 2t 

His affections orderly and pure, - • - 21^ 

The qualities of his righteousness, - - 23 

Of man's original happiness, - . . . 25 

Man a glorious creature, - - - - ibi 

The favourite of heaven, •.-».*- 26 

The covenant of works, « • • - - ibu 

Lord of the world, ----- 2^ 

The forbidden tree, a stay to keep him from falling,ib. 

iHis perfect tranquility, - * - - 3# 

. Life of pure delight, •• • • • -31 

Man immortal, - - • * m * ' $3 . 

^structions from this state, • . • • . H,^ 

Three sorts of persons reproved,* • • 3S 

A lamentation over the ruins, « • - 34 

IJ. The State of Nature, or State of Entire D|KW 

PRAVATION. 

Head L The Sinfulness of Man's Natural State, d^ 

coursed from Gen. vi. 5. 

That man's nature is corrupted, proven, - - 41 
From God's word, - - - - - lb. 
From men's experience and observation, • - 44 
Fallen Adam's image natural to men, in eleven partic- 
ulars, -.•-.-. so 
Of the corruption of the understanding, - • 55 
Weakness with respect to spiritual things, - 56 
Three evidences of it, - - - - • sf 
Gross darkness in spiritual things, - - 59 



corrEKTs* 



XI 



Four evidences oiF it, - - -' fiage 60 

A bias in it to evil, - - - - 62 

8iK evidences of that biaSf - - 63 

Aversion to spiritual truths, - - -67 

Three evidences thereof, « • 68 

Proneness to lies and falsehood^ - 'To 

Man naturally high-minded, - - T\ 

Of the corruption of the will, - - - 73 

Utter inability for what is truly good, - , ib. 

Two evidences of it, - - - 73 

Averseness to.good, • • • 74 

Four evidences of it, - - - 75 

Proneness to evil, - • - 77 

Five evidences of it, - . • * 78 

Enmity ag^st God, . * - $0 

Against the being and nature of God, - 62 

Five queries, for conviction, on this head, 83 

Against the Son of God, - - .Hi 

In his prophetical office, . • 85 

Two evidences of it, - - - ib. 

In his priestly offic©-r-Three evidences of it, 88 

In his kingly office— Three evidences of it, 89 

A peculiar malignity against the priestly office, cor- 
rupt nature lying cross to the gospel contrivance of 
salvation, - - • • • 90 

Four proofs of it, - - - - 9 1 

Bent to the way of the law, as a covenant ©f works, 92 

Four proofs of it, - - - 93 

Against the Spirit of God, ♦■ - 97 

Against the law, as a rule of life, - - ib. 

Two evidences of it, - - • ib. 

-Contumacy against the Lord, - - 98 

Perverseness in reference to the chief end, 99 

Of the corruption of the affections, * - lOl 

■ ■ of the conscience, - 103 

■ ' " of the memory, - . - 103 
The body partaker of this corruption, - ib. 
How man's nature was corrupted, - • 104. 
The doctrine of the corruption of nature applied, 107 

The natural man can do nothing but sin, - 1 10 
God takes special notice of the sin of our nature, 112 

Evidencesof men's oycriookiiig the sin o£theiinaLl\tte> V\5^ 

' A 2 



XU' COHTEKTS. 

Wherein that sin is to be specially noticed, {lage 1 1 6 
Why is it to be specially noticed, - - 117 

How to get a view of the corruption 6f nature^ 119 

Head II. Ths Misery of Man's Natural State» 

discoursed from Eph. ii. 3» 131 

Man's natural state, a state of wrathi - « 1S3 
What this state of wrath is, - - 125 
Wrath in the heart of God agtdnst the natural man, ib.. 
Wrath in the word of God against him, - 126 
. Wrath in the hand of God against him, - 1 27 
On his body and soul, - - - ib. 
On his enjoyments, - - - 1 28 
He ik under the power of Satan, - - . 1 29 
Hath no security for a moment's safety, - lb. 
Wrath against hiin at death, and at the general judg- 
ment, -• - - - " 130 
The qualities of that wrath, - - 131 . 
The doctrine of the state of wrath ccmfirmed and vin- 
dicated, - ■* - - 134 
Several instructions from it, -» - ib. 
Alarm to the unregenerate, - - - 141 
They are under the covenant of works, - 142 
Their misery in that respect, - - 143 
They are without God, - > - 145 
Their misery in that respect, • - ib. 
Instances of the wrath of God, - - 14^ 
A view of tlie nature of God, whose wrath it is, 1 4$ 
How to flee from wrath, - - - 149 
A few words to the saints, and a few to all, 1 49-* 1 5 9 

Head HI. Man's Utter Inability to recover him- 
self, discoursed from Rom. v. 6. John vi. 44. 15S 

Only two Ways of man's recovering himself sup- 
poseable, viz. the way of the law, and the way of 

the gospel, ... - ib. 

Man unable to recover himself, in the way of the law, 154 

He cannot keep the commands perfectly, ib. . 

The perfection of law-obedience, four-fold, 1 5 JC 

He cannot satisfy the j^tsticQ of Qo4 for his sin^ \$T 



€ONT£irrt» xiii 

Object.*— God is merciful ; we hope to be saved, if 

- we do as well as we can, Answered, - page 159 

Man unable to recover himself in the way of the gos- 
pel, to embrace and use the help offered for his re- 
covery, . . - . . 160 
Proved by several arguments, - - ib. 

Object. (1.) If we be under an utter inability to do 
any good, how can God require us to db it ? An- 
swered, - - - - 163 

Object. (2.) Why do you then call us to believe, re- 
pent, and use the means I Answered, - 1 64 

Object. (3.) The use of means needless, seeing we 
are utterly unable to help ourselves out of the state 

of sin and wrath : Answered, - - 166 

Quest. Has God promised to convert and save them, 
who, in the use of means, do what they can to- 
wards their own relief ? Answered, - - ib. 

The conclusion of this head, - - 168 

III. The State of Grace, or Begun Recovery. 

Head I. Regeneration, discoursed from 1 Peti. 23. 169 

Of the nature of regeneration, - *- \76 

Partial changes mistaken for this change, ib. 

The change m<ide in regeneration, what it is, 173 

In general and particular, - - 173, 175 

The mind illuminated, and the will renewed, 17^ 

Cured of its utter inability to good, - 179 

Endued with a fixed aversion to evil, «• 1 80 

' bent and propensity to good, ib. 

Reconciled to the covenant of peace, - 181 

Disposed to receive Jesu^Christ, - 182f 

The affections are changed, - • ^^ 18 J 

• . — — — rectified and regulated, 184 

■ The conscience renewed, - - * 185 
The memory bettered by regenerating grace, 1&6 
The body changed in respect of use, - 187 
The whole conversation changed, - 188 
The resemblance betwixt natural and spiritual gene- 
ration, in nine particulars, - - - 190 
Trial of one's state, whether born again, or not, 195 

Some cases of doubtiiig- Christians resolved) - \^^ 



Xilr CdVTBKYS. 

Case (h) Theprecise time and way of one's coA- 

yersion not knowUf - - . fiage \ 

Case (2\\ Sin {Mrevuling^ 

Case {%S Corruptions more violent than formerly, S 
Case (4.} Affections to the creature stronger than 

to the Creator^— -Glowing affections to God 

gone, - - - - - 3 

Case (5.) Attainments ofhypocrites and apostates, 

a terror, . • . - 2 

Case (6.) Falling short of the Saints mentioned in 

Scripture, and of others, - • - 2 

Case (7.) No child of God so tempted, 2 

. Case last. Strange and unusual afflictions, S 

The necessity of regeneration, * . 2 

To qualify one to do good. 

To communion with God in duties, - 3 

■ To make one meet for heaven, - - 2 

To one's being admitted into heaven, 2 

Advices to the unregenerate, - - 2 

Head II. Thk Mystical Union betwixt Christ a 
Believers, discoursed from John xv. 5. 2 

A General view of the Mystical Union, ^ 2 

The natural stock of all men, Adam, «- 2 

Originally a choice vine, * • - 2 

Now a degenerate stock, 
fruits growing on the branches of the nature of the 
stock, - - - .. - 2 

A dead stock, ... 2 

The condition of the branches in that 
respect, « 
A killing stock, - - 3 

The condition of the branches in that 
respect, - - - 2 

The supernatural stock, into which the branches are 

ingrafted, Jesus Christ, -' - - 3: 

The branches taken out of the natural stock, and 

grafted into the supernatural stock, the elect, 3 

How cut off from the natural stock, in twelve parti- 
culars, ----- 2; 
How ingrafted into Christji - - ^ 3i 



COMTBKTSi. Xt 

Christ apprehends the sinner by his Spirit, fiage 234 
The sinner apprehends Christ by faith, - 344 
How one mayl^now one's self to be apprehended of 

Christ, - ... - 24d 

The benefits flowing to believers from union with 

Christ, - . - - - - 348 

Justification, 349. Peace with God, and peace of 
conscience, 353. Adoption, 2S5. Sanctifica- 
tion, 357. Growth in grace, • - 361. 

Quest. If all true Christians be growing ones, 
what shall be said of those who, instead of 
growing, are going backward ? Answered, ib* 
^ Quest. Do hypocrites grow at all ? And if so, 

how shall we distinguish betwixt their 
growth, and the growth of the Christian? 
Answered, • ^ - 26^ 

Fruitfulness • • . • 364 

_ Acceptance of their fruits of holiness, 367 

Establishment, « • . 270 

Support, - . • . 37^ 

The special care of the Husbandman, 375 

The duty of saints united to Christ, - 278 

A word to sinners, - - - 28^ 

IV. .The £t£Rnaj« State, or State of Consummate 

Happiness or Misery. 

Head I. Death, discoursed from Job xxx. 23. 233 

The certainty of death, • - - 284 

Man's life vanity, - - • 286 

A short-lived vanity, - - - 288 

A flying vanity, - - - - 289 

The doctrine of death, a looking-glass, wherein to be- 
hold the vanity of the world, - - 290 
A store-house for contentment and patience, 292 
A bridle to curb lusts conversant about the body, 294 
A spring of Christian resolution, - 297 
A spur to incite to prepare for deatli^ - lb. 



XXi COHTXVTf. 

Head II. The Difference betwixt the righteous and 
Wicked at death) discoursed from Prqy. xiv. 32. 3 

The wicked dyings are driren awafy « 3* 

In what casea a wicked man may be willing to die, 3 

Whence they are driyen, and whither, • 3 

Driven away in their wickedness - ** 3 

The ho^lessness of their state at deaths - 3 

Their hopes of peace and pleasure in this life cut off, 

They have no solid grounds to hope for eternal 

happiness, - • - - 3 

Death roots up their delusive hopes of heaven, 3 
Makes their state absolutely and for ever hopeless, : 
Caution against false hopes: Character of those hopes, 3 
Exhortation to hasten out of a sinful state, - 3 
To be concerned for the salvation of ethers, 3 

The state of the godly at death, a hopeful state, 

Christy their best friend, is Lord of the other world, : 

They will have a safe passage to it^ - 3 

A joyful entrance into it, • - 3 

Object. Many of the godly, when dying, full of fears, 

and have little hope : Answered, - - ^ 3 

Death uncomfortable to them in three cases, 3 

Ten cases of saints anent death, Answered, - j 

Considerations to bring saints in good te-ms with 

death,' . • - - - .3! 

Direcnons how to prepare for death, - - 3! 

Head III. The Resurrectiok, discoursed from 

John V. 28, 39. - - 3 

The possibility of the resurrection, - - 3: 

The certainty of the resurrection, - 3. 

Who shall be raised, 338. What shall be raised, 3: 

How the dead shall be raised, . - "3' 

The difference betwixt the godly and the wicked, 

in their resurrection, - - - 3< 

The qualities of the raised bodies of the saints, 3 

The qualitiesof the raised bodies of the wicked, 3' 

Comfort to the people of Godj - - 3' 

Terror to all natural men, - - - ?' 



COKTEKTS. STli 

dsAoiV. The General Judgment^ discoursed 
from Matth. xxv. 31, 33, 33, 34, 41, 46. pagt 354 

That there shall be a general judgment, pnyveoy 355 

Jefus Christ the Judge, «- - - 358 

The coming of the Judge, • - 359 

The summons given, - - * - ' 360 

The Judge's sitting down in the tribunal^ 361 

The compearance of the parties, • - 363 
The separation betwixt the righteous and the wicked, 364 

The trud of the pardes, ... 355 

The books opened, - - - 369 

Sentence pronounced on the saints^ - ' - 378 

The saints Judge the world, - - 374 

Sentence ofdamnation on the ungodly^ ' - 375 

The execution, - - • - 379 

The general conflagration, - - - ib. 

The place and time* of the judgpnent unknowni 38 1 

Comfort to the saints, - - - 382 

Terror to unbelievers, - - - 383 

Exhortation to prepare for the judgment, * 385 

Head V. The Kingdom of Heaven, discoursed 
from Matlh. xxv. 34. - - » 387 

The natui*e of the kingdom of heaven, • 389 

Tlie saints kingly power and authority, • ib. 

Their ensigns of royalty, - - - 390 

White garments, on what occasion used : Much of 

heaven under them, - - - 391 

The country where this kingdoja lies, - 397 

The royal city, . • - - • ib. 

The royal palace, - • - -398 

The palucc-gai'den, >*-•*, ib. 

The royal treasures, - - - - 399 

The temple in this kingdom, - -. 400 

The society there, - - - - ib. 

The society of the saints among themselves, 401 

Society with the holy angels, - - 402 

Glorious communion with God and Christ, the 

perfection of happiness, - - 403 

The glorious presence of God and the Lamb, 404 

Tb^ niU enjoyment of God and the Lamb, 406 



wiii coKTsirrs. 

Bjr sight, - - - flag 

They will sec Christ with their bodily eyes, 
They will see God, with the eyes of the mind, 
By experimental knowledge. 
Fulness of joy mispeakable, 
The eternal duration of this kingdom, 
The saints admission to the kingdom. 

The quality in which they are introduced, 
Trial of the claim to the kingdom of heaven, 
Duty and comfort of the heirs of the kingdom, 
Exhortation to these who have no right to it, 

Head VI. Hell, discoursed of, from Matth. xxv 4! 

The curse under which the damned shall be shu 

up in hell, - - 

Their misery under that curse, 

The punishment of loss, separation from God, 
The horror of separation from God, evince< 

by several considerations, 
The punishment of sense, departing into fire, 
Hellriire more vehement and terrible than an; 

other, evinced by several considerations, 
Six properties of the fiery torments in hell, 
Three inferences from this doctrine, 
^Society with devils in this miserable state, «> 
The eternity of the whole, - - 

What eternity is, • • » 

What is eternal in the state of the damned, 
Reasonableness of the eternity of the punishment o 
the damned, • - • - 

A measuring reed to measure our time, and endea 
vours for salvation by, • 

A balance to discover the lightness of what is falsel] 
thought weighty, and the weight of what is falsel] 
thought light, - - - • ' 

Exhortation to flee from the ^mrath to come^ 



STATE I. 



NAMELY, 

TBS STATS OF IKNOCENCE9 OR PRIMITIVS INTEGRITY, 
IN WHICH MAN WAS CREATED. 



EccLES. vii. 29. 

^Oj tfda only have I found j That God hath made Man rtfi^ 
right : But they have sought out many Inventions, 

THERE are four things very necessary to be known 
by all that would see heaven. Firaty What man 
Was in the state of innocence, as God made him. Second' 
^) What he is in the state of corrupt nature, as he hath 
^made himself. Thirdly^ What he must be in the state 
•f grace, as created in Christ Jesus unto good works,, if 
ever he be made a partaker of the inheritance of the saints 
^ light. And, Lastly^ What he shall be in his eternal 
state, as made by the Judge of all, either perfectly happy, 
^ completely miserable, and that for ever. These are 
weighty points, that touch the vitals of practical godliness, 
from which most men, and even many profeseors^n these 
dregs of time, are quite estranged. I design, therefore, 
^derthe divine conduct^ to open up these things, and 
^Pply them. 

. I begin with the first of them, namely. The state of 
Innocence : That,beholding man polished after the simili- 
tude of a palace, the ruins may the more affect us ; we may 
||ic more prize that matchless Person, whom the Father 
"^ appointed the repairer of the breach ; and that we may 
J^th JRxed resolves, betake oui'selves to that way which 
'cadeth to the city that hath immoveable foundations. 

In the text we have three things : 

1. The state of innocence wherein man was created, 
jorf hath made man ufiright. By man here we are to un- 
"^rstand our first parents;, the archetypal pair, the root of 
Mankind, the compendis^d world, and the fouiAm^feOTw 

JS 



18 The Exfilication qf the Text. [Sta 

whence all generations have streamed; as may appea 
comparing Gen. v. 1.2. *< In the day that God ere 
man) in the likeness of God made he him^ male an< 
male created he them, and blessed them/' (as the 
of mankind,) " and called their name Adam." The 
ginal words are the same in our text, in this sense, 
was made rights (agreeable to the nature of God, wl 
work is perfect,) without any imperfection, contiptio] 
principle of corruption in his body or soul. He was n 
Upright, that is, straight with the will and law of i 
without any irregularity in his soul. By the set it g< 
its creation, it directly pointed towards God, as his < 
end ; which straight inclination was represented, as i 
emblem, by the erect figure of his body, a figure th£ 
other living creature partakes of. What David was 
gospel sense, that was he in a legal sense : One accor 
to God's own heart, altogether righteous, pure, and 1 
Cod made him thiys: He did not nrst make him, and 
make him righteous ; but in the very making of hin 
madehimrighteous. Original righteousness was cone: 
ed with him; so that in the same moment he was a i 
he was a righteous man, morally good ; with the s 
breath that God breathed in him a living soul, he bn 
ed in him a righteous soul. 

2. Here is man's fallen state ; but they have sough 
many inventions. They fell off from their rest in God 
fell upon seeking inventions of their own, to mend i 
case ; and they quite marred it. Theii' ruin was i 
their own proper motion ; they would not abide as 
had made them ; but they sought out many inventior 
deform and undo themselves. 

3. Observe here the certainty and importance of t 
things ; Zo, this only have I founds Sec. Believe tl 
they are the result of a narrow seaixh, and a serious ir 
ry, performed by the wisest of men. In the two prece 
verses, Solomon represents himself as in quest of good 
in the world: But the issue of it was, he could find n< 
tisfying issue in his search after it ; though it was no 
want of pains ; for he counted one by one to find ou* 

jBCCOunt. Behold thus have I founds (saith the Preachei 

wit, that (as the same word is read in our text) ye 

•eekethj but IJind not. He could make no satisf 




State!.] Of Man^a Original Right eousnesa, 19 

^scoveiy of it, which might stay his enquiry. He found 
good men very rare, one, as it were, among a thousand ; 
good women more rare, not one good among his thousand 
wires and concubines, 2 Kings xi. 3. But could that sa- 
tisfy the grand query. Where shall wisdom be /bund ? No, 
it could not ; (and if the experience of others in tliis point 
run counter to Solomon's, as it is no reflection on his dis- 
cerning, it can as little decide the question ; which will 
remain undetermined till the last day.) But amidst all this 
uncertdnty, there is one point found out, and fixed : ThiB 
hxLiic I found* Ye may depend upon it as most certain 
truth, and be fully satisfied in it : Lo this : fix your eyes 
up(siit,as a matter worthy of most deep and serious re- 
gard : to wit, that man's nature h now depraved, but that 
depravadon was not from God, for he made man ufiright : 
but for themselyes, they have sought out many inventions. 

Doctrine, God made man altogether righteous, 

TUB is that state of innocence in which God set man 
down in the world. It is described in tlie holy 
scriptures with a running pen, in comparison of the fol- 
lowing states, for it was of nd conUnuance, but passed as 
a flying shadow, by man's abusing the freedom of his own 
^^11. Uhall, 

First, Inquire into the righteousness of this state 
"W^herein man was created. 

Secondly, I«ay before you some of the happy concom- 
itants, and consequents thereof. 

Lastly, Apply the whole. 

0/ Ma7i^s Original Righteousness. 

First, As to the righteousness of this state, consider, 
that as uncreated righteousness, the righteousness of God 
IS die supreme rule; so all created righteousness, whether 
of men or angels, hath respect to a law as its rule, and is 
a conformity thereunto. A creature can no more be mo- 
Tcilly independent on,God, in its actions and powers, than 
i^ can be naturally independent on him. A creature, as 
^ creature, must acknowledge the Creator's wUl si^'to ^\x- 




20 Of Man's Original Righteousness. []Stat« 

preme law ; for as it caiinot be without him, so it must 
be but for him, and according to his will : Yet no law 
liges until it be revealed. And hence it follows, that th* 
was a law which man, as a rational creature, was subj^ 
ed to in his creation ; and that this law was revealed, 
him. God made man u/irighty says the text. This pres"«-il> • 
poseth a law to which he was conformed in his creation ; 
as when any thing is made regular, or according to nn-JCf 
of necessity the rule is presupposed. Whence we 
gather, that this law was no other than the eternal, in( 
pensible law of righteousness, observed in all points by 
second Adam: Opposed by the carnal mind; some notion. s 
of which remain yet among the Pagans, who, ^ hnvirK^ j 
not the law, are a law unto themselves," Rom. ii. 15. Xn | 
a word, this law is the very same which was afterward^ / 
summed up in the ten commandments, and promulgator ./ 
on Mount Sinai to the Israelites, called by us the moraJ J 
law : And man's righteousness consisted in conformity "to f9 
this law or rule. More particularly, tliere is a twofold con.^ f 
formity required of man : A conformity of the powers of | 
his soul to the law, which you may call habitual righteous- ' 
ness ; and a conformity of all his actions to it, which is ac- 
tual righteousness. Now, God made man habitually rijght- 
cous ; man was to make himself actually righteous : Th© 
former was the stock God put into his hand : The lattcTf 
the improvement he should have made of it. The sum d 
what I have said is, that the righteousness wherein man 
was created, was the conformity of all the faculties an^ 
powers of his soul to the moral law. This is what we call 
original righteousness, which man was originally endued 
with. We may take it up in these three things : - 

Firstj Man's understanding was a lamp of light. H*"^ 
had perfect knowledge of the law, and of his duty accord- 
ingly : He was miade after God's image ; and, consequent- 
ly, could not want knowledge, which is a part thereoff 
Col. iii. 10. " The new man is renewed in knowledge* 
after the image of him that created him." And, indecdj 
this was necessaiy to fit him for universal obedience ; sc^' 
ing no obedience can be according to the law, unless^ ** 
Ijroceed from a sense of tlie commandment of God requi^' 
it. It is true, Adam had not the law written upon t^*' 
of stone : But it was written upon his mind, the kno^'* 



State 1.] Of Man* 9 Original Right eousnesB. 21 

ledge tliereof being concreated with him. God impressed 
it upon his soul, and made him a law to himself, as the re- 
mains of it among the Heathens do testify, Rom. ii. 14, 15. 
And seeing man was made to be the mouth of tlic crea- 
tion, to glorify God in his works ; we have ground to be- 
lieve he had naturally an exquisite knowledge of the works 
of God. We have a proof of this in his giving names to 
the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air, and these 
such as express their nature. " Whatsoever Adam called 
every living creature, that was the name thereof," Gen. ii^ 
.19. And the dominion which God gave him over the crea- 
tures, soberly to use and dispose of them according to his 
will, (still in subordination to the will of God,) seems to 
require no less than a knowledge of their natures. And 
besides all this, his perfect knowledge of the law proves 
his knowledge in the management of civil dfiiirs, which, 
in respect of the law of God, « a good man will guide 
iivith discretion," Psal. cxii. 5. 

Secondly^ His will lay straight with the will of God, 
£ph. iv. 24. There was no corruption in his will, no 
bent nor inclination to evil ; for that is sin properly and 
truly so called ; hence the apostle suys, Rom. vii. 7. « I 
had hot kno>vn sin, but by the law, for I had not known 
lust, except tlie law had said, Thou shalt not covet." An 
inclination to evil is really a fountain of sin, and therefore 
inconsistent witli that rectitude and uprightness which the 
text expressly says he was endued with at his creation. 
The will of man then wus directed, and naturally inclined 
to God and goodness, though mutably. It was disposed^ 
by its original make, to follow the Creator's will, as the 
shadow does the body ; and that was not left in equal ba- 
lance to good and evil : For at that rate he had not been 
upright, nor habitually confonn to the law ; which in no 
moment can allow the creature not to be inclined towards 
God as his chief end, more than it can allow man to be a 
god to himself. The law was impressed upon Adam's 
soul ; now this according to the new covenant, by wiiich 
the image of God is repaired, consists in two things : 
1 . Putting the law into tlie mind, denoting the knowledge 
of it : 2. Writing it in the heart, denoting inclinations 
in tlie will, answerable to the commands of the law, 
llcb. viii. 10. So that, as the will, wj^en we consider it 

B2 



^2 Of^Man*% Original Rtghteouanesa. [State I. 

as renewed by grace, is by that grace natively inclined to 
the same holiness in ail its parts which the law requires ; 
so was the will of man (when we consider him as God 
niade him at first) endued with natural inclinations to 
every thing commanded by the law. For if the regenerate 
are partakers of the divine nature, as undoubtedly they are; 
for so says the scripture, 2 Pet. i. 4. And if Uiis divine, 
nature caQ import no less than inclinations of the heart to 
holiness ; then surely Adam's will could not want this 
inclination ; for in him the image of God was perfect. It 
is true, it is said, Rom. ii. 14. 15. ^ That the Gentiles 
shew the work of the law written in their hearts :*' But this 
denotes only their knowledge of that law, such as it is ; 
but the apostle to the Hebrews, in the text cited, takes the 
word Aeari in another sense, distinguishing it plainly from 
the mind. And it must be granted, that when Gkxl pro- 
xniseth in the new covenant. To write his law in the hearts 
of his people, it imports quite another thing than what 
Heathens have ; for though they have notions of it in 
their minds, yet their hearts go another way ; their will 
has got a set and bias quite contrary to that law ; and 
therefore the expression suitable to the present purpose 
must needs import, besides these notions of the mind, in* 
clinations of the will going along therewith ; which incli- 
nations, though mixed with corruption in the regenerate, 
were pure and unmixed in upright Ad-<im. In a word, as 
Adam knew his master's pleasure in the matter of duty^ 
so his will stood inclined to what he knew. 

Thirdly^ His affections were orderly, pure, and holy ; 
which i^ a necessary part of that uprighmess wherein man 
was created. The apostle has a petition, 2 Thess. iii. 5. 
/•* The Lord direct your hearts unto the love of God ;" that 
is. The Lord straighten your hearts, or make themlie 
straight to the love of God : And our text tells us, man 
was thus made straight. The new man is created in righ- 
teousness and true holiness, £ph. iv. 24. Now this holi- 
ness, as it is distinguished from righteousness,^may import 
the purity and orderliness of the affections. And thus the 
apostle, \, Tim. ii. 8. will have men to pi*ay, lifting Up 
holy hands, without wrath and doubting: Because, as 
troubled water is unfit to receive the image of the sun ; so 

tjie hearty filled witb impure and disorderly affectionsx la 



State 1.3 Of Manila Original RighteounncH. 8S 

■lot fit for divine commuiiications. Men's sensidve appe- 
XiMt was indeed naturally carried out towards objects g^te- 
ful to the senses. For seeing man was made up of body 
and soul, and God made this man to glorify and enjoy him, 
and for this end to use his good creatures in suboniination 
to lumself ; it is plain that man was naturally inclined both 
to B^ritual and sensible good ; yet to spiritual good, the 
chief good as his ultimate end. And, therefore, his sensi* 
tive motions and inclinations were subordinate to his rea- 
son and will, which lay straight with the will of God, and 
were not, in the least, contrary to the same. Otherwise he 
should have been made up of contradictions ; his soul be- 
ing naturally inclined to God as the chief end, in the su- 
perior part thereof ; and the same soul inclined to the 
creature as the chief end in the inferior part thereof, as 
they call it ; which is impossible ; for man, at the same in- 
stant, cannot have two chief ends. Man's affections then, 
in his primitiYe state, were pure from all defilement, free 
^m sdl disorder and distemper, because in all their mo- 
^ns they were duly subjected to his clear reason, and his 
. Holy will. He had also an executive power answemble to 
his will ; a power to do the good which he knew should 
he done, and which he inclined to do, even to fulfil tlie 
whole lkj.w of God. If it had not been so, God would not 
have required of him perfect obedience ; for to say, That 
the Lord gatheretli where he hath not strdwed, is but the 
hlasphemy of a wicked heart, against a good and bounti- 
ful God, Mat. XXV. 24, 25. 

^''rom what has been said, it may be gathered, that the 
<^ginal righteousness explained was universal and natu- 
^; yet mutable. 

•j^W, It was imiversal, both with respect to the subject 
^Ht, the whole man ; and the object of it, the whole law. 
Universal I say, with respect to the subject of it ; for this 
^ghteousness was diffused through the whole man; it was 
* blessed leaven that leavened the whole lump. There 
"'^ not one wrong pin in the tabernacle of human nature, 
^hen God set it up, however shattered it is now. Man 
^as then holy in soul, body, and spirit : While the soul 
"^niamed untainted, its lodging was kept pure and unde- 
fined ; the members of the body were consecrated vessels, 

^ iastruments of right^usn^ss. A comba.t betYrUti &^^ 



64 0/Man^8 Original Righteoumeas, [State I. 

and spirit) reason and appetite ; nay the least inclination to 
sin, lust of the flesh in the inferior part of the soul^ was 
utterly inconsistent witii this uprightness, in which man 
was created ; and has been invented to veil the corruption 
of man's nature, and to obscure the grace of God in Jesus 
Christ ; it looks very like the language of fallen Adam, 
laying his own sin at his Maker's door, Gen. iii. 12. 
« The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave 
me of the tree, and I did eat." But as this righteousness 
was universal in respect of the subject, because it spread 
through the whole man; so also it was universal, in respect 
of the object, the holy law. There was nothing in the 
law but what was agreeable to his reason and will, as God 
made him ; though sin hath now set him at odds with it; his 
soul was shapen out, in length and breadth, to the com^ 
inaiidment, though exceeding broad ; so that this original 
righteousness was not only perfect in parts,but in degrees. 

Secondly^ As it was univei*sal, so it was natural to him* 
and not supernatural to him in that state. Not that it 
was essential to man as man ; for then he could not have 
lost it, without the loss of his very being ; but it was con- 
iiatui*al to him. He was created with it; and it was 
nccessaiy to the perfection of man, as he came out of the 
hand of God : Necessary to constitute him in a state c^ 
iiitegrity. Yet, 

77«V^//y, It was mutable ; itwasarighteousness that might 
be lost, as is manifested by the doleful event. His will 
was not absolutely indifferent to good or evil ; God set it 
towards good only : Yet he did not so fix and confirm its 
inclinations, that it could not alter. No, it was moveable 
to evil ; and that only by man himself, God having given 
him a sufficient power to stand in this integrity, if he had 
pleased. Let no man quarrel God's works in this ; for if 
Adam had been unchangeably righteous, he behoved to 
have been so, either by nature, or by free gift : By nature 
he could not be so, for that is proper to God, and incom* 
municable to any creature ; if by free gift, then no wron^ 
was done him, in with-holding of what he could not crave. 
Confirmation in a righteous state is a reward of gprace^ 
given upon continuing righteous,through the state of trial ; 
and would have been given to Adam, if he had stood out 

the time appointed for probation by the Creditor \ ftnd a^» 



State I.] O/Mm^a Original Hapfdnaa. 25 

cordingly is given to the saints, upon the account of the 
merits of Christ, who was obedient even to the death. 
And herein believers have the advantage of Adam, that 
they can never totally nor finally fedl away from grace. 

Thus was man made originally righteous, being ^ cre- 
ated in God's own image," Gen. i. 27, which consists in 
the positive qualities of <^ knowledge, righteousness, and 
, holiness," Col. iii. 10. £ph. iv. 24. All that God made 
was very good, according to their several natures. Gen. i. 
^1. And so was man morally good, being made after the 
image of him who is good and upright. Psalm xxv. 8. 
"Without this, he could not have answered the g^at end 
of his creation, which was to know, love, and serve his 
God) according to his will. Nay, he could not be created 
otherwise ; for he behoved either to be conform to the law> 
in hb powers, principles, «nd inclinations, or not ; if he 
vaa, then he was righteous ; and if not, he was a unner, 
vhich is absurd and horrible to imagine. 

Of Man*9 Original Hafitdnt9%. 

SficoNDLT, I shall lay before you some of those things 
which did accompany or flow from the righteousness of 
man's primitive state. Happiness is the result of holi- 
ness ; and as it was an holy, so it was an happy state. 

Firht^ Man was then a very glorious creature. We 
l)ave reason to suppose, that as Moses' face shone when he 
came down from the mount ; so man had a very lightsome 
and pleasant countenance, and beautiful body, while as yet 
there was no darkness of sin in him at all. But seeing 
God himself is glorious in holiness, (Exod. xv. 11.) surely 
tliat spiritual comeliness the Lord put upon man at his 
creation, made him a very glorious creature. O how did 
light shine in his holy conversation, to the glory of the 
Creator ! while every action was but the darting forth of a 
ray and beam of that glorious, unmixed light, which God 
had set up in his soul ; while that lamp of love, lighted 
from heaven, continued burning in his heart, as in the holy 
place ; and the law of the Lord, put in his inward parts by 
the finger of God, was kept by him there, as in the most 
holy. There was no impurity to be seen without ; no 
«(][uint look in, the eyes, after any unclean thin^ \ the 



26 OfMatCi Original Hajifiinctt. [State I. 

tongue spoke nothing but the language of heaven ; and 
in a word, the King's Son was all glorious within^ and 
his cloathing of wrought gold. 

Secondly^ He was the favourite of heaven. He shone 
brightly in the image of God, who cannot but love his 
own image, wherever it appears. While he was alone 
in the world, he was not alone, for God was with him. 
His communion and fellowship was with his Creator, and 
that immediately : For as yet there was nothing to turn 
away the face of God from the work of his own hands ; 
seeing sin had not as yet entered, which alone could make 
the breach. 

By the favour of God, he has advanced to be confede- 
rate with heaven, in the first covenant, called, The Cove^ 
nam of Works, God reduced the law, which he gave, in 
his creation, into the form of a covenant) whereof perfect 
obedience was the condition ; life was the thing promised* 
and death the penalty. As for the condiUon, one great 
branch of the natural law was, that men. believe whatso* 
ever God shall reveal, and do whatsoever he shall com«* 
mand : Accordingly, God making this covenant with maiii 
extended his duty to the not eating of the tree of know- 
ledge of good and evil ; and the law thus extended^ was 
the rule of man's covenant-obedience. How easy were 
these terms to him, who had the natural law written on his 
heart ; and that inclining him to obey this positive law, 
revealed to him, it seems,by an audible voice, (Gen.ii. 16.) 
the matter whereof was so very easy ? And, indeed, it was 
highly reasonable that the rule and matter of his covenant- 
obedience should be thus extended ; that which was add- 
ed, being a thing in itself indifferent, where his obedience 
was to turn upon the precise point of the will of God, the 
plainest evidence of true obe<fience, and it being in an ex- 
ternal thing, wherein his obedience pr disobedience would 
be most clear and conspicuous. 

Now, upon this condition, God promised him life, the 
continuance of natural life, in the union of soul and body ; 
and of spiritual life, in the favour of his Creator : He pro- 
mised him also eternal life in heaven, to have been entered 
into, when he should have passcid the time of his trial upon 
earth, and the Lord should see meet to transport him into 
the upper Paradise., This promise of life Wtis upicludcd ia 



Aw^&VBtetdftg of'-deaOl, mentUaed G«n. ii. 17. For 

wlule God says, " In the day thou Wtett thereof, thou 
ahalt surely die ;" it is in effect, " If thou do not cM 
of it;tliou shalt surely live." And thii wu ■ftcnmentalljr 
confirmed by another tree in the garden, called, therefore, 
the tree of life, which he was del^rred fVon, wbea he had 
^nned: Gen. iii. 22,23. " ]>st he put fimh his huid» 
and take also of the tree of life, and est, and Utc for ever. 
Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of 
Eden." Yet it is not to be tliought, that man's life and 
[ deadi did hang only on this matter of the forWdden fruit, 
Wl on the whole law ; for so says the apoatle, Cal.iii. IQ. 
" It is written, cursed is every one that condnueth not in 
al! ihingB, which are written in the bboik of the Itw to do 
&nu." That of the forbidden fruit mis a revealed part 
of Adam's religion; and so behoved expKtaly to be laid 
t«fort him ; but as to the natural laff, he naturally knew 
death to be the reward of disobedience ; for the very Hea- 
thens were not ignorant of this, " knowing die judgment 
of God, that they which commit such thinga are worthy 
ofdeath," Rom. i. 32. And, moreover, the promiie in- 
cluded in the threatening secured Adam's life, according 
t« the covenant, aa long as he obeyed the natural law, with 
the addition of that positive command ; so that he needed 
nothing to be expressed to him in the covenant, but what 
concerned the eating of the forbidden fruit. That eternal 
"K IQ heaven was promised in this covenant is plain from 
this, that the threatening was of eternal death in hell ; to 
*hich when man had miide himself liable, Christ was pro- 
■ Jl^Md, by his death, to purchase eternal life ; and Christ 
'''I'lsclf expounds the gromise of t!ie covenant of works of 
tternal life, while he promiseth the condition of that cove- 
"Uil to a proud young man, who, though he had not 
^ttUm'a stock, yet would needs enter into life in the wi^y 
"■■wking, as Adam was to haiR done under this cove- 
■*«, Mat. xix. 17. " If thou wilt enter into life," (viz. 
"tww! life, by doing, ver. 16.) "keep the command- 

Tke penalty was death, Gen. ii. 17. "In the day that 
™wi eucst thereof, thou shall surely die," The death 
"Kttened was such, as the life pramised was ', inv^^TnaX 
'^iattiy,nx./tvi/>orei,t/iirUual,anieteTnai death. Tla» 



^a Of Man' 9 Original Hafifiine»9. [State T. 

event is a commentary on this : For that very day he did 
eat thereof, he was a dead man in law ; but the executioh 
was stoppedybecause of his posterity then in his loins; and 
another covenant was prepared : However, that day his 
body got its death'NS-wound> and became mortal. Death 
also seized his soul: He lost his original righteousness and 
the favour of God ; witness the gripes and throes of con* 
science, which made him hide himself from God. And 
he became liable to eternal death, which would have ac- 
tually followed of course, if a Mediator had not been pro- 
vided, who found him bound with the cords of death, as a 
malefactor ready to be led to execution. Thus you have a 
short description of the covenant, into which the Lord 
brought man, in the state of innocence. 

And seemeth it a small thing unto you, that earth was 
thus confederate with heaven? This could have been done, 
to none but him, whom the King of heaven delighted to 
honour. It was an act of grace worthy of the gracious. 
God whose &,vourite he was; for there was gp^ce and free 
favour in the first covenant, though the exceeding riches qf 
grace (as the apostle calls it, Eph. ii. 7.) was reserved foi* 
the second. It was certainly an act of grace, favour, and 
admirable condescension in God, to enter into a covenant; 
and such a covenant with his own creature. Man was not 
at his own, but at God's disposal. Nor had he any things 
to work with, but what he had received from God. There 
was no proportion betwixt the work and the promised re- 
ward. Before that covenant, man was bound to perfect 
obedience, in virtue of his natural dependence on God ; 
and death- was naturally the wages of sin^ which the jus- 
tice of God could and would have required, though there 
had never been any covenant betwixt God and man: But 
God was free ; man could never have required eternal life 
as the reward of his work, if there had not been such a co- 
venant. Gdd was free to have disposed of his creatures as^ 
he saw meet ; and if he had stood in his integrity as long 
as the world should stand, and there had been no covenant 
promising eternal life to him upon his obedience ; God 
might have withdrawn his supporting hand at last, and so 
made him creep back into the womb of nothing, whence 
almighty power had drawn him out. And what wrong 
could there have been in this> while God should have ta- 



State 1.3 Q/* MBin*a Original ffafi/tineM. 29 

ken back what he freely gav6 ? But now the coTenant be- 
iag made, God becomes debtor to his own faithfulness : 
If man will work) he may crave the reward on the ground 
of the covenant. Well might the angels then, upon his 
being raised to his dignity, have given him that salutation, 
^ Hal thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with 
thee." 

Thirdly f God made him lord qf the worlds prince of the 
inferior creatures, universal lord and emperorof the whole 
earth. His Creator gave him dominion over the fish of 
the sea, and over the fowls of the air, over all the earth, 
yea, and every living thing that liveth upon the earth : 
He ** put all things under his feet," Psal. viii. 6, 7, 8. 
He gave him a power soberly to use and dispose of the 
creatures in the earth, sea, and air. Thus man was God's 
deputo-govemor in the lower world ; and this his domi- 
nion-was an image of God's sovercigrty. This was com- 
mon to the man and the woman ; but the man had one 
thing peculiar to him, viz, that he had dominion over the 
woman also, 1 Cor. xi. 7. Behold how tlie creatures 
came to liim, to own tlieir subjection, and to do him 
homage as their lord ; and quietly stood before him, till 
he put names on them as his own, Gen. ii. 19. IMan's 
face struck an awe upon them ; the stoutest creatures 
stood astonished, tamely and quietly adoring him as their 
lord and ruler. Thus was man " cro^^^lcd with glory and 
honour," Psal. viii. 5. The Lord dealt most liberally 
and bountifully with him, fiut all things under his feet : 
only he kept one thing, one tree in the garden, out of his 
hunds, even the tree of knowledge of good and evil. 

But, you may say, j^fid did he grudge him this ? I an- 
swer, Nay ; but when he had made him thus holy and 
happy, he graciously gave him this restriction, which was 
in its own nature a prop and stay to keep him from falling. 
And this I say, upon these three grounds : (1.) As it was 
most proper for the honour of God, who had made man 
lord of the lower world, to assert his sovereign dominion 
over all, by some particular visible sign ; so it was most 
proper for man's siifcty. Man being set down in a beauti- 
ful Paradise, it was an act of infinite wisdom, and of grace 
too, to keep from him one single tree, as a visible testi- 
mony that he must hold all of liis Creator, as his great 

C 



so Of Man^a Original Hafifune98, [State I. 

Landlord ; that so while he saw himself lord of the crea- 
tures, he might not forget that he was still God's subject. 
(2.) This was a memorial of his mutable state given m to 
him from hcaven« to be laid up by him, for his great cau- 
tion. For man was created with a free will to good, which 
the tree of life was an evidence of: But his will was also 
free to evil, and the forbidden tree was to him a memorial 
thereof. It was in a manner a continual watch- word to 
him against evil ; a beacon set up before him, to bid him 
beware of dashing himself to pieces, on the rock of sin. 
(3.) God made man upright, directed towards God, as the 
chief end. He set him, like Moses, on the top of the hill, 
holding up his hands to heaven ; and as Aaron and Hur 
stayed up Moses' hand, (£xod. xvii. 10, 11, 12.) so God 
gave man an erect figure of body, and forbid him the eat- 
ing of this tree, to keep liim in that posture of uprightness 
wherein he was created. God made the beasts looking 
down towards the earth, to shew that their satisfaction might 
be brought from thence ; and accordingly, it does afford 
them what is commensurable to their appetite : But the 
erect figure of man's body, which looketh upward, shewed 
him, that his happiness lay above him, in God ; and that 
he was to expect it from heaven, and not from earth. 
Now this fair tree, of which he was forbidden to eat, 
taught him the same lesson ; that his happiness lay not in 
enjoyment of the creatures, for there was a want even in 
Paradise : So that the forbidden tree was, in effect, the 
hand of all the creatures, pointing man away from them- 
selves to God for happiness. It was a sign of emptiness * 
hung before the door of the creation, with that inscrip- 
tion. Tins 18 not your rest. 

Fourthly i As he had a perfect tranquillity within hik 
own breast, so he had a perfect calm without. His heart 
had nothing to reproach him with ; conscience then had 
nothing to do, but to dii^ect, approve, and feast him : And 
without, there was nothing to annoy him. The happjr 
pair lived in perfect amity ; and though their knowledge 
was vast, true, and clear, they knew no shame. Though 
they were naked, tliere were no blushes in tlieir faces ; for 
sin, the seed of shame, was not yet sown, (Gen. ii. 35.) 
and their beautiful bodies were not capable of injuries from 
the air i so they had.no need of clothes, which are origi- 



State 1.3 Of Man* % Original Haptdnt%%. SI 

nally the badges of our shame. They were liable to no 
^seases, nor pains : And though they were not to li^e 
idle, yet toil, weariness, and sweat of the brows, were not 
known in this state. 

Fifthly y Man had a life of pure delight, and undrcggy 
pleasure in this state. Rivers of pure pleasures runtiirough 
it The earth, with the product tliercofji was now in its 
glory ; nothing had yet come in, to mar the beauty of the 
creatures. God set him down, not in a common place of 
die earth, but in Eden : a place eminent for pleasantness, 
as the name of it imports : Nay, not only in Eden^ but in 
the garden of Eden : the most pleasant spot of that plea- 
sant place ; a garden planted by God himself, to be the 
mansion house of this his favourite. As, when God made 
the other living creatures, he said, ^ Let the water bring 
forth the moving creature," Gen. i. 20. And, *< Let tho 
earth bring forth the living creature," ver. 34. But, 
when man was to be made, he ssdd, ^^ Let us make man," 
yer. 3.6« So, when the rest of the earth wad to be fur- 
mshed with herbs and trees, God said, << Let the earth 
bring forth grass and the fruit tree," ^c. Gen. i. 1 1 . 
But of Paradise it is said, God filanted itj chap. ii. 8. which 
cannot but denote a singular excellency in that garden, be- 
yond all other parts of the then beautiful earth. There 
he wanted neither for necessity nor delight: For there was 
« every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for 
food," ver. 9. He knew not these delights which luxury 
has invented for the gratifying of lusts : But his delights 
were such as came out of the hand of God : without pass^ 
ing through sinful hands, which readily leave marks of 
impurity on what they touch. So' his delights were pure, 
his pleasures refined. And yet may I shew you a more ex- 
cellentway^ Wisdom had entered into his heart: Surely then 
knowledge was pleasant unto his soul ! What delight do 
some find in their discoveries of the works of nature, by 
the scraps of knowledge they have gathered I But how 
much more exquisite pleasure had Adam, while his pierc- 
ing eyes read the book of God's works ; which God laid 
before him, to the end he might glorify him in the same ! 
And therefore he had surely fitted him for the work. But 
above all, his knowledge of God, and that as his God ! 
And the communicn he had with him, could not but afford 



c« 



2 O/Man^^ Original Hafifiines^. [State I. 



him the most refined and exquisite pleasure in the inner- 
most recesses of his heart. Great is that delight which 
the saints find in these views of the glory of God, that their 
souls are sometimes let into, while they are compassed 
ahout with many infirmities ! But much more may well be 
allowed to sinless Adam ! No doubt he relished these 
pleasures at another rate. 

Lastly^ He was immortal. He would never have died^ 
if he had not sinned ; it was in case of sin that death Was 
threatened, Gen. ii. 17. Which shews it to be the con- 
sequent of sin, and not of the sinless human nature. The 
perfect constitution of his body, which came out of God's 
hand very good ; and the righteousness and holiness of hui 
soul, removed all inward causes of death ; nothing being 
prepared for the grave's devouring mouth, but the vile 
body, Philip, iii. 21. and those who have sinned. Job 
xxiv. 19. And God's special care of his innocent crea- 
ture secured him against outward violence. The apostle's 
testimony is express, Rom. v. 12. « By one man sin en- 
tered into the world, and death by sin." Behold the door 
by which death came in ! Satan wrought with his lies till 
he got it opened, and so death entered ; and therefore is 
he said to have been " a murderer from the beginningi** 
John viii. 44. 

Thus have I shewn you the holiness and happiness of 
man in this state. If any say. What's all this to us, who 
never tasted of tliat holy and happy state ? They must 
know it nearly concerns us, in so far as Adam was the roDt 
of all mankind, our common head and representative; who 
received from God our inheritance end stock to keep it for 
himself and his children, and convey it to them. The 
Lord put all mankind's stock (as it were) in one ship : 
And, as we ourselves should have done, he made our com- 
mon father the pilot. He put a blessing in the root, to 
have been, if rightly managed, diffused into all the 
branches. According to our text, making Adam up- 
right, he made man upright ; and all mankind had that 
uprightness in him ; for, if the root be holyy so are the 
branches. But more of this afterwards. Had Adam 
stood, none would have quarrelled the represeijtalion. 

Use I. Fgf information. This shews us, (1 .) That not 
God, but man himself, was tlie cause of his ruin. God 



Stftte I.] 7%e Doctrine of thcy &c. fta 

made him upright : His Creator set him up, but he threw 
himself down. Was the Lord's directing and inclining 
Jum to good the' reason of his woful choice? Ordid hea- 
ven deal so sparingly with him, that his pressing wants 
sent him to hell to seek supply ? Nay, man was, and is» 
the cause of his own ruin. (2.) God may most justly re- 
quire of men perfect obedience to his law, and condemn 
tiiem for their not obeying it perfectly, though now they 
have no ability to keep it. In so doing, he gathers but 
where he has strawed. He gave man s^ility to keep the 
whole law ; man has lost it by his own fault ; but his sin 
could never take away that right which God had to exact 
perfect obedience of his creature, and to punish in case of 
disobedience. (3.) Behold here the infinite obligation we 
lie under to Jesus Christ the second Adam ; who with his 
own precious blood has bought our cscheatc, and freely 
makes ofifer of it again to us. Hos. xiii. 9. and that with 
the advantage of everlasting security, tliat it can never be 
altogether lost any more, John x. 28, 29. Free grace will 
fix those whom free will shook down into a gulf of misery. 
Use II. This teacheth a reproof to tiu*ec sorts of per- 
sons. (I.) To those who hate religion in the power of it, 
wherever it appeal's ; and can take pleasure in nothing but 
in the woiUl and their lusts. Surely those men ure fur 
from righteousness ; they are haters of God, Rem. i. 30. 
for they are haters of his image. Upright Adam in Para- 
dise would have been a great tye-rore to ull such persons, 
as he was to the serpcnt)Whose seed they prove themselves 
to be, by their malignity. (2.) It reproves those who put 
religion to shame, and tliose who ure ashumed of religion 
before a graceless world. There is a generation who make 
so bold with the God that made them, and can in a mo- 
ment crush them, that they ridicule piety, and muke j^ 
mock of seriousness. «' Against whom do ye sport your- 
selves? Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw 
out the "tongue ?" Isa. Ivii. 4. Is it not against God him- 
self, whose image, in some measure repaired on some of 
his creatures, makes them fools in your eyes? But " be ye 
not mockers, lest your hands be made strong/' Isa. xxviii. 
fl2. Holiness was the glory God put on man, when he 
made him : But now sons of men turn that glory intD, 
filiame} because they themselves glory in their sh^me. 

C^ 



$4 The Doctrine qf the [Stati 

There are others that secretly approve of religion, and 
religious company will profess it ; who at other times 
be neighbour-like,areashamed to own it; soweak areth 
that they are blown over with the wind of the wicke 
mouth. A broad laughter, an impious jest, a silly g 
out of a profane mouth, is to many an unanswerable ar! 
tnent against religion and seriousness ; for in the caus< 
religion, they are as silly doves without heart. O that si 
would consider that weighty word ! Mark viii. 38. " W 
soever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my woi 
in this adulterous and sinful generation ; of him also si 
the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the g] 
of his Father with tlie holy angels." (3.) It reproves. 
]iroud self-conceited professor, who admires himself 
garment he hath patched together of rags. There 
many, who, when once they have gathered some sci 
of knowledge of religion, and have attained to some 
formation of life, do swell big with conceit of themseh 
a sad sign that tlic effectsof the fall lie so heavy upon th 
that they have not as yet come to themselves, Luke xv 
They have eyes behind to see their attainments ; bu 
eyes within, no eyes before, to see their wants, wl 
would surely humble them; for true knowledge makes i 
to see, both what once they were, and what they ar 
present ; and so is humbling, and will not suffer thci 
be content with any measure of grace attained ; but ] 
them on to press forward, « forgetting the things that 
behind," Phil. iii. 13, 14. But those men are such a s] 
tacle of commiseration, as one would be, that had set 
palace on fire, and were glorying in a cottage he had I 
tb'r iiimself out of the rubbish, though so very weak, 
it could not stand against a storm. 

Use III. Of lamentation. Here was a stately build 
piariy carved like a fair palace, but now lying in asl: 
let us stand and look on the ruins, and drop a tear. \ 
is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. C( 
we chuse but to weep, if we saw our country ruined, 
turned by Uie enemy into a wilderness ? If we saw 
bouses on fire,and our households perishing in thefiun 
But all this comes far short of the dismal sight, man 
, en as a star from heaven. Ah I may not we now say 
tj^ we were a^ i& months paat^ when there were 



State I.^ State of Innocence applied, %% 

stains in our nature, no clouds on our minds, no pollution 
in our hearts ! Had we never been in better case, the mat- 
ter had been less ; but they that were brought up in scarlet* 
do now embrace dunghills. Where is our primitive glory 
now ? Once no darkness in the mind, no rebellion in the 
wiJU, no disorder in the affections. But ah 1 '< How is the 
^diful city become an harlot? Righteousness lodged in it; 
but now murderers. Our silver is become dross, our wine 
mixed with water." That heart which was once the tem- 
ple of God, is now turned into a den of thieves. Let our 
name be Ichabod, for the glory is departed. Happy wast 
thou, O man, who was like unto thee ! No pain or sick- 
ness could affect thee, no death could approach thee, no 
sigh was heard from thec,till these bitter fruits were pluck- 
ed off the forbidden tree. Heaven shone upon thee, and 
earth smiled : Thou wast the companion of angels, and the 
envy of devils. But how low is he now laid, who was 
created for dominion, and made lord of the world ! " The 
crown is fallen -from our head : Wo unto us that we have 
unned." The creatures that waited to do him service arc 
now, since the fall, set in battle uiTay against him ; and 
the least of them having commission proves too hard for 
him. Waters overflow the old world ; fire consumes So- 
dom ; the stars in their courses fight against Siscra; frogs, 
flies, lice, life, turn executioners to Pharaoh and his Egyp- 
tians ; worms eat up Herod : Yea, man needs a league 
with the beasts, yea witli the very " stones of tlie field,*' 
Job V. 13. having reason to fear, that every one tliat find- 
eth hinti will slay him. Alas ! How are we fallen ? How 
are we plimged into a gulf of misery I The sun has come 
down on us, death has come in at our windows ; our ene- 
mies have put out our two eyes, and sport themselves with 
our miseries. Let us then lie down in our shame, and let 
our confusion cover us. Nevertheless, there is hope in 
Israel concerning this thing. Come then, O sinner, look 
to Jesus Christ, the second Adam ; quit the first Adam 
and his covenant ; come over to the Mediator and Surely 
of the new and better covenant : And let our hearts say, 
" Be thou our ruler, and let this breach be under thy 
hand." And let your « eye trickle down, and cease not 
without any intermission, till the Lord look down and be«^ 
bold from hcaveB>" Lam. lii. 49^ 50. 



STATE II. 



NAMELY, 

Ttif STATE OF NATUES, OR OF ENTIBX DBPRAVA- 

TION. 



HEAD I. 

i^HE SlNFUl^HESS OF MAN'S VA^UBAL StATE. 

Genesis vi. 5. 

And God saw that the wickedness of Man was great in the 
earthy and that every Imagination of the thoughts ofbi% 
Heart was only £vil continually. 

WE have seen what man was, as God made him» a 
lovely and happy creature : Let us view him now 
as he hath unmade himself ; and we shall see him a sinful 
and miserable creature. This is the sad state we were 
brought into by the full ; a state as black and doleful as the 
former was glorious ; and this we commonly call. The 
state 6f nature, or man's natural state ; according to that 
of tlie Vpostle, Eph. ii. 2. « And were by nature the chil- 
dren ofvrrath even as others." And herein two things 
are to be c)9i|isidered : \st^ The sinfulness ; 2rf/y, The mi-^ 
sery of this i^te, in which all the unregenerate do live. 
I begin with the lunfulness of man's natural state, whereof 
the text gives us a full, though short account ; ^' And God 
saw tliat the wickedness of man was great," ^r. 

The scope and design of these words is, to clear God's 
justice, in bringing the flood on the old world. There 
are two particular causes of it taken notice of in the prer 
ceding verses. (1.) Mixed marriages, ver. 2. The sous qjT 
Godj the posterity of Seth and Enos, professors of the true 
religion^ married with the daughters of men> the pro&iis> 



Head 1-3 2"Ar ExfiHcation qf the Text. yt 

cursed race of Cain. They did not carry the matter before 
the Lord, that he might chuae for them^ Psal. xlviii. 14. 
But without any respect to the will of God they chose ; 
not according to the rules of their faith, but of their fancy : 
They saw that they were fair ; and their marriage with 
them occasioned their divorce from God. This was one 
of the causes of the deluge, which swept away the old 
world. Would to God all professors in our day could 
plead uot guilty : But though that sin brought on the de- 
luge, yet the deluge hath not swept away that sin ; which, 
as of old, so in our day, may justly be looked upon as one 
of the causes of the decay of religion. It was an ordinary 
thing among the Pagans to change their gods, as they 
changed their condition into a married lot : And many sad 
instances the Christian world affords of the same, as if 
people were of Pharaoh*s opinion. That religion is only 
for those that have no otlier cai'c upon tlieir heads, Exod. 
T. 1 r. (2.) Great opl)ression, ver. 4. " There were giants 
in the earth in those days," men of great stature, great 
strcng^ and monstrous wickedness, ^ filling the earth 
with violence," ver. U. But neither their strength nor 
treasures of wickedness could profit them in the day of 
wrath. Yet the gain of oppression still carries many over 
the terror of this dreadful example. Thus much for the 
connexion, and what particular crimes that generation was 
guilty of. But every person that was swept away with the 
flood could not be guilty of these things, and shall not the 
Judge of all the earth do right ? Therefore, in my text, 
there is a general indictment drawn up agdnst them all, 
" The wickedness of man was great in the earth," l^c. 
And this is well instructed, for God saw it. Two things 
arc laid' to their charge here : 

Firat^ Corruption of life, wickedness, great wickedness. 
I understand this of the wickedness of tlieir lives; for it is 
plainly distinguished from the wickedness of their hearts. 
The sins of their outward conversation were great in the 
nature of them, and greatly aggravated by tlieir attending 
circumstances ; and this not only among those of the race 
of cursed Cain, but those of holy Seth : The wickedness 
of man was great. And then it is added, in the carth| 
(1.) To vindicate God's severity, in that he not only cut 
oiT sinners, but defaced the beauty of the earth; and swept 



3S The ExfiUcation ^fthc Text. [State II» 

off the brute creatures from it by the deluge ; that as meii 
had set the marks of their impiety^ God might set the 
marks of his indignation on the earth. (2.) To shew the 
heinousness of tlieir sin^ in making the earth which God' 
had so adonied for the use of man a sink of sin^'and a stage 
whereon to act their wickedness, in defiance of heaven. 
God saw this corruption of life ; he not only knew it, and. 
took notice of it, but he made them to know, that he did 
take notice of it ; and that he had not forsaken the earthy 
though they had forsaken heaven. 

Secondly J Corruption of nature. « Every imagination of 
the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually." All 
theirwicked practices are here traced to the fountain-head ; 
a corrupt heart was the source of all. The soul, which 
was made upright in all its faculties, is now wholly disor- 
dered. The heart, that was made according to God's own 
heart, is now the reverse of it, a forg^ of evil imaginationsy 
a sink of inordinate affections, and a store-house of all im- 
piety, Mark vii. 21, 32. Behold the heart of the natural 
man, as it is opened in our text The mind is defiled; the 
thoughts of the heart are evil; the will and affections ar^ 
defiled ; the imagination of the thoughts of the heart, (i. e* 
whatsoever tlie heartframethwithinitself by thinking, such 
as judgment, choice, purposes, devices, desires, every in* 
ward motion,) or, rather, the frame of thoughts of the heart 
(namely, the frame, make, or mould of these, 1 Chron. 
xxix. 18.) is evil. Yea, and every imagination, every 
frame of his thoughts is so. The heart is ever framing 
something ; but never one right thing ; the frame of 
thoughts, in the heart of man, is exceeding various; yet 
are they never cast into a right frame : But is there nof^ 
at least, a mixture of good in them? No; they are only 
evil; there is nothing in them truly good and acceptable to 
God ; nor can any thmg be so that comes out of that forge ; 
where not the Spirit of God, but "the prince of the power 
of the air worketh," Eph. ii. 2, Whatever changes paay bo 
foundinthem,areonlyfromevilto evil; for the im8^;inatMi]i 
of theheai*t,orframeofthoughtsinnaturalmen,isevil conti- 
nually, or every day; From the first day, to the last day ia 
this state, they are in midnight darkness ; there is not a 
glimmering of the light of holiness in them; not one holy 
thought can ever be produced by the imholy heart. O 
what a vile heart is this ! O what a corrupt nature is this i 



Head I.} The Sgi^tlieation qf the Text. 59 

The tree that always brings forth fruit, but never good 

fruit, whatever soil it be set in, whatever pains be taken 

cm it, must naturally be an evil tree: and what can 

that heart be, whereof every imagination, every set of 

thoughts, is only evil, and that continually ? Surely 

that corruption is ingrained in our hearts, interwoven 

with our very natures, has simk into the marrow of our 

souls ; and will never be cured, but by a miracle of grace. 

^ow such is man's heart, such is his nature, till regen- 

cradng graces change it. God that searcheth the heart 

saw man's heart was so, he took special notice of it ; and 

the &ithful and true witness cannot mistake our case ; 

though we are most apt to mistake ourselves in this point, 

and generally do overlook it. 

Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, 
saying, What is that to us ? Let that generation of whom 
the text speaks sec to that. For the Lord has left the 
case of that generation on record, to be a looking-glass to 
all after-generations; wherein they may see their own cor- 
ruption of heart, and what their lives would be too, if he 
restrained them not ; for " as in water face answereth to 
face, so the heart of man to man," Prov. xxvii. 19. A- 
dam's fall has framed all men's hearts alike in this matter. 
Hence the apostle, Rom. iii. 10. proves the corruption of 
the nature, hearts, and lives of all men, from what the 
Psalmist says of the wicked in his day, Psal. xiv. 1, 2, 3. 
Psal. V. 9. Psal. cxl. 3. Psal. x. 7. Psal. xxxvi. 1. and 
from what Jeremiah saith of the wicked in his day, Jer. ix. 
3. and from what Isaiah says of those that lived in his 
time, Isa. Ivii. 7, 8. and concludes with that, ver. 19. 
<* Now we know, that what things soever the law saith, it 
saith to them that are under the law; that every mouth 
may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty be- 
fore God." Had the history of the deluge been transmit- 
ted unto us, without the reason thereof in the text, we 
might thence have gathered the corruption and total de- 
pravation of man's nature ; for what other quarrel could a 
holy and just God have with the infants that were destroy- 
ed by the flood, seeing they had no actual sin ? If we saw 
a wise man, who having made a curious piece of work, 
and heartily approved of it when he gave it out of his hand, 
as fit for the use it was designed for^ rise up in wr^tK^sx^ 



40 The ExfiUcatian qfthc Tcxl. [State II 

break it all in pieces, when he looked on it afiterwlti*d8 
"would we not thence conclude the frame of it had beei 
quite marred, since made, and that it does not serve fortha 
use it was designed for? How much more, when we seeth< 
holy and wise God destroying the work of his own handi 
once solemnly pronounced by him very good, may we con 
elude that the original frame thereof is utterly marred, tha 
it cannot be mended, but it must needs be new made^ o 
lost altogether ? Gen. vi. 6,7. « And it repented the Lon 
that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him. a 
his lieait; and the Lord said, I will destroy man," or blot bin 
out; as a man doth a sentence out of a book, that canno 
be corrected, by cuttingofF some letters, syllables,or wordc 
and interlining others here and there ; but must needs h 
wholly new frumed. But did the deluge carry off this cor 
ruption of man's nature ? Did it mend tlie matter ? No, i 
did not. God, in his holy providence, « That every moutl 
may be stopped, and all the new world may become guilt 
before God," as well as the old, permits that corruption o 
nature to break out in Noah, the father of the new world 
after the deluge was over. Behold him as another Adam 
sinning in the fruit of a tree. Gen. ix. 20, 21. He plantei 
a vineyard, and he drank of the wine, and was drunken 
and he was uncovered within his tent. More than thai 
God gives the same reason against a new deluge, which h 
gives in our text for bringing that on the world: "I will no 
(saith he) again curse the ground any more for man's sake 
for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth,' 
Gen. viii. 21. Whereby it is intimated, that there is m 
mending of the matter by this means ; and that if he wouh 
always take the same course with men that he had done 
he would be always sending deluges on the earth, seein| 
the corruption of man's nature remains still. For thoug] 
tlie flood could not carry off tlie corruption of nature, ye 
it pointed at the Way how it is to be done, viz. That mei 
must be bom of water and of the Spirit, raised from spiri 
tual death in sin, by the grace of Jesus Christ, who cam< 
by water and blood ; out of whidh a new world of &ai(it 
arise in regeneration, even as the new world of sinners ou 
of the waters, where they had long lain buried (as it were 
in the ark. This we learn from I Pet. iii. 20,21. wheri 
the apostle, speaking of Noah's ark, saith, "Wherein few," 



Head 1.3 TAat Mttn^% Nature i% eorrufttedj ftrwtdn 41 

that is, « eight souls, were saved by water. The like fi- 
ffot whereunto, even baptism doth also now suvc us.'* 
Now the waters of the deluge being a like figure to bap- 
tism ; it plainly follows, tliat they signified (as baptism 
doth) « the wiiAhing of regeneration, and renewing of the* 
Holy Ghost.'' To conclude, then, these waters, though 
now dried up, may serve us for a looking-glass, in which 
to seethe total corruption of our nature, and the necessity 
of regeneration. From the text thus explained, ariscth 
thig weighty point of Doctrine, which he that runs may 
wad in it, viz. Man*s nature U now wholly coi-^ufited. 
Now b there a sad alteration, a wonderful overturn, in the 
Bature of man ! where, at first, there was nothing etil ; 
now there is nothing good. In prosecuting of this doc- 
trine, I shall^ 
fir%t^ Confirm it. 

Secondly, Represent this, corruption of nature in its se- 
veral parts. 

Thirdly, Shew you how man's nature comes to be tlius 
corrupted. 
LoBtlyj Make application. 

That Man^fi A'ature is corrupted. 
First, I am to confirm the doctrine of the con*uption 
of nature ; to hold the glass to your eyes, wherein you 
Hiuy see your sinful nature ; which, though God takes 
particular notice of it, many do quite overlook. And 
iicrewe shall consult, 1. God's word. 2. Men's expcri- 
^oce and observation. 
I. For scripture proof, let us consider, 
^irit. How the scripture takes particular notice of 
Adam's communicating his image to his posterity, (»en. 
y» 3. «< Adam begat a son in his o^vn likeness, uftcr his 
^^%t^ and called his name Seth." Compare with this 
*Cf. 1. of that chapter, " In the day that God created 
^"^j in the likeness of God made he him." Behold 
pcre, how the image after which man Wi;s made, and the 
^^ge after which he is begotten, are opposed. Man was 
JJ^e in the likeness of God; that is, a holy and righteous 
"<^ made a holy and righteous creature ; but fJlen 
Adam begat a son, not in the likeness of God, but in his 
^n likeness ; that is, corrupt sinful Adam begat a cor^ 
^pt linful scHi. For as the image of God bore righteous^ 

D 



nest and immortality in it, as was cleared before^ ut- tlus . 
image of fidien Adam bore corruption and dcatkinit^. 
L. Cor. xy. 49y 50. compare with Ter. 33. Moaes» in 
that fifth chapter of Genesis, bein^ to (^ve us the first bill 
of moitality that erer was in the world, ushers it:ixi 
with this, tliat dying Adam beg^t moi^tate. BLaving sin- 
ned', he became mortal, accoiiding to the thrcateiung^ ; 
and so he beg^t a son, in his own likeness^ aiajfttl, «ad 
therefore mortal ; thus sin and death, passed on all. 
Doubtless, he begat both Cain and Abel in his own .iike^; 
ne^, as well as Setii. But it is not recorded ofAbcl^;^^ 
because he left no issue behind him* and his fiJling ^tfas' 
first sacrifice to death in the world, was a sufficient docu* 
ment of it ; nor of Cain, to whom it might hanre fbeen 
thought peculiar, because of his monstrous wickednen ;, 
and besides^ all his posterity was drowned in the flood ; 
but it is recorded c»f Seth, because he was the £iither»of 
the holy seed ; and from him all numkind smce the flood 
has descesided, and fidlen Adam's own likeness \rith 
them. 

Secondly^ It appears from that scripture-text, Job xvbu4. 
« Who can bring a dean thing out of an unclean? Not 
one." Our first parents were unclean, how then can we 
be clean ? How could our immediate parents be clean? Orf 
how shall our children be so ? The uncleanness here aim- 
ed at is a sinful uncleanness ; for it is such as makes man's 
days full of trouble ;,and it is natural, being derived ftson 
unclean parents ; << Man is bom of a woman, yer. 1. And 
how can he be clean that is bom of a woman ?" Job xxav. 
4. An omnipotent God, whose power is not here chal- 
lenged, could bring a clean thing out of an uitdcHi ; 
and did so, in the case of the num Christ ; but no othef 
can. Every person that is born according to the couraooi 
nature is bom unclean. If the root be corrupt, . so vixm 
the branches be. Neither is the matter mended, .thgugli 
the parents be sanctified ones ; for they are bntiiQljfivi 
parti and that by grace, not by nature ; and thily ht^ 
their children as men, not as holy men. Wherefan^ ai 
the circumcised parent begets an uncircumcised cHMJftil 
after the purest grain is sownj we reap com with th6 ehaflT; 
so the holiest parents beget unholy children, and eannst 
communicate their grace to themya&they do^thciariaiiiwir; 



wliidi' nattily gbdly parents find ti-ue, in their sad experi- 
cnccw . 

. Thirdly^ Consider the confession of the Psalmist David, 
Psala ii. (k M Behold I was 8haf>en in iniquitjr, and in sin 
dil my modier conceive me.'* Here he ascends from his 
actual Any to the fountain of it, namely, coiTupt nature. 
cHe was« man according to Gbd's own heart ; but from 
the besinning it vas not so with him. He was begotten 
n iawral marriage ; but when the lump was shapen in the 
womb, it was a sin^ lump. HencivtUe corruption of na- 
tove is called the old man ; being as old as ourselvesi older 
than grace, even in those that are sancdfied from the womb. 
Fourthly^ Hear our Lord's determination of tlie point, 
John ill. 6. M That which is bom of the flesh is flesh." 
Behold the universal corruption of all mankind, all are 
flesh. Not that all are frail, though that is a sad truth 
too ; yea, and our natural frailty is an evidence of our na- 
tural-corruption ; but that is not the sense of this text; 
but hcnre is the meaning of it, all are corrupt and sinful, 
and that naturally ; hence our I*ord argues here, tliat bo- 
cause they are flesh, therefoi*e they must be boni ap^in, or 
else thoy ^ caimot enter into the kingdom of God," ver. 
3, 5. And as the corruption of our nature evidenced! 
-the absolute necessity of regeneration ; so the absolute 
necessity of regeneration plainly proves the corruption 
of our nature ; for why should a man need a second 
birth, if his nature were not quite marred in the first 
birtli ? Infants must be bom again, for tliat is an except 
(John iii. 3.) which admits of no exception. And, there* 
fore, they were circumcised under the Old Testament ; 
as having <^ the l)ody of the sins of the flesh (which is con- 
veyed to them by natui*al genei-ution) to put off"," Col. ii. 
11. And now by tlie appointment of Jesus Christ, they 
are to be baptized ; which says they are unclean, and 
that there is no salvation for them, but by the « washing of 
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost," Tit. iii. 5. 
• F^fihly^ Man certainly is sunk very low now, in com- 
parison of what he once was : God made him but a ^ little 
lower than the angels ;" but now we find him likened to 
the beasts that perish. He hearkened to a brute ; and is 
now become like one of them. Like Nebuchadnezzar, 
-his poition ^in his natural state) is with the beasts, « mind«^ 



44 That Man*9 Mature U corrufitedj firoved. [State IL 

ing only earthly things," Phil. iii. 19. Nuy, brutes, in 
8ome sort, have the Ldvuntage of the natunri man, vho ig 
sunk a degree below them. He is more witless, in what 
concerns him most, than the stork, or the tuitle, or tbc» 
crane, or the swallow, in what is for then* interest, Jer. 
viii. 7. He is more stupid than the ox or ass, Isa. L 3. 
' I find liim sent to school, to learn of the ant or emmet, 
which having no guide or leader to go before her ; no over- 
seer or officer to compel or stir her up to work ; no inilert 
but may do us she lists, being under die dominion of none ; 
yet ^^ provide th her meat in tlie summer and liar vest," 
. Prov. vi. 6. 7. 8. while the nutuiMl man has all these, and 
yet exposcth himself to etem:tl starving. N^y, moi*e than 
all this, tlie scripture holds out tlie niUur^l man, not only 
as wanting the good qualities of those creatures ; but as a 
compound of the evil qualities of the worst of the Crea- 
tures, in which do concenter the fierceness of the lion, the 
craft of the fox, tlie unteachublenesa of the wild ass, the 
filthiness of tlie dog and swine, the poison of the asp, and 

- such like. Truth itself calls them " serpents, a genera- 
tion of vipers ; yea more, even « children of tl.e dtrP/* 
Mat. xxi. S3. John viii. 44. Surely then, man's nature is 
miscr;ibly conuptcd. 

iMstlify ^ Wc i;re by nature children of wrath," ' Eph. 
ii. 3. We are wortliy of, I'nd liible to the wrath of God ; 
and this by nature ; and, therefore, doubtless we are by na^ 
ture sinful creatures. We are condemned before W6;.have 
done good or evil ; under the curse, ere wc know Miat it. 

- is. " But will a lion roar in the forest, while he hath no. 
prey ?*' Amos. iii. 4. that is, Will a holy and just God rof.r 
in his wrutli against man, if he be not, by his sin, mai^e 

. a prey for wrutli ? No, he will not, he cannot. Let us con- 
clude, tlien, that according to the woi-d of God, mun's 
nature is a corrupt nature. 

II. If we consult experience, and observe the case of 
the world in tliese tilings that ai*e obvious, to any person 
thiJt will not shut his eyes against clear light; wc will 
quickly perceive such fruits,. as discover this root of bitUir* 
■ness : I shall propose a few things, tliat may serve to con- 
vhice us in tliis point. 

Fh'Htj Who sees not a flood of miseries overflowing^ 
tlie world I And whitlier can a man go, where he Hhall 



miii tj 1%tf Mm*B Miture U cf^rrufitedy firoted. 45 

not dip his foot, if he go not over head and ears in h ? 
Every one at home aiid abroad, in city and countiy, in 
palaces and cottages^ is groaning under some one thing or 
other, imgratefdl to him. Some are oppressed with povcv- 
ty) some chastened with sickness and pain, some arc lu- 
inenting their losses ; none wunts a cross of one sort or an« 
other- No man's condition is so soft, but there is soniu 
tiiom of mieasincss in it. And at Icngtli death, the wagi'S 
of sin, comes after these its harbingers, and sweeps all 
away^. 

Now, what but sin has opened the sluice ? There is not 
a complaint nor sigh hoard in tlic world, nor a tear that 
foils from our eye, but it is an evidence that man is fallen 
as a star from heaven ; for « God distributcth sonow in 
his anger,"" Job xxi. IT. This is a plain proof of the cor- 
rupdon of nature, forasmuch as those that have not yet 
actually sinned have their share of these son^ows ; yea> and 
draw theii' first breath in the world weeping, as if they 
knew this worlds Lt first sight, to be a Bochim, the pluc$ 
of weepers There urc graves of the smallest, as well as 
of the largest size, in the church-yuixl ; and there arc 
never wanting some in the world, who, like Rachel, arc 
weeping for their children, because they arc not, Mat. iL 
18. 

Secondly J Observe how early this corruption of natui*c 
begins to appear in young ones : Solomon observes, that 
« even a child is kno-wn by his doings,'* Prov. xx. 1 1 . 
it may soon be discerned, what Wt-.y the biiis of the heart 
lies : Do not the children of fallen Adam, before they can 
'go alone, follow their father's footsteps ? Whu a vast deal 
of little pride, ambition, curiosity, vanity, wilfulness, and 
averscness to good, appears in them ? And when they 
creep out of in&ncy, there is a necessity of using the rod 
of correction, to drive away tlie foolishness that is bound 
up in tlieir hearts, Prov. xxii. 15* Which shews, that if 
gi*ace prevail not, the child will be as Ishmael, a vfiid aas^- 
tnuJij as the w^ord is. Gen. xvi, 13. 

Thirdly y Take a view of the manifold gross otrt-brci^k- 
ings of sin in the world ; The nickfdrrcae of men is yet 
great in tlie earth* Behold the bitter fruits of the corrup- 
tion of our natai*e, Hos. iv. 2. ^ By swearing, and lying, 
and killings and stealing, and committiue uduUetv^ >^v^^ 



46 Thai ManU I/ature is eorrufited^ firoved. [^tate BL 

break out» (like the brcukin^ forth of water,) and blood 
touchcth blood/* The world is filled with filthmeas} and 
all manner of lewdness, wickedness, and pro&nitf. 
Whence is this deluge of sin on the eartli, but from the 
breaking up of the fountiuns of the great deefi^ the heart of 
man ; out of which proceed evil tlioughts, adulteries, for- 
nications, murders, tliefts, covctoufness, wickedness, Sec. 
Mark vii. 21. 22. Ye will, it may be, thsnk God with 
a whole heart, that ye are not like these other men ; and 
indeed yc have better reason for it than, 1 fear, ye are a- 
ware of ; for, " As, in water, face answereth to face, so 
the heart of man to man," Prov. xxvii. 19. As in look- 
ing into clear water, ye see your own face ; so in looking^ 
into your own heait, ye may sec other mens there ; .ana 
looking into other mens, in them ye muy see your own* 
So that the most vile and profane wretches that are in the 
world should serve you for a looking-glass j in which you 
ought to discern the corruption of your oy^n natui*e ; aiid 
^f you do so, ye would with a heirt truly touched, thank 
God, and not yourselves, indeed, that yc are not as other 
mcnj in your lives ; seeing the corruption of nature is the 
same in you as in them. 

Fourthly^ Cast your eye upon these terrible convulsions 
the world is tlirown into by the lust of men. Lions make not 
a prey of lions, nor wolves of wolves ; but men arc turned 
wolves to one another, biting and devouring one another. 
"Upon how slight occasions will men sheath their swords ]n 
one another*s bowels ! Ti^e world is a wilderness where the 
clearest fire men can carry about with tliem will not fright 
away the wild beasts that inhabit it, (and that because, th ^ 
are men, and not brutes,) but one way or other tliey will 
be wounded. Since Cidn shed the blood of Abel, the earth 
has been tunicd into a slaughter-house ; and the chace baa 
l:een continued since Nimrod began his hunting ; on the 
eiirtii> as in the sea, the greater still devouring the lesser. 
When we see the world in such a ferment, every one 
stubbing another 9fi\X\ words or swords, we may conclude 
there is an evil spirit among them. These violent heats 
among Adam*s sons speak the whole body to be tlistem- 
pcred ; the whole head to be sick, and the whole heurt f;int. 
Tiiey surely proceed from an inward cause, Jamea vi. I* 
JU Lusts that war in our meinbers.** 



Head £?[ Tkai Mm*s /i/ature U ewrt^tfdj fir^^ed. 4f 

WiftMyy Consider the necessky of human laws, fenced 
mxxh terrors and severities ; to which we may apply what 
the apostle says, 1 Tim. i. 9. ^ That the ihw is not made 
for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, 
for the ungodly and for sinners," &c. Man was made for 
society ; and God himself said of tlie fiist man, when he 
had created him, that it was not meet that he should he 
alone : Yet the case is such now, that, in society, he must 
be hedged in with thorns. And that, from hence we may 
the better see the corruption of man's nature, considcr,( 1 .) 
Every man naturally loves to be at full liberty himself; to 
have his own will for his kw ; and, if he would follow 
his natural inclinations, would vote himself out of the reach 
of all laws, divine and human. And hence some (the 
power of whose hands has been answerable to their nutui*al 
inclination) have indeed made- themselves absolute, und 
above laws ; agreeable to man's monstrous design ut first, 
to be-as gvdtj 6en. iii. 5. Yet, (2.) Thcr^ is no man that 
mrould willingly adventure to live in a lawless society: And» 
therefore, even pirate a and robbers have laws among them- 
selves, though the whole society cast off all respect to law 
and right. Thus men discover themselves to be conscious 
of the corruption of nature ; not daring to tinist one another, 
but upon security. (3.) How dangerous soever it is to 
break through the hedge; ytt, the violence of lust makes 
many adventure daily to run the risk. They will not only 
sacrifice their credit and conscience, which last is highly 
esteemed in the world ; but, for the pleasure of a few mo- 
ments, immediately succeeded witli terror from withhi, 
they will lay themse[ves open to a violent deuth, by the 
laws of the land wherein they live. (4.) The laws are of- 
ten made to yield to men's lusts. Sometimes whole socie- 
ties i*un into such extravagancies, that, like a compLi:iy of 
prisoners, tliey break off their fetters, and put their guai^s 
to flight ; and the voice of laws cannot be heurd icf the 
noise of aiTns. And, seldom is there a time wherein there 
are not some persons so great and daring, that the laws dare 
not look their impetuoils lusts in the face ; which made 
David say, in the case of Joab, who liad murdered Abncr, 
** These men, the sons of Zeruiah, be too hard for me," 
2 Sam. iii. 39. Lusts sometimes grow too stron f>; for laws t 
so that tlie law is slackcdi as the pulse -of a dying man> 



so Tk0H Mi(n*9 Miiure i* torfufitedf ^enfetL {5t»HdB 



we do resemble our first parous. Everf vae- of Uff-1 
the image aiKl impress of their Mi upon him.: AgnAnk 
evioce the truth of thbf^ I do appeal to the conacaro^o.^ 
«11 in these, following particulars : 

Uty I«. not a sinful curiositf natural to lu I And istttt 
.this a print of Adam's image ? Gren. iii. 6. la noc-iMh 
lUiturully much more desirous to know new things, 4^iMn ID 
practise old known truths I How like to old Adam dtf we 
iook in tliis itching after noTelties, and disreliahuig old 
:aolid doctinne ? We seek after knowledge rather thaivholi* 
iDiess ; and. study most to know these things which an 'least 
edifyingt Our wild and roving f<u;icies needa^bri^&'ttl 
.curb them, while good solid affections must be qm^MMll 
.and spurred up. .-.i 

2dlih If the Lord, by his. holy law and wise provideiwii 
do put a restraint upon us, to keep us back from any iSmmg\ 
.doth not that restraint whet the edge of our natnral ii 
nations, and make us so much the more keener in our < 
aires ? And in ^s do we not betray it plainly that wtA 
Adam's children ; Gen. . iu. 3, 3, 6. I think tbi* 
be denied ; for daily obsei^vation evinceth, that it Is^k'aa- 
4unil principle, that stolen waters are sweet, and \umA. 
-eaten in secret is pleasant, ProT« ix. 17. The Tery.Hci- 
thens are convinced, that man was possessed with this-sfi* 
rit of contradiction, though they knew not the sprilig'sf 
it. How often do men give themselves the loose in l9iesp 
things, ift which, if God had left them at libeity,-lJiS)r 
would haye bound up themselves ! But corrupt Bativse 
takes a pleasure in the veiy jumping over the hed|^s-;^srf 
is it not a repeating of our father's fi)lly, that me» wU 
rather climb for forbidden fruit, than gather what is sUMi 
oif the tree of good providence to them, when they hasitt 
God's express allowance for it ? . . . : — 

• ' ^dly^ Which of all die children of Adam is not nattiralif 
disposed to hear the instruction that cauaeth to errf And 
was not this the rock our first parents split upon ? Gen^iS. 
4, 6. How apt is weak man, ever since that tunej^tD 
pariey vrith temptations \ << God speaketh once ^ yea ttfte** 
yet man perceivetli it not,'^ Job xxxiii. 14. but readily 
doth he listen to Sat^ih. Men might often come iaiTJtM%^ 
they would dismiss temptations with s^horrence, when 
\y appear ^ if they would nijvth^m in tho^badrtiNy 




tponld coon die away ; buty alas ! when -we see the tram 
laid &r us, vod the fire pat to it, yet we stand till it run 
aAon^) and we be blown up with its force. 

4thly9 Do not the eyes in our heiad often bliad the eyea 
of the nu&d ? And was not tliis the very case of our first 
paoreots ? Gen. iii. 6. Man is neyer more blind than when 
he^ia looking on the objects that are most pleasant to sense. 
Sinco the eyea <^our first parents were opened to the for- 
Uddeo fruitf mens eyes have been the gates of destruction 
to -their aoula ; at which impure imaginations and sinful 
decree have entered the heart, to the wounding of the soul, 
wasting of the conscience, and bringing dismul effects 
sometimes on whole societies; as in Achan's case, Joshua 
vii. 21. Holy Job was aware of this danger, from these 
two ■ little roiling bodies, which a very small splinter of 
wood will make useless ; so as (with that King who durst 
AOt» with his- ten thousand, meet him thi«t came with 
twenty thousand against him, Luke xiv. SI, 32.) he send- 
•th-«nd deaireth conditions of peace, Job xxxL \.^l have 
nude a covenant with mine eyes," is^c. 
f 5tkly, Is it not natural for us, to care for the body, 
even at the expencc of the soul ] This was one ingredient 
in the sin of our first parents. Gen. iii. 6. O how hi?ppy 
might we be, if we were but at half the pains about uur 
souls, that we bestow upon our bodies ! If that question, 
« Wiiat must I do to be saved ?" (Acts xvi. 30.) did run 
but near as oft through our minds, as those other questions 
do, *< What shall we eat ; what shall we drink ; where- 
withal shall webc ck>athed V' Mat. vi. 2 1 . many a (now) liopc- 
•less case would turn very hopeful. But the truth is, most 
jnen live as if they were noUiing but a lump of fiesii ; or 
as if their souls served for no other use, but like ealt to 
keep the body from corrupting : " They are flesh," John 
iii. 6. <« They mind the things of the flesh," Rom. viii. 
5. and** they live after the flesh," ver. 13. If the consent 
of the fle^^be got to an action, the consent of the con- 
science is rarely waited for ; yea, the body isoften served, 
when -^e consciekice has entered a dissent. 

6rA/y, Is not every one, by nature, discontent with his 
tnnesent lot in the world, or with some one thing or otlier 
m it I This also was Adam's case. Gen. iii. 5, 6. Some 
oKe tlmig is always missing ; so that Bian is a creature 



62 That Min*9 J/aiure U eorrufitedj firoved, {[State. II.. 

I^iven to changes. And if aiiy doubt of this, let them- 
look ]Over uU their enjoyments ; and after a review of thezOf 
listen to their own hearts, and tliey will hear a secret 
murmuring for wunt of something ; though, perhups, if 
they considered the matter right, they would see tixat it- 
b better for them to want, than to have tliat something, 
^inec the hearts of our first parents flew out ut their eyesy 
on the forbidden fruit, and a night of darkness was there- 
by brought on the world ; tlicir ix>stcrity have a natural 
disease, wliich Solomon calls, '< The wandering of the de^ 
sires," (or, as the word is, " The walking of the soul,") 
Eqcl. vi. 9. This is a sort of diabolical trancci wherein 
the soul travcrseth the world; feeds itself with a thousand 
airy nothings ; snatcheth at this and the other created ex-^ 
cellency, in imagination and desire ; goes here and there» 
and every where, except where it should go. And the- 
soul is never cured of this disease, till overcoming grace 
bring it back, to take up its everlasting i*est in God 
through Christ : But till this be, if man were set c^^ain ia 
Paradise, the garden of the Lord ; all the pleasures there. 
would not keep him from looking, yea, and leaping over 
the hedge a second time. 

7t/ilify Are we not far more easily impressed and influ* 
cnced by evil counsels and examples, than by those that 
are good ? You will see this was the ruin of Adasif 
Gen. iii. 6. Evil example, to this day, is one of SataA't 
miaster-de vices to ruin men. And though we have bf 
nature more of the fox than of the lamb ; yet that ill pron 
perty some observe in this creature, viz. That if one 
lamb skip into a water^ the rest that are near will sud* 
deniy follow, may be observed also in tlie disposiUcm of 
the children of men ; to whom it is veiy natural to cm^ 
brace an evil way, because they see others upon it before 
them. Ill example has frequently the force of a violent 
stream, to carry us over plain duty ; but especially, if the 
example be given by thpse we bear a great affectioil to^ 
our affection, in that case, blinds our judgment ; and what 
we would abhor in others, is complied with, to humour 
them. And nothing is more plain, than that generally 
men chuse rather to do what the most doy than what the 
best do. 

d/i^/y, Who of all Adam's «on« need be taught the ait 



cff ^emng JigAetne% together ^ to cbvcr their nakedness I 
Gen. iii. 7. When we have ruined oursebrcs, and nuidd 
ottrselves naked, to our shame ; we naturally ^eck tii 
help ourselves by ourselves; and many poor shifb aro' 
fidlen upOD) as siiiy and insignificant as Adam's fig- 
leaves. What pains are men at, to cover their sin from 
their own consciences, and draw all the fair colours upon 
k that they can ? And when once convictions are fastened 
upon them, so that they cannot but see themselves naked ; 
it is as natural for them to attempt to' spin a cover to it 
Out of their own bowels, as for fishes to swim in ther 
Waters, or birds to fly in the air. Therefore, the first 
question of the convinced is, What thall we do ? Acts ii. 
37. How shall we qualify ourselves ? What shall we 
perform ? Not minding that the new creature is God's 
own workmansliip (or deed, Eph. ii. 10.) more tlian Adiim 
thought of being clothed with skins of sacrifices. Gen. iii. 

9tkiyj Do not Adam's children naturally follow his foot- 
steps, in hiding themselves from the presence of the Lord ?■ 
Gen, iii. 8. We are every whit as blind in this matter 
as he was, who thought to hide himself from the presencfc 
<rf God among the shady trees of the garden. We arc 
^ry apt to promise ourselves more security iii a secret 
sin, than in one tliat is openly committed. " The eye 
of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No eye 
shall see me," Job xxiv. 15. And men will freely do 
that in secret, which they would be ashamed to do in the 
presence of a child ; as if darkness could hide from an all- 
seeing God. Are we not naturally careless of communion 
'^th God ; ay, and averse to it ? Never was there any 
communion betwixt God and Adam's children, where tlie 
Lord himself had not the first word. If he would let them 
akme, they would never inquire after him. Isa. Ivii. 1 8. 
Ifdde m€4 ■ Did he seek after a hiding God ? Very far 
from it, ^He went on in the way of his heart. 

■ lOthly, How loath are men to confess sin, to take guilt 
and shame to themselves 1 And was it not thus in the case 
before U9 ? Gen. iii. 10. Adam confesseth his nakednesa, 
wMch he could not get denied ; but not one word he says 
(if Ma sins : Here was the reason of it, he would fam have 

E 



54 That Man*s JStature ia eorrufiied, Jiroved. [State II. 

hid it if he conld. It is as natural for us to hide sin as to 
Commit it. Manf sad instances thereof we have in tMs 
world ; but a far clearer proof of it we shall get at the day 
of judgment, the duy in which God vfill judge the aeereta 
4>fm€n^ Rom. ii. 16. Many a foul mouth will then be 
seeny which is now wiped and saith^ / ha-ve done no vnck^ 
edneesy Proverbs xxx. 20. 

Lastly^ Is it not natural for us to extenuate our sinj and 
transfer tiie guilt upon others ? And when God examined 
our guilty first parents, did not Adam lay the blame on 
the serpent? Gen. iii. 12, 13. Now Adam's children 
need not be taught this hellish policy ; before they can 
well speak (if they cannot get the fact denied) they will 
cimningly lisp out something to lessen their fault, and lay 
the blame upon another. Nay, so natural is this to meni 
that in tlie greatest of sins, they will lay the fault upon God 
himself; they will blaspheme his holy providence, under 
the nustaken name of misfortune, or ill-luck, and thereby 
lay tlie blame of their, sin at heaven's door. And 
was not this one of Adam's tricks after his fall I Gen. iiL 
12. '< And the man said, the woman whom thou gayest 
to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat." 
'Observe the order of the speech. He makes his apology 
in the first place ; and then comes his confession : His 
apology is long ; but his confession very short ; it is all 
comprehended in a wofd, ^nd I did eat. How pointed 
and distinct is his apology, as if he was afraid his meaning 
Would have been mistaken ? The woman^ says he, or that 
woman, as if he would have pointed the Judge to his own 
work, of which wc read. Gen. ii. 22. There was but one 
woman then in the world ; so that one would tliink he 
needed not have been so nice and exact in pointing at her ; 
yet she is as carefully marked out in his defence, as if there 
had been ten thousand. The woman nvhom thou gaveat me: 
Here he speaks as if he had been ruined witli God's gifts. 
And to make the sliift look tlie blacker, it is added to all 
this, thou gaveat to be with me^ a constant companioUi to 
stand by me as a helper. This looks as if Adam would 
have fathered an ill design upon tlie Lord, in giving him 
this gift. And after all, there is a new demonstrative herci 
belpre the sentence is complete j he says not, Thevfomtm 



Read I.] 7%e Corrufition of the UnderMtandlng. $s 

gone m^y but the woman she gave me: emphaticallj-, as If he 
had saidy She^ even She gave me of the tree. This much 
for his apology. But his confession is quickly over, in 
one word, (as he spoke it,) and I did eat. And there is 
nothing here to point to himself, and as little to shew 
what he had eaten. How natural is this black art to 
Adam's posterity I He that runs may read it. So uni- 
Tersidly does Solomon's observe hold true, Pi'ov. xvii. 3. 
« The foolishness of man perveiteth his ways, and his 
heart fretteth against the Lord." Let us then call fallen 
AAscoi^ father : let us not deny.the relation, seeing we bear 
his image. 

And now to shut up this point, sufficiently confirmed by 
concurring evidence from the Lord's word, our own expe- 
rience and observation ; let us be persuaded to believe the 
doctrine of the corruption of our nature ; and to look to 
the second Adam, the blessed Jesus, for the application of 
his precious blood, to remove the guilt of this sin ; and for 
the efficacy of his holy Spirit, to make us new creature^, 
knowing that except we be born agahi^ we cannot enter 
into the kingdom of God, 

Of the Corrufition of the Understanding. 

SEcoNnLY, I proceed to enquire into the corruption of 
nature, in tlie several parts thereof. But who can com- 
prehend it ? Who can take the exact dimension of it, in 
Its breadth, length, height, and depth ? The heart is de- 
ceitful above all things, and desperately wicked ; who can 
know it ? Jer. xvii. 9. However, we may quickly perceive 
as much of it, as may be matter of deepest humiliation) 
and may discover to us the absolute necessity of regenera- 
tion. Man in his natural state is altogether corrupt. 
Both soul and body are polluted, as the apostle proves at 
large, Rom. iii. 10 — 18. As for the soul, this natural 
corruption has spread itself through all the faculties tliere- 
of ; and is to be found in the understanding, tlic will, the 
affections, the conscience, and the memory. 

I. The understanding, that leading faculty, is despoiled 
of its primitive glory, and covered over with confusion. 
We have fallen into the hands of our grand adversary, aa 
Samaon into the hands of the PhiUstiness and arc deprived 



56 TAe Corrufition <ifthe Underaidnding, [StatelC 

of our two eyes. There is none that underatandetk^ 
Rom. iii. 1 1. Mind and conscience are dtjiledy Tit i. 15. 
The natural man's apprehension of divine things is cor^ 
rupt, Psal. 1. 21. <* Thou thoughtest that I was altogether 
such an one as thyself." His judgement is corrupt, and 
caimot be otherwise, seeing his eye is evil : And therefore 
the scriptures, that shew that men did all wrong, saySf 
JEvery one did that which was right in hia ovm eyea^ 
Judges xvii. 7. and xxi! 25. And his imaginations, or 
reasonings, must be cast down, by the power of the word| 
being of a piece with his judgment, 2 Cor. x. 5. Buti 
to point out this corruption of the mind or understanding 
more particularly, let thesefollowing things be considered s 
Firsts There is a natural weakness in the minds of 
men, with respect to spiritual things. The apostle de- 
termines concerning every one that is not endued with the 
graces of the Spirit, That he ia btind and cannot aee qfaroff^ 
2 Pet. i. 9. Hence the Spirit of God, in the scripturei 
clothes, as it were, divine truths with earthly figures, even 
as parents teach their children, using similitudes, Hos.xii. 
10. Wliich, though it doth not cure, yet doth evidence 
this natural weakness in the minds of men. But we wan^ 
not plain proofs of it from experience. As, (1.) How 
hard a task is it to teach many people, the common prin- 
ciples of our holy religion, and to make truths so plain 
us they may understand them ? Here there must be firecept 
njionfirecefit^ jfirecejit ufion precefii : tine ufion liney Une 
njion lincy Isa. xxviii. 10. Tiy the same persons in other 
tilings, they shall be found iviaer in their generation that^ 
the children of light. They understand their work and 
businesfc in the world as well as their neighbours, though 
they be very stupid and unteachable in tlie matters of God. 
Tell them how they may advance their worldly wealth, 
or how they may gratify their lusts, and they will quickly 
understaiid these things ; though it is very hard to make 
them know how their souls may be saved ; or how their 
heaits may find ixist in Jesus Christ. — (2.) Consider these 
who have many advantages, beyond the common gang of 
mankind ; who have had the benefit of good education and 
instruction ; yea, and are blest with the light of grace in 
that measure, wherein it is distributed to the saints on 
ettf th 5 yet how small a portion have they of the know* 



Head I.] The Corrufitiorl 0/ the Underetand^ng. §7 

ledge of divine thin^ ! What ignorance and confusion 
do still remain in their minds 1 How often are thef mired^ 
even in the matter of practical truths, and speak as a child 
in these things \ It is a pitiful weakness, tiiat wc cannot 
perceive the things which God has revealed to us ; and it 
must needs be a sinful weakness, since the law of God 
requires us to know and believe them. (3.) What dun- 
gerous mistakes are to be found amongst men in their 
concerns of greatest weight ! What wofui delusions pre- 
vail over them ! Do wc not often see those, who otiiei-^ 
wise are the wisest of men, the most notorious fools, wlili 
respect to their souls interest ? Matth. xi. 25. *' Tiioii 
hast hid these things from the wise and prudent." Muny 
that are eagle-eyed in the trifles of time, urc like owls and 
bats in the light of life. Nay, truly, llie life of every 
natural man is but one continued dream and delusion ; 
out of which he never awakes, till either by a new light 
darted from heaven into his soul, he come to himself, 
Luke XV. 17. or, in hell he lift ufi hia eyes^ chap. xvi. 23. 
And therefore in scripture -account, be he never so wise, 
he is a fool, and a simple one. 

Secondly-i Man's understanding is naturally overwhelm- 
ed with gross darkness in spiritual things. Man at the 
instigation of the devil, attempting to break out a new li^ht 
in his mind, (Gen. iii. 5.) instead of that, broke up the doors 
of the bottomless pit ; so as, by the smoke thereof, he WaS 
buried in darkness. When God at first had made many 
his mind was a lamp of light ; but now, when he conies 
to make him over again, in regeneration, he finds it dark- 
less, Eph. V. 8. " Ye were sometimes darkness." Sin 
h& closed the windows of the soul ; darkness is over all 
that region. It is the land of dai-kness, and shadow of 
death, where the light is as darkness. The prince of 
darkness reigns there, and notliing but the works of dai*k- 
ness are filmed there. We are bom spiritually blind, and 
camiot be restored without a miracle of grace. This is 
thy case, whosoever thou art, if thou art not bom again* 
And tliat you may be convinced in this matter, tnkc those 
following evidences of it : 

Evidence 1 . The darkness that was upon the face of the 
world before, Jind at the time when Christ came, ariwlig 
as the Sun of righteousness upon the earth* When Adam^ 

E3r 



The CwrrupHm </ the tfndifktemdtngi [Btnto II, 



hf his sin, Imd lost that primidve light wherewith he 
endued in his creadon, it pleased God to make a gracioii» 
revelation of his inind and will to tim, touching the waf 
of salvation. Gen. iii. 15. This was handed down \if 
hini} and other godly fathers* before the flood ; yet the 
natural darkness of the mind of man prevailed so fitf 
against that revelation, as to carry off all sense of true reli- 
gion from the old world, except what remauied in Noah's 
£imily, which was preserved in the ark. After the floods 
as men multiplied on the earth, tlie natui*al darkness of 
mind prevails again, and the light decays, till it died out 
among the generality of mankind, and is preserved only 
among the posterit}' of Shem. And even with them it 
was well near its setting, when God called Abraliam frosn 
serving other gods, Josh. xxiv. 15. God gives Abraham 
a more clear and full revelation, and he communicates the 
same to his family. Gen. xvii. 19. Yet the^natural dark- 
tie ss wears it out at length, save what of it was preserved 
among the posterity of Jacob.. They being carried down 
into Egypt, that darkness prevailed so, as to leave them 
very little sense of true religion ; and a new revelatioa 
behoved to be made them in the wilderness. And many 
a cloud of darkness got above that, now and then, during 
the time from Moses to Christ. When Christ came, the 
world was divided into Jews and Gentiles. The Jew8| 
and the true light with them, were within n» inclosuref 
Psal. cxlvii. 19, 20. Betwixt them and the Gentile world 
there was a paitition-wall of God's making, namely, the 
ceremonial law ; and upon that tliere was reared up ano- 
ther of man's own making, namely, a rooted enmity be- 
twixt tlie parties, Eph. li. 14, 15. If we look abroad^ 
without the inclosure, (and except those proselytes of the 
Gentiles, who, by means of some rays of light breaking 
forth unto them from within the inclosure, having renoun- 
ced idolatry, worshipped the true God, but did not conform 
to the Mosaical rites,) we see nothing but dark places of 
the' earth, full of the habitations of cruelty, Psal. Ixxiv. 
SO. Gross darkness covered the face of the Gentile world ; 
and the way of salvation was Utterly unknown among; 
them. They w'ere drowned in superstition and idolatry ; 
and had multiplied their idols to such a vast number, that 
i^ve thirty thousand are reckoned to have been worship- 



Kead V] Tke C^m/uhh tfthe UnderMtandmg, $t 

{Msd bf those of Europe alone^— Whatever wisdom was 
among their philosophers, the world by that wisdom knew 
not Oody 1. Cor. i. 31. and all their researches in religion 
were but groping in the dark, Acts xvii. 27. If we look 
within the inlcosure, and, except a few that were groan- 
ing and waiung for the Consolation of Israel, we will see 
a gross darkness on the face of that generation. Though 
to them were committed the omclcs of God, yet they were 
most corrupt in their doctrine. Their traditions were 
multiplied, but the knowledge of these things wherein the 
life of religion lies was lost : Masters of Israel knew not 
the nature and necessity of regencraUon, John iii. 10. 
Their religion was to build on their biith-privilege, as 
children of Abraham,' Matth. iii. 9. to glory in their cir- 
cumcision, and other external ordinances, Philip, iii. S, 
3. And to rest in the law, (Rom. ii. 17.) after they had, 
by their false glosses, cut it so short, as they might go 
well near to the fulfilling of it, Matth. v. 

Thus was darkness over the face of the world, when 
Christ, the true lijiht, came into it ; and so is darkness 
over every soul, till he, as the day-star, arise in the heart. 
The former is an evidence of the latter. What, but the 
natural darkness of mens minds, could still tlius wear out 
the light of external revelation, in a matter upon which 
eternal happiness did depend ? Men did not forget the 
way or preserving their lives, but how quickly did they 
lose the knowledge of tlie way of salvation of their souls, 
which are of infinite more weight and worth ! When 
patriarchs and prophets teaching was ineffectual, men be- 
hoved to be taught of God himself, who alone can open 
the eyes of tlic understanding. But, that it might appear 
that the corruption of man's mind lay deeper than to be 
cured by n.3re external revelation, there were but very 
few converted by Christ's preaching, who spake as never 
man spoke, John xii. 37, 38. The great cure on the 
generation remained to be performed, by tlic Spirit ac- 
companying the preaching of the apostles ; who, accord- 
ing to the promise, (John xiv. 12.) were to do great 
works. And if we look to the miracles wrought by our 
blessed Lord, we will find, that, by applying the remedy 
to the soul, for the cure of bodily distempers, (as in the 
case df the m^an sick of the palsy, Matth. ix 2.) he^ plainly 



63 The Corrufition (if the Underatanding. [State I] 

(Deut xxix. 3.) to whom nevertheless the Lord had nc 
<< given an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and eara t 
hear, unto that day," ver. 4. Many a man that bears th< 
name of a Christian may make Pharaoh's confession c 
faith, Exod. v. 2. « I know not the Lord," neither wil 
they let go when he commands them to part with. Go 
is with them as a prince in disguise among his subject! 
who meets with no better treatment from them, than i 
they were his fellows, Psal. 1. 21. Do they know Chrisi 
or see his glory, and any beauty in him, for whdch he 1 
to be desired ? If they did, they would not slight him a 
they do ; a view of his glory would so dazzle all create< 
excellency, that they would take him for, and instead c 
all, and gladly close with him, as he offereth himself L 
the gospel, John iv. 10. Psal. ix. 10. M atth. xiii. 4^ 
45, 50. Do they know what sin is, who hug the serper 
in their bosom, hold fast deceit, and refuse to let it go 
I own, indeed, they may have a natui*al knowledge c 
those things," as the unbelieving Jews had of Christ, whoc 
they, saw and conversed with ; but there was spiritua 
glory in him, perceived by believers only, John i. 14. an. 
in respect of that glory, the unbelieving world knew hit 
not, ver. 10. But the spiritual knowledge of him the 
cannot have ; it is above the reach of the carnal mindy 
Cor. ii. 14. '< The natural man receiveth not the things c 
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him ; nei 
ther can he know them, for they are spiritually discern 
ed.'* He may indeed discourse of them ; but no othc 
way than one can talk of honey or vinegar, who neve 
tasted the sweetness of the one, nor the sourness of th 
cither. He has some notions of spiritual truths, but see 
not the things themselves, that are wrapt up in the word 
of truth, 1 Tim. i. 7. " Understanding neither what the 
say, nor whereof they affirm." In a word, natural mc 
fear, seek, confess they know not what. Thus may yo 
see man's understanding naturally is overwhelmed wit 
gross darkness in spiritual things. 

Thirdly y There is in the mind of a man a naturalblas t 
evil, whereby it comes to pass, that whatever difficulties : 
finds, while occupied about things truly good, it acts wit 
a great deal of ease in evil ; as being, in that case, in it 
own elementy Jen iv. 22. The carnal, mind drives heavi 



^1 Head 1.3 The Corrufition qf the Understanding. 63 

If in the thoughts of good ; but furiously in the thoughts 
of eril. While holiness is before ity fetters are upon it ; 
iNit when it has got over the hedge, it is as the bird got out 
ttf the cage, and becomes a free-Uiinker indeed. Let us 
reflect a httJe on the apprehension and imagination of the 
carnal mind ; and -we shall find incontcstible evidence of 
this woful bias to evil. 

Evidence 1. As when a man, by a violent stroke on the 
head, loseth his sight, there ariseth to him a kind of fhlse 
light, whereby he perceiveth a thousand airy nothings ; so 
xnan being struck blind to all that is truly good, and for 
his eternal interest, has a light of another sort brought 
into his mind ; his eyes are opened, knowing evil, and so 
axe the words of the tempter verified, Gen. iii. 5. The 
"Words of the Prophet ai'e plain, « They are wise to do 
eidl, butto do good they have no knowledge," Jer. iv. 22. 
*X*he mind of man has a natural dexterity to devise mis- 
chief ; none are so simple as to want skill to contrive 
^virays to gratify their lusts, and ruin tlieir souls ; though 
"tlie power of every one's hand caiuiot reach to put their 
devices in execution. None needs to be taught this 
t>lack art ; but as weeds grow up, of their own accord, in 
"the neglected ground, so doth this wisdom, (which is 
earthly^ sensual j devilishy James iii. 15.) grow up in the 
■nunds of men, by virtue of the corruption of their naturci 
Why should we be surprised with the product of currupt 
^ts ; their cunning devices to affront heaven, to oppose 
^d run down truth and holiness, and to gratify their own 
and other mens lusts ? They row with the stream, no 
■fonder they make great progress ; their stock is withm 
tiem, and mcreaseth by using of it ; and the works of 
^kness ai*e contrived with greater advantage, that the 
Diind is wholly destitute of spiritual light, which, if it 
^ere in them, in any measure, would so far mar the work, 
J John iii. 9. " Whosoever is born of God doth not com- 
'Jwt sin ;" he does it not as by art, for " Ids seed remain- 
*^th in him." But, on the other hand, " it is a sport for a 
fool to do mischief; but a man of understanding hath 
^ wisdom," Prov. x. 23. " To do witty wickedness nice- 
J r |y,** as the word imports, is as a sport, or a play to a fool ; 
it conies off with liim easily ; and why, but because he is 
* fool, and hath not wisdom ; which would mar the con- 



:tM 



/ 



SS The Carrufition qfthe Underttanding. [State 

of their lusts. Thus the corrupt heart feeds itself w: 

imagination sins : The unclean person is filled with 8| 

dilative impurities, having eyes full of adultery ; the cov 

ous man fills his heart with the world, though he cani 

get his hands full of it ; the malicious person, with deli| 

acts his revenge within his own breast ; the envious m 

within his own narrow soul, beholds^ with satisfacti< 

his neighbour laid low enough ; and every lust finds 1 

corrupt imagination a friend to it in time of need. A 

this it doth, not only when people are awake, but son 

times eyeri when they are asleep ; whereby it comes 

pass, that these sins ai^e acted in dreams which th 

hearts were candied out after, while they were awake 

I know some do question the sinfulness of these thin^ 

But can it be thought they are consistent with that h 

liaturc and frame of spirit, wliich was in innocent Adi 

and in Jesus Christ, and should be in every man ? 1 

the corruption of nature, then, that makes filthy dream 

condemned, Jude 8. Solomon had experience of 

exercise of grace in fcleep ; in a dream he prayed ; i 

dream lie made the best choice ; both were accepted 

God, 1 Kings iii. 5— *1S. And if a man may, in 

aieep, do what is good and acceptable to God ; why ii 

he not also, when asleep, do that which is evil and c 

-pleasing to God ? The same Solomon would have n 

aware of this ; and prescribes the best remedy againsi 

namely, the law upon the heart, Prov. vi. 20, 

^^ When thou slecpest (says he, ver. 22.) it shall keep, th 

to wit, from the sinning in thy sleep : That is, from sii 

dreams. For one's being kept from sin (not his be 

kept from affliction) is the inmiediate proper effect of 

law of God impressed upon the heart, Psal. cxix. 11. i 

thus the whole verse is to be understood, as appears fi 

Verse 33. <« For the commandment is a lamp, and the 

IB 'light ; and reproofs of instruction' are the way of Iii 

Kow, the law is a lamp of light, as it guides in the y 

xA duty;, wid instructing repixwfs from the law, are 

iray of life, as they keep from sin : Neither do they gu 

into the way of peace, but as they lead into the wa; 

duty ; nor do they keep, a man out of trouble, but as t 

iieep him from sin. And remarkable is the particular 

sriucb -Solomon in^taoceth, nfane}y> the siu of uhqU 



Head I;3 ^^ CwrruJUhn qf the UndtrMtandkig. ^ 



I 



nesft ; TV keefi^ thee from the evil womanj verse 24. Which 

M to be joined with verse 32. including verse 23. in a 

"parenthesis) as some versions have it. These things may 

suffice to convince us of tlie natural bias of the mind to 

evil. 

Fourthly y There is in the carnal mind an opposition to 
spiritual truths, and an aversion to the receiving of them. 
It 18 as little a friend to divine truths, as it is to holiness. 
The truths of natural religion, which do, as it were, force 
their entry into the minds of natural men, 'they hold 
prisoners in unrighteousness, Rom. i. 1 8. And as for the 
truths of revealed religion, there is an evil heart of unbelief 
in them, wliich opposeth their entry ; and there is an 
armed force necessary to captivate the mind to the belief 
of them, 2 Cor. x. 4, 5. God has made a revelation of 
his mind and will to sinners, toucliing the way of salva- 
tion ; he has given us the doctrine of his holy word : 
But do natural men believe it indeed ? No, they do not ; 
*• Fop he that believcth not on the Son of God, believeth 
not God;" as is plain from 1 John v. 10. They believe 
. iJot the promises of tlic word ; they look on them, in eflect 
only as fair words; for these that receive them, are thereby 
intide partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. i. 4. The 
promises are as silver cords, let down from heaven, to 
^w sinners unto God, and to waft them over into the 
promised land ; but they cast them from them. They be- 
?eve not the tbreatcnings of the woixl. As men travelling 
in desarts carry fire about with them, to fright away wild 
'^^ts; so God has made liis law a fiery law, (Deut. xxxiii. 
3') hedging it about with threats of wmth : But men 
'^'iturally are more brutish than beasts themselves ; and 
'^ill needs touch the fiery smoking mountain, though they 
•hould be thrust through with a dart. I doubt not but 
^ost, if not all of you, who are yet in the black state of 
'^ture, will here plead, Not guilty : But remember the 
^*Pnal Jews in Christ's time were as confident as you 
^ that they believed Moses, John ix. 28, 29. But he 
^^nfutes their confidence, roundly telling them, John v. 
*6. '* Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed 
?ae." Did ye believe the truths of God, ye durst not re- 
ject, as ye do, him wlio is truth itself. The yery difficulty 
you find in assenting to this tvutbi bewrays that unbelief 



€• 7*he Corruption qf the Understanding. \^to,t^J\ 

I am charging you with. Has it not proceeded so ^ 
' irith some at this day, that it has steeled their foreh^^^ 
"with the impudence and impiety, openly to reject all ^' 
vealed religion \ Surely it is out of the abundance of ^^ 
heart their mouth speaketh. But though yc set not Y^^^ 
mouths against the heavens, as they do, Uie same \xiM^'^^^ 
root of unbelief is in all men by nature, and reigns in >^^ 
and will reign, till overcoming grace captivate your mir::^ * 
to the belief of the truth. To convince you in this poL-^^ ' 
consider these three things : - A 

Evidence 1 . How few are there who have been bless^^^ ^ 
with an inward illumination, by the special operation 
the Spirit of Christ, lettim^ them into a view of divir^^^^^^^ 
truths, in their spiritual and heavenly lustre I How bai 
you learned the truths of religion, which ye pretend' to 
lieve I Ye have them merely by the benefit of extei 
revelation, and of your education ; so that you are Christ 
ians, just because you were not bom and bred bi a 
but in a Christian country. Ye are strangers to the in 
ward work of the holy Spirit, bearing witness by and 
the word in your hearts ; and so you cannot have tht 
assurance of faith, with respect to that outward divine re- 
velation made in the word, 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11, 12. 
Idierefore, ye are still unbelievers. " It is written in th< 
prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every^ 
man, therefore, that hath heard, and hath learned of th* 
Father, cometh unto me," says our Lord, John vi. 45. 
Now ye have not come to Christ, therefore ye have not 
been taught of God ; ye have not been so taught, and 
therefore ye have not come ; ye believe not. Behold the 
revelation from which the faitli even of the fundamental 
prirciples in religion doth spring, Mttth. xvi. 17, 18. 
" Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. — Blessed 
art thou, Simon Barjona ; for flesh and blood hath not re- 
vealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven*" If 
ever the Spirit of the Lord take a dealing with thee, to 
work in thee that faith, which is of the operation of God \ 
it may be, as much time will be spent in razing the old 
foundation, as will make tliec find a necessity of the work- 
ing of his mighty power, and to enable thee to believe the 
very foundation principles, which now thou thinkest thoil 
makest no doubt of; £ph. i. 19, 




"Kead 1.] 7%e CotrufiHon of the Understanding. 69 

Evid. 3. How many profeftsors have made shipwreck 
of their &ith (such as it was) in time of temptation and 
tjrial I See how they fall, like stars from heaven, when 
Antichrist prevails, 2 Thess. ii. 11, 12. «« God shall send 
tlicm strong delusions, that they should believe a lie ; 
'tJttttheyall might be damned, who believed not the truth." 
"Xhey fell into damning delusions, because they never 
Really believed the truth, though they themselves, and 
cithers too, thought they did believe it. That house is 
l>iiilt upon the sand, and that faith' is but ill-founded, that 
^iannot bear out, but is quite overthro^vn, when the storm 
^omes. 

^ EtAd, 3. Consider the utter inconsistency of most mens 

li?C8, with the principles of religion which they profess ; 

ye may as soon bring east and west together, as their 

practice. Men believe that fire will burn them, and thei^e- 

^re they will not throw themselves into it : But the truth 

is, most men live as if they thought the gospel a mere 

^le ; and the wrath of God revealed in his word against 

their unrighteousness and ungodliness, a mere scareci*ow. 

If ye believe the doctrines of the word, how is it tliat ye 

*re so unconcerned about the state of your souls before 

the Lord ? How is it that you are so little concerned 

^ith that weighty point, whether ye be ])oni again or not ? 

Muny live as they were bom, and are like to die as they 

j ^e, and yet li\e in peuce. Do such believe the sinful- 

' Jiess wid misery of a natural state ? Do they believe they 

^Y^dMren of wrath ? Do they believe there is no su: va- 

"On without regeneration ? and no regeneration but what 

i ttakes man a new creature ? If you believe the pi-omises 

I of the word, why do you not embrace them, and labour 

[ to enter into the promised rest? What sluggard would 

not dig for a hid treasure, if he really believed he might so 

obuin it ?. Men will work and sweat for a maintenance ; 

"Ccausc they believe that by so doing they Avill get it; yet 

they will be cX no tolerable pains for " the eternal weight 

of glory ;" why, but becuuse they do not believe the word 

pf promise ? Heb. iv. 1,2. If you believe the UircLten- 

^^gSj how is it that you live in your sins, live out of Christ, 

^^ yet iiope for mercy ? Do such believe God to be the 

'^oly and just one, who will by no means clear the guilty ^ 

F2 



The Corru/ttion qfihe Undeftandhtg. [Stat' 



IX 




no, none believey none (or next to none) believe 
tdt God the LORD i*, and how 9everely he fiuniii^ 
fifthly ^ There is in the mind of man a natural /rron< 
&>« and faUfhood^ which make for the safety of liE^ 
Fhcy go astray as soon as they be bom, speaking lit 
ial. Ivii. 3. We have this wiUi the rest of the corr 
Dn of our nature from our first parents. God revej 
le truth to them ; but through the solicitation of 
empter, they first doubted of it ; they disbelieved it, 
mibraced a lie instead of it. And for an iiicontcsti 
evidence hereof, we may sec that firet article of the dcv 
creed, ye shall not surely die^ Gen. iii. 4. which was 
truded by him on our first parents, and by them receive 
naturally embraced by their posterity, and held fast, 
light from heaven oblige them to quit it. It sprei 
itself through the lives of natural men ; who till tlfc- ^ 
cDnscienccs be awakened, walk after their own lusts ; ^-'^ 
detaining the principle. That they shall ?'ot surely die, J^^ D 
this is often improved to that perfection, that the rr^ta 
Oan say, over the belly of the denounced curse, « I ah^ ^ 
have peace though I walk in the imagination of rai^ 
hcurt, to add drunkenness to thirst," Deut. xxix. ^' 
Whatever advantage the truths of God have over er" 
by means of education, or otherwise ; error has alw: 
with the natural man this advaiitage against truth, naiT^ 
ly, That Uiere is something within him, which says^ 
•ihat it were true : so the mind lies fair for assenting to 
And here is the reason of it. ,The true doctrine is, " "t: 
doctrine that is according to godliness," 1 Tim. vi- 
and " the truth which is after godliness," Tit. i. 1. ErJ 
js the doctrine which is according to ungodliness ; 
tiiere ie never an error in the mind, nor an untruth vcn* 
in the world, (in matters of religion,) but what has 
«Lfiinity with one corruption of the hean or other ; acci 
ing to that of the apostie, 2 Thess. ii. 21. « They 
Jieved not the trutli, but had pleasure in unrighteousnc 
'So that ti'uth and error being otherwise attended 
equal advantages for their reception, error, by this n 
has ready access to the minds of men in their n? 
9tate. Wherefore, it is nothing strange that men 
tiie simplicity of gospel truths and institutionf 
greedilf embrace error and external pomp ia re) 



Btead I.3 7%e CorrufiHw ^fthe UnderMtandiT^. XI 

seeing they are so a^eable to the lusts of the heart, and 
tbe vanity of the mind of the natural man. . And from 
hence al^ it is, that so many embrace atheistical princi- 
ples ; for none do it but in compliance with their irregular 
p&ssions ; none but these, whose advantage it would be^ 
-that there was no God. 

Za«^/y, Man is naturally high minded; for when the 
Mspel comes in power to him, it is employed in <' casting 
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth 
itself against the knowledge of God," 2 Cor. x. 5. Low- 
liness of mind is not a flower that grows in the field of 
nature ; but is planted by the fingers of God in a renewed 
heart, and learned of the lowly Jesus. It is natural to 
man to think highly of himself, and what is his own ; for 
the stroke he has got by his fall in Adam has produced a 
false light, whereby mole -hills about him appear like 
mountains ; and a thousand airy beauties present them- 
selves to his deluded fiancy. Vain men would be tnV, 
(so he accounts himself, and so he would be accounted of 
ay others,) though man be born like a wild a»8*9'Colty Jcbxi. 
12. His way is right, because it is his own ; for, « every 
"way of a man is right in his own eyes," Proverbs xxi. 2. 
His state is good, becduse he knows no better ; he is 
alive without the law, Rom. vil. 9. and therefore his hope 
is strong, find his confidence firm. It is another tower 
of Babel reared up against heaven; and shall not fall 
"While .'the power of darkness can hold it up. The word 
l>atters it, yet it stands ; one while breaches are made in 
It, but they are quickly repaired ; at another time, it is all 
'BM^e to shake ; but still it keeps up ; till either God him- 
*lf, by his Spirit, rise an earthquake within the man, 
I which tumbles it down, and leaves not one stoiie upon 
^iW)ther, (2 Cor. x. 41, 45,) or death batter it dovm and 
'^e the foundations of it, Luke xvi. 23. And as the 
'^turalman thinks highly of himself, so he thinks meanly 
^ God, whatever he pretends. Psalm 1. 2K " Thou 
thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself." 
* he doctrme of the gospel and the mysteiy of Christ are 
^lishness to him ; and in his practice he treats them as 
8Uch, I Corinth, i. 18. and ii. 14. He brings the word 
■ndthe works of God, in the government of the world, be- 
^^ the bar of his carnal reason ; and there they are pre- 
sumptuously censured md cpndemned, Hoa. -xh* ^% 



7% Of the Corrutition qf the Witt. [State TL 

Sometimes the ordinary restraint of providence ia taken 
offf and Satun is permitted to stir up the carnal mind ; 
and, in that case it is like an ant's nest, uncovere'd and 
disturbed ; doubts, denials, and hellish reasons crowd in it» 
and cannot be laid by all the argimients brought against 
them, till 1^ power from on high captivate the mindi and 
still the mutiny of the corrupt principles. 

Thus much of the corruption of the understanding s 
which, although the half be not told, may discover to you 
the absolute necessity of regenerating grace. Call tho 
understanding now Ichabod, for the glory is departed from 
it. Consider this, ye that are yet in the state of naturey ^ 
and groan ye out your case before the Lord, that the Sun "^ 
of righteousness may arise upon you, before you be shut 
up in everlasting darkness. What avails your worldly^ 
wisdom ? What do your attainments in religion avails 
while your understanding lies yet wrapt up in its natural 
darkness, and confusion, utterly void of the light of life I 
Whatever be the natural man's gifts or attainments, w6 
must (as in the case of the leper. Lev. xlii. 24.) «^ pro- 
nounce him utterly unclean, his plague is in his head." ' 
But tliat is not all ; it is in his heart too, his will is cor* 
rupted, as I shall shew anon. 

Of the Corrufition of (he Will. 

II. The will, that commanding faculty, (which some* 
times was faithful, and ruled with God,) is now turned 
traitor, and rules with, and for the devil. God plant- 
ed it in man wholly a right seed ; but now it is turned 
into the degenerate plant of a strange vine. It Was origi- 
nally placed in a due subordination to the will of God* 
as was shewn before, but now it is gone wholly aside. 
However some do magnify the power of free-will, a view 
of the spirituality of the law, to which acts of moral dis- 
ciplhie do in no ways answer ; and a deep insight into 
the corruption of nature, given by the inward operati(m 
of the Spirit, convincing of sin, righteousness, and judg* 
ment, would make men find an absolute need of tho 
power of free grace, to remove the bands of wickedness 
from off the free-will. To open up tliis plague of the 
heart, I offer these following thinjrs to be considered : 

Firstj There is, in the unrenewed will, an utter in- 
sibility for what is truly good suq^d skccegtable in the sight 



Head I.3 Q/* the Corruption qf the WilL 73 

of God. The natural man's will is in Satan's fetters ; 
hemmed in, within the circle of evil, and cunnot move 
beyond it, more tlian a dead man can ndse himself out of 
his^ grave, Eph.ii. 1. We deny him not a power to 
chuse, pursue^ and act, what on the matter is good ; but 
though he can will what is good and right, he can will 
nothing aright and well. John xv. 5. Without mcy i. e. 
separate from me, as a branch from the stock, (as both 
the word and context do carry it,) ye can do nothing : to 
mt, nothing truly and spiritually good. His very choice 
and desire of spiritual things is carnal and selfish, John 
vi. 26. " Ye seek me because ye did eat of the loaves 
and were filled." He not only comes not to Christ, but 
he cannot come, John vi. 44. And whut can one do 
acceptable to God, who believeth not on him whom the 
Father hath sent ? To evidence this inability for good in 
the unre generate, consider these two tilings : 

£vid, 1 . How often does the light so shine before mens 

eyes, that they cannot but see the good they should chuse, 

and the evil they should refuse ; and yet their hearts have 

no more power to comply with that light than if they were 

arrested by some invisible hand ? They see what is right ; 

yet they follow, and cannot but follow, what is wrong. 

Their conscience tells them the right way, and approves of 

it too ; yet cannot their will be brought up to it ; their 

corruption so chains them, that they cannot embrace it ; so 

they sigh and go backward, over the belly of their light. 

And if it be not thus, how is it that the word, and way of 

holiness, meets with such entertainment in the world ? How 

w it the t clear arguments and reason on the side of piety 

and a holy life, which bear in themselves even on the car- 

^ mind, do not bring men over to that side ? Although 

the being of a heeiven and a hell were but a may-be^ it were 

sufficient to determine the will to the choice of holiness, 

^ere it capable to be determined thereto by mere reason : 

But men, knowing the judgment of God, (that they which 

commit such tliings arc worthy of death,) not only do the 

same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Rom. i. 32. 

And how is it that these who magnify the power of free-will 

do not confirm their opinion before the world, by an ocular 

demonstration, in a practice as far above others in holiness, 

*8 the opinion of their natural ability is above others ? Or 



74 - <y the Carrufiiion qf the Will. [Sm» ^ 

is it maintained only for the protection of lusts, which xnea 
may hold fast as long as they please ; and when they ha?» 
no more use for them, can throw them off in a momenl^ 
and leap out of Delilah's lap into Abraham's bosoai i 
Whatever use some make of that principle, it does of itself 
and in its own nature, cast a broad shadow for a shelter to 
wickedness of heart and life. And it may be observedi 
that the generality of the hearers of the gospel, of all deno- 
minations, are plagued with it ; for it is a root of bittemesf^ 
natural to all men ; from whence do spring so much fear^ 
lessness about the soul's eternal state ; so many delays and 
off-puts in that weighty matter, whereby much work is laid 
up for a death-bed by some ; while others are ruined by it 
legal walk) and unacquaintedness with the life of faith, aod 
the making use of Christ for saactification ; all flowing 
from the persuasion of sufficient natural abilities. Se 
agreeable is it to corrupt nature. 

£vid,'2. Let those, who, by the power of the spirit of 
bondage, having had the law laid out befoi*e thenv in^^ 
spirituality, for their conviction, speak and tell, if they 
found themselves able to incline their heaits towards itt i& 
that case ; nay, if the more that light shone into their souliH 
they did not find their hearts more and more unable to 
comply with it. There are some, who have been brought 
unto the place of the breaking forth, who are yet in th» 
devil's camp, that from their experience can tell, light let 
into the mind, cannot give life to the will, to enable itt& 
comply therewith ; and could give their testimony here, i* 
they would. But take Paul's testimony concerning it, wbOf 
in his unconverted state, was far from believing his uttfff 
inability for good ; but learned it by experience, Rom* ^ 
9, 10, 11, 13. I own the natural man may have akin» 
of love to the law ; but here lies the stress of the matt^ 
he looks on the holy law in -a carnal dress ; and so, wWl^ 
he hugs a creature of his own fancy, he thinks he has tw 
law, but in very deed he is without the law ; for as yet h^ 
sees it not in its spirituality : If he did, he would find ^ 
the very reverse of his own nature, and what his will cotti* 
not fall in with, till changed by the power of grace. 

Secondly^ There is in the unrenewed will an aversenO** 
to good. Sin is the natural man's element ; he is loaUitO 
' " ith it, as the fishes are to come out of the water InW 



.--^t 



'*v- .. ■** • "^ - ■ ■ . ■ 

lipd. Be not oidf casBoi^ikiie to Cihiitt) 1^ 
gcaaey Jcrfm ▼. 40. He i» pollatody and bste* to W 
JN^V Jer. xiiL 2f. « WEt thoif not be made cknirf 
Ml flballit OBce be V* He is tick, but utterly aTene to ' 
■teaiedf ; he loves his disease sO| that he lottths Ae 
fiiitiaik^ .He is a captive, a prisonery and a slave ; but 
lofes Ms coaquetor, his jailor and master ; heisfeiid of 
S^Vi prison, imd drud^ry ; and has no liidng to his ' 
vfif^ ' F<Mr evidence, of tms averseness to good, in the 
L^ man, I shall instance in some partkruhrs. 
Md^ I. The untowardness of children. Do we not 
jAem naturally lovers of sinful liberty ? Hiow unwiUmg 
;tiiey to.be hedged in ? How averse ta restraint? The 
rijd can ikar witnesss, that they are as bullocks unaceus-^ 
udto ike yoke : and more, tluit it is fiu* easier to brii^ 
lagbojlocks tamely to b^ the yoke, than eto bring 
DDig childrai under discipline, and make them tamely 
iBfut to the restraint of sinful^ liberty. Every body bu^k 
I in thk, M in a glass, that man ia naturally wild and 
ifid, a€cc»ding to ^phar's observe, J<^xL IS.thatmiui 
ftonr like a wUd ass't-coU. What can be said more I 
i is like a colt, the colt of an ass, the colt of a wild ass* 
pipare Jef. ii. 24. << A wild ass used to the wilderness, 
i snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, in her occasion 
o can turn her away ?" 

Bvid. 3. What psdn and difficulty do men often find in 
bg^ig their hearts to religious duties ? And what a task 
it to the carnal heart to id^ide at them I It is a pain to it, 
leave the world but a little, to converse with God. It 
not easy to borrow dme from^the toany things, to bestow 
upon the one thing, needful. Men often go to God la 
ties, with their feces towards the world ; and when their 
dies are on the mount of ordinances, their hearts will be 
flilid at the foot of the hilUf^oing after their cc^ifetQusnesMf 
Bsk. xxxiii. 3 1 . They are soon wearied of well'^oing'S 
p'koly duties are not agreeable to their corrupt nature* 
ike notice of them at tiieir woridly business, set thent 
yvn irith their carnal company, or let them be sucking 
e breasts of a lust ; time seems to them to fly, and drive 
Q^Dusly, so that it is gone ere they are aware. But kow» 
^y docs it drive, while a prayer, a sermon, or a. Sab* 
tthlatis ? The JLerd'a digr ii the longestday of aU Omi 



/ , 



r6 €(f the Corrufiiion qf the WllL [fitate H 

week with many ; and, tiierefore, they must sleep longer 
that morning, and go sooner to bed that night, than 6ra» 
nariiy they do ; that the day may be made of a tolenbie 
length ; for their hearts say within them, " When will the 
Sabbath be gone ?" Amos viii. 5. The hours of wonMp 
are the longest hours of that day ; hence when duty is over^ 
they are like men eased of a burden ; and when sermon i» 
ended, many have neither the grace nor the good maimen 
to stay till the blessing be pronounced, but like the beastSf 
their head is away us soon as one puts his hand to loose 
them ; why, but because while they are at ordinances, they 
are as Doeg, " detained before the Lord," 1 Sum. xxii. 7. 
. Evid, 3. Consider how the will of the natural man 
doth rebel against the lights Job xxiv. IS. I^ght som6^ 
times entercth in, because he is not able to hold it out; 
but he loveth darkness rather than light. Sometimes fjff 
the force of truth, the outer door of understanding It , 
broken up ; but the inner door of the will remains &ft 
bolted. Then lusts rise against light; corruption and 
conscience encounter, and fight as in the field of battle i 
till corruption getting the upper hand,conscience is force^ " 
to give back : Convictions are murdered ; and truth k ■ 
made and held prisoner, so thut it can create no more 4JUH 
turbance. While the word is preached or read, or the 
rod of God is upon tlie natural man, sometimes convict 
tions are darted in on him, and his spirit is woundedf in 
greater or lesser measure : But these convictions notbeii^ ■ ., 
able to make him full, he runs away with the airows 
sticking in his conscience ; and at length, one way er 
other, gets them out, and licks himself whole agidn. 
Thus, while the light shines, men, naturally averse to hy - 
wilfully shut their eyes ; till God is provoked to blind 
them judicially, and they become proof against the word 
and providences too : So they may go where they willf 
they can sit at ease ; there is never a word from heaven 4ir 
them, that goeth deeper than into their ears, Hos. iy« 17* . 
^ Ephraim is joined to his idols, let him alone.'* ".. 

Evid 4. Let us observe the resistance made by eled .. 
souls, when the Spirit of the Lord is at work, to bringT 
them from the power of Satin unto God. Zion's KfaBfr 
gets no subjects but by stroke of sword, in the day St. 
hin power, Psal. cs. 2> 3. None come to himy ViL 



Bead I.] Of the Cortufition qf the mil, n7 

inch as are drawn by a divine hand, John vi. 44. When 
the Lord comes to the soul^ he finds the strong man^ keep- 
ing the house^ and a deep peace and security there, while 
the tool is fast asleep in the devil's arms. But the prey 
nutt be taken from the mighty, and the captive delivered. 
Therefore, the Lord awakens the sinner, opens his eyes^ 
ud strikes him with terror, while the clouds are black 
ibove his head, and the sword of vengeance is held to his 
breast Now he is at no small pains to put a fair face on 
a black heart, to shake off his fears, to make head against 
them, and to divert himself from thinking on the un- 
pleasant and ungrateful subject of his soul's ease. If he 
cannot so rid himself from them, carnal reason is oJled 
in to help, and urgeth that there is no ground for so great 
fear; all may be well enough yet; and if it be ill witli 
Mm, it will be ill with many. When the sinner is beat 
from this, and sees no advantage of going to hell with 
company, he resolves to leave his sins, but cannot think 
of breaking off so soon ; there is time enough, and he will 
<fe it afterwards. Conscience says, To^ay, if ye wilt hear 
^vtnce^hardcn not your heart t : but he cries, To-morrow, 
^rd, to-morrow, Lord ; and, Just now. Lord ; till that 
'K)w is never like to come. And thus, many times, he 
comes from his prayers and confessions, witli nothing but 
a breast full of sharper convictions; for the heart doth 
l^ot always cast up the sweet morsel, as soon as confession 
is made with the mouth. Judges x. 10—16. And when 
Conscience obligeth them to part with some lusts, others 
^ kept as right eyes and right hands ; and there are rue- 
fcl looks after those that are put away, as it was with the 
Israelites, who, with bitter hearts, did remember the fish 
tbey did eat in Egypt freely, Num. xi. 5. Nay, when 
^0 is so pressed, that he must needs say before the Lord, 
^ he is content to part with all his idols ; the heart will 
^ giving the tongue the lie. In -a word, the soul in this 
^^^ will shift from one thing to another, like a fish with 
^0 hook in his jaws, till it can do no more ; and power 
^ome to make it succumb, as the wild asi in her montf^y 

Thirdly^ T here is in the will of man a natural prone- 
*^C8s to evil, a woful bent towards sin. Men naturally 
?*o bent to backsliding from God, Hos. u. 7, T\v^^ 
"^^^«5 the word is) towards backsliding ', evt\i ^ ^ 

G 



810 C^ the Corrttfktion qf the WiU. [Stat«>fiL 

- a stonC) yea, harder than the nether mill-stone^ in point 
of receiving of them ; it is otherwise unstable as watevi 
and cannot keep them. It works against the receiTiiig 
of them ; and when they are made^ it works them off* 
and returns to its natural bias, Hos. vi. 4. << Your good- 
ness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew, it goeth 
away.'' The morning cloud promiseth a hearty shower^ 
but, when the sun aiiseth, it evanisheth ; the sun heiti 
upon the early dew, and it evaporates ; so the husband- 
man's expectation is disappointed. Such is the good- 
ness of the natural man. Some sharp affliction, or pkic- 
ing conviction, oblig^th him, in some sort, to turn from 
his evil course ; but his will not being renewed, religion 
ih still ag^ainst the grain with him, and therefore this goes 
off again, Psal. Ixxviii. 34, 36, 37. Though a atoms 
thrown up into the air may abide there a little whilA; 
yet its natural heaviness will bring it down to the eank 
again ; and so do unrenewed men return to the wallowsi|t • 
in the mire ; because although they were washed, ^ et 
Aheir swinish nature was not changed. It is hard to caca^m 
wet wood take fire, hard to make it keep fire; but it is « 
harder than either of these to make the unrenewed wilt 
IPetain attained goodness ; which is a plain evidence of 
the natural bent of the will to eviL 

JEvid, last. Do the sunts serve the Lord now, as the]f 
were wont to serve sin in their unconverted state ? Vciy 
far from it, Rom. vi. 20, " When ye were the servants 
of sin, ye were free from righteousness." Sin got ally 
and admitted no partner ; but now, when tliey are the 

^ servants of Christ, are they free from sin ? Nay, there are 
still with them some deeds of the old man, shewing that 
he is but dying in them. And hence their hearts often 
misgive them, and slip aside unto evil, when they would 
do good, Rom. viii. 21. They need to watch, and keep 
their hearts with all diligence ; and their sad experience 
teaching them, that « He that trusteth in his own heart 
is a fool," Prov. xxviii. 26. If it be thus in the giFec!^ 
tree, how must it be in the dry ? 

Fourthly^ There is a natural contrariety, direct o^posi-- 
tion and enmity, in the will of man, to God himself, aad 
his holy will, Kom. viii. 7. « The carnal mind is enmity 
Hgiimst God j for it; is not subjegt to the law of Go^ 



Head h% €lf the C<»ruJition of the JVUIj ,t\ 

neither indeed can be.'* The will was once God's deputy 
in the soul, set to command there for him ; but now it va^ 
set up against him. If you would have the picture of it, 
in its natural state, the very reverse oi the will of God re- 
presents it. If the fruit hanging before one's eyes be but 
forbidden, that is sufficient to draw the heart after it. Let 
me instance in the sin of pro&ne swearing and cursing, to 
which some are so abandoned, that they take a pride in them ; 
belching out horrid oaths and curses, as if hell opened 
with the'opening of their mouths,or larding their speeches 
with minced oaUis, as faith^ hath^ f<ii*d ycy hai'd ye, and 
such like ; and ail this without any manner of provocation, 
though even that would not excuse them. Pi'ay tell mc, 
(1 .) What profit is there here ? A thief gets something in 
hishand for his pains; a drunkard gets a belly-full; but what 
do ye get ? Others serve the devil for pay ; but ye are 
-volunteers, that expect no reward, but your work itself, in 
affronting of heaven. And if you repent not, you will get 
your reward in full tale ; when ye go to hell, your work 
will follow you. The drunkard shall not have a drop of 
water to cool his tongue there. Nor will the covetous 
man's wealth follow him into the otlier world ; but ye 
shall drive on your old trade there. And an eternity shall 
be long enough to give you your heart's fill of it. (2.) 
What pleasure is there here, but what flows from your 
trampling upon the holy law ? Which of your senses doth 
swearing or cursing gratify ? If it gratify your ears, it can 
only be by the noise it makes against the heavens. Thouj^h 
you had a mind to give up yourselves to all- manner of 
profanity and sensuality, there is so little pleasure can be 
strainedoutof these, that we must needs conclude, your 
love to them, in this case, is a love to them for themselves ; 
a devilish unhired love, without any prospect of profit or 
pleasure from them otherwise. If any shall say, these are 
monsters of men. Be it so ; yet, alas 1 the world is fruit- 
ful of such monsters ; they are to be found almost every* 
where. And allow me to say, They must be admitted as 
the mouth of the whole unregenerate world against heaven, 
Rom. iii. 14. « Whose mouth is full of cursing and 
iHttemess," ver. 19. " Now we know, that what things 
soever the law ssdtb) it saith to them vf ho are under the 

G2 



is Of the Corrufition qf the tVUi. [State It 

^aW) that every mouth may be stopped, and all the worid 
may become guilty before God. 

I have a charge against every unregenerate man and 
woman, young or old, to be verified by the testimoniea of 
the Scriptures of truth, and the testimony of their own 
consciences; namely, that whether they be professors or 
profietne, whatever they be, seeing they are not bom agaiiit 
they are heart-enemies to God; to the Son of Grod, to tlir 
Spirit of God, and to the law of God. Hear this, ye care^ 
less souls, that live at ease in your natural state. 

\9t. Ye are enemies to God in your minds, Col. LSI. 
Ye are not as yet reconciled to him, the natui^ enmity i& 
not as yet slain, though perhaps it lies hid, and ye do not 
perceive it. (1.) Ye are enemies to the very bemg of 
God, Psal. xiv. 1. « The fool hath said in his heart, Tneip 
is no God." The proud man would that none were abovo 
himself; the rebel, thut there were no King ; and the un* 
renewed man, who is a mass of pride and rebellion, that 
there were no God. He saith it m his heart, he wisheth 
it were^so, though he be ashamed and afraid to speak it 
but And that all natural men are such fools, appears 
from the Apostle's quoting a part of this Psalm, *« That 
every mouth may be stopped," Rom. iii. 10, U, 12, 19. 
I own indeed, that while tlie natural man looks on God 
as the Creator s^d Preserver of tlie world ; because he 
loves his ownself^ therefore his heart riseth not against 
the being of his benefactor : But this enmity will quickly 
'appear, when he looks on God as the Rector and Judge oT 
the world ; bindmg him, under the pain of the curse, to 
exact holiness, and girding him with tlie cords of deathy 
because of his sin. Listen in this case to the voice of the 
'heart, and you will find it to be, .A^o God, (2.) Ye are 
'enemies to the nature of God, Job. xxi. 1 4. ** They say 
-unto God, Depart from us ; for we desire not tlie know* 
ledge of thy ways." Men set up to themselves an idol^of 
their own fancy instead of God, and then fall down aod 
worship it. They love him no otiaer way, than Jacob loved 
Leah, while he took her for Rachel. Every natural man 
is an enemy to God, as he is revealed in his word. An 
infinitely holy, just, powerful, and true Being, is nottbe 
Crod whom he loves, but the God whom he loaths. lift 
eifeot men naturally are haters of God, Rom* i. 30» Ajld 



Held L] Cf the Carrufition qf the Will. 13 

if tbty couldy they certainly would make him another than 
what he is. For, consider it is a certain truth, that what- 
M3titT is in God, is God ; and, therefore, his attributes or 
perfections are not any thing really distinct from himself. 
If Crod's attributes be not himself, he is a compound be- 
ing, and so not the first Being ; (which to say is blasphe- 
mouB,) for the parts compounding are before the com- 
pound itself; but he is ^ Alpha and Omega, the first and 
the last." 

Now upon this I would, for your conviction, propose to 
yoUr consciences a few queries: ( I .) How stand yourhearts 
affected to the infinite purity and holiness of God ? Con- 
science will give an answer to this, which the tongue will 
not speak out. If ye be not partakers of his holiiiess, ye 
cannot be reconciled to it. The Pagans finding they 
could not be like God in holiness, made their gods like 
themselves in filtliiness ; and thereby discovered what 
lortof a god the natural man would have. God is holy ; 
can an unholy ci*eature love his unspotted holiness ? Nay, 
it is the righteous only that can <^ give thanks at the re- 
membrance of his holiness," Psal. Ixxxvii. 1 2. God is 
light ; can creatures of darkness rejoice therein ? Nay, 
" every one that doth evil hateth the light," John iii. 29. 
For, « What communion hath light with darkness?" 2- 
Cor. vi. 14. (2.) How stand your hearts affected to the 
jusdce of God ? There is not a man, who is wedded to his 
lusts, as all the unregencrate are, but would be content 
with the blood of his bodv, to blot that letter out of the 
name of God. Can the malefactor love his condemning 
judge ? Or an unjustified sinner a just God ? No, he can- 
not, Luke vii. 47. « To whom little is forgiven, the 
same loveth little." Hence seeing men cannot get the 
doctrine of his justice blotted out of the Bible, it is such 
an eyesore to them, that they strive to blot it out of their 
minds. And they ruin themselves by presuming on his 
mercy, while they are not careful to get a righteousness, 
wherein they may stand before his justice ; but " say in 
their heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he 
do evil," Zeph.i. 12. (3.) How stand ye affected to the 
onmiscience and omnipresence of God I Men naturally 
would rather have a blind idol, than an all-seeing God ; 
ftnd| therefore, do whsa they canj as Adam did, to hide 



M Of the CorrufiHon tf the mil. [Statu 

themselres {rom the presence of the Lord. They no n 
love an all-seeing, every-where-present God, than 
thief loves to have the judge witness to his evil-deeds, 
it could be carried by votes, God would be voted out oi 
world, and closed up in heaven : For the language of 
carnal heart is, « The Lord seeth us not ; tlie Lord I 
forsaken the earth," Ezek. viii. 13. (4.^ How stan* 
affected to the truth and veracity of God i There are 
few in the world, that can heartily subscribe to that 
tence of the Apostle, Rom. iii. 4. « Let God be true, 
every man a liar." Nay truly, there are many, whc 
effect, do hope that God will not be true to his w 
There ai'e thousands who hear the gospel, that hope t 
saved, and think all safe with them for eternity, whc 
ver had any experience of the new birth, nor do at all 
cern themselves in that question, Whether they are 1 
^;ain or not ? A question that is like to wear out I 
among us at this day. Our Lord's words are plain 
peremptory, << Except a manbe bom agcdn, he cannot 
the kingdom of God." What are such hopes then, 
real hopes that God (with profoundest reverence l 
spoken) will recall his word, and that Christ will pro 
felse prophet ? What else means the sinner, who, " v 
he heareth the words of the curse, blesseth himself k 
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in 
imagination of mine heart?" Deut. xxix. 19. La 
How stand ye affected to the power of God ? None 
new creatures will love him for it, on a fair view ther 
though others may slavishly fear him upon the accoui 
it. There is not a natural man but would contril 
to the utmost of his power, to the building of ano 
tower of Babei, to hem it in. On these grounds, I dec 
every unrenewed man an enemy to God. 

2rf/y, Ye are enemies to the Son of God. That 
mity to Christ is in your hearts, which would have n 
you join the husbandmen, who killed the heir, and cast 
out of the vineyard; if ye had been beset with their ten 
tions, and no more restrained than they were, jim I a 
you will say, to have so treated my sweet Saviour i 
said Hazael in another case ; but when he had tlie te 
tation, he was a dog to do it. Many call Christ t 
ftweet Saviour, whose consciences can bear witiieas» ' 



Head I.] Of the CorrufitiM <f t/n TVili. m 

Bever sucked so much sweetness from him^ as from their 
sweet lusts, which are ten times sweeter to them than their 
Saviour. He is no other way sweet to them than as they 
abuse his death and sufferings, for the peaceable enjoyment 
of their lusts ; that they may live as they list in the world ; 
and when they die, may be kept out of hell. Alas ! it is 
but a mistaken Christ that is sweet to you, whose souls 
loathe that Christ, who ^( is the brightness of the Father's 
^ry, and the express image of his person.'' It is with 
70U as it was in the carnal Jews, who delighted in him 
while they mistook his errand into tlie world, fancying 
that he would be a temporal deliverer to them, Mai. iii. 1. 
But when he was come, and <^ sat as a refiner and purifier 
of silver/' ver. 2. 3. and cast them as reprobate silver, 
who thought to have had no small honour in the kingdom 
of the Messiah ; his doctrine galled their consciences, and 
they rested not till they imbrued their hands in his blood. 
To open your eyes in this point, which ye are so lothe to 
believe, I will lay before you the enmity of your hearts 
against Christ and all liis ofiices. 

1. Every unregcnerate man is an enemy to Christ in 
his prophetical office. He is appointed of the Father, thp 
gi'cat Prophet and Teacher ; but not upon the world's 
call, who, in their natural state, would have unanimously 
voted against him : And, therefore, when he came, he was 
condemned as a seducer and blasphemer. For evidence 
of this enmity, I will instance in two tilings. 

Jivid, 1. Consider the entertainment he meets with, 
when he comes to teach souls inwardly by his Spirit. Men 
do what they can to stop their ears, like the deaf adder, 
that they may not hear his voice. They always resist the 
Holy Ghost. " They desire not the knowledge of his 
Ways ;" and, therefore, bid him depart from them. The 
old calumny is often raised upon him, on that occasion, 
John X. 20. « He is mud, why hear ye him ?" Soul exer- 
cise raised by the spirit of bondage, is accounted by many 
nothing else but distinction, and melancholy fits; men thus 
hhispheming the Lord's work, because they themselves 
tre beside themselves, and cannot judge of these matters. 

Evid,2. Consider the enterUtinmcnt he meets with, 
when he comes to teach men outwardly by his word. 



M Of the Corrutition qf the WilL [State 13^ 

(1.) His written word, the Bible^ is slighted; Christ 
hath left it to us, as the book of our instructions, to show 
us what Way we must steer our course, if we would come 
to Emmanuers land. It is a lamp to light us through a 
dark world to eternal light. And he hath left it upon U8| 
to search it with that diligence wherewith men dig into 
mines for silver and gold, John v. 39. But, uh ! how is 
this sacred treasui'e profaned by many ! They ridicule the 
holy word, by which they must be judged at the last day; 
and will ratlicr lose their souls than their jest, dressing up 
the conceit of their wanton wits in scripture -phrases ; in 
which they act as mad a part, as one who would dig into a 
mine to procure metal to melt, and pour do\ni his own and 
his neighbour's throat. Many exhaust their spirits in read- 
ing i*omances, and their minds pursue them, as the flame 
doth the dry stubble ; while they have no heart for, nor 
relish of the holy word, and therefore seldom take a Bible 
in their hands. What is agreeable to the vanity of thefap 
minds is pleasant and taking : But what recommends holi- 
ness to their unholy hearts, makes their spirits dull and 
flat. What pleasure will they find in reading of a pro£Eme 
ballad, or stoiy book, to whom the Bible is tasteless, as 
the white of an egg ! Many lay by their Bibles with their 
Sabbath day's clothes ; and whatever use they have for 
their clothes, they have none for their Bibles, till the return 
of the Sabbath. Alas ! the dust or finery about your 
Bibles is a witness now, and will, at the last day^ be a 
witness of the enmity of your hearts against Christ as a 
prophet. Besides all this, among these who ordinarily 'read 
the scriptures, how few are there that read it as the word 
of the Lord to their souls, and keep communion with him 
in it. They do not make his statutes their counsellors, nor 
doth their particular case send them to their Bibles. They 
are strangers to the solid comfort of the scriptures. And 
if at any time they be dejected, it is something else than 
the word that revives them : As Ahab was cured of his- 
sullen fit, by the securing of Naboth's vineyard for him- 

(2.) Christ's word preached is despised. The entertain- 
ment most of the world, to whom it has come, have always 
given it, is that which is mentioned, Mat. xxii. 5. They 
made light of it. And for its sake they are despised whom 
he has employed to preach it ; whatever other face men 



Head I.] Q/* the Corru/ition qf the fVUi. 97 

put upon their contempt of the ministiy, John xt. 30. 
« The servant is not greater than his Lord ; if they have 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you ; if they have 
kept my sayings, they will keep yours also. But all these 
thmgs will they do unto you for my name's sake/' That 
Levi was the son of the hated, seems not to have been 
without a mystery, which the world in all ages hath un- 
riddled. But though the earthen vessel, wherein God has 
put the treasure, be turned, with many, into vessels where- 
in there is no pleasure, yet why is the treasure itself 
lighted ? But slighted it is, and that with a witness this 
day. Lord, who hath believed our report ? To whom 
shall we speak ? Men can, without remorse, make to them-> 
selves silent Sabbaths, one after another. And, alas ! 
when they come to oi*dinances, for the most part, it is but 
to appear (as the word is, to be seen) before the Lord, and 
te tread his courts, namely, as a company of beasts would 
do, if they were driven into them, Isa. i. 12. So little 
reverence and awe of God appeal's on their spirits. Many 
stand tike brazen walls before the word, in whose con*upt 
conversation the preaching of the word makes no breach* 
Nay, not a few are growing worse and worse, under 
precept upon precept ; and the result of all is, " They go 
and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken," 
Isa. xxviii. 13. What tears of blood are sufficient to lament 
that (the gospel) the grace of God is thus received in vain ! 
We are but the voice of one crying ; the speaker is in 
heaven ; and speaks to you from heaven by men ; why do 
ye rtfuse him that s/ieaketh ? Heb. xii. 25. God has made 
our Master hear of all things, and we are sent to court a 
<pouse for him. There is none so worthy as he ; none 
more unworthy than they to whom this match is promised; 
hut the prince of darkness is preferred before the Prince 
of peace. A dismal darkness overclouded the world by 
Adam's fall, more terrible than if the sun, moon, and stars, 
had been for ever wrapt up in blackness of darkness ; and 
there we should have eternally lain, had not this grace of 
the gospel, as a shining sun, appeared to dispel it, Tit. ii. 
11. But yet we fly like night-owls from it ; and like the 
•wild beasts, lay ourselves down in our dens ; wjien the sun 
ariseth, we are struck blind with the light thereof; aiid, as 
ere«ture» of darknessi love darkness rather than lightr 



88 Of the Comtfition qf the Witt. [Stkte D 

Such is the enmity of the hearts of men against Christy ii 
his prophetical office. 

3. The natural man is an enemy to Christ in his priest- 
ly office. He is appointed of the Father a Priest for ever , 
thaib by his alone sacrifice and intercession^ sinners mv 
have peace with, and access to God ; but Christ cmci 
fied is a stumbling-block, and foolishness to the unrenewm 
part of mankind, to whom he is preached, 1 Cor. L 23 
They are not for him, as the new and living way. Nor i] 
he, by the voice of the world, an high Priest over the bou» 
of God. Cormpt nature goes quite another way to work 

Evidence 1. None of Adam's children nuturally incline 
to receive the blessing in borrowed robes ; but would al 
ways, according to the spider's motto, owe all to them 
selves ; and so climb up to heaven on a thread spun out o 
their own bowels. For they " desire to be under tlie law,* 
Gal. iv. 24. And « go about to establish their own righ 
teousness, Rom. x. 3. Man, naturally, looks on Gbd ai 
a great Master ; and himself, as his servant, that tnns 
work and win heaven as his wages. Hence, when con 
science is awakened, he thinks, that, to the end he may b< 
saved, he must answer the demands of the law ; serve Go( 
as well as he can, and pray for mercy wherein he comft 
short. And thus mtmy come to duties, that never com( 
out of them to Jesus Christ. 

Evid. 2. As men, naturally, think highly of their da 
ties, that seem to them to be well done ; so they look fiw 
acceptance with God according as their work is done, na 
according to the share they have in the blood of Christ 
" Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not J* 
They will value themselves on their performances and at* 
tainments ; yea, their very opinions in religion, (Phil. ii. 4 
5, 6, 7.) . taking to themselves what they rob from Christ 
the great High Priest. 

Evid, 3. The natural man, going to God in duties, irill 
always be found either to go without a Mediator, or witl 
more than the only Mediator, Jesus Christ. Nature ii 
blind, and therefore venturous : It sets a man a-going im* 
mediately to God without Christ; to rush into his presence] 
and put their petitions in his hand, without being introdu- 
ced by the secretary of heaven, or putting their requestsin- 
to his hand. So fixed is this disposition in the unrencwctd 



;|U|]^ €ir^^ Corrvfittw qf the ma. «| 

4|Biit^ "tfi^ urben inaay hearera of the gospel are convened 
i^-OMi tbe point of their hopes of sidvadon, the name 
d&mtt wiU scarcely be heard from their mouths. Ask 
Itaii IxHr thef think to obtain the pardon of sin ? they will 
iBil jfOOy fhey beg and look for mercy, because God is a 
flftilBiliil Gold; and that is all they have to confide in. 
Mali look fer mercy for Christ's sake ; but how do they 
kiowtk^t Christ will take their plea in hand ? Why, as 
diePapistshave their mediators with the Mediator, so haro 
l(tof . They know he cannot but do it ; for they pray, con- 
faM, taioumy uid have great desires, and the like ; and so 
knesoinething of their own to commend them unto him s 
Tky were never made poor in spirit^ and brought empty- 
Iwledto Christ, to lay the stress of all on his atoning 
UoodL - • ' 

S.-The natural man is an enemy to Christ in his kingly 
ofice. The Father has appointed the Mediator King in 
&Rf Psalm iL 6. And all to whom the gospel comes are 
caianiaDded,on their highest peril, to kiss the Son, and subr 
nit themselves unto him, ver. 12, But the natural voice 
|«faiankind is, ^way with bim^ as you may see, ver. S.'S. 
**niey will not have him to reign over them,*' Luke xix. 14, 
'Evid. I . The workings of corrupt nature to wrest the 
^WTcniment out of his. hands. No sooner was he bom, but 
being bom a king, Herod persecuted him, Matth, ii. And 
when he was crucified, they set up over his head his accu- 
satioii, written. This is Jesus j the King of the Jewsy Matth. 
ixvii 3/. Though his kingdom be a spiritual kingdom, 
•ninot of this world ; yet, they cannot allow him a king^ 
^sm. within a kingdom, which acknbwledgeth no other 
head or supreme, but the royal Mediator. They make bold 
with his royal prerogatives, changing his laws, institudons, 
•nd ordini^nces, modelling his worship according to the de- 
vices of their own hearts ; introducing new offices and of- 
Icers into his kingdom, not to be foimd in the book of the 
I Mmer of his kingdom ; disposing of the external govem- 
l ywnt thereof, as may best suit their carnal designs. Such 
is the enmity of the hearts of men against Zion's King. 

Evid. 2. How unwilling are men, naturally, to submit 
tato, and be hedged in by the laws and discipline of his 
kingdom \ As a king, he is a law-giver, (Isa. xxxiii, 22.) , 
iQd has appointed an external government} discipline^ and 



*\ 



102 The Corru/ition qf the Conscience. [[Stat 

'No^y here is a three-fold cord against heaven and 1 
ness, not easily broken ; a blind mind^ a perverse willy 
disorderly distempered ufTections. The mind swelled* 
self-conceit) says the man should not stoop ; the will, 
posite to the will of God, says he will not ; and the 
nipt affections, rising against the Lord, in defence oi 
4:orrupt will, say, he shall not Thus the poor crea 
(Stands out against God and goodness, till a day of pc 
come, in which he is made a new creature. 

IV. The conscience is corrupt and defiled, Tit. i. 

it is an evil eye, that fills one's conversation with n: 

darkness and confusion ; being naturally unable to d 

ofTice ; till the Lord, by letting in a new light to the i 

awaken the conscience; it remains sleepy and inac 

Conscience can never do its work, but according to 

light it hath to work by. Wherefore, seeing the nat 

man cannot spiritually discern spiritual tilings, (1 Co 

14.) the conscience naturally is quite useless in 

point ; being cast into such a deep sleep, that nothing 

a saving illumination from the Lord can set it on i 

in that matter. The light of the natural conscienc 

good and evil, sin and duty, is very defective; there 

tliough it may check for grosser sins, yet, as to the i 

subtile workings of sin, it cannot check them, becau 

discerns them not. Thus, conscience will fly in the 

of many, if at any time they be drunk, swear, ncj 

prayer, or be guilty of any gross sin ; who otherwise hi 

profound peace ; though they live in the sin of unb 

are strangers to spiritual worship, and the life of J 

And natui*al light being but faint and languishing in i 

things which it doth reach, conscience in that case si 

like a stitch in one's side, which quickly goes off; il 

citements to duty, and checks for and struggles agains 

are very remiss, which tlie natural man easily gets < 

But, because there is a false light in the dark mind 

natural conscience following the same, will call evil ^ 

and good evily Isa. v. 20. And so it is often found 1 

b]ind and furious horse, which doth violently run down 

self, his rider, and all that doth come in his way. Join 

2. " Whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth 

service." When the natural conscience is awakenc 

tho Spirit of conviction, it will indeed rage and roar, 



lead I.] The Corruption qfthe Memory and Body. \qs 

piit thewholeman in a'drcadful con8ternation,nwfully snni- 
tntm all the powers of the soul to help in a strait ; ' make 
Ac fttifF heart to ti*cmb]e, ami the knees to bow ; set the 
•yeaa-weepingythetonguc a-confessinj^; and oblige the num 
locust cut the goods into the sea, which it apprehends arc 
\kz to sink the ship of the soul, thougli the heurt still goca 
Hber them. But yet it is un evil conscience wliich native- 
ly leads to despair, and will do it effectually, as in Judas' 
cue ; unless either lusts prevail over it, to lull it asleep, as 
in the case of Felix, Acts xxiv. 25. or the blood of Christ 
|Kvail over it, sprinkling and purging it from deud works, 
8siu the case of all true conveits, Hcb. ix. 14. and x. 23. 
• Lastly J Even the memory bears evident miirks of this 
corruption. What is good and worthy to be muided, as it 
makes but slender inipi*cssion, so thut impression easily 
vearsoff; the mcmoiy, as a leaking vessel, lets it slip, 
Heb. ii. 1 . As a sieve that is full, when in the water, 
lets all go when it is taken out ; so is the memory, with 
Kapect to spiritual things. But, how does it retain what 
ought to be forgotten ? Naughty things sobeai* in them* 
teh-es upon it, that though men would fain have them out 
of mind, yet they stick there like glue. However forget- 
ful men be in otiier things, it is hard to forget an injury. 
So the memory often furnishes new fuel to old lusts; makes 
men in old age to re-act the sins of their youth, wliile it 
presents tliem again to the mind with delight, which there- 
upon licks up the former vomit. And thus, it is like the 
Hddle, that lets through tlie pure grain, and keeps the re- 
fuse. Thus far of the ccrrupdon of the soul. 

The body itself also is partaker of tliis corruption and de-. 
filement, so far as it is capable thereof. Wherefore the 
Scripture calls it sinful flesh, Rom. viii. 3. We may Uke 
this up in two things. (1.) The natural temper, or rather 
distemper of the bodies of Adam's children, as it is an ef- 
fect of original sin ; so it hath a native tendency to sin, in- 
dtes to sin, leads the soul into snares, yea, is itself a snare 
Lo the soul. The body is a furious beast, of such metal, 
that if it be not beat down, kept under, and brought into 
subjection, it will cast the soul into much sin and misery^ 
I. Cor, ix. 27. There is a vileness in the body, (Pliil. iu. 
31.) which, as to the saints, will never be removed, until 
i| b€ melted down in a grave, and cast into a new fnould, 



9^ Of the Corru/ition q/ the WW. [Sca^4 

sum of the gospel reli^^ion is, to deny ourselyes, and -^ 
jg;ood from and for Christ, Philip, i. 2 1. 

Thirdly^ Every thing in nature is against believin| 

Jesus Christ. What beauty can the blind man discern 

a crucified Saviour, for which he is to be desired ? H 

can the will, naturally impotent, yea, and ayerse to goc 

' make choice of him? Well may the soul then say to hi 

in the day of the spiritual siege, as the Jebusites said 

David in another case, ^^ Except thou take away the bib 

and the lame, thou shalt not come in hitlier," 2 Sam. ▼» 

The way of nature is to go into one's self for all; accpr 

fng to the fundamental maxim of unsanctified moralit 

That a man should trust in himself ; which, according 

th^ doctrine of faith, is mere foolishness. For so it is d 

Cermincd, Prov. xviii. 26. " He that trusteth in his on 

heart is a fool." . Now> faith is tlie soul's going out of i 

self for all; and this nature, on the other hand, deteramu 

to be foolishness, 1 Cor. i. 18,23. Wherefore there 

need of tlie working of mighty power, to cause sinners ' 

believe, Eph. L 19. Isa. liii. I. We see promises jof we 

come to sinners, in the gospel covenant^ are ample, larg 

and free, clogged with no conditions, Isa. Iv. I. Rev. xx 

17. If they cannot believe his bare word, he has giT< 

them his oath upon it, Ezek. xxxiii. 11. And for the 

greater assurauce, he has appended seals to his sworn o 

'venant, namely, the holy sacraments* So that no moi 

could be demanded of the most frdthless person in tl 

world, to make us believe him, than the Lord hath cond 

scendcd to give us, to make us believe himself. This plaii 

ly speaks nature to be against believing, and these whofl< 

to Christ for refuge, to have need of strong consolatic 

(Hcb. vi. 18.) to blame their strong doubts, and propeiifi 

ty to unbelief. FtUther, also, it may be observed, how,i 

the word sent to a secure,graceless generation, their objo 

tions are answered aforehand ; and words of grace ai 

heaped one upon another, as ye may read, Isa. Iv. 7, 8j! 

Joel ii. 13, Why ? Because the Lord knows, that vhc 

these secure sinners are thoroug^hly wakened^ doubt 

fears, and cumal reasonings against believing, will be p 

ing within their breasts, as thick as dust in a house, rak 

ed by sweeping a dry floor. 

Lastly^ Corrupt nat,ure is bent towards tli^e way of tfi 



Head 1.1 Hoto Man^s Aiisure wdi C^rrujitrcfj iOi*- 

bead, in the covenant of works ; vre were in him Rcminul-' 

1^9 as our natural head ; hence wc fell in him, and by his 

disobedience wei*e made sinners^ as Levi, in the louis oi' 

Abraham, paid tithes, Heb. vii. 9. Ills first sin is inipiit- 

cd to us ; therefore, justly are we left under the w^nt oi liis 

onginal righteousness, wliich, being given to him as a com- 

inoQ person, he cast oiF, by his sin ; &nd this is nccvissunly 

followed, in him and us, by the corruption of the whole 

nature; righteousness and corruption being two contrancsvi 

one of which must needs alw^-ys be in nuui, us a subject cu- 

pable tliereof. And Adi»m, on r common Ltlicr, being coi'- 

rupt, we arc so too ; for, " Who c;in bring a clean thin;^ 

out of an unclean ?" 

Althou;^h it is sufficient to evince the rij^btecusncss ct' 
this dispensation, thut it w:*s from tlie Lord, who doth all 
things well ; yet, to sikiicc the muvmurings of proud na- 
ture, let these few thmi;3 further be considered. (I.) In 
the covenant wherein Adam represented us, <:tcni;J kipj)*- 
ness was promised to him and his posterity, upon coiiditif.n 
of his (\hiX is, Adam's) perfect obedience, as the repusm.- 
tativelor all mankind ; whereas, if there hid b-Jdi no cc- 
vcnant,d\ey could not have pleaded eternal life, upon tiieir 
mostperftctobcd'tncc, but might have been, aft. r all, re- 
ted to notliintr, notwitlistanding, by natural jiisiico, th( y 
"Would have been liable to God's eternal wn^tii, in clsv* oL" 
»in. Who, in that case, would not have cor.sent. d to i\i:X . 
^presentation ? ('-i.) Adam had a power to sti nd j^iveii hliiu 
^ingmiLde upright. He was i.s cupi.ble to st..r.d lur l;'in- 
wlf, and all his posterity, as ai-y ificr him ccuid b.^ Ibj-. 
themselves. This trial of mc.nklnd, hi their head, ^iouid 
Won have been over, and the crown won to them al!, liicd 
he stood ; whereas, had his posterity been hulcpiT.der.t on 
^) and every one left to act for himself, the tiiul wcii'd 
i»ave been continually a-carryint on, as men came into the 
World. (5.) lie had naturarafVeetions the strongest to en* 
P^ him, being our common father. (4.) His own stock 
wus in the ship, his all lay at stake as well as ours. He 
^d no separate hiterest from ours ; for, if he for^ot ours^ 
^e behoved to have forgot his own. (5.) If he laid stood y 
^e should have hc.d the light of his mind, the righteous- 
"^esa of his will, and holiness of his affections? with entire 
purity tr^nsmitted unto us ; we could not have t*.Ucu ; t?t« 

13 



94 0/ the Corruption f^ ihe WUL , [Scaf 

principallj opposed bjr corrupt nature* One may wd 

tliat of all errors in religion^ since Chiistf the seed 6 

voman» wa& preached> this of works, in opposition to 

grace in him^ vas the first that lived ; and it is likely 

tue last that dies. There have been vast numbers of er 

which sprung up> one after another, whereof at le 

the World became ashamed and wearjr ; so that they: 

out. But this has continued fi*om Cain, the first auu 

this heresy, unto this day ; and never wanted some 

clave to it, even In the times of greatest light I dc 

without ground, call Cain the author of it: For, ^ 

Abel brought the sacrifice of atonement, a bloody off< 

of Ihe firstlings of his flock, (like the Publican, tmith 

hi%brea9t\idsA saying, Gocf be merciful to me a tinner y) 

idvanced with his Uiank-offermg of the first-fruit o 

ground, (Gen» iv. 3, 4.) like the proud Pharisee, wU 

God I tbank thee. For what was the cause of Cain's ki 

and of his murdering of Abel ? Was it not that he ws 

ctpted of God for \S& work ? Gen. iv. 4, 5. « And w 

fore slew he him I Because his own works were evil 

his brother's righteous, 1 John iii. 22. That is, do 

fidth, and accepted ; when his were done without fait 

therefore rejected, as the Apostle teacheth, Heb. 

AJid so he wrote his indignation against justificatio 

acceptance with God througii faith, in opposition to « 

in the blood of his brother, to convey it down to post 

And since that time, the unbloody sacrifice has often s 

med in tlie blood of those that rejected it. The pr< 

Ynade to Abraham, of the seed in which all nations s 

te blessed^ was so overclouded among his poster 

£gypt, that the generality of them saw no need o: 

way of obtaining the blessing, tiU God himself cos 

their error, by a fiery Taw from mount Sinai, " whic 

added because of transgressions, till the seed should c< 

Gal. iii* 19* 1 need not insist to tell you, how Mose 

the Prophets had stiil much ado, to Icud the people c 

conceit of then- omu righteousness ; Deut.^ xi: is en 

spent on that purpose. They were very gross in that 

in our Saviour's time. In the time of the Aposdea» 

the doctrine of free grace was most clearly preachec 

ertor lifi:ed lip its head, in face of clearest light ; wi 

the Epistle to the Romans and Galatians: And, sincf 

iim^ it hsA aot beeaMranting i, Popery being the cox 



' fbnnerhBretiet^ andthis theheartand life of thatde- 
. And) finally, it may be observed, that always as the 
1 declined from her purity otherwise, the doctrine of 
race was obscured propordonably* 
Inch is the natural propensity of man's heart, to the 
: the law in opposition to Christ ; that, as the tdnt- 
lel turns the taste of the purest liquor put into it, so 
tural man turns the very p^ospel into law ; and trans* 
the covenant of grace mto a covenant of works, 
cremonial law "vtras to the Jews a real gospel ; which 
lood, death, and translation of guilt before their eye* 
ually, as the only way of salvation : Yet their very 
r. e. their altar, with the several ordinances pertain- 
sreto, Mai. i. 12.) was a snare unto tbeniy Rom. ii. 
hile they use it to make up the defects in their obe- 

to the moral law, and cleave to it so, as to reject 
whom the altar and sacrifices pointed them to, as 
bstance of all : Even as Hagar, whose it was only 
re, was by their father brought into her mistress's 
not without a mystery in the purpose of God, for 
'.re the two covenantsj GdiL iv. 34. Thus is the doc* 
f the gospel corrupted by Pupists,and other enemies 
doctrme of free grace. And, indeed, however na- 
iiens heads may be set right in this point, as surely 
r are out of Christ, their fiiith, repentance and obe- 
, (such as they are,) are placed by them in the room 
ist and his righteousness, and so trusted to, as if by 
:hey fulfilled a new law. 

Great is the difficulty in Adam's sons their parting 
he law, as a covenant of works. None part with 
lut respect, but those whom the power of the Spirit 
ce separates from it. The luw is our first husband, 
;ts every one's virgin love. When Christ comes to 
111, he finds it murried to the law ; so as it neither 
or will be married to another, till it be obliged to 
ith the first husband, as the apostle teucheth, Rom. 
2, 3, 4. Now that ye may see what sort of a part* 
lis is, consider, 

It is a death, Rom. vii. 4. Gal. iii. 19. Intrea- 
LIl not prevail with the soul here ; it suith to the first 
id, as Ruth to Naomi, " The Lord do so to me, 
ore also, if ought but d^th part thee and me." And 

anners are true to their word i they dit \d \b^ \3M> 






9«. (if the Corru/iHon ^ the WHt. [)MMKI|^\ 

■ 

ere they be married to Christ Death.is hard to erUq^'* 
body : But what difficulty do ye imagine must a loyini^ 
wifO) on her dealii-bed, find in parting with her husfaiaDQi: 
the husband of her youth, and with the dear childrelk i|>t 
has brought forth to him : The law is that husband ;. aM 
the duties performed by the natural man are these cidlt 
dren. What a struggle, as for life, wilt be in the htaH^ 
ere they be got parted. I may have occasion to teaol^ ^ 
upon this afterwards. In the mean time, take the Apo&tle*ir 
short, but pithy description of it, Rom. x. 3. ^ For theyr 
being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about ^ 
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted theia?r 
selves to the righteousness of God." They go about to 
establish their own righteousness, like an eager disputattf 
in schools, seeking to establish the point in questbn ; ttM 
&He a tormentor, extorting a confession from one upon diA 
rack. They go about to establish it to make it stamlt^ 
their righteousness is like a house built upon the sand s 
it cannot stand, but they will have it to stand : It.fiUt^ 
they set it up again : But still it tumbles down on thetoi:^ 
yet they cease not to go about to make it stand. BiliC 
' wherefore all this pains about a tottering righteousness I! 
Because, such as it is, it is their own. What ails them iC^ 
Christ's righteousness? Why, that would make them frceif 
grace's debtors for all, and tiiat is what the proud heartby* 
no means can submit to. Here lies the stress of the.mat-^ 
ter, Psal. x. 4. The wicked through the pride of hhf 
countenance will not seek, (to read it without the suppled 
"incnt,) that is, ih other teims, « He cannot dig, and to bej 
he is ashamed." Such is the stiniggle ere th^ soul die Iflt 
the law. But what speaks yet more of thiswoful dispo^«^ 
tion of the heart, nature oft-times gets the mastery of tm 
disease ; insomuch that the soul, which was like to havY^ 
died to the law, while convictions were sharp and piercifij^ 
fatally recovers of the happy and promising sickness ; aim 
(what is veiy natural) cleaves more closely than ever t» 
the law, even as a wife brought back from the gates of deadi 
would cleave to her husband. This is the issue of the ex- 
crcise of many about their souls case : They are indee^ 
brought to follow duties more closely ; but they arenas fio? 
from Christ as ever, if not farther. 

(2.). It is a violent death, Rom. vii. 4. " Ye are' b«rf 
rozna dead to the law/' being killed) slaiuy or put V 



ttitfiA JtJ Of the C^rrv/uimi qf ike WUL ff 

Aeathf aft the word bears. Theiaw haelf has a ^;reat hairf 

a this ; the husbaifd ^Yes the -wound, Gral. ii. 19. ^ ] 

Ihreligh'lhe. faKw am dead to the law.'* The soul that dies 

t^ilesih, is like a loving wife matched with a rigorous 

lHttbaiid>- She does what she can to please him, yet he is 

Mier pleased ; buttosseth^ harasseth, andb^^her^ till 

Ae break her heart, vgkd death sets her free; as wUl i^iv 

. wards more fully appear. Thus it is made evid^it, that 

1^08 hearts are naturally bent to the way of the law, and 

lie cross to the gospel-contrivance ; and die second article 

of the charge, against you that are unregenerate, isveri* 

fied, namely, that ye are enemies to the Son of God. 

^dfyy Ye are enemies to the Spirit of God. He is tiie 
Stnrit of holiness: The natural man is unholy, and knrcs 
toi)e so, and therefore reti9t9 the fioly Ghost j Acts vii. 5 1. 
'Che work of the Spirit is to convince the world of «in, 
ti^ht€0U9nc99y and judgmentj John. xvi. 8. But O how do 
nun strive toward off these convicUons,as ever they would 
"Ward off a blow, threatening their loss of a right eye, or a 
^gfat hand ! If the Spirit of the Lord dart them in, so as 
wj cannot evite them ; the heart says, in effect, as Ahab 
to Elijah, whom he both hated and fearied, Hast thou found 
^ mine enemy ? And indeed they treat him as an ene«> 
lOf, doing their utmost to stifle convictions, and to mur* 
^Vt these harbingers, that come to prepare the Lord's way 
^iito-the soul. Some All their h&nds with business, to put 
^ir convictions out of their heads, as Cain, who fell a 
building of a Qity : Some put them off with delays and &ir 
promises, as' Felix did : Some will sport them away in 
Company, and some sleep them away. The Holy Spirit 
18 the Spirit of sanctification ; whose work it is to subdue 
hsts, and bum up corruptions : How then can the natural 
»^n, whose lusts are to him as his limbs, yea, as his life, 
^ of being an enemy to him ? 

^•%, Ye are enemies to the law of God. Though 
the natural man desires to be under the law, as a covenant 
of Works, chusing that way of salvation in opposition to 
the mystery of Christ ; yet as it is a rule of life, requiring 
universal holiness,and discharging all manner of impurity, 
h® is an enemy to it: ** Is not subject to the law of God, 
^cither indeed can be," Rom. viii. 7. For, (I.) There is 
noiuu>^2iewed man, who is not wedded to some one luat 



I 









« fSb • Ofif^e Corru/itton qf the Wm. fSteU^H 

or other) which hb heart can by no means part wft£ 
NoW) that he cannot bring up his inclinations to /the hoj^ 
lawy he would fain have the law brought down to hiskh 
clinations ; a plain evidence of the enmity of the he^ 
against it. And, therefore, to delight in the law qfGod^ tf 
ttr the inward tnan^ is proposed in the word &s a mark M 
a gracious soul, Rom. vii. 23. Psal. i. 23. It is from tlA 
natural enmity of the heart against the law, that all th^ 
Pharissucal gloss upon it have urisen*; whereby the com* 
mandment, which is in itself exceeding broad, has beei 
made, narrow, to the intent it might be tjhe more ag^eabk 
to the natural disposition of the heart. (2.) The law lij& 
home to the natural conscience, in its spirituality, irritaibe; 
corruption. The nearer it comes, nature riseth the tniprl 
against it. In that case, it is as oil to the fire, whiclvitt 
stead of quenching it, makes it flame the more : W^hen fB 
commandment came^ ainrevived^ says the Apost)e,RomitU 
9. What reason can be assigned for this, but the natoffl 
enmity of the heart against the holy law ? UnmortaM 
corruption, the more it is opposed, the more it rag^ 
Let us conclude then, that the unregenerate are hearten)^ 
mies to €rod, his Son, his Sjpirit, and his law ; that thef^ 
is a natural contrariety^ opposition, and enmity in the wil 
of man, to God himself, and his holy will. 
- Fifthly^ There is, in the will of man, contumacy agaitiii 

- the Lord. Man's will is naturally wilful in an evil course 
He will have his will, though it should ruin him ; itt 
with him, as With the leviatlian. Job xli. 29. ** Darts ar< 
counted as stubble; he laugheth at the shaking of a spear;' 
The Lord calls to him by his word, says to him, as Psfl 
to the jailor, when he was about to kill himself. Do thyn^ 
no harm. Sinners, " Why will ye die V* Ezek. xvui. 31 
But they will not hearken : « Every one tumeth to* U 
course, as the horse rushetli into the battle," Jer. viii. ( 
We have a promise of life in form of a command, Proi 
iv. 4. « Keep my commandments and live." It spealj 
impenitent sinners to be self-destroyers, wilful self-m^rdei 
ers. They transgress the command of living ; as if one' 

^ servant should wilfully starve himself to death, or greedil 
drink up a cup of poison, which his master commands hii 
to forbear ; even so do they ; they will not live, they wi 
^ty Proy. viii. 36. ^ All they that hute me lore deaidu 



iirhat A heart ittfab I It is a ttcnqr heart, (E«ek. xxztL 
9^]Jiard and iiifleitible, as a stcme i Mercies melt it iiot» 
pdgmcat break it not ; yet it ivili break ere it bow. If 
iB-aniAseiiaible heart ; though there be itpon the siaiier a 
iK^t of siDytihich makes the earth to atagger; altiiough 
^lere is a weight of wrath on him, which makes the devils 
tft tremble; jet he goes lightly under the bmden; he 
1Kb not the we^ht more thEui a stone ; till the Spirit of 
the Lord quicken him) so &r as to feel it. 
- Loitfyj The unrenewed will is wholly perverse in rifer* 
W^ to man's chief and highest end. The natural man's 
diief end is not his God, but his self. Man is a mere re- 
lidve^ dependent, borrowed being ; he has no being nor 
|oodne88 originally from himself; but all he hath is from 
God, as the first cause and spring of all perfection, natural 
m: moral : Dependence is woven into his very nature ; so 
tetif God should totally withdraw from tdm, he would 
ivindle into a mere nothing. Seeing then whatever man 
^ he is of him ; sorely in whatever he is, he should be to 
~TO ; as the waters which come from the sea do, of course, 
W*ttm thither again. And thus man was created, directly 
lookmg to God, as his chief end ; but falling into sin, he 
fell off from God, and turned into himself ; and like a 
traitor usurping the throne, he gathers in the rents of the 
^own to himself : Now, this infers a total apostacy, and 
^versal corruption in man ; foe where the chief and last 
^d is changed, there can be no goodness there. This is 
the case of all men in their natural state, Psal. xiv. 2, S. 
* The Lord looked down,-— to see if there were any that 
did— seek God. They are all gone aside," viz. from God ; 
^y seek not God, but themselves. And though many 
fcir shrewds of morality are to be found amongst them, 
yet there is none that doeth goody no not one : for though 
*ome of them run well, they are still oif the way ; they 
Jtever aim at the right murk. They are lovers ofhheir own" 
w/vfa (2 Tim. iii. 2.) more than God^ verse 4. Wherefore 
••fius Christ, having come into the world, to bring men 
}*ck*tb God again, pame to bring them out of themselves, 
^theTfirat place, Matth. xvi. 25. The^^ocIIy groan under 
^e remains of this woful disposition of the heart ; they 
acknowledge it, and set themselves against it, in its sub- 
^ and Aangerous insinuations. The unregenerate^thougli 



lU Mcnt overlooking the Sin of jsTaCure. [State IE . 

when sin sleeps soundljr in their own breasts, Even goocf 
David, when he was at his worst) was most violent agunit 
the £iu!ts of others. While his conscience was asleep ufr 
der his guilt, in the matter of Uriah ; the Spirit ctf tli» 
hoTiiakesnoticCtthal biA an gcriuaa greatly kindled a ^ni'' 
the man, in the parable, 2 Sam. xii. 5. And on t 
grounds it is thought, it was. at the same time that he 
ed the Ammonites so cruelEf , as is related, ver. 31. '■ 
ting tiicin under saws, and under harrows of iron, fti ■ 
dcr ascs of iron, and maltins tliem pass through the 1 
kiln." Grace mokes men zealous against sin in othi 
well as in themselves ; but eyes turned inward to th' 
niption of nature, clothe ih«m with pity and com pa- 
and fill them with thankfulness to the Lord, that they "^ 
selves were not the personslcft to be such spectacles' ', 
man frjilty. (3.) There arc not a few, who, if th - . 
kept from afliicdon in worldly tilings, and from grot ' 
breakings in their conversation, know not what it is ti 1 
a sad heart. If they meet with a cross, which their 
hearts cannot stoop to bear, they will be ready to sv 
to be gone; but the corruption of theirnature never n 
tliem long for heaven. Lusts scandalously brealung - 
a time will mar their peace ; but tlie sin ot their natui 
ver makes them a heavy heart, (4.) Delaying of re 
ancc, in hopes to set about it afterwards. Many have 
own appointed time for repentance am! reformation 
they were such complete masters over their lusts, tin- 
can allow them to gather ni ore strength, and yet ovei 
them. They take up resolutions to aineud, without, 
to Jesus Christ, union witli him, and strength from h ■ 
plain evidence that they are sU'angers to themselvea 
so they are left to themselves, und their ilourisliiog 
tiona wither ; for as they see not the necessity, so tl 
not the benefit of the dcwfi'om heaven to water them 
Mens venturing frankly on temptations, and promisi 
berally on tlieir own heads. They cast themselves feai 
ly into temptation, in confidence of coming off fairly' 
were they sensible of the corruption of their nature, 
would beware of entering on the devil's ground ■. A< 
girt about with bags of gun-powder, would be loth tO' 
where spiirUs of fire are flying, lest he should be blorf 
S'elf-jcaiousing well becomes Christians : Lord, w] 



Bead L] ilfpU werlocUng the Sin qfJVature. 1 15 

- 1 ■ - . 



1 

oil 

^1 T^aii^hutm the deceit of their bow, will not be very 
r- ^'««*^*rtU*f|,^fthallhittheiiiark. (6.) Unacquiuntcd- 
■ f^ iie knowledge of tlieplagucsof 

■n. There are indeed some of 
characters, that he who runs 
re others more subtile, which 
re there, to whom the bias of 
ithen ? Nay they perceive it 
convictions of other sins, that 
iced of their unbelief; tliough 
" _ led at m a thorough convic- 

5^'^>^J:f^ ^e will reprove the world of 

jl^ S 5" 5 ^ 5 - lot on me." A disposition to 

j-5*jri5j:^^>r«^^^ sness is a weed that naturally 

S ^^ J^ £ J. j' ^ ^' , : ^ r - '•■ ; but few sweat at the plucking 
. •' . ii.|:5 I ^ 5 I : ■' ^i :^ :ed. The bias of the heart, to 
^ r* J5^ > ' 1 * 1 r > "'^ ^ •! works, is a hidden plague of 
' "S" ^ = r -ij ''": difficulty they find is, in get- 

•'••.." i ; they find no difficulty in get- 

ad over them to Jesus Christ. 
. off from their own righteous- 
;onvince them of their leaning 
id self-conceit. A view of the 
be very humbling, and oblige 
.nself the chief of sinners. Un- 
l enlargements,it would be bal- 
lide from his eyes. The want 
rcing to the sin of one's nature, 
■i ; fordigging deep makes great 
oolish builders,Lukevi. 48,49. 
few things, in which ye should 
I of your nature. (1.) Have a 
cation to Jesus Christ. Do you 
•t: r ' ' ' .- ■' yr iich sends you to him as the 

• '"i " ^et not your disease when you 

: I ^ ' • -* ■— iiey never yet knew well their 

_i r " -^ not to him for the sin of their 

vC away the guilt of it, and his 

- : ^ f it. Though in the bitterness 

of your souia,^ . ' before him a catalogue of your 

sins of amission and cou ssion, which might reach from 

earth to heaven ; yet, if the sin of your nature \j^\:fe \t^5xV 




r 1 

s :: 






JDg in lU assure yourselves you hare fi>r^ the best 
of the errand a poor sintier has to the Physician of soiSL'Sk 
What would it have availed the people of Jericho^ to li 
set before Elisha all the vessels in their city full of 



water that was naught, if they had not led him fortlft. ts 
;j to cast m the salt there ? 3 Kings ii. 



^e spring} to cast in the salt there r 3 Kings u. 19) 
9\. The application is easy. (2.) Have a special eye -^ 
wards it in your repentance) whether initial or progreadL^v^ 
in your first repentance, and in the renewing of your 



pentance, afterwards. Though a man be sick^ therein i» 
fear of death,if the sickness strike not his heart ; and ihj^tt i 
is as little fear of the death of sin, as long as the sin c^40'^ J 
nature is not touched. But if ye would repent indeed^ Ift | 
the streams lead you up to the fountain ; and mourn ov^ | 
your corrupt nature, as the cause of all sin, in hearty Sf^ J 
loid life, Psalm li. 4, 5. << Against thee, thee only fesLT*. ', 
. 1 sinned, and done tliis evil in thy sight.*— —-Beh(M9./)0 
was shapen in iniquity, Bhd in sin did my mother conq^H^;;; 
me." (3.) Have a special eye upon it in your mxirHBi^S^i 
tiori, Gal. V. 24. " And they that are Christ's havf^ew^* 
cified the flesh." It is the root of bitterness that ixaai^^, ' 
struck at, which the axe of mortifioation mustbelaiA<!Kl|'j 
else we labour in rain. In vain do men go about to pur:CI^ 
the streams, while they ai*e at no pains about the mom 
fountain : It is vain religion to attempt to make the I' 
truly good, while the corruption of nature retsdns *ts.|l 
cient vigour, and the power of it is not broken. XmI^O^ 
Ye are to eye it in your daily walk. He that would wii*^ 
aright, must have one eye upwards to Jesus Christ, and art^ 
other inward to the corruption of his own nature. If * 
not enough that we look about us, we must also look wit^* 
in us. There the wall is weakest; there our greatest o*?^ 
my lies ; and there are grounds for daily 'Watching aJf*** 
mourning. ^ 

III. I shall offer some reasons, why we shoi|.I^ 
especially notice the sin of our nature. , \- 

h Because of all sins it is the most extensive and diiSW-. 
sive. It goes through the whole man, and spoils alt 
Other sins mar particular parts of the image of God ; M^ 
this doth at once deface the whole. A disease aiTecBaf 
^^v particular member of the body is ill ; .but that whitw 
^■fectsthe whole is worse, TU^ corruption ofixatureii^ 



PS.I 




•Wkffti Uiohe 9fit€laihf noHctd. 117 

tte poiikm of the old serpent, cast into the fountain of A- 
itmi and so infects every action, every breathing of the 
mil. 

■ \ S. It is the cause of ail particular lusts, and actual sinii, 

in bur hearts and lives. It is the spawn which the great 

Letiathan has left in the souls of men; from whence comes 

sdlthe fry of actual sins and abominations. Mark lii. 21. 

^Oot of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulte- 

' liei,'' Ifc. It is the bitter fountain ; particular lusts are 

but rivulets running from it, which bring forth into the 

*life, a part onljr, and not the whole of what is within. 

Kowthe fountain is still above the streams ; so where the 

<^ster is good, it is best in the fountain ; where it is ill, it 

is worst Acre. The corruption of nature b^ing that which 

^ifiles all, itself must needs be the abominable thing. 

M It is virtually all sin ; for it is the seed of all sins, 

mich want but the occasion to set up their heads ; being 

• ift&e corruption of nature, as the effect in the virtue of its 

OiQse. Hence it is called a body of deathj Rom. vii. 24.> 

. 1$ €(msisting of the several members, belonging to such 

miody ofdnay Col. ii. 1 1. whose life lies in spiritual death. 

Itistibe cursed groimd, fit to bring forth all manner of 

Doxious weeds. As the whole nest of venemous creatures 

Jfitist needs be more dreadful than any few of them that 

'Come creeping forth ; so the sin of thy nature, that mother 

^abominations, must be worse than any particular lusts, 

that appear stirring in thy heart and life. Never did every 

^ appear in the conversation of the vilest wretch that ever 

"lived ; but look thoti into thy corrupt nature, and there 

thou mayest see all, and every sin in the seed and root 

thereof. There is a fulness of all unrighteousness there, 

llom. i. 29. There is atheism, idolatry, blasphemy, mur- 

*^cr, adultery, and whatsoever is vile. Possibly none of 

tbe^e appear to thee in thy heart ; but there is moi'e in tliat 

"Imfathomable depth of wickedness than thou knowest. 

Thy corrupt heart is like an ant*s nest, on whichy while 

the stone lieth, ncme of them appear; but take off the stone, 

'*tir tiiem up but with the point of a straw, you will see 

what a swarm is there, and how lively they be. Just 

such a si^t would thy heart afford thee, did the Lord but 

withdraw the restraint he has upon it, and suffer Salan 

to stir it up by temptation. 

£2' 



ill Why it U to 6c •fieciaUy noticed. S|:ate: 

#4. The sin of our nature is, of all sins, the most fiX' 
and abiding. Sinful acUons^ though the guilt and stain 
them may remain,yct in themselves they are passing. T 
drunkard is not always at his cup, nor the unclean pers 
always acting lewdness. But the corruption of nature 
an abiding sin ; it remains with men in its full power 
tiight.and by day, at all times, fixed as with bands -of ir 
and brass ; till their nature be changed by convert! 
grace ; and the remains of it continue with the godly, ui 
the death of the body. Pride, envy, covetousness, and t 
like, are not always stirring in thee. But the proud, < 
Tious, carnal nature, is still with thee ; even as the clo 
that is wrong is not always striking wrong ; but the wro 
set continues with it, without great intermission. 

5. It is the great reigning sin, Rom. vi. 12. ^ Let! 
sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you shoi 
obey it in the lusts thereof.** There are three things y 
may observe in the corrupt heart. (1.) There is the c 
nipt nature ; the corrupt set of the heart, whereby men i 
unapt for all good, and fitted for all evil. This the Apoi 
here calls, sin which reigns. (2.) There are particu 
lusts, or dispositions of that corrupt nature, which * 
Apostle calls the lusts thereof ; such as pride, coveto 
ness, l^c^ (3.) There is one among these, which is (1: 
Saul amongst the people) higher by far than the rest,nai 
ly, dn which doth. so easily beset us ^ Heb. xii. I. This 
usually call the predominant sin,because it doth,as it wc 
yeljjn over other particular lusts ; so that other lusts m 
yield to it. These three are like a river which divides 
self into many streams, whereof one is greater than the n 
The corruption of nature is the river4iead,which hasm: 
particular lusts, in which it runs ; but it mainly disburd' 
Itself into what is commonly called one*s predominant i 
Now, all of tliese being fed by the sin of our nature,, i 
evident that sin is the great reigning sin which never 1 
eth its superiority over particular lusts, that live and 
with it, and by it. But as in some rivers, the main strc 
runs not always in one and the same channel ; so parti 
lar pixdominants may be changed, as lust in youth maj 
succi. V ded by covetousness in old age. Now,- what dot 
aviai 10 reform in other sins, while the great reigning 
rem^d in its full power i Whfit though some fiarUQi 






fici4|>} ff€9 ^fhe Cvrrvittimn^ Mttvre. 110 

Jmtlie^brokcii? If'tbatiin»tbe on of our nature, keep the 
ikRRWyU will set op another in its stead ; aa when awater 
tcHme ia Atopped in one place, while the fountain is not 
.dunmed up, it will stream forth another way. And thus 
Mne caatcSBT theijr prodigality, but coYetousnest comes up 
is its stead; some cast away their profiuiity, and the cor^ 
n^don of nature sends not its main stream that way as be- 
Cm; but it runs in another channel, namely, in that of a 
^sl disposition, self-righteousness, or the like, so that 
people are ruined by their not eyeing the sin of their na- 
tare. 

La9tiyj It is an hereditary evil, Psal. li. 5. ^ In sin 
ilid my mother conceive me." Particular lusts are not so, 
but in the virtue of their cause. A prodigal fether may 
ksTe a frugal son; but this disease is necessarily propa- 
pM in nature, and therefore hardest to cure. Surely 
Hwadie word should be given out against this sin, as 
ipunst the King of Israel, 1 Kings xxii. 31. Fight nei* 
wr with small nor great, save only with this ; for this 
^ being broke, all other sins are broken wiUi it ; and 
Vhi)e it stands entire, there is no victory. 

IV. That ye may get a view of the corruption of your 
nature, I would recommend to you three things. (1.) Stud^ 
to know the spirituality and extent of the law of God, for 
that is the glass wherein you may see yourselves. (2.) Ob- 
lerve your hearts all times, but especially under tempta- 
^. Temptation is a fire that brings up the scum of the 
^ heart : Do you carefully mark the first risings of 
corruption. Laatly^ Gro to God through Jesus Christ, for 
iQimunation by his Spirit. Lay out your soul before the 
Wd, as willing to know the vUeness of your nature ; say 
teto him. That which I know noty teach thou me, and be 
willing to take in light from the word. Believe, and you 
shall see. It is by the word the Spirit teacheth, but with- 
out the Spirit's teaching, all other teaching will be to little 
purpdse. Though the gospel should shine about you, like 
the Sim at noon-day, and this great truth be never so plain- 
ly preached ; you will never see yourselves aiight, until 
the Spirit of the Lord light his candle within your breast : 
The fulness and glory of Christ, the corruption and vile- 
ness of our nature, are never rightly learned, but where 
the Spirit of Christ is the teacher.^ 



,122 The Explication ^ the Text. [S&te II. 

man u a child of wrath, a son of de&th. He U ji malefuc- 
tor dead in law, lying in chains of guilt ; a criminal 
held fast in hia fetters, till the day of execution ; whieb 
will not fiiil, unless a pardon be obtained from his God, 
who is his judge and partjr too. By that means, indeed, 
children of wrath may become children of the kingdom. 
The phrase in the text, however common it is in holy lan- 
guage, is veiy significant. And as it ia erident, that the 
Apostle calling natural men the children of disobedience, 
ver. 2. means more than that they were disobedient chil- 
dren ; for such may the Lord's own children be : So to be 
children of wrath is more than simply to be liable to, or 
wnder wrath. Jesus Christ wjs liable to, and under^wrathj 
but I doubt we have any warrant to s^y, he was a child 
of wrath, The phrase seems to intimate, that men aKj 
whatsoever they are in their natural state, under the wrafll 
of God ; that they are wholly under wrath ; wrath is, as it 
were, woven into their very nature, and mixcth itself witli 
the whole of the man ; who is (if I may so speak) a veT 
lump of wrath, a child of hell, as tlic iron in the fireiaaU 
fire. For men naturally are children of wrath, come fotth 
(so to speak) out of the womb of wi-ath ; Jonah's gourd 
was the sonof a night, which we render came upinanightj 
Jonah iv. 10. as if it had come out of the womb of the mBM* 
(as we read of the womb of the morning, Psal. ex. 3.) an^ 
BO tlie birth following the belly whence it came was sooo 
gone. The sparks of fire are called sons of the burning 
coal. Job V. 7, marg. Isa. xxi. 10. " O my threshing, 
and the corn (or son) of my floor," threshed in the floor of 
■wrath, and, as it were, brought forth by it. Thus the na- 
tural man ia a child of wrath j " It comes into his boweU 
like water, and like oil into his bones," Psal. cix. 1 8. Fo' 
though Judas was tlie only son of perdition amongst th* 
Apostles, yet all men, by nature, are of the same family' 

2. There ia the rise of this misery ; men have it by W 
ture. They owe it to their nature, not to their substance 
or offence ; for that neither is nor was sin ; and, there- 
fore, cannot make them children of wi-ath, though fof 
sin it may be under wrath ; not to their nature as quaU- 
fied, at man's creation, by his Maker, but to their na- 
ture, as vitiated and corrupted by the fall. To the vici- 
Mts quality, or corruption of their nature, (whereofb^fbrt,) 



Man'i natural State a State af Wrath. 153 

sir principle of action, and ceasing from action, 
inciple is an unregenerate state. Now by this 
\ are children of wrath ; as in time of pestilcn- " 
n, one di-aws in death together with the disease 
;. Wherefore seeing from our first being as 

Adam, we are corrupt children, shaped in ini- 
.ciyed in sin ; we are alsO) from that moment, 

wrath, 
iniversity of this misery. All arc by nature 

wrath ; ffr, saith the Apostle, even as othert ; 
II as Gentiles. Those that are now by grace 
n of God, were by nature in no better case than 
ire still in their natural state. 
There is a glorious and happy change intimated 
re children of wrath, but are not so now j grace 
t us out of that fearful state. This the Apostle 
self and other believers. And thus, it well be- 
pcople of God to be often standing on the shore, 
:k to the red seaof tlie state of wratli, they were 

weltering in, even as others. 

lan'a natural State a State of Wrath. 

NE, The state of nature it a gtair if -arat/i. 

in a natural unregenerate state is in a state of 

'e are bom children of wrath ; and continue so, 

I bom again. Nay, as soon as we were children 

we were children of wrath. 

sher in what I am to say on this point, with a 

res touching the universality of this state of 

lich may serve to prepare the way of the word 



has gone as wide as ever sin went. When 
led, the wrath of God brake in upon them as a 
iod spared not the angels which sinned, but cast 
n to hell," 2 Pet ii. 4. And thereby it was 
ted, that no natural excellency in the creature 
it from the wrath of God ; if once it becomes a 
iture. The finest and the nicest piece of the 
hip of heaven, if once the Creator's image upon 
ed by sin, God can and will dash to pieces, in 
i unless satis^twn be made to justice, and that 
repaired ; neither of which the sinner himself 



13i ManU natural State a State ^ Wraih. ^Stib^ 

can do. Adam siimed ; and the whole lump of msolM 
was leavened, and bound over to the fieiy oven of Gwl 
wrath. And from the text ye may learn, (1 .) That imdh 
ranee of that state cannot free men fron^ it ; the GencS^ 
that knew not God, were by nature children qfvraikj eveii 
ae othere, A man's house may be on fire, his wife and 
children perishing in the flames ; while he knows nothii^ 
.of it, and therefore is not concerned about it. Such li 
vour case, O ye that are ignorant of these things ! wnih 
IS silently sinking into your souls, while you are blesslqp^ 
yourselves, saying. Ye shall have peace. Ye need nnt.ai 
more certain token, that ye are children ofwrath<i than tb^i 
ye never yet saw yourselves such. Ye cannot be tl|i^> 
children of God, that never yet saw yourselves children ^ 
the deviJl. Ye cannot be in the way to heaven, that n^vi^, 
saw yourselves by nature in the road to hell. . iTe a^ 
grossly ignorant of your state by nature ; and so ignofMl^ 
of God, and of Christ, and your need of him : And thcMUw 
ye look on your ignorance as a covert from wrath ; yettiu^ 
it out of the mouth of God himsel£^ that it will ruin y# 
if it be not removed, Isa. xxvil. 11. « It is a people » 
no understanding ; therefore, he that made them wUl Bpfe* 
have mercy on them." Sec 2 Thess. i. 8. Hos. iv*.^ 
(2.) No outward privileges can exempt men from this 8t|ittf. 
of wrath ; for the Jews, the children of the kingdom, G*f*i 
peculiar people, were children of wrath, even as dthP^^: 
Though ye be church-members, partakers of all church- 
privileges ; though ye be descended of godly parents,-^ 
great and honourable families ; be what ye will, ye are iff 
nature heirs of hell, children of wrath. (3.) No proto, 
sion, nor attainments in a profession of religion, do or c^ 
exempt a man from this state of wrath. Paul was one *^ 
the strictest sect of the Jewish religion, Acts xxvi. MJJ^ 
a child of wrath, even as others, till he was converted,. T^i 
close hypocrite, and the profane, are alike as to their lertjattK 
however different their conversations be ; and they wiB^ 
alike in their fatal end, Psal. cxxv. 5.. " As for sudi « 
turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall to*ft 
them forth with the workers of iniquity." (4.) Yoiingojirt 
that are yet but setting out into the world have not9i»t% 
do, to make themselves childitn of wrath, by follo^rfrtE' 
the graceless multitude. They arc children of wradi^S- 



(. . 



n.] Man*% naiural State a State qf Wrath. 1 35 

; so it is done already ; they were bom heirs of 
they will indeed make themselves more so, if they 
, while they are young, flee from that wrath they 
om to, by fleeing to Jesus Christ. Lastly^ What- 
len are now by grace, they were even as others, by 
And this may be a sad meditation to them that 
reen at ease from their youth, and have had no 

5S. 

'^, these things being premised, I shall, in the first 
shew what this state of wrath is ; next, confirm the 
le ; and then apply it. ■ ' 

am to shew what this state of wrath is. But who 
ly describe the wrath of an angry God ? None can 
Yet so much of it must be discovered, as may 

convince men of the absolute necessity of fleeing 
s Christ, out of that state of wrath. Anger in men 
ssion, and commotion of the spirit for an injury re- 
, with a desire to resent the same. When it comes 
ight, and is fixed in one's spirit, it is called wrath, 
here are no passions in God, properly speaking ; 
e inconsistent with his absolute unchangeablcnessy 
icpendcncy ; and, therefore, Paul and Barnabas (to 
; the mistake of the Lycaonians, who thought they 
ods) tell them, they were men of like passions with 
ilves, Acts xiv. 15. Wrath then is attributed to 
lot in respect of the affection of wrath, but the 
thereof. Wrath is a fire in the bowels of a man, 
iting the man himself; but there is no perturbation 
. His wrath does not in the least mar that infinite 
and happiness, which he hath in himself. It is a 
ure undisturbed act of his will, producing dreadful 
against the sinner. It is little we know of an in- 
lod ; but condescending to our weakness, he is 
i to speak of himsfelf to us, after the manner of men. 
therefore notice man's wratli, but remove every 

1 our consideration of the wrath of God, that argues 
ection ; and so we may attain to some view of it, 
sr scanty. By this means we are led to take up the 
Df God against the natural man in these three : 

r. There is wratli in the heart of God against him- 
ord approves him not, but is displeased with him. 
natural man lies under the displeasure oC G<id% 

L 



136 MaiC% natural State a State ^f Wrath. [St 

and that is heavier than mountains of brass. Alt) 
he be pleased with himself, and others be please 
him too ; yet God looks down on him, as displ 
Firet^ His person is under God's displeasure; Thou 
all worker 9 ofiniqiUtyy Psal. v. 5. A godly man's 
displeasing to God, yet his person is still accepted 
beiovedy £ph. i. 6. But (< God is angry with the ^ 
every day," Psal. vii. 1 1 . A fire of wrath burai 
tinually against him in the heart of God. They are a 
and swine, most abominable creatures in the sight o 
Though their natural state be gilded over wi^ a s 
profession, yet they are abhorred of God ; they are ' 
as Mmoke in hi» noacj Isa. Ixv. 5. and lukewarm watei 
Bfiewed out qf hi* mouthy Rev. iii. 1 6. whited aefiu 
Matt, xxiii. 27. a generation of vi/iersj Matt* xii. S 
9ifieofile of his wra^ A, Isa. x. t, '-^Secondly ^ He is disp 
with all they do : It is impossible for them to pleas 
being unbelievers, Heb. xi. 6. He hates their pe 
and so hath no pleasure in, but is displeased wit! 
best works, Isa. Ivi. 3. ^^ He that sacrinceth a laml 
he cut off a dog's neck," ^c. Their duty, as d< 
them, is an abomination to the Lord^ Prov. xv. 8. . 
men turn their back upon them whom they are 
with ; so the Lord's refusing communion with the i 
man in his duties, is a plain indication of this wrat 
Secondly J There is wrath in the word of God i 
him. When wrath is in the heart, it seeks a vent 
lips, so God fights against the natural man with the 
of his mouthy Rev. ii. 16. The Lord's word never 

g)od of him, but always curseth or condenuiet 
ence it is, that when he is awakened, the word i 
preached often in crease th his horror. Firsts It con 
all his actions, together with his corrupt nature, 
is nothing he does, but the law declares it to be s 
is a rule of perfect obedience, from which he al"w 
all things declines ; and so it rejects every thing 1: 
as sin. Secondly^ It pronounceth his doom, and d 
ceth God's curse against him, Gal. iii. 10. "1 
many as are of the works of the law are under the > 
for it is written, Cursed is every one that contiriui 
in all things, which are written in the book of tl 
to do them." Be he never so well in the world. 



Read 11.] Jlfan'« natural State a State ^f WratK \2T 

noimceth a woe from heaven against him, Isa. iii. il. 
The Bible is a quiver filled with arrows of wrath against 
idm, ready to be poured in on his soul. God's thrcat- 
enings in his word hang over his head as a black cloud, 
read]^to shower down on him every moment. The woi*d 
is indeed the saint's security against wrath, but it binds 
the natural man's sin and wrath together, as a certain 
pledge of his ruin, if he continue in that state. So the 
Gonicience being awakened, and perceiving this tie made 
l^the law, the man is filled with terrors in his soul. 
I Thirdly^ There is wrath in the hand of God against 
tike natural man. lie is under heavy strokes of wrath 
lireidy, and is liable to more. 

l«f, There is wrath on his body. It is a piece of 

CQwcd clay, wliich wrath is sinking into by virtue of the 

threstening of the first covenant. Gen. ii. 17. « In the 

: 4gr that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die," There 

• il never a disease, gripe, nor sUtch, that aficcts him, but 

it comes on him with tlie sting of God's indignation in 

I h. They are all cords of death, sent before to bind the 

i prisoner. 

r 2rf/y, There is wrath upon his soul. (1.) He can have 
[' Ao communion with God ; he ihfoolUh and shall not stand 
\ w God* a nighty Psal. v. 5. When Adam sinned, God 
\ turned him out of paradise ; and natural men are, as 
' Adam left them, banished from the gracious presence of 
tbe Lord ; and can have no access to him in that state. 
There is war betwixt heaven and them ; and so all com- 
Jfierce is cut off. " They are without God in the world,'* 
Eph. u. 12. The sun is gone down on them, and there 
*« not the least glimpse of favour towards them fix>ni 
heaven. (2.) Hence the soul is left to pine away in its 
iniquity. The natural darkness of their minds, the 
^▼erseness to good in their wills, the disorder of their 
affections, and distemper of their consciences, and all 
their .natural plagues, are left upon them in a penal way ; 
^ being so left, increase daily. God casts a portion of 
Worldly goods to them, more or less, as a bone is thrown 
^ a dog ; but alas I his wrath against them appears, In 
t*ttt they get no grace. The Physician of souls comes 
^ them, and goes by them, and cures others beside them j 
^Wle they are consuming away in their iniquity, and 



128 Jl/an'« natural State a State qf IVrath. [State 

ripening daily for utter destruction. (S.) They lie oi 

to fearful additional plaguca on tlieir souls, eyen in t 

life. Firsts Sometimes they meet with deadening stroke 

silent blows from the hand of an angry God ; arrows 

-wrath that enter into their souls without noise ; Isa. vL 

^ Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ei 

heavy) and shut their cycs^ lest they see with their eye: 

Ijtc* God strives with them for a while, and com-icdc 

enter their consciences ; but they rebel against the iigl 

and by a secret judgment, they are knocked on the hea 

so that, from that time, they do, as it were, live and i 

ftbQvc ground. Their hearts arc deadened ; their a£f( 

tions withered ; their consciences stupified ; and thi 

whole souls blasted ; ^^ cast fortli as a branch and widie 

ed,'' John xv. 1 6. They are plagued witli judicial blin 

tiess. They shut their eyes against the light, and di 

are given over to the devil, the god of this world, to ' 

blinded more, 3 Cor. iv. 4. Yea, " God sends the 

strong delusion} that they should believe a lie," 2 Thei 

ii. 11. even conscience, like a ialse light on the shoi 

leads them upon rocks ; by which they ai*e broken 

pieces. They harden themselves against God ; and 1 

gives up with them, and leaves them to Satan and the 

own hearts, whereby they are hardened more and moi 

They arc often given up unto vilo affections, Rom. i. 2 

The reins are laid on their necks ; and they are left 

run into all excess, as their furious lusts di'aw thci 

Secondly^ Sometimes they meet with quickening strok« 

whereby their souls become like mount Sinai ; whci 

notliing is seen but fire and smoke ; nothing heard bi 

the thunder of God's wrath, and the voice of the trump 

of a broken law, waxing louder and louder ; which mak< 

them like Pasliur, (Jer. xx. 4.) ^I terror to t/icntselvt 

God takes the filthy garments of their sins, which tli< 

were wont to sleep in securely ; ovei lays them witli brie 

stone, and sets them on file about iheir ears; sotb< 

have a hell within them. 




Lord is in the house of the wicked." Wrath is on all tbJ 
he has j on tlic bread that hg eats, the U(^uor he diinks, aP 



11.2 ^^"^^^^ natural State a State qf Wrathr. l%% 

swhich he wears, ^Hla basket and store arc curscd»*' 
xxviii. 17. Some things fail wrong with him ; and 
>mes to pass by virtue of his wrath ; other things go 
ling to his wish, and tliere is wrath in that too ; for 
snare to his soul, Prov. i. 32. ^^ The prosperity of 
hall destroy them." This wrath turns his blessings 
iirses, Mai. ii. 2. ^ I will curse your blessings ; yeu, 
\ cursed tliem already." The holy law is a killing, 
to him) 2 Cor. iii. 6. The ministry of the gospel 
ywrof death unto deaths chap. ii. 15. In the sacra- 
3f the Lord's supper, <« He eatcth and drinketh dam- 
to himself," 1 Cor. xi. 29. Nay, more than all 
Christ himself is to him a atone qf atumblingy and a 
f offence^ 1 Pet. ii. 8. Thus wrath follows the natu- 
in, as his shadow doth his body. 
Vy He is under the power of Satan, Acts xxvi. 18. 
evil has overcome him, so he is his by conquest ; his 
captive, Isa. xlix. 2i. The natural man is con- 
id already, John iii. 18. and, therefore, under the 
hand of him that hath the power of death, that is, 
vil. And he keeps his prisoner, hi the prison of a 
i state, bound hand and foot, Isu. Ixi. 1 . laden with 
lusts, as chains wherewith he holds him fast. Thou 
: not, as many do, ctdl on the devil to take thee ; for 
. a fast hold of thee already, as a child of wi'ath. 
tly^ The natural man has no security for a moment*s 
from the wrath of God, its coming on him to the 
lost. The curse of the law denounced against him, 
ready tied him to the stake ; so tliat the arrows of 
; may pierce his soul ; and in him may meet all the 
cs and plagues that flow from the avenging wrath of 
See how he is set as a mark to the arrows of wrath, 
vii. 11, 12, 13. " God is angry with the wicked 
day. If he turn not, he will whet his sword : He 
ent his bow, and made it ready ; he hath also pre- 
fer him the instruments of death." Doth he lie down 
jp ? There is not a promise, he knows of, or can 
to secure him that he shall not be in hell ere he 
. Justice is pursuing, and cries for vengennce on 
mer ; the law casts tiie fire-balls of its curses con- 
ly upon him ; wasted and long-tired patience is that 

keeps in hi? life \ he walks amidst eii«pu«s anned 

is 



139 Mzn^M natural State a State qf Wrath, [5ts 

ag^ainst him ; his name may be Magor Miasabid^i, e. t 
round abouty Jcr. xx. S. Angels, devils, men, b 
stones, heaven, and earth, are in readiness, on a wi 
command from the Lord, to ruin him. 

Thus the natural man lives, but he must die too 

death is a dreadful messenger to him. It comes 

him armed with wrath, und puts tliree sad charges 

hand. (1.) Decth cliargeth him to bid an etenial 

wel to all things in this world ; to leave it, and mak 

to another world. Ah ! what a dreadful charge 

this be to a child of wrath ! He can huve no comfort 

heaven) for God is his enemy ; and as for the thin 

the world, and tlic enjoyment of his lusts, which 

the only springs of his comfort ; these arc in a m( 

dried up to him for ever. He is not ready for ar 

world ; he was not thinking of removing so soon ; 

he was, yet he has no portion secured to him in ar 

world, but that which he was born to, and was incn 

all his days, namely, a treasure of wrath. 13ut go he 

his clay*god, the world, must be parted with, and 

hsis he more ? There was never a glimmering of lig 

favour from heaven, to his soul ; and now the wrat 

did hang in the threatening, as a cloud like a man's 

is darkening the face of tiie whole heuven above 

and if he " look unto tlie earth," (from whence 

light was wont to come,) " b'>;hold trouble and dar! 

dimness of anguish ; and he shall be driven to dark; 

Isa. viii. 22. (2.) Death chargeth soul and body t 

till the great duy. His soul is required of him, Lu 

20. O wht*t a miserable piTtiiig must tliis be to a 

#f wrath I Care was indeed taken to provide for the 

thuigs necessary for this life ; but, uias ! there is n< 

laid up for another life to it ; nothing to be a s 

glorious resurrection : As it lived, so it must die, ar 

figain sinful ftesh ; fuel for the fire of CJod's wratt 

for the soul, he was never solicitous to provide for 

lay in the body, dead to God, and all things truly 

smd so must be carried out into the pit, in the ; 

clothes of its natural state ; for now that death com 

companions in sin must part. (3.) Death charge 

fioul to compear before the tribunal of God, while th' 

lic^ft to be ,€»med tfx the grave> £€dlG«« xiL. 7* 



*- 



Head 11.] Man*9 natural State a State qf Wrath. \ 3 1 

sjttrit shull return unto God who gave it," Hcb. ix. 2, 7. 
^ It is appointed unto ail men once to die, but after this 
the jufllgment." Well were it for the sinl'ul soul, if it 
night be buried together with the body. But th::t c&nnot 
be; it must go and receive its sentence ; and shdU be shut 
up in the prison of hell, while the cursed body lies im* 
prisoned in the grave, till the day^of the general judg* 
tnent 

When the end of the world, appointed of God, is come, 
tlie trumpet shall sound, and the dead arise. . Then shall 
the weaiy earth, at the command of the Judge, c&st forth 
the bodies ; the cursed bodies of tliosc that lived and died 
in their natural state: ^ The sea, death, and hell, shall 
deKver up their dead," Rev. xx. 13. Their miserable 
bodies and souls shall be re-imited, and they sisted before 
the tribunal of Christ. Then shtU they receive that fear- 
ful sentence, " Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting 
fire, prepared for the devil uiid his angels," Matth. xxv. 
41. Whereupon " they shall go away into everlasting 
punishment," ver. 46. They shall be eternally shut up 
^ hell, never to get the lei.st drop of comfort, nor the 
least ease of their torment. There they shall be punished 
^tlithe punishment of loss ; being excommunicated from 
the presence of Goc^ his angels and saints. All means 
•^f grace, all hopes of u delivery, shall be forever cut off 
^roiu their eyes. They shall not have a drop, of water to 
fw/ their tongues, Luke xvi. 24, 25. They shall be 
ponished with the punishment of sense. They must not 
^y depart from God, but depart into fire, into everlasting 
fife. There the worm, that shall gnaw them, shall never 
^; the fire, that shall scorch them, shall never be 
quenched. God shall, through all eternity, hold them up 
*ith the one hand, and pour tlie full vials of wratli into 
^ein with the other. 

This is that state of wrath natural men live in ; being- 
J^cr much of the wrath of God, and liable to more. But 
*^ A further view of it, let us consider the qualities of that 
J^th. (1.) It is irresistible ; there is no standing before 
It : « Who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art 

ary ?" Psal. Ixxxvi. 7. Can the worm, or the moth> 
;nd itself agiJnst him that designs to crush it ? As 

***U Gaa won» mm stand before «a angry God. Foo&U 



133 ManU natural State a State ^ Wrath. [State XL 

man indeed piacticitily bids a defiance to heaven ; but tb0 
liOrd often, even in tliis world, opeus such sluices of wrath 
on them, as all tncir might coimot stop ; they are earned 
away thereby, as witii a flood. How much more will it 
be so in hell I (2.) It is insupportable. What one cm- 
not resist, he will set himself^o bear; but, " Who shall 
dwell witli devourhig fire I Who shall dwell with efcr- 
lasting buniings l" God's wrath is a weight that iriU 
sink men into the lowest hell. It is a buixlen no man li 
able to stand under. ^ A wounded spirit who can bear 
it?" Prov. xviii. 14. (3.) It is unavoidable to such U 
go on impenitently in their sinful course. ^He that being 
often reproved, hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be di^* 
stroyed, and that without remedy," Prov. xxiz. 1. W;*- 
may now fly from it mdeed, by flying to Jesus Christ ; but 
sucn as fly fi*om Christ shall never be able to avoid it 
Whither can men fly from an avenging God I WhW 
will they find a shelter ? The hills will not hear tbemi 
the mountains will be deaf to their loudest cries-; when 
they cry to them, to hide them from the wrath of ^ 
Lamb. (4.) It is powerful and fierce wrath, Psalm xc. H» 
" Who knowctli the power of thine anger ? Even accord* 
ing to thy fear, so is thy wrath." We are apt to fearthff 
wrath of man more than we ought ; but no man can a]^ 
prehend the wrath of God to be more dreadful than it 
really is : The power of it can never be known to the irt» 
most ; seeing it is infinite, and (properly speaking) has to^ 
Utmost ; how fierce soever it be, either on earth or in bcH 
God can still carry it further. Every thing in God is mo^ 
perfect in its kind ; and, therefore, no wrath is so fierce 
as his. O sinner, how wilt thou be able to endui% that 
wratli, which will tear thee in pieces, Psal. 1. 32. «d4 
grind thee to powder, Luke xx. 18. The history of tho 
two she-be^rs, that tore the children of Bethel, is an awfal 
one, 2 Kings ii. 23, 24. But the united force of the rag^ 
of lions, leopards, and she-bears, bereaved of their whelp^i^ 
is not sufficient to give us even a scanty view of the poW«f 
of the wrath of God, Hos. xiii 7, 8. « Therefore I will 
be unto them as a lion ; as a leopard by the way will I 
observe them. I will meet them as a bear that is bereaYfid 
of her whelps, and will rent the call of their heart," Wf. 

(5.) It is penetrating and piercipg ymXk* It i& bvqiiDE 



R^ n.] Man*B natural State a State qf Wrath. \ 33 

wrath, and fiery indignation. There is no pain more ex- 
quisite than that i¥hich is CaUsed by fire ; and no fire so 
piercing as the fire ol God's indignation^ that burns into 
tbe lowest hell, Deut. xxxii. 22. The arrows of mens 
Jmith can pierce flesh, blood, and bones, but cannot reach 
the soul; but the wrath cf God will sink into the soul, 
and so pierce a man in the most tender part. like as, 
^when a person is thunder-struck, oft-times there is not a 
wound to be seen in tlie skin ; yet life is gone, and the 
bones are, as it were, melted ; so God's wrath can pene- 
trate into, and melt one's soul within him, when his taith- 
ly comforts stand about him entire, and untouched, as in 
Beishazzar's case, Dan. v. 6. (6.) It is constant wrath, 
nmning parallel witli the man's continuance in an unrege- 
nerute state ; constantly attending him, from the womb to 
the grave. There arc few so dark days, but the sun some- 
times looketh out from under the clouds ; but tlie wrath 
of God is an abiding cloud on the subjects of it, John iii. 
^6. The wrath of God abideth on him that believes not. 
(7.) It is eternal. O miserable soul ! If thou fly not from 
tiiis wrath unto Jesus Christ, thy misery bad a beginning, 
but it shall never have an end. Should devouring death 
wholly swallow thee up, and for ever hold tliee fast in a 
grave, it would be kind ; but thou must live again, and 
Dever die ; that thou mayst be ever dying, in the hands of 
the living God. Cold death will quench the flame of 
Jfian's wrath against us, if nothmg else do*it ; but God'a 
^ruth, when it has come on the sinner, millions of ages 
^ill still be the wrath to come. Mat. iii. 7. 1 Thess. i. 10, 
As the water of a river is still coming, how much soever 
of it has passed. While God is, he will pursue the quar- 
rel. Lastly^ Howsoever dreadful it is, and though it be 
eternal, yet it is most JMst wrath ; it is a clear fire, without 
^e least smoke of injustice. The sea* of wrath raging 
^th greatest fury against the sinner is clear as chrystal. 
The Judge of all the earth can do no wrong. He k^iowa 
^ transports of passion, for they are inconsistent with the 
Perfection of his nature. " Is God unrighteous, who 
^cth vengeance ? (I speak as a mt-n,) God forbid ; fov 
*<iu,how shall God judge tl;e world V Rom. iii. 5, 6* 



1 34 The Doctrine of the State of Wrath [State IL 

The Doctrine (\f the State qf Wrath confirmed and 

vindicated. 

II. I shall confirm the doctrine. Consider, (1.) How 
peremptory the threatening of the first covenant is ; * hi 
the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die,'* GeD.U 
1 7. Hereby sin and punishment being connected, the 
veracity of God ascertains the execution of the threatening* 
Now all men being by nature under this covenant, tte 
breach of it lays them under the curse. (2.^ The justice 
of God requires that a child of sin be a child of wretb ; 
that the law being broken, the sancuon thereof should 
take place. God, as man's Ruler and Judge, cannot but 
do right, Gen. xviii. 25. Now it is a righteous thl*-^ 
with God to recompence sin with wrath, 2 Thess. I ^ 
He is offiurer eycM^ than to behold evilj Hab. i. 13. Anit 
he hates all the workers of iniquity j Psal. v. 6. (3.) The 
horrors of a natural conscience prove this. . There is t 
conscience in the breasts of men, which tell them they are 
sinners, and therefore liable to the wrath of God.* Let 
men, at any time, soberly commune with themselves, and 
they will find they have the witness in themselves, ** know* 
ing the judgment of God, that they which commit soch 
things are worthy of death,'* Rom. i. 32. (4.) The 
pangs of the new birth, the work of the spirit of bondage 
on elect souls in order to their conversion, demcmstrat^ 
this. Hereby their natural sinfulness and misery, as Uable 
to the wrath of God, ai*e plainly taught them ; fillip 
their hearts with fear of that wrath. Now that this spiA 
of bondage is no other than the Spirit of God, wbo^ 
work is to convince of sin, righteousness, and judgmenti 
(John xvi. 8.) this testimony must needs be true ; itortbe 
Spirit of truth cannot witness an untruth. Meanwhile, tru* 
believers being freed from the state of wrath, " receive irt 
the spirit of bondage again to fear, but receive the Spii» 
of adoption," Rom. iii. 15. And, therefore, if fears of 
that nature do arise, after the soul's union with Chn^'i 
they come from the saint's own spirit, or from a worse* 
Lastly yThe sufferings of Christ plainly prove this docttin* 
Wherefore was the Son of God, a Son under wrath, bttt 
because the children of men were children of wrath ? H* 
differed the wrath of God^ not for himself, but for tbxfifi 



our of God, will be apt to rise up against l)is Judge, ' f r 

bis own heart condemn his procedure. Neverthe- ' 1 i* 

e Judge being infinitely just, the sentence must be i i 

us. And, therefore, to stop thy mouth, O proud '! I 

and to still thy clumour against the righteous Judge, ■ ,! 

r, Firsts Thou art a smner by nature, and it i« 
reasonable that guilt and wrath be as old as sin. . [' 

lould not God begin to vindicate his honour, as |. 

vile worms begin to impair it ? Why shall not a ' 

: bite the thief, as soon as he leaps over the hedge? ^ \ 

dould not tlie threatening take hold of the sinner, ■ j^ 

as he casts away the command ? The poisonous 
»f the serpentaffordsaman sufficient ground to kill it, 
as ever he can reach it ; and, by this time thou \ 

be convinced,that thy nature is a very compound of ^ 

againstGod. 5fcowc//y, Thou hastnot only an enmity " ' 

God in thy nature, but hast discovered it by ac- 
ts, which are in his eye acts of hostility. Thou 
3ught forth thy lust into the field of battle against 
^ereign Lord. And now, that thou art such a cri- 
thy condemnation is just ; for besides the sin of thy 

tliou hast done that ag^nst heaven, which if thou 
one against men, thy life behoved to have gone for 
I shall not wrath from heaven overtake thee ? (1.) 
irt cuiltv of high treason, and rebellion against the 



136 The Doctrine of the State qf Wrath [State U* 

stopx>ed tbine ears at their voice, a»d sent them avaf 
mourning for thy pride. Thou hast conspired with hu 
grand enemy the devil. Altliough thou tot a sworn ser- 
vant of the King of glory, daily receiving of his favourSf 
and living' on his bounty ; thou art holding a correspoiw 
dence, and hast contracted a friendship with his greateBt 
enemy, and art acting for him aguinst thy Lord ; for, 7%e 
luat of the devil ye ivill do., John viii. 44. (2.) Thou art 
a murderer before the Lord. Thou hast laid the stumb- 
ling-block of thine iniquity l)efore the blind world ; and 
hast mined the souls of others l)y thy sinful course. And 
though thou dost not see now, the time may come, when 
thou shalt sec the blood of thy rehitions, neighbours, ac- 
quaintances, and others, upon ihy head, Matth. xviii. 7. 
** Wo unto the world because of offences.— Wo to that 
man by whom the offence cometh. Yea, thou art a self- 
murderer before God," Prov. viii. 36. " He that sifr 
neth against me wrongeth his own soul ; all they that hate 
me love death," Ezek. xviii. 31. Why will ye die? The 
laws of men go as far as they can ag'ainst the self-murder- 
er, denying his body a burial-place amongst others, and 
confiscating his goods ; what wonder is it the law of God 
is so severe against soul murderers ? Is it strange, that 
they who will needs depart from God now, cx)st what it 
Mill, must be forced to depart from him at last, into ever- 
lastuig fire ? But what is yet more criminal, thou art 
guilty of the murder of the Son of God, for the Lord wiU 
reckon these amongst those that pierced him. Rev. !• ^• 
Thou hast rejected him as well as the Jews did; andbf 
thy rejecting him, thou hast justified their deed. They 
indeed did not acknowledge him to be the Son of GoA^ 
but thou dost. What they did against him was in a istate 
of humiliation : but thou hast acted . against him in his 
state of exaltation. These things will aggravate thy con- 
demnation. What wonder, then, if the voice of the Lamb 
change to the roaring of the lion, again F-t the traitor and 
murderer. 

Object. But some will say. Is there not a vast dispHH. 
portion betwixt our sin and that wrath you talk of i . ' 
answer. No ; God pmiishes no more than the sinner de- 
serves. To rectify your mistake, in this matter, consider 
(l .) The vast rewards God has annexed to obedie|ice« B>* 



Head n.] confirmed and vindicated, 137 

1 word is no more full of fiery wrath against sin, than it ii 
of gracious re^Tards to the obedience it requires. If heaven 
be in the p:-omises, it is altogether equal that hell be in the 
tbtatenings. If death were not in the balance with life, 
eternal misery with eternal happiness, where werc*the pro- 
portion ? Moreover, sin deserves the misery, but our best 
works do not deserve the happiness ; yet both are set be- 
fcrc us ; sin and misery, holiness and happiness. What 
reason is there then to complain ? (2.) How severe 
soever the thrcatenings be, yet all has enough ado to 
reach the end of the law. " Fear him," says our Lord, 
* which, after he hath ki?I.'.*d, hath power to cast into hell ; 
yea, I say unto you, fear him," Luke xii. 5. This be- 
speaks our dread of divine power and majesty ; but how 
few fear him indeed ! The Lord knows tlic sinners hearts 
to be jcxccedingly intent .upon fulfilling their lusts ; they 
cleave so fondly to those fulsome breasts, that a small force 
does not suffice to draw them from them . They that travel 
through deserts, where they are in hazard from wild beastSf 
have need to carry fire along with them ; and they have 
fteed of a hard wedge that have knotty timl>er to cleave j 
80 a holy law must be fenced with a dreadful wrath, in a 
^rld lying in wickedness. But who are they tliat com- 
plain of that wrath as too great, but those to whom it is 
too little to draw them oif from their sinful courses ? It 
Was the man who pretended to fear his lord, because he 
Wjtt an austere man, that kept his pound liud up in a nap- 
kin; and so he was condenuied out of his own mouthy 
lukc xix. 20, 21, 22. Thou art that man, even thou 
whose objection I am answering. How can the wratli 
^M art under, and liable to, be too great, while yet it is 
^ sufficient to awaken thee to fly from it ? Is it time to 
'elax the penalties of the law, when men are trampling 
the commands of it under foot ? (3.) Consider how God 
dealt with his own Son, whom he spared not, Rom. viii. 
32. The wrath of God seized on his soul and body both, 
•nd brought him into the dust of death. That his suf- 
ferings were not eteraal, flowed from the quality of the 
■uflfcrcr, who was infinite ; and, therefore, able to bear 
•tonce tjie whole load of wrath ; and, upon that account, 
Ws sufferings were infinite in value. But in value, they 
*U8t be protracted to an eternity. And wh»t confidence 

M 



138 The Doctrine of the Mttert^ of [State 11. 



can a rcbel-subjcct have to quarrel (for his part^ a punish- 
ment executed on the King's Son ? f 4.) The sinner doth 
against God what he can. <' Behold thou hast done evil 
things as thou couldst," Jcr. iii. 5. That thou hast not done 
more and worse, thanks to him who restrained thee ; to 
the chain which the wolf was kept in by, not to thyiel£ 
No wonder God shew his power on the sinner, who pott 
forth his power against God, as fur as it will reach. The 
unregencrate man puts no period to his sinful course; 
and would put no bounds to it neither, if he were not 
restrained by divine power for wise ends ; and, thereibrei 
it is just he be for ever under wrath. (5.) It is infinite 
majesty sin strikes against ; and so it is, in some sort, an 
infinite evil. Sin riseth in its demerit, according to the 
quality of the party offended. If a man wound his neid^- 
hour, his goods must go for it; but if he wound his 
prince, his life must go to make amends for that ' The 
mfinity of God makes infinite wrath the just demerit of 
sin. God is infinitely displeased with sin ; and when he 
acts, he must act like himself, and shew his displeasure 
by proportionable means. Laatly^ Those that shdl lie ftr 
ever under his wrath, will be eternally sinning ; anA 
therefore, must eternally suffer; not only in respected 
divine judicial procedure, but because sin is its own 
punishment, in tlic same manner that holy obedience >i 
Its own reward. 

The Doctrine of the Misery of Man* s Natural State appB^* 

Use (1.) Of information. Is our state by nature » 
state of wrath ? Then, 

1. Surely we are not bom innocent. These chaina 
of wrath, which by nature are upon us, speak us to be 
bora criminals. The swaddling bands wherewith infen** 
are bound hand and foot as soon as they are born, mayp''^ 
us in mind of the cords of wrath, with which they al* 
held prisoners, as children of wrath. 

2. What dcspei*ate madness is it for sinners to go <* 
in their sinful course : What is it but to heap coals of fi** 
on thine own head, and lay more and more fuel to the 
fire of wrath, to treasure up unto thyself wrath against the 
day of wrath ? Rom. ii. 5. Thou mayst perish, whit* 
his wrath is kindled but a little; Psalm ii. 12/- Whywi^ 



I H.] Man* 9 Mitural State applied. \ 39 

increase it yet more ? Thou art already bound with 
cords of death, as will not easily be loosed ; what 
is there of more ? Stand, careless sinner, and con- 
this. 

Thou hast no reason to complsdn, as long as thou 
ut of hell. " Wherefore doth a living man com- 
V* Lam. iii. 39. If one who hs^ forfeited his life be 
bed his nutive country, and exposed to many hard- 
; he may well bear all patiently, seeing his life is 
1 Do ye murmur,- for that yc are under piun or 
:s8 ? Nuy, bless God ye are not there, where the 
never dicth. Dost thou grudge that thou art not 
2;ood a condition in the world, as some of thy neigh- 
are ? Be thankful rather, that ye are not in the case 
damned. Is thy substance gone from thee ? Won^ 
lat the fire of God's wrtxth hath not consumed thy- 
Kiss the rod, O sinner, and acknowledge mercy ( 
)d punisheth us less than our iniquities deserve^ 
ix. 13. 

flere is a memorandum, both for poor and rich« 
he poorest that go from door to door, and hatli not 
snny left them by their parents, were bom to an in* 
ace. Their first father Adam left them children of 
; and continuing in their natural state, they cannot 
.f it ; " For this is the portion of a wicked man from 
ind the heritage appointed to him by God," Job xx. 
Vn heritage that will furnish them with an habita- 
'ho have not where to lay their head ; they shall be 
ito utter darkness, Mat. xxv. 30. for to them is rc- 
l the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. Avherc 
>ed shall be sorrow : " They shall lie down in sor» 
Isa. 1. 11. their food shall be judgment, for God 
edthem with judgment, Ezek. xxxiv. 16. and their 
shall be the red wine of God's wrath, the dregs 
of all the wicked of the earth shall wring out, and 
them, Psal. Ixxv. 8. I know, tliat those who are 
ite of worldly goods, and withal void of the know- 
and grace of God, who therefore may be called the 
\ poor, will be apt to say here, We hope God will 
us suffer all our misery in this world, and we shall 
)py in tlie next : As if their miserable outward con- 
in time would secure their Ivappiness in etenytjr. 



156 Mun unable to recover kim^eif. 



■ I' 



thing out of ai^unclean ?" Job xiv. 4. And dotf j t| 
thiukj by sin, to help thyself out of sin &d nutery }; S 
Thy obedience must also be petfect in parts. It.inii| v 
as broad as the whole law of Grod ; if thou lackeij^ 
thin^, thou art undone ; for the law denounceth the^ 
«on him that continueth not in every thing written tM 
Gal. iii. 10. Thou must give internal and extemli 
dience to the whole law ; keep all the command ^ 
heart and life. If thou breakest any one of themy tlM||'*il 
insure thy ruin! A vain thought, or idle word, wit'^f 
shut thee up under the curse. (3.) It must be pei^ >i|K. 
respect of degrees, as was the obedience of AdaiOfl -* 
he stood in his innocence. This the law require^ 
will accept of no less, Mat. xxii. 37. '< Thou shall ' 
the Lord thy God, with all thy heai*t» and with i 
soul, and with all thy mind." If one degree of thi9 
required by the law, be wanting ; if each part of tfajoi > 
ence be not scrcwe^up to Aic greatest height coqnl '' 
ed ; that want is a breach of the law, and so leovel; J 
still under the curse. One may bring as many buckf w^ 
water, to a house that is on fire, as he is able to can}} 
yet it may be consumed ; and will be so, if he brinf 
as many as will quench the fire. . KvHn in, although 
shouldst do what thou artajtxlt!, in keeping the commc ? 
if thou fail in the least degree of obedience which tb( I 
enjoins, thou art certainly ruined for ever ; unleii » 
take hold of Christ, renouncing all thy righteousae f 
filthy mgs. See Rom. x. 5. Gal. iii. 10.-..^I.a«(| 
must be perpetual, as the man Christ's obediencf : 
who always did the things that pleased the Father ;&{ 
tenor of the law is, '< Cursed is he that continoethjf 
all things written in tlie law, to do them." Henceitl^ 
Adam's obedience was for a while absolutely perC^ 
because at length he tripped in one point, viz, mj 
the forbidden fruit, he fell under the curse of thtU 
one should live a dutiful subject to his prince, till iii 
of his days, and then conspire against him, he nip 
for his treason. Even so, though thou shouldst*: i| 
time of thy life, live in perfect obedience tothefi 
God, and only at the hour of death entertain t^ 
thought, or pronounce an idle word, that idle wordy tf 
tho\ight| would blot out all thy former righteousoM 



* ■ 

lead III.3 Afii« unable to recover himself. 157 

vun thee ; namely, in this way, in which thou art seeking 
recover thyself. 

Now such is the obedience thou must perform, if thou 
irouldst recover^thyself in the way of the law. But though 
hou shouldst thus obey, the law stakes thee down in the 
tate of wrath, till another demand of it be satisfied, viz. 

Secondly, Thou must pay what thou owest. It is un- 
leniable thou art a sinner ; and, whatever thou mayest be 
n time to come, justice must be satisfied for thy sin alrea- 
[y committed. The honour of the law must be maintain- 
d, by thy suffering the denounced wrath. It may be thou 
last changed thy course of life, or art now resolved to do 
:, and set about the keeping of the commands of God ; 
ut, what hast thou done, or what wilt thou do, with the 
Id debt ? Your obedience to God, though it were perfect, 
a a debt due to him, for the time wherein it is performed ; 
nd can no more satisfy for former sins, than a tenant's pay- 
71% the current year's rent, can satisfy the master for all 
ygones. Can the paying of new debts acquit anian from 
Id accounts ? Nay, deceive not yourselves, you will find 
bese laid up in store with God, and sealed up among his 
peasures, Deut. xxxii. 34. It remains then, that either 
hou must bear that wrath, to which, for tliy sin, thou ait 
iablc, according to the law ; or else, tliou must acknow- 
edge thou canst not bear it, and thereupon have recourse 
o the surety, the Lord Jesus Christ. Let me now ask thee, 
Vrt thou able to satisfy tiie justice of God? Canst thou pay 
by own debt ? Surely not ; for, seeing he is an infinite 
j»od, whom thou hast offended, the punishment, being 
viitcd to the quality of the offence, must be infinite. But 
^ it is, thy punishment or sufferings for sin cannot be in- 
»nitc in value, seeing thou art a finite creature; therefore, 
^^y must be infinite in duration or continuance ; that is, 
Vicy must be eternal. And so all thy sufferings in this 
World are but an earnest of what thou must sufiFer in the 
World to come. 

Now, sinner, if thou canst answer these demands, thou 
•Gayest recover thyself in the way of the law. But, art 
thou not conscious of thy inability to do any of these things, 
^^ch more to do them all ? Yet, if thou do not all, thou 
^ost notiiing. Turn then to what course of life thou wilt^ 



**- 



He nHMt flwdtfy for tbeir sin, by suffeiing tfia p 
ment dua to h ;,besinuBt do wht^ they cannot dO) v£i 
the Ifiw pedeetlyyaad 00 fiUfil all righteouoiess. 41 
iagly^ all tbk he didjaad so became the end of the j 
tighfeeouaneas to every one that \>eUeveth, Rom. %» i 
noir dost thou think Ood will abate of these teonPitf 
idien hisvown Son. got no abatement of. them I Ex 
not) thovn^ thou ahonldst beg it wi^ tears of bloo^ 
if they ^vailed* they behoved to prevail against tks 
justice, and hoiM>iir of Qod^ Gal. ill. 10. 22. ^ Coj 
every one that continueth not in all things, which ai!i 
ten in the book of the law, to do them.— -And the 
not of fidthfbut the msta that doth them shall live int 
It is true, that God is merciful ; he cannot but-hi 
ciful, .unless he save you in a way that is neithtei 
Mstent with his law nor gospel. Hath not hisj;<)i 
. and mercy suf&ciently appeared, in sending the Son 
love% to do what, the law could not do, in that it was 
tliftt)ugh ttie flesh? He has provided help forthei 
canned help themselves ; but thou, insensU)le of this 
weakness, wilt needs thkik to recover thyself by this 
works ; while thou art no more able to do it, than 
move mountains of brass out of their place. 

Wherefore, I conclude thou art^utterly unable 
cover thyself, by the way of works, or of the Ja^ 
that thou wouldst conclude the same concerning tfa 

II, Let us try next, what the sinner can do to n 
iiimself, in the way of the .gospel. It is Ukely 
thinkest, ^at howbeit thou canst not do all, by t 
alone ; yet Jesus Christ offering thee help, thou c^ 
thyself embrace it, and use it to thy recovery. B 
ainner, be convinced of thine abstolute need of the 
of Christ, for. truly there is help offered, but thou 
not accept of it ; . there is a rope cast out to hail 
wrecked sinners to land ; but, alas ! they have «i6. 
< to catch hold of it. They are like infants exposed 
open field that must starve, though their food beljp 
them, unless one put it into their mouths. TfO 64 
natunil men of this, Jet it be omsidered, 

JPirst^ That altlnugh Christ is offered in theg 

yetithey cajinot believe in him. Saving &ith is titf 

.of God5a.filect^ the special .gi£tof God to thoip^itol 



ITead III.^ -Man unable to recover MtmcI/. 16 1 

in them by his Spirit. Salvation is oiTcred to them that 
«ill believe in Christ ; but how can ye believe ? John 
t. 44. It is offered to those that will come to Christ ; 
but no man can come unto himj except the Father draw 
ium. It is offered to them thsTt will look to him, as lifted 
up on the pole of the gospcL Isa. xlv. 23. but the natural 
man is spiritually blind. Rev. iii. 17. and as to the things 
of the Spirit of God^ he cannot know them, for they are 
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. ii. 14. Nay, whosoever 
will, he is welcome ; let him come, Rev. xxii. 1 7. But 
there must be a day of power on the sinner, before the 
will be willing, Psulm ex. 3. "^ 

Secondly^ Man naturally has nothing wherewithal to 
inaprove, to his recovery, the help brought in bj^the 
gospel. He is cast away in a state of wrath ; bm is 
bound hand and foot, so that he cannot lay hold of the 
Cords of love, thrown out to him in the gospel. The 
luost skilful artificer cannot work without instruments, 
nor can the most cunning musician play well on an iu- 
•trument that is out of tunc. How can one believe, how 
can he repent, whose understanding is darkness, Eph. 
^•8. whose heait is a stony heart, inflexible, insensible, 
Ezek. xxxvi. 26. whose affections are wholly disordered 
»nd distempered ; wlio is averse to good, and bent to 
^il ? The arms of natural abilities are too short to reach 
•Upeniatiiral help ; hence those who most excel in them, 
*re oft-times most estranged from spiritual things, Matth. 
^i. 24. « Thou hast hid tliese things from tlie wise and 
!>rudent. 

Thirdly^ Man cannot work a saving change on himself; 
>Ut so changed he must be, else he can neither believe nor 
'epent, nor ever see heaven. No action can be without a 
iuitable principle. Believing, repenting, and the like, 
re the pixxluct of the new nature ; and can never be pro- 
duced by the old corrupt nature. Now, what can the 
atural man do in this matter ? He must be unregenerate, 
egotten again into a lively hope ; but as the child can- 
ot be active in his own generation, so a man cannot be 
:tive, but passive only, in his own regeneration. The 
Bart is shut against Christ ; men caiinot open it, only 
rod can do it by his grace. Acts xvi. 14. He is dead 
I sin ; he must be quickened, raised out of liis gruv^ \ 

O 



163 Man unable to recover himself. [St 

i\ ho can do this but God liimsclf ? Eph. ii. ] , 3. 
he must be created in Christ Je^us unto good works 
ii. 10. These arc works of oWupotcncy, end c 
done by no less power. 

Fourthly^ Miin, in his depraved state, is under ai 
inability to do any thing trulyj^od, as was cleared 
at large ; how tlien can he ooey the gospel ? His ] 
is the very reverse of the gospel ; how can he, of 
self, fall in with tliat device of solvation, and accc 
offered remedy ? The conoiption of man's nature inf 
concludes his utter inability to recover himself any 
ner of way ; and whoso is convinced of the one, 
needs admit tlie other ; for tliey stand and f^ili tog 
Weme all the purchase of Cln-ist offered to the unre 
rate man, for one good thought ; he cannot comm; 
2 Cor. iii. 5. " Not that M'e are sufficient of ours 
to think any thing as of ourselves.** Were it offei 
condition of a good word, yet how can ye, beinj 
speak good things ? Mutth. xii. 35, Nay, were ; 
to yourselves, to chuse what is easiest ; Christ b 
tells you, John xv. 5. Without me^ ye can do nothin^ 

Lastly^ The natural man cannot but resist tlie 
offering to help him ; howbeit that resistance is inf 
overcome in tlie elect, by converting grace. C 
stony heart chuse but to resist the stroke ? There 
only an inability, but an enmity and obstinacy in 
will by nature. God knows, natuml man, (whetlic: 
knowest it or not,) that thou art obstinate, and tli) 
is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass, Isa. xlviii. ^ 
cannot be overcome, but by him, who hath broke 
gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder. I 
is there such hard work in converting a sinner. \ 
times he seems to be caught in the net of the gospc 
quickly he slips away again. The hook catcheth h 
him ; but he struggles, till getting free of it, he*] 
away with a bleedhig wound. When good hopes ar 
ceived of him, by those tliat travail in birtli, for the 
ing of Christ in him ; there is oft-times nothing bi 
forth but wind. The deceitful heart makes many 
to avoid a Saviour, and to clieat the man of his e 
happiness. Thus the natural man lies sunk in a s 
sin and wratli, utterly unable to recover himself. 



Head III.] ObjecHonM answered. 1 63 

Object, (\ .) If we be under an utter inability to do anjr 
|ood, how can God require us to do it ?— -^n^. God mak« 
zng man upriglit, Eccles. vii. 29. gave him a power to do 
.everything he should require of him ; tlus power m;i.n lobt 
by his own fault. We were bound to senx God, and do 
whatsoever he commanded us, as being his creatures ; and 
•Iso, ye were under the superadded tie of a covenant, for 
thatefiTect. Now, we having, by our own £iult, disabled 
oteelves, shall God lose his right of requiring our task, 
because we haye thrown away the stren.2;th he guve us, 
wherewithal to perform it ? Has the creditor no right to 
require payment of his monry, because the dtbior hr.s 
squandered it awry, and is not able lo pay him ? Truly, if 
God can require no more of us than we are able to do, we 
iw<d no more to save us from wrath, but to make our- 
selves unable for every duly, and to incapacitate ourselves 
fcf serving of God any manner of way, as profane men 
frequently do ; and so the deeper one is immersed in sin, 
fe will be the more secure from wrath ; for where God 
Can require no duty of us, we do not sin in omitting it ; 
Mid where there is no sin, there can be no wrath. (As 
to.,what may be urged by the unhumbled soul, against 
the putting of our stock in Adam's hand, the rightcou&- 
iKiss of that dispensation was cleared before.) But, more- 
over, the unrenewed man is daily throwing away the very 
Remains of natund abilities ; that light and strength which 
^ to be found amongst the ruins of mankind. Nay, 
ferthcr, he will not believe his own utter inability to help 
himself; so that out of his own mouth he will be con- 
tenned. Even those who make their natural impotcncy 
too good a cover to their sloth, do, with others, delay the 
iprk of turning to God from time to time ; under con- 
victions, make large promises of reformation, which after- 
Ward they never regard ; and**delay their repentance to 
adcath-bed, as if they could help themselves in a moment; 
which speaks them to be far from a due sense of their 
tiatural inability, whatever they pretend. 

Now, if God can require of men the duty they are 
M)t able to do ; he can in justice punish them for their 
lot doing it, notwithstanding of their inability. If he 
lave power to exact the debt of obedience, he has also 
»ower to cast the insolvent debtor into prison, for his not 



16* - ' OJ^ecttoM owvfrrrf. 

paying It Fnrtliert dtougfa umi^tcnerate 

gnieioaaidnlhi«a,7et_fhc7irentiiottiatitr^Ub'tlltlea,Trtaeb'' 
^nereitiiBlew thev irill not improve, There are vOOf 
thiiqp tbey eta do, which they do not, they ivUl noi d» 
them; utd, thneforat their Aunnatlon ^vill he jnit. 
Nftyi'all their ini&ili^ to good ia voluntary i they vii)' 
act CMne to Ckiiiti John v. 40, TheySwill not repent, 
they wijl fie, Eiek. xviU. 51. So they will be juWlf 
cmdemned ; bec4UBe they irill not tm-n to God, dAI- 

■f' cMme to Christi hut lore Uirir chains hf;tter than their 
liberty, and darkness rather than lig-ht, John iii. 19. 

Object. (3.) Why do you then prcuch Christ tom; 
call hb to come to him, to belierc, i-epcnt, ajid use die 

* meuiBof aalration! — ^n«. Because it is your duty 9oU 
do. It ia your duty to eccept of Chiist us he is otrfM 
in;the gospel; to repent of your sins, and to bebolyin 
aU manner of eonTerqaUon : These things are cnrnmaw^ 
you of God ; and his command, not your abiliiy, ii tb> 
measure of your duty. Moreover, these calls and^ 
Ifortations are the means that God is pleased to make uw 
of, for converting his electa and working grace in thor' 
lieiirU ; to them, Jaith cotneth by licareng, Rom. s. llTi 
while they are unable to help them-selves, as the rest of 
mankind are. Upon very ^ood g^unds may wc, at tlM 
command of God, who nuscth the dead, go to thMT 
graves and cry in his name, " Awate thou that aleepWft 
and vise from the dead, and Christ Eliall give thee ligtiS!''' 
Eph. V. 14. And seeing the elect arc net to be knovl 
W)d distinguished from others before conversion, as tw 
BUfi shines on the blind man's face, and the rain falls oft. 
the rocks as well as on the fruitful plains ; so we prexok ' 
Christ to all, and shoot the arrow at a venture, wlach Gfflt 
himself directs as he sees meet. Moreover, these cdl 
and exhortations are notitltogether in vain, even to thO«?" 
that arc not converted by them. Such persons aaf^' 
convinced, though they be not converted, although thejl 
" be not sanctified by these means, yet they may be V 
strained by tliem, from running into that excess ef 
wickedneffs which otherwise they would arrive at. Ths I 
means of grace serve, as H were, to embHlm many dead 
souls which sre never quickened by them, thuur^h they do 
not restore thenkto life ; yet they keep tliem from ameS* 



Head III. J ObjeetiwtM amivered, 16S 

ing so rank as otherwise they would do^'^^Finallyj Though 
ye cannot recover yourseIves> nor take hold of the sa\'ing 
l»e|p offered to you in the gospel ; yet even by tlic power 
of nature, ye may use the outward and ordinary means, 
whereby Christ comniunicutes the benefits of redemption 
to ruined sinners, who are utterly unable to recover them- 
selves out of the state of sin and wmth. Ye m;iy, uid 
can, if ye please, do many things that would set you in a 
&ir way for help from the Lord Jesus Christ. Ye may 
go so far oUf as to be not fur from the kingdo:n of God, r-s. 
Ae ^screet scribe hud done, Mark xii. 34. thougli (it 
«reuid seem]) he was destitute of supeiiiatural abiliiits. 
Though ye cannot cure yourselves, yet ye may come to 
ihe pool, where mimy such diseased persons as ye arc 
lave been cured : Ye have none to put you into it, yet yc 
aaay lie at the side of it ; and who knows but the Lord 
Bay return, and_ leave a blessing behind hini> a& hi the 
jase of -the impotent man, recorded, John v. 5, 6, 7, 8. 
' hope Satan does not chain you to your houses,, nor stake 
'ou down in your fields on the Lord's day ; but ye are :«t 
iberty, and can wait at the posts of wisdom's door, if yo 
«^1. And when ye come thither, he doth not beut drums 
(t your ears, tliat yc cannot hear what is said ; there is na 
orce upon you, obliging you to apply ail you heap to* 
rthcrs ; ye nwy apply to yourselves^ what belongs to your 
;tate and condition ; and when you go home, you are not 
ottered in your houses, where perhaps no religious, dis- 
•our-ic is to be heurd ; but yc may retire to some sepuratft 
)h.cc, where ye can meditute, and pose your conscience 
^th pertinent questions upon what ye have heard. Ye 
•fe not possessed with a dumb devil, tliut ye cannot get 
our mouths opened in prayer to God. Ye are not sa 
Wven out of yow beds to your worldly business, and 
foiii your worldly business to your beds again, but ye 
aif:lit, if ye would, bestow some pruyers to God upon the: 
ise of your perishing souls. Ye mt y examine youusclve?^ 
s to tiie stvite of your souls, In a solemn muLner, ls iiv 
»e presence of God; ye may discern that ye have no 
ra^e, arid tiiat ye are lost dud undone without it ; an^i 
\iiy cry unto God fior it. These tilings are within tlie 
)mpass of natural abilities,, and may be practised, where 
ere is no g^racc* It must aggjravate your g,uiU, thatyaui 



1 ■ .-'•"■ 

^ » " ■■ ■ . .' • 



i66 .4*^ Ohjec$i9iu^aimerei^ 

iHU^otbeftk so mueh piAML^boitt the tMtuA^ 

jrour preebns tools. Am if fe do not what yott 

viife willbo condeimied not only for yovLV want of 

bat ftr your despiiong (tf it ^ 

'Objee$. (3.) But all this is needless, seeing we sue 

lyt'oniRble-to keep -ourselves out of the state <^ jSii{| 

iihrathi— ^^c* Give noplace to that delusioui whid^i ,. 

«8under what God hath joined, namely the use fAvmA 

waA. a sense of our own ilnpotency. If ever the l^rii^ 

,«>^!'Ood graciously influence your souls,' ye will M"^ 

Mlkoroi^^y sensible of your absolute inability^ andjpcf i 

upon a vigorous^se of means. Ye will do for youcpi 

aii if ye were to do ail ; and yet overlook all ye do^ si. 

had done nothing. Will ye do nothing for yoursellNMi 

cause ye cannot do alll 'Lay down no such impioo*i 

elusion against your own souls. Do what youcasf i" 

may be, while ye are doing what ye can* for yoi 

God will do for you what ye cannot. ^ Undei 

thou what thou readest V* Said Philip to tho 

*< How can I,^' said he, << except some man a^uldri 

me^'' Acts viii. SO, 31. . He could not midei 

scripture he read ; yet he could read it *y he did 

could, he read, and while he was reading, God seoti 

an interpreter. The IsraeUtes were m a great stwtj 

Red Sea ; and how could they help themselves when^ .... 

. the (me hand where mountains, and on the other, the W 
my's garrison ; when Pharaoh and his host were belM 
them, and the Red Sea before them ? What could th^JM^ 
« Speak uifto the ({Children ef Israel,'* saith the'Lcii^ 
Moses,^that they go forward," Exod. xiv. IS. 'Bi 
what end should they go forward ? Can. they make * jif{^ 
sage to themselves through the sea ? No ; but let th< 
forward, saith the Lord ; though they cannot tur^yjci 
dry land, yet they can goforward to the shore,, and sD?t 
^d ; and when tl^ey did what . they could^ God ^f§ 
them' what they could not do. *|f^ 

Queat. Has God promised to convert and save 
who, in the use of means, do what they can towards' 
own relief ?—v^««. We piay not speak wickedly for^ 

' natural men being strangers to the covenants of ppo 
Eph. ii. 13. have no such promise made to them t Nlri'. ., 
tjheless, they de^ not act rationally, unless they tM^ 







•t 



B^IIL] OdjecHotu atuwered, 167 

powers they have, and do what they can. For, (1.) It i» 

IposBible this course may succeed with them. If jre do what 

Recall) it may be^ God will da for you what you cannot* 

do for yourselves. Thisis sufficient to determine a mahf 

k ft matter of the utmost importance, such as this is. Acts 

nil. 32. «< Fray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart 

nay be forgiven thee." Joel ii. 14. <« Who knoweth if 

ha will return ?" If success may be, the trial should be. 

I^ina wreck at sea, all the sailors and passengers had 

betaken themselves each to a broken board for safety, and 

oneof tiiem should see all the rest perish, notwithstanding 

of their utmost endeavours to save themselves, yet the very 

possibility of escaping by that means would determine that 

one still to do his best with his board. Why then do ye 

Bot reason with yourselves, as tlie four lepers ^id who sat 

8t the gates of Samaria ? 2 Kings vii. 3, 4. Why do ye 

iK)t gay, If we sit still, not doing what we can, we die ; 

fetus put it to a trial, if we be saved, we shall live ; if 

' Bot, we shall but die ? (2.) It is probable this course may 

•ucceed. God is good and merciful ; he loves to surprise 

i&en with his grace, and is often found of them that sought 

him not, Isa. Ixv. 1 . If ye do thus, ye are so far in the 

Jjoad of your duty ; and ye are using the means which the 

Lord is wont to bless for mens spiritual recovery ; ye lay 

yourselves in the way of the great Physician, and so it is 

probablfe ye may be healed. Lydia went, with others, to 

^^ place where prayer was wont to be made, and the Lord 

opened her heart, Acts xvi. 13, 14. Ye plodgh and sow, 

Aough nobody can tell you for certain, that ye will get so 

Jfiuch as your seed again : Ye use means for the recovery 

of your health, though ye are not sure they will succeed- 

fo these ciises, probability deterhiines you ; and why not in 

tiiis also 1 Importunity, we see, does very much witJi men; 

therefore pray, meditate, desire help of God ; be much at 

the throne of grace, supplicating for grace, and do not 

feint. Though God regard not you, who, in your present 

State, are but one mass of sin, universally depraved, and 

vidated in all the powers of your soul ; yet he may regard 

kis own ordinance. Though he regards not your prayers ,» 

your meditations, ^c. yet he may regard prayer, medita-% 

tion, and the like means of his own appointment, and so 

bless them to you. Wherefore, if ye will not do what yc 



1 SB. ConcluHon qfthe third Head. [Stat* 

can ye are not only dead, but you declare yourselvet ^ 
worthy of eternal life. 

To conclude : Let the saints admire the freedom aw 
power of grace, which came to them in their helpless coa 
dition, made their chains fall off, the iron gate to openti 
them, raised the fallen creatures, and brought them out (X 
the state of sin and wrath, wherein they would have lait 
and perished, had they not been mercifully visited. Ltl 
the natui*ul man be sensible of his utter inability to recoTei 
himself, know thou, art without strength, and cannol 
come to Christ, till tliou art drawn. Thou art lost, and 
cannot help thyself. This may shake the foundation of thy 
hopes, who never saw thy absolute need of ChiTst and hifl 
grace ; but thinkest to shift for thyself, by thy civilityi 
morality, drowsy wishes and duties ; and by a faith and re- 
pentance, which have spiking up out of thy natural powenh 
without the power and efficacy of the grace of Christ 
be convinced of thy absolute need of Christ, and his 6ver- 
coming grace ; believe thy utter inability to recover, thf* 
self ; and so thou mayest be humbled, shaken out of tbj 
self-confidence, and lie down in dust and ashes, groaiung 
out thy miserable case before the Lord. A kindly scDi© 
of thy natural impotency, the impotency of depraved hUr 
man nature, would be a stv'p towards d delivery. 

Thus far of man's natural state, Uic state of entire dc? 
pravation. 



i 



STATE III. 



NAMELYr 



STATE 07 GRACE ; OR BEGUN RECOTERT. 



HEAD I. 

m 

1 Peter i. 23. 

n again^ not of corruptible Seed^ but ofineorrufit'' 
' the Word of God^ which Urveth and abideih 
r. 

proceed now to the state of grace, the state of 
3 gun recovery of human nature, into which, all 
partake of eternal happiness, are translated, soon- 
r, while in this world. It is the result of a gra- 
nge, made upon those who shall inherit eternal 
:h chanf^e may be taken up in these two, (1.) In 
1 to their natural real state, the state of corrup- 
•e is a change made upon them in regeneration, 
their nature is changed. (2.) In opposition to 
iral relative state, the state of wrath, there is 
made upon them, in their union with the Lord 
rist ; by which they are set beyond the reach of 
ition. These, therefore, namely, regeneration 
1 witli Christ, I design to handle, as the great 
irehcnsive changes on a sinner, constituting him 
te of grixe. 

St of these we have in the text, together with fliQ 
jid ordinary means, by which it is brought about. 



4. 



iro 



Th0 Miture fif RegeturoHon. 



^ 



The sfK>stIeliere9 to excite the saints to the stodjr of 
ness, hihI particularly of brotherly lore, puts them in 
4 of their spiritual orig^inal. He tells them they w^ 
wain'; sn4 that of one incorruptible seed, the i 
This speaks them to be brethreni partakers of therii 
new nature ; which is the rOot from which hoUnessi'' 
particularly brotherly love, doth sprmg. Wejfdeie 
both sinni^rs; we must be bom. agsuni that^we 
saints. The simple word signifies to be begotten. \\ 
it may be read, Matth. xi. \\* tobe conceived^ Mattiw' 
and to be homy Matth. ii. 1. Accordingly, the cqm[ 
word used in the text may be taken in its full ladtudfi^ 
last notion presupposing the' two former ; and so 
tion is a supernatural real change on the whole 
compared to natural or corporeal generation, as 
ward appear. The ordinary means of rc_ 
called the seed, whereof the new creature is form 
corruptible seed. Of such, indeed, our bodies jure 
rated; but the spiritual seed, of which the new c: 
generated, is incorruptible ; namely, ^ the word 
which liveth and abideth for ever.*' The sound 
of God passeth evea as other sounds do ; but the*' 
lasteth, liveth, and abideth, in. respect of its 
effects, on all upon whom it operates. This word,, 
by the gospel is preached unto you, yen 25. im'_ 
by the Spirit of God, is the means of regenera^ioti | 



i^X., 



n f" 



by It are dead sinners raised to life. 



■-^w 



Doctrine. AU men in the state of grace are bori^i 
—-All gracious persons, namely, such as are uia 
£aivour with God, and endued with gracious t^aA 
and dispositions, are regenerate persons. In dh 
this subject, I shall shew what regeneraiion is: N 
it is so called ; and then apply the doctrine. 



itJ 



Of the JSTature (\f Regeneration^ -. ■ v.fljl 

l-^For the better understanding of the imture ot^ 
neration, take this along with you. in the fiihst plaee/l! 
as there are false conceptions in nature, sql thcrejks^f 
in grace; and by these many are deluded, mistakliij^. 
partial changes made upon them for this great andtdlc 
chaage, ^To.remoye such mistakes^ let these l^tt 



eadl.] Th e Xature qf Regeneration, 171 

& considered) (1.) Many call the church their motiier, 
hoitn God will not own to be his children, Ci.nt. i. 6. 
fy mother's children (/. e. false brethren) were angry tvifh 
If. All that are baptized are not bom again. Simon 
"as baptized, yet still in the gall of bitterness, and in the 
ond of iniquity^ Acts viii. 13, 23. Where Christiunity 
tthe religion of the country, many will be called by tlic 
ame of Christ, who have no more of him but the name ; 
nd no wonder, • seeing the devil had his goats among 
Christ's sheep, in these places, where but few professed 
be Christian religion, 1 John ii. 19^ „ I'hey went out from 
«, hut they were not of us. (2.) Cood education is not 
egeneration. Education may chain up men's lusts, but 
annot change their hearts. A wolf is still a ravenous 
•east, tliough it bi in chains. Joash was very devout dur- 
D^ the life of his good tutor Jehoiada ; but afterwi.rds he 
uickly shewed what spirit he was of, by liis sudden apos- 
Jcy, 2 Chron. xxiv. 2, 17, 18. Good example is of 
nighty influence to change the outward man ; but tliat 
himge often goes off, when one changes his company ; of 
'hich tlie world affords many sad instances. (3.) A tuni- 
ng from open profanity, to civility and sobriety, falls short 
f this saving change. Some arc, for a while, very loose^ 
Specially in their younger years ; but at Icngtli they re- 
3tTn, and leave their profane courses. Here is a change, 
^ but such an cne as muy be found in men, utterly void of 
^^ grace of God, and whose righteousness is so far from 
acceding, that it doth not come up to the righteousness cf 
l^e Scribes and Pharisees. (4.) One may engage in all 
je outward duties of religion, and yet not be born again, 
hough lead be cast into various shapes, it remains 
till but a base metal. Men may escape the pollu- 
ons of the world, and yet be but dogs and swine, 2 
*et. ii. 20, 22. All tlic external acts of religion are 
'ithin the compass of natural abilities. Yea, hypocrites 
lay have the counterfeit of all the graces of the Spirit; for 
'eread of true holiness, Eph. iv. 23. and faith unfeigned, 
Tim. i. 5. which shews us, that there is a counterfeit 
oliness, and a feigned faith. (5.) Men may advance to a 
'J^t deal of strictness m their own way of religion, and 
^be strangers to the new biith. Acts xxvi. 5. ' " After 
l^e most stiictCBt sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee." 



1 72 The Miture qf Regeneration, [St 

Nature has its own unsanctiiied strictness in religio 
Pharisees had so much of it, that they looked on C! 
little better than a mere libertine. A man who 
science hath been awakened, and who lives under 
influence of the covenant of works, what will he 
that is within the compass of natural abilities ? I 
truth, though it came out of a hellish month, that 
for skin, all that a man hath, will he give for his life 
iL 4. (6.^ One may have sharp soul-exercises and 
and yet die in the birtli. Many have been in pai 
have but, as it were, JiKbught forth wind. There 
sore pangs and throes of conscience, which turn to i 
at lust. Pharaoh and Simon Mugus had such conv 
as made them desire the prayers of othei*s for them, 
repented himself ; and under terrors dftt>nscienc< 
back his ill-gotten pieces of silver. All is not g( 
glistens. Trees may blossom fairly in the spiing, oi 
no fruit is to be ^ound in the harvest; and some hav 
soul-exercises, which are nothing but fore-tastes < 
The new birth, however in appearance hopefully 
may be marred two ways. First , Some, like Zand 
xxxviii. 28, 29. arc brought to the birth, but go bad 
They have sharp convictions for a while ; ]>ut these 
and they turn as careless about their salvation, as ] 
as ever ; and Ssually worse than ever ; their last 
worse than their first, Mat. xii. 45. They get awa 
grace, but not converting grace ; and thiit goes off 
grees, as the light of the declining day, till it issue 
night darkness. Secondly^ Some, like Ishmuei, con 
too soon ; they are bom before the time of the pi 
Gen. xvi. 1,2. compare Gal. iv. 22. and downward, 
take up with a mere law-work, and stay not till tl 
of the promise of the gospel. They snatch at cons 
not waiting till it be given them ; and foolishly dra 
comfort from the law that wounded them. The; 
the healing plaister to themselves, before their wo 
sufficiently searched. The law, that rigorous hi 
severely beats them, and throws ^n curses and ven 
upon their souls ; then they fall a-reforming, p 
mouniing, promising, and vowing, till this ghost b 
which done, they fall asleep again in the arms of tfc 
but they are neyer shaken out of themselves and the 



lead I.] The Mature qf Regeneration, 17Z. 

ighteousness,norbroughtforwardto Jesus Christ. Ltutly^ 
There may be a wonderful moving of the affections, m 
KHils that are not at all touched with regenerating grace. 
IVhere there is no grace, there may notwithstanding be a 
lood of tears, as in £sau, who found no place of repen- 
Mice, though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb. xii. 
7. There may be great flashes of joy j as in the hearers 
f the word, represented in the parable of the stony ground, 
irho anon with joy receive it, Malth. xiii, 20. There 
oay be also great desire after good things, and great de- 
i^t in them too ; as in these hypocrites described, Isa. 
nii. 2. " Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know 
ay wuys. — ^They take delight in approuching unto God." 
•ep how high they may sometimes stand, who yet fall 
«^y, Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6. They may be enlightened, taste 
r the heavenly gift, be partakers of the Holy Ghost, taste 
le good word of God, and the powers of the world to 
>ine. Common operations of Uie divine Spirit, like » 
nd-flood, make a strange turning of things upside down, 
nd when they are over, all runs again m the ordinary 
lannel. All these things may be where the sanctifying 
[>rit of Christ never rests upon the soul, but the stony 
iart still remains; and in that case, these affections cannot 
It wither, because they have no root. 
But regeneration is a real thorough change, whereby the 
an is made anew creature, 2 Cor. v. \7. The Lord 
od makes the creature a new creature, as the goldsmith 
elts down the vessel of dishonour, and makes it a vessel 

honour. Man is, in respect of his natural state, alto- 
ither disjointed by tbe fall ; every faculty of the soul is, 

it were, dislocate ; in regeneration the Lord looseth 
"ery joint, and sets it right again. Now this change 
ade in regeneration is, 

1. A change of qualities or dispositions : It is not a 
ange of the substance, but of the qualities of the soul. 
Icious qualities are removed, and the contrary dispositions 
5 brought in their room. " The old man is put off," 
)h. iv. 22. « the new man is put on," ver. 24. Man 
kt none of the rational faculties of his soul by sin ; he 
d an understanding still, but it was darkened ; he had 
11 a will, but it wcis contrary to the will of God. So in 
generation there is not a new substance created, but new 

P 



-;'i^ 



174 The Miture tf Regeneration. [StflttV 

^ . <• ' 

qualities are infused ; light instead of darknes8)ri^Ue)Hi|| 

ness instead of unrighteousness. 

2. It is a supernatural change ; he that is bom afj^l 
bom of the Spirity John iii. 5. Great changes m^ h 
made by.the power of nature, especially ^en asusted-li 
external revelation. And nature may be so eleTatdl|i 
the common influences of the Spirit, that one may thittdq 
be turned into another man, (as Saul was, 1 Sun. x.ii 
yrho yet nerer becomes a new man* But in regenentiix 
nature itself is changed, and we become partakers of tl| 
divine nature ; and this must needs be a superaatoM 
change. How can we, that are dead in trespasses m 
BUis, renew ourselves, more than a dead man can taia 
himself out of his grave ? Who,^ but the sanctifying fi^ 
of Christ, can form Christ in a soul, changing it mlQ A 
same image ? Who, but the Spirit of sanctificatson Qt 
give the new heart ? Well may we say, when we lo^ 
man thus changed, This U tkejinger of God, 'y 

3. It is a change into the likeness of God, 2 Cor.19* t^ 
ci We— beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Ldiri 
are changed into the same imag^.*' Every thing that p 
nerates, generates its like ; the child bears the im^'^ 
the parent ; and they that are bom of God bear Go4 
image. Man aspiring to be as God, made himself like ft 
devil. In his natural state he resembles the devils ts 
child doth the father, John viii. 44. « Ye are of yo* 
father the devil.** But when this happy change coin^ 
the image of Satan is defaced, and the image of Godrf 
stored. Christ himself, who is the brightness of hisFj 
ther's glory, is the pattern after which the new creatoi*' 
made, Rom. viii. 29. « For whom he did foreknoir»^ 
also ^d predestinate to be conformed to the image of ^ 
Son." Hence he is said to be conformed in the regtf^ 
tate^ Gal. iv. 19. 

4. It is an imiversal change ; all things become 9^ 
2 Cor. V. 17. It is ja blessed leaven, that leavens jS 
whole lump, the whole spirit, and soul and body. OiJ9 
tial sin infects the whole man ; and regenerating gl*^ 
ivhiqh is the salve, goes as fax as the sore. This ow< 
the Spirit is in all goodness ; goodness of the nundy goo^ 
ness of the will, goodness of the affections, goodnessof A 

^i^hole man. Oiie gets not only a new head to knoW.^ 



!%€' Maure jff SegtmeraHim. 1 7S 



ligioii^or a new tcmgue to talk of it ; but a new heart to 
itoirtt t|id embrace it) in the whole ojf his cpnversQtion. 
When the Lord opens the sluice df grace on the soul's new 
JUttirdayy ^e waters run through the whole man, to purify 
tindt make him fruitful. In these natural changes spoken 
^ before^ there arc, as it were, pieces of new cloth put 
iv ioio an old garment ; a i^ew life sewed to an old heart ; 
jfot the gracious change is a thorough change, a chabge 
Jwdi of heart and life. 

■ 5^ Tet itis but an imperfect change. Though every 

; Vp^ <>f the man is renewed, there is no part of him per* 

^ ' Kctly renewed. As an infant has all the parts of a man, 

: .but none of them are come to their perfect growth; so re- 

\ (Siietation brings a perfection of parts, to be brought for- 

i: ;vsrd mthe gradual advances of sanctification,^ 1 Pet ii. 3. 

^ 5 As ]iew4x>m babes, desire the sincere milk of the wordy 

\ that ye may grow Uiereby.'^ Although in regeneration 

I there b alieavenly light let into the mind, yet there is still 

1 some darkness there ; ttiough the will is renewed, it is 

lK)t perfectly renewed ; there is still some of the old la* 

.cfipatlon to sin remaining ; and thus it will be, till that 

WUch is in part be done away, and the light' of glorjr 

<^Q]ue. Adam was created at his full stature, but they 

ibitare bom must have their time to grow up ; so these 

that are bom again do come forth into the new world of 

Snu:» but imperfectly holy ; though Adam being created 

upright was at the same time perfectly righteous, without 

tfie least mixture of sinful imperfection. 

Lattli/j Neveitheless it is a lasting change, which never 
S<^es off. The seed is incorruptible, saith the text; and so 
.« the' creature that is formed of it. The life given in re- 
geQeration, whatever decays it may fall under, can never 
Se utterly lost : His seed remaineth in hxmy who is bom of 
Cod, 1 John iii. 9. Though the branches should be cut 
down, the root shall abide in tiie earth ; and being watered 
\nth the dew of heaven, shall sprout ^^n ; for, « The 
Jt>ot of the righteous shall not be maved>" Prov. xii. 3. 
But to come to particulars : 

. JFiretj In regeneration the mind is savingly enlightened : 

There is a new light let into the understanding, so that 

*they who were sometimes darkness^ are now li^ht in the 

Lordy £ph; v. 8. The beams of the light of life make 

their way intp the dack dungeon of ^tbeheaiti theapight 



vr- 



476 the ABnd illuminated. 




■fW.i.; 



18 overi and the morning light is come, which irill ddfr 
more and more untathe perfect day. Now the miul'i[ 
illuminated, - 

1 . In the knowledge of €^. He has for other thoii{M 
of God than ever he had before, Hps. ii. 30. « Iml^ 
even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness,' and Uiou 
know the I^rd." The Spirit of the Lord brings Urn 
tb that question, What is Crod ? And catechiseth 1 
anew upon that grand point, so as he is made to 
•* I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; 
now mine eyes seeth thee,'^ Job xlii. 5. The spodii 
purity of God, his exact justice, his all-suj9iciency, 
Other glorious perfections revealed in his word,are^by 
new light, discovered to the soul, with a plainneas riijl 0^ 
certainty that doth as far exceed the knowledge it hid^if^i 
these thine:s before, as ocular demonstration exceeds tfffPr.% 
mon feme: For now he sees what he only heard of bCH)!N|<K 

3. He is enlightened in the knowledge of sin. W, 
hath other thoughts of it than he was wont to have. Y$h-. 
merly his ught could hot pierce through the cover Sai;^ 
laid over it; but now the Spirit of God strips it before b^ 
wipes off the paint and fairding ; and he sees it in its n&ti!^ .^ 
colours, as the woret of evils ; exceeding Binful^ Rom. vt ; 
•12. O what deformed monsters do formerly beloved Ittfl* I 
appear ! Were they right eyes, he would pluck th^* ' 
out ; were they right hands, he would consent to tficfr 
cutting off. He sees how offensive sin is to God, hfi^-> . 
destructive it is to the soul ; and calls himself fool> ^.' 
fighting so long against the Lord, and hai*bouring ti**f 
destroyer as a bosom friend. 

3. He is mstructed in the knowledge of himselt Bj! 
generating grr.ce cuuseth the prodigal to come to him*p% ' 
Luke XV. \T, and makes men full of eyes within, knowiw 
every one the plague of his own heart. The mind beiJ^B; 
savingly enlightened, the man sees how desperately con H/* 
his nature is ; what enmity against God and his holy l^* 
has long lodged there ; so that his soul lothes itself. N^ 
open sepulchre, no puddle, so vile and lojtthsome in hJ* 
eyes as himself, £zek. xxxvL 31. « Then shall ye re* . 
member your own evil ways, iaid your doings that wd^ / 
not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight* . 
He is no worse than he was before; but the sun is shiningf 
And so these pollutions are seen^ which hecouldnot disseisin 



etd X.} TV Mind iUumnated. 1 77 

hen there wt» no dawning in him ; as the word is^ 
ta. viii. 30. while as yet the day of grace was not broken 
ithhim. 

4. He is enlightened in the knowledge of Jesus Christy 
Cor* i. 3, 24. ^ But we preach Chnst crucified^ unto 
\t Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolish* 
iw'f but unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, 
brist, the power of God, and the wisdom of God.*' The 
uth is, imregenerate men, though capable of preaching 
hrist, have not (properly speaking) tlie knowledge of 
m, but only an opinion, a good opinion of him ; as one 
» of many controverted points of doctrine, wherein he is 
r from certainty. As when ye meet with a stranger up* 
I the road, he behaving himself discreetly, ye conceive a 
>od opinion of him ; and, therefore, willingly converse 
ith hfin ; but yet ye will not commit your money to him ; 
^casse, though you have a good opinion of the man, he 
a stranger to you ; ye do not know him. So many they 
ink well of Christ, but they will never commit them- 
Ives to him ; seeing they know him not. Biit saving 
umination carries the soul beyond opinion, to the certain 
lowledge of Christ and his excellency, 1 Thes. i. 5. 
For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also 
power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance.** 
he light of grace thus discovers the suitableness of thet 
ystery of Christ, to the divine perfections, and to the sin* 
ir*s case. Hence the regenerixte admire the glorious plan 
'salvdtion through Christ crucified, lay their whole weight 
>on it, and heartily acquiesce therein ; for whatever he 
' to others, he is to them Christ the power of God^ and 
c Vfiadom of God, But unrenewed men, not seeing this, 
« offended in him ; they will not venture their souls in. 
at bottom, but betake themselves to the broken boards of 
^irown righteousness. The same light convincinglydia- 
►vers a superlative worth, a transcendent glory and cxcel- 
J^cy in Christ ; which darken all created excellencies, as 
^ rising sun makes th^ stars to hide their heads ; and so 
engages the merchant-man to sell all that he hath^ to 
ly the one pearl o£ great price, Matth. xiii. 45,. 46. 
*kes the soul well content to take Christ for all, and in- 
^d of all. Even as an unskilful merchant, to whoiu 
le offepcth a pearl of great price, for all his petty warcs» 

P S 



1 r a The Mind illuminated. {State &' 

dares not venture on the bargsdn ; for though he thiokif 
that one pearl may he more worth than all he has, yet in 
IS not sure of it ; but when a jeweller comes to hini» ami. 
ussures him it is worth double all his wares, he then gree- 
dily embraceth the bargain, and cheai'fuUy parts with aft 
that he has for that pearl. Finally^ This iliuminatioD ift 
the knowledge of Christ convincingly discovereth to voOk 
& fulness in him, sufficient for the supply of all their wantiV 
enough to satisfy the boundless desires of an immottd 
soul. They are persuaded such fulness is in him, and 
that in order to be communicated, they depend upon ky 
as a certain truth ; and, therefore, their souls take ap 
their eternal rest in liim. 

4. The man is instructed in the knowledge of the vaiAy 
of tlic world, Psal. cxiK. 96. << I have seen an end of att 
perfection." Regenerating grace elevates the soul, seta itf 
«LS it were, amongst the stars, from whence this earth can- 
not but appear a little, yea, a veiy litUe thing ; even a* 
heaven appeared befiore, while the soul was inumeraed b 
the earth. Grace brings a man into a new world ; whil^ 
this world is reputed but a stage of vanity, an howBoS 
wilderness, a valley of tears. God hath hung the sign ^ 
vanity at the door of all created enjoyments ; yet how d< 
men throng into the house, calling and looking for scBi^ 
what that is satisfying ; even after it has heejQ a thousal*^ 
times told them, there is no such thing in it, it is not t 
be got there, Isa. Ivi. 10. " Thou art wearied in tl* 
greatness of thy ways ; yet saidst thou not. There is H 
hope." Why are men so foolish ? The truth of the m^ 
ter lies here, they do not see by the light of grace, th< 
do not spiritually discern, that sign of vanity. They ha** 
often indeed made a rational discoveiy of it ; but can tb 
. truly wean the heart from the world I Nay, no more thC 
painted fire can bum off tiie prisoner's bands. But tk 
light of grace is die light of life, powerful and efficaciou 
J^aatly^ (To sum up all in one word,) In regeneratic 
the mind is enlightened in the knowledge of spiritui 
things, I John ii.. 20^ " Ye have an unction from tl 
Holy one>" (that is, from Jesus Christ, Rev. iii. 18, 1 
is an allusion to tiie sanctuary, whence the holy oil w« 
brought to anoint the priests,) " and ye know all thingSj 

vit,^ necessary to salvatiou. Though men bie not bool 



r Head I.l The Will renewed. If» 

^ learnedy if. they l>e born again, they are Spirit-learned ; 
for hll such are taught of God, John vi. 45. The Spirit 
of regeneration teacheth them what they knew not belbre; 
ind what they did know, as by the ear only, he teacheth 
them over again, as by the eye. The light of grace is an 
OTercoming light, determining men to assent to divine 
' truths on the mere testimony of God. It is no easy thing 
■for the mind of man to acquiesce in divine revelation. 
Many pretend great respect to the scriptures ; whom, ne- 
tertheless, the clear scripture testimony will not divorce 
from their preconceived opinions. But this illumination 
viil make mens minds run, as captives, after Christ's 
chariot wheels ; which, for their part, shall be allowed to 
drive over, and cast down their own imaginations, and 
tvery high thing that cxalteth itself against the knowledge 
of God, 2 Cor. X. 5. It will make them receive the king- 
dom of God as a little child, Mark x. 1 5. who thinks he has 
sufficient ground to believe any thing, if his father do but 
say it is so. 

Secondly f The will is renewed. The Lord takes away 
the stony heart, and gives a heart of fiesh, £zek. xxxvi. 
^. And so, of stones raiseth up children to Abraham. 
Regenerating grace is powerful and efficacious, and gives 
the will a new set. It docs not indeed force it ; but 
sweetly, yet powerfully draws it, so that his people are 
billing in the day of his power, Psal. ex. 3. There is 
keavenly oratory in the Mediator's' lips, to persuade sin- 
ners, Paal. xlv. 2. " Grace is poured into thy lips." 
There are cords of a man, and bands of love, in his 
kands, to draw them after him, Hos. xi. 4. Love makes 
* net for .elect souls, which will infallibly catch them, and 
hill them to land. The cords of Christ's love are strong 
cords ; and they need to be so ; for every sinner is heavier 
than a mountain of brass ; and Satan, together with the 
heart itself, draw the contrary way. But love is strong as 
death ; and tlie Lord's love to the soul he died for is 
strongest love ; wliich acts so powerfully, that it must 
come off victorious.^ 

1. The will is cured of its utter inability to will what is 
good. While the opening of the prison to them Uiat are 
bound is proclaimed in the gospel, the Spirit of God comes 
to the prison door, opens it, goes to the prisoner, and by 
the power of his grace luakcs lu§ chains f?iU off \ bt<i^^ 



180 T%e Will rtnefuti. 

the bond of iniquity, wherewiih he was held in stn, a 
he could neither will nor do any thing truly good ; br 
him forth into a large place. " Working in him hot 
will and to do of his good pleasme," Phil. ii. 13. I.-^^ 
it i> that the sou], ihut w^a fixed to the cnrth, can n 
hurenwai-d ; the wittered hand is restored, and a 
siratched out. 

3. There is wrought in the will a fixed aversion to ^«'' 
In regeneration, a man gels a new spirit put within to 
Exek. xxxvi. 116. and tlut s^rit lusteth against the id 
Gal. T. 17. The sweet morsel of sin, so greedily »M 
lowed down, he now lothes, and would fain be rid 
it ; even as willingly as one that had drttnk a! cup of p( 
son would throw it up again. When the spring i« sts 
ped, the mud lies in the well unmoved ; bm when (w 
the spring is cleared, the waters springing up, will W 
the mud away by degrees. Even aoj while a man cond 
ues in an unregeneraie state, sin lies at ease in the hear .^_ 
but ua soon aa the Lord strikes the rocky heart withftft 
rod of his strength, in the day of conversion, grace is u. 
him a well of water springing up intp everlasting life, J(*» 
iv. working away natufal corruption, and gradtially pint'; 
lying tUe heart, Acts xv. 9. The renewed will riseth of 
against sin, strikes at the root thereof, and the hranciiM 
too. Lusts are now grievous, and the soul endeavours to 
at rvethem; the corrupt nature is tlie source ofalUvilJ 
and, therefore, the sou! will be often laying it before tW 
great Physician. O what sorrow, sliame, and self-lottiing ^ 
fill the heart, in the diiy that grace makes its triuinpliant i 
entrance into it. For now the madman is come to hiinsewi 
and the remembrance of his follies cuiuiot but cut him WJ 
the heart. J 

Lastly, The will is endued with an inclination, bcnttl 
and propensity to good. In its depraved state, it lay qui»j 
another way, being prone and bent to- evil only ; ^\ 
now, by a pull of tlie omnipotent ;dl -con cjue ring aiin, it ■'3 
drawn from evil to good, and gets another set. And aH 
the former set was natural, so this is natural too, in i*l 
spect of the new nature given in i^e generation, which ha*| 
its own holy lustitigs, as well as ti.^' coiTupt old naOH^J 
hath its sinful lustings, Giri. v. 17. The will, as reneiM 
etf. inclines uid poivH&t.i'w«c4&ti'^*Bd^odUnesB. Wt**l 



Head I.] The Will renevfed. 1 8 1 

God made 'man, his will, in respect of its intention, was 
directed towards God, as his chief end ; in respect of its 
choice, it pointed towards that which God willed. When 
Jam unmade himself, his will was framed into the very 
rcYcrse hereof; he made himself his chief end, and his 
own will his law. But when man is new made, in reg^e- 
neradon, grace rectifies this disorder in some measurci 
though not perfectly indeed ; because we are but rinewcd 
in part, while in this world. It brings back the sinner, 
out of himself, to God as his chief ead, truly, though not 
perfectly, Psalm Ixxiii. 25. « Whom have I in heaven 
but thee ? and there is none upon earth that I desire be- 
•idcB thee." Phil. i. 2 1 . « For me to live is Christ." 
It makes him to deny himself, and whatever way he turns, 
to point habitually towiU*ds God, who is the center of the 
gracious soul, its home, its dwelling place in all genera- 
tions, Psalm xc. 1 . By regenerating grace, the will is 
framed into a conformity to the will of God. It is con- 
fcrmed to his preceptive will, being endued with holy in- 
clinations, agreeable to every one of his commands. ^The 
^hole law is impressed on the gracious soul ; every part 
^it is 'written over on the renewed heart. And although 
Remaining corruption makes such blots in the writing, 
tiiat oft times the man himself cannot read it ; yet he that 
^^tii it, ran read it at all times ; it is never quite blotted 
^Ut, nor can be. What he has written, it shall stand ; 
" For this is the covenant, — I will put my laws into their 
^iiid, and write them in tlicir hearts," Heb. viii. 10. 
^d it is a covenant of salt, a perpetual covenant. It is 
^ko conformed to his providential will ; so that the man 
^'^11 no more be master of his own process, nor carve out 
^s lot for himself. He learns to say from his heart, 
''The will of the Lord be done, he shall chuse our inhe- 
ritance for us," PsaL xlvii. 4. Thus the will is disposed 
fo full in with those things, which, in its depraved state, 
It could never be reconciled to. 

Particularly, ( 1 .) The Lord is reconciled to the cove- 
lant of pet ce. The Lord God promiseth a covenant of 
)cacti to sinners ; a covenart which he himself hath fi^am- 
d, and registered in the Bible ; but they are not pleased 
mh it ; nay, an unrenewed heart cannot be pleiscd with 
. Were i^ put into their hands, to fnune it accordbg to 




'■fil^ 



Its IV WiU renewed. 

thra* imad» thef irould blot manf things, out o£»il^ 
God hM piit in ; and put in manjr thin«i which God 
kejit out. But the renewed he«it is entirely: satisfieif 
the Goventnt, 3 9am. xxiiL 5. « He hath madewidi 
an everlasting coVenant^ ordered in all things and wSm 
is all my salTadon, and all my desire." Though the 
nant could not be brought down to their depravedj 
their will is, by grace, brought up to the covenant t 
wre well pleraed with it ; there is nothmg in it they 
have out, nor is any ^ng left out of it which they 
Imve in. (S.VThe will is disposed to receive Christ 
the Lord. The soul is content to submit to him. 
nerating grace undermines, and brings down the 
imaginalions of the heart, raised up against its 
Lord; it breaks the iron sinew, which kept the siniiBi^ 
bowing to him, and disposed him to be no more s^ 
cd, but to yield to himself. He is willing to take 
yoke of Christ's commands, to take up ti^e cross 
Ibflow him. He is content to tak« Christ on any 
Psal. ex. 3. « Thy. people shall be willing in thie 
Ay power/* , 

Now, the mind being savingly enlightened and the 
renewed, the sinner is thereby determined and enabl^^ 
answer the gospel call. Sothe main work inregeneradiMMf 
done ; the fort of the heart is taken ; there is room nis^ 
for the Lord Jesus Christ, in the innermo^ parts ot.^ 
soul; the outer door of the will being now opened totU^ 
as well as the inner door of the understanding. Id 01^ 
word, Christ is passively received into the heart ; M ^ 
come into the soul by his quickening Spirit, where^ trf^ 
ritual life is p^ven to the man, who m himself was dsiul ^^ 
sin. And his first vital act we may conceive to beaot^ 
tive receiving of Jesus Christ, discerned in his gloriom^' 
cellencies ; that is, a believing on him, a clodng «iA 
him, as discerned, offered, and exhibited in the word <^fc>f 
p^ace, the elorious gospel ; the immediate effect of wiM 
IS union with him, John i. 12, 13. " To as many J8 19* 
ceived him, to them gave he power (or privilege} tohip' 
come the sons of God, even to them that be£eve oabfa 
name, which were bom, not of blood, nor of the witll|| 
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of Gon.*' S^^lv 
If. M That Christ may dwell in yo«r hearts bf fiiidu' 




f 

L 



Scad t3 ^^ Aff€cdfm% changed^ 1 83 



\ Chiiat having taken the heart by storm* and triumphantly 
\ entered into it, in regeneration, the soul by faith yields it* 
; letf to him, as it is expressed, 3 Chron. xxx. 8. Thus this 
. glorious King, who came into the heart by his Spirit, 
I dwells in it by £edth. The soul being drawn, runs ; and, 
i being effectually called, comes. 

Thirdly^ In regeneration there is a happy change made 
on the affections ; they are both rectified and regulated. 
. I. This change rectifies the affections, placing them on 
nutable objects, 2 Thess. iii. 5. «< The Lord direct your 
hearts into the love of God." The regenerate man's de- 
arei are rectified ; they are set on God himself, and the 
things above. He who before cried with the world, « Who 
will shew us any good ?" he changes his note, and says, 
* Lohi lift up the light of thy countenance upon iis," 
Peal. iv. 6. Sometimes he saw no beauty in Christ, for 
which he was to be desired ; but now he is all desires, he 
is altogether lovely, Cant. v. 1 6. The msdn stream of his 
Genres is turned to run towards God ; for there is the one 
tiling he desireth, Psal. xxvii. 4. He desires to be holy, 
Wwell as to be happy; and rather to be gracious than great. 
His hopes, which before were low and staked do¥m to 
things on earth, are now raised, and set on the glory which 
is to be revealed. He entertains the hope of eternal life, 
founded on the word of promise, Tit. i. 2. Which hope 
he has, as an anchor of the soul, fixing the heart under 
trials, Heb. vi. 18. And it puts him upon purifying him- 
■^If, even as God is puTe, John iii. 3. For he is begotten 
*gain unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. i. 3. His love is raised 
and set on God himself, Psal. xxviii. 1. on his holy law, 
Psal. cxix. 97. Though it strike against his most beloved 
hst^ he says, " The law is holy, and the commandment 
holy, and just, and good," Rom. vii. 12. He loves the 
ordinances of God, Psal. Ixxxiv. 1 . How amiable are thy ta- 
bernacles, O Lordof Hosts?" Being passed from death un- 
to life, he loves the brethren, (1 John iii. 14.) the people 
of God, as they are called, 1 Pet. i. 10. He loves God 
for himself, and what is God's, for his sake. Yea, as be- 
ing a child of Grod, he loves his own enemies. His hea- 
venljr Father is compassionate and benevolent ; he maketh 
the sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain 
on Uie just, aad on the unjust ; and, therefore, he is in the 



184 _M' 'nu-:4feetiiiu ekngtd- [StatftflT- 



tmnod agaioM Rm in fdmielf ■Ad^odten, Psal. ci. 3. " I 
hsta tke wort of tbein tbtt turn aude, h shall not clent 
to aw.** Ha grOBii* under the remains of it, aiid longs ftr I 
deUTenoce, Ron. vii. 34. " O wretched man that 1 as! 
Who Bhall deliver me &om tbebod^of this dcuth?" Hit 
jojrs snd delightR ktb m God the Lord, m the ii^ht ofhii 
counteqaDce, in Mb law, and in his people ; because thef 
are like bim. Sin is what he chiefly fean ; it is a fountatn 
of sorrow to him now, though formerly a spring of 
pleasure. 

3. It regulates the affections placed on suitable objccti' 
Our affections, when placed on the creature, are natunlty 
exorbitant ; when we joy in itt we are apt lo over-jcy ; siii 
wbeii we sorrow, we are ready to sorrow over-much : Bit 
grace bridks these affections, clips their wings, and keo^ 
them within bounds, that they overflow not at all tbcir 
banks. It makes a man hate his fiither und mother, and 
wife, and children, yea, and his own life also, conipuc- 
tivety ; that is, to love them less than he loves God, Luke 
-xiv.36. It also sancufies lawful affections; bringingthcA 
forth from right principles to right ends. There mnj be 
unholy desires after Christ and his grace ; ns when men de- 
sire Christ, not from any love to him, but merely outof 
love to themselves. Give us of your oi], said the foolis'' 
virgins, for our lamps are gone out, Matth. xxv. 8. There 
may be an unsanctificd sorrow for sin ; as vk'hen on; if 
roweth for it, not because it is displeasing to God, but<^ 
because of the wrath annexed to it, as did Pharaoh, Jivl*^ 
and others. So a man may lore his fjther and mx>ther,fRA 
mere natural principles, without any respect to the ^Mt- 
mand of God binding him thereto. But grace sanctBp*- 
the affections in such cases, making them to run in a v^_ 
channel of love to God, respect to his commands, Sti,^ 
gard to his glory. Again, grace screws up the afiecaff^i 
where they are too low. It gives the chief seat in thoffl.tff' 
God ; and pulls down all other rivals, whether personsif 
things, making them lie at his feet. Psalm IxxiiL SA>^ 
« Whom have I in heaven but thee ? and there is nme Vff 
on earth that I desire besides thee." He is loved br hVr 
self ; and other persons or things, for hia Ake. ' What^ 
iQveijr in them, to the renewed heart, is some nj 01^,9^ 



ead L] The Conscience renewed^ 195 

Tine^^oodness appearing in them; for, unto gracious souls 
«y thme only by borrowed light. This accounts for the 
intiuloTing all men^ and yet hating those that hate God, 
id contemning the wicked as vile persons. They hate 
d contemn them for their wickedness ; there is nothinp: 
God in that ; and, there fore, nothing lovely nor honour* 
le in it; but they love them for their commendable quali- 
iS, or perfections, whether natural or moral ; because, 
whomsoever these are, th^ are from God, and can bo 
iced to him as their fountain. Finally^ Regenerating 
ace sets the affections so firmly on God, that the man is 
^osed, at God's command, to quit his hold of every 
ing else, in order to keep his hold of Christ ; to hate fa- 
erand mother, in comparison with Christ, Luke xiv. 
. It makes even lawful enjoyments, like Joseph's man- 
, to hang loose about a man ; that he may quit them when 
IB in hazard to be ensnared by holding them, 
[f the stream of our affections was never thus turned, we 
I doubtless going down the stream into the pit. If the 
t of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of lifcv 
^e the throne in our hearts, which should be possessed 
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost ; if we never had so 
ch love to God as to ourselves ; if sin has been somc- 
at bitter to us, but never so bitter as suffering, never so 
er as the pain of being weaned from it ; truly we are 
ingers to this saving change. For grace turns tiie affec- 
iS up-side do^vn, whenever it comes into the heart. 
Fourthly^ The conscience is renewed. Now, that a new 
It is set up in the soul in regeneration, conscience is 
ightened, instructed, and informed. That candle of 
Lord, Prov. xx. 27. is now snuffed and brightened j 
IS it sliines, and sends forth its light into the most re- 
id comers of the heart, discovering sins which the soul 
\ not aware of before ; and in a special manner discover- 
the corruption or depravity of nature, that seed and 
wn whence all actual sins proceed. This produces the 
f complaint, Rom. vii. 24. " O wretched man that I 
V who shall deliver me from the body of this death ?'* 
at conscience, which lay sleeping in the man's bosom 
ore, is now awakened, and ms^es its voice to be heard 
3ugli the whole soul ; and, therefore, there is no more 
t for him in the sluggard's bed ; he must get up and be 
ag, arise, haste and escape for his life. It powerfully 

Q 



1 86 The Biemory bettered by Grace, [State IS-. 

incites to obedience, even in the most spiritual actSi wluch 
laj not within the view of the natural conscience ; ukA 
powerfully restrains from sin, even from those sins wbibfc 
do not lie open to the observation of the world. It argedi 
the sovereign authority of God, to which the heart is nmr 
reconciled, and which it willingly acknowledges ; and bo 
it engageth the man to his duty, whatever be the haiard 
from the world : for it fills the heart so with the fear €>f 
God, that the force of the fear of man is broken. This 
hath engaged many to put their life in their hand, and fof" 
low the cause of religion they once contemned, and reso* 
lutely walk in the path they formerly abhorred, Gal. i. *3- 
<< He which persecuted us in time past, now preacheth tla^ 
faitli which oucc he destroyed." Guilt now makes tla0 
conscience to smait. It hath bitter remorse for sins .party 
which fills the soul with anxiety, sorrow, and self-lotUn^'* 
And every new reflection on tliese sins is apt to affectf tti*! 
make its wounds bleed afresh with reg^ret. It is made tso* 
der, in point of sin and duty, for the time to come ; hmfS 
once burnt, it dreads the fire, and fears to break the hec^r^^ 
where it was formerly bit by the serpent. Finattyy TlH? 
renewed conscience drives the sinner to Jesus Christ, »• 
tlie only physician that can draw out the sting of guil^ ^ 
and whose blood alone can purge the conscience frott^ 
dead works, Hcb. ix. 14. refusmg all case offered to it 
from any other hand. And this is an evidence, that tb© 
conscience is not only fired, as it may be in an unregcnc 
rate state, but reconciled also with regenerating grace. ^ 

Fifthly^ As the memory wanted not its share of depravi- J 
ty, it is also bettered by regenerating grace. The memory 1 
is weakened with respect to those things that are not worth 
their room therein; and men are taught to forget injuries, 
and drop their resentments, Matth. v. 44, 45. " Do good 
to them that hate you, and pray for them which despiteful' 
ly use you. — That ye may be (i, <?. appear to be) the chil' 
dren of your Father which is in heaven." It is strengthen* 
ed for spiritual things. We have Solomon's receipt for an 
ill memory, Prov. iii. 1. My sony saith \it^ forget nStff^ 
law. But how shall it be kept in mind ? Let thine heert 
kee/imy commandments. Grace makes a heart memory,cfcn 
where there is no good head memory, Psal. cxix. 1 1- ^ 
nvord have I hidin mine heart. The heart, truly toudhed wifh 

f/?cpowerfu] sweetness of truth) will help the memorytorc* 



\- 



Head I.] The Body changed. 187 

tain idiat is so relished. Did divine truths make deeper 
impresiians on our hearts, they would thereby impress 
ttmnselves with more force onourmemorics, Psul. cxix. 9 3. 
"I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou hast 
quickened me." Grace sanctities the memory. Many have 
' large,but unsanctified memories, which serve only to gatli- 
er knowledge, whereby to aggpravate their condemi.dtlon ; 
but a renewed memory serves to remember his coumuuKl- 
inenta to do them, Psal. ciii. 1 8. It is,a sacred store house, 
from whence a Christian is furnished in his way to Zion ^ 
for £uth and hope are often supplied out of it, in sc dark 
hour. It is the store house of former experiences ; and these 
are the believer's way-marks,by noticing of which he comes 
to know where he is, even in a dark time, Psal. xlii. 6. <( O 
nif God, my soul is cast down within me ; therefore will 
I remember tliee from the land of Jordan," is^c. It also 
lielpstiie soul to godly sorrow and self-loathing, presenting 
' old guilt anew before the conscience ; and making it bleed 
*frcih, though the sin be already pardoned, Psal. xxv. 7. 
" Remember not tlic sins of ray youth." And where un- 
pardoned guilt is lying on the sleeping cowiscience, it is 
often employed to bring in a word, which in a moment sets 
^€ whole soul astir : As when Peter remembered the 
vords of Jesus, he went out and wept bitterly, Matth, 
^vi. 75. The word of God, laid up in a sanctified me- 
^oiy, serves a man to resist temptations, puts the sword in 
Us hand against his spiritual enemies, and is a light to di* 
^ect his steps in the way of religion and righteousness. 

Sixthly, There is a change made on the body, and the 
Members thereof, in respect of their use ; they are conse* 
crated to the Lord. Even the body is for the Lord, 1 
Cor. vi. 13. It is the temple of the Holy Ghost, ver. 19. 
The members thereof, that were formerly instruments of 
Unrighteousness unto sin,become instruments of righteous- 
ness unto God, Rom. vi. 13. " Servants to lighteousnesji 
unto holiness," ver. 19. The eye that conveyed sinful 
imaginations into the heart is under a covenant, Job xxxi. to 
do so no more ; but to serve the soul in viewing the works, 
mid reading the word of God. The ear that had often been 
death's porter, to let in sin, is tunied to be the gate of 
life, by which the word of life enters the soul. The tongue 
that set on fire Uie whole coursiC of nature is restored to 




1^0 lie D^t4m ^. ^ f gmefmt i om m /^h L {y| 

iUMi £v»feT ^kaS tlMfMevatei, fttmntemibtmi 
tte ff«fM4rato«re putdoei^vf tlie cBviq^ iMtiiie» ij] 
4» tfaeHKinl perfectioiu of the difiiie natture ar^lii 
wve and degree conunumcated to the renewed sonl 
tlnui the d^Tiike image it retriered; aothatfaatlie cU 
•emUea the frther, the new creature reaeniMea CM 
■elf^ behig holf as he ia hc^y. ' 

Ltfiiy^ Aft there ia no. birth without paiib bodi^ 
mother and to the child, ao there ia great pain inbil 
fiMth the new creature. TheichildrenhaTemoreor'l 
these binh-painay wh^rebj they are pricked in tiialr 
Acta iL ST. The aoul baa sore puna when under ci 
tton and humiliation i^K wounded apirit who cait^ 
The mother ia pained».Zkm travails, laa* te 
ugln, 0xians, crieth, and hath hard labour, in her 
teraMidmenibera, tabrilkglbrth children to htr^ 
Oal. IT. 19. « My UtUe cfaiidreoi of whom I tramlJi 
agasoy until C^unat be formed inyou.'^ Andneriar! 
mother more feelingly touched with Joy, thatanA 
was horn into the worlds than ahe ia uponthonaik 
of her chUdreti. But wlasit ia more remarkablif tib 
this, we read not cmiy of our Lord Jesus Chiist'ati 
or toil of aoul^ Isa. liii. 1 1. but (what liea more dii 
to our purpose)of his pains, or pangs,as<of one tra?; 
in child-birth ; ao the word used. Acta iL 24.^ pro 
signifies. Well mxf he -call the new creature^ aa B 
called her dear*bought son Behoni, L ^. The aonc 
aorrow ; and aa she called another, Naphtali, u^e 
wrestling ; for the pang^ of that travail put him to a 
crying «nd tears, Heb. v. 7. y^a, in an agony 9SsAh 
sweat, Luke xxii. 44. And, in the end, he died Oi^ 
pangs f they became to him the pains of death, Acts 

' • - ■ 

The- Doctrine of Reoperation afifiUed. ^'^ 

Use I. By what is said, you may try whether yt 
in the atate of grace or not. If ye be brought4>iit i 
state of wrath or ruin, into the state of grace or ftalv 
ye are ilew creatures, ye are bom again. Butyc 
Bay, How shall we know whether we be bom agj 
not? 



L 



f 

Heacll.] 



Trial qfont^M State j Sec. 19S 



dki. Did you ask mcy if the sun were riscD) and how 
joa should know whether it were risen or not ? I would 
lud jou look up to the heavenS) and see it with your eyes. 
And would you know if the light be risen in your heart ? 
Look in and^and see. Grace is light, and discovers it^lf : 
Look into thy mind, see if it has been illuminated in the 
knowledge of God. Hast thou been inwardly taught 
irfaatGod is ? Where thine eyes ever turned inwiu^ to see 
thjrflelf; the sinfulness of thy depraved state; the corrup- 
tion of thy nature ; the sins of thy heait and life ? Wast 
thou ever let into a view of the exceeding sinfulness of 
un ? Have thine eyes seen King Jesus in his beauty ; the 
namfold wisdom of God in him, his transcendent excel- 
lency, and absolute fulness and sufficiency, with the vani- 
ty and emptiness of all things else ? Next, What change 
k there on thy will ? Are the fetters taken off, where- 
'With it was sometimes bound up from moving heaven* 
* vardi ? .^d has tliy will got a new set ? Dost thou find 
tn tfcrsion to sin, and a proneness to good wrought in 
thy heart ? Is thy soul turned towards God, as thy chief 
end ? Is thy will new moulded into some measure of con* 
fcrmity to the preceptive and providential will of God ? 
Art thou heartily reconciled to the covenant of peace, and 
fixedly disposed to the receiving of Christ, as he is offered 
m the gospel ? And as to a change on your affections, 
•^ they rectified and placed on right objects ? Are your 
^iesires going on after God ? Are they to his name and 
^^embrance of him ? Isa. xxVi. 8. Are your hopes in 
Mm? Is your love set upon him, and your hatred set 
Against sin ? Does your offending a good God affect your 
Heart with sorrow, and do you fear sin more than suffer- 
ing ? Are your affections regulated ? Are they, with res- 
Net to created comforts, brought down, as being too 
high ; and with respect to God in Christ, screwed up, as 
^ing too low ? Has he the chief seat in your heart ? And 
ire all your lawful worldly comforts and enjoyments laid 
it his feet ? Has thy conscience been enlightened and 
iwakened, refusing all ease, but from the application of 
ihe blood of a Redeemer ? Is thy memory sanctified, thy 
Dody consecrated to the service of God ? And art thou 
aow walking in newness of life ? Thus ye may discover, 
If hether yc are bom again or not 



3 



196 Trial 0/ one's StaUy Statfl^; 

But for your further help in this mattei^ I iriU'diH 
course a little of another sign of regeneratioDy .wnftf* 
The love of the brethren, an evidence whereby the «w-; 
est and most timorous saints have often had comfort} nJM^ . 
they could have little or no consolation from other ruiff^ ^ 
proposed to them. This the Apostle lays dowUf 1 Jola J 
lii. IS. ^ We know that we have passed from death si? ':( 
to life, because we love the brethren." It is not to ti^ 
thought, that the Apostle, by the brethren in this placet 
means brethren by a common relation to the first Adin»' 
but to the second Adam, Christ Jesus : Because, howjBTSP- j| 
true it is, that universal benevolence, a good-will to tbs 
whole race of mankind, takes place in the renewed soolf 
as being a lively lineament of the divine image ; yet^t^ 
whole context speaks of those that are the sons of Gbil) 
ver. 1, 3. children of God, ver. 10. bom of Grod, ter.?* 
distinguishing betwixt the children of God and the cb&i' 
ren of the devil, ver. 10. betwixt these that are of d© 
devil, ver. 8, 12. and these that are of God, vef . 10- 
And the text itself comes in as a reason why we shoud : 
not marvel that the world hates the brethren, the children 
of God, ver. 1 3. How can we marvel at it, seeing thfi 
love of the bretliren is an evidence of one's having paiwcd 
from death to life ? And therefore, it were absurd to look 
for that love amongst the men of tlie world, who are dead 
in trespasses and sins. They cannot love the brethicxiJ 
no marvel then that they hate then*. Wherefore it i* 
plain, that by brethren here, are meant brethren by rege- 
neration. 

Now, in order to set this mark of regeneration in • 
true light, consider these three tilings : ( I .) This love to 
the brethren is a love to them as such. Then do wc 
love them in the sense of the text, when the grace 0^ 
image of God in them is the chief motive of our love to 
them. When we love the godly for their godliness, the 
saints for their sanctity or holiness ; then we love God © 
them, and so may conclude, we are bom of God : For* 
"Everyone that loveth him that begat, loveth him also 
that is begotten of him," 1 John v. I . Hypocrites xMf 
love saints, on account of a civil relation to them; be- 
cause of their obliging conversation ; for their being of 
the same opinion with Uiemselves inreligious matters$tfd 



aisceming, Dear tne image oi uoa. i ney tnat can- 

ve a gracious person in rags, but confine their love 

«c of them who wear gay cloathing, have not this 

30 the brethren in them. Those who can confine 

love to a party, to whom God has not confined his 

,are souls too narrow to be put among the children. 

at points soever men diifer from us, in their judg- 

or way, yet if they appear to agree with us, in love 

d| and our Saviour Jesus Christ, and in bearing his 

i ; we will love them as brethren, if we ourselves be 

; heavenly family. And, (3.) If tliis love be in us, 

ore grace any person appears to be possessed of, he 

e the more beloved by us. The more vehemently - 

oly fire of grace doth flame in any, the hearts of 

'hristians will be the more warmed in love to them. 

lot with the saints as with many other men, who 

themselves the standard for others $ and love them . . 

as they think they are like themselves. But, if they ■■ | 

to out-shine and darken them, their love is turned * i | 

red and envy ; and they endeavour to detract from j | | 

le praise of their exemplary piety ; because nothing ; ■; | 

eth with them in the practice of religion, that goes ' j j 

d their own measure. What of the life and power .J ^ 









198 Trial qf one's State^ [State HI. 

vho in a little time lose it again ; because, while t&cf 
hear tlie word preached, they make applicution of it ; biit 
do not considerof these tilings more deliberately and lei- 
surely when alone. The action is too sudden and shorlf 
to give lasting comfort. And it is often so indeliberate 
that it has bad consequences. Therefore, set about this 
work at home, after earnest and serious prayer to God, lor 
his help in it. Complain not of your want of time, while 
tlie night follows the busy day ; or of place, while the 
fields and out-houses are to be got (2.) Renew your * 
repentance before the Lord. Guilt lying on the con- 
Science, unrepentcd of, may darken all your evidences and j 
marks of grace. It provokes Uie Spirit of grace to de- ^ 
part; and when he goes, our light ceases. It is not fit 
time for a saint to read his evidences, when the candle is 
blown out by some, conscience-wounding guilt. Lasti^^ 
Exert the powers of the new nature ; let the graces of 
the divine Spirit in you discover themselves by action. 1* 
ye would know whether there is a sacred fire in vout 
breast or not, ye must blow the coal ; for although it b© 
a live-coal, yet if It be under the ashes, it will give yo* 
no light. Settle in your hearts a firm purpose, through* 
the grace that is in Christ Jesus, to comply with evei^ 
known duty, and watch against every known sin ; having 
a readiness of mind, to be instructed in what ye kno*^ 
not. If gracious souls would thus manage their inqui" 
ries into their state, it is likely they would have a caaC^" ' 
foitablc issue. And if others would take such a solenr*^ 
review, and make trial of tlieir state impartially, sbtin^ 
themselves before the tribunal of their own consciences^ 
they might have a timely discovery of their own naughti^ 
ness : But the neglect of self-examination leaves mo^ ^ 
men under sad delusions, as to their state ; and deprive 
many saints of the comfortable sight of the grace of 
in them. 

But that I may afford some further help to true Chris -^ 
tians, in their inquiries in their state, I shall proposed 
and briefly answer, some cases or doubts, which may pos^ 
sibly hinder some persons from the comfoitable view o^ 
their happy state. The children's bread must not bc^ 
with-held, though while it is reached to them, the dog» 
should snatch at it. 





ad I. j ~ Cases qf ChrUtiana^ doubting^ &c. 1 99 

2a»e 1. I doubt if I be regenerate, because I know 
: the precise time of my conversion ; nor can I trace 

particular steps, in the way in which it was brought 
)ass. — jins. Though it is very desirable to be able to 
e an account of the beginning, and the g^radual ad- 
ices of tlie Lord's work upon our souls, as some 
ats can distinctly do ; howbeit, the manner of the 
irit's working is still a mystery ; yet this is not neccs- 
Y to evidence the truth of grace. Happy he that can 
, in this ca^e, as the blind man in the gospel, << One 
ig I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see.** 
^. as when we see flatnies, we know there is fire, though 

kftw no% how or when it beg^ ; so the truth of 
ce in us muy be discerned, though we know not hoW| 
when, it was dropped into our hearts. If thou canst 
•ceive the happy change, which is wrought on thy soul ; 
Aou findest thy mind is enlightened, thy will inclined 
'omply with the will of God in all things, especially 
Fall in with the divine plan of salvation through a 
cified Redeemer ; in vain dost thou trouble thyself, 

refuse comfort, because thou knowest not, how and 
Lt way it was brought about. 
hae 2. If I were a new creature, sin could not pre- 

against me as it doth. — Arts. Though we must not 
pillows for hypocrites to rest their heads upon, who 
ilge themselves in their sins, and make the doctrine 
jod's grace subservient to their lusts, lying doum 
fcentedly in the bond of iniquity, like men that are 
I of golden chains ; yet it' must be owned, the just 
I falletli seven times a-day, and iniquity may prevail 
nst the children of God. But if thou art groaning 
er the weight of the body of death, the corruption of 
nature ; loathing thyself for the sins of thy heart and 
; striving to mortify thy lusts ; fleeing daily to the 
'd of Christ for pardon ; and looking to his Spirit for 
;tification ; though thou may est be obliged to say with 
Psalmist, " Ini([uities prevail against me :" Yet thou 
est add with him, " As for our transgressions, thou 
t purge them away," Psal. Ixv. 3. The new cr^a* 
■ doth not yet possess the house alone ; it dwells 
dean ill neighbour; namely, remaining corruption! 
relicts of deprived nature, These struggle togejhev 



202 Ca9t9 qf Chriatiofw^ doubtinf [Stite IE 

gracious hearty than love to any creature enjoyment wliat^ 
soever ; as appears when competitiou arises in such a 
manner, that the one or the other is to be {bregooe. 
Would you then know your case ? Retire into your own,' 
hearts, and there lay the two in the -balance, and tfy> 
which of tliem weighs down the other. Ask thyself 
as in the sight of God, whether thou wouldst part with' 
Christ for the creature, or part with the creature for 
Christ, if tliou weit left to thy choice in the matter! 
If you find your heart disposed to part with what H 
dearest to you in the world for Christ, at his call, joa 
have no reason to conclude, you love the creature mors 
than God ; but, on the contrary, that you love God more 
than the' creature ; albeit you do not feet such nolent 
motions in the love of God, as in the love of some created 
tlung, Matth. x. 37. «< He that loveth father or mother 
more than me, is not worthy of me." Luke xiv. 36. 
^' If any man come to me, and hate not his Either and 
mother,-— he cannot be my disciple." From which texti 
compared, we may infer, that he who hates, k e, is ready 
to part with, father and mother for Christ, is, in our 
lord's account, one that loves them less than him; and 
not one who loves father and mother more than him* 
Moreover, ye are to consider, there is a twofold love to 
Christ. (1.) There is a sensible love to him, which B 
felt as a-dart in the heart ; and makes a holy love-sick* 
ness in the soul, arising either from want of enjoyment^ 
as in the case of the spouse. Cant. v. 8. "I charge yoU, 
O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that Jt 
tell him, that I am sick of love ;" or else from the foil* 
ness of it, as in that case, Cant. ii. 5. ^< Stay" me with 
flagons, comfort me with apples ; for I am sick of ioTC.*' 
These glowings of affections are usually wrought in young 
converts, who are ordinarily made to sing in the days w 
their youth, Hos.ii. 14. While the fire-edge is on the 
young convert, he looks on others reputed to be godly, 
and not finding them in such a temper and dispo^tion' as* 
himself, he is ready to censure them ; and think there 
is tur less religion in the world than indeed there is* 
But when his own cup comes to settle below the biiniy 
and he finds tl-i.t in himself j which made him questidi 
the stsitc of others^ he is more humbted^. and. fi^eU mom 



Head I.3 ^Adr RtgentruHmy ruolved. S03 

md'tnore the necessity of daily recourse to the blood of 
Christ for'pardony and to the Spirit of Christ for sanctifi- 
cation ; amd thus grows downwurdb in humiliation^ self* 
loathing, and self-denial. (3.) There is a rational love 
to Christy which) without these sensible emotions felt in 
the former case, evidences itself by a dutiful regard to the 
divine authority and command. When one bears such a 
love to Christ) though the vehement stirrings of affection 
be wanting, yet he is tinily tender of offending a gracious 
God ; endeavours to walk before him unto all-pleasing ; 
and grieved at the heart, for whitt is displeasing unto him» 
1 John~v. 3. <( For this is the love of God, tliat we 
keep his commandments." Now, although that sensible 
love doth hot always continue with you, ye have no rea« 
son to account in a hypocritical fit, while the rational 
love remains with you, more than a faithful and loving 
wife needs question her love to her husband, when her 
fondness is abated. 

Case 5. The attainments of hypocrites and apostates are 
a terror to me, and come like a shaking storm bn me, 
when I am about to conclude from the marks of grace 
which I seem to find in myself, that I am in the state of 
gntce.— -./^n«. These things should indeed stir us up to a 
most serious'and impartial excimination of ourselves ; but 
ought not to keep us in a continued suspense as to our 
state. Sirs, ye see the outside of hypocrites, their duties, 
their gifts, their tears, ^c. but ye see not their inside ; ye 
do not discern their hearts, the bias of their spirits. Upon 
what ye see of them, ye found a judgment of charity, as 
to their state ; and ye do well to judge charitiibiy in such 
a case, because ye cannot know the secret springs of their 
acting : But ye are speaking, and ought to have a judg- 
ment of certainty, as to your own state ; and, therefore, 
are to look in to that part of religion, which none in the 
world but yourselves can discern in you, and which ye can 
as little see in others. An hypocrite's religion may ap* 
pear far greater than that of a sincere soul ; but, that 
which me^es the greatest figure iu the eyes of nxen, is 
often least worth before God. I would rather utter one 
of those groans the Apostle speaks of, Rom. viii. 26» 
than shed Esciu's tears, have Balaam's prophetic spirit, or 
the joj of the stony-gromid hearers* The fire that shall 



304 Caie9 of ChrUttansj doubting ^ate IIL 

ttj every man's work, will try, not of what bulk it is, but 
of what sort it is, 1 Cor. iii. IS. Now, ye may know 
whut bulk of religion another has ; and what though it be 
more bulky than your own \ God doth not reg^ttfd that: 
Why then do you make such a matter of it f It is im- 
possible for you, without divine revelaUon, certainly to 
know of what sort another man's religion is ; but ye m^ 
certainly know what sort your own is of, without 6X0%* 
ordinary revelation ; otherwise the Apostle would not 
exhort the saints to give diligence to make their calling 
and election sure, 2 Pet. i. 10. Therefore, the attain- 
ments of hypocrites and apostates ^hould not disturb you 
in your serious inquiry into your own state. But I will 
tell you two things, wherein the meanest ssdnts go beyond 
the most refined hypocrites. (I.) In denying themselTes, 
renouncing all confidence in themselves, and their own 
works, acquiescing in^ being well-pleased with, and ven- 
turing their souls upon God's plan of salvation throu^l^ 
Jesus Christ, Mat. v. 3. « Blessed are the poor in spint, 
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." And chap. ix. 6» 
" Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in mc. 
Phil. iii. 3. « We are the circumcision which worship 
God in tlie spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no 
confidence in the flesh.'* (2.) In a real hatred of sin ; be- 
ing willing to part with every lust, without exception> 
and comply with every duty the Lord makes, or shall 
rouke known to them, Psal. cxix. 6. " Then shall I not 
be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy command* 
ments." Try yourselves by these. 

Case 6. I see rjyself fall so far short of the saints 
mentioned in the scriptures, and of several excellent 
persons of my own acquaintance ; that, when I look 
on them, I hardly look on myself as one of the same 
family with them.— ./^n«. It is indeed matter of humiUa* 
tion, that we get not forward to that measure of grace 
and holiness, which we see is attainable in this life. Tins 
should make us more vigorously press towards the mark; 
but surely it is from the devil, that weak Christians make 
a rack for themselves of the attainments of the strong. 
And to yield to this temptation, is us unreasonable as for 
a child to dispute away his relation to bis father, because 
he is not of the same stature with his elder brethreiu 



\9d 1.3 their RegeneraHafti resolved* 30^ 

ere are saints of seyeral sizes in Christ's fionily ; some 
lerS} some young men> and some little children^ 1 John 
13, 14. 

'JaBe 7. I never read in the word of God, nor did I 
:r know of a child of God so tempted, and so left of 
d as I am ; and, therefore, no saint's case being like 
le, I cannot but conclude I am none of their number. 
int. This objection arises to some, from their un- 
uuntedness with the scriptures, and with experienced 
ristians. It is profitable in this case, to impart the 
tfcer to some experienced Christian friend, or to some 
lly Minister. This has been a blessed mean of peace 
some persons ; while their case, which appeared to be 
gular, has been evinced to have been the case of other 
Its. The scriptures give instances of very horrid temp- 
.oni, wherewith the saints have been assaulted. Job 
s tempted to blaspheme ; this was the great thing the 
ni aimed at, in the case of that saint, Job i. 1 1. << He 
1 curse thee to thy face.'' Chap. ii. 9. ^ Curse God 
I die." Asaph was tempted to think, it was in vain 
3c religious, which was in effect to throw off all re- 
:on, Psalm Ixxiii. 13. " Verily I have cleansed my 
irt in vain." Yea, Christ himself was tempted to cast 
iself down from a pinnacle of the temple, and to wor- 
p the devil, Mat. iv. 6, 9. . And many of the children 
God have not only been attacked with, but have ac- 
lly yielded to very gross temptations for a time. Peter 
ded Christ, and cursed and swore that he knew himi 
, Mark xiv. 71. Paul, when a persecutor, compelled 
n the saints to blaspheme. Acts xxvi. 10, 11. Many 
he saints can, from their sad experience, bear witness 
rery gross temptations, which have astonislM^d their 
cits, made their flesh to tremble, and sickened their 
ies. Satan's fiery darts make terrible work, and will 
t pains to quench them, by a vigorous managing of UiQ 
M of faith, Epb. vi. 1 6. Sometimes, he makes such 
perate attacks, that never was one more put to it, in 
ining to and fro without intermission, to quench the 
-balls incessantly thrown into his house, by -an enemy 
igning to bum the house about him, than the poor 
iptcd saint is, to repel satanical injections ; these horrid 
iptations, though ^ey are a dreadful «fiUction| they ar^ 



306 Ca$e9 qf ChrUtiana^ d^biing [State m. 

not the sins of the tempted, unless they make them tbxm , 
by consenting to them. They will be charged upon tUt 
tempter alonc^ if tliey be not consented to ; and wiU no 
mora be laid to the charge of the tempted party^thana 
bastard's being laid down at the chaste man's door will 
fix g^ilt upon him. 

But, suppose neither Minister nor private Christiant t> 
whom you go, can tell you of any who has been in your 
case ; yet you ought not thence to infer, that your caitf' 
certainly is singular, far less to give over hopes ; for.it la 
not to be thought, that every godly Minister, or priTStft 
Christian, has had the experience of all the cases a child 
of God may be in. And we need not doubt, but apine 
have had distresses known only to God, and their owii 
consciences ; and so, to others these distresses are aa if ' 
they had never been. Yea, and though tlie scriptures do 
conudn suitable directions for every case a child of God 
can be in ; and these illustrated with a sufficient number 
of examples ; yet it is not to be imagined, there are in the 
scriptures, perfect instances of every particular case ind* 
dent to the saints. Therefore, howbeit you cannot find 
an instance of your case in the scriptures, yet bring youf ■ 
case to it, and you shall find suitable remedies prescribed 
there for it. And study rather to make use of Christ for 
your case, who has salve for all sores, than to know if 
ever any was in your case. Though one should shewyoU 
an instance of your case, as an undoubted saint, yet none 
could promise it would certainly give you ease-; for* 
scrupulous, conscience would readily find out some <fif- 
fcrence. And if nothing but a perfect conformity of 
anotlicr's case to^ yours will satisfy, it will be hard if not 
impossMe to satisfy you. For it is with people's cases as 
with their natunil faces ; though the faces of all men artt 
of one make, and, some are so very like others, that at first 
view we are ready to take them for the same ; yet if yoU 
view them more accurately, you will see something in 
every face, distinguishing it from all others, though po»y 
sibly you cannot tell what it is : Wherefore I conclude, 
that if you can find in yourselves the marks of regenera- 
tion, proposed to you from the word ; you ought to con- 
clude, you arc in the state of grace, though your ens* 
were singular, which is indeed unlikely. 



I.] thfir Regeneration^ retolved, 307 

e last. The afflictions I meet with are strange and 
a1^ I doubt if ever a child of God was trysted with 
iispensatioDs of providence as I am.— -«^n«. Much 
It was said on the preceding; case may be helpful 
s. Holy Job was assaulted with this temptation, 
1. "To which of the sainu wilt thou turn r* 'But 
ected it) and held fast his integrity. . The Apostle 
seth Christians may be tempted to' think strange 
ming the fiery trial, 1 Pet iv. 1. But they have 
3f larger experience than Solomon's who will ven- 

3 say, See ! this is new^ Eccles. i. 10. And what 
h, in respect of the outward dispensations of Provi- 
, it happen to you according to the work of the 

4 ? You may be just notwithstanding, according to 
ion's observe, Eccles. viii. 14. Sometimes we tra- 
I ways, where we cannot perceive the prints of the 
r man or beast ; yet we cannot from thence conclude, 
bere was never any there before us ; so, albeit thou 
not perceive the footsteps of the flock in the way of 
affliction, thou must not therefore conclude, thou art 
rst that ever travelled that road. - But what if it were 
sit thou wert indeed the first? Some saint or other be- 
i to be the first, in drinking of each bitter cup the 
ave drunk of. What warrant have you or I to limit 
oly One of Israel to u trodden path, in his dispen- 
s towards us ? " Thy way is in tlie sea, and thy 
n the great waters; and thy footsteps are not known," 
I Ixxvii. 19. If the Lord should carry you to hea- 
!>y some retired road, and let you in at a back door, 

speak ; you would have no ground to comphiin. 
. to allow sovereignty a latitude ; be at your duty ; 
jt no affliction cast a veil over any evidences you 
wise have for your being in the state of grace": For, 
man kuoweth either tlieir love or hatred, by all that 
ore them," Eccles. ix. 1. 

E II. Ye tliat are strangers to this new birth be con- 
d of the absolute necessity of it. Are all in the state 
ice bom again ? Then ye have neither part nor lot 

who are not bom again. I must tell you in the 
I of our Lord and Saviour, (and O that he would 
. them to your hearts,) « Ye must be bora again," 



308 7%e J^ecetdty of RegemraHon^ [State IIL 

John iii. 7. And for your convictiony C(»iBider these few 
things: 

JPtratj Regeneration is absolutely necessary to qmM 
you to do any thing really ^ood and acceptable to Goi 
While you are not bom ag^aui, your best works are M 
glittering sins ; for though the matter of them is goflfl 
they are quite marred in the making. Consider^ (1.) Thiil 
without regeneration there is no ikith ; and, ^ WithoM 
ftsiith, it is impossible to please God," Heb. xi. 6. Failll 
is a vitnl act of the new-bom soul. The Evangelii^ 
shewing the different entertainment our Lord Jesus lad 
from different persons, some receiving lum,8ome rejecting 
him, points at regenerating grace as the true rise of thai 
difference, without which never one would have reoeived 
him. He tells us, that as many as received him were.tbesS 
which were bom of God, John i. U, 12, 13. Unrege* 
nerate men may presume, but true faith they cannot have. 
Fsdth is a flower that grows not in the field of natuiei 
As thei tree cannot grow without a root, neither can asiiB 
believe, without the new nature, whereof the principlt of 
believing is a part. (2.) Without regeneration, a xnan'f 
works are dead works. As is the principle, so must tbv 
effects be : If the lungs be rotten, the breath will be VBDe 
savoury ; and he who, at best, is dead in sin, his works^it 
best, will be but dead works. « Unto them that are defiled 
and unbelieving, is nothing pure — ^being abominable vA 
disobedient ; and unto every good work, reprobate," Titi 
15, 16. Could we say of a man, that he is more blameleU 
in his life than any other in the world ; that he macerate! 
his body with fasting; and has made his knees as homsindt 
continual praying; but he is not bom again; that.exceptios 
would mar all. As if one should say. There is a well pr6» 
portioned body, but the soul is gone ; it is but a dead lump^ 
This is a melting consideration. Thou dost many thingi 
materially good, but God saith, All these things avsdl n^ 
as long as I see the old nature reigning in the man, Gal 
vi. 15. For, in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avMl* 
cth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature." 
If thou art not born again, (1.) All thy reformation il 
naught in the sight of God. Thou hast shut the dooTi 
. but the thief fs still in the house. It may be thou art not 
what once thou wast, yet thou art not what thou must bCf 

V 



Head I.] The ^eceuity f/* RegencraHoiu 30^ 

if eyer thou seest heaven ; for, « Except a man be bom 
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God/' John ill. 3. 
(2.) Thy prayers arc an abomination to the Lord, Prov. 
XV. 8. It may be, others admire thy seriousness ; thou 
criest as for thy life ; but God accounts of the opening of 
thy mouth as one would account of the opening of a 
gniYc full of rottenness, Rom. iii. 1 3. " Their throat is 
an (^n sepulchre." Others are affected with thy praycrr ^ 
"Which seem to them as if they would rend the heavens ; 
but God accounts them as the howling of a dog : " They 
have not cried unto me with their heart, when they how.'- 
cd upon their beds," Hos. vii. 14. Others take thee for- 
a wrestler and prevailer with God ; but he can take no 
delight in thee nor thy prayers neither, Isa. Ixvi. 3. " He 
that killeth an ox, as if he slew a man ; he that sacri- 
ficeth a lamb, as if he cut off a do^'s neck ; — he that bum- 
eth incense, as if he blessed an idol." Why that? Be- 
cause thou art yet in the gall of bitterness and bond of ini- 
^iuity. (3.) AH thou hast done for God and his cause in 
the world, though it may be followed with temporal re- 
Wards, yet is lost as to divine acceptance. This is cleai* 
ffom the case of Jehu, who was indeed rewarded with a 
, kingdom, for his executing due vengeance upon the house 
pf Ahsd), as being a work good for the matter of it, because 
U was commanded of God, as you may see, 2 Kings x. 1 3. 
Vet he was punished for it, in his posterity, because he did 
it not in a right manner, Hos. i. 4. " I will avenge the 
blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu." God looks 
tnainly to the heart ; and if so, truly albeit thy outward ap- 
pearance be fairer than that of many others, yet the hidden 
man of thy heart is lothsome ; thou lookest well before 
Jnen, but art thou, as Moses was,ya/r to God ? as the mar- 
gin hath it, Acts vii. 20. O what a difference is there be- 
twixt the characters of Asa and Amaziah : « The high 
places were not removed ; nevertheless, Asa his heart was 
perfect with the Lord all his days," 1 Kings xv. \A^ 
•* Amaziah did that which was right in the sight of the 
Lord, but not with a perfect heart," 2 Chron. xxv. 2. It 
may be, thou art zealous against sin in others, and dost ad- 
monish them to their duty, and reprove them for their sin ; 
tod they hate thee, ^cause thou dost thy duty: But I 
ma^ tell thee, Godliates thee too, because thou dost it not 

S 



210 Tht ^rcceaMiiy of Rfffeneratian. [State III 

in a right manner ;jaid that thou canst never do, wluto 
thou art not bom ag^n. Lastly, All thy struggles agaiav 
sm in thine own heart and life, are naught The pnmc 
Pharisee afflicted his body witli fasting, and God strucl 
his soul, in the mean time, with a sentence of condeiuk 
nation, Luke xriii. Balaam struggled with his coTetooi 
temper to that degree, that though he loved the wages of lift 
righteousness, yet he wouldnotwin them by cursing IswA 
but he died the death of the wicked. Numb. xxxi. 8. All 
thou dost, while in an unregenerate state, is for thyself; 
and, therefore, it will fare with thee as with a subject 
who, have reduced the rebels, put the crown on his owi 
head ; and, therefore, loseth all liis good semce, and hii 
head too. 

Object, If it be thus with us, then we need never per- 
form any religious duty at all.— ^n*. The conclusion bnoi 
just. No inability of thine can loose thee from the dutj 
God's laAV lays on thee ; and there is less evil in thy doin| 
thy duty, than there is in the omitting of it. But there h 
a mids betwixt omitting of duty, and the doing of it as thoi 
dost it. A man ordereth masons to build a house ; if the] 
quite neglect the work, that will not be accepted.: if the] 
fall on, and build upon the old rotten foundation, neithe: 
\7i\\ that please, but they must raze the old foundation, am 
build on finn ground : Go thou and do likewise. In th< 
mean time, it is not in vain for thee, even for thee, to seel 
the Lord ; for tliough he regards thee not, yet ye may hav( 
.respect to his own ordinance, and do thee good thereby, a 
was said before. 

Secondly^ Without re generation there is no communioi 
with God. There is a society on earth, whose fellowshi] 
is with the Father and with the Son Jesus Christ, 1 Johi 
i. 3. But out of that society all the unregenerate are ex 
eluded ; for they are all enemies to God as ye heard b< 
fore at large. Now, " Can two walk together, excef 
they be agreed ?" Amos iii. 3. They are all unhol 
and, " What communion hath light with darkness— Chris 
with Belial ?" 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15. They may have a shei 
and semblance of holiness ; but they are strangers t 
true holiness ; and, therefore, without God in the worh 
How sad is this case, to be enmh>yed in religiot) 
duties, but to have no fellowship 'irah God in them 
Ye would not be conteuXmtlv Y^^^* meaty unless it fed yOt] 



Head L] Tke Mcasiey of Regeneration, s 1 1 

nor with your clothes, unless tkcy kept jou warm : And 
1m)w can you satisfy yourselves with your duties, while they 
u% Bot effectual to your communion witli (xod ? 

Thirdly J Regeneration is absolutely necessary to qualify 

you for heaven. None go to heaven but tliey that are 

niade meet for it, Col. i. 12. As it was with Solomon'si 

temple, 1 Kings vi. 7. so it is vrith the temple above. It 

i» built of stone, made ready before it is brought tliither ; 

fiamely, of lively stones, 1 Pet. ii. 5. wrought for the same 

thing, 2 Cor. v. 5. for they cannot be laid in that glorious 

•building, just as they came out of the quarry of depraved 

nature: Jewels of gold are not meet for swine, and fur less 

Jewels of gloiy for unrenewed sinners. Beggars in their 

Tsi^ arc not m^et for Kings houses ; nor sinners to enter 

into the King's palace, without the raiment of needle -work, 

Psal. xlv. 14, 15. What wise man would bring fishes 

out of the water to feed in his meadow ; or send his oxen 

to feed in the sea ? Even as little are the unregeneratc 

meet for heaven, or is heaven meet for them. It would 

never be liked by them. 

The unregeneratc would find fault with heaven on seve- 
ral accoimts. As, (1.) That it is a strange country. Hea- 
ven is the renewed man's native country ; his Father is in 
heaven ; his mother is Jerusalem, which is above, Gal. iv. 
26. He is born from above, John iii. 3. Heaven is his 
home', 2 Cor. v. 1 . Therefore, he looks on himself as a 
stranger on this earth, and his head is homeward, Hcb. vi. 
16. " They desire a better country, that is, an heavenly.'* 
But the unregeneratc man is the man of the earth, Psal. x. 
18. written in the earth, Jer. xvii. IS. Now, home is 
home, be it never so homely ; therefore, he minds earthly 
things, Philip, iii. 19. There is a peculiar sweetness in 
our native soil, and hardly are men drawn to leave it, and 
dwell in a strange country. In no case does that prevail 
more than in this ; for unrenewed men would quit their 
pretensions to heaven, were it not tliat they see they can- 
not make a better of it. (2.) there is nothing there of 
what they delight most in, as most agreeable to the cai-nal 
heart. Rev. xxi. 27. " And tliere shall in no wise enter 
into it any thing tliat defileth." When Mahomet gave 
out paradise to be a place of sensual delights, his religion 
yi^% greedily embraced j for that is the heaven men natu: 



3 12 the Meciiity qf RegeneraHom [Stirte lU. 

k*ally chuse. If the covetous man covJA get bags Callof gtfid 
there,and the voluptuous inan caQ promise himself his soi- 
sual delights there ; they might be reconciled to heaveiH 
and meet for it too : But since it is not so, though they 
may utter "fear words about it, truly it has little of their 
hearts. (3.) Every comer there is filled with that whichy 
of all things, they have the least liking to ; and that b ho&- 
nessytrue holiness, perfect holiness. Were one that abhors 
swine's flesh bidden to a feast, where all the dishes were of 
that sort of meat^ but variously prenared ; he would fiad 
fault with every dish at the table, notwithstanding all the 
•art used to make them palatable. It is true, there is joy 
in heaven, but it is holy joy ; there are pleasures in heayeni 
but they are holy pleasures ; there are places to stand hf in 
heaven, but it is holy ground. That holiness that casts up 
in every place, and in every thing there, would mar all to 
the unregenerate. (4.) Were they carried thither, they 
would not only change their place, which would be a great 
heart-break to them ; but they would change their cox*^* 
pany too. Truly they would never like the company thcrci 
who' care not for communion with God here ; nor vaf**® 
the fellowshipof his people,at least in the vitals of practical 
godliness. Many indeed mix themselves with the godly 
on earth, to procure a name to themselves, and to cover t^ 
nuughthiess of their hearts ; but that trade could not ^ 
managed there. (5.) They would never like the empl(7^' 
ment of heaven, they care so little for it now. The bu^^' 
ness of the saints there would be an intolerable burden t^ 
ihem, seeing it is not agreeable to their nature. To t>* 
taken up in behofding, admiring, and praising of him thi*^ 
sitteth upon the throne, and of the Lamb, would be wor^ 
unsuitable ; and, therefore, unsavoury to an unrenewed 
houl. Lastly, They wbuld find this fault with it, that th^ 
^vholc js of everlasting continuance. This would be ^ 
killing ingredient in it to them. How would such as noi^ 
account the Sabbath-day a burden, brook the celebrating 
of an everlasting Sabbath in the heavens ? 

Xa«;/y,RcgenerationisabsoluteIy necessary to your bein^ 
admitted into heaven, John iii. 3. No heaven without it*- 
Though carnal men could digest all these things, which 
make heaven so unsuitable for them, yet God will never 
^(ufiVi^r them to come thither : Therefore, born again ye mu^t 



Head I.] T%e Mceseity of Regeneration^ 213 

l>e,clse ye shall never sec heaven; ye shall perish eternally^ 
For, (1.) There is a bill of exclusion against you in the 
court of heaven, and against all your sort ; *' Except a man 
be bom again, he cannot see the kingdom of God,'* 
1 John iii. 3. Here is a bar before you, that men and 
angeis cannot remove. And to hope for heaven, over the 
^Hy of this peremptory sentence, it is to hope God will re- 
call his word, and sacrifice his truth and faithfulness to your 
safety ; which is infinitely more than to hope tlie eurth 
'hall be forsaken for you, and the rock removed out of hia 
)Iace. (2.) Thei'e is no holiness without regeneration. 
;t is the new man, which is created in true holiness, 
^ph. iv. 24. And no heaven without holiness ; for. 

Without holiness no mtm shall sec the Lord," Heb. xii. 
"*• Will the gates of pearl be opened, to let in dogs and 
"^ne? No ; ^eir place is without. Rev. xxii. 15. God 
'ill not admit such into the holy place of communion 
ith him here ; and will he admit them into Jlic holiest of 
1 hereafter ? Will he take the children of the devil, and 
ive them to sit with him in his throne ? Or ynW he bring; 
le unclean into the city, whose street is pure gold ? Be 
yt deceived, grace and glory arc but two links of one 
"^ain, which God has joined, and no man shall put a- 
mder. None ai*e transplanted into the paradise above, 
at out of the nursery of grace below. If ye be unholy 
hile in this world, ye will be for ever miserable in the 
orld to come. (3.) All the unregcnerate are without 
hrist ; and, therefore, having no hope while in that case, 
ph. ii. 12. Will Christ prepare mansions of glory for 
^^m that refuse to receive him into their hearts ? Nay ; 
ither, will he not laugh at their calamity, who now sot at 
f>^ght all his counsel ? Prov. i. 25, 26. Lastly^ There 
• an infallible connection betwixt a finally unregcnerate 
^te and damnation, rising from the nature of the things 
^eiTiselvcs ; and from the decree of heaven, which is fixed 
^d unnioveablc as mountains, John iii. 3. Rom. viii. 6, 

be carnally minded is death. An unregcnerate state is 
^11 in the bud. It is eternal destruction in embryo; 
'I'owing daily, though thou dost not discern it. Death is 
^^intcd on many a fair face in tliis life. Depraved na- 
^J'e makes men meet to be partakers of the inneritance of 
^« d^ed, in utter darkness. (1 .) The heart gf stone 



irttMntheeisft.amkiiiRwe%ht;«>*>t(ihe naturall; got> 
downmrdr to tfaa iuxattoaj heart teodi downward ti ' 



ye an told four danger, yet ye -wilFnot ice it, ye will nqt 
btliere it But remember, that the conscience, iis buii| 
aeared with a hot irofa, U a ud presage of everlasting baiii' 
bga. (3.) Your utkfrukfilliieflS'UDmr the means of gn« 
fit* foQ for the axe of Ood's judgments, Matth. iii. 10. 
** Everf tree that bringeth not fiirth good fiuit, is bewa i 
iawa and cast into the fire." The withered braiicb is fuel , 
for the fire, John xt. 6. Tremble at thta, ye dcapisers of 
the RMpeli if ye be not thereb]' made meet fur heaven, fc 
will be like the barren ground, bearing briers and thornt, 
nigb unto curung^ who«e end is to be burned, Heb. ti. S. 
(s!j The hellish diqioudon of mind, which dlscaven 
themaelYea in profanity of life, fit the guilty for the teginiis 
«r horror. A pro&me life will have a niiaei-dble eoi, 
*^ They wbidt do a'uch things ahsll not inherit the kicg- 
^ornof God," Gal. t. 19, 3D, 31^ Think on this, r« 
^rajedeas peraona, ye mockers of religion, ye cursers uid 
vweuera, ye vnclean-and unjust persons, who have not so 
much as moral honesty to keep you from lying, cheawiffi 
md ttealingr What sort of a tree think yc it to be, upon 
-which theie fruits grow? la it a tree oi nghteuusiicsei 
which the Lord hath planted! Or is it not such an one» 
combers the ground, which God will pluck up for liiBiti 
the fire of his wrath f (4.^ Your being dead m sin laik**- 
yen. meet to be wrapt in flames of brimstone, as a windaS 
sheet ^ond to be buried in the bottomless pit, as in a gra*** 
Great was the cry in Egypt, when the first-born in oaeb 
&mily was dead ; but are there not many bmtliea, vb«a 
idl are dead together I Nay, many there are, who are twka 
dead, plucked up by the roots. Sometime, in. their tifoi 
Ibey have been roused by apprehendons of deathiud 
its consequences ; but now they are so £tr on in thoc 
way to the land of darkness, that they hardly ever have tlM 
least glimmering of light from heaven. (S.) The darknus 
«fyouT minds presagetbeUMual darkness. O tiie homblt 
ignorance some are plagued with ; while otbeis who hart 
got some rays of morning light into theirheads, are vO^Hf 
void of spiritual l^^t in their hearts '. If ye kneW'^oui 
CftUtjc.'VoaldciyQiHtQb tolueul (UrkucMl ' * ' 



Bead 1.1 The Meeitity ^f JRegeneratton. S 1 5 

making waf for the blackness of darkness for ever ! The 
fece-corering is upon fou already^ as condemned persons ; 
10 Qeu* are ye to everlasting darkness. It is only Jesus 
Christ who can stop the execution, pull the napkin off the 
&ce of the condenan^d male&ctory and put a pardon in hia 
laod, Isa* XXV. 7. << And he will destroy in tins mountaip, 
the face of the covering cast over all people," i. e. The 
&ce-covering cast over the condemned, as in Haman's 
case, Esther vii. 8. << As the word went out of the king's 
sioQth, they covered Haman's face." Lattly^ The chains 
^f darkness ye are bound with in the prison of your de- 
praved state, Isa. Ixi. 1 . fits you to be cast into the burning 
^^ry furnace. Ah miserable men I Sometimes their con- 
sciences stir within them, and they begin tothink of amend- 
^g their ways. But, alas ! they are in chains, they can- 
^X do it. They are chained . by the heart ; their lusts 
cleave so fast to them, that they cannot, nay, they will not 
^hake th^m off. Thus you see what affinity there is be- 
^xt an unregeneratc state, and the state of the damned, 
^e state of absolute and irretrievable misery : Be con- 
vinced then, that ye must be bom again ; put a high value 
^ the new birth, and eagerly desire it. 

The text tells you, that tie word is the seed, whereof 
ie new creature is formed ; therefore, take heed to it 
ttid entertain it, for it is your life. Apply yourselves to 
Ihe reading of the scripture. Ye that cannot read, cause 
others read it to you. Wait diligently on the preaching 
:)f the word, as by divine appointment, the special mean 
^f conversion : ^ For it pleased God, by the foolishness 
)f preaching, to save them that believe," I Cor. i. 21. 
^Vherefore cast not yourselves out of Christ's way ; reject 
lot the means of grace, lest ye be found to judge your- 
jelves unworthy of eternal life. Attend carefully tothe 
vord preached. Hear every sermon, as if you were 
learing for eternity ; and take heed the fowls of the air 
)ick not up this seed from you as it is sown. Give thy- 
»elf wholly to it, 1 Tim. iv. 15. " Receive it not as 
hi word of men, but as it is in truth the word of God,** 
I Thess. ii. IS. Ai.d hear it with application, looking 
)n it as a message sent from heaven, to you in particular, 
hough not to you only, Rev. iii. 23. « He that hath 
m ear let bua h^ar^ what the Spirit saith upto the 



31i ne MtHtiitf ^ ltegtnermtim$. [St 

ciiurchts.'* La/ it up in your heaitsi meditate, ii 
and be not at tile unclean beasts that chew not ti 
but bf earnest prayer beg the dew of heaven may 
thy hearti that lAie seed may spring up there. 

-More-p«rticularly9 (I.) Receive the testimony 
word of God} oonceming the misety of an uiu'eg 
state) the sinfulnessr thereof^ alid the absolute nece 
regeneration. (2.^ Receive its testimony concemiz 
wbnt a holy and just one he is. (3.) Examine th 
by It ; namely, the thoughts of thy heart, the expr 
of thy lipS) and the tenor of thy life. I^ook back t 
the several periods of thy life, and see thy sins ft 
precepts of the word ; and learn from its threat 
what thou art liable to, on the account of tliet 
(4.) View the corruption of thy nature, by the 
the same word of Ged ;. as a glass which represe 
ugly &ce in a lively manner. Were these things 
rooted in the heart, they might be the seed of tl 
and sorrow, <m account of thy soul's states :Whi 
necessary to prepare and stir thee up to look- afke 
tiour. Fix your thoughts upon him offered to the< 
gospel, as fully suited to thy case ; having, by I 
dience to the death, perfectly satisfied the justice -( 
and brought in everlasting righteousness. This ma^ 
the seed of humiliation, desire, hope, and &it! 
put thee on to stretch out the withered hand unto 
his command. 

Let these things sink deeply into your hearts, s 
prove them diligently. Remember, whatever ye 
must be bom again ; else it had been betteribr 
had never been bom. Wherefore, if any of you sh 
and die in an unregcnerate state, ye will be inexc 
having been fairly warned of your hazard. 



HEAD II. 



ITSTICAL VKION BETWIXT CHEI8T AHD BfiLIEV£&8> 



John xv. 5. 

/ am the Vincy ye are the Branche%. 

lVING spoken of the change^ made hy regenei^- 
tion, on all those thdt shall inherit eternal life^ ijx 
tion to their natural state, tht state of degeneracy ; 
Bed to speak of the change made upon them^ in 
inion with the Lord Jesus Christy in opposition to 
latural relative state, the state of misery. The 
le of the saints union with Christ is very plainly 
lly insisted on, from the beginning of the 12th 
of this chapter ; which is a part of our Lord's 
11 sermon to his disciples. Sorrow had now filled 
earts ; they were apt to say, Alas ! what will be- 
Qf us, when our Master is taken from our head I 
n\\ then instruct us ? Who will solve our doubts ? 
rill we be supported under our difficulties and dis- 
•ements ? How will we be able to live, without our 
I communications with him ? Wherefore, our 
esus Christ seasonably teaches them the mysterjr of 
mien with him, comparing himself to the vme- 
and them to the branches. 

compares, I say, (1.) himself to a vine-stock i I am 
le. He had been celebrating, with his disciples, 
crament of his supper, that sign and seal of his 
's union with himself; and had told them, he would 
no more of the fruit of the vine, till he should 
it new with them in his Father's kingdom : And 
e shews himself to be the vine, from whence the 
f their consolation should come. The vine hath 
Miuty than many otjiier trees, but is cxceediii|; 



218 A general View of the My9tieal Union. [State IIL 

fruitful ; fitly representing the low condition our Lord 
was then in, yet bringhig many sons to glory. But tbit^ 
which is chiefly aimed at, in his comparing himself lot' 
vine, is to represent himself us the supporter and nouriaber 
of his people, in whom they live, and bring forth fruit 
(2.) He compares them to the branches; Ye are tk 
branches of that vine. Ye are the branches^ knit to* vA 
growing on this stock ; drawing all your life and flip 
from it. It is a beautiful comparison : As if he hid 
said, I am as a vine ; ye are as the branches of that vine. 
Now there are two sorts of branches, (1.) Natund 
branches, which at first spring out of the stock : Theie' 
are the branches that are in tlie ti^e, and were never oot 
of it. (2.) There are ingrafted branches, which aW 
branches broken oiF fi*om the tree that first gave tfaor 
life ; and put into another to grow upon it. Thus 
branches come to be on a tree, which originally were not 
on it. The branches mentioned in the text are of di* 
latter sort ; branches broken off, (as the wordi io d* 
original language, denotes,) namely, from the tree dvt 
.first gave them life. None of the children of me& tffr 
natural branches of the second Adam, viz. Jesus Chrilli 
the true Vhie ; they are all the natural branches of tl* 
first Adam, that degenerate vine : But the elect are, all«f 
them, sooner or later, broken off from the natural stocki 
and ingrafted into Christ, the true Vine. 

Doctrine. They who are in the state of grace are 
ingrafted in, and united to, the Lord Jesus Christ Tfaef 
are taken out of their natural stock. Cut off from it ; and 
are now ingrafted into Christ, as tlie new stock. In 
handling of this, I shall speak to the mystical uniooi 
(1.) More generally. (2.) More particularly, 

A general View qf the Mystical Union, 

First, In the general, for understanding the union be* 
twixt the Lord Jesus Christ, and his elect, who believe in 
him, and on him ; 

1. It is a spiritual union. Man and wife, by their mar* 
riage-union, become one flesh : Christ and true believcrii 
by this union, become one spirit, 2 Cor vi. 17. As one 
soul or spiritactuates both the head andthe.m?emberfliQt}ie 



Head II.] J general Viev> ^ the Myntical Union. S19 

■ 

BBtnral body, iM> the one Spirit of God dwells in Christ and 
the Christian ; for* ^ If any man have not the Spirit of 
Christ) he is none of his," Rom. viii. 9. Corporal union 
IB made by ccmtract ; so the stones in a building are uni- 
ted ; but this is an union of another nature. Were it pos- 
nble we could eat the flesh, and drink the blood of 
Christ, in a corporal and carnal manner, it would profit 
BOthmg, John vi. 63. It was not Mary's bearing him in 
her womb, but her believing on him, that made her a saint, 
Luke xi. 27, 28. << A certain woman— said unto him, 
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which 
thou hast sucked. But he said. Yea, rather, blessed are 
they that hear the word of God, and keep it." 

2. It i^ a real union. Such is our weakness in our pre- 
sent state, so much are we immersed in sin, that we are 
prone to fbrm in our fancy an image of every thing propos- 
ed to us ; and as to whatsoever is denied us, we are apt to 
sufpcct it to be but a fiction, or what has no reality. But 
nothing is more real, than what is spiritual ; as approach- 
ing nearest to the nature of him who is the fountain of all 
i^ity, namely, God himself. We do not see with our 
eyes, the union betwixt our own soul and body ; neither 
can we represent it to ourselves truly, by imagination, as 
We do sensible things ; yet tlie reality of it is not to be 
doubted. Faith is no fancy, but the substance of things 
hoped for, Heb. xi. 1 . Neitiier is the union thereby made 
betwixt Christ and believers imaginary, but most real, 
** For we are members of his body, of his fiesh, and of his 
bones," Eph. v. 30. 

3. It is a most close and intimate union. Believers, re- 
generate persons, who fiduciously credit him, and rely on 
him, have put on Christ, Gal. iii. 27. If that be not 
enough, he is in them, John xvii. 23. formed in them, as 
the child in the mother's belly. Gal. iv. 19. He is the 
foundation, 1 Cor. iii. 11. They are the lively stones 
built upon him, 1 Pet. ii. 5. He is the head, and tliey 
the body, Eph. i. 22, 23. Nay, he liveth in them, as 
their very souls in their bodies. Gal. ii. 30. And, what 
IS more than all this, they are one in the Father and the 
Son, as the Father is in Christ, and Christ m the Father, 
John xvii. 21. « That they all may be one, as thou, 



330 A general View qf the Myetical Union. [State IE 

Father, art in mci and I in thee, they also may be-eoe 

* >• 
in us. 

4. Though it is not a mere leg^al union, yet it is iSi ' 
unioii sustained in law. Christ, as the cautioner, the elect 
as the principal debtors, are onei in the eye of the law.; . 
When the elect had run themseWes, with the rest of masr 
kind, in debt to the justice of God, Christ became suretf 
for them, and paid the debt. When they believe on hutti 
they ai*e united to him in a spiritual marria^ unicMi \ which 
takes eifect so far, that wliat he did and suffered for thm 
is reckoned, in law, as if they had done and suffered fiff ; 
themselves. Hence they are said to be crucified with 
Jesus, Gal. ii. 20. Buried with him. Col. ii. 12. Yesi \ 
raised up together, (namely, with Christ,) and made to sit : 
together, in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Eph. iL 6. j 
In which places, saints on earUi, of whom the Apostle << 
there speaks, cannot be said to be sitting, but in the way ^ 
of law-reckoning. 

5. It is an indissolvable union : Once in Christ, ever in 
him. Having taken up his habitation in the heart, he never 
removes. None can untie this happy knot. Who will 
dissolve this union ? Will he himself do it ? No, he wiB 
not ; we have his word for it ; "I will not turn away from 
them," Jer. xxxii. 40. But perhaps the sinner will do this 
mischief for himself; no, he shall not ; " They shall not 
depart from me," saith their God. Can devils do it ? No 
imless they be stronger than Christ, and his Father too: 
" Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand," saith 
our Lord, John x. 28. " And none is "able to pluck 
them out of my Father's hand," ver. 39. But, what saf 
you of death, which parts husband and wife ; yea, separates 
the soul from the body ? Will not death do it ? No ; the 
Apostle (Rom. viii. 38, 39.) is persuaded, that neither 
death, for as terrible as it is, nor life, for as desirable as it 
is, nor devils, those evil angels, nor the devil's persecutins; 
agents, though they be principalities or powers on earth; 
nor evil things present already lying on us, nor evil things 
to come on us; nor the height of worldly felicity, nor depth 
of worldly misery ; nor any other creature, good or ill, shaU 
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is ift 
Christ Jesus our Lord. As death separated Christ's soul 
from his body, but could not separate either his soul or 



Head II.] Mam the nmtural Stock if all Men. i2\ 

body from his divine nature ; «o though the taints should 
be separated from their nearest relations in the world, and 
from all their earthly enjoyments ; yea, though-their souls 
dMMild be separated from their bodies, and their bodies se- 
parated in a thousandpieces, their bones scattered, as when 
Me cutteth or cleayeth wood; yet soul and body, and 
every piece of the body, the smallest dust of it shall remain 
united to the Lord Christ ; for even in death, they sleep 
b Jesus, 1 Thess. iv. 14. And he keepeth all their bones, 
Psal. xxxiv. 20. Union with Christ is the grace wherein 
^t stpnd, firm and stable, as mount Zion, which cannot be 
removed. 

La%tlyy It is a mysterious union. The gospel is a doc* 
txine of mysteries. It discovers to us the substantial union 
of the three persons in one Godhead, 1 John v. 7. The^e 
three are one ; the hypostatical union of the divine and hu- 
inu natures,in the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Tim. 
iii. 16.> Godwat manifest in the fie sh. And the mystical 
uiion, betwixt Christ and believers, is a greatmystery also, 
Eph. v. 32. O what mysteries are here ! the Head in 
icaven, the members on earth, yet really united ! Chiist 
^ the believer, living in him, walking in him, and the 
Jeliever dwelluig in God, putting on the Lord Jesus ; eat- 
% his flesh, and drinking his blood ! This makes the 
Kunts a mystery to the world j yea, a mystery to them- 
leives. 

Secondly, I come now more particularly to speak oftliis 
inion with, and ingrafting into Jesus Christ. And, (1.) 
shall consider the natural stock which the branches are 
*ken out of. (2.) The supernatural stock they are ingrafted 
i*to. (3.) What branches are cut off the old stock, and 
*U into the new. (4.) How it is done. And, lastly^ 
\t benefits flowing from this imion and ingrafting. 

^fthe natural and sufiernatural Stocks^ and the Brancke^^ 
taken out of the former^ and ingrafted into the latter. 

I. Let us take a view of the stock which the branches 
"e taken out of. The two Adams, that is, Adam and 
hrist,arethe two stocks; for the scripture speaks of these 
no, as if there had never been more in the world than 
ey, I Cor. xv. 45, 47. "The first man Adam wim5 

T 






333 Mam the natural Stcck qfaii Men* {Sb 

made a Bvine totd ; the last Adam was made a qi 
ing Spirit>---The first man is of the earth, earth) 
second man is the Lord from heaven." And the rei 
there were never any that Werenotbranches of onfe c 
two ;. all men being either in the one stock or in the 
for in these two sorts all mankind stands divided, i 
*< As is the earthly, such are they also that are eardij 
as is the heavenly, such are they also that are hea^ 
The first Adam, then, is the natural stock : . On thi 
are the branches found growing at first ; which ari 
wards cut off, and ingreited into Christ. As for tb 
angels, as they had no relation to the first Adam, i 
have hone to the second. 

There are four things to be remembered here, (1 
kll:nankind(themanChristexcepted)arenaturall^bi 
qi the^ first Adam, Rom. v. 13. << By one man sm i 
into the World, and death by sin ; and so death passe 
all men." (3.) The bond which Itnit us unto the 
stock was the covenant of works. Adam being on 
fal robt, was made the moral root also ; bearing all 1 
terity, ais represeh&ig them -in the covenant of 
For, f^ By one man'^ disobedience many wer^ ma 
ners," Kom. v. 19. Now, there behoved to be a p 
relation betwixt that one man and the many, as a i 
tion for imputing his sin to them. This relation < 
arise from the mere natural bond betwixt him and 
iatherto his children; for so we are related to our imi 
parents, whqse sins are not thereupon imputed tf 
'Adam's sin is. It behoved then to arise from i 
bond betwixt Adam and us, the bond of a covenant; 
could be no other than the covenant of works, whei 
were united to him as branches to a stock. Henc( 
Christ, though a son of Adam, (I.uke iii. 33, 31 
none of these branches ; for seeing he came not of 
in virtue of the blessing of marriage, which was gi 
fore the fall, Gen. i. 28. « Be fruitful and multipl; 
but in virtue of a special promise made after t! 
Cren. iii. 15. << The seed of the woman shall bm 
sei*pent's head." Adam could not represent him in j 
nant made before his fidl. (3.) As it is impossibl 
branch to be in two stocks at once ; so no man cai 
epe and the same time, both in the first and second 



:$e«|l ILJ Tk^nanirtU Stock a degenerate Stock. 2^3 

Hence jt endently follows, that all who are not iiir 

Vin Jesus Christ are yet branches of Uic old stock ; 

Isdpartake of the nature of the same. Now, as to the 

Aaean, onr'natural stock, consider, 

UrBty What a stock he was originally. He was a vine 

4?flfae Lord's planting, a choice vine, a noble vine, wholly 

Slight se^d; There was a consultation of the Trinity 

at m planting of this yine, Gen. i. 36. ^ Lut us make 

JPUii in our own image, after our own likeness." There 

in« tto rottenness at the heart of it. There was sap and 

j)itlite enough in it, to have nourished all the bnmches, to 

hri|ig forth fruit unto God. My meaning is, Adam was 

tede aUe perfectly to keep the commaii^ments of God, 

|:%Uch would have procured eternal life to himself, and 

tio til his posterity ; for seeing all die by Adam's disobe- 

fwKe, all should hare had life, by his obedience, if he 

^1 stood. Consider, 

. Secondly y What tliat stock now is : Ah ! most unlike tO 
lAst it was, when planted by the author and fountain of 
fBgood. A blast from hell, and a bite with the veno« 
Ims teeth of the old serpent, have made it a degenerate 
vtock, a dead stock ; nay, a killing stock. 

'!•/, It b a degenerate naughty stock. Therefore, the 
Wd God said to Adam, in that dismal day, Where art 
^Pu I Gen. iii. 9. In what condition art thou now ? 
How ai:t thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange 
[ ??nc, unto me ? Or, Where wast thou ? Why not in the 
. pJice of meeting with me ? Why so long a«<:omin^ ? What 
*5cwieth this f€ai'fulchange,this hidingof thyself from me? 
Alls i the stock is degenerate, quite spoiled, become alto. 
8tther naught, and brings forth wild grapes. Converse 
y^ the devil is preferred to communion with God. SataQ 
** believed, and God, who is truth itself, disbelieved. He 
jJio was the friend of God is now in conspiracy against him* 
^rkness is come into the room of light ; ignorance pre* 
^»il»in the mind, where divine knowledge shone ; the will, 
?JWetime righteous or regular,is now tunied rebel against 
^s Lord ; and the whole man is in dreadful disorder. 

Before I go further, let me stop and observe, Here is a 
'^UTor both for saints and sinners. Sinners, stand here 
^d consider what you are ; and saints, learn ye what once' 
ye were. Ye sinnerji are branches of a degenerate stocfci 



4^24 7%e natural Stock a degenerate 8roeh [State III& 

Fruit 70U may bear indeed ; but now tbat your vine is to-* 
vine of Sodom, your grapes must of course be grapes 10^ 
gall, Deut. xxxii. 32. The scripture speaks of two sorfc^ 
of fhiit, which grow on the branches upon the natur^k.] 
.stock ; and it is plain enough, they are of the nature o^ 
their degenerate stock. (1 .) The wild grapes of wickecX- 
ness, Isa. v. 2. These grow in abundance by infiuen^* 
from hell : See Gal. v. 19, 20, 21 . At their gates arc vlMI 
manner of these fruits, both new and old. Storms conm'* 
from heaven to put them back ; but they sull grow. Tht^ 
are struck at with the sword of the Spirit, the word o^ 
God ; conscience gives them many a secret blow ; yetthe^ 
thrive. (2.) Fruit to themselves. Rosea x. 1. What el»* 
are all the unrenewed man's acts of obedience, his refi»*- 
matibn, sober deportment, his prayers, and good works 2 
They are all done chiefly for himself, not for the glory 
God. These fruits are like the apples of Sodom, fi^rt- 
look at, but fall to ashes, when handled and tried, 
think ye have not only the leaves of a profession, but tb.« 
fruits of a holy practice too ; but if ye be not broken 
off from the old stock, and ingrafted in Christ Jesus, God 
accepts not, nor regards your fruits. 

Here I must take occasion to tell you, there arc fivo 
faults will be found in heaven witJi your best fruiCJ- 
(1 .) Their bitterness ; your clusters are bitter, Deut. xxxii- 
32. There is a spirit of bitterness, wherewith somecomcbc- 
fore the Lord, in religious duties, living in malice an^enty; 
?ind which some professors entertain against others, because 
they outshine them, by holiness of life, or because theyaro 
not of their opinion or way. This, wheresoever it reignSf 
is a fearful symptom of an unregenerate state. But I do 
.not so much mean this, as that which is common to all tbo 
branches of the old stock ; namely, the leven of hypocrisff 
Luke xii. 1. which sours and embitters every duty thef 
perform. The wisdom that is full of good fruits is with* 
out hypocrisy, James iii. 17. (2.) Their ill savour. Thc^ 
works are abomini;ble,for themselvesare co»rupt,Psal.xi^' 
1 . They all savour of the old stock, not of the new ; ^ 
is the peculiar privilege of the saints, that they are unto 
God a sweet savour of Christ, 2 Cor. ii. 15. The unrc* 
generate man's fruits savour not of love to Christ, nor of 
the bipod of Chn^t} npr of the incep^e of td9 inte^Qessioo i 






'. Head IIQ < X^naivrtd Stock a degenerate Stocks 335 

• 

aod therefiore will never be acceptedof in heaven. (3^) Their 

;. tuiripeness. Their grape is an unnpe g^pe^ Job xv. 33. 

^There is no influence on them from the Sun of riglitcous' 

: netti to bring them to perfectioff; the^ have the shape of 

. .fiidt) but no more. The matter of duty is in them ; but 

A^j want right principles and ends ; their works are not 

Jhoi^tin God, John iii. 21. Their prayers drop from 

.- tbeir ups, before their hearts be impregnated with the ritai 

si^^oftiie Spirit of supplication ; their tears fall from their 

fiyesi ere their heaits be truly softened ; their feet turn to 

A^wpathS) and their way is altered, while yet their nature 

UQQt changed. (4.) Their lightness. Being weighed in 

tfie balances, they are found wandng, Dan. t. 27. For 

.^^TJdence whereof, you may observe, they do not humble. 

}^ soal, but lift it up in pride. The good fruits of holi- 

^8s bear down the branches they grow upon, making 

™m to salute the groiuid, I Cor. xv. 13. « I laboured 

J^re abundantly than they all; yet not t, but the grace of 

.Oed which was with me." But the blasted fruits of uAe- 

^Wed mens perfor^nance himg lightly on branches towcr- 

Wg up to heaven, Judges xvii. 13. " Now know I, that 

the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my 

tHest." They look indeed so high, that God cannot be- 
i>ld them. Wherefore have ivefastedj say they, and thou 
^itit not? Isa. Iviii. 3. The more duties they do, and the 
better they seem to perform them, the less are they hum- 
bled,^ the more they are liftc*d up. This disposition of the 
(inner is the exact reverse of what is to be found in the 
aaint. To men, who neither are in Christ, nor are solici- 
tous to be found in him, their duties are like windy blud* 
ders, wherewith they think to swim ashore to Immanuers 
land : But these must needs break, and they consequently 
sink ; because they take not Christ for the lifter up of their 
head. Psalm iii. 3. Lastly^ They are not all manner of 
pleasant fruits, Cant. vii. IS^ Christ is a King must be 
served with variety. Where God makes the heait his 
garden, he plants it as Solomon did his, with trees of all 
kinds of fruits, Eccles. ii. 5. And accordingly it brings 
forth the fruit of the Spirit in all goodness, Eph. v. 9. But 
the ungodly are not so; their obedience is never universal ; 
there is always some one thing or other excepted^ In one 

T a 



226 The natural Stock a dead Biack. [State, Iffi 

word, their fruits are fruits of an ill tree, that caniiot M 
accepted in heaven. , 

2(Uyi Our natural stock is a dead stock, according to 
the threatening, Gen. ii. 17. "In the day tliou catcat 
thereof, thou shalt surely die.*' Our root now is rotten-. 
ness, no marvel the blossom go up as dust. The stroke 
is gone to the heart ; the sap is let out, and the tree fe 
wiSiered. The curse of the first covenant, like a bot 
thunder-bolt from heaven, has lighted on it, and ruined 
h. It is cursed now as the fig-tree. Mat. xxi. 19. "Let 
no fruit grow on thee, henceforth for ever." Now it ii 
good for nothing, but to cumber the ground, and furnisli ", 
fuel for Tophet. 

Let me enlarge a little here also. Every unrenewed 
man ia a branch of a dead stock. When thou seest, ^ 
sinner, a dead stock of a tree, exhausted of all its 8&p» 
having branches on it in the same condition ; look on k 
as a lively representation of thy soul's state. ( 1 .) Whcro 
th^ stock is dead, the branches must needs be barren* 
Alas ! the barrenness of many professors plainly discovert 
on what stock they are growing. It is easy to pretend tft 
faith, but shew me thy faith without thy works, if tliou 
canst, James ii. 17. (2.) A dead stock can convey no 
sap to the branches, to make tlieni bring forth fruit. ,Th^ 
covenant of works was the bond of our union with th© 
natural stock, but now it is become weak through the 
flesh ; that is, through the degeneracy and depravity of 
human nature, Rom. vii. S. It is strong enough to 
command, and to bind heavy burdens on the shoulders of 
those who are not in Christ ;• but it affords no strength to 
bear them. The sap, once in the root, is now gone r 
and the law, like a merciless creditor,, apprehends Adam's 
heirs, saying. Pay what thou owest ; when, alas ! his 
effects are riotously spent. (3.) All pains and cost are 
lost on the tree whose life is gone. In vain do mc» 
labour to get fruit on the branches, wiien there is no sap 
in the root- Firsts The gardener's pains. at« lost ; mini* 
sters lose their labour on the branches of the old stock, 
while they continue on it. Many scvmons are preached 
to no purpose \ because there is no life to give sensation* 
Sleeping men may be awakened, but the dead caimot bo 

4?i$ed without a wracle \ even so^ the dead sinner nuisC 



n.) ^f the Mturai St9tk. 3 £» 

t of it| tiH such time as he has recourse to the blood 
rist for pardon, and renew his repentance, yet all 
le trusted to for \\£e and salvation, namely, the 
ousness of Christ, still stands entire, and the core- 
emains firm. See Rom. vii. 24, 3s. and viil. 1. 
r, though some men spend their lives in making and 
ng such covenants of their own, the terror upon the 
ng of them wearing weaker and weaker by degrees, 
la^t it creates them little or no uneasiness ; yet the 
in whom the good woi4l is carried on, till it be ac- 
lished in cutting him off from the old stock, finds 
covenants to be as rotten cords, broke at every touch ; 
le terror of God, being thereupon redoubled on his 
t and the waters at every turn getting into his very 
he is obliged to cease from catching hold of such 
ants, and to seek help some other way. 
2thlyy Therefore, the man cfraies at length to beg at 
t's door for mercy ; but yet he is a proud beggar* 
ng on his personal worth. For, as the Papists have 
itors to plead for them, with the one only Mediator ; 
i bninches of the old stock have always something to 
ice, which they think may commend them to Chnst, 
ngagc him to take their cause in hand. They cannpt 
of coming to the spiritual market, without money in 
hand. They are like persons, who have once had an 
: of their own, but are reduced to extreme poverty, 
)rced to beg. When tiiey come to beg, they still rc- 
)er their former character; and though they have lost 
>ubstance,yet they retain much of their former spirit; 
Fore, they cannot think they ought to be treated as or- 
Y t>eggars, but deserve a particular regard ; and, if 
>e not given them, their spirits rise against him to 
1 they address themselvesfbr supply. Thus God gives 
nliumblcd smner many commoh mercies, and shuts 
iot up in the pit, according to'his deserving ; but all 
3 nothing in his eyes. He niust be set down at the 
ren's table, otherwise he reckons himself hardly dealt 

and wronged ; for he is not yet brought so low, as 
nk, God may be justified when he speaketh, (against 
i and clear from all iniquity, when he judgeth him ac- 
ng to his real demerit, Psal. li. 4. He thinks, per- 

that even before he was enlightened, he was better 



$38 TAe natural Stock a killing. Stock. [State jll 

death is in the pot ; and all that taste of the pulse or 
pottage are killed. 

Know then) that evcrj natural man is a branch of I 

killing stock. Our natural root not only gives us not 

life, but it has a killing power, reacliing all the branch 

thereof. There are four things which the first Ad«a 

conveys to all his branches ; and they are abiding in, apd 

lying on, such of them as are not ingrafted to Clunit 

Pirstj A corrupt nature. He sinned, and his nators 

was thereby corrupted or depraved ; and this corrupdofl 

is conveyed to all his posterity. He was infected, sod 

the contagion spread itself over all his seed. Secondly'. 

Guilt ; that is an obligation to punishment, Rom. ?. 31 

<' By one man sin entered into the world, and death bjj 

sin ; and so death passed upon all men, for all that haT< 

sinned." The threatenings of the luw, as cords of death 

are twisted about the branches of the old stock, to dniM 

them over the hedge into the fire. And till they be ctt! 

off from this stock by the pruning knife, the sword o 

vengeance hangs over their heads, to cut them down 

Thirdly y This killing stock transmits the curse into thi 

branches. The stock as the stock (for I speak not 

Adam in his personal and private capacity) being cursed 

so are the branches, Gal. iii. 10. " For as manyasiir* 

of the works of the law, are under the cuvsc." Tlii! 

curse affects the whole man, and all that belongs to hina 

every thing he possesses ; and worketh three ways. (!• 

As poison, infecting ; thus their blessuigs are cursed 

Mai. ii. 2. Whatever the man enjoys, it can do hiin d< 

good, but evil, being thus impoisoned by the curse. Hii 

prosperity in the world destroys him, Prov. i. 32. TlU 

ministry of the gospel is a savour of death unto death tc 

him, 2 Cor. ii. 16. His seeming attainments in relig^ 

are cursed to him ; his knowledge serves but to pufFbiB" 

"up, and his duties to keep him back from Christ. (2.^ 1 

worketh as a moth, consuming and wasting by lM< 

and little, Hos. v. 12. " Therefore will I be unto Ephrsiff 

as a moth." There is a worm at the root, consumiui 

them by degrees. The curse pursued Saul, till it woffliet 

him out of all his enjoyments, and out of the vei7 she* 

he had of religion. Sometimes they decuy as the fit© 

iaiabSf and melt a^ay as the- snow in a sun-shine* (3-: 




JL}, iatrittfke mi/immimrmt Si^ek. m 

jbactistlittiaHoiLnmptiitf Hos.T. 14. ^ I will be unto 
l^^^mum ms a lioiu" Tlie Lord ndns on tbem mares, firo 
Immstane, and an horrible tempest* in such a man* 
that thejr are hurried away with the stream* He 

th'their enjoyments from thpm in his wrsthfpurauedi 

i^bsm with terrorsy rents their souls from their bodies, and 
jttiows t^ deadened brsnch into the fire. Thus the curse 
^toipars like fire, which none can quench. Xotf/y, Thia 
ySOmf; stock transmits deadi to the branches upon it* 
^Mun took the poisonous cup and drsnk it off; thia 
!%icauaiied death to lumself and us. We came into the 
^Mrald spiritually dead, thereby obnoxious to etetnal 
; dcadi^and absolutely li^le to temporal death. This root 
i^iilJi OB like the Scythian rirer, which, they say, brin^ 
torth little bladders every day, out of which come certain 
; Mftll flies, which are bred in the morning, winged at 
^Mo, and dead at night ; a Tcry lirely en&lem of our 
Nnnd state. 

p Kow, Sirs, is it not absolutely necessary to be broken 
; at from this our natural stock ? What will our fidr leayea 
i rfa profession, or our fruits of duties avail, if we be still 
^1ttanches of the degenerate, dead, and killing stock ? But, 
^ibfl! among the many questions tossed among us, few 
' vs ti^en up about these : Whether am I broken off from 
lAe old stock or not ? Whether am I ingrafted in Christ 
pfHot^ Ah ! wherefore sdl this waste ? Why is there so 
' Mch noise about religion amongst many, who can give no 

E)d account of their having laid a good foundation, 
pg mere strangers to experimental religion ? I fear, if 
Ood do not, in mercy, timeously undermine the religion 
<H many of us, and let us see we have none at all ; -our - 
Voot will be found rottenness, and our blossom go up as 
^ftt, in a dying hour. Therefore let us look to our state, 
tiiat we be not found fools in our latter end. 

II. Let us now view the supernatural stock, in which 
the branches, cut off from the natural stock, are ingrafted. 
Xesus Christ is sometimes called the Branchy Zech. ii. a* 
Be he is, in respect of his human nature ; being a branch, 
and the top-branch of the house of David. Sometimes he 
is called a Root, Isa. xi. 10. we have both together, Rev. 
axil 16. « I am the Root, and the Offspring of David :" 
Parid'a roots ^ God i and his QlEspringi as man. TllO 



230 Christ the supernatural Stock, [[State Hi-* 

text tells, that he is the Vine ; that is, He, as a MediafeeyTiC 
is the vine-stock, wherejgf believers are the branches. A* 
the' sap comes from the earth into the root and stock, znA 
from thence is diffused into the branches ; so by Christ) ak 
Mediator, divine life is conveyed from the fountain, unto 
those who are united to him by faith, John vi. 57. « A* 
the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father ; 
so he that ealeth me, even he shall live by me." Now 
Christ is Mediator, not as God only, as some have assert* 
ed ; nor yet as man only, as the Papists generally hold s 
But he is Mediator, as God-man, Acts xx. 28.^ — f^ The 
church of God, which he hath purchased with his Wood-** 
Heb. ix. 14. — ^' Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit* 
offered himself, witliout spot, to God." The diyine and ■ 
human natures have their distinct actings ; yet a joint ope* 
ration in this, discharging the office of a Mediator. Tbi« 
is illustrated by the similitude of a fiery sword, which at 
once cuts and burns ; cutting it burneth, and burning it 
cutteth ; the steel cuts, and the fire bums. Wherefore 
Christ, God-man, is the stock, whereof believers are the 
branches ; and they are united to whole Christ They ai* 
united to him in his human nature, as being members of 
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Eph. v. 30, And 
they are united to him in his divine nature ; for so tbo 
Apostle speaks of this union, Col. i. 27. « Christ in yoU| 
the hope of glbry." And by him they are united to the 
Father, and to the Holy Ghost, 1 John iv. 15. « Who- - 
soever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God 
dwelleth in him, and he in God." Faith, the bond of ; 
this union, receives whole Christ, God-man ; and so j 
unites us to him as such. 

Behold here, O believers, your high privilege ! Ye 
were once branches of a degenerate stock, even as others; 
but ye are, by grace, become branches of the true Vine, 
Jolin XV. 1 . Ye are cut out of a dead and killing stock, and 
ingrafted in the last Adam, who was made a quickening 
Spirit, 1 Cor. xv. 45. Your loss by the first Adam is made 
up, with great advantage, by your union with the second. 
Adam, at his best estate, was but a shrub, in comparison 
with Christ, the tree of life. He was but a servant ; Christ 
is the Son, the Heir, and Lord of all things ; the Lord 
from hcaveji. It cannot be denied, that grace was show» 



^^BEkc 



q The £l(eiltHit»M^aeiutmna8tK», Stl 



. bot it b M &t exceeded, by tfcc pwe 
second coTenalit, . as die twilight U I7 the fight & 

III, Wh&t branrhea are taken »ttt of the natonl Heck, 
ud grafted into this Vine ?— ^m. Thcae are the elect) 
snd none other. They, and they only, are p-kftedinto 
Christ i and, consequently, none but they ore cut off from 
ihe killing stock. For them alone he mtercedet, that tliejr 
na; be one in him and Ub Father, John xvii. 9, 33. 
Faith, the bond of tlia union, is gircatO none else ; itia 
the faith of God's elect. Tit. i. 1. The Lnd paaaeth bf 
maiif bmnchcs growing on the natural stock, and cuts off 
only here one, and there one, and grafts them into the true 
Vine, according as free Jove hath determined. Oft does 
lie pitch upon the most unlikely branch, leanng the top* 
Ixiughs; passing by the mighty, and the noble, and calling 
Qieveak, base, and despised, 1 Cor. i. 36, 37. Yea, he 

. o^ten leaves the fair and smooth, and takes tlie rugged and 
knotty. " And such were some of you ; but ye are 
■washed," tTc. 1 Cor. vi. M. If ye inquire why so ! We 
G&d no other reason but because they were chosen in hin}, 
^ph. i. 4. " Predestinated to the adoption of children by 
Jesus Christ," ver, i. Thus are they gathered together 
"" Christ, while the rest are left growing on their natural 
*lf>ck, to be afterwards bound up in bundles for the fire. 
}Vberefore, to -whomsoever the gospel may come io vain, 
it will have a blessed effect on God's elect, Acts 3Uii. 48. 
"As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed." 
Where tlie Lord has much people, the gospel will have 
niuch success, sooner or later. Such as are to be saved 
vrill he added to the mystical body of Christ. 
ffow the Branches are taken out nf Ike Mtmral Stock, 
and ingrafted into the Supernatural Stock. 

IV. I am to shew how the branches are cut off from 
the natural stock, the first Adam, and grafted into the true 
Viiie, the Lord Jesus Christ. Thanks to the Husbandman, 
not to the branch, that it is cut off from its natural stock, 
and ingrafted into anew cme. The sinner, in his coming 
off from the first stock, is passive ; and neither can nor 
win come off from it of its own accord, but clings to it, 
d^ Almighty power make him to fall off, John vi. 44. '* No 



! 



Si76 The 9fiecial Cart qf the Htuibandnmn. [State iQ.* 

he purgeth it, that it may bii^ forth more fruit*' Be- 
lievers, by virtue of their union with Christ, are the object 
of God'i special care and providence. Mystical Christ ii 
God's vine ; other societies in the world^are but wild oli^ 
trees. The men of the world are hut God's out-field; the 
saints are tiis vineyard, which he has a special propriety 1% 
SBid a special concern for, Cant. viii. 12. << My vineyardt 
which is mine, is before me." He that slumbei's not, nor 
sleeps, is the keeper of it; he doth keep it, lest any hurt;iie 
will keep it night and day: He in whose hand is the dew of 
heaven will water it every moment, Isa.xxvii.3. Hedreu* 
eth and purg^eth it, in order to fiyrtlier fruitfulness, Jtita 
XV. 2. He cuts off the luxui*iant twigs, that mar the fnx^ 
fulness of the brunch. This is done, especially, by die 
word, and by tlie cross of afflictions. The saints need the 
ministry of the word, as much as the vineyard needetb ene 
to dress and prune the vines, 1 Cor. iii. 9. « We are !•• 
feourers together with God.— Ye are God's husbandry, yt 
are God's building.^' And they need the cross too, 1 Pet.i.6. 
And, therefore, if we should reckon the ci'oss amengit 
the benefits flowing to believers from their union with 
Christ, I judge, we should not reckon it amiss. Sure I asfl) ^ 
in their sufferings, they suffer with him, Rom. viii. 17« J 
And the assurances they have of the cross have rather the f 
nature of a promise, asof a threatening,Psal.lxxxix.S0,3l, 
52,33. " If his children forsake my law, — ^thenwilll 
visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity 
with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving-kindness will I not 
utterly take from him; nor suffer my faithfulness to fail * 
This looks like a tutor's engaging to a dying father, to td^e 
care of the children left upon liim ; and to give them boA 
nurture and admonition, for their good. The covenant rf 
grace does truly beat the spears of affliction into pruniDg 
hooks to them that are in Christ, Isa. xxvii. 9. " By thi»r 
therefore, shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged ; and tLis* 
all the fruit to take away his sin." Why then should we 
be angry with our cross ? Why should we be frighted at it-J 
The believer must take up his cross, and follow his leader^ 
the Lord Jesus Christ. He must take up his ilk-day's crosej 
Luke ix. 23. « If any mun will come after -me, let hifl* 
deny himself, and take up his cross daily." Yea, he must, 
^e up his holy day's cross too^ Lam. ii. 22. «« Thoiib«^ 



EST-}:" i^ 



ii •■ 




ffdie wttne of lier Head and Husbtiidy ) Cor. m. 19. 
tcrastliebodyisone^aiid hathmtiijiiieoibenf— eoal* 

^^K. Frooi what is said, wc wmf draw these following 
mfifenee9» 

i^t* The preaching of the law is most necessur. Hei&at 
ItBsOA ingraft mastneeds ose the snedding knife. Sinners 
i^ many shifts to keep them from Christ ; many things 
If ffhich tfacy keep their hold of the natural stock ; there- 
mttj they have need to be closely pursued, and hunted out 
tf'dirir'sculking holes, and refuge of lies. 

^,Tet, it is the gospel that crowns the work ; the law 
noakes ik>thing perfect. The law lays open the wound^ 
hit h, is the gospel that heal^* ' The law strips a many 
wiimds him, and leaves lum half dead : The gospel binds 
Ij^Ms wounds, pouring in wine and oil, to hed them. By 
mixw we are broken oif ; but, it is by the gospel we are 
Hfken up, and implanted in Christ. 
. S. ^ If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none 
if his,** Rom. vnL 9. We are told of a monster in na- 
tffre, having two bodies differently animated, as appeared 
hmi contrary affections at one and the same time ; but so 
•itcd, that they were served with the self-same legs. 
Ktcu so, however men may cleave to Christ, call them- 
i^s of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God 
)f l8tael,Isa. xlvii. 2. and they may be bound up as branch* 
^ in htm, John xv. 2. by the outward ties of sacraments; 
Ni if the Spirit that dwells in Christ dwell not in them, 
^ are not one with liim. There is a gi'eat difference 
)ctwixt adhesion and ingrafting. The ivy clasps and 
Wsts its'ellf about the oak, but it is not one with it, for it 
^ grows on its o\(rn root ; so, to allude to Isaiah iv. I.' 
^f professors take hold of Christ, and eat their own 
•^rt^, and wear their own apparel, only they are called by 
^najne. They stay themselves upon lum, but grow 
'^ their own root ; they take him to support ^eir hope% 
?^ their delights are elsewhere. 

.4. The union betwixt Christ and his mystical members 
fiha and indissolvable. Were it so that the believer onr 
t apprehended Christ, but Christ appr^ended not him^ 
^0 could promise little on the stability of such an union ; 
^^ht quickly^be dissolved : But as the believer apprc-» 

X 



tttints^are in thy hand, X>eut. xxxiii. 3. It is obsei 
ifsmej that the word Mba is the same, whether you 
Cbrward or backward. Whatever the belieyer's < 
the Lord is still to hiip, Mba, Father. 

Lastly^ They have an unsure hold of Christ, w] 
has not apprehended by hi^ Spirit. There are ma 
marriages here, where the soul apprehends Christ 
not apprehended of him. Hence many fall away, i 
ver rise again ; they let go their hold of Christ ; an' 
that b gone, all is.gone* These are the branches in 
that bear not fruit, which the husbandman taket 
John XV. 2.— .Qtt^«/. How can that be ?r — ^na. 
branches are set in the stock, by a profession, or 
iKmnd'hypocritical &ith ; they are bound up with il 
eternal use of the sacraments ; but the stock a: 
arc never knit ; therefore, they cannot bear fruit 
tbey need not be cut off, nor broken off; they are 
hU^Nundman only taken away, or (as the word pr 
sig^nifies) lifted up ; smd so taken away, because t 
Bt^ingto hold them: They are indeed boimd up ^ 
fltock } but they have never united with it. 

Que9t. How shall I know if 1 am 'apprehended of 
--^n4^. You may be satisfied in this inquiry, if yoD 
der and apply these two things : 

Pit'Mt^ IXTKati C.liiriat ftrfcTir*»hi*Ti*1ft n Tnnn hrr fiis 



^•^ 



1 il.} Sign9 €f Ckru$U apprehtnding a SUmer. i47 

Ify to the numntain of the Lord's bouse. It denotes 
nly the abundance of conyeit% but the ^sposidoii 
eir souls, in doming to Christ ; they come heartilf 
reely, as drawn with loving Idndness, Jer. xxxi. 3« 
Y people shall be willing in the day of thy power,** 
ex. 3. f. e, free, ready, open hearted, giving them- 
I to thee as free-will offerings. When the bride- 
n has the bride's heart, it is a right marriage \ but 
give their hand to Christ, who give him not their 
. . They that are only driven to Christ by terrorit 
»arely leave him again, when that terror is gone. 
)r may break a heart of stone, but the pieces into 
x it is broken still continue to be stone ; the terrors 
»t soften it into a heart of flesh. Yet terror may 
the work, which love crovms ; the strong wind^ 
irthquake, and the >fire going before $ the still small 
) in which the Lord is, may come after them, 
a the blessed Jesus is seeking sinners to match with 
they are bold and perverse, they will not speak vrith 
ill he hath wounded them, made them captives, and 
i them with the cords of death. Wh^n this is donet 
It is he makes love to them, and wins their hearts. 
Lord says, Hos. ii. 16—20. that his chosen Israel- 
be married unto himself. But, how will the brides 
nt be won ? Why, in the first place, he will bring 
ito the wilderness, as he did the people when he 
;ht them out of Egypt, vcr. 1 4. There she will be 
jT dealt with, scorched with thirst, and bitten with 
nts ; and then he will speak comfortably to her, or, 
; expression is, he will speak upon her heart The 
t- is first driven, and then di^awn to Christ. It is 
the soul as with Noah*s dove ; she was forced back 
to the ark, because she could find nothing else to 
ipon ; but when she did return, she would have 
i on the outside of it, if Noah had not put fi>rth his 
and pulled her in. Gen. viii. 9. The Lord sends 
renger of blood in pursuit of the criminal, and he, 
I sad heart, leaves his own city ; and with tears in 
^es, parts with his old acquaintance, because he dare 
ay with them ; and he flees for his life to the city, 
fage. This is not at all his choice, it is forced 
; necessity has no law. But when he cornea to Uick 



246 Benefit9jt9tringfi'^m ChrUt^ Sec. [})^ 

gttteih and sees the beauty of the place> the excello! 
lovelkieBs of it channs Mm ; and then he enterg 
heart and good-will, sayin^f Thit U my reetf and he 
l9tay } and, as one said in another case, I had p< 
tmless.I had perished. 

, Secondly J When Christ apprehends a soul, the 1 
disengaged from, and turned against sin. As in < 
(ofip the branch from the old stock, the great idol 
brought down, the man is powerfully taught to den 
eelf '; so, in the apprehending of the sinner by his 
'that imion is di$solyed» which was betwixt the m 
liis lusts, while he was in the flesh, as the Apqst 
presses it, Rom. viii. 5. the heart is loosed from 
thoughr formerly as dear to him, as the members 
body, as his eyes, legs, and arms ; andj instead of 
pleasure in them, as^ometime he did, he longa to 
of them. When the Lotd Jesus comes to a soul, 
day of conyerting grac§, he finds it like Jerusalem 
day of her nativity,. (Ezek. xvi. 4r.) with its navel n 
drawing its fulsome nourishment and satisfaction fit 
lusts ; but, he cuts off this communication, that h 
set Uie soul on the breasts of his own conaolatiov 

five it rest in himself. And thus the Lord woun 
ead and heart of sin, and the soul comes to him, < 
<♦. Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and 
jjrherein there are no profit/' Jer. xvi. 19, 

QfthtJBehefitaJlo^ng to true Believer a^rom their 

wth Christy 

y. And, lastlyj I come to speak of the benefits 
jng to true believers, from their union with Christ, 
chief oif the particular benefits believers have by 
justification^ peace, adoption, sanctification, groi 
grace, fruitfulness in good works, acceptance of 
good works, establishment in a state of grace, st 
and a special conduct of Providence about them, 
communion with Christ,, it is such a benefit, as bei 
imtnediate consequent of union with him, compn 
all the res^ as mediate ones. For look, as the t 
immediately upon its union with the stock, hath 
nxunion wijth the ^ock, in all that is in it i sothebe 



»:■ 



•«» 



Sx$i u.j[ 



JuityUaOoth 24S 



voting with Chrittf hath commuiuoii with him ; in 
^i^ixAi he iauncheth forth into an ocean of happiness* is 
M intb a paradise of pleasures, and has a saving interest 
a ^ treasure hid in the field of the gospel, the unsearch<» 
Afe riches of Christ. As soon as tl^e believer is united 
lb .Christ, Christ himself, in whom all fulntfss dwells, is 
Vki Cant.~ii. 16. ^ My beloved b mine, and I am his.'' 
Airty ^ How shall he not with him freely f^ve us ALL 
tUagH ?'' Rom. vii. 32. << Whether Paul, or ApoUos, or 
C^Eas, or the-world, or life, or death, or things present^ 
QT' thmgs to come, ALL are yours,^' I Cor. iiL 32. 
rims communion with Christ is the great comptehenuvo 
blessDg, necessanfy flowing from our union with him. 
^t us now consider the particular benefits flowing fronoL 
% before mentioned. 

'The Jirst particular benefit, that a sinner hath by his: 
^nbn with Christ, is Justification ; for being united to 
3uist, he hath communion with him in his righteous- 
ly 1 Cor. i. 30. <« But.of him are ye in Christ Jesus^ 
Hioof God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness.'^' 
i« stands no more condemned, but justified before God^ 
» being in Christ, Rom. viii. 1. « There is thei*eforet 
»w no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.*' 
rhe branches hereof are pardon of sin, and personal aq- 
'tptance. 

U/, His sins are pardoned, the guilt of them is remov* 
^*' The bond obliging him to pay his debt is cancelled 
h^ tl»e Father takes the pen, dips it in the blood of his 
^ crosseth the sinner^s accounts, and blottetli them out 
^ his debt-book. The sinner, out of Christ, is bound 
•^r to the wrath of God ; he is under an obligation ia 
iw to go to the prison of hell, and there lie till he has 
"aid the utmost farthing. This ariseth from the terrible 
*Rction with which the law is fenced, which is no less ' 
^ death, Gen. ii. 17. So that the sinner, passmg the 
^ods assigned him, is as Shjmei in another case, >a maa 
f death, } Kings ii. 42.^ But now being united ta 
?^ri8t, God saith, " Deliver him from gcMug down to the 
*t 5 I have found a ransom,** Job xxxiii. 24* The sen- 
dee of condemnation is ireveraed,the believer is absolved, 
1^ set beyond the reach of the condemning kw. . Hi^ 

^h trhich sometimes were set before the tiotdy Ptete. 



f- 



they Ao not sink I He will cast them in vith for 
that they ahall go to the ground, md sink as lead 
Yoi^ty waters of the Redeemer's bloo<L Theyi 
fOiIy forgiven) but forgotten^ Jer, xxxi. 34. << I w 
give their iniquity^ ami I will remember their 8 
:more/* And Uiough their after-sins do in themset 
serve eternal wrath^ and do actually make them li 
temporal strokes^ and fatherly chastisements, accor 
the tenor of the covenant of grace, Psalm Ixxxix. S 
Yet they can never be actually liable to eternal wr 
ihe curse of the law ; for they are dead to the 
Christ, Rom. vii. 4. And they can never fall froi 
union with Christ, nor can they be in Christ, and * 
det cende^mation,, Roni. viii» 1. ^ There is th 
MiwHio oonderanation tQ them which are in Christ < 
This is am inference drawn from that doctrine of 
liever's being dead to the law> delivered by the i 
ichap^ vii. l-**^ as is clear from chap. viii. 2, 3, 4. 
this respect, the justi&ed mail is the blessed ma- 
iKhom t&e Lord imputeth not iniquity, Psal. xxxii^ 
|iii^ whahas no design to chaise a debt on anotlu 
It not down in his count-book. 
, 2d^y.Thfi believer la accept as lighteous ii 
aighty % Cor. v. 2 1. For he is found in Christ, v 
ins his own ciehteousness, but that which is thro* 



lead n.] Ju9tificati^4 M 

if justice demasd a righteousneis of one that is in Christy 
vpoQ which hb may be accounted righteous before the 
Lord; Surely shtUl suchan one say^In the Lord have I righ* 
teoumess, Isa jxv. 24. The law is fulfilled, its commands 
m obeyed, its sanction is satisfied. The believer's Cau- 
tiiHier has paid the debt. It was exacted, and he answer* 
cdforit , 

Thus the person united to Christ is j ustified. You ma^ 
coQceiTe of the whole pi'oceeding herein in this manner* 
The avenger of blood pursuing the criminal, Christ, as 
the Saviour of lost sinners, doth by the Spirit apprehend 
Idm, and draw him to himself ; and he by faith lays hold 
on Christ; so the Lord our righteousness and tlie un» 
righteous creature unite. From this union with Christ 
results a communion witli him, in his unsearchable riches^ 
t&d, consequently, in hisCligbteousness, that white raiment 
wkich he has for clothing of the naked. Rev. iiL 1 8. Thus 
the righteousness of Christ becomes his ; and because it 
is his by unquestionable title, it is imputed to him ; it is 
Yeckoned his, in the judgment of God, which is always 
according to truth of the thing. And so the believ- 
ing sinner having a righteousness which fully answers 
the demands of tlie law, he is pardoned and accepted as 
righteous. See Isa. xlv. 22, 24, 25. Rom. iii. 24. and 
chap. v. 1 . Now he is a free man : Who shall lay anjr 
thmg to the charge of those whom God justifieth ? Can 

gdce lay any thing to their charge I No ; for it is satis- 
d. Can the law i No ; for it has got sdl its demands 
of them in Jesus Christ, Gal. ii. 26. / am crucified with 
Christ, What caii the law require morc,a£ter it has wound- 
ed their Head ; poured in wrath, in full measure, inta 
their soul ; and cut off their life, and brought it into the 
dust of death ? In so far as it has done all this to Jesu& 
Christ, who is their Head, Eph. i. 22. their Soul, Acts ii. 
35, 27. and their Life I Col. iii. 4. What is become of 
tiic sinner*s own hand-writing, which would pi'ove the 
debt upon him ? Christ has blotted it out. Col. ii. 14^ 
But, it may be justice may get its eye upon it again : No^ 
he took it out of the way^ But, O that it had been torn in 
pieces, may the sinner say : Yea, so it is ; the nails that 
{lierced Christ's hands and feet are driven through it, he 
BsUed it fiut viiat if the \gan pieces b^ set together 



ask Ai«rr w^a Ood, [Sti^llt! 

■cain t l%Kt caanot be, for be nuled tl to his cross, kA 
hu oroM vaa buried irith lum ; but will never rise more, 
Mung Christ i^tb no more. Where ia tbe face-coveni^ 
that ma ajxni the condemned Toaa, ^ Christ has destroyed 
ib lu. xxr. r. Where is death, that stood bcfoie tht 
^mer with s gndi fiice, and an D^«n mouth, readf to de- 
vgur him ? Christ haa awallowed it ay in victoi^t ver. B: 
Glory, glorf) glory to hint, that thus l9^ed us, and wa^' 
ed ua from our sins in his owit blood ! 

The tetond benefit Sowing from die same spriug of 
oidou with^hriat, and coming by the way of jusll£cation, 
IB Peace ; peace with God, and peace of conscience, ac- 
cording to the measure of the aensc the justified havepC 
their peace with God, Rom. v. 1- -« The le fore, being 
jasdfied by faith, we have peace with God." Chap. liT. 
37. K For the kingdom of GdVts not meat and drink, 
bat righteouancaa imd peace, ^d joy in the Holy Ghost." 
Whereaa God was their enemy before, dow he is reconcil- 
ed to them in Christ ; they are in a covenant of peace 
with him ; and aa Abraham was, so Uicy ure the friends 
of God. He is well-pleased irith them in his beloted 
Son. His woi'd, which spoke terror to them formerly, 
DOW speaks p«ace, if they rightly take up Its langu^^gC' 
And there is4ove in, all his dispensations towards thein, 
which makes all work together &>r their good. Their 
consciences are purged of that guilt and filthiness that 
. sometimes lay upon tbem: tiis conscience-puiilying hlood 
streams through their souls, by virtue of tlicir union wiA 
Km, Heb. ix. 14- " How much more shall tlie blood of 
Cbrist-^urge your conscience from detd works, to serre 
the living God \" The bonds laid on their consciences, 
by the Spirit of God, acting as the spirit of bondage, htSi 
taken off,, never more to be l^d tm by tlut l>i.ndi Roa]> 
vii. U. « For ye have not received the spirit of bondage 
^aitt to foar.". Hereby the conscience is quietcd,asaooiJ 
as the soul becomes c<mscioas of the applicnUon of that 
blood ; which fells out sooner or later, acccrding to tlio 
Uieasuie of fitith, and as the only wise God sees meet to 
time it. Unbelievera may have troubled consciences, 
which they may get quieted again ; but, alaa \ their poB* 
sciences bccomepeaccabic,ere they become pure; sodMU 
jieacelabnttlieseedufgKawhori'orandqoafaiUm. Cv** 



itd II.] and Peace of Conscience. 25*3 

isness may give ease for a while to a 8*ck conscience ; 
m neglecting its wounds, they close again of their own 
:orcl, before the filthy matter is purged out. Many 
ry their guilt in the grave of an ill memory ; conscience 
larts a little ; at length the man forgets his sin, and 
;rc is an end of it : But that is only an ease before 
&th. Business, or the affairs of life, oftan give ease in 
s case. When Cain is banished from the presence of 
; Lord, he fulls a-building of cities. When the evil 
rit came upon Saul, he calls not for his Bible, nor for 
: priests to converse with him about his case ; but for 
isic,to play it away. So many when their conscience sbe- 
1 to be uneasy, they fill their heads and hands witli busi- 
SS| 'to divert themselves, and to regain ease at any rate, 
a, some will sin, over the belly of their convictions ; 
i so some get ease to tlieir consciences, as Hazuel gave 
his master, by stifling him. Again, the performing 
duties may give some ease to a disquieted conscience ; 
i this is all that legal professors have recourse to, ibr 
ieting of their consciences. When conscience is wound- 
, they will pray, confess, mourn, and resolve to do 

no more ; and so they become whole acain, with-v- 
t any application of the blood of Christ by faith. But 
ey, whose consciences are rightly quieted, come for 
ace and purging to the blood of sprinkling. Sin is a 
^cet morsel, that makes God's elect sick souls, ere they 
't it vomited up. It leaves a sting behind it, which, 
•me one time or other, will create them no little pain. 
Elihu shews us both the case and cure, Job xxxiii. 
^hold the case one may be in, whom God has thoughts 

love to ! He darteth convictions into his conscience, 
(d makes them stick so fast, that he cannot rid himself 

them, ver. 1 6. " He openeth the cars of men, and 
aleth their instructions." His veiy body sickens, ver. 
^ " He is chastened also, with pain upon his bed ; and 
« multitude of his bones with strong pain." He loseth 
* stomach, ver. 20. « His life abhorcth bread, and his 
'Ul dainty meat." His body pines away, so that there is 
'tiling on him but skin and bone, ver. 21. " His flesh 
consumed away, that it cannot be seen ; and his bones, 
^ were not seen, stick out." Though he is not pre* 
^ed for death, he has no Jiopes of life, ver. 32, " Hia 



254 Peace mih Gody fStateltL^ 

soul draweth near unto the grave, and*' (which is dii 
height of his misery) " his life to the destroyers.** Mcii^ 
looking every moment, when devils, these destroyer^ 
(Rom. ix. 1 1 .) these murderers, or man-slayers, (Jo^ 
viii. 44.) will come and carry away his soul to hell ! 
dreadful case \ yet tliere is hope. God designs to keef|' 
back his soul from the pit, although he bring him&N^ 
ward to the brink of it, ver. 18. Now, see how the sick, 
man is cured : The physician's art cannot prevail henjj 
the disease lies more inward, than that his medicines cili 
reach it. It is soul-trouble that has brought the bodf 
into this di»5order ; and, therefore, the remedies must be 
applied to the sick man*s soul and conscience. The 
physician for this case must be a spiritual physician ; the 
remedies must be spiritual ; a righteousness, a ransoniy or . 
atonement. Upon the application of these, the soul is ' 
cured, the conscience is quieted, and the body recovcrSf 
ver. 23, 24, 25, 26. " If there be a messenger wiA ; 
him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto i 
man his uprightness ; then he is gracious unto him, and ; 
saith. Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have' 
found a ransom. His flesh shall be fresher than a child's^ \ 
he shall return to the days of his youth. He shall pray \ 
unto God, and he shall be favourable unto him, and : 
he shall see his face with joy." The proper physician ■ 
for this patient is a messenger^ an interpreter^ ver. 23. 
that is, as some expositors, not without ground, under- j 
stand it, the great Physician Jesus Christ, whom Job 
had called his Redeemer, chap. xix. 25. He is a mei^ 
aengevj the messenger of the covenant of peace, Mai. iii- 
1. who comes seasonably to the sick man. He isfl» j 
inter/ire ter, the great interpreter of God's counsels of love ! 
to sinners, John i. 28. One among' a thouaandj even the 
chief among ten thousand. Cant. v. 10. One chosen out 
of the people, Psal. Ixxxix. 29. One to whom the Lord 
hath given the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in 
season to him that is weary, Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6. It is h^ 
that is with him, by his Spirit, now, to convince him o^ 
righteousness ; as he was with him before, to convince 
him of sin and judgment, John xvi. 8. His work now 
is to shew unto him his uprightness, or his righteousness; 
if e. the interpreter Christ his righteousness -, which i?. 



lead 11.3 ^d Peace qf Conscience. SUf 

lie only righteousness ariiiDg from the paying of a ran- 
Kmif and upon which a sinner is deiiyered mm going 
kwn to the pit, ver. 24. And thus Christ is said to de- 
dare God's name, Psal. xxii. 23. and to preach right- 
Booaness, Psal. xl. 9. The phnise is remarkable ; it is 
tMtto riiew unto the man, but unto man his righteousness; 
vMch not obscurely intimates, that he is more than a 
tnan, who shews, or declareth this righteousness : Com- 
pare Amos iv. 13. « He that formeth the mountains, 
and createth the wind, and declareth unto man what is 
lu8 thought." There seems to be in it a sweet allusion 
to the first declaration of this righteousness unto man, or, 
as the word is, unto Adam^ after the fall ; while he lay 
under terror from apprehensions of the wmth of God ; 
which declaration was made by the Messenger, the Inter- 
preter, namely, the eternal Word of the Son of God, call- 
ed, 7!^ f -voice of the Lord God^ Gen. iii. 8. and by him 
appearing, probably, in human shape. Now, while, by 
bis Spirit, he is the Preacher of righteousness to the man, 
ttis supposed the mun li»ys hold on the offered righteous- 
ness ; whereupon the ransom is applied to him, and he 
IS delivered from going down to tlic pit ; for God hath a 
ftnsom for him. This is intimated to him ; God saith, 
J)eHver him^ ver. 24. Hereupon his conscience, being 
purged by the blood of atonement) is pacified, and sweetly 
<iuieted : « He shall pray unto God— and see his face 
"With joy," which before he beheld with horror, ver. 26. 
That is New Testament hmguage, " Having an High- 
ftiest over the house of God," he shall " draw near with 
*true heart, in full assurance of faith ; having his heart 
sprinkled from an evil conscience," Heb. x. 21, 22. But 
*Sen, what becomes of uie body, the weak and weary 
flesh ? Why, " His flesh shall be fresher than a child's ; 
^e shall return to the days of his youth," ver. 25. « Yea, 
^ his bones" (which were chastened with strong pain, 
"^er. 19.) " shall say. Lord, who is like unto thee V\ 
Psal. XXXV. 10. 

^ A third benefit, flowing from union with Christ, is A- 
^option. Believers, being united to Christ, become child- 
"^n of God, and members of the family of heaven. By their 
^n with him, who is the Son of God by nature, they 
■ecome the sons of ^Gkwi by grace^ John i. 12. As whpn 



the Sfmit of hia Son, which brmg them to God^ % 
#eti t6 a father ; to pour out their complsdnts in his 
veidtosdek neoeasary supply, GaL iv. 6., ^ Becaui 
SODS, ^ God hath sent forth Uie Spirit -of his Son ii 
keartSy crying, Abba, Father." Under all their wed 
they have fetherly pity and compassion shewn th^i 
ciii. 13. Like av a &tlier pitieth his children, so t 
pitieth thetti that fe» him.'* Although they w 
foundling found in a desart land ; yet now that 1 
bekmgfi the adoption, he keeps them as the appi 
eye, Deut. xxxii* 10. Whosoever pursue them, tl 
a refuge, Prov. xiv. 26. " His children shall have 
of refbg^/' In a time of common calamity, th< 
clkianbeirs for protection, where they may be hid, i 
indignation be overpast, Isaiah xxvi. 20. And ha 
ondv'tjieir refuge for prptectk^n, but their portion ' 
visiflin, in that refuge, Psalm cxlii. 5. ^ Thou art 
fuge.and niy portion, in the land of the living." 1 
provided for, for eternity, Heb. xi. 1 6. ^ He ha^ 
ed for them a city." And What he sees they havfe- 
for time, they shaR not' want, Mat. id. 3 1 , 32. « ." 
thought, spying. What shall w^eat ? Or, What l 
dnqk ? Or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed I I 
heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of s^ 



4^ir8 of God) who himself is the portion of their inhcri* 
tece, Psalm, xvi. 5. and joint heirs with Christ, Rom. 
Tiii. 17. And because they are the children of the Gi-cat 
^Ung, and young heirs of glory, they have angels for their 
attendants, who are sent forth to minister for tlicni thiit 
4itail be heirs of salvation, Heb. i. 14. 

A fourth benefit is SanctificaUoa, I Cor. i. 50. « But 
f»f him are ye in Christ Jesus, wlio of God is made unto 
W wisdom and righteousness, and sanctifi cation." Being 
United to Christ, they partake of his Spirit which is the 
Spirit of holiness. There is a fulness of theSpirit in Christ* 
•and it is not like the fulness of a vessel, which only retains 
What is poured into it ; but it is the fulness of a fountain 
Ibr diffusion and communication, which is always sending 
ftrth Its water, and yet is always full. The Spirit of Christ^ 
that spiritual sap which is in the stock, and from thence is 
communicated to the branches, is the Spirit of grace, Zecli. 
^. 10. And where the Spirit of grace dwells, there will 
be found a complication of all graces. Holiness is not one 
grace only, but all the graces of the Spirit ; it is a constel- 
lation of grace ; it is all the graces in their seed and root. 
And as the sap conveyed Jrom the stock into the branch 
goes through it, and through every pan of it, so the Spirit 
of God sanctifies the whole man. The poison of sin was 
diffused thix)ugh the whole spirit, soulandbody of the whole 
J'Jan ; and sanctifying grace pursues it into every comer, 
J Thess. V. 2S. Every part of the man is sanctified, though 
iJo part is perfectly so. The truth we are sanctified by is 
W, held in the head, as in a prison ; but runs, with its 
-fMJctifying influences, through heart and life. There are, 
indeed, some graces in every believer, which appear as top 
^M^ches above tlie rest; as meekness in Moses, patience in 
Job ; but seeing there is in every child of God a holy prin- 
^ple going along with the holy law, in all the parts theror 
^ loving, liking, and approving of it ; as appears from 
^eir universal respect to the commands of God ; it is evi- 
dent they are endued with all the graces of the Spirit ; b^- 
^^ae, there can be no more in the cflTect than there was in 
'^e cause. 

. Now, this sanctifying Spirit, whereof believers partake, 
^* unto them, C^-) A Spirit of mortification. " Throuj^h 
^ Spirit they mortify the deeds of the body," Rom. vii?. 

V 



258 Sanctification, [State IQ 

13. Sin is cruciiicd in them, Gal. v. 24. They are planta 
together (namely with Christ) in the likeness of his deal!) 
which was a lingering death, Rom. vi. 5. Sin in the saint 
though not quite dead, yet is dying. If it were dead, i 
would be taken down from the cross, and buried out of hi 
sight ; but it hangs there as yet, working and struggUnj 
under its mortal wouni^. Look, as when a tree has ga 
such a stroke as reaches tlie heart of it, all the leaves m 
branches thereof begin to fade and decay ; so, where tlw 
sanctifying Spirit comes, and breaks the power of sin, then 
is a gradual ceasing from it, and dying to it, in the wholi 
man, so that he no longer lives in the flesh to the lusts o 
men. He does not make sin his trade and business ; iti 
not his great design to seek himself, and to satisfy his c(» 
nipt inclinations ; but he is for Immanuel's land, and i 
walking in the high-way to it, the way which is called 
The way of holiness ; though tlie whid from hell, that fa 
on his back before, blows now full in his face, makes lu 
travelling uneasy, and often drives him off the high-wa] 
(2.) This Spirit is a Spirit of vivification to them ; for h 
is the Spirit of life,and makes them live unto right eousXic« 
Ezck. xxxvi. 27. " And I will put my Spirit within ytw 
and cause you to walk in my statutes." Those that hav 
been planted together with Christ, in the likeness of hi 
death, shall be also in the likeness of hisresurrection,RaD 
vi. 5. At Christ's resurrection, when his soul was r< 
united with his body, every member of that blessed boi 
was enabled again to perform the actions of life ; so, tk 
soul being influenced by the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, 
enabled more and more to perform all the actions of SJ 
ritual life. And as the whole of the law, and not soJi 
scraps of it only, is written on the holy heart ; so believe 
are enabled to transcribe that law in their conversatic 
And although they cannot write one line of it without blor 
yet God, for Christ's sake, accepts of the performances, 
point of sanctifi cation ; they being disciples to his own Sc 
and led by his own Spirit. 

Thi$ sanctifying Spirit, communicated by the Lo 
Jesus to his members, is the spiritual nourishment tl 
branches have from the Stock into which they arc i 
grafted, whereby the life of grace, given them in reg^ci 
tion, is preserved, continued, and actuated. It is tl 



II.] Sanctificaiion. 259 

shment whereby the new creature liveih, and is 
shed up towards perfection. Spiritual I if.' needs 
fed, and must have supply of nourishment ; ind he- 
rs derive the same from Christ, whom the I'uihiT has 
ituted the hv-ad of influences to all his memhrrs, 
ii. 19. « Aiul not holding- the head, from which 
36 body by joints and bands having nourishnivnt 
Jtered," or supplied, i!fc. " Xow, this supply is 
lupply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ," Phil. i. 19. 
saints feed richly, eatiiig Christ's flesh, and drinking 
lood, for their apimiuil nourishment; yet our Loi'd 
elf teachc th us, that it is the Spirit that quicken eth 
that Spirit who dwells in that blessed bo.:y, John 
I. The human nature is united to the divine na- 

in the person of the Son, and so (like the bowl in 
ariah's candle sticU, Zech. iv.) lies at the fountain 
. as the conveyance of influences, from the fountain 
J Deity ; and receives not the Spirit by measure, but 
hath a fulness of the Spirit by reason of that personal 
1. ' Hence, believers being imited to the man Christy 
he seven lamps to the bowl, by their seven pipes, 
I. iv. 2.) his flesh is to them meat indeed, and his 
I drink indeed ; for, feeding on that blessed body, 
efi*ectually applying Christ to their souls by faith,) 
partake more and more of that Spirit, who dwelleth 
in, to their spiritual nourishment. The holiness of 
could never admit of an immediate union with the 
1 creature, nor (consequently) an immediate com- 
ion with it ; yet the creature could not live the life 
race, without communion with tlic fountain of life : 
'cfore, that the honour of Ciod's holiTiess, and the 
lion of sinners, might jointly be provided for, the 
id Person of the glorious Trinity took into a personal 
1 with himself a sinless human nature ; that so this 
harmless, and uiidefiled humanity, might immediate- 
-eivc a fulness of the Spirit, of which he might com- 
'cate to his members by his divine power tuid efficacy, 
like as, if there were a tree, having its root in the 
») and its branches reaching to heaven, the vast dis- 
' betwixt the root and the branches would not inter- 

the communication betwixt the root and the top 
:h; even so J tlic cUstance betwixt tlie mau Christy 



S$9 '^ SupctificaiMb ^ 

who is in -heavcii, and his members who are oi 
«annot hinder the communication betwixt them, 
though the parts of mystical Christ (viz, the head 
members) are not contiguous, as joined togethe 
Way of a col'poral union ? The union is not therei 
]|ess re^ and effectual. Yea, our Lord himself sh 
tliat albeit wc should eat his flesh in a corporal ant 
tnanner, yet it w6uld profit nothing, John vi. 
Would not be one whit holier thereby. But the m 
t)f Christ on earth are united to tlieir head in hea 
the invisible bond of the self-same Spirit dwe! 
botli ; in him as the head, and in them as the me 
©yen as the wheels, in Ezekicl's vision, were n< 
tiguous to the living creatures, yet were united t 
by jJi invisible bond of one spirit in both ; so thj 
^he living creatures went, the wheels went by th 
when the living creatures were lifted up from th 
the wheels were lifted up, Ezek. i. 19. « For," s 
Propliet, " the spirit of the living creatures was 
wheels," ver. 20. 

Hence we nuiy see the difference betwixt true 
tification ^and that shadow of it, which is to be 
amongst some strict professors of Christianity, v 
are not true Christians, are not regenerated by th< 
of Christ, and is of the same kind with what he.s aj 
in many sober Heathens. True saiictification is th 
of the soul's union with the holy Jesus, the first s 
mediate receptacle of the sanctifyini^ Spirit ; out o\ 
fuhvcss his members do, by viitue of tlicir union wi 
receive sanctifying influences. The other is th< 
product of the man's own spirit, which, whatevei 
or seems to have of the matter of true holiness, y 
not arise from the supernatural principles, nor 
aims and ends thereof; for, as it comes from sel 
j'uns out into the dead sea of self again ; and lies j 
of true holiness, as nature doth of grace. Th< 
hi..ve this bastard holiness, are like common boj 
who serve tiiemse Ives with their own oars ; where 
ship bound for Immunuel's land siiils by the blow 
the divine Spirit. How is it possible there sh( 
true. Sc-nctificjtion without Christ ? Can there 1: 
faocdfication) without partakmgof the Spirit of ha 



Head ir.J Gro'(ufh in Grace. 261 

Can we partake of that Spirit, but by Jesus Christ, the 
«ray, the truth, and the lifL* I Thi' jf^Llliij;; dew sh-.ilj as 
soon make its way through the il::uy rock, :!S infl'.j.ncv.s 
of grace sliall conic tVom Clod to siiiiici's, any otii.'i* \\\iy 
but through him wliom the Fat lie r h:-.s conslitutc-cl I'u 
head of uilluencos, Col. i. 19. « For it pleased the Fa- 
^er, that in him should all fulness dwv:ll ; and chap. 
». 9. " And not hoklinjj the head, fro:!: whioli ali ilic 
body by joints and bands having nourisiinunt nsinisir'red, 
md knit together, ii\crouselh with the iiicreuric of iiu-l." 
Hence see how it comes to p iss, th^t many fall awuv, 
from their sfc mil. g SiinciifiCitio.i, and never recover ; it 
IS because th'..y .iit iiol b'^aiches truly k.iit to the li-u;? 
^'in;. McwUiwi/iIe, others recover from their decays, bc- 
canse of their union v>lLh the life {giving stcck, by the 
quickening Spirit, 1 Jo'm ii. 19. They vront out from, 
i^s, but they were not of us ; for ii they h.id been of us, 
^ey would no doubt hav*- continued with us.*' 

^ffih benefit is CJrowth in Grace. '^ Having nourisli- 
ilcnt minister. (1, ihey increase with the increase cfCiocl," 
^1. ii. 19. " Tbe iij^iiteous sliail flourish like the p:lm— 
^t'c, he shiill glow like a cedar in I^ebanon,'* Psal. xcii. 
^2. Grace is of a growing nature ; in the way to Zloa 
liCy ^o from strength to strength. Ti:ough the holy nran 
*c ut first a little ciiild in grace, yet ^L Icn.^th he becon\es 
I young man, a fttiier, 1 John ii. 13. Though he does 
>ut creep in the way to heaven sometimes, yel afterwards 
)c Walks, he runs, he mounts up with wings as eagks^ 
sa. xl. 31. If a branch be grcdled into a stock never 
jrows, it is a plain evidence of its not having knit with 
^e stock. 

I^ut some may perhaps say. If all true Christians be 
;rowing ones, what shall be said of tliose, who, instead 
'* growing, are going lj.ick ? I answer, ./?r.»^, Tiierc is » 
i^eat difference between the Christian's growing simply, 
^^ his growing at all times. All true Christians do 
'^o\v, but 1 do not say they grow at all times. A tree 
^^t has life and nourishment grows to its perfection, yet 
; ^'*5 not alv/ays growing ; it grows noi in the winter. 
^^Hstians also have their winters, wherein theinilirencesof 
^*}ce, necessary for growth,are ceased. Cant. v. 2. fstcefi, 
' Is by tdtli the believer derives graciQua i3ASi\iftiaK.^^<3rcsw 

Y 2 



fiiitli is nut us the hypocrite's, like a pipe Isiid sho 
Ibuiittiiii, whtircby tlicrc c&n be no conveyance ; il 
maiiis 11 bond of union betwixt Cliriat and the not 
thcKiforc, because Chiist lives, the believer shall 1 
John xiv. 19. The I^rd Jesus puts in his han 
hole of the door, and clears the means of conv 
and then ijiflucnces for growth flow, and the b 
graces look fresh and green aqiaiu, Hoa. xiv. 7. 
that ilviell under his shadow shall return ; they : 
vive as the com, and grow as the vine." In the 
times, the saints, have a principle of growth in 
JTolin iii. 9. " His seed remajneth in him.'' An^ 
forc^ after decays tliey revive again ; namely, v 
■winter i« over, and tlie Sun of righteousness re 
them, with his warm influences. Mud throwi 
pool may lie there at ease ; but if it be caat inU 
tidn, the spring will at length work it out, and r 
IS fonnerif. Seeondli/y Chnstians may mistal 
growth, and that two ways. (1.) By judging 
case according to their present feeling. They 
tiicmaelves, and canpot perceive themselves to t 
ing ; but tliere is no reason thence to conclude 
not growing, Mark iV. 27. " The seed spri. 
grows up, he knowcth not how." Should one fii 
*vrr so (ttcdfiiBtlv on the s - . - 



[eadll.J Growth in Grace- i^S 

y the. advances of the top only, not of the root. Though 
. man be not growing taller, he niay be growing stronger, 
fa tree be taking with tlxe ground, fixing itself in the 
arth, and spreading out its roots, it is ceiiainly growingi 
Itliough it be nothing taller than formerly. So, albeit 
. Christian may wunt the sweet consolation and flashes of 
Section, which sometimes he has had, yet if he be grow- 
U% in humility, self-denial, and sense of needy depend-. 
iK^e on Jesus Christ, he is a growing Christian, Hos. 
dv. 5.^1 will be as tlie dew unto Israel, he shall cast 
orth his roots as Lebanon." 

Quest, But do hypocrites gi'ow at all ? And if so, how 
(hall we distbiguish betwixt their growth, and true Chris- 
ian growth ? — ^ns. To the first part of the question, 
i}'pocrites do grow. The tares have their growth as 
7ell as the wheat : And the seed that fell among thorns 
lid spring up, Luke riii. 7. only it did bring no fruit to 
>erfection, vcr. 1 4. Yeu, a true Christian may have a 
alse growth. James and John seemed to grow in the 
Stace of holy zeal, when their spirits grew so hot in the 
|ause of Christ, tliat they would have fired whole villages, 
'w not receiving their Lord and Master, Luke ix. 54. 

* They said, Lord> wilt thou that we command fire to come 
Wn from heaven, to consume them, even as Elias did ?" 
^•ut it was indeed no such thing ; and, therefore, he 
:umed and rebuked them, ver. 55. and said, " Ye know 
^t what manner of spirit ye arc of." To the second 
*^ of the question it is answered. That tliere is a 
'^uliar beauty in true Christian growth, distinguishing 
f from all false growth : It is universal, regular, propor- 
'onable. It is a " growng up to him in all things, who 

* the head," Eph. iv. 15. /fh^ growing Christian 
r^'ws proportionably in all the parts of the new man* 
'^der the kindly influences of the Sun of righteousness, 
-Uevcrs grow up as calves in the stall, Mai. iv. 2. Ye 
^Uld think it a monstrous growth in these creatures^ 

ye saw their heads grow, and not their bodies ; or if ye 
'"W one leg grow, and another not ; or if all the parts do 
H grow proportionably. Ay, but such is the growth of 
^ny in religion. They grow like rickety children wha 
^Ve a big head, but a slander body ; they get more 
^^wledge into their headsj but po more holiness in^ 



264 Fruitfulne89. [State lit 



1 



their hearts and lives : Tncy grow very hot outwardly, 
but vciy cold inwardly ; like men in a fit of the ague. 
They are more taken up about the externals of religion 
than formerly ; yet as great strangers to the power of 
godliness as ever. If a garden is watered with the hand, 
some of the plants will readily get much, some little, and 
some no water at all ; and, tlierefore, some wither, while 
others are coming forward : But after a shower from the 
clouds, all come forward together. In like manner, all 
the graces of the Spirit grow proportionably, by the 
special influences of divine grace. The bmnches ingrafted 
in Christ, gi*owing aright, do grow in all the several way* 
of growth at once. They grow inward, growing into 
Christ, growing aright, do grow in all the several ways 
of growth at once. They grow inward, growing iirto^ 
Christ, Eph. iv. 15. uniting more closely with him ; and 
cleaving more firmly to him, as tlie head of influences,- 
which is tiie spring of all other true Christian growth* 
They grow outward, in good works in their life and 
conversation. They not only, with Naphtiili, give goodlj 
words ; but, like Joseph, they i\rc fruitful bou^^hs. Thcf 
grow upward in heavenly-mind^^dness, and contempt of ■ 
the world ; for tlieir conversation is in heaven, Philip- 
iii. 20. And, finally, they grow downward in humilitj 
and self-loathing. Tlie branches of the largest growth in 
Christ ure, in their own eyes, less than the leivst of ull 
saints, Eph. iii. 8. The chief of shmers, 1 Tim. i. 15. 
More brutish thim any man, Prov. xxx. 2. They see 
they cim do nothing, no, not so much as to think anf 
thing, as of themselves, 2 Cor. iii. 5. that they dcsen'e i 
nothinp;, boinir not v.orthv of the least of all the mercies ] 
shewed inito them. Genesis xxxii. 10. and that they arc 
nothing, 2 Cor. xii. 2. 

A aijit/i ]icn(;fit is Fruitfulncss. The branch ingrafted 
into Christ is not barren, but brings forth fruit, John xv.5. 
'•■ lie thai, abidcth in me, and I in him, the s.imc bringctb 
foilh nmch fruit." For liic.t very end are souls married to 
CVii'ist, th^t tliey may bring forth fruit unto God, .Roin* 
vii. 4. They nn\y be l)ranciios in Christ by profession, but 
not by real imp!.\r;tutiv.'n, llii.tare barren branches. Whcso- 
eT(.\' L.re united lo Chi'ist brinr* fortli the fruits of gospf^ 
obi^di'cncc and true holmt^s^ EaiUi i& always followed wi^ 



iad II.J Frui{fuln€%%. 265 

od WQrks- The believer is not only come out of the 
dve of his natural state, but he has put ofT his grave* 
ithes ; namely, reigning lusts, in the which he walked 
Bietime like a ghost, being dead while he lived in them 9 
A, ill. 7, 8. For Christ has said of him, as of L:izaru3« 
\oae him J and let him go. And now that he has put on 
irist, he personates him (so to speak) as a beggar, in bor- 
ired robes, represents a king on the stage, walking as he 
o walked. Now, the fruit of the Spirit in him is in all 
odness, £ph. v. 9. The fruits of holiness will be found 
the hearts, lips, and lives of those who arc united to 
irist. The hidden man of the heart is not only a temple 
lit for God, and consecrated to him, but u»cd and em* 
jyed for him ; where love, fear, trust, and all the otliep 
rts of unseen religion, are exercised, Philip, iii. 3. *^ For 
5 arc of the circumcision, which worship God in the 
»irit." The heart is no more the devil's common, where 
oughts go free ; for th^re even vain thoughts ui-e hated, 
aim cxix. 123. But it is God's inclosure, hedged about 

a garden for him. Cant. iv. 16. It is true, there are 
;eds of corruption there, bcciiuse the ground is not yet 
rfcctly healed : But the man, in the day of his new crea- 
)li, is set to dress and keep it. A live-coal from the al- 
I'has touched his lips, and they are purified, Psalm xv. 
2, 3. « Lord, who shall abide in tliy tabciuiicle ? Who 
all dwell in thy holy hill ? lie that speaketh the truth in 
s heart. He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor 
keth up a reproach against his neighbour." There may 
5 indeed a smooth tongue, where tlicre is a false heart* 
he voice may be Jacob's, while the hands arc Esau's, 
ut, « If any man among you seem to be religious, and 
■idleth not his tongue, but dcceiveth his own heart, that 
an's religion is vain," James i. 26. The power of godli- 
'Ss will rule over the tongue, though a world of iniquity, 
one be a Galilean, his speech will bewray him ; he will 
't speak the language of Ashdod, but the language of Ca* 
^. He will neither be dumb in religion, nor will his 
"^gue walk at random; seeing to the double guard nature 
ft given the tongue, grace hatli added a third. The 
lits of holiness wall be found in his outward conversation, 
* he hath clean hands, as well as a pure heart, Psal. xxiv* 

lie is a godly m;ai, and religiously discharges the d^,- 



ttioso truits art! a ciustur oi viui actions, wuei 
Chiist is the principle and end : 'I'lic principle, fi 
in them ; and thi: lilc which ilic-y live is by tlie f 
Son of God, Gul. i. 20. TliP fud, foi- they li» 
aiid to them to live is Chrlut, Philip, i. 31. Th< 
feligion are, in the world, like futherlcss childrc 
some will not t^ike ihom in, because they never li 
nor their Father: So.iie uke them in, because th 
Berviceiible to thorn ; Vrnl the saintu Uike them ii 
Father's siku ; thst is, l\w Christ' .i si^kc : iind the; 
ly in their eves, bf^CHUse they are like him. O ! 
the new lifu'of the snints? Siivcly it could never 
hammered out of the natui'al powers of their soi 
united force of all created power. In eternal t 
ahould their womb have been shut upi but that h 
ried to Christ, they bring forth fruit unto God, B 
If you ask mc, How your nourishment, en 
fniitfuinosB, may be ibi'wardcd ? I offer these fc 
(1.) Make sure work, as to your knitting with 
by faith imfeigned; and beware of hypocrisy; a b 
is not sound at the heart will certainly wither. 
of the Lord's planting are trees of righteousness 
So when others fade, they bring forth fruit. Hyp 
disease in the vitals of religion,^which will consi 
length. It is a leak in the ship, that will certain 



.J Accefitance qftht Fruiti ofSoMnuw, 367 

3iy wind of doctrine. But speaking the truth in 
ly grow up unto him in all things, who is the headf 
irist." A roiling stone gathers no fog, and a wa- 
udgment makes a fruitless life. Though a tree be 
> sound, yet how can it grow, or be fruitful, if ye 
removing it out of one soil into another ? (3.) En- 
to cut off the suckers, as gardeners do, that their 
ly thrive. These are unmortified lusts. Therefore, 
y your members that are upon the earth," Col. iii. 
en the Israelites got meat to tlieir lusts, they got 
I to their souls. She that has many hungry children 
;r hand, and must be slill putting into their mouths, 
re much ado to get a bit put into her own. They 
Fuse the cnvving of inordinate affections, who would 
;ir souls to prosper. Lastly^ Improve, for these 
e ordinances of God. The courts of our God arc 
e, where the trees of righteousness flourish, Psalm 
. The waters of the sanctuary are the means ap- 
of God, to cause his people grow as willows by 
jr-courscs. Therefore, drink in with desire the sin- 
Ik of the word, that ye may grow tliereby, 1 Pet. 
3mc to these wells of salvation, not to look at them 
It to draw water out of tliem. The sacrament of 
d's supper is in a special manner appointed for 
ids. It is not only a solemn public profession, and 
f our union and communion with Christ, but it is a 
f most intimate communion with him,and strength- 
union with him ; our faith, love, repentance, and 
races, 1 Cor. x. 26. " The cup of blessing which 
s, is it not tlie communion of the blood of Christ ? 
3ad which we break, is it not the communion of 
y of Christ r" And chap. xii. 13. « We have been^ 
e to drink into one Spirit." Give yourselves unto 
open your mouths, and he will fill them. By these 
:he branches in Christ may be furtlier nourished, 
p, and bring forth much fruit. 
fenth benefit is, The acceptance of their fruits of 
5 before the Lord. Though they be vciy imper- 
^y arc accepted, because they savour of Christ the 
stock, which the branches grow upon ; while the 
f others are rejected of God, Gen. ii. 4, 5. " And 
)rd had respect unto Abel, and to his offering : 



MB Aecefitanee qfthe Frtuta o/HoUneu. [Sute fi)^ 

But unto Ciun and his offering he had not respect' 
•Compare Heb. xi. 3. <' By faith Abel offered unto God 
a more excellent sacrifice than Cain.'* O how defective 
are the suints duties in the eye of the law ! The believer 
himself espies many faults in his best performances, yet 
the Lord graciously receives them. There is no grace 
pbmted in the heart, but there is a weed of comipdoft 
hard by its side, while the saints are in this lower worWi 
Their very sincerity is not without mixture of dissimula- 
tion or hypocrisy, Gal. ii. 1 3. Hence there arc defccli 
in the exercise of every grace, in the performance of every 
duty ; depraved nature always drops something to stain 
their best works. There is still a mixture of darkness 
with their clearest light. Yet this does not mar their 
acceptance, Cant. vi. 10. « Who is she that looked 
forth as the morning ?" or as the dawning. Behold how 
Christ's spouse is esteemed and acceptedof her Lord,cvCT 
when she looks forth as the morning, whose beauty Vi 
mixed with the blackness of the nighf 1 When the mom' 
ing was looking out, as the word is, Judges xix. 26. i. f 
in the dawning of the day, as we read it. So the ver] 
dawning of grace, and good-will to Christ, grace peepiof 
out from under amass of darkness in believers, is pleasan' 
and acceptable to him, as the break of day is to the wearj 
traveller. Though the remains of unbelief make thcii 
hand of faith to shake and tremble, yet the Lord is so vcl 
pleased with it, that he employs it to carry away pardoiw 
and supplies of grace, from the throne of grace, and th< 
fountain of grace. His faith was effectual, who cried out 
and said with tears, " Lord, I believe, help thou mine un 
belief," Mark ix. 24. Though the remains of scnsua 
affections make the flame of their love weak and smoky 
he turns his eyes from the smoke and beholds the flame 
how fair it is, Cant. iv. 10. « How fair is thy love, tn) 
sister, my spouse !** The smell of their undcr-garments« 
inherent holiness, as imperfect as it is, is like the smell 
Lebanon, ver. 11. and that because they are covered ^vkl 
their elder brother's clothes, which make the sonsof GtH 
to smell as a field which the Lord hath blessed. Thci 
good works arc accepted ; their cups of cold water jjivcl 
to a disciple, in tJie name of a disciple, shall not w-int > 
rCvMtfcL ^Though they cwmot offer for tlie tabcfnuc^' 



lead 11*3 Accefitante •/the Fruif t^ HMn€99. 3$9 

^Idy silreri and brass, and onyx-stone, let them come for- 
irard with what they have ; if it were but g;oat'B huir, it 
dtadl not be rejected ; if it be but ram-skins, they shall be 
kindly accepted, for they are dyed red, dipi>ed by faith iii 
iie Mediator's blood, and so presented unto God. A 
rery ordinary work done in faith, and from f^th, if it were 
to the building of a wall about the holy city, is a great 
work, Neh. vi.-S. If it were but the bestowing of a box 
)f ointment on Christ, it shall never be forgotten, Matth. 
Kxvi. IS. Even a cup of cold water only, given to one ol 
Christ's little ones^ in the name of a disciple, shall be re- 
irarded, Mutth. x. 42. Nay, not a good word for Christ 
ttiall drop from their mouths, but it shall be registered in 
Qod's book of remembrance, Mai. iii. 1 6. Nor shall a 
tear drop from their eyes for him, but he will put it in hii». 
bottle, Psal. Ivi. 8. Their will is accepted for the deed ; 
fiieir sorrow for the want of will, for the will itself, 2 
Cor. viii. 12. << For if there be first a willing mind, it is 
iccepted according to thut a man hath, and not according 
to that he hath not." Their groanings, when they can- 
tot well word their desires, are heard in heaven ; the 
■Waning of these groans is well known there, and they will 
be returned like the dove with an olive branch of peace in 
her mouth. Sec Rom. viii. 2§, 27. Their mites are 
better tlian other mens talents. Their lisping and broken 
sentences are more pleasant to their Father in heaven than 
the most fluent and flourishing speeches of those that are 
*ot in Christ. Their voice is sweet, even when they arc 
ashamed it should be heard ; their countenance is comely, 
J;^n when they blush, and draw a veil over it, C.int. 
*^ U. The Mediator takes their petitions, blots out 
*OQie parts, rectifies otiiers, and then presents them to the 
'Pttther, in consequence whereof they pass in the court of 
heaven. 

; Every true Christian is a temple to God. Ifyc look for 
^rifices, they arc not wanting there ; they offer the sacri- 
pce of praise, and they do good; with such sacrifices Go<l 
^ Well pleased, Heb. xiii. H, 16. Christ himself is the 
*ltar that sanctifies the gift, ver. 10* But what comes of 
^^ skins and dung of their sacrifices? They arc carried 
V^jr without the camp. If we look for incense, it is 
^'^^ too. The grace9 of the Spirit are found in their 

Z 



An ngM/i Dcnent nowmg trom union witn l 
Establishment. The Christian cannot iall away, b 
persevere unto the end, John x. 28. << They sha 
peiish} neither shall any man pluck them out of m] 
Indeed, if a branch do not knit yrith the stocky it 
away when shaking winds arise ; but the brantci 
the stock stands fast> whateyier wind blows. Soi 
a stormy wind of temptation blows from hell,, and 
the branches in Christ the true Vine, but their un 
bim is their security ; ntoved they may be, but r 
they never can be : The Lord will, with the ten 
also make a way to escape, 1 Cor. x. 13. Ca 
never of any continuance ; there is almost alw^y 
wind blowing. ^ and, therefore, branches are rart 
gether at rest. But sometimes. violent winds arise 
threaten to rend them from off their stock. Even 
with saints ; they are daily; put to it, to keep their 
against temptation ; but sometimes the wind fn 
nseth so high, and bloweth so furiously, that it mat 
top branches. to sweep the ground; yet being 
Christ their stock, they get up again in spite oft 
TioleBt efibrtB of the prince oltlie power of the ai 
sciv. 18. << When I said my foot sUppeth, . thy« 
O Locd, held weup.'i') But the Christian impi 
this trial \ and is so far from being damaged, ths 



Mb, One Cfarittim who hath had ezpeiience oFtempu* 
liflOiis worth a thousand others. 

Sometunes a stormy wind of trouble and persecution^ 
Irem the men of the world, blows upon the vine, t. r. 
nfidcal Christ ; but union witli the stock is a sufBcient 
leciiritf to the branches. In a time of the church's peace 
nd outward prosperity, while the angels hold the winds 
|. that they blow not ; there are a great many branches taken 
k vp, and put into the stock, which never knit ivith it, nor 

^live by it, though they be bound up with it, by the bonds 
•f external ordinances. Now these may stand a while or 
, the stock, and stand with great ease while the cahn lasts t 
Butirlien once the storms arise, and the winds blow, thej 
wiiJ begin to fall off, one after another ; and the higher 
file wind riseth, the greater will the number be that rails. 
Tea some strong boughs of that sort, when they fall, will, 
\ff their weight, carry others of their own kind quite down 
to the earth with tbsm, and will bruise and press down 
lOBie true branches in such a manner, that they would ak» 
&I1 off, were it not for their being knit to the stock ; in 
firtue whereof tliey get up their heads again, and cannot 
&Ii off, because of that fast hold the stock has of them. 
Then it is that many branches, sometime liigh and eminent, 
are found lying on the eartli withered, and fit to be gather- 
ed up and cast into the fire, Matth. xiii. 6. ^ And When 
tiie sun was up, they were scorched ; and because they 
had no root, they withered away." John xt. 6. << If a 
man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is 
t withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the 
fire, and they are burned." But howerer violently the 
; winds blow, none of the truly ingrafted branches, that are 
knit wkh the stock, are found missing, when the storm is 
ohangcd into a calm, John xvii. 13. « Those that thou 
gavest me, I have kept, and none of them fs lost." The 
least twig growing in Christ shall stand it out, and subsist ; 
when the tallest cedars growing on their own root, shall 
be laid flat on the ground, Rom. viii. 35— -^9. " Who 
shall separate us from the loye of Christ ? Shall tribula* 
tion, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, 
•r peril, ox sword ?" ^r. However severely Israel be sift- 
ed, yet shall not the least grain, or, as it is in the original 
laiigiiage, a liHle «l(Hie lali upon the earth, Amosi^. P. 



306 The HoJieleamcMM qf the Unregenerate. [St 

Luke vii. 38, 29. (3.) In as much as they are di 
way, loaded with the guilt of all their sins ; thi 
winding-sheet, that shall lie down with them in tl 
Job XX. 1 1. Their works follow them into the other 
they ^o away with the yoke of their transgressions 
ed about their necks. Guilt is a bud companion 
but how terrible will it be in death ! It lies now, p 
like cold brimstone on their benumbed conscicnc( 
when death opens the way for sparks of divine ven 
like fire, to fall upon it, it will make dreadful ilame 
conscience, in which the soul will be, as it were, w 
for even Lastly^ The wicked are driven away ; 
wickedness, in so far as they die under the absolute 
of their wickedness. While there is hope, there ; 
restraint on the worst of men : and these moral endov 
which God gives to a number of men, for the be 
mankind in this life, are so many allays and restrain 
the impetuous wickedness of human nature. But i 
being cut off, and these pifts withdrawn, the wicke( 
the wicked will then arrive at its perfection. As th 
of grace, sown in the hearts of the elect, come to tl: 
maturity at death ; so, wicked and hellish disposit 
the reprobate, come then to their highest pitch, 
prayers to God will then be turned to horrible curs 
their praise to hideous blasphemies, Mat. xxii. 13. 
ahall be weejiing^ and gnashing of teeth. This give 
mal, but genuine view, of the state of the wicked, 
ther world. 

II. I shall discover the hopelessness of the state c 
nSwed men, at death. It appears to be very hope 
we consider these four things : 

Fii'st^ Death cuts off all their hopes and prosp 
peace and pleasure in this life, Luke xii. 19, 20. 
thou hast much goods laid up for many years ; tak 
case, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said un 
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of 
then whose shall those things be, which thou hast ] 
ed?" They look for great matters in this world; the 
to increase tlieir wealth, to see their families prosp 
to live at ease ; but death comes like a stormy win 
shakes off all their fond hopes, like green fruit froi 
^ce ; ^ When he is about to fill his belly, God shi 



Head IL] The HoficlcBBneBa of the Unregenerate. .307 

the fury of his wrath upon him,** Job xx. 23. He may 
Ijegin a web of contrivances, for advancing his worldly iu- 
terest; but, before he gets it wrought out, death comes, 
and cuts it out : " His breath goeth forth, he returneth to 
liis earth ; in that very day his thoughts perisli,** Psalm 
cxlvi. 4. 

^econdly^ When death comes, they haveno solid t^rouiuls 
to hope for eternal happhiess : " For what is the hope of 
the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh 
away his soul ?" Job xxvii. S. Whatever hopes they fond- 
jy entertain, they are not founded on God's word, which 
is the only suic ground of hope : If they knew their own 
case, they would see themselves only happy in a dream. 
And, indeed, what hope can they have ? The law is plain 
against them, and condemns them. The curses of it (these 
cords of death) are about them already. " The Saviour, 
yhom they slighted, is now their Judge ; and their Judge 
^s their enemy. How then can they hope ? They have 
*^lted the door of mercy against themselves, by their un- 
belief. They have despised the remedy ; and, therefore, 
^ust die without mercy. They have no saving interest hi 
Jesus Christ, the only channel of conveyance, in which 
^crcy flows ; and, therefore, they can never taste of it. 
The sword of justice guards the door of mercy, so as none 
^an enter in, but the members of the mystical body of 
Christ, over whose heads is a covert of atoning blood, the 
Mediator's blood. These, indeed, may pass without harm, 
Tor justice has nothing to require of them. But others can- 
lot pass, since they are not in Christ ; death comes to them 
vith the sting in it, the sting of unpardoned guilt. " It is 
.rmed against them with all the force the sanction of a ho- 
y law can give it, 1 Cor. xv. 56. " The sting of death is 
in, and the strength of sin is the law." When that law 
iras given on Sinai, the whole mount quaked greatly,Exod. 
ix. 1 8. When the Redeemer was making satisfaction for 
he elect's breaking of it, the earth did quake, and the rocks 
cnt, Matth. xxvii. 5 1 . What possible ground of hope^ 
[len, is there to the wicked man, when death comes upon 
im, armed with the force of this law ? How can he escape 
bat fire, which bunied unto the midst of heaven ? Deut. 
ir'. 11. How shall he be able to stand in that smoke, that, 
sccnded as tlie smoke of a furnace ? Exod. xix. 18. How 



.:^08 Tfi» Hofieie^ttnets of the UnregenertLte. [$tat»£!^* 

^111 he endure the terrible thunders and lightnings, ?ef. 
16. and dwell in the darkness, clouds, and thick darkness ( 
Deut. iv. 11* All these resemblances, heaped togethel^ 
do but faintly represent the fearful tempest of wr^ anJ 
indignation, which shall pursue the wicked to the lowest 
hell ; and for ever abide on tliem, who are driven to dark* 
pess at death. 

Thirdly^ Death roots up their delusive hopes of etenwl 
happiness ; then it is, their covenant with death, and agrcc- 
jnent with hell, is broken. They are awakened out of thejjf 
golden dreams, and at length lift up their eyes, Job viii* 
.14. « Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall 
be a spider's web." They trust all shall be well with the© 
after death ; but this their trust is but a web woven out of 
their own bowels, with a great deal of art and industry. 
They wrap themselves up in this their hope, as the spider 
irraps herself in her web. But it is but a weak and slendet. 
defence ; for however it may withstand the tlireatenings of 
the word of God, death, tliat besom of destiniction, viff 
Aweep them and it both away, so as there shall not be the 
least shred of it left them ; but he, who this moment will 
not let his hope go, shall next moment be utterly hopeless. 
Death overturns the house built on the sand j it leaves no 
Ijian under the power of delusion. . 

Laatly<i Death makes their state absolutely and fcr^ 
ever hopeless. Matters cannot be retrieved and amended 
after death. For, (I.) Time once gone can never be vt* 
called. If cries or tears, price or pains, could bring time 
back again the wicked man might have hope in his death. 
But tears of blood will not prevail ; nor will his roaring 
for millions of ages cause it to return. The sun will not 
fitc'jid stijl, until the sluggard awake and enter on his 
journey ; and when once it is gone down, he needs not 
expect the nigiit to be turned into d^.y for his sake ; he 
must lodge through the long night of eternity, where his 
lime left him. (2.) There is no returning to this life, to 
anuiid whot is amiss : It is a stite of probation and trial) 
ivi ich terminates at death ; and, therefore, we cannot re- 
turn to it again : It is but once we thus live, and once 
we die. Death carries the wicked man to his own place, 
Acts i. 25. Thus life is our working-clay ; and dc:;th 
closeth our day a;id our work together. Wc may rcudijf 



4 






I 



.- \ 



».< 



Head II.J Caution agmnMt/aUe Hofiea ^f Heaven* 3f 9 

I 

imagine the wicked might have some hope in their death ^ 
it after death has opened their eyes, they could return t© 
fife, and have but the trial of one Sabbath, one offer of 
Christ, one day, or but one hour more, to make up their 
peace with God : " But, man lieth down, and riscth not 
till the heavens be no more ; they shall not awake, nor be 
raised out of their sleep,** Job xiv. 1 2. Lastly^ In the 
other world, men have no access to get their rpincd st.ite 
^d condition retrieved, if they never so fain would t 
^ ''For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
^sdom in the grave, whitlier thou goest,** Ecclcs. ix. iO» 
Now, a man may flee from tlic wrath to come \ now, he 
*iay get into a refuge ; but when once death has done its. 
'^ork, the door is shut ; there are no more offers of 
P^epcy, no more pardons ; where the tree is fallen, tliere 
^ must lie. 

Let what has been said be carefully pondered : And> 
ftatit may be of use, let me exhort you, 

Pir^ty liO take heed that ye entertain no hopes of heaven, 
^Ut what are built on a solid foundation. Tremble la 
^hink what fair hopes of happiness deatli sweeps away, 
Uke cobwebs ! How the hopes of many are cut off, when 
^ey seem to themselves to be on the very threshold of 
heaven 1 How, in the moment they expect to be carried 
^y angels into Abraliam's bosom, into the regions of bliss 
^nd peace, they are carried by devils, into the society of 
the damned in hell ; into the place of torment, and regions 
f)f horror ! I beseech you to beware, (1.) Of a hope built 
lip, where the ground was never cleared. Tnc wise 
builder digged deep, Luke vi. 48. Were your hopes of 
heaven never shaken ; but ye have had good hopes all 
your days ? Alas for it ! you may see the mystery of your 
case explained, Luke xi. 21. " When a strong man^ 
anned, keepeth liis palace, his goods are in peace.** But 
if they have been shaken, take heed lest there have onljr 
some branches l>ccn made in the old building, which you 
have got repaired again, by ways and means of your own. 
I assure you, your hope (howsoever fair a building it is)- 
is not to trust to ; unless your old hopes have been razed, 
aaid you have built on a foundation quite new. (2,)^ Be- 
ware of that hope, which looks brisk in the dark ; but 
Imseth. all it$ lustre^ when it is set in the lig^ht of God's 



&\0 Caution againat/aiae Hojiea of Heaven. [&^M T% 

vord ; when it is examined and tried hj the touchstone^ 
of divine revelation, John iii. 20, 21. " For every <fflc 
that doth evil, hateth the light ; neither cometh to the 
light, least his deeds should be reproved. But he that 
doth the truth, cometh to the light, that his deeds may he 
made manifest, that they are wrought in God.'* That 
hope, which cannot abide scripture-trial, but sinks, when 
isearched into by sacred truth, is a delusion, and not a true 
hope ; for God's word is always a friend to the graces of 
God's Spirit, and an enemy to delusion. (3.) Beware 
of that hope, which stands without being supported by 
SCI ipture-evidences. Alas ! many are big with hopei, 
who cannot give, because they really have not, any scrip- 
ture-grounds for them. Thou hopest, that all shall be 
well with thee, after death ; but What word of God is itf 
on which tliou hast been caused to hope ? Psalm cxix. 49.. 
What scripture -evidence hast thou, to prove that thy hope 
is not the hope of the hypocrite I What hast thou, afbet 
impartial self-examination, as in the sight of God, foufid 
In tiiyself, which the word of God determines to be a sore 
evidence of his right to eternal life, who is possessed of it? 
Numbers of men are ruined with such hopes, as stand uor 
Supported by scripture evidence. Men are fond and tena- 
cious of tliese hopes ; but death will throw them dowii| 
and leave the self-deceiver hopeless. Lastly y Beware of 
that hope of heaven, which doth not prepare and dispose 1 
Jrou for heaven, which never makes your soul more holy) 
i John iii. 3. " Every man that hath this hope in hitn, 
purifieth himself, even as he is pure." The hope of the 
Xnost part of men is rather a hope to be free of pain and 
torment in smother life, than a hope of true happincsS) 
the nature whereof is not understood and discerned ; audi 
therefore, it stakes down in sloth and indolence, and does 
not excite to mortification and a heavenly life. So far are 
they from hoping aright for heaven, that they must owHf 
if they speak their genuine sentiments, removing out of 
this world into any other place whatsoever, is rather their 
fear than their hope. The glory of the heavenly city 
does not at all draw their hearts upwards towards it ; nor 
do they lift up their heads with joy, in the prospect of 
arriving at it. If they had the true hope of the marriage* 
day, they wovild> as the \fliie^ the Ii«nb'3 wiie; be saaktof 



HfiiSi II.J ZfcAortatiqn ^ SiAneri. .3 1 1 

themselves ready for it. Rev. xix. 7. But their hopes are 
produced by their sloth, and their sloth is nourished by 
their hopes. Oh ! Sirs, as ye would not be driven away 
hopelessln your deatli, beware of these hopes. Raze them 
now, and build on a new foundation ; lest d^ath leave not 
one stone of them upon another, and ye never be able te 
hope any more. 

Secondly i Hasten, O sinners, out of your wickedness^ 
out of your sinful state, ^and out of your wicked life ; if 
ye would not, at death, be driven away in your wicked- 
ness. Remember the fatal end of the wicked man, as 
the text represents it. I know there is a great difference 
in the death of the wicked, in respect of some circum- 
stances ; bi^t all of them, in their death, agree in this, 
that they are driven away m their wickedness* Some of 
thein die resolutely, as if they scorned to be afraid. Some 
in raging despair ; so filled with horror, that they cry out, 
as if they were already in hell ; others in sullen desponden- 
cy, oppressed with fears; insomuch, that their heaits are 
sunk within them, upon the remembrance of misspent 
time, and tiic view they have of eternity ; having neither 
head nor heart to do any thing for their own relief. And 
others die stupid ; they lived like beasts, and they die like 
beasts ; without any concern on their spirits, about their 
eternal sU^te. They groan, under their bodily distress, 
but have no sense of the danger of their souls. One may, 
-with almost as much prospect of success, speak to a stone, 
as speak to them : Vain is the attempt to teach them ; 
nothing that can be said moves them. To discourse to 
them, either of the joys of heaven, or the torments of hell, 
is to plow on a rock, or beat the air. Some die like the- 
foolish virgins, dreaming of heaven ; their foi*eheads are 
steeled against the fears of hell, with presumptuous hopes 
of heaven. Their business, who would be useful to them> 
is not to answer doubts about the case of their souls ; 
but to dispute them out of their false hopes. But wiiich 
way soever the unconverted man dies, he is driven away 
in his wickedness. O dreadful case i Oh, let the consider- 
ation of so horrible a departure out of this world, move 
you to betake yourselves to Jesus Christ,as an ail-sufticient 
Saviour, an Almighty Redeemer. Let it prevail to drive 
rfipQ out of your wickednes5> to holmess of heart and life. 



St« State ^ihe Chdif in Deain, haiiefuL [State W. 

Tfaey must indeed go through the vallcylbftlie ahudowi^ 
. death, but though it be in itself u d<irk and shady vale, it 
fthsll be a valley of hope U them ; tlicy shall not be dnng 
duough it) but walk throu^hit, as men in perfect aafi:^) 
who USX DO evil) PsaJ- xxiii. 4. Why should ibey fearf 
They lure the Lord of the Ui)ds safe cooduct, his pu) 
settled with hts own blood) namely, the blessed covenu^ 
which.is the saint's death-^Kd comfort, 3 Saiu. xxit 3. 
** Althoagh mjr house be itot so with God, yet he hattk 
mado with me an ererlsB^ng Covenant, ordered in all 
thing^>fliidBttre.;f6rthisiiiallTny salvation, and iiU my de- 
sire, although he cause it not lo grow." Who thenm 
harm them f It Is a safe riding in Christ's chariot, (Cjnt. 
uL'9.) both through life and death. They have good ad 
bonourable atten£ints, a guard, even a guard of m^ 
These cucunp i^kout them in the time of their life; and 
■ surely wiRntHlUTCthemin the day oftheirdeath. Thes* 
happr ininistenDf^ spirits are otiendants on their Lorfi 
bnietond willdfAlbtleBa convey hersitfe home to his house; 
WHien fiunds m moumfulmood &tand by the Baint'ebe^- 
side, waitmg to see him drav his last breath ; his soiili> 
waited for of holy angels, to be carried by them into Abra- 
ham's bosom, Luke xvi. 23, The Ciiplain of the ss^i 
salvation is the captuin of tliis holy guard ; he was tbur 
puide even unto de^th, and he will be their guide througb 
It too- Psal. xxiii. 4. « Yea, thougli I w;ilk through ilie 
valley of the shadow of deatii, I will fear no evil ; for 
thou art with me." They may without fear pass that riyei, 
being confident it shall not overflow them ; and may walk 
through that fire, being sure tliey shall not be burnt by it. 
Death cm do them no harm. It cannot even hiut 
their bodies ; though it separate the soul from the bodfi 
- it cunnot separate the body from the Lord Christ Even 
deathis to them but sleep in Jtsus, 1 Thess.iv. 14. Tbiy 
continue members of Christ, though in a grave. ThMf 
dust is precious dust, laid up in a grave as in their lord's 
cabinet. - They lie in a grave mellowing ; as precioua-finit 
laid up to be brought forth to him at the TesurrGctioB> 
The husbandman has com in his bam, and com lyii^ is 
the ground; the latter is more precious to him thai) the 
former ; because he looks to get it returned nith increase. 
Byw B9 the dead bodies «f the at^ntt are valued by tbek 



Head n.J An Objection answered, 319 

much ado to keep up hope on a death-bed ; while others 
{ASS off quickly, like sheep to the slaughter ; the rather 
that Scttan, who useth all his art to support the hopes of 
the hypocrite, will do his utmost to mar the peace, and 
increase the fears of the saint. Finally^ The bat' frame of 
spirit, and ill condition, in which death sometimes scizeth 
a true Christian, muy cause this pei-plexity. By his beinjs: 
in the state of gr^ce, he is indeed always habitually pre- 
pared for death, and his dying safely is insured ; but there 
is more requisite to his actual preparation, and dying com* 
fcptably ; his spirit must be in good condition too. 

Wherefore there are three cases, in which death cannot 
but be veiy uncomfortable to a child of God, (1.) If it 
Seize him at a time when the guilt of some particular sin^ 
Unrepented of, is lying on his conscience ; and death 
Comes on that very account, to take him out of the land 
of the living ; as was the case of many of the Corinthian 
believers, 1 Cor. xi. 30. " For this cause," namely, of 
Unworthy communicating, << many are weak and sickly 
among you, and mi«ny sleep." If a person is surprised 
"With the approach of death, while lying under the guilt 
of some unpardoned sin, it cannot but cause a mighty 
consternation. (2.) When death catches him napping. 
The mighty cry must be frightful to sleeping virgins. 
The man who lies in a ruinous house, and awakens not 
till the timber begins to crack, and the stones to drop 
down about his ears, may indeed get out of it safely, but 
not without fears of being crushed by its fall. When a 
Christian has been going on in a course of security and 
backsliding, and awakens not till death comes to his bed- 
side, it is no marvel if he get a fearful awakening. 
Lastly^ When he has lost sight of his saving interest in 
Christ, and cannot produce evidences of his title to 
heaven. It is hard to meet death without some evidence 
of a title to etenial life at hand ; hard to go through the 
dark valley, without the candle of the Lord shining upon 
the head. It is a terrible adventure to launch out into 
eternity, ^^•^i<5n a man can make no better of it, than a leap 
in the dark, not knowing where he shall light, whether in 
heaven or hell. 

Nevertheless, the state of the saints, in their death, i» 
always in itself hopeful. The presumptuous hopes of the 



^%0 Cadfn qf SaiMsy unem Heat/if aiUwred. [State Bt^ 

ungodly, in their death, cannot make their state hopeful^ 
neither can the hopelessness of a saintmake his state hope' 
less : For God judgeth according to the truth of thethingt 
not according to mens opinions about it. Howbeittte 
saints can no more be altogether without hope, than thcf 
can be altogether without faith. Their faith may be veiy 
weak, but it fails not ; and their hope very low, yet they 
will, and do, hope to the end. Even while the godly 
seem to be carried away with the streams of doubts and 
fears there remains still as much hope as determines thei4 
to lay hold on the tree of life, that grows on the banks of 
the river. Jonah ii, 4. " Then I said, I am cast out of 
thy sight ; yet I will look again towards thy holy temple. 

Use. This speaks comfort to the godly a[^ainst tW 
fear of death. A godly man may be called a happy maiif 
before his death : because, whatever befal him in life, h© 
shall certainly be happy at death. You who are in Christy 
"Who are true Christians, have hope in your end ; and 
such hope as may comfort you against all those fears) 
which arise from the consideration of a dying hour. Thii^ 
I shall branch out, in answering some cases briefly. 

Caae 1. The prospect of death (will some of the saindT 
say) is uneasy to itic, not knowing what shall become of 
my family, when I am |f;;one. — ^ns. The righteous hatR 
hope in his death, as to liis family, as well as to himself. 
Although you have little for the present to live upon; 
which has been the case of many of God's chosen ones, I 
Cor. iv. 11. " We /. e. the Apostles, both hunger and 
thirst, and are naked, and arc buffeted, and have no certain 
dwelling-place." And though you have notliing to leave 
them, as was the case of thut son of the prophet's, who 
did fear the Lord, and yet died in debt, which he was un- 
able to pay ; as his poor widow represents, 2 Kings iv. 1. 
yet you huve a good friend to leave them to ; a covenanted 
God, to whom you may confidently commit them, Jer. 
xlix. 11. " Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve 
them alive ; and let thy widows trust in me." The 
wovid can bear witness of signal settlements n^.ade upon 
the children of providence ; such as,by their pious parents, 
have been cast upon God's providential care. It has been 
oftcii remarked, thut they wanted neither provision nor 
education. Moses is an emiuejit iqjjtance of this. He, 



[ irj CoMea of SmtB^ mnent Deaths antroereJ. 9?t 

t he was an out-cast in&uit, Exod. ii. S. jet was learn* 
al4 the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts ni. 32. and 
ne king in Jeshurun, Deut. xxxiii. 5. O ! may wo 
e asliamedt that we do not securely trust him with 
DDcems of our families^ to whom> as our Saviour and 
emer, we have committed our eternal interests I 
tc 2. Death will take us away from our dear 
is ; yea, v/e shall not see the Lord in the land of the 
J, in the blessed ordinances — ^7ia, It will take you 
ur best friend, the Lord Christ* And the fiicnds 
eavc behind you, if they be indeed persons of worth, 
rill meet them again, when they come to heaven ; 
|rou will never be separated any more* If death 
^ou away from the temple below, it will curry you to 
ample above. It wiil indeed take you from the 
ns, but it will set you down by the fountain. If it 
at your cundle, it will cany you where there is nQ 
, where there is an eternal day* 

^e 3. I have so much ado, in time of health, to satis#> 
/^self, as to my interest in Christ, about my being a 
yhristian, a regenerate man ; thut I judge it is almost 
jsible I shoulddie comfortably. — 4ns, If itis thiis with 
hen double your diligence, to make your calling and 
on sure. Endeavour to grow in knowledge, and walk. 
y with God ; be diligent in self-examination ; and 
earnestly for the Holy Spirit, whereby you may know 
lings freely given you of God. If you are enabled, 
i power and Spirit of Christ, thus diligently to prose- 
^our spiritUc.l concerns ; though the time of your life 
ither day nor night ; yet, ivt evening time, it m^y be 
Many weakChristiansindulgedoubtsandfears about 
spiritual state, as if tliey placed, at least, some pc.rt of 
onin this im prude ntpr^^cticc; but, towards the period 
, they are forced to think and act in another nu.nner, 
ravellcr, who reckons he has time to spare, may st^^nd 
iebating with himself, whether tliis or tiie other be 
gilt Wv.y ; but when the sun begins to set, he is forced 
aside his scruples,and resolutely to go forwaird ©nthe 
tie judges to be the right one, lest he lie all night iix 
>en fields. Thus some Christians, who perplex them- 
smuch, throughout the courseof their lives, with jeal- 
3ubts and &<a:si content themselyes^t when they comt? 

Dd2 



322 CfatcB of Saintsj anent Dcathy answered. [State IVf mk 

to die, with such evidences of the safety of their state, ai l»i 
they could not be satisfied with before ; and by disputing m- 
less a^nst themselves, and believing more, court tlifi |^ 
peace they formerly rejected, and gain it too. 

Caac 4. 1 am under a sad decay, in respect of my spiritinl 
condition. — ^na. Bodily consumptions may make death 
easy ; but it is not so in spiritual decays. I will not say, 
thixt a godly man caiinot be in such a case^ when he des \ 
but 1 believe it is rarely so. Ordinarily, I suppose, a ci| 
comes to awaken sleepy virgins,before death comes. Sam- 
son is set to grind in the prison, until his locks grow again* 
Duvid and Solomon fell under great spiritual decays ; but, 
beiorc they died, they recovered their spiritual strength 
and vigour. However, bestir ye yourselves, without de- 
hiy, to strengthen the things that remain ; your fright will 
be tlie less, that ye awake from spiritual sleep, ere death 
comes to your bed-side : And ye ought to lose no timC; 
sfeeing ye know not how soon death may seize you. 

Cvse 5. It is terrible to think of tlie other world, thab 
world of spirits, which I have so little acquaintance witb^ 
— v^wfi. Thy best friend is Lord of that other world. Abra- 
liam's bosom is kindly, even to those who never saw to 
fiice. After death thy soul becomes capable of converse 
with tlic blessed inhabitants of that other world. The spi- 
rits of just men miide perfect were once such as thy spirit 
now is. And as for the angels, howsoever they be of a svl- 
perior nature, in the rank of beings, yet our nature is dig- 
niiied above theirs, in the man Christ j and they are, all 
of them, thy Lord's scrviints, and so thy fellow-servants. 

Caac 6. The pangs of death are terrible.— .^w«.* Yet not 
so terrible as pangs of conscience, caused by a piercine 
sense of guilt, and apprehensions of divine wrath, with 
which I suppose thee to be not altogether unacquainted. 
But who would not endure bodily sickness, that the soul 
anuy become sound, and every whit wiiole ? Each pang of 
death will set sin a step nearer the door ; and with the last 
breath, the body of sin will breath out its last. The puins 
of death will not last long ; and the Lord thy God will not 
leave, but support thee, ui.der them. 

Caae 7. But I am like to be cut off in the midst of raj 
days.— ^«*. Do not complain, you will be the sooner at 
hom^A Ydu biiv9 tj^ercby ,tUe jjidYaatage pf youy jfeilo^-J^- 



I{eftll IL] CatcM o/Sainrti unent Deaths anawercd. 329 

bouren, who were at work before you in the vineyardi 
Ood, in the course of his providence, hides some early ia 
the grave, that they may be taken away from the evil to 
come. An early removal out of thb world prevents much 
sin and misery : And they have no ground of compUint, 
who get the residue of their years in Immanuel's land« 
Surely thou shalt live as long as thou hast work cut out for 
thee,by the great Master, to be done for him in this world; 
>nd when that is at an end, it is high time to be gone. 
' Case 8. I am afraid of sudden death.— ^n^. Thou may 
indeed die so. Good Eli died suddenly, 1 Sam. iv. 18. 
Vet death found him watching, ver. 12. " Watch, there- 
fore ; for ye know not what hour the Lord doth come,*' 
liiatth. XXV. 42. But be not afi^aid, it is an unexpressible 
comfort, that death, come when it will, can never cutch 
thee out of Christ ; and, therefore, can never seize thee, 
«s a jailor, to hurry thee into the prison pf hell. Sudden 
death may hasten and facilitate thy passage to heaven, but 
can do thee no prejudice. 

Gate 9. I am afmd it may be my lot to die wanting tlie 
exercise of reason — jlns, I make no question but a child of 
God, a true Christian, muy die in this case. But what 
harm ? There is no hazard in it, as to his eternal state ; a 
disease, at death, may divest him of his reason, but not of 
his religion. When a man, going a long voyage, has put 
his affairs in order, and put ail his goods aboard ; he him- 
self may be curried aboard the ship sleeping : All is safe 
with him, although he knows not where he is, till he 
awaken in the ship. Even so the godly man, who dies in 
this case, may die uncomfortably, but not unsafely. 

Case last. I am naturally timorous, and the very thoughts 
of death are terrible to me. — jins. The less you think on 
death, the thoughts of it will be the more frightful ; but 
make it familiar to you by frequent meditations upon it, 
and you may thereby allay your fears. I^ook at the white 
and bright side of the cloud ; take faith's view of the city 
that hath foundations ; so shall you see hope in your deathi< 
Be duly affected with the body of sin and death, and fre- 
quent interruptions of your communion with God,and with 
the glory which dwells on the other side of death : This 
will contribute much to remove slavish fear 
It ia pity s^ipts should be so fond of life as they oftei 



fi24t Connderatians to make Saint9 [State!?. 

are ; they ought always to be in good terms with death. 
When matters are duly considered, it might well be €!• 
pccted every child of God, every regenerate man, should 
generously profess concerning thislife,what Job (tid,chap. 
vii. 16. "I lothe it ; I would not live always." In order 
to gain their hearts to this desirable temper, I offerlthefol* 
lowing additional considerations. 

Firaiy Consider the sinfulness that attends life in this 
world. While ye live here, ye sin, and see others sin-, 
ning. Ye breathe infectious air. Ye live in a pest-house. 
Is it at all strange to lothe such a life ? ( 1 .) Your own 
pilgrim's sores ai*e running on you. Doth not the sin^ rf 
your nature make you groan daily ? Are you not sensible^ 
that though the cure be begun, it is yet far from being 
perfected ? Has not the leprosy got into the walls of the 
house, which cannot be removed without pulling it down ^ 
Is not your nature so vitiated, that no less than the sepa- 
ration of the soul from the body cun root out the disease I 
Have you not your sores without, as well as your sickness 
within I Do you not leave murks of your pollution (Mi 
whutsoever passes through your hands ? Are not all your 
actions tainted und blemished with defects and imperfec- 
tions ? Who else then should be much in love with life, 
but such whose sickness is their health, and who glory 
in their shame ? (2.) The lothsomc sores of others ure 
always before your eyes, go where you will. The follies 
and wickedness of men are every where conspicuous, and 
muke but an unpleasant scene. The sinful world i$ but 
an unsightly co»npuny, a disagreeable crowd, in which 
the most lothsome are the most numerous. (3.) Are not 
your own sores oft-times breaking out again, after heal- 
ing ? Frequent relapses may well cause us remit of our 
fondness for this life. To be ever struggling, and anon 
falling into the mire again, makes weary work. Do yc 
never wish for cold dciith, thereby effectually to cool the 
heat of these lusts which so often take fire again ; even 
after a flood of godly sorrow has gone over them ? (4.) Do 
not ye sometimes infect others, and others mfect you ? 
There is no society in the woi'ld, in which every member 
of it doth not sometimes lay a stumbling-block before the 
rest. The best carry about with them the tinder of a cor- 
rupt nature; which they cannot be rid of, wiiilc they live -, 



t 



£ad 11/] vnlUng to die, 335 

id which is liable to be kindled at all times, and in all 
laces ; yea, they are apt to inflame others, and become 
le occasions of sinning. Certainly these things arc apt 
) imbitter this life to the saints. 

Secondly y Consider the misery and trouble that attend it« 
est is desirable, but it is not to be found on this side of 
te grave. Worldly troubles attend all men in this life. 
his "vvorld is a sea of trouble, where one wave rolls up- 
1 another. They who fancy themselves beyond the 
'ach of trouble, are mistaken ; no state, no stage of life, 

exempted from it. The crowned head is surrounded 
ith thorny cares. — Honour many times paves the way to 
Sep disgrace : Riches (for the most part) are kept to the 
'^rt of the owners. The fairest rose wants not prickles ; 
id the heaviest cross is sometimes found wrapt up in tlie 
Peatest earthly comfoit. Spiritual troubles attend the 
ints in this life. They are like travellers travelling ia 
cloudy night, in which tiie moon sometimes breiiks out 
t>m under one cloud, but quickly hides her head c;gain 
ider another ; no wonder they long to be at their jour- 
'y*s end. The sudden alterations the best frame of spirit 

liable to, the perplexing doubts, confouiiding ft^rs, 
ort-lived joys, and long running sorrows, which have a 
■rtain ruffmity, with the present life, must needs create 
the saints a desire to be with Christ, which is best of 

Lastly^ Consider the great imperfections attending this 
e. While the soul is lodged in this cottage of clay, the 
cessities of tlie body ure many ; it is always craving. 
^iC mud walls must be repaired and patched up daily 
I the clay cottage fall down for good and all. Eating, 
inking, sleeping, and the like, are, in themselves, but 
?an employments for a rational creature ; and will be 
outed such by the heaven-born soul. They are badges 
imperfection, and, as such, unpleasant to the mind, 
firing unto that life and immonality, which is brought 
light through the gospel ; and would be very grievous, 
this state of things were of long continuance. Doth 
t the gracious soul often find itself yoked with the body, 
with a companion in travel, unable to keep pace with 
' When the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak. When 
? soul would mount upward, the body is as a clog up- 



336 DireciiQTu how to [State IY< 

on it) and as a stone tied to the foot of a bird attempting 
to fly. The truth is, O believer ! thy soul in this body 
is, at best but like a diamond in a ring, where much of 
it is obscured ; it is far sunk in the vile clay, till reBeved 
by death. 

I conclude this subject with a few directions how to 
prepare for death, so as we may die comfortably. I speak 
not here of hiibitu:d preparation for death, which a true 
Christian, in virtue of his gracious state, never wantSj 
from the time he is horn agtdn and united to Christ ; but 
©factual preparation or readiness,in respect of his circum* 
fttnntiatc; case, frame, and disposition of mind and spirit 9 
the Want of which makes even a saint very unfit to die. 

Firsts Let it be your constant care to keep a clean cott- 
science void of offence towai*d God, and toward maiH 
Acts xxiv. 17. Beware of standing controversy betwixt 
God and you, on the account of some iniquity regarded 
in the heart. When an honest man is about to leave hift 
country, and not to return, he settles accounts with thos© 
he had dealings with, and lays down methods for paying 
his debts timeously ; lest he be reckoned « bankrupt, and 
be attacked by an officer, when he is going off. Guilt. 
lyinij^ on the conscience is a fountain of fears ; and will 
readily sting severely, when death stares the criminal in 
the face. Hence it is, tiiat many, even of God's children 
when a-dying, are made to wish passionately, and desire 
eagerly, that they may live to do, what they ought to 
have done before that timet Wherefore, walk closely 
with God, be diligent, strict, and exact in your course; 
beware of a loose, careless, and irregular conversation \ 
as ye would not lay up for yourselves anguish and bitter- 
ness of spirit, in a dying hour. And because, through 
the iiifirmity cleaving to us, in our present state of in^" 
pcrf^ ction, in many things we offend all, renew your re- 
pej.t.nce daily, and be ever washing in the Redeemer's 
blood. As long as ye are in the world, ye will need to 
Wfcsh your feet, John xiii. 10. that is, to make applica- 
tion to the blood of Christ, anew, for purging your con- 
sciences from the guilt of daily miscarriages. Let death 
find you at the fountain : and if so, it will find you ready 
|0 answer its call. 

Slccondlify Be always watchful, waiting for your cban^ > 



Head IL] l^rvfimre for Death. SS/. 

like UDt0 men that wait for their Lord, that when he com* 
ethand knocketh, they may open unto him immediately ^ 
Lake xxi. 36. Beware of slumbering and sleeping^ wiiile 
tiie bridegroom tarries. To be awakened out of spiritual 
(dumber, by a surprising call to pass into another woridi 
is a very frightful thing : But he who is duly waiting for 
the coming of his Lord, shall comfoi*tiiibly receive tlie grim 
messenger, while lie beholds him ushering in Hini, of 
whoni he may confidently say, TM9 is my Godj I have 
vaited for him. The wuy to die comfoitably is to die 
daily. Be often essuying as it wei-e, to die. Bring 
yourselves familiarly acquainted with death, by makijig 
iDiiiiy visits to the grave, in serious meditations upon it. 
This wus Job's practice, Chap. xvii. 13, 14. "1 harve 
ixiade my bed in the darkness." Go thou, and do likc- 
^sc; and when death comes, thou slialt have notliing 
•do but to lie down. " I have said to corruption, thou art 
^y father ; to the worm, thou art my mother and my sis- 
ter." Do thou, say so too ; cJid thcu wilt be tlie fitter to 
80 home to their house. Be frequently reflecting upon 
y^Ur conduct^ and considering wh**t course of life you 
'^sh to be found in, when death arrests you ; and act ac- 
cordingly. When you do the duties of your station in life, 
^^ are employed in acts of worship, think with yourselves, 
r^«t, it may be, tliis is the last opportunity ; and, tbere- 
^i*c, act as if you wus never to do more of that kind. 
W^hen you lie down at night, compose your spirits as if 
''Ou was not to awake, till the heavens be no more. And 
•^hen you awake in the morning, consider that new day 
^^ your last ; and live accordingly. Surely that night com- 
-th, of which you will never sec tlie morning, or that 
):ioming, of which you will never sec the night. But 
¥hich of your momings or nights will be such, you know 

lot. 

Thirdly^ Employ yourselves much in weaning your 
learttf from the world. The mc.n who is making rei.dy 
j> go abroad, busies himself in tdking leave of his friends. 
'-iCt the mantle of earthly enjoyments hang loose about 
rou, that it may be easily dropped, when death comes to 
^iiiiy you away into another. Moderate your affections 
jowards your lawful comforts of life ; and let not yoUr 
itwrts be too much taken with them. The trayeHer acts 




umriMly, nbo snffen himulf to be so allured with the 
waver^eatea of the im, where he lodgeth, us to make hi} 
jkecevwirdeparturefroEaitgrievous, Feed with fear, and 
-mik ihroug^hthe vorld &a pilgrinis and strangers. Likev, 
irbim the com !■ fenakmg the gi-nund, it is ready for Us 
McUe ; when the fruit 18 ripe, it fulls ofi' the tree easily j 
.S0> ^rtiea a Chriitiiiii'B heart is truly weaned from thtf 

' iiroriOi 'fie iq prepared fiir death, and it will be tlic more 
eujto Um. A heart disengaged from the world ia an 
hM^mly one ; and then are we ready for heaven) when 
our heart i* there before us, "Matth. \ i. '2 1 . 

Fourthly, Be diUgent' in gailiLriiig and laying nj 
erldencefi of your title to heaven, fur your snpportand 
oemfbrt at the hour of death. The neglect hereof man 
(the joy and consolation, which i^onie ChrisUuns migbt 
otherwise huve at their death. V^herefore, examine your- 

■ ielTeS(frequently,aBtoyoijrspiritual state; that evidence^ 
which lie hid and unobserved, muy be brought to ligbt 
and taken nodce of. Andif youivould rrtanage this woric 
BQcceufullyt make solemn work ot'it. Set up^rt some unH 
for it. And after earnest prayer to God, through JesW 
Christ, for the enlightening influences of the Holy Spii* 
whereby ye may be enabled to understand his own word) 
to discern his own work in youL- souls ; sist yourseh« 
before the tribunal of^our consciences, that ye may judgB 
yourselves in this weighty matter. 

Id the firtt place, Let the marks of a regenerate state 
be fixed; from the Lord's word ; und have recourse to 
some particular text for that purpose, such as Ptot. 
viiL 17. " I love them that love me." Compare Lti^ ', 
xiv. 26. " If any man come to me, and hate not his 
father and mother, and wife and children, and brethmi' 
and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be iny 
disciple." Psal. cxix. 6. " Then shall 1 not be asham- 
ed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments." 
Psal. xviii. 33. « I was also upright before him ; and 
I kept myself from mine iniquity." Compare Bom. tB. 
3S, 23. « For I delight in the law of God, after the in- 
ifard man ; but I see another law in my members, wai" 
ling against the law of my mind," isfc. 1 John iiL 3. 
" ^d every man that hath this hope in htm, purifieA 
bimself, even as. he: is pure." Matth. v. $• " Bleaq^ 






t»tia»i far Bemik. ^ 339 



T 



tjIb^fOorinSpiiit^ for theirs is the kingdom of hescven.*' 
koL ;iii. 3. ^ For We are the circumcision which wor« 
1^ (or serve) God in the spirit) and rejoice in Christ 
vus^ and have no confidence in the flesh." The sum 
r Ae evidence arising from these texts lies here. A real 
lltstian^tfr one who loves Grod for himself, as well as 
^, his benefits, and that with a supreme love, above all 
encms and things : He has an awful and impartial re* 
iad to God's commands ; he opposeth and wrestleth 
j;dnftt that sin, which of all others most easilf besets 
un ; he approveth and loveth the holy law, even in that 
^ point, wherein it strikes against his most beloved 
1st ; his hope of heaven engageth him in the study of 
oiversal holiness; in the which he aims at perfection, 
Kmgh he cannot reach it in this life ; he serves the Lord^ 
'A^j in acts of worship, but in the whole of his con- 
SjrsaticHi ; and as to both, is spiritual in the principle, 
oitives, aims, and ends of his service ; yet he sees no- 
iDj? in himself to trust to before the Lord : Christ and 
s ralness is the stay of his soul ; and his confidence is 
|toff from all that is not Chnst, or in Christ, in pobt 
justification, or acceptance with God, and in point of 
notification too. Every one in whom these characters 
e found has a title to heaven, according to the word* 
is convenient and profitable to mark such texts for this 
ecial use, as they occur, while you read the scriptures, 
hear sermons. The marks of a regenerate state thus 
:ed : in the next place. Impartially search and try youi^ 
m. hearts thereby, as in the sight of God, with depend- 
ce on him for spiritual discerning, that ye may know 
lether they be in you or not. And ^hen ye find them, 
TO the conclusion deliberately ajvd distinctly ; namely. 
It therefore you are regenerate, and have a title to 
given. Thus you may gather evidences. But be sure 
have recourse to God in Christ by earnest prayer, for 
5 testimony of the Spirit, whose office is to bear witnessr 
th our spirit, that we are the children of God, Rom^. 
i. 16, Moreover, carefully observe the course and 
^thod of Providence toyrards you ; and likewise how 
ur soul is affected under the same, in the various steps 
sreof ; compare bqth with scripture doctrines, promises, 
reateniings, and examples, so shall ye perceive, if the 



/ 



330 Jbtreetjong, feci 

Lord deals with you as lie usptli to do unto those 
his name : And if you be going forth by the footsteps 
the flock] this mny afford you cotnforluble evidence. 
"Walt tenderly and circumspectly ; and the Lord will 
nianifest himself to you, according to his protniBc, John 
xiv. 21. "He that hath mf commandTiienis, and keepttll 
them, he it is that loTCth me ; and he that loveih me, 
shull be loved of my Father ; and 1 will lovc him, and 
frill manifest myself to him." But it is in vain to iliink 
on successful self-examination, if ye be loose and irregular 
in'your conversation. 

Lastly^ Dispatch the work of your day and generation 
with speed and diligence. " DuVid, L^icr he had stTveii 
his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep," 
Acts xiii. 36, God h.^s allotted us certain pieces of wort 
<rf this kind, which ought to be dispatched before the 
ime of working be ovt-r, Eccl. is. 10. " Whatsoever 
thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might ; for there 
is no work, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the gi'uve, 
whither thou goest." GjJ. vi. 10. " As we have tiii-re- 
fore opportunity, let us do^ood unto all men, especially 
imto them who are of the household of faitli." If » 
passenger, after he is got on shipboard, and the ship is 
getting under sail, remember that he has omitted to dis- 
patch a piece of necessury business when lie was ashore, 
it must needs be uneasy to him: even so reflection in a 
dying hour, upon neglected seasons, and lost opportunities 
cannot fuil to disquiet a Christian, Wherefore, whatever 
is incumbent upon thee to do for God's honour, and the 
good of others ; either as the duty of thy station, or \sf 
special opportunity put into thy hand, pcrfonn it season* 
ably, if thou wouldst die comfoitably. 



HEAD m. 



TBB &Bft9&mSCTt0«« 



JOHH Tw 98) 39. 



el not at tMa ; For the hour is condngj in the wMe^ 
hat are in the graves shall hear his voice : And shall 
e forth ; they that have done good unto the resur» 
ion of life ; and they that have done evil unto the 
trrection of damnation. 



lESE words are pari; of the defence our Lord JesUs 
Christ makes for himself^ when persecuted by the 
for curing the impotent man> and ordering him to 
away his bed on the Sabbath ; and for vindicating 
ciduct, when accused by them of having thereby pro- 
thut day. On this occasion, he professeth himself 
ly Lord of the Sabbath, but also Lord of life and 
; declaring, in the words of the texty the rcsurrec- 
f the dead to be brought to pass by his power. Thi« 
'oduceth with these words, as with a solemn preface^ 
el not at this ; i. e, at this strange discourse of mine : 
t wonder to hear me, whose appearance is so ycTf 
in your eyes, talk at this rate ; for the day is com* 
1 which the dead shall be raised by my power. 
icrve in this text, (1.) The doctrine of the resurreo 
>serted,^// that are in the gravesjshall hear his voice^ 
^me forth. The dead bodies, which are reduced to 
ihall revive,and evidence life by hearing and moving'* 
he author of it, Jesus Christ, the Son ofman^ ver. 27«i ^ 
«a4 »haU hear his voic^e, and be raised thereby. (3.). 



J33;? PoanUUiy of the Reaurrettion. [Sififef^. |i 

The number that shall be raised, ^11 that are in thegnne^ ■< 
i, e. ftll the dead bodies of men, howsoever differently dil> li 
posed of, as it were, in different kinds of graves ; oralithe .|1 
dead, good or bad. -. They are not all buried in gtaves^ 
proper! V so called; some are burnt to ashes, some drownedf { 
and buried in the bellies of fishes ; yea some devoured by j 
man-eaters called Cannibals ; but wheresoever the matter 
or substance, of which the body was composed, is to bar 
found, thence they shall come forth. (4.) The great dis- 
tinction that shall be made betwixt the godly and tbe ■ 
wicked* They shall indeed both rise again in the resnf* 
rection. None of the godly will be missing ; though 
perhaps, they either had no burial, or a very obscure one; 
and all the wicked shall come forth ; their vaulted tombs 
Shall hold them no longer than the voice is uttered. But 
the former shall have a joyful resurrection to life, while 
the latter have a dreadful resurrection to drnmnation* 
Lastly y The set time of this great event : There is all 
hour^ or certain fixed period of time, appointed of God 
fbr it. We are not told when that hour will be, but tW 
it is coming ; for this among other reasons ; that we mlf 
alvv^ays be ready. 

Doctrine. 
There ahall be a Reeurrectidn of the Dead. 

.In discoursing of this subject, I shall, -FVr*f, Shew the 
Certainty of the resurrection. Secondly^ I shall enquirf? 
into the nature of it : And, Lastly^ Make some practical 
improvement of the whole. 

I. In shewing the certainty of the resurrection, I shall 
evince, (1.) That God can raise the dead. And, (2.) 
That he will do it : Which are the two grounds or topics 
laid down by Christ himself, when disputing with the 
Sadducees, Mat. xxii. 29, Jesus answered and said unt9 
them^ Ye do err^ not knowing the scrijitures, nor the 
power of God, 

FirBt^ Seeing God is Almighty, surely he can raise the 
•dead. We have instances of this powei'ful work of God, 
both in the Old and New Testament. The son of the wi- 
dow in Sarepta was raised from the dead, 1 Kings xviL 
^2. The ShUlv^xut^'s son; 2 Kings iy. 35. And tbe mai 



"^^ ■;.>;;. 



r 

Mtnlothe sepulchre of£li8li%clM4».xuL 81. Inirtucli 
%[re tauf <rtMier?e a gf|^tion» the' sepDnd of these nunco* 
lofM events being more Ulustrious than the first* and the 
third tiian the second. The firstofthese persons was raised 
Vben he was but newly dead ; the pr^diiet Elijah who 
niaed hko) being present at his decease. The secondf 
wheo he \aA lain dead a considerahle time ; namely^ while 
Ilia mother travelled from Shuisem to mount C^annel^ 
(reckoned stout the distance of sixte^ miles) and retnroK 
ed from then<:e to her house with Elisha^ who raised him^. 
The iaat, not till they were burying him, and the corpso 
was cast into the prophet's grave. . In like manner in the 
New Testament, Jcdrus' daughter, (Mark v. 41.) and 
Dorcas (Acts ix. 40.) were both raised to life, when lately 
■dead ; the widow's son in Nain, when they were carrying 
Umout to bury him, Luke vii. 11. 15. And Lazai'U},^ 
l^en stinking in the grave, John xi. 39. 44. 

Can men make curious glasses out of ashes, reduce flow- 
isrs into ashes, and raise them again out of these ashes, re- 
storing them to their former beauty ; and cannot the great 
Creator, who made all things of nothing, raise man's body 
idter it is reduced into dust I If it be objected^ How cun 
men's bodies be raised up again after they are dissolved in-^ 
to dust, and the ashes of many generations are mingled to^ 
gether ? Scripture and not reason, furnishes the answer^ 
With men it is imfiosMlCyAut not with God. It is absurd for 
men to deny that God can do a thing, because they see 
jiot how it may be done. How small a portion do we 
know of his ways 1 How absolutely incapable are we of 
conceiving distinctly of the extent of almighty power, and 
- much more of comprehending its actings, and tiie method 
of procedure 1 1 question not, but many illitcr&te men are 
as great infidels to many chyinical experiments, as some, 
learned men are to the. doctrine of the resurrection ; and 
as these last are ready to deride the former, so the Lord 
will have them in derision. What a mystery was it to 
the Indians, that the Europeans could, by a piece of paper^ 
converse togeUier at the dis^nce of some hundreds of 
miles I And how much were they astonished to see 
them with their guns, produce as it were, thunder and 
lightning in a moment, and at pleasure kill men afar off i 
8btU sooao n^n do such things as ai:e wonders in the ey^s 

Ee2 



SS4 Pomiility of the ReaurrteHon. £Stiate ni[^ 

of others, because they cannot comprehend them ; andy 
Shall men confine the infinite power of God, withm 
the narrow boundaries of their own shallow capacitieii ' 
in a matter no ways contrary to reason ? An inferior me 
ture has but a very imperfect conception of the power of 
-a superior. Brutes do not conceive of the actings of 
feason in men : And men have but lame notions of the 
power of angels ; how low and inadequate a conceptioo^ 
then, must a finite nature have of the power of that 
"which is infinite ! Though we cannot conceive how God 
acts^ yet we ought to believe he can do above what ire 
can think or can conceive of. 

Wherefore, let the bodies of men be laid in the grave*, 
let them rot there, andJbe resolved into the most minute 
particles ; or let them be burnt, and the ashes cast into 
rivers, or thrown up into the air, to be scattered by the 
wind ; let the dust of a thousand generations be mingled 
And the streams of the dead bodies wander to and fro in 
the air ; let birds or wild beasts eat the dead bodies, or the 
fishes of the sea devour them, so that the parts of human 
bodies, thus destroyed, pass into substantial parts of birds^ 
beasts, or fishes ; or what is more than that, let man-eaters, 
who themselves must die, and rise again, devour human 
bodies, and let others devour them again; and then let our 
modern Sadducees propose the question in these cases, 8i^ 
tlie ancient Sadducees did, in the case of the woman, who 
bad been married to seven husbands successively, Mai 
xxii. 28. We answer, as our blessed Lord and Savioitf 
did, ver. 26. Ye do err ^ not knonving the scrifituresy nor 
the fioiver of God. We believe God to be omniscieDt, 
and omnipotent, infinite in knowledge and in power; and 
bence, agreeable to the dictates of reason, we conclude the 
possibility of the resurrection, even in the cases supposed* 

Material things may change their forms and shapes, may 
be resolved into the pi'inciples of which they are formed,: 
But they are not annihilated, or reduced to nothing ; nor 
can they be so, by any created power. God is omniscient, 
his understanding is infinite, therefore he knows all things 
whatsoever ; whut they were, at any time, what they arc, 
and where they are to be found. Though the country-man; 
who comes into the apothecai7's shop, cannot find out the 



J^ead III.] PoiMiHty qf the Returreetionf aSjT 

he has in his shopy whence it came, and where it is to be 
found. And in a mingle of many different seeds, the ez- 
.pert gardener can distinguish betwixt seed and seed: Why 
*then may not omniscience distinguish betwixt dust and 
dust ? Can he, who knows all things to perfection, be 
liable to any mistake about his own creatures ! Whoso 
.belie¥es an infinite understanding, must needs own, that 
no mass of dust is so jumbled together, but God per* 
iSecUy comprehends, and infallibly knows how the 'most 
minute paiticle, and every one of them, is to be matched. 
And therefore he knows where tlie particles of each dead 
body are, whether in the earth, sea, or air; how confused 
■soever they lie. And particularly, he knows where ta 
£fkd the primitive substance of the man-eater ; howso- 
ever evaporated or reduced, as it were, into air or vapour^ 
by sweat or perspiration ; and how to separate the parta 
of the body that was eaten, from the body of the eater^ 
liowsoever mcovporate, or made one body mth it ; and 
fio understands, not only how, but whence, he is to bring 
iMick the primitive substance of the man-eater to its pro- 
per place ; and also to separate from the man-eater's body, 
that part of the devoured body which goes into its sub- 
stance, and is indeed but a very small part of it. It is 
certain, the bodies of men, as of all other animals, or 
living creatures, are in a continual flux ; they grow, and 
;are sustained, by daily food, so small a part whereoi be- 
. comes nourishment, that the most part is evacuated. And 
it is reckoned that, at least as much of the food is evacua- 
ted insensibly by perspiration, as is voided by other per- 
ceptible ways. Yea, the nourishing part of the food, 
when assimilated, and thereby become a part of the 
.body is evacuated by perspiration through the pores of 
the skin, and again supplied by the use of the food ; yet 
the body is still reckoned one, and the same body. 
Whence we may conclude, that it is not essential to the 
resurrection of the body, that every paiticle of the matter, 
which at any dme was part of a human body, should be 
restored to it, when it is raised up from death to life« 
Were it so, the bodies of men would become of so huge a 
aize, that they would bear no resemblance of the persons^ 
. -It is sufl&cient to denominate it the same body tlvat died, 
yfi^ it is ri^id again i if tlie body that is raii^ed be formed 



iU 7^ Ceriainty o/cAe Rttwrettion. [ft&telV. 

4n its former proportions ol tliesaiLie purticles of matter, 
which rtl wiy limti wtre lu constituebi pans, huwso^:¥er il 
b« ri. tilled ; like as, we i-eckuii it is ibe fnxaie body tliiil wu 
piiieU iiw:i7 by iong sickness, which becomes iaX. imil fait 
■jj;uin ^cr recovei'y. 

Wuw, 10 tiiia infinite understanding join infinite power, 
vhertby he is dble to subdue .ill ttiingu unto hiniscit' ; and 
this glorious grctitwoi'k appe^irs most rcaaunable. lEonint- 
science discover every little particle of duM, where it i*i 
and how it is to be matched ; cannot omn potence bring 
thcin, and join thenf together in their order ? Can the 
WHtch'iuHker tuku up the several pieces of a w^itch, tying 
in it confused lic^p before him, And set each in its propa 
plixe ; iind cuntiot God put the huniLtn body into ortlefi 
tttter its dissaiutiun i Did he speak this world into lieing 
outttf notiiiiig ; and can he not form man's body out ofils 
pre-exiatent matter ? If he ciJIeth those things which be 
not, as though they were, surely he can ciJl things tliat are 
dissolved to be as they were, before the compound waa 
resolved into its parts and principles : Wherefore, God 
can raise the dead. And " Wherefure ihoutd ic be sAought 
-a Ihtng incredible tiiilh you, Ihas GoU ahauid ruUe tht 
dead." Acts xxvi. 8. 

Stcondiy, God will do it. He uot only can do it, but 
he ccrtaudy will do it, because he has said it. Our text 
is very full to this pur|>ose : " All that are in their graves 
shall hear his voice ; and shall come forth : they that have 
done good, unto the resurrection of life ; and they that 
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." These 
words relate to, and are an explanation of, that part of 
Daniel's prophecy, Dan. xiJ. " And many of them that 
sleep in the dust of the earth shall ai,VL\ke ; some to ever- 
lasting life, and some to shame and everlasting con- 
tempt." The which appears to have been calculated to 
confront the doctrine of the Swdducees ; which the Holy 
Ghost knew was to be at a great height in the Jewish 
church, under the persecution of Antiochus. There aro 
many other tests in the Old and New Testaments, that 
might here be ddduced ; such as Acts sxiv. 15. "And 
have hope towards God, which they themselves also al- 
low; that there shuil be a resurrection of the dead, of the 
iust and unjust" Aud Job xix. 36, 37. « Aud thougit. 



«Keirift)r'skiii9 worms destroy tbis bodj, yet in my flesB: 
jrfiatf I see God : Whom I shall see for myself, and nun» 
.'%j[iMi4n)l behold, and not another; though my reuis bo- 
.tttisomed within me." But I need not multiply testi* 

_ monieS) in a matter so clearly and frequently taught ii^ 
•sieredl scripture. Our Lord and Sariour himself prores. 
.kf sttiiiHit t)ie Sadducees, in that remarkable text, Luke. 

' ' a£lK.- 1/» 38. '^ Now that the dead are raised, evefn Moses 

-'Aewed st^the bush, when he calleth the Lord, the God. 

^; Abraham, and the €rod of Isaac, and the God of Jacob s 

I'iDr he u not a God of the dead, but of the living ; tot 

^ itH-fiYe imto him.'* These holy patriarchs were now dead ) 
it^yeithelessy the Lord Jehovah is called their Godi^ 
jisoGMly in Tirtue of the covenant of grace, and in the senso 
liittNsof '; in which sense, the phrase comprehends alP 
Gfeilliedness, as that which, by the covenant, is secured to 

: ibem trho are in it, Heb. xi. 1 6. << God is not ashamed 
,-^ be odled their God ; for he hath prepared for them » 
tsty" He is not called the God of their souls only ^ 
h^t their God, the God of their persona, souls, and bodies ; 

, .tlie whicli» by virtue of his truth and faithfulness, must 
'itkre hs full effect : Now it cannot have its full effect on. 
Ae dead, who, in as far as they are dead, are far from 
-afl blessedness ; but on the living, who alone are capa- 
ble of it ; therefore, since God is still called their Goff^ 
'they are tiving in respect of God, although their bodies^ 
4ire yet in the grave ; for in respect of him, who by hisi 
jlower can restore them to life, and in his covenant has 
declared his will and purpose so to do, and whose pro* 

.-mise cannot fail, they all are to be reckoned to live ; and, 
Otoustent with the covenant, their death is but a sleepy 
.Out of which, in virtue of the same covenant, securing 
ml! blessedness to their persons, their whole man, they 
must and shall certainly be awakened. The apostle Paul 
proves the resurrecUon at large, 1 Cor. xv. and shews it 
to be a fundamental article, the denial whereof is subver- 
sive of Christianity, ver. 13, 14. " If there be no resur- 
rection pf the dead, tlien is Christ not risen. And if 
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching va^, and your 
■ Iftidi is also vain." 

To assist us in conceiving of it, the scripture gives us 
J||H^ o£ 4^0 resurrection of the 4ead ; as the dry bon^ 



^ ' f 



"^M ne Mkiwte qf tkc He^m^itm* ' l!*>^W:J 



Unng^y Exek. xxxviii Jonah's coming mtt of the wUMllli 
belly, Mat. xii. 40. And nature affoi^ds us fuibli>milri|jB< 
.resemblances of it ; as the suns setting and rising sgiNAl 
night and day^ winter and summer, sleeping and awalnf|^t 
■wdlows in winter, lying void of all appearance of fifty i^^ 
ruinous bmldings, and subterraneous caverns, aoadt v?^' 
ing in the spribg seasons ; the seeds d3miig under tto do4' 
and thereafter springing up again: Ail whieh, ftoA^ 
like, may justly be admitted, as designed by 1iN» CM 
of nature, though not for proofs, yet for memoriall-fll 
tiie resurrection; whereof we have 'assurance framilH 
scripture, I Cor. zv. 36. << Thou fool, that which ft|k 
sowest is not quickened, except it die.*' ■ . ''W^ 

II. I shall enquire into the nature of the re8urraeA% 
shelling, 1«/, Who shall be raised, ^dly^ What ahdlk^ 
raised. Sflf/y, How the dead shall be raised. 

Fift^ Who shall be raised I Our text tells us whodi|r 
are f namely. All that are in the graves 4 i. e. ail Ham 
kind, who are dead. As for those persons who shall 1* 
found alive at the second coming of Christ, they shall Mt 
die, and soon thereafter be raised again, but such a Changs 
shall suddenly pass upon them, as shall be to them itt* 
stead of dying and rising ag^n ; so that their bodies shidl 
become like to those bodies which are raised out of tlii 
graves, 1 Cor. xv. 51, 52. "We shall not all sleepi 
but we shall all be changed ; in a moment, in the twinkp ' 
ling of an eye." Hence those who are to be judged it 
the great day are distinguished into quick and dead, Aett j 
X. 42. All the dead sludl arise, whether godly or wiclb* ^ 
ed, just or unjust, (Acts xxiv. 15.) old or young; ths, 
whole race of mankind, even those who never saw tfa^ 
sun, but died in their mother*s belly, Rev. xx. 12. <♦ And 
I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God«*' Ths 
seu and earth shall give up their dead, without reserve { 
none shall be kept back. 

Secondly y What shall be raised ? The bo<Ues of man* 
kind. A man is said to die^ wheii the soul is separst* 
ed from the body, and returns unto God who gave '% 
Eccles. xii. 7. But it is the body.only which is laid la 
the grave, and can be properly said to be raised : Where- 
fore the resurrection is, strictly speaking, competent to 
^tbe body only« Moreover, it is the same body Umi 



^e% vMch ihaH tim again. At the resarrectiaD, mett 
«lMU.Bot apl«ff widi odier bodies for aubstance, than 

.'rflieatf which they now have, and which are laid down in 
itoffrave^^ But with the self-same bodies endowed with 
-edier qualities. The very notion of a resurrection implies 
1kia» amce ncything can be said to rise i^^ain, but that 

..; wMch fidls. : But to illustrate it a little, ^rat, It is plain 

'iftm ^Scrijiture-testimony : The Apostle tells, it is this 
temtu which must put on immortality, 1 Cor. xv. 53. 

■ and tiutt Christ shall change our vile body, that it may be 
itthiflB^ like unto his glorious body, Philip, iii. 31. 
Scatfa, in' scripture-language, is a sleep, and the resurrec* 
iktti an awakmg out of that sleep. Job xiv. 12. which 
riiffWi the body rising up, to be the self-same that died. 
tStcamiih/j The equity of the divine procedure, both with 
mpect to the godly and the wicked, evmces this. It it 
•M: reckoned equal among men, that one do the workf 
qiid another get the reward. Though the glorifying of 
ttb bodies of the stdnts, is not, properiy spec^ig, and in 
M Mict sense, the rewai*d of their services or sufferings on 
MKA ; yet this is evident, that it is not at all agreeable 
lo tfaje manner of the divine dispensation, that one body 
Sb^ve him, and another be glorified ; that one fight, and 
anodier receive the crown. Uow can it be imagined, that 
thet^mples of the Holy Ghost (as these bodies of believers 

* aire termed, 1 Cor. vi. 19.) should always lie in rubbish ; 

s and others be reared up in their stead : That these mem- 
kers of Christ (ver. 15.) shall perish utterly, and other 

: kodies comes in their room ? Nuy, surely, as these bodies 
• •f the saints now bear a part in glorifying God, and some 
#f them suffer in his cause ; so they shall partake of the 
l^ory that is to be revealed. And these bodies of the 
Wkked, which are laid in the dust, shall be raised again ; 
that the same body, which sinned, may suffer. Shall one 

/body sin here, and another suffer in hell for that sin? 
Shall that body, which was the soul's companion in, sib, 
fie forever hid in the dust; and anotlier body, which did 
Mt act any part in sinning, be its companion in torment ? 
No, no; it is that body, which now takes up all the 
thoughts to provide for its back and belly, that shall be 
fidaed'Up, to suffer in hell. It is that tongue that is 
liow the awearing, lying tonguer which will need water 



340 The J^ature of the Resurreetiw. [Stite JV. j 

to cool it, in eteraal flames. These same feet, that iio# 
stand in the way of sinners, and carry men in their uiH 
godly courses, shall stand in the burning lake. Andthesftfi 
now covetous and lascivious eyes, shall take part in thefia^ 
and smoke of the pit. 

Thirdly J How the dead shall be raised. The same Jesw^ 
who was crucified without the gate of -Jerusalem, «ludl, it 
the last day, to the conviction of all, be declared tiodi 
Lord and Christ ; appearing as Judge of the world, attend- 
ed with his mighty angels, 2 Thes. i. 7. He shall descend 
from heuven with a shout, with the voice of the ardi-«ngel 
and with the trump of God, 1 Thes. iv. 16. The trumpet 
shall sound, and the dead shall be v;»ised, and these who are 
alive, changed, 1 Cor. xv. 52. Whether this shout, voice 
and trumpet, do denote some audible voice, or only tfi& 
workings of divine power, for the raising of the dead, and 
other dwful purposes of that day (though the former seems 
probable) I will not positively determine. There is no 
question but this coming of the Judge of the world will he 
in greater majesty and terror, than we can conceive: 
Yet that awful grandeur, majesty and state, which Wii 
displayed at the giving of the law, viz, thunders heard* 
lightnings and a thick cloud upon the mount seen ; the 
Lord descending in fire, the whole mount quaking greatly, 
and the voice of the trumpet wiixing louder and louder* 
(Exod. xix. 16, 18, 19.) may help forward a becoming^ 
thought of it. However, the sound of this trumpet shall be 
heard all the world over ; it shall reach to the depths of 
the sea, and into the bowels of the earth* At this loud 
alarm, bones shall come together, bone to his bone : the 
scattered dust of all the dead shall be gathered together, 
dust to his dust ; neither shall one thrust another, they 
«hall walk every one in his path ; and meeting together 
again, shall make up that very same body, which crumb- 
led into dust in the grave. And at the same alaiTning 
voice, shall every soul come again into its own body, ne- 
ver more to be separated. The dead can stay no longer 
in their graves, but must bid an etenial farewel to their 
long homes : Tliey hear his voice, and must come fortb,- 
jlnd receive their final sentence. 

Now, as there is a great difference betwixt the godly 



1 






IbadJlU.] ne Mawe qf tie Mtiumtit^ 941 

and the wicked in their life„ and in their death; io will 
- ttere be alto in their resurrection. 

-'.' The^godly shall be raised up out of their g^raves, by 

];"Wtiie m the Spirit of Christ, the blessed bond of their 

^ wniDQwithhim>Rom.viiL 11. << He that raised up Chrift 

S*f9iiE.the dead} shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by 

Im ^irit that dwelleth in you.** Jesus Christ arose from 

[jAitditadf as the first-fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. xr. 

yioL, So they tlut are Christ's shall follow at his comings 

ver. 33. The mystical Head having got above the waters 

cif death) he cannot but bring forth Uie members after him 

.{ndiietime. 

' Thev shall come forth with inexpressible joy ; for then 

•hall, that passage of scripture, which, ih its immediate 

ioype respected the Babylonish captivity, be fully accom- 

tt^^&edin its extensive spiritual view, Isaiah xxvi. 19* 

*, Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust/' As a 

foi«le>. .adorned for her husband, goes forth of her bed* 

chamber unto the marriage ; so shall the saints go forth of 

their graves, unto the marriage of the Lamb. Joseph had 

a joyful out-going from the prison, Daniel from the lion's 

. ^Pfkj and Jonah from the whale's belly ; yet those are but 

fiibt representadonsof the saint's out-goin^ from the grave 

lit. the resurrection. Then shall they smg the song of 

Moses and of the Lamb, in highest strains ; death being 

duite swallowed up in victory. They had, while in this 

^b£by sometimes sung, by faith, the triumphant song over 

death and the grave, ^ O death where is thy sting ? O 

i:,«ave, where is thy victory ?" 1 Cor. xv. 55, But when 

%Siey sing the same, from sight and sense ; the black band 

WmX doubts and fears,^ which frequently disturbj^ them,* and 

K disquieted their minds, is for ever cashiered. 

. May We not suppose the soul and body of every saint as* 

In mutual embraces, to rejoice in each other, and triumph 

-in their happy meeting again ? And may not one imagine 

• the body to address the soul thus ? <' O my soul, have we 

got together agdn, after so long a separation 1 art tHou 

come backint^ thine old habitation,never more to remove! 

O joyfiil meeting! how unlike is our present state to what 

•ur case was, when a separation was made betwixt us at 

death ! now is our mourning turned into joy ; the light 

;i]Qd|^bdness sometime sown, are now sprung up, ainA 

* w F f 



**« ...•!. 




S4S TSkrJAmit <if tit Re^urrffetiotL 

Oert Ifl perpetual ipring ia Immanuel's land. 
the day, in vliich I waa u&itcd lo thee, whose cbiel 
\ntt to get Christ in ub the hope of glury, aiid 10 makt 
me a temple for his Hoi; Spirit. O blessed soul, -which, 
in the time of ojir pUgriinage, kept tliine eye on the land 
then tSu oS, but now oesr. at hand ! thou tookest me up 
into secret places, and there made&t me bow these knees 
Ivefore the Lord, that I might bear a part in our humilia- 
lioiis before him ; and now is tlie due time, and I un 
lifted up. Thou didst employ this tongue, in confeEsionS) 
petitions, and tbtnksgirings, which henceforth aliall be 
emplojied in praiaing for evL-rmore. Thou madcstthew 
(sometimes) wt^eping fycs sow th<<t seed of tears, which ii 
Bov sprung up in joy that sliall never end. 1 was happlr 
beat down by thee, and kept in Subjection ; while othen 
{tampered their Qesh, And ni;.de thoir bellies dictr god«, 
to their own destruction : And, now 1 gloriously arise, te 
take my place in the mansions of glory, whilst they are 
dr^;ged out of their gravet, to be cast into fieiy fiunes- 
Kow, my soul, thou shalt complain 00 more of a sck 
ftnd pained body, tbou shalt be no more clogged wUk 1 
Vreak and weary flesh ; I ahull now hold pace with tbce 
in the prwseBofourGodfoicvcrmore." AndmaynotAe 
soul say, ** O happy day in ^vliich i return to dwell in thai 
blessed body, which WBs,and is, and will be for ever a mem- 
Iter of Christ, a temple of the Holy Spiiit 1 now ahall I be 
. ctematiy knit to thee; the silver cord shall never be loosed 
tnorejdeath shallnever mak>: another sepsnitionbetwixtiu. 
Arise then, my body, and dome away ; and let these eyes, 
vliich served to weep over my sins, behold now with joji 
the face of tmr glorious Redeemer; Lolthis is our GodiS&d 
ire have waited for him. Let these ears, which aerved to 
Jiear the word of life, in the temple below, come nov 
snd^eai- the hallelujtiha in the temple above. Let these 
feet, that carried me to the congregation of skints on earth, 
take their place now amcaig these who stand by. And let 
that tongue, which confessed Cliriat before raen,anduied 
to be still dropping something to his commendation, joiB 
the choir of the upper house in his praises for evermore' 
Thou shalt fast no more, but keep on everlasting feaitt 
thou shalt weep no more, neither shall thy countenUM^ 
ibe orerclouded ; but thou shtilt shine for ever, as a "W ill 



Head 111^3 Tfu Nature qfthe Resurrection. 34S 

the firmament. We took part together in the fight, come 
now, let us go together to receive and wear the crown. 

But) on the other hand, the wicked shall he rsdsed bj 
the power of Christ, as a just Judge, who is to render ven* 
geance to his enemies. The same .divine power which 
diut up their souls in hell, and kept their bodies in a gravct 
as in a prison, shall bring them forth, that soul and body 
together may receive the dreadful sentence of eternal 
dsmojiation, and be shut up together in the prison of hell ! 

They shall come forth -of their graves, with unspeakable 
horror and consternation. They shall be dragged forth aa 
so many malefactors out of a dungeon, to be led to execu- 
tion f crying to the mountains and to the rocks to fall oa 
them, and hide them from the face of the Lamb. Fearful 
was the cry in Egypt, that night the destroying angel 
went through, and slew their first bom. Dreadful were 
the shouts, at the earth opening her mouth, and swallow- 
ing up Dathan and Abii*am, and all that appertained to 
them. What hideous crying then must there be, when 
at the sound of the last trumpet, the earth and sea shall 
open their mouths, and cast forth all the wicked world, 
delivering them up to the dreadful Judge ? How will they 
cry, roar, and tear themselves ! how will the jovial com- 
panions weep and howl, and curse one another ! how will 
the earth be filled with their doleful shrieks and lamenta* 
tions, while they are pulled out like sheep for the slaugh- 
ter ? They who, while they lived in the world, were pro- 
fane debauchees, covetous, worldlings, or formal hypo- 
crites, shall then, in anguish of mind, wring their hands, 
beat their breasts, and bitterly lament tlieir case ; roaring 
forth their complaints, and calling themselves beasts, fools 
and mad-men, for having acted so mad a part in this life, 
and not having believed what they then see ! 

They were driven away in their wickedness at death ; 
and now all their sins rise with them, and like so many 
serpents twist themselves about their wretched souls, and 
bodies too, which have now a frightful meeting after a long 
separation. 

Then we may suppose the miserable body thus to accost 
the soul: " Hast thou again found me, O mine enemy, 
my worst enemy ! savage soul I more cruel than a thou- 
|»jid tygers ! Cursed be the day that ever we met I O that 



;^^6' ^trt %hail be if [State ISd 

The apostle is very express, Acts xxvii. 31. "He hati 
appointed u day, in the which fie will judge the world ia 
I'ig^hteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained." See- 
;Mat. xvi. 27. 2 Cor. v. 10. 2 Thes. i. 7, 8, 9, 10. RcT. 
.XX. 1 1—15. God has not only said it, but he has swon 
it, Rom. xiv. 10, 11. "We must all stand before the 
judgment-seat of Christ. For it is written, As I live saith 
the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue 
shall confess to God.'' So that the truth of God is moat 
solemnly plighted for it. 

Secondly y The rectoral justice and goodness of Gk)d,th^ 
sovereign Ruler of the world, do necessarily require i^ 
inasmuch as they require its being well with the righteousy 
and ill with the wicked. Howbeit, we often now see- 
wickedness exalted, while truth and righteousness M\ is 
tlie streets; piety oppressed, while profanity and irreligioil 
:do triumph. This is so very ordinary, that every one; 
who sincerely embraceth the way of holiness, must and 
doth lay his account with the loss of all he has, whiob 
.the world can take away from him, Luke xiv. 26. ** U 
any man come to me, and hate not his father anld mother, 
and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and 
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple." But it is in- 
consistent with the justice and goodness of God, that the 
affuirs of men should always continue in this state, which 
they appear in, from one generation to another, but that 
every man be rewarded according to his works ; and since 
that is not done in this life, there must be a judgment to 
come, « Seeing it is righteous with God, to recompcncc 
tribulation to them that trouble you ; and to you who are 
troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be re- 
vealed from heaven," 2 Thes. i. 6, 7. There will be a 
duy, in which the tables will be turned ; and the wicked 
shall be called to an account for all their sins, and suffer 
the due punishment of them ; and the pious shall be the 
prosperous ; for, as the apostle argues for the happy resur- 
rection of the saints, « If ui this life only we have hope 
in Christ, we are of all men most miserable," 1 Cor. xv. 
,19. It is true, God sometimes punisheth the wicked in 
this life, that men may know, he is a God that judgeth 
in the earth ; but yet much wickedness remains unpunish- 
ed, and untocovered, to be a pledge of the judgment to 



ilead IV^] general Judgment^ firov^. . ^>7 

come. If none of the wicked were punished here, tlffey 
^iTould conclude, that God had utterly forsaken the earth ; 
if all of thenv were punished in this life, men would bet 
apt to think, there is no after-reckoning, Therefore, in the 
wisdom of God, some are punished now, and some not.\ 
Sometimes the Lord smites sinners, in the very act of sin> 
to shew unto the world, that he is witness to all their 
wickedness, and will call them to an actount for it. Some- 
times he delays long, ere he strike ; that he may discover 
to the world, that he forgets not mens ill deeds, though 
he does not presently punish them. Besides all this, the 
sins of many do outlive them ; and the impure fountain, 
by them opened, runs long after they are- dead and gone* 
As in the case of Jeroboam the first king of the ten tribes ; 
whose sin did run on all along unto the end ,of that un-? 
happy kingdom, 2 Kings xvii. 22, 23. « The children of 
Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam, which he did ; 
they departed not from them ; until the Lord removed 1^* 
rael out of his sight. 

Thirdly^ The resurrection of Christ is a certain proof 
that there shall be a day of judgment* This argument Puul 
useth to convince the Athenians: says hc,« He hathgiveu 
assurance to all men, in that he hath raised him from the 
dead. Acts xvii. 31. The judge is already named, his pa- 
tent written and sealed, yea and read before all men, in hfe 
rising again from the dead. Hereby God hath given assur- 
ance of it (or offered faith, Marg.) He hath by ridsing 
Christ from the dead, exhibited his credentials as Judge 
of the world. When, in the days of his humiliation, ho 
was sisted before a tribunal, arraigned, accused, and con- 
demned of men ; he plainly told them of this judgment, 
and that he liimself would be the Judge, Math. xxvi. 64. 
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the ricjht 
hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. And 
now that he was raised from the dead, though condemned 
as a blasphemer on this veiy head, is it not un undeni iblo 
proof from heaven, of the truth of what he asserted \ More- 
over, this was one of the great ends of Christ's death and 
resurrection ; " For to this end Christ both died, and rose, 
and revived, that he might, be the Lord" (i. e. The Lord 
Judge, as is evident from the contexj:,) ^' both of the dead, 
and of the liying/' Rom. xiv. 9. 

GS3- 






; every one who has had, or, to the end tf 
tiie vorldi'flfaftB have, a living soul united to a body, will 
make Up this great congregation. Even tiiosewkoreftiwid 
to cone to the throne of grace, simll be forced to tlie W 
•f jUBtieev for there can he no hiding from the all-aeeiag 
Jvogti no (l]fm!E ^"'^ ^^"^ ^''o i^ present every vhere, ao 
M^fdiig Ubi who is armed with almighty power. « We 
must ^ BDUd'before the judgment aeat of Christ, 2 Cor. v. 
lo. « Before him sliallbc gathered all nations," snys the 
iilxt. X'lilS'^* t^ ije done by the ministry of angels. 
By tftem'r'rfilkll the elect be gathered, Mark xiii, it 
•** Tbeta-shBlibe send his angels, and shall gather togetlier 
hiselect fromthe four winds." And they also shall ^' 
thev the.npretMte, Manh. xiii. 40,41. » go aliall it be 
in the esdMtfals world, The Son of man shall send forlli 
Ilia Uigelarud they shall gather out of his kingdom^l 
thingB titiM ofi^d, and them which do iniquity." Fi-qdi 
ell eonw.4 of the world, shall the inhabitants thereof be 
gathered untodte place, where he shall set his throne fW 
jedgment 

Kxthly, There shall be a separation made betwixt the 
righteous and the wicked ; the fair company of the elect 
eheep being set on Christ's right hand, and the reprobate 
^ats on tuB left. There is no necessity to wait for tlti& 
eeparation, till the trial be over ; since the paitiea do rise 
out of their graves, with plain outward marks of distinc- 
rion, as jraa cleared before. The scpai-ation seems to be 
efiected by that double gathering before mentioned ; the 
one of the elect, Mark xiii. 37. the otherof them that do 
iniquity, Matth. xiii. 41. The elect being caught up t'>- 
RS^ec in the cleuds, meet the Lord in the air, (1 Thess- 
Sv. 17.) and so are set on liis right hand i ami the repro- 
tate left on the earth (Matth. xxv. 40.) upon the Judge's 
left hu)d< Here is now a total separation of two parues, - 
who were always opposite to each other, in their princi- 
ples, aims, and munncr of life ; wboi when togeth^J> < 
were a bui-Aen the one to the other, under which die ons 
groaned, and the other raged ; but now they are freely ^ 
parted, never to come together any nwre. The iron ani 
cluy(alluded to Dan. ii. j(l, 43.) which could never tniii 
.are quite separate!] ; the one bemg drawn up into the aiit, 
1»y fee «(^r»c(iTe Tirtjie of the stone cut oat of the VQW-' 



Jtf^iy.] thelbgiiieouMmUtheWkktd. i€f 

Ivbiy namelf, Jesus Christ ; the other left upon its eartib 
4(6 be t^ under fi>ot. 

^ Mow let us look to .the ri^ht hand, and there we will 
4iee a glorious companf of saints, shining as so many stars 
in their orbs ^ and with a cheerful countenance, beholding 
.liita who sitteth upon the throne. Here will be two 
ipooderiul sights, which the world used not to see. (1.) 
A great Gongregati<»i of saints, id which is not so much an 
^me hypocrite There was a bloody Cain in Adam's fin 
WBSkft a cursed Ham in Noah's Umily, in the ark ; « 
tneacherous Judas in Christ's own family, but in that com- 

Cn^ shall be none but sealed ones, members of Christ, 
nng all one Father : And this is a sight reserved for that 
«tiB9r« (S-) All the godly upon one side. Seldom or ne» 
vor .do Ihe saints on earth make such a harmony, but there 
is some jarring strings among them. It is not to be expect* 
•d, tjbat men who see but in part, though they be all go^ 
ing^ one city, will agree as to every 'step in the way ; no, 
Wie need not look for it, in this state of imperfection. But 
Bt that day, Paul and Barnabas shall meet in peace and 
unity, tho' once the contention was so sharp between them, 
that they departed asunder, the one from the other. Acts 
-XT. 39. There shall be no more divisions, no more sepa- 
rate standing, amongst those who belong to Christ; All 
the godly of the different parties, shall Uien be upon one 
j^ide; seeing, whatever were their differences in lesser 
tlungs, while in the world, yet even then, they met and 
concentered all in one Lord Jesus Christ, by a true and 
lively faith, 9nd in the one way of holiness or practical 
godliness. And the naughty hypocrite, of whatsoever 
party, shall be led forth with the workers of iniquity.' 
" Look to the left hand, and there you will see the curs^ 
ed goats (all the wicked ones, from Cain to the last ungod<- 
ty |>ersoB who shall be in the world) gathered together into 
•one most miserable congregation. There are many assem- 
"blies of the wicked now ; then there shall be but one. But 
'all.of them shall be present there, brought together as one 
lieird for the slaughter,bel]owing and roaring, weeping and 
.howling for the miseries come on them. (And r^ember 
thou slutk not be a mere spectator, to look at these two so 
-different companies ; but must take thy place in one 
iot the^wo, and shalt share with the company, whatever 

HJi 



f 



366 The Triai •/ the Parties^^ l>««ilM;. 

hand it be upon.) These who now abhor no aoscietyft 
much as that of the samts, would then be glad to heiA<l 
lowed to fet m among them, though it were but toMe^'j 
mong their feet. But then not one tare shall be foimd iJtt ' 
the wheat: he will thoroughly purge his floor. Bfaaf 
of the right-hand men of this world) will be left-hand wA , 
in that day. Many who must have the door voA the fif^ 
hand of these, who are better than they, (if the rigfateoos , 
be more excellent than his neighbour) shall th^ be tniB* 
ed to the left hand, as most despicable wretches, * O hot 
terrible inll this separation be to the ungodly ! how droid* 
ful will this gathering them together into one company be! 
what they will not believe,- they will then see^ nameij} 
that but few are saved. They think it enough now, to be 
roeighbour-like, and can securely follow the multtedefM 
the multitude on the left hand will yield them no coodprt 
How will it sting the ungodly Christian, to see himself let 
on the same hand with Turks and Pagans ! how wiD'it '\ 
gall men to find themselves standing^ profiau:ke Pnytestaq^Sf 
with idolatrous Papists ; praying people with their pn^sAe 
tieighbours, who mocked at religious exercises .; formal 
professors, strangers to the new birth and the pow^rbf 
(godliness, with persecutors ! now there are many opposite 
societies in the world, but then all the ungodly shall be in 
one society. And how dreadful will the faces of compan- 
ions in sin be to one another there I what doleful shrieks 
when the whoremonger and his whore shall meet ; when 
the drunkards, who have had many a jovial day together, 
^all see one another in the face ; when the husband and 
wife, the parents and children, the master and servants, 
and neighbours, who have been snares and stumbling-blocks 
to one another, to the ruin of tlieir own souls, and these of 
tiieir relatives, shall meet again in that miserable society 1 
Then will there be curses instead of salutations \ and tear- 
ing of themselves, and raging against one another, instead 
of the. wonted embraces. 

Seventhly^ The parties shall be tried. The Trial cannot 
be difficult, in regard the Judge is omniscient, and nothing 
can be hid from him. But, that his righteous judgment 
may be evident to all, he will set the hidden things of 
darkness in clearest light at that trial, I Cor. iv. 5. 

Men shall be tried, Firat^ Upon tbejr works : fc^i 



EteadlV.] The Trial fj the Fa^it^. ^kJT 

b Grod «hall bring eveiy work into judgment^ witlr et^ 
ftccret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil/^ 
EccL xii. 14. The Judge will try every man's '^conTersa-* 
tioDf and set his deeds ^me in the body^ with, all the cir- 
cumatances thereof^ in a true light Then will many ac-*- 
kions commended and applauded of men, as good and just> 
be discoTered to have been evil and abominable in the 
bi^ht of God ; and many works, now condemned by the 
world, -will be approven and commended by the great 
Judgei as good and just. Secret things will be brought to 
light : and what was hid from the view of the world, shall 
be laid open. Wickedness, which hath kept its lurking 
place in spite of all human search, will then be brought 
rorth to tlie glory of God, and the confusion of impenitent^ 
-sinners who hid it. The world appears now very vile, 
in the eyes of those who are exercised to godliness ; but it 
irill then appear a thousand times more vile, when tha^ 
which is done of men in secret, C9mes to be discovered; 
£very eood action shall then be remembered; and the hide 
den religion and g^d works, most industi'iously concealed 
by the saints, from the eyes of men, shall no more lie hid^ 
ibr though the Lord will not allow men to proclaim evei 
snan his own goodness, yet he himself will do it in di 
time. Secondly y Their words shall be judged, Matth. 
37. ^ For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by 
thy words thou shalt be condemned.*' Not a'word spoken 
ibr God, and his cause in the world, from love to himselP 
shall be forgotten. They are all kept in remembrance^ 
and shall be brought forth as evidences of faith, and of an 
mterest in Christ, Mai. iii. 16, 17. "Then they that 
Jeared the Lord, spake often one to another, and the Lord 
hearkened and heard it ; and a book of remembrance was 
written before him. And they shall be mine, saith the 
Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels.** 
And the tongue, which did run at random, shall then con- 
fess to God : and the speaker shall find it to have been fol* 
lowed, and every word noted that dropped from his \jtl-' 
sanctified lips. " Every idle word that men shall speak, 
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.'*' 
Matth. xii. 36. And if they shall give account of idk 
words, that is, words spoken to no good purpose, neithei 
t6 Qoid's glory, on^'^ own, or one's neighbout^sgood ; iBt^ 




HiQch 'Aott dudl mens wicked words, their sinfiil (MrtEijf 
CuraeS) liesi filthy communications, and. bitter worda^.lifii 
calledjoirer again that day ? The tongues of mahy.dUt 
then &11 upon themselvesy^^and ruin them* TTiirdfyj Mof 
thoughts siiall be brought into judgment ; thp judge w^i 
make ioianifeat the counsel of the hearts, 1 Cor«,iTr 1; 
Thoughts go free from man's judgment, but not firc H ttth a 
judgment of the heart^searchm^ Grod, who knows mem 
thoughts, without the help of signs to discern thtm bjej 
The secret springs of mens actions, will then be bfouf^ 
tt> light ; and the sins, that never came further than tM 
heart, will then be laid open. O what a figure wiU nan'# 
corrupt nature make, when his inside is turned out, ani 
all his speculative impurities are exposed ! the rottenaew 
that is within msoiy a whited sepulchre, the speculatiTe Sb . 
thiness and wantonness, murder and malignity, now Intk^ 
mg in the hearts of men, as in the chamber of imageiJi 
{0ill then be discovered ; and what good was in the heartt 
of any, shall no more lie concealed. If it was in ^wit 
hearts to build a house to the Lord, they shall hear^ HuA 
iJiey did well that it was in their heart. 

This trial will be righteous and impartial, accurate and[ 
' searching, clear and evident. The Judge is the righteeaa 
Judge, and he will do right to every one. He has a ]vat 
balance for good and evil actions, and for honest afid falB0 
hearts. The fig-leaf cover of hypocrisy will then be btowa 
aside, and the hypocrite's nakedness will appear ; as whcsi 
the Lord came to judge Adam and Eve, in the cool (of, 
us the word is, in the tvind) of the day, Gen. iii. 8. TM 
Jire (which tries things most exquisitely,) « shall try 
every man's work, of what sort it is," 1 Cor. iii. 13. 
Man's judgment is oft-times perplexed and confused ; but' 
here the whole process shall be clear and evident, as writ* 
ten with a sun-beaiij. It shall be clear to the Judge, trf 
whom no case can be intricate ; to the parties, who shall 
be convinced, Jude 15. And the multitudes on "both 
sides, shall see the Judge is clear when he judgeth ; for 
then the heavens shall declare his righteousness, in the 
audience of the world ; and so it shall be universally 
known, Psal. 1. 6. 

On these accounts it is, that this trial is held out in the 
Scripture, under the notion of opening of books ^ and men 



JtjhsadlV^ The SaoU sfienei, -99 



said tobe judged outof thosethings written mthebooks* 
JleT* XX. 13. The Judge of the world, who in&llibly 
Imoweth all things, hath no need of books to be lud be> 
fife liim, to prevent mistake in any point of lair or feet ; 
but the expression points at his proceeding, as most nicr> 
accurate, just,and well-grounded, in e^ery step of it Novr^ 
tlicre are four books that shall be opened in that day. 

JPirmt^ The book of God's remembrance or ommscience^ 
Jdal. liL 19. This is an exact record of every man's state, 
thoughts, words, and deeds, good or evil : it is, as it weri^, 
a day-book, in which the Lord puts down all that passeth 
iki menshearts, lips, and lives : and it is a-filling up every 
day^that one lives. In it ane recorded mens sins and good 
"vorks, secret and open, with all their circumstance§» 
Here a|« registered all their privileges, mercies tempoitil 
and siuntualr sometime laid to their hand ; the cheeky 
admonidons, and rebukes, given by teachers, neighbours^ 
afflictions, and mens own consciences ; every thing in i^ 
due order. This book will serve only as a libel, in re- 
spect of the ungodly ; but it will be for another use in re- 
spect of the godly, namely, for a memorial of their good* 
The opening of it, is the Judge's bringing to light wh^i 
is written in it ; the reading as it were, of the libel and 
jmemorial, respectively, in their hearing. 

Secondly y The book of conscience will be opened, and 
shall be as a thousand witnesses to prove the fact, Rom. ii. 
\S. " Which shew the work of the law written 'in thetr 
iiearts, their conscience also bearing witness. Conscienoer . 
is a censor going with every man whithersoever he goes^ 
taking an account of his deeds done in the body, and, fta 
it were, noting them in a book ; the which being opened^ 
will he found a double of the former, so far as it relates 
to one's own state and case. Much is written in it, which, 
.cannot be read now ; the writing of conscience being,, inr 
many cases, like to that which is made .with the juice of 
lemons, not to be read, till it be held before the fire t 
But then men shall read it clearly and distinctly :> The: 
fire which is to try every man's work, will make thp^ 
book of conscience legible in every point.. Though the 
l>ook be sealed now (the conscience blind,: dumb and deaf }i 
the seals will then be broken^ and the book epeneo. 
There shall be |io more a weak or misinformed eongcience 

«k2 



sro The Bcokt afitneti ^ l^tt^^^ 

«mong those on the right hand, or these ott the left Thcllfe; 
shall not he a silent conscience, and far iess a seared Gcto< 
science amongst all the ungodly crew : But their toiK 
sciences shall be most quick sighted, and most tmif^ m 
that day. None shall then call good eyit, or ctil gMt* 
Ignorance of what sin is, and what thmgs are fldniH'im 
have no place among them : And the subtle reasQidftgA' ' 
of men, in favour of their lusts, will then be forever htflted 
t)y their own consciences. None shall have die fiivoar 
^if I may so speak^ of lymg under the soft cover of dsla- 
Bion : But they shall all be convicted by their comMsi^nee. 
Nill they, will they, they shall look on this booki readind 
he confounded, and stand speechless, knowing thatiKXr 
thing is charged upon them by mistake ; since thb is s 
lK>ok, which was always in their own custody. ThusshiR 
^e Judge make every man see himself in the gils8S«l 
^s own conscience which will make quick work. 

Thirdly^ The Book of the Law shall be opened. Tl^ 
Ibook is the standard and rule, by which is known vrtaft 
is right, and what is wrong ;. as also, what sentence is t|> 
Ibe passed accordingly, on these who are under it. As tt> 

■ the opening of this book, in its statutory part, which shei^ 
lyhat is sin, and what is duty ; it falls m with the Open- 
ing of the book of conscience. For conscience is set, by 
the sovereign Law-giver, in every man's breast, to be hfc 
private teacher, to shew him the law, and his private pas» 
tor, to make application of the same ; and at that day, U 
Mrill be perfectly fit for its oflRce ; so that the conscience 
^hich is most stupid now, shall then read to the malH 
^ost accurate, but dreadful lectures, on the law. But 
«vhat seems (mainly at least) pointed at, by the opening ^ 
this book, is the opening of that part of it, which detet- 
^mines the reward of mens works. Now, the law promis* 
cd life, upon perfect obedience ; but none can ht found 
on the right hand, or on the left, who will pretend to thali 
rwhen once the book of conscience is opened, it threatencth 
death upon disobedience, and will effectually bring it tip- 
on all under its dominion. And this part of the book of 
the law,, determining the reward of mens works, is opened 
tonly to shew what must be the portion of the unffodly,and 
that there they may read their sentence before it be pro- 
nounced. But it is not opened for the sentence of the 



dmn> out of it. Tbe kw promiseth lifot not a* it it te 
sluJec^aetioiiSYbutMacoTenaiitof worlEs: Andthereforo 
femocent loan could not haye demuided life opon his obe- 
^Bencoy till the law was reduced into th^fenn of a coTe« 
Badt) aa was shewn before. But the aunts haying been 
m tida fife) brought under a new coyeaant) namelf ^ tho 
coyenant cf ^:nu:e, were dead to the kwy aa a coyenant of 
wofks, «id It was dead to them. Wherefore, as they 
ahall not haye anf fears of death Iran it, so they can haye 
no hopes of life from it, Mnce they are not under the lawj 
but under grace, Rom. yi. 14w But, for their sentence^ 
anotfieT book is opened ; of which in the next place. 

Thus the Book of the Law is opened, for the sentence 
i^r^st all those on the left hand, and by it they will 
clearly see the justice of the judgment agamst them, and 
how the Judge proceeds therein, according to law. Ne^ 
yertheless, there will be this difference, namely,^ that theses 
who had only the natural law, and liyed not under any 
'Special reyelation, shall be judged by that law of nature- 
they had m their hearts : Which law bears, ^ That they 
irho commit such things (as they will stand convicted of) 
are worthy of death," Rom. i. 32. But these, who had the 
^rritten law, to whom the word of God came, as it has 
teu^ded in the visible church, shall be judged by that 
written law. So says the Apostle, Rom. u. 13. ^ For as 
many as have sinned without (the written) law, shall perish 
without (the written) law : And as many as have sinned 
In the law (s. e. under the written law) shall be judged by 
the (written) law.** 

Lastly y Another book shall be opened j which is the book of 
iffey Rev. XX. 12. In this, the names ef all the elect are 
Irritten, as Christ said to his disciples, Luke x. 20.^^ 
Tour names are written in heaven. This book containis 
God*s gracious and unchangeable purpose, to bring all the 
Itlect to eternal life ; and that, in order thereto, they be 
redeemed by the blood of his Son, effectually called, jus* 
tified, adopted, sanctified, and raised up by him at the last 
day without sin. It is now lodged in the Mediator**, 
himd, as the book of the manner of the kingdom ; and 
having perfected the work the Father gave them to do, he 
shall on the great day, produce and open the book, and 
present the persons therein named, faultless before the, 

-meaense qi |a» ^^} Aido:^4r. ^ Not haying tjgot 6t 



■ • 

nvrinklfi or any such thing,** Eph. v. 2T. >Nooe of them 
all, who are named in the book shall be iftissingr Tfaey 
«hall be found qualified, according to the order of tha^ 
book, red.eemecL called, justified, sanctified, raised up 
without spot ; what remains then, but that, accordii^ to 
the same book they obtain the great end, namely, twfO^ 
lasting life. This may be gathered from that ^recioaf ^ 
pronuse. Rev. iii. 5. . << He that overcometh, the same, 
shall be clothed in white raiment (being raised in glo^) 
and I will not blot oat his name out of the book of lifef 
But I will. confess his name (it shall be, as it were, real 
out amongst the rest of Crod's elect) before my Fadier|- 
and before his angels/' Here is now the ground of th^ 
«aints absolviture, the ground of the blessed sentence th^ 
shall receive, the book of life being opened, ItwiffM 
known to all, who are elected, and who are not. Thus to 
of the trial of the parties. 

Eighthly y Then shall the Judge pronounce that blessed 
sentence on the saints, <« Come ye blessed of my Fatherr 
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundadon 
of the world, Mat. xxv. 34. It is most probable, ilM>> 
man Christ will pronounce it with an audible voice; which 
tioi only all the saints, but all the wicked likewise, shall 
hear and understand. Who can conceive the hiexpwssi* 
ble joy, with which these happy ones shall hear thcs^ 
words 1 Who can imagine that fulness of joy, which shall . 
be poured into their heaits, with these words reaching 
their ears ? And who can conceive how much of hell shaU 
break into the hearts of all the ungodly crew, by these 
words of heaven ? It is certain this sentence shall be pro^ 
nounced before the sentence of damnation, Mat. xxv. 34) 
41. <' Then shall the King say unto them on his right 
hand. Come ye blessed, (^c— -Then shall he say also to 
them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,*' l!fe^ 
There is no need of this order, that (he saints may with* 
out fear or astonishment, hear the other sentence on the 
reprobate ; they who are raised in glory, caught up to 
meet the Lord in the air, presented without spot, and 
whose souls (for the far greater part of them), have been so 
long in heaven before, shall not be capable of any such* 
fear. But hereby tliey will be orderly brought in, to sit 
ii\ judgmiQjit} Its Clusist'^ &sa6d9ors3 against the ungodly i 



"J 



i 



* -m 



^s 



i ff ho e e tonnent inll be aggr&Tatedbjrit. ItwiXl h€ ahell 
^ tijiem, to be kept out a£ hell, till they see the doore of 
beaKven opened to receive the saints, who once dwelt ia 
the same country, parish, or town, and sat under the same 
iBiiiistrjr with themaeWes. Thus will they see hearen a^ 
off, to saake their hell the hotter. Like that unbeHeTing^ 
brd, S King;s yii. 19, 30. they shall see the plenty with 
Hieir ejres, but shall not eat thereof. Every word of the 
Ueaaed sentence, shall be like an enrenomed arrow shot 
into their hearts, while they see what they have lost, and 
£ron thence gather what they are to expect. 

ThiB sentence paaseth on the saints according to their 
works. Rev. xx. 13. But not for their works, nor for 
their ^th neither, as if eternal life were merited by them» 
The sentence itself overthrows this absurd conceit. The , 
kingdom they are called to, was prepared for them, front 
the foundation of the world ; not left to her merited b^ 
tiiemaelves, who were but of yesterday. They inherit it 
as sons, but procure it not to themselves, as servants do 
the revrard of then* work. They were redeemed by the 
blood of Christ, and clothed with his spotless righteous<» 
ness, which is the proper cause of the sentence. Theyp 
were also qualified for heaven, by the sanctification of his- 
Spirit; and hence it is according to their works : So that 
the ungodly world shall see now, that the Judge of the 
quick and dead does good to them, who were good* 
Therefore it is added to the sentence, «< For I was aa 
hungered, and ye g^ve me meat," ^r. ver. 35, 36. which 
doth not denote the ground, but the evidence of their right 
to heaven : As if a judge should say, he absolves a man 
pursued for dehu for tlie witnesses depone, that it is paid 
already. So the Apostle says, 1 Cor. x. 5. " But with 
many of them God was not well pleased, for they were 
overthrown in the wilderness." Their overthrow in tho 
wilderness was not the ground of God's displeasure with 
them, but it was an evidence of it. And thus our Lord 
teacheth us the necessary connection betwixt glory and 
good works, namely, works evangelically good ; work^ 
having a respect to Jesus Christ, and done out of faith in 
him, and love to him, without which they will not^ be re- 
garded in that day. And the saints wiH so far be judged 
acjcording to svct^worki^that the degrees of j(k>ry amonj^ 



^ \^ ■ ■■■ ■ *• 

ihetn shall be according to these works ; &r.it is in etAv 
nai mith, ^ He that soweth sparinglj) shall reap s]iitf%- 
ly," 5 Cor. ix. 6. 

Thus shall the good works of the godly have a glofioai^ 
tiot a gratuitous reward ; a reward of gracCf not of debt; 
wfcich will fill them with wonder at the richesof free grsce, 
and the Liord^s condescending to take any notice, esp^ntHf 
Such public notice^ of their poor worthless works. The 
which seems to be the import of what they are said to an' 
swer, ^ Sa)dng) Lord^ when saw we thee an hungered,*'^ 
ttc. ver. 37, 38, 39. And may they not justly wonder^ 
to see themselves set down to the marriage-supper of tlir 
Lamb, in consequence of a dinner or supper, a little bM: 
or drink (such as they had) which they gave to an bu>|^ 
4>r thirsty member of Christ, for his sake I Oh pledAH 
harvest following upon the seed of good works : Rivt^ff 
pleasure sprhiging up from (perhaps) a cup of cold wMT 
ffiven to a disciple, in the name of a disciple ! Eterni 
man^ons of glory rising out of a night's lodging giv^-ib 
A saint, who was a stranger \ Everlasting robes m glorf 
jpiven in exchange of a new coat, or, it may be, an old 
'^ne, bestowed on some saint, who had not necessary cloth* 
ing ! A visit to a sick saint, repaid by Christ himself 
-coming in the glory of his Father, with all his holy an- 
gels ! A visit made to a poor prisoner, for the cause cF 
Christ, repaid with a visit from the Judge of all, taking 
nway the visitant with him to the palace of heaven, there 
to be ever with himself I These things will be matter of 
everlasting wonder, and should stir up all, to sow liberally 
in time, while the seed-time of good works doth last But 
it is Christ's stamp on good works, that puts a value on 
them, in the eye of a gracious God ; which seems to be 
the import of our Lord's reply, ver. 40. " In as much a5 
ye have done it, unto one of the least of these my brethrcn» 
ye have done it unto me." 

IX. Now the saints having received their own sentence^ 
they shall judge the world, 1 Cor. vi. 2. This was not 
fulfilled, when the empire became Christian, and Chris- 
tians were made magistrates. No, the Psalmist tells us, 
i^ This honour have all the saints," Psal. cxlix. 9. An4 
the Apostle in the forecited place, adds, " And if the 
.tr^rid shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge:- 



AetA IV.3I $^s 9kaU judge the WorUa ^^S 

the smallest matters ?*' ver. 3. ^ Know ye not, that we 
shall judge angels ?'* Being called, they come to receiTe 
Iheir kingdom^ in the view of angels and men ; they go 
as it were, from the bar to the throne, ^ To him t£it 
•Tercometh, will I grant to sit with me on my throne/' 
Jier. iii. 31. They shall not only judge the world in 
Christ their head, by way of communion with him ; by 
their works compared with these of the ungodly ; or, by 
way of testimony against them : but they shall be assessors 
to Jesus Christ the Judge, giving their voice against thei% 
consenting to his judgment as just, and saying. Amen, to 
die doom pronounced against all the ungodly ; as is said 
of the saints, upon the judgment of the great whore, Rev. 
xix* 1» 3. ^ Hallelujah, for true and righteous are his 
judgments." Thus the upright shall have dominion over 
them in the morning of the resurrection, Psal. xlix. 14. 
Then, and not till then, shall that be fully accomplished, 
which ye may read, Psal. cxlix. 6, 7, 8, 9. ^ Let the high 
-praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword 
ID their hand, to execute vengci^jice upon the heathen, 
and punishments upon the people,—- this honour have all 
his saints." O ! wiiat a strange turn of affairs, will ap- 
pear here i what an astonishing sight will it be, to see 
wicked churchmen and statesmen, standing as criminals 
before the saints, whom sometimes they condemned as 
heretics, rebels and traitors ! to see men of riches and 
• power, stand pale-faced befoi*e these whom they oppress- 
ed i to see the mocker stand trembling bcfoi^ these whom 
he mocked, the worldly-wise man before these whom he 
accounted fools! then shall the despised faces of the saints, 
be dreadful faces to the wicked; and those who were some- 
times the song of the drunkards, shall then be a terror to 
them. All wrongs must be righted at length, and every 
one set in his proper place. 

Tenthly^ The Judge shall pronounce the sentence of 
damnation on all the ungodly multitude. ** Then shall he 
say also unto thehi on the left hand, Depait from me ye 
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his- 
angels," ver. 41. Fearful doom I and that from the same 
mouth, from whence proceed the sentence of absolmion 
before. It was an aggravation of the misery of the Jews, 
ti^en their city ^jfua d^troyed^ that .they were ruined by 



A 



■% 4 






• r' 



one who iFat.accouted the darling Hif die woM, D( 
what an amavation of the^misery of tiie ipiiekoi<wilHkl% 
-that he tluiu ffiranounce this sentence also ! te ttw # 
curse £rom mount Zkm, must needs hemostterriUet ts 
be damned by himy who came to save HimerSy umit Jb 
double daxanation. But thus it shall be. The Ljtndi id 
God shall roar) as a lion against them : he shall escMi^ 
mumcate* and cast them out of his presence for evier,bjrl^ 
^ sentence from the tinrone, saying) << Depart from wa^fii 
cursed." He shall adjudge them to everlasting fitejW 
the society of devils for evermore. And this sentence Mis 
we suppose, shall be pronounced with an audible itomm^ 
by the man Christ. And all the saints shall say^ ^ HM- 
lelujah) true and righteous are his judgments.'' MmH 
were «o compassionate as the saints, when on earth .te^ 
ing the time of God^s patience. But now that time iitf 
an ^nd) their compassion on the ungodly is swailowed ijp 
in joy, in the Mediator's glory, and his executing i^ jait 
judgment, by which his enemies are made his rootsMfc 
Though sometimes the righteous man did weep msedHl;. 
places for their pride, and because they would not h^r; 
yet, then, " He shall rejoice, when he seeth the vea* 
geance ; he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked,'^ 
Psal. Iviii. 10. No pity shall be then shewn to them, from 
tlieir nearest relations. The godly wife shall applaud tbe • 
justice of the Judge, in the condemnation of her ungodly 
husband : the godly husband shall say, Amen, to the dam' 
nation of her who lay in his bosom : the godly parent! 
shall say, Hallelujah, at the passing of the sentence against 
*^heir ungodly child : and the godly child, shall from his 
heart, approve the danmation of his wicked pai*ents, tiw 
father who begat him, and the mother who bore him- 
The sentence is just: they are judged '^ according to their 
TRTorks," Rev. xx. 12. 

There is no wrong done them : " For I was hungry,** 
3aith our Lord, « and ye gave me no meat ; I was thirst/) 
and ye gave me no drink ; I was a stranger, and ye to<i 
me not in ; naked, and ye clothed me not ; sick, and in 
prison, and ye visited me not," ver. 42, 43. These are 
not only evidences of their ungodly and cursed state, but 
«nost proper causes and grounds of their condemnatioifi^ 
^1^u||^h good work&donot merit salvation^ yet evil vor]^ 



. IV. J 98 the Uni^odly. "SffiT 

: damnation. Sins of one kind only^ namely, of omiff*- 

are here mentioned ; not that these alone shall thea 
scovered (for the opening of the books lay all open) 
ecause these, tho' there were no more, are sufficient 
mn unpardoned sinners. And if men shall "be con- 
led for sins of omission, much more for sins of com- 
on. The omission of works of charity and mercy^ 
idescended on particularly, to stop tlie mouths of the 
ed ; for it is most just, that he have judgment with- 
mercy, that hath shewed no mercy, James ii. 13. 
mentioning of the omission of acts of charity and 
y towards the distressedmembers of Christ, intimates, 
t is the judgment of those who have heard of Christ 
( gospel, that is principally intended here, in this por- 
of scripture ; and that the slighting of Christ, will be 
;reat cause of the ruin of tiiose who hear the gospel ; 
he enmity of the heaits of the wicked against himself 
jcovered by the entertainment they now give to his 
bers. 

vain will they say, « When saw we thee an hungered, 
St ?" &c. ver 44. For the Lord reckons, and will 
^n, the world's unkindness to his people, unkindness 
mself ! " In as much as ye did it not to one of the 

of these, ye did it not to me," ver. 45. O meat and 
z unhappily spared, when a member of Christ was in 

of it I O wretched neglect, that the stranger saint 
Qot taken in ! it had been better for them, they had 
ed their own room, and tlieir own bed, than he had 
ed lodging. O cursed clothing, may the wicked say^ 
was in my house, locked up in my chest, or hanging 
y wardrol^, and was not brought out to clothe such 
5 ! Oh that I had stripped myself, rather than he had 

away without clothing ! Cursed business, that divert- 
»e from visiting a sick saint 1 O that I had rather 
hed whole nights with him. Wretch that I was ! 
did I sit at ease in my house, when he was in prison, 
lot visit him ? But now the tables are turned ; Christ's 
mts shall eat, but I shall be hungry ; his servants 

drink, but I shall be thirsty ; they rejoice, but I am 
tned, Isa. Ixv. 13. They are taken in, but I am cast 
ind bid depart ; they are clothed with robes of ^lory, 
[ walk naked, and they see my stiame> Rev. xvi. 15. 

ii 



'jfc aM*^ ' Seii^tnee 0/ Bamnatlott [StatelV. 

.They are wnr nited up on high, beyond the reach of 
. uckneu.orpftln] 1>ut I must now lie dovn in sornnr, 
Im. 1. l\. Nonr Bhidl they go to the paluce of heavcDi 
Itut I must go to the prison of hell. 
"■ But *C owr Lord Uiua resents mens neglecting 10 help 
hii people under thcie and the like distresses ; whstnu^ 
they expect, who ■» the authors and instruments of themi 
U they ahaU be fed mth wrath, who fed them not) wb» 
they were hungiy ; -what shall become of those, trho robb- 
ed and spoiled them, and took their own bread itway front 
-them i ~ What a fiill cup of wrath shall be the portion of 
tfioae, who were so fax from giving them meat or drmk, 
Vhen hungry or thirsty, that they made it a crimed 
- Others, to entertam them, and made tliemselves dninkfift 
with thdr blood! theymust lodge withdevUs for evcnnotBi 
trho took not in the Lord's people, when strangers ; tbait 
vhiita todg^K sbtdl tboee have, who di-avc thera outcf 
their own-houses, out of their native land, and made thera 
ttrangers t M^n will be. condemned for not clothing tbem 
tfben asked ; then, how heavy must the sentence of th-wt 
Iw, who hare stripped them, and mude Uiem go withwit 
(Nothing J Surely, if not visiting of them in sickness, or 
& a prison, shall be so severely punished ; they shall not 
escape a most heavy doom, who have ca&t them into pri' 
Aons, and have them put under such hardships, as have 
Impaired their health, brought sickness an them, and cut 
^eir daysin prison, or out of prison. 

-Toputaface upon such wicked practices, men ffiU 
jiretend to retun an honour (or Christ and religion, vV3» 
they thus treat his members, walking in hii wayB,uidkeep- 
iig the truth. They are here represented to say, " Wl»« 
saw, we thee an hungered, or athirst, of a nranger, or DS-' 
i[:ed,'or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee P* 
Ter. 44. As if they should say, Our broad, drink, lodgr ' 
jng, clothing, and visits, were indeed refused, but not t* 
(Christ i hut to a set of men, of abad character ; men vlif 
turned the world upside down,(Actft xvu. 6.) who trqvbM 
Israel, (3 Kings xviit IT.) an humorous and fiuitastictait 
of people, having laws diverse from all people j fictiMl- 
and rebellious (they did not keep the king's laws) Itt 
therefore a very dangerous set of men; it waJs not fof ^ 
'^ hpiS'^ profit to sifjSjcr tj^ein, Esther iii. I.^Qt ^ihoi^liiil^ 






I IV.] on the Ungodly^ .^^ 

iniquity upon the ungodly, and give them ill naniesj 
they may treat them as criminals ; all these pretences 
ivail them nothing; in the g^at day, before thcrighte- 
Fudge7nbr before their own consciences neither ; but 
eal ground of their enmity against the sahits, will be 
1, (to their own conviction) to be their enmity against 
St himself. This seems to be the import of the objec- 
)f the damned, (vcr. 44. and of the answer to it, ver. 

*« In as mucM as ye did it not to one of the least of 
J, ye did it not to me." 

istly^ Sentence being past on both parties, follows the 
jxecution of the same, ver. 46. " And these shall go 

into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into. 
Jternal." The damned shall get no reprieve, but got 
eir place without delay ; they shall be driven awajt 
the judgment-seat into hell ; and the saints shall en- 
ito the king's palace, (Psal. xlv. 15.) namely, into 
en the seat of tlie blessed. But our Lord Christ, and 
glorious company, shall keep the field that day, an^ 
the backs of all their enemies : for the danmed go 
irst. 

this day of the Lord, the great day, shall be the gte- 
i confiagration, by which Uiose visible heavens, the 
I and sea shall pass away. Not that they shall be an- 
ated (or reduced to nothing), that is not the operation 
[•e ; but they shall be dissolved, and purged by that 
from all the effects of sin, or of the curse, upon them ; 
iien renewed, and made glorious and stable. Of this 
agration, the Apostle Peter speaks, 2 Pet." iii. 10. 
t the day of the Lord will come, as a thief in the 
t ; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a 
t noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat : 
arth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt 
See also ver. 7, 12. And of the renewing of the 
d, he adds, ver. 13. " Nevertheless we, according to 
romise look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein 
leth righteousness." 

seems most agreeable to the Scriptures, and to the 
re of the thing, to conceive this conflagration to fot- 
ifter the general judgment ; sentence being past pix 
parties before it. And I judge it probable, that tt 
4ll iA with the putting of tiho^eentence in execgfWh 



SQ^C^ SOiie general ConflagratUtt. ][State I^^ 

against the damned ; so as they shall (according to theifi 
licntence) depart^ and the heavens and the earth pass away 
•loy^ether and at once, at that furious rebuke from the 
throne, driving away the damned out of the world (in thi& 
fire) to the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and hil 
angels. Even as, in the deluge, with which the Apoatte 
peter compares tlie conflagration or burning of the worldy 
^2 Pet. iii. 6, 7.) the world itself, and the wicked upon i^ 
perished together ; the same water which destroyed the 
earth, sweeping away the inhabitants. For it is not likdft 
that the wicked shall at all stand on the new earth, where- 
.in dwelleth righteousness, 2 Pet. iii. 13. and as for this 
earth, it shall flee away, (which seems to denote a wry 
quick dispatch) and it shall flee from his face, who aits OA 
tiie tlironc, Rev. xx. 11. << And I saw a great white thnmO) 
and him that sat on it, from whose face the heavens aod 
the earth fled away »'* ' The execution of the sentence oa 
the wicked, is also thus expressed : They shall be punish* 
ed with everlasting destruction from the presence, or from 
the face of the Lord, 2 Thess. i. 9. The original word i» 
tlie same in both texts, the which being compared, seem 
to say, tliat these creatures being abused by the wicked^ 
being left to stand, as witnesses against them in the judg- 
ment, arc, after sentence past on their abusers, made to 
puss away with them from the face of the judge. It is 
trui.*, the fleeing away of the earth and heaven is narrated, 
Rev. XX. 1 1. before the judgment ; but that will not prove 
its going before the judgment, more than the narrating of 
the judgment, ver. 12. before the resurrection, ver. 13. 
will prove the judgment to be before it. Further, it is rc^ 
aiarkable, in the execution of the sentence. Rev. xx. 14, 
15. that not only the reprobate are cast into the lake, but 
deijth and hell are cast into it likewise ; all eff*ects of siiH 
and of the curse, are removed out of the world (for which 
very cause shull the conflagration be) and they are confin- 
ed to the place of the damned. Besides all this, it is evi- 
dent the end of the world is by the conflagration ; and the 
Apostle tells us, (I Cor. xv. 24, 35.) that " then cometh 
the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to 
God, even the Father : when he shall have put down all 
ruic, and all authority, and power. For he must reign, till 
^hp hatli put all unemi^g uuclcr his feet.'* The ^yhich last 



Sead IV.3 The gentrtd Conjlagraiifin. 3«1 



it must be done before the end ; so it seems not to te 

y but by putung the sentence in execution, pastia 

day of judgment, ag^nst the wicked. 

. Now, if the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah^ that ai*e 

-aet forth for an example, (Jude 7,) was so dreadJPui ; how 

terrible will that day be, when the whole world shall be 

mt once in flames ! how will wretched worldlings look, 

^hen their darling world shall be all set on fire T Then 

afaall strong castles, and toweringxpalaces, with all thcip 

xich furniture, go up together in one flame with the lowest 

coai^;es. What heart can fully conceive the terror of that 

day to the wicked, when the whole fabiic of heaven and 

earth, shall at once be dissolved by that fire ! when that 

ndserable company shall be driven from the tribunal tp 

the pit, with fire within them, and fire without them^ 

and fire behind them, and on every hand of them ; and 

fire before them, awaiting them in the lake, whether tlife 

fire (for ought appears) may foilow them ! 

As for die paiticular place of this judgment, though 
some- point us to tlie valley of Jehoshaphat for it, yet oux* 
Lord, who knew it, being asked the question by his dis- 
ciples, " Where Lord ?" told them only, " Wheresoever 
the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered togetlier,-*' 
Luke xvii. 37. After wliich answer, it is too much fdr 
men to renew the question. As for the time when it shall 
be ; in vain do men search for what the Lord has purpose^ 
ly kept secret. Acts i. «. " It is not for you to know the 
^unes or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own 
power." The Apostle Paul, after having very plainly de- 
scribed the second coming of Christ, 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17, 
adds, (chap. v. 2.) " But of the times and seasons, bretliron, 
ye have no need that 1 write unto you. For yourselves 
know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so cometli, as a* 
thief in the night." Nevertheless, some in several ages, 
have made very bold with the time ; and several piirticular 
years, which are now past, have been given out to the 
world, for the time of the end, by men who have, pried in- 
to the secrets of God. Time has proclaimed to the world 
their rashness and.folly ; and it is likely, they will be m> 
more happy in their conjectures, whose determinate time 
is'yet to come. Let us rest in that he cometh. God hath 
iept the day hid from us, that we jnay be every day |^a- 

Ii2 



Sft,;. '-' <it»mfin* ft tut dllmti-'{1Z " ' {^M^^' 

oeither t^ da/ nor Uie boor,* wherein titt S««t;j«f|iHt 
cometK." And let as remember) th«tt|iu(i.iM dif.ciloife 
life .will determine our atatt, ki the liMt d^ff of'ffiil «M^^ 
andms.wc-die^ Boshall webejlttdgcid. .,;- .-.>^« 

I ftball now ihut up this.ftubjl^ectt with eow q^p^^ 
of what has been said, -^ — * ^ i*^'-^ 

UwL Of comfbrtto all the saints. lfet«.isabi|]idilM« 
of congelation to ail who are in the state of grace.^ -''^WMi« 
ever be youpafi^^^tions in the worldy this dajr inHmake;!)^ 
Bll jour losses. ^ Thou^ yeJbave ban among the.iMtii]^ 
ebiJi be as the wings of a dove coTered with siiMif aw 
lier feathcarsof yellow gold,V Psalm Ixvmw IB^^Thfigif^ 
^e world reproach, judge and ccmdenm jox^ Jthil MJjl: 
,'Witi at that day absolve you, and bring forth your n^ft^ 
ouaness as the light. The world's fools, will then appiUfc 
lb have been the odly wbe men that were In it. Thoaf^ 
tfie cross be heavy, you maf well bear it in expectatiiA.\ii 
tfaecrown of righteousness, which the rigl^eous Judge -idl 
iben give 3i^ou. If the woxdd do despise you, and trtaty^^ \ 
with the utmost contempt, regard it not ; the day coni^ ' 
Irhereiii you shall sit with Christ on his throne* Be nO& 
discouraged, by reason of manifold temptations : but resJiC | 
tiie devil, in confidence of a full and complete victory ; te | 
wou shall judge the tempter at last. Though you have had 
wrestling now with the body of sin and death ; yet ye shall 
l^t all your enemies under your feet at length, and be pre« 
aented faultless before the presence of his glory. Let not 
the terror of that day dispirit you, when you think upon it;, 
let these, who have sUghted the Judge, and continue ene^ 
3Enies to him, and to the way of holiness, droop and haoar 
down their heads when they think of his coming ; but M* J 
^e up your heads with joy, for the last day wUl be youc i 
best day. The Judge is your Head and Husband, year ? 
Redt^emer, and your Advocate. Ye must appear before ,' 
the judgment-seat) but ye shall not come into condemns* . 
tidn, John v. 24. His coming will not be against you, bat 
:fo£>you. He came in the £esh, to remove the lawful im* 
pediments of the spiritual marriage, by bis death ; he came 
in the gosipel to you,, to espouse you to himself; he will 
xome, at the last day, te fSQ}^m»9» t^ JgSfi^Tis^e^ apfl t^r^ 



{{cad lY.j Ttrfor to UnbeBeverU', 34^ 

the bride home to his Father's house. ^ Even so come 
Lord Jesus.*' 

UbsIL Of Terror to all unbelievers. This may serve 
to awaken a secure generation, a world lying in wicked- 
ness) as if they were never to be called to an account for 
it ; and slighting the Mediator as if he were not to judge 
them. Ah ! how few have the lively impressions of the 
judgment to come I Most men live, as if what is said of 
itf from the word, were but idle tales. The profane lives 
ef many, speak the thoughts of it to be £air from their 
hearts, and in very deed n^kes a mock of it before the 
irorid, saying in effect, Where is the promise of his com- 
ing I The hypocrisy of others, who blind the eyes of the 
"world with a splendid profession, being in appearance 
Christ's sheep, while they are indeed the devil's g^ats, ia 
an evidence, that the great separation of the sheep from 
the goats, is very little laid to heart. How do many in- 
dulge in secret wickedness, of which they would be asham- 
ed before witnesses; not considering that their most secret 
thoughts and actions will, at that day, be discovered, be- 
fore the great congregation ! How eagerly are men hearts 
fet on the world, as if it were to be their everlasting ha- 
bitation ! The solemn assemblies, and public ordinances^ 
wherein the Judge is upon a transaction of peace with the 
eriminals are undervalued ; mens hearts will swim like 
feathers in the waters of the sanctuary, that will sinki 
like stones, to the bottom, in cares of this life : They will 
be very serious in trifles of this world, and trifle in the 
most serious and weighty tilings of another world. But O 1 
consider the day that is approaching, in which Christ 
fihall come to judgment ; the world shall be summoned, 
by the sound of the last trumpet, to compear before his 
tribunal. The Judge shall sit on his throne, and all na- 
tions shall be sisted before him ; the separation shall be 
made betwixt the godly and the wicked, the books open- 
ed, and the dead judged out of them ; one party shall be 
adjudged to everlasting life, and the other to everlasting 
fire, according to their works. ^ 

It would be a sight of admirable curiosity, if thou 
couldst wrap up thyself in some dark cloud, or hide thy- 
self in the cleft of some high rock, from whence thou 
^Bgiglitest espy wicked kings, princes^ judges, and gre^t 



" 1»* ■ : ^efftr H, tr«t>elifMt^. 

Onw of tha%Bl!tb( l-iBing out of their marble torn! 
broug;ht to the bftTtto unswer for dll their cruckr, tnji 
oppreauon, and profanity, withoul any marks of distinc 
r^tm, but what their wickedness puis fipon thf m : Prorane, 
unhohf mi unfeifliHil diuixlmien, pursued wi\h the curses 
of ^e mined peo'plc, from tbcir graves to the judgment* 
seat, und churged with the hlood of souls, to whom thef 
save QO bithful Wiinittig : Mighty men standing trerablio j 
befbi-e the Judge, unable to recover their wonted boldnessi 
to out-wit him with their subtiltles, or drfend themaelTBa. 
by their strength: Delicate women cbst forth of theif 
graves, as ^wmindite branches, dragged to the tribunal 
to answer for their ungodly lives ; The ignorant, sudden- 
ly taught in tiie law, to their cost ; and the learned de- 
clared, before the woi-ld, fools and laborious triilers ; the 
atheist connnced, the hypocrite unmasked ; and the pro- 
&nc, at long ma, turned serious about his eternal s^tef 
Secret murders, adulteries, thefts, cheats, and other works 
of dst'kaets, which scorned a.H human search, discovered 
aad Iftid open before the world, with tlicir most minute 
drcutnstances ; No regard had to the rich^ no pity she^ 
to the poor : The sciJes of the world turned ; oppressed 
and despised piety set on high j and prosperous wicked'' \ 
ness, at last brought low i AH, not found in Christ, bt-' 
raigned, convicted, and condemned without respect of 
persons, and diiven from the tribunal to the pit ; whUtf 
tbe&e found in lum, at that day, being absolved b^re ths 
world, go with him into heaven. Nay, but thou camt -^ 
not HO escape. Thyself, whosoever thou art, not being i 
in Christ, must bear a part in thb tragical and frightfiir 
action. 

Sinner, that same Lord Christ, whom thou now des- 
pisest, whom thou woundest through the aides of bis mes- 
sengers, and before whom thou dost prefer thy lusts, will 
be thy Judge, And a neglecfed Saviour will be & severe 
Judge. O ! what mountain, what rock wilt thou get to 
fall on thee, and hide thee from the face of him that sit- 
teth on the throne ? Thou hast now a rock within thee, a 
heart of adamant, so that thou canst count the darts of the 
world as stubble, aftd laugh at the shaking of "the spearc 
But that rock will rent, at the sight of the Judge ; that 
^vd heart will then break, $ad thou ah«h v«ep and wu^ 



Head IV.] Pre/iatdtionfcr Judgfaeni. ^^f 

-when weeping and wailing will he to no purpose. Deaths 
bands will full off ; the grave will vomit thee out ; and the 
rocks refuse to grind thee to powder. How will these 
oursed eyes abide the sight of the Judge I Behold he Com- 
eth! Where is the profane swearers, who tore his wounds? 
the wretched worldling, now abandoned of his God ; the 
formal hypocrite, who kissed him, and betrayed him ? the 
despiser of the gospel, who sent him away in his messen- 
gcrs groaning, pi-ofuncd his ordinances, and trampled un- 
der foot his precious blood ? O murderer, the slain Man 
is tliy Judge ! There is he whom thou didst so maltreat ! 
Behold the neglected Lamb of God, appearing as a lion 
agbinst thee ! How will thine heart endure tlie darts of 
his fiery looks ! That rocky heart now kept out against 
him, shall then be blown up I That face, which rci'usctli 
to blush now, shall then gatlier blackness ! arrows of 
wratli shall pierce, where arrows of conviction cannot en- 
ter now. What will thou answer him, when he riseth 
up, and chargeth thy unbelief and impenitency ? Wilt 
thou say, thou Wi«s not warned ? Conscience within theC) 
will give thee the lie : The secret groans and weariness of 
those who warned thee, will witness the contrary. If a 
child or fool did toll you your house were on fire, you 
would immediately run to quench it ; but in matters o£ 
eternal concern, men will first fill their hearts with pre« 
judices against the mcssengei*s, and then cast their mes- 
sage behind their backs. But these silly shifts and pre- 
tences will notavisil, in the day of the Lord. How will 
these cursed ears, now d( af to the call of the gospel, in- 
viting siniicrs to come to Christ, hear the fearful sentence, 
" Depc-rt from me, ye cursed into everlasting fire, pre- 
pared for the devil and his angels ?" No sleepy hearer 
shall be there: No m«n's heart will then wander : Their 
hearts and eyes will thon be fixed on their misery, which 
they will iiot believe. O that we* knew in this our day^ 
the thinj>:s tlufbelong to our peace. 

Lasflt/y Be exhorted to belie ve this great truth ; and bC" 
lieve it so, as you may pn pare for its judgment betimes. 
Set up a secret tribunal in your own breasts, and often call 
yourselves to an account there. Make the Judge your- 
friend in time, by closiiitr with him in the offer ot the 
^spel i tuid )j;ivQ all diligence; that ye may be found fo 









ehrist at that daf . Cast off the works of darkubM, tft 
liTe, as believin| you are^ at all times, and inidyi plai 
under the eye oi jrouf Judges who wUl bring wery wi 
Into judgement, with every secret thing. Be friutfid 
good works, knowing that as ye sbw^ye shall reap. Sfii 

Eiety towards €rod, righteousness and charity towards liMfeir 
lay up in store plenty of works of charity and mercy,. '^^ 
wards them who are in distress, especially such as liti 
<he household of fidth, that .they may be produced that 
as evidences, that ye belong to Christ. Shut not up 
bowels of mercy, how, towwis the needy ; lest ye^ 
find no mercy. Take hee'd^ that in all your works, y^ 
single and sincere s aiming, in them all, at the gl(»y. ^^ 
your Lord} a testimony of your love to him,andobedi^(}| ■ 
to his command. LeaV« it to hypocrites, whohky^^Mi^v 
rewardf to proclaim every man Ms bwn' goodn^ta, iMti^ :' 
aound a trumpet, when they do their altois. It fii wtal-.j 
and unchristian spirit, which cannot hare aatisfktttiiA in it 
^ood work) unless it be exposed to the vi«w <rfcj^siiiji' j^*\ 
IS utteriy unwor^ of one-^htftielieves that theias^^ttibM^ 
pet sHiall call together thcrwhole world ; beibre ^riumi flfi^. ' 
Judge himself shall publish works truly good,howsecn^ 
soever they were done. Live in a believing expectado^* j 
of the coming of the Lord. Let your loins be. always girl' 
and your lamps burning ; so when he comes, whetherfll' 
.the last day of your life, or in the last day of the woridb ; 
ye shall be able to say with joy, Xo, $lda iffmnrGody 04' 
Vft have waited for him^ ' •- 






HEAD V. 



tBE KINGDOM OF XEATJ^. 



Mat. XXV. S4. 

Ol%€n shall the Kinf^ say unto them on his right liandj Cujne 
ye bleaeed of my Father^ inherit the kingdom firefiared 
for you from the foundation of the world, 

HAVING, from this portion of Scripture, which the 
text is a part of, discoursed of the general judgment; 
and Being to speak of the everlasting happiness of the 
Saints, and the everlasting misery of the wicked, from the 
respective sentences to be pronounced upon them in the 
great day ; I shall take them in the order wherein tliey lie 
liefore us ; the rather, that a sentence is first past upon 
the righteous, so the execution thereof is first bet^-un, 
though possibly the other may be fully executed before it 
be completed. 

The words of the text contain the joyful sentence itseli^ 
together with an historical introduction thereto, which 
gives us an accountof the Judge pronouncing the sentence; 
the King, Jesus Christ ; the parties on whom it is given, 
them on his right hand ; and the time when, thenj as soon 
as the trial is over. Of these I have spoken already. It 
is the sentence itself we are now to consider, Come ye bles-- 
0ed of my Father^ &c. Stand a-back, O ye profane goats ; 
have away all unregenerate souls, not miited to Jesus 
Christ ; this is not for you. Come, O ye saints, brought 
out of your natural state, into the state of grace ; behold 
Jhere the state of glory awaiting you. Here is glory let 
down to us in words and syllables ; a looking-glass, in 
^jKch you may see your everlasting happiness j a scheme 



588' ' -afW+or ft VnbeUevert. {^StettfT, 

(or dnLi^jht) of Cbiin'fe Father's bouie, wberein there are 

ThU gloribu* tentence bears tvo things. (I) Tbe 
oonipleto bappincss to which the saints are adjudged, tk 
JUxgdom. (2.^ Their solemn admission to iti " Come ys 
Ueued of my Fatber, inherit," &c First, their con- 
pkte happiness i> a kingdom. A kingdom is the top of 
worldly felicity ; there is notlibg on earth greater tlaii I 
Ungdom ; tbereibre the hidden weight of glory in heavClti 
iiheld forth to us under th&titotion. But it is not an or 
dinary kingdom, it is the kingdom ; the kingdom of heir 
Teti) surpassing all the kingdoms of the earth in glo^i 
honour, profit and pleiisure, infinitely more than W} 
do in these excel the low and inglorious condition of i 
beifgav in rags and on a dunghill. See ondly. Therein 
solemn Rdmission of the saints into this Uieir kiagdoiPi 
*' ComA ye, inheritthci kingdom." In the view of ange&> 
men and deyils, tbey ai-e invested with royally, and sa- 
lemnly inaogurated ficfoi-c the whole world, bv Jtrnt 
Christ the heir of all things, who hath all power in hea- 
Ten and m earth. TTheir right to the kingdom is solemn- 
ly recognized and owned 1 They ai'c udmittcd 'to it, a 
undoubted heirs of the kingdom, to poasc-sB it by inherit- 
ance or lot, as tlie word properly signifies ; because of 
old, inheritances were designed by lot, as Canaan to Is- 
lael, God's first-born, as they are called, Exodi iv. 3?. 
And because this kingdom is the Father's kingdom, 
therefore they are openly acknowledged in their admis- , 
aion to it, to be the blessed of Christ's Father ; the whicb 
lilessing was given them long before ibis sentence, but i( 
now solemnly recognized and confirmed to them by tlie , 
Mediator, in his Father's name. It is observable, he i 
^ays not, Ye blessed of Me Father ; but, Ye blessed of ' 
my Father ; to shew us, that all blessings are derived u^ 
on us from the Father, the fountain of blessing, as he n , 
. the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, tbrou|^; 
vhom we are blessed, Eph.. i. 3. And fisally d^ 
are admitted to this kingdom, as that which was pr^ared 
for them, from the foundation of the world, m God's 
eternal purpose, before tbey, or ai^ of them were ; that 
aU the world siay see eternal life to be the free oft ^ 
God. - '' . 



Qead V.3 Pofoer and Authoritii ffiven the Sainti^ v3k9 

Doctrine. 

T'he Saints shall be made comfiletely hafifiy^ in the P08' 

session of the Kiiigdom of Heaven. 

Two things I shall here enquire into, (I.) The natufe 
of this kingdom. (2.) The admission of the saints thereto. 
And then I shall make a practical improvement of the 
irhole. 

First, As to the nature of the kingdom of heaven, our 
knowledge of it is very imperfect : for, " Eye hath not 
«een, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him," 1 Cor. ii. 9. As, by familiar resemblances, 
parents instruct their little children concerning things, of 
which otherwise they can have no tolerable notion ; so 
our gracious God, in contemplation ^f our weakness, is 
pleased to represent to us heaven's \ piness, under simi- 
litudes taken from earthly things, glorious in the eyes of 
men ; since naked discoveries of the heavenly glory, di- 
vested of earthly resemblances, would be too bright for our 
weak eyes, and in them we would but lose ourselves. 
Wherefore now, one can but speak as a child of these 
things, which the day will fully discover. 

The state of gloiy is represented under the notion of a 
kingdom ; a kingdom among men, being that in which the 
greatest number of earthly good things doth concenter. 
Now every saint shall, as a king, inherit a kingdom. 
All Christ's subjects shall be kings, each one with his 
croMm upon his head : not that the great King shall di- 
vest himself of his royalty, but he will make all his chil- 
dren partakers of his kingdom. 

I. The saints shall have kingly power and authority 
given. Our Lord gives not empty titles to his favourites ; 
he makes them kings indeed. The dominion of the 
saints will be a dominion far exceeding that of the great- 
est monarch ever was on earth. They will be absolute 
masters over sin, that sometime had dominion over them. 
They will have a complete rule over their own spirits ; 
an entire management of all their affections and inclina- 
tions, which now create them so much molestation : the 
turbulent root of corrupt affections, shall be for ever ex- 
pelled out of that kingdom, and never be able any more* 

Kk 



390 Their Enngm of Royalty, [State 1V==^ 



to .give tlicm the least disturbance. They shall have po 
cr over the nations, the luigodly of all iiationsi and sha 
rule them with a rod of iron, Rev. ii. 26, 27. The whoL 
world of the wicked shall be broken before them : Sata_ 
shall be bruised under their feet, Rom. xvi. 20. He sha 
never be able to fasten a temptation on them, any more; h 
he will be judg^cd by them ; and in their sight cast, witJi 
tlic reprobate crew, into the lake of fire and brimstoni^. 
So shall they rule over their oppressors. Having fougtxt 
the good fight, and got the victory, Christ will entertain 
them as Joshua did his captains, cuusing tliem come ne&r^ 
and put their feet upon the necks of kings. Josh. x. 24. 

IL They shall have tlie Ensigns of Royalty. For a 
throne, Christ will grant them to sit with him on his 
throne. Rev. iii. 12. They will be advanced to the highest 
honour and dignity they are capable of ; and, in the en- 
joyment of it, they will have an eternal undisturbed re- 
pose, after all the tossings they meet with in the worldi 
in their way to the throne. For a crown, tliey shall re- 
ceive a crown of glory, that fkdeth not away, 1 Pet v. 4. 
Not a crown of flowers, as subjects, being conquerors^ 
or victors, sometimes have got ; such a crown quickly 
fades ; but their crown never fadeth. Not a crown of , 
gold, such as eainiily kings do wear ; even a crown of 
gold is often stained, and can never make them happy 
who wear it. But it shall be a crown of glory. A crown 
of gloiy is a crown of life, Rev. ii. 10. that life wiiich 
knows no end ; a crown which death can never make to 
fall off one's head. It must be an abiding crown ; for it 
is a crown of righteousness, 2 Tim. iv. 8. It w^as pur- 
chased for them by Christ's righteousness, which is im- 
puted to them'; they are qualified for it by inherent righte- 
ousness ; God's righteousness or faithfulness secures it to 
them. They shall have a scepti'e, a rod of iron (Rev. iL 
27.) terrible to all the wicked world. And a sword too, 
a two-edged sword in their hand, to execute vengeance 
Upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people, Psal, 
cxlix. 6, 7. They shall have royal apparel. The royal 
robes in this kingdom arc white robes, Rev. iii. 4. 
"They shall walk with me in white." And these last 
do, in a very particular manner, point at the inconceiv- 
able glory pf th^ st^te of the saints in heavcji. 



V.3 



IFkite Garmenu. -39 1 



e Lord is pleased often to represent unto us the g^lo- 

state of the saints, under tlic notion of their bein^ 
cd in white garments. It is promised to the ovcr- 
*r, tliat he shall be clothed in white raiment, Rev. iii. 
he cldci-subout the throne are clothed in white raiment, 
•• iv. 4. The multitude before tlic tht*ouc arc clothed 

white robes, chap. vii. 9. arrayed in white robes, ver. 
tnade white in the blood of the Lamb, ver. 14. I own. 
last two testimonies adduced, do respect the state oi* 
saints on earth ; but withal the terms arc borrowed 
\ the state of the church in heaven. All garments, 
>erly so called, being badges of sin and shame, shall 
lid aside by the saints, when they come to tlicir state 
lory. Bat if we consider on what occasions whitd 
aents were wont to be put on, we shall .find much of 
en under them. 

irsty The Romans, when they manumitted their bond- 
ants, gave them a white garment, as a badge of their 
iom. So shall the saints that day get on white robes ; 
t is the day of the glorious liberty of the children of 

(Rom. viii. 2 1 .) the day of the redemption of their 
, ver. 23. They shall no more see the house oF 
age, nor lie any more among the pots. If we com- 

the state of the saints on earth, with that of the 
ed, it is indeed a state of freedom ; whereas the 
r is a state of slavery : but in comparison with their 

in heaven, it is but a servitude. A saint on earth is 
5d a young prince, and heir to the crown ; but his 
o may be, / scrve^ for he diffcreth nothing from a 
int, though he be Lord of all, Oal. iv. 1. What are 
groans of a saint, the sordid and base work he is some- 
s found employed in, the black and tattered garments 
alks in, but badges of this comparative servitude ? 

from the day the saints come to the crown, 

receive their complete freedom, and serve no more. 
y shall be fully freed from sin, which of all evils is 
vorst, both in itself, and in their apprehensions too : 
• great then must that freedom be, when these Egyp* 
. whom they see to-day, they shall see them again no 
5 for ever ? They shall be free from all temptation to 

Satan can have no access to tempt them any more, 
iraself, nor by his agents. A full answer will then be 



^92 fFhUe Carmentt. gState I^. 

given to that petition they have so often repeated, Lead fit 
not into temptation. No hissmg serpent can come intotho 
paradise above ; no snare nor trap can be laid there, to 
catch the feet of the saints ; they may walk there fearles^ 
ly, for they can be in no hazard, there are no tions densi 
no mountains of the leopards, there. They shall be set 
beyond the possibility of sinning, for they shall be con- 
firmed in goodness. It will be the consummate freedom 
^f their will to be for ever unalterably determined to goodr 
And they shall be freed from all the effects of sin: 
« There shall. be no more death, neither sorrow, nor cry- 
ing, neither shall there be any more pain," Rev* xxL 4. 
'VVhat kingdom is like unto this ? Death makes its wwr 
ixow into a palace, as easily as into a cottage I sorrow fills 
the heart of one, who wears a crown on his head : royid 
i^obes are no fence ag^nst pain, and crying by reason of 
pftin. But in this kingdom no misery can have place. 
All reproaches shall be wiped off; and never shall a te^ 
4rop any more from their eyes. They shall not coia* 
plain of desertions again ; the Lord will never hide h|8 
face from them : but the Sun of righteousness shining 
upcn them in his meridian brightness, will dispel all 
clouds, and give them an everlasting day, without the 
least mixture of darkness. A deluge of wrath, after a 
fearful thuiidcr-clap from the throne, will sweep away the 
wicked from before the judgment-seat, into the lake of 
fire ; but they are, in the first place, like Noah brought 
into the ark, and out of harm's way. 

Secondlijt White raiment hath been a token of purity. 
Therefore the Lamb's wife is arrayed in fine linen, cleaii 
and white, Rev. xix. 8. And those who stood before the 
tlirone, washed their robes, and made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb, chap. vii. 14. The saints shall then 
put on the robes of perfect purity, and shine in spotless 
holiness, like the sun in his strengtli, without the least 
cloud to intercept his light. Absolute innocence shall 
then be restored, and every appearance of sin banished 
fcir from his kingdom. The guilt of sin, and the reign- 
ing powt r of it, arc now taken away in the saints ; nevcr- 
tl\i less sin dwelletli in them, Rom. vii. 20. But then it 
shall be no more in them ; the corrupt nature will be 
quite removed } that root of bitterness will be plucked 



Head V.} IfTiite CarmenCs^ 39S 

up, and no yestiges of it left in their souls ; their nature 
shall be altogether pure and bin less. There siiall be no 
more darkness in their minds; but the under stun dini^ of 
every saint, 'when he is corne to his kingdom, irill bo la^ 
a globe of pure and unmixed light. There shall not bo 
the least aversion to good, or inclination to evil, in their 
wills ; but they will be brought to a perfect conlbrmity to 
the will of God, blessed with angelical purity, and fixed 
therein. Their aftcctions shall not be liable to the leiitfe^ 
disorder or irregularity ; it will cost them no trouble to 
keep them right ; they will get such a set of puiity, a» 
they can never lose. They will be so refined from all 
earthly dross, as never to savour more of any thing but 
heaven. Were it possible they should be set again a- 
midst the ensnaring objects of an evil woild, the y should 
walk among them witfiout the least defilement ; as tho 
sun shines on the dunghill yet untainted, and as the an- 
gels presei-ved their purity in the midst of Sodom. Their 
graces shall then be perfected, and all the impcrftctions 
now cleaving to them, done a^vay. There wiU be no moro 
ground for complaints of weakness of gi*ace ; none in that 
kingdom shall complain of an ill lieart or a corrupt na« 
ture. « It doth not yet appear what we shall be, bul — 
when he shall appear, we shall be like him," 1 John iii. 2, 
Thirdly^ Among the Jews, these who desired to be ad- 
mitted into the priestly office, being tried, and found to be 
of the priest's line, iuid without blemish, wci-e clothed in 
white, and enrolled among the priests. Tliis seems to be 
alluded to. Rev iii. 5. " fie that overcometh — the sj nta 
shall be clothed in white ruiment, and I will not blot our 
his name out of the book of life."- The saints are not 
kings only, but priests also ; for they are a Koyal Priest- 
hood, 1 Pet ii. 9. They will be priests upon their Uironos* 
They are judicially found descended from the great High 
Priest of their pix)fession, begotten of him by his Spirit, 
of the incorrii^tible seed of the word, and without blemish ; 
so the trial being over, they are admitted to be priests in 
the temple above, that they may dwell in the house of the 
Loi-d for ever. There is notliing on eaith more glorious 
than a kingdom, nothing move venenible tlian the priest- 
hood ; and both meet loijether in the glorified state of the 
Bidnts. The general assembly of the first-bornji (Iie&« sil, 

]Lk2 



394 Wiite Garments, [[State ly^ 

23.) whose is the priesthood and the double portion^ ap*' 

pearing in their white robes of glory, will be a reverend 

and glorious company. That day will shew them to be 

the persons, whom the Lord has chosen out of all the 

tribes of the earth, to be near unto him, and to entier into 

his temple, even into his holy place. Their priesthood, 

begun on earth, shall be brought to its perfection, while 

they shall be employed in offering the sacrifice of praise 

to God and the Lamb, for ever and ever. They got not 

tlieir portion in the earth with the rest of the tribes ; but 

tlie Lord himself was their portion, and will be their 

double poition, through the ages of eternity. 

Jf'Qurthlyj They were wont to wear white raiment, in a 
time of triumph ; to the which also there seems to be an 
allusion. Rev. ill. 5. << He that overcometh, the same 
shall be clothed in white raiment.'* And what is heaven 
but an everlasting triumph 1 None get thither, but such 
as fight, and overcome too. Though Canaan was given 
to the Israelites, as an inheritance, they behoved to con- 
quer it, ere they could be possessors of it. The saints 
in this world, are in the field of battle ; often in red gar* 
ments, garments rolled in blood ; .but the day approacb- 
cth, in which they shall stand before the throne, and be- 
fore the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in 
their hands, (Rev. vii. 9.) having obtained a complete vic- 
ipTj over all their enemies. The palm was used as a 
$ign of victory v because that tlree, oppressed with weights, 
yielded not, but rather shooteth upwards, and palm trees 
were carved on the doors of the most holy place, (I Kin(js 
vi. 32) which was a special type of heaven ; for heaven IS 
{he place which the saints are received into, as conquerors* 
Behold the joy and peace of the saints in their white 
robes I The joy arising from the view of past dangers, 
and of riches and honours gained at the very door of death} 
do most sensibly touch one's heart ^ and this will be Qi 
uigredicnt in the everlasting happiness of th» saints, which 
could have had no place in the heaven of innocent Adam, 
and his sinless offspring, supposing him to have stoo(L 
Surely the glorified saints wiir not forget the entertsdn- 
ment they met with In the world : it will be for the glory 
of God to remember it, and also for the heightening of 
their joy. J^ Sicilian lung) by bkth (he ggfli gf ^ po^ter^ 



Head V.] fFhUt Garmtnljtf .392 

acted a wise part) in that he would be served at his table^ 
with earthen vesselsy the which could not but put an ad* 
ditional sweetness in his meals, not to be relished by one 
bom heir to the crown. Can eyer meat be so sweet to 
anyt as to the hungry man ? Or can any have such a rel- 
ish of plenty, as he who has been under pinching straits : 
The more difficulties the saints have passed through in 
their way to heaven, the place will be the sweeter to them, 
when they come at it. Every happy stroke struck in the 
spiritual warfare, will be a jewel in their crown of glory. 
Each victory obtained against sin, Satan, and the world, 
will raise their triumphant joy the higher. The remem* 
brance of the cross will sweeten the ciown ; and the me» 
mory of their travel tlirough the wilderness, will put an 
additional verdure on the fields of glory, while they walk 
through them, minding the day, when they went mourn*, 
ing without the sun. 

And now that they appear triumphing in white robe% 
it is a sign that they have obtained an honourable peace \ 
such a peace as their enemies can disturb no more. So 
every thing peculiarly adapted to their militant condition 
is laid^de. The sword is laid down ; and they betake 
themselves to the pen of a ready writer, to commemorate 
the praises of him by whom they overcame. Public ordi- 
nances, preaching, sacraments, shall be honourably laid 
aside ; there is no temple lliere. Rev. xix. 32. Sometimes 
these were sweet to them ; but the travellers being all got 
home, the inns appointed for their entertiunment by the 
way, are shut up ; the candles arc put out when the sun isr 
risen ; and the tabernacle used ib the wilderness is folded 
up when the temple of glory is come in its room. Many 
of the saints duties will then be laid aside ; as one gives 
bis staff out of his hand when he is come to the end of bis 
jouniey. Praying shall then be turned to praising ; and, 
there being no sin to confess, no wants to seek the supply 
•f, confession and petition shall be swallowed in everlast- 
ing tlianksgiving. There will be no mourning in heaven $ 
they have sown in tears, the reaping time of joy is come^ 
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Rev* 
xxi. 4. No need of mortification there ; and self-exami- 
nation is then at an end. They will not need to watch 
^;i^ viox^^ the dimrger is oycllr. Patience has had its perfect 



99$ White Garmentek ^State V^ 

work) and there is no use for it there. Faith is turned iB^ 
to sight) and hope is swuUowed up in the ocean of senti^ 
blc and full enjoyment. Ail the rebels aro* subdued, the 
saints quietly set on their throne ; and so the forces need- 
ful in the time of the spiritual warfare, are disbanded ; and 
lliey curiy on their triumph in profoundest peace. 

Lastly n White Garments were worn on festival days, in 
token of joy. And so shall the saints be clothed in white 
raiment, for they shall keep an eYcrlusting Sabbath to the 
Lord, Heb. iv. 9. " There remahieth therefore a rest (or 
keeping of a Sabbath) to the people of God." The Sitbbatht 
in the esteem of Scdnta, is the queen of days : and the^ shall 
have an endless ^bbatUm in the kingdom of heaven ; so 
shall their garments be always white. They will have ail 
eternal rcat^ ^ith an uninterrupted joy ; for heaven is not 
a resting place, where men may sleep out an eterhity (there 
tlicy rest not day nor night) ; but their work is their rest 
and continual recreation, and toil and weai'iness have no 
place there. They rest there in God, who is the centre of 
their souls. Here they find the complement, or satisfac* 
tion of all their desires ; having the full enjoyment of God^ 
iind uninterrupted communion with him. This is the point 
unto the which, till the soul come, it will always be rest- 
less ; but, that pomt reached, it rests ; for he is the lust 
end, and the soul can go no further. It cannot under** 
stand, will, nor desire more ; but in him it has what is 
commensurable to its boundless desires, This is the hap- 
py end of all the labours of the saints ; their toil and sor- 
rows issue in a joyful rest. The Chaldeans measuring the 
natural day, put the day first, and the night last : but the 
Jews counted the night first and the day last. Even so 
the wicked begin with a day of rest and pleasure, but end 
with a night of everlasting toil and sorrow : but God's peo- 
ple have their gloomy night first, and then comes their day 
of eternal rest. The which, Abraham, in the p..ruble> 
observed to the rich man in hell, Luke xvi. 25. '<• Son, 
remember that thou in thy life-time receivedst thy good 
things, and likewise Lazarus cvibtlimgs : but now he is 
comforted, .md thou art tormented." 

III. If one enquires where the kingdom of the saints 
lies ? It is not in this world ; it lies in a better country, 
tbittis^ an heavenly, Heb. xi. 16. a country betteri^^ 



Head V.] The Country and Royal €ity. J}9J 

the best of Jthii world, namely, the heavenly Canaan, Im« 
maimers land, where nothing is wanting to complete the 
happiness of tiie inhabitants. This is. the happy country^ 
blestwith a perpetual spring,and which yieldcthall things, 
Ibr necessity, conveniency and delight. There men siuili 
eat angels food ; they shall be entertained with the hidden 
manna (Re:^. ii. 17.) witliout being set to the painful ga- 
thering of it : they will be fed to the full, with the pro- 
duct of the land falling into their mouths, without the 
least toil to them. That land enjoys an everlasting day, 
for there is no night there, Rev. xxi. 25. An eternal sun- 
shine beautifies this better country, but there is no scorch- 
ing heat there. No clouds shall be seen there for ever : 
yet it is not a land of drought; tlie trees of the Lord's plant- 
ing, are set by the rivers of water, and shall never want 
moisture; for they will have an eternal supplv of the Spirit, 
by Jesus Christ, from his Father. This is the country 
from whence our Lord came, and witlier he is gone 
9gain ; the countr>' which all the holy patriarchs and pro- 
phets had their eyes upon, while on earth ; and which all 
the saints, who have gone before us, have fiSught their way 
to ; and unto which, the martyrs have joyfully swimmed 
through a sea of blood. This earth is the place of the 
saints pilgrimage : that is their country, where they find 
their everlasting rest. 

IV. The Royal City is that great city, the holy Jerusa- 
lem, described at large. Rev. xxi. 10, &c. (It is true, 
some learned divines place this city m the earth, but the 
particulars of the description seem to me to favour those 
most, who point us to tlie other world for it.) The saints 
bhall reign in that city, whose wall is of jasper (ver. 16.) 
luid the foundations of the wull garnished with all manner 
of precious stones (ver. 19.) and the street of pure gold 
(ver. 21.) so that their feet shall be set on that, which the 
men'of this world set their hearts upon. This is the city 
God has prepared for them, Heb. xi. 16. A city that hath 
foundations (ver. 10.) : a continuing city (chap. xiii. 14.) 
which shall stand and flourish, when all the cities of the 
world are laid in ashes ; and which shall not be moved, 
when the foundations of tlie world are overturned. It is a 
city that never changeth its inhabitants : none of them 
tthall ever be rem^yed out of it ; for life and immortality 



39a STAc Royal Palace. [State IV. 

reign there, and no death can enter into it. It is blessed 
with a perfect and perpetual peace, and can never be in , 
the iCrtSt disturbed. Nothing from without can annoy it; 
the gates therefore are not shut at ail by day, and there is 
no night there, Rev xxi. 25. There can nothing from 
within trouble it. No want of provision there ; no scarci- 
ty ; no discord amongst the inhabitants. Wiiatever cohten^* 
tiona are amongst the saints now, a vestige of their former 
jarring^ shall not remain tliere. Love to God, and to one 
another, shall be perfected : and these of them who stood st 
great distance here, will joyfully embrace and delight in 
one another there. 

V. The Royal Palace is Christ's Father's house ; ia 
which arc many mansions, John xiv. 2. There shall the 
saints dwell for ever. This is the house prepared for all 
the Jieirs of glory, even these of them . ho dwell in the 
meanest cottage now, or have not where to u.y their heads. 
As our Loi*d calls his saints to a kingdom, he will provide 
them a house suitable to the dignity he puts upon them* 
Heaven will be a convenient, spacious and glorious houset 
for those whom' the King delighteth.to honour. Never was 
a house purchased at so dear a rate as this, b-ing the pur- 
chase of the Mediator's blood ! And no less could it bf af- 
forded for to them. Never was there so much ado, to fit 
inhabitants for a house : The saints were, by nature, ut- 
terly unfit for this house ; and human art and indusuy 
could not make them meet for it. But the Father gives 
the designed inhabitants to his Son, to be by him redeem- 
ed ; the Son pays the price of their redemption, even his 
own precious blood ; that, with the allowance of justice, 
they may have access to the house : and the Holy Spirit 
sanctifies them by his grace ; that they may be meet to 
come in thither, where no unclean thing can enter. And 
no marvel, for it is the King's palace tliey enter into, Psal. 
xiv. 15. The house of the kingdom, where the great 
King keeps his court ; where he has his throne, and shews 
forth his glory, in a singular manner, beyond what mor- 
tals can conceive. 

VI. Paradise is their Palace-garden. " This day shalt 
thou be witli me in Paradise," said our Saviour to the 
penitent thief on the cross, Luke xxiii. 43. Heaven is a 
I*uradise for pleasure and delight ; where there is both 



^ead v.] The Royal TreaHirci. 39f 

wood and water : << A pure river, of water of life, clear 
as chrystai, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of 
the Liajnb : and of cither aide of the river, the tnx* of life, 
which bears twelve manner of fruits, und yields her fruit 
every month," Rev. xxii. 1, 2. How huppy might inno- 
cent Adam have been in the earthlv Paradise, where there 
Was nothing wanting for necessity nor delight 1 Eden was 
the most pleasant spot of the uncorruptcd eurth, and Para- 
dise the most pleasant spot of Eden ; but what is earth in 
compurison of heaven ? The glorified saints, are advanced 
to the heavenly Paradise. There tiiey shall not only see, 
but eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of tl)c Pa- 
radise of God, Rev. ii. 7. They shall behold the Media- 
tor's giory, and be satisfied with his goodness. No ficiming 
sWord will be there, to keep the way of thut tree of lite ; 
but they shall freely eat of it, and live for ever. And they 
ohiiii drink of the river of pleasures (Ps«il. xxxvi. 8.) these 
sweetest und purest pleasui*cs, the which Immcinucrs land 
doth afford ; and shall swim in an ocean of unmixed de- 
light for evermore. 

VII. They shall have Royal Treasures, sufficient to 
support the dignity they are advanced unto. Since the 
street of the royal city is pure gold, and the twelve gates 
thereof are twelve pearls ; their treasure must be of tliat 
which is better than gold or pearl. It is an eternal weight 
of glory, 2 Cor. iv. 17. O precious treasure ! a treasure 
inot liable to insensible corruption,by motl.s or rust; a trea- 
sure which none can sleal from them, Matth. vi. 20. Ne- 
ver did any kingdom afford such a precious trcc'sure, nor 
a treasure of such variety ; for, " He that ovcrconjeth 
shall inherit all things," Rev. xxi. 7. No treasures on 
earth are stored with all things : if they were all put to- 
gether in one, there would be far more, valuable things 
wanting in that one, than found in it. This then is the 
peculiar treasure of these kings, who inherit tiic kinpjclom 
of heaven. They shall want nothing, that may contribute 
to their full satisfaction. Now tliey are rich in ho})e : but 
then they will have their riches in hand. Now all things are 
theirs in respect of right : then all shall be theirs in posses- 
sion. They may go for ever through Immanuel's land, und 
behold the glory and riches thereof, witli the siitisfymg 
thought, that all they see is their own. It is a pity these 



4de tJie Temfile. [State t¥. 

should ever be uneasy under the want of earthly good thingfip 
who mdy be sure, ihcy shall inherit all things at len^. 

VIII. Albeit there is no material Temple therein, no 
mediate serving of God in the use of ordinances, as here 
on earth ; yet, as for this kingdom, ^ The Lord God AI- 
tmghty, and the Lumb, are the temple of it," Rer. xu 
22. As the temple was the glory of Canaan, so will the 
celestial temple be the glory of heaven. The saints shall 
be brought in thither as a royal Priesthood, to dwell in the 
house of the Lord for ever : for Jesus Christ will then 
make every saint a pillar in the temple of God, and he 
3hall go no more oui (Rev. iii. 12.) as the Priests and Le- 
vites did in their courses go out of the material temple. 
There the saints shall have the cloud of glory, the divine 
presence, with most intimate, uninterrupted communioB « 
with God : there they shall have Jesus Christ as the true 
ark, wherein the fiery law shall be for ever hid from thdr 
eyes : and the mercy-seat, from which nothing shall be 
breathed, but everlasting peace and good will towards 
them : the cherubim s, the society of holy angels who shall 
join with them in eternal admiration of the mystery of 
Christ, the golden candlestick, with its seven lamps ; for 
the glory of God doth lipjhtcn it, and the Lamb is the light 
thereof, Rev. xxi. 23. The incense -altar, in the interces- 
sion of Christ, who ever liveth to make intercession for 
tliem, (Heb. vii. 25.) eternally exhibiting the merits of 
his death and sufferings, and efficaciously willing for ever, 
that these wliom the Father hatli given him, be with himj 
jmd the shew -bread table, in the perpetual feast, they shall 
have together, in the enjoyment of God. This leads me 
more particularly to consider, 

IX. The society in this kingdom. What would royal 
power and authority, ensigns of royalty, richest treasures, 
and all other advantages of a kingdom avail witliout com- 
fortable society ? Some crowned heads have made but a 
sorry life through the want of it ; their palaces have been 
})ut unto them as prisons, and their badges of honour, as 
diuins on a prisoner ; while hated of all, they had none 
they could trust in, or whom they could have comfortable 
fellowship with. But the chief pait of heaven's happiness, 
lies in the blessed society the saints shall have there. 
Tor clearing of which, consider these few things : 



E|ead V.} !ne Society of &jii/«, 401 

Jf'irstf The society of the saints, among themselves, 
prill be no small part of heaven's happiness. The commu- 
(lion of saints on earth, is highly prized by all those who are 
Unveiling through the world unto Zion ; and companions 
in sin can never have such true pleasure and delight in 
)ne another, as sometime the Lord's people have in pray- 
Lng together, and conversing about these things, which the 
irorld is a stranger to. Here the saints are but few in 
oompany, at best ; and some of them are so posted, as 
they seem to themselves to dwell alone ; having no access 
to such, as they could freely unbosom themselves to, hi 
fche matter of their spiritual case. They sigh and say, 
I'c Wo is me, for I am as when they have gathered the 
summer-fruits — ^there is no cluster to eat— the good minx 
is perished out of the earth," Mic. vii. 1, 2. But in the 
eeneral assembly of the first-born in heaven, none of all 
the saints, who ever were, or wiil be on the earth, shall be 
missing They will be all of them together in one place, 
ail possess one kingdom, and all sit down together to the 
marriage-supper of the Lamb. Here the best of the sainti^ 
want not their sinful imperfections, making their society 
less comfoitable ; but there, they shall be perfect, without 
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Eph. v. 27. And all 
natural, as well as sinful impei*fections, are then done 
away ; '< They shall shine as the brightness of the firma- 
ment," Dan. xii. 3. 

There we will see Adam and Eve in the heavenly pant- 
iSiSe^ freely eating of the tree of life ; Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob,and all the holy patriarchs, no more wandering from 
land to land, but come to their everlasting rest ; all the 
prophets feeding their eyes on the glory of Him, of whose 
fK>ming they prophesied ; the twelve Apostles of the 
Lamb, sitting on their twelve thrones ; all the holy mar- 
tyrs in their long white robes, with their crowns on their 
heads ; the godly kings advanced to a kingdom which 
4sannot be moved ; and tliem that turn many to righteous- 
ness, shining as the stars for ever and ever. There will 
we see our godly friends, relations and acquaintances, pil- 
lars 101 the temple of God, to go no more out from us* 
.And it is more than probable, that the s'lUnts will know one 
another in heaven ; that, at least, tliey will know th«ir 
fiiendsj itilativcsy and these they were acquainted ivith oh 

LI 



*,. Szcif:':f zL'i:h the AngeU. [State IV 



3 



rir:>. i:-..i such is h:.ve been most eminent in the church; 
b:v. rvi: :*r.-: krowlcd^e will be purged from ail earthly 
th.uc.*".:* AT.d -^tc:'.^:':*. This seems to be included in 
I'*: TK-rtV:::::! ci huwiness, to which the saints shall be 
£.£-'-r:ei :he^. 1: A-«l^m knew who and what Eve wai I 
it r.r*: ji^*/.:. when the Lord God brought her to himi | 
ttv-. i:. Co, C4. whv should one Question, but husbandi 
a. w w:ve<. i"^rir.:s .jid children, will know each other in 

* 

c"^ r> I 1: :r.t T.-.e*salonijJis- converted by Paul's ministrf, 

^r. '. r< h.5 wTjwn of rejoicing, in the presence o* our 

L-:-i J v<u* Christ, &t his coming, 1 Thess. ii. 19. why 

r.*c]i ",•: cr.e cor:Ciuvte% th^^t ministers shall know their 

iv . :'.: • :j^.i T^^crle their ministers in heaven ? And if the 

o: " 5>, cr. then;cuntof transfiguration, knew Moses 

;j\.'. V.:-*, whoni they had never seen before (Matth.XTiL 

i ? ^t hj.ve ground to think, we shall know them tooj 

.>'. sucn is they, when we come to heaven. The com- 

in'cr.'.n jf si^.ts shjkll be most intimate there ; they shall 

*:: i:* n wi:h Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom 

•.:' hc-vcr. M-tth. viii. 11. Liizorus was carried by the 

ir Ci- ' > ir.f.^ Arr.iham's besom. Luke xvi. 23. which denotict 

V.-.. ?: :-:l:v.i.:e ^r..^. f.:.m:!i^r society. And though diversity 

c :" :. . ^-..jj- M'^y. cci-se, i Ccr. xiii. S.^ I muke no quostioDi 

b..: .'~:r," v.;:; ><• ^n use of <reech in heuven ; and that the 

S-^ :< *'' .'.'. c'-rlfy Goo ir* t2:eir bodies there, as well asm 

i:c r <7.r.:>, >pc;:k:r.c forth his praises with an audible 

>.*.:: A> frrt'r.e ;:iri{:u..g:e, we shall understand what 

1; •>. v.h-- ^c c^r.'.c t.ii:her/ When Paul was cuughtup 

ic t-'c t>:rj >.:..ven, the se^t of the blessed, he heard there 

v.r>^*;..k.>lc vorcs, which it is not lawful for a man to 

t.::,-, • Ccr xi:. 4. Mcs*:s :i:>d Elias, on the mount with 

Crr:>:. t::I\ci with him, >Ltth. xvii. 3. and spake of his 

il.Ci-.-.>c V* -^ich he shcuid iccompliih at Jcrusakm, Luke 

C?./. •:.:'.., The Ssiir.ts will have the society of all the 
K^'t ..rcili- there Ar. ir-rAimerable company of angels 
s' .,.: Vc Cviv.pj^-ior* to them in their glorified state. 
^l. *;rv were :he shepherds who heard the song of the 
•e.\ee/.> he>:, when Christ w«s bom ; but thrice happy 
:".\. whw" sh«Il -ei-^ their voices with tl'.eirs, in the ch<r!r 
:* .v'.e. irc-'.s iv. he-.ver., ^»ntn he shall be. glorified 

.'V, who s'^.tc: >: -S-^'.v. *::r.i there. Then shall wc be 



^ • > 



v.]. Society with the Angel^^ ^4(^S 

*ht acquainted with the blessed spirits, vho never * 
d. How bright will these mominj^-stars shine in 
3ly place ! tliey were ministchng; spirits to the heirs 
vadon, loved them for tlieir Lord tuid Master's sake; 
(iped round about thein, to preserve them from dan- 
how joyfully will they welcome them to their ever- 
g habitations; and rejoice to sec them come at length 
Mr kingdom, as the tutor dotli in the prosperity of 
ipils ! ' The saints shall be no more afraid of thern^ 
netime they were wont to be ; they shall then have 
ff mortality, and infirmities of the flesh, and be them- 
s, as the angels of God, fit to entertain communion 
2llowship with these shining ones. And both being 
l^ht under one head, the Lord Jesus Chiist ; they join 
5 praises of God, and of the Lamb, ^ Saying, with a 
voice, Wortliy is the Lamb that was slam," &c. 
V. 11, 13. Whether the angels shall (as some 
) assume airy bodies, that they may be seen by the 
f eyes of the saints, and be in nearer capacity to con* 
wkh them, I know not ; but as they want not ways of 
irse amongst themselves, we have reason to thinkf 
onversation betwixt them and the saints, shall not bo 
er blocked up. 

%tly^ They shall have society with the Lord him* 
in heaven, glorious communion with God and 
t, which is the perfection of happiness. I chuse* 
;ak of communion with God, and the man Christ 
aer ; because as we derive our grace from the 
», so we will derive our glory from him too ; the 
Christ being (if I may be allowed the expression) 
mtre of the divine glory in heaven, from when.ce it 
iised unto all the saints. This seems to be taught 
these scriptures, which express heaven's happiness 
iing with Christ. Luke xxiii. 43. « This day shalt 
be with me in paradise." John xxvii. 24. " Father, 
that these also, whom thou hast given me, be with 
(And remarkable to this purpose is what follows^ 
hey may beheld my glory, ^ 1 Thess. iv. 17. "So 
we ever be with the Lord," viz. the Lord Christy 
1 we shall meet in the sdr. This also seems to be 
mport of these scriptures, wherein Ged and the 
I the dlain Saviour, are jointly 9pbken oi^ in ^cm 



4M The Preatnte 0/ God^ ^State ly. 



point of the happiness of the saints in heaven. Rev. T&i 
17. ^^ For the Lumb A?hich is in the midst of the thronei 
bhall feed them, and shuU lead them unto living fountains 
of waters : and God shull wipe away all tears from their 
cyi'S." Cliap. xxi. 3. <^ Behold the tabernacle of God 10 
with men, and he will dwell with them," viz. as in a ta« 
homacle, (so the word signifies) that is, in the flesh of 
C^hrist, (compare John i. 14. and 22.) " The Lord God 
Almighty, and tlic Lamb are the temple of it.'* Here ]iff 
the chief happiness of the Saints in heaven, that without 
which they could never be happy, though lodged in that 
glorious place, and blessed with the society of angeijl 
there. \Vhut I will venture to say of it> shall be coii(r 
prised in three things. 

U/, The sains in heaven shall have the glorious pr6 
scnce of God, and of the Lamb ; <^ God himself shall bfe 
wiih them,'* Rev. xxi. 3. and they shall be ever with tMs 
I^ord. God is every where present, in respect of his e4« 
sencc ; tlie saints militant have his special gracious pre* 
sence : but in heaven they have his glorious presence 
There they ai*e brought near to the throne of the great | 
King, and stand before him, where he shews his incon* 
ccivahle gloiy. There they have the tabernacle of God, 
on which the cloud of glory rests, the all-glorious human 
iKUiire of Christ, wherein the fulness of the Godhead 
dwells, r.vit veiled as in the days of his humiliation, but 
slrinihij: throu[.';h thut blessed flesh (that all the saints niuy 
beholii t:is p:iory) *ncl making that body more glorious than 
a ihous.jul suiiS ; so that the city has no need of the sun> 
r.or ef ib.e moon, but the glory of God doth lighten it, and 
the Lumb is t/:r //"•/// thereof^ (properly, the candle thert^ 
oj\) lit V. xxi. 23. /. e. The Lamb is the luminaiy, or lumi- 
3u>us hotly, vluch gives light to the city,as the sun and moon 
now ^i\ e lii^ht to the world, or as a candle lightens a durk 
room ; and the lij>:ht proceedinj^: from that glorious lumi- 
nary, for the city is tlie glory of God. Sometime that cliH- 
dle JHinU very dim, it Wus hiil urider a bushel, in the lime 
of his hunnliwtion ; but thut, Viow . nd then, it daitcd out 
some rays of this light, which dazzled the eyes of the sp^c- 
t;.tors ; but now it is set on high, in the city of (Jul, 
where it shines, and sh^ll shine lor ever, in ptrf^^ctlon of 
glory. It was sometimes laid aside, as a stone disailuwcd 



Head V.] and tf the Lamb. 4Q5 

of the builders ; but now it is^ and for ever will be, the 
light or luminary of that city ; and thut, like unto a stone 
most preciouS) even like a jasper stone clear as crystal^ 
Ter. U. 

Who can conceive the happiness of the saints, in the 
presence-chamber of the great King, where he sits in his 
chair of state, making his gloiy eminently to appear m 
the man Christ ? His gracious presence makes a mighty 
change upon the saints in this world ; his glorious pre- 
sence in heaven then must needs screw up their graces 
to their perfection, and elevate their capacities. The 
saints do experience, tliat the presence of God now with 
them, in his grace, can make a little heaven of a sort of 
hell ; how great then must the glory of heaven be, by his 
presence there in his glory ! If a candle, in some sort» 
beautifies a cottage or prison, how will the shining sun 
beautify a palace or paradise ! The gracious presence of 
God made a wilderness lightsome to Moses, the valley of 
the shadow of death to David, a fieiy furnace to the thiec 
children : What a ravishing beauty shall then arise from 
the sun of righteousness, shinuig in his meridian bright- 
ness, on the street of the city laid with pure gold ? The 
glorious presence of God in heaven, will put a glory oh 
the saints themselves. The pleasant garden hath no beau- 
ty, when the dctrkness of the night sits down on it ; but the 
shining sun puts a glory on the blackest mountains ; so 
these who are now as bottles in the smoke, when set in 
the glorious presence of God, will be glorious both in 
soul and body. 

2dly^ The saints in heaven shall have the full enjoy- 
ment of God and of the Lamb. This is it that jyerfectly 
satbfies the rational creature ; and here is the saints ever- 
lasting rest. This will make up all their wants, and fill 
the desires of their souls, which, after all here obtained, 
still cry, G«ve, give^ not without some anxiety ; because, 
though they do enjoy God, yet they da not enjoy him fully. 
As to the way and manner of this enjoyment, our Lord 
tells us, John xvii. S. « This is life etenial, that they may 
know thee, the only ti'ue God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent.'* Now, there are two w«iys, how a desir- 
ible object is known most perfectly and satisfyingly ; the 
4me is by sights the otliqr by experience ; sight satisfies 

L12 



406 Full Enjoyment of God^ [State IV. 

ihc understanding, and experience satisfies the will. Ao 

c<sruin^iy one niay say, U^ut the suints enjoy God, and the 

I^auiU in heaven. (I.) By an intuitive kno>vledgc. (3.^ 

By <in experimental knowledge, both of them perfect, I 

mcun^ in rcspt ct of the capacity of the creature ; for; 

otnLrwisc, a creature's perfect knowledge of an infinite 

Bcin;;- is impossible. The saints below, enjoy Godj in 

th..t knowledge they have of him by report, from his holy 

vurd, which they believe : tliey see him likewise, darkly) 

in the glass of ordinances, which do as it w^ere^ represent 

the Lriciegroom's picture, or shadow, while he is absent ; 

they huve also some experimental knowledge of him, they 

taste that God is good, and that the Lord is gracious. 

But the saints above shall not need a good report of the 

Kinij:, they shall see himself; therefore &ith ceaseth; 

ihcy will behold his own face ; therefore ordinances are 

no more ; there is no need of a glass ; they shall drink) 

end drink abundantly of that whereof they have tasted ; 

and so hope ceaseth, for they are at the utmost bounds of 

titcir desires. 

1. The saints in heaven shall enjoy God and th^ 
Lamb, by sight; and that in a most perfect manner, I 
Cor. xiii. 12. ** For now we see through a glass, darl^ 
ly ; but then face to face." Here our sight is but me- 
diate, as by a gkss ; in which we see not things them« 
solves, but the images of things : but there we siiall 
have an immediate view of God and the Lamb. Here 
our knowledge is but obscure ; there it shall be clear, 
uiihout the least mixture of darkness. The Lord doth 
now converse with his saints, through the lattices of 
ordinances ; but then shall they be in the presence- 
chamber with him. There is a veil now on the glorious 
T^ce, as to us ; but when we come to the upper house, 
that veil, through which some rays of beauty are now 
darted, will be found entirely taken off ; and then shull 
glorious excellencies and perfections, not seen in him 
by mortals, be clearly discovered, for we shall see his 
fucc, Rev. xxii. 4. The phrase seems to be bonowed 
.from the honour put on some in the courts of monarchs,- 
lo be attendants on the king's person. We read, Jcr. 
liii. 25. of seven men of them that were (Heb. Seen rf 
* 7r A/;:^**/trcf > i. €. «s we rew) it) ot^ tte kirs'^ person: 



Head 'V.j and qf the Lamb\ 4i)^ 

O unspeakable glory I the great King keeps his court 
in heaven ; and the saints shall all be his courtiers, ever 
near the King's person^ seeing his fs^ce : <* The throne of 
God, and of the Lamb, shall be in it ; and his servants 
shall serve him, and they shall see his face. Rev. xxii/ 
3, 4. 

(1.) They shall see Jesus Christ with their bodily 
eyeSf since he will never lay aside the human nature. 
They will always behold that glorious blessed body, 
which is personally united to the divine nature, and 
exalted &r above principalities and powers, and every 
name that is named. There we will see, with our eyess 
that very body which was bom of Mary at Bethlehemr 
and crucified at Jerusalem betwixt two thieves ; that 
blessed head that was crowned with thorns ; the fuce 
that was spit upon ; the hands und feet that were nailed 
to the cross ; all shining with inconceivable glory. 
The glory of the man Christ, will attract the eyes of 
all the saints ; and he will be for ever admired in all 
them that believe, 2 Thes. i. 10. Were each star in 
the heavens, shining us tlie sun in its meridian bright- 
ness, and the light of the sun so increased, as the stars 
in that case, should beai* the same proportion to the sun, 
in point of light, that they do now ; it might possibly 
be some faint resemblance of the glory of the man 
Christ, in comparison with that of the saints ; for though 
the saints shall shine forth as the sun ; yet not they, but 
the Lamb, shall be the light of the city. The wise 
men fell down, and worshipped him, when they saw him 
a young child, with Mary his mother, in the house. 
But O ! what a ravishing sight will it be, to see him, in 
his kingdom, on his throne, at the Father's right hand ! 
The Word was made fiesh (John i. 1 4.) and the glory of 
God shall shine through that flesh, and the joys of hea- 
ven spring out from it, unto the saints, who shall see 
and enjoy God, in Christ. For since the union betwixt 
Christ and the saints, is never dissolved, but they con- 
tinue his members for ever ;. and the members cannot 
draw their life, but from their Head ; seeing that which 
is independent on the head, as to vital influence, is no 
member : therefore Jesus Christ will remain the ever- 
l^tisj^ bond of union bet^^t God and the sa,ints \ fropci 



408 J^uU Enjoyment qf God^ [State IV. 

trhence their eternal life shall spring, John xvii. 3, 3, 32) 
33. << Thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he 
should give etercual life to as many as thou hast given him. 
And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, tlie 
only true God, 8cc. And the glory which thou gavestnu^ 
I have eiven them, that they may be one, even as we are 
one : I m them, and thou in me ; that they may be made 
perfect in one.*' Wherefore, the immediate enjoyment ol 
God in heaven, is to be understood in respect of the laying 
aside of word and sacraments, and such external means aft 
we enjoy God by, in this world ; bikt not as if the sainti 
should then cast off their dependence on their Head, for 
vital influences : nay, ^^ The Lamb, which in the midal 
of the throne, shall feed them ; and shall lead them on- 
to living fountains of watei's,** Rev. vii. 17. 

Now, when we shall behold him, who died for us, 
that we might live for evermore, whose matchless love 
made him swim the red sea of God*S wi'ath) to make a 
path in the midst of it for us, by which we might past 
safely to Canaan's Land : then we will see what a glo- 
rious one he was, who suffered all this for us ; what en- 
tertainment he had in the upper house ; what hallelujah* 
of angels could not hinder him to hear the groans of a 
perishing multitude on earth, and to come down for their 
help ; and what a glory he laid aside for us. Then will 
we be more able to comprehend, with all saints, what is 
the breadth, and length, and depth, and hcighth ; and to 
know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, Eph. 
iii. 19. When the saints shall remember, that the waters 
of wrath he was plunged into, are the wells of salvation, 
from whence they draw all their joy ; that they have got 
the cup of salvation, in exchange of the cup of wititli his 
Father gave him to drink, which his sinless human nature 
shivered at : how will their hearts leap within them, bum 
with seraphic love, like coals of juniper, and the arch of 
heaven ring with their songs of salvation ? The Jewsi 
celebrating the feast of tabernacles (which was the most 
joyful of all their feasts, and lasted seven days) went once 
every day about the altar, singing hosanna, with their myr- 
tle, palm, and willow branches in their hand (the two for* 
mer, signs of victory, the last of chastity), in the mean 
^me bending xl[vdr \>q\x^V\s towai'ds the altar. '\Vheji 



Head V.J md of tbe LamH. i05 

the ^Dts are presented as a chaste virgin to Christ, and 
as conquerors, have got their palms in their hunds, how* 
joyfully will they compass the altar evermore ; and sing^ 
their hosannas, or rather their hallelujahs, about it 
(bending their palms towards it), acknowledc;ing them* 
selves to owe all unto the Lamb that was slain, and re* 
deemed them with his blood ! And to this agrees what 
John saw, Rev. vii. 9. 10. "A great multitude — stood 
before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with 
"vhlte robes, and palms in their hands, and cried with 
a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sit^ 
^th upon the throne, and unto the Lamb." 

(2.) They shall see God, Matth. v. 8. They will be 
happy in seeing the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (not 
vith their bodily eyes, in respect of which God is invisible^ 
1 Tim. i- 17.) but with the eyes of their understanding; 
being blest with the most perfect, full, and clear know- 
. ledge of God and divine things, \Vhich the creature is ca- 
pable of. This is called, the beatific viaion^ and is the 
perfection of the understanding, the utmost tenn thereof. 
It is but an obscure delineation of the glory of God, that 
mortals can have on earth ; a sight, as it were, of his bctck 
p<trt, Exod. xxxiii. 23. But there they will see his face, 
Rev. xxii. 4. Tiiey shall see him in the fulness of his 
glory, and behold him fixedly ; whereas it is but a pass* 
ing view they can have o: him here, Exod. xxxiv. 6, 
There is a vast difference betwixt the sight of a king in 
his night-clothes, quickly passing by us,and a fixed leisure 
view of him sitting on his throne, in his royal robes, his 
crown on his head, and his sceptre in his hand : Such a 
difference will there be, between the greatest manifesta- 
tion of God that ever a saint had on earth, and ti)e display 
of his glory that shall be seen in heaven. There the saints 
shall eternally, without interruption, feed their eyes upon 
him, and be ever viewing his glorious perfections. And 
as their bodily eyes shiill be strengthened and fitted, to 
behold the glorious majesty of the man Christ ; as eagles 
gaze on the sun, without being blinded thereby : so their 
minds shall have such an elevation, as will fit them to see 
God in his glory. Their capacities shall be enlargedi 
accorduig to the measure in which he shall be pleased to^ 



4 Id ^^ Enjoyment <if God^ [State iV^i. 

communicate hin^^elf unto them, for their complete hap» 
pincss. 

This blissful sight of God, being quite above our pre- 
sent Capacities, we must needs be much in tlie dark about 
it. But it seems to be something else, than the sight of 1 
that glory, which we will see with our bodily eyes in the 1 
saints, and in the man Christ, or aiiy other splendour or 
refulgence from the Godhead whatsoever ; for no created 
thing can be our chief good and happiness, or fully sad^ 
fy our souls ; and it is plain, that these things are soAie* 
what different from God himself. Therefore I conceivei 
that the souls of the saints shall see God himself; for the 
scriptures teach us, that we shall see face to face, 9iid 
know even as we are known, 1 Cor. xiii. 13. And that we 
shall see him as he is, 1 John iii. 3. Howb«it the saints 
can never have an adequate conception of God ; they can- 
not comprehend that which is infinite. They may touch 
the mountain, but cannot grasp It in their arms. They 
cannot with one glance of their eye, behold what grows 
on every side ; but the divine perfections will be an un- 
bounded field, in which the glorified shall walk etemailyi 
seeing more and more of God ; since they can never come 
to the end of that which is infinite. They may bring their 
vessels to this ocean every moment, and fill them with 
new Waters. What a ravishing sight would it be, to see 
all the perfections, and lovely t^ualities, that are scattered 
here and there among the creatures, gathered together 
into one ! but even such a sight would be infinitely below 
this blissful sight the saints shall have of heaven. For 
they shall see God, in whom all these perfections shall 
eminently appear, with infinitely more, whereof tliere is 
no vestige to be found in the creature. In him shall they 
see every thing desirable, and nothing but what is de- 
sirable. 

Then shall they be perfectly satisfied, as to the love of 
God towards them, which they are now ready to question 
on every turn. They will be no more set to persuade 
themselves of it, by marks, signs and testimonies ; they 
will have an intuitive knowledge of it. They shall (with 
the profoundest reverence be it spoken) look into the 
heart of God, and there see the love he bore to them from 
all eternity, and the love and good-will he will bear to 



Head VI.] ^ense, in Heil. *5$ 

by, what of horror is wanting in one notion of hell, i» 
supplied by another. VVny is heaven's happiness repre- 
sented under the Vcirious notions of a treasure, a paradise, 
a feast, a rest, ^c." but that tlicre is not one of these things 
sufficient to express it? Even so, liell-tomients are repre- 
sented under the notion of Bre ; » which the damned are 
"cast into. A droudful representation indeed I yet not suf- 
ficient to express the misery of the state of sinners in them. 
Wherefore we hear also of the second death, (Rev. xx. 6.) 
for the damned in hell shall be ever dying ; of the wine- 
press of the wrath of God, (chap. xiv. 19.) wherein tliey 
will be trodden in anger, trampled in the Lord's fury, (Isa. 
Ixiii 3.) pressed, broken, and bruised, without end : The 
worm that dieth not, (M-irk ix. 44.) which shall eternally 
^aw tliem ; a bottomless pit, where they will be ever 
sinking, Rev. xx. 3. It is not simply called a fire, but 
the lake of fire and biimstone, (ver. 19.) a lake of fire 
burning with brimstone, (chap. xix. 20.) than which one 
can imagine nothing more dreadful. Ye^, because fire 
gives light, and light (as Solomon observes, Eccl. xi. 
7.) is sweet, there is no light there, but darkness, utter 
darkness, Mat. xxv. 30. For they must have an everlast- 
ing night, since notliing can be there, which is in any 
measure comfortable or refreshing. 

3. Our fire cannot affect a spirit, but by way of sympa- 
thy with the body to which it is united ; but hell-fire will 
not only pierce into the bodies, but directly into the souls 
of the damned ; for it is prepared for the devil and his an- 
j^els, these wicked spirits, whom no fire on earth can hurt. 
Job complains heavily, under the chastisement of God's 
fatherly hand, saying, '" The arrows of the Almighty are 
witliin me, the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit,'* 
Job vi. 4. But how will the spirits of the damned be 
pierced with the arrows of revenging justice I How will 
they be drunk up with the poison of the curse on these 
arrows I How vehement must that fire be, that pierccth 
directly into the soul, and makes an everlasting burning 
in the spirit, the most lively and tender part of a mian> 
wherein wounds or pain are most intolerable ! 

Lnstly^Th^ preparation of this fire,evinceth the inexpres- 
sible vehemence and dreadfulness of it. The text calls it 
prepared fire? yea, the prepared fire, by way of eminency. 



4 Id The Mnjoymefft tf Go(^ (pkatt V{: 

ing waters, vrho will fully and freely commuDicate himself 
unto them. He will pour out of his goodness etemallf 
into tlicir souls ; and then shall they have a most lively 
sensation, in the innermost part of their souls, of all thit 
goodness tliey heard of, and believed to be in him ; and 
of what they see in him by the light of glory. This will 
be an everlasUng practical exposition of that word, which 
men and angels cannot sufficiently unfold, viz. God shalt-- 
«< be their God," Rev xi. 3. God will communicate him* 
self unto them fully ; they -will be no more set to taste of 
the streams of divine goodness in ordinances, as they , 
-were wont, but sliall drink at the fountadn-head. They 
will be no more entertained with 6ips and drops, but filled 
with all the fulness of God. And this will be the enter- 
tainment of every saint ; for, though in created things, 
what is given to one, is with-held from another ; yet an 
infinite good can fully communicate itself to all, and fill 
all. These who are heirs of God, the great heritage, 
shall then enter into a full possession of their inheriton* 
oes ; and the Lord will open his treasures of goodness 
imto them, tliat their enjoyment may be full. They shall 
not be stinted to any measure ; but the enjojrment shall 
go us far as their enlarged capacities can reach. As a 
narrow vessel camiot contain the ocean, so neither can the 
finite creature comprehend an infinite good ; but no mea- 
sure shall be set to the enjoyment, but what ariseth from 
the capacity of the creature. So that, although there be 
degrees of glory, yet all shall be filled and have what thef 
can hold ; though some would be capable to hold more 
than others, there will be no want to any of them, all 
shall be fully satisfied, and perfectly blessed in the full 
enjoyment of divine goodness, according to their enlarged 
capacities. As when bottles of different sizes are filled, 
some contain moi*e, others less ; yet all of them huve 
^hut they can contain. The gloi'ified shall have all in 
God, for the satisfaction of all their desires. No created 
•thing can afford satisfaction to all our desires ; clothes 
may warm us, but they cannot feed us ; the light is com- 
fortable, but cannot nourish us. But in God we shall have 
all our desires, and we shall desire nothing witliout him. 
They shall be the happy ones, that desire nothing but 
•yrliat i» truiy de^ira&le j and withal have all the:y desire. 



Jcad v.] and of the Lamt, 413 

God will be all in all to the saints ; he will be their life, 
health) riches, honour, peace, and all good things. He 
will communicate himself freely to them ; the door of 
access to him shall never be shut again, for one moment. 
They may, when they will, take of the fruits of tlie tree 
of life, for they will find it on each side of the river. Rev. 
xxii. 2. There will be no veil betwixt Cvod and them, to 
be drawn aside ; but his fulness shall ever stand open to 
them. No door to knock at in heaven ; no asking to go 
before receiving ; the Lord will allow his people an un- 
restrained familiarity with himself there. 

Now they are in part made^ partakers of the divine nOr 
tore \ then they shall perfectly partake of it ; that is to 
say, God will communicate to them his own image, make 
all his goodness not only pass before them, but pass into 
them^ and stamp the image of all his perfections on thenr, 
«o &r as the creature is capable to receive the same ; 
from whence shall result a perfect likeness to him, in all 
things in or about them, which completes the happiness 
of the creature. And this is what the Psalmist seems to 
have had in view. Psalm xvii. 15. << I shall be satisfi:;d 
when I awake, with thy likeness ;" the perfection of God'ft^ 
image, following upon the beatific vision. And so says 
John, 1 John iii. 2. <^ We shall be like him ; for we shall 
see him as he is." Hence there shall be a most close 
and intimate union betwixt God and the saints : God shall 
be in them, and they in God, in the way of a most glo- 
rious and perfect union ; for then shall they dwell in love 
made perfect. ♦* God is love, and he that dwelleth in 
love, dwelleth in God, and God in him," 1 John iv. 1 6. 
How will the saints knit with God, and he with them ^ 
when he sees nothing in them, but his own image ; when 
their love shall arrive at its perfection, no nature but the 
divine nature, being left in them ; ahd all imperfection 
swallowed up in that glorious transfoi'mation into the like- 
ness of God I their love to the Lord being purged from 
the dross of self-love, shall be most pure ; so as they will 
love nothing but God, and in God. It shall be no more 
faint and languishing, but burn like coals of juniper. It 
will be a light without darkness, a flaming fire without 
smoke. As the live coal, when all the moisture is gone 
dtK of it5 is all fire y so will the saints be all lovej when 

Mm 



4 1 4 Fulness cf Joy. [State IV, 

they come to the full enjoyment of God in heayen, bf 
intuitive and experimental knowledge of him, by sight 
and full pariicipation of the divine goodness. 

Lastly^ From this glorious presence and enjoyment 
slidll arise an unspeakable juy, which the saints shall be 
filled with. »* In thy presence is fulness of joy," Psalm 
xvi. 1 1 . The saints sometimes enjoy God in the worldi 
when their eyes being held, that they cannot perceive i^f 
they have not tJ'.c comfoit of the enjoyment ; but then^ all 
mistakes being removed, they shall not only enjoy Go(Jj 
but rest in the enjoyment, with inexpressible joy and 
satisfaction. The desire of earthly tilings breeds torment, 
and the enjoyment of them often ends in loathing. But 
though the glorified saints shall ever desire more and 
more of God, their desires shall not be mixt with the least 
anxiety, since the fulness of the Godrhead stands alvayi 
open to them ; therefore thCy shall hunger no more, they 
.shall not have the least uneasiness, in their eternal appe- 
tite after the hidden manna t neither shall continued en* 
joyment breed loathing ; they shall never think they have 
too much ; therefore it is added, « Neither shall the 
sun light on them, nor any heat," Rev. vii. 1 6. The en- 
joyment of God and the Lamb will be ever fresh and new 
to them, through the ages of eternity ; for they shall drink 
of living fountains of waters, where new waters ai'e con- 
tinually springing up in abundance, ver. 1 7. They shall eat 
of the tree of life, which for variety, affords twelve man- 
ner of fruits, and these always new and fresh, for it yields 
every montli. Rev. xxii. 2. Their joy shall be pure 
and unmixed, without any dregs of sorrow : not slight 
and momentary, but solid and everlasting, without in- 
terruption. They will enter into joy, Matth. xxv. 21. 
** Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." The cxprts- 
sion is somewhat unusual, and brings me in mind of that 
word of our suffering Redeemer, Mark xiv. 34. ** My 
soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death." His soul was 
beset *ivith sorrows^ as the word there used, will bear: 
the floods of sorrow went round about him, encompciS- 
sing him on every hand : whithersoever he turned his 
ryes, sorrow was before him ; it sprang in upon himt 
Ij om heaven, earth, and hell, all at once ; thus was he 
c?ft^rcd Jnt?> soitow, and therefore saith, Psal, Ixix. 2. 



Head v.] Futneas qf Joy. 415 

** I am come into deep waters, where the floods over- 
flow me." Now, wherefore all tliis, but that his own 
might enter into joy ? Joy sometimes enters into us now, 
with much ado to get access, while we arc compassed 
with sorrows ; but then joy shall not only enter ii.to ujs, 
but we shall enter into it, and swim for ever in an ocean 
of joy ; where we will sec nothing but joy, whitliersoevcr 
^e turn our eyes. The presence and enjoyment of God 
and the Lamb, will satisfy us with pleasures for ever- 
more ; and the glory of our souls and bodies, arising fix>m 
thence, will afford us everlasting delight. The spirit of 
heaviness, how closely soever it cleaves to any of the 
saints, sliall drop off then ; their weeping shall be tuiii- 
cd into songs of joy, and bottles of tears shall issue in 
rivers ot pleasures. Happy they who now sow in tears. 
Which shall spring up in joy in heaten, and bow their 
heads there with a weight of glory upon them. 

Thus far of the society in this kingdom of the saints. 

X. In the laat place. The kingdom shall endure for 
erer. As every thing in it is eternal, so the saints 
shall have an undoubted certainty and full assurance oi 
the eternal duration of the same. This is a necessafy 
ingredient in perfect happiness : for the least uncer- 
tainty, as to the continuance of any good with one, 
Is not without some fear, anxiety, and torment: andj 
therefore is utterly inconsistent with perfect happiness. 
But the glorified shall never have fear, nor cause of fear, 
of any loss ; they shall be ever with the Lord, 1 Thes. iv. 
17. They shall attain the full persuasion, that nothing 
shall be able to separate them from the love of God, nor 
from the full enjoyment of him, for ever. The inheri- 
tance, reserved in heaven, is incorruptible ; it hath no 
principle of corruption, in itself, to make it liable to decay, 
but endures for evermore : it is undefiled; notliing from 
without can mar its beauty, nor is there any thing in it- 
self, to offend those who enjoy it : And therefore it 
fadeth not away, but ever remains in its native lustre, and 
primitive beauty, 1 Pet. i. 4. Hitherto of the nature of 
the kingdom of heaven. 

Secondly, Proceed we now, to speak oC. the admis- 
sion of the saints into this their kingdom ; where I sliaU 
briefly touch upon two tilings :(l.) The formal adiKas- 



'31011, in the call unto them from the Judge, to come to 
their kmgdom. (2.) The quality in which they are ad- 
mitted und introduced to it. 

I. Their admissioui the text shews to be by a voice 
'from the throne ; the King calling to them from the 
throne, bcfoie angels and men, to come to their king^ 
dom. Come and go arc but short words, but they will h% 
fiVLoh, as will afford matter of thought to all mankin^i 
throuj^h the ages of eternity ; since upon the one de- 
pends everlasting happiness, and upon the other, everlas^ 
mg niisciy. Now our Lord bids the worst of sinner^ 
\vho hear the gospel. Come ; but the most part will nA 
come unto him. Some few, whose hearts are touched 
by his Spirit, do embrace the call, and their souls witfaixi 
them say Behold ! we come unto thee : they give then!* 
selves to the Lord, forsake the world and their lusts fof 
him ; they bear his yoke, and cast it not off, no not ih 
the heat of the day, when the weight of it, perhaps, makes 
them sweat the biood out of their bodies. Behold the 
^ fools, saith the carnal world, whither ai*e they going? 
But stay a little, O foolish world I From the same mouth) 
whence they had the call they are now following, another 
call shall come, which will make amends for all : ^^ Com^} 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kmgdom," &c. 

The saints shall find an inexpressible sweetness in 
tliis call, to come : (1.) Hereby Jesus Christ shews lus 
desire of their society in the upper house, that they may 
be ever with theni there. Thus he will open his heart uiitt) 
them, as sometirnes he did to his Father concerning 
thcra, S'jiying, " Father, I will that they — ^be with me, 
where 1 am," Sec. John xvii. 34. Now the travail of his 
soul str.nds before the throne, not only the souls, but the 
bodies he has redeemed ; and they must come, for he 
must be completely satisfied — (2.) Hereby they are so- 
lemnly invited to the marriag<?-supper of the Lamb. 
They were invited to the lower table, by the voice of the 
servants, and the secret workings of tlie Spirit within 
them ; and they came, and did partake of the feast of 
divine communications in the lower house ; but Jesus 
Christ, in person, shall invite tliem, before all the world, 
to the higher table. (3.) By this he admits them into the 
mansions of glory. The keys of heaven hang at the gir* 



Head v.] Sainf^ introduced. 4 it 

die of our royal Mediator : All power in heaven is given 
to hinif Mat. xxviii. 18. and none get in thither, but 
whom he admits. When they were living on cartli, with 
the rest of the world, he opened the everlasting doois of 
their hearts, entered into them himself^ and shut them 
again, so as sin could never re-enter, to reign there as 
formerly : and now he opens heaven's doors to them, 
draws his doves into the ark, and shuts them in there ; 
so as the law, death and hell, can never get them out 
again. The saints, in this life, were still labouring to 
enter into that rest ; but satan was always pulling them 
back, their corruption always drawing them down ; in so 
much, that they have sometimes been lefl to hang by a 
hair of a promise (if I may be allowed the expression), 
not without fears of falling into the lake of fire : but 
now Christ gives the word for their admission ; they are 
brought in, and put beyond all hazard. Lastly^ Thus he 
speaks to them, as the person introducing them into the 
kingdom, into the presence-chamber of the great King, 
and unto the throne. Jesus Christ is the great Secretary 
of heaven, whose it is to bring the saints into the gruci* 
ous presence of God ; and to whom alone it belongs, to 
bring them into the glorious presence of God in heaven. 
Truly heaven would be a strange place to them, if Jesus 
was not there : but the Son will introduce his brethren 
into his Fcither's kingdom ; they shall go in with him to 
the marriage, Matth. xxv 10. 

II. Let us consider in what quality they ai'e introduced 
by him. 

Firat^ He brings them in as the blessed of his Father : 
80 runs the call from the throne ; " Come, ye blessed of 
my Father," &c. It is Christ's Father's house, tbey are 
to come into ; therefore he puts them in mind, that they 
are blessed of his Father ; dear to the Father, as well as 
to hiniself. This is it, that makes heaven home to them ; 
namely, that it is Christ's Father's house, where we may 
be assured of welcome, being married to the Son, and 
being his Father's choice for that very end. He brings 
them in- for his Father's sake, as well as for his own ; thejr 
are the blessed of his Father, who, as he is the fountiun 
of the Deity, is also the fountain of all blessings conferred 
oil the chUdren of men. They are these to whom God 

Mm 2 



4ia Saint 9 introduced. ([State IV, 

designed well from eternity. They were blessed in tbe 
etcnuJ pui'|K)sc of God, being elected to everlasting li£e : 
at the opening of the book of life, their names were found 
-wrtftcn therein. So that, bringing them to the kingdomi 
he doth but bring them to what the Father, from all eter- 
nity, designed for tliem ; being saved by the Son, they 
arc saved according to his (2 e. the Fatlier's) purpose, % 
Tim. i. 9. They are these, to whom the Father has 
spoken well. He spake well to them in his word, which 
)uust now receive its full accomplishment. They had his 
promise of the kingdom, lived and died in the faith of it; 
and now they come to receive the thing pi'onrnsed. Unta 
them he has done well : A gift is often, in scripture, call- 
ed a blessing ; and God's blessing is ever real, like IsaacV 
blessing, by which Jacob became his heir ; they were all 
by grace justified, sanctified, and made to persevere unto 
the end ; now they are raised up in glory, and, being 
Cried, stand in the judgment : what remains then, but 
thut God crown his own work of grace in them, in giving 
them their kingdom, in the full enjoyment of himself for 
ever I Finally^ They are these, whom God has conse- 
crated ; the Which, also, is a scripture-notion of blessings 
1 Cor. X. 1 6. God set them apart for himself, to be kiiij^ 
and priests unto him ; and the Mediator introduccth 
tiiem, as such, to theii* kingdom and priesthood. 

Sfcondly^i Christ introduce th them, as heirs of tfie 
Itingdom to tlie actual possession of it : " Come, ye blcB- 
ijed, inherit the kingdom," &c. They are the childr^ 
of God, by regeneration and adoption : " And if childrcfif 
ihon heirs : heirs of God, and joint heirs witli Christ,'* 
Rom. viii. 17. Now is the general assembly of tbe 
fii st-born before the throne : their minority is over- 
past, and the time appointed of tlie Father, for their re- 
<:eiving of their inheritance is come. The Mediator pur- 
chi'.sed the inheritance for them, with his own blood; 
their rights and evidences were drawn long ago, and re- 
gistered in the Bible : nay, they had infeftment of thcii 
inheritance, in the person of Jesus Christ, as their proxfi 
when he ascended into heaven, whither the Forerunner is 
Ibr us entered, Heb. vi. 20, Nothing remaineth, but 
:that they enter into personal possession thereof; which) 
begun at d5«4i>j i? P9vfccttt$l %t tt^e J^t ^y \ v]j6P ^« 



Head V.J ^JifiiieaiiQih 41j; 

saints, in their bodies as well as their souls, go into their 
kingdom. 

Lastly J They are introduced to it, as these it was 
prepared for, from the foundation of the world. The 
kingdom was prepared for them in the eternal purpose 
of God, before they or any of them had a being ; which 
shews it to be a gift of free grace. to them. It was, from 
eternity, the divine purpose, that there should be such a 
kingdom for the elect ; and that all impediments, which 
might mar their access to it, should be removed out of 
the way ; and withal, by the same eternal decree, every 
one's place in it was determined and set apart, to be 
reserved for him, that each of the children coming home 
at length ii>to their Father's house, might find his own 
place awaiting him, and ready for him ; as, at Suul's table, 
pavid's place was empty, when he was not there to oc- 
cupy it himself, 1 Sam. xx. 25. And now that the ap- 
pointed Ume is come, they are brought in to take theiit 
Bevcral places in glory, set apart and reserved for them^ 
till they should come at tlicm. 

Use. 1 shall shut up my discourse on this subject, 
with a word of application. (1.) To all who claim a light 
io this kingdom. (2.) To these who have indeed a right 
to it. (3.) To these who have not a right thereto. 

Firsts Since it is evident, there is no promiscuous 
admission into the kingdom of heaven ; and none do 
obtain it, but tliese whose claim is solemnly tried by the 
gi*eat Judge, and, after trial, sustained as good and" 
Talid ; it is necessary that all of us impartially try and 
examine, whetlier, according to the laws of the kingdom, 
-contained in the holy Scriptures, we can verify and make 
good our claim to this kingdom ? The hopes of heaven, 
which most men hi^ve, are built on such sandy foynda- 
tions, as can never abide the trial ; having no ground in 
the word, but in their own deluded fancy : such hopes will 
leave those who entertain them, miserably disappointed at 
last. Wherefore, it is not only our duty, but our inter- 
est, to put the matter to a fair trial in time. If we find, 
we have no right to heaven, indeed we are yet in the way ; 
and what we have not, we may obtain ; but if we find we 
have a right to it, we will then have the comfort of a 
;]^py prospect in^ etemityi^'Qrhich is the greatest coni* 



iJO- ^PfiHcatian. [State % 

fort one is capable of in the world. If 70 enquire) 
How ye may know whether ye have a right to heavep) 
or not ? I answer, ye must know that, by the . state ye 
arc now in. If you are yet in your natural state, ye 
are children of wrath, and not children of this kinr« 
dom ; for that state, to them who live and die in it» 
issues in eternal misery. If you be brought into the 
state of grace, you have a just claim to the state of 

flory ; for grace will certainly issue in glory at length, 
'his kingdom is an inheritance, which none but ^e 
children of God can justly claim ; now we become the 
children of God, by regeneration and union with Christ 
his Son : <' And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, 
and joint heirs with Christ,*' Rom. viii. 17. These then 
are the great points, upon which one's evidence for the 
' state of glory do depend. And therefore I refer you to 
what is said on the state of grace, for clearing of you as to 
your right to glory. 

If you be heirs of glory, the kingdom of God is 
within you, by virtue of your regeneration and unioa 
with Christ. (1.) The kingdom of heaven has the 
throne in thy heart, if thou hast a right to that king- 
dom : Christ is in thee, and God is in thee ; and having 
chosen him for thy portion, thy soul has taken up its ever- 
lasting rest in him, and gets no kindly rest but in him ;. 
as the dove, until she came into the ark. To him the 
soul habitually inclines, by virtue of the new nature, the 
divine nature, which the heirs if glory are partakers of, 
Psul. Ixxiii. 25. " Whom have I in heaven but thee. 
And there is none upon earth, that I desire besides thee.** 
(2.) The laws of heaven are in thy heart, if thou art an 
heir of heaven, Heb. viii. 10. " I will put my laws into 
their mind, and write them in their hearts." Thy mind 
is enlightened in the knowledge of the laws of the king* 
dom, by the Spirit of the Lord, the histructor of all the 
heirs of glory ; for whoever may want instruction, sure 
an heir to a crown shall not want it. " It is written in 
the prophets, And they shall all be taught of God," John 
vi. 45. Tliereforc, though father and mother leave them 
early, or be in no concern about their Christian education, 
and they be soon put to work for their daily bread ; yet 
they shall not lack teachmg. Withal thy heart. 1]^ 



changed, and thou hearest God's image) which consists 
in righteousness and true holiness, £ph. iv. 34. Thy 
aoul is reconciled to the whole luw of God, and at war 
vith all known sin. In vain do they pretend to the hoty 
Jungdom, who are not holjr in heart and life ; for^ 
^ Without holiness no man shall see the Lord/' Heb« 
zii. 14. If heaven is a rest, it is for spiritual labourers, 
and not for loiterers. If it is an etcnial triumph, they 
are not in the way to it, who avoid the spiritual warfare^ 
and are in no care to subdue corruption, resist tempta- 
tion, and to cut their way to it, through the opposition 
made by the devil, the world, and the flesh. (3.) The 
treasure in heaven is the chief in thy esteem and desire, 
Ibr it is your treasure ; and, ** Where your treasure is, 
there will your heart be also," Matth. vi. 31. If it is 
Bol the things that are seen, but the things tliat are not 
seen, which thy heart is in greatest care and cone era to 
obtain ; if thou ait driving a trade with heaven, and thy 
chief business lies there ; it is a sign thy treasure is there, 
for thy heart is there. But if thou art of these who won- 
der why so much ado, about heaven and eternal life, as if 
less might serve the turn ; thou art like to have nothing 
to do with it at all. Carnal men value themselves most 
on their treasures upon earth ; with them, the things that 
are seen, are weighed down by the things that are not 
seen ; and no losses do so muoh affect them as earthly 
. Josses : but the heirs of the crown of glory, will value 
themselves most on their treasures in heaven, and will 
not put their private estate hi the balance with their king- 
dom ; nor will the loss of the former go so near their 
hearts, as the thoughts of the loss of the latter. Where 
these first fruits of heaven are to be found, the eternal 
vcjght of glory will surely follow after ; while the want 
of them must be admitted, according to the word, to be 
incontestible evidence of an heir of wrath. 

Secondly^ Let the heirs of the kingdom behave them<» 
^Ives suitable to their character and dignity. Live as 
having the faith and hope of this glorious kingdom : let 
your conversation be in heaven, Phil. iii. 20. Let your 
souls delight in communion with God, while ye are on 
earth, since ye look for your happiness in communion 
with him in heaven \ let your speech and actipns savo\}r 



iM J/ifiHeafioat. f State I?. 

6f hearen : and, in your manner of life, look like the 
country to whicii ye arc going ; that it may be said of 
you, .IS of Gideon's brethren, Judges viii. 28. each one 
res(Mn)>lcd the children of a king. Maintain a holy cod- 
tempt of the world, and of the things of the world. AI* 
thout^h others whose earthly things are their best thingtf 
do set their hccurts upon them ; yet it becomes you to set 
your feet on them, since your best things are above. Tliii 
world is but the country, tlirough which lies your road to 
Immanuei's land ; therefore pass through it as pilgrims 
and strangers, and dip noi into the incumbrances of it, so 
as to retard you in your jouniey. It is unworthy of one 
l>ora to a pulace, to set his heart on a cottage, to dwell 
there ; and of one running for a prize of gold, to go off 
his way, to gather the stones of the brook ; but much 
more is it unwoithy of an heir of the kingdom of heavcin 
to be hid among the stuff of this world, when he sHbuld 
be going on to receive his crown. The prize set before 
you, challengeth your utmost zeal, activity and diligence { 
and holy courage, resolutioni and magnanimity, become 
those who are to inherit the crown. Ye cannot come at 
h, without fighting your way to it, through difficulties 
from without, and from within ; but the kingdom before 
you is sufficient to balance them all, though ye should be 
called to resist, even unto blood. Prefer Christ's cross 
before the world's crown ; and wants in the way of duty 
befoi'e ease and wealth in the way of sin ; " Choose rather 
to suffer i*ffliction with the people of God, than to enjoy 
the pleasures of sin for a season," Heb. xi. 25. In a com- 
mon inn, strangers (perhaps) fare better than the chil- 
dren ; but here lies the difference, the children are to pay 
nothing for what they have got, but the strangers get their 
bill, and must pay completely for all they have had. Did 
we consider the wicked's after-reckoning, for all the 
smiles of common providence they meet witli in the 
world, we would not grudge them their good things 
here ; nor take it amiss that God keeps our best things 
last. Heaven will make up all the saints losses, and ail 
tears shall be wiped away fi^om their eyes there. 

It is worth observing, that there is such a variety of 
scripture -notions of heaven's happiness, as may suit e- 
▼ery afflicted case of the saints. Are they oppressed i 



Head VI.I State of tfie Damned, 451 

end ; but there they must'live, who chused death and re- 
fused life ; for there death lives, and the end ever begins. 

2rf/y, The curse shall lie upon them cternuUy as the ever- 
lasting chain, to hold them in everlasting fire ; a chain that 
shall never be loosed, being fixed for ever about them, by 
the dreadful sentence of the eternal judgment. This chain 
which spurns the united force of devils held fast by it, is 
too strong to be broken by men, who being solemnly ana- 
thematised and devoted to destruction, can never be reco- 
vered to any other use. 

Zdly^ Their punishment shall be eternal. Mi t xxv. 46. 
« They shall go away into everlasting punishment." They 
will be for ever- separated from God and Christ, and from 
the society of the holy angels and saints ; between whom 
and them, an impassible gulf will be fixed, Luke xvi. 26. 
" Between us and you" (says Abraham in the parable, to 
the rich man in hell), *' there is a great gulf fixed ; so that 
they which would pass from hence to you, cannot ; neither 
can they pass to us, that would come from thence." They 
shall for ever have the horrible society of the devil and his 
angels. There will be no change of company for ever- 
more in that region of darkness. Their torment in the 
fire will be everlasting ; they must live for ever in it. Se- 
veral authors, both ancient and modern, tell us of earthen 
flax, or Salamander's hair ; that clotli made of it, being 
cast into the fire, is so far from being burnt or consumed, 
that it is only made clean thereby, as other things arc by 
washing. But however that is, it is ceitain, the damned 
shall be tormented for ever and ever in hell fire, and not 
substantially destroyed, Rev. xx. 10. And indeed nothing 
is annihilated by fire, but only dissolved. Of what nature 
soever hell fire is, no question but the same God who kept 
the bodies of the three childi*en from burning in Nebu- 
chadnezzar's fiery furnace, can also keep the bodies of the 
danmeu from any such dissolution by hell fire, as may in- 
fer privation of life. 

Lastly^ Their knowledge and sense of their misery, shall 
be eternal ; and they shall assuredly know that it will be 
eternal. How desirable would it be to them, to have their 
senses for ever locked up, and lose the consciousness of 
their own misery ; as one may rationally suppose it to fare 
at length with some, in the punishment pf death infiicl;cd 



4U Afil^lieathn.' [Skate IV. 

happiness is opened, it is no time to sit still and loiter. 
Ruiac up your iieurts towards the glory that is to be re- 
vealed ; and do not always lie along on this perishing 
earth. What can all your worldly enjoyments avail you, 
while vou have no solid ground to expect heaven, after 
this life is gone ? These riches and honours, promts and 
pleasures, that must be buried with us, and cannot accom- 
pany us into another world, arc but a wretched portion^ ' 
and will leave men comfortless at long-run. Ah ! why 
arc men so fond, in their life-time to receive their good 
things ! why arc they not rather in care, to secure an in- 
terest in the kingdom of heaven, which would never be 
taken from them, but afford them a portion, to make them 
happy through the ages of eternity 1 If you desire honour^ 
there you may have the highest honour, and which will 
last, when the world's honours are laid in the dust : if 
riches, heaven will yield you a treasure ; and there are 
pleasures for evermere. O i be not despisers of the 
pleasant land, neither judge yourselves unworthy of eter« 
nal life ; but marry the heir, and heaven shall be your 
dowry ; close with Christ, as he is offered to you in the 
gospel, and ye shall inherit all things. Walk in the way 
of holiness, and it will lead you to the kingdom. Fight 
against sin and satan, and yc shall receive the crown. 
Forsuke the world> and the doors of heaven will open to 
•xeccive yoU. 



HEAD VI, 



HELL* 



Mat. XXV. 41« 

!Srhefi 9hall he say also unto them on the l^ hand^ JDefiarl^ 
from mcy ye cursed^ into everlasting Jirej Jire/iared for 
the devil and hie angels, 

WERE there no other place of eternal lodging but 
heaven, I should here have closed my discourse 
of man's eternal state : But seeing in the other world, there 
is a prison for tlie wicked, as well as a palace for the saints, 
we must also enquire into that state of everlasting misery ; 
the which the worst of men may well bear with, without 
cryingfjirt thou come to torment us bffore the time? Since 
there is yet access to fly from the wrath to come ; and all 
that can be said of it comes short of what the damned will 
^feel ; for who knoweth the power of God's anger \ 

The last thing our Lord did, before he left the eart|K 
'was. He lifted up his hands and blessed his disciplesy 
Xiuke xxiv. 50, 51. But the last thing he will do, before 
he leave the throne, is to curse and condemn his enemies i 
as we learn from the text, which contains the dreadful 
sentence, wherein the everlasting misery of the wicked is 
wrapt up. In which three things may be taken notice of. 
JFiTst^ The quality of the condemned, ye tursed. The 
Judge finds the curse of the law upon themastransgressors^ 
and sends them aw»y with it, from his presence into heil> 
there to be fully executed upon them. Secondly^ The 
^R^nishment which they are adjudgeil to» and to whic^h 



454 -^ Measuring Reed. f State TV, 

one unbccon)ing thought ofGod, and far less an unbecom*^ 
ing word. 

Use I. Here is a measuring Reed; O I that men would 
apply it. Firsts Apply it to your time in this world, and 
you will find your time to be very short. A prospect of 
much time to come, proves the ruin of many souls. Meft 
will be reckoning their time by years, like that rich maD, 
Luke xii. 19, 20. When it may be, there are not many 
hours of it to run. But reckon as you will, laying your time 
to the measuring reed of eternity, you will see your age is 
as nothing. What a small and inconsiderable point is 
sixty, eighty, or a hundred years, in respect of eternity ? 
Compared with eternity, there is a greater disproportion^ 
than between a hair's breadth, and the circumference of 
the whole earth. Why do we sleep then in such a short 
day, while we are in hazard of losing rest, through the 
long night of eternity ? Secondly^ Apply it to your endea* 
\oui'<i for salvation, and they will be found very scanty. 
When men arc pressed to diligence in their salvation 
work, they are ready to say, " To what purpose is this 
waste ? Alas ! if it were to be judged by our diligence, what 
is it that we have in view ; as to the most part of us, no man 
could thereby conjecture, that wc have eternity in view. 
If wc duly considered eternity, we could not but conclude, 
that, to leave no means appointed of God unessayed, till 
we get our salvation secured; to refuse rest or comfort in 
any thing, till we are sheltered under the wings of th& 
Mediator ; to pursue our great interest with the utmost 
vigour, to cut off lusts dear as right hands and right eyes^ 
to set our faces resolutely against all difficulties, and fight 
our way through all the opposition made by the devil, the 
world and the flesh, are, all of them together, little enough 
for eternity. 

Use II. Here is a balance of the sanctuary, by whiclk 
one may understand the lightness of whut is falsely thought 
v/eighty ; and the weight of some things, by many reckon- 
«ed to be very light. 

Firsts Some things r,cem very weighty, which weighed 
in this balance, will be found very light. (1.) Weigh the 
world, and all that is in it, the lust of the flesh, the lust of 
the cyc^, and the pride of life, and the whole will be found 
Jigfht; in the baJsm^ie of eternity. Weigh herein all worldly 



Head VI»3 ike Dnmned art 9hut up. 4|ir 

mhilationf or a redacin^^ them to ncHlnng, will be clesdr 
in the progress of onr discourse.) In treating of this aw* 
fill subject! I shall enquire into these four things : (1.) 
The curse under which the damned sliall be shut up. 
(3.) Their misery under that curse. (3.) Their society 
with devils in this miserable state. (4.) The eternity of 
the whole. 

I. As to the curse under which the damned shall be 
fthut up in hell, it is the ternble sentence of the law, by 
Which they are bound over to the wrath of God, as trans- 
Itressors. This curse does not first seize them, wheni 
standing before the tribunal, they receive their sentence ; 
but they were bom under it, they led their life under it in 
this world ; they died under it ; rose with it out of their 
(raves ; and the Judge finding it upon them, sends them 
«way with it into the pit ; where it shall lie on them 
through the ages of eternity. By nature all men are un* 
der the curse ; but it is removed from tiie elect, by vi^« 
tue of their union with Christ. It abides on the rest of 
sinful munkind ; and by it they are devoted to destruction^ 
separated to evil, as one may describe the curse, from 
Scut. xxiii. 21. «' And the Lord shall separate him unto 
evil." Thus shall the damned, for ever, be persons de- 
voted to destruction ; separate and set apart, from among; 
the rest of mankind, unto evil, as vessels of wrath, set up 
for marks to the arrows of divine wrath ; and made the 
common receptacle and sewer of vengeance. 

This curse hath its first fruits on earth, which are a 
pledge of the whole lump that is to follow. And hence 
It is, that as temporal and eternal benefits are bound up 
together, under the same expressions in the promise to the 
Lord's people, as Isa. xxxv. 10. ^ Apd the ransomed of 
the Lord shall return, and come to Zion," (^r. relating 
both to the return from Babylon, and to the saints going 
to their eternal rest in heaven : Even so temporal and eter- 
nal miseries, on the enemies of God, are sometimes wrapt 
up under one and the same expression in the threatening* 
as Isa. XXX. 33. ^ For Tophet vb ordained of old ; yea for 
the king it is prepared : He hath made it deep and large ; 
the pile thereof is fire and much wood : The breath of the 
Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it/' Which 
relates both to the temporal and eternal destruction of the 



4M .' -n* OtrM tatdrr vAith 

AMfriaM» lAo Ml by the hand of the angel befor 
. mlnm Sm bIn, SeLk. Ixvi 24. What is ihiLt I 
UiudlMHr'tftvhich many are given up (" In whoDt ti* \ 
Sod of ttabimrid bath blinded their eyes," 2 Cor. iv. 4.) { 
ftm the fint frmU at hell, and of the curse i Their sun is 
JBoiDgdo«li«t&ocut^ity; theiv darkness increasing, as if 
It WoaUnot Mop, till it issue in utter ilbirkncss. Muijr a 
lnbuithedarlc>WMld conscience give the wicked, which 
4he world doth not hear of : And what is that, but that 
the narer dfin^ nilcm is already begun to gnaw them J 
Andthno » »at«ic of tbeae, but they may cull it Joeepi, 
Strtia I,9rd*A»Umdd another : Or rather, Gad,!orairo(^ 
tMMlA. Theie drops of wrath, are terrible forebodings^ 
-(he ftdi ihoirer iriiicb is to follow. Sometimes they are 
.(hrcDMlp to their rile alTeclions, that they have no more < 
.pt^mnnd ovsr tbe», Rom. i. 36. So their lusts grow 
'1^1 mm and moro towards perfection, if I niiiy so speak, ^ 
■M Ut hnvcB gn»o comes to its perfection, so in heli sin ' 
. jvrnrea at it> ughost pitch j and as sin is thus advimcing 
-JMWHthe nutat he- Is the nearer and the liker to helL 
.1 TjkBm are. Ibtee things that have a fearful aspect here. 
■JKrat, Whta eTOPy thing that might do good to men's 
aouls is bloated to them ; so that their bleasingt are curaod, 
Alal- ii- 3. serauMiB, prayers, adnitKutioni, and reprooft) 
which are powerful towards others, are quite inefficacioiu 
to them. Stdly, When men go on sinning atiU in the 
f^ce of plain rebukes from the Lord, in ordiaances and 
providences t God meets them with roda, in the fWy rf 
their sin, as it were striking them back-; yet they rush 
foi'ward. What can be more like hell, where the Lord ia 
alwnys smiting, uid the damned always sinning against 
him i Lttatly, When' every thing in one's lot is tunicd>>~ 
- to fuel to one's lusts. Thus adversity uid prosperity, po- 
verty and wealth, the want of ordinances and the enjoy 
ment of them, do all but nourish the corruptions of many. 
.Their vicious stomachs corrupt whatsoever they receiTCk 
•nd all does but increase noxious huraoura. 

But the.full harvest follows, in that miaeiy which thef 
ahall for ever lie under in hell ; that wrath, which 1^ vii^ 
tue of the curse, shall come upon them to the uttermoatt 
the which, is the curse fully executed. Thia'black cloud 
Qpena Upon theur and the terriUe ttauuder-tioit atrikaa 



Head VL] ihe damntd mre thut up. 449 

them by that dreadful yoice from the throne, ^ Depart 
from me, ye cursed/' iJtc. Which will give the whole 
bricked world a dismal view of what is in the bosom of the 
curse. ( 1 .) It is a voice of extreme indignation and wrath, 
a furious rebuke from the Lion of the tribe of Judah. His 
looks will be most terrible to them : His eyes will cast 
Barnes of fire on them ; and his words will pierce their 
hearts like envenomed arrows. When he will thus speak 
them out of his presence for ever, and by his word, chase 
them away from before the throne ; they will sec how 
keenly wrath bums in his heart against them for their sins. 
(3.) It is a voice of extreme disdcun and contempt from 
tiie Lord. Time was, when they were pitied, besought 
to pity themselves, and to be the Lord's ; but they des- 
]used him, they would none of him : but now shall they 
be buried out of his sight, under everlasting contempt. 
(3.) It is a voice of extreme hatred. Hereby the Lord 
shuts tliem out of his bowels of love and mercy : Defiart 
/rom mej ye cursed^ g. d, I cannot endure to look at you ; 
there is not one purpose of good to ypu in mine hean ; nor 
shall ye ever hear one word more of hope from me. Lastly^ 
It is a voice of eternal rejection from the Lord. He com* 
mands them to be gone, and so casts them off for ever, 
.Thus the doors of heaven are shut against tliem ; the gulf 
is fixed between them and it, and they are driven to the 
pit. Now should they cry with all possible earnestness, 
JLordy Lordy ofien to us ; they will hear nothing but, De* 
ftarty defiartf ye cUreed. Thus shall the damned be shut 
Up under the curse. 

Use First j Let all these who, being yet in their natural 
state, and under the curse, consider this, and flee to Jesus 
Christ betimes, that they may be delivered from it. Hovr 
can ye sleep in that state, being wrapt up in the curse ] 
Jesus Christ is now saying unto you. Come, ye cursed ; X 
will take the curse from off you, and give you the blessing. 
The waters of the sanctuary are now running, to heal tho 
cursed ground ; take heed to improve them for that end to 
your own souls, and fear it as hell, to get no spiritual ad- 
irantage thereby. Remember that the tniry filaces (whicli 
are neither sea, nor dry land, a fit emblem of hypocrites^ 
mnd the mar shies (that neither breed fishes, nor bear trees: 
4lu« ifta wa^r^ of the sanctuary leare th^m as they fioA 

Nn9 



458 Exhortatiotij &c. [State IV. 

in a state past remedy, to speak forth their fruitless wishes: 
O that I had never been born ! That the womb had been 
my grave, and I had never seen the sun ! O that I had ta- 
ken warning in time, and fled from this wrath, while the 
door of mercy was standing open to me \ O that I had ne- 
ver heard the gospel, that I had lived in some comer of 
the world, where a Saviour and the great salvation were 
not once named ! But all in vain. What is done cannot 
be undone ; the opportunity is lost, and can never be re- 
trieved ; time is g^ne, and cannot be recalled. Where- 
fore improve time, while you have it, and do not wilfully 
ruin yourselves, by stopping your ear to tlie gospel-call. 

And now if ye would be saved from the wrath to come, 
and never go into this place of torment, take no rest in 
your natural state ; believe the sinfulness and misery of itj 
and labour to get out of it quickly, fleeing unto Jesus 
Christ by faith. Sin in you is the seed of hell ; and if the 
guilt and reigning power of it, be not removed in time, 
they will bring you to the second death in eternity. There 
IB no way to get them removed, but by receiving of Christ, 
as he is oflered in the gospel, for justification and sancti- 
fication ; and he is now offered to you with all his siilva- 
tion, Rev. xxii. 12, 17. "And behold, I come quickly, 
and my reward is with me, to give every man according 
as his work shall be. And the Spirit and the bride suy. 
Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let 
him that is athirst, Come. And whosoever will, let him 
take the water of life freely." Jesus Christ is the Me- 
diator of peace, and the Fountain of holiness ; he it is who 
delivcreth us from the wrath to come. " There is there- 
fore now no condemnation to them which arc in Christ 
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit," 
Rom. viii. 1. And the terrors of hell, as well as the joys 
of heaven, are set before ycu, to stir you up to a cordial 
receiving; of him, with all his salvation ; c.nd to determine 
you unto the way of faith and holiness, in which alone 
you can escape the everlasting fire. May Uie Lord him- 
self, n^ake them effVctual to that end. 

Thus far of man's Eternal StAte ; the which, because it 
is eternalj admits of no succeeding one for ever. 



Head VI.] the Damned are thut ufi. 43 1; 

cxxxix. 8. But they shall be miserable beyond expression 
in a relative separation from €rod. Though he will be pre- 
sent in the very centre of their souls (if I may so express 
it) while they are wrapt up in fiery flames^ in utter dark- 
nessy it shall not only be to feed them with the vinegar of 
his wrath) to entertain them with the emanations of his re- 
▼eng;ing justice; but they shall never taste more of his good- 
ness and bounty, nor have the least glimpse of hope from 
him. They wiil see his heart to be absolutely alienated 
from them ; and that it cannot be towards them ; but that 
they are the party against whom the Lord will have an in- 
dignation for ever. They shall be deprived of the glorious 
presepce and enjoyment of God ; they shall have no part 
m the beatific vision, nor see any thing in God towards 
them, but one wave of wrath rolling at the back of another. 
This will bring upon them, overwhelming floods of sor- 
rows for evermore. They shall never taste of #ie rivers 
of pleasures the saints in heaven enjoy ; but shall have an 
everlasting winter, and a perpetual night, because the Sun 
of righteousness has departed from them, and so they are 
left in utter darkness. So great as heaven's happiness is, 
so great will their loss be ; for they can have none of it 
for ever. 

This separation of the wicked fi*om God, will be, (1.) 
An involuntary separation. Now they depart from him* 

• they will not come to him, though they are called, intreated 
and obtested to come : but then they shall be driven away 
from him, when they would gladly abide with him. Al- 
though the question, ^ What is thy beloved, more than 
another beloved ?" is frequent now amongst the despisers 
of the gospel, there will be no such question among all 
the damned crew ; for then they will see, that man's hap« 
piness is only to be found in the enjoyment of God ; and 
that the loss of him, is a loss that can never be balanced. 
(2.) It will also be a total and utter separation. Albeit 
the wicked are in this life separated from God, yet there 
is a kinfl d^intercourse betwixt them: he gives them many 
fi^ood gifts, and they give him, at least, some good words : 

• so that the peace is not altogether hopeless. But then there 
shall be a total separation ; the damned being cast into utter 
darkness, where there will not be the least gleam of light 
or &YOUr from the X/>rd : the which vili put an end untp 



7S« Pmni»hmf»t «/ 

rII their fur irords to him. Laally, It shall be a S 
pantion : thty will part with him nt 
being »hiK op uader everliisting horror anil drspdir. 
match betwist Jesus Chriet and unbelievers, which hasM 
ofttsR been carried forwurd, iumI put buclc ugidn, shall ihca 1, 
be brgken for erer : and never shdh one message or &vour 
or good-will, gobetwi:ct the pailieBany more. 

Tliis punishment of loss, in a total and finul separation 
from God, is a misery beyond whjt mortals can conceivt, 
«nd which the dreadful experience of theddmued cun only 
sufficiently unfold. But that we may have some concep- 
tion of the horror of it, let the following things be coosi- 
dcrcd : 

1 St, God is the chief good, and tlierefore to be separated 
from him must be the chief evil. Our native coimtry, our 
relucionst and our fife arc good ; and, therefore, to be de- 
prived of them, wc reckon a great evil : and the better 
tatj thing is, so much the greater evil is the loss of it : 
Wherefore, God being the chief good, and no good com- 
parabte to bim, there cun be no loss so great us the lossof 
■ God. The full enjoyment of him is the highest pLnn>ck 
- of happiness (he creature ia capiible of arrivhig at ; to be 
fully and finally separated from him, must tlieii be the low- 
«M Mep of miicry which the r&thmsl creatBre c«s bo re- 
duced to. To be cast off by men, bf good men, by llie 
beat of man, U heavy ; what muBt h tben be to be rejected 
of God, of goo^tvsa itself ! 

' 3dly, God is the fountain of aU goodnew, fromwhub 
all goodlKM tow9 into the ercatures, and hf which it ii 
continued i& them and to thein. Whatever goodnewar 

rifectniT natnral tm well asmoral, is itr afl^ crcatwn^-k 
from God, and depCDdi upon fiim as the light is friiB 
~Mid depend* on the sun : for every created bung, as auck, 
Is a dependeitt one. Wherefore a total Mparutien fran 
God, wbcreln allco'nfortBUe conmuMCatiOD betwixt Odd 
and a ndonal creature is abeohit^ blocked apr naat«f 
neces^ bring elonff with it v total eclipoe oKu Bcfat iff 
vomfint and ease wbatsocTcr. M there is bat one wndor 
«ropeiildace la a boaae, and tlMt be cfsitc rirut sp; it is 
•vldem there can be nothing but darkneaain that htiBM. 
Our Lord tells &•» Matth. xbc IV. •< There is nmw hmiI 



Head VI.3 HoBii i» ^^U' 483 

originally from the creature; whatever good or comfortable 
thing one finds in one's self, as health of body or peace of 
mind ; whatever sweetness, rest) pleasure, or delight) one 
finds in other creatures, as in meat, drink, art or sciences ; 
all these are but some £unt rays of the divine perfections, 
commimicated from God unto tlie creature, and depending 
on a constant influence from him for their conversation ; 
which failing, they would immediately be gone ; for it is 
impossible that any created thing can be to us more or bet- 
ter than what God makes it to be. All the rivulets of 
comfort we drink of, within or without ourselves, come 
{h>m God as their spiing-head : the course of which to- 
trards us being stopt, of necessity they must all dry up* 
So that when God goes, all that is good ai.d comfortable 
goes with liim ; all ease and quiet of body or mind, Hbs* 
ix. 13. «. Wo also unto them, when I depart from them.** 
When the wicked are totally and finally separated from 
him, all that is comfortable in or about them, returns to its 
fountain, as the light g^es uway with the sun and darkness 
succeeds in the room thereof. Thus, in their separation 
from God, all peace is removed far away from them, and 
pain in body, and anguish of soul succeed to it ; all joy 
goes, and unmixed sorrow settles in them ; all quiet and 
rest separate from t}iem,and they ai*e filled with horror and 
rage ; hope flees awuy and despidr seizeth them ; common 
operations of tlie Spirit which now restrain them, are with- 
drv^wn for ever, and sin comes to its utmost height. And 
thus we have a dismal view of the horrible spectacle of 
sin and misery which a creature proves when totally sepa« 
rated from God, and left to itself ; and one may see thia 
separation to be the very heil of hell. 

Being separated from God they are deprived of all good. 
The good things which they set their heart upon in this 
world, ure beyond their reach there. The covetous man 
cannot enjoy his wealth there, nor the ambitious man his 
honours, nor the sensual man his pleasures ; no not a drop 
of water to cool his tongue, Luke xvi. 24, 25. No meat 
nor drink there to strengthen the fciint, no sleep to refresh 
the weary ; and no music nor pleasant company to comfort 
and chear up the sorrowful. And as for these good thingSy 
they despised in the world, they shall never more hear of 
ihem nor see them. No offers of Christ there^ no pai^donsi^ 



4i/i The Pufdahment ^f |State iVir 

no peace ; no welU of sali^atioo in the pit of destrucUML 
In one wordy thejr shall be deprived of whatsoever might 
comfort them, bemg totally and finally separated from God 
the fountain of ail goodness. 

Sdiv, Man naturally desires to be happy^ being withal 
eouscious to himself that he is not self*sufiicient ; and 
therefore has ever a desire of something without himself 
to make him happy; and the soul being by its natural mak» 
and constitution capable of enjoying God, and nothing elsd 
being commensurable to its desires ; it can never have true 
and solid rest till, it rest in the enjoyment of God. Thii 
desire of happiness the raUonal creature can never lay 
aside, no not in hell. Now, wliile the wicked are on earth 
they seek their satisfaction in the creature ; and when one 
fails they go to another ; thus they put off their time in 
the world, deceiving their own souls, and luring them fOk 
with vain hopes. But in the other world, all comfort ia 
the creature have failed together at once, and thcf shadows 
they are now pursuing, ha\ning all of them evanished in a 
moment, they shall be totally and finally separated from 
God, and see they have thus lost him. So the doors of 
earth and heaven both are shut against them at once. 
This will create them unspeakuble anguish, while they 
shall live under an eternal gnawing hunger after happi- 
ness, which they certainly know, shall never be in the 
least measure satisfied, all doors being closed on them. 
Who then CcJi imagine how this separation shall cut the 
damned to the heart 1 How they will roar and rage under 
it ! and how it will sting them and gnaw them through 
the ages of eteniity ! 

4thly, The damned shall know, that some are perfectly 
happy in the enjoyment of that God, from whom they 
themselves are sepai*ate : And this will aggravate the 
sense of their loss, that they can never have shart 
with these happy ones. Being separated from God» 
they are separated from the society of the glorified saints 
and angels. They may see Abraham afar off, and Laza- 
rus in his bosom, Luke xvi. 23. but can never come into 
their company ; being as unclean lepers, thrust out with- 
out the camp, and excommunicated from the presence of 
the Lord, and of all his holy ones. It is the opinion of 
some, that every person in heaven or hell) shidl hear and 



Bead Vf^ tfemwe, in HeU. 4S4 

«ee all that passeth in either state. Whatever h to be 
tiddof this, we have ground from the word to conciudei 
that the damned shall have a very exquisite knowledge of 
Ihe happiness of the saints in heaven ; for what else can 
be m^ant bv the rich man in hell his seeing Lazarus ia 
Abraham's bosom ? One tiling is plain in this case, that 
their own torments will give them such notions of the 
happiness of the saints, as a sick man has of health, or a 
prisoner has of liberty. And as they cannot fail of re- 
flecting on the happiness of those in heaven, more than 
they can attain to contentment with their ('Wn lot : So 
every thought of tli^t happiness, will aggravate their loss. 
It would be a mighty torment to a hungry man, to see 
others liberally feasting, while he is so chained up, as he 
cannot have one crumb to stay his gnawing appetite. To 
bring music and dancing before a man labouring under 
extreme pains, would but increase his anguish : How 
then will the songs of the blessed, in their enjoyment of 
Gk>d, make the damned roar, under their separation from 

Sthly, They will remember, that time was, when they 
nught have been made partakers of the blessed state of the 
saints, in their enjoyment of God : And this will aggravate 
their sense of the loss. All may remember, there was once 
a possibility of it ; that sometime they were in the world in 
some comers of which, the way of salvation was laid open 
to mens view; and may wish they had gone round the worlds 
till they had found it out. Despisers of the gospel will re- 
member with bitterness, that Jesus Christ, with all his be- 
nefits, was offered them; thatthey were exhorted,intreated 
and pressed to accept, but would not : and that they were 
warned of the misery they feel, and obtested to flee from 
the wrath' to come, but they would not hearken. The gos- 
pel-offer slighted, will make a hot hell ; and the loss of an 
offered heaven, will be a sinking weight on the spirits of 
unbelievers in the pit. Some will remember, that there 
Was a probability of their being eternally happy ; that some* 
time they seemed to stand fair for it, and were not far from 
the kingdom of God ! That they had once almost consent-^ 
ed to the blessed bargain ; the pen in their hand, as it 
were, to sign the marriage contract betwixt Christ and 
iheirjBoul9|| but unhappilyi they dropped it> and turned 




. tflcklinBdictMditotbeir lusts again. And 
lemenbori ^atttM^ thought themselves sure 
bat* b^g hlfaukd .Vith pnde und self-conceit, 
matin Ohaatuemit and bejrond instruction, and 
^aipIWi tbair libttftt which ms their ruin : Bui 
•hMll ■D.vtqt. wi^ th^ had reputed themBclvcs 
tX the CBMCg ga lion id which tliey lived ; and curse the 
jbnd conceituiCT had of themselves, aud that others bad 
ai them too. Th<is It will ning the damned that tb^ 
BURht hare escaped this loss. 

Xaal^tThey will see die loss to be irrecoTerahlejihat 
they must eteniaU7 tie under it, never, never to be repair- 
ed. Might the duoned, after millions of ages in hell, re 
•ain what they have lost) it would be some ground of 
AOpe ; but.the prize ia gtme, und can never be recovered. 
JlsiA there are two things here, which will pierce them 
to the hearL (1.) That thejr never knew the worth of it 
till ttwasirrecovBTaUj lost. Should a man give &way an 
MUlhen pot'fuU of gold for a triSe, never knowing whut 
Was in it till it wen quite gone from him and p^st re- 
corery, how would this iboluh action gall him, upon the 
discovery of the riches in it ! Such a one's case may be a 
feint resemblance of the case of despiaers of the gospel, 
Wheo in hell they lift up their tycs, and behold that to 
their torment, which they will not see now t o their salva- 
don. (S.) That they have lost it foi- loss and dung ; sold 
their pan of heaven, and not enriched tlictnselvcs with 
the price. They lost heavenly for earthly piofitsand plea- 
sures, and now bothare gone together from them. Tbe 
drunkards cupi are gone) the covetous oiui's giUfi, die I'O' 
luptuous mun!a carnal delights, and the sluggard's caW ; 
nothing is left them to comfort them now. The bapionM 
.they lost remains indeed, but they pan have no pan ia it 
Ibr ever. . , 

Usz. Sinners, be persuaded to come to God thnm|^ 
Jesus Christ, uniting with him through a Mediator; t^ 
ye may be preserved from this fearful aepuration from hink 
O be afraid to live in u state of separation from God* leit 
that which ye now make your choice, become your eter- 
nal punishment hereafter : Do not reject comntunicni vith 
God,, cast, not off the communion of saints ; ibr it wil' ^ 
fh^ miseiy of tbe daoimed, to be driven out from that Gonr 



Head VI.3 Sensfyin He!!. A^t 

Tnuuion. Cease to build up the wall of separation betwixt 
God and you, by continuing in your sinful courses ; re- 
pent r«ither in time, and so pull it down, lest the cape-stone 
be laid upon it, and it stand for ever between you and ha;j*- 
piness. Tremble at the thoughts of rejection and separa- 
tion fi-om God. By whomsoever men are rejected on the 
earth, they ordhiarily find some pity to them ; but if ye be 
thus separated from God, ye will find all doors shut against 
you. Ye will find no pity from any in heaven ; neither 
saints nor angels will pity them whom God has utterly 
cast off : None will pity you in hell, where there is no 
love but lothing ; all being lothed of God, lothing him, 
Mid lothing one another. This is a day of losses and fears. 
I shew you u loss, you would do well to fear in time : Be 
afraid lest you lose God ; if ye do, a long eternity will 
be spent in roaring out lamentations for this loss. O hor- 
rid stupidity ! Men are in mighty care and concern to 
prevent worldly losses : But they are in hazard of losing 
heaven, the communion of the blessed, and all good things 
for soul and body in another world : Yet as careless in that 
matter, as if they were incapable of thought. O ! com- 
pare this day with the day our text aims at. This diiy is 
heaven opened to them, who hitherto have rejected Christ, 
and yet there is room, if they will come ; but that day the 
doors shall be shut. Now Christ is saying unto you, 
Comr^ then he will say. Depart; seeing ye would not come 
when ye were bidden. Now pity is shown ; the Lord 
pities you, his servants pity you, and tell you, that the 
pit is before you, and cry to you, that ye do yourselves no 
harm : But then ye shall have no pity from God nor man. 
Secondlify The damned shall be punished in hell with 
the punishment of Sense ; they musi depart from God in- 
to everlasting fire. I am not in a mind to dispute, what 
kind of fire it is which they shall depart into, and be tor- 
mented by for ever, whether a niaterial fire or not ? Ex- 
perience will more than satisfy the cuiiosity of those, who 
are disposed rather to dispute about it, than to seek how 
to escape it. Neither will I meddle with that question. 
Where is it ? It is enough that the worm which never 
dieth, and the fire that is never quenched, will be foun<( 
somewhere by impenitent sinners. But (!•) I shall evince^ 
diat vhatcTcr kind of fire it is ; it is more rehement an4 

O o 



