.** 


M 


\&\w  f  IsiffrW 


> 


Division  ^~ *>*-* 

Section 

Number./ OO 


<r 


/ 


43986 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/hytheirOOchri 


HYMN-WRITERS 


THEIR   HYMNS. 


BY     TIIK 

REV.  s.   W.  CHRISTOPHERS. 


"  There  are.  it  miy  be.  so  rainy  kinds  or  voice-  in  th  ■  world,  and  none  of 
them  are  without  signification.     .  What  is  it.  then?    I  will  sing  with  the 

spirit,  and  I  will  sin^  with  the  understanding  also."*— 1  Cor.  xiv.  10.  15. 


L  0  N  I)  ON:      S.    W.    P  A  R  T  R  I  I)  G  E  . 

N  E  W    Y  O  R  K  : 

\XSOX    1).    F.    RANDOLPH.   No.  770  BROADWAY 
1867. 


TO   THE    DAUGHTER    OF    A    HOME    ONCE    RICH    IN    THE 
MUSIC    OF    HYMNS    AND    PSALMS; 

TO 

E  M  M  A, 

THE    WIFE    AND    BROTHER, 

WHOSE      VOICE     AND     SMILE      STILL     AWAKEN      DAILY      SONGS 
IN    THE    HOUSE    OF    MY    PILGRIMAGE, 


fcbese  pages  are  geSicaieb, 


WITH    MOST   TENDER    AND    HALLOWED    AFFECTION, 


BY    HER   HUSBAND, 


S.  W.  CHRISTOPHERS. 


CONTENTS 


>^< 


PAGE 

TO   THE    READER      .  .  .  ...  .  .  .XI 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER 1 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK 18 

CHAPTER  III. 

EYMNS    OP    THE    LATTER    DAY    MORNING    .....         37 

CHAPTER  IV. 

EYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS 07 

CHAPTER  V. 

MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS 74 

CHAPTER  VI. 

HYMNS    OF    OLD    ENGLAND'S    CHRISTIAN    BIRTH-TIME  .  .         02 


V1U  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

I'AliK 

HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS  .  .  .  .  .  .111 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

SONGS  IN  HIGH  PLACES 129 

CHAPTER  IX. 

SONGS    IN    PRISON 150 

CHAPTER  X. 

PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE 171 

CHAPTER  XI. 

HYMN -MENDERS 192 

CHAPTER  XII. 

HYMNS    OF    CREATION 212 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

HYMNS    ABOUT    THE    BOOK 233 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      253 

CHAPTER  XV. 

HYMNS   BY   THE   WAY 274 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS 295 


CONTENTS.  IX 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

SONGS    OF    THE    MORNING  .  .  .  -  •  •  .01/ 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

SONGS    IN    THE    NIGHT 


PAGE 

.31 ; 


33; 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAT    HYMNS         ....      '354 

CHAPTER  XX. 

HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD  .  .  .  .  .378 

CHAPTER  XX T. 

HYMNS   OF    GETHESEMANE    AND    THE    CROSS      ....       398 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

FUNERAL    HYMNS  418 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

JUDGMENT    HYMNS 435 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

SONGS    OF    GLORY  454 


TO    THE    READER. 


' '  What  !  another  hymn-book  ?  Why  surely  the  world 
has  hymn-books  enough."  Well,  that  may  be,  and 
yet  here  is  something  like  another.  It  is  something 
like  another,  as  there  are  hymns  in  it ;  and  yet  it  is 
rather  unlike  any  other  in  that  it  has  the  hymns  inter- 
woven with  what  may  be  called  gossip,  innocent,  and,  it 
is  hoped,  not  unpleasant  gossip,  about  the  hymns  and 
those  who  wrote  them.  Who  does  not  like  to  know 
the  why,  the  when,  and  the  wherefore  of  men  and 
things  ?  Who  does  not  love  a  chat  about  the  people 
and  the  affairs  which  interest  him  ?  Here,  then,  is 
chat  about  hymns,  their  birth  and  parentage,  their 
circumstances,  their  character,  and  their  influence. 
These  pages  make  no  pretension  to  learning — that  is 
left  to  the  doctors.  Nor  do  they  aim  at  criticism,  that 
belongs  to  those  who  go  up  the  Rhine.  Neither  do 
they  affect  the  style  of  history — that  has  been  well 
done  in  other  volumes.  It  will  be  enough  if  the  lover 
of  sacred  music  should  snatch  up  the  book  now  and 


Xll  TO    THE    READEK. 

then,  after  a  good  practice  in  psalmody,  and  opening 
it  anywhere,  find  a  chapter  containing  some  story 
about  a  dear  old  hymn  which  makes  that  hymn  still 
dearer  to  his  heart.  Or,  if  those  who  like  to  have  some 
fresh  stanzas  always  on  their  merry  lips,  should  catch 
new  strains  from  the  voices  which  mingle  in  these  chap- 
ters of  chat;  or,  if  those  who  turn  over  the  leaves 
should  find  an  hour^s  pleasant  communion  with  the 
spirit  of  Christian  hymns,  or  with  the  mind  and  hearts 
of  those  who  wrote  them  •  or,  if  a  chapter,  perchance, 
arrest  the  soul  of  any  reader,  and  teach  him  the  secret 
of  a  happy,  cheerful,  and  tuneful  life.,  a  life  of  inward 
hymn  and  song ;  the  book  will  answer  its  purpose,  and 
fill  its  place.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  setting, 
the  gems  with  which  these  pages  are  enriched,  the 
psalms  and  hymns  which  illuminate  the  text,  need 
no  commendation  but  their  own  transparent  rich- 
ness and  beauty. 

Many  of  these  hymns  are  from*  living*  authors, 
and  grateful  acknowledgments  are  due  for  permission 
to  reprint  them.  Mrs.  Julius  Collinses  fine  rendering 
of  the  hymn  from  the  Synagogue  Morning  Service  has 
been  inserted  by  the  kind  consent  of  Dr.  Benisch. 
Mrs.  Charles  has  freely  sanctioned  the  use  of  several 
of  her  translations  of-  ancient  hymns.  The  following 
are  hers: — Hymn  from  Ephrem  Syrus  "On  the  Chil- 
dren in  Paradise;"  St.  Ambrose's  "Advent  Hymn;" 
Bede's  hymn  "  On  the  Ascension  •"  portions  of  St. 
Bernard's    hymn,     "To    Christ   on   the    Cross;"  the 


TO    THE    READER.  Xlll 

"  Yeni,  Sancte  Spiritus,"  by  King  Eobert  II.  of 
France ;  and  the  "  Dies  Iras/'  These  are  all  taken 
from  her  beautiful  and  instructive  "  Voice  of  Christian 
Life  in  Song."  Five  hymns  translated  by  Miss  Wink- 
worth  are  reprinted  from  her  "  Lyra  Germanica,"  by 
permission  of  Messrs.  Longman,  Green,  and  Co. — 
"  Gustavus  Adolphus'  Battle  Song,"  "  Queen  Maria  of 
Hungary's  Song/''  "  Jesus  my  Redeemer  Lives/'  by 
Louisa  Henrietta,  Electress  of  Brandenburgh ;  "Leave 
all  to  God/'  by  Anton  Ulrich,  Duke  of  Brunswick ;  and 
Notker's  hymn  by  Luther,  "In  the  Midst  of  Life, 
Behold."  All  the  other  renderings  of  ancient  hymns, 
without  a  name  in  the  volume,  are  new.  Among  the 
modern  hymns  selected,  those  by  the  Rev.  John  S.  B. 
Monsell  are  from  his  "  Parish  Musings/'  and  are  given 
by  the  gifted  author's  permission.  The  Rev.  John 
Keble,  author  of  the  "  Christian  Year,"  very  kindly 
sanctions  the  use  of  those  hymns,  which  are  inserted 
as  from  his  pen.  Most  of  the  other  hymns  in  the 
volume  come  from  hymnists  who  are  now  above  our 
thanks  ;  but  "the  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed." 

Yes,  it  may  be  repeated,  "  the  memory  of  the  just 
is  blessed  /'  for  scarcely  had  the  above  record  of  John 
"Keble's  Christian  kindness  found  its  way  to  the  press 
before  he  too  had  joined  the  hymnists  who  are  "  now 
above  our  thanks."  It  was  but  the  other  evening  that 
one  looked  at  him  as  his  bending  form  moved  gently 
over  the  sands  along  the  beautiful  shore  of  Mount's 
Bay,  in  Cornwall ;  and  as  his  peaceful  face  was  now  and 


XlV  TO    THE    READER. 

then  turned  upwards  to  the  star-lighted  heavens, 
it  seemed  as  if  he  were  inwardly  singing  his  own 
deeply  spiritual  hymn  for  "  the  Fourth  Sunday  after 
Easter;"  but  those  who  kept  him  company  little 
thought  that  he  would  so  soon  realize  the  consoling 
prophecy  of  his  own  verse  :  — 

Then,  fainting  soul,  arise  and  sing ; 

Mount,  but  be  sober  on  the  wing ; 

Mount  up,  for  Heaven  is  won  by  prayer, 

Be  sober,  for  thou  art  not  there ; 

Till  death  the  weary  spirit  free, 

Thy  G-od  hath  said,  'Tis  good  for  thee 

To  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight : 

Take  it  on  trust  a  little  while  ; 
Soon  shalt  thou  read  the  mystery  right 

In  the  full  sunshine  of  His  smile. 

S.  W.  C. 

Croydox,  May,  1866. 


HYMN-WRITERS  AXD   THEIR  HYMNS. 


WvdxBbndaxn  (STIjapter, 


jpF^g1  SAL M S  of  praise  were  the  firstfruits  of  crea- 
!i  raS3  tion.  Hymns  were  the  earliest  utterances  of 
■agfeil  human  nature  in  the  morning  light  of  the 
world  —  man's  first  responses  to  the  voice  of  his 
Creator — the  earth's  first  echoes  to  the  music  of  the 
heavens,  when  "  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and 
all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy."  This  world's 
first  love  was  told  in  hymns.  Music  first  broke  forth 
in  psalms.  The  earliest  recorded  essays  of  human 
language  are  in  spiritual  song.  Spiritual  songs  were 
the  delight  of  the  world  in  the  days  of  her  youth ; 
they  have  been  her  solace  during  her  advance  towards 
maturity ;  and  they  will  brighten  the  eventide  and 
close  of  her  life.  The  antediluvian  age  seems  to  have 
had  its  darling  household  songs.  In  patriarchal  times 
the  father's  blessing  was  sometimes  poured  forth  in 
lofty  hymnic  measures.  In  the  youth-tide  of  her 
national  life,  Israel  gave  out  her  joys  of  deliverance  in 
sea- side  hymns.  She  was  once  shut  up  between  the 
mountains,  the  sea,  and  her  infuriated  enemies.     In 

1 


Z  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

her  distress,  God  divided  the  waters  before  her,  and 
the  tribes  went  safely  through  the  depths.  Their  foes, 
essaying  to  follow  them,  were  overwhelmed  in  the 
flood  ;  and  while  charioteer  and  horseman  were  strug- 
gling with  the  waves,  and  the  sea  was  uttering  a  loud 
requiem  over  the  sinking  hosts,  the  redeemed  multi- 
tude confidently  stood  on  the  shore,  and  mingled  their 
hymn  of  triumph  with  the  sound  of  the  waters. 

Sing  unto  the  Lord, 

For  He  hath  triumphed  gloriously  ! 

The  horse  and  his  rider 

He  hath  cast  into  the  sea  ! 

The  Lord  is  my  strength  and  song, 

And  He  is  become  my  salvation. 

******* 

"Who  is  like  unto  Thee, 

0  Lord,  among  the  gods  ? 

Who  is  like  Thee— 

Glorious  in  holiness, 

Fearful  in  praises, 

Doing  wonders  ? 

******* 
The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever  ! 

The  song  which  thus  first  rose  "o'er  Egypt's  dark 
sea"  rose  again,  ever  and  anon,  along  the  desert,  and 
in  the  land  of  promise.  Israel  kept  up  the  circlings  of 
her  religious  dances  to  the  song  of  Moses  and  the 
music  of  Miriam.  In  the  fulness  of  her  meridian 
strength,  her  psalms  were  her  delights  as  she  went  up 
to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  plaintive  hymns  have 
been  the  solace  of  her  faithful  children  all  throup-h  the 
weary  periods  of  her  decline.  The  primitive  and 
purer  literature  of  even  those  false  or  corrupted 
systems  of  religion  which  sprung  up  against  the  early 
claims  of  the  true  Messiah  take  the  hymnic  form,  as  if 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER.  -y 

that  form  must  be  the  most  natural,  the  most  sacred, 
and  the  most  happy  mode  of  religious  utterance.  The 
foundations  of  the  Christian  Church,  too,  were  laid 
amidst  the  hymnings  of  her  first  converts.  She  owes 
the  preservation  of  her  spiritual  life,  and  the  continued 
purity  of  her  belief,  in  a  large  measure,  to  the  service 
of  song ;  and  how  many  of  her  generations  have  left 
hymns  as  the  only  living  memorials  of  their  character 
and  works.  "  Psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs'-' 
form  the  native  language  of  Christianity.  The  religion 
of  the  new  covenant  is  the  happy  religion.  It  calls  its 
people  to  u  rejoice  evermore,  and  in  everything  to  give 
thanks/'  When  it  is  allowed  to  exert  its  proper  and 
full  influence  on  the  human  character,  it  regulates  the 
affections,  without  destroying  man's  capacity  for  de- 
light ;  it  composes  and  cheers  the  soul ;  it  banishes 
mere  levity,  and  checking  all  vicious  and  boisterous 
mirth,  it  fills  the  mind  with  serene  joy,  and  gives  a 
tone  of  cheerfulness  to  the  manners  and  to  the  voice 
But  how  many  have  mistaken  the  Christian's  calling  ! 
The  Christianity  of  some  has  been  seemingly  made  up 
of  depressing  recollections  of  the  past,  gloomy  views 
of  the  present,  and  dark  apprehensions  of  the  future. 
And  if  an  inward  joy  is  ever  felt,  such  people  think  it 
their  duty  to  repress  it,  or  at  least  not  to  give  it 
expression,  but  rather  to  keep  up  an  aspect  in  unbroken 
accordance  with  the  gravity  of  their  notions.  They  are 
not  of  this  world,  they  say,  and  therefore  they  have  no 
smiles  for  those  around  them,  no  songs  for  themselves. 
Theirs  are  melancholy  manners,  austere  looks,  and 
voiceless  lives — a  religion  which  threatens  to  extino-uish 
all  gladness,  to  dark  the  face  of  nature,  and  to  destroy 
the  very  relish  of  life.  But  does  not  the  Saviour  call 
his  people  to  open  a  cheerful  face  upon  the  world,  and 


4  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

to  cheer  it  with  grateful  hymns.  (C  Let  your  light  so 
shine  before  men,"  says  He,  "  that  they  may  see  your 
beautiful  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  "  Who  is  she  that  looketh  forth  as  the 
morning,  fair  as  the  moon,  and  clear  as  the  sun  ?"  Is 
it  not  the  Messiah's  spouse,  the  Saviour's  Church  ? 
And  who  should  be  as  cheerful  as  the  sunlight,  if 
Christ's  people  are  not  ?  "  Truly  the  light  is  sweet, 
and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  to  behold  the  sun ;  which  is 
as  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber,  and 
rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race."  All  nature 
is  glad  when  the  day-spring  opens.  The  sparkling 
sea,  the  lucid  rivulet,  the  fluttering  leaf,  the  colours 
and  the  tones  of  creation,  all  tell  how  the  sunbeams 
cheer  the  world.  All  see  the  light,  and  all  bless  the 
light-bearer.  And  what  is  so  cheerful  in  its  character 
and  influence  as  the  Christian  religion  ?  "  Light  is 
sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the  upright  in 
heart."  Revelation  opens  around  the  Christian  solem- 
nities holy  enough  to  chasten  his  spirit,  but  it  throws 
a  light  upon  God^s  character  and  will  which  inspires 
the  believer  with  sacred  cheerfulness.  All  the  prin- 
ciples and  all  the  feelings  which  now  command  him 
dispose  the  Christian  to  form  the  habit  of  turning  the 
bright  side  of  things  towards  himself — the  habit  of 
keeping  Divine  goodness  in  sight,  of  marking  the 
blessings  of  every  moment  as  it  passes,  and  of  com- 
muning with  a  happy  future,  until  he  learns  to  speak 
to  himself  "  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs, 
singing  and  making  melody  in  his  heart  unto  the 
Lord."  And  wThen  praise  thus  lives  in  the  heart,  it 
will  express  itself  in  pleasant  music  and  lively  measures. 
The  peaceful  conscience  and  merry  heart  will  have 
songs  for  the  outside  world.     And  when  all  Christians 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER.  5 

breathe  this  happy  spirit  of  their  religion,  the  Christian 
Church  will  be  the  beautiful  embodiment  of  a  happy 
godliness,  and  will  be  ceaseless  in  its  service  of  song. 

But  as  the  rise  and  advance  and  decline  of  the 
human  race,  or  of  human  empires,  or  of  religious 
systems,  may  somewhat  answer  to  the  stages  of  an 
individual  life — or  as  the  history  of  a  single  life  may 
picture  the  course  of  the  world,  or  the  career  of  a 
people — so  those  favourite  modes  of  utterance  which 
the  world  or  any  one  of  its  communities  have  used,  as 
distinctive  of  the  different  stages  of  its  course,  have 
their  answering  types  in  the  most-loved  forms  of 
individual  expression.  Childhood  loves  to  lisp  its  joys 
in  a  hymn.  Manhood,  in  its  times  of  purest  and  most 
exalted  feeling,  speaks  to  itself  in  hymns.  Hymns, 
too,  most  naturally  weave  themselves  into  the  language 
of  declining  life,  and  often  supply  the  departiug  soul 
with  its  most  happy  words. 

There  is  scarcely  anything  that  maintains  a  more 
permanent  influence  over  human  thought  and  feeling 
in  the  present  life  than  the  hymns  and  songs  which 
the  soul  drinks  in  during  our  childhood.  The  sim- 
plicity of  children  makes  them  capable  of  being  swayed 
through  life  by  the  earliest  lessons.  The  little  one's 
mind  is  so  retentive  that  first  impressions  are  most 
lasting  and  powerful.  The  first  supplies  of  knowledge 
find  the  deepest  and  most  secure  lodgement  in  the 
soul;  and  especially  when  the  knowledge  comes  in  an 
agreeable  form  as  in  the  rhythm  and  rhyme  of  simple 
hymns.  These  are  entertained  for  life,  and  often  live 
to  make  themselves  felt  in  spite  of  all  the  changes  and 
distracting  circumstances  of  the  later  course.  There 
has  been  many,  many  an  instance  like  those  which,  a 
few  years  ago,  were  recorded  in  a  pastoral  address  to 


6  HYMN- WRITERS  ■  AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

a  Christian  Church.  The  minister  was  guarding  his 
flock  against  the  danger  of  betrayal  into  hardness  and 
bitter  feeling  by  those  trials  which,  spring  out  of  the 
seeming  unequal  distribution  of  good  and  evil  in  the 
world.  "  I  am  free  to  tell  you/'  said  he,  "  that  some- 
times in  the  course  of  my  life,  I  have  been  powerfully 
tempted  to  hardness,  when  the  thought  has  been 
insinuated,  that  my  share  in  life  has  been  wearisome 
toil  and  frequent  depression,  while  others  have  been 
lapped  in  ease  and  plenty,  though  apparently  not  a 
whit  more  deserving  than  myself;  and  I  confess  that 
now  and  then  the  temptation  has  been  so  timed  that 
my  soul  has  gone  too  far  through  the  process  of  trans- 
formation into  something  like  cold  iron  or  steel.  But 
one  gentle  corrective  has  always  prevented  the  harden- 
ing process  from  being  complete.  When  I  have  been 
all  but  shut  up  to  the  curse  of  a  stony  heart,  some 
stanza  from  one  of  the  simple  hymns  or  ( divine  songs/ 
which  used  to  touch  and  soften  me  in  childhood,  has 
come  up  from  its  home  in  my  memory,  and,  like  a 
divine  charm,  has  soothed  and  melted  me  into  child- 
like tenderness,  simplicity,  and  love.  Yerses  that 
seemed  to  have  been  lost  for  years,  have  suddenly 
sprung  into  life  again,  and  brought  so  many  good 
recollections  in  their  train,  that  my  rugged  nature  has 
yielded  at  once,  and  all  within  and  all  without  have 
responded  to  the  music  of  the  hymn,  as  the  face  of 
nature  answers  to  the  genial  sunbeams  of  spring.  And 
I  have  met  in  the  course  of  my  life  with  many  others 
whose  experience  might  be  taken  as  a  reflection  of  my 
own.  One  remarkable  instance,  however,  somewhat 
varies  from  the  rest ;  inasmuch  as  it  shows  how  the 
well-  timed  recurrence  of  verses,  once  fondly  cherished 
by  the  young  memory  and  heart,  may  give  the  deciding 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER.  / 

touch,  to  the  wandering  soul,  and  convert  a  prodigal 
from  '  the  error  of  his  way/  A  good  man  in  declining- 
life  told  me  that  the  first  book  in  which,  as  a  child,  he 
took  an  interest,  was  a  small  edition  of  Watts\s, 
1  Hymns  and  Divine  Songs'  for  children.  Each  hymn 
was  headed  by  a  woodcut,  and  one  especially  was  his 
favourite.  It  represented  a  little  boy,  something  like 
himself,  as  he  thought,  leaning  at  an  open  window, 
looking  with  a  calm,  happy  face  on  the  setting  sun, 
which  was  throwing  his  parting  light  upon  a  quiet 
country  scene.  Many  of  the  hymns,  and  that  one  in 
particular,  had  been  read  often,  until  they  lived  in  his 
soul.  But  as  he  grew  up,  the  impressions  were  worn 
off  by  more  exciting  and  less  pure  thoughts  and 
pursuits.  He  fell  into  a  course  of  dissipation  and  vice, 
and  seemed  for  a  time  to  be  given  up  to  sin,  and 
devoted  to  ruin.  Worn  down  at  last,  and  threatened 
with,  consumption,  he  was  ordered  into  the  country  for 
change  of  air ;  and  after  some  time  spent  in  quietness 
and  retirement,  far  away  from  the  scenes  of  old  temp- 
tations, he  wandered  out  one  evening  about  sunset, 
and  hanging  pensively  over  a  gate,  he  watched  the 
sun  as  it  sunk  behind  the  copse,  and  was  throwing  its 
last  beams  upon  the  silent  and  peaceful  hill  side. 
There  was  a  hush,  upon  his  spirits,  and  suddenly,  as  if 
sketched  by  an  unseen  hand  before  his  inward  eye,  the 
little  picture  which,  used  to  interest  his  boyish  mind 
lived  again,  and  the  hymn  which  it  illustrated  seemed 
to  be  spoken  sweetly  to  his  heart — 

And  now  another  day  is  gone, 
I'll  sing  my  Maker's  praise. 

*  #  #  # 

The   tear  started.     He    had    seen  many   of   his  days. 


8  HYMN-WKITEKS    AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

go ;  but  as  yet  Ms  Maker  had  never  heard  an  even- 
song from  his  lips,  or  from  his  heart.  What  an  un- 
grateful life  his  had  been  !  The  c  remembrance  was 
grievous/  But  his  heart  was  broken,  and  there  and 
then  the  softened  man  made  his  vows  of  return  to  God, 
and  offered  the  prayer  which  was  answered  in  blessings 
which  filled  both  the  mornings  and  evenings  of  his 
mature  life  with  hymns  and  songs  of  thanksgiving 
and  praise/' 

And  how  important,  and  holy,  and  happy  is  the 
office  of  psalms  and  hymns  in  the  service  of  human 
nature  amidst  the  struggles  and  toils,  the  conflicts  and 
victories,  the  sorrows  and  joys  of  mature  life.  Their 
mission  has  been  to  the  multitude  as  well  as  the  indi- 
vidual heart.  How  often  has  the  popular  use  of  a  few 
songs  swayed  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  a  nation,  or 
quickened,  united,  directed,  and  ruled  the  energies  of 
a  people,  or  permanently  given  a  distinct  character  to 
an  entire  race.  Facts  would  sustain  the  philosophy  of 
the  man  who  said,  "  Let  me  furnish  a  nation  with  its 
songs,  and  I  will  govern  it."  Psalms  and  hymns, 
too,  have  many  times  afforded  the  secret  of  union,  and 
harmony,  and  strength,  and  consolation  to  persecuted 
households,  down-trodden  tribes,  and  oppressed  popu- 
lations. They  have  been  as  food  to  the  famine- stricken 
crowd,  and  as  waters  in  the  wilderness  to  fugitive 
churches.  How  often  have  they  cheered  the  souls  of 
congregated  confessors  in  Roman  catacombs,  in  the 
recesses  of  Eastern  deserts,  in  the  fastnesses  of  Swiss 
mountains,  and  in  the  Highland  glens  and  moorland 
hollows  of  Scotland.  The  psalm  and  choral  chant 
have  sometimes  nerved  the  host  for  battle  on  behalf 
of  home,  and  conscience,  and  truth.  The  Divine 
•  Spirit  himself  has  recorded  an  exemplar  "  hallelujah 


INTRODUCTORY   CHAPTER.  V 

victory."  Jehoshaphat's  appeal  for  divine  help  against 
the  enemies  of  goodness  and  faith  was  answered  by  a 
revelation  of  God's  order  of  battle.  "  And  when  he 
had  consulted  with  the  people,  he  appointed  singers 
unto  the  Lord,  and  that  should  praise  the  beauty  of 
holiness  as  they  went  out  before  the  army,  and  to  say, 
Praise  the  Lord,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever. 
And  when  they  began  to  sing  and  to  praise,  the  Lord 
set  ambushments  against  the  children  of  Amnion, 
Moab,  and  Mount  Seir,  which  were  come  against 
Judah,  and  they  were  smitten/''  The  singers  were 
victorious ;  the  spoil  was  gathered  to  the  music  of 
psalms.  "And  on  the  fourth  day  they  assembled 
themselves  in  the  valley  of  Berachah,  for  there  they 
blessed  the  Lord ;  therefore  the  name  of  the  same 
place  was  called  the  valley  of  Berachah  unto  this  day. 
Then  they  returned  every  man  of  Judah  and  Jeru- 
salem, and  Jehoshaphat  in  the  forefront  of  them,  to 
go  again  to  Jerusalem  with  joy,  for  the  Lord  had 
made  them  to  rejoice  over  their  enemies/''  Yes,  and 
since  then  many  a  Christian  army  has  kept  up  the 
strain,  and  have  made  prayerful  hymns  and  hymns  of 
praise  their  battle  songs.  Nor  has  Jehoshaphat's 
victory  been  the  only  "  hallelujah  victory/-'  It  was 
probably  repeated  once  on  the  Welsh  border,  and 
has  had  its  antitypes  in  the  history  of  Protestant 
struggles  for  freedom  on  many  a  storied  field  of 
Europe. 

And  how  much  of  their  youthful  freshness,  and 
manly  courage,  and  constitutional  vigour,  and  public 
spirit,  nations  owe  to  the  habitual  use  of  their  national 
anthems,  who  can  tell  ?  How  France  has  glowed  at 
the  sound  of  a  popular  hymn  !  how  Scotland  kindles 
at  an  old  psalm  or  song  which  embalms  the  name  of 


10  HYMN-WKITEES    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Her  Hero  !    and   how  Englishmen's  hearts    swell   and 
come  together  when  they  sing 

Bule  Britannia ! 

or  when   they  nncover   and   unite   in   the  grand  old 

strain, 

God  save  our  gracious  Queen  ! 

It  is  most  pleasant  to  the  Christian,  however,  to 
trace  the  influence  of  devout  psalmody  in  the  shaping 
of  a  people's  happily  distinct  character.  Among  the 
most  blessed  results  of  faithfully-administered  truth 
to  a  teachable  and  obedient  people,  is  their  perpetu- 
ated fondness  for  "  psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual 
songs."  Nor  can  there  be  any  richer  or  more  agree- 
able fruits  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  upon  human 
masses,  than  a  popular  love  for  psalmody,  the  culture 
of  sacred  music  in  the  people's  homes,  and  the 
habitual  enjoyment  of  favourite  hymns  continued  from 
parents  to  children,  and  renewing  its  freshness  among 
children's  children.  Will  the  old  Scotch  version  of 
the  psalms  ever  cease  to  be  music  to  those  who  owe 
so  much  to  the  covenanting  fathers  who  first  sang 
them  ?  Will  the  spiritual  songs  of  the  first  Reformers 
ever  die  out  from  the  mind  and  heart  of  Germany  ? 
The  cheerful  character  and  influence  of  the  primitive 
churches  left  memorials  for  many  generations  among 
the  hymn-singing  populations  of  many  spots  in  Europe. 
Richard  Baxter' slab  ours  at  Kidderminster  were  crowned 
with  many  a  holy  song.  He  toiled  and  prayed  until 
from  every  house  within  his  pastorate  there  was  daily 
the  all  but  ceaseless  voice  of  psalms  and  hymns.  He 
was  literally  "  compassed  about  with  songs  of  deliver- 
ance."    Vital  piety  makes  people  cheerful,  and  their 


INTRODUCTOKY    CHAPTER.  11 

cheerfulness   naturally  expresses  itself  in  devout  and 
merry  rhyme  and  metre. 

Perhaps  no  district  in  England  has  a  population  so 
deeply  and  widely  imbued  with  religious  thought  and 
feeling  as  the  county  of  Cornwall.  As  a  whole,  the 
Cornish  folk  may  be  called  a  religious  people,  and 
their  great  love  for  sacred  music,  and  especially  hymn 
singing,  may  be  at  once  a  cause  and  effect  of  their 
sustained  religious  life.  Nowhere  has  the  gospel  of 
Christ  wrought  more  happy  changes ;  nowhere  has  it 
left  a  more  permanently  cheerful  impress;  nowhere 
could  an  entire  population  so  generally  illustrate 
obedience  to  the  apostolic  rule,  "Is  any  merry,  let 
him  sing  psalms."  No  one  who  has  seen  them  can 
forget  the  lines  and  knots  of  merry  creatures  who 
preserve  a  kind  of  elegant  appearance  amidst  their 
rough  work,  in  open  sheds,  and  among  heaps  of  tin 
and  copper  ore  on  the  surface  of  the  Cornish  mines. 
"Who  could  forget  these  girls'  standard  and  style  of 
beauty  ?  and  who  that  has  heard  them  will  ever  forget 
the  music  of  their  hymns,  as  they  sing  in  concert, 
while  they  ply  their  hammers,  that  music  at  once  so 
reverent,  so  earnest,  and  so  lovely  ?  They  seem  to 
have  hymns  appropriate  for  all  times  and  seasons,  and 
sometimes  their  stanzas  have  been  beautifully  timed. 
A  few  of  the  more  gay  and  thoughtless  of  a  large 
group  had  been  indulging  a  laugh  at  one  good 
Christian  girl,  whom  they  charged  with  inconsistent 
conformity  to  the  world  because  she  wore  a  pair  of 
tasteful  ear-rings.  The  jeers  were  meekly  borne  for  a 
while ;  but  at  length  the  persecuted  girl  lifted  up  her 
voice  in  song,  and  quietly  taking  the  jewels  from  her 
ears,  she  placed  them  on  the  block  before  her,  and 
demolished    them    with    a    stroke    of    her    hammer, 


12  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

singing  as  she  did  it  a  stanza  from  a  favourite 
hymn — 

Neither  passion  nor  pride  Thy  cross  can  abide, 

But  melt  in  the  fountain  that  streams  from  Thy  side. 

Her  persecutors  were  silenced,  and  blushed  as  she 
sang  out  her  hyniu  of  submissive  but  triumphant 
faith.  The  same  spirit  of  holy  song  is  breathed  by 
the  men,  who  cheer  the  deep  caverns  in  which  they 
toil  with  heartfelt  psalmody.  The  road-side  and  the 
cottage  hearth,  the  engine-house,  the  stream  works, 
the  moorland,  and  the  barren  earn,  the  unpretending 
chapel  and  the  quiet  grave-yard,  are  all  hallowed  in 
turn  by  the  melodies  and  harmonies  of  this  hymn  and 
anthem-loving  race.  Seldom  have  the  hearts  and 
voices  of  a  race  been  more  graciously  blended  in  the 
service  of  Him  who  said,  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy, 
"  In  the  midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing  praise  unto 
Thee." 

The  claims  of  Christianity  as  the  religion  of  uni- 
versal man,  and  its  adaptation  to  all  races  and  people, 
circumstances  and  times,  are  beautifully  illustrated  by 
the  fact,  that  those  happy  features  of  character  which 
it  impressed  upon  the  Cornish  families  are  the  same 
with  those  which  distinguish  the  Christianized  tribes 
of  Southern  Africa.  On  the  testimony  of  a  venerable 
missionary,  who  was  the  first  to  open  the  gospel  to 
the  Little  Namacquas,  that  popular  love  of  sacred 
song  which  is  so  peculiar  to  the  Keltic  masses  in 
Western  England,  became  the  habitual  feeling  and 
distinctive  pleasure  of  the  converted  African  tribes. 
Hymn  singing  in  both  cases  seemed  to  be  the  natural 
action  of  public  religious  life.  Spiritual  songs,  says 
the   African   evangelist,  were   soon   interwoven   with 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER.  13 

their  daily  existence ;  all  their  movements  seemed  to 
be  made  to  the  music  of  hymns;  and  how  many  a 
time  I  have  listened  to  their  voices  of  an  evening,  as 
they  walked  homeward  from  the  field  or  the  bush 
singing  some  favourite  hymn,  as  a  kind  of  spiritual 
march.  I  remember  having  my  heart  deeply  touched 
once  as  I  hearkened  to  the  happy  bands  psalming  it, 
and  responding  to  one  another  while  approaching  the 
village.     I  caught  the  strain  of  an  old  Dutch  hymn — 

Faith  loves  the  Saviour,  and  beholds 

His  sufferings,  death,  and  pain  ; 
And  this  shall  ne'er  grow  old  nor  cold, 

Till  we  with  Him  shall  reign. 

It  was  the  song  of  Southern  Africans  first  love. 
The  first-fruits  of  Ethiopia's  praise  to  God  ;  the  tuneful 
earnest  of  what  an  ancient  hymn  foretold.  "  Princes 
shall  come  out  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia  shall  soon  stretch 
out  her  hands  unto  God.  Sing  unto  God,  ye  king- 
doms of  the  earth ;  0  sing  praises  unto  the  Lord ; 
Selah  \" 

But  what  Christian  psalmody  has  done  for  nations, 
and  races,  and  tribes,  it  does  for  many  an  individual 
man  and  woman.  What  hymns  have  been  to  the 
multitude  they  have  been  to  many  a  solitary  Christian 
soul.  To  the  gentle  and  to  the  simple,  to  the  great 
and  to  the  small,  to  the  bond  and  to  the  free,  to  the 
strong  and  to  the  weak,  to  the  cultured  and  to  the  rude, 
divine  songs  have  served  to  brighten  and  bless  the 
different  stages  and  turns  of  personal  history.  Many 
of  the  ruling  spirits  of  the  world,  men  whose  names 
will  always  be  landmarks  in  history,  have  had  tender 
fondness  for  psalmody  and  holy  song.  There  have 
been  royal  psalmists,  imperial  songsters,  and  courtly 


14  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

hymnists.  Many  a  great  leader  of  his  generation, 
while  he  has  been  guiding  the  world's  mind  and  heart 
amidst  the  dangers  of  revolution,  and  through  the 
deep  and  broad  processes  of  moral  and  religious  re- 
newal, has  cheered  his  own  soul  with  favourite  hymns. 
Hymns  have  been  his  chosen  expressions  of  joy  in 
success.  Hymns  have  been  his  solace  in  moments  of 
darkness  and  depression.  Luther  and  his  companions 
with  all  their  bold  readiness  for  danger  and  death  in 
the  cause  of  truth,  had  times  when  their  feelings  were 
akin  to  those  of  a  divine  singer  who  said,  (C  Why  art 
thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  V9  But  in  such  hours  the 
unflinching  Eeformer  would  cheerily  say  to  his  friend 
Melancthon,  "  Come,  Phillip,  let  us  sing  the  forty- sixth 
Psalm ;"  and  they  could  sing  it  in  Luther's  own 
characteristic  version. 

A  sure  stronghold  our  God  is  He, 

A  timely  shield  and  weapon  ; 
Our  help  He'll  be,  and  set  us  free 

From  every  ill  can  happen. 
***** 

And  were  the  world  with  devils  fill'd, 

All  eager  to  devour  us, 
Our  souls  to  fear  shall  little  yield, 

They  cannot  overpower  us. 

Later  Reformers  in  our  own  land  have  been  equally 
remarkable  for  their  love  of  sacred  music,  and  their 
aptness  at  using  it  for  the  encouragement  of  the 
multitude,  and  their  own  secret  comfort  amidst  their 
sufferings  and  toils. 

Some  of  the  noblest  intellects,  too,  the  most  cul- 
tured and  refined  of  their  race ;  men  whose  thoughts 
and  feelings  are  embalmed  in  an  undying  literature, 
have  had  each  his  own  cherished  psalm  or  tenderly- 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER.  15 

loved  hymn.  And  the  psalm  or  hymn  has  been  called 
up  in  every  time  of  need ;  as  if  it  had  a  comforting 
power  which  no  other  voice  could  bring.  The  great 
Niebuhr  was  lovingly  attached  to  von  Lowenstern's 
hymn — 

Christ,  Thou  the  champion  of  that  war-worn  host. 

And  might  be  heard  now  and  then  refreshing  his 
own  soul  amidst  its  intense  labours  and  researches  by 
murmuring  the  metrical  prayer — 

And  give  us  peace ;  peace  in  the  church  and  school, 
Peace  to  the  powers  who  o'er  our  country  rule, 
Peace  to  the  conscience,  peace  within  the  heart, 
Do  Thou  impart. 

So  shall  Thy  goodness  here  be  still  adored, 
Thou  Guardian  of  Thy  little  flock,  dear  Lord  ; 
And  heaven  and  earth  through  all  eternity 
Shall  worship  Thee ! 

And  what  was  the  solace  of  Niebuhr  has  been  the 
consolation  of  many  a  commanding  and  highly  cultured 
mind.  The  hymn  of  joy  and  the  hymn  of  plaintive 
appeal  have  ministered  strength  and  peace,  in  sweet 
alternation,  through  all  the  scenes  of  mental  action. 

And  how  often  has  the  master  mind,  the  truly 
great  soul  finished  its  brilliant  and  successful  course 
with  a  closing  hymn  !  Saintly  and  useful  men  like 
Eowland  Hill  have  died  on  consecrated  ground  with 
the  music  of  a  hymn  in  their  souls.  But  minds  of 
another  class  also  have  ended  their  course  with  songs. 
Walter  Scott's  last  utterances  were  stanzas  of  favourite 
ancient  hymns.  It  is  stated  that  Cobden  departed 
repeating  that  grand  old  strain,  rendered  from  the 
German  by  John  Wesley — 


16  HYMN- WRITERS   AND   THEIR   HYMNS. 

Thee  will  I  love,  my  joy,  my  crown, 
Thee  will  I  love,  my  Lord,  my  God : 

Thee  will  I  love,  beneath  Thy  frown, 
Or  smile — Thy  sceptre  or  Thy  rod  : 

What  though  my  flesh  and  heart  decay, 
Thee  shall  I  love  in  endless  day  ! 

And  our  own  Prince  Albert  "  the  good/'  breathed 
as  his  last  song,  while  his  spirit  mounted — 

Rock  of  Ages  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee  ! 

And  how  many  thousands  after  thousands  in  the  more 
retired  and  obscure  scenes  of  life  have  had  psalms  and 
hymns  of  victory  on  their  dying  lips. 

Indeed,  the  holiest  and  best  of  people,  those  who 
have  done  most  to  make  the  world  happy,  have 
hallowed  every  stage  of  life,  every  turn  in  their 
history,  every  relation  which  they  have  sustained,  and 
every  time  and  season  of  their  mortal  pilgrimage  with 
"  thanksgiving  and  the  voice  of  melody.^  Their  re- 
cord is  above ;  but  neither  they  nor  their  hymns  can 
be  forgotten  below.  Many  of  their  names  are  recorded 
in  the  following  pages ;  and  some  of  their  hymns  are 
interwoven  with  the  outlines  of  their  character  and 
the  memorials  of  their  history. 

And  perhaps  the  lover  of  sacred  melody  will  learn  to 
love  hymn-writers  and  their  hymns  more  deeply,  and 
to  siug  with  more  spiritual  joy,  while  he  spends  an 
hour,  now  and  then,  over  chajDters  about  the  first 
hymn-book;  and  hymns  of  the  latter  day  morning, 
hymns  of  the  fathers,  and  hymns  of  old  England's 
Christian  birth-time ;  hymns  from  old  cloisters,  songs 
in  high  places,  and  songs  in  prison.  From  these 
he  may  pass  to  chapters  about  psalms  in  English 
metre,     hymn    menders,    and     songs     of     creation. 


INTRODUCTORY    CHAPTER.  17 

Then  come  hymns  about  the  book,  songs  of  the 
Sabbath,  hymns  by  the  way,  hymns  on  the  waters, 
hymns  of  the  morning,  and  songs  in  the  night.  Nor 
will  the  world  ever  lose  its  interest  in  chapters  on 
marriage  songs,  and  birth-day  hymns,  or  hymns  from 
beneath  the  cloud,  hymns  of  Gethsemane,  and  the 
cross,  funeral  hymns,  judgment  hymns,  and  songs  of 
glory. 

To  catch  the  spirit,  and  to  be  enriched  with  the 
music  of  the  first  hymn-book,  is  to  be  prepared  for 
daily  (<  speaking  to  ourselves  in  psalms,  and  hymns, 
and  spiritual  songs,  singing  and  making  melody  in  our 
hearts  to  the  Lord ;  giving  thanks  always  for  all 
things  unto  God  and  the  Father,  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ; "  and  a  life  thus  spent  will 
certainly  issue  in  songs  of  glory. 


Ofbapter  IL 

THE    FIKST    HYMN-BOOK. 
"  Thy  statutes  have  been  my  songs  in  the  house  of  my  pilgrimage." 

jPEAK  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  hymns,  and 
spiritual  songs,  singing,  and  making  melody  in 
your  heart  to  the  Lord."  Happy  advice  from  a 
happy  man  !  If  ever  man  had  his  life  on  earth  enriched 
and  brightened  by  the  psalmody  of  heaven,  St.  Paul 
was  that  man.  He  seems  now  and  then  to  be  an  im- 
personation of  the  jubilant  religion  which  he  preached. 
Here  and  there  he  uses  a  threefold  form  of  speech,  as 
if  the  notion  of  a  Trinity  were  ever  in  his  mind,  and  as 
if  the  Triune  form  gave  the  completest  possible  expres- 
sion to  his  feeling  as  to  that  full  harmony  of  fixed 
belief,  triumphant  principle,  and  exultant  feeling,  to 
which  he  called  the  Christian  Church.  He  challenged 
the  generations  of  the  future  to  an  unbroken  service  of 
song,  and  the  family  lines  of  God's  children  have  ever 
since  been  singing  and  chanting  in  response.  Paul  had 
heard  the  chant  of  the  Temple  service,  and  had  so  often 
joined  in  the  songs  and  hymns  of  the  synagogue  that 
like  his  fellow  apostles  of  the  circumcision,  he  enjoyed 
ample  means  of  expression  for  all  the  joys  of  the  Holy 


THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK.  19 

Spirit's  dispensation.     The  church  of  his  fathers  had 
treasured  the  forms  of  praise  which  now  furnish  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  with  hymns  and  songs  for  all  ages  of 
its  militant  and  triumphant  course.     Nor  is  the  har- 
mony of  inspired  truth  ever  felt  to  be  more  impressive 
than  in  the  use  which  the  blessed  Spirit  makes  of  Old 
Testament  psalmody  in  his  work  on  the  souls  of  New 
Testament    saints.      The  three  inspired  songs    which 
graced  the  manifestation  of  Immanuel ;  the  rich  gush 
of  Mary's    devotional    joy,    the    prophetic     strain    of 
Zacharias,  and  the  holy  song  of  Simeon,  all  show  the 
influence   of  Old  Testament   style  and   spirit.     "  The 
Word  of  Christ/'  as  once  issued  in  the  law  of  "  Moses, 
and  in  the  Prophets,  and  in  the  Psalms,"  had  dwelt  in 
Mary's  heart  so  "  richly  "  as  to  give  its  own  character 
to  her   rapturous    utterances.     The  lips  of  Zacharias 
were   touched  with    fire  from    the    very   altar    before 
which  the  Messianic  seers  had  kindled  into  ecstacy. 
And    Simeon   had    chanted    the    hymns    of   his    rapt 
ancestry  until  his  own  inspired  sentences  breathed  in 
unison  with  voices  from  "  holy  men  of  old."     Mary, 
and  Hannah,  and  Deborah  drank  into  one  another's 
spirit ;  and  their  tones  have  that  likeness  and  unlike- 
ness  which  belong  to  daughters   of  the  same  family. 
The  celebration  of  Old  Testament  victories   and  the 
joy  of  gospel  salvation  melt  into  oneness  and  harmony 
in  "  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb."     And  when 
will  earth  or  heaven   cease  to  echo  to  the  psalms  of 
ancient  Zion  ?     Judah's  holy  song  book,   "  the  Book 
of  Psalms,  hath    exercised  the  hearts   and  lips  of  all 
saints,  and  is  replenished  with  the  types  of  all  possible 
spiritual  feelings,  and  suggests  the  forms  of  all  God- 
ward  emotions,  and  furnishes  the  choice  expressions  of 
all   true  worship,  the  utterances  of  all  divine  praise 


20  HYMN-WRITEKS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

the  expressions  of  all  spiritual  humility,  with  the 
raptures  of  all  spiritual  joy."  This  well-spring  in  the 
desert  has  never  failed  to  refresh  the  pilgrim  church 
from  age  to  age.  Israelite  and  Samaritan,  "Greek 
and  Jew,  circumcision  and  uncircumcision,  barbarian, 
Scythian,  bond  and  free/'  east  and  west,  the  old  world 
and  the  new — all  confess  the  sacred  power  and  sweet- 
ness of  David's  voice ;  all  kindle  into  songs  under  his 
leadership.  That  ever-living  sympathy  with  the  most 
cherished  interests  of  God's  children,  that  spirituality 
which  so  deeply  touches  the  believer's  inner  man ; 
and  that  expression  which  so  engages  all  conditions  of 
men,  and  adapts  itself  to  all  circumstances  of  humanity  ; 
indeed,  all  the  immortal  sweetness,  grandeur,  and 
power  which  distinguish  the  Old  Testament  Psalms, 
are  found  living  still,  and  renewing  their  freshness  in 
the  inspired  hymns  and  songs  of  those  who  went  up 
to  the  Temple  in  "  the  last  days,"  and  spoke  "  in  other 
tongues  the  wonderful  works  of  God,  as  the  Spirit 
gave  them  utterance."  How  much  like  a  psalm  of 
ancient  Israel  is  that  early  song  of  the  primitive 
Christians  which  the  spirit  has  left  on  record.  The 
little  persecuted  community  sang  in  the  style  of  their 
fathers,  when  they  "  lift  up  their  voices  to  God  with 
one  accord  and  said," 

Lord,  Thou  art  God, 

Which  hast  made  heaven  and  earth, 

And  the  sea, 

And  all  that  in  them  is  : 

Who  by  the  mouth  of  David 

Thy  servant,  hast  said, 

Why  did  the  heathen  rage 

And  the  people  imagine  vain  things  ? 

The  kings  of  the  earth  stood  up, 


THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK.  21 

And  the  rulers  were  gathered  together 

Against  the  Lord, 

And  against  his  Christ. 

For  of  a  truth, 

Against  thy  Holy  Child  Jesus, 

Whom  Thou  hast  anointed, 

Both  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate, 

With  the  Gentiles, 

And  the  people  of  Israel, 

Are  gathered  together ; 

For  to  do  whatever  thy  hand 

And  thy  counsel 

Determined  before  to  be  done. 

And  now,  Lord ! 

Behold  their  threatenings  ! 

And  grant  unto  thy  servants, 

That  with  all  boldness 

They  may  speak  thy  word, 

By  stretching  forth  thy  hand  to  heal ; 

And  that  signs  and  wonders 

May  be  done 

By  the  name 

Of  thy  Holy  Child  Jesus. 


Xearest  akin  to  these  odes  of  highest  inspiration 
are  the  songs  of  the  synagogue  service.  The  family 
features,  and  much  in  the  distinctive  manner,  some- 
times deeply  touch  the  soul.  In  their  simple  grandeur, 
lofty  vigour,  solemn  measure,  and  glow  of  holy  feeling, 
they  are  felt  to  be  close  allies  of  the  anthems  of  reve- 
lation; though  not  bearing  the  divine  honours  of 
those  holier  forms  into  which  the  Spirit  of  God  once 
"  breathed  the  breath  of  life."  Would  you  realize 
the  grand  simplicity  of  primitive  hymns  ?  Then  go 
to  the  synagogue  and  hear  the  lineal  descendants  of 
God's  ancient  people  sing  in  their  Sabbath  morning 
service — 


22  BYMN-WKITERS    AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

Praised  be  Thy  name  for  ever,  0  our  King ! 

Thou  Sovereign  God ! 

The  Great  and  the  Holy  in  heaven  and  in  earth  : 

For  unto  Thee,  Jehovah,  our  God, 

And  the  God  of  our  fathers , 

Belong  song  and  praise ; 

Hymn  and  psalm ; 

Strength  and  dominion ; 

Victory,  greatness,  and  power ; 

Adoration  and  glory ; 

Holiness  and  majesty ; 

Blessings  and  thanksgivings ; 

From  this  time  forth  and  for  ever  ! 

Blessed  art  Thou,  Jehovah ! 

Sovereign  God ! 

Great  in  praises ; 

The  God  of  thanksgivings ; 

The  Lord  of  wonders  ; 

The  Chooser  of  song  and  psalmody ; 

King  Eternal !     Ever-living  God  ! 

Sometimes  the  utterance  of  the  synagogue  is  as 
the  voice  of  one  longing  soul;  now  jubilant,  now 
melting  into  warm,  tender,  spiritual  feeling,  and  now 
swelling  again  into  lofty  celebrations  of  Divine 
Majesty;  as  if  the  devout  heart  breathed  by  turns 
the  spirit  of  the  Psalms,  the  Canticles,  and  the 
Prophets.     So  it  is  in  "the  Hymns  of  Glory" 

Sweet  hymns  I  attune, 

And  songs  I  weave, 

For  my  soul  panteth  after  Thee  ! 

My  soul  longeth  in  the  shadow  of  thy  hand 

All  thy  secret  of  secrets  to  know  ! 

Whilst  my  words  speak  thy  glory 

My  heart  is  yearning  for  thy  love. 

Therefore  in  Thee  I  speak  of  thy  glorious  things ; 

And  with  songs  of  love  I  honour  thy  name  : 


THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK.  Zb 

I  will  tell  of  thy  glory 
Though  I  saw  Thee  not ; 
And  though  I  knew  Thee  not, 
I  arrange  my  similitudes  of  Thee. 
By  the  band  of  thy  prophets, 
By  thy  trusty  servants, 

Thou  hast  symbolized  the  glorious  honour  of  thy  majesty . 
Thy  greatness  and  thy  might 
They  named  after  the  powers  of  thy  creation. 
They  compared  Thee, 
But  not  as  Thou  art ; 
And  they  likened  Thee, 
According  to  thy  works, 
They  represented  Thee  in  multiplied  visions  : 
Yet  behold,  Thou  art  one  in  all  semblances  ! 
***** 

The  Head,  thy  Word,  is  the  Truth, 

Proclaiming  from  the  beginning, 

From  generation  to  generation, 

Thy  people  are  ever  seeking  Thee  ! 

Array  thyself  in  the  multitude  of  my  psalms, 

And  let  my  singing  come  near  to  Thee  ! 

Let  my  praise  be  a  crown  to  thy  head, 

And  my  hymns  acceptable  incense. 

Let  the  song  of  the  poor  be  precious  to  Thee, 

As  the  anthems  over  the  gifts  of  the  altar. 

Let  my  blessing  ascend  to  the  Almighty  Head, 

The  Beginning,  the  Lifegiver,  the  Righteous  Mighty  One! 

And  when  I  bless,  let  thy  Head  be  inclined  to  me, 

And  take  it  to  thyself  as  chief  perfumes ; 

Let  it  be  pleasant  to  Thee 

For  my  soul  panteth  unto  Thee  ! 

The  daughters  of  Israel  have  not  yet  lost  the  spirit 
of  ancient  psalmody.  There  are  Hebrew  women  now 
who  can  emulate  the  mothers  of  Hebrew  song,  who 
have  spiritual  warmth  enough  to  revive  the  service  of 
praise  in  both  synagogue  and  household ;  and  whose 
heart,    intellect,  taste,   and    culture   are    sufficient    to 


24  HYMN-WEITEES    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

prove  that  the  hymns  of  their  fathers  may  be  happily 
rendered  in  English  metre  and  rhyme.  Mrs.  Hester 
Eothschild  has  inserted  the  opening  hymn  of  the 
Sabbath  morning  service  in  her  volume  of  "  Prayers 
and  Meditations/'  and  acknowledges  her  obligation 
to  the  talented  pen  of  Mrs.  Julias  Collins  for  this 
beautiful  version  : — 

Before  thy  heavenly  Word  revealed  the  wonders  of  thy  will ; 
Before  the  earth  and  heavens  came  forth  from  chaos,  deep 

and  still ; 
E'en  then  Thou  reignedst  Lord  supreme !  as  Thou  wilt  ever 

reign, 
And  moved  thy  holy  spirit  o'er  the  dark  unfathom'd  main  ; 

But  when  through  all  the  empty  space  thy  mighty  voice 

was  heard, 
Then  darkness  fled,  and  heavenly  light  came  beaming  at  thy 

word; 
All  nature  then    proclaimed  the  king,  most  blessed  and 

adored ! 
The  great  Creator !     God  alone  ! — the  Universal  Lord ! 

And  when  this  vast  created  world  returns  to  endless  night, 
When  heaven  and  earth  shall  fade  away  at  thy  dread  word 

of  might ; 
Still  Thou  in  Majesty  wilt  rnle,  Almighty  One  alone, 
Great  God,  with  mercy  infinite,  on  thy  exalted  throne. 

Immortal  power !  Eternal  One !  with  Thee  what  can  com- 
pare, 

Thy  glory  shines  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  fills  the  ambient 
air; 

All  time,  all  space,  by  Thee  illumed,  grows  bright  and 
brighter  still, 

Obedient  to  thy  high  behest,  and  to  thy  heavenly  will. 

To  Thee  dominion  sole  belongs,  and  'tis  to  Thee  alone 
My  Father!    Saviour!    living    God!    I    make  my  sorrows 
known ; 


THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK.  25 

Thy  love  celestial  and  divine  descends  upon  my  heart, 
Inspiring  courage,  hope,  and  joy,  and  bidding  grief  depart. 

Protected  by  thy  boundless  love,  my  body  sinks  to  rest ; 
My  soul,  within  thy  heavenly  arm  reposes,  calm  and  blest. 
Lord  of  my  life!  in  darkest  night  I  sleep  and  have  no  fear, 
And  in  the  early  dawn  of  day  I  wake  and  find  Thee  near. 

As  the  official  honours  and  powers  which  have  their 
united  seat  in  Him  who  is  Head  over  all  things  to 
the  Church,  are  by  his  Spirit  divided  and  distributed 
among  his  people,  so  the  "  lights  and  perfections " 
which  are  all  harmoniously  embodied  in  the  psalmody 
of  Holy  Writ,  are  scattered  and  variously  apportioned 
among  the  later  children  of  song.  With  one  is  the 
grandeur,  with  another  the  beauty ;  here  the  sweetness, 
there  the  power;  this  voice  is  plaintive,  that  trium- 
phant. Now  we  have  harmony,  now  gracefulness ;  now 
deep  contemplative  life,  and  now  a  full  and  holy  unc- 
tion. There  are  different  ministrations.  Nor  has  the 
gift  of  coming  most  agreeably  near  to  the  standard  of 
highest  hymnic  inspiration  always  fallen  on  those  to 
whom  the  Church  would  soonest  look  for  aid.  That 
God,  who  perfectly  knows  every  man's  mental  and 
moral  constitution,  and  sees  at  a  glance  all  the 
fitnesses  of  human  agency  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  own 
purposes,  may  sometimes  tax  the  gifts  of  even  a 
Balaam,  and,  wrapping  him  in  awful  visions,  constrain 
him  to  give  out  utterances  with  wmich  his  own  will  and 
disposition  are  somewhat  in  discord,  and  which  become 
immortalized  as  at  once  witnesses  for  God,  and 
memorials  of  the  faithless  prophet's  unconsecrated 
talents.  A  Rousseau  may  dream  of  heavenly  music, 
and  wake  to  jot  down  the  melody  which  has  helped 
many  Christians  to  give  touching  expression  to  their 


26  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

purest  and  sweetest  hymns.  And  who  would  expect  a 
combination  of  features  so  near  akin  to  those  of  old 
prophetic  psalmody  as  are  now  associated  in  a  few  pro- 
ductions of  Byron,  Scott,  and  Olivers  ?  What  a  trio  ! 
a  sensuous  scorner,  an  idolized  novelist,  and  a  metho- 
dist  preacher  !  And  were  all  these  among  the  pro- 
phets ?  If  to  write  hymns  like  prophets'  hymns  is  to 
have  the  shadow  of  a  prophet's  claim,  let  them  share 
the  honour  of  being  in  the  train  of  prophetic  hymnists. 
The  three  men  wrote  three  remarkable  hymns,  each  of 
which  is  instinct  with  some  virtue  of  Hebrew  psalmody. 
Byron  has  happily  caught  the  spirit  of  the  137th 
Psalm,  and  in  his  plaintive  but  spirited  melody  gives 
the  soul  pleasant  yet  mournful  touches,  after  the  manner 
of  the  original  ode,  "By  the  rivers  of  Babylon," 
etc. — 

We  sat  down  and  wept  by  the  waters 

Of  Babel,  and  thought  of  the  day 
"When  our  foe,  in  the  hue  of  his  slaughters, 

Made  Salem's  high  places  his  prey ; 
And  ye,  oh  her  desolate  daughters  ! 

Were  scatter'd  all  weeping  away. 

While  sadly  we  gazed  on  the  river 
Which  rolled  on  in  freedom  below, 

They  demanded  the  song;  but,  oh  never 
That  triumph  the  stranger  shall  know  ! 

May  this  right  hand  be  wither' d  for  ever, 
Ere  it  string  our  high  harp  for  the  foe. 

On  the  willow  that  harp  is  suspended — 
Oh  Salem !  its  sound  should  be  free ; 

And  the  hour  when  thy  glories  were  ended, 
But  left  me  that  token  of  thee  : 

And  ne'er  shall  its  soft  tones  be  blended 
With  the  voice  of  the  spoiler  by  me  ! 


THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK.  27 

He  who  could  breathe  so  deeply  in  unison  with 
the  harp  of  captive  Judah,  cannot,  with  all  his  sins 
and  errors,  be  shut  out  from  among  the  children  of 
sacred  minstrelsy.  It  may  still  be  a  wonder  how  such 
a  hand  as  his  could  string  its  harp  to  melody  like  this ; 
but  there  must  have  been  something  in  the  poet,  both 
in  his  heart  and  intellect,  which  was  capable  of  occa- 
sional sympathy  with  the  sublime  mysteries  of  the  Old 
Testament,  the  grand  march  of  its  history,  and  the 
deep  variations  of  its  prophetic  songs.  It  was  this 
occasional  sympathy  which  expressed  itself  in  the  awful 
dramas,  "  Cain  "  and  "  Heaven  and  Earth, "  and  which 
sometimes  showed  itself  in  more  pleasing  beauty  and 
power  in  his  "  Hebrew  Melodies."  Will  the  religious 
world  ever  forget  his  musical  verses  on  Sennacherib  ? 

The  Assyrian  came  down  like  a  -wolf  on  the  fold ; 

but  where  and  when  had  the  touch  been  given  which 
ever  after  acted  now  and  then  like  a  charm,  and 
hushed  his  dark  tempestuous  soul  into  communion 
with  the  scenes,  and  the  men,  and  the  music  of  the 
Bible  ?  Minds  and  hearts  like  his  are  not  left  by 
God  without  Divine  visitation  from  above.  Truth 
speaks  at  intervals  with  commanding  power.  A  loving 
voice  sometimes  whispers,  "My  salvation  is  near/-' 
and  to  Byron  such  a  voice  came  in  his  earlier  course. 

"  Lord  Byron  and  I  met  once,"  said  an  old  man  to 
a  friend,  as  they  sat  in  the  window  of  a  quiet  little 
parlour  looking  out  upon  Falmouth  harbour.  "  It  was 
one  evening  in  the  year  1809.  I  had  been  sitting  here 
thinking  how  Providence  and  the  Holy  Ghost  work 
together  in  promoting  the  salvation  of  man,  when 
the    servant    girl,   who    had  gone  out  on    an   errand, 


28  HYMN-WEITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

came  rushing  back  in  a  great  hurry ,  and  ran  upstairs. 
She  was  closely  followed  by  a  gentleman,  who,  when 
he  saw  me,  apologized  in  a  jaunty  way  for  his  intrusion, 
but  at  the  same  time  walked  in,  took  a  seat,  and  seemed 
at  perfect  ease.  He  was  a  noble,  handsome  young 
man.  I  shall  never  forget  the  bright  glance  of  his 
light  eyes  as  they  playfully  lightened  from  under  his 
very  dark  eyebrows.  Their  sparkles  of  fire  seemed  to 
float  on  the  surface  of  a  thoughtful  depth. 

"  '  Was  that  your  girl,  old  gentleman  V  said  he. 

"  '  Yes,  sir;  pray  what  is  the  matter  V 

"  c  Oh,  nothing  ;  but  I  wanted  to  make  her  acquain- 
tance on  the  terrace  yonder.  She  gave  me  a  spirited 
reception,  and  provoked  me  to  the  chase ;  so  here  I 
am.  I  admire  that  girl  of  yours  for  her  virtuous 
energy.  But  now,  letting  her  alone  in  her  retreat, 
turn  out  your  cards,  and  let  us  have  some  play.' 

"  '  We  keep  no  cards  here,  sir,'  said  I,  looking  at 
him  gravely. 

" '  No  cards  !  Perhaps  you  have  a  novel  or  two 
one  could  look  over  V 

"  '  No  sir;  such  things  are  never  found  in  this  house.'' 

"  '  What  have  you  got  then,  eh  V 

" '  I  have  a  book  here  that  might  interest  you/  I 
replied,  ( and  one  that  I  am  sure  will  not  only  refine 
your  taste,  but  do  your  heart  good/  I  opened  the 
Bible  before  him.  He  started.  The  gay  life  passed 
away  from  his  countenance,  and  he  was  silent  and 
thoughtful,  while  I  gave  him  some  lessons  on  the  Bible 
and  from  the  Bible.  '  I  have  not  the  pleasure  of 
knowing  your  name,  sir/  said  I,  as  he  rose  to  depart, 
'  but  I  pray  God  to  bless  you/ 

"  '  Thank  you/  was  his  parting  reply,  f  my  name 
is  George,  Lord  Byron.     Good-bye  V  " 


THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK.  29 

It  was  the  future  poet  on  his  way  to  Lisbon,  and 
who  knows  how  far  the  quiet  old  Methodist's  lesson 
<(  on  the  Bible  and  from  the  Bible"  influenced  his  after 
thought  and  feeling,  as  the  author  of  "  Hebrew  Me- 
lodies ;"  and  was  it  the  echo  of  that  good  little  man's 
touching*  appeal  that  sometimes  in  after  days,  and  in 
other  climes,  made  him  (C  silent  and  sombre/'  as  when 
he  said  in  the  presence  of  his  friend  Shelley,  "  Here  is  a 
little  book  which  somebody  has  sent  me  about  Chris- 
tianity, that  has  made  me  very  uncomfortable  ;  the 
reasoning  seems  to  me  very  strong,  the  proofs  are  very 
staggering.  I  don't  think  you  can  answer  it,  Shel- 
ley, at  least,  I  am  sure  I  can't,  and  what  is  more,  I 
don't  wish  it."  Poor  Byron  !  his  heart  cherished  some 
early  lessons  "  on  the  Bible  and  from  the  Bible ;"  and 
sometimes,  as  in  his  correspondence  with  Mr.  Shep- 
herd, prompted  him  to  express  his  feelings  of  concern 
about  his  own  spiritual  condition,  by  nobly  saying,  "  I 
can  assure  you  that  all  the  fame  which  ever  cheated 
humanity  into  higher  notions  of  its  importance  would 
never  weigh  in  my  mind  against  the  pure  and  pious 
interest  which  a  virtuous  being  may  be  pleased  to  take 
in  my  welfare."  But  whatever  he  owed  to  the  words 
and  prayers  of  the  old  man  in  the  quiet  parlour  at 
Falmouth,  he  owed  something,  and,  perhaps,  much,  to 
another,  who  seems  to  have  been  the  only  man  who 
was  kind,  and  faithful,  and  Christian  enough  to 
warn  him  against  evil,  and  recommend  him  to  the 
good,  in  the  midst  of  his  successes,  and  in  the  height 
of  his  poetic  glory.  That  man,  was  Sir  Walter 
Scott. 

"  "Would  you  have  me  turn  Methodist  ? "  said  Byron, 
in  reply  to  his  friend's  advice. 

<c  No,"  was  the  reply,  "  I  cannot  conceive  of  your 


30  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

being  a  Methodist,   but   you   might    be   a    Catholic 
Christian." 

His  heart  seems  never  to  have  lost  the  impression 
of  that  affectionate  touch,  and  he  recorded  it  by  say- 
ing, "  I  have  known  Sir  Walter  Scott  long  and  well, 
and  in  occasional  situations  which  call  forth  the  real 
character ;  and  I  can  assure  you  that  his  character  is 
worthy  of  admiration.  I  say  that  Walter  Scott  is  as 
nearly  a  good  man  as  man  can  be,  because  I  know  it 
by  experience  to  be  the  case."  Scott  had  shown  him- 
self to  be  Byron's  true  friend ;  but  he  proved  too  that 
he  was  akin  to  him  in  sympathy  with  the  Hebrew 
psalmist.  His  higher  moral  standing,  however,  gave 
him  the  advantage,  and  his  immortal  hymn  is  more 
full  in  its  conformity  to  the  ancient  and  holy  standard. 
Byron  had  the  pathos  and  the  tone  of  wailing  Israel, 
but  Scott,  equal  in  all  this,  entered  into  the  spirit  of 
Hebrew  worship,  and  rises  into  the  grandeur  of  devout 
submission  and  holy  trust. 

When  Israel  of  the  Lord  beloved, 

Out  of  the  land  of  bondage  came; 
Her  father's  God  before  her  moved, 

An  awful  guide  in  smoke  and  flame. 
By  day  along  the  astonished  lands 

The  cloudy  pillar  glided  slow  ; 
By  night,  Arabia's  crimsoned  sands 

Returned  the  fiery  column's  glow. 

There  rose  the  choral  hymn  of  praise, 

And  trump  and  timbrel  answered  keen  : 
And  Z ion's  daughters  poured  their  lays, 

With  priest's  and  warrior's  voice  between. 
No  portents  now  our  foes  amaze, 

Forsaken  Israel  wauders  lone  ; 
Our  fathers  would  not  know  thy  ways, 

And  Thou  has  left  them  to  their  own. 


THE    FIEST    HYMN-BOOK.  31 

But  present  still,  though  now  unseen, 

When  brightly  shines  the  prosperous  day ; 
Be  thoughts  of  Thee  a  cloudy  screen 

To  temper  the  deceitful  ray. 
And  oh,  when  stoops  on  Judah's  path, 

In  shade  and  storm  the  frequent  night ; 
Be  Thou  long-suffering,  slow  to  wrath, 

A  burning  and  a  shining-  light. 


Our  harps  we  left  by  Babel's  streams, 

The  tyrant's  pest,  the  Gentile's  scorn ; 
No  censer  round  our  altar  beams, 

And  mute  are  timbrel,  trump,  and  horn. 
But  Thou  hast  said  the  blood  of  goat, 

The  flesh  of  rams  I  will  not  prize  ; 
A  contrite  heart,  a  humble  thought, 

Are  mine  accepted  sacrifice. 

But  it  remained  for  the  Methodist  preacher  to  show 
the  modern  hymn  in  its  stronger  family  likeness  to 
those  old  spiritual  songs  in  which  all  beautiful,  grand, 
and  devout  thoughts,  expressions,  and  feelings  are  so 
richly  combined.  He  has  done  more  than  this.  He 
has  brought  the  spirit  of  the  old  covenant  into  har- 
mony with  that  of  the  new ;  and  in  one  hymn  has 
finely  blended  the  voices  of  all  Abraham's  spiritual 
children,  whether  ' '  Greek  or  Jew,  barbarian,  Scythian, 
bond  or  free.""  His  hymn  takes  position  above  those 
of  Byron  and  Scott.  The  hymns  of  this  remarkable 
trio  are  like  a  "  psalm  of  degrees."  They  move  in  an 
upward  gradation,  raising  the  swell  of  Christian  song 
until  it  rivals  the  music  of  Hebrew  fathers.  Under 
Byron's  hand,  the  distinctive  form  of  beauty  began 
to  breathe  and  unfold  its  tender  charms.  At  Scott's 
touch  it  expands  into  more  majestic  proportions,  and 


32  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

puts  forth  more  of  its  inner  life.  But  at  Olivers'  com- 
mand, it  manifests  its  maturity  of  soul,  and  gives  full 
and  harmonious  expression  to  all  its  heavenliness  of 
thought  and  affection.  In  the  course  of  conversation 
a  few  years  ago,  the  son  of  an  old  minister  said,  "  I 
remember  my  father  telling  me  that  he  was  once  stand- 
ing in  the  aisle  of  City-road  Chapel,  during  a  Confe- 
rence in  Wesley's  time,  and  Thomas  Olivers,  one  of 
the  preachers  came  down  to  him,  and  unfolding  a 
manuscript,  said,  f  Look  at  this,  I  have  rendered  it 
from  the  Hebrew,  giving  it  as  far  as  I  could  a  Chris- 
tian character,  and  I  have  called  on  Leoni,  the  Jew, 
who  has  given  me  a  synagogue  melody  to  suit  it,  here 
is  the  tune,  and  it  is  to  be  called  Leoni.'  I  read  the 
composition,  and  it  was  that  now  well-known,  graud 
imitation  of  ancient  Israel's  hymns — 

The  God  of  Abraham  praise, 
Who  reigns  enthroned  above, 
Ancient  of  everlasting  days, 
And  God  of  love  ; 
Jehovah  !  Great  I  am  ! 
•  By  earth  and  heaven  confest ; 
I  bow  and  bless  the  sacred  name 
For  ever  blest ! 

The  God  of  Abraham  praise  ! 
At  whose  supreme  command 
From  earth  I  rise  and  seek  the  joys 
At  his  right  hand : 
I  all  on  earth  forsake, 
Its  wisdom,  fame,  and  power, 
And  Him  my  only  portion  make, 
My  shield  and  tower. 

The  God  of  Abraham  praise  ! 
"Whose  all-sufficient  grace 
Shall  guide  me  all  my  happy  days 
In  all  my  ways : 


THE    FIEST    HYMN-BOOK.  33 

He  by  Himself  hath  sworn, 
I  on  his  oath  depend ; 
I  shall,  on  eagle's  wings  upborne, 
To  heaven  ascend ; 
I  shall  behold  his  face, 
I  shall  his  power  adore, 
And  sing  the  wonders  of  his  grace 
For  evermore. 

Though  nature's  strength  decay, 
And  earth  and  hell  withstand, 
To  Canaan's  bounds  I  urge  my  way 
At  his  command : 
The  watery  deep  I  pass 
"With  Jesus  in  my  view, 
And  through  the  howling  wilderness 
My  way  pursue. 

The  goodly  land  I  see, 
With  peace  and  plenty  blest, 
A  land  of  sacred  liberty, 
And  endless  rest : 
There  milk  and  honey  flow, 
And  oil  and  wine  abound, 
And  trees  of  life  for  ever  grow, 
"With  mercy  crown 'd. 

There  dwells  the  Lord  our  King, 
The  Lord  our  Righteousness, 
Triumphant  o'er  the  world  and  sin, 
The  Prince  of  Peace ! 
On  Zion's  sacred  height 
His  kingdom  still  maintains, 
And  glorious  with  his  saints  in  light, 
For  ever  reigns ! 

He  keeps  his  own  secure ; 
He  guards  them  by  his  side  ; 
Arrays  in  garments  white  and  pure 
His  spotless  bride ; 

3 


34  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

With  streams  of  sacred  bliss, 
With  groves  of  living  joys, 
With  all  the  fruits  of  Paradise, 
He  still  supplies. 

Before  the  great  Three-One 
They  all  exulting  stand, 
And  tell  the  wonders  He  hath  done, 
Through  all  their  land ; 
The  listening  spheres  attend 
And  swell  the  growing  fame, 
And  sing  in  songs  which  never  end, 
The  wondrous  name  ! 

The  God  who  reigns  on  high, 
The  great  archangels  sing, 
And  "  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,"  cry, 
"  Almighty  king ! 
Who  was  and  is  the  same, 
And  evermore  shall  be  ! 
Jehovah  !  Father  !  great  I  Am  ! 
We  worship  Thee !" 

Before  the  Saviour's  face 
The  ransom'd  nations  bow, 
Overwhelm'd  at  his  almighty  grace, 
For  ever  new  : 
He  shows  his  prints  of  love ; 
They  kindle  to  a  flame, 
And  sound,  through  all  the  worlds  above, 
The  slaughtered  Lamb ! 

The  whole  triumphant  host 
Give  thanks  to  God  on  high ; 
"  Hail !  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost !" 
They  ever  cry : 
Hail !  Abraham's  God  and  mine  ! 
I  join  the  heavenly  lays  ; 
All  might  and  majesty  are  Thine, 
And  endless  praise ! 


THE    FIRST    HYMN-BOOK.  35 

How  little  Byron  knew  when  he  shrank  from  what 
he  thought  to  be  Scott's  recommendation  of  Methodism, 
that  a  Methodist  preacher  would  be  honoured  as  more 
than  his  equal  in  true  "  Hebrew  melodies."  And  how 
little  Scott  thought  when  he  found  himself  arrested 
by  Wesley's  preaching  in  Kelso  churchyard,  that  the 
name  of  one  of  Wesley's  itinerant  companions  would 
stand  in  the  lists  of  immortality  above  his  own,  in  the 
line  of  Israelitish  hymnists.  It  is  interesting,  too,  to 
see  posterity  balancing*  the  relative  claims  of  Olivers 
and  his  bitter  theological  antagonist  Toplady.  Wesley 
employed  Olivers  as  his  "  corrector  of  the  press."  But 
he  was  more.  He  sometimes  took  part  in  the 
doctrinal  strife  which  was  raging  then  between  the 
Arminians  and  the  Calvinists.  Olivers,  though  once 
a  cobbler,  had  a  great  deal  of  native  logic,  and  could 
use  a  syllogism  with  all  the  effect  which  he  was  once 
apt  to  give  to  his  awl.  He  knew  how  to  stitch  up 
collegians  like  Toplady  ;  and  poor  Toplady  was  now 
and  then  irritated  under  the  process  until  bitter  and 
even  vulgar  outcries  were  his  only  mode  of  defence. 
"  Mr.  Wesley,"  cries  he,  "  has  taken  refuge  under  a 
cobbler's  apron  i"  Alas !  for  the  gentleman  when  the 
theological  polemic  rises.  Human  nature  is  a  strange 
complexity,  even  in  its  most  hallowed  condition,  espe- 
cially when  its  religious  taste  and  temper  take  the 
form  of  controversy.  He  who  grins  about  a  cobbler's 
apron  to-day,  sings  to-morrow, 

Eock  of  ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee  ! 

and  has  thus  rendered  it  difficult  to  say  whether  he 
or  his  cobbler  foe  was  the  greater  benefactor  to  the 
Christian  world  when  they  exercised  their  higher  and 


36  HYMN -WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

diviner  calling  as  Christian  hymnists.  Toplady's  name 
will  ever  be  balmy  to  those  whose  tremulous  spirits 
feel  the  need  of  the  cross ;  while  those  who  can  rise 
into  the  jubilant  assurance  of  pilgrims  on  the  very 
banks  of  Jordan  will  bless  the  memory  of  the  man 
whose  memorial  is  thus  recorded  by  his  companions  in 
travel  with  characteristic  brevity  and  force.  u  Thomas 
Olivers  died  advanced  in  years.  In  his  younger  days 
he  was  a  zealous,  able,  and  useful  travelling  preacher ; 
but  for  a  long  period  of  his  life  he  was  employed  by 
Mr.  Wesley  as  the  corrector  of  his  press.  His  talents 
were  very  considerable  :  and  his  attachment  to  Mr. 
Wesley  and  Methodism  was  fully  evidenced  by  several 
masterly  publications.'"  He  proved  himself  to  be  no 
mean  writer,  logician,  poet,  and  musical  composer. 
With  all  this  he  was  a  good  man  •  and  long  ago  he 
fully  realized  the  blessedness  which  his  last  stanza 
anticipated — 

Hail !  Abraham's  God,  and  mine  ! 
I  join  the  heavenly  lays  ; 
All  might  and  majesty  are  Thine 
And  endless  praise ! 


)7c^S^i  £^2>S  ~xTd£^  C  ?<^Js 


©fbaptcr  IIL 


HYMNS   OF  THE  LATTER  DAY  MORNING. 

"But  who  the  melodies  of  morn  can  tell." 


HE  morning;  lio-lit  of  the  Christian  Church  fell 
upon  Pliny  the  younger ;  and  in  that  light  he 
saw  the  martyr  spirit  of  our  first  century.  He 
had  seen  the  Christians  of  his  time  suffer,  and  knew 
that  their  sufferings  never  broke  their  joy.  Their 
morning  hymns  had  never,  perhaps,  touched  his  ear ; 
but  he  has  bequeathed  a  precious  testimony  to  the 
cheerful  devotion  of  the  people  who  could  be  charged 
with  no  crime  but  that  of  meeting  on  "  a  stated  day 
before  it  was  light,  to  sing  hymns  to  Christ  as  God," 
and  to  renew  their  mutual  pledges  of  truthfulness, 
purity,  and  love.  Blessed  souls !  "  The  word  of 
Christ  dwelt  in  them  so  richly  "  that  they  must  needs 
"present  the  dawning  of  the  day"  with  their  songs. 
The  apostolic  spirit  was  still  alive  in  them.  They  were 
rejoicing  in  the  dawn  of  the  latter  day.  They  were  in 
jeopardy  every  hour;  every  little  group  was  "baptized 
for  the  dead  "  ;  but  they  ate  their  "  meat  with  glad- 
ness," cheering  their  meat-time  with  joyful  psalmody; 
their    love -feasts   were   brightened    with    chant    and 


38  HYMN-WEITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

chorus,  and  their  homes  were  vocal  with  simple  melo- 
dies and  favourite  hymns.  What  hymns  must  they 
have  been  which  were  pure  overflowings  of  hearts  full 
of  divine  influence  ?  What  songs,  when  every  singer 
gave  out  the  form  of  old  anthems  newly  instinct  with 
Christian  life,  or  extemporized  in  melody  and  rhythm 
according  to  his  own  distinctive  spiritual  gift  ?  What 
was  their  style  of  hymn  ?  How  did  they  sing  ?  Their 
psalmody  must  have  been  at  once  a  reiteration  of  the 
past  and  an  embodiment  of  exemplar  songs  for  the 
future.  Echoes  from  that  morning  of  church  music 
come  to  our  ears  and  hearts  even  now  in  some  hymns 
which  still  breathe  the  perfume  of  an  apostolic  age. 
The  warm  and  jubilant  spirit,  and  the  triumphant 
heavenliness  of  tone  which  distinguish  those  ancient 
songs,  give  life  to  our  modern  liturgies,  and  are  so  like 
the  worship  of  prophets,  apostles,  and  martyrs,  that  in 
singing  them  we  may  enjoy  a  feeling  of  unison  with 
choirs  of  the  first  Christian  converts.  When  we  join 
u  with  angels  and  archang-els  "  in  the  ' '  thrice  holy," 
or  lift  up  our  hearts  with  the  "  gloria  in  excelsis,"  or 
help  to  swell  the  anthem  peal  of  the  Te  Denm,  are  we 
not  using  fragments  from  that  early  collection  of  hymns 
in  which  the  praises  of  the  old  covenant  saints  were 
taken  up  and  poured  ouward  in  richer  Christian  har- 
mony through  the  first  ages  of  Messiah's  kingdom  ? 
In  them  we  have  the  first  Christian  responses  to  the 
songs  of  patriarchal  and  prophetic  days.  The  first 
song  in  which  the  people  join  at  the  Holy  Communion 
"  with  angels  and  archangels/'  etc.,  is  one  of  the  first 
echoes  of  the  Christian  Church  to  those  voices  of 
seraphims  which  the  prophet  heard  in  the  temple,  and 
which  were  answered  and  repeated  from  Patmos  in  the 
hearing  of  a  rapt  apostle  : — 


HYMNS    OF    THE    LATTER    DAY   MORNING.  39 

Holy,  holy,  holy 
Jehovah  Sabaoth, 
The  whole  earth  is  full 
Of  his  glory. 

The  anthem  of  ' '  Glory  to  God  in  the  Highest/'  sang 
by  the  multitude  of  "  heavenly  hosts/'  was  first  re- 
sponded to  by  the  happy  shepherds  as  they  "  returned 
glorifying  and  praising  God  for  all  the  things  they  had 
heard  and  seen  •"  and  then  both  angels  and  shepherds 
were  answered  by  the  martyr  church  in  the  glorious 
old  Greek  hymn  which  in  our  English  Liturgy  the 
communicants  are  called  to  chant  at  the  close  of  the 
Sacramental  Supper.  And  if,  as  the  tradition  goes, 
the  Te  Deum  broke  in  alternate  parts  from  the  lips  of 
Ambrose  and  Augustine  during  the  solemnities  of 
Augustine's  baptism,  it  is  probable  that  the  holy 
singers  merely  caught  the  full-toned  expression  of  an 
earlier  time,  the  day-spring  of  the  Church,  when  the 
company  of  believers  gave  forth  utterances  in  which 
creeds,  and  praises,  and  thanksgivings,  and  intense 
prayer,  and  living  hopes  were  interwoven  and  wrought 
up  into  one  grand  church  hymn  for  all  generations  and 
all  times.  One  incident  in  the  history  of  Robert  Hall 
serves  to  set  forth  the  native  majesty  of  the  Te  Deum, 
and  its  close  conformity  to  the  spirit  and  manner  of 
inspired  psalms.  He  had  composed  a  sermon  on  a 
text  which  had  touched  his  fine  sense  of  grandeur  and 
had  deeply  moved  his  heart.  On  completing  his  ser- 
mon, he  turned  to  the  concordance  to  find  the  text. 
It  was  not  to  be  found.  It  was  not  in  the  Bible.  It 
was  a  sentence  from  the  Te  Deum,  "  All  the  earth  doth 
worship  Thee,  the  Father  everlasting."  All  ears  are 
not  fine  enough  to  be  charmed  with  the  rhythm  of 
these  ancient  hymns ;  and  many  sincere  worshippers 


40  HYMN-WEITEKS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

even  lack  the  power  of  fairly  appreciating  their  simple 
grandeur  and  glowing  power.  Translations  necessarily 
dim  their  glory,  lower  their  tone,  and  lessen  their 
power.  But  now  and  then  some  hymnist  of  deep 
sympathy  with  the  past,  drinks  inspiration  from  these 
ever-living  springs  of  song,  and  casts  the  whole 
breathing  measures  into  metrical  form  and  rhyme, 
which  at  once  suit  the  taste  and  command  the  hearts 
of  wider  multitudes  and  later  times.  How  many  who 
were  never  moved  into  fellowship  with  "  all  the  com- 
pany of  heaven"  by  the  liturgical  translation  of  the 
Ter  Sandus,  have  risen  into  something  like  an  approach 
to  the  old  strain  when  singing  Bishop  Mantes  more 
popular  but  beautiful  verses — 

Bright  the  vision  that  delighted 

Once  the  sight  of  Judah's  seer, 
Sweet  the  countless  tongues  united 

To  entrance  the  prophet's  ear. 
Round  the  Lord  in  glory  seated, 

Cherubim  and  seraphim 
Fill'd  his  temple,  and  repeated 

Each  to  each  th'  alternate  hymn. 

"  Lord,  thy  glory  fills  the  heaven, 
Earth  is  with  its  fulness  stored ; 
Unto  Thee  be  glory  given, 
Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord !" 
Heaven  is  still  with  glory  ringing, 
Earth  takes  up  the  angels'  cry, 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy,"  singing, 

"  Lord  of  hosts,  the  Lord  most  high !" 

Ever  thus  in  God's  high  praises, 

Brethren,  let  our  tongues  unite ; 
Chief  the  heart  when  duty  raises 

God-ward  at  his  mystic  rite  : 
"With  his  seraph  train  before  Him, 

With  his  holy  Church  below, 
Thus  conspire  we  to  adore  Him, 

Bid  we  thus  one  anthem  flow  ! 


HYMNS    OF    THE    LATTER    DAY    MORNING.  41 

"  Lord,  thy  glory  fills  the  heaven, 

Earth  is  with  its  fulness  stored ; 
Unto  Thee  be  glory  given, 

Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord  !" 
Thus  thy  glorious  name  confessing, 

We  adopt  thy  angels'  cry. 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy,"  blessing 

Thee,  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  most  high  !" 

As  rank  after  rank  from  "  the  noble  army  of  mar- 
tyrs" passed  away  during  the  morning  tide  of  the 
Church,  leaving  no  record,  and  without  the  least  care 
about  the  preservation  of  tlieir  memory  upon  earth, 
so,  many  of  the  hymnists  of  early  days  were  happy  in 
expressing  their  joys  in  song  while  they  lived,  and 
then  departed,  bequeathing  their  hymns  to  following 
generations,  without  a  single  effort  to  secure  for  their 
own  names  the  future  honours  of  authorship.  Some 
of  their  simple,  tender,  trustful  hymns,  full  of  Christ 
and  winged  with  heavenliness,  still  remain  as  nameless 
memorials  of  the  generation  whose  purity  inspired 
contemporary  authorities  with  wonder.  One  hymn 
there  is  which  seems  to  claim  a  place  among  those 
which  Pliny  says  the  Christians  used  to  sing  before  the 
morning  dawn.  It  is  in  the  spirit  of  the  Psalmist,  who 
said,  "  My  eyes  prevent  the  night  watches,"  and  may 
be  rendered  thus  : 

From  our  midnight  sleep  uprising, 

Thee,  Gracious  One,  we  will  adore ; 
Loud  the  angels'  hymn  uplifting 
To  Thee,  Almighty,  evermore  ! 
The  holy,  holy,  holy  Lord  and  God  art  Thou! 
In  mercy's  name,  have  mercy  on  us  now! 

From  the  couch  and  death-like  slumber 

Thou  makest  me,  0  Lord,  to  rise  : 
Thou  my  mind  and  heart  enlighten 

And  free  my  lips  from  sinful  ties, 


42  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

So  may  I  'fore  Thee,  Triune  God,  with  praises  bow ; 
For  holy,  holy,  holy  Lord  and  God  art  Thou  ! 

With  multitudes  on  multitudes, 

The  coming  Judge  will  soon  be  here  ; 
And  ev'ry  deed  of  ev'ry  man, 
Will  bare  and  open  then  appear. 
We'll  wait  in  filial  fear,  cheering  our  midnight  now, 
With  holy,  holy,  holy  Lord  and  God  art  Thou ! 

Many  of  the  voices  which  were  thus  lifted  up  in  the 
night  watches  of  Pliny's  time,  were  contemporaries  of 
the  "  beloved  disciple" ;  and  among  the  rhythmical 
fragments  which  survive  there  seem  to  be  traces  of  the 
influence  which  the  last  of  the  apostles  had  shed  upon 
the  mind  and  heart  of  the  youthful  Church.  Indica- 
tions may  be  found  here  and  there  of  familiarity  with 
the  last  apostle's  closing  utterances,  "  Hereby  know 
ye  the  Spirit  of  God :  every  spirit  that  confesseth  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  of  God,  ....  and 
we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given 
us  an  understanding  that  we  may  know  Him  that  is 
true,  and  we  are  in  Him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true  God  and  eternal  life. 
Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols."  This  clos- 
ing admonition  was  sacredly  observed  by  these  "  little 
children,"  while  they  kept  their  adoring  eyes  on  John's 
last  vision  of  "  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne," 
and  continued  to  admonish  one  another  "in  psalms, 
and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs"  about  the  incarnate 
Saviour,  their  reigning  Lord.  One  of  their  strains  is  so 
like  John,  and  so  befitting  his  "  little  children"  in  its 
pure  simplicity,  its  joyful  earnestness,  and  reverent 
friendship  with  a  present  Saviour,  that  it  must  ever 
have  a  charm  for  all  who  have  spiritual  sympathy  with 
the   apostle    of   "  perfect  love."     It   loses   much,    of 


HYMNS    OP    THE    LATTER    DAY    HORNING.  43 

course,  by  translation  into  English  rhyme,  but  in  that 
form  it  is  most  likely  to  touch  the  present  generation  : 

We  adore  thy  pure  image, 

0  good  Lord,  imploring  Thee ! 
Pardon  all  our  sins  and  failures, 

Christ,  our  gracious  Deity. 
Thou  didst  come  in  thy  good-will, 

Taking  flesh  with  all  its  woe, 
Thy  own  creatures  to  redeem 

From  the  bondage  of  the  foe. 
Therefore  cry  we  thankfully, 

Fulness  of  delight,  to  Thee, 
Our  Saviour,  once  appearing, 

Purging  earth's  iniquity. 

Some  of  the  hymns  of  early  dawn  must  have 
mingled  with  the  joy  of  angels  over  penitent  hearts. 
Human  nature  was  sinful  then  as  it  is  now.  The 
contrite  heart  and  broken  spirit  had  its  psalm  then  as 
it  ever  will.  Apostle  churches  were  never  lacking  in — 

The  godly  grief,  the  pleasing  smart, 
The  meltings  of  a  broken  heart ; 
The  tear  that  tells  the  son's  forgiven, 
The  sighs  that  waft  the  soul  to  heaven. 

The  guiltless  shame,  the  sweet  distress, 

The  unutterable  tenderness, 

The  genuine  meek  humility, 

The  wonder,  "  why  such  love  to  me  !" 

One  of  these  plaintive  psalms  of  primitive  repen- 
tance seems  to  sob  and  moan  with  gentle  sorrow,  and 
to  palpitate  with  mystic  penitential  joy  and  tender 
longings  for  Christ  : 

Long-suff 'ring  Jesus,  precious  Jesus  ! 

Heal,  oh,  heal  my  wounded  soul ! 
Oh,  sweeten  Thou  my  heart,  my  Jesus  ! 

Save,  I  pray  Thee,  make  me  whole  ! 


44  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

That  saved  by  Thee,  my  Savour,  I 
May  thy  great  mercy  magnify. 

Lover  of  man,  oh,  hear  me,  Saviour  ! 

Thine  afflicted  servant  cries  : 
Oh,  deliver  me  from  judgment ; 
Bid  the  sentenced  culprit  rise  ! 
Thou  merciful,  long-suffering  Son, 
Oh  most  sweet  Jesus,  only  One  ! 

Do  let  thy  servant  come,  my  Saviour  ! 
Sinking  'fore  Thee  now  with  tears ; 
Save  me,  Jesus  !  me  repenting  ! 
Save  from  hell,  and  hellish  fears  ! 
O  Master  !  my  deep  wounds  I  feel ! 
Now  heal  me  !  blessed  Saviour,  heal ! 

"With  thy  strong  hand,  my  Saviour,  rescue 

From  that  Spirit -murd'rer  fell ; 
In  compassion  snatch  from  Satan  ; 
Though  I've  sinn'd  and  merit  hell : 
Merciful,  long- suff 'ring  One,  I  flee 
To  thy  defence  !     To  Thee !  to  Thee  ! 

Oh,  meeten  me  to  thy  blest  kingdom, 

Jesus,  be  my  inward  light ! 
To  my  lost  soul  Thou  art  salvation ; 
From  hell  redeeming  by  thy  might. 
Here,  weeping  like  a  helpless  child, 
Save  me,  0  Christ !  0  Jesus  mild ! 

Such  meltings,,  bemoanings,  struggles  of  thought, 
regrets,  half-plaintive,  half-joyful,  now  desponding,  and 
now  hopeful  appeals,  are  felt  to  be  his  own  by  every 
prodigal  sinner  in  every  age,  and  all  the  world  over. 
Repentance  never  changes  its  character.  Its  language, 
though  varied  in  metre,  is  essentially  one.  The  old 
eastern  penitential  psalm  falls  naturally  from  the  lips 
of  a  penitent  transgressor  in  our  modern  western  world 
and  any  genuine  living  hymn  from  a  truly  softened 


HYMNS    OF    THE    LATTER    DAY    MOENING.  45 

English,  heart,  appealing  to  its  Saviour,  would  be 
chanted  amidst  tears  by  penitent  worshippers  in  an 
Eastern  basilica.  A  good  man  from  the  far  West,  not 
many  years  ago,  during  his  pilgrimage  in  the  East, 
found  his  way  into  an  Armenian  church  at  Constanti- 
nople. The  people  were  singing.  The  language  of 
their  hymn  was  foreign  ;  but  it  was  evident  that  the 
singers  were  in  earnest,  and  that  there  was  deep  feel- 
ing in  the  words  of  their  song.  The  music  was  a  simple 
melody.  All  sang  with  closed  eyes,  but  as  the  strain 
continued,  tears  were  starting,  and  trickling  down 
many,  many  a  cheek.  Dr.  Pomeroy  would  fain  have 
joined  in  the  plaintive,  tender,  yet  glowing  hymn.  What 
were  they  singing  ?  The  stanzas  were  translated,  and 
as  they  fell  on  his  ear,  his  heart  responded  to  the  pre- 
cious, well-known  verses — 

Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 

Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee  ; 

Let  the  water  and  the  blood, 

From  thy  wonnded  side  which  flowed 

Be  of  sin  the  double  cure, 

Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power. 

Not  the  labours  of  my  hands, 
Can  fulfil  thy  law's  demands, 
Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 
Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow, 
All  for  sin  could  not  atone ; 
Thou  must  save,  and  Thou  alone. 

Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring, 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling ; 
Naked,  come  to  Thee  for  dress ; 
Helpless,  look  to  Thee  for  grace ; 
Foul,  I  to  the  Fountain  fly  : 
Wash  me,  Saviour,  or  I  die! 


46  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

"While  I  draw  this  fleeting  breath, 
"When  my  eye-strings  break  in  death, 
When  I  soar  through  tracts  unknown, 
See  Thee  on  thy  judgment-throne  : 
Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee  ! 

Who  would  not  like  to  nave  heard  and  seen  the  author 
of  this  hymn  ?  He  might  have  been  found  once  in  a 
sequestered  village  in  the  eastern  corner  of  Devon. 
There,  amidst  the  beautiful  hills  which  are  overlooked 
by  the  western  slopes  of  the  Black  Down  range,  the 
quiet  parish  church  of  Broad  Hembury  stands  silently 
inviting  the  folks  of  the  hamlet  to  "  seek  the  living 
among  the  dead."  Within  those  walls  on  any  Sunday 
about  the  year  1770  the  vicar  might  be  found,  during 
church  hours,  fervently  leading  the  devotions  of  his 
flock,  and  then  dispensing  saving  truth  from  the  pulpit 
in  a  style  and  spirit  not  to  be  enjoyed  everywhere, 
especially  in  those  times.  The  preacher  is  described 
as  having  an  "  ethereal  countenance,  and  light,  im- 
mortal form.  His  voice  was  music.  His  vivacity 
would  have  caught  the  listener's  eye,  and  his  soul-filled 
looks  and  movements  would  have  interpreted  his 
language,  had  there  not  been  such  commanding 
solemnity  in  his  tones  as  made  apathy  impossible,  and 
such  simplicity  in  his  words  that  to  hear  was  to  under- 
stand. From  easy  explanations  he  advanced  to  rapid 
and  conclusive  arguments,  and  warmed  into  importu- 
nate exhortations,  till  conscience  began  to  burn  and 
feelings  to  take  fire  from  his  own  kindled  spirit,  and 
himself  and  his  hearers  were  together  drowned  in  sym- 
pathetic tears."  The  preacher  was  Augustus  Montague 
Toplady.  He  was  the  son  of  Major  Toplady,  who 
died  at  the  siege  of  Carthagina  in  1740,  leaving  his 


HYMNS    OF    THE    LATTER   DAY    MORNING.  47 

infant  Augustus  to  the  care  of  a  tender  but  judicious 
mother,  under  whose  oversight  the  gentle  and  affec- 
tionate  character  of  the  future  hymnist  was  happily 
developed    and    matured.      He    owed    much   to   his 
mother ;  and  his  heart  was  always  ready  for  returns  of 
filial  love  and  duty.     The  genuine  and  decided  nature 
of  his  conversion,  however,  was  the  deeper  secret  of 
his  distinctive  character  as  a  divine,  a  preacher,  and  a 
hymnist.     "When  he  was  but  sixteen,  during  a  visit 
to  Ireland  with  his  mother,  he  found  his  way  into  a 
barn  at  Codyrnain,"  where  an  uncultivated  but  warm- 
hearted layman  was  preaching  from  Eph.  ii.  13.     The 
human    instrument   was    unpolished,    but   the    divine 
word  was   effectual ;    and   looking   back,    after   some 
years,   on  the  happy  change  which  passed   over  his 
heart  during  that  hour  in  the  barn,  and  speaking  of 
the  gracious  sentence  which  so  deeply  touched  him,  he 
says,   "It   was   from   that   passage  that   Mr.   Morris 
preached  on  the  memorable  evening  of  my  effectual 
call  by  the  grace    of   God.      Under  the   ministry  of 
that  dear  messenger,  and  under  that  sermon,  I  was,  I 
trust,    c  brought    nigh   by   the    blood    of    Christ/    in 
August,  1756.     Strange  that  I,  who  had  so  long  sat 
under   the    means    of   grace   in    England,    should   be 
brought  nigh  unto  God  in  an  obscure  part  of  Ireland, 
amidst  a  handful  of  God's  people  met  together  in  a 
barn,  and  under  the  ministry  of  one  who  could  hardly 
spell  his  name.     Surely  it  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it 
is  marvellous.     The  excellency  of  such  power  must  be 
of  God,  and  cannot  be  of  man." 

He  was  ordained  in  June,  1762.  The  circumstances 
and  mode  of  his  conversion  seem  to  have  disposed  him 
to  a  strong  and  ruling  conviction  of  the  Calvinistic 
sense  of  the  articles  to  which  he  subscribed,  and  to 


48  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

which,  as  he  said,  he  subscribed  because  he  believed 
them.      He    entered   on   his   rural   charge   at   Broad 
Hembury  in  1768.     And  there    his    finely-tempered 
soul  regaled  itself  now  and  then  amidst  the  delicious 
retreats  on  the  banks  of  the  Otter  stream,  by  cele- 
brating the  grace   of  his  Redeemer  in  the  immortal 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs  from  which  so  many  peni- 
tent and  believing  hearts  continue  to  gather  saving 
balm.     Strange  that  harsh  and  bitter  words  should 
have  been  uttered  in  controversy  with  such  kindred 
hymnists  as  Wesley  and  Olivers  !     When  these  poetic 
spirits  sang,  they  were  in  perfect  harmony ;  but  when 
they    dogmatized,    there    was    intemperate    discord. 
Toplady's  strong  conviction  and  warm  zeal  for  those 
dogmas   whose    exclusive   claims    he    thought   to   be 
demonstrated  by  his  own  conversion  sometimes  mas- 
tered his  native  gentleness  and  Christian  feeling,  and 
led  him  astray  into   a   false   position.     His  example 
cautions  the  lover  of  truth  against  allowing  himself  to 
be  provoked  into   controversy.     Better  let  the  truth 
work  its  own  way.     His  polemic  essays  may  repose  on 
the   theological   shelf,   but   his   hymns   will   for   ever 
wreathe  his  name  with  holy  light  in  the  memory  and 
heart  of  the  Christian  Church. 

How  beautiful  was  the  closing  scene  of  his  life ; 
"  Sickness  is  no  affliction,"  said  the  saintly  pilgrim, 
"  pain  no  curse,  death  itself  no  dissolution/'  To  one 
who  inquired  whether  his  consolations  always  abounded, 
it  was  replied,  <c  I  cannot  say  there  are  no  intermis- 
sions ;  for  if  there  were  not,  my  consolations  would  be 
more  and  greater  than  I  could  possibly  bear;  but 
when  they  abate  they  leave  such  an  abiding  sense  of 
(rod's  goodness,  and  of  the  certainty  of  my  being 
fixed  upon  the  eternal  rock  Christ  Jesus,  that  my  soul 


HYMNS    OF   THE    LATTER    DAY    MORNING .  49 

is  still  filled  with  peace  and  Joy."  Happy  hyinnist  ! 
He  now  realized  the  full  meaning  of  his  own 

Eock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me. 

Like  many  others,  he  had  mistaken  Wesley  on  one 
point,  and,  with  strange  perversity  of  error,  condemned 
him  for  teaching  the  doctrine  of  "  absolute  perfection," 
as  the  Christian's  privilege.  It  was  in  his  zeal  against 
this  illusion  that  he  entitled  his  ' c  Rock  of  Ages,"  ( '  A 
living  and  dying  prayer  for  the  holiest  believer  in 
the  world."  But  "Wesley  was  as  innocent  of  this 
alleged  heresy  as  was  Toplady  himself ;  and  no  believer 
in  the  world  would  sing  Toplady's  hymnic  prayer  with 
more  reverent  feeling  than  John  Wesley.  Indeed,  the 
last  utterances  of  the  two  men  were  graciously  akin. 
Wesley  breathed  the  spirit  of  Toplady's  hymn  when  in 
departing  he  sang — 

I  the  chief  of  sinners  am, 
But  Jesus  died  for  me. 

Blessed  spirits  !  They  have  met  in  clearer  light,  and 
now  see  "  eye  to  eye." 

Hallowed  genius  continues  to  consecrate  itself  to 
that  holy  "  name  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  Xor 
does  it  fail  to  furnish  the  succession  of  believing 
penitents  with  happy,  suitable  forms  of  tuneful  expres- 
sion in  their  appeals  to  Jesus.  What  the  old  Greek 
hymnists  did  for  those  who  were  coming  to  Christ  in 
their  day,  and  what  Toplady  did  for  later  generations, 
both  in  east  and  west,  has  been  done  for  the  hearts 
that  the  Lord  opens  by  still  later  voices  of  equal 
sweetness  and  power.  Some  of  these  are  the  voices 
of  "  devout  women."  A  woman  took  the  lead  in  holy 
song   at  the   dawning  of  the  "latter  day."     Women 

4 


50  HYMN-WRITEES   AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

were  most  ready  to  weep  with  Him  who  wept  for  us, 
and  to  rejoice  in  his  joy.    The  voices  of  women  swelled 
the   joy    of    the   resurrection,  mingled  in  the  straius 
which  cheered  the  simple  tables  around  which  the  first 
disciples  e<  ate  their  meat  with  gladness,"  and  filled  up 
the   harmonies    of    those    gatherings    whose    cheerful 
worship  and  happy  expression  gave  them  "  favour  with 
all  the  people."     Many  of  the  hymns  preserved  to  us 
from  the  Syrian  and  Greek  hymnists  were,  doubtless, 
from  the  hearts  and  pens  of  sons  of  holy  mothers ;   or, 
it  may  be,  some  of  the  simple  rhythmical  celebrations 
of  the  birth    and  glory  of  the   "  Child  Jesus"   were 
utterances  of  widow-confessors,  or  mothers  of  conse- 
crated "  little  ones."     No  name,  however,  has  come 
down   to   us.      No    fragment   can    be   verified   as   a 
woman's  hymn.      It  has  remained    for  more   modern 
days  to  hear  songs  from  "  devout  women"  which  equal 
the  tenderest  and  most  happy  of  all  tender  and  happy 
melodies  adapted  to  the  softened  hearts  which  long  for 
a  Saviour.     One  of  these  comes  from  Devon,  from  its 
southern  coast.     If  anybody  wishes  to  enjoy,  within 
the  limits  of  a  few  days'  ramble,  one  of  the  richest 
interminglings   of  balmy  air  and  bright  blue   sea,  of 
hill  and   dale,   copsy  knoll    and    ferny   hollow,    villa- 
crowned  heights  and  cottages  in  dells,  noble  cliffs  and 
terraced  gardens,  mountain-paths  and  quiet  sparkling 
beaches,  weedy  rocks  aud  whispering  caverns,   ever- 
varying,  ever-harmonizing  scenes,  amidst  which,  above, 
beneath,  around,  and  everywhere,  grandeur  is  melting 
into  beauty — he  must  be  a  quiet  sojourner  for  a  little 
while  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Torquay.     Of  those  who 
seek  and  find  enjoyment  in  that  delicious  retreat,  one 
lady  has  happily  brightened  the   scenes  already  bright 
by  the  charm  of  a  pious  example,  the  quiet  but  dili- 


HYMNS    OF    THE    LATTER    DAY    MORNING.  51 

gent  diffusion  of  truth,  and  the  gracious  exercise  of 
her  Christian  charity.  A  lover  of  nature,  a  lover  of 
souls,  a  lover  of  Christ,  her  talents  and  zeal  have  shed 
their  best  and  most  lasting  blessings  on  the  Christian 
world  by  the  issue  of  those  hymns  which  promise  ever 
to  reflect  blessing  on  her  name.  Thousands  who  never 
saw  Torquay,  thousands  who  merely  know  the  name  of 
Charlotte  Elliott,  will  find  themselves  nearer  to  the 
blessed  Jesus  while  they  sing  her  justly  popular  hymn — 

Just  as  I  am,  without  one  plea 
But  that  thy  blood  was  shed  for  me, 
And  that  Thou  bidst  me  come  to  Thee, 
0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come ! 

Just  as  I  am,  and  waiting  not 
To  rid  my  soul  of  one  dark  blot, 
To  Thee,  whose  blood  can  cleanse  each  spot, 
0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come  ! 

Just  as  I  am,  though  toss'd  about 
With  many  a  conflict,  many  a  doubt, 
Fightings  and  fears  within,  without, 
0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come  ! 

Just  as  I  am,  poor,  wretched,  blind, 
Sight,  riches,  healing  of  the  mind, 
Tea,  all  I  need,  in  Thee  I  find, 

0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come ! 

Just  as  I  am,  Thou  wilt  receive, 

"Wilt  welcome,  pardon,  cleanse,  relieve  ! 

Because  thy  promise  I  believe, 

0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come ! 

Just  as  I  am  (thy  love  unknown 
Has  broken  every  barrier  down,) 
Xow  to  be  Thine,  yea,  Thine  alone, 
0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come  \ 


52  (  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR   HYMNS. 

Just  as  I  am,  of  that  free  love 

The  breadth,  length,  depth,  and  height  to  prove, 

Here  for  a  season,  then  above, 

0  Lamb  of  God,  I  come  ! 

This  sounds  like  repeated  and  still  repeated  echoes 
of  some  sweet  music ;  and  indeed  the  verses  may  be 
listened  to  as  if  they  were  the  echoes  of  the  coast-hills 
of  Devon  answering  to  the  voice  of  spiritual  songs 
which  a  century  before  arose  from  a  quiet  garden  oh 
the  borders  of  the  Hampshire  downs.  That,  too,  was  a 
woman's  voice  ;  and  that  voice,  too,  was  the  voice  of 
tender,  melting  desire  for  the  Saviour — the  voice  of  a 
penitent  believer  answering  to  the  Divine  call,  "  Come 
unto  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  It  was  the  voice  of 
one  chosen  "  in  the  furnace  of  affliction ;"  but  the 
tones  were  sweet  and  clear,  with  that  gentle  ring  which 
thrills  the  devotional  heart  as  if  something  of  pure 
heavenliness  had  touched  it.  So  where  it  was  when 
this  song  was  uttered — 

Thou  lovely  Source  of  true  delight, 

Whom  I  unseen  adore, 
Unveil  thy  beauties  to  my  sight, 

That  I  may  love  Thee  more. 

Thy  glory  o'er  creation  shines, 

But  in  thy  sacred  word 
I  read,  in  fairer,  brighter  lines, 

My  bleeding,  dying  Lord. 

'Tis  here,  whene'er  my  comforts  droop, 

And  sins  and  sorrows  rise, 
Thy  love,  with  cheerful  beams  of  hope, 

My  fainting  heart  supplies. 

But  ah,  too  soon  the  pleasing  scene 

Is  clouded  o'er  with  pain  ; 
My  gloomy  fears  rise  dark  between, 

And  I  again  complain. 


HYMNS    OF    THE    LATTER  HAY    MORNING.  53 

Jesus,  my  Lord,  my  life,  my  light, 

Oh  come  with  blissful  ray, 
Break  radiant  through  the  shades  of  night, 

And  chase  my  fears  away. 

Then  shall  my  soul  with  rapture  trace 

The  wonders  of  thy  love ; 
But  the  full  glories  of  thy  face 

Are  only  known  above. 

This  hymn,  with  many  others,  had  a  deep  interest  in 
the  heart  of  a  venerable  Nonconformist  minister,  who,  in 
175  7,  had  the  pastoral  charge  of  a  congregation,  meeting 
in  the  village  of  Broughton  in  Hampshire,  on  the  spot 
where  their  fathers  had  worshipped  from  the  time  of 
the  Commonwealth.  The  good  pastor  writes  in  his 
diary  : — "  1757,  Nov.  29.  This  day  Nanny  sent  a  part 
of  her  composition  to  London  to  be  printed.  I  entreat 
a  gracious  God,  who  enabled  and  stirred  her  np  to  snch 
a  work,  to  direct  in  it,  and  bless  it  for  the  good  and 
comfort  of  many."  And  again: — "Oct.  1759.  Her 
brother  brought  with  him  her  poetry,  not  yet  bound. 
I  earnestly  desire  the  blessing  of  God  upon  that  work, 
that  it  may  be  made  very  useful.  I  can  admire  the 
gifts  that  others  are  blessed  with,  and  praise  God  for 
his  distinguishing  favours  to  our  family.  I  have  now 
been  reading  our  daughter's  printed  books,  which  I 
have  earnestly  desired  might  be  accompanied  with  the 
Divine  Spirit  in  the  perusing."  Amd  yet  again  : — 
"Nov.  27.  Mr.  W spoke  very  highly  in  commen- 
dation of  her  book.  I  pray  God  to  make  it  useful,  and 
keep  her  humble."  Which  is  most  beautiful  in  all  this, 
the  simple  naturalness  of  the  father's  feeling,  or  the 
devout  spirit  of  the  Christian  parent  ?  The  good  man's 
prayers  were  richly  answered  in  his  daughter's  charac- 
ter and  life,  and  in  the  hearts  of  all  who  read  her  pious' 


54  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

pure,  and  finely-toned  hymns.     One  song  alone  of  hers 
forbids  a  doubt  of  this — 


Jesus,  my  Lord,  in  thy  dear  name  unite, 

All  things  my  heart  calls  great,  or  good,  or  sweet ; 

Divinest  springs  of  wonder  and  delight, 

In  Thee,  Thou  fairest  of  ten  thousand,  meet. 

Do  I  not  love  Thee  ?  ah,  my  conscious  heart 
Nor  boldly  dares  affirm,  nor  can  deny ; 

Oh  bid  these  clouds  of  gloomy  fear  depart, 
With  one  bright  ray  from  thy  propitious  eye ! 

Do  I  not  love  Thee  ?  can  I  then  allow 

Within  my  breast  pretenders  to  thy  throne  ? 

Oh  take  my  homage,  at  thy  feet  I  bow ! 
ISTo  other  Lord  my  heart  desires  to  own. 

Take,  take  my  passions  in  thy  sovereign  hand, 
Refine  and  mould  them  with  Almighty  skill ; 

Then  shall  I  love  the  voice  of  thy  command, 
And  all  my  powers  rejoice  to  do  thy  will. 

Thy  love  inspires  the  active  sons  of  light, 

With  swift-wing'd  zeal  they  wait  upon  thy  word ; 

Oh  let  that  love,  in  these  abodes  of  night, 

Bid  my  heart  glow  to  serve  my  dearest  Lord. 

Come,  love  Divine,  my  languid  wishes  raise  ! 

With  heavenly  zeal  this  faint  cold  heart  inflame, 
To  join  with  angels  in  my  Saviour's  praise, 

Like  them,  obey  his  will,  adore  his  name. 

But  can  the  mind,  with  heavy  clay  opprest, 

To  emulate  seraphic  ardour  rise  ? 
While  sin  pollutes  her  joys,  forbids  her  rest, 

How  can  she  join  the  worship  of  the  skies  ? 

Yet  He  commands  to  love  and  to  obey, 

Whose  hand  sustains  those  happy  spirits  there ; 

In  Him,  my  soul,  who  is  thy  Guide,  thy  Stay, 
In  Him  confide,  to  Him  commit  thy  care. 


HYMNS    OF    THE    LATTER  DAY    MORNING.  55 

Jesus,  my  Lord,  oh  give  me  strength  divine ! 

Then  shall  my  powers  in  glad  obedience  move  ; 
Receive  the  heart  that  wishes  to  be  Thine, 

And  teach,  oh  teach  me  to  obey  and  love ! 

This  is  one  of  the  hymns  from  the  volume  on  which 
the  fond  father  invoked  a  blessing — a  volume  of  hymns 
and  poems  by  ft  Theodosia."  And  who  and  what 
Theodosia  was  is  happily  revealed  in  one  of  her  letters 
to  her  "honoured  father:" — "As  many  of  these  verses 
have  been  favoured  with  your  approbation,  I  have  now 
at  your  desire  collected  them  into  a  little  book,  which 
I  beg  leave  to  present  to  you  as  a  humble  acknowledg- 
ment of  my  grateful  sense  of  your  parental  affection, 
and  the  benefit  I  have  received  from  your  instructions. 
If  you  should  survive  me,  it  will,  I  doubt  not,  be  pre- 
served by  you  (however  inconsiderable  its  real  value)  as 
a  mournfully  pleasing  remembrance  of  a  departed 
child  who  once  shared  your  tender  regard.  If  you 
think  they  are  capable  of  affording  pleasure  or  profit, 
you  may,  if  you  please,  communicate  any  of  them  to 
friends  or  fellow- Christians.  They  may,  perhaps,  find 
seasons  when  the  thoughts  of  the  unworthy  writer  may 
suit  their  own,  and  the  resemblance  produce  delight. 
If  while  I  am  sleeping  in  the  silent  grave  my  thoughts 
are  of  any  real  benefit  to  the  meanest  of  the  servants 
of  my  God,  be  the  praise  ascribed  to  the  Almighty 
Giver  of  all  grace.  May  the  blessed  hope  of  eternal 
life  cheer  my  soul  amidst  the  pangs  of  dissolution  ! 
May  the  blissful  smiles  of  my  Redeemer  illuminate  the 
gloomy  shades  of  death,  and  point  out  my  passage  to 
the  mansions  of  eternal  day ;  that  I  may  be  able  to 
say,  in  the  full  evidence  of  faith  and  hope,  I  am  going 
to  '  be  ever  with  the  Lord/  Then  shall  my  God  be 
glorified,  and  my  dear  relatives  comforted  in  my  death. 


56  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

May  the  Almighty  long  preserve  your  valuable  life, 
and  continue  to  make  you  a  blessing  to  your  family,  a 
useful  instructor  to  the  people  under  your  care,  and  an 
ornament  to  religion,  is  the  ardent  wish  and  prayer  of, 
dear  and  honoured  father,  your  ever  dutiful  and  grate- 
ful daughter,  ' (  Anne  Steele." 


OTIjapter  IY* 

HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHEES. 
"  Our  holy  and  beautiful  house,  where  our  fathers  praised  Thee." 

HO,  in  his  dreams  of  the  past,  has  not  some- 
times found  himself  floating  across  the  Medi- 
terranean down  to  ancient  Egypt,  and  there 
moving,  as  none  but  spirits  can  move,  along  the  face 
of  those  venerable  and  mysterious  deposits  of  the 
Delta  over  which  Egyptian,  Ethiopian,  Assyrian, 
Persian,  Roman,  and  Saracen,  in  successive  gene- 
rations, have  passed  before  him  ?  and  whose  imagina- 
tion has  not  wandered  up  the  Nile  in  quiet  visionary 
fashion,  now  under  the  shadow  of  African  palms,  and 
now  through  lily  banks  by  the  side  of  gliding  pelicans, 
and  within  sight  of  the  giraffe  and  the  gazelle  freely 
rambling  on  the  desert  sands  ?  Who  has  not  in  his 
dreams  looked  at  the  calcareous  cliffs  from  which  the 
generations  of  the  Old  World  dug  their  lime  ?  or  at 
the  sandstone  quarries  which  supplied  slabs  and 
blocks  for  the  temples  that  had  fallen  into  ruin  long 
before  England  began  her  course  ?  or  at  the  awful 
granite  piles  from  whence  came  the  materials  for  those 
gigantic  sculptures  which  still  overawe  mankind  ?  or 


58  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

at  the  wilderness  of  ruins  and  sepulchres  which,  with 
their  myriads  of  mummy  forms,  give  to  our  hearts 
such  lessons  on  human  life  ?  Who  has  not  wandered 
there  thinking  of  Abraham  and  Sarah,  Joseph  and  his 
brethren,  Jacob  worshipping  on  his  staff,  his  embalm- 
ment, and  his  funeral ;  and  then  of  another  Joseph 
and  Mary,  and  the  Holy  Child ;  and  then  of  the  first 
Christian  disciples,  and  their  first  flight  to  the  desert  ? 
Our  dreamy  flights  have  sometimes  led  us  from  Egypt 
across  the  Red  Sea  to  the  base  of  Mount  Colzim,  just 
where  its  bend  looks  out  •  through  the  desert  pass  of 
Mount  Kallil  towards  the  plain  of  Baccarah,  there  to 
look  at  a  few  palms,  sustained  by  three  brackish 
springs,  with  a  little  garden  of  potherbs,  onions,  and 
dourah ;  and  to  find  a  human  form  seated  at  the 
entrance  of  a  recess  dressed  in  wash-leather,  with  a 
sallow  face  expressive  of  quiet  earnestness  and  high 
purpose,  the  lustrous  depth  of  his  upturned  eye 
revealing  the  joy  of  his  communion  with  heaven ;  the 
man  who  might  be  called  the  father  of  that  recluse 
life  which,  though  springing  from  perverted  Christian 
principle,  yet  for  so  many  ages  swayed  the  movements 
of  the  Christian  world,  and  gave  out  the  precious 
streams  of  hymns  and  songs  which  helped  to  preserve 
the  spiritual  life  of  a  cloistered  church.  Then,  have 
there  not  been  visions  of  old  Alexandria  ?  visions 
which,  like  dissolving  views,  have  changed  from 
brilliant  palaces  to  libraries  and  lecture-halls,  from 
close  retired  streets  to  old  basilicas,  from  students' 
cells  to  crowded  places  filled  with  multitudes  strug- 
gling and  heaving  amidst  the  processes  of  transition 
from  old  heathenism  to  a  half-formed  Christianity; 
and  then  our  visionary  path  has  been  crossed  by  the 
shadows  of  such  men  as  Clement,  and  Origen,  and 


HYMNS    OP    THE    FATHERS.  5y 

Didyinus,  and  their  trains  of  disciples  who  peopled  the 
first  Christian  schools  of  Alexandria.  One  would  like  to 
arrest  the  shade  of  Clement,  and  ask  him.  to  give  us  a 
few  more  hymns,  or  to  sing  to  us  some  of  the  frag- 
ments that  we  have  caught  up  from  the  ruins  of  his 
music- school,  and  to  sing  them  as  he  and  his  scholars 
used  to  sing  them  both  at  home  and  in  the  church. 
It  is  difficult  to  catch  even  a  dreamy  outline  of 
Clement's  person  and  life ;  he  has  left  a  few  touches 
of  his  own  character.  At  the  end  of  the  second 
century,  Alexandria  was  like  a  great  centre  of  tele- 
graphic communication,  mysteriously  linking  itself 
with  all  the  outstanding  points  in  the  world  of 
thought.  In  and  around  that  centre  many  were 
running  to  and  fro  asking  and  answering  questions, 
and  voices  from  all  nations  were  mingling  in  deep- 
toned  inquiries  after  the  supreme  good.  There,  in 
the  midst,  was  Clement,  anxiously  looking  hither  and 
thither,  always  intensely  hungering  and  thirsting  after 
truth.  J^ow,  he  took  lessons  from  the  retreats  of 
Lebanon,  now  from  Assyria,  and  now  from  the  Hebrew 
school  of  Tiberias.  It  was  a  weary  search;  but  perfect 
sincerity  is  always  honoured  from  above,  and  is  sure 
of  its  goal.  His  heart  found  rest  at  last ;  where  his 
heart  rested,  there  the  wants  of  his  intellect  were 
supplied.  He  says  enough  about  himself  and  Chris- 
tianity to  prove  that  he  had  found  the  secret  of 
Christian  life,  and  that  he  had  been  "  transformed  by 
the  renewing  of  his  mind."  Still,  his  long  in  and  out 
and  round-about  search  for  truth,  and  the  hard  pro- 
cesses through  which  his  mind  and  heart  had  passed 
in  the  course  of  his  religious  pursuit,  gave  a  peculiar 
shaping  to  his  mental  and  spiritual  character  as  a 
Christian.     Some  of  his  peculiar  views,  his  views  of 


60  HYMN-WRITERS   AND   THEIR   HYMNS. 

Christian  perfection,  canght  the  attention  of  Wesley, 
who,  stigmatized  as  a  perfectionist  himself,  though 
coming  very  much  nearer  to  the  truth  than  the  Alex- 
andrian father,  has  ingeniously  given  a  versified  ex- 
position of  Clement's  mistaken  notion,  and  has 
embodied  it  in  his  collection  of  hymns  and  sacred 
poems.  It  seems  fitting  that  one  of  the  earliest 
hymnists  among  the  Fathers  should  have  his  dis- 
tinctive views  thrown  into  a  hymnic  form  by  a  modern 
Father  of  spiritual  hymns  and  songs.  Wesley  sings 
"  on  Clement  Alexandrinus's  description  of  a  perfect 
Christian :" — 


Here  from  afar  the  finish' d  height 

Of  holiness  is  seen ; 
But  oh  what  heavy  tracts  of  toil, 

What  deserts  lie  between  ! 

Man  for  the  simple  life  divine 

What  will  it  cost  to  break, 
Ere  pleasure  soft  and  wily  pride 

No  more  within  him  speak  ? 

What  ling'ring  anguish  must  corrode 

The  root  of  nature's  joy  ? 
What  secret  shame  and  dire  defeats 

The  pride  of  heart  destroy  ? 

Learn  thou  the  whole  of  mortal  state 

In  stillness  to  sustain  ; 
Nor  soothe  with  false  delights  of  earth, 

Whom  God  hath  doomed  to  pain. 

Thy  mind  no  multitude  of  thoughts, 

ISTor  stupor  shall  distress  ; 
The  venom  of  each  latent  vice 

Wild  images  impress. 


HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS.  61 

Yet  darkly  safe  with  God  thy  soul 

His  arm  still  onward  bears, 
Till  through  each  tempest  on  her  face 

A  peace  beneath  appears. 

'Tis  in  that  peace  we  see  and  act 

By  instincts  from  above, 
With  finer  taste  of  wisdom  fraught, 

And  mystic  powers  of  love. 

Tet  ask  not  in  mere  ease  and  pomp 

Of  ghostly  gifts  to  shine, 
Till  death,  the  lownesses  of  man, 

And  pitying  griefs  are  thine. 

As  an  exposition  of  Clement's  doctrine  of  Christian 
perfection,  this  is  sufficiently  clear  to  guard  those 
whose  service  of  song  the  author  intended  to  regulate; 
while  it  is  aptly  made  to  fall  off  into  that  kind  of 
haziness  which  indicates  the  uncertain  theology  of  the 
Alexandrine  Father.  But  whatsoever  peculiar  turn 
of  thought  Clement's  mind  might  take  on  some  theo- 
logical points,  Christianity  had  simplified  his  heart 
and  kindled  his  poetic  powers  into  hallowed  devotion 
to  his  beloved  Redeemer.  The  artless  child  seems  to 
brighten  into  the  praiseful  seraph  in  his  hymn  "  of 
the  Saviour  Christ."  An  English  rendering,  some- 
what in  imitation  of  the  original  metre,  may  help  us 
to  sing  with  Clement : — 

Lead,  Holy  One,  lead ! 
The  little  ones  need 
The  voice  of  their  King. 
The  footprints  of  Jesus 
Are  shining  before  us, 
His  children  to  lead, 
On  the  heavenly  way  then'  footsteps  to  bring. 


62  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

0  Age  Infinite ! 
Original  Light ! 
Divine  Living  "Word ! 
The  Fountain  of  mercy ! 
Creator  of  beauty ! 
Sustainer  of  might 
To  all  happy  spirits  ;  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ! 

By  milk  from  above 
For  babes  of  thy  love, 
Thy  wisdom's  sweet  store, 
Their  tender  lips  nourished, 
Refreshed,  and  replenished ; 
They  sing  o'er  and  o'er 
Their  own  artless  hymns,  as  tow'rds  Thee  they  move. 

0  Christ  our  King, 
Together  we  sing ; 
Our  hymns  never  cease. 
Of  rewards  from  the  Holy  ; 
To  the  child  ever  mighty, 
Our  chorus  shall  sing, 
Till  thy  kindred  see  the  God  of  all  peace. 

The  history  of  Christian  hymnology  affords  here 
and  there  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  truth, 
"  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  Thee."  When 
the  apostate  Julian  ascended  the  throne,  he  turned  his 
legislation  against  Christ,  and  prohibited  all  Chris- 
tians from  learning  or  teaching  the  classic  literature 
of  the  Gentile  world.  He  thought  to  extinguish  Chris- 
tianity by  shutting  up  Christians  to  barren  ignorance. 
His  policy,  however,  worked  against  his  own  purpose. 
The  poetic  power  and  taste  of  Christian  leaders  were 
now  called  forth  to  supply  purer  elements  of  education 
than  the  popular  classic  poets  could  yield ;  and  driven 
from  heathen  measures,  Christians  were  supplied  with 
hymns  and  songs,  which  at  once  formed  literary  lessons 


HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHEKS.  63 

and  means  of  chaste  excitement  for  the  heart.  Among 
several  who  took  the  lead  in  opening  these  fresh  sup- 
plies of  poetic  food  for  youthful  Christianity,  there 
was  one  who  had  been  a  schoolfellow  and  companion 
of  Julian  himself.  The  interior  of  Asia  Minor,  now  so 
little  known,  was  open  during  the  third  century  to  the 
genial  influence  of  the  Christian  religion.  To  us  the 
richly  diversified  landscapes  are  all  but  forbidden 
ground;  but  once  the  mountain-ranges  and  romantic 
glens,  the  fruitful  plains  and  garden-like  valleys,  the 
charming  dales  and  upland  forests  of  pine  and  beech 
and  odorous  cedar,  the  perfumed  flower-beds  broadly 
sheltered  by  the  plane-tree,  and  the  river  banks 
adorned  with  the  verdure  of  mastic  and  tamarind 
groves,  combined  to  form  a  scene  in  which  the  Chris- 
tian Church  trained  some  of  her  noblest  sons.  Several 
of  these  were  the  sons  of  holy  women  :  one  was  Basil 
the  Great ;  and  another  was  his  schoolfellow  and  life- 
long friend,  Gregory  bf  Nazianzen,  whose  father  lived 
to  see  his  son  associated  with  him  in  the  bishopric  of  his 
native  township,  and  whose  saintly  mother,  Nonna, 
had  her  last  days  cheered  by  the  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs  of  the  boy  in  whose  holy  character  and  life  she 
saw  the  answer  to  her  prayers.  Basil's  letters  to  his 
friend  from  his  own  religious  retreat,  throw  some  light 
upon  Gregory's  character  as  a  Christian  poet ;  and 
from  one  to  whose  love  for  nature  and  fine  taste  the 
cultivated  Basil  could  make  such  affectionate  and 
charming  appeals,  we  might  expect  such  hymnic  con- 
tributions as  even  now  assist  our  service  of  song. 
Gregory  might  be  said  to  have  spent  his  useful  life — 

'Twixt  the  mount  and  multitude  ; 
Doing  or  receiving  good. 


64  HYMN-WRTTERS    AND    THEIR   HYMNS. 

With  the  multitude  he  sang  of  Christ  •  and  he  in- 
structed his  flock  in  their  creed,  while  he  taught  them 
to  sing — 

Hear  us  now,  0  King  eternal ; 
Give  us  power  to  hymn  thy  praise  ; 
Thou,  our  Lord ;  and  Thou  our  Master  ; 
By  Thee  alone  our  songs  we  raise. 

By  Thee  the  choirs  of  angels  glow ; 

By  Thee  the  ceaseless  ages  flow. 
By  Thee  the  sun  appears  in  glory ; 
The  moon  in  brightness  keeps  her  pace  ; 
Stars  shine  forth  in  smiling  beauty  ! 
And  reason  marks  the  human  race. 

Man  breathed  that  light  from  Thee  alone, 

That  all  thy  other  works  outshone. 
Thou  art  of  all  things  the  Creator  ; 
Life  springs  where'er  thy  voice  is  heard ; 
All  is  ordered  by  thy  wisdom  ; 
All  is  finished  by  thy  word ; 

Thy  Holy  Word,  thy  only  Son 

With  Thee  in  might  and  glory  one. 
As  Lord  of  all  we  Him  confess ; 
With  Him,  the  Holy  Ghost  we  bless  ; 
Pervading  and  inspiring  all, 
0  Triune  God :  on  Thee  we  call ! 


But  the  junior  bishop  had  to  psalm  it  in  "  trou- 
blous times."  He  was  sometimes  touched  by  circum- 
stances so  like  those  of  ancient  psalmists,  that  his 
feelings  seemed  to  be  reflections  of  theirs;  and  his 
metrical  expression  is  sweetly  attuned  to  their  measures. 
Things  around  him,  both  in  Church  and  State,  were 
heaving  and  breaking  up,  threatening  indeed  a  return 
of  chaotic  confusion.  "Men's  hearts  were  failing 
them  for  fear,  and  for  looking  after  those  things  which 
were   coming    on   the    earth" — Ecclesiastical    tremor, 


HYMNS    OP    THE    FATHERS.  65 

social  corruption,  storms  from  "high,  places/'  and 
faithlessness  among  the  masses,  all  pressed  hardly  upon 
the  spirits  of  Gregory.  His  heart  was  overwhelmed  at 
times,  and  like  another  sweet  singer,  he  was  ready  to 
cry,  "Oh  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove!  for  then  would 
I  fly  away,  and  be  at  rest.  Lo,  then  would  I  wander 
far  off,  and  remain  in  the  wilderness.  I  would  hasten 
my  escape  from  the  windy  storm  and  tempest."  One 
of  his  plaintive  songs  has  reached  us  from  his  religious 
retreat — 

My  fatherland  alone  to  me  remains, 

The  floods  of  faction  o'er  my  country  sweep  ; 
For  my  uncertain  feet,  the  land  retains 
No  resting-place ;  no  friend  to  weep  ; 
No  child  to  soothe  the  homeless  poor  forlorn  ; 
I  wander  day  by  day  with  trembling  limbs  and  torn. 

What  lot  awaits  me  ?     What  my  mortal  doom  ? 

Where  shall  this  jaded  body  find  its  rest  ? 
Shall  this  poor  trembling  flesh  e'er  find  a  tomb  ? 
By  whom  shall  these  dim  eyes  in  death  be  blest  ? 
Will  any  watch  ?     Will  any  pity  me  ? 
Will  they  be  Christian  watchers?  Or,  shall  sinners  see? 

Or  shall  no  grave  enclose  this  mortal  frame  ? 

When  laid  a  heavy  breathless  corpse  of  clay  ? 
Cast  on  the  rock  uncovered  and  in  shame ;  ■ 

Or  tossed  in  scorn  to  birds  and  beasts  of  prey  ? 
Or  burnt  to  ashes,  given  to  the  air  ? 
Or  thrown  into  the  weedy  deep  to  perish  there  ? 

Thy  will  be  done,  0  Lord !     That  day  shall  spring, 

When  at  thy  word,  this  clay  shall  reappear  ! 
No  death  I  dread,  but  that  which  sin  will  bring ; 
No  fire  or  flood  without  thy  wrath  I  fear ; 
For  Thou,  0  Christ,  my  Lord,  art  fatherland  to  me ! 
My  wealth,  and  might,  and  rest ;  my  all  I  find  in  Thee ! 

5 


66  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

There  is  something  in  the  calm  light  and  devout 
stillness  of  the  evening  hour  which  touchingly  answers 
to  the  solemn  peacefulness  of  the  Christian's  last 
moments  on  earth.  This  has  been  felt  in  all  ages  by 
Christian  genius.  And  the  feeling  has  found  expres- 
sion in  a  line  of  evening  hymns,  hymns  which  have 
served  to  hush  the  spirits  of  God's  children  from 
generation  to  generation ;  and  from  age  to  age  to 
hallow  the  mysterious  advances  of  nightly  repose. 
Gregory  is  among  the  leaders  in  evening  song;  and 
how  his  music  lulls  us — 

Christ,  my  God,  I  come  to  praise  Thee, 

As  the  day  dims  into  night ; 
Thou  who  art  from  everlasting — 

Light  of  ever  living  light, 

Thou  didst  melt  orig'nal  darkness, 
Give  to  light  its  first  unfolding, 

That  all  things  might  live  in  light. 
Settling  the  unsettled  chaos 
Into  forms  of  beauteous  order, 

As  we  see  them  fair  and  bright. 

Reason's  light  to  man  Thou  gavest, 

'Bove  the  speechless  creature's  dight, 
That  on  light  in  thy  light  gazing, 

He  himself  might  be  all  light. 

• 

Thou  hast  deck'd  the  heavens  with  radiance  ; 
With  thy  clust'ring  lamps  of  glory, 

Hanging  the  expanse  above ; 
Calling  day  and  night  to  service, 
Like  a  happy  brotherhood,  by  turns 

Obedient  to  the  law  of  love. 

Thou  by  night,  from  tears  and  toiling, 

Giv'st  our  wearied  nature  rest, 
Waking  us  as  day  arises, 

To  the  works  Thou  lovest  best. 


HYMNS    OF    OUR   FATHERS.  67 

While  the  last  stanza  lingers  on  our  ears,  who  does 
not  think  of  Bishop  Ken  ?  who  is  not  ready  to  sing 
that  immortal  "  even-song"  of  his,  which  for  a  century 
and  a  half  has  been  naturally  rising  to  the  lips  of 
English  Christians 

Soon  as  the  evening  shades  prevail  ? 

How  alike  were  Bishop  Gregory  of  Nazianzen  and 
Bishop  Ken  in  some  of  the  closing  circumstances  of 
their  career  !  and  how  alike  was  their  mode  of  uttering 
the  quiet  joys  of  their  life  in  retreat.  Gregory  had 
mastered  the  swellings  of  heresy,  and  had  weathered 
the  storm  of  imperial  hate;  but  just  as  he  saw  the 
dawn  of  favour  from  ' '  high  places/'  and  there  was  the 
promise  of  some  reward  for  his  faithfulness  on  earth, 
unforeseen  difficulties  beset  his  way  to  ecclesiastical 
preferment ;  and  shrinking  from  strife  for  mere  posi- 
tion, he  turned  aside  from  the  public  scenes  of  action, 
and,  as  a  lone  man,  spent  his  last  few  years  in  attun- 
ing his  heart  to  the  melodies  of  heaven.  So,  good 
Bishop  Ken,  having  stood  a  faithful  witness  for  Chris- 
tian purity  in  two  courts,  under  William  of  Orange  in 
Holland,  and  then  as  chaplain  to  Charles  II.  of  Eng- 
land, securing  in  both  cases  the  esteem  of  those  whom 
he  consistently  reproved,  and  having  shared  imprison- 
ment with  his  six  episcopal  brethren,  for  resisting  the 
irregular  measures  of  James  II.,  his  conscience  found 
difficulty  in  accepting  the  continuance  of  ecclesiastical 
honour  under  William,  and  he  retired  into  private 
life,  to  solace  himself  with  hymns  and  songs  while 
waiting  for  his  divine  Master's  coming.  His  spirit 
shrank  from  the  strife  of  party.  He  would  take  on 
part  in  the  vain  contention.  "  No,  no  \"  said  he,  in 
his  own  style, 


68     p  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

I  gladly  wars  ecclesiastic  fly, 
Where'er  contentious  spirits  I  descry ; 
Eas'd  of  my  sacred  load,  I  live  content, 
In  hymns,  not  in  disputes,  my  passions  vent. 

And  had  his  meek  and  tuneful  spirit  found  no  other 
vent  than  in  his  blessed  evening  hymn,  his  memory 
would  never  lose  its  freshness,  interwoven  as  it  is  with 
the  evening  devotion  of  so  many  English  homes. 
Have  you,  as  a  lover  of  contemplative  goodness,  ever 
lingered  of  an  evening  among  the  peaceful  homes  of 
Berkhampstead,  in  Hertfordshire,  Ken's  birthplace  ? 
or  did  you  ever  sit  in  the  summer  gloaming  on  the 
old  bench  in  Winchester  School,  where  he  took  his 
early  lessons,  and  try  to  call  up  the  presence  of  the 
poetic  boy  ?  or  have  you  joined  at  even  song,  in  the 
noble  old  church  at  Bath,  where  the  pious  bishop  used 
to  compose  prayers  as  well  as  hymns  for  his  flock  ?  or 
have  you  watched  the  sunset  from  amidst  the  quiet 
beauties  of  Longleat,  in  Wiltshire,  where  the  venerable 
pilgrim  closed  his  life -journey,  saying,  "I  die  in  the 
communion  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  it  stands 
distinguished  from  all  Papal  and  Puritan  innovations, 
and  as  it  adheres  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross "  ? 
Have  you  ?  Then  the  evening  hymn  will  always  have 
music  for  your  heart;  and  like  one  who  had  caught 
the  spirit  of  the  gentle-minded  hymnist,  you  will  learn 
at  every  night-fall  to  pass  devoutly  into  sleep  singing 
within  your  soul — 

All  praise  to  Thee,  my  God,  this  night, 
For  all  the  blessings  of  the  light, 
Keep  me,  oh,  keep  me,  King  of  kings, 
Beneath  Thine  own  Almighty  wings  ! 

Forgive  me,  Loj-d,  for  thy  dear  Son, 
The  ill  that  I  this  day  have  done ; 


HYMNS    OF    OUR    FATHERS.  *     69 

That  with  the  world,  myself,  and  Thee, 
I,  ere  I  sleep,  at  peace  may  be. 

Teach  me  to  live  that  I  may  dread 
The  grave  as  little  as  my  bed ! 
To  die,  that  this  vile  body  may 
Rise  glorious  at  the  awful  day  ! 

Oh,  may  my  soul  on  Thee  repose, 
And  may  sweet  sleep  mine  eyelids  close  ; 
Sleep,  that  may  me  more  vig'rous  make, 
To  serve  my  God  when  I  awake ! 

When  in  the  night  I  sleepless  lie, 
My  soul  with  heavenly  thoughts  supply  ! 
Let  no  ill  dreams  disturb  my  rest, 
No  powers  of  darkness  me  molest ! 

Dull  sleep,  of  sense  me  to  deprive  ! 
I  am  but  half  my  time  alive  ; 
Thy  faithful  lovers,  Lord,  are  grieved 
To  he  so  long  of  Thee  bereav'd. 

But  though  sleep  o'er  my  frailty  reigns, 
Let  it  not  hold  me  long  in  chains  ; 
And  now  and  then  let  loose  my  heart, 
Till  it  an  hallelujah  dart ! 

The  faster  sleep  the  senses  binds, 
The  more  unfettered  are  our  minds  ; 
Oh,  may  my  soul  from  matter  free, 
Thy  loveliness  unclouded  see ! 

Oh,  when  shall  I  in  endless  day, 
For  ever  chase  dark  sleep  away, 
And  hymns  with  the  supernal  choir, 
Incessant  sing,  and  never  tire  ? 

Oh,  may  my  Guardian  while  I  sleep, 
Close  to  my  bed  his  vigils  keep  ; 
His  love  angelical  instil ; 
Stop  all  the  avenues  of  ill : 


70  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

May  He  celestial  joy  rehearse, 

And  thought  to  thought  with  me  converse  ; 

Or  in  my  stead,  all  the  night  long, 

Sing  to  my  God  a  grateful  song ! 

Praise  God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow, 
Praise  Him,  all  creatures  here  below ! 
Praise  Him  above,  ye  heavenly  host ! 
Praise  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ! 

Gregory  of  Nazianzen  and  Bishop  Ken  have  long 
since  met,  and  sung  together  where  evening  shadows 
never  fall;  and  there,  too,  are  the  kindred  spirits  whose 
evening  hymns  form  the  links  between  the  times  of 
Gregory  and  Ken.  There,  among  the  rest,  is  Hilary 
of  Aries,  once,  bishop,  popular  preacher,  theologian, 
and  poet.  And  there  is  Ambrose  of  Milan,  whose 
morning  and  evening  melodies  gave  form  of  devo- 
tional expression  to  the  softened  heart  of  the  great 
Augustine,  who  "alone  upon  his  bed"  remembered 
the  verses  of  his  friend — 

Maker  of  all,  the  Lord 

And  ruler  of  the  height, 
Who,  robing  day  in  light,  hast  poured 

Soft  slumbers  o'er  the  night, 
That  to  our  limbs  the  power 

Of  toil  may  be  renew' d, 
And  hearts  be  rais'd  that  sink  and  cower, 

And  sorrows  be  subdu'd. 

From  one  of  these  hymnists  we  have  one  touching 
strain,  one  of  the  living  links  in  the  Church's  line  of 
evening  hymns — 

Christ  our  day,  our  brightest  light,  ' 
With  thy  face  illume  the  night ; 
Very  Light  of  light  art  Thou, 
Most  blessed  light  imparting  now. 


HYMNS    OF    OUR    FATHERS.  71 

Oh  most  holy  Lord,  we  pray; 
Mighty  Guardian,  with  us  stay  ; 
With  quiet  blest  these  hours  be ; 
All  calm,  while  we  have  rest  in  Thee. 

Let  not  heavy  sleep  oppress  ; 
Let  no  deadly  foe  distress ; 
Nor  our  flesh  through  him  beguile, 
And  in  thy  sight  our  souls  defile. 

Though  sleep  fasten  on  our  eyes, 
Keep  our  hearts  in  wakeful  guise; 
With  thine  own  right  hand  defend 
Thy  servants  who  on  Thee  depend. 

Servants  purchased  with  thy  blood, 
Bearing  still  their  mortal  load, 
Lord,  remember !  meet  us  here, 
Thou  soul  defender,  now  be  near ! 

How  beautiful  are  the  oneness  and  the  harmony  of 
the  evening  voices  that  thus  come  to  us  from  the  dif- 
ferent periods  of  Christian  history.  And  no  one  can 
catch  the  tones  of  evening  worship  from  far-off  ages 
without  feeliug  that  they  sweetly  melt  into  that  tender 
melody  of  John  Keble's,  to  which  so  many  hearts  of  our 
own  times  respond,  in  singing  the  evening  hymn 
founded  on  St.  Luke  xxiv.  29,  "  Abide  with  us  :  for 
it  is  toward  evening,  and  the  day  is  far  spent" — 

'Tis  gone,  that  bright  and  orbed  blaze, 
Fast  fading  from  our  wistful  gaze ; 
Yon  mantling  cloud  has  hid  from  sight 
The  last  faint  pulse  of  quivering  light. 

In  darkness  and  in  weariness 
The  traveller  on  his  way  must  press, 
No  gleam  to  watch  on  tree  or  tower, 
Whiling  away  the  lonesome  hour. 


72  HYMN-WRITEfJS    AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

Sun  of  my  soul !  Thou  Saviour  dear, 
It  is  not  night  if  Thou  be  near ; 
Oh  may  no  earth-born  cloud  arise 
To  hide  Thee  from  thy  servant's  eyes. 

When  round  thy  wondrous  works  below, 
My  searching  rapturous  glance  I  throw ; 
Tracing  out  Wisdom,  Power,  and  Love, 
In  earth  or  sky,  in  stream  or  grove  ; — 

Or  by  the  light  thy  words  disclose, 
Watch  Time's  full  river  as  it  flows ; 
Scanning  thy  gracious  providence, 
Where  not  too  deep  for  mortal  sense  ; — 

When  with  dear  friends  sweet  talks  I  hold, 
And  all  the  flowers  of  life  unfold ; 
Let  not  my  heart  within  me  burn, 
Except  in  all  I  Thee  discern. 

When  the  soft  dews  of  kindly  sleep 
My  wearied  eyelids  gently  sleep  ; 
Be  my  last  thought,  how  sweet  to  rest 
For  ever  on  my  Saviour's  breast. 

Abide  with  me  from  morn  till  eve, 
For  without  Thee  I  cannot  live  : 
Abide  with  me  when  night  is  nigh, 
For  without  Thee  I  dare  not  die. 

Thou  Framer  of  the  light  and  dark, 
Steer  through  the  tempest  Thine  own  ark ; 
Amid  the  howling  wintry  sea 
We  are  in  port  if  we  have  Thee. 

The  rulers  of  this  Christian  land, 
'Twixt  Thee  and  us  ordained  to  stand ; 
Guide  Thou  their  course,  0  Lord,  aright, 
Let  all  do  all  as  in  thy  sight. 

Oh,  by  Thine  own  sad  burthen,  borne 
So  meekly  up  the  hill  of  scorn, 
Teach  Thou  thy  priests  their  daily  cross 
To  bear  as  Thine,  nor  count  it  loss  ! 


HYMNS    OF    OUR    FATHERS. 

If  some  poor  wandering  child  of  Thine 
Have  spurn'd  to-day,  the  voice  divine  ; 
Now,  Lord,  the  gracious  work  begin ; 
Let  him  no  more  he  down  in  sin. 

"Watch  by  the  sick :  enrich  the  poor 
"With  blessings  from  thy  boundless  store : 
Be  every  mourner's  sleep  to-night 
Like  infant's  slumbers,  pure  and  light. 

Come  near  and  bless  us  when  we  wake, 
Ere  through  the  world  our  way  we  take ; 
Till  in  the  ocean  of  thy  love 
We  lose  ourselves  in  heaven  above. 


MM 


wxg^mmmm 


MORE  HYMNS  OP  THE  FATHERS. 

Showing  to  the  generations  to  come  the  praises  of  the  Lord." 

RIMITIVE  Christianity  soon  found  its  way  to 
the  old  seats  of  patriarchal  life.  Some  of 
its  first  songs  came  from  across  the  land 
which  has  "  neither  mountain,  valley,  or  even  plain — 
the  whole  being  an  unequal  surface  like  the  high  and 
long  waves  of  a  deep  sea  when  subsiding  from  a 
tempest  into  a  calm;"  with  verdant  hollows  here  aud 
there,  but  with  no  ' '  tree  anywhere  in  sight  to  relieve 
the  monotony  of  the  scene."  Along  this  mysterious 
reach,  this  ancient  Mesopotamia,  Abraham  came,  re- 
freshing himself  now  and  then  on  a  grassy  plot,  on 
his  way  to  Canaan.  He  came  out  of  "  Ur  of  the 
Chaldees"  to  be  the  Father  of  the  faithful ;  and  from  the 
same  place  one,  at  least,  of  the  Christian  fathers  came. 
He,  too,  was  faithful ;  and  by  his  Christian  hymns  he 
made  faithfulness  pleasant  to  his  own  generation  and 
to  many  following  ages.  Ephrem  Syrus  was  born  by 
the  crystal  waters  which  refresh  the  city  of  Orfah, 
once  Edessa,  and  which  form  the  lake  known  to  those 
who  enjoy  the  mulberry  groves  which  overshadow  its 


MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS .  /O 

banks  as  "  Abraham  the  beloved,  or  the  Friend  of 
God."  Ephrem,  like  all  who  aimed  at  high  spirituality 
in  the  fourth  century,  became  a  devoted  monk ;  and 
on  some  aspects  of  his  character  there  still  remain 
shadows  of  the  asceticism  which  was  peculiar  to  a 
time  of  reaction  from  social  licentiousness  and  decay. 
But  with  all  Ephrem/s  asceticism,  his  hymns  testify 
that  he  had  learnt  the  lesson  which  the  Saviour  so 
gracefully  taught  his  disciples ;  that,  though  in  some 
cases  religious  celibacy  might  be  in  keeping  with  the 
spirit  and  principles  of  his  kingdom — hardness  and 
severity  were  in  no  case  consistent  with  Christian 
piety ;  that  the  hardness  which  the  law  of  Moses 
admitted,  and  which  showed  itself  in  those  stern 
rebukes  which  were  cast  on  the  women  who  broug-ht 
their  infants  to  Jesus,  must  yield  to  that  gentle  love 
which  looked  with  utmost  tenderness  upon  the  little 
ones  whose  humility,  simplicity,  and  submissiveness 
typify  the  highest  style  of  the  Christian  character. 
The  venerable  Mesopotamian  hymnist,  however  severe 
in  his  treatment  of  self,  was  like  his  divine  Master  in 
his  feelings  towards  children.  He  must  have  laid  his 
hands  on  them  lovingly.  His  smile  must  have  been 
full  of  blessing.  How  sweetly  He  attunes  his  music 
to  the  voices  of  his  "little  flock,"  while  He  teaches 
them  to  sing  in  unison  with  children  in  paradise — 

To  Thee,  0  God,  be  praises 
From  lips  of  babes  and  sucklings, 
As  in  the  heavenly  meadows 

Like  spotless  lambs  they  feed. 

'Mid  leafy  trees  they  pasture, 
Thus  saith  the  Blessed  Spirit ; 
And  Gabriel,  prince  of  angels, 
That  happy  flock  doth  lead. 


76  HYMN-WEITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  messengers  of  heaven, 
With  sons  of  light  united, 
In  purest  regions  dwelling, 
No  curse  or  woe  they  see. 

And  at  the  resurrection,  , 
"With  joy  arise  their  bodies  ; 
Their  spirits  knew  no  bondage, 
Their  bodies  now  are  free. 

Brief  here  below  their  sojourn, 
Their"  dwelling  is  in  Eden, 
And  one  bright  day  their  parents 
Hope  yet  with  them  to  be. 

The  heart  that  is  gentle  enough  to  be  childlike 
among  children  must  always  have  deep  sympathy  with 
parents,  especially  under  the  sorrows  of  bereavement. 
And  many  a  lover  of  little  children,  though  never 
himself  really  touched  by  the  unspeakable  pang  of 
seeing  his  own  babe  breathe  its  last,  has  shown  himself 
capable  of  entering  very  deeply  into  the  feeling  of  the 
desolated  parent,  almost  as  if  that  feeling  were  his 
own.  A  few  touching  verses  from  a  living  author 
afford  an  example  of  such  inspirations  of  sympathizing 
genius.  The  author  of  "  Records  of  the  Western 
Shore,"  had  no  child  of  his  own  when  he  issued  his 
first  volume,  but  he  utters  the  grief  of  a  Cornish 
mother,  thus  : — 

They  say  'tis  a  sin  to  sorrow, 

That  what  God  doth  is  best, 
But  'tis  only  a  month  to-morrow 

I  buried  it  from  my  breast ! 

I  know  it  should  be  a  pleasure 

Your  child  to  God  to  send, 
But  mine  was  a  precious  treasure 

To  me  and  to  my  poor  Friend  ! 


MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS.  77 

I  thought  it  would  call  me  mother 

The  very  first  words  it  said ; 
Oh  !  I  never  can  love  another, 

Like  the  blessed  babe  that's  dead  ! 

I  shall  make  my  best  endeavour 

That  my  sins  may  be  forgiven  ; 
I  will  serve  God  more  than  ever 

To  meet  my  child  in  heaven  ! 

I  will  check  this  foolish  sorrow, 

For  what  God  doth  is  best ; 
But  oh  !  'tis  a  month  to-morrow, 

I  buried  it  from  my  breast ! 

Ephrem  Syrus,  too,  monk  as  he  was,  could  deeply 
sympathize  with  a  bereaved  heart ;  and  he  shows  how 
truly  he  made  another's  sorrows  his  own  when  he 
personates  the  Christian  father  lamenting  the  death  of 
his  boy.  He  becomes  as  natural  in  his  utterance  of 
parental  feeling  as  he  is  happy  in  the  expression  of 
living  faith : — 

Babe,  the  gift  of  God's  sweet  mercy 

To  thy  mother's  heart  and  mine, 
To  this  world  of  sorrow  coming, 

Beautiful  by  Grace  Divine ; 
Fair  as  some  sweet  summer  flower : 

Till  that  hand  of  deathly  shade 
Scathed  the  beauty  of  my  blossom, 

Made  the  lovely  petals  fade. 
Yet  I  will  not  grieve  nor  murmur, 

For  the  King  of  kings  is  thine ; 
To  his  marriage  chamber  taken, 

Bridal  joys  are  ever  thine. 

Xature  would  have  me  repining, 

Love  would  hold  a  mournful  sway : 
But  I  tell  them  heav'n  has  call'd  thee 

To  its  scenes  of  endless  day. 


78  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

And  I  fear  that  by  lamenting, 

Breathing  tearfully  thy  name, 
I  might  in  the  Royal  presence 

For  my  sorrow  merit  blame ; 
By  my  tears  of  bitter  anguish 

Desecrate  the  home  of  joy ; 
Therefore  will  I,  meekly  bending, 

Give  thee  up  to  God,  my  boy. 

Still  thy  voice,  thy  infant  music 

Dwells  for  ever  in  my  ears  ; 
And  fond  mem'ry,  while  I  listen, 

Sheds  forth  many  natural  tears. 
Of  thy  pretty  prattle  thinking, 

And  the  lispings  of  thy  love, 
I  should  soon  begin  to  murmur 

Were  I  not  to  look  above  ; 
But  the  songs  of  blessed  spirits 

Make  me  wonder,  love,  and  long  : — 
Oh  those  endless  sweet  hosannas ; 

Angels  sing  thy  bridal  song. 

Hymns  like  these  come  down  to  us  as  pleasant 
records  of  that  Christian  simplicity  with  which  some  of 
the  fathers  showed  forth  the  spirit  and  meaning  of  their 
Saviour's  words,  "  Whosoever  therefore  shall  humble 
himself  as  this  little  child,  the  same  is  greatest  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.-"  One  of  the  finest  examples 
of  this  Christian  greatness,  this  beautiful  association 
of  mental  dignity  and  spiritual  power  with  childlike 
simplicity  and  pure  humbleness  and  submissiveness, 
is  seen  in  the  justly-celebrated  and  sainted  Augustine. 
He  has  not,  like  Ephrem,  embalmed  his  gentle  spirit 
in  hymns  for  little  ones  ;  but  he  has  immortalized  those 
who,  like  himself,  were  "  converted  and  became  as  little 
children,"  and  who,  amidst  the  joys  of  their  first  love, 
consecrated  their  genius  to  the  work  of  providing  both 
the  elders  and  the  children  of  the  Church  with  hymns 


MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS.  79 

and  spiritual  songs.  "  I  remember/''  says  he,  in  his 
holy  converse  with  God — "  I  remember  the  tears  I 
shed  at  the  psalmody  of  thy  Church,  in  the  beginning 

of  my  recovered  faith How  did  I  weep  through 

thy  hymns  and  canticles,  touched  to  the  quick  by  the 
voices  of  thy  sweet  attuned  Church.  The  voices  sank 
into  mine  ears,  and  the  truth  distilled  into  mine  heart ; 
whence  the  affections  of  my  devotions  overflowed,  tears 

ran  down,  and  happy  was  I  therein And  how 

at  this  time  I  was  moved,  not  with  the  singing,  but 
with  the  things  sung.  When  they  are  sung  with  a 
clear  voice  and  modulation  most  suitable,  I  acknow- 
ledge the  great  use  of  this  institution.""  His  account 
of  the  first  hymn-service  in  the  church  at  Milan,  the 
place  of  his  first  love,  is  touching  and  instructive. 
' '  It  was  a  year,  or  not  much  more,  that  Justina,  mother 
to  the  Emperor  Yalentinian,  then  a  child,  persecuted 
thy  servant  Ambrose  in  favour  of  her  heresy,  to  which 
she  was  seduced  by  the  Arians.  The  devout  people 
kept  w^atch  in  the  church,  ready  to  die  with  their 
bishop,  thy  servant.  There  my  mother,  thy  hand- 
maid, bearing  a  chief  part  in  those  anxieties  and 
watchings,  lived  for  prayer.  We,  yet  unwarmed  by 
the  heat  of  thy  Spirit,  still  were  stirred  up  by  the  sight 
of  the  amazed  and  disquieted  city.  Then  it  was  insti- 
tuted that,  after  the  manner  of  the  Eastern  Churches, 
hymns  and  psalms  should  be  sung,  lest  the  people 
should  wax  faint  through  the  tediousness  of  sorrow, 
and  from  that  day  to  this  the  custom  is  retained."  The 
Christian  flock  which  thus  kept  up  their  chant  and 
song  in  u  troublous  times,"  were  supplied  with  many 
of  their  favourite  hymns  by  their  diligent  faithful,  and 
gifted  bishop,  Ambrose,  Augustine's  beloved  friend, 
gome  of  his  songs  are  favourites  still,  and  have  been 


80  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

sung  from  age  to  age,  becoming  fresher  and  fresher 
until  our  own  times,  and  are  now  giving  the  promise  of 
renewed  life.  It  is  interesting  to  see  that  the  man 
who,  under  the  prejudices  of  his  times,  utters  libels 
upon  matrimony,  melts  into  childlike  tenderness  when 
he  sings  of  Jesus,  and  feels  that  his  Saviour  became  an 
infant  that  He  might  save  infants,  and  hallow  human 
nature  in  all  its  relations.  This  more  pure  and  gentle 
Christian  feeling  may  be  traced  in  the  "  Advent 
Hymn,"  so  well  known  as  one  of  the  flowers  which 
wreathe  his  memory — 

Kedeexner  of  the  nations,  come ; 
Pure  offspring  of  the  Virgin's  womb, 
Seed  of  the  woman  promised  long, 
Let  ages  swell  Thine  advent  song. 

Once  from  the  Father  came  He  forth, 
Home  to  the  Father  rose  from  earth  ; 
The  depths  of  hell  the  Saviour  trod, 
Now  seated  on  the  throne  of  God. 

To  God  the  Father  equal,  Word, 
Thy  mortal  vesture  on  Thee  gird  ; 
The  weakness  of  our  flesh  at  length 
Sustaining  by  thy  changeless  strength. 

Thy  cradle  shine  the  darkness  through, 
Illuming  night  with  lustre  new, 
Which  never  night  shall  hide  again, 
But  faith  in  ceaseless  light  retain. 

Nor  has  hallowed  genius  lost  its  tender  affection 
for  the  u  Holy  Child  Jesus."  Ephrem  Syrus  has  long 
since  left  his  Eastern  retreat,  and  the  cloisters  of  the 
West  no  longer  echo  to  the  voices  of  Ambrose  and  his 
companions ;  but  spirits  of  equal  simplicity,  and  voices 
of  even  more  than  equal  sweetness  continue  to  supply 


MORE    HYMNS    OP    THE    FATHERS.  81 

God's  children  with  hymns  and  spiritual  songs.  One  of 
Ambrose's  last  strains  seems  to  have  some  gentle 
relation  to  the  hymn  of  a  modern  bishop*  whose 
amiable  soul  breathes  its  music  from  an  Eastern  mis- 
sion Church.  Ephrem,  and  Ambrose,  and  Heber  were 
kindred  spirits.  They  might  be  thought  to  emulate 
each  other  in  songs  on  "the  childhood  of  Christ." 
The  pure  and  delicate  beauty  of  Heber's  hymn  would 
have  charmed  the  ancient  hymnists,  as  it  insinuates  its 
affectionate  devotion  into  every  ' '  new-born  babe  "  in 
Christ  who  has  learnt  to  sing  it — 

By  cool  Siloam's  shady  rill 

How  sweet  the  lily  grows  ; 
How  sweet  the  breath  beneatlj  the  hill 

Of  Sharon's  dewy  rose  ! 

Lo,  such  the  child,  whose  early  feet 

The  paths  of  peace  have  trod ; 
"Whose  secret  heart,  with  influence  sweet, 

Is  upward  drawn  to  God  ! 

By  cool  Siloam's  shady  rill 

The  lily  must  decay  ; 
The  rose  that  blooms  beneath  the  hill 

Must  shortly  fade  away. 

And  soon,  too  soon,  the  wintry  hour 

Of  man's  maturer  age, 
Will  shake  the  soul  with  sorrow's  power, 

And  stormy  passions  rage  ! 

0  Thou,  whose  infant  feet  were  found 

Within  thy  Father's  shrine  ! 
Whose  years,  with  changeless  virtue  crowned, 

Were  all  alike  divine. 

Dependent  on  thy  bounteous  breath, 

We  seek  thy  grace  alone, 
In  childhood,  manhood,  age,  and  death, 

To  keep  us  still  thine  own  ! 

6 


82  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

We  can  never  sing  thus  about  the  childhood  of 
Christ  without  having  our  pleasures  deepened  by  the 
assurance  that  our  children  have  a  sacred  interest  in 
"the  Holy  Child."  Yes,  Jesus  smiles  to  see  the 
cradled  infant  hushed  by  a  Christian  lullaby.  Each 
little  one  is  sacred  to  Him  who  was  once  swaddled  in 
the  manger.  It  was  this  thought  that  used  at  once  to 
melt  and  brighten  the  sturdy  German  Reformer  as  he 
hung  over  his  sleeping  darling,  and  sang — 

Sleep  well,  my  dear  ;  sleep  safe  and  free ; 
The  holy  angels  are  with  thee, 
Who  always  see  thy  Father's  face, 
And  never  slumber  nights  nor  days. 

Thou  lies!  in  down,  soft  every  way  ; 
Thy  Saviour  lay  in  straw  and  hay ; 
Thy  cradle  is  far  better  drest 
Than  the  hard  crib  where  He  did  rest. 

None  dare  disturb  thy  present  ease ; 
He  had  a  thousand  enemies  ; 
Thou  liv'st in  great  security; 
But  He  was  punished,  and  for  thee  ! 

God  make  thy  mother's  health  increase, 
To  see  thee  grow  in  strength  and  grace, 
In  wisdom  and  humility, 
As  infant  Jesus  did  for  thee  ! 

God  fill  thee  with  his  heavenly  light 
To  steer  thy  Christian  course  aright ; 
Make  thee  a  tree  of  blessed  root, 
That  ever  bends  with  godly  fruit ! 

Sleep  now,  my  dear,  and  take  thy  rest ; 
And  if  with  riper  years  thou'rt  blest, 
Increase  in  wisdom,  day  and  night, 
Till  thou  attain'st  th'  eternal  light ! 


MOEE    HYMNS    OF    TI1E    FATHERS.  83 

And  who  that  knows  George  "Wither* s  "rocking 
hymn  n  is  not  thankful  to  providence  that  it  has  out- 
lived the  storms  that  beset  its  author's  later  life,  and 
is  still  adapted  to  its  original  purpose  ?  "  Nurses/' 
says  he,  quaintly,  "  usually  sing  their  children  asleep, 
and  through  want  of  pertinent  matter,  they  oft  make 
use  of  unprofitable,  if  not  worse  songs ;  this  was 
therefore  prepared,  that  it  might  help  acquaint  them 
and  their  nurse  children  with  the  loving  care  and  kind- 
ness of  their  heavenly  Father/' 

Sweet  baby,  sleep  ;  what  ails  my  dear  ; 
What  ails  my  darling  thus  to  cry  ? 
Be  still  my  child,  and  lend  thine  ear, 
To  hear  me  sing  thy  lullaby. 

My  pretty  lamb,  forbear  to  weep  ; 

Be  still,  my  dear ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

Thou  blessed  soul,  what  can'st  thou  fear  ? 
What  thing  to  thee  can  mischief  do  ? 
Thy  God  is  now  thy  Father  dear, 
His  holy  spouse  thy  mother  too. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep  ; 

Be  still,  my  babe  ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

Whilst  thus  thy  lullaby  I  sing, 

For  thee  great  blessings  ripening  be ; 

Thine  eldest  brother  is  a  king, 

And  hath  a  kingdom  bought  for  thee. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep ; 

Be  still,  my  babe  ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

Sweet  baby,  sleep,  and  nothing  fear, 
For  whosoever  thee  offends, 
By  thy  protector  threaten'd  are, 
And  God  and  angels  are  thy  friends. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep ; 

Be  still,  my  babe ;  sweet  baby,  sleep 


84  HYMN-WEITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

When  God  with  us  was  dwelling  here, 
In  little  babes  he  took  delight  ; 
Such  innocents  as  thou,  my  dear ! 
Are  ever  precious  in  his  sight. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep  ; 

Be  still,  my  babe  ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

A  little  infant  once  was  He, 

And  strength  in  weakness  then  was  laid 

Upon  his  virgin  mother's  knee, 

That  power  to  thee  might  be  conveyed. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep  ; 

Be  still,  my  babe  ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

In  this  thy  frailty  and  thy  need, 
He  friends,  and  helpers  doth  prepare, 
Which  thee  shall  cherish,  clothe,  and  feed ; 
For  of  thy  weal  they  tender  are. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep  ; 

Be  still,  my  babe  ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

The  king  of  kings  when  He  was  born, 
Had  not  so  much  for  outward  ease  ; 
By  him  such  dressings  were  not  worn, 
Nor  such  like  swaddling  clothes  as  these. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep  ; 

Be  still,  my  babe ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

Within  a  manger  lodged  thy  Lord ! 
Where  oxen  lay,  and  asses  fed ; 
Warm  rooms  we  do  to  thee  afford, 
An  easy  cradle  or  a  bed. 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep ; 

Be  still,  my  babe  ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 

The  wants  that  He  did  then  sustain, 
Have  purchased  wealth,  my  babe,  for  thee ; 
And  by  his  torments  and  his  pain 
Thy  rest  and  ease  secured  be. 

My  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep  ; 

Be  still,  my  babe ;  sweet  baby,  sleep. 


MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS.  85 

Thou  hast  yet  more  to  perfect  this, 

A  promise  and  an  earnest  got, 

Of  gaining  everlasting  bliss, 

Though  thou,  my  babe,  perceiv'st  it  not ; 

Sweet  baby,  then,  forbear  to  weep ; 

Be  still,  my  babe  ;  sweet  baby,  sleep, 

The   author  of  this  pattern  Christian   lullaby  was 
born  June  11,  1588.     His  portrait  has  come  down  to 
us    surrounded  by   the    quaint  motto,    "  I   grow    and 
wither  both  together  •"  but   neither  the  portrait  nor 
the  motto  gives  us  so  deep  and  clear  an  insight  into 
his   character   as  the  poems  of  his    earlier  life.     His 
genius  shone  brightest  while  he  was  a  Eoyalist ;  and 
his  "  Rocking  Hymn "  was  probably   written    before 
his  tenderness  had  given  way  to  the  more  bitter  spirit 
of   satire,   which   he    sometimes  vented  after   he    had 
sided  with  Cromwell,  and  had  tasted  the  bitter  fruits 
of  change  in  the  loss  of  both  power  and  fortune.  "Who 
is  not  sorry  to  see  the  man  whose  early  hymns  gave 
forth  "  the  finest  bursts  of  sunshine/'  struggling  for 
popularity  under  the  thick   cloud  which  gathered  at 
last  over  his  party  and  his  character,  by  sending  out 
squibs  under  the  title  of  "  abuses  whipt  and   stript  V3 
Nevertheless,  peace  to  his  memory.     He  has  taught 
many  a  Christian  mother  and  nurse  to  hush  her  baby 
into  rest  by  singing  of  its  happy  relation   to  Jesus  ; 
and  perhaps  "Watts  had  seen  his  verses,  and  caught 
from  them  the  notion  of  his  own  "  Cradle  Hymn.-"  At 
all  events,  we  naturally  think  of  Watts  as  we   sing  the 
"  Eocking  Hymn  "  over  the  cradle.     Nobody  can  sing 
about  children  or  teach  children  to  sing,  without  grate- 
ful thoughts  of  Isaac  "Watts.     He  too,  had  felt  deeply 
that   the   "  Holy  child  Jesus "   had   procured  for  our 
children  the  joy  of  taking  a  part  in  "  Hosannas  to  the 


86  HYMN-WKITEES    AND   THEIE    HYMNS. 

Son  of  David ;"  that  the  voice  of  " little  ones"  is 
divine  music  in  the  ears  of  Jesus ;  and  that  to  Him 
the  songs  of  infancy  are  as  the  incense  of  the  morning. 
"  During  my  stay  by  the  seaside  at  one  time,"  said  a 
lady  whose  appearance  was  always  graceful,  though 
she  never  seemed  to  follow  the  fashion,  ' ( I  used  to  be 
charmed  every  morning  by  the  voices  of  the  children 
in  the  nursery,  singing  as  they  dressed,  under  the 
guidance  of  the  nurse,  the  inimitable  little  song  by 
Watts,  (  against  pride  in  clothes/  The  music  seemed 
to  be  the  voice  of  innocence  itself.  I  used  to  think  of 
Him  who  taught  us  how  to  be  clothed  with  humility ; 
and  my  soul  felt  now  and  then  as  if  He  must  be  listen- 
ing with  pleasure  to  the  dear  little  creatures  singing 
their  morning  lesson  about  the  '  blest  apparel/  The 
lesson  was  hallowed  to  me.  The  exquisite  little  song 
was  never  to  leave  me,  and  I  am  all  the  better  for  the 
habit  which  those  darling  children  taught  me  of 
humming  to  myself  now  and  then — 


Why  should  our  garments,  made  to  hide 
Our  parents'  shame,  provoke  our  pride  ? 
The  act  of  dress  did  ne'er  begin, 
Till  Eve  our  mother  learnt  to  sin. 


When  first  she  put  the  covering  on, 
Her  robe  of  innocence  was  gone ; 
And  yet  her  children  vainly  boast 
In  the  sad  marks  of  glory  lost. 

How  proud  we  are,  how  fond  to  show 
Our  clothes,  and  call  them  rich  and  new  ; 
When  the  poor  sheep  and  silkworm  wore 
That  very  clothing  long  before. 


MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS.  87 

The  tulip  and  the  butterfly 

Appear  in  gayer  clothes  than  I : 

Let  me  be  drest  fine  as  I  will, 

Flies,  .worms,  and  flowers  exceed  me  still. 

Then  will  I  set  my  heart  to  find 
Inward  adornings  of  the  mind  ; 
Knowledge  and  virtue,  truth  and  grace, 
These  are  the  robes  of  richest  dress. 

No  more  shall  worms  with  me  compare, 
This  is  the  raiment  angels  wear ; 
The  Son  of  God,  when  here  below, 
Put  on  this  blest  apparel  too. 

It  never  fades,  it  ne'er  grows  old, 

!Nor  fears  the  rain,  nor  moth,  nor  mold ; 

It  takes  no  spot,  but  still  refines, 

The  more  'tis  worn,  the  more  it  shines. 

In  this  on  earth  would  I  appear, 
Then  go  to  heaven  and  wear  it  there ; 
God  will  approve  it  in  his  sight, 
'Tis  his  own  work,  and  his  delight." 

Would  that  the  childish  multitude  were  learning  to 
{(  murmur"  this  beautiful  lesson,  and  to  practice  it,  in 
these  days  of  growing  strife  and  vicious  rage  for  mere 
appearances.  "  Watts  "  should  be  a  household  name 
among  all  English  children.  He  is  always  at  home 
with  little  ones.  He  is  heart  to  heart  with  them,  and 
therefore  always  makes  them  understand;  and  never 
fails  to  sway  their  feeling.  He  is  the  child's  hymnist. 
As  such,  none  have  surpassed  him;  few  are  his  equals. 
He  never  lowers  the  manliness  of  his  simplicity  when 
he  sings  with  children ;  though  he  not  unfrequently 
becomes  puerile  when  he  provides  hymns  for  men. 
In  this  respect  Charles  Wesley  has  the  advantage  over 
him.      Wesley  never,  like   Watts,    brings    a   mature 


88  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

congregation  plump  down  from  grandeur  into  childish- 
ness. When  leading  the  devotions  of  adults  his  vigour 
never  fails,  though  his  music  may  now  and  then  falter. 
He  never  has  to  make  so  curious  an  apology  for  namby 
pamby  verses  as  Watts  puts  forth  in  excuse  for  occa- 
sional trips  into  tameness.  "  If,"  says  Watts,  "  the 
verses  appear  so  gentle  and  flowing  as  to  incur  the 
censure  of  feebleness,  I  may  honestly  affirm  that  some- 
times it  cost  me  labour  to  make  it  so.  Some  of  the 
beauties  of  poesy  are  neglected,  and  some  wilfully 
defaced,  lest  a  more  exalted  turn  of  thought  or  language 
should  darken  or  disturb  the  devotions  of  the  weakest 
souls."  Who  can  wonder  that  such  an  apologist  should 
sometimes  flatter  the  devotions  of  adult  worshippers 
by  forcing  on  them  a  sense  of  the  ridiculous  ?  Wesley 
never  does  that ;  at  the  same  time,  as  a  child's  hymnist 
he  is  never  below  the  standard  of  Watts ;  never  being 
out  of  tune  with  the  voices,  thoughts,  or  hearts  of 
little  ones.  Some  of  his  hymns  for  children  have  been 
issued  on  some  occasions  with  Watts's  name  attached ; 
comparative  ignorance  of  hymnology  favouring  the 
notion  that  all  merit  in  juvenile  psalmody  must  neces- 
sarily belong  to  the  author  of  "  Divine  and  Moral 
Songs.""  So  it  has  happened  with  one  of  the  best 
known  of  Wesley's  "  Hymns  for  the  Youngest." 

Gentle  Jesus,  meek  and  mild, 
Look  upon  a  little  child  ; 
Pity  my  simplicity, 
Suffer  me  to  come  to  Thee. 

Fain  I  would  to  Thee  be  brought, 
Dearest  God,  forbid  it  not, 
Give  me,  dearest  God,  a  place 
In  the  kingdom  of  thy  grace. 


MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS.  89 

Put  thy  hands  upon  my  head, 
Let  me  in  thy  arms  be  stay'd, 
Let  me  lean  upon  thy  breast, 
Lull  me,  lull  me,  Lord,  to  rest. 

Hold  me  fast  in  thy  embrace, 
Let  me  see  thy  smiling  face, 
Give  me,  Lord,  thy  blessing  give, 
Pray  for  me,  and  I  shall  live  : 

I  shall  live  the  simple  life, 
Free  from  sin's  uneasy  strife, 
Sweetly  ignorant  of  ill, 
Innocent  and  happy  still. 

0  that  I  may  never  know 
What  the  wicked  people  do  ! 
Sin  is  contrary  to  Thee, 
Sin  is  the  forbidden  tree. 

Keep  me  from  the  great  offence, 
Guard  my  helpless  innocence, 
Hide  me,  from  all  evil  hide, 
Self,  and  stubbornness,  and  pride. 

The  second  part  of  this  favourite  hymn  is  of  sur- 
passing beauty.  It  wins  its  way  into  the  soul  of  every 
child  who  lisps  it;  gently  opening  the  heart  to  let  the 
infant  Saviour  in  : — 

Lamb  of  God,  I  look  to  Thee 
Thou  shalt  my  example  be  ; 
Thou  art  gentle,  meek,  and  mild  ; 
Thou  was't  once  a  little  child. 

Fain  I  would  be  as  Thou  art, 
Give  me  thy  obedient  heart ; 
Thou  art  pitiful  and  kind, 
Let  me  have  thy  loving  mind. 

Meek  and  lowly  may  I  be, 
Thou  art  all  humility ; 
Let  me  to  my  betters  bow, 
Subject  to  thy  parents  Thou. 


90  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Let  me  above  all  fulfil 
God  my  heavenly  Father's  will, 
Never  his  good  spirit  grieve, 
Only  to  his  glory  live. 

Thou  did'st  live  to  God  alone, 
Thou  did'st  never  seek  thine  own, 
Thou  thyself  did'st  never  please. 
God  was  all  thy  happiness. 

Loving  Jesus,  gentle  Lamb, 
In  thy  gracious  hands  I  am, 
Make  me,  Saviour,  what  Thou  art, 
Live  thyself  within  my  heart. 

I  shall  then  show  forth  thy  praise, 
Serve  Thee  all  my  happy  days, 
Then  the  world  shall  always  see 
Christ,  the  holy  child,  in  me. 

James  Montgomery  lias  followed  Watts  and  Wesley, 
not  to  rival  their  fame,  or  to  eclipse  it ;  but  to  claim  a 
share  in  the  joy  of  teaching  childhood  to  honour  and 
love  the  Divine  lover  of  little  children.  Nor  does  he 
claim  an  equal  place  in  vain.  His  voice,  his  taste,  his 
manner,  and  his  heart  are  all  worthy  of  a  position  in 
the  leading  choir  of  children's  hymnists  ;  and  one  of 
his  tender  expressions  of  youthful  devotion  may  be 
gracefully  associated  with  the  most  pure  and  touching- 
hymns  of  the  fathers  about  the  childhood  of  Jesus. 

When  Jesus  left  his  Father's  throne, 

He  chose  au  humble  birth  ; 
Like  us,  unhonoured  and  unknown, 

He  came  to  dwell  on  earth. 

Like  Him,  may  we  be  found  below 

In  wisdom's  paths  of  peace  ; 
Like  Him,  in  grace  and  knowledge  grow, 

As  years  aud  strength  increase. 


MORE    HYMNS    OF    THE    FATHERS.  91 

Jesus  pass'd  by  the  rich  and  great 

For  men  of  low  degree ; 
He  sanctified  our  parents  state, 

For  poor,  like  them,  was  He. 

Sweet  were  his  words,  and  kind  his  look, 

When  mother's  round  Him  press'd ; 
Their  infants  in  his  arms  He  took, 

And  on  his  bosom  bless'd. 

Safe  from  the  world's  alluring  harms, 

Beneath  his  watchful  eye, 
Thus  in  the  circle  of  his  arms 

May  we  for  ever  lie  ! 

When  Jesus  into  Salem  rode, 

The  children  sang  around ; 
For  joy  they  pluck'd  the  palms,  and  strew'd 

Their  garments  on  the  ground. 

Hosanna  our  glad  voices  raise, 

Hosanna  to  our  King  ! 
Should  we  forget  our  Saviour's  praise, 

The  stones  themselves  would  sing  ! 


11 


^^^^^»^«^^w 


(grirote  YL 


HYMNS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND'S  CHRISTIAN  BIRTH-TIME. 

"  And  the  people  that  shall  be  created  shall  praise  the  Lord." 


HEN  I  lived  at  Lichfield/'  said  a  lady  to  a 
clerical  friend,  "  I  used,  now  and  then,  to 
attend  the  ordination  service ;  and  I  learnt 
one  thing  at  least." 

'<  What  was  that  ?  " 

"  Why,  that  there  are  some  hymns  which,  though 
they  are  known  to  be  mere  human  compositions,  are 
scarcely  ever  sung  without  touching  the  soul  in  a 
manner  very  like  that  of  inspired  truth." 

"  Pray,  what  impressed  you  with  that  thought  ?  " 

"  Well,  I  observed  that  there  were  always  some 
among  the  candidates  for  ordination  who  seemed  dis- 
posed to  go  through  the  service  without  seriousness, 
if  not  in  a  style  approaching  to  levity,  even  during  the 
time  allowed  for  silent  prayer ;  but  that  as  soon  as  the 
hymn  l  Veni  Creator  Spiritus '  was  begun,  a  solemn 
hush  and  reverent  feeling  appeared  to  rest  on  each  and 
all." 

"  Which  of  the  hymns  do  you  refer  to  ?  There  are 
two  in  the  ordination  service." 


"  The  first.  And  now  let  me  read  it.  And  if  I 
can  read  so  as  to  give  you  the  feeling  with  which  it 
always  impresses  me,  I  think  you  will  believe  as  I  do, 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  honours  the  hymn  by  which  He 
is  honoured,  and  breathes  a  holy  power  into  its  gracious 
lines.     Let  me  read." 

Come  Holy  Ghost  our  souls  iuspire, 
And  lighten  with  celestial  fire. 

Thou  the  anointing  Spirit  art, 

Who  dost  thy  seven-fold  gifts  impart. 

Thy  blessed  unction  from  above, 
Is  comfort,  life,  and  fire  of  love. 

Enable  with  perpetual  light 
The  dulness  of  our  blinded  sight. 

Anoint  and  cheer  our  soiled  face 
With  the  abundance  of  thy  grace. 

Keep  far  our  foes,  give  peace  at  home : 
Where  Thou  art  guide  no  ill  can  come. 

Teach  us  to  know  the  Father,  Son, 
And  Thee  of  both  to  be  but  One  ; 

That  through  the  ages  all  along, 
This  may  be  our  endless  song ; 

Praise  to  Thine  eternal  merit, 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit, 

The  lady  was  right ;  and  her  clerical  friend  con- 
fessed to  the  feeling  in  which  many,  many  have  shared, 
a  sense  of  the  spiritual  unction  which  attends  this  as 
well  as  several  other  hymns  of  like  primitive  simplicity 
and  power.  And  he  was  reminded,  he  said,  of  Keble's 
Ordination  Hymn,  in  which  this  feeling  is  so  sweetly 


94  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

expressed.  The  hymn  is  founded  on  that  passage  in 
the  rubric  in  the  "  Office  for  Ordering  Priests/'  ' '  After 
this  the  congregation  shall  be  desired,  secretly  in  their 
prayers,  to  make  their  humble  supplication  to  God  for 
all  these  things  ;  for  the  which  prayers  there  shall  be 
silence  kept  for  a  space.  After  which  shall  be  sung  or 
said  by  the  bishop  (the  persons  to  be  ordained  priests 
all  kneeling)  '  Veni  Creator  Spiritus.'  " 

'Twas  silence  in  thy  temple,  Lord, 
When  slowly  through  the  hallowed  air, 

The  spreading  cloud  of  incense  soared, 
Charg'd  with  the  breath  of  Israel's  prayer. 

'Twas  silence  round  thy  throne  on  high, 
When  the  last  wondrous  seal  unclos'd ; 

And  in  the  portals  of  the  sky 
Thine  armies  awfully  repos'd. 

And  this  deep  pause,  that  o'er  us  now 

Is  hovering — comes  it  not  of  Thee  ? 
Is  it  not  like  a  mother's  vow, 

When  with  her  darling  on  her  knee, 

She  weighs  and  numbers  o'er  and  o'er 
Love's  treasures  hid  in  her  fond  breast ; 

To  cull  from  that  exhaustless  store 
The  dearest  blessing  and  the  best  ? 

And  where  shall  mother's  bosom  find, 

With  all  its  deep  love-learned  skill, 
A  prayer  so  sweetly  to  her  mind, 

As,  in  this  sacred  hour  and  still, 

Is  wafted  from  the  white-rob'd  choir, 

Ere  yet  the  pure  high-breathed  lay, 
"  Come,  Holy  Ghost  our  souls  inspire," 

Rise  floating  on  its  dove-like  way. 


HYMNS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND'S  CHRISTIAN  BIRTH-TIME.       95 

And  when  it  comes,  so  deep  and  clear 

The  strain,  so  soft  the  melting  fall, 
It  seems  not  to  th'  entranced  ear 

Less  than  Thine  own  heart-cheermg  call. 

Spirit  of  Christ — Thine  earnest  given 

That  these  our  prayers  are  heard  ;  and  they 

Who  grasp,  this  hour,  the  sword  of  heaven, 
Shall  feel  Thee  on  their  weary  way. 

The  "  Veni  Creator  Spiritus  "  was  introduced  into 
the  ritual  of  the  Western  Church  about  the  end  of  the 
eleventh  century ;  and  with  beautiful  consistency,  as 
an  utterance,  probably,  from  the  lips  of  one  whose 
name  marks,  an  era  in  the  history  of  church  music ; 
and  it  was  gracefully  retained  in  the  service  of  the 
English  Church  as  a  contribution  from  the  man  to 
whom  England  •  owes  her  first  lesson  in  Christianity. 
This  was  Gregory  the  Great,  a  man  whose  name  is  one 
of  the  landmarks  of  history,  and  whose  character,  in 
grand  outline,  will  ever  remain  as  the  most  distin- 
guished honour  of  his  generation.  He  was  a  man  for 
his  times.  Shut  up  in  Rome,  with  savage  hordes  at 
the  gates,  and  pestilence,  famine,  and  flood  within; 
with  heresy  in  the  provinces,  and  the  care  of  every 
department  weighing  heavily  upon  him  at  home ;  he 
never  "bated  jot  of  heart  or  hope/''  but  met  every 
demand  in  turn ;  always  ready,  always  prompt,  always 
decided,  and  generally  successful.  He  was  modest  and 
simple  in  his  dress,  plain  in  his  household,  severe  to 
himself,  but  ceaselessly  kind  to  others.  He  was  at 
once  the  domestic  economist,  the  vigilant  landowner, 
the  municipal  overseer.  Now,  he  is  the  watchful 
diplomatist ;  then  the  soldier,  superintending  his  own 
commisariat,  planning  his  own  defences,  and  directing 
his  troops.     Now  in  the  pulpit,  passionately  rousing 


96  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

his  flock  to  spiritual  life  and  action;  in  the  cloisters, 
keeping  his  monks  to  their  discipline ;  or  in  his  closet, 
writing  "  morals  "  on  the  book  of  Job,  or  keeping  up 
a  wide  correspondence  with  kings  and  queens,  ecclesi- 
astics and  scholars.  Then,  in  the  choir,  reforming  the 
church  service,  and  giving  that  musical  impulse  to  the 
Christian  world  which  will  be  felt  as  long  as  the 
"  Gregorian  chant/'  continues  to  charm  a  human  soul. 
Indeed,  he  was  everything  which  his  church  and  his 
times  required.  If  to  us  he  seems  over  credulous,  he 
was  only  conformed  to  the  fashion  of  his  day  :  and  it 
is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  the  same  reproach,  if  re- 
proach it  be,  has  been  cast  upon  almost  every  man 
who  has  been  a  leader  of  his  generation.  In  his  time 
the  Teutonic  tribes  had  cut  ont  their  "  marks  "  in  this 
island,  and  had  fairly  taken  possession  of  the  soil. 
They  were  as  yet  heathen,  but  they  were  the  chosen 
instruments  of  heaven  in  renovating  and  reorganizing 
the  western  world,  and  in  preparing  Christendom  for 
her  benevolent  mission 


"  to  the  farthest  verge 
Of  the  green  earth." 


But  who  first  ministered  to  them  the  truth  which 
touched,  and  purified,  and  consecrated  their  minds 
and  hearts  to  the  nobler  service  of  Him  by  whose 
providence  they  had  so  far  been  trained  ?  It  was 
Gregory  the  Great.  Let  no  Protestant  be  alarmed ; 
his  religion  is  not  in  danger.  Protestantism  must 
never  be  blind  to  truth,  nor  do  its  interests  ever 
require  ns  to  be  unfair.  The  scattered  remnants  of 
the  unfaithful  British  Church  had  proved  themselves 
nnable  or  unwilling  to  evangelize  the  rude  Teutons, 
and  the  first  Christian  mission  to  these  Teutons  was 


HYMNS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND'S  CHRISTIAN  BIRTH-TIME.       97 

from  Gregory.  The  sight  of  some  young  Saxon  slaves 
in  the  Roman  markets  probably  touched  his  heart,  and 
suggested  the  first  thought  of  a  mission  to  England. 

DO  O  O 

He  would  fain  have  entered  on  the  mission  himself, 
but  he  was  too  valuable  a  man  for  Rome  to  lose.  When 
raised  to  the  Papal  chair,  amidst  all  his  labours  and 
cares,  his  favourite  scheme  was  not  forgotten.  His 
first  purpose  was  to  procure  young  natives  from  the 
slave  market,  and  have  them  trained  as  evangelists  to 
their  countrymen.  This  process,  however,  was  too 
slow  for  his  impatient  zeal.  He  fell  back  on  his 
monks,  selected  a  missionary  band  of  nearly  forty,  and 
in  the  year  596  sent  them,  with  many  exhortations  and 
blessings,  to  the  coast  of  Kent.  England  still  reaps 
the  fruit  of  his  success,  and,  it  may  be,  records  her 
early  sense  of  obligation  to  Gregory  in  her  national 
legend  of  "St.  George  (or  St.  Gregory)  and  the 
Dragon."  Paganism  (the  "  Dragon  ")  in  England  fell 
before  the  cross  ;  and  the  ultimate  result  of  Augustine's 
mission  was  the  establishment  of  a  Saxon  Church, 
which  for  many  generations  exemplified  the  purity  and 
power  of  the  Christian  faith.  Like  the  primitive 
churches,  it  had  its  "  psalms  and  hymns,  and  spiritual 
songs,"  some  of  them  borrowed  from  the  land  to  which 
it  owed  its  spiritual  birth,  and  others,  in  native  Saxon 
rhythm,  springing  from  the  warm  and  simple  hearts  of 
English  converts.  A  few  precious  fragments  of  native 
hymnology  remain,  and  a  translation  from  the  Codex 
Exoniensis  may  afford  some  notion  of  the  simple  hearti- 
ness and  quaint  music  of  a  Saxon  hymn  C(  to  the  Holy 
Trinity." 

Holy  art  Thou,  holy, 

Lord  of  archangels, 

True  Lord  of  triumph, 

Ever  Thou  art  holy, 

7 


yo  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Lord  of  lords. 

Thy  power  for  ever  lasteth 

Earthly  with  men, 

In  every  time  * 

"Widely  revered ; 

Thou  art  God  of  hosts, 

For  Thou  hast  filled 

Earth  and  heavens — 

Safeguard  of  warriors  ! 

With  thy  glory, 

Patron  of  all  beings  ! 

Be  to  Thee  in  the  highest 

Eternal  health, 

And  on  earth  praise, 

Bright  with  men. 

Live  Thou  blessed, 

Who,  in  the  Lord's  name, 

With  power  comest, 

In  comfort  to  the  humble  ; 

To  Thee  in  the  heavens  be, 

Ever  without  end, 

Eternal  praise. 

But  the  Saxon  Church  was  not  left  to  its  own  resources 
merely  for  supplies  to  its  "  service  of  song/''  Many  a 
choral  chant  and  many  a  grand  old  Latin  hymn  came 
floating  across  the  Channel  from  the  churches  of  Italy 
and  Gaul.  England  had  its  schools  of  Church  music, 
and  diligently  enriched  its  public  devotion  with  the 
compositions  of  continental  hymnists.  Venantius 
Fortunatus  was  in  his  prime  during  Gregory's  early  life. 
A  monk,  too,  in  his  later  days,  he  exemplified  the 
possibility  of  harmonizing  literary  freedom  and  cheerful 
or  even  light-hearted  contentment  with  monastic  vows. 
He  could  enjoy  many  a  quiet  laugh  in  his  correspon- 
dence with  saintly  ladies,  and  yet  furnish  them  with 
grand  hymns  to  grace  their  church  processions.    One  of 


HYMNS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND'S  CHRISTIAN  BIRTH-TIME.       99 

these  immortal  productions  was  composed  for  a  special 
service,  in  which  Gregory  of  Tours  and  the  author's 
lady  friend  St.  Radigund  took  a  leading  part.  It 
would  be  sung  as  a  kind  of  spiritual  march,  "  a  song 
of  degrees,"  as  they  moved  with  devout  steps  towards 
the  church  which  was  to  be  consecrated.  The  strain 
is  not  quite  so  simple  and  unpretending  as  some  hymns 
of  an  earlier  time,  but  it  has  a  solemn  swell  and  a 
subduing  pathos. 

The  royal  ensigns  onward  go  ; 
The  cross  in  mystic  glory  beams ; 
Where  He  who  made  us  bears  our  woe, 
Our  curse  removes,  our  soul  redeems. 

Where  gushing  life  flows  from  his  side, 
To  wash  our  hearts — a  precious  flood ; 
Where  deeply  once  the  spear  was  dy'd, 
And  mingling  water  came  with  blood. 

FulfiU'd  is  David's  song  of  old, 
How  David's  Son  and  Lord,  is  He 
Who  rules  the  nations,  as  foretold ; 
The  God  who  triumphs  from  the  tree.* 

In  royal  purple  richly  drest, 
O  cross  of  light !     O  tree  of  grace ! 
Chosen  was  thy  triumphal  breast, 
For  holy  limbs,  a  resting-place  ! 

So  widely  thy  dear  arms  were  spread, 
The  ransom  of  the  world  to  bear — 
To  pay  the  price  in  sinners'  stead, 
And  spoils  from  our  fell  spoiler  tear. 

*  An  allusion  to  Psalm  xcvi.  10,  which  in  the  Italic  version  is 
rendered,  "  Tell  it  among  the  heathen  that  the  Lord  reigneth  from  the 
tree." 


100  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

From  all  thy  boughs,  0  fragrant  tree, 
Sweetest  of  nectar  sweets  distil, 
And  praises  richly  bloom  on  thee, 
And  fruits  of  peace  thy  branches  fill. 

Hail,  holy  victim  !     Hail,  0  life ! 
Who  death  for  sinners  once  endured ; 
Victorious  from  thy  passion's  strife, 
Thy  death  hath  life  for  man  procured !       \ 

We  can  never  think  of  England's  Christian  birth-time 
without  thinking  of  one  of  her  first  and  holiest  Chris- 
tian children  — one  whose  memory  is  now  honoured 
under  the  title  of  the  "  Venerable  Bede."  Nor  can 
this  name  ever  cease  to  be  associated  with  Christian 
psalmody.  Born,  about  the  year  672,  near  the  spot  on 
which  the  good  Benedict  Biscop  soon  afterwards 
founded  the  Abbey  of  Wearmouth,  he  became  a  pupil 
under  Biscop  when  seven  years  old,  and  remained  a 
devout  brother  of  the  monastery  of  Wearmouth  until 
death.  His  earlier  years  were  spent  in  the  study  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  in  the  practice  of  psalmody,  which 
formed  a  prominent  part  in  the  daily  services  of  the 
church.  His  taste  for  psalms  and  hymns  and  holy 
music  was  cultivated  under  the  care  of  John  the 
arch- chanter,  who  had  accompanied  Biscop  from 
Rome.  In  his  nineteenth  year  he  was  made  deacon, 
and  at  thirty  was  ordained  a  priest.  His  life  was 
spent  in  tranquil  study,  earnest  prayer,  and  cheerful 
praise.  His  disciple  and  friend  Cuthbert,  who  wit- 
nessed his  end,  gives  us  the  following  beautiful  and 
touching  story  : — "  He  had  been  labouring  under  a 
severe  attack  of  difficulty  of  breathing,  yet  without 
pain,  for  nearly  two  weeks  before  the  day  of  our  Lord's 
resurrection ;  and  in  this  state  he  continued,  cheerful 
and  rejoicing,  and  giving  thanks  to  Almighty  God, 


HYMNS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND^  CHRISTIAN  BIRTH-TIME.      101 

both  day  and  night,  even  every  hour,  until  ascension 
day.  He  daily  instructed  us  his  disciples,  and  spent 
the  remainder  of  the  day  in  the  singing  of  psalms,  and 
continued  on  also  during  the  night  in  joy  and  thanks- 
giving, except  when  interrupted  by  a  moderate  sleep. 
On  awaking,  he  returned  to  his  accustomed  occupation, 
and  with  outstretched  hands  ceased  not  to  give  thanks 
to  God.  He  was  in  truth  a  blessed  man.  He  chanted 
the  passage  from  St.  Paul,  '  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  •/  and  many  other 
passages  of  Holy  Writ,  in  which  he  admonished  us  to 
rise  from  the  sleep  of  the  soul  by  anticipating  the  last 
hour.  And  being  skilled  in  our  poetry,  he  thus  spoke 
in  the  Saxon  language  of  the  awful  departure  of  the 
soul  from  the  body  : — 

Before  the  need-fare 

No  man  becometh 

Of  thought  more  prudent 

Than  is  needful  to  him 

To  consider 

Before  his  departure 

"What,  to  his  spirit, 

Of  good  or  evil 

After  his  death-day 

Will  be  adjudged. 

He  also  sang  anthems,  as  well  for  our  consolation  as 
his  own,  one  of  which  was  the  following  : — 

0  King  of  glory 
God  of  might, 
Who  didst  ascend  to-day, 
In  triumph  above  all  heavens, 
Leave  us  not  orphans, 
But  send  upon  us 
The  promise  of  the  Father, 
The  Spirit  of  truth. 
Hallelujah ! 


102  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

And   when   he    came   to   the   words,    '  Leave   us   not 
orphans/  he  burst  into  tears,  and  wept  much ;  and, 
after  the  space  of  an  hour,  he  resumed  the  repetition 
of  what  he  had  begun.     As  we  heard,  we  wept  along 
with  him  ;  one  while  we  read,  another  while  we  wept ; 
and  our  reading  was   always  mingled  with  tears.     In 
such  kind  of  joy  as  this  we  passed  the  days  between 
Easter,  and  up  to  the  day  which  I  have  mentioned ; 
and  he  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  thanked  God,  who 
had  thought  him  worthy  of  suffering.  ...  In  addition  to 
the  lessons  we  received  from  him,  and  the  singing  of 
psalms,  ho  strove  all  this  time  to  finish  two  very  im. 
portant  works — the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  which  he  was 
translating  into  Saxon  for  the  use  of  the  Church,  and 
certain   extracts    from   the   books    of    the    Rotas    of 
St.  Isidore.     '  Learn   quickly,'  he  would  say,   '  for  I 
know  not  how  long  I  may  abide,  nor  how  soon   He 
who    created   me   may  take   me   away/       One  of  us 
remained  with  him  one  day,  and  said,  (  Dearly  beloved 
master,  one  chapter  is  still  wanting ;  and  it  appears  to 
be   painful   to    you    that   I    should    ask    any   further 
questions.'     But  he    said,   '  It  does  not  trouble  me ; 
take  your  pen,  and  be  attentive,  and  write    quickly/ 
At  the  ninth  hour  he  expressed  a  wish  to  see  all  the 
presbyters,  that  he  might  admonish  them,  and  distri- 
bute a  few  gifts  among  them.     They  all  mourned  or 
wept,  chiefly  because  he  told  them  that  they  should 
no  longer  see  his  face  in  the  world ;  but  they  rejoiced 
when  he  said,  c  It  is  time  that  I  returned  to  Him  who 
made   me,  who    created   me,   and  formed  me    out  of 
nothing.     I  have  had  a  long  life  upon  the  earth ;  the 
merciful  Judge  has  also  been  pleased  to  ordain  for  me 
a  happy  life.     The  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand, 
for  I  have  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ/ 


And  with  many  such  like  remarks  he  passed  the  day 
until  eventide ;  then  the  boy  whom  we  have  already 
mentioned  said  to  him,  {  Still  one  sentence,  dear 
master,  remains  unwritten/  He  replied,  '  Write 
quickly  V  After  a  little  while  the  boy  said,  '  Now 
the  sentence  is  finished/  He  answered,  ( You  have 
spoken  the  truth  ;  it  is  indeed  finished.  Raise  my 
head  in  your  hands,  for  it  pleases  me  much  to  recline 
opposite  to  that  holy  place  of  mine  in  which  I  used  to 
pray,  so  that,  while  resting  there,  I  may  call  upon 
God  my  Father/  And  being  placed  upon  the  pave- 
ment of  his  cell,  he  said,  (  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost  V  and  as  soon  as 
he  had  named  the  name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  breathed 
out  his  own  spirit,  and  so  departed  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven/'     Blessed  man  !  he  has  followed 

The  Saviour's  pathway  to  his  home  above. 

And  while  we  linger  around  the  scene  of  his  departure, 
we  catch  the  music  of  that  divine  "Ascension  hymn" 
of  his,  in  which  he  used  to  express  the  longing  of  his 
soul  in  its  upward  gaze  after  the  ascending  Lord : — 

A  hymn  of  glory  let  us  sing  ; 

New  hymns  throughout  the  world  shall  ring ; 

By  a  new  way  none  ever  trod, 

Christ  mounteth  to  the  throne  of  God. 

The  apostles  on  the  mountain  stand — 
The  mystic  mount  in  Holy  Land ; 
They,  with  the  Virgin  Mother,  see 
Jesus  ascend  in  majesty. 

The  angels  say  to  the  eleven, 
"  Why  stand  ye  gazing  into  heaven  ? 
This  is  the  Saviour — this  is  He  ! 
Jesus  hath  triumph'd  gloriously  !" 


104  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

They  said  the  Lord  should  come  again, 
As  these  beheld  Him  rising  then, 
Calm  soaring  through  the  radiant  sky, 
Mounting  its  dazzling  summits  high. 

May  our  affections  thither  tend, 
And  thither  constantly  ascend, 
"When,  seated  on  the  Father's  throne, 
Thee,  reigning  in  the  heavens,  we  own  ! 

Be  Thou  our  present  joy,  0  Lord, 
Who  wilt  be  ever  our  reward ; 
And  as  the  countless  ages  flee, 
May  all  our  glory  be  in  Thee  ! 

Ill  this  hymn,  as  well  as  in  the  other  fragments 
which  have  come  to  us  from  the  venerable  Bede,  there 
is  the  holy  familiarity  with  the  historical  parts  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  the  same  simple  and  devout 
pleasure  m  them  which  distinguish  most  of  the  earlier 
hymns  of  the  Christian  Church.  Bede,  too,  keeps  up 
that  fixed  adoring  gaze  upon  the  divine  objects  of 
faith,  and  that  deeply  reverent  yet  jubilant  feeling  of 
devotion  which  give  the  songs  of  Christianity's  first 
love  the  secret  of  their  beauty  and  life.  In  him,  also, 
there  is  sometimes  that  tender  sympathy  with  infancy 
and  youth  which  is  so  often  associated  with  pure 
heavenliness  of  spirit  in  the  truly  primitive  Christian 
Fathers.  This  feeling  breathes  sweetly  in  his  hymn 
"  for  the  Holy  Innocents  :" — 

Kaise  the  conquering  martyr's  song ; 
Song  of  the  Yictor  Innocents  ; 
Outcasts  from  th'  unholy  throng, 
Numbered  now  with  heaven's  saints  ; 
Those  whose  angels  see  God's  face, 
Pour  unceasing  shouts  along ; 
While  they  ever  hymn  his  grace, 
Eaise  the  conquering  martyr's  song  ! 


105 


By  that  cursed  ruler  slain ; 

By  their  loving  Maker  crowned  ; 

Sorrowless  with  Him  to  reign, 

Where  beanty,  light,  and  peace  abound. 

There  He  gives  them  mansions  all ; 

They  have  changed  their  loss  for  gain ; 

In  their  heavenly  Father's  hall, 

By  that  cursed  ruler  slain. 

A  wailing  voice  in  Raman  rose, 

From  weeping  mothers  all  forlorn  ; 

Sad  Rachel  mourned  her  children's  woes, 

Her  victim  babes,  for  murder  born. 

ISTow  then'  triumph  is  complete  ; 

Unconquered  by  tormenting  foes  ; 

Though  once  from  homes,  and  fields,  and  street, 

A  wailing  voice  in  Ramah  rose. 

Blest  little  flock,  no  longer  fear 
The  lion  that  prey'd  on  your  life, 
For  now  your  heav'nly  Shepherd  dear 
Gives  pastures  never  scath'd  by  strife  : 
On  Sion's  hill  now  dwelling  safe, 
The  footprints  of  the  Lamb  are  clear  ; 
JSTo  tyrant  there  your  souls  will  chafe, 
Blest  little  flock,  no  longer  fear. 

The  tear  is  wiped  from  every  eye 
By  his,  your  tender  Father's,  hand ; 
No  harm  of  death  is  ever  nigh, 
Where  life  breathes  o'er  the  happy  land. 
Who  sow  in  tears,  in  joy  shall  reap ; 
Their  harvest-home  is  found  on  high ; 
The  light  of  heav'n  sees  no  one  weep  ; 
The  tear  is  wiped  from  every  eye. 

A  city  blest  through  all  the  earth, 
With  martyrs'  triumphs,  martyrs'  love 
Thy  boast  is  in  thy  Saviour's  birth, 
Which  gives  thee  greatness  far  above 


106  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

All  cities  that  would  count  thee  small, 
Or  rival  thee  in  pride  or  mirth  ; 
Thy  holy  claim  surpasses  all, 
0  city  blest  through  all  the  earth ! 

That  venerable  hymnist,  who  thus  supplied  the 
choir  with  appropriate  means  of  celebrating  the  day  of 
1 '  Holy  Innocents/'  quotes  from  other  hymnists  here 
and  there — hymnists  whose  names,  it  may  be,  we 
shall  never  know  in  this  world,  but  whose  hymns 
seem  to  have  been  familiar  to  Bede,  and  were  probably 
used  in  the  English  Church  in  that  its  Christian  birth- 
time.  Of  these,  one  is  a  fine  old  judgment  hymn, 
which,  as  Dr.  Neale  observes,  manifestly  contains  the 
germ  of  the  Dies  Irce,  to  which,  however  inferior  in 
lyric  fervour  and  effect,  it  scarcely  yields  in  devotion 
and  simple  realization  of  its  subject : — 

That  great  day  of  wrath  is  coming, 

Day  of  doom  and  final  woe  ; 
Like  a  midnight  robber  breaking 

On  the  sons  of  men  below  ; 
"When  the  world's  proud  life  is  over, 

All  her  pomp  of  ages  pass'd, 
And  her  children  stand  in  anguish, 

That  the  end  is  come  at  last ; 
And  the  blast  of  that  loud  trumpet, 

Through  earth's  quarters  pealing  dread, 
Louder  and  yet  louder  waxing, 

Calls  together  quick  and  dead ; 
And  the  glorious  King  appearing 

On  his  throne  so  high  and  white, 
And  his  holy  bands  of  angels 

Wait  within  his  circling  light ; 
And  the  sun,  like  sackcloth  darkling, 

And  the  moon  a  bloody  red, 
And  the  stars  from  heaven  falling, 

As  untimely  figs  are  shed ; 


107 


Tempests,  fires,  and  desolation 
'Fore  the  Judge's  footsteps  go ; 

Earth  and  sea,  all  life's  abysses, 
Shall  his  final  sentence  know. 


Wherefore  man,  while  judgment  lingers, 

Fly  the  dragon's  charm  of  sin ; 
And  with  bread  supply  the  needy, 

If  thou  would'st  thy  heaven  win ; 
Gird  thy  loins,  be  up  and  ready, 

Heart  all  pure,  and  conscience  right ; 
Let  the  Bridegroom,  when  He  cometh, 

Find  thy  lamp-flame  clear  and  bright. 

Who  does  not  wish  to  realize  oneness  with  those 
who  used  to  sing  such,  hymns  ?  In  many  respects 
mere  translations  are  defective,  but  in  this  case  they 
may  be  so  far  in  the  spirit  and  manner  of  the  originals 
as  to  show  us  that  the  early  English  Christians  really 
learnt  to  "  admonish  one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs. " 

England,  however,  may  be  said  to  have  had  a 
second  Christian  birth- time,  when  she  was  saved  from 
the  darkness  and  corruption  which  for  many  centuries, 
in  her  later  history,  had  been  enclosing  and  oppressing 
her  Christian  life,  when  in  all  her  sanctuaries  she 
might  have  sung  one  of  her  own  bishop' s  hymns  : — 

Hence  in  thy  truth  thy  church  delights    j 

From  all  corruptions  freed ; 
Unblemish'd  worship,  spotless  rites, 

And  unadulterate  creed : 
Hence  thy  pure  words  her  children  lead 

To  speak  the  united  prayer, 
Their  Saviour's  name  alone  to  plead, 

His  cup  of  blessing  share. 


108  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

0  God,  whose  love,  onr  country's  guides, 

Once  nerved  with  courage  strong, 
And  still  o'er  us  their  sons  presides 

Accept  our  grateful  song. 
And  0  the  truth,  revived  among 

Our  sires  from  times  of  old, 
Do  Thou  to  future  times  prolong, 

And  grant  our  sons  to  hold  ! 

The  process  of  England's  Christian  renewal  was 
somewhat  slow ;  beginning  amidst  the  changes  under 
Henry  VIIL,  and  unfolding  its  first  definite  results  as 
the  claims  of  the  Stuart  dynasty  yielded  to  the  rights 
of  conscience  and  of  law.  The  seventeenth  century 
may  be  called  the  age  of  England's  renovation,  and 
the  period  was  marked  by  a  quickening  in  every 
department  of  public  life.  Every  sphere  of  science, 
literature,  arts,  and  religion  was  adorned  with  the 
most  illustrious  talent,  learning,  and  genius.  Nor 
was  the  age  wanting  in  poets  whose  hallowed  powers 
were  given  to  Him  whose  grace  had  inspired  the  new 
Christian  life.  Psalms  and  hymns  broke  forth  then, 
as  well  as  in  the  earlier  times  of  deliverance.  The 
hymns  were  not  perhaps  so  simple,  so  childlike ;  their 
manner  and  style  had  more  of  the  artificial ;  and,  like 
the  times  which  gave  them  birth,  they  had  too  many 
elaborated  conceits,  and  quaint  turns  of  thought  and 
expression;  still,  they  had  their  distinctive  beauty, 
and  were  quite  equal  in  spirituality,  and  cheerfulness, 
and  warmth.  Among  other  hymnists  of  the  age, 
there  was  Francis  Quarles.  "Who  can  forget  him  ? 
He  was  "the  darling  of  our  plebeian  judgments,"  as 
Milton's  nephew,  Phillips,  called  him,  with  a  kind  of 
prophetic  insight  into  the  unfailing  popularity  of 
"  Quarles's   Divine   Emblems/'   in  the  cottage  homes 


HYMNS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND'S  CHRISTIAN  BIRTH-TIME.       109 

of  liis  country.  Born  in  Essex  in  1592,  Quarles  was 
by  and  by  known  among  the  Cambridge  scholars, 
then  respected  as  a  student  in  Lincoln's  Inn;  and 
then,  by  turns,  he  acted  as  cup-bearer  to  a  royal 
hymnist,  Elizabeth  of  Bohemia,  as  secretary  to  Arch- 
bishop Usher,  and  as  chronologer  to  the  City  of 
London.  Amidst  all  the  activities  of  his  busy  and 
public  life  his  poetic  genius  was  kept  in  full  play  ; 
ever  and  anon  giving  to  the  world  either  a  "  Job 
Militant/''  or  a  "  Feast  of  Worms/'  or  u  Sion's 
Elegies  "  or  the  fruits  of  "  the  Morning  Muse." 
The  good  man,  however,  like  many  of  his  fellows, 
suffered  so  much  from  the  strife  of  parties  that  he  fell 
a  victim  to  sorrow  at  the  age  of  fifty-two.  His 
"  Emblems "  have  enriched  the  thoughts  of  many 
a  peasant ;  but  peasant  and  prince  alike  may  enjoy  his 
noble  hymn  on  "  Delight  in  God  Only." 

I  love  (and  have  some  cause  to  love)  the  earth  : 
She  is  my  Maker's  creature  ;  therefore  good: 
She  is  my  mother,  for  she  gave  me  birth  ; 
She  is  my  tender  nurse — she  gives  me  food  ; 

But  what's  a  creature,  Lord,  compared  -with  Thee  ? 

Or  what's  my  mother,  or  my  nurse  to  me  ? 

I  love  the  air  :  her  daily  sweets  refresh 
My  drooping  soul,  and  to  new  sweets  invite  me ; 
Her  shrill-mouth' d  quire  sustains  me  with  their  flesh, 
And  with  their  polyphonian  notes  delight  me : 
But  what's  the  ah*,  or  all  the  sweets  that  she 
Can  bless  my  soul  withal,  compared  to  Thee  ? 

I  love  the  sea  :  she  is  my  fellow  creature, 

My  careful  purveyor;  she  provides  me  store ; 

She  walls  me  round ;  she  makes  my  diet  greater  ; 

She  wafts  my  treasure  from  a  foreign  shore : 

But,  Lord  of  oceans,  when  compared  with  Thee, 
What  is  the  ocean,  or  her  wealth  to  me  ? 


110  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

To  heaven's  high  city  I  direct  my  journey, 
Whose  spangled  suburbs  entertain  my  eye, 
Mine  eye,  by  contemplations  great  attorney, 
Transcends  the  crystal  pavement  of  the  sky  : 

But  what  is  heaven,  great  God,  compared  to  Thee  ? 

Without  thy  presence  heaven's  no  heaven  to  me. 

•  Without  thy  presence  earth  gives  no  refection ; 

Without  thy  presence  sea  affords  no  treasure ; 

Without  thy  presence  air's  a  rank  infection ; 

Without  thy  presence  heaven  itself  no  pleasure  ; 
If  not  possess'd,  if  not  enjoy'd  in  Thee, 
What's  earth,  or  sea,  or  ah-,  or  heaven  to  me  ? 

The  highest  honours  that  the  world  can  boast, 

Are  subjects  far  too  low  for  my  desire  ; 

The  brightest  beams  of  glory  are  (at  most) 

But  dying  sparkles  of  thy  living  fire  : 

The  loudest  flames  that  earth  can  kindle,  be 
But  mighty  "glow-worms,  if  compared  to  Thee. 

Without  thy  presence  wealth  is  bags  of  cares ; 

Wisdom  but  folly  ;  joy  disquiet  sadness  : 

Friendship  is  treason,  and  delights  are  snares ; 

Pleasures  but  pain,  and  mirth  but  pleasing  madness  ; 
Without  Thee,  Lord,  things  be  not  what  they  be, 
Nor  have  they  being  when  compared  with  Thee. 

In  having  all  things,  and  not  Thee,  what  have  I  ? 

Not  having  Thee,  what  have  my  labours  got  ? 

Let  me  enjoy  but  Thee,  what  further  crave  I  ? 

And  having  Thee  alone,  what  have  I  not  ? 

I  wish  nor  sea  nor  land ;  nor  would  I  be, 
Possess'd  of  heaven,  heaven  unpossess'd  of  Thee. 


tr  YIL 


HYMNS  FROM  OLD  CLOISTEES. 

"  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them  ;  and 
the  desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose.  It  shall  blossom 
abundantly,  and  rejoice  even  with  joy  and  singing." 


(AVE  you  learnt  to  bless  the  name  of  Jesus 
from  the  depth  of  a  loving  heart  ?  Then,  at 
times,    you    have    been    sweetly    touched    or 


strangely  warmed,  while  trying  to  realize  communion 
with  all  that  is  holy  in  the  past,  as  you  caught  the 
music  of  a  hymn  coming,  now  but  faintly,  and  now  in 
swelling  fervent  tones  from  successive  generations  of 
the  faithful.  Listen  !  Do  you  know  the  gracious 
heartfelt  verses  ? 


Jesus,  the  only  thought  of  Thee, 
With  sweetness  fills  my  breast ; 

But  sweeter  far  it  is  to  see, 
And  on  thy  beauty  feast. 

~No  sound,  no  harmony  so  gay, 

Can  art,  or  music  frame  : 
No  thought  can  reach,  no  words  can  say, 

The  sweets  of  thy  bless'd  name. 


112  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Jesus,  our  hope,  when  we  repent, 
Sweet  source  of  all  our  grace  ; 

Sole  comfort  in  our  banishment ; 
0  !  what  when  face  to  face  ! 

Jesus  !  that  name  inspires  my  mind 
With  springs  of  life  and  light, 

More  than  I  ask,  in  Thee  I  find, 
And  lavish  in  delight. 

No  art  or  eloquence  of  man 

Can  tell  the  joys  of  love  ; 
Only  the  saints  can  understand, 

What  they  in  Jesus  prove. 

Thee,  then  I'll  seek,  retired  apart 
From  world  and  business  free  ; 

When  these  shall  knock,  I'll  shut  my  heart, 
And  keep  it  all  for  Thee. 

Before  the  morning  light  I'll  come, 

With  Magdalen  to  find, 
In  sighs  and  tears,  my  Jesus'  tomb, 

And  there  refresh  my  mind. 

« 
My  tears  upon  his  grave  shall  flow, 

My  sighs  the  garden  fill ; 
Then  at  his  feet  myself  I'll  throw, 

And  there  I'll  seek  his  will. 

Jesus,  in  thy  bless'd  steps  I'll  tread, 

And  walk  in  all  thy  ways  ; 
I'll  never  cease  to  weep  and  plead, 

Till  I'm  restored  to  grace. 

0  King  of  love,  thy  blessed  fire, 
Does  such  sweet  flames  excite, 

That  first  it  raises  the  desire, 
Then  fills  it  with  delight. 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS.  113 

Thy  lovely  presence  shines  so  clear 

Thro'  every  sense  and  way, 
That  souls  which  once  have  seen  Thee  near, 

See  all  things  else  decay. 

Come  then,  dear  Lord,  possess  my  heart, 
Chase  thence  the  shades  of  night ; 

Bid  all  but  perfect  love  depart, 
Before  thy  shining  light. 

Thy  name  I  then  will  ever  sing, 

And  with  thy  saints  rejoice ; 
My  heart  shall  own  Thee  as  its  king, 

Midst  never-ending  joys. 

From  whence  did  this  song  arise  ?  Who  first  sang 
it  ?  Let  us  seek  its  birthplace  in  a  many-storied  land. 
In  one  of  the  eastern  departments  of  France,  not  far 
from  the  source  of  the  Seine,  and  on  the  banks  of  the 
tranquil  Saone,  we  should  be  far  away  from  commercial 
bustle  and  mechanical  strife,  in  a  region  where  a  simple 
and  quiet  husbandry  is  content,  without  the  aid  of 
science;  where  the  multiplied  subdivisions  of  the 
fruitful  soil,  wild  and  neglected  tracts,  and  a  popula- 
tion of  unaspiring  cultivators  would  scarcely  seem  to 
witness  of  an  illustrious  past.  Nevertheless,  we  should 
find  ourselves  surrounded  by  monuments  of  former 
splendour.  There  are  ancient  tokens  of  lordly  pride 
and  martial  power,  footprints  of  bright  intellect, 
hallowed  learning,  religious  mystery,  saintly  thought, 
and  heavenly  devotion.  There  are  remnants  of  old 
cities,  and  castles,  and  abbeys,  with  garden  grounds, 
and  vine-covered  slopes,  and  verdant  hills;  indeed, 
enough  in  nature,  and  still  enough  of  art  to  show  that 
old  Burgundy  was  "  a  land  of  corn  and  wine,"  in 
appearance,  and  resources,  and  fruitfulness,  verily  the 
"  golden  land."     There,   in  a  forest  valley,  within  a 


114  HYMN-WJRITERS    AND    THEIR   HYMNS. 

recess   adorned  with   interwoven  flowers,    and   over- 
shadowed by  primitive  oaks  and  beeches,  somewhat 
more  than  seven  centuries  ago,  heaven  first  heard  the 
music  of  our  hymn  to  "  the  sweet  memory  of  Jesus." 
It  arose  from  the  sanctified  heart  and  lips  of  Bernard, 
deservedly  honoured  as   St.  Bernard,  the  "  mellifluous 
doctor."     He  was  a  monk  ;  but  though   a  monk,  he 
was  never  what  one  prejudiced  biographer  supposed 
that,  as  a  monk,  he  must  necessarily  be,  "  a  turbulent 
and  hot-headed  fanatic."     No ;  Bernard  was  a  saintly 
man.      He   was    not    "  above   his    Master."      It   was 
enough  for  him  that  "  the  disciple  be  as  his  Master"  ; 
and  there  had  been  those  who  said  of  his  Master, "  He 
hath  a  devil  and  is  mad."     But   who   could   sing  of 
Jesus  as  Bernard  did,  unless  he  were  ruled  by  "  the 
love  of  Christ"  ?     The  monastery  in  Bernard's  day  was 
the  only  home  for  such  high-toned  piety  as  his.     He 
had  scarcely  passed  into  mature  manhood  when  he 
was  elected  as  the  leader  of  twelve  recluses,  who,  with 
himself,  were  devoted  to  the  work  of  founding  a  new 
religious  community  in  the  desert.     Their  chief  design 
was  to  save  themselves  and  the  souls  of  the  people 
among  whom  they  exercised  their  itinerant  ministry ; 
but  they  were   also  bent  upon  toiling  until  ' '  the  land 
that  was  desolate  was  become  like  the  Garden  of  Eden." 
They  were  among  the  first  "model  farmers"  of  Europe. 
And  though  they  may  not  be  classed  with  the  (<  genial 
fraternities"   whose    names    still   mark  the  most  dis- 
tinguished vineyards  of  modern  times,  they  share  the 
honour  of  those  labourers  who  first  broke  the  soil  of 
our  western  wastes,  and  taught  it  to  unfold  its  re- 
sources so  as  to  meet  the  advancing  claims  of  modern 
civilization.     Bernard  found  a  spot  within  a  pathless 
forest,  haunted  by  robbers,  and  dreaded  as  the  <(  valley 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS.  115 

of  wormwood" ;  and  there  he  and  his  companions 
began  their  task  with  cheerful  courage,  and  worked, 
now  in  a  devotional  silence,  and  now,  with  chant  and 
psalmody,  literally  speaking  to  themselves  and 
answering  one  another,  "in  psalms  and  hymns  and 
spiritual  songs,"  till  "the  valley  of  wormwood" 
became  Clairvaux,  "  the  bright  valley  ";  and  the  fruitful 
little  church  in  the  desert  might  rejoice  in  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promise,  <(  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards 
from  thence,  and  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of 
hope ;  and  she  shall  sing  there  as  in  the  days  of  her 
youth,  and  as  in  the  day  when  she  came  up  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt."  It  was  amidst  the  toils  and  songs, 
the  prayers  and  chants  of  that  valley  that  the  character 
of  Bernard  attained  its  maturity  of  Christian  manliness. 
There  his  character  seemed  to  perfect  its  balance,  and 
to  show  how  unearthliness  and  tender  humanity,  the 
contemplative  and  the  practical,  the  severe  and  the 
gentle,  the  strict  and  the  free,  the  frugal  and  the 
generous,  the  truthful,  the  wise,  and  the  loving,  could- 
all  harmonize  in  blessing  the  existing  generation,  and 
in  shedding  balmy  lessons  on  the  minds  and  hearts  of 
following  ages.  How  much  Bernard  owed  to  his 
mother  !  and  how  often  when  his  name  occurs  do  we 
think  of  Hannah  and  the  child  of  her  many  prayers. 
Hannah's  inspired  joy  as  a  mother  gave  holy  song  to 
the  "  church  throughout  all  the  world" ;  and  the 
prayers  of  the  Lady  Aletta  for  her  boy  who  first  saw 
the  light  in  a.d.  1091,  under  the  vine  slopes  of  Cote 
d'Or,  had  their  full  answer  in  the  jubilant  piety  and 
songful  life  of  her  converted  Bernard.  She  prayed 
that  he  might  be  a  monk  :  believing  that  such  a  life 
was  best  for  his  soul ;  and  what  she  prayed  for,  her 
well-trained  child  was  brought  to  enjoy.  Like  Hannah, 


116  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

she  had  "  lent  him  to  the  Lord,"  and  like  Hannah's 
son  he  found  the  joy  of  his  life  in  the  "  Beauty  of 
Holiness."  His  mother's  death-chamber  was  to  him 
the  birthplace  of  a  new  life.  Aletta  wished  to  depart 
with  the  chant  of  a  litany  on  her  ears.  She  lived  to 
catch  the  touching  appeal,  "By  thy  cross  and  passion," 
and  her  last  words  were  the  response,  "  Good  Lord, 
deliver  us  !"  She  was  gone  to  her  rest;  her  works  of 
piety  and  charity  follow  her ;  but  her  boy  was  left  to 
record  the  hour  of  her  departure  as  the  turning  point 
of  his  own  life.  He  had  lost  his  mother,  but  Jesus 
her  Saviour  was  now  his  own ;  and  with  the  hallowed 
memory  of  Aletta' s  final  hour  still  touching  his  soul, 
he  breathed  his  hymn  of  appeal  to  Christ — 

When  my  dying  hour  must  be, 
Be  not  absent  then  from  me  ; 
In  that  dreadful  hour,  I  pray, 
Jesus,  come  without  delay, 

See  and  set  me  free  ! 
When  Thoubiddest  me  depart, 
Whom  I  cleave  to  with  my  heart, 
Lover  of  my  soul  be  near, 
With  thy  saving  cross  appear, 

Show  thyself  to  me  ! 

The  character  of  Bernard  was  a  faithful  mirror  of 
his  times.  The  crusade  against  the  "  infidel,"  and  the 
rescue  of  his  own  countrymen's  souls  from  sin,  both 
engaged  his  burning  zeal  and  effective  eloquence  and 
prayers.  He  advocated  a  high  spiritual  standard  of 
Romanism.  He  entered  the  controversial  lists  against 
sceptical  Churchmen  and  fashionable  heresies ;  but 
whatever  he  did,  he  did  it  "  to  the  Lord,"  and  did  it 
with  all  his  heart.  It  is  most  pleasant,  however,  to 
commune  with,  him  as  the  expositor  of    evangelical 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS.  117 

truth,  and  the  tender,  ardent,  and  spiritual  hymnolo- 
gist  of  the  universal  Church.  We  love  him  for  his 
warm  and  spirited,  but  reverent,  testimony  for  Christ, 
especially  in  his  atoning  work  ;  but  how  all  our  powers 
and  feelings  harmonize  in  choral  service,  when  his 
theme  of  Christian  controversy  glows  and  kindles  into 
song  !  Where  is  the  Christian  heart  that  is  not  ready 
to  sing  with  him  ? — 

Fix,  oh  fix  each  crimson  wound, 
And  those  nail-prints  so  profound, 
In  my  heart  engrave  them  fully, 
That  I  may  grow  like  Thee  wholly, 

Jesus,  Saviour,  sweet ! 
Pitying  God,  to  Thee  I  cry, 
Guilty,  at  thy  feet  I  lie  ; 
Oh  !  be  merciful  to  me, 
Nor  bid  me,  unworthy,  flee 

From  thy  sacred  feet ! 

Prostrate,  see  thy  cross  I  grasp, 
And  thy  pierced  feet  I  clasp ; 
Gracious  Jesus,  spurn  me  not ; 
On  me,  with  compassion  fraught, 

Let  thy  glances  fall. 
From  thy  cross  of  agony, 
My  beloved,  look  on  me ; 
Turn  me  wholly  unto  Thee ; 
"  Be  Thou  whole,"  say  openly, 

"  I  forgive  thee  all." 

Of  all  the  men  of  his  time,  he  seems  to  have  had 
the  deepest  insight  into  St.  Paul's  spirit  and  views ; 
and  he  richly  exemplified  the  connection  between  right 
views  of  the  cross  and  genuine  zeal  for  the  Church  and 
the  salvation  of  the  world.  His  recorded  views  of  the 
atonement  show  that  he  kept  his  acute  intellect  attuned 
to  his  subdued  will  and  high-toned  affections,  while 


118  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

they  afford  us  an  insight  into  the  secret  of  his  deep 
feeling  and  power  as  a  leader  in  psalms,  and  hymns, 
and  chants  in  praise  of  Christ.  "  We  cannot  fathom 
the  mystery  of  the  Divine  will/'  says  he ;  "  yet  we 
can  feel  the  effect  of  the  (atoning)  work,  we  can  be 
sensible  of  the  benefit.  Why  did  He  accomplish  that 
by  his  blood  which  He  might  have  accomplished  by  a 
word  ?     Ask  Himself  ?     It   is   vouchsafed   to  me   to 

know  that  the  fact  is  so,  but  not  the  ivherefore It 

was  not  the  death  of  Christ  in  itself,  but  the  will  of 
Him  who  freely  offered  Himself  that  was  acceptable 
to  God ;  and  because  this  precious  death,  procuring 
the  downfall  of  sin,  could  only  be  brought  about  by 
sin,  so  God  had  no  pleasure  in  the  sin,  but  used  it  for 
good.  God  did  not  only  require  the  death  of  his  Son, 
but  accepted  it  when  offered.     He  did  not  thirst  for 

man's  blood,    but  for  man's   salvation Three 

things  here  meet  together — the  humility  of  self-renun- 
ciation ;  the  manifestation  of  love,  even  to  the  death 
of  the  cross ;  the  mystery  of  redemption,  whereby  He 
overcame  death.  The  two  former  facts  are  nothing 
without  the  third.  The  examples  of  humility  and 
love  are  something  great,  but  have  no  firm  foun- 
dation without  the  redemption."  Some  of  Bernard's 
first  converts  were  his  own  father,  and  brothers,  and 
personal  friends.  Like  Andrew,  "  he  first  found  his 
own,  and  brought  them  to  Jesus."  He  closed  his 
father's  eyes  in  peace  and  hope,  and  then  he  saw  his 
best-beloved  brother,  Gerard,  take  his  flight  into 
eternal  life.  What  a  touching  memorial  he  has 
bequeathed  to  us  of  the  last  scene  !  It  is  like  a  plain- 
tive parting  hymn,  having  all  poetic  beauty  and  pathos 
in  the  form  of  prose.  "  Who  could  ever  have  loved 
me  as  he  did  ?     He  was  a  brother  by  blood,  but  far 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS.  119 

more  by  religion God  grant,    Gerard,  I  may 

not  have  lost  thee,  but  that  thou  hast  preceded  me ; 
for  of  a  surety  thou  hast  joined  those  whom  in  thy 
last  night  below  thou  didst  invite  to  praise  God,  when 
suddenly,  to  the  great  surprise  of  all,  thou,  with  a 
serene  countenance  and  a  cheerful  voice,  didst  commence 
chanting,  f  Praise  ye  the  Lord  from  the  heaven,  praise 
Him,  all  ye  angels  V  At  that  moment,  O  my 
brother,  the  day  dawned  on  thee,  though  it  was 
night  to  us;  the  night  to  thee  was  all  brightness. 
....  Just  as  I  reached  his  side,  I  heard  hiin  utter 
aloud  those  words  of  Christ,  '  Father,  into  Thine  hands 
I  commend  my  spirit  V  Then  repeating  the  verse 
over  again,  and  resting  on  the  word  '  Father  V 
'  Father  P  he  turned  to  me,  and  smiling  said,  '  Oh, 
how  gracious  of  God  to  be  the  Father  of  men,  and 
what  an  honour  for  men  to  be  his  children  V  And 
then  very  distinctly,  c  If  children,  then  heirs/  And 
so  he  died,  and  so  dying,  he  well  nigh  changed  my 
grief  into  rejoicing,  so  completely  did  the  sight  of  his 
happiness  overpower  the  recollection  of  my  own  misery. 
....  0  Lord,  Thou  hast  but  called  for  thine  own. 
Thou  has  but  taken  what  belonged  to  Thee  !  and  now 
my  tears  put  an  end  to  my  words.  I  pray  Thee  teach 
me  to  put  an  end  to  ray  tears  \"  By  and  by  Bernard's 
own  call  was  come.  He  had  lived  as  a  witness  for  the 
truth.  He  had  taught  his  neighbours  to  be  industrious, 
and  holy,  and  happy.  He  had  preached  Christ  as  the 
life  and  soul  of  the  "  Song  of  songs."  He  had  helped 
to  brighten  and  enrich  the  aspect  of  his  native 
land.  He  had  gathered  many  a  family  of  spiritual 
children,  had  led  his  own  household  to  the  Saviour, 
and  now,  having  spent  his  little  remaining  strength  in 
the  work  of  a  "  peace-maker/;  he  found  his  reward, 


120  HYMN-WRITEKS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

and  passed  into  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven."  He  de- 
parted exhorting  his  weeping  friends  to  "  abound  more 
and  more  in  every  good  work,"  and  murmuring  as  his 
last  sentence  on  earth,  "I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two, 
having  a  desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which 
is  far  better  \"  Happy  Bernard  !  His  Kedeemer  had 
given  the  full  response  to  his  hymn — 

Let  me  true  communion  know 
With  Thee  in  thy  sacred  woe, 
Counting  all  beside  but  dross, 
Dying  with  Thee  on  thy  cross  ; — 

'Neath  it  will  I  die ! 
Thanks  to  Thee  with  every  breath, 
Jesus,  for  thy  bitter  death ; 
Grant  thy  guilty  one  this  prayer, 
When  my  dying  hour  is  near, 

Gracious  God  be  nigh ! 

Old  Burgundy  was  verily  the  "  golden  land  "  ;  for 
it  found  a  cloistered  home  for  a  second  Bernard — a 
monk  likewise,  and  contemporary  with  the  saint ;  one 
who,  from  the  fulness  of  his  gifted  and  consecrated 
soul  gave  birth  to  that  "  thing  of  beauty,"  the  hymn 
now  so  widely  known  as  "  Jerusalem  the  Golden/' ' 
Two  such  hymnists  in  the  same  province,  in  the  same 
time,  and  of  the  same  name,  and  saints  both,  may  well 
be  confounded,  as  they  have  sometimes  been,  by 
people  who  are  more  equal  to  the  joy  of  singing  their 
hymns  than  to  the  pains  of  exploring  the  old  cloisters 
in  which  they  wrote  them.  Bernard  of  Morlaix  never 
found  a  place  in  the  saint's  calendar ;  but  his  glorious 
verses  have  now  secured  a  home  for  him  in  the  best 
hearts  of  Christendom.  Of  English  parentage,  and  a 
child  of  old  Brittany,  he  found  his  way  into  the  clois- 
ters of  the  celebrated  Cluny,  and  spent  his  devoted  life 
in  praying  and  singing  of  judgment  and   of  heaven, 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS'.  121 

under  the  fatherly  direction  of  Peter  the  venerable 
abbot,  himself  a  master  of  spiritual  song,  and  then  at 
the  summit  of  his  reputation.  Bernard's  home  was 
supreme  in  monastic  fame.  Surrounded  by  a  host  of 
brethren,  worshipping  in  the  grandest  old  church  in 
France,  and  daily  joining  in  the  most  full  and  impres- 
sive ritual  of  his  times,  there  would  seem  to  be  no  way 
open  for  unpleasant  intrusions  on  his  contemplative 
life.  But,  alas  !  no  cloisters,  however  richly  furnished, 
or  however  strictly  guarded,  are  at  all  times  inviolable 
retreats  from  the  gathering  woes  and  sorrows  of  a 
sinful  world.  Bernard  felt  the  heaving  outside.  He 
saw  the  darkness  thickening  on  society,  he  heard 
the  voices  of  woe  foretelling  dissolution,  change,  and 
judgment.  To  him  the  judge  was  at  the  door,  and 
he  tried  to  keep  himself  in  the  posture  of  readiness  by 
singing  hymns  of  admonition.  How  plaintive  is  his 
voice,  yet  how  it  thrills  ! — 

The  world  is  old  and  sinful, 

Its  passing  hour  is  near  ; 
Keep  watch,  be  hushed,  and  sober, 

The  Judge's  knock  to  hear. 
The  Judge  in  mercy  coming, 

The  Judge  enthroned  in  might, 
All  evil  things  to  banish, 

All  good  to  crown  with  light. 
That  Monarch  just  and  gentle 

The  dead  from  thrall  shall  free. 
Let  trembling  seize  the  guilty, 

For  God  and  man  is  He  ! 
Rise,  Christian,  rise  to  meet  Him, 

Let  wrong  give  way  to  right, 
Let  tears  of  godly  sorrow 

Melt  into  songs  of  light — 
The  light  that  has  no  setting, 

Too  new  for  moon  or  sun, 


122  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

So  crystal-like  and  golden, 

So  like  its  Maker,  one. 
And  when  the  Son  shall  render 

The  kingdom  up  once  more, 
And  God  the  Father's  glory 

Shall  brighten  evermore, 
Then  light,  as  yet  unfolded, 

Shall  open  on  the  blest, 
All  mysteries  revealing 

Of  holy,  endless  rest. 


The  note  struck  in  the  last  stanza  opened  a  transition 
movement,  and  Bernard's  soul  caught  an  insight  into 
the  clear  jasper  light  and  balmy  atmosphere  of  his 
own  "  sweet  and  happy  region."  What  a  happy  proof 
of  the  harmonizing  power  of  heavenliness  is  shown  in 
the  fact  that  the  hymn  of  this  heavenly-minded  monk 
has  found  its  way  into  the  hearts  of  all  classes  of 
Christians,  and  into  the  choirs  and  public  services  of 
all  Christian  Churches.  The  sweet  accordance  of  this 
hymn  with  the  spirit  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  with 
the  mind  of  its  Divine  Lord,  is  shown,  too,  in  the 
response  which  it  has  from  the  most  hallowed  depths 
of  the  consecrated  heart,  and  in  its  sacred  charm  over 
the  spirit  of  those  of  whom  Jesus  said,  "Whosoever, 
therefore,  shall  humble  himself  as  this  little  child,  the 
same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.-"  The 
hymn  has  sometimes  brought  heaven  still  nearer,  even 
when  the  departing  spirit  has  felt  itself  on  the 
threshold  of  its  home.  So  it  was  with  the  dear  little 
sufferer  mentioned  by  Dr.  Neale  in  his  notes  on 
Bernard.  Almost  unequalled  agony  attended  the 
upward  passage  of  the  child,  but  the  youthful  sufferer 
was  hushed  by  the  music  of  this  hymn,  and  would  lie 
without  a  murmur  while  they  repeated  it — 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS.  123 

Jerusalem,  the  golden, 
Where  milk  and  honey  flow, 
Both  heart  and  voice  sink  fainting 
Beneath  thy  crystal  glow. 

I  know  not,  oh,  I  know  not 
What  joys  of  home  are  there, 
What  bright  unfolding  glory, 
WTiat  bliss  beyond  compare  ! 

They  stand,  those  courts  of  Zion, 
All  glad  with  holy  song, 
And  radiant  with  the  angels, 
And  all  the  martyr  throng ; 

The  Prince  abides  within  them, 
Amid  serenest  light, 
And  all  the  blest  ones'  pastures 
In  glorious  sheen  are  dight. 

There  is  the  throne  of  David, 
And  there,  all  free  from  care, 
Are  conquerors  in  triumph  ; 
And  feast  and  song  are  there. 

And  they  who  with  their  Captain 

Have  overcome  in  fight, 

For  ever  and  for  ever 

Are  robed  with  Him  in  white  ! 


O  sacred,  peaceful  harp-notes  ! 
0  never-ending  hymn ! 
O  hallow'd,  sweet  refreshment, 
And  peace  of  seraphim  ! 

O  ceaseless,  ardent  thirsting, 
With  ever  full  content ! 
0  real  matchless  vision 
Of  God  omnipotent ! 


124  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

There  are  the  many  mansions 
For  many  a  saintly  heir, 
And  various  compensations 
For  divers  claimants  there  ; 

As  'midst  the  starry  clusters 
That  deck  our  lower  sky 
One  star  excels  another, 
So  will  it  be  on  high ! 

Jerusalem,  the  glorious, 
The  pride  of  the  elect, 
Dear  vision  of  the  future, 
That  longing  hearts  expect. 

By  faith  I  now  behold  thee, 
Thy  walls  I  here  discern  ; 
My  thoughts  are  kindling  for  thee, 
And  strive,  and  pant,  and  yearn  ! 

Jerusalem,  in  oneness, 
That  dost  our  lowness  see, 
Thou,  thou  art  all  my  boasting  ; 
All  shame  belongs  to  me  ! 


Jerusalem,  triumphant, 
On  that  safe,  happy  shore, 
I  hope,  I  long,  I  sing  thee, 
And  love  thee  more  and  more  ! 

I  do  not  plead  my  merit, 
I  seek  not  such  a  plea ; 
My  merit  is  perdition 
Abiding  upon  me ; 

And  yet  I  venture,  trusting, 
And  hoping  on  my  way, 
For  those  rewards  immortal 
To  labour  night  and  day. 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS.  125 

My  Father,  best  and  dearest, 
Who  made  and  saved  his  child, 
Bore  with  me  in  my  weakness, 
And  washed  me  when  defiled. 

When  in  his  strength  contending 
For  joy  my  spirits  leap ; 
"When  quailing  in  the  conflict, 
I  weep,  or  fain  would  weep. 

And  grace,  sweet  heav'nly  unction, 
Shall  all  its  virtue  prove, 
And  David's  royal  fountain 
Shall  every  stain  remove. 

0  Sion,  mine,  the  golden, 

More  lovely  far  than  gold ; 

With  bands  of  laurell'd  bright  ones 

For  ever  there  enrolled ! 

O  sweet  and  happy  region, 
Wilt  thou  ever  bless  my  eyes  ? 

0  sweet  and  happy  region, 
Wilt  thou  ever  be  my  prize  ? 

1  have  the  inward  earnest, 
The  hope  to  cheer  and  bless, 
Shall  I  ever  gain  the  land  itself? 
Tell  me,  0  tell  me,  yes  ! 

Eejoice,  0  dust  and  ashes  ! 
The  Lord  shall  be  thine  own  ! 
And  thou  art  his  for  ever ! 
His  now,  and  his  alone  ! 

For  many  generations  such  winged  thoughts  as 
these  about  the  new  Jerusalem  continued,  at  times,  to 
rise  acceptably  to  heaven  from  the  monastic  cells  of 
Europe.  The  song  of  the  Monk  of  Cluny  is  so  akin 
to  the  strain  of  another  monk;  a  Dutch  brother  of 
"  The  Common  Life/'  that  to  sing  the  one  is  to  be 
carried  in  imagination  to  the  cloisters  where  the  other 


126  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

first  came  gushing  from  the  soul  of  its  devout  author. 
About  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  in  one  of 
the  retreats  of  his  order,  an  eminently  pious  recluse, 
as  he  used  to  walk  with  his  brethren  in  the  cloisters 
or  in  the  garden,  would  sometimes  stop  and  say, 
"  Dear  brethren,  I  must  go ;  there  is  some  one 
waiting  for  me  in  my  cell."  That  "  some  one  "  was 
the  object  of  his  supreme  affection,  the  chosen  com- 
panion of  his  soul,  his  Redeemer  and  Lord.  Those  who 
heard  him  knew  with  whom  he  wished  to  commune, 
and  have  told  us  that  what  he  said  to  the  Lord,  and 
what  the  Lord  said  to  him  at  such  times,  is  left  for  our 
instruction  in  his  tract  on  the  inward  discourse  of 
Christ  to  the  faithful  soul.  This  tract  forms  the  first 
part  of  that  book  which  "  came  forward  as  an  answer 
to  the  sighing  of  Christian  Europe  for  light  from 
heaven,  and  which  contained  so  many  rivulets  of  truth 
silently  stealing  away  unto  light  from  that  interdicted 
fountain,"  the  Bible,  that  its  wide-spread  "  diffusion 
over  Christendom,  anticipated  in  1453  the  diffusion  of 
the  Bible  itself  in  1853."  In  that  "one  remarkable 
book,"  as  Dean  Milman  says,  "was  gathered  and 
concentrated  all  that  was  elevating,  passionate,  pro- 
foundly pious,  in  all  the  older  mystics.  Gerson, 
Rysbroek,  Tauler,  all  who  addressed  the  heart  in  later 
times,  were  summed  up  and  brought  into  one  circle  of 
light  and  heat,  in  this  single  small  volume.  That  this 
book  supplied  some  imperious  want  in  the  Christianity 
of  mankind,  that  it  supplied  it  with  fulness  and 
felicity,  which  left  nothing,  at  this  period  of  Chris- 
tianity to  be  desired,  its  boundless  popularity  is  the 
one  unanswerable  testimony.  .  . .  The  size  of  the  book, 
the  manner,  the  style,  the  arrangement,  as  well  as  its 
profound    sympathy  with   all   the   religious   feelings, 


HYMNS    FROM    OLD    CLOISTERS.  127 

wants,  and  passions ;  its  vivid  and  natural  expressions, 
to  monastic  Christianity  what  the  Hebrew  psalms  are 
to  our  common  religion,  to  our  common  Christianity ; 
its  contagious  piety ; — all  conspired  to  its  universal 
dissemination.  Its  manner,  its  short  quivering  sen- 
tences, which  went  at  once  to  the  heart,  and  laid  hold 
of  and  clung  tenaciously  to  the  memory  with  the 
compression  and  completeness  of  proverbs  ;  its  axioms, 
each  of  which  suggested  endless  thought ;  its  imagery, 

scriptural  and  simple,  were  alike  original,  unique 

No  book  has  been  so  often  reprinted,  no  book  has 
been  so  often  translated,  or  into  so  many  languages, 
as  e  The  Imitation  of  Christ/  "  Who  does  not  bless 
the  memory  of  its  author ;  who  does  not  enjoy  the 
sentences  of  the  man  who  wrote  as  the  Saviour 
was  speaking  to  his  heart  ?  who  does  not  love  the 
name  of  Thomas  a  Kempis  ?  He  who  instructed  the 
world  on  the  f  Imitation  of  Christ/  could  sing  too  of 
the  heaven  where  he  hoped  to  see  his  beloved  Master.  ■ 
He  was  a  hymnist,  and  the  joys  above  formed  his 
chosen  theme.  Let  those  who  would,  like  him,  find 
Christ  after  waiting  for  them  in  their  cell,  be,  like 
him,  ever  ready  for  devotion,  and  breathing  more  and 
more  deeply  his  heavenly  spirit  from  day  to  day,  they 
will  find  a  daily  joy  in  singing  with  him — 

High  the  angel  choirs  are  raising 

Heart  and  voice  in  harmony  ; 
The  Creator  King  still  praising, 

"Whom  in  beauty  there  they  see. 

Sweetest  strains,  from  soft  harps  stealing ; 
Trumpets,  notes  of  triumph  pealing ; 
Radiant  wings  and  white  stoles  gleaming, 
Up  the  steps  of  glory  streaming ; 
When  the  heavenly  bells  are  ringing, 


128  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  singing 

To  the  mighty  Trinity  ! 
Holy,  holy,  holy !  crying  ; 
For  all  earthly  care  and  sighing 

In  that  city  cease  to  be  ! 

Every  voice  is  there  harmonious, 
Praising  God  in  hymns  symphonious  ; 
Love  each  heart  with  light  enfolding, 
As  they  stand  in  peace  beholding 

There  the  Triune  Deity  ! 
Whom  adore  the  seraphim, 
Aye  with  love  eternal  burning  ; 
Venerate  the  cherubim. 

To  their  want  of  honour  turning ; 
Whilst  angelic  thrones  adoring 
Gaze  upon  his  majesty. 

Oh,  how  beautiful  that  region, 
And  how  fair  that  heavenly  region, 

Where  thus  men  and  angels  blend ; 
Glorious  will  that  city  be, 
Full  of  deep  tranquillity, 

Light  and  peace  from  end  to  end ! 
All  the  happy  dwellers  there 

Shine  in  robes  of  purity, 

Keep  the  law  of  charity, 

Bound  in  fervent  unity ; 
Labour  finds  them  not,  nor  care. 

Ignorance  can  ne'er  perplex, 

Nothing  tempt  them,  nothing  vex  ; 

Joy  and  health  their  fadeless  blessing, 

Always  all  things  good  possessing. 


mi^ut  yiil 


SOXGS  IN  HIGH  PLACES. 


"  Praise  Him  in  the  heights.     Kings  of  the  earth,  and  all  people, 
princes,  and  all  judges  of  the  earth,  let  them  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord." 


'HE  great  dramatist  gives  us  no  mere  fancy 
sketch  when  he  makes  an  inheritor  of  royalty 
say  of  himself : — 


The  government  I  cast  upon  my  brother, 

And  to  my  state  grew  stranger,  being  transported 

And  rapt  in  secret  studies. 


I  pray  thee  mark  me. 
I  thus  neglecting  worldly  ends,  all  dedicated 
To  closeness  and  the  bettering  of  my  mind 
"With  that  which,  but  by  being  so  retired, 
O'er  prized  all  popular  rate,  in  my  false  brother 
Awaked  an  evil  nature. 

Such  princes  have  lived,  and  studied,  and  prayed, 
and  suffered,  to  the  edification  of  a  few,  and  to  the 
sorrow  of  many.  Hugh  Capet,  the  father  of  the  third 
line  of  French  kings,  showed  himself  quite  equal  to 
his  position,  and  held  the  reins  so  as  to  keep  his  rude 
and  kicking  subjects  within  the  traces.  He  knew  how 
to  preserve  quietness  within  his  own  border,  and  how 

9 


130  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

to  make  a  sufficiently  awful  impression  outside.  He 
was  a  ruler  at  home  and  a  terror  abroad ;  and  in  those 
days  both  were  desirablevirtues  in  men  of  his  calling.  He 
prospered,  and  finished  his  royal  career  in  996.  But 
like  does  not  always  beget  like.  His  son  Robert  came 
to  the  throne,  bringing  to  it  all  his  father's  softer 
virtues,  without  those  sterner  qualities  for  government 
which  are  necessary  to  keep  the  balance  of  state.  He 
wanted  to  be  good,  and  was  good.  But  he  was  too 
willing  to  cast  the  affairs  of  government  upon  some 
brother,  and  false  brothers  are  not  lacking.  If  not  to 
be  found  in  France,  Italy  could  furnish  one.  Gregory 
the  Fifth  could  do  the  politics  for  him,  and  the  fighting 
too,  and  manage  at  the  same  time  to  lord  it  over  King 
Robert's  conscience.  The  king  was  not  fit  for  king- 
ship ;  he  was  more  disposed  to  the  cloisters.  Any- 
body might  rule  for  him.  He  might  have  had  rule  in 
Italy ;  yes,  and  the  imperial  crown  might  have  been 
on  his  brow.  But  no,  not  he  :  "  Let  me  alone,"  he 
seemed  to  say,  ' '  my  joy  is  in  secret ;  give  me  my 
psalter,  my*  service-book,  my  psalm,  my  hymn,  and  I 
am  happy."  And  so  he  was.  He  took  his  choice. 
The  outside  world  might  wag  its  way  as  it  pleased ; 
he  would  be  a  royal  monk,  and  his  palace  should  be 
his  cell.  And  so  he  lived,  and  prayed,  and  chanted, 
and  sung;  and  whether  France  or  the  world  were 
ever  the  better  for  his  rule  or  not,  Christendom  is  the 
better  for  one  hymn  at  least,  which  he  left  as  the  fruit 
of  his  devotion,  and  in  which  his  reverent,  tender,  and 
peaceful  spirit  is  graciously  embalmed.  As  a  king, 
his  memory  might  have  melted  into  oblivion;  but  as  a 
hymnist  his  name  will  be  dear  to  every  following 
generation  of  those  who  breathe  the  feeling  and 
sustain  the  music  of  his  Veni  Sancte  Sypiritus. 


SOXGS    IX    HIGH    PLACES.  131 

Holy  Spirit  come,  we  pray, 
Come  from  heaven  and  shed  the  ray 
Of  thy  light  divine. 

Come,  thou  Father  of  the  poor, 
Giver  from  a  boundless  store, 

Light  of  hearts,  0  shine  ! 

Matchless  comforter  in  woe, 
Sweetest  guest  the  soul  can  know, 
Living  waters  blest. 

When  we  weep  our  solace  sweet, 
Coolest  shade  in  summer  heat, 
In  our  labour  rest. 

Holy  and  most  blessed  light, 
Make  our  inmost  spirits  bright, 
With  thy  radiance  mild ; 

For  without  thy  sacred  powers, 
Nothing  can  we  own  of  ours, 
Nothing  undefiled. 

What  is  arid,  fresh  bedew, 
What  is  sordid,  cleanse  anew, 

Balm  on  the  wounded  pour. 

What  is  rigid  gently  bend, 
On  what  is  cold  thy  fervour  send ; 
What  has  stray'd,  restore. 

To  Thine  own  in  every  place 
Give  the  sacred  seven-fold  grace, 
Give  thy  faithful  this. 

Give  to  virtue  its  reward, 
Safe  and  peaceful  end  afford, 
Give  eternal  bliss. 

By  bequeathing  this  hymn  to  us  King  Robert  has 
left  the  world  better  than  he  found  it.  Nevertheless, 
it  is  a  mercy  for  the  world  that  Providence  makes 


132  HYMX-WR1TERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

heroes  as  well  as  monks.  Monkish  monarch  s  have 
been  blessings  in  their  way.  But  both  men  and  things 
need  leaders  now  and  then  of  harder  make.  Human 
nature  being  as  it  is.  the  master  heart  may  be  called 
for.  the  mighty  arm.  and  the  sceptre  of  steel.  And 
there  have  been  men  starting  up,  at  some  junctures, 
above  the  strife  and  rage  of  human  opposition  to  the 
good  and  the  true,  who  have  exemplified  the  possibility 
of  being  valiant  for  truth  in  the  field  as  well  as  in  the 
closet  and  the  choir.  And  if  these  have  not  been 
hymnists,  they  have  never  lacked  a  hymn  to  cheer 
them  in  the  day  of  battle,  in  the  day  of  victory,  in  the 
day  of  death.  Gustavus  Adolphus  of  Sweden  had  the 
spirit  of  a  king,  the  powers  of  a  hero,  and  the  heart 
of  a  Christian  :  all  this  he  proved  in  his  chivalrous 
advance  to  the  succour  of  the  German  Protestants  in 
their  lono-  and  terrible  struo-o-le  for  libertv  of  con- 
science  and  worship.  He  landed  on  the  coast  of 
Pomerania  with  thirty  thousand  men  on  the  24th  of 
June,  1630,  and  in  unison  with  his  German  allies 
marched  to  successive  victories,,  and,  as  ifc  proved,  to 
victorious  death.  He  was  cheered  onward  by  those 
who  hailed  him  as  their  deliverer;  but  he  needed 
more.  His  heart  looked  to  the  source  of  might;  and 
who  can  tell  how  richly  and  mightily  that  heart  received 
responses  of  power  by  means  of  one  hymn  ?  If  he 
could  not,  like  Robert  of  France,  write  hymns  for  his 
own  use,  God  could  supply  the  lack.  Out  of  the  ranks 
of  battling  Protestants  the  hymnist  rose  whose  words 
were  to  nerve  the  arm  and  strengthen  the  heart  of  the 
hero  and  his  bands.  In  1631  Altenburo-  issued  that 
hymn,  now  so  widely  known  and  loved  by  so  many 
hearts.  He  called  it  "  a  heart-cheering  song  of  com- 
fort, or  the  watchword  of  the  evangelical  army  in  the 


SONGS    IH    HIGH    PLA  133 

battle  of  Leipsic,  September  1 ,  1631,  '  God  with  o 
This  became  the  battle  song  of  Gustavus.  The  con- 
queror often  sung  it  with  his  troops.  He  sang  it  for 
the  last  time  when  entering  the  field  of  Liitzen  against 
the  famous  YVallenstein — his  last  field,  the  scene  of  his 
last  victory,  and  to  him  the  field  of  triumphant  death. 
The  hero's  parting  song  has  cheered  many  a  Christian 
soldier  since  then.     Let  it  cheer  us  now. 

Fear  not.  0  little  flock,  the  foe 

Tio  madly  seeks  your  overthrow, 

Dread  not  his  rage  and  power  ; 
What  though  your  courage  sometimes  faints, 
His  seeming  triumph  o'er  God's  saints 

Lasts  but  a  little  hour. 

Be  of  good  cheer,  your  cause  belongs 
To  Him  who  can  avenge  your  wrongs, 

Leave  it  to  Him  our  Lord. 
Though  hidden  yet  from  all  our 
He  sees  the  Gideon  who  shall  ri    . 

To  save  us  and  his  word. 

A  a  true  as  God's  own  word  is  true, 
Xor  earth  nor  hell  with  all  their  crew 

Against  us  shall  prevail. 
A  jest  and  byword  are  they  grown  ; 
God  is  with  us,  we  are  his  own, 

Our  victory  cannot  fail. 

Amen,  Lord  Jesus,  grant  our  pr; 

Great  Captain,  now  thine  arm  make  bare ; 

gjht  for  us  once  again  ! 
So  shall  thy  saints  and  martyrs  raise 
A  mighty  chorus  to  thy  praise, 
World  without  end.     Amen. 

Songs  in  high  places  have  not  been  always  "songs 
of  deliverance/'  or  hymns  of  victory.  Xo  high  places 
on  earth  are  so  high  as  to  be  beyond  the  swell  of 
human  sorrow.     The  floods  will  arise  in  days  of  dark- 


134  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

ness,  and  occasionally  desolate  the  homes  and  hearts 
of  royal  life.  So  it  was  in  the  court  of  Hungary  in 
1526.  The  Turkish  hordes  had  swept  down  upon  the 
Christian  borders,  and  the  king,  who  had  armed  him- 
self for  the  defence  of  his  throne,  had  been  cut  down 
with  the  flower  of  his  nobility,  leaving  Maria,  his 
queen,  a  defenceless  widow,  open  not  only  to  Turkish 
violence,  but  what  was  more  dreadful  to  her,  an  inva- 
sion of  her  Christian  rights  of  conscience  on  the  part 
of  those  who  bore  the  hallowed  name  of  the  Saviour, 
whom  she  loved.  Her  attachment  to  the  reformed 
doctrine  rendered  her  desolated  home  unsafe  ;  and  for 
her  religion's  sake  she  fled  from  Buda,  trusting  alone 
to  Him,  who  is  the  husband  of  the  widow,  and  the 
"  present  help"  and  reward  of  those  who  suffer  for 
his  name's  sake.  Nothing  is  grander  than  the  sight 
of  a  human  soul  cut  off  from  all  visible  help,  casting 
itself  with  all  its  interests  in  time  and  eternity  upon 
the  power  and  goodness  of  God  alone.  Such  sublime 
action  is  recorded  in  the  song  of  this  bereaved,  perse- 
cuted, and  fugitive  queen. 

Can  I  my  fate  no  more  withstand, 
Nor  'scape  the  hand 
That  for  faith  would  grieve  me  ; 
This  is  my  strength,  that  well  I  know 
In  weal  or  woe, 
God's  love  the  world  must  leave  me. 
God  is  not  far,  though  hidden  now, 
He  soon  shall  rise  and  make  them  bow, 
Who  of  his  Word  bereave  me. 

Judge  as  ye  will  my  cause  this  hour, 
Yours  is  the  power, 
God  bids  me  strive  no  longer ; 
I  know  what  mightiest  seems  to-day 
Shall  pass  away, 


SONGS    IN    HIGH    PLACES.  135 

Time  than  your  rule  is  stronger. 
The  eternal  God  I  rather  choose, 
And  fearless  all  for  this  I  lose, 

God  help  me  thus  to  conquer  ! 

All  has  its  day,  the  proverb  saith  ; 
This  is  my  faith, 
Thou,  Christ,  wilt  be  beside  me, 
And  look  on  all  this  pain  of  mine 
As  were  it  Thine, 
When  sharpest  woe  betide  me  ; 
Mil  st  I  then  tread  this  path  — I  yield ; 
World,  as  thou  wilt,  God  is  my  shield, 
Ajid  He  will  rightly  guide  me  ! 

We  have  no  record  of  the  divine  response  to  the 
widow's  act  of  trust,  but  the  "  record  is  on  high." 
Trust  in  God  is  never  long  without  its  answering  hush 
from  above.  God  arranges  his  times  and  instruments 
of  blessing  so  as  most  happily  to  aid  the  sufferer  and 
most  fully  to  glorify  Himself,  and  how  often  does  the 
blessing  come  by  means  of  a  comfortable  hymn  ?  From 
time  to  time  the  hymn  of  plaintive  appeal  is  replied  to 
by  the  hymn  of  consolation.  In  many  an  individual 
history  it  is  so ;  and  it  is  always  so  in  the  history  of 
the  Church.  Now  God's  children  are  supplied  with 
hymns  expressive  of  reliance ;  and  now  with  forms  of 
"  joy  in  tribulation.-"  Thus,  "  one  generation  shall 
praise  his  works  to  another."  Nor  can  it  be  other- 
wise than  instructive  and  cheering  to  listen  to  the 
voices  of  song  from  the  "  high  places"  of  Germany _,  as 
they  come  in  successive  responses  through  the  periods  of 
her  suffering,  joy  answering  to  sorrow,  and  triumph  to 
depression.  Though  a  century  passes  between,  it  is 
not  difficult  to  recognize  something  like  an  inspiration 
responsive  to  Queen  Maria's  trustful  hymn  in  the  song 
which  in  1653  rose  from  the  full  heart  of  Louisa  Hen- 


136  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

rietta,    Electress  of  Brandenburgh.     How   the  music 
lulls  the  tremulous  sufferer  ! 

Jesus,  my  Redeemer,  lives, 

Christ,  my  trust,  is  dead  no  more  ; 

In  the  strength  this  knowledge  gives, 
Shall  not  all  my  fears  be  o'er, 

Though  the  night  of  death  be  fraught 

Still  with  many  an  anxious  thought  ? 

Jesus,  my  Redeemer,  lives, 

And  his  life  I  once  shall  see ; 
Bright  the  hope  this  promise  gives, 

Where  He  is  I  too  shall  be. 
Shall  I  fear,  then  ?     Can  the  Head 
Rise  and  leave  the  members  dead  ? 

Close  to  Him  my  soul  is  bound, 

In  the  bonds  of  hope  enclasp'd ; 
Faith's  strong  hand  this  hold  hath  found, 

And  the  Rock  hath  firmly  grasp'd ; 
And  no  care  of  death  can  part 
From  our  Lord  the  trusting  heart. 

I  shall  see  Him  with  these  eyes, 

Him  whom  I  shall  surely  know ; 
Not  another  shall  I  rise, 

With  his  love  this  heart  shall  glow ; 
Only  there  shall  disappear 
Weakness  in  and  round  me  here. 

Te  who  suffer,  sigh,  and  moan, 

Fresh  and  glorious  there  shall  reign ; 

Earthly  here  the  seed  is  sown, 
Heavenly  it  shall  rise  again  ; 

^Natural  here  the  death  we  die, 

Spiritual  our  life  on  high. 

Body,  be  thou  of  good  cheer, 

In  thy  Saviour's  care  rejoice; 
Give  not  place  to  gloom  and  fear, 

Dead  thou  yet  shalt  know  his  voice, 


SONGS    IX    HIGH    PLACES.  137 

When  the  final  trump  is  heard, 
And  the  deaf  cold  grave  is  stirr'd. 

Laugh  to  scorn,  then,  death  and  hell, 
Laugh  to  scorn,  the  gloomy  grave ; 

Caught  into  the  air  to  dwell 
With  the  Lord  who  comes  to  save, 

W^e  shall  trample  o'er  our  foes, 

Mortal  weakness,  fear,  and  woes. 

Only  see  ye  that  your  heart 

Eise  betimes  from  earthly  lust ; 
Would  ye  there  with  Him  have  part, 

Here  obey  your  Lord  and  trust, 
Fix  your  hearts  beyond  the  skies, 
Whither  ye  yourselves  would  rise. 

Another  short  interval,  and  the  soothing  response 
to  the  widow's  hymn  is  repeated  by  a  masculine  voice, 
in  fine  harmony  with  the  utterance  of  the  Branden- 
burgh  Princess.  The  voice  comes  this  time  from  an 
ancient  and  princely  house,  the  name  of  which  is  dear 
to  every  English  heart,  loyal  and  reverent  enough  to 
acknowledge  the  Providence  which  associated  that 
name  with  the  happiest  period  of  English  royalty. 
Who  does  not  thank  God  for  the  line  of  Brunswick  ? 
Even  losing'  sight  of  the  blessings  which  have  come 
to  us  in  our  national  relation  to  that  illustrious  line, 
there  will  always  be  Christian  hearts,  which,  while  the 
German  or  the  English  language  lives,  will  gather 
strength  and  joy  from  one  at  least  who  graced  that 
Brunswick  pedigree.  In  the  noble  family  succession 
from  Henry  the  Lion  to  the  honoured  and  beloved 
lady  who  now  sways  the  sceptre  of  Great  Britain, 
there  have  been  names  distinguished  by  many  family 
virtues  and  courtly  actions ;  but  one  has  left  a  longer- 
lived  memorial  in  a  few  sweet  and  touching  hymns. 


138  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

One  of  these  is  a  song  for  the  soul  in  bereavement  and 
sorrow.  It  comes  upon  the  burdened  heart  with  a 
soothing  music.,  like  that  which  touched  the  lonely 
spirit  of  the  bereaved  widow  at  Nain,  when  Jesus 
"had  compassion  on  her,  and  said  unto  her,  Weep 
not  \» 

Leave  all  to  God, 
Forsaken  one,  and  stay  thy  tears  ; 

For  the  Highest  knows  thy  pain, 
Sees  thy  sufferings  and  thy  fears  ; 
Thou  shalt  not  wait  his  help  in  vain, 
Leave  all  to  God. 

Be  still  and  trust ! 
For  his  strokes  are  strokes  of  love, 

Thou  must  for  thy  profit  bear ; 
He  thy  filial  fear  would  move, 
Trust  thy  Father's  loving  care, 
Be  still  and  trust ! 

Know,  God  is  near  ! 
Though  thou  think  Him  far  away, 

Though  his  mercy  long  have  slept, 
He  will  come  and  not  delay, 

When  his  child  enough  hath  wept, 
For  God  is  near ! 

Oh,  teach  Him  not 
When  and  how  to  hear  thy  prayers ; 

Never  doth  our  God  forget, 
He  the  pross  who  longest  bears 
Finds  his  sorrows'  bounds  are  set. 
Then  teach  Him  not. 

If  thou  love  Him, 
Walking  truly  in  his  ways, 

Then  no  trouble,  cross,  or  death, 
E'er  shall  silence  faith  and  praise  ; 
All  things  serve  thee  here  beneath, 
If  thou  love  God ! 


SONGS    TN    HIGH    PLACES.  lo9 

This  was  the  hymn  of  Anthony  Ulric,  Duke  of 
Brunswick  Wolfenbuttel.  He  gave  it  to  the  Christian 
world  in  1667,  and  it  will  ever  live  as  the  precious 
utterance  of  a  noble  heart  in  its  purest  and  most 
hallowed  state  of  feeling.  There  is,  however,  another 
hymn  whose  birth  and  history  claim  a  page  in  the 
chronicles  of  the  House  of  Brunswick.  How  finely 
wrought  are  some  of  the  most  important  links  of 
things  in  human  history;  how  minute  and  delicate 
the  points  on  which  the  most  weighty  consequences 
turn ;  how  slight  a  touch,  at  certain  junctures,  would 
have  turned  the  mightiest  current  of  human  affairs  ! 
About  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  seven 
sons  of  William  of  Brunswick  cast  lots  to  determine 
which  of  them  should  marry.'  Poor  young  princes  ! 
the  patrimony  was  probably  not  rich  enough  to  bless 
them  all  with  matrimonial  rights  !  The  lot  fell  upon 
George,  the  sixth  son.  After  four  of  his  brothers  had 
reigned,  of  course  without  issue,  the  government  came 
to  Christian  Lewis,  his  son ;  then  to  George  William, 
another  son,  who  left  as  his  heiress  Sophia  Dorothea, 
who  married  her  cousin,  George  Lewis,  of  Hanover, 
afterwards  George  I.  of  England.  George  Lewis  was, 
on  his  mother's  side,  the  grandson  of  Elizabeth, 
Queen  of  Bohemia,  daughter  of  James  I.  of  England. 
The  houses  of  Stuart  and  Brunswick  were  thus  at 
one,  and  the  results  as  happily  developed  in  the 
history  of  modern  England  may,  perhaps,  illustrate 
the  divine  proverb,  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap,  but 
the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord."  This 
remarkable  linking  of  Stuart  and  Brunswick  has  a 
peculiar  interest  for  the  lover  of  spiritual  hymns  and 
songs.  There  was  a  hymnist  among  the  Brunswickers, 
and    one,   too,    among   the    Stuarts.      Elizabeth,    the 


140  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

grandmother  of  George  I.,  used  to  solace  herself  with 
hymns,  and  one  of  these  has  come  down  to  us  among 
the  evidences  of  her  piety  and  talents.  Its  music  is 
not  flowing  throughout ;  its  has  some  of  the  quaint- 
ness  of  its  time,  but  it  is  pleasant  in  its  simplicity ;  it 
breathes  a  vigorous  spirit,  and  has  a  rich  and  cheerful 
tone  of  Christian  feeliug.  The  hymnist  was  the 
daughter  of  James  I.  The  morning-tide  of  her  life 
was  bright ;  she  had  been  brought  from  Scotland  an 
infant  when  her  father  came  to  the  throne  of  the 
United  King'dom,  and  her  first  English  residence  was 
Combe  Abbey,  in  Warwickshire,  where,  amidst  scenes 
of  quiet  rural  beauty,  she  spent  some  of  the  happiest 
days  of  her  life.  She  soon  gave  promise  of  those 
charms  of  person,  mind,  and  manners  which  after- 
wards secured  for  her  the  title  of  iC  Queen  of  hearts." 
She  must  have  had  an  inspiring  presence  to  bring 
from  Ben  Jonson  that  remarkable  poetic  combination 
of  compliment  and  prophecy,  which  he  addressed  to 
the  King  and  Queen  when  their  eldest  son  was  created 
Prince  of  Wales  : — 

Nor  shall  less  joy  your  royal  hopes  pursue 

In  that  most  princely  maid,  whose  form  might  call 

The  world  to  war,  and  make  it  hazard  all 

Its  valour  for  her  beauty;  she  shall  be 

Mother  of  nations,  and  her  princes  see 

Eivals  almost  to  these. 

Could  Ben  Jonson  have  foreseen  that  she  would  be 
the  mother  of  that  illustrious  line  now  represented  by 
our  beloved  Queen  Victoria  ?  A  foreign  prince,  who 
saw  Elizabeth  in  1608,  says  that  she  was  "handsome 
and  of  a  noble  expression  of  countenance  ";  and  one 
of  her  own  countrymen  who  knew  her,  tells  us  that 


SONGS    IN   HIGH    PLACES.  141 

she  was  "  a  princess  of  lovely  beauty,  in  whom  at  the 
first  glance,  majesty  shines  out,  though  hidden  by 
courtesy.  Although  she  has  not  yet  passed  her  twelfth 
year,  yet  all  behold  in  her  lively  proofs  of  most  ex- 
cellent and  noble  dispositions.  Her  wit  is  acute,  her 
memory  tenacious,  her  judgment  discerning,  beyond 
her  years.  In  piety  and  knowledge  of  languages  she 
excels.  She  also  diligently  cultivates  music,  and  is  a 
great  proficient  in  the  art;  for  this  tranquil  liberal 
science  most  fittingly  accords  with  the  temper  of  the 
most  placid  and  illustrious  maiden.  Added  to  this,  her 
manners  are  most  gentle ;  and  she  shows  no  common 
skill  in  those  liberal  exercises  of  mind  and  body  which 
become  a  royal  maiden.  In  fine,  whatever  was  ex- 
cellent or  lofty  in  Queen  Elizabeth,  is  all  compressed 
into  the  tender  age  of  this  virgin  princess,  and  if  Grod 
spare  her  to  us,  will  be  found  there  accumulated." 
She  and  her  brother,  Henry,  Prince  of  Wales,  loved 
one  another  very  tenderly.  The  one  could  scarcely  be 
happy  in  the  other's  absence.  Nor  was  the  tender 
bond  at  all  loosened  by  the  attachment  which  now 
sprang  up  between  Elizabeth  and  her  husband  elect, 
Frederic  V.,  Count  Palatine  of  the  Ehine.  Just,  how- 
ever, as  all  were  preparing  themselves  for  mutual 
congratulations  on  Elizabeth's  marriage,  Henry  was 
seized  with  fever.  His  affectionate  sister,  distressed 
at  being  forbidden  to  see  him,  stole  away  from  St. 
James's  more  than  once  in  disguise,  and  made  vain  at- 
tempts to  gain  admittance  to  his  chamber.  She  never 
saw  him  again.  He  died,  saying,  ce  Where  is  my  dear 
sister  ?"  A  dark  shadow  fell  on  the  soul  of  the 
tender-hearted  princess.  This  was  her  first  pang  of 
bereavement ;  and,  alas  !  it  proved  to  be  the  fore- 
shadowing of  future  sorrows,  the  earnest  of  a  long 


142  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

succession  of  clouds  upon  her  eventful  life.  It  was 
while  this  early  tribulation  pressed  upon  her  heart 
that  she  gave  expression  to  her  feelings  in  the  hymn 
so  remarkable  for  its  beauty  and  pathos. 

This  is  joy,  this  is  true  pleasure, 
If  we  best  things  make  our  treasure, 
And  enj  oy  them  at  full  leisure, 
Evermore  in  richest  treasure. 

God  is  only  excellent, 
Let  up  to  Him  our  love  be  sent ; 
Whose  desires  are  set  or  bent 
On  aught  else,  shall  much  repent. 

Theirs  is  a  most  wretched  case 
Who  themselves  so  far  disgrace, 
That  they  their  affections  place 
Upon  things  nam'd  vile  and  base. 

Let  us  love  of  heaven  receive, 
These  are  joys  our  hearts  will  heave 
Higher  than  we  can  conceive, 
And  shall  us  not  fail  nor  leave. 

Earthly  things  do  fade,  decay, 
Constant  to  us  not  one  day ; 
Suddenly  they  pass  away, 
And  we  cannot  make  them  stay. 

All  the  vast  world  doth  contain, 
To  content  man's  heart,  are  vain, 
That  still  justly  will  complain, 
And  unsatisfied  remain. 

God  most  holy,  high,  and  great, 
Our  delight  doth  make  complete  ; 
When  in  us  He  takes  his  seat, 
Only  then  we  are  replete. 


SONGS    IN    HIGH    PLACES.  143 

Why  should  vain  joys  us  transport, 
Earthly  pleasures  are  but  short, 
And  are  mingled  in  such  sort, 
Griefs  are  greater  than  the  sport. 


0  my  God !  for  Christ  his  sake, 
Quite  from  me  this  dulness  take  ; 
Cause  me  earth's  love  to  forsake, 
And  of  heaven  my  realm  to  make. 

If  early  thanks  I  render  Thee, 
That  Thou  hast  enlightened  me 
"With  such  knowledge  that  I  see 
What  things  most  behoveful  be  ; 

That  I  hereon  meditate, 
That  desire  I  find  (tho'  late) 
To  prize  heaven  at  higher  rate, 
And  these  pleasures  vain  to  hate  ; 

0  enlighten  more  my  sight, 
And  dispel  my  darksome  night, 
Good  Lord,  by  thy  heavenly  light, 
And  thy  beams  most  pure  and  bright. 

Since  in  me  such  thoughts  are  scant, 
Of  thy  grace  repair  my  want, 
Often  meditations  grant, 
And  in  me  more  deeply  plant. 

Work  of  wisdom  more  desire, 
Grant  I  may,  with  holy  ire, 
Slight  the  world,  and  me  inspire 
With  thy  love  to  be  on  fire. 

What  care  I  for  lofty  place, 
If  the  Lord  grant  me  his  grace ; 
Showing  me  his  pleasant  face, 
And  with  joy  I  end  my  race. 


144  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

This  is  only  uiy  desire, 
This  doth  set  my  heart  on  fire, 
That  I  may  receive  my  hire, 
"With  the  saints  and  angels'  quire. 

0  my  soul,  of  heavenly  birth, 
Do  thou  scorn  this  basest  earth  ? 
Place  not  here  thy  joy  and  mirth, 
Where  of  bliss  is  greatest  dearth. 

From  below  thy  mind  remove, 
And  affect  the  things  above  ; 
Set  thy  heart  and  fix  thy  love 
Where  thou  truest  joy  shalt  prove. 

If  I  do  love  things  on  high, 
Doubtless  them  enjoy  shall  I ; 
Earthly  pleasures  if  I  try, 
They  pursued  faster  fly. 

0  Lord,  glorious,  yet  most  kind, 

Thou  hast  these  thoughts  put  in  my  mind; 
Let  me  grace  increasing  find, 
Me  to  Thee  more  firmly  bind. 

To  God  glory,  thanks,  and  praise, 

1  will  render  all  my  days  ; 
Who  hath  blest  me  many  Trays, 
Shedding  on  me  gracious  rays. 

To  me  grace,  0  Father,  send, 
On  Thee  wholly  to  depend  ; 
That  all  may  to  thy  glory  tend — 
So  let  me  live,  so  let  me  end. 

!Now  to  the  true  Eternal  King, 
!N"ot  seen  with  human  eye, 
Th'  immortal,  only  wise,  true  God, 
Be  praise  perpetually ! 

Ill-fated  hymnist !     How  many,  many  a  time  after 
she  penned  this  first  hymn,  and  gave  it  into  the  hand 


BONGS    IN    HTGH    PLACES.  145 

of  her  friend  and  tutor,  Lord  Harrington,  was  she 
called  to  test  the  faithfulness  of  her  God  in  hours  of 
trouble  !  She  went  a  happy  bride  to  her  husband's 
hereditary  palace  at  Heidelberg,  became  a  happy 
mother  at  eighteen,  saw  her  husband  placed  on  the 
throne  of  Bohemia,  and  realized  the  dream  of  her  own 
youthful  ambition — a  crown.  But  scarcely  had  she 
shown  her  queenly  presence  in  Bohemia,  before  her 
husband  was  driven  from  his  royalty.  She  fled  for 
her  life,  and  entered  on  the  dark  succession  of  misfor- 
tunes which  crowded  on  her  all  through  the  "  thirty 
years'  war/'  Hers  was  indeed  a  life  of  royal  suffering. 
Widowed  at  last,  beggared,  tortured  by  her  father's 
crooked  policy,  living  to  hear  of  her  brother  Charles's 
death  on  the  scaffold,  parting  with  her  children  for 
lack  of  means  to  support  them,  treated  with  cold 
neglect  by  the  only  son  who  could  help  her,  having 
her  sound  Protestant  heart  smitten  at  the  perversion 
of  others  of  her  children  to  Romanism  ;  yet  her  hope- 
ful and  buoyant  heart  kept  up  until,  after  forty  sorrow- 
ful years  of  exile,  and  thirty  years  of  desolate  widow- 
hood, she  returned,  at  the  age  of  sixty-five,  to  finish 
her  eventful  career  in  the  land  of  her  infancy.  She 
died  in  Leicester  House,  Leicester  Square,  leaving  the 
relics  of  her  royal  furniture  to  be  preserved  in  that 
same  Combe  Abbey  which  had  witnessed  the  pleasures 
of  her  youth,  and  the  beginnings  of  that  piety  which 
sustained  her  in  sorrow,  and  gave  peace  to  her  last 
hour.  Of  her  surviving  daughters,  it  was  said  that 
Elizabeth,  Abbess  of  Hervarden,  was  the  most  learned 
woman,  that  Louise  was  the  greatest  artist,  and  that 
Sophia,  her  youngest,  was  the  most  accomplished 
woman  in  Europe.  Elizabeth's  memory  as  a  hymnist 
is  remarkably  associated  with  the  names  of  some   of 

10 


146  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

the  most  distinguished  hymnists  of  her  time.  Dr. 
John  Doune  wrote  her  epithalium  on  her  marriage- 
day.  George  Wither  presented  complimentary  stanzas 
on  her  betrothal,  and  her  music  master  was  no  other 
than  John  Bull,  the  reputed  author  of  that  national 
hymn  in  which  all  British  hearts  now  offer  their  prayer 
for  the  illustrious  living  descendant  of  her  youngest 
daughter — 

God  save  our  gracious  Queen, 
Long  live  our  noble  Queen, 

God  save  the  Queen  !  • 

Send  her  victorious, 
Happy  and  glorious, 
Long  to  reign  over  us, 

God  save  the  Queen  ! 

0  Lord  our  God,  arise, 
Scatter  her  enemies, 

And  make  them  fall. 
Frustrate  their  knavish  tricks, 
Confound  their  politics  ; 
On  her  our  hearts  we  fix  : 

G#od  save  the  Queen  ! 

Thy  richest  gifts  in  store, 
On  her  be  pleased  to  pour  ; 
Long  may  she  reign  ! 
May  she  defend  our  laws, 
And  ever  give  us  cause 
To  sing  with  heart  and  voice, 
God  save  the  Queen  ! 

On  the  Sunday  after  the  coronation  of  Victoria, 
"  our  most  religious  and  gracious  Queen/'  there  was  an 
interesting  scene  at  Brixham  in  South  Devon.  A 
crowd  of  sailors  and  fishermen  attended  the  church — 
the  church  that  looks  out  upon  Torbay,  on  whose 
waters   so  many  of  the  hardy   sons   of  that  beautiful 


SONGS    IX    HIGH    PLACES.  14  7 

sea-board  have  been  trained  to  man  "  the  wooden  walls 
of  Old  England.-"  The  parson  of  the  parish  was  in  the 
pulpit,  the  gifted  and  gentle-spirited  Henry  F.  Lyte,  be- 
loved by  all  who  knew  him,  and  still  talked  of  with  reve- 
rence and  affection  by  the  children  of  those  whom  he 
taught  in  sea-songs  to  remember  God  upon  the  mighty 
waters.  He  had  intended  to  preach  from  another  text 
that  day;  but  seeing  the  character  of  his  congregation, 
he  changed  his  theme,  and  addressed  them  from  the 
Lord's  words  to  the  fishermen  of  Galilee,  "  Cast  the 
net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship,  and  ye  shall  find/" 
He  showed  his  hearers  that  "  it  is  the  religious  man 
that  is  always,  and  in  every  relation  of  life,  the  best 
member  of  society,  the  most  useful  to  others,  and  the 
most  happy  in  himself;"  and  that  no  man  ever  "  casts 
the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship,  none  ever  catches 
anything  worth  his  finding,  who  does  not  seek  and 
find  the  favour  of  God  through  Christ."  Then 
referring  to  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were 
met— those  of  the  coronation  week — he  said,  "  The 
manner  in  which  our  fishermen  have  conducted  them- 
selves through  all  this  week  cannot  have  failed  to 
gratify  all  who  have  witnessed  it.  The  people  of 
Brixham  may  well  be  proud  of  a  body  of  men  who 
have  so  practically  proved  that  they  can  command 
themselves But  if  the  opening  of  your  pro- 
ceedings was  praiseworthy,  the  close  of  them  is  not 
less  so.  To  meet  you  here,  my  brethren,  in  the  house 
of  God,  to  witness  your  orderly  conduct,  your  devo- 
tional manner,  is,  indeed,  most  pleasing  and  encou- 
raging  It  seems  to  me  to  intimate  that    you 

have  a  proper  sense  of  the  religious  nature  of  the 
great  ceremony  we  have  just  been  celebrating  in  these 
realms ;  that  you  view  it,  as  indeed  it  is,  as  a  solemn 


148  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIK    HYMNS. 

national  transaction,  carried  on  in  the  sight  of  God,  in 
one  of  his  holy  temples,  between  his  vicegerent  on 
earth  and  the  people  He  has  committed  to  her  charge  ; 
and  that  von  are  aware  that  God  must  be  appealed  to, 
in  order  that  she  may  prove  a  blessing  to  us,  or  that 
we  may  be  enabled  to  discharge  our  duties  to  her. 
My  dear  friends,  nothing  is  really  great  in  which  God 
and  religion  have  not  a  place.  Deprive  the  coronation 
of  these,  strip  the  pageant  of  its  heavenly  halo,  and 
how  poor  and  insignificant  does  it  become  !  It  is,  as 
connecting  itself  with  God,  with  his  will,  his  sanc- 
tuary, his  appointment,  and  his  blessiug,  that  the  cere- 
mony becomes  truly  impressive.  In  this  light  I  trust 
that  your  presence  here  to-day  shows  that  you  view  it. 
It  is,  I  trust,  as  if  you  said,  We  have  but  half  dis- 
charged our  duty  on  this  occasion  till  we  have  gone  to 
the  house  of  God,  and  asked  his  blessiug  on  our  youth- 
ful sovereign — asked  the  King  of  kings  and  the  Lord 
of  lords  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  our  services 
towards  her.  The  prayers  in  which  we  have  all 
joined  here  to-day  afford  a  strikiug  compendium  both 
to  monarch  and  subject  of  their  respective  duties  to 
each  other ;  and  I  trust  that  we  shall  all  make  a  point 
of  studyiug  their  contents,  and  of  pouring  them  forth 
earnestly  every  Sabbath  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Then 
may  our  loyalty  be  expected  to  be,  not  like  the  vows 
and  garlands  that  adorned  the  festal  hour,  and  then 
faded  away,  but  like  the  jewels  of  the  royal  crown, 
that  have  come  down,  precious  and  untarnished, 
through  successive  generations.  Oh,  let  the  loyalty 
of  British  hearts  once  thus  vent  itself  in  fervent,  per- 
severing prayer  for  their  sovereign,  and  who  shall  say 
what  benefits  may  thus  descend  upon  her  head,  and, 
through   her,    upon   her  people  V      The    preacher's 


SONGS    IN    HIGH    PLACES. 


149 


address  was  closed,  and  all  rose  and  sang  a  hymn,  a 
beautifully  condensed  and  accommodated  paraphrase  of 
the  21st  Psalm,  composed  for  the  occasion  by  the 
pastor  himself: — 

Lord,  thy  best  blessings  shed 
On  our  Queen's  youthful  head; 

Eound  her  abide. 
Teach  her  thy  holy  will, 
Shield  her  from  eveiw  ill, 
Guard,  guide,  and  speed  her  still 

Safe  to  thy  side. 

Grant  her,  0  Lord,  to  be 
Wise,  just,  and  good  like  Thee, 

Blessing  and  blest. 
"With  every  virtue  crowned, 
Honoured  by  nations  round, 
ALidst  earthly  nionarchs  found 

Greatest  and  best. 

Long  let  her  people  share 
Here  her  maternal  care  ; 

Long  ?neath  her  smile 
Alay  every  good  increase, 
"May  every  evil  cease, 
And  freedom,  health,  and  peace 

Dance  round  our  isle. 

Under  thy  mighty  wings 
Keep  her,  0  King  of  kings  ! 

Answer  her  prayer : 
Till  she  shall  hence  remove 
Up  to  thy  courts  above, 
To  dwell  in  light  and  love 

Evermore  there. 


ii?:,%K^-myn"%^y'*?"^iim: 


vc  IX. 


SONGS    IN    PKISON. 

"  From  the  freed  spirit  every  shackle  falls, 
Earth's  gloom  is  lost  in  heaven's  glorious  light." 


HO  would  not  like  to  have  heard  that  midnight 
song  of  Paul  and  Silas  in  the  prison  at 
Philippi  ?  With  bodies  lacerated  by  the 
executioner's  whip,  and  cast  upon  the  bare  floor  of 
the  dungeon  under  the  torturing  burden  of  the  Roman 
stocks,  parched  and  weary  after  a  day's  labour,  excite- 
ment, and  abuse,  whither  should  they  look  for  help 
and  comfort  ?  They  knew  their  refuge,  and,  "  having 
prayed,  they  sang  a  hymn  to  God,  and  the  prisoners 
heard  them."  They  sang  heartily,  "  with  the  spirit 
and  with  the  understanding  also."  Their  hymn  is 
not  recorded  ;  but  we  may  be  sure  that  Jesus  was  its 
leading  theme,  that  they  uttered  their  theme  dis- 
tinctly enough  for  the  prisoners  to  know  what  they 
were  singing  about,  and  that  the  spirit  of  their  hymn 
and  its  rhythm,  its  manner  and  its  music,  were  such 
as  accorded  most  fully  with  the  simple,  childlike 
devotion  of  the  unselfish  and  heavenly-minded  pri- 
soners. Had  their  strain  come  down  to  our  ears  with 
sufficient  clearness  and  certainty  to  allow  us  to  render 


SONGS    IN    PRISON.  151 

it  into  English  metre  or  rhyme,  it  might  have 
appeared  somewhat  alien  to  an  ancient  hymn  which 
broke  forth  from  the  bars  of  a  prison  a  few  centuries 
later.  It  was  on  a  Palm  Sunday,  about  seven  hundred 
and  fifty  years  after  Paul's  song  in  the  prison.  The 
Emperor  Louis,  the  Debonnaire,  and  his  Court,  were 
on  their  way  to  the  cathedral  at  Mentz  in  fall  pro- 
cession, and,  when  passing  a  dungeon,  the  following 
hymn  issued  from  an  open  window,  and  was  taken  up 
by  the  choristers  : — 

Glory,  and  honour,  and  praise, 

To  Thee,  our  Eedeemer  and  King ; 

To  whom  little  children  sang  lays, 
To  whom  our  hosannas  we  bring. 

David's  own  heir  to  the  throne 

Of  Israel's  royal  domain  ; 
Thou  Blessed  One,  come  to  Thine  own, 

Thy  kingdom  for  ever  maintain  ! 

Angelical  choirs  above 

Sing  glory  to  Thee  from  on  high ; 

And  mortals  and  all  things  that  move 
Give  anthems  and  songs  in  reply. 

Those  Hebrew  people  of  old 

Went  singing  before  Thee  with  psalms ; 

With  prayers  and  praises  untold, 
We,  too,  will  be  waving  our  palms  ! 

While  hastening  on  to  thy  death, 

They  loudly  uplifted  their  voice  ; 
But  we,  with  our  every  breath, 

In  Thy  exaltation  rejoice. 

Fragrant  to  Thee  was  their  praise, 
Oh  smile  on  the  offering  we  bring ; 

Thy  joy  is  in  all  pleasant  lays, 

Thou  Blessed  and  All-gracious  King  ! 


152  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THETR    HYMNS. 

This  was  the  prison  song  of  Theodulph  of  Orleans, 
afterwards  named  in  the  calendar  as  a  "  saint "  ;  and 
not  without  some  reason,  for  he  was  a  saintly  man. 
Like  many  other  saintly  men,  he  had  incurred  the 
ill-will  of  those  on  whom  his  goodness  reflected 
reproof,  and  suffered  imprisonment  on  the  testimony 
of  false  accusers.  His  hymn  from  the  prison,  how- 
ever, touched  the  heart  of  Charlemagne's  imperial 
son,  and  the  persecuted  bishop,  like  Paul  and  Silas, 
found  the  joy  of  deliverance  coming  after  his  song. 
Those  who  have  Christian  cheerfulness  enough  to 
begin  their  hymns  in  the  straits  of  tribulation  will 
often  find  themselves  swelling  the  chorus  "  in  a  large 
place." 

Songs  in  prison  !  who  can  think  of  them  with- 
out some  thought  about  the  "  beloved  disciple/''  the 
last  of  his  order,  the  apostle  of  love,  in  his  banish- 
ment, his  narrow  sea-girt  prison.  Shut  up  "  for 
the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  he  had  songs  nevertheless.  His  Patmos  was 
<c  compassed  about  with  songs  of  deliverance"  ;  songs 
from  the  New  Jerusalem;  songs  that  for  ever  filled 
his  heart  with  responsive  music.  How  his  soul  must 
have  repeated  the  hymns  which  he  had  caught  in  his 
vision  of  the  Holy  City  !  His  record  of  the  vision  is  a 
lofty  hymn,  whose  music  lives  for  ever.  "And  I 
John  saw  the  holy  city,  New  Jerusalem,  coming  down 
from  God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned 
for  her  husband.  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of 
heaven  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with 
men,  and  He  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be 
his  people  ;  and  God  Himself  shall  be  with  them,  and 
be  their  God.  And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears 
from  their  eyes ;  and  there  shall  be  no  death,  neither 


SONGS    IN    PRISON.  153 

sorrow  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more 
pain  :  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away/''  How 
many  suffering  Christians,  from  generation  to  gene- 
ration since  "  the  Lord's-day"  of  the  apostle's  vision, 
have  caught  the  light  of  the  city  from  the  narrow 
windows  of  their  prison-house  in  the  flesh.  Into  how 
many  a  deep  cell  has  his  ever-living  vision  shed  its 
cheering  radiance  !  Some  fragments  of  one  ' '  prisoner's 
song  "  have  come  to  our  ears,  witnessing  to  the  power 
of  Christian  hope  in  giving  the  soul  a  refreshing  sense 
of  its  heavenly  freedom,  even  while  the  body  is  pining 
in  bondage.  The  prisoner  solaced  himself  in  his  lone- 
liness by  writing  and  singing  of  the  New  Jerusalem. 
Happy  man  !  his  cell  became  his  little  heaven,  while 
he  was  preparing  for  a  u  better  inheritance/''  Some 
cell  in  that  storied  old  "  Tower  "  on  the  banks  of  the 
Thames  was  often  illumined  by  a  light  from  the 
distant  home,  towards  which  the  imprisoned  citizen  of 
heaven  was  daily  and  nightly  turning  his  longing 
eyes.  It  was  there,  probably,  towards  the  end  of 
Elizabeth's  reign,  that  a  long  prison  song  was  written 
by  F.  B.  P.,  alias  Francis  Baker.  His  hymn  found  a 
home  in  the  British  Museum.  It  is  too  long  to  be 
sung  every  hour,  but  it  had  too  much  life  to  stay,  all 
of  it,  in  its  Museum  cell.  Precious  bits  have  slipped 
out  into  tuneful  liberty,  and  have  found  their  way  into 
thousands  of  hearts,  north  and  south,  in  the  Old 
World  and  in  the  New.  How  many  a  prisoner  of 
hope  has  been  heard  singing — 


Jerusalem,  my  happy  home, 
When  shall  I  come  to  thee  ? 

When  shall  my  sorrows  have  an  end, 
Thy  joys  when  shall  I  see  ? 


154  HYMN- WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Oh  happy  harbour  of  the  saints ! 

Oh  sweet  and  pleasant  soil ! 
In  Thee  no  sorrow  may  be  found, 

No  grief,  no  care,  no  toil. 

There  lust  and  lucre  cannot  dwell, 
There  envy  bears  no  sway ; 

There  is  no  hunger,  heat,  nor  cold, 
But  pleasure  every  way. 

Thy  walls  are  made  of  precious  stones, 
Thy  bulwarks  diamonds  square  ; 

Thy  gates  are  of  right  orient  pearl, 
Exceeding  rich  and  rare. 

Thy  turrets  and  thy  pinnacles 
With  carbuncles  do  shine ; 

Thy  very  streets  are  paved  with  gold, 
Surpassing  clear  and  fine. 

Oh,  my  sweet  home,  Jerusalem, 
Would  God  I  were  in  thee  ! 

Would  God  my  woes  were  at  an  end, 
Thy  joys  that  I  might  see  ! 

Thy  saints  are  crown'd  with  glory  great 
They  see  God  face  to  face  ; 

They  triumph  still,  they  still  rejoice, 
Most  happy  in  their  case. 

We  that  are  here  in  banishment 

Continually  do  moan, 
We  sigh,  and  sob,  we  weep,  and  wail, 

Perpetually  we  groan. 

Our  sweet  is  mix'd  with  bitter  gall, 

Our  pleasure  is  but  pain, 
Our  joys  scarce  last  the  looking  on, 

Our  sorrows  still  remain. 


SONGS    IN    TRISON.  155 

But  there  they  live  in  such  delight, 

Such  pleasure  and  such  play, 
As  that  to  them  a  thousand  years 

Doth  seem  as  yesterday. 

Thy  gardens  and  thy  gallant  walks 

Continually  are  green, 
There  grow  such  sweet  and  pleasant  flowers 

As  nowhere  else  are  seen. 

Quite  through  the  streets  with  silver  sound 

The  flood  of  life  doth  flow  ; 
Upon  whose  banks  on  every  side, 

The  wood  of  life  doth  grow. 

There  trees  for  evermore  bear  fruit 

And  evermore  do  spring  ; 
There  evermore  the  angels  sit, 

And  evermore  do  sing. 

Jerusalem,  my  happy  home, 

Would  God  I  were  in  thee ! 
Would  God  my  woes  were  at  an  end, 

Thy  joys  that  I  might  see  ! 

Many  versions  of  this  "  prisoner's  hymn "  have 
found  their  way  into  different  parts  of  Europe;  and 
many  a  home  and  many  a  prison,  it  may  be, 
have  been  made  the  happier  by  its  simple  soothing 
tones,  and  its  tuneful  alternations  of  plaintiveness 
and  triumph.  Snatches  of  it  used  to  be  heard  among 
the  hills  and  glens  of  Scotland.  'They  lived  in  the 
memory  and  heart  of  many  a  Scotch  mother ;  and 
seem  to  have  been  sung  as  devout  and  cheering 
accompanimeuts  to  the  daily  duties  of  cottage  life. 
Nor  was  this  without  good  fruit  even  in  distant  lands — 
fruit  that  sprang  up  far  away  from  the  spot  where  the 
seed  first  fell.  A  young  Scotchman  wrho  was  on  his 
death-bed   at   New  Orleans,   says  the  American  bio- 


156  HYMN-WRITERS    AND   THEIR    HYMNS. 

grapher  of  Whitefield,  was  visited  by  a  Presbyterian 
minister,  but  continued  for  a  time  to  shut  himself  up 
against  all  the  good  man's  efforts  to  reach  his  heart. 
Somewhat  discouraged,  at  last  the  visitor  turned  away, 
and  scarcely  knowing  why,  unless  it  were  for  his  own 
comfort,  began  to  sing,  "  Jerusalem,  my  happy  home." 
That  was  enough,  a  tender  chord  was  touched.  The 
young  patient's  heart  was  broken  ;  and  with  bursting 
tears  he  said,  li  My  dear  mother  used  to  sing  that 
hymn."  His  softened  spirit  was  now  open  to  his 
Redeemer.  Jesus  gave  the  penitent  peace  ;  and  hope 
threw  light  upon  his  passage  to  the  city  which  is  now 
for  ever  the  "  happy  home  "  of  his  mother  and  her 
son.  The  prisoner,  too,  whose  song  went  out  from 
the  Tower  to  fulfil  such  heavenly  missions,  now  enjoys 
the  city  of  his  desire ;  and  many  have  gathered  around 
him  there,  whose  way  thither  had  been  brightened  by 
the  music  of  his  hymn.  And  there  he  has  met  with 
others,  once  psalmists  like  himself  in  prison,  but  now 
at  large  to  commune  amidst  the  joys  of  immortal 
freedom,  and  to  watch  the  accumulating  fruit  of  their 
prison  psalmody.  Among  the  rest  is  one  rapt  spirit, 
the  spirit  of  a  sainted  lady  who  now  realizes  the  truth 
of  her  Saviour's  words,  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men 
shall  revile  you  and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all 
manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my  sake. 
Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad :  for  great  is  your 
reward  in  heaven." 

Jeane  Marie  Bouviers  de  la  Mathe  Guion  was  a 
sufferer  for  Christ ;  and  was  in  one  sense  a  martyr  for 
the  honour  of  the  Blessed  Spirit.  ' i  In  the  time  of  the 
ancient  law,"  as  she  herself  remarks,  "there  were 
several  of  the  Lord's  martyrs,  who  suffered  for 
asserting  and  trusting  in  the   one  true  God.     In  the 


SONGS    IN    PRISON.  157 

primitive  church  of  Christ,  the  martyrs  shed  their 
blood  for  maintaining  the  truth  of  Jesus  Christ 
crucified;  but  now  there  are  martyrs  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  suffer  for  their  dependence  on  Him,  for 
maintaining  his  reign  in  souls,  and  for  being  subject  to 

the  divine  will The  devil  now  directly  attacks  the 

dominion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  opposing  his  celestial 
nation  in  souls,  and  discharging  his  hatred  on  the 
bodies  of  those  whose  minds  he  cannot  hurt."  Like 
many  others  whose  spirituality  has  been  too  high  and 
full  for  a  carnal  world  and  a  worldly  church,  she  was 
called  to  suffer  from  human  efforts  to  repress  and  shut 
up  the  overflowings  of  "  perfect  love.-"  She  was  im- 
prisoned for  her  spiritual-mindedness  and  her  uncon- 
trollable zeal  for  a  religion  of  inward  spirit  and  power. 
Born  on  Easter  Eve,  April  13,  1648,  at  Montargis, 
about  fifty  miles  south  of  Paris,  of  gentle  blood, 
tender  and  delicate  constitution,  and  trained  in  a  style 
which  prepared  her  for  intercourse  with  frequenters  at 
court,  wThile  it  made  her  familiar  with  the  sorrows  of 
ill-tempered  government  at  home;  this  distinguished 
woman  entered  on  her  remarkable  course  of  suffering, 
discipline,  and  activity,  in  her  sixteenth  year,  when,  as 
a  tall,  beautiful  girl,  she  was  made  the  victim  of  con- 
venience, by  marriage  with  an  elderly  gentleman,  who 
in  conjunction  with  his  mother  ruled  her  as  a  pupil  if 
not  a  slave.  Her  decided  conversion  to  vital  Chris- 
tianity, however,  very  soon  laid  the  foundation  of  that 
exemplary  piety,  charity,  and  devotion,  which  she 
sustained  for  so  many  years  as  a  wife,  a  mother,  a 
widow,  and  a  consecrated  evangelist  for  Christ.  The 
instrument  of  her  conversion  was  a  modest  but  de- 
voted religious  recluse,  who  quietly  dropped  a  passing 
word  to  her  on  the  subject  of  inward  godliness.     It 


158  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

was  "  a  word  in  season/'  She  had  been  groping  after 
truth,  feeling  after  God  ;  but  those  few  "  good  words" 
opened  the  blessed  to  her  heart.  "  They  were  unto 
me/'  she  says,  "like  the  stroke  of  a  dart,  which 
pierced  my  heart  asunder.  I  felt  at  the  instant  a 
wound  very  deep,  smitten  with  the  love  of  God ;  a 
wound  so  delightful  that  I  desired  it  never  to  be  cured. 
These  words  brought  into  my  heart  what  I  had  been 

seeking  so  many  years 0  infinite  Goodness  !      0 

Beauty  ancient  and  new  !  why  have  I  known  Thee  so 
late  ?  Alas  !  I  sought  Thee  where  Thou  wast  not, 
and  did  not  seek  Thee  where  Thou  wast.  It  was  for 
want  of  understanding  these  words  of  thy  gospel, 
'  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation  ; 
neither  shall  they  say,  lo  here,  or  lo  there ;  for  behold 
the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you/  This  I  now 
experienced,  since  Thou  became  my  King,  and  my 
heart  thy  kingdom,  where  Thou  didst  reign  as 
sovereign,  and  didst  all  thy  will.  This  fell  out  on 
Magdalen's  Day,  1668."  On  Magdalen's  Eve,  1676, 
her  husband  died,  and  on  the  following  morning  she 
renewed  what  she  called  her  marriage -contract  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  I  renewed  it  every  year," 
she  writes,  "  on  Magdalen's  Day."  She  proved  herself 
equal  to  all  the  business  of  settling  her  husband's 
affairs;  and  then,  she  gave  herself  as  a  "widow 
indeed"  to  the  work  of  proclaiming  the  salvation  which 
she  had  found,  and  of  gathering  souls  for  her  divine 
Lord.  Full  of  spiritual  power  and  love,  she  went 
everywhere,  wherever  her  way  was  open,  in  France 
and  in  Italy;  and  under  great  bodily  suffering,  "in 
perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in  perils  by  her 
own  countrymen,  in  perils  of  the  city,  in  perils  of  the 
wilderness,  in  perils  among  false  brethren,"   and  false 


SONGS   IN    PEISON.  159 

sisters,  "  in  weariness  and  painfulness,  in  watchings 
after,  and  in  fastings  often,"  she  prayed,  and  exhorted, 
and  taught,  and  persuaded,  until  in  convents,  in 
monasteries,  in  homes,  by  the  way,  wherever  she  came 
indeed,  the  fruit  of  her  labours  multiplied  in  many 
souls  saved  from  sin,  and  brought  to  love  Christ  with 
all  their  heart,  and  to  commune  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Her  writings  were 
voluminous,  and  these  brought  upon  her,  at  last,  the 
ecclesiastical  authorities  of  the  day.  Her  soul-con- 
verting power  excited  the  wrath  of  many ;  but  her 
writings,  not  in  all  points  accurate,  and  never  to  be 
understood  by  those  who  were  most  forward  to  judge, 
afforded  seeming  reason  for  that  continued  persecution 
which  resulted,  at  length,  in  her  consignment  to  prison 
by  order  of  the  king.  She  was  at  first  consigned  to 
a  convent,  under  the  cruel  oversight  of  a  severe  nun  ; 
her  child  was  torn  from  her,  and  all  comforts  were 
withdrawn ;  but  she  had  "  an  interior  joy  at  her  new 
humiliation."  By  and  by,  however,  after  various 
examinations  by  church  dignitaries,  she  was  thrown 
into  the  prison  at  Yincennes.  "  There,"  she  tells  us, 
"  I  passed  my  time  in  great  peace,  content  to  pass  the 
rest  of  my  life  there,  if  such  were  the  will  of  God.  I  sang 
songs  of  joy,  which  the  maid  who  served  me  learned  by 
heart,  as  fast  as  I  made  them,  and  we  together  sang 
thy  praises,  0  my  God !  The  stones  of  my  prison 
looked  in  my  eyes  like  rubies.  I  esteemed  them  more 
than  all  the  gaudy  brilliancies  of  the  world.  My  heart 
was  full  of  that  joy.  Thou  givest  to  them  that  love 
Thee  in  the  midst  of  their  greatest  crosses."  The  free 
music  of  her  hymn,  and  her  warm  and  flowing  devotion, 
move  us  even  now  as  she  and  her  maid  sincr— 


160  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Great  God,  here  at  ease, 
Thee  singly  to  please. 

I  sing  all  the  length  of  the  day ; 
Shut  up  in  a  cage, 
Yet  sheltered  from  rage, 

Oh  listen  and  smile  on  the  lay ! 

From  sorrow  releas'd, 
With  solace  increas'd, 

The  bars  of  my  prison  I  love  ; 
All  toil  here  untried, 
All  wants  well  supplied, 

I  am  blest  and  enriched  from  above. 

What  if  aliens  are  prone 
To  despise,  as  unknown, 

A  language  in  heaven  understood  ? 
'Tis  a  feast  to  the  taste 
Of  the  soul  that  is  chaste, 

As  it  flows  from  the  fountain  of  good. 

Tho'  my  foes  have  combin'd, 
And  my  body  confin'd, 

Yet  my  soul  is  with  liberty  blest; 
I  am  humbly  content 
With  whatever  is  sent, 

For  I  know  that  thy  pleasure  is  best. 

Oh  pleasure  divine, 
All  excellence  thine, 

And  Thee  will  I  love  and  adore ; 
The  more  piercing  my  pain, 
The  more  freedom  I  gain, 

And  of  every  choice  blessing  the  more. 

Accept  then,  I  pray, 
The  tribute  I  pay, 

I  sing,  as  a  bird  full  of  joy ; 
Vivacious,  expos'd, 
In  a  cage  when  enclosed, 

His  warbling  effusions  employ. 


SONGS    IN    PRISON.  161 

Grant  my  hymns  uttered  here, 
Melodious  to  cheer, 

Tho'  tend'rer  and  softer  than  fine ; 
And  the  strength  ever  deign 
Of  my  life  to  sustain, 

Of  that  durable  life  which  is  Thine, 

Thy  wondrous  defence 
Makes  a  cell  seem  immense — 

It  sheds  so  peculiar  a  grace ; 
Such  a  pleasure  abounds, 
Such  a  glory  surrounds, 

And  the  joys  of  thy  kingdom  embrace. 

All  my  foes  I  behold, 

All  the  stout  and  the  bold, 

Perplexing  their  hearts  with  their  pain  ; 
Confounded,  I  see, 
While  happily  free, 

How  they  vent  all  their  furies  in  vain  ! 

With  a  spirit  thus  unsubdued,  and  a  soul  thus  joy- 
fully communing  with  the  heaven  which  the  storms  of 
persecution  never  disturb,  she  found  her  enemies  still 
unwearied  with  the  efforts  of  their  false  zeal.  They 
kept  her  in  prison  several  years  in  a  sick  and  suffering 
condition.  Her  keepers  in  every  case  learnt  to  respect 
and  love  her;  and  then,  to  avert  the  danger  of  such 
attachments,  she  was  moved  from  prison  to  prison. 
Now  at  Yincennes,  then  at  Yaugirard,  and  from  Yau- 
girard  to  the  Bastile.  Still  her  truthfulness  was  clear, 
her  purity  was  transparent,  and  her  unsullied  character 
as  a  Christian  convinced  even  the  gainsay ers.  Her 
songs,  too,  w^ere  unfailing.  Nor  was  the  notorious 
Bastile  left  unsanctified  by  a  hymn.    There  she  sang — 

My  dearest  Protector,  see  how  they  detain 
My  life  in  a  dungeon  !     Yet  let  me  remain 
While  such  is  thy  pleasure  :  for  better  no  doubt 
In  a  prison  with  Thee  than  &  palace  without ! 

11 


162  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

No  thought  in  my  heart  dares  to  lift  up  its  head, 

But  the  thought  which  to  love,  and  to  serve  Thee,  is  led. 

I  wish'd  to  be  Thine  from  my  tenderest  age  : 

No  lovers  beside  have  I  sought  to  engage  ; 

No  slender  supports  of  the  loftiest  reeds ; 

No  trust  in  their  words,  and  no  hope  of  their  deeds. 

In  every  probation,  to  Thee  the  recourse 
Of  my  soul,  in  thy  grace  is  its  only  resource. 
What  else  can  I  do,  so  surrounded  with  foes, 
But  fly  to  thy  goodness  which  heals  all  my  woes  ? 

"When  my  hair  shall  grow  white,  and  infirmities  shake 
This  old  shatter'd  fabric,  Thou  wilt  not  forsake. 

I  Avas  formerly  pain'd  when  I  saw  night  and  day, 
What  innocence  suffered  in  walking  her  way ; 
But  since  I  have  learn'd,  we  are  summon'd  to  prove 
By  the  weight  of  our  suffering  the  weight  of  our  love. 

Love  perfect  and  pure  goes  farther  than  thought ; 
None  knows,  till  he  proves  it,  how  dear  'twill  be  bought ; 
Yet  'tis  well  worth  its  price,  and  a  thousand  times  more, 
Since  it  brings  us  to  heaven  when  our  labours  are  o'er. 

The  imprisoned  sufferer  was  nappy  in  the  will  of 
God ;  but  she  felt  herself  called  ceaselessly  to  demand 
a  fair  trial,  that  her  crime,  if  there  were  any,  might  be 
openly  specified  and  proved.  The  only  response  to 
her  appeals  seems  to  have  been  an  inquisitorial  process 
of  inquiry  for  some  evidence  to  damage  her  case.  All, 
however,  was  vain  ;  her  character  was  stainless.  She 
was  dismissed  from  prison  ;  but  because  of  the  alleged 
doubtfulness  of  her  doctrines,  they  banished  her  to 
Blois,  where  for  nearly  twelve  years  her  example  shed 
the  calm  and  pure  light  of  a  Christian  eventide,  and 
in  the  end  left  bright  memorials  of  its  holiness  in  the 
hearts  of  all  who  knew  her.     She  died  in  peace  amidst 


SONGS    IN    PRISON.  163 

a  few  of  her  best  friends.     Some  of  Madame  Guion's 
teachings  would  have  seemed  less  doubtful,  it  may  be, 
had  her  terminology  been  fully  understood ;    or  had 
her   mode   of    expression   been   less    symbolical   and 
dreamy.     Her  experience  as  a  Christian  was  not  far 
different    from    that    of  many   other   highly    spiritual 
Christians  who  have  never  been  accused  of  an  approach 
to  error.     "  Perfect  love"   in  all  ages   bears  the  same 
Divine  impress.     Some  of  Madame   Guion's  last  say- 
ings must    ever    secure   a   hallowed  memory  for  her 
name.      "Nothing/'  says  she,  "is  greater  than  God, 
nothing  less  than  myself.      He  is  rich,  I  am  poor ; 
and  yet  I  want  nothing.    Life  or  death  is  equal  to  me ; 
God  is  love.     I  want  nothing  but  God  and  his  glory." 
The  leading  notion  of  her  theology,  if  she  may  be  said 
to  teach  theology,  is  given  in  her  "  Spiritual  Torrents." 
"  As  soon  as  a  soul  is  touched  of  God  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  return  to  Him  in  all  sincerity,  after  the  first  pur- 
gation, or  cleansing,  which  confession  and   contrition 
have  made,  God  gives  it  a  certain  instinct  for  turning 
to   Him  in  a  more  perfect  manner,  to  be  united  to 
Him  ;  as  it  then  clearly  sees  that  it  was  not  created 
for  the  amusements  and  trifles   of  the  world,  but  that 
it  has  a  centre,  to  which  it  must  strive  to  return,  and 
out  of  which  it  can  never  find  true  repose."     That  her 
holiness  was  truly  Christian  is  seeu  in  her  last  words 
to  her  many  spiritual  children  :   "  Oh,  my  dear  children, 
open  your  eyes  to  the  light  of  truth.     '  Holy  Father, 
sanctify  them    through  thy  truth/     Thy  Divine  Word 
has  spoken  to  them  through  my  mouth.     Christ  alone 
is  the  Truth.      He  said   of  his   apostles,    '  For  their 
sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they  also  may  be  sanc- 
tified through  the  truth/     Oh,  say  the  same  thing  to 
my  children.     Sanctify  thyself  in  them  and  for  them. 


164  HYMN- WRITERS    AKD    THEIR    HYMNS. 

It  is  being  truly  sanctified  in  all  holiness,  to  have  none 
of  our  own,  but  only  the  holiness  of  Jesus  Christ.  Let 
Him  alone  be  all  in  all  in  us,  and  for  us,  that  the  work 
of  sanctification  may  be  carried  on  through  the  experi- 
mental   knowledge    of    the    Divine   truth My 

children,  receive  the  instruction  from  y©ur  mother, 
and  it  will  procure  you  life.  Receive  it  through  her, 
not  as  for  her,  but  as  of  and  for  God.  Amen.  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."     Amen  ! 

Give  glory  to  Jesus,  our  Head, 
With  all  that  encompass  his  throne ; 

A  widow,  a  widow  indeed, 
A  mother  in  Israel  is  gone  ! 

^jfe  *^:  ;&  :&  :&  :fe 

Rejoice  for  a  sister  deceased, 

Our  loss  is  her  infinite  gain ; 
A  soul  out  of  prison  released, 

And  free  from  its  bodily  chain. 
With  song  let  us  follow  her  flight, 

And  mount  with  her  spirit  above, 
Escaped  to  the  mansions  of  light, 

And  lodged  in  the  Eden  of  love. 

It  is  pleasant  to  read  the  songs  of  a  prisoner  who 
has  learned  to  be  happy  in  prison ;  and  the  pleasure  is 
greater  when  the  hymns  come  from  a  "  prisoner  of 
Jesus  Christ" — one  who  suffers  bondage  purely  for 
Christ's  sake.  But  even  that  pleasure  is  equalled,  if 
not  surpassed,  by  the  joy  with  which  we  joy  over  that 
goodness  of  heart,  that  overflowing  charity  which  con- 
strains a  man  to  task  his  genius  in  providing  appro- 
priate, instructive,  and  cheery  prison  hymns  for  those 
who  have  neither  heart  nor  genius  to  compose  hymns 
for  themselves,  or  in  teaching  those  who  have  merited 
imprisonment  so  to  sing  as  to  beguile  their  hours  of 


SONGS    IX    PRISON.  165 

confinement,  to  make  legal  penalties  contribute  to 
their  heart's  welfare,  and  to  prepare  themselves  while 
in  bondage  for  the  privileges  and  duties  of  freedom. 
Such  is  the  joy  which  must  bless  those  who  tune  them- 
selves for  companionship  with  the  man  under  whose 
striking  old  portrait  the  lover  of  quaint  but  well- 
strung  psalmody  may  read — 

So  this  is  he  whose  infant  muse  began 

To  brave  the  world  before  years  styled  him  man ; 

Though  praise  be  slight,  and  scorns  to  make  his  rhymes 

Beg  favours  or  opinion  of  the  times, 

Yet  few  by  good  men  have  been  more  approv'd, 

None  so  unseen,  so  generally  loved. 

A  very  good  character,  especially  for  a  man  whose 
sympathy  with  prisoners  was  strengthened  by  his  own 
experience  as  a  prisoner,  having  been  in  iC  durance 
vile  "-  three  successive  times — once  for  writing  a  little 
too  freely,  as  some  people  thought,  about  public 
abuses ;  a  second  time  because  he  chose  to  be  a 
"  roundhead/''  while  some  of  his  more  powerful  neigh- 
bours lorded  it  as  cavaliers  ;  and  once  more  because  it 
was  thought  impertinent  for  him  to  remonstrate  against 
being  stripped  of  the  spoils  which  he  had  picked  up  while 
he  happened  to  stand  on  the  winning  side  of  the  game. 
His  second  period  of  bondage  might  have  been  fatal 
but  for  the  plea  of  a  fellow-poet,  Denham,  who  wore 
royalist  colours.  "  Let  him  live/'  was  the  plea,  "  for 
while  he  lives  I  shall  not  be  thought  the  worst  poet." 
It  was  a  good  joke,  for  it  saved  a  good  life;  and 
George  Wither  lived  to  show  his  tuneful  sympathy 
with  poor  prisoners.  "  Men  in  affliction,"  says  he, 
very  kiudly,  "  are  somewhat  eased  when  they  can  find 
words  whereby  to   express   their  sufferings;    to    help 


166  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

them  who  want  expression  of  their  endurance  in 
imprisonment,  and  to  remember  prisoners  of  such 
meditations  as  are  pertinent  to  their  condition,  is  the 
intent  of  this  hymn  :  " — 

I  whom  of  late 

No  thraldom  did  molest, 
Of  that  estate, 

Am  wholly  dispossess'd  : 
My  feet  once  free, 

Are  strictly  now  confined, 
"Which  breeds  in  me 

A  discontented  mind. 

Those  prospects  fair 

Which  I  was  wont  to  have, 
That  wholesome  air 

Which  fields  and  meadows  gave, 
Are  changed  now 

For  close,  unpleasant  cells, 
WTiere  secret  woe 

And  open  sorrow  dwells. 

Instead  of  strains 

Delightful  to  mine  ear, 
Gyves,  bolts,  and  chains, 

Are  all  my  music  here ; 
And  ere  I  get 

Those  things  for  which  I  pray, 
I  must  entreat 

With  patience  in  delay. 

To  feed  or  sleep, 

To  work  or  take  mine  ease, 
I  now  must  keep 

Such  hours  as  others  please  : 
To  make  me  sad, 

Complaints  are  likewise  heard, 
And  often  made 

Of  wrongs  without  regard. 


SONGS    IN    PRISON.  1C7 

Lord  !  as  I  ought, 

My  freedom  had  I  used, 
Of  this,  no  doubt, 

I  might  have  been  excused : 
But  I  confess 

The  merit  of  my  sin, 
Deserves  no  less 

Than  hath  inflicted  been. 

Let  me,  0  God  ! 

My  sin  Thine  anger  move  ; 
But  let  this  rod 

Correct  my  faults  in  love : 
With  patient  mind 

Let  me  thy  stripes  endure, 
And  freedom  find 

When  they  have  wrought  their  cure. 

Whilst  here  I  'bide 

Though  I  unworthy  be, 
Do  Thou  provide 

All  needful  things  for  me  : 
And  though  friends  grow 

Unkind  in  my  distress, 
Yet  leave  not  Thou 

Thy  servant  comfortless. 

So  though  in  thrall 

My  body  must  remain, 
In  mind  I  shall 

Some  freedom  still  retain  ; 
And  wiser  made 

By  this  restraint  shall  be, 
Than  if  I  had 

Until  my  death  been  free. 

Tender-hearted  Wither  !  This  hymu,  which  in  his 
gentleness  he  offers  to  the  lips  and  heart  of  a  prisoner 
as  a  devout  mode  of  beguiling  his  solitary  hours,  was 
doubtless  the  very  song  of  his  own  soul,  under  the 


168  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

rigours  of  his  unalleviated  confinement,  and  in  the 
damp  and  gloomy  atmosphere  of  his  comfortless  dun- 
geon. His  were  hard  times  ;  and  those  who  got  the 
upper  hand  sometimes  forgot  their  own  sufferings  in 
the  joy  of  inflicting  suffering  in  their  turn.  It  was  not 
easy,  however,  to  clip  or  singe  the  wings  of  Wither' s 
muse.  Some  of  his  best  verses  were  made  in  the 
Marshalsea  ;  and  we  cannot  but  pay  honourable  tribute 
to  the  memory  of  the  man  who,  while  he  helped  those 
who  had  less  genius  and  fewer  resources  than  himself 
to  sing  with  him,  cheered  on  his  own  muse  in  a  style 
like  this — 

If  thy  verse  do  bravely  tower, 

As  she  makes  wing  she  gets  power ; 

Yet  the  higher  she  doth  soar, 

She's  affronted  still  the  more  ; 

Till  she  to  the  high'st  hath  past, 

Then  she  rests  with  fame  at  last : 

Let  naught,  therefore,  thee  affright, 

But  make  forward  in  thy  flight ; 

For,  if  I  could  match  thy  rhyme, 

To  the  very  stars  I'd  climb ; 

There  begin  again,  and  fly 

Till  I  reach'd  eternity. 

But,  alas !  my  muse  is  slow  ; 

For  thy  page  she  flags  too  low : 

Yea,  the  more's  her  hapless  fate, 

Her  short  wings  were  dipt  of  late ; 

And  poor  I,  her  fortune  rueing, 

Am  myself  put  up  a-mewing  ; 

But  if  I  my  cage  can  rid, 

I'll  fly  where  I  never  did ; 

And  though  for  her  sake  I'm  crost, 

Though  my  best  hopes  I  have  lost, 

And  knew  she  would  make  me  trouble 

Ten  times  more  than  ten  times  double  : 

I  should  love  and  keep  her  too, 

Spite  of  all  the  world  could  do. 


SONGS    IN    PEISON.  169 

For,  though  banish'd  from  my  flocks, 
And  confin'd  within  these  rocks, 
Here  I  waste  away  the  light, 
And  consume  the  sullen  night, 
She  doth  for  my  comfort  stay, 
And  keeps  many  cares  away. 


She  doth  tell  me  where  to  borrow 

Comfort  in  the  midst  of  sorrow ; 

Makes  the  desolatest  place 

To  her  presence  be  a  grace ; 

And  the  blackest  discontents 

Be  her  fairest  ornaments. 

In  my  former  days  of  bliss, 

Her  divine  skill  taught  me  this, 

That,  from  every  thing  I  saw, 

I  could  some  invention  draw; 

And  raise  pleasure  to  her  height, 

Through  the  meanest  object's  sight : 

By  the  murmur  of  a  spring, 

Or  the  least  bough's  rustleing  ; 

By  a  daisy,  whose  leaves  spread, 

Shut  when  Titan  goes  to  bed ; 

Or  a  shady  bush  or  tree, 

She  could  more  infuse  in  me, 

Than  all  Nature's  beauties  can 

In  some  other  wiser  man. 

By  her  help  I  also  now 

Make  this  churlish  place  allow 

Some  things  that  may  sweeten  gladness, 

In  the  very  gall  of  sadness. 

The  dull  loneness,  the  black  shade, 

That  these  hanging  vaults  have  made ; 

The  strange  music  of  the  waves, 

Beating  in  these  hollow  caves ; 

This  black  den  which  rocks  emboss, 

Overgrown  with  eldest  moss ; 

The  rude  portals  that  give  light 

More  to  terror  than  delight ; 


170  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR   HYMNS. 

This  my  chamber  of  neglect, 
Walled  about  with  disrespect ; — 
From  all  these  and  this  dull  air, 
A  fit  object  for  despair, 
She  hath  taught  me  by  her  might 
To  draw  comfort  and  delight. 
Therefore,  thou  best  earthly  bliss, 
I  will  cherish  thee  for  this. 

Well  sung,  Wither  !  He  lias  broken  his  prison  • 
he  has  reached  the  home  of  freedom,  and  now  drinks 
at  its  very  source  the  inspiration  which  still  gives  life 
to  his  best  hymns.  Let  his  name  be  wreathed  with 
peace  ! 


^&&?y&?y£&£?y£ZAS?y£?y££M3?y 


PSALMS   IN  ENGLISH  METRE. 

"  As  through  thy  temple  now  the  deep  strains  peal, 
And  choral  minstrelsy  is  heard  to  swell, 
Devotion  wakes  within  us,  and  we  feel 

All  that  the  Psalmist  hath  expressed  so  well." 


f  OW  few  among  the  legion  of  modern  versifiers 
have  ever  caught  either  the  spirit  or  the 
manner  of  the  sacred  old  hymns,  which  they 


have  tried  to  throw  into  English  metre.  With  few 
Exceptions,  those  who  have  aimed  at  a  literal  version 
of  the  Psalms  in  metre  are  tame,  and  have  lost  the 
soul  of  the  original ;  while  many  of  the  paraphrasers 
are  lacking  in  dignity,  and  excite  any  feeling  but  that 
of  devotion,  by  calling  their  neighbours  to  sing  their 
psalms  "  done  into  metre/'  Sternhold  and  Hopkins 
must  be  venerated  as  we  revere  antiquity  even  in  its 
dotage.  Brady  and  Tate  are  always  associated  with 
our  early  impressions  of  old  Church  psalmody,  when 
the  parish-clerk  used  to  act  as  head  singer,  and  give 
the  key-note  on  a  doleful  instrument  that  they  called 
a  pitch-pipe.  As  to  the  music  of  the  Scotch  version, 
it  is  enough  that  it  is  admired  most  by  those  who 


172 

abominate  the  organ,  while  they  are  agreeably  moved 
by  the  notes  of  a  Highland  piper.  It  would  be  better 
to  let  the  old  English  Psalter  alone.  Many  a  weary 
poet  would  have  been  spared  his  pains,  and  many 
psalm- singers  would  have  escaped  bewilderment  amidst 
wildernesses  of  dreary  verse,  had  due  and  wide  atten- 
tion been  given  to  a  few  verses  from  one  whose  happily 
expressed  opinion  is  of  some  value.  An  author  who 
inherited  poetic  taste  from  a  gifted  father,  who  shared 
poetic  power  with  two  brothers  still  more  gifted,  who 
had  passed  twenty  years  of  classical  discipline  in  West- 
minster School,  and  who  lived  to  catch  the  spirit  of 
Hebrew  melodies  and  enjoy  communion  with  holy 
psalmists  among  the  inspiring  beauties  of  Devonian 
valleys  and  hills,  has  a  right  to  have  his  opinion 
respected  on  the  question  of  metrical  psalmody.  Who 
that  has  sought  out  the  loveliest  retreats  of  our  native 
island  can  ever  forget  the  valley  of  the  Exe,  as  it 
winds  down  from  the  borders  of  Exmoor  to  the  old- 
storied  town  of  Tiverton,  overlooking  from  its  southern 
slopes  the  ancient  fords  of  the  Exe  and  the  Leman, 
lapped  amidst  orchards  and  gardens,  and  its  streets 
and  houses  refreshed  and  beautified  by  the  clear 
bright  stream  which  flows  down  through  it  from  the 
upper  springs.  Two  pilgrims  of  nature  once  found  their 
way  to  this  old  Two-ford-town.  One  of  them  lives  to 
remember  that,  having  lingered  about  the  remains  of 
the  castle,  and  having  mused  and  talked  over  the 
fortunes  of  the  pensive  daughter  of  Edward  IV.,  who 
spent  the  days  of  her  widowhood  in  its  delicious 
retirement,  and  having  talked  about  those  who  for 
many  ages  had  lived,  and  sung,  and  fought,  and  died 
in  and  around  the  sturdy  fortress,  they  found  their 
way,  by  an  avenue  of  venerable  trees,,  into  the  famous 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE.  173 

graromar-school,  founded  in  1599  by  the  will  of  Peter 
Blundell;  and  there,  after  sundry  speculations  over 
the  ponderous  antique  oaken  desks  and  benches,  with 
their  multitudinous  records  of  penknife  work,  they 
found  themselves  standing  in  silence  before  a  remark- 
able portrait.  It  represented  one  of  the  former 
masters  of  the  school,  nor  could  its  distinctive  family 
features  be  mistaken.  te Look  at  that,"  said  the  one 
to  the  other,  "  does  not  the  face  seem  instinct  with 
life  ?  It  looks  as  if  it  knew  what  we  have  been 
saying,  in  our  way  down  the  valley,  about  the  various 
efforts  of  people  to  produce  a  metrical  version  of  the 
Psalms.  Surely  those  lips  are  moving,  as  if  they 
would  re-utter  what  they  expressed  so  long  ago." 

"  What  was  that  V 

"  What  ?  Why,  just  listen,  and  hear  with  what 
quiet  ease  keen  polished  satire  may  be  made  to  pass 
into  warm  and  beautiful  hymnic  devotion  " — 

Has  David  Christ  to  come  foreshow'd  ? 

Can  Christians  then  aspire 
To  niend  the  harmony  that  flow'd 

From  his  prophetic  lyre  ? 

How  curious  are  their  wits,  and  yam, 

Their  erring  zeal  how  bold, 
Who  durst  with  meaner  dross  profane 

His  purity  of  gold ! 

His  Psalms  unchanged  the  saints  employ, 

Unchanged  our  God  applies  ; 
They  suit  th'  apostles  in  their  joy, 

The  Saviour  when  He  dies. 

Let  David's  pure  unaltered  lays 

Transmit  through  ages  down 
To  Thee,  0  David's  Lord,  our  praise  ! 

To  Thee,  0  David's  Son  ! 


174  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Till  judgment  calls  the  seraph  throng 

To  join  the  human  choir, 
And  God,  who  gave  the  ancient  song, 

The  new  one  shall  inspire. 

So  thought  and  so  sang  Samuel  Wesley;  thereby 
somewhat  condemning,  not  only  Watts,  against  whom 
chiefly  these  lines  had  been  directed,  but  his  brother 
Charles  also — yea,  his  own  father,  and  even  himself: 
for  each  of  them  had  tried  his  powers  in  translating  or 
paraphrasing  Hebrew  psalms  into  English  rhyme.  Nor 
had  Samuel  Wesley,  the  father,  failed  in  every  case. 
His  version  of  Psalm  cxiv.  may  be  sung  with  unbroken 
pleasure — 

"When  ransom'd  Israel  came 

From  faithless  Egypt's  bands, 
The  house  of  Jacob's  name 
From  foreign  hostile  lands, 
Judah  alone 
God's  holy  place, 
And  Israel's  grace 

Was  his  bright  throne. 

Amazed  old  ocean  saw, 

And  to  its  chambers  fled ; 
While  Jordan's  streams  withdraw 
To  seek  their  distant  head. 
Tall  mountains  bound 
Like  jocund  rams, 
The  hills  like  lambs 
Skipp'd  lightly  round. 

What  ail'd  thee,  0  thou  sea, 

To  leave  thine  ancient  bed  ? 
Why  did  eld  Jordan  flee, 
And  seek  its  distant  head  ? 
Ye  mountains,  why 
Leap'd  ye  like  rams, 


Skipp'd  lightly  by  ? 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISE    METRE.  175 

All  nature's  utmost  bound 
The  God  of  Jacob's  own, 
"Where  sea  or  land  is  found, 
Fall  trembling  at  his  throne ; 
At  whose  command 
Hard  rocks  distil 
A  crystal  rill 

And  drench  the  sand. 

The  tasteful  old  rector  shows  himself  alive  to  the 
grand  simplicity,  the  condensed  power,  elegant  con- 
ciseness, and  noble  imagery  of  this  seeming  fragment 
of  a  sublime   ode ;    and  he  will  be  thought  to  have 
approached  nearer  to  the  original  than  his  own  son 
Charles,  who  has  rendered  the  same  psalm  more  freely, 
and  in  more  pompous  measure.     The  mind  and  pen 
which  gave  its  distinctive  character  to  the  ' '  Spectator  " 
would  naturally  feel  the  inspiration  of  a  psalm  like 
this ;  and  Addison  has  remarked  that  "  its  author  has 
written  so  as  deeply  to  impress  the  mind  of  his  readers 
by  pointing  out  miraculous  effects  without  mentioning 
an  agent,  till  at  last,  when  the  sea  is  seen  rapidly 
retiring    from    the    shore,    Jordan   retreating    to   its 
source,  and  the  mountains  and  hills  running*  away  like 
a  flock  of  affrighted  sheep,  that  the  passage  of  the 
Israelites    might  be    every  way  uninterrupted;    then 
the  cause  of  all  is  suddenly  introduced,  and  the  pre- 
sence of  God  in  his   grandeur  solves  every  difficulty.-" 
Literature  was  Addison's  calling.     Like  many  others 
who    have    been  tempted  into   positions    unsuited  to 
their  character,  or  to  which  then    powers   have  not 
proved  equal,  Addison  found  that  marriage  into  high 
life  afforded  "  no  addition  to  his  happiness,"  and  that 
elevation  to  official  state  entailed  burdens  from  which 
an  easy  and  happy  relief  is  not  always  possible.     Re- 
treat alone  gave  him  the  promise  of  peace  at  the  last. 


176  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Pensioned  and  in  retirement,  he  sought  for  solace  in 
preparing  a  "  defence  of  the  Christian  religion/'  and 
in  planning  a  new  poetical  version  of  the  Psalms. 
Neither  plan  was  completed.  And  perhaps  it  is  better 
for  his  reputation,  as  a  psalmist,  that  he  left  mere 
specimen  fragments  of  his  intended  version. 

What  he  wrote  will  always  live.  Nor  is  there  in 
what  he  wrote,  anything,  either  in  spirit  or  tone,  which 
favours  in  the  least  degree  the  suspicion  which  some 
have  cast  upon  his  Christian  sincerity.  His  memory 
will  not  be  damaged  by  the  unworthy  insinuations  of 
Pope,  neither  will  lovers  of  charity  think  the  worse  of 
him  because  the  unsympathizing  and  unloving  Tonson 
11  always  thought  him  a  priest  in  his  heart."  As  an 
undying  minister  of  instruction  and  pleasure  to  English 
minds  and  hearts,  his  memory  will  not  take  the 
tarnish  of  contemporary  slander.  All  lovers  of  well- 
applied  genius  will  love  him,  were  it  only  for  his 
version  of  Psalm  xix.  It  has  been  thought  that  the 
pure  love  for  "  silently  living  nature  "  which  gives  such 
a  devotional  charm  to  his  verses,  and  which  he  so 
sweetly  expresses  on  introducing  his  psalm  to  the 
readers  of  the  "  Spectator/'  must  have  breathed  its 
first  and  deepest  inspiration  into  his  soul  amidst  some 
of  the  quiet  scenes  of  his  boyhood.  One  of  these  was 
the  cathedral  close  at  Lichfield.  It  was  evening  when 
for  the  first  time  we  entered  that  reverend  enclosure. 
The  sun  had  gone  down,  and  it  was  our  time  of  pre- 
paration for  the  Sabbath.  Where  could  such  an  hour 
be  more  solemnly  kept  than  amidst  the  associations 
which,  seen  and  unseen,  gathered  beneath  the  shadows 
of  so  venerable  a  sanctuary  ?  The  outer  world  was 
growing  dim,  but  everything  that  was  visible  offered 
an  agreeable  introduction  to   the  invisible.      Among 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    ilETEE.  i  /  / 

the  whisperings  which  came  to  the  ear  of  fancy,  as  we 
paced  np  and  down  that  noble  avenue  on  the  north 
side  of  the  church,  known  as  ' '  the  Dean's  walk/'  there 
came  many  remarkable  names,  which,  as  they  touched 
us  in  succession,  called  up  some  deep  thinkings  about 
the  present  life  and  action  of  those  who  once  enjoyed 
the  shade  of  these  same  trees,  and  figured  familiarly 
in  these  same  sequestered  dwellings.  On  this  scene 
the  last  century  had  witnessed  some  curious  inter- 
lacings  of  character.  The  sober  and  the  frolicsome, 
the  comic  and  the  tragic,  the  sacred  and  the  profane, 
had  strangely  mingled  and  manoeuvred  here  at  times. 
Many  a  day  had  seen  Addison,  as  a  school-boy,  passing 
to  and  fro  through  the  deanery  garden.  There  the 
wit  and  imagination  of  Farquhar  were  stimulated  to 
immortalize  the  dishonours  of  his  licentious  age ;  there 
the  Bishop's  Registrar,  Gilbert  YValinsley,  saved  his 
own  name  from  oblivion  by  acting*  the  patron  to  David 
Garrick.  At  the  end  of  the  walk  the  eye  could  wander 
over  the  parapet  of  the  close,  and  command  the  beau- 
tiful valley  where  Samuel  Johnson  used  to  wander  in 
early  life.  The  mysteries  of  nightfall  were  beginning 
to  shroud  it  here  and  there  ;  but  Stow  Hill  was  standing 
in  clear  outline  against  the  sky,  in  affectionate  watch- 
fulness over  its  still  waters.  There,  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill,  was  the  old  tower  of  St.  Chad's  church,  where, 
tradition  savs,  "  Ovin  heard  the  angels  sing"  at  St. 
Chad's  obit."  We  lingered  long,  watching  the 
brightening  reflections  of  the  stars  in  Stow-Pool,  and 
musing  on  the  possibility  of  angels  taking  a  part  in  the 
anthem  at  a  saint's  burial,  until  our  ear  caught  a  sweet, 
thrilling  harmony  coming  up  seemingly  from  the 
recesses  of  the  cathedral  crypt,  and  floating  tremu- 
lously along  the  dark  aisles  above.      \Vas  it  the  music 

12 


178  HYMN-WKITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

of  angels  ?  It  might  rather  be  the  voice  of  choristers 
tuning  themselves  for  the  morrow's  psalmody.  But  it 
touched  one's  very  soul,  and  called  up  the  voice  of  a 
psalm  from  within.  Just  then  the  rising  moon  threw 
up  her  light  from  the  horizon,  and  gave  the  last 
inspiring  touch.  The  spirit  of  Addison  himself  might 
be  there  joining  us  in  his  own  inimitable  psalm — 

The  spacious  firmament  on  high, 

With  all  the  blue  ethereal  sky, 

And  spangled  heavens,  a  shining  frame, 

Their  great  original  proclaim. 

The  unwearied  sun,  from  day  to  day, 

Does  his  Creator's  power  display, 

And  publishes  to  every  land 

The  work  of  an  almighty  hand. 

Soon  as  the  evening  shades  prevail, 
The  moon  takes  up  the  wondrous  tale, 
And  nightly  to  the  listening  earth 
Repeats  the  story  of  her  birth  ; 
Whilst  all  the  stars  that  round  her  burn, 
And  all  the  planets  in  their  turn, 
Confirm  the  tidings  as  they  roll, 
And  spread  the  truth  from  pole  to  pole. 

What,  though  in  solemn  silence  all 
Move  round  the  dark  terrestrial  ball ; 
What,  though  no  real  voice  or  sound 
Amidst  their  radiant  orbs  be  found; 
In  reason's  ear  they  all  rejoice, 
And  utter  forth  a  glorious  voice, 
For  ever  singing  as  they  shine, 
"  The  hand  that  made  us  is  divine." 

The  author  of  this  noble  psalm  in  EDglish  metre 
may  have  been  thrown  back  in  imagination  to  quiet 
evenings  under  the  elms  in  Lichfield  Close,  when, 
amidst  the  excitements  of  literary  life,  he  issued  his 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METKE.  1  <  \) 

Saturday  invitation  to  the  pleasures  of  psalmody,  and 
prepared  his  readers  for  them  by  saying,  "  Faith  and 
devotion  naturally  grow  in  the  mind  of  every  reason- 
able man  who  sees   the  impressions  of  Divine  power 
and  wisdom  in  every  object  on  which  he  casts  his  eye. 
The  Supreme  Being  has  made  the  best  arguments  for  his 
own  existence,  in  the  formation  of  the  heaven  and  the 
earth  ;  and  these  are  arguments  which  a  man  of  sense 
cannot  forbear  attending  to,  who  is  out  of  the  noise 
and  hurry  of  human  affairs."     Peace   to  the   memory 
of  the  man  who  thus  taught  his  generation  to  enjoy 
the  inspired  utterance  that  "  the  heavens  declare  the 
glory    of  God,  and  the  firmament  showeth  his  handy 
work."      Nor  can  any  one   despise  the  reflections  of 
Divine  power  and  goodness  which  come  upon  us  from 
suns,  and  moons,  and  stars,  without  being  in  danger  of 
debasing  his  own  soul  •  at  the  same  time,  to  confine 
ourselves  to  the  lights  of  the  visible  creation,  or  even 
to  the  lessons  of  a  mere  general  providence,  is  to  rest 
in  a  religion  of  sentiment  rather  than  of  life,  and  to  be 
in  danger  of  looking  for  satisfaction  in  a  partial  and 
comparatively  powerless  devotion.     No,  God  must  be 
sought  chiefly  in  his  revealed  word,  and  should  be  con- 
templated in  the  work  of  his   Holy  Spirit,  and  in  the 
person  and  kingdom  of  his  manifested  Son.     How  the 
devotion   of  the  inspired  psalmist  kindles  and  glows 
when   he  looks  at  God  in  the  face  of  the   reigning 
Messiah  !         Can    anything    be    more    sublime    than 
Psalm  lxxii.  ?     Could  there  be  a  more  perfect  harmony 
of  the  Divine  and  the  human  in  prayer  and  praise  ? 
And  who  does  not  thank  God  for  the  man  who  threw 
that  song  into  English  metre,  so  happily  as  to  give  it 
all  the  charms  of  new  music,  so  effectually  as  to  natu- 
ralize it  to  the  purest  taste  and  to  the  warmest  hearts 


180  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR   HYMNS. 

of  Christian  England?     James  Montgomery  did  this 
when  he  taught  us  to  sing — 

Hail  to  the  Lord's  anointed, 

Great  David's  greater  Son  ! 
Hail,  in  the  time  appointed, 

His  reign  on  earth  begun ! 
He  comes  to  break  oppression, 

To  let  the  captive  free, 
To  take  away  transgression, 

And  rule  in  equity. 

He  comes  with  succour  speedy, 

To  those  who  suffer  wrong  ; 
To  help  the  poor  and  needy, 

And  bid  the  weak  be  strong  ; 
To  give  them  songs  for  sighing, 

Their  darkness  turn  to  light, 
"Whose  souls,  condemn'd  and  dying, 

Were  precious  in  his  sight. 

He  shall  come  down  like  showers 

Upon  the  fruitful  earth, 
And  love,  joy,  hope,  like  flowers, 

Spring  in  his  path  to  birth  ; 
Before  Him  on  the  mountains, 

Shall  peace,  the  herald,  go; 
And  righteousness,  in  fountains, 

From  hill  to  valley  flow. 

Arabia's  desert  ranger 

To  Him  shall  bow  the  knee  ; 
The  Ethiopian  stranger 

His  glory  come  to  see ; 
With  offerings  of  devotion 

Ships  from  the  isles  shall  meet, 
To  pour  the  wealth  of  ocean 

In  tribute  at  his  feet. 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE.  181 

Kings  shall  fall  down  before  Him, 

And  gold  and  incense  bring ; 
All  nations  shall  adore  Him, 

His  praise  all  people  sing  ; 
For  He  shall  have  dominion 

O'er  river,  sea,  and  shore  ; 
Far  as  the  eagle's  pinion 

Or  dove's  light  wing  can  soar. 

For  Him  shall  prayer  unceasing, 

And  daily  vows  ascend, 
His  kingdom  still  increasing 

A  kingdom  without  end. 
The  mountain  dews  shall  nourish 

A  seed  in  weakness  sown, 
Whose  fruit  shall  spread  and  nourish, 

And  shake  like  Lebanon. 

O'er  every  foe  victorious, 

He  on  his  throne  shall  rest, 
From  age  to  age  more  glorious, 

All  blessing,  and  all  blest : 
The  tide  of  time  shall  never 

His  covenant  remove  ; 
His  name  shall  stand  for  ever, 

That  name  to  us  is  Love. 

But  while  a  versifier  here  and  there  has  given  a 
psalm  in  rhyme  without  entirely  degrading  the  hol}r 
strain  of  the  inspired  Psalmist ;  it  may  be  said  again, 
better,  on  the  whole,  to  let  the  grand  old  English 
Psalter  alone.  Chant  its  measures,  sing  them,  or 
murmur  them  in  holy  under-tones,  but  let  nobody  try 
to  make  them  all  into  a  book  of  rhymes.  Were  we  to 
judge  from  what  Milton  did  in  this  line,  even  he  would 
fail  in  the  larger  attempt ;  and  after  his  failure  we 
might  expect  as  little  as  we  get  from  Watts  and 
Charles  Wesley,  and  their  modern  followers  in  whole- 
sale psalmody.     Watts  wrote   too  fast ;   Wesley  was 


182  HYMN-WRXTERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

faster  still.  One  of  Wesley's  zealous  advocates  amuses 
and  instructs  us  by  saying,  "  You  may  take  all  the 
poetry  of  Watts,  and  Cowper,  and  Pope,  and  the 
hymnic  compositions  of  many  others,  who  have  a 
well-earned  name  as  sacred  poets,  and  they  are  all 
outnumbered  by  the  single  prolific  pen  of  the  poet  of 
Methodism."  The  standard  is  quantity  then  !  How 
much  did  he  write  ?  ''Seven  thousand  c  psalms  and 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs' "  !  Seven  thousand  from 
one  pen  !  and  that  the  pen  of  a  zealous,  busy  evan- 
gelist and  pastor  !  These  thousands  could  not  all  be 
gems ;  nor,  indeed,  could  multitudes  of  them  have 
any  claim  even  to  the  honour  of  paste  jewellery.  No 
man  can  write  so  many  verses,  and  so  fast,  and  always 
write  well.  Not  that  the  voluminous  pages  of  Wesley 
and  Watts  are  left  without  adornment  of  rich  gems 
set  here  and  there.  Amidst  many  dreary  pages  Watts 
sometimes  clothes  a  psalm  in  simple  and  unblemished 
beauty.  Whose  gratitude,  and  trust,  and  hope,  have 
not  kindled  into  quiet  fervour  while  singing  thus  ? 


My  Shepherd  will  supply  my  need, 

Jehovah  is  his  name ; 
In  pastures  fresh  He  makes  me  feed, 

Beside  the  living  stream. 

He  brings  my  wandering  spirit  back, 

"When  I  forsake  his  ways  ; 
And  leads  me  for  his  mercy's  sake, 

In  paths  of  truth  and  grace. 

When  I  walk  through  the  shades  of  death, 

Thy  presence  is  my  stay  ; 
A  word  of  thy  supporting  breath 

Drives  all  my  fears  away. 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE.  183 

Thy  hand  in  spite  of  all  my  foes, 

Doth  still  my  table  spread  ; 
My  cnp  with  blessings  overflows, 

Thine  oil  anoints  my  head. 

The  sure  provisions  of  my  God 

Attend  me  all  my  days  ; 
0  may  thy  house  be  my  abode, 

And  all  my  work  be  praise ! 

There  would  I  find  a  settled  rest, 

(While  others  go  and  come) 
No  more  a  stranger  or  a  guest, 

But  like  a  child  at  home. 

Charles  Wesley,  however,  is  more  equal  throughout 
than  Watts,  and  holds  a  more  gracefully  sustained 
flight.  Where  the  rapt  psalmist  specially  invites  us 
to  a  celestial  elevation,  Watts  sometimes 

Meets 
A  vast  vacuity :  all  unawares 

Fluttering  his  pennons  vain,  plump  down  he  drops 
Ten  thousand  fathom  deep. 

Wesley's  power  in  metrical  psalmody  is  seen  to  the 
best  advantage  where  most  others  are  least  successful. 
His  version  of  Psalm  cxix.  is  one  of  his  best.  What 
Manton  required  an  awful  folio  to  explain,  Wesley  sets 
forth  with  charming  fulness  and  transparency  in  the 
light  of  twenty-four  pages.  He  shows  himself  at  once 
the  expositor,  the  theologian,  the  Hebrew  chorister, 
and  the  poet ;  nor  is  it  too  much  to  say  that,  in  his 
version  of  this  remarkable  didactic  ode,  he  has  pre- 
sented to  us  "  an  enchanting  and  well-sustained  poem, 
which,  without  any  approach  to  tautology,  exhibits  all 
the  pleasing  variety,  warmth,  and  freshness  of  original 
verse,  while  it  tenaciously  adheres  to  the  spirit  of  the 


184  HYMN-WEITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

inspired  Psalmist/7  The  world  had  well-nigh,  lost 
this  pleasant  morsel ;  the  manuscript  turned  up  to  a 
friendly  eye  where  it  was  not  looked  for.  There  are 
mysteries  in  the  world  of  literature,  and  especially 
about  the  ins  and  outs  of  the  literary  market,  which, 
in  a  way,  answer  to  some  of  the  curious  secrets  of 
nature.  There  have  been  precious  germs  of  vegetable 
life  unseen  and  unknown  for  years,  treasured  up  far 
below  the  surface,  until  some  modern  road-makers 
effect  their  cutting  through  the  hill- side,  and  then,  at 
the  very  next  spring  season,  up  start,  on  the  bare 
slope,  many  a  plant  and  flower  that  had  hitherto  been 
thought  foreign  to  the  neighbourhood;  or,  as  the 
warm  summer  sun  opens  on  some  sea-side  garden  of 
our  inland  coast,  a  tiny  seed-vessel,  borne  on  the 
ocean  current  or  on  the  breeze,  or  by  a  winged  carrier 
from  across  the  water,  opens  its  beauty  on  this 
strange  soil,  and  excites  a  wonder  how  it  should  have 
come  here.  So,  now  and  then,  a  freakish  inroad  on 
the  deep  accumulations  of  some  venerable  library 
makes  way  for  some  hidden  treasures  to  show  them- 
selves; or,  perhaps,  a  curious  current  of  interest,  or 
even  a  questionable  side-wind,  carries  out  a  manu- 
script or  two  from  their  obscurity,  and  leaves  them 
open  to  the  daylight  on  some  unpretending  book- 
stall. How  the  wind  blew,  or  from  what  point  the 
stream  came  which  dislodged  Charles  Wesley's  manu- 
script from  its  college  confinement,  must  still  be  a 
mystery.  It  is  clear,  however,  that,  with  some  of  its 
library  honours  yet  upon  it,  it  was  found  by  a 
book-hunter  as  he  was  scouring  the  book-market, 
possibly  in  one  of  the  many  indefinable  stages  of 
Bibliomania.  Had  there  been  nothing  more  in  the 
volume   than   Wesley's  rendering  of   Psalm  cxix.,   it 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE.  185 

would  have  been  worth  finding.  The  seventh  and 
eighth  parts,  answering  to  Zain  and  Cheth  in  the 
original,  are  fair  specimens  of  the  poet's  embodiment 
of  the  Psalmist's  spirit,  in  a  kind  of  harmonized  para- 
phrase and  translation : — 

Thee,  0  Lord,  the  good,  the  just, 

True  and  faithful  I  receive ; 
Keep  thy  word,  in  which  I  trust, 

Thou  who  gav'st  me  to  believe  : 
Hoping  for  thy  promised  aid, 

Comfort  in  my  grief  I  find ; 
This  my  fainting  mind  hath  stay'd, 

Still  it  stays  my  fainting  mind. 

Me  the  proud  have  greatly  scorn'd  ; 

Yet  I  still  unshaken  stood, 
Never  from  thy  statutes  turn'd, 

Never  left  the  narrow  road. 
On  thine  ancient  works  I  thought, 

Look'd  again  the  same  to  see  ; 
Thou  of  old  hast  wonders  wrought, 

Wonders  Thou  shalt  work  for  me. 


Fearless  of  the  scorner's  power, 

Fearful  for  their  souls  I  was, 
Saw  hell  open  to  devour 

All  who  break  thy  righteous  laws 
Lord,  thy  laws  my  songs  have  been 

In  my  pilgrimage  below, 
Kept  by  them  from  woe  and  sin, 

In  a  world  of  sin  and  woe. 


Thee  I  have  remembered,  Lord, 
Musing  in  the  silent  night 

Loved  thy  name,  and  kept  thy  word 
Pure  and  permanent  delight 


186  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

I  did  in  thy  precepts  prove : 
Heaven  on  earth  obedience  is, 

Perfect  liberty  and  love, 

Perfect  power  and  perfect  peace. 

Thou  my  portion  art,  0  Lord  ! 

Long  resolved  through  Thee  I  am 
To  fulfil  thine  every  word, 

Give  me  but  the  help  I  claim : 
All  my  heart  hath  sought  thy  face, 

Still  thy  favour  I  implore  ; 
Grant  me  now  the  promised  grace, 

Bid  me  go  and  sin  no  more. 

All  my  sins  I  call'd  to  mind, 

Own'd,  and  left  them  all  for  God; 
Labour'd  the  right  way  to  find, 

Thee  with  earnest  zeal  pursued  ; 
Turn'd  my  feet  without  delay ; 

Long'd  thine  utmost  will  to  prove, 
Eager  all  thy  law  to  obey, 

Restless  to  retrieve  thy  love. 

Spoil'd  and  hated  for  thy  sake, 

Thee  I  never  would  forego, 
"Would  not  from  thy  law  turn  back ; 

Oh  my  Life,  my  Heaven  below, 
Thee  I  all  day  long  will  praise, 

Thee  I  will  at  midnight  sing  ! 
True  and  righteous  are  thy  ways, 

Glory  to  my  God  and  King  ! 

Join'd  to  all  who  fear  the  Lord, 

Them  my  dearest  friends  I  own ; 
Them  that  keep  thy  holy  word, 

Saved  by  grace  through  faith  alone. 
Earth  is  full  of  love  divine  ; 

Love  divine  for  all  is  free ; 
Teach  me,  then,  the  law  benign ; 

Guide,  and  save,  and  perfect  me. 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE.  187 

Psalm  xc.  comes  to  us  in  a  metrical  English 
version  of  beautiful  simplicity  from  one  who  has 
been  called  "the  Shakespeare  of  Scotland."  It  is 
said  of  Robert  Burns  that  he  never  failed  in  any  poetic 
attempt,  except  in  epigrams.  He  certainly  did  not 
fail  in  this  essay  at  turning  an  old  eastern  ode  into 
charming  English  verse.  The  man  had  indeed  a  ver- 
satile genius.  He  could  sing  in  Scotch  or  English,  or 
in  a  musical  mixture  of  the  two.  He  could  be  comic 
or  serious,  tender  or  lofty,  each  and  all  by  turns.  He 
engages  our  hearts  in  a  "  Cotter's  "  family  devotion, 
laughs  and  jokes  with  "  auld  Nickie-ben,"  dances  and 
rides  with  witches,  mimics  the  voice  of  Bruce  with 
effect,  becomes  an  impersonation  of  passionate  love 
for  a  "  bonnie  lassie,"  and  melts  into  tenderness  over 
a  crushed  daisy  or  a  broken  mouse's  nest.  With  the 
prayerful  he  prays,  with  the  toper  he  rants,  and  with 
the  truly  "  merry"  he  can  "  sing  psalms."  Gifts  that 
were  distributed  among  many  other  penmen  were 
happily  combined  in  him.  Would  that  we  could 
always  see  Burns  in  the  purer  and  generous  light  of 
his  earlier  days,  in  his  youthful  manliness  and  integrity. 
Would  that  we  could  always  think  of  him  as  swayed 
by  the  better  feelings  of  even  his  later  life ;  when,  for 
instance,  those  feelings  prompted  him  to  say  in  a  letter 
to  a  lady,  whose  manners  and  principles  reproved  him 
at  times,  "  I  have  some  favourite  flowers  in  spring, 
among  which  are  the  mountain  daisy,  the  harebell,  the 
foxglove,  the  wild-brier  rose,  the  budding  birch,  and 
the  hoary  hawthorn,  that  I  view  and  hang  over  with 
particular  delight.  I  never  hear  the  loud  solitary 
whistle  of  the  curlew  on  a  summer  noon,  or  the  wild 
mixing  cadence  of  a  troop  of  grey  plovers  in  an 
autumnal  morning,  without  feeling  an  elevation  of  soul, 


188  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

like  the  enthusiasm  of  devotion  or  poetry.  Tell  me, 
my  dear  friend,  to  what  can  this  be  owing  ?  Are  we 
a  piece  of  machinery,  which,  like  the  ^Eolian  harp, 
passive,  takes  the  impression  of  the  passing  accident  ? 
Or  do  these  workings  argue  something  within  us  above 
the  trodden  clod?  I  own  myself  partial  to  such  proofs 
of  those  awful  and  important  realities — a  Grod  that 
made  all  things — man's  immaterial  and  immortal 
nature,  and  a  world  of  weal  or  woe  beyond  death  and 
the  grave."  It  would  be  pleasant  indeed  ever  to  have 
the  poet  before  us,  warm  with  the  feeling  which  moved 
him  when  he  wrote — 

But  deep  this  truth  impressed  my  mind, 

Through  all  his  works  abroad, 
The  heart  benevolent  and  kind 

The  most  resembles  God. 

Or  kindling  into  the  still  more  devout  spirit    of  his 
little  gem  of  a  psalm — 

O  Thou,  the  first,  the  greatest  friend 

Of  all  the  human  race  ! 
Whose  strong  right  hand  has  ever  been 

Their  stay  and  dwelling-place. 

Before  the  mountains  heaved  their  heads 

Beneath  thy  forming  hand  ; 
Before  this  ponderous  globe  itself 

Arose  at  thy  command. 

That  power  which  raised  and  still  upholds 

This  universal  frame ; 
From  countless  unbeginning  time 

Was  ever  still  the  same. 

Those  mighty  periods  of  years, 

Which  seem  to  us  so  vast, 
Appear  no  more  before  thy  sight 

Than  yesterday  that's  past. 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE.  189 

Thou  giv'st  thy  word,  thy  creature  man, 

Is  to  existence  brought ; 
Again  Thou  sayest,  "  Ye  sons  of  men, 

Keturn  ye  into  nought." 

Thou  layest  them  with  all  their  cares, 

In  everlasting  sleep ; 
As  with  a  flood  Thou  tak'st  them  off 

With  overwhelming  sweep. 

They  flourish  like  the  morning  flower, 

In  beauty's  pride  arrayed ; 
But  long  ere  night,  cut  down  it  lies, 

All  withered  and  decayed. 

But  shadows  sometimes  gather  around  the  memory 
of  this  departed  genius ;  shadows  that  even  to  this 
day  dim  the  moral  life  of  scenes  in  which  that  memory 
is  cherished.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  doubt  of  any  human 
life,  whether  the  good  it  bequeathed  is  equal  to  the 
mischief  it  entails.  But  Burns  is  gone,  as  all  the  sons 
of  genius  must  go,  hallowed  or  unhallowed ;  gone  with 
the  "  flood/''  as  he  himself  psalmed  it,  or  as  Watts, 
with  more  sublimity,  renders  the  same  truth — 

The  busy  tribes  of  flesh  and  blood, 

With  all  their  lives  and  cares, 
Are  carried  downwards  by  thy  flood, 

And  lost  in  following  years. 

Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 

Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 

Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

Like  flow'ry  fields  the  nations  stand, 
Pleas'd  with  the  morning  light ; 

The  flow'rs  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  with'ring  ere  'tis  night 


190  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  fragment  of  this  psalm  which  Burns  has  left 
is  precious,  were  it  only  to  show  how  a  master  of  his 
own  pure  native  English  can  succeed  in  imitating 
the  crystal-like  beauty  and  simple  grandeur  of  an 
ancient  Hebrew  hymn,  even  though  his  own  heart 
never  realized  full  sympathy  with  the  higher  spiritual 
feeling  of  the  original  Psalmist.  "  The  Spirit  of  the 
Psalms"  has  been  more  happily  caught  in  later  times 
by  one  whose  own  spirit  had  learnt  deeply  to  converse 
with  the  author  of  holiest  inspiration.  Quietly  toiling 
in  a  sea-side  parish  of  South  Devon,  about  thirty 
years  ago,  a  devout  and  gentle-minded  parson  con- 
secrated his  poetic  genius  to  the  work  of  providing 
"  an  appropriate  Manual  of  Psalmody"  for  the  use  of 
the  Church.  With  characteristic  modesty  he  tells  us 
that  he  "  simply  endeavoured  to  give  the  spirit  of 
each  psalm  in  such  a  compass  as  the  public  taste  would 
tolerate,  and  to  furnish,  sometimes,  when  the  length 
of  the  original  would  admit  of  it,  an  almost  literal 
translation ;  sometimes,  a  kind  of  spiritual  paraphrase  ; 
and  at  others,  even  a  brief  commentary  on  the  whole 
psalm."  He  published  his  collection  under  the  tide 
of  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Psalms."  What  he  wrote  he 
taught  his  flock  to  sing,  and  beautiful  was  it  to  find 
Henry  F.  Lyte  leading  the  psalmody  of  his  congre- 
gation by  singing  with  them  his  own  metrical  versions. 
One  Sunday  morning  in  the  summer  of  1838,  his 
church  was  crowded  with  seafaring  men  and  their 
families.  He  took  for  his  text  the  Saviour's  words 
to  the  boatmen  of  Galilee,  "  Cast  the  net  on  the 
right  side  of  the  ship,  and  ye  shall  find ";  and  he 
began  by  saying,  "  The  affecting  and  interesting  sight 
which  presents  itself  here  to-day,  induces  me  to  select 
a  subject  directly  suitable  to  our  dear  fishermen,  whom 


PSALMS    IN    ENGLISH    METRE.  191 

I  so  rejoice  to  meet  in  the  house  of  God  this  morning. 
There  is  surely  not  one  person  present  who  does  not 
partake  of  the  emotions  which  I  feel  in  standing  up 
among-  such  a  body  of  my  parishioners,  and  who  will 
not  excuse  me  for  addressing  myself  on  this  occasion 
almost  exclusively  to  them."  Then  followed  a  faithful 
and  touching  appeal  to  those  who  saw  God's  "  wonders 
in  the  deep/'  and  then  this  beautiful  and  appropriate 
version  of  Psalm  xlvi. 

The  Lord  is  our  refuge,  the  Lord  is  our  guide ; 

"We  smile  upon  danger  with  Him  at  our  side  : 

The  billows  may  blacken,  the  tempest  increase, 

Though  earth  may  be  shaken,  his  saints  shall  have  peace. 

A  voice  still  and  small  by  his  people  is  heard, 

A  whisper  of  peace  from  his  life-giving  word. 

A  stream  in  the  desert,  a  river  of  love, 

Flows  down  to  their  hearts  from  the  fountain  above. 

Be  near  us,  Bedeemer,  to  shield  us  from  ill ; 
Speak  Thou  but  the  word,  and  the  tempest  is  still. 
Thy  presence  to  cheer  us,  thy  arm  to  defend, 
A  worm  grows  almighty,  with  Thee  for  a  friend  ! 

The  Lord  is  our  helper ;  ye  scorners,  be  awed  ! 
Te  earthlings,  be  still,  and  acknowledge  your  God. 
The  proud  He  will  humble,  the  lowly  defend ; 
0  happy  the  people  with  God  for  a  friend  ! 


©%pitr  XL 

HYMN- MENDERS. 

For  the  ear  trieth  words  as  the  mouth  tasteth  meat." 

0  man  was  ever  more  apt  at  writing  an  effective 
preface  than  John  Wesley.  Never  did  author 
more  decidedly  assert  his  own  claims  and 
powers,  or  more  strikingly  advertise  the  virtue  of  his 
own  pages.  Read  the  notice  on  the  title-page  of  his 
remarkable  "  Pocket  Dictionary,"  "  N.B.  The  author 
assures  you,  he  thinks  this  is  the  best  English 
Dictionary  in  the  world  V3  And  then,  who  does  not 
enjoy  the  satirical  humour  and  playful  earnestness  of 
his  address  to  the  reader,  "  as  incredible  as  it  may 
appear,  I  must  avow,  that  this  dictionary  is  not  pub- 
lished to  get  money,  but  to  assist  persons  of  common 
sense  and  no  learning,  to  understand  the  best  English 
authors  ;  and  that  with  as  little  expense  of  time  and 

money  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  will  allow I 

should  add  no  more,  but  that  I  have  so  often  observed, 
the  only  way,  according  to  the  modern  taste,  for 
any  author  to  procure  commendation  to  his  book,  is, 
vehemently  to  commend  it  himself.  For  want  of  this 
deference  to  the  public,  several  excellent  tracts  lately 


HYMN-MENDERS.  193 

printed,  but   left   to    commend    themselves   by   their 
intrinsic   worth,    are    utterly   unknown    or   forgotten. 
Whereas  if  a  writer  of  tolerable  sense  will  but  bestow 
a  few  violent  encomiums  on  his  own  work,  especially 
if  they  are  skilfully  ranged  on  the  title-page,  it  will 
pass  through  six  editions  in  a  trice ;  the  world  being 
too   complaisant   to   give   a   gentleman   the   lie,    and 
taking  it  for  granted   he  understands  his   own  per- 
formance   best.      In    compliance   therefore   with   the 
taste  of  the  age,  I  add,  that  this  little  dictionary  is  not 
only  the   shortest  and  the  cheapest,  but  likewise  by 
many  degrees  the  most  correct  which  is  extant  at  this 
day.     Many  are  the  mistakes  in  all  the  other  English 
dictionaries  which   I  have  yet  seen.     Whereas  I  can 
truly  say,  I  know  of  none  in  this ;  and  I  conceive  the 
reader  will  believe  me ;  for  if  I  had,  I  should  not  have 
left   it   there.      Use   then   this   help    till  you   find   a 
better."      This  is   all   anonymous,    and   some   might 
doubt  its  authorship,  but  for  its  unmistakable   claim 
to  the  same  parentage  with  the  preface  to   C(  A   Col- 
lection of  Hymns  for  the  Use  of   the  People   called 
Methodists,  by  John  Wesley,  M.A."     Who  can  doubt 
the  identity  of  the  self-reliance,  firm  decision,  strong 
sense,  straightforward  sincerity,  and  transparent  purity 
of  purpose  ?     "  The  hymn-book  you  have  now  before 
you/'  says  the  writer,  "is  not  so  large  as  to  be  either 
cumbersome  or  expensive ;  and  it  is  large  enough  to 
contain  such  a  variety  of  hymns,  as  will  not  soon  be 
worn  threadbare.  .  .  .  As  but  a   small  part  of  these 
hymns  is   of  my  own   composing,   I   do  not  think  it 
inconsistent  with  modesty  to  declare  that  I  am  per- 
suaded   no    such   hymn-book   as    this   has  yet   been 
published  in  the  English  language.      In  what  other 
publication  of  the  kind  have  you  so  distinct  and  full 

13 


194  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

an  account  of  scriptural  Christianity?  Such  a  de- 
claration of  the  heights  and  depths  of  religion,  specu- 
lative and  practical  ?  So  strong  cautions  against  the 
most  plausible  errors ;  particularly  those  that  are  now 
most  prevalent  ?  and  so  clear  directions  for  making 
your  calling  and  election  sure ;  for  perfecting  holiness 
in  the  fear  of  God  ?  May  I  be  permitted  to  add  a 
few  words  with  regard  to  the  poetry  ?  Then  I  will 
speak  to  those  who  are  judges  thereof  with  all  freedom 
and  unreserve.  To  these  I  may  say  without  offence, 
1.  In  these  hymns  there  is  no  doggerel;  no  blotches ; 
nothing  put  in  to  patch  up  the  rhyme;  no  feeble 
expletives.  2.  Here  is  nothing  turgid  or  bombast,  on 
the  one  hand,  or  low  and  creeping  on  the  other. 
3.  Here  are  no  cant  expressions ;  no  words  without 
meaning.  Those  who  impute  this  to  us  know  not 
what  they  say.  We  talk  common  sense,  both  in  prose 
and  verse,  and  use  no  word  but  in  a  fixed  and  deter- 
minate sense.  4.  Here  are,  allow  me  to  say,  both  the 
purity,  the  strength,  and  the  elegance  of  the  English 
language ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  utmost  simplicity 
and  plainness,  suited  to  every  capacity.  Lastly,  I 
desire  men  of  taste  to  judge  (these  are  the  only  com- 
petent judges)  whether  there  be  in  some  of  the 
following  hymns  the  true  spirit  of  poetry,  such  as 
cannot  be  acquired  by  art  and  nature,  but  must  be 
the  gift  of  nature." 

This  is  a  fair  challenge,  and  the  majority  of  those 
to  whom  the  appeal  is  made  seem  to  have  a  growing 
conviction  that  Wesley's  judgment  was  quite  equal  to 
his  poetic  taste  and  power ;  but  now  comes  the 
assertion  of  other  claims.  "  And  here,"  continues  the 
writer,  "I  beg  leave  to  mention  a  thought  which  has 
been  long  upon  my  mind,  and  which  I  should  long 


HYMN-MENDERS.  195 

ago  have  inserted  in  the  public  papers,  had  I  not  been 
unwilling  to  stir  up  a  nest  of  hornets.     Many  gentle- 
men have  done  my  brother  and  me  (though  without 
naming  us)  the  honour  to  reprint  many  of  our  hymns. 
Now,  they  are  perfectly  welcome   so  to  do,   provided 
they  print  them  just  as  they  are ;  but  I  desire  they 
would  not  attempt  to  mend  them,  for  they  really  are 
not  able.     None  of  them  is   able  to  mend  either  the 
sense  or  the  verse.     Therefore,  I  must  beg  of  them 
one  of  these  two  favours — either  to  let  them  stand 
just  as  they  are,  to  take  them  better  for  worse ;  or  to 
add  the  true  reading  in  the  margin,  or  at  the  bottom  of 
the  page,  that  we  may  no  longer  be  accountable  either 
for  the  nonsense  or  for  the  doggerel  of  other  men." 
Who   does    not    recognize    here    the    voice    of    the 
humorous,  trenchant,   and  self-possessed  compiler  of 
' c  the  best  English  Dictionary  in  the  world  "  ?     John 
Wesley  feels  himself  equal  alike  to  lexicography  and 
hymnic  composition.     He  might  be   called  a  prophet 
too.     At  all  events,  there  is  something  in  his  preface 
like  a  forecasting  of  times,  when  the  rage  for  com- 
piling hymn-books  would  lead  to  all  sorts  of  hymn- 
mending.     Did  he  foresee  this  age  of  literary  sacri- 
lege ?     He   seemed  to  deprecate  the  early  attempts  to 
improve  his  hymns,  as  foretokens  of  the  days  which 
have  fallen  upon  us ;  days  of  adaptation  hymn-books, 
when    churches  high   and   low,    congregations   great 
and  small,  communions  close  and   open,  connections 
loose  and  tight,  schools  both  wholesome  and  ragged, 
associations  young  and  old,  all  sects,   all  parties,  all 
shades  and  standards  of  doctrine  and  feeling,  all  and 
each  must  have  a  hymn-book  •  ' '  yea,  every  one  hath  a 
psalm,  hath  a  doctrine,  hath  a  tongue,  hath  a  reve- 
lation, hath  an  interpretation  "  ?     Poor  Wesley  !    the 


196  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

reckless  menders  began  while  he  was  yet  alive,  and 
surely  his  critical  sense  must  have  been  painfully 
touched  when,  among  many  other  violations,  the  first 
verse  of  his  brother's  jubilant  hymn  on  the  name  of 
Jesus  was  weakened  into  compliance  with  another 
creed.     The  original  hymn  sings — 

Let  earth  and  heaven  agree, 

Angels  and  men  be  join'd, 
To  celebrate  with  me 

The  Saviour  of  mankind  ; 
To  adore  the  all-atoning  Lamb, 
And  bless  the  sound  of  Jesu's  name. 

But,  instead  of  this  closing  couplet,  the  menders  would 
make  us  sing — ■ 

To  fall  before  the  atoning  Lamb, 
And  praise  the  blessed  Jesu's  name. 

In  another  noble  hymn  "  for  the  Jews,"  we  are  taught 
to  pray — 

Come,  then,  Thou  great  Deliverer,  come  ! 

The  veil  from  Jacob's  heart  remove ; 
Receive  thy  ancient  people  home  ! 

That,  qnicken'd  by  thy  dying  love, 
The  world  may  their  reception  find 
Life  from  the  dead  for  all  mankind. 

This,  however,  is  too  large  a  prayer  for  some,  and,  to 
suit  their  narrower  views,  the  last  lines  are  softened 
down  to  this — 

That,  quickened  by  thy  dying  love, 
The  world  may  their  reception  view, 
And  shout  to  God  the  glory  due ! 

Of  all  that  Charles  Wesley  ever  wrote,  nothing  ought 
to  have  been  held  more  sacred  from  the  touch  of  mere 
senseless  mutilators  than  the  hymn  which  has  hushed 


HYMN-MENDERS.  197 

and  cheered  so  many  souls  amidst  the  tempests  of  this 
mortal  life.     How  many  voices  from  both  worlds  pro- 
nounce it  sacrilege  to  alter  that  hymn !     One  heart, 
at  least,  still  beats  by  whom  it  is  held  as  an  invaluable 
treasure,  nor  is  it  for  ever  enshrined   in    that   heart 
without  good  reason.     About  twenty  years  ago,  on  a 
winter's  night,  a  heavy  gale  set  in  upon  the  precipi- 
tous rock-bound  coast  of  one  of  our  western  counties. 
A  tight,   brave  little   coasting  vessel  struggled  hard 
and  long  to  reach  some  shelter  in  the  Bristol  Channel, 
but  the  struggle  was  vain ;  one  dark  fearful  headland 
could  not  be  weathered;  the  bark  must  go  on   shore, 
and  what  a  shore  it  was  the  fated  men  well  knew. 
Then  came  the  last  pull  for  life  ;  the  boat  was  swung 
off  and  manned  ;  captain  and  crew  united  in  one  more 
brave  effort,  but  their  toiling  at  the  oar  was  soon  over, 
their  boat  was  swamped.     They  seemed  to  have  sunk 
together,   <(  and  in  death  they  were  not  divided,"  for, 
when  the  morning  dawned,  they  were  found  lying  all 
but  side  by  side  under  the   shelter  of  a  weedy  rock. 
They  might  have  been  saved  had  they  stayed  in  the 
ship,  for  she  had  been  borne  in  upon  a  heavy  sea  close 
under  the    cliff,   where  she   was  jammed   immovably 
between  two  rocks,  and  in  the  morning  the  ebb  tide 
left  her  lying  high  and  dry.     There  was  no   sign  of 
life  on  deck,  and  below  scarcely  anything  told  of  her 
late  distress.     One  token  of  peace  and  salvation  there 
was ;  it  was  the  captain's  hymn-book  still  lying  on  the 
locker,  closed  upon  the   pencil  with  which  the  good 
man  had  marked  the  last  passages  upon  which  his  eye 
had  rested  before  he  left  the  ship  to  meet  his  fate.     A 
leaf  of  the  page  was  turned  down,  and   there  were 
pencil   lines    in   the    margin   at    several   passages    of 
Charles  Wesley's  precious  hymn — 


198  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Jesu,  lover  of  my  soul, 

Let  me  to  thy  bosom  fly ; 
While  the  nearer  waters  roll, 

While  the  tempest  still  is  high  ! 
Hide  me,  O  my  Saviour,  hide, 

Till  the  storm  of  life  is  past, 
Safe  into  the  haven  guide  ; 

Oh  receive  my  soul  at  last ! 

Other  refuge  have  I  none ; 

Hangs  my  helpless  soul  on  Thee ; 
Leave,  ah !  leave  me  not  alone, 

Still  support  and  comfort  me  : 
All  my  trust  on  Thee  is  stay'd 

All  my  help  from  Thee  I  bring : 
Cover  my  defenceless  head 

"With  the  shadow  of  thy  wing  ! 

Wilt  Thou  not  regard  my  call  ? 

Wilt  Thou  not  accept  my  prayer  ? 
Lo  !  I  sink,  I  faint,  I  fall ! 

Lo  !  on  Thee  I  cast  my  care  ! 
Beach  me  out  thy  gracious  hand  ! 

While  I  of  thy  strength  receive, 
Hoping  against  hope  I  stand, 

Dying,  and  behold  I  live ! 

Thou,  0  Christ,  art  all  I  want ; 

More  than  all  in  Thee  I  find : 
Raise  the  fallen,  cheer  the  faint, 

Heal  the  sick,  and  lead  the  blind  ! 
Just  and  holy  is  thy  name ; 

I  am  all  unrighteousness  ; 
False  and  full  of  sin  I  am, 

Thou  art  full  of  truth  and  grace  ! 

Plenteous  grace  with  Thee  is  found, 
Grace  to  cover  all  my  sin; 

Let  the  healing  streams  abound; 
Make  and  keep  me  pure  within  ! 


HYMN-MENDERS.  199 

Thou  of  life  the  fountain  art ; 

Freely  let  me  take  of  Thee  ; 
Spring  Thou  up  within  my  heart. 

Eise  to  all  eternity! 

This  was  the  pious  captain's  death  song.  And  who 
that  loves  his  memory,  or  who  that  has  mused  by  his 
green  seaside  grave  where  his  dust  awaits  the  resur- 
rection, or  who  that  has  learnt  to  sing  his  favourite 
verses,  "  with  the  spirit  and  with  the  understanding 
also/'  but  must  be  painfully  touched  at  finding  any 
part  of  the  hymn  mangled  and  flattened,  until  its  spirit 
and  life  are  all  but  gone  ?  Yet  to  such  grief  some  of 
our  hymn-manglers  would  subject  the  lovers  of  original 
poetic  beauty  and  power.  Alas  !  for  the  taste  of  the 
man  who  could  blot  out  Charles  Wesley's  first  four 
exquisite  lines  to  substitute  his  own  thus — 

Jesus,  refuge  of  my  soul, 

Let  me  to  thy  mercy  fly ; 
"While  the  raging  billows  roll, 

While  the  tempest  still  is  high  ! 

But  even  this  is  nothing  compared  with  the  stupid 
impertinence  exemplified  in  some  of  the  little  spiritual 
song  books  which  swarm  from  the  press  for  the  use  of 
various  parties  professing  to  be  the  unsectarian  repre- 
sentatives of  spiritual  revival.  The  two  shores  of  St. 
George's  Channel  seem  to  strive  for  the  mastery  in 
doggerel.  One  manual  gives  a  version  of  Wesley's 
glorious  hymn — 

Oh  love  divine,  how  sweet  thou  art ! 
"When  shall  I  find  my  willing  heart 

All  taken  up  by  Thee  ? 
I  thirst,  I  faint,  I  die  to  prove 
The  greatness  of  redeeming  love, 

The  love  of  Christ  to  me  ! 


200  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  glowing  climax  of  the  last  three  lines,  so  finely 
expressive  of  the  rising  warmth  of  the  soul  in  its  long- 
ing for  Christ,  breaks  down  into  flatness  at  the  touch 
of  the  emendator's  pen — 

Oh  may  I  faint,  and  thirst  to  prove 

The  greatness  of  redeeming  love — 

The  love  of  Christ  to  me ! 

Wesley  keeps  up  the  swell  of  the  soul's  devotion  in  the 
following  verse — 


o 


God  only  knows  the  love  of  God  : 
Oh  that  it  now  were  shed  abroad 

In  this  poor  stony  heart ! 
For  love  I  sigh,  for  love  I  pine : 
This  only  portion,  Lord,  be  mine, 

Be  mine  the  better  part ! 

But  our  modern  editor  thinks  the  "poor  stony  heart" 
too  cold,  and  makes  it  a  "  poor  longing  heart" ;  yet 
falls  immediately  into  doubtfulness  as  to  the  reality  of 
its  present  desires,  and  awkwardly  changing  both  mood 
and  tense,  timidly  promises,  that  if  the  love 

were  shed  abroad 


In  this  poor  longing  heart, 

he  would  sigh  for  it  still,  and  pine  for  it  still — 
For  love  Yd  sigh,  for  love  Yd  pine ! 

The  sublimest  strain  is  not  safe  from  the  damaging 
touch  of  conceited  hymn-menders.  Evidence  of  this 
is  found  in  the  humiliating  fact  that  the  inimitable 
hymn  founded  on  St.  Paul's  saving,  "  of  whom  the 
whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named,"  has  been 
published  in  a  mutilated  form.  The  first  verse  begins — 


HYMN-MENDERS.  201 

Come  let  us  join  our  friends  above 

That  have  obtained  the  prize, 
And  on  the  eagle  wings  of  love 

To  joys  celestial  rise. 

Such  eagle   flights  are   beyond   the   power   of  some 
songsters,  and  they  change  it  by  singing — 

Come  let  us  join  our  friends  above 

Who  have  obtained  the  prize, 
And  happy  in  the  Saviour's  love 

To  joys  celestial  rise. 

Nor  can  that  grand  expression  of  realizing  faith  at  the 
close  of  the  hymn  be  allowed  to  remain,  but  instead  of 

Our  spirits  too  shall  quickly  join, 
Like  theirs  with  glory  crown'd ! 

The  weaker  and  more  wavering  confidence  says — 

The  morning  comes  when  all  shall  join, 
Alike  with  glory  crown'd. 

Another  of  Charles  Wesley's  joyful  outbreaks  of 
Christian  assurance  needs  to  be  checked  and  qualified, 
as  his  censor  thinks.     The  original  hymnist  shouts — 

Away  with  our  sorrow  and  fear, 

We  soon  shall  recover  our  home ; 
The  city  of  saints  shall  appear, 

The  day  of  eternity  come. 
From  earth  we  shall  quickly  remove, 

And  mount  to  our  native  abode  ! 
The  house  of  our  Father  above, 

The  palace  of  angels  and  God. 

The  second  line  is  tamed  down  to 

We  soon  shall  have  enter'd  our  home. 


202  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

And  as  if  the  good  people  were  afraid  to  mount  in 
Wesley's  style,,  they  sing — 

From  earth  we  shall  quickly  remove, 

To  dwell  in  our  native  abode, 
In  mansions  of  glory  above 

Prepared  by  our  Father  and  God. 

And  then  follows  a  jumble  of  stanzas  gathered  from 
several  hymns  of  the  same  metre,  the  heterogeneous 
mixture  being  introduced  by  a  distinctive  Irishism — 

Ah !  who  upon  earth  can  conceive 
The  bliss  that  in  heaven  well  share  ? 

The  writer  of  course  means  the  bliss  that  we  shall 
share ;  but,  like  many  of  his  incurable  countrymen,  he 
must  have  it  will,  expressive,  doubtless,  of  his  fixed 
determination  to  have  his  own  share  of  hymning  in  the 
other  world,  as  well  as  his  own  way  of  hymn-mendmg 
in  this.  But  enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  John 
Wesley  had  reason  for  shrinking  from  being  "  account- 
able for  the  nonsense  or  the  doggerel  of  other  men." 
It  is  not  surprising,  however,  that  the  unskilful  multi- 
tude should  try  their  hands  at  hymn-mending  when 
masters  in  the  art  have  set  such  examples.  Critical 
inquiries  into  the  history  of  hymnology  open  up  some 
curious  scenes.  The  Wesleys  are  seen  mending 
Herbert  and  Watts,  Toplady  and  Madan  are  found 
hashing  and  re-cooking  Charles  Wesley.  Somebody 
else  is  trying  to  improve  Toplady.  Heber  makes  free 
with  Jeremy  Taylor.  Montgomery  is  altering  and 
altered.  Keble,  and  Milman,  and  Alford  are  all 
pinched,  and  twisted,  and  re-dressed  in  turn.  Among 
all  these  menders  John  Wesley  was  perhaps  one  of  the 


HYMN-MENDERS.  203 

best.  He  was  positively  sure  that  nobody  could  mend 
his  own  hymns ;  but  he  was  not  scrupulous  in  mending 
other  people's.  His  critical  power  and  poetic  taste, 
however,  were  exercised  chiefly  on  the  productions  of 
his  brother  Charles,  and  generally  his  emendations 
were  improvements.  And  perhaps,  too,  it  was  happy 
for  Charles  that  he  had  a  brother  so  severe ;  for  one 
who  wrote  so  many  verses  and  so  fast  needed  another 
eye  and  another  hand  to  guard  him  from  the  conse- 
quences of  voluminous  rhyming.  In  dealing  with 
other  authors,  whose  hymns  are  brought  to  enrich  his 
hymn-book,  John  Wesley's  touches  are,  for  the  most  part, 
delicate  but  effective.  By  the  slightest  stroke  he  some- 
times turns  weakness  into  strength,  commonplaces  into 
beauties,  and  irregularity  into  order.  A  transforming 
word  or  two  from  him,  now  and  then,  makes  ques- 
tionable things  pure,  and  calls  up  grandeur  from  what 
was  puerile  or  mean.  Witness  the  transformation  of 
some  verses  in  Watts's  hymn  on  "  Heavenly  joys  on 
earth."     The  original  first  verse  is 


Come,  we  that  love  the  Lord, 

And  let  our  joys  be  known ; 
Join  in  a  song  with  sweet  accord, 

And  thus  surround  the  throne. 

Wesley  takes  away  the  sign  of  weakness  by  rendering 
it- 
Come,  ye  that  love  the  Lord, 

And  let  your  joys  be  known, 
E'en  in  a  song  with  sweet  accord, 
While  ye  surround  Ms  throne. 

The  rise  from  something  akin  to  silliness  into  gran- 


204  HY3IX- WRITERS   AXD    THEIR    HYMNS. 

deur  is  still  more  strikingly  seen  in  the  change  of  the 
fonrth  verse  from 

The  God  that  rules  on  high, 

And  thunders  when  He  please, 
That  rides  upon  the  stormy  sky, 

And  manages  the  seas, 
into 

The  God  that  rules  on  high, 

That  all  the  earth  surveys, 
That  rides  upon  the  stormy  sky, 

And  calms  the  roaring  seas. 

The  noble  hymn  is  thus  equalized,  and  saved  from 
those  occasional  lapses  into  weakness  which  so  sadly 
break  the  grand  march  of  some  of  Watts's  best  pro- 
ductions. What  additional  dignity  Wesley  gives  to 
Watts's  version  of  the  Psalm  cxlvi.  by  a  slight  altera- 
tion of  two  lines,  changing 

I'll  praise  my  Maker  with  my  breath, 
into 

I'll  praise  my  Maker  while  Tve  breath, 

and  rendering 

The  Lord  hath  eyes  to  give  the  blind, 
thus — 

The  Lord  pours  eyesight  on  the  blind. 

Still  more  remarkable  is  the  improvement  in  the  hymn 
on  (( Christ  dying,  rising,  and  reigning."  Watts's 
first  verse  begins  too  fondly,  and  then  becomes 
puerile. 

He  dies  !     The  heavenly  Lover  dies  ! 

The  tidings  strike  a  doleful  sound 
On  my  poor  heart-strings.     Deep  He  lies 

In  the  cold  caverns  of  the  ground. 

Wesley's   improvement    opens   with   great   beauty  of 


HYMN-MEXDEKS.  205 

thought  and  grandeur  of  imagery _,  consistently  leading 
the  mind  into  the  noble  strain  of  the  following  verses — 

He  dies  !     The  Friend  of  sinners  dies  ! 

Lo  !  Salem's  daughters  weep  around; 
A  solemn  darkness  veils  the  skies, 

A  sudden  trembling  shakes  the  ground. 

The  Christian  church  will  never  cease  to  enjoy  the 
grand  swell  of  the  Psalm  c.  as  given  by  Watts ;  but 
thanks  will  ever  be  due  to  Wesley  for  making  the 
first  verses  worthy  of  the  last.  Watts's  verses  begin 
without  much  promise. 

Sing  to  the  Lord  with  joyful  voice ; 

Let  every  land  his  name  adore  ; 
The  British  isles  shall  send  the  noise 

Across  the  ocean  to  the  shore. 

Nations  attend  before  his  throne 
With  solemn  fear,  with  sacred  joy. 

Wesley  drops  the  first  verse,,  and  begins  the  second 
thus : — 

Before  Jehovah's  awful  throne, 
Ye  nations,  bow  with  sacred  joy ; 

giving  a  noble  completeness  to  the  hymn,  opening  it 
with  a  majesty  suitable  to  its  continued  swell,  and 
preparing  us  for  that  sublime  close  which  leaves  the 
devout  multitude  rapt  before  God  in  solemn  joy. 

We'll  crowd  thy  gates  with  thankful  songs, 

High  as  the  heavens  our  voices  raise ; 
And  earth  with  her  ten  thousand  tongues 

Shall  fill  thy  courts  with  sounding  praise. 

Wide  as  the  world  is  thy  command, 

Yast  as  eternity  thy  love ; 
Firm  as  a  rock  thy  truth  shall  stand. 

When  rolling  years  shall  cease  to  move. 


206  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  Wesleyan  hymn-menders  are  not  always  as  Happy 
in  dealing  with  other  hymmsts  as  in  their  emendations 
of  Watts.  For  instance,  when  they  alter  that  beautiful 
hymn  by  Berridge — 

Jesus,  cast  a  look  on  me. 

and  place  the  altered  form  in  their  collection  as  begin- 
ning with 

Lord,  that  I  may  learn  of  Thee. 

The  original  should  have  been  held  sacred.  It  is 
founded  on  Psalm  cxxxi.  2,  "My  soul  is  even  as  a 
weaned  child."     Thus  : — 

Jesus,  cast  a  look  on  me, 
Give  me  sweet  simplicity ; 
Make  me  poor,  and  keep  me  low, 
Seeking  only  Thee  to  know. 

Weaned  from  my  lordly  self, 
"Weaned  from  the  miser's  pelf, 
Weaned  from  the  scorner's  ways, 
Weaned  from  the  lust  of  praise. 

All  that  feeds  my  busy  pride, 
Cast  it  evermore  aside ; 
Bid  my  will  to  thine  submit, 
Lay  me  humbly  at  thy  feet. 

Make  me  like  a  little  child, 
Of  my  strength  and  wisdom  spoil'd ; 
Seeing  only  in  thy  light, 
Walking  only  in  thy  might. 

Leaning  on  thy  loving  breast, 
Where  a  weary  soul  may  rest ; 
Feeling  well  the  peace  of  God, 
Flowing  from  thy  precious  blood  ! 


HYMN-MENDERS.  207 

In  this  pasture  let  me  live, 
And  hosannas  daily  give  ; 
In  this  temper  let  me  die, 
And  hosannas  ever  cry  ! 

It  must  be  said  of  John  Wesley,  that  whether  he 
worked  as  compiler,  or  critic,  or  hymn-writer,  he 
evidently  worked  with  a  pure  aim.  His  object  was  to 
provide  for  his  people  a  hymn-book  distinguished  by 
completeness  of  rhyme,  a  large  variety  of  metre,  energy 
of  thought  and  expression,  sound  argument,  thorough 
evangelical  orthodoxy,  and  pure  and  warm  religious 
feeling.  The  great  popularity  and  widening  usefulness 
of  his  collection  show  the  measure  of  his.  success. 
Many  people  would  naturally  ask  what  sort  of  hymns 
such  a  hymn-mender  as  he  could  write.  He  wrote  but 
few.  But  these  few  fairly  sustain  his  claims  as  a 
worthy  member  of  a  poetic  family,  and  a  leader  among 
the  hymnists  of  his  day.  One  of  his  hymns  is  highly 
characteristic  at  once  of  his  genius  and  his  religious 
character :  and  marks  some  peculiar  phases  of  his 
experience,  as  well  as  some  points  of  his  personal 
history.  The  hymn  may  be  called  "the  Pilgrim's 
Hymn." 

How  happy  is  the  pilgrim's  lot ! 
How  free  from  every  anxious  thought, 

From  worldly  hope  and  fear  ! 
Confined  to  neither  court  nor  cell, 
His  soul  disdains  on  earth  to  dwell 

His  only  sojourn's  here. 

His  happiness  in  part  is  mine, 
Already  saved  from  low  design, 

From  every  creature  love  ; 
Blest  with  the  scorn  of  finite  good, 
My  soul  is  lightened  of  its  load, 

And  seeks  the  things  above. 


208  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Tke  things  eternal  I  pursue  ; 
A  happiness  beyond  the  view 

Of  those  that  basely  pant 
For  things  by  nature  felt  and  seen ; 
Their  honours,  wealth,  and  pleasures  mean, 

I  neither  have  nor  want. 

I  have  no  babes  to  hold  me  here ; 
But  children  more  securely  dear, 

For  mine  I  humbly  claim  ; 
Better  than  daughters  or  than  sons, 
Temples  divine  of  living  stones, 

Inscribed  with  Jesu's  name. 

No  foot  of  land  do  I  possess, 
No  cottage  in  this  wilderness  ; 

A  poor  wayfaring  man, 
I  lodge  awhile  in  tents  below, 
Or  gladly  wander  to  and  fro, 

Till  I  my  Canaan  gain. 

Nothing  on  earth  I  call  my  own ; 
A  stranger,  to  the  world  unknown, 

I  all  their  goods  despise  ; 
I  trample  on  their  whole  delight, 
And  seek  a  country  out  of  sight, 

A  country  in  the  skies. 

There  is  my  house  my  portion  fan ; 
My  treasure  and  my  heart  are  there, 

And  my  abiding  home  ; 
For  me  my  elder  brethren,  stay, 
And  angels  beckon  me  away, 

And  Jesus  bids  me  come. 

I  come — thy  servant,  Lord,  replies  : — 
I  come  to  meet  Thee  in  the  skies, 

And  claim  my  heavenly  rest ! 
Now  let  the  pilgrim's  journey  end ; 
Now,  0  my  Saviour,  Brother,  Friend, 

Eeceive  me  to  thy  breast ! 


HYMN-MENDEES.  209 

One  stanza  is  now  generally  omitted.  It  was 
written  probably  while  he  was  unmarried ;  and  under 
the  influence  of  views  sometimes  peculiar  to  unmarried 
life— 

I  have  no  sharer  of  my  heart, 
To  rob  my  Saviour  of  a  part, 

And  desecrate  the  whole  : 
Only  betrothed  to  Christ  am  I, 
And  wait  his  coming  from  the  sky, 
To  wed  my  happy  soul. 

There  have  been  many  Christian  souls  who,  during 
some  period  of  their  life  would  take  up  the  language 
of  this  remarkable  hymn,  and  sing  it  on  their  lonely 
way.  It  may  be  said  of  some  one  part  of  many  a 
mam's  life-journey,  "  it  was  desert" ;  and  that  desert 
part  he  may  have  gone  over  single-handed,  scripless 
and  alone.  How  often,  in  such  cases,  has  the  music 
of  this  hymn  risen  on  the  silent  air,  as  an  acceptable 
sacrifice  of  holy  confidence,  gratitude,  and  joy.  Of 
one  singular  character,  at  least,  it  may  be  said  that 
he  could  adopt  it  and  use  it  from  his  first  starting  in 
Christian  life  to  his  final  hour.  To  those  who  knew 
him,  and  many,  many  in  the  west  of  England  were 
thankful  to  know  him,  it  seemed  as  if  the  hymn  were 
made  for  him.  Nor  was  there  a  day  through  his 
somewhat  lengthened  life  in  which  some  stanza  of  it 
was  not  on  his  lips.  "  Foolish  Dick,"  people  called 
him,  and  not  without  some  share  of  reason.  In  early 
life  he  was  enough  of  an  idiot  to  be  unequal  to  any 
labour  that  required  a  tolerable  amount  of  regulated 
thought  or  skill.  But  he  proved  to  be  one  of  those 
whose  history  strikingly  shows  the  quickening,  ex- 
panding, and  regulating  power  of  vital  religion  on  the 
human   intellect   even    in   its   nearest   approaches   to 

14 


210  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

hopeless  idiocy.  Dick  was  one  morning  on  his  way  to 
the  well  for  water,  when  an  old  Christian  man  who 
was  leaning  over  the  garden  gate  said,  "  So  yon  are 
going  to  the  well  for  water,  Dick  V 

"Yes,  sir." 

"Well,  Dick;  the  woman  of  Samaria  found  Jesus 
Christ  at  the  well." 

"  Did  she,  sir  V* 

"Yes,  Dick." 

That  was  enough.  A  quickening  thought  had 
struck  into  his  half-awakened  mind.  The  thought 
worked;  and  when  he  came  to  the  well,  he  said, 
within  himself,  but  loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  his 
Saviour,  "  Why  should  not  I  find  Jesus  Christ  at  the 
well  ?  Oh  that  I  could  find  Him  !  Will  He  come  to 
me  ?"  Yes,  his  prayer  was  heard ;  and  Dick  returned 
bearing  his  full  pitcher ;  but  bringing  in  his  heart, 
too,  the  joy  of  which  Jesus  said,  "  It  shall  be  in  him 
a  well  of  water,  springing  up  into  everlasting  life." 
From  that  hour,  Dick  "  left  his  watering-pot"  ;  and 
gave  himself  up  to  the  work  of  telling  his  neighbours 
the  story  of  his  conversion  at  the  well,  and  indeed  to 
the  work  of  preaching  Christ,  in  his  way,  in  dis- 
courses marked  by  strong  sense,  warm  feeling,  and 
stirring  appeals  to  the  sinner's  conscience  and  heart. 
Every  faculty  of  his  mind,  and  all  the  passions  of  his 
soul  now  seemed  to  unfold  new  powers  and  fresh  life. 
He  was  verily  born  again.  His  memory  soon  showed 
marvellous  power.  To  hear  a  chapter  in  the  Bible,  or 
a  hymn  read  to  him,  was  to  know  it,  and  to  have 
power  to  reproduce  it.  His  new  gifts  were  used  for 
Christ.  He  went  forth  as  an  itinerant  evangelist; 
going  without  purse  or  scrip ;  and  through  a  life-long 
pilgrimage   round  and  round  his  native   county,  and 


HYMN-MENDERS.  211 

sometimes  over  the  Border,  he  went  everywhere 
preaching  Jesus.  He  never  lacked  food  or  raiment, 
and  when  he  entered  into  rest  many,  many  happy 
spirits  hailed  him  as  the  instrument  of  their  salvation 
from  sin  and  death.  He  was  indeed  a  pilgrim 
preacher,  rude  and  unpolished,  as  some  thought,  but 
certainly  taught  of  Christ.  The  "  Pilgrim's  Hymn  " 
was  always  in  keeping  from  his  lips.  It  was  his 
favourite  hymn,  and  every  home  that  welcomed  him 
had  its  hearth  cheered  by  his  music ;  for  he  would  sit 
and  wave  too  and  fro,  and  sing,  in  a  way  that  set 
forth  the  elegant  simplicity  of  the  lines — 

No  foot  of  land  do  I  possess, 
No  cottage  in  this  wilderness  ; 

A  poor  wayfaring  man, 
I  lodge  awhile  in  tents  below ; 
Or  gladly  wander  to  and  fro, 

Till  I  my  Canaan  gain. 

This  was  his  song  all  through  the  land  of  his 
pilgrimage.  And  not  long  ago,  followed  by  the 
blessings  of  his  generation,  the  weary  old  pilgrim 
departed,  to  realize  the  full  answer  to  his  last  stanza — 

Now  let  the  pilgrim's  jonrney  end ; 
Now,  0  my  Saviour,  Brother,  Friend, 
Receive  me  to  thy  breast ! 


(SrijaBftr  XII. 

HYMNS  OF  CREATION. 

"  Thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive  glory  and  honour  and  power  ; 
for  Thou  hast  created  all  things,  and  for  thy  pleasure  they  are  and  were 
created." 

ONCE  joined  a  party  for  a  day's  pleasure  trip  in 
the  west  of  England,  says  an  old  rambler ;  "  onr 
plan  was  to  get  to  the  top  of  the  highest  hill  in 
the  neighbourhood,  and  there  for  a  time  take  our  fill  of 
joy  from  the  grandeur  and  beauty  of  the  scenes  around 
and  beneath  us.  Alas,  for  human  pleasures  !  The  morn- 
ing opened  with  rain,  and  we  were  seemingly  doomed 
to  disappointment.  At  length,  encouraged  by  some 
weather-wise  folks,  we  resolved  to  accomplish  our 
purpose,  even  at  the  risk  of  wet  jackets  by  the  way. 
We  climbed  the  steeps  in  spite  of  wind  and  rain,  and 
came  by  and  by,  on  the  highest  peak,  to  some  steps 
leading  to  the  door  of  an  old  tower,  which  from  time 
immemorial  had  withstood  the  rush  of  years  and 
storms.  As  we  mounted  these  steps,  we  found,  to  our 
wonderment  and  delight,  that  on  looking  out,  our  eyes 
glanced  along  the  upper  surface  of  the  clouds ;  and 
when  we  had  fairly  reached  the  roof  of  the  old  tower, 


HYMNS   OF   CREATION.  213 

there  was  nothing  of  our  native  earth  to  be  seen  but 
the  few  square  feet  of  stone  work  on  which  we  stood. 
Beneath  us  was  an  ocean  of  clouds  ;  above  us  were  the 
bright  blue  heavens.  The  sun  had  gone  down  just  to 
the  horizon,  where  the  clear  sky  touched  the  cloud- 
billows.  The  faint-looking  crescent  of  the  new  moon 
was  peeping  on  us  too  from  above  the  offing  line  of  the 
cloudy  deep.  We  could  hear  the  carol  of  a  lark,  but 
otherwise  the  silence  of  nature  was  profound  and 
solemn.  We  felt  ourselves  for  once  beyond  the  sight 
and  sound  of  the  world  which  gave  us  birth.  One 
voice  uttered  the  key-note,  and  then,  as  if  we  had  but 
one  soul,  we  sang — 

High  in  the  heavens,  Eternal  God, 

Thy  goodness  in  full  glory  shines  ; 
Thy  truth  shall  break  through  every  cloud 

That  veils  and  darkens  thy  designs. 

For  ever  firm  thy  justice  stands 

As  mountains  their  foundations  keep  ; 

Wise  are  the  wonders  of  thy  hands ; 
Thy  judgments  are  a  mighty  deep. 

There  was  a  charm  in  psalmody  at  that  moment  which 
I  had  never  felt  before,  and  it  really  seemed  as  if  that 
charm  were  acknowledged  by  nature  ;  for  just  at  this 
moment  there  were  movements  in  the  cloud-world 
beneath  us — the  masses  were  rolling,  heaving,  and 
cleaving  here  and  there.  Now  the  top  of  a  green  hill  ap- 
peared, like  an  island  rising  from  the  depths  to  court  the 
sunlight ;  now  a  slope  was  seen  opening  from  beneath 
the  passing  mist ;  now  a  spire  rose  above  the  surface  ; 
and  now  a  village  peeped  on  the  hill-side,  and  the  clus- 
tering roofs  of  a  more  distant  town  sparkled  as  the  sun- 
beams touched  them.     The  clouds  resolved  themselves 


214  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

at  length  into  river-like  courses,  filling  the  valleys  and 
leaving  the  uplands  to  show  themselves.  The  rivers 
narrowed,  became  shallow  streams,  and  at  last,  like 
silvery  threads,  they  ran  off  towards  the  shore,  until 
every  filmy  vapour  was  gone,  even  from  the  face  of  the 
sea,  and  the  whole  scene,  with  its  glorious  variety  of 
hill  and  plain,  valley  and  heath,  woods  and  ocean,  lay 
bright,  calm,  and  beautiful  beneath  the  setting  sun. 
Fresh  inspiration  now  came  upon  us,   and   we   sang 


God  is  a  name  my  soul  adores, 
Th'  Almighty  Three,  th'  eternal  One, 

Nature  and  grace,  with  all.  their  powers, 
Confess  the  infinite  Unknown. 

From  thy  great  self  thy  being  springs  ; 

Thou  art  thy  own  original, 
Made  up  of  uncreated  things, 

And  self-sufhcience  bears  them  all. 

Thy  voice  produced  the  seas  and  spheres, 
Bid  the  waves  roar  and  planets  shine ; 

But  nothing  like  thyself  appears 

Through  all  these  spacious  works  of  Thine. 

Still  restless  nature  dies  and  grows  ; 

From  change  to  change  the  creatures  run ; 
Thy  being  no  succession  knows, 

And  all  thy  vast  designs  are  one. 

A  glance  of  Thine  runs  through  the  globes, 
Rules  the  bright  world,  and  moves  their  frame 

Broad  sheets  of  light  compose  thy  robes, 
Thy  guards  are  formed  of  living  flame. 

Thrones  and  dominions  round  Thee  fall, 

And  worship  in  submissive  forms ; 
Thy  presence  shakes  this  lower  ball, 

This  little  dwelling-place  of  worms. 


HYMNS   OF    CREATION.  215 

How  shall  affrighted  mortals  dare 

To  sing  thy  glory  or  thy  grace ; 
Beneath  thy  feet  we  lie  so  far, 

And  see  but  shadows  of  thy  face. 

Who  can  behold  the  blazing  light  ? 

Who  can  approach  consuming  flame  ? 
None  but  thy  wisdom  knows  thy  might, 

None  but  thy  word  can  speak  thy  name. 

"  '  Well/  said  one,  as  we  came  down  from  the 
tower,  '  I  never  before  felt  the  music  and  power  of 
those  fine  old  hymns  so  deeply.  Watts  does  not 
always  keep  us  up  so  steadily  to  the  end  of  the 
strain.  Dear  old  singer  !  he  had  times  of  deep  sym- 
pathy with  the  natural  world,  and  often  helps  one,  as  he 
helped  us  to-day,  to  catch  the  inspiring  breath  of 
natural  grandeur  and  beauty,  so  as  to  feel  as  if  we 
were  one  with  all  the  works  of  our  heavenly  Father.'' 

u  c  Yes/  said  somebody  else ;  '  but  we  owe  much  of 
our  enjoyment  of  Watts  to  association,  to  the  lingering 
influence  of  our  early  impressions  about  his  hymns; 
and  a  great  deal,  too,  in  his  case  depends  on  the  music 
to  which  his  hymns  are  set.  We  enjoy  his  verses 
when  they  are  sung  more  frequently  than  when  we 
read  them.  I  have  a  notion  that  it  is  with  his  hymns 
somewhat  as  it  is  with  many  of  Thomas  Moore's  "  Irish 
Melodies  " ;  about  which  I  am  very  willing  to  admit 
all  that  is  said  as  to  their  graceful  thought,  their  ten- 
der pathos,  and  bursts  of  heroic  feeling.  They  have 
wonderful  melody  of  words,  too;  but  it  strikes  me  that 
we  have  learnt  to  award  to  Moore's  verses  much  that 
really  belongs  to  the  old  tunes  for  which  he  provided 
the  words.  At  all  events,  in  reading  many  of  them  you 
but  seldom  find  your  soul  arrested,  while  to  hear  them 
sung  is   to  be  mastered  by  the   feeling  which  they 


216  HYMN-WRITERS   AND   THEIR   HYMNS. 

create.  Now,  speaking  of  Tom  Moore,  I  like  him 
best  when  he  gets  away  from  amidst  the  rather 
wearisome  gorgeousness  of  his  Eastern  imagery,  and 
from  the  brilliant  circles  in  which  his  genins  and  wit 
so  brightly  sparkle,  and  allows  himself  to  be  hushed 
into  a  devout  feeling  within  the  quietude  of  his  cottage 
retreat.  I  like  to  find  him  in  that  little  Wiltshire 
home,  with  its  old-fashioned  windows  and  trellised  door- 
way, hung  about  with  creepers  and  evergreens,  and 
surrounded  by  such  touching  evidences  of  Divine  good- 
ness as  melt  the  heart,  and  constrain  the  genius  to 
express  itself  in  hymns  and  spiritual  songs.  You  say 
Watts  had  times  of  deep  sympathy  with  the  natural 
world — had  not  Moore  ?  And  had  he  not  some  reve- 
rent sympathy  with  the  God  of  nature,  too  ?  And 
does  he  not  help  us  to  praise  the  source  of  life  and 
beauty  ?     Only  listen  to  this  : — 

Thou  art,  0  God,  the  life  and  light 

Of  all  this  wondrous  world  we  see ; 
Its  glow  by  day,  its  smile  by  night, 

Are  but  reflections  caught  from  Thee. 
Where'er  we  turn,  thy  glories  shine, 
And  all  things  fair  and  bright  are  Thine. 

"When  day,  with  farewell  beam,  delays 

Among  the  opening  clouds  of  even, 
And  we  can  almost  think  we  gaze 

Through  golden  vistas  into  heaven : 
Those  hues,  that  make  the  sun's  decline 
So  soft,  so  radiant,  Lord,  are  Thine. 

"When  night,  with  wings  of  starry  gloom, 
O'ershadows  all  the  earth  and  skies, 

Like  some  dark  beauteous  bird,  whose  plume 
Is  sparkling  with  unnumbered  eyes  : 

That  sacred  gloom,  those  fires  divine, 

So  grand,  so  countless,  Lord,  are  Thine.   ■"    - 


HYMNS    OF    CREATION.  217 

"When  youthful  spring  around  us  breathes, 
Thy  Spirit  warms  her  fragrant  sigh ; 

And  every  flower  the  summer  wreathes, 
Is  born  beneath  that  kindling  eye. 

"Where'er  we  turn,  thy  glories  shine, 

And  all  things  bright  and  fear  are  Thine.' 

'"  Yes/  said  a  pleasant-looking  companion,  as  we 
all  flung  ourselves  down  among  the  heath,  as  if  we  were 
all  disposed  to  keep  up  the  chat  about  hymns,  '  yes, 
Moore  is  much  to  my  taste  in  a  few  of  his  hymns ; 
and  I  wish  some  severe  people  that  I  know  would  get 
a  little  more  of  his  spirit.  I  know  some  who  seem  to 
have  a  notion  that  a  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of 
nature  is  so  distinct  from  inward  religion  as  to  be 
opposed  to  it,  that  warm  devotion  to  the  one  almost 
necessarily  excludes  any  eminent  success  in  the  pursuit 
of  the  other.  This  notion  leads  them  to  set  God's 
works  in  opposition  to  his  word,  and  to  view  what 
they  call  natural  religion  as  altogether  independent  of 
revealed  truth.  But  I  think  a  deeper  insight  into  the 
sacred  volume  convinces  us  that,  as  the  harmony  of  the 
Divine  character  is  absolutely  perfect,  so  all  the  mani- 
festations of  that  character  to  man  are  in  sacred  con- 
cord, whether  they  come  as  reflections  from  nature  or 
revelations  of  the  Spirit.  While  the  mere  intellect  is 
cultivated  to  the  neglect  of  the  heart,  or  the  will  or 
affections  are  indulged  at  the  expense  of  the  under- 
standing, the  nature  of  man  is  out  of  course,  and  his 
character  is  so  discordant  in  itself  that  he  is  incapable 
of  discovering  the  invariable  agreement  of  the  natural 
and  the  spiritual,  of  religion  and  science.  This  Divine 
unison  can  be  known  and  enjoyed  by  none  but  the 
harmonized  soul.  The  human  spirit  must  be  attuned 
to  the  voice  of  God.     The  sanctified  intellect  must  act 


218  HYMN- WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

in  concert  with  the  purified  heart.  The  rectified  will 
must  fully  accord  with  the  Word  of  God.  And  then 
the  visible  universe  and  the  region  of  mind,  the 
creature,  the  word,  and  the  Spirit,  the  world  without 
and  the  world  within,  all  harmonize  around  the  happy 
man,  and  lead  him  to  his  God.  Now,  you  have  spoken 
of  Thomas  Moore  and  his  ee  Irish  Melodies  "  ;  let  me 
illustrate  what  I  have  said  by  a  song  from  old  Ireland. 
It  comes  from  a  quiet  rectory  in  county  Antrim,  and 
shows  that  the  truly  harmonized  Christian  soul  can 
exercise  its  hallowed  genius  in  hymns  to  the  God  of 
nature,  and  teach  us  to  live  in  the  spirit  of  that  hymnist 
who  said,  u  All  thy  works  praise  Thee,  0  Lord ;  and 
thy  saints  bless  Thee."  Listen  to  John  S.  B.  Monsell's 
song : — 

Oh,  what  a  gloomy,  cheerless  scene, 

A  world  accursed  might  have  been, 

If  He,  who  in  his  mercy  hath 

Strew'd  such  delight  along  life's  path, 

Had  changed  each  passing  breath  and  sound 

That  floats  in  harmony  around, 

To  discords,  such  as  would  destroy 

Sensation's  every  pulse  of  joy ! 

But  He  who  bids  us  seek  his  face, 
Makes  Nature  handmaiden  to  Grace ; 
And  lest  our  souls — to  earth  too  prone — 
Should  faint  before  they  reach  the  throne, 
The  sea  beneath,  the  sky  above, 
Hath  form'd  as  mirrors  of  his  love  ; 
And  ev'ry  rock,  and  flow'r,  and  tree, 
Hade  Vocal  for  eternity. 

"Where'er  we  move  or  walk  abroad, 
We  see,  we  feel  a  present  God ! 
The  very  balm  that  scents  the  air, 
Breathes  of  a  purer  essence  there ; 


HYMNS    OF    CREATION.  219 

The  bubbling  runnels  as  they  flow, 
Chant  sweetest  anthems  soft  and  low ; 
And  every  bird,  from  bush  and  brake, 
To  praise,  the  sylvan  echoes  wake. 

Nature,  with  one  harmonious  voice, 
Seems  in  her  Maker  to  rejoice ; 
Earth's  flowers  reflect  Him  in  their  bloom, 
And  breathe  his  praise  in  rich  perfume. 
The  sun  by  day,  the  moon  by  night, 
The  stars,  those  heavenly  flow'rs  of  light, 
All  in  one  sweet  accord,  his  name 
Almighty !  "Wonderful !  proclaim. 

And  oh  !  shall  I,  when  flowers  and  trees, 
Things  soulless,  senseless,  such  as  these, 
Live  to  his  praise,  as  though  they  seemed 
His  own,  his  purchas'd,  his  redeem'd ! 
Shall  I,  for  whom  his  blood  was  poured, 
The  blood  of  the  Incarnate  Lord, 
Be  silent,  when  this  heart  should  raise 
To  its  Kedeemer  hymns  of  praise  ? 

Lord,  when  among  the  songs  of  earth, 
Forgetful  of  my  heavenly  birth, 
My  harp  hangs  on  the  willow-tree, 
And  renders  back  no  praise  to  Thee  ; 
Let  the  sweet  hymns  of  those  who  know 
Not  half  the  debt  of  love  I  owe, 
If  not  for  love,  at  least  for  shame, 
Move  this  dull  soul  to  praise  thy  name. 

"  '  This  is  one  of  the  tuneful  "  Parish  Musings " 
which  we  owe  to  Mr.  MonselPs  hallowed  taste  and  heart, 
open  as  they  have  been  to  the  music  of  his  Saviour's 
voice,  and  as,  in  companionship  with  the  blessed 
Spirit,  they  have  had  suggestions  from  the  "  incidents 
or  feelings  of  each  passing  day,"  as  he  tells  us,  "in 
storm  or  sunshine,  by  the  way-side  or  on  the  hill-top, 
in  the  country  meadow  or  the  busy  street,  by  day  or 


220  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

by  night,  wherever  duty  called,  and  whenever  the  spirit 
caught  from  without  or  from  within,  subject  matter 
for  serious  conversation  with  heaven."  I  like  the  way 
in  which  he  infuses  the  Christian  element  into  his 
song  of  creation.  Some  professing  Christians  seem 
never  to  have  either  taste  or  heart  for  anything  but 
what  they  term  evangelical  doctrine  and  experience ; 
the  outer  world  is  never  allowed  to  associate  its  happy 
influences,  with  what  they  call  their  "  inner  life."  But 
Christianity  is  love — love  to  God,  and  love  for  every- 
thing which  bears  his  image,  or  is  marked  by  Him  as 
lovable.  "  We  love  Him,"  says  an  apostle,  "  because 
He  first  loved  us."  His  love  to  us  is  shown  first,  and 
above  all,  in  his  only-begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ.  But 
as  He  "  created  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ,"  as  Christ 
"  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power,"  and 
as,  by  virtue  of  the  Redeemer's  cross,  all  things  are 
to  be  reconciled  and  harmonized,  "  whether  they  be 
things  in  earth  or  things  in  heaven,"  all  who  truly 
love  God,  and  hold  loving  communion  with  <l  the 
Father  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,"  will  be  affectionately 
ready  to  catch  reflections  of  his  love  from  everything 
that  bears  his  impress,  everything  on  which  his  mind 
and  heart  are  set.  The  well-regulated  Christian  heart 
will  turn  pleasantly  towards  the  tiniest  thing  for  which 
God  cares,  or  in  which  Jesus  has  shown  an  interest. 
All  beauty,  all  grandeur,  all  light,  all  life,  all  melodies, 
harmonies,  and  fitnesses  of  things  are  his ;  He  made 
them,  He  loves  them,  his  sympathy  with  all  is  perfect. 
And  so  they  are  objects  of  admiration,  sympathy,  and 
love  to  human  souls,  just  as  these  souls  are  "  perfect 
as  He,  their  heavenly  Father,  is  perfect."  The  noblest 
minds,  the  greatest  hearts,  the  most  Christlike  cha- 
racters  are    those  -  who,    with    the    deepest    spiritual 


HYMNS    OF   CREATION.  221 

intercourse  with  the  heavenly  and  the  unseen,  have 
the  most  tender,  gentle,  childlike  attachment  to  every- 
thing that  God  smiles  upon  in  visible  life.  Now,  I 
am  disposed  to  class  the  author  of  the  "  Christian 
Year 3i  with  these ;  he  is  not  always  equal.  In  a  few 
instances  his  verses  lack  vigour,  are  simply  pretty, 
but  when  he  hymns  it  in  his  best  style,  he  gives  us  a 
sweet  relish  for  that  devotion  which  seems  at  once 
to  hush  and  exalt  the  soul  amidst  the  analogies  of 
creation.  How  beautifully  he  interweaves  nature  and 
grace,  the  visible  and  the  invisible,  in  his  hymn  for 
Septuagesima  Sunday — 

There  is  a  book  who  runs  may  read, 

"Which  heav'nly  truth  imparts, 
And  all  the  love  its  scholars  need, 

Pure  eyes  and  Christian  hearts. 

The  works  of  Grod  above,  below, 

Within  us  and  around, 
Are  pages  in  that  book  to  show 

How  God  Himself  is  found. 

The  glorious  sky  embracing  all 

Is  like  the  Maker's  love, 
"Wherewith  encompassed,  great  and  small, 

In  peace  and  order  move. 

The  moon  above,  the  church  below, 

A  wondrous  race  they  run, 
But  all  their  radiance,  all  their  glow, 

Each  borrows  of  its  sun. 

The  Saviour  lends  the  light  and  heat 

That  crowns  his  holy  hill ; 
The  saints,  like  stars,  around  his  seat, 

Perform  the  courses  still. 


222  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  saints  above  are  stars  in  heaven — 

What  are  the  saints  on  earth  ? 
Like  trees  they  stand  whom  God  has  given, 

Our  Eden's  happy  birth. 

Faith  is  their  fix'd,  unswerving  root, 

Hope  their  unfading  flower, 
Fair  deeds  of  charity  their  fruit, 

The  glory  of  their  bower. 

The  dew  of  heaven  is  like  thy  grace, 

It  steals  in  silence  down ; 
But  where  it  lights,  the  favour'd  place 

By  richest  fruits  is  known. 

One  name  above  all  glorious  names, 

With  its  ten  thousand  tongues, 
The  everlasting  sea  proclaims, 

Echoing  angelic  songs. 

The  raging  fire,  the  roaring  wind, 

Thy  boundless  power  display  : 
But  in  the  gentler  breeze  we  find 

Thy  spirit's  viewless  way. 

Two  worlds  are  ours  :  'tis  only  sin 

Forbids  us  to  descry 
The  mystic  heaven  and  earth  within, 

Plain  as  the  sea  and  sky. 

Thou  who  hast  given  me  eyes  to  see 

And  love  this  sight  so  fair, 
Give  me  a  heart  to  find  out  Thee, 

And  read  Thee  everywhere.' 

"  '  Thank  you/  cried  one  of  our  roost  earnest  young 
men — one  whose  full  round  bass  voice  I  have  often 
admired  when  coming  into  the  chorus  swell  of  a 
jubilant  psalm  or  anthem,  '  thank  you.'  John 
Keble  often  succeeds,  as  he  does  in  this  case,  in 
making  us  feel  what  he  calls  "  that  soothing  tendency 


HYMXS    OF    CREATION.  223 

in  the  Prayer-book" ;  and  which,  as  he  adds,  "  it  is 
the  chief  purpose  of"  his  hymns  "  to  exhibit."  But 
now,  by  way  of  a  little  variation,  let  us  have  that 
spirited  and  inspiriting  psalm  of  George  Wither' s, 
which  seems  to  bring  up  around  one's  expanding 
and  rising  heart  all  the  voices  and  instruments  that 
heaven  and  earth  can  muster,  to  swell  the  mighty 
chorus  of  creation  before  the  throne  of  its  Maker. 
*  Come  V  said  he,  starting  up,  and  beckoning  us  into 
position,  f  come,  let  us  chant  it  V — 

Come,  oh  come  !  in  pious  lays 
Sound  we  God  Almighty's  praise ; 
Hither  bring  in  one  consent, 
Heart  and  voice  and  instrument. 
Music  add,  of  ev'ry  kind ; 
Sound  the  trump,  the  cornet  wind ; 
Strike  the  viol,  touch  the  lute  ; 
Let  no  tongue,  nor  string  be  mute; 

Zs  or  a  creature  dumb  be  found, 

That  hath  either  voice  or  sound. 

Let  those  things  which  do  not  live 

In  still  music  praises  give  : 

Lowly  pipe,  ye  worms  that  creep 

On  the  earth  or  in  the  deep  : 

Loud  aloft  your  voices  strain, 

Beasts  and  monsters  of  the  main  : 

Birds,  your  warbling  treble  sing; 

Clouds,  your  peals  of  thunder  ring  : 
Sun  and  moon,  exalted  higher, 
And  bright  stars  augment  this  choir. 

Come,  ye  sons  of  human  race, 
In  this  chorus  take  a  place 
And  amid  the  mortal  throng, 
Be  you  masters  of  the  song. 


224  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Angels,  and  supernal  powers, 
Be  the  noblest  tenor  yours  ; 
Let  in  praise  of  God,  the  sound 
Run  a  never-ending  round ; 

That  our  song  of  praise  may  be 

Everlasting  as  is  He. 

From  earth's  vast  and  hollow  womb, 
Music's  deepest  bass  may  come  ; 
Seas  and  floods,  from  shore  to  shore, 
Shall  their  counter-tenors  roar. 
To  this  consort,  when  we  sing, 
Whistling  winds,  your  descants  bring ; 
That  our  song  may  over  climb 
All  the  bounds  of  place  and  time, 

And  ascend  from  sphere  to  sphere, 

To  the  great  Almighty's  ear. 

So,  from  heaven,  on  earth  He  shall 

Let  his  gracious  blessings  fall ; 

And  this  huge,  wide  orb  we  see, 

Shall  one  choir,  one  temple  be  ; 

Where,  in  such  a  praise,  full  tone 

We  will  sing  what  He  hath  done, 

That  the  cursed  fiends  below 

Shall  thereat  impatient  grow. 
Then,  oh  come,  in  pious  lays, 
Sound  we  God  Almighty's  praise, 

11  Our  united  chant  seemed  to  awaken  a  kind  of 
emulation  in  calling  up  favourite  hymns.  The  scenes 
around  us  appeared  to  claim  our  homage  to  one  theme. 
Our  songs  must  all  be  songs  of  creation.  It  was  sug- 
gested that  a  woman's  voice  had  sometimes  given 
forth  sweet  melodies  ;  could  any  of  us  remember  a 
hymn  from  among  the  daughters  of  holy  song  ?  Yes, 
of  course ;  whose  mind  did  not  go  off  at  once  to  that 
comfortable-looking  old  house  in  the  village  of  Brough- 


HYMNS   OF   CREATION.  225 

ton  in  Hampshire,  with  its  high  roof  and  massive 
chimneys,  its  antique  porch  and  rural  garden  palisades 
overshadowed  by  the  trees  which  beautified  Theodosia's 
village  birthplace  on  the  borders  of  the  'Downs'? 
Theodosia  !  { The  gift  of  God' ;  and  '  eminently  so 
in  this  world  of  ours'  ;  and  who  would  not  think  of 
that  affectionate  address  to  Theodosia's  niece  byr  an 
old  friend  who  loved  her  memory,  and  has  helped  us 
to  love  it  too  ? — 

Still  I  am  musing  in  your  rustic  bower, 

Under  that  moss-deck'd  roof;  and  gaze  in  thought, 

Down  the  soft  turfy  vista,  where,  between 

Those  aged  pines  (friends  of  your  infancy), 

The  fleeting  sunshine  and  the  broader  shade 

Picture  our  path  to  heaven.     I  trace  the  walk, 

Where  at  this  noontide  hour,  no  foot  perhaps 

Is  seen :  but  thought  hath  peopled  it.     I  see 

In  fancy's  telescopic  mirror,  forms 

Of  some  that  were — that  are,  that  would  be  there. 

I  mark  the  forms  that  were  there :  those  who  walk'd 
With  God,  and  spake  to  artless  minds  of  Him  ; 
And,  with  them,  one  who  pour'd  a  sylvan  strain 
Of  meek  devotion  in  those  quiet  shades — 
Bequeathing  thence  her  Christian  heart  and  hope 
To  other  generations. 

"  Let  the  scene  be  immortalized  ;  that  terrace  walk 
looking  down  on  the  shrubbery  and  garden,  and  the 
avenue  of  firs,  where  about  the  middle  of  the  last 
century,  Anne  Steele,  with  a  body  enfeebled  by 
affliction,  used  to  regale  her  tender  and  devout  soul, 
and  give  forth  those  utterances  of  hallowed  genius 
which  so  refresh  all  childlike  spirits  who  long  to  sing 
of  Him  whom  she  supremely  loved.  '  I  enjoy  a  calm 
evening  on  the  terrace  walk/  said  that  gentle  voice, 
tremulous  with  holy  feeling,  '  and  I  wish,   though  in 

15 


226  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

vain,  for  numbers  sweet  as  the  lovely  prospect ;  and 
gentle  as  the  vernal  breeze,  to  describe  the  beauties  of 
charming  spring ;  but  the  reflection,  how  soon  these 
blooming  pleasures  will  vanish,  spread  a  melancholy 
gloom,  till  the  mind  rises,  by  a  delightful  transition, 
to  the  celestial  Eden — the  scenes  of  undecaying  plea- 
sure and  immutable  perfection.-'  She  did  not  wish 
for  '  sweet  numbers '  entirely  in  vain.  Her  songs 
never  rose  to  the  higher  strain  which  some  have 
reached ;  but  they  never  became  unworthy  of  her 
theme.  They  are  always  read  with  as  much  pleasure 
as  they  are  sung ;  always  simple  in  thought  and 
expression,  always  full  of  warm  and  tender  feeling, 
and  are  always  welcome  to  the  peaceful  heart  when 
it  wants  a  song  to  express  its  quiet  joys.  It  was 
probably  on  her  favourite  terrace  walk,  or  in  the 
avenue  where  the  zephyrs  whispered  music  among  the 
fir-trees,  that  she  first  sang  her  hymn  '  On  Creation 
and  Providence' — 

Lord,  when  my  raptured  thought  surveys 

Creation's  beauties  o'er, 
All  nature  joins  to  teach  thy  praise 

And  bid  my  soul  adore. 

Where'er  I  turn  my  gazing  eyes, 

Thy  radiant  footsteps  shine  ; 
Ten  thousand  pleasing  wonders  rise, 

And  speak  their  source  divine. 

The  living  tribes  of  countless  forms, 

In  earth,  and  sea,  and  air ; 
The  meanest  flies,  the  smallest  worms, 

Almighty  power  declare. 

All  rose  to  life  at  thy  command, 

And  wait  their  daily  food 
From  thy  paternal,  bounteous  hand, 

Exhaustless  springs  of  good ! 


HYMNS    OF    CREATTON.  227 

The  meads  array 'd  in  smiling  green. 

With  wholesome  herbage  crown'd  ; 
The  fields  with  corn,  a  richer  scene, 

Spread  thy  full  bounties  round. 

The  fruitful  tree,  the  blooming  flower, 

In  varied  charms  appear  ; 
Their  varied  charms  display  thy  power, 

Thy  goodness  all  declare. 

The  sun's  productive,  quickening  beams, 

The  growing  verdure  spread  ; 
Refreshing  rains  and  cooling  streams 

His  gentle  influence  aid. 

The  moon  and  stars  his  absent  light 

Supply  with  borrowed  rays, 
And  deck  the  sable  veil  of  night, 

And  speak  then  Maker's  praise. 

Thy  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  Lord, 

In  all  thy  works  appear ; 
And  oh,  let  man  thy  praise  record ; 

Man,  thy  distinguish'd  care. 

From  Thee  the  breath  of  life  he  drew  ; 

That  breath  thy  power  maintains  ; 
Thy  tender  mercy  ever  new, 

His  brittle  frame  sustains. 

Let  nobler  favours  claim  his  praise 

Of  reason's  light  possess'd  ; 
By  revelation's  brighter  rays 

Still  more  divinely  blest. 

Thy  providence,  his  constant  guard 

When  threatening  woes  impend, 
Or  will  the  impending  dangers  ward, 

Or  timely  succours  lend. 

On  me  that  providence  has  shone 

"With  gentle,  smiling  rays  ; 
Oh  let  my  lips  and  life  make  known 

Thy  goodness  and  thy  praise. 


228  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

All  bounteous  Lord,  thy  grace  impart ; 

Oh  teach  me  to  improve 
Thy  gifts  with  ever  grateful  heart, 

And  crown  them  with  thy  love. 

"  Somebody  inquired  whether  Anne  Steele  was  not 
the  daughter  of  a  Dissenting  minister.  fYes/  was 
the  reply,  '  her  father  preached  to  the  Baptist  congre- 
gation in  Broughton  for  sixty  years,  and  he  followed 
his  uncle  in  the  same  pastorate,  an  uncle  who  was 
equally  remarkable  with  her  father  for  piety,  amiable 
simplicity,  and  industrious  attention  to  his  flock. 
There  is  a  story  told  of  him  which  is  rather  instructive. 
He  was  so  popular  as  a  preacher  in  Broughton,  his 
native  village,  that  the  parson  reported  at  the  Epis- 
copal visitation  that  his  parochial  province  was  sadly 
invaded  by  the  Dissenter.  "  How  can  I  best  oppose 
him  V  was  his  query  to  the  Bishop,  the  celebrated 
Gilbert  Burnet ;  ( '  Go  home,"  said  the  wise  Diocesan, 
"  and  preach  better  than  Henry  Steele,  and  the  people 
will  return  •/'  a  piece  of  good  advice  that  might  be 
happily  followed  in  all  other  cases  of  parochial 
rivalry/ 

"  Anne  Steele's  connection  with  dissent  naturally 
brought  up  the  name  of  another  lady  hyninist, 
whose  family  relations  belonged  to  the  same  religious 
school.  Anna  Letitia  Barbauld  issued  her  first 
lyrics  during  her  residence  with  her  father,  Dr. 
Aiken,  in  a  Dissenting  academy  at  Warrington ; 
continued  her  literary  pursuits  as  the  wife  of  a 
French  Protestant  minister,  who  acted  in  the  double 
capacity  of  tutor  and  Dissenting  pastor ;  while  she 
cheered  her  widowhood  with  songs  and  hymns  from 
her  overflowing  heart  and  prolific  and  cultured  genius. 
Her  memory  is  fresh  in  many  a  family  circle,  in  its 


HYMNS    OP    CREATION.  229 

association  with  the  tales  in  f  Evenings  at  Home/ 
Her  verses  still  speak  of  her  extensive  and  varied 
reading,  and  show  that  she  had  vigour  of  intellect  to 
balance  her  flowing  imagination.  Our  conversation 
on  the  hill-side  about  songs  of  creation  was  closed 
with  the  rehearsal  of  her  charming  hymn,  and  one  of 
her  last — 

Praise  to  God,  immortal  praise, 

For  the  love  that  crowns  our  days ; 

Bounteous  Source  of  every  joy, 

Let  thy  praise  our  tongues  employ. 

For  the  blessings  of  the  field, 
For  the  stores  the  gardens  yield, 
For  the  vine's  exalted  juice, 
For  the  gen'rous  olive's  use. 

Flocks  that  whiten  all  the  plain, 
Yellow  sheaves  of  ripened  grain ; 
Clouds  that  drop  their  fattening  dews, 
Suns  that  temperate  warmth  diffuse. 

All  that  spring,  with  bounteous  hand, 
Scatters  o'er  the  smiling  land ; 
All  that  liberal  autumn  pours 
From  her  rich  o'erflowing  stores. 

These  to  Thee,  my  God,  we  owe, 
Source  whence  all  our  blessings  flow; 
And  for  these  my  soul  shall  raise 
Grateful  vows  and  solemn  praise. 

Yet,  should  rising  whirlwinds  rear 
From  its  stem  the  rip'ning  ear  ; 
Should  the  fig-tree's  blasted  shoot 
Drop  her  green,  untimely  fruit. 

Should  the  vine  put  forth  no  more, 
Nor  the  olive  yield  her  store  ; 
Though  the  sick'ning  flocks  should  fall, 
And  the  herds  desert  the  stall. 


230  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Should  Thine  altered  hand  restrain 
The  early  and  the  latter  rain, 
Blast  each  op'ning  bud  of  joy, 
And  the  rising  year  destroy. 

Yet  to  Thee  my  soul  shall  raise 
Grateful  vows  and  solemn  praise ; 
And  when  every  blessing's  flown, 
Love  Thee  for  thyself  alone. 

This  agreeable  and  pious  hymnist  was  a  native  of 
Kibworth,  in  Leicestershire,  and  ceased  her  psalmody 
on  earth  in  March,  1825,  aged  fourscore  years  and 
two." 

But  no  chapter  of  talk  about  Hymns  of  Creation 
should  be  ended  without  homage  paid  to  the  memory 
of  one  whose  glorious  hymn  may  always  serve  as  the 
closing  anthem  peal  to  all  such  chapters.  Scotland 
has  given  birth  to  many  a  genius,  whose  unfolding 
powers  it  has  lacked  either  skill  or  disposition  to 
cherish.  Among  the  rest  there  was  one  who  first  saw 
the  light  at  Ednam,  in  Roxburghshire,  on  the  11th  of 
September,  1  700 ;  and  there,  amidst  rich  and  varied 
scenery,  in  a  land  of  wild  romance,  he  gave  the  first 
promise  of  poetic  wealth.  But  his  sensuous  and  indo- 
lent, though  guileless,  generous,  and  glowing  nature, 
must  needs  court  the  congenial  influences  of  a  more 
southern  clime.  Like  many  other  young  northern 
adventurers,  however,  his  native  powers  were  first  put 
forth  under  the  pressure  of  poverty.  His  pure,  fresh, 
childlike,  "perfect  love"  of  nature;  his  deep  sympathy 
with  all  visible  created  things ;  his  luxurious,  enthu- 
siastic affection  for  all  living  grandeurs,  beauties,  and 
harmonies,  made  their  presence  felt  in  the  world  of 
taste,  when,  in  1730,  his  "all-embracing  genius" 
charmed  the  English  public  with  his  living  pictures  of 


HYMNS    OF    CREATION.  231 

"The  Seasons."  Thompson,  "the  fine  fat  fellow," 
was  not  without  his  errors;  but  he  was  a  loving 
brother,  a  fast  friend,  a  sharp  and  accurate  observer  of 
men  and  things,  and  gave  hope,  in  his  last  hours,  that 
he  "  died  in  the  faith."  "Who  can  think  of  him  with- 
out affection  and  gratitude  as  the  author  of  that 
sublime  hymn,  with  which  his  poem  on  the  Seasons 
closes  ?  It  has  been  well  said  of  that  hymn,  that  in  it 
the  essential  beauty  of  his  poem  "  is  collected  in  a 
cloud  of  fragrance,  and  by  the  breath  of  devotion 
directed  up  to  heaven."  Who  does  not  listen  breath- 
less to  its  opening  music  and  its  closing  swell  ? 

Almighty  Father  ! 

The  rolling  year 
Is  full  of  Thee.     Forth  in  the  pleasing  spring 
Thy  beauty  walks,  thy  tenderness  and  love. 
"Wide  flush  the  fields ;  the  softening  air  is  balm ; 
Echo  the  mountains  round ;  the  forest  smiles; 
And  every  sense  and  every  heart  is  joy. 
Then  comes  thy  glory  in  the  summer  months, 
With  light  and  heat  refulgent.     Then  thy  sun 
Shoots  full  perfection  through  the  swelling  year; 
And  oft  thy  voice  in  dreadful  thunder  speaks, 
And  oft  at  dawn,  deep  noon,  or  falling  eve, 
By  brooks  and  groves,  in  hollow  whispering  gales  ; 
Thy  bounty  shines  in  autumn  unconfined, 
And  spreads  a  common  feast  for  all  that  lives. 
In  winter,  awful  Thou !  with  clouds  and  storms 
Around  Thee  thrown  !  on  the  whirlwind's  wing 
Biding  sublime,  Thou  bidst  the  world  adore, 
And  tremblest  nature  with  thy  northern  blast. 

Should  fate  command  me  to  the  furthest  verge 
Of  the  green  earth,  to  distant  barbarous  climes, 
Eivers  unknown  to  song,  where  first  the  sun 
Gilds  Indian  mountains,  or  his  setting  beam 
Flames  on  th'  Atlantic  isles,  'tis  nought  to  me ; 


232  HYMN- WRITERS   AND    THEJR    HYMNS. 

Since  God  is  ever  present,  ever  felt, 

In  the  void  waste,  and  in  the  city  full ! 

And  where  He  vital  breathes  there  must  be  joy. 

When  e'en,  at  last,  the  solemn  hour  shall  come, 

And  wing  my  mystic  flight  to  future  worlds, 

I  cheerful  will  obey ;  there  with  new  powers, 

With  rising  wonders,  sing.     I  cannot  go 

Where  universal  love  not  shines  around, 

Sustaining  all  yon  orbs,  and  all  their  suns, 

From  seeming  evil  still  educing  good, 

And  better  them  again,  and  better  still, 

In  infinite  progression.     But  I  lose 

Myself  in  Him,  in  light  ineffable  ! 

Come,  then,  expressive  silence  !  muse  his  praise. 


...    -\ryyy 


HYMNS  ABOUT  THE  BOOK. 


"  In   God  will  I  praise  his  word  ;  in  the  Lord  will  I  praise  his 
word." 


XGLAND  has  her  classic  divinity;    a  theolo- 
gical   creation    affording    everything    to    en- 
!  lighten   the    minds,   regulate   the   lives,    and 
warm   the  hearts    of  the  most  cultivated   Christians, 


as  long  as  the  English  language  lives.  In  the 
midst  of  this  brilliant  firmament  of  religious  litera- 
ture, like  a  central  and  imperishable  sun,  stands  our 
Bible.  This  is  the  one  book  of  the  Christian ;  that 
which  affords  enough  to  form  his  character  were  all 
other  volumes  consumed  with  the  dust  of  their  authors. 
The  great  design  of  this  book  is  to  regulate  the  affec- 
tions of  man,  and  to  perfect  his  character  for  an  im- 
mortal state.  But  it  affords  innumerable  pleasures  to 
the  mind  which  it  sways,  and  allures  the  soul  toward 
religious  maturity  by  gratifying  its  distinctive  taste. 
Do  we  seek  for  beauty  of  composition  ?  In  the  Bible 
we  find  the  most  natural  simplicity  and  force,  the  most 
genuine  strength  and  grandeur.  Do  we  look  for 
poetry  ?     Here  we  may  feast  on  the  amazing  sublimi- 


234  HYMN-WKITEES    AND    THETR    HYMNS. 

ties  of  Isaiah,  and  read  with  pleasure  the  pastorals  of 
Solomon ;  we  are  excited  to  heavenly  feeling  by  the 
sound  of  David's  lyre,  are  sometimes  melted  by  the 
pathetic  strains  of  Jeremiah,  and  at  intervals  over- 
whelmed by  the  awful  grandeurs  of  the  entranced 
Ezekiel.  Does  our  taste  lead  us  to  inquire  for  the 
beauties  of  logic  ?  In  the  Bible  we  have  the  most 
delicate  distinctions,  the  most  acute  reasonings,  and 
the  most  perfect  developments  of  the  human  mind. 
Do  we  wish  to  gratify  our  taste  for  the  science  of 
numbers  ?  Questions  may  be  drawn  from  this  Book, 
the  solution  of  which  may  deeply  engage  the  most 
profound  calculators.  Are  we  astronomical  in  our 
propensity  ?  Then  we  may  follow  the  inspired  pen- 
man, and  ride  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,  fly  above 
these  lower  elements,  perform  the  circuit  of  the  earth, 
consider  the  influences  of  the  moon,  mark  the  Pleiades, 
measure  the  bands  of  Orion,  follow  the  "  going  forth  " 
of  Mazaroth,  or  commune  with  Arcturus  and  his  sons. 
Are  we  in  pursuit  of  geographical  knowledge  ?  Here 
are  notices  interesting,  explanatory,  and  illustrative. 
Are  we  students  in  natural  philosophy  ?  Here  the 
wide  field  of  nature  is  opened  to  us ;  and  the  philoso- 
phical writers  of  this  book  direct  us  to  particulars  and 
universals.  In  the  Bible  the  pious  politician  meets 
with  the  great  principles  of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  polity, 
and  here  is  a  system  of  moral  philosophy  which  far 
transcends  all  that  has  been  produced  among  men. 
And  all  these  secondary  lights  are  so  placed  in  the 
sphere  of  truth,  that  their  beams  unite  to  glorify  and 
render  prominent  the  great  Source  of  all  good.  Nor 
can  we  trace  their  rays  without  being  led  to  contem- 
plate the  glorious  character  and  righteous  will  of  the 
Divine  Being.     The  book  that  thus  gratifies  our  taste, 


HYMNS   ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  235 

introduces  the  mind  to  God,  and  assimilates  it  to  his 
image  by  calling  it  to  enjoy  the  writings  of  the  law, 
the  oracles  of  the  prophets,  the  doctrine  of  types,  the 
experience  of  histories,  the  instruction  of  proverbs,  the 
beauty  of  promises,  and  the  music  of  psalms.  There 
is  no  book  which  has  such  power  to  transform  and 
perfect  the  character  of  the  Christian ;  none  which 
holds  in  such  pleasurable  servitude  the  intellect  over 
which  it  has  the  entire  sway.  While  the  mind  has  a 
strong  passion  for  books,  and  a  relish  for  great  variety 
prevails,  it  is  difficult  for  the  young  Christian  to  give 
the  Bible  its  proper  place,  to  afford  it  its  proper  share 
of  his  time,  attention,  and  heart.  But  to  the  self- 
denying  student,  who  devotes  himself  to  revealed 
truth,  that  book  opens  its  hitherto  veiled  beauties, 
and  fixes  and  absorbs  the  wondering  and  ravished 
mind.  Dr.  Kennicott  was  occupied  for  thirty  years 
on  his  edition  of  the  Hebrew  Bible.  During  that  time 
it  was  Mrs.  Kennicott's  office,  in  their  daily  airings,  to 
read  to  him  those  different  portions  to  which  his  im- 
mediate attention  was  called.  When  preparing  for 
their  ride  the  day  after  his  great  work  was  completed, 
upon  her  asking  him  what  book  she  should  now  take, 
"  Oh/''  exclaimed  he,  "  let  us  begin  the  Bible  again." 
So,  then,  the  love  of  the  sacred  volume  grows  as  our 
acquaintance  with  it  deepens ;  and  just  as  its  various 
riches  and  powers  open  our  hearts,  we  shall  take  up 
the  simple  but  touching  melody  of  Anne  Steele's 
hymn   on   "the    excellency  of  the    Scriptures,"    and 


Tather  of  mercies,  in  thy  word, 
What  endless  glory  shines ! 

For  ever  be  thy  name  adored 
For  these  celestial  lines. 


236  HYM,N-WRITEES    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Here  mines  of  heavenly  wealth  disclose 
Their  bright,  unbounded  store ; 

The  glittering  gem  no  longer  glows, 
And  India  boasts  no  more. 

Here  may  the  wretched  sons  of  want 

Exhaustless  riches  find ; 
Riches  above  what  earth  can  grant, 

And  lasting  as  the  mind. 

Here  the  fair  tree  of  knowledge  grows, 

And  yields  a  free  repast ; 
Sublimer  sweets  than  nature  knows, 

Invite  the  longing  taste. 

Here  may  the  blind  and  hungry  come, 
And  light  and  food  receive  ; 

Here  shall  the  meanest  guest  have  room, 
And  taste,  and  see,  and  live. 

Amidst  these  gloomy  wilds  below, 
When  dark  and  sad  we  stray  ; 

Here  beams  of  heaven  relieve  our  woe, 
And  guide  to  endless  day. 

Here  springs  of  consolation  rise, 
To  cheer  the  fainting  mind ; 

And  thirsty  souls  receive  supplies, 
And  sweet  refreshment  find. 

When  guilt  and  terror,  pain  and  grief, 

United  rend  the  heart, 
Here  sinners  meet  divine  relief, 

And  cool  the  raging  smart. 

Here  the  Redeemer's  welcome  voice 
Spreads  heavenly  peace  around ; 

And  life,  and  everlasting  joys, 
Attend  the  blissful  sound. 


HYMNS    ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  237 

But  when  his  painful  sufferings  rise 

(Delightful,  dreadful  scene !) 
Angels  may  read  with  wondering  eyes 

That  Jesus  died  for  men. 


Oh,  may  these  heavenly  pages  be 

My  ever  dear  delight, 
And  still  new  beauties  may  I  see. 

And  still  increasing  light. 

Divine  instructor,  gracious  Lord, 

Be  Thou  for  ever  near ; 
Teach  me  to  love  thy  sacred  word, 

And  view  my  Saviour  there. 


There  is  something,  too,  in  this  blessed  book  which 
seems  to  infnse  a  kind  of  immortal  vigour  into  the 
writings  of  those  men  who  have  made  it  their  chief 
study.  There  are  two  authors  whose  writings  breathe 
immortality,  whose  books  will  live,  while  myriads  of 
subsequent  productions  pass  into  oblivion  —  John 
Milton  and  John  Bunyan.  Milton's  masterpiece  is  his 
"  Paradise  Lost/'  and  though  every  page  of  that 
poem  shows  the  vast  range  of  bis  reading,  it  would 
seem  that  we  owe  the  life  of  its  best  parts  to  the  poet's 
deep  communion  with  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  Some 
of  the  most  sublime  passages  of  u  Paradise  Lost "  are 
poetic  translations  and  paraphrases  of  Hebrew  words 
and  sentences  used  by  Moses  and  the  prophets;  in  his 
daily  intercourse  with  whom,  Milton's  soul  gathered 
strength  for  a  flight  through  the  depths  of  chaos,  and 
into  the  regions  of  the  blessed.  And  where  is  the 
secret  of  that  life  which  animates  ' '  Pilgrim's  Progress"  ? 
that  undying  vigour  and  immortal  beauty  which 
enchant  every  successive  generation  of  readers  ?  Why 


238  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

you  have  it  in  the  fact  that  Bunyan  was  a  man  of 
one  book,  and  that  book  was  the  English  Bible. 
Bunyan  and  Milton,  both  imperishable  authors, 
gather  their  life,  the  one  from  the  Hebrew  Scrip- 
tures, and  the  other  from  their  incomparable  English 
version. 

To  the  same  volume  we  may  trace  that  power 
which  formed  those  mature  and  influential  characters 
who  have  left  such  gracious  impressions  on  the  Church 
and  the  world — Luther,  Calvin,  Wesley,  and  White- 
field.  One  of  them  has  opened  his  heart  to  us,  and 
has  shown  the  source  of  that  energy  which  distin- 
guished his  preaching,  and  which  still  lives  in  the 
volumes  which  he  wrote.  He  says : — "  To  candid, 
reasonable  men,  I  am  not  afraid  to  lay  open  what  have 
been  the  inmost  thoughts  of  my  heart.  I  have  thought 
I  am  a  creature  of  a  day,  passing  through  life  as  an 
arrow  through  the  air.  I  am  a  spirit  come  from  God, 
and  returning  to  God;  just  hovering  over  the  great 
gulf,  till,  a  few  moments  hence,  I  am  no  more  seen ;  I 
drop  into  an  unchangeable  eternity  !  I  want  to  know 
one  thing — the  way  to  heaven  ;  how  to  land  safe  on 
that  happy  shore.  God  Himself  has  condescended  to 
teach  the  way ;  for  this  very  end  He  came  from  hea- 
ven. He  hath  written  it  down  in  a  book.  Oh  give  me 
that  book  !  At  any  price,  give  me  the  book  of  God  ! 
I  have  it.  Here  is  knowledge  enough  for  me.  Let 
me  be  a  man  of  one  book.  Here  I  am,  far  from  the 
busy  ways  of  men.  I  sit  down  alone;  only  God  is 
here.  In  his  presence  I  open,  I  read  his  book ;  for 
this  end  I  find  the  way  to  heaven.  Is  there  a  doubt 
concerning  the  meaning  of  what  I  read  ?  Does  any- 
thing appear  dark  or  intricate  ?  I  lift  up  my  heart  to 
the  Father  of  lights  : — Lord,  is  it  not  thy  word,  c  If 


HYMNS   ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  239 

any  man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God '  ?  Thou 
1  givest  liberally,  and  upbraidest  not.''  Thou  hast  said, 
'  If  any  man  be  willing  to  do  thy  will,  he  shall  know/ 
I  am  willing  to  do,  let  me  know  thy  will.  I  then 
search  after  and  consider  parallel  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture, '  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual.''  I 
meditate  thereon  with  all  the  attention  and  earnestness 
of  which  my  mind  is  capable.  If  any  doubt  still 
remains,  I  consult  those  who  are  experienced  in  the 
things  of  God ;  and  then  the  writings,  whereby  being 
dead,  they  yet  speak.  And  what  I  thus  learn,  that  I 
teach. "  Thus  speaks  John  Wesley  in  his  preface  to 
his  sermons ;  and  the  spirit  of  the  beautiful  and  strik- 
ing passage  has  been  happily  caught  by  his  brother 
Charles,  and  embodied  in  the  form  of  a  metrical  para- 
phrase on  Deut.  vi.  6,  7 — "  And  these  words,  that  I 
command  thee  this  day,  shall  be  in  thine  heart :  and 
thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  unto  thy  children,  and 
shalt  talk  of  them  when  thou  sittest  in  thine  house,  and 
when  thou  walkest  by  the  way,  and  when  thou  liest 
down,  and  when  thou  risest  up." 

The  table  of  my  heart  prepare 

(Such  power  belongs  to  Thee  alone), 

And  write,  0  God,  thy  precepts  there, 
To  show  Thou  still  canst  write  in  stone, 

So  shall  my  pure  obedience  prove 

All  things  are  possible  to  love. 


Father,  instruct  my  docile  heart, 
Apt  to  instruct  I  then  shall  be, 

I  then  shall  all  thy  words  impart, 

And  teach  (as  taught  myself  by  Thee) 

My  children,  in  their  earliest  days, 

To  know  and  live  the  life  of  grace. 


240  HYHN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

When  quiet  in  my  house  I  sit, 

Thy  book  be  my  companion  still, 
My  joy  thy  sayings  to  repeat, 

Talk  o'er  the  records  of  thy  will, 
And  search  the  oracles  divine, 
Till  every  heartfelt  word  is  mine. 

Oh,  might  the  gracious  words  divine 

Subject  of  all  my  converse  be, 
So  would  the  Lord  his  follower  join, 

And  walk  and  talk  Himself  with  me ; 
So  would  my  heart  his  presence  prove, 
And  burn  with  everlasting  love. 

Oft  as  I  lay  me  down  to  rest, 

Oh,  may  the  reconciling  word 
Sweetly  compose  my  weary  breast, 

While  on  the  bosom  of  my  Lord 
I  sink  in  blissful  dreams  away, 
And  visions  of  eternal  day. 

Eising  to  sing  my  Saviour's  praise, 

Thee  may  I  publish  all  day  long, 
And  let  thy  precious  word  of  grace 

Flow  from  my  heart  and  fill  my  tongue ; 
Fill  all  my  life  with  purest  love, 
And  join  me  to  thy  church  above. 

This  hymn  has  become  a  sort  of  household  joy  to 
thousands  who  guide  the  daily  devotions  of  their 
families ;  and  its  music  promises  to  be  happily  familiar 
to  a  widening  circle  of  devout  Bible  students  whose 
homes  are  hallowed  as  scenes  of  daily  communion 
with  inspired  truth.  As  a  hyrunist,  however,  Charles 
Wesley  wras  never  content  merely  to  record  his  own 
or  even  his  brother's  experience  in  tuneful  measures. 
He  was  not  among  the  lyric  poets  who  find  full  em- 
ployment for  their  muse  amidst  the  intricacies  and 


HYMNS    ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  241 

subtle  workings  of  their  own  inner  world.  He  had  a 
large  share  of  that  unselfishness  which  so  eminently 
distinguished  his  more  active  brother,  and  longed, 
like  an  apostle,  "to  spend  and  be  spent,"  rather  in 
guiding,  blessing,  and  saving  others  than  in  dwelling 
complacently  or  uneasily  upon  the  throne  of  his  own 
spiritual  kingdom.  Or  if,  like  St.  Paul,  he  sometimes 
threw  his  own  experience  into  the  form  of  an  example, 
it  was  only  that  he  might  the  more  effectually  teach 
the  world  and  assist  the  devotions  of  the  church. 
Thus,  while  in  one  hymn  he  takes  the  individual  mode 
of  expression,  singing  as  a  person,  that  every  like- 
minded  person  may  have  a  song  about  the  book  ;  in 
another,  he  pours  the  desire  of  his  soul  into  a  metrical 
prayer  so  adapted  to  the  many,  that  ministers  and 
people  may  sing  together  in  "the  great  congre- 
gation. " 

Inspirer  of  the  ancient  seers, 
Who  wrote  from  Thee  the  sacred  page, 

The  same  through  all  succeeding  years, 
To  us  in  our  degenerate  age, 

The  Spirit  of  thy  word  impart, 

And  breathe  the  life  into  our  heart. 

While  now  thine  oracles  we  read, 

With  earnest  prayer  and  strong  desire, 

0  let  thy  Spirit  from  Thee  proceed, 
Our  souls  to  awaken  and  inspire ; 

Our  weakness  help,  our  darkness  chase, 

And  guide  us  by  the  light  of  Grace  ! 

Whene'er  in  error's  paths  we  rove, 
The  living  God  through  sin  forsake, 

Our  conscience  by  thy  Word  reprove, 
Convince  and  bring  the  wanderers  back, 

Deep  wounded  by  thy  Spirit's  sword, 

And  then  by  G Head's  balm  restored. 

16 


242  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  sacred  lessons  of  thy  grace, 

Transmitted  through  thy  Word,  repeat ; 

And  train  us  up  in  all  thy  ways, 
To  make  us  in  thy  will  complete ; 

Fulfill  thy  love's  redeeming  plan, 

And  bring  us  to  a  perfect  man. 

Furnish'd  out  of  thy  treasury, 

Oh  may  we  always  ready  stand 
To  help  the  souls  redeemed  by  Thee, 

For  what  their  various  states  demand; 
To  teach,  convince,  correct,  reprove, 
And  build  them  up  in  holiest  love  ! 

There  are  but  two  hymns  "  on  the  Scriptures" 
in  the  Olney  collection ;  and  they  stand  side  by  side, 
as  if  to  remind  us  of  that  bond  of  spiritual  fellow- 
ship which  once  held  their  authors  heart  to  heart.  In 
some  respects  it  was  a  strange  association,  that  of 
Cowper  and  Newton.  The  one  robust,  trained  to 
hardihood  upon  the  high  seas;  the  other  frail,  in- 
stinctively shrinking  from  both  wave  and  wind. 
Unlike  in  birth  and  education,  and,  indeed,  in  all  the 
circumstances  of  their  earlier  course,  yet  one  in  their 
love  of  truth,  and  united  in  their  work  of  giving 
new  sougs  to  the  Christian  world.  Many  passages 
of  the  blessed  book,  Cowper,  in  his  morbid  depression, 
would  misinterpret  against  his  own  soul;  as  if  he 
were  unwilling  that  the  fire  of  divine  wrath  should 
ever  glance  on  any  but  the  one  on  whom  they  were 
to  be  concentrated — himself.  Whether  his  friend 
Newton's  spiritual  direction  was  the  best  for  him 
has  been  a  question  ;  but,  however  that  may  be,  there 
were  times  when  his  enjoyment  of  the  Sacred  Volume 
was  equal  not  only  to  his  own  support,  but  to  the 
consolation  of  all  lovers  of  truth,  who  have  followed 


HYMNS    ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  243 

him,  and   have    learnt    his  bright  and    hopeful  little 
hymn,  on  "  The  Light  and  Glory  of  the  Word." 

The  Spirit  breathes  upon  the  Word, 

And  brings  the  truth  to  sight ; 
Precepts  and  promises  afford 

A  sanctifying  light. 

A  glory  gilds  the  sacred  page, 

Majestic  like  the  sun ; 
It  gives  a  light  to  ev'ry  age, 

It  gives,  and  borrows  none. 

The  hand  that  gave  it  still  supplies 

The  gracious  light  and  heat ; 
His  truths  upon  the  nations  rise, 

They  rise,  but  never  set. 

Let  everlasting  thanks  be  thine, 

For  such  a  bright  display, 
As  makes  a  world  of  darkness  shine 

With,  beams  of  heavenly  day, 

My  soul  rejoices  to  pursue 

The  steps  of  Him  I  love ; 
Till  glory  breaks  upon  my  view 

In  brighter  worlds  above. 

Then  comes  Newton's  happy  song  on  "  The  Word 
more  Precious  than  Gold."  How  like  a  man  of  his 
temper  is  this  hymn  ?  How  expressive,  from  the 
lips  of  one  who  had  passed  through  the  remarkable 
experiences  of  his  life.  How  differently  Cowper  and 
he  had  been  dealt  with  by  divine  mercy.  But  as  it 
was  in  both  cases  the  same  providence  and  the  same 
spirit,  so  they  were  brought  to  the  same  goal.  Newton 
himself  has  put  this  in  his  own  style.  "  Imagine 
to  yourself  a  number  of  vessels,  at  different  times, 
and  from  different  places,  bound  to  the  same  port, 
there  are  some  things  in  wrhich  all  these  would  agree — 


244  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

the  compass  steered  by,  the  port  in  view,  the  general 
rule  of  navigation,  both  as  to  the  management  of  the 
vessel  and  determining  their  astronomical  obser- 
vations, would  be  the  same  in  all.  In  other  respects 
they  would  differ ;  perhaps  no  two  of  them  would 
meet  with  the  same  distribution  of  wind  and  weather. 
Some  we  see  set  out  with  a  prosperous  gale;  and 
when  they  almost  think  their  passage  secured,  they 
are  checked  by  adverse  blasts;  and,  after  enduring 
much  hardship  and  danger,  and  frequent  expectations 
of  shipwreck,  they  just  escape  and  reach  the  desired 
haven.  Others  meet  the  greatest  difficulties  at  first ; 
they  put  forth  in  a  storm,  and  are  often  beaten  back  ; 
at  length  their  voyage  proves  favourable,  and  they 
enter  the  port  with  a  'rich  and  abundant  entrance/ 
Some  are  hard  beset  with  cruisers  and  enemies,  and 
obliged  to  fight  their  way  through ;  others  meet  with 
little  remarkable  in  their  passage.  Is  it  not  in  the 
spiritual  life  ?  All  true  believers  '  walk  by  the  same 
rule/  and  mind  the  same  things;  the  word  of  God 
is  their  compass  ;  Jesus  is  their  polar  star.  .  .  .  Yet 
their  experience  formed  upon  these  common  principles 
is  far  from  being  uniform.  The  Lord,  in  his  first  call, 
and  his  following  dispensations,  has  a  regard  to  the 
situation,  temper,  talents  of  each,  and  to  the  par- 
ticular sorrows  or  trials  He  has  appointed  them  for. 
Though  all  are  exercised  at  times,  yet  some  pass 
through  the  voyage  of  life  much  more  smoothly  than 
others/'' 

With  all  the  varieties  of  their  personal  histories, 
both  Cowper  and  Newton  had  learnt  to  love  the  Bible ; 
and  both  hearts  found  an  inexhaustible  treasure  in 
that  "-one  book/"'  Newton's  mother  had  taught  him 
to  read  the  Bible,  and  to  store  his  memory  with  its 


HYMNS    ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  245 

chapters,  when  lie  was  but  four  years  old,  and,  as  lie 
says,  "  though  in  process  of  time  I  sinned  away  all  the 
advantages  of  these  early  impressions,  yet  they  were 
for  a  great  while  a  restraint  upon  me  ;  they  returned 
again  and  again,  and  it  was  very  long  before  I  could 
wholly  shake  them  off;  and  when  the  Lord  at  length 
opened  my  eyes,  I  found  a  great  benefit  from  the 
recollection  of  them."  In  the  course  of  his  subsequent 
wanderings,  he  picked  up  Shaftsbury's  "  Charac- 
teristics," "in  a  petty  shop  at  Middleburg  in  Holland." 
"  The  title,"  says  he,  "  allured  me  to  buy  it,  and  the 
style  and  manner  gave  me  great  pleasure  in  reading. 
....  Thus,  with  fine  words  and  fair  speeches,   my 

simple  heart  was  beguiled No  immediate  effect 

followed;  but  it  operated  like  a  slow  poison."  Evil 
companionship  finished  what  Shaftsbury  began,  it  con- 
firmed him  in  blank  infidelity.  But  when  at  last 
extreme  suffering  and  danger  brought  him  to  cry  to 
God  for  mercy,  the  sacred  utterances  with  which  his 
youthful  mind  had  been  stored,  unfolded  their  meaning 
to  his  heart ;  and  that  word  which  he  had  taught  him- 
self to  despise  was  now  his  best  friend,  the  companion 
of  his  leisure  hours,  and  the  source  of  those  holy 
lessons  which,  as  a  preacher,  he  afterwards  gave  out 
to  his  flock,  and  with  which,  as  a  hymnist,  he  enriched 
his  undying  hymns.  Who  can  wonder  that  he  sang  of 
the  book  thus  ? — 


Precious  Bible !  what  a  treasure 
Does  the  Word  of  God  afford  ? 

All  I  want  for  life  or  pleasure, 

Food  and  med'cine,  shield  and  sword 

Let  the  world  account  me  poor, 

Having:  this  I  need  no  more. 


246  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Food  to  which  the  world's  a  stranger, 

Here  my  hungry  soul  enjoys  ; 
Of  excess  there  is  no  danger, 

Tho'  it  fills,  it  never  cloys  : 
On  a  dying  Christ  I  feed, 
He  is  meat  and  drink  indeed  ! 

When  my  faith  is  faint  and  sickly, 

Or  when  Satan  wounds  my  mind, 
Cordials  to  revive  me  quickly, 

Healing  med'cines  here  I  find : 
To  the  promises  I  flee, 
Each  affords  a  remedy. 

In  the  hour  of  dark  temptation 

Satan  cannot  make  me  yield ; 
For  the  word  of  consolation 

Is  to  me  the  mighty  shield : 
While  the  Scripture  truths  are  sure, 
From  his  malice  I'm  secure. 

Vain  his  threats  to  overcome  me, 

When  I  take  the  Spirit's  sword ; 
Then  with  ease  I  drive  him  from  me, 

Satan  trembles  at  the  word : 
'Tis  a  sword  for  conquest  made, 
Keen  the  edge  and  strong  the  blade. 

Shall  I  envy  then  the  miser, 

Doating  on  his  golden  store  ? 
Sure  I  am  or  should  be  wiser, 

I  am  rich,  'tis  he  is  poor : 
Jesus  gives  me  in  his  word, 
Food  and  med'cine,  shield  and  sword. 

Charles  Lamb  once  resolved,  if  possible,  to  check  a 
young  friend  who  was  rather  too  ready  to  abandon  him- 
self to  dependence  on  a  literary  profession,  and  he  wrote 
to  him,  saying,  "  Throw  yourself  on  the  world,  with- 
out any  rational  plan   of  support   beyond  what   the 


HTMXS   ABOUT   THE    BOOK.  247 

chance  employ  of  booksellers  would  afford  you  ! 
Throw  yourself  rather,  my  dear  sir,  from  the  steep 
Tarpeian  rock,  slap-dash  headlong  upon  iron  spikes. 
If  you  have  but  five  consolatory  minutes  between  the 
desk  and  the  bed,  make  much  of  them,  and  live  a 
century  in  them,  rather  than  turn  slave  to  the  book- 
sellers. They  are  Turks  and  Tartars  when  they  have 
poor  authors  at  their  beck.  Hitherto  you  have  been 
at  arm's  length  from  them — come  not  within  their 
grasp.  I  have  known  many  authors  want  for  bread — 
some  repining,  others  enjoying  the  blessed  security  of 
a  counting-house — all  agreeing  they  had  rather  have 
been  tailors,  weavers — what  not  ?  rather  than  the 
things  they  were.  I  have  known  some  starved,  some 
go  mad,  one  dear  friend  literally  dying  in  a  workhouse. 
Oh,  you  know  not — may  you  never  know — the  miseries 
of  subsisting  by  authorship  I"  This  strong  preventive 
was  effectual ;  and  Bernard  Barton  stuck  to  his  bank- 
ing establishment  at  Woodbridge  in  Suffolk.  Lamb 
knew  his  man,  and  gave  wise  counsel.  Happy  was  it 
for  Barton  that  he  listened  to  a  true  friend.  His  were 
not  the  talents  for  the  general  literary  market.  In 
1820  he  published  a  volume  of  miscellaneous  poems, 
remarkable  for  their  simple  elegance,  chasteness  of 
style,  and  purity  of  feeling.  The  pieces  will  always  be 
agreeable  to  those  who  love  quiet  English  scenery 
pictured  with  gentle  feeling ;  or  meditative  verses 
breathing  tenderness  and  devotion,  always  soothing 
and  always  happy.  There  is  little  that  would  strike, 
little  that  would  seem  original ;  yet  Bernard  Barton  is 
always  welcome  to  the  cultivated  taste.  He  was  a 
hymnist,  and  one  hymn  is  about  "  the  book"  and  full 
of  sweetness.  With  all  his  distinctive  notions  as  a 
Quaker  about  <(  inward  light,"  he  had  a  deep  reverence 


248  HYMN-WRITERS    AXD    THETR    HYMNS. 

for  the  written  word,  and  a  childlike  trust  in  the 
certainty  of  its  guidance ;  and  expresses  his  love  for 
inspired  truth,  and  his  faith  in  its  lessons,  in  the  hymn 
founded  on  Psalm  cxix.  105 — "  Thy  word  is  a  lamp 
unto  my  feet" — 

Lamp  of  our  feet,  whereby  we  trace 

Our  path  when  wont  to  stray, 
Stream  from  the  fount  of  heavenly  grace, 

Brook,  by  the  traveller's  way. 

Bread  of  our  souls,  whereon  we  feed, 

True  manna  from  on  high ; 
Our  guide  and  chart,  wherein  we  read 

Of  realms  beyond  the  sky  : 

Pillar  of  fire  through  watches  dark, 

And  radiant  cloud  by  day ; 
"When  waves  would  whelm  our  tossing  bark, 

Our  anchor  and  our  stay  : 

Word  of  the  everlasting  God, 

Will  of  his  glorious  Son ; 
Without  thee  how  could  earth  be  trod, 

Or  heaven  itself  be  won  ? 

Lord,  grant  us  all  aright  to  learn 

The  wisdom  it  imparts ; 
And  to  its  heavenly  teaching  turn, 

With  simple,  childlike  hearts. 

But  pleasant  as  it  is  to  sing  these  later  hymns  about 
the  book,  the  older  songs  must-  not  be  forgotten. 
Who  can  forget  George  Herbert's  hymn  on  "  the 
Holy  Scriptures  "  ?  More  antique  it  is,  more  quaint, 
less  adapted  to  popular  music  than  some  others ; 
yet  how  full  of  deep  thought — too  full,  perhaps,  for 
most    thinkers    now-a-days — and    how    richly    it    is 


HYMNS    ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  249 

coloured  by  the  living  breath  of  inspired  truth  itself? 
Xobody  would  expect  anything  but  hymns  and  songs 
about  truth  and  love  from  him.  Whether  at  home  or 
abroad,  in  the  church  or  in  the  household,  the  author 
of  the  "  Country  Parson  "  was  always  in  appearance, 
manner,  and  spirit  the  holy  parson.  "  He  was,"  says 
his  venerable  biographer,  "  for  his  person,  of  a  stature 
inclining  towards  tallness ;  his  body  was  very  straight ; 
and  so  far  from  being  cumbered  with  too  much  flesh, 
that  he  was  lean  to  an  extremity.  His  aspect  was 
cheerful,  and  his  speech  and  motion  did  both  declare 
him  a  gentleman ;  for  they  were  all  so  meek  and 
obliging,  that  they  purchased  love  and  respect  from 
all  that  knew  him.""  He  entered,  in  his  thirty-sixth 
year,  on  his  parsonage  at  Bemerton,  saying,  "  I 
beseech  God  that  my  humble  and  charitable  life  may 
so  win  upon  others,  as  to  bring  glory  to  my  Jesus, 
whom  I  have  this  day  taken  to  be  my  Master  and 
Governor;  and  I  am  so  proud  of  his  service,  that  I 
will  always  observe,  and  obey,  and  do  his  will ;  and 
always  call  Him  Jesus  my  Master."  And  Herbert's 
life  answered  to  his  prayer.  It  was  "  so  full  of 
charity,  humility,  and  all  Christian  virtues,"  says  a 
friend,  "  that  it  deserves  the  eloquence  of  St.  Chry- 
sostom  to  commend  and  declare  it  !  a  life  that,  if  it 
were  related  by  a  pen  like  his,  there  would  then  be  no 
need  for  this  age  to  look  back  into  times  past  for  the 
examples  of  primitive  piety,  for  they  might  be  all 
found  in  the  life  of  George  Herbert."  Alas !  his 
holy  career  was  short,  though  full.  Dr.  Humphrey 
Henchman,  afterwards  Bishop  of  London,  who  was 
present  at  his  ordination  to  the  priesthood,  plain- 
tively says,  "  I  laid  my  hand  on  Mr.  Herberts  head, 
and,    alas !    within   less    than   three    years    lent    my 


250  HYMN-WRITERS    AND   THEIR    HYMNS. 

shoulder  to  carry  my  dear  friend  to  his  grave."  But 
"he,  being  dead,  yet  speaketh  •"  and  speaketh  in 
rich  glowing  praise  of  the  blessed  book  from  whose 
commands,  doctrines,  and  promises  he  gathered  the 
secret  of  his  holy  character  and  life. 

Oh  book  !  infinite  sweetness  !  let  my  heart 

Suck  every  letter  and  a  honey  gain, 
Precious  for  any  grief  in  any  part, 

To  clear  the  breast,  to  mollify  all  pain. 

Thou  art  all  health,  health  thriving,  till  it  make 

A  full  eternity :  Thou  art  a  mass 
Of  strange  delights,  where  we  may  wish  and  take. 

Ladies,  look  here  ;  this  is  the  thankful  glass, 

That  mends  the  looker's  eyes  :  this  is  the  well 
That  washes  what  it  shows.    Who  can  endear 

Thy  praise  too  much  ?     Thou  art  heaven's  lieger  here, 
"Working  against  the  states  of  death  and  hell. 

Thou  art  joy's  handsel :  heaven  lies  flat  in  thee, 
Subject  to  every  mounter's  bended  knee. 

Oh  that  I  knew  how  all  thy  lights  combine, 

And  the  configurations  of  their  glory  ! 
Seeing  not  only  how  each  verse  doth  shine, 

But  all  the  constellations  of  the  story. 

This  verse  marks  that,  and  both  do  make  a  motion 
Unto  a  third,  that  ten  leaves  off  doth  lie  ; 

Then  as  dispersed  herbs  do  watch  a  potion, 

These  three  make  up  some  Christian's  destiny. 

Such  are  thy  secrets,  which  my  life  makes  good, 
And  comments  on  thee  ;  for  in  everything 

Thy  words  do  find  me  out,  and  parallels  bring, 
And  in  another  make  me  understood. 

Stars  are  poor  books,  and  oftentimes  do  miss  : 
This  book  of  stars  lights  to  eternal  bliss. 


HYMNS   ABOUT    THE    BOOK.  251 

Would  young  men  improve  their  taste,  their  thinking 
powers,  and,  above  all,  the  tone  of  their  piety  ?  Let 
them  make  George  Herbert  their  companion  and 
study,  until  they  lose  sight  of  all  in  him  that  at  first 
appears  rugged,  grotesque,  and  quaint  in  their  deep 
enjoyment  of  his  fragrant  thoughts,  poetic  glow,  and 
heavenly  feeling;  and  when  they  wish  for  an  occa- 
sional change  to  the  more  simple  style  of  psalmody, 
they  may  turn  to  Watts' s  hymn  on  "  Instruction  from 
Scripture,''''  founded  on  parts  of  Psalm  cxix. : — 

How  shall  the  young  secure  their  hearts, 

And  guard  their  lives  from  sin  ? 
Thy  Word  the  choicest  rule  imparts, 

To  keep  the  conscience  clean. 

When  once  it  enters  to  the  mind, 

It  spreads  such  light  abroad, 
The  meanest  souls  instruction  find, 

And  raise  their  thoughts  to  God. 

'Tis  like  the  sun,  a  heav'nly  light, 

That  guides  us  all  the  day ; 
And  through  the  dangers  of  the  night, 

A  lamp  to  lead  our  way. 

The  men  that  keep  thy  law  with  care, 

And  meditate  thy  word, 
Grow  wiser  than  their  teachers  are, 

And  better  know  the  Lord. 

Thy  precepts  make  me  truly  wise ; 

I  hate  the  sinner's  road ; 
I  hate  my  own  vain  thoughts  that  rise, 

But  love  thy  love,  my  God. 

The  starry  heavens  thy  rule  obey, 

The  earth  maintains  her  place ; 
And  these  thy  servants  night  and  day 

Thy  skill  and  power  express. 


252  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

But  still  thy  law  and  gospel,  Lord, 
Have  lessons  more  divine  : 

Not  earth  stands  firmer  than  thy  word, 
Nor  stars  so  nobly  shine. 

Thy  Word  is  everlasting  truth, 

How  pure  is  ev'ry  page  ; 
That  holy  book  shall  guide  our  youth, 

And  well  support  our  age. 


CSTbnpfcr  XIY. 

HYMNS  OF  THE  SABBATH. 

"  How  still  the  morning  of  the  hallowed  day  ! 
Mute  is  the  voice  of  rural  labour,  .... 
"While  from  yon  lowly  roof,  whose  curling  smoke 
O'ermounts  the  mist,  is  heard,  at  intervals, 
The  voice  of  psalms,  the  simple  song  of  praise," 


fOW  certainly  the  outside  world  sometimes 
answers  to  the  condition   of  our   inner   life  ! 

!l  The  face  of  creation  seems  troubled  when  our 
souls  are  uneasy.  Signs  of  sorrow  appear  around 
us  when  our  hearts  are  distressed.  All  music  is  dis- 
cord when  we  ourselves  are  out  of  tune;  and  all  forms 
are  rugged,  all  outlines  harsh,  when  irregularities  and 
unlovely  tempers  are  taking  unholy  shapes  in  our  own 
inward  selves.  But  all  forms  of  creation  become  lines 
of  beauty,  all  shapes  make  themselves  agreeable,  all 
sounds  harmonize,  and  all  influences  are  calm,  when 
our  souls  are  conformed  to  God's  will,  when  we  enjoy 
the  repose  of  a  spiritual  Sabbath."  These  were  the 
thoughts  of  a  pilgrim  who  had  lived  and  journeyed  till 
he  had  seen  all  the  companions  of  his  earlier  course 
drop  off  from  the  road,  and  who  had  learned  to  turn 
with  tremulous  delight  towards  anything  in  nature  that 


254  HYMN-WEITEES    AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

seemed  to  wear  an  expression  of  sympathy  with  him 
in  his  loneliness.  Hills,  rocks,  valleys,  and  waters, 
flowers  and  all  tiny  forms  of  beauty,  he  had  become 
happily  familiar  with ;  and  friendship  with  nature,  in 
his  case,  was  so  akin  to  friendship  with  (<  the  God  of 
all  grace,"  that  they  seemed  to  blend  their  influences 
for  his  pleasure,  and  to  act  by  turns  as  a  sort  of  bro- 
therhood on  his  behalf.  He  was  sometimes  far  away 
from  the  Sabbath  assemblies  of  God's  people ;  but 
everything  in  the  outer  world  at  such  times  tendered 
its  sympathies,  and  offered  its  ministrations,  and  joined 
him  in  the  celebration  of  his  Sunday  service.  So  it 
was  one  Sunday  morning,  as  he  went  quietly  but  with 
buoyant  footsteps  over  the  soft,  turfy  undulations 
which,  like  the  waves  of  a  quietly-subsiding  sea,  sank 
from  the  hills  of  the  coast  down  to  the  low  cliff,  and 
formed  the  marshy  lawn-like  approach  to  a  lone 
cottage,  which  looked  out  upon  the  waters  of  the 
Atlantic.  Every  step  brought  up  fragrance  from  the 
crushed  camomile  or  the  wild  thyme.  No  breeze  dis- 
turbed the  sea.  There  was  something  solemnly  calm 
in  the  very  sunlight.  "  Nature  feels  her  Sabbath," 
said  he  to  himself,  <c  and  is  still ;  but  my  undertoned 
music  will  only  deepen  her  stillness ;"  and  then,  as  he 
went,  his  steps  kept  tune  with  his  low  chant,  as  he 
sang  a  charming  hymn,  which  in  that  day  was  just 
beginning  to  float  about  in  a  few  private  circles  of 
religious  life — 

Hail,  thou  bright  and  sacred  morn, 
Risen  with  gladness  in  thy  beams  ! 

Light,  which  not  of  earth  is  born, 
From  thy  dawn  in  glory  stream  : 

Airs  of  heaven  are  breath'd  around, 

And  each  place  is  holy  ground. 


HYMNS    OF   THE    SABBATH.  255 

Sad  and  weary  were  our  way, 

Fainting  oft  beneath  our  load, 
But  for  thee,  thou  blessed  day, 

Resting-place  on  life's  rough  road ! 
Here  flow  forth  the  streams  of  grace, 
Strengthened  hence  we  run  the  race. 

Great  Creator,  who  this  day 

From  thy  perfect  work  didst  rest, 
By  the  souls  that  own  thy  sway, 

Hallow' d  be  its  hours,  and  blest ; 
Cares  of  earth  aside  be  thrown, 
This  day  given  to  heaven  alone ! 

Saviour  !  who  this  day  didst  break 

The  dark  prison  of  the  tomb  ; 
Bid  my  slumbering  soul  awake, 

Shine  through  all  its  sin  and  gloom: 
Let  me,  froni  my  bonds  set  free, 
Bise  from  sin,  and  live  to  Thee ! 

Blessed  Spirit !  Comforter  ! 

Sent  this  day  from  Christ  on  high ; 
Lord,  on  me  thy  gifts  confer, 

Cleanse,  illumine,  sanctify : 
All  Thine  influence  shed  abroad, 
Lead  me  to  the  truth  of  God  ! 

Soon,  too  soon,  the  sweet  repose 

Of  this  day  of  God  will  cease  ; 
Soon  this  glimpse  of  heaven  will  close, 

Vanish  soon  the  hours  of  peace, 
Soon  return  the  toil,  the  strife, 
All  the  weariness  of  life. 

But  the  rest  which  yet  remains 

For  thy  people,  Lord,  above, 
Knows  nor  change,  nor  fears,  nor  pains, 

Endless  as  their  Saviour's  love : 
Oh,  may  every  Sabbath  here 
Bring  us  to  that  rest  more  near ! 


256  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMXS. 

The  last  line  still  lingered  on  his  lips  as  he  entered  the 
cottage. 

"  Ah !  you  were  singing,"  said  a  young  woman 
who  was  lying  on  a  couch,  so  placed  that  she  could 
look  out  upon  the  ocean ;  "  you  were  singing.  Well, 
I  do  not  wonder  at  that,  for  who  could  help  singing  on 
a  morning  like  this  ?  Does  not  all  nature  seem  to  feel 
its  Sabbath  hush  and  its  Sabbath  joy  ?" 

"  That  was  the  very  thought  which  moved  me  to 
sing,"  was  the  reply ;  "  and  I  was  indulging  in  that 
sort  of  inward  murmur  of  which  the  psalmist  speaks 
as  one  of  his  devotional  pleasures.  I- was  murmuring 
the  praise  which  seemed  to  rise  with  a  kind  of  natural- 
ness from  my  quiet  heart,  and  Mrs.  Lyte's  beautiful 
hymn  appeared  to  be  my  best  form  of  expression." 

"  That  is  rather  remarkable,"  said  the  young 
sufferer,  with  a  smile  that  told  the  whole  story  of  her 
long  discipline  of  affliction,  and  the  peaceful  submis- 
sion and  patience  which  she  had  learnt  in  the  process 
of  her  trial.  "  Just  before  you  came  in  I  was  humming 
to  myself  that  sweet  Sabbath  hymn  by  Bishop  Heber. 
How  often  some  of  his  hymns  rise  within  mj  soul,  as 
if  the  hand  of  my  Redeemer  had  touched  all  the 
musical  chords  within  me  !  I  sing  them  to  myself, 
while  the  sea  is  whispering  and  roaring  by  turns  on 
the  beach ;  and  then  I  look  on  the  waters  as  I  He  here, 
and  love  to  think  of  that  cultivated  and  gifted  man 
crossing  the  deep  under  the  constraining  power  of  his 
Redeemer's  love,  and  gladly  sacrificing  all  the  comforts 
and  honours  of  his  native  island  for  the  joy  of  pro- 
claiming peace  to  the  multitudes  of  India.  I  think  of 
him,  gentleman,  poet,  scholar,  theologian,  as  he  was, 
going  out  to  live  and  die  amidst  the  idolatrous  millions 
of  that  vast  old  country,  that  he  might,  as  he  said,  "in 


HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH.  ZO/ 

some  decree,  however  small,  be  enabled  to  conduce  to 
the  spiritual  advantage  of  creatures  so  goodly,  .so 
gentle,  and  now  so  misled  and  blinded/  How  I  love 
to  follow  him  in  his  travels  !  Everything  that  he 
describes  lives  before  me.  How  I  like  to  watch  him 
as  the  tear  trembles  in  his  eye  at  hearing  one  of  his 
own  blessed  hymns  sung  far  up  in  India,  at  Meerut, 
and  sung,  as  he  says,  '  better  than  he  had  ever  heard 
it  sung  before/  Then  to  go  with  him  from  Delhi  to 
Bombay,  from  Bombay  to  Ceylon,  where  he  seems  to 
have  caught  the  inspiration  for  his  missionary  hymn — 

What  though  the  spicy  breezes 

Blow  soft  o'er  Ceylon's  isle  ; 
Though  every  prospect  pleases, 

And  only  man  is  vile. 
In  vain  with  lavish  kindness 

The  gifts  of  God  are  strown, 
The  heathen  in  his  blindness, 

Bows  down  to  wood  and  stone. 

Can  we,  whose  souls  are  lighted 

With  wisdom  from  on  high, 
Can  we  to  men  benighted, 

The  lamp  of  life  deny  ? 
Salvation  !  oh,  salvation  ! 

The  joyful  sound  proclaim, 
Till  each  remotest  nation 

Has  learnt  Messiah's  name. 

And  then  to  follow  him  to  the  south,  the  scene 
of  his  last  charge,  and  his  mysterious  call  to  his 
reward.  Oh  that  last  kind,  iovmg,  truly  Christian 
address,  at  Trichinopoly  !  How  often  I  have  read  it. 
i  And  now/  says  he,  '  depart  in  the  faith  and  favour 
of  the  Lord ;  and  if  what  you  have  learned  and  heard 
this  day  has  been  so  far  blessed  as  to  produce  a 
serious  and  lasting  effect  on  you,  let  me  entreat  you 

17 


258  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

to  remember  sometimes  in  your  prayers  those  ministers 
of  Christ  who  now  have  laboured  for  your  instruction, 
that  we  who  have  preached  to  you  may  not  ourselves 
be  cast  away,  but  that  it  may  be  given  to  us  also  to 
walk  in  this  present  life  according  to  the  words  of  the 
gospel  which  we  have  received  of  the  Lord,  and  to 
rejoice  hereafter  with  you,  the  children  of  our  care,  in 
that  land  where  the  weary  shall  find  repose,  and  the 
wicked  cease  from  troubling ;  where  we  shall  behold 
God  as  he  is,  and  be  ourselves  made  like  unto  God  in 
innocence,  and  happiness,  and  immortality.'  Blessed 
man  !  he  soon  found  his  rest  after  he  had  uttered  these 
words.  How  touching  it  is,  that  story  of  his  end  ! 
Alone  in  his  last  moment,  and  his  happy  spirit  sud- 
denly departing  and  leaving  his  body  in  the  waters  of 
the  bath  in  which  he  had  sought  refreshment  after  his 
Sabbath  toils.  I  wonder  where  he  wrote  that  beautiful 
Sabbath  hymn.  I  have  often  pictured  him  lying  yonder, 
sick  and  weary,  under  the  pressure  of  a  tropical 
climate,  still  bent  on  his  holy  mission,  but  feeling  the 
lack  of  England's  Sabbath  pleasures,  and  looking 
upwards  in  hope — 

Longing,  gasping  after  home ; 
and  then  I  seem  to  have  pleasant  sympathy  with  him ; 
and  his  Lord's-day  song  comes  with  deeper  pathos  and 
richer  music  upon  my  soul  as  I  sing  it — 

Thousands,  0  Lord  of  Hosts,  to-day, 

Within  thy  temple  meet ; 
And  tens  of  thousands  throng  to  pay 
.    Their  homage  at  thy  feet. 

They  see  thy  power  and  glory  there, 

Where  I  have  seen  Thee  too  ; 
They  read,  they  hear,  they  join  in  prayer, 

As  I  was  wont  to  do. 


HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH.  259 

They  sing  thy  deeds  as  I  have  sung, 

In  sweet  and  solemn,  lays  ; 
"Were  I  among  them,  my  glad  tongue 

Might  learn  new  themes  of  praise. 

For  Thou  art  in  the  midst  to  teach, 

While  they  look  up  to  Thee ; 
And  Thou  hast  blessings,  Lord  for  each, 

And  blessings,  too,  for  me. 

Behold  thy  prisoner,  loose  my  bands, 

If  'tis  thy  gracious  will ; 
If  not,  contented  in  thy  hands, 

Only  be  with  me  still. 

I  may  not  to  thy  courts  repair, 

Yet  here  Thou  surely  art ; 
Oh  give  me  here  a  house  of  prayer, 

Here  Sabbath  joys  impart ! 

To  faith  reveal  the  things  unseen, 

To  hope  the  joys  unfold  ; 
Let  love,  without  a  veil  between, 

Thy  glory  now  behold." 

The  closing  prayer  of  her  hymn  was  answered. 
There  was  an  ethereal  light  on  her  face  as  from  the 
unfolding  visions  of  faith.  Her  eyes  seemed  to  reflect 
the  smile  of  her  loving  Saviour.  An  air  of  deeper 
stillness  pervaded  the  little  chamber,  and  for  a  time 
the  two  remained  in  silence — silence  that  was  full  of 
Sabbath  peace  and  joy.  The  poor  girl  had  been  long 
a  sufferer.  A  spinal  affection  kept  her  to  her  couch ; 
but  she  was  contented  and  happy  in  daily  companion- 
ship with  Jesus.  A  little  table-like  bracket  had  been 
fixed  on  the  wall  by  her  bed-side,  so  that  she  could  at 
any  time  take  a  book  from  it,  or  regale  herself  with 
the  perfume  of  the  flowers  with  which  she  was  daily 
supplied.  On  that  Sunday  morning  her  visitor  saw 
Herbert's  poems  near  her ;  she  had  been  using  it  he 


260  HTMN-WRITEBS    AND    THEIK    HYMNS, 

thought,  and  taking  it  up  lie  said,  f'  Do  you  like 
Herbert  ?  " 

••  Oli.  ye?."  said  slie,  ''I  like  him.  for  lie  makes  roe 
think,  while  I  am  enjoying  the  old  fashion  music  of  his 
verses.  There  is  that  rich  old  hymn  for  '  Sunday  '  ; 
ir  always  sends  my  thoughts  back  to  the  time  when,  in 
my  ehildhood.  I  used  to  keep  my  eyes  on  the  glorious 
old  painted  window  that  was  over  against  me  in  the 
church,  and.  while  they  were  singing  the  anthem,  used 
to  iancy  that  the  music  and  the  coloured  light  were 
like  one  another  somehow.  I  wish  I  could  sin^  that 
hymn;  but  I  am  never  tired  of  saying  it  over  to 
myself.     Bead  it  to  me,  will  you?  " 

The  hymn  was  read;  and  how  full  of  thought  and 
Sabbath  feeling  it  is — 

0  day  most  calm,  most  bright. 
The  fruit  of  this,  the  next  world's  bud, 
Th'  indorsement  of  supreme  delight. 
Writ  by  a  friend,  and  with  his  blood; 
The  couch  of  time,  care's  balm  and  bay. 
The  week  were  dark  but  for  thy  light : 

Thy  torch  doth  shew  the  way. 

The  other  days  and  Thou 
Make  up  one  man,  whose  face  Thou  art, 
Knocking  at  heaven  with  thy  brow : 
The  working  days  are  the  back  part ; 
The  burden  of  the  week  lies  there, 
Alaking  the  whole  to  stoop  and  bow, 

Till  thy  release  appeal'. 

Man  had  straight  forward  gone 
To  endless  death ;  but  Thou  dost  pull 
And  turn  us  round  to  look  on  one 
"Whom,  if  we  were  not  very  dull, 
TVe  could  not  choose  but  look  on  still : 
Since  there  is  no  place  so  alone, 
The  which  He  doth  not  fill. 


HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH.  261 

Sundays  the  pillars  are 
On  which  heaven's  palace  arched  lies  : 
The  other  days  fill  up  the  spare 
And  hollow  room  with  vanii     - 
They  are  the  fruitful  beds  and  borders 
In  God's  rich  garden :  that  is  bare 
*  Which  parts  their  ranks  and  orders. 

The  Sundays  of  man's  life 
Threaded  together  on  time's  string, 
Make  bracelets  to  adorn  the  wife 
Of  the  eternal  glorious  King. 
On  Sunday  heaven's  gate  stands  ope; 
Blessings  are  plentiful  and  rife, 

More  plentiful  than  hope. 

This  day  my  Saviour  : 
And  did  enclose  this  light  for  his  : 
That,  as  each  beast  his  manger  kr_ 
Man  might  not  of  his  fodder  miss. 
Christ  has  took  in  this  piece  of  ground, 
And  made  a  garden  there  for  those 

"Who  want  herbs  for  their  wound. 

The  rest  of  our  creation 
Our  great  Redeemer  did  remove 
With  the  same  shake,  which  at  his  passion 
Did  th'  earth  and  all  things  with  it  move, 
As  Samson  bore  the  doors  away, 
Christ's  hands  though  nail'd,  wrought  our  salvation, 

And  did  unhinge  that  day. 

The  brightness  of  that  day 
We  sullied  by  our  foul  offence : 
Wherefore  that  robe  we  cast  away, 
Having  a  new  at  his  expense, 
Whose  drops  of  blood  paid  the  full  price, 
That  was  required  to  make  us  gay, 

And  fit  for  paradise. 

Thou  art  a  day  of  mirth : 
And  where  the  week-day  trails  on  ground, 
Thy  flight  is  higher,  as  thy  birth : 


262  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Oh  let  me  take  thee  at  the  bound, 
Leaping  with  thee  from  seven  to  seven, 
Till  that  we  both  being  tossed  from  earth, 
Fly  hand  in  hand  to  heaven. 

"Thank  you/'  said  the  smiling  sufferer.  "How 
often  have  I  repeated  that  hymn  to  myself;  and  then 
I  have  gone  off  into  pleasant  dream-like  thoughts 
about  fHoly  George  Herbert.'  I  have  pictured 
Montgomery  Castle  where  he  was  born,  and  I  have 
imagined  that  birth-day,  April  3,  1593,  to  be  a 
Sunday ;  and  then  I  have  seen  that  blessed  pious 
mother  of  his  watching  her  boy  with  that  look  of 
'  cheerful  gravity'  which  those  who  knew  her  wit  and 
kindness  and  piety  so  admired;  and  then  I  have 
listened  to  that  evening  music  from  the  pious  boy's 
chamber  at  college,  the  music  with  which  he  cheered 
himself  and  guarded  his  own  soul  against  outward 
mischiefs.  Then  comes  up  the  image  of  Jane  Danvers 
who  fell  in  love  with  him  before  she  saw  his  face,  and 
who  became  his  wife  three  days  after  their  first  inter- 
view ;  and  I  think  of  what  happy  old  Isaak  Walton  says 
about  the  wedded  pair,  ( The  eternal  lover  of  mankind 
made  them  happy  in  each  other's  mutual  and  equal 
affections  and  compliance,  indeed  so  happy  that  there 
never  was  any  opposition  betwixt  them,  unless  it  were 
a  contest  which  should  most  incline  to  a  compliance 
with  the  other's  desires.  And  though  this  begat  and 
continued  in  them  such  a  mutual  love,  and  joy,  and 
content,  as  was  no  way  defective;  yet  this  mutual 
content,  and  love,  and  joy  did  receive  a  daily  augmen- 
tation by  such  daily  obligingness  to  each  other,  as  still 
added  such  new  influences  to  the  former  fulness  of 
these  divine  souls,  as  was  only  improveable  in  heaven, 
where  they  now  enjoy  it.'     I  think,  too,  of  Bemerton, 


HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH.  263 

and  long  to  visit  it  to  see  the  scene  of  that  holy  man's 
life  as  a  parish  priest,  happy  in  his  home  and  happy 
amidst  his  flock,  happy  in  the  church,  and  happy  in 
the  homes  which  he  visited.  I  try  to  picture  him  on 
the  ground  before  the  altar  in  silent  prayer  on  the  day 
of  his  entrance  upon  his  charge  ;  then  going  with  his 
wife  and  household  twice  a  day  to  prayers  in  the 
church;  then  practising  psalmody  with 

The  sound  of  glory  ringing  in  his  ears ; 

then  walking  twice  a  week  into  Salisbury  Cathedral, 
where  he  used,  as  he  said,  ( to  find  heaven  on  earth  ;' 
and  then  I  see  him  on  his  last  bed,  worn  to  a  shadow, 
but  all  soul  and  all  heavenly  devotion,  glowing  with 
hope  and  love ;  and  oh  that  last  Sunday  scene,  before 
he  fled  to  his  rest  !  When  he  rose  from  his  bed, 
seized  his  favourite  instrument,  and  sang  as  he 
played — 

My  God,  my  God, 
My  music  shall  find  Thee, 

And  every  string 
Shall  have  his  attribute  to  sing ! 

Finishing  with  part  of  that  very  hymn  for  (  Sunday/ 
which  was  just  now  read ;  thus  at  the  very  last,  as 
Walton  says,  '  singing  on  earth  such  hymns  and 
anthems  as  the  angels,  and  he  and  Mr.  Ferrar  are  now 
singing  in  heaven.''  Blessed  to  me  is  the  memory  of 
George  Herbert,  were  it  only  for  that  Sunday  hymn. 
How  pleasant  it  is  to  be  here  so  quiet,  and  so  near  to 
Jesus,  listening  to  such  hymns  !  Do  you  know  any 
others  ?  Please  to  let  me  hear  them.  These  spiritual 
songs  so  refresh  me." 

"  Well,"    said   the   pilgrim,    "  there   are   Mason's 
'  Spiritual  Songs,'  have  you  any  knowledge  of  them  ?" 


264  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

<c  No  ;  who  was  lie  ?  Tell  me  something  about  him  ; 
and  then  I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  some  of  his  songs ." 

"  I  will  try  to  meet  your  wishes.  I  am  sure  you 
would  like  some  of  his  hymns.  Richard  Baxter  says 
that  Mason  was  '  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  England/ 
that  f  the  frame  of  his  spirit  was  so  heavenly,  his 
deportment  so  humble  and  obliging,  his  discourse  of 
spiritual  things,  and  little  else  could  we  hear  from 
him,  so  weighty,  with  such  apt  words  and  delightful 
air,  that  it  charmed  all  that  had  any  spiritual  relish, 
and  was  not  burdensome  to  others,  as  discourses  of 
that  nature  have  been  from  other  ministers.''  " 

cc  Mr.  Mason  was  a  minister,  then  V9 

"  Yes ;  he  was  brought  up  in  Northamptonshire  ; 
and  began  his  ministry  in  the  same  county  as  curate 
of  Isham,  after  he  had  gone  through  his  course  at 
Cambridge.  In  October,  1668,  he  became  vicar  of 
Stanton- Bury ;  and  in  January,  1674,  rector  of  Water- 
Stratford,  in  Buckinghamshire,  where  he  spent  his 
holy  and  useful  life,  and  finished  his  course  in  the 
year  1694.  Like  many  other  good  men,  he  fell  into 
some  rather  wild  notions  in  his  latter  days.  Among 
these  notions  some  would  class  his  persuasion  that  he 
had  seen  the  Lord.  In  that,  however,  he  was  not 
more  peculiar  than  very  many  highly  spiritual  Chris- 
tians whose  faith  sometimes  brightens  into  something 
very  like  open  vision.  He  was  wild  in  his  notions 
about  Christ's  personal  reign  upon  the  earth ;  and 
like  many  others  who  mistake  fulfilled  for  unfulfilled 
prophecy,  he  led  his  neighbours  astray  into  the  fervent 
expectation  that  Christ  would  appear  in  his  glory  at 
Water- Stratford.  But  his  mistakes  were  not  incon- 
sistent with  perfect  love,  and  he  left  the  scene  of 
mortality  and    human    mistakes,    exclaiming,    ( I    am 


HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH.  2G5 

full  of  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord  V  One  who 
followed  him  in  the  parish  of  Stanton-Bury  says, 
( My  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Mason  I  have  esteemed 
one  of  the  greatest  mercies  I  ever  received.  His 
affections  were  so  fervent,  and  his  zeal  so  great,  that 
as  they  were  the  comfort  so  they  were  the  admiration 
of  those  who  feared  God  and  lived  near  him/  His 
hymns  still  live  to  testify  to  his  personal  holiness,  and 
to  keep  alive  the  fruits  of  his  hallowed  genius.  His 
songs  seem  to  have  been  relished  by  Pope,  and 
Watts,  and  the  Wesleys,  who  now  and  then  garnished 
their  own  verses  with  choice  bits  from  his  hymns. 
James  Montgomery  was  of  opinion  that  '  his  style  is 
a  middle  tint  between  the  raw  colouring  of  Quarles 
and  the  daylight  clearness  of  Watts/  that  '  his  talent 
is  equally  poised*  between  both,  having  more  vig-our 
but  less  versatility  than  that  of  either  his  forerunner 
or  his  successor.''  That  is  probably  correct.  But  you 
would  like  to  hear  some  of  his  verses.  He  has  two 
Sabbath  hymns.  One  of  them  would  rather  remind 
one  of  Herbert's  hymns  about  which  we  have  talked  ; 
this  is  it  : — 

Blest  day  of  God,  most  calm,  most  bright, 

The  first  and  best  of  days  ; 
The  lab'rour's  rest,  the  saint's  delight, 

A  day  of  mirth  and  praise  : 
My  Saviour's  face  did  make  thee  shine, 

His  rising  did  thee  raise  : 
This  made  thee  heavenly  and  divine 

Beyond  the  common  days. 

The  firstfruits  do  a  blessing  prove 

To  all  the  sheaves  behind ; 
And  they  that  do  a  Sabbath  love, 

An  happy  week  shall  find : 


266  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

My  Lord  on  thee  his  name  did  fix, 
Which  makes  thee  rich  and  gay  ; 

Amidst  his  golden  candlesticks 
My  Saviour  walks  this  day. 

He  walks  in  's  robes,  his  face  shines  bright, 

The  stars  are  in  his  hand  ; 
Out  of  his  mouth,  that  place  of  might, 

A  two-edged  sword  doth  stand. 
Grac'd  with  our  Lord's  appearance  thus, 

As  well  as  with  his  name, 
Thou  may'st  demand  respect  from  us 

Upon  a  double  claim. 

This  day  doth  God  his  vessels  broach, 

His  conduits  run  with  wine  : 
He  that  loves  not  this  day's  approach, 

Scorns  heaven,  and  Saviour's  shine. 
What  slaves  are  those  who  slav'ry*  choose, 

And  garlick  for  their  feast, 
Whilst  milk  and  honey  they  refuse, 

And  the  Almighty's  rest  ? 

This  market  day  doth  saints  enrich, 

And  smiles  upon  them  all ; 
It  is  their  Pentecost,  on  which, 

The  Holy  Ghost  doth  fall. 
Oh  day  of  wonders  !  mercies  pawn, 

The  weary  soul's  recruit, 
The  Christian's  Goshen,  heaven's  dawn, 

The  bud  of  endless  fruit. 

Oh  could  I  love  as  I  have  loved 

Thy  watches  heretofore : 
As  England's  glory  Thou  hast  proved, 

May'st  Thou  be  so  yet  more. 
This  day  must  I  for  God  appear ; 

For  Lord,  the  day  is  Thine  : 
Oh  let  me  spend  it  in  thy  fear ! 

Then  shall  the  day  be  mine. 


HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH.  267 

Throughout  the  day  cease  work  and  play, 

That  I  to  God  may  rest ; 
Now  let  me  talk  with  God,  and  walk 

"With  God,  and  I  am  blest. 

"  Do  you  not  think/'  said  the  young  listener,  as  the 
pilgrim  finished,  "  do  you  not  think  that  Mason  must 
have  seen  Herbert's  hymns  ?  He  has  those  happy 
expressions  of  Herbert's  in  his  first  line — 

Most  calm,  most  bright. 

Perhaps  Herbert's  hymn  touched  his  chords  of  psal- 
mody, and  gave  him  the  first  note." 

"  Perhaps  so  ;  but  he  has  another  (  song  of  praise 
for  the  Lord's-day/  which  is  generally  thought  to  be 
the  better  hymn  ;  and  it  has  original  power  and  beauty 
enough  to  show  that,  though  he  might  for  once  have 
caught  a  key-note  from  his  predecessor,  he  had  native 
talent  distinctive  enough  to  mark  him  as  Herbert's 
brother  hymnist.     Listen  to  this — 

My  Lord,  my  Love  was  crucified, 

He  all  the  pains  did  bear  ; 
But  in  the  sweetness  of  his  rest 

He  makes  his  servants  share. 
How  sweetly  rest  thy  saints  above, 

Which  in  thy  bosom  lie  ; 
The  Church  below  doth  rest  in  hope 

Of  that  felicity. 

Thou,  Lord,  who  daily  feed'st  thy  sheep, 

Mak'st  them  a  weekly  feast : 
Thy  flocks  meet  in  their  several  folds 

Upon  this  day  of  rest. 
Welcome  and  dear  unto  my  soul 

Are  these  sweet  feasts  of  love; 
But  what  a  Sabbath  shall  I  keep 

When  I  shall  rest  above 


268  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

T  bless  thy  wise  and  wondrous  love, 

Which  binds  us  to  be  free  ; 
Which  makes  us  leave  our  earthly  snares, 

That  we  may  come  to  Thee. 

I  come,  I  wait,  I  hear,  I  pray : 

Thy  footsteps,  Lord,  I  trace  : 
I  sing  to  think  this  is  the  way 

Unto  my  Saviour's  face. 

These  are  my  preparation  days  : 

And  when  my  soul  is  drest, 
The  Sabbaths  shall  deliver  me, 

To  mine  eternal  rest." 

11  Yes,  I  like  that,"  said  the  happy  looking  girl, 

"  What  a  Sabbath  shall  I  keep, 
When  I  shall  rest  above  !" 

Some  of  these  old  hymns  Lave  undying  vigour  and 
beauty.  I  have  sometimes  thought  how  much  I  should 
like  to  see  and  feel  all  the  music  and  Christian  life  of 
the  still  older  Latin  hymns.  I  have  one  here  in  a 
translation,  which  I  am  very  fond  of,  and  I  try  to  sing 
it  sometimes  on  a  Sunday  morning,  realizing,  as  far  as 
I  can,  the  thought  that  I  am  singing  the  very  hymn 
which  many,  many  sincere  Christians  have  sung  on 
Sunday  mornings  for  more  than  a  thousand  years,  it 
may  be.     This  is  the  hymn  I  mean — 

On  this  first  day,  when  heaven  and  earth 
Eose  at  the  Triune's  word  to  birth  ; 
The  day  when  He,  who  gave  us  breath, 
Eevived  our  souls  and  vanquish'd  death ; 

Why  close  in  sleep  your  languid  eyes  ? 
Shake  off  dull  slumber,  wake,  arise ; 
And,  mindful  of  the  prophet's  voice, 
Right  early  in  our  God  rejoice. 


HYMNS    OF    THE    SABBATH.  269 

That  He  may  hear  the  ascending  cry ; 
That  He  may  stretch  his  hand  from  high ; 
That  He  may  cleanse  and  make  us  meet 
To  join  Him  in  that  heavenly  seat : 

That,  while  each  consecrated  hour 
We  praise  and  sing  his  glorious  power, 
The  offerings  of  this  day  of  rest 
May  with  his  choicest  gifts  be  blest. 

Paternal  Glory,  Sire  of  all, 
Thee  with  o'ernowing  hearts  we  call, 
That  we  this  day  may  serve  Thee,  freed 
From  guilty  thought  and  sinful  deed : 

That  no  foul  passion's  lawless  flame 
May  injure  this  corporeal  frame, 
Xor  the  unhallow'd  heart's  desire 
Plunge  us  in  flames  of  fiercer  fire. 

Saviour  of  men,  whose  blood  alone 
Can  for  a  ruin'd  world  atone, 
Cleanse  Thou  our  hearts,  and  upward  lift 
To  share  in  thy  perennial  gift. 

To  Thee,  most  Holy  Sire ;  to  Thee, 
Co-equal,  only  Son,  we  flee  : 
With  Him,  the  union  to  complete, 
The  Spirit  best,  the  Paraclete." 


"  That  hymn  is  very  old/''  said  the  pilgrim.  u  It 
has  been  sung  for  ages,  as  you  say,  in  its  original  form  ; 
but  this  is  a  translation  by  Bishop  Mant,  who  was 
always  happier  in  translating  old  hymns,  and  in  emu- 
latino*  the  ancients  in  hymns  of  his  own,  than  he  was 
in  fencing  with  the  Methodists  in  his  Bampton 
Lectures,  though  his  lectures  did  more  than  his  hymns, 


270  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

it  may  be,  in  opening  his  way  to  a  bishopric.  It  is 
always  happier  to  move  oneself  to  devotion  by  aiding 
the  devotions  of  others,  than  to  be  offering  battle  to 
our  neighbours  about  notions  which  those  neighbours 
never  held.  It  is  more  gracious  to  { admonish  one 
another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs/ 
than  to  array  ourselves  against  foes  who  do  not  exist, 
and  to  ' fight  as  one  that  beateth  the  air.'  I  say 
agaiu,  Mant  was  happy  as  a  hymnist ;  some  of  his 
hymns  will  long  outlive  his  lectures,  and  one  of  his 
best  original  hymns  is  c  commemorative  of  the  Day  of 
Holy  Rest.'     Let  me  repeat  it — 

Blest  day,  by  God  in  mercy  given 

To  soothe,  refresh,  and  cheer, 
We  greet  the  blest  of  all  the  seven, 

And  hold  thee  doubly  dear. 

We  prize  thee  as  the  day  of  rest, 

Which  toil  nor  travail  knows ; 
The  Sabbath-day,  when  man  and  beast 

From  week-day  works  repose. 

We  prize  thee  as  the  day  design'd 

From  worldly  studies  freed, 
The  Holy  Day,  to  train  the  mind 

To  holy  thought  and  deed. 

We  prize  thee  as  God's  living  sign 

Join'd  with  his  faithful  Word, 
How  man  was  form'd  by  power  divine, 

By  power  divine  restored. 

Blest  day,  by  God's  commandment  made 

The  goodliest  of  the  seven, 
Type  of  the  heavenly  rest,  our  aid 

In  journeying  to  heaven  : 


HYMNS    OP    THE    SABBATH.  271 

May  holy  thoughts  and  holy  rites 

Thy  peaceful  hours  employ, 
Till  we,  through  love  of  such  delights, 

God's  endless  rest  enjoy ! 

There  hymn,  amid  his  heavenly  host, 

The  praise  on  earth  begun, 
Of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 

The  uncreated  One  !" 

"  Do  you  know  that  hyinn,  '  on  the  joys  and 
blessings  of  the  Sabbath/  which  begins  with — 

Dear  is  the  hallowed  morn  to  me  ?" 

"  No  ;  whose  is  it  V3 

"  It  is  said  to  be  Allan  Cunningham's,  and  I  like 
it  all  the  better.  I  like  hymns  that  come  gushing 
from  the  heart  of  a  man  of  original  and  uncultured 
genius  in  his  devotional  moments,  they  are  so  fresh ; 
and  this  one  of  Cunningham's  is  like  the  clear,  tuneful 
rivulet  of  his  native  hills,  that-  flows  and  sparkles  with 
pure,  joyful  life, 

Adown  by  the  greenwood  side. 

The  author  was  a  diligent,  earnest  man,  whose  life, 
from  1784  to  1842,  was  well  filled,  every  nook,  and 
corner,  and  chink  of  it.  His  work  as  the  super- 
intendent in  Sir  Francis  Chantrey's  studio  would  have 
been  enough  for  any  ordinary  man;  but,  over  and 
above  all  that,  he  has  immortalized  his  name  as  the 
biographer  of  eminent  British  painters,  sculptors,  and 
architects,  and  has  adorned  his  own  memory  with 
many  a  beautiful  song.  He  has  helped  us  to  catch 
the  spirit  of  the  old  Covenanters'  love  songs  and  hill- 
side psalmody,  and  one  enjoys  his  effusions  the  more 


272  HYMN-WJRITERS    AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

entirely  because  he  never  prostituted  his  genius  to  the 
claims  of  vice.  It  cannot  be  said  of  him,  as  it  is 
alleged  of  a  more  popular  Scotch  songster,  that  his 
unpublished  songs  have  left  a  moral  taint  upon  the 
social  life  of  the  neighbourhood  in  which  they  were 
circulated  and  sung.  But  let  me  sing  to  you  his 
Sunday  song,  and  then  I  must  say  good-bye.  Try  to 
sing  with  me — 

Dear  is  the  hallowed  morn  to  me, 

When  village  bells  awake  the  day ; 
And,  by  their  sacred  minstrelsy, 

Oall  me  from  earthly  cares  away. 

And  dear  to  me  the  winged  honr, 

Spent  in  thy  holy  courts,  0  Lord  ! 
To  feel  devotion's  soothing  power, 

And  catch  the  manna  of  thy  Word. 

And  dear  to  me  the  loud  Amen, 
Which  echoes  through  the  blest  abode ; 

Which  swells  and  sinks,  and  swells  again, 
Dies  on  the  walls,  but  lives  to  God. 

And  dear  the  rustic  harmony, 

Sung  with  the  pomp  of  village  art ; 
That  holy,  heavenly  melody, 

The  music  of  a  thankful  heart. 

In  secret  I  have  often  prayed, 

And  still  the  anxious  tear  would  fall ; 

But,  on  thy  sacred  altar  laid, 

The  fire  descends,  and  dries  them  all. 

Oft  when  the  world,  with  iron  hands, 
Has  bound  me  in  its  six-days'  chain, 

This  bursts  them,  like  the  strong  man's  bands, 
And  lets  my  spirit  loose  again. 


HYMNS    OP    THE    SABBATH.  273 

Then  dear  to  me  the  Sabbath  morn, 
The  village  bells,  the  shepherd's  voice  ! 

These  oft  have  found  my  heart  forlorn, 
And  always  bid  that  heart  rejoice. 

Go,  man  of  pleasure,  strike  the  lyre, 

Of  broken  Sabbaths  sing  the  charms ; 
Ours  be  the  prophet's  car  of  fire, 

Which  bears  us  to  a  Father's  arms. 


IH 


mm^mmmmmmm 


©Chapter  XY* 

HYMNS    BY    THE    WAY 
"  Yea,  they  shall  sing  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord." 

OW  often  lias  some  sweet  singer  cheered  his 
own  way  through  the  changes  of  life's  journey 
with  snatches  of  song !  Some  pretty  peep, 
some  quiet  nook,  or  happy  turn,  or  unfolding  prospect, 
or  storied  way-mark  or  remarkable  adventure,  or  im- 
pressive event,  has  touched  his  soul,  and  awakened  a 
tuneful  tribute  or  suggested  an  immortal  hymn.  And 
in  how  many  cases  such  hymns  have  helped  to  beguile 
the  journey  of  other  travellers,  or  furnished  the  means 
of  lightening  the  steps  of  pilgrims  of  other  days  on 
their  daily  march.  No  hymnist  was  ever  more  open 
to  wayside  inspiration  than  Charles  Wesley.  His  eye 
was  always  open  to  beauty  and  goodness.  His  ear 
was  ever  delicately  alive  to  kindred  harmonies,  and  his 
heart  was  never  out  of  tune,  never  indisposed  to 
entertain  the  tuneful  thought  that  touched  it.  Hymns 
came  welling  up  from  his  soul  amidst  the  changes 
and  activities  of  his  evangelizing  course,  and  the  habit 
of  wayside  composition  became  so  fixed,  that  in  his 
last  days,  when  he  had  gone  beyond  his  "  three  score 


HYMNS    BY    TEE    WAY.  275 

years  and  ten/'  and  growing  infirmity  obliged  him.  to 
perform  his  street  jonrneys  in  London  on  a  little  pony, 
he  always  kept  a  supply  of  small  cards  in  his  pocket, 
and  as  he  jogged  along,  he  might  be  seen  now  and 
then  jotting  down  a  stanza;  and  then  on  arriving  at 
City  Road  House,  he  was  out  of  the  saddle,  and  might 
be  heard  hurriedly  calling  for  pen  and  ink  that  he 
might  fix  the  results  of  his  street  inspirations.  To 
him  the  saddle  was  the  seat  of  ease  and  qniet,  and 
had  peculiar  charms,  as  a  place  of  poetic  study.  "  Near 
Ripley,"  says  he,  with  a  spice  of  that  sportive  humour 
which  is  so  often  showing  itself  in  his  and  in  his 
brother's  journals,  "  my  horse  threw  and  fell  upon  me. 
My  companion  thought  I  had  broken  my  neck ;  but 
my  leg  only  was  bruised,  my  hand  sprained,  and  my 
head  stunned,  which  spoiled  my  making  hymns  till 
the  next  day."  His  journals  afford  many  instructive 
illustrations  of  the  manner  in  which  his  hymns  were 
brought  out  of  real  life  and  passing  circumstances. 
He  goes  to  the  Newcastle  colliers  with  his  message  of 
salvation,  and  the  fires  amidst  which  he  found  them 
labouring  awakened  thoughts  about  divine  flames,  and 
brought  from  his  kindling  soul  that  stirring  hymn — 

See  how  great  a  flame  aspires, 

Kindled  by  a  spark  of  grace ! 
Jesu's  love  the  nations  fires, 

Sets  the  kingdoms  on  a  blaze ; 
To  bring  fire  on  earth  He  came ; 

Kindled  in  some  hearts  it  is ; 
Oh  that  all  might  catch  the  flame, 

All  partake  the  glorious  bliss  ! 

Touched,   too,   at   the   sight    of  needy  and  eager 
multitudes    crowding   around   him    to   hear   his   pro- 


276  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

clamation  of  the  Sinner's  Friend,  he  utters  his  feelings 
in  that  outburst  of  beautiful  song — 

Who  are  these  that  come  from  far, 

Swifter  than  a  flying  cloud  ? 
Thick  as  flocking  doves  they  are, 

Eager  in  pursuit  of  God  : 
Trembling  as  the  storm  draws  nigh, 

Hastening  to  the  place  of  rest, 
See  them  to  the  windows  fly. 

To  the  ark  of  Jesu's  breast ! 

Who  are  these,  but  sinners  poor, 

Conscious  of  their  lost  estate ; 
Sin-sick  souls  who  for  their  cure 

On  the  good  Physician  wait ; 
Fallen,  who  bewail  their  fall, 

Proffer' d  mercy  who  embrace, 
Listening  to  the  gospel  call 

Longing  to  be  saved  by  grace  ? 

For  his  mate  the  turtle  moans, 

For  his  God  the  sinner  sighs  ; 
Hark,  the  music  of  their  groans, 

Humble  groans  that  pierce  the  skies  I 
Surely  God  their  sorrow  hears, 

Every  accent,  every  look, 
Treasures  up  their  gracious  tears, 

Notes  their  sufferings  in  his  book. 

He  who  hath  their  cure  begun, 

Will  He  now  despise  then*  pain  ? 
Can  He  leave  his  work  undone, 

Bring  them  to  the  birth  in  vain  ? 
!No  ;  we  all  who  seek  shall  find, 

We  who  ask  shall  ah  receive, 
Be  to  Christ  in  spirit  join'd, 

Free  from  sin  for  ever  live. 

At  another  time  he  is  found  at  Portland.     He  is  on 
a  missionary  tour ;  like  his   brother  John,  going  first 


HYMNS    BY    THE    WAY.  1  t  t 

to  those  who  wanted  him  most.  The  uncultured  and 
uncared  for  quarrymen  and  their  households,  had 
drawn  his  zealous  steps  towards  their  rude  and  isolated 
scenes  of  life.  Those  to  whom  every  passing  glance 
at  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  yields  fresh  pleasure,  would 
think  it  worth  while  to  visit  Portland  as  the  source 
from  which  Wren  drew  his  materials  for  giving  reality 
to  the  conceptions  of  his  genius.  And  all  who  love 
to  listen  to  the  "  testimony  of  the  rocks/'  would  be 
drawn  to  Portland  by  the  mysterious  voices  from 
the  buried  forests  of  its  wonderful  "  dirt  bed."  But 
Charles  Wesley,  though  free  from  sympathy  with 
those  who,  like  one  of  his  preaching  followers,  <c  never 
go  a  step  out  of  their  way  to  see  a  curiosity  or  a 
wonder,"  yet  kept  his  main  object  before  him — the 
salvation  of  his  perishing  countrymen.  On  June  4th, 
1746,  we  find  him  about  nine  o'clock  at  night,  after  a 
wearisome  journey  arriving  at  William  Nelson's  quaint- 
looking  old  stone-house  in  the  village  of  Fortune's 
Well.  There  on  the  following  Friday,  he  says,  in 
true  Wesley  style, ' '  I  preached  to  a  houseful  of  staring, 
loving  people,  from  Jer.  i.  20.  Some  wept,  but  most 
looked  quite  unawakened.  At  noon  and  night  I 
preached  on  a  hill  in  the  midst  of  the  island.  Most  of 
the  inhabitants  came  to  hear,  but  few  as  yet  feel  the 
burden  of  sin,  or  the  want  of  a  Saviour." 

"  Sunday,  June  8th. — After  evening  service  we  had 
all  the  islanders  that  were  able  to  come.  I  asked,  '  Is 
it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ?'  About  half 
a  dozen  answered,  '  it  is  nothing  to  us,'  by  turning 
their  backs,  but  the  rest  hearkened  with  greater  signs 
of  emotion  than  I  had  before  observed.  I  found  faith 
that  our  labour  would  not  be  in  vain. 

"  Monday,  June  9th. — At  Southwell,  the  farthest 


278  HYMN-WRITEES    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

village,  I  expounded  the  Song  of  Simeon.  Some  very 
old  men  attended.  I  distributed  a  few  books  among 
them,  rode  round  the  island,  and  returned  by  noon  to 
preach  on  the  hill,  and  by  night  at  my  lodgings. 
Now  the  power  and  blessing  came.  My  mouth  and 
their  hearts  were  opened.  The  rocks  were  broken  in 
pieces,  and  melted  into  tears  on  every  side."  And 
now  the  inspiration  came  on  the  hymnist  as  well  as 
the  preacher ;  and  with  the  sound  of  the  Portland 
hammers  in  his  ears,  and  the  sight  of  broken  hearts 
before  him,  he  cries — 

Come,  0  Thou  all  victorious  Lord, 

Thy  power  to  us  make  known  ; 
Strike  with  the  hammer  of  the  Word, 

And  break  these  hearts  of  stone  ! 

Oh  that  we  all  might  now  begin 

Our  foolishness  to  mourn ; 
And  turn  at  once  from  every  sin, 

And  to  our  Saviour  turn ! 

Give  us  ourselves  and  Thee  to  know, 

In  this  our  gracious  day  ; 
Bepentance  unto  life  bestow, 

And  take  our  sins  away. 

Conclude  us  first  in  unbelief, 

And  freely  then  release ; 
Fill  every  soul  with  sacred  grief, 

And  then  with  sacred  peace. 

Impoverish,  Lord,  and  then  relieve, 

And  then  enrich  the  poor ; 
The  knowledge  of  our  sickness  give ; 

The  knowledge  of  our  cure. 

That  blessed  sense  of  guilt  impart, 

And  then  remove  the  load ; 
Trouble,  and  wash  the  troubled  heart 

In  the  atoning  blood. 


HYMNS    BY    THE    WAY.  279 

Our  desperate  state  through,  sin  declare, 

And  speak  our  sins  forgiven ; 
By  perfect  holiness  prepare, 

And  take  us  up  to  heaven. 

The  poetic  pilgrim  finds  his  way  by  and  by  into 
Cornwall,  still  in  search  of  those  who  were  most  in 
want  of  truth ;  and  here  he  finds  himself  in  scenes 
and  circumstances  equally,  and  even  more  exciting, 
than  all  he  had  witnessed  at  Portland  or  in  Newcastle. 
He  found  poets  in  Cornwall  who  conld  lustily  sing 
their  own  verses,  and  serenade  him  under  his  window 
with — 

Charles  Wesley  is  come  to  town 
To  try  to  pull  the  churches  down  ! 

This,  however,  was  a  mistaken  fancy  on  the  part  of 
the  gifted  mob  ;  he  was  come  not  to  pull  down,  but 
to  gather  and  to  build.  Nor  was  he  without  success, 
as  his  journal  testifies.  A  modern  Eomish  tourist  who 
has  gone  over  the  line  of  Wesley's  journey,  says  that, 
"a,  curious  spot  in  the  parish  of  Gwennap  may  deserve 
a  visit.  An  antiquary,  stumbling  upon  it  by  chance, 
would  be  apt  to  fancy  that  he  had  lighted  upon  a 
Roman  circus  in  a  wonderful  state  of  preservation.  It 
is,  however,  a  pit — so  called — of  modern  formation, 
with  circular  seats  of  turf  rising  one  above  the  other, 
precisely  after  the  fashion  of  ancient  amphitheatres, 
from  the  area  of  which  the  great  apostle  of  methodism 
used  to  preach  to  assembled  thousands."  Here  Charles, 
as  well  as  John,  Wesley  seems  to  have  had  the  joy  of 
seeing  the  fields  "  white  unto  the  harvest. "  "  On 
Sunday,  August  10th,  1746,"  he  tells  us,  "at  Gwennap, 
nine  or  ten  thousand  by  computation,  listened  with  all 


280  HYMN-WRITEES   AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

eagerness,  while  I  commended  them  to  God,  and  to 
the  word  of  his  grace.  For  near  two  honrs  I  was 
enabled  to  preach  repentance  towards  God  and  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ.  I  broke  out  again  and  again  in 
prayer  and  exhortation.  I  believed  not  one  word 
would  return   empt}^.     Seventy  years  sufferings  were 

overpaid  by  one  such  opportunity Never  had 

we  so  large  an  effusion  of  the  Spirit  as  in  the  society. 
....  I  expressed  the  gratitude  of  my  heart  in  the 
following  thanksgiving — 

All  thanks  be  to  God, 

Who  scatters  abroad, 

Throughout  every  place, 
By  the  least  of  his  servants,  his  savour  of  grace. 

"Who  the  victory  gave, 

The  praise  let  him  have, 

For  the  work  He  hath  done  : 
AJ1  honour  and  glory  to  Jesus  alone. 

Our  conquering  Lord 

Hath  prospered  his  Word, 

Hath  made  it  prevail, 
And  mightily  shaken  the  kingdom  of  hell. 

His  arm  He  hath  bared, 

And  a  people  prepared 

His  glory  to  show, 
And  witness  the  power  of  his  passion  below. 

He  hath  opened  a  door 

To  the  penitent  poor, 

And  rescued  from  sin, 
And  admitted  the  harlots  and  publicans  in. 

They  have  heard  the  glad  sound ; 

They  have  liberty  found, 

Through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
And  plentiful  pardon  in  Jesus'  name. 


HYMNS    BY    THE    WAY.  281 

And  shall  we  not  sing 

Our  Saviour  and  King  ? 

Thy  witnesses,  we 
With  rapture  ascribe  our  salvation  to  Thee ! 

Thou,  Jesus,  hast  bless'd, 

And  believers  increased, 

Who  thankfully  own 
We  are  freely  forgiven  through  mercy  alone. 

His  Spirit  revives 

His  work  in  our  lives, 

His  wonders  of  grace, 
So  mightily  wrought  in  the  primitive  days. 

Oh  that  all  men  might  know 

His  token  below, 

Our  Saviour  confess 
And  embrace  the  glad  tidings  of  pardon  and  peace  ! 

Then  Saviour  of  all, 

Effectually  call 

The  sinners  that  stray ; 
And,  oh  let  a  nation  be  born  in  a  day  ! 

Thy  sign  let  them  see, 

And  flow  unto  Thee 

For  the  oil  and  the  wine, 
For  the  blissful  assurance  of  favour  divine. 

Our  heathenish  land, 

Beneath  thy  command, 

In  mercy  receive ; 
And  make  us  a  pattern  to  all  that  believe  : 

Then,  then  let  it  spread, 

Thy  knowledge  and  dread, 

Till  the  earth  is  o'erflow'd, 
And  the  universe  filled  with  the  glory  of  God." 

He  who  could  be  thus  jubilant  over  the  work  of  the 
blessed  Spirit  upon  the  souls  of  sinful  multitudes,  was 
not,  like  some  spiritual  zealots,  blind  and   heartless 


282  KTMN-WEITEBS   AND   THEIR   HYMNS. 

towards  fclie  beauties  and  grandeurs  of  the  natural 
world.  lie  must  needs  enjoy  a  visit  to  the  "  Land's 
End."  And  who  would  not?  "  Such  a  panorama  of 
lonely  grandeur  as  the  Land's  End  affords  to  one  fond 
of  contemplating  nature  under  her  most  sublime 
aspects,  will  not  be  readily  forgotten,"  says  a  tasteful 
stranger,  who  onco  saw  it,  "  a  gentle  green  slope 
conducts  the  traveller  to  the  edge  of  the  cliff  so 
designated.  Eere  the  scenery  is  at  once  of  a  sublime 
and  awful  character.  From  the  rocks  that  guard  the 
extremity  of  the  promontory,  ho  looks  down  perpen- 
dicularly upon  a  raging  sea,  the  Atlantic  Oeean  bring- 
ing the  full  force  of  its  mighty  waves  to  bear  against 
the  iron-bound  basement  of  tho  coast.  All  around 
are  vast  gigantic  masses  of  granite  in  every  variety  of 
grotesque  form  and  situation;  some  hanging  overhead, 
and  seemingly  about  to  topple  from  their  frail  fasten- 
ings, and  overwhelm  the  pigmy  lords  of  creation  in 
their  Call.  It  would  be  difficult  amidst  this  grand 
scenery  not  to  recognize  the  striking  handiwork  of 
Divine  Foresight  in  the  barrier  which  the  wonderful 
cliffs  of  this  tremendous  coast  oppose  to  the  billows  of 
the  wide  ocean,  which  perpetually  thunder  against 
their  shores."  Amidst  these  grandeurs  Charles 
Wesley  once  stood  j  and  there,  it  is  said,  feeling  him- 
self tremulous  between  tho  mysterious  past  and  the 
boundless  future,  In;  gave  utterance  to  the  hymn 
which  always  impresses  one  with  a  sense  of  solemn 
aw  fulness — 

Thou  Cod  of  glorious  majesty, 

To  Thee,  against  myself,  to  Thee, 
A  worm  of  earth  1  cry; 

A  half-awakened  child  of  man  ; 

A ii  licit-  of  endless  bliss  or  pain  ; 
A  sinner  born  to  die ! 


HYMNS    BY    TIIE    WAY.  283 

Lo  on  a  narrow  neck  of  land, 
'Twixt  two  unbounded  seas  I  stand, 

Secure,  insensible; 
A  point  of  time,  a  moment's  space, 
Removes  me  to  thai  heavenly  place, 

Or  shuts  me  up  in  hell. 

The  conception  of  this  hymn  rising  from  snch  a 
scene  is  confessedly  very  fine;  nor,  perhaps,  is  the 
full  sublimity  of  the  hymn  itself  felt  until  one  tries  to 
sing  it  on  that  "  awful  neck  of  land."  The  tradition 
may  be  cherished.  But  Wesley  himself  says,  "  Tues- 
day, July  29,  1743.— We  rode  to  Zunning,  and  took  up 
our  lodgings  at  a  hospitable  farmer's.  I  walked  with 
our  brother  Shepherd  to  the  Land's  End,  and  sang  on 
the  extremest  point  of  the  rocks — 

Come,  Divine  Immanuel,  come, 
Take  possession  of  thy  home ; 
Now  thy  mercy's  wings  expand, 
Stretch  throughout  the  happy  land. 

Carry  on  thy  victory, 
Spread  thy  rule  from  sea  to  sea ; 
Re-convert  the  ransomed  race ; 
Save  us,  save  us,  Lord,  by  grace. 

Take  the  purchase  of  thy  blood, 
Bring  us  to  a  pardoning  God ; 
Give  us  eyes  to  see  our  day, 
Hearts  the  glorious  truth  t'obey, 

Ears  to  hear  the  gospel  sound, 
Grace  doth  more  than  sin  abound ; 
God  appeased,  and  man  forgiven, 
Peace  on  earth  and  joy  in  heaven. 


284  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Oh  that  every  soul  might  be 
Suddenly  subdued  to  Thee ! 
Oh,  that  all  in  Thee  might  know 
Everlasting  life  below ! 

Xow  thy  mercy's  wings  expand, 
Stretch  throughout  the  happy  land, 
Take  possession  of  thy  home, 
Come,  Divine  Immanuel,  come." 

His  thought  seems  to  have  turned  on  Isaiah's  ex- 
pression (chap.  viii.  8),  "  And  the  stretching  out  of  his 
wings  shall  fill  the  breadth  of  thy  land,  0  Immanuel." 
At  all  events,  his  heart  was  set  upon  his  Saviour's 
glory,  and  his  hopes  upon  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 
mise, "  He  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea." 
Everything  he  met  with  on  his  way  must  be  turned  to 
account  in  the  pursuit  of  his  great  object.  He  could 
make  the  sublimities  and  beauties  of  nature  pay  tri- 
bute to  his  Divine  Master ;  but  he  had  tact  and  genius 
enough  to  turn  the  freaks  and  follies  of  men  also  into 
means  of  blessing  and  praise. 

"  Come  here,"  said  an  old  Cornishman,  as  he 
took  the  arm  of  a  visitor  in  one  of  our  south-western 
sea-ports,  "  come  here  and  look  at  this  house.  This 
is  the  house  in  which  I  was  born  and  reared;  and 
here,"  he  continued,  leading  his  companion  up  a  narrow 
passage,  to  an  old-fashioned  heavy  door,  with  a  pon- 
derous iron  knocker,  "  look  at  these  pits  and  dents  in 
the  door,  these  were  made  once  by  the  mob  as  they 
were  trying  to  break  in  upon  Mr.  Wesley,  who  had 
taken  refuge  there.  My  father  used  to  tell  me  the 
story,  and  put  me  to  feel  the  marks  in  the  door. 
Well,  the  people  kept  beating  the  door  until  they 
burst  it  open,  and  rushing  in,  they  found  that  the  dear 


HYMXS    BY    THE    WAY.  285 

little  roan  was  in  a  small  room  divided  from  the  hall 
by  a  wooden  partition.  They  were  trying  to  force  the 
door  of  the  parlour,  when  up  came  some  sailors  from  a 
ship-of-war ;  and  as  Jack  is  always  ready  for  sport 
or  mischief,  they  forced  their  way  in  crying  ( Avast, 
boys  V  and  putting  their  shoulders  to  the  door,  in  it 
went,  and  in  they  leaped.  There  was  Mr.  Wesley  at 
the  upper  end  of  the  room,  calmly  waiting  the  result. 
"When  the  sailors  got  in,  he  quietly  looked  at  them, 
and  said  c  Who  wants  me  V  They,  quite  as  ready  now 
to  befriend  the  persecuted  as  they  had  been  ignorantly 
to  aid  the  persecutors,  surrounded  the  Methodist,  and 
violently  clearing  the  way,  and  defying  any  one  to 
touch  him,  they  led  him  out  in  triumph,  and  conducted 
him  to  a  boat  as  the  safest  mode  of  conveyance  from 
the  town." 

"  Well  done,  Jack  Tars  \"  said  the  old  Cornishman's 
companion;  "well  done!  But  I  have  a  story  about 
an  adventure  of  Charles  Wesley  and  some  sailors, 
somewhere  in  these  parts,  I  believe." 

"  Oh  yes ;"  was  the  reply,  "  my  father  knew  all 
about  that j  too.  Mr.  C.  "Wesley  had  just  begun  a 
hymn  in  the  open  air,  intending  to  preach  to  the 
gathering  crowd,  when  some  jolly  fellows,  f  half  seas 
over/  as  they  say,  came  and  struck  up  a  favourite 
song.  Between  the  hymn  and  their  song  it  was  but 
sorry  music;  but  the  preacher's  ear  was  quick  enough 
to  catch  the  metre  of  their  song,  and  to  master  their 
tune  there  and  then.  He  challenged  them  to  come 
again  by  and  by,  when  he  would  be  there,  and  sing  a 
song  to  their  tune.  They  came,  and  he  gave  out  a 
new  hymn  made  for  the  occasion  ;  the  new  tune  was 
started,  and  the  merry  tars  very  soon  found  themselves 
beaten,  and  giving  up  the  contest  seemed  to  enjoy  the 


286  HYMN- WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 


hymn   more   than   their   old   song.       The   hymn  was 


this — 


Listed  into  the  cause  of  sin, 

Why  should  a  good  be  evil  ? 
Music,  alas  !  too  long  has  been 

Prest  to  obey  the  devil. 
Drunken,  or  lewd,  or  light  the  lay, 

Flowed  to  the  soul's  undoing  ; 
Widened,  and  strewed  with  flowers  the  way 

Down  to  eternal  ruin. 

Who  on  the  part  of  God  will  rise, 

Innocent  sound  recover ; 
Fly  on  the  prey  and  take  the  prize, 

Plunder  the  carnal  lover  ; 
Strip  him  of  every  moving  strain, 

Every  melting  measure ; 
Music  in  virtue's  cause  retain, 

Eescue  the  holy  pleasure  ? 

Come,  let  us  try  if  Jesu's  love 

Will  not  as  well  inspire  us ; 
This  is  the  theme  of  those  above, 

This  upon  earth  shall  fire  us. 
Say,  if  your  hearts  are  tuned  to  sing, 

Is  there  a  subject  greater  ? 
Harmony  all  its  strains  may  bring, 

Jesu's  name  is  sweeter. 

Jesus  the  soul  of  music  is, 

His  is  the  noblest  passion ; 
Jesu's  name  is  joy  and  peace, 

Happiness  and  salvation. 
Jesu's  name  the  dead  can  raise, 

Show  us  our  sins  forgiven, 
Fill  us  with  all  the  light  of  grace, 

Carry  us  up  to  heaven. 


HYMNS    BY   THE    WAY.  287 

Who  hatli  a  right  like  us  to  sing — 

Us  whom  his  mercy  raises  ? 
Merry  our  hearts,  for  Christ  is  King, 

Cheerful  are  all  our  faces.        . 
"Who  of  his  love  doth  once  partake, 

He  evermore  rejoices  ; 
Melody  in  our  hearts  we  make, 

Melody  with  our  voices. 

He  that  a  sprinkled  conscience  hath, 

He  that  in  God  is  merry ; 
Let  him  sing  Psalms,  the  Spirit  saith, 

Joyful  and  never  weary. 
Offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise, 

Hearty  and  never  ceasing  ; 
Spiritual  songs  and  anthems  raise, 

Honour,  and  thanks,  and  blessing. 

Then  let  us  in  his  praises  join, 

Triumph  in  his  salvation  ; 
Glory  ascribe  to  love  Divine, 

Worship  and  adoration. 
Heaven  already  is  begun, 

Opened  in  each  believer ; 
Only  believe,  and  still  go  on, 

Heaven  is  ours  for  ever  ! 

"  That's  the  hymn/'  said  the  old  Cornishman, 
"  and  the  tune  was  '  Nancy  Dawson ' ;  and  a  cheery 
thing  it  was  to  hear  my  father  sing  it,  just  as  the  old 
folks,  he  said,  used  to  sing  it.  Yes,  and  I  used  to 
sing  it  with  him,  and  love  to  sing  it  now,  though  he  is 
gone,  and  my  voice  is  not  what  it  used  to  be.  He  and 
I  shall  join  again,  by  and  by,  and  then  we  shall  sing 
as  we  never  could  sing  in  this  world — 

Heaven  is  ours  for  ever ! " 

It  has  occurred  to  some  that  one  of  Charles 
Wesley's  most  glorious  hymns  may  have  sprung  into 


288  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

life  under  the  influence  of  circumstances  distinctive  of 
some  remarkable  point  on  his  personal  way  through 
life.  That  being  supposed,  the  hymn  may  be  classed 
with  hymns  by  tne  way.  The  hymn  in  question  is  the 
one  of  which  Watts,  with  great  nobility  of  spirit,  said, 
"that  single  poem,  ' Wrestling  Jacob/  is  worth  all 
the  verses  which  I  have  ever  written." 

"  I  used  often  to  read  that  hymn  to  my  family," 
said  a  man  whose  face  showed  deep  lines  of  sorrow 
overlying  a  calm  expression  of  peacefulness,  "and 
often  have  I  called  their  attention  to  its  wonderful 
combination  of  majesty  and  tenderness,  beauty  and 
power,  rich  music,  deep  feeling,  graphic  life,  and  lofty 
devotion.  But  when  I  used  to  read  it  to  myself,  I  felt 
as  if  there  were  something  in  it  as  an  expression  of 
Christian  experience  which  I  could  not  make  my  own. 
Not  that  I  ever  adopted  the  opinion  of  a  critic  who 
thinks  that  it  is  a  fault  in  a  hymn  to  be  fin  a  too 
elevated  strain  of  Christian  experience ' ;  no,  Chris- 
tians are  prone  enough  to  grovel.  They  often  need 
elevated  strains  to  keep  them  to  the  height  of  their 
calling.  But  I  seemed  to  lack  the  power  of  singing 
that  hymn  with  a  full  relish  of  its  meaning  and  spirit. 
Were  any  peculiar  circumstances  needed  to  put  me  in 
a  condition  to  adopt  it  as  the  felt  utterance  of  my  own 
heart  ?  I  prayed  that  I  might  understand  its  full 
power  ?  Little,  however,  did  I  think  that  my  prayer 
would  be  answered  as  it  was.  I  was  called  to  a  journey 
with  my  household.  On  the  way  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
arrested  us.  The  shadow  of  that  hand  grew  dark,  and 
yet  darker.  One  child  I  watched  as  he  passed  from 
among  us.  Another  was  soon  gone  ;  and  yet  another. 
Then,  last  of  all,  the  mother,  the  wife  of  my  youth, 
and  the  light  of  my  home  !     I  was  left  alone  in  deso- 


HYMNS   BY   THE    WAY.  289 

lation  !  What  a  night  was  that  !  I  wandered  out 
into  the  darkness,  and,  friendless  in  my  woe,  paced 
the  margin  of  a  stream.  I  thought  of  Jacob,  alone 
with  God.  Verily  I  had  seen  all  that  was  dear  to  me 
on  earth  pass  over  the  brook  before  me.  Was  I  kept 
behind  to  meet  with  Jacob's  God?  I  raised  my  eyes 
upward  in  silent  prayer,  and  then  it  seemed  as  if  my 
soul  were  seized  with  the  spirit  of  agonizing  prayer. 
A  sense  of  the  Divine  power  was  upon  me ;  and  as  I 
tried  to  fasten  my  soul  upon  the  truth  and  love  of 
God,  now  my  only  helper,  it  appeared  as  if  some  holy 
prompter  were  rehearsing  my  favourite  hymn  within  me. 
My  spirit  seemed  to  pass  through  all  the  deep  processes 
which  that  hymn  records ;  and  now  it  came  gushing 
from  an  understanding  heart : — 


Come,  0  Thou  Traveller  unknown, 
"Whom  still  I  hold,  but  cannot  see, 

My  company  before  is  gone, 
And  I  am  left  alone  with  Thee ; 

With  Thee  all  night  I  mean  to  stay, 

And  wrestle  till  the  break  of  day. 

I  need  not  tell  Thee  who  I  am, 

My  misery  or  sin  declare ; 
Thyself  hast  called  me  by  my  name  ; 

Look  on  thy  hands,  and  read  it  there ! 
But  who,  I  ask  Thee,  who  art  Thou  ? 
Tell  me  thy  name,  and  tell  me  now. 

In  vain  Thou  strugglest  to  get  free, 

I  never  will  unloose  my  hold ; 
Art  Thou  the  Man  that  died  for  me  ? 

The  secret  of  thy  love  unfold. 
Wrestling  I  will  not  let  Thee  go, 
Till  I  thy  name,  thy  nature  know. 

19 


290  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Wilt  Thou  not  yet  to  me  reveal 
Thy  new,  unutterable  name  ? 

Tell  me,  I  still  beseech  Thee,  tell : 
To  know  it  now  resolved  I  am  : 

Wrestling  I  will  not  let  Thee  go, 

Till  I  thy  name,  thy  nature  know. 

'Tis  all  in  vain  to  hold  thy  tongue, 
Or  touch  the  hollow  of  my  thigh ; 

Though  every  sinew  be  unstrung, 
Out  of  my  arms  Thou  shalt  not  fly : 

Wrestling  I  will  not  let  Thee  go, 

Till  I  thy  name,  thy  nature  know. 

What  though  my  shrinking  flesh  complain, 
And  murmur  to  contend  so  long  ? 

I  rise  superior  to  my  pain ; 

When  I  am  weak  then  I  am  strong : 

And  when  my  all  of  strength  shall  fail, 

I  shall  with  the  God-Man  prevail. 

My  strength  is  gone ;  my  nature  dies ; 

I  sink  beneath  thy  weighty  hand, 
Faint  to  revive,  and  fall  to  rise ; 

I  fall,  and  yet  by  faith  I  stand : 
I  stand,  and  will  not  let  Thee  go, 
Till  I  thy  name,  thy  nature  know. 

Yield  to  me  now,  for  I  am  weak, 
But  confident  in  self-despair ; 

Speak  to  my  heart,  in  blessings  speak, 
Be  conquer'd  by  my  instant  prayer  ; 

Speak,  or  Thou  never  hence  shalt  move, 

And  tell  me  if  thy  name  is  Love  ? 

'Tis  Love  !  'tis  Love  !     Thou  diedst  for  me  ! 

I  hear  thy  whisper  in  my  heart ! 
The  morning  breaks,  the  shadows  flee ; 

Pure  universal  Love  Thou  art ! 
To  me,  to  all  thy  bowels  move ; 
Thy  nature  and  thy  name  is  Love ! 


HYMNS    BY    THE    WAY.  291 

t 

My  prayer  hath  power  with  God  ;  the  grace 

Unspeakable  I  now  receive  ; 
Through  faith  I  see  Thee  face  to  face, 

I  see  Thee  face  to  face,  and  live  : 
In  vain  I  have  not  wept  and  strove  ; 
Thy  nature  and  thy  name  is  Love. 

I  know  Thee,  Saviour,  who  Thou  art : 

Jesus,  the  feeble  sinner's  Friend ! 
!Nor  wilt  Thou  with  the  night  depart, 

But  stay,  and  love  me  to  the  end ! 
Thy  mercies  never  shall  remove, 
Thy  nature  and  thy  name  is  Love. 

The  Sun  of  Righteousness  on  me 
Hath  rose  with  healing  in  his  wings  ; 

YVither'd  my  nature's  strength,  from  Thee 
My  soul  its  life  and  succour  brings  ; 

My  help  is  all  laid  up  above  ; 

Thy  nature  and  thy  name  is  Love. 

Contented  now  upon  my  thigh, 

I  halt  till  life's  short  journey  end; 
All  helplessness,  all  weakness,  I 

On  Thee  alone  for  strength  depend ; 
!Nor  have  I  power  from  Thee  to  move  ; 
Thy  nature  and  thy  name  is  Love. 

Lame  as  I  am,  I  take  the  prey, 

Hell,  earth,  and  sin  with  ease  o'ercome ; 

I  leap  for  joy,  pursue  my  way, 

And  as  a  bounding  hart  fly  home  ! 

Through  all  eternity  to  prove, 

Thy  nature  and  thy  name  is  Love." 

The  author  of  this  hymn  came  to  the  end  of  his 
journey  at  last.  His  toils,  and  wrestlings,  and 
hymnings  by  the  way  were  over ;  but,  true  to  his 
calling  up  to  the  latest  step,  even  when  his  feet  were 


292  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

"  dipped  in  the  brim  of  the  Jordan/'  he  gave  forth,  as 
his  final  hymn  by  the  way,  his  parting  song — 

In  age  and  feebleness  extreme, 
Who  shall  a  sinful  worm  redeem  ? 
Jesus,  my  only  hope  Thou  art, 
Strength  of  my  failing  flesh  and  heart.; 
Oh,  could  I  catch  one  smile  from  Thee, 
And  drop  into  eternity ! 

His  prayer  was  answered.  He  caught  that  smile,  and 
now  it  may  be  said  of  him,  that  the  principles  and 
feeling-s  with  which  he  began  his  course  as  a  hymnist 
were  his  principles  and  feelings  up  to  the  end;  they 
were  holy  and  pure.  "  From  the  first  day  until  the 
day  of  Christ "  dawned  on  him,  he  had  been  ' c  stead- 
fast, unmovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,"  This  is  more  than  can  be  recorded  of  some 
whose  hymns  still  give  pleasure  to  every  Christian 
who  knows  and  sings  them.  There  is  a  touching  and 
instructive  tradition  about  one  in  particular,  showing 
that  hymns  once  given  out  from  a  simple  loving 
Christian  heart  may  serve  to  beguile  the  journey  of 
many  a  pious  wayfarer,  while  they  now  and  then,  in 
after  days,  spring  up  in  the  path  of  their  authors  to 
reprove  them  for  denying  and  forsaking  that  Saviour 
of  whom  and  to  whom  they  once  so  sweetly  sang.  It 
used  to  be  more  easy  to  beguile  the  way  with  chat  in 
the  old  coaching  days  than  it  is  now  amidst  the  hurry, 
rattle,  and  screech  of  our  iron  roads.  It  was  more 
possible  then  to  get  an  occasional  bit  of  agreeable 
reading  too,  and,  among  inside  passengers  especially, 
there  was,  at  times,  a  sort  of  Old  English  freedom  in 
the  mutual  enjoyment  of  a  book.  It  is  said  that  one 
day,  on  one  of  the  well-known  roads,  a  lady  had  been 
for  some  time  engaged  over  one  page  of  a  little  book, 


HYMNS    BY    THE    WAY.  203 

which,  in  the  course  of  the  journey,  she  had  occa- 
sionally consulted.  Turning  at  length  to  her  com- 
panion in  travel,  a  gentleman  from  whose  appearance 
she  gathered  that  an  appeal  on  such  a  question  would 
not  be  disagreeable,  she  held  the  open  page  towards 
him,  and  said,  "  May  I  ask  your  attention  to  this 
hymn,  and  ask  you  to  favour  me  with  your  opinion  of 
it  ?     Do  you  know  it  ?"     It  was — 

Come.  Thou  Fount  of  every  blessing, 

Tune  my  heart  to  sing  thy  grace  : 
Streams  of  mercy,  never  ceasing, 

Call  for  songs  of  loudest  praise. 
Teach  me  some  celestial  measure, 

Sang  by  ransomed  hosts  above  ; 
Oh,  the  vast,  the  boundless  treasure 

Of  my  Lord's  unchanging  love! 

Here  I  raise  ray  Ebenezer  ; 

Hither,  by  thy  help  Fm  come  ; 
And  I  hope,  by  thy  good  pleasure, 

Safely  to  arrive  at  home. 
Jesus  sought  me  when  a  stranger, 

Wandering  from  the  fold  of  God ; 
He,  to  save  my  soul  from  danger, 

Interposed  his  precious  blood. 

Oh  1  to  grace  how  great  a  debtor, 

Daily  I'm  constrained  to  be  ; 
Let  that  grace,  Lord,  like  a  fetter, 

Bind  my  wandering  heart  to  Thee. 
Prone  to  wander ;  Lord,  I  feel  it ; 

Prone  to  leave  the  God  I  love ; 
Here's  my  heart,  Lord,  take  and  seal  it, 

Seal  it  from  thy  courts  above. 

Her  companion  glanced  down  the  page,  and  made  an 
attempt  to  excuse  himself  from  conversation  on  the 


294  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

merits  of  the  hymn ;  but  the  lady  ventured  on  another 
appeal. 

"  That  hymn  has  given  me  so  much  pleasure,"  she 
said;  "its  sentiments  so  touch  me;  indeed,  I  cannot 
tell  you  how  much  good  it  has  done  me.  Don't  you 
think  it  very  good  V 

"  Madam  V3  said  the  stranger,  bursting  into  tears, 
"  I  am  the  poor  unhappy  man  who  wrote  that  hymn 
many  years  ago,  and  I  would  give  a  thousand  worlds, 
if  I  had  them,  to  enjoy  the  feelings  I  then  had." 

Poor  Robinson  !  it  was  he,  the  victim  of  eccen- 
tricity, love  of  change,  and  self-conceit;  it  was  he  of 
whom  Robert  Hall  said,  "  he  had  a  musical  voice,  and 
was  master  of  all  its  intonations;  he  had  wonderful 
self-passion,  and  could  say  what  he  pleased,  when  he 
pleased,  and  hoiv  he  pleased."  Like  many  other  men 
of  popular  and  versatile  talents,  however,  he  ran  a 
zigzag  course.  Now,  one  of  Whitefield's  converts, 
and  a  student  at  ' '  the  Tabernacle "  as  a  Calvinistic 
Methodist ;  now,  an  Independent  minister ;  now,  a 
Baptist,  translating  Saurin's  sermons,  dealing  in  coals 
and  corn,  writing  a  history  of  baptism,  in  which  all 
the  jumbled  powers  and  oddities  of  his  character  seem 
to  be  reflected;  and,  at  last,  a  Socinian,  groping  his 
way  downward  into  the  cheerless  gloom,  to  realize  the 
awful  meaning  of  an  inspired  utterance,  "  He  that 
despised  Moses'  law  died  without  mercy  under  two 
or  three  witnesses :  of  how  much  sorer  punishment, 
suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought  worthy  who  hath 
trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted 
the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was  sanctified, 
an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit 
of  grace  ?" 


^?^ 


■    i^ 


^[fdStlwcB  S»W^  313s>  ?c6S^S5t 


Chapter  XYL 

HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS. 

"  Hast  thou  heard  of  a  shell  on  the  margin  of  ocean, 
Whose  pearly  recesses  the  echoes  still  keep, 
Of  the  music  it  caught  when,  with  tremulous  motion, 
It  joined  in  the  concert  poured  forth  by  the  deep  ? 

"And  fables  have  told  us  when  far  inland  carried, 
To  the  waste  sandy  desert  and  dark  ivied  cave, 
In  its  musical  chambers  some  murmurs  have  tarried, 
It  learnt  long  before  of  the  wind  and  the  wave." 


UST  at  the  opening  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
a  clergyman  in  Hull  was  stepping  into  a  boat 
with  a  young  couple,  whom  he  was  going  to 
marry  in  Lincolnshire.  The  weather  was  calm,  and 
there  was  the  promise  of  a  bright  voyage  to  the  scene 
of  the  wedding;  but  a  mysterious  sense  of  coming 
danger  pressed  upon  the  good  parson's  heart,  and 
throwing  his  cane  on  shore  as  the  boat  went  off,  he 
cried,  "  Ho,  for  heaven  V  The  shout  was  prophetic ; 
neither  he,  nor  bridegroom,  nor  bride  returned.  They 
never  reached  the  altar.  They  sank  together.  It 
was,  indeed,  "  Ho,  for  heaven  V*  The  son  of  that 
prophetic  pastor  lived  to  give  us  one  of  the  best  boat 
songs  that  ever  floated  over  the  waters,  or  charmed  a 


296  HYMN-WRITEES   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

pilgrim  on  the  ocean.  This  was  Andrew  Marvel,  the 
friend  of  Milton,  and  his  associate  as  private  secretary 
to  Cromwell.  A  man  who  was  faithful  to  his  prin- 
ciples, and  held  his  integrity  though  tempted  in  the 
hour  of  need  by  offers  of  a  royal  bribe ;  one  whose 
ability  and  honourable  bearing  secured  his  election  as 
member  of  Parliament  for  his  native  city ;  and  whose 
genius,  talent,  humour,  and  wit  were  always  engaged 
for  goodness  and  truth  against  corruption,  falsehood, 
and  wrong.  Did  you  ever  read  his  whimsical  re- 
flections on  Holland  ?  They  prove  that  Dutchmen 
were  not  his  favourites.  Their  politics  were  not  his. 
And  his  lines  serve,  too,  to  show  the  power  which  he 
could  wield  as  a  satirist : — 

Holland,  that  scarce  deserves  the  name  of  land, 

As  but  th'  offscouring  of  the  British  sand ; 

And  so  much  earth  as  was  contributed 

By  English  pilots  when  they  heave  the  lead, 

Or  what  by  th'  ocean's  slow  alluvion  fell 

Of  shipwreck'd  cockle  and  the  mussel  shell — 

This  undigested  vomit  of  the  sea 

Fell  to  the  Dutch  by  just  propriety. 

This  is  enough  as  evidence  that  his  memory  justly 
inherits  the  distinction  of  great  humour  and  satirical 
genius.  But  he  was  a  good  man.  Nor  was  he,  as  a 
poet,  less  capable  of  tenderness  and  reverent  beauty, 
when  they  were  called  for,  than  for  logical  and  acute 
philippic.  Of  course,  he  would  deeply  sympathize 
with  the  emigrants  who  in  his  day  fled  their  country 
to  avoid  the  oppression  to  which  they  were  subject  for 
their  religious  and  ecclesiastical  principles;  and  for 
those  of  them  who  found  their  way  to  the  Bermudas 
he  wrote  a  hymn  which  lives  to  give  pleasure  to  the 
devout  taste  of  every  following  generation  : — 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS.  297 

Where  the  remote  Bermudas  ride 
In  ocean's  bosom  unespied, 
From  a  small  boat  that  row'd  along, 
The  listening  winds  received  their  song. 

"  What  should  we  do  but  sing  his  praise 
That  led  us  through  the  watery  maze, 
Unto  an  isle  so  long  unknown, 
And  yet  far  kinder  than  our  own  ! 

"  Where  He  the  huge  sea-monsters  racks, 
That  lift  the  deep  upon  their  backs ; 
He  lands  us  on  a  grassy  stage, 
Safe  from  the  storm's  and  tyrant's  rage. 

"  He  gave  us  this  eternal  spring 
Which  here  enamels  everything, 
And  sends  the  fowls  to  us  in  care, 
On  daily  visits  through  the  air. 

"  He  hangs  in  shades  the  orange  bright, 
Like  golden  lamps  in  a  green  night, 
And  in  these  rocks  for  us  did  frame, 
A  temple  where  to  sound  his  name. 

"  Oh!  let  our  voice  his  praise  exalt 
Till  it  arrive  at  heaven's  vault, 
"Which  then  perhaps  rebounding  may 
Echo  beyond  the  Mexique  bay." 

Thus  sang  they  in  the  English  boat 
A  holy  and  a  cheerful  note, 
And  all  the  way  to  guide  their  chime, 
With  falling  oars  they  kept  the  time. 

None  but  a  kind  heart,  and  a  good  one,  too,  would 
provide  hymns  like  this  for  those  who  toil  at  the  oar, 
and  it  is  a  happy  thing  for  human  life  that  such  kind 
hearts  do  not  fail.  One  follows  another  as  men  need 
songs  on  the  waters.  Marvel  sang  for  emigrant  boat- 
men on  the  island  shores  of  the  west ;  Wordsworth 


298  HYMN-WRITERS    AND   THEIR    HYMNS. 

has  furnished  us  with  hymn  music  from  the  boatmen 
on  the  Neckar.  Those  who  have  wandered  on  the 
Rhine,  and  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  drawn  aside 
by  the  charms  which  surround  some  of  its  tributaries, 
will  remember  the  beauties  that  cluster  about  Heidel- 
berg, and  allow  many  of  its  river  scenes  to  enrich  the 
imagery  of  their  dreams  in  after  life.  It  would  not  be 
difficult  to  picture  one  wanderer  there ;  a  wanderer  in 
whose  witching  company  many  of  us  have  sauntered 
on  an  "  Excursion"  among  the  highlands  of  Scotland, 
the  English  Lakes,  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Yfye  and 
the  Wharfe  ;  a  Cumberland  man,  tall,  though  scarcely 
of  dignified  carriage ;  evidently  used  to  travel,  not- 
withstanding his  "narrowness  and  drop  about  the 
shoulders" ;  with  a  face,  however,  telling  of  deep 
thoughts  and  beautiful  day-dreams,  and  eyes  that 
seemed  like  windows  opening  into  some  pure  spiritual 
world,  and  emitting  "  the  light  that  never  was  on  land 
or  sea."  Who  would  not  know  William  Wordsworth  ? 
and  who  would  not  enjoy  to  watch  him,  on  the  river  bank 
or  near  the  rapids,  catching  the  spirit  of  the  boatmen's 
chant,  and  helping  us  to  sympathize  with  them  in 
danger,  and  to  join  them  in  their  hymn? — 

Jesu !  bless  our  slender  boat, 

By  the  current  swept  along ; 
Loud  its  threatenings — let  them  not 

Drown  the  music  of  a  song 
Breath'd  thy  mercy  to  implore, 
Where  these  troubled  waters  roar. 

Saviour,  for  our  warning,  seen 

Bleeding  on  that  precious  rood ; 
If  while  through  the  meadows  green 

Gently  wound  the  peaceful  flood, 
We  forgot  Thee,  do  not  Thou 
Disregard  thy  suppliants  now  ! 


HYMNS    ON    THE   WATERS.  299 

Hither  like  yon  ancient  tower 

Watching  o'er  the  river's  bed, 
Fling  the  shadow  of  thy  power, 

Else  we  sleep  among  the  dead ; 
Thon  who  trod'st  the  billowy  sea, 
Shield  ns  in  onr  jeopardy. 

Guide  our  bark  among  the  waves ; 

Through  the  rocks  our  passage  smooth ; 
Where  the  whirlpool  frets  and  raves, 

Let  thy  love  its  anger  soothe  ; 
All  our  hope  is  placed  in  Thee ; 
Miserere  Domine! 

No  one  can  think  of  Wordsworth  and  the  English 
lakes  without  having  Coleridge  and  Southey  before 
him.  Nor  could  he  fail  to  see  that  plain-looking  house 
a  little  way  out  of  Keswick  standing  on  a  gentle 
eminence  over  the  river  Greta,  near  the  old  bridge. 
Greta  Hall  would  be  interesting  to  all  who  love  songs 
on  the  waters ;  for  there  it  was  that  Caroline  Bowles 
appeared  as  Mrs.  Southey  a  few  years  before  the  poet's 
death ;  and  there  she  ministered  to  the  paralyzed  man 
who  had  so  widely  influenced  the  literature  of  his 
times ;  and  there,  like  his  guardian  spirit,  she  watched 
and  soothed  him  through  the  dimness  and  depression 
of  his  closing  hours.  She  would  be  thought  of  with 
deep  respect  as  the  second  wife  of  Southey,  but  she 
has  for  ever  established  her  claim  on  our  admiration 
and  esteem  by  such  touching  appeals  to  our  best  feel- 
ings as  we  have  in  her  Mariner's  Hymn — 

Launch  thy  bark,  mariner ! 

Christian,  God  speed  thee ! 
Let  loose  the  rudder-bands — 

Good  angels  lead  thee  ! 


300  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Set  thy  sails  warily, 

Tempests  will  come ; 
Steer  thy  course  steadily ; 

Christian,  steer  home ! 

Look  to  the  weather  bow, 
Breakers  are  round  thee  ; 

Let  fall  the  plummet  now, 

•    Shallows  may  ground  thee. 

Reef  in  the  foresail,  there ! 
Hold  the  helm  fast ! 

So — let  the  vessel  wear — 
There  swept  the  blast. 

"  What  of  the  night,  watchman  ? 

What  of  the  night  ?" 
"  Cloudy — all  quiet — 

No  land  yet — all's  right." 
Be  wakeful,  be  vigilant — 

Danger  may  be 
At  an  hour  when  all  seemeth 

Securest  to  thee. 

How !  gains  the  leak  so  fast  ? 

Clean  out  the  hold — ; 
Hoist  up  thy  merchandise, 

Heave  out  thy  gold ; 
There — let  the  ingots  go — 

Now  the  ship  rights ; 
Hurra  !  the  harbour's  near — 

Lo  !  the  red  lights ! 

Slacken  not  sail  yet 

At  inlet  or  island ; 
Straight  for  the  beacon  steer, 

Straight  for  the  high  land ; 
Crowd  all  thy  canvas  on, 

Cut  through  the  foam — 
Christian,  cast  anchor  now— 

Heaven  is  thy  home ! 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS.  301 

Hymns  on  the  waters  come  with  their  richer  and 
deeper  music  to  the  heart  when  they  are  sung  to  us  by 
gifted  spirits,,  who  have  themselves  gone   "  down  to 
the  sea  in  ships,  to  do  business  in  great  waters,  to  see 
the  works  of  the  Lord  and  his  wonders  in  the  deep  "  ; 
or    who,   on  missions  of  mercy,   have  been    "  in  the 
deep/'  "  in  perils  of  waters,  and  in  perils  in  the  sea." 
Among  these  Charles  Wesley  is  a  remarkable  example, 
combining,  as  he  does  in  his  ocean  songs,  the  recollec- 
tions of  an  experienced  observer,  fine  poetic  power,  a 
jubilant  faith,  a*nd  devout  feeling.     There  is  a  record 
in  the  journal  which  he  kept  on  his  voyage  back  from 
America  in  1736,  which  helps  to  open  the  secret  of  his 
success  in  his  hymns  for  mariners :  "  Thursday,   Oct. 
28th/'  says  he,  "  the  captain  warned  me  of  a  storm 
approaching.     In  the  evening,   at  eight,  it  came,  and 
rose  higher  and  higher.     Often  I  thought  it  must  have 
come  to  its  strength,  for  I   did  not  lose  a  moment  of 
it,  being  obliged  by  bodily  suffering  to  rise  frequently. 
At  last  the  long-wished-for  morning  came,  but  brought 
no  abatement  of  the  storm.     There  was  so  prodigious 
a  sea  that  it  quickly  washed  away  our  sheep,  and  half 
our  hogs,  and  drowned  most  of  our  fowls.     The  ship 
had  been  new  caulked  at  Boston,  how  carefully  it  now 
appeared  ;  for  being  deeply  laden  the  sea  streamed  in 
at  all  sides,  so  plentifully,  that  it  was  so  much  as  four 
men  could  do,  by  continual  pumping,  to  keep  her  above 
water.     I    rose    and   lay    down  by   turns,    but    could 
remain  in  no  posture  long ;  strove  vehemently  to  pray, 
but   in   vain;  persisted  in  striving,  yet   still  without 
effect.     I  prayed  for  power  to  pray,  for  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,   continually  repeating  his  name,  till  I  felt  the 
virtue  of  it  at  last,  and  knew  that  I  abode  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Almighty.     It  was  now  about  three  in 


302  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMKS. 

the  afternoon,  and  the  storm  at  the  height.  I  endea- 
voured to  encourage  poor  Mr.  Brig  and  Cutler,  who 
were  in  the  utmost  agony  of  fear.  I  prayed  with  them 
and  for  them  till  four,  at  which  time  the  ship  made  so 
much  water  that  the  captain,  finding  it  impossible 
otherwise  to  save  her  from  sinking,  cut  down  the  mizen 
mast.  In  this  dreadful  moment,  I  bless  God,  I  found 
the  comfort  of  hope  ;  and  such  joy  in  finding  I  could 
hope  as  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  I 
had  that  conviction  of  the  power  of  God  present  with 
me,  overruling  my  strongest  passion,  fear,  and  raising 
me  above  what  I  am  by  nature,  as  surpassed  all  rational 
evidence,  and  gave  me  a  taste  of  the  Divine  goodness. 
At  the  same  time  I  found  myself  constrained  in  spirit 
to  bear  witness  to  the  truth."  With  scenes  like 
these  pictured  in  his  soul,  who  can  wonder  that  his 
hallowed  genius  found  expression  in  such  hymns  as 
this — 


0  Thou  who  didst  prepare 
The  ocean's  caverned  cell, 
And  teach  the  gathering  waters  there 
To  meet  and  dwell ; 
Toss'd  in  onr  reeling  bark 
Upon  this  briny  sea, 
Thy  wondrous  ways,  0  Lord,  we  mark, 
And  sing  to  Thee. 

That  glorious  hand  of  Thine 
"Which  fills  the  fount  of  day, 
And  gives  the  lunar  orb  to  shine 
With  silv'ry  ray, 
Which  hangeth  forth  on  high 
The  clustering  dews  of  night, 
Can  point  beneath  a  beamless  sky, 
Our  course  aright. 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS.  303 

Borne  on  the  dark'ning  wave, 
In  measured  sweep  we  go, 
Nor  dread  tli'  unfathomable  grave 
Which  yawns  below ; 
For  He  is  nigh  who  trod 
Amid  the  foaming  spray, 
Whose  billows  own'd  th'  Incarnate  God, 
And  died  away. 

How  terrible  art  Thou, 
In  all  thy  wonders  shown ; 
Though  veil'd  in  Thine  eternal  brow, 
Thy  steps  unknown ! 
Invisible  to  sight, 
But  oh !  to  faith  how  near ; 
Beneath  the  gloomiest  cloud  of  night 
Thou  beamest  here. 

To  peaceful  rest  we  go, 
And  close  our  tranquil  eyes  ; 
Though  deep  beneath  the  waters  flow, 
And  circling  rise. 
Though  swells  the  flowing  tide, 
And  threatens  far  above, 
We  know  in  whom  our  souls  confide 
With  fearless  love. 

Snatch'd  from  a  darker  deep, 
And  waves  of  wilder  foam, 
Thou,  Lord,  our  trusting  souls  wilt  keep, 
And  waft  them  home — 
Home,  where  no  storm  can  sound, 
Nor  angry  waters  roar, 
Nor  troublous  billows  heave  around 
That  peaceful  shore. 

The  journal  continues,  "  Towards  morning,  the  sea 
heard  and  obeyed  the  Divine  voice,  '  Peace,  be  still ! ' 
The  calm  day  that  now  broke  on  the  weather-beaten 
men  was  Sunday ;  and,"  says  the  hymnist,  "  my  first 


304  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

business  to-day — may  it  be  the  business  of  all  my  days  ! 
— was  to  offer  up  the  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving. 
Then  we  all  joined  in  thanks  for  our  deliverance." 
And  how  he  could  render  thanks  for  such  deliverances 
we  know  from  the  echo  of  his  song.  It  is  repeated  to 
this  day. 

All  praise  to  the  Lord, 

Who  rules  with  a  word 

Th'  untractable  sea, 
And  limits  its  rage  by  his  steadfast  decree  ; 

"Whose  providence  binds 

Or  releases  the  winds, 

And  compels  them  again, 
At  his  beck  to  put  on  the  invisible  chain. 

Oh  that  all  men  would  raise 

A  tribute  of  praise, 

His  goodness  declare, 
And  thankful  confess  his  fatherly  care. 

With  joy  we  embrace 

This  pledge  of  his  grace, 

And  wait  to  out  fly 
These  storms  of  affliction,  and  land  in  the  sky. 

It  is  natural  that  one  who  had  known  the  mingled 
pleasures,  discomforts,  and  dangers  of  a  sea  voyage, 
should  look  with  kind  sympathy  on  those  who  are  just 
embarking ;  and,  where  a  kind  heart  and  ready  muse 
are  agreed,  that  sympathy  would  prompt  a  tuneful 
prayer  for  the  use  of  all  who  look  for  God's  blessing 
when  "  going  on  shipboard/''  Charles  Wesley,  always 
in  tune  for  such  service,  has  cheered  tremulous  hearts 
on  many  a  deck  with  his  hymn — 

Lord,  whom  winds  and  waves  obey, 
Guide  us  through  the  watery  way ; 
In  the  hollow  of  thy  hand, 
Hide,  and  bring  us  safe  to  land. 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS.  305 

Jesus,  let  our  faithful  mind 
Eest,  on  Thee  alone  reclined  ; 
Every  anxious  thought  repress, 
Keep  our  souls  in  perfect  peace. 

Keep  the  souls  whom  now  we  leave, 
Bid  them  to  each  other  cleave ; 
Bid  them  walk  on  life's  rough  sea ; 
Bid  them  come  by  faith  to  Thee. 

Save,  till  all  these  tempests  end, 
All  who  on  thy  love  depend  ; 
Waft  our  happy  spirits  o'er  ; 
Land  us  on  the  heavenly  shore. 

About  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  ago,  on  a  low 
sandy  island,  almost  covered  with  palm  trees,  a  few 
leagues  south-east  from  Sierra  Leone,  on  the  western 
coast  of  Africa,  a  wretched-looking  young  Englishman 
might  be  seen  toiling  in  a  plantation  of  lemon  trees. 
He  was  barely  covered  with  an  old  trousers  and  shirr, 
a  yard  or  two  of  cotton  wrapped  about  his  shoulders, 
and  an  old  handkerchief  around  his  head.     There  he 
worked,  without  shelter  from  the  sun,  or  the  gales  and 
torrents  of  the  rainy  season,  half  starved,  craving  un- 
wholesome roots  to  allay  his  hunger.     Like  another 
prodigal,  (<  no   man  gave  unto  him  " — no,  nor  woman 
either.      Slaves   shunned  him;    and  the  only  woman 
who   noticed  him  was  a  sinful  black  tyrant,  who,  in 
vicious  association  with  his   master,   sported  with  his 
miseries,  and  answered  his  appeals  for  mercy  by  aggra- 
vating his  woe.     He  had  brought  himself  into    this 
condition   by  his   reckless   profligacy.      He  was  but 
twenty;    but  his   few  years  had  been  filled  to   over- 
flowing  with   ungodliness   in   its    most   blasphemous 
forms.    Born  of  a  pious  mother,  his  childhood  hallowed 
by  her  instruction,  and  blessed  in  youth  with  fair  pros- 

20 


306  HYMN-WRITE  KS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

pects,  he  nevertheless  took  to  the  sea  in  early  life  in  a 
manner  which  disappointed  his  friends ;  cut  himself  off 
from  one  good  after  another ;  was  pressed  into  the 
naval  service,  degraded  from  his  first  honours ;  passed 
into  the  African  trade  on  the  slave  coast ;  was  now  a 
castaway,  and  had  become  all  but  the  hopeless  slave  of 
a  man  who  engaged  him  in  the  meanest  drudgery  of 
his  meanest  traffic.  This  woe-begone  prodigal  was 
John  Newton,  afterwards  known  as  the  reverend 
rector  of  St.  AVoolnoth,  London,  the  friend  of  Cowper, 
the  compiler  of  the  "  Olney  Hymns/'  and  the  hymnist 
whose  songs  have  so  often  quickened  failing  hearts 
into  cheerful  worship  both  on  land  and  at  sea.  His 
adventures  on  sea  and  land  may  be  called  romantic. 
On  escaping  from  his  degradation  on  the  African  coast, 
he  was  still  a  rover,  but  at  last  on  a  homeward 
voyage,  Divine  mercy  arrested  him.  A  terrible  storm 
fell  on  them.  Death  raged  around  the  sinking  ship ; 
and  then  it  was,  as  he  says,  "  I  began  to  pray.  ...  I 
could  not  utter  the  prayer  of  faith ;  I  could  not  draw 
near  to  a  reconciled  God,  and  call  Him  Father.  My 
prayer  was  like  the  cry  of  the  ravens,  winch  yet  the 
Lord  does  not  disdain  to  hear."  The  Lord  heard  his 
cry.  The  storm  was  hushed ;  but  then  came  on  the 
horrible  thought  of  slow  death  upon  the  deep  from  the 
failure  of  provisions,  and  the  lack  of  means  to  hasten 
the  shattered  vessel  toward  the  land.  l '  I  had  a  New 
Testament,"  he  tells  us,  "  I  was  struck  with  several 
passages,  but  particularly  the  '  Prodigal/  a  case,  I 
thought,  that  bad  never  been  so  nearly  exemplified  as 
by  myself ;  and  then,  the  goodness  of  the  father  in 
receiving,  nay,  in  running  to  meet  such  a  son,  and  this 
intended  to  illustrate  the  Lord's  goodness  to  returning 
sinners.     This  gained  upon  me.     I  continued  much  in 


HYMNS    ON    THE   WATERS.  307 

prayer ;  I  saw  that  the  Lord  had  interposed  so  far  to 
save  me,  and  I  hoped  He  would  do  more.  The  out- 
ward circumstances  helped  in  this  place  to  make  me 
still  more  serious  and  earnest  in  crying  to  Him  who 
alone  could  relieve.  I  saw  that  by  the  way  pointed 
out  in  the  gospel,  God  might  declare,  not  his  mercy 
only,  but  his  justice  also,  in  the  pardon  of  sin  on  the 
account  of  the  obedience  and  sufferings  of  Jesus 
Christ.  .  .  .  Thus,  to  all  appearance,  I  was  a  new 
man."  In  this  return  to  his  heavenly  Father  amidst 
the  terrors  of  an  ocean  storm  there  was,  it  may  be, 
the  first  kindling  of  that  hallowed  genius  which  after- 
wards recorded  the  penitent  mourner's  feelings  thus — 

I  hear  the  tempest's  awful  sound, 
I  feel  the  vessel's  quick  rebound ; 
And  fear  might  now  my  bosom  fill, 
But  Jesus  tells  me,  "  Peace !  Be  still !" 

More  and  more  loud  the  billows  roar, 

Far  distant  is  the  friendly  shore ; 

But  even  storms  obey  his  will, 

And  He  can  tell  them,  "  Peace  !  Be  still !" 

In  this  dread  hour  I  cling  to  Thee, 

My  Saviour  crucified  for  me. 

If  that  I  perish  be  thy  will, 

In  death,  Lord,  whisper,  "  Peace !  Be  still !" 

My  soul,  I  charge  thee  not  to  fear : 

Jesus  is  nigh,  my  prayer  to  hear ; 

His  promise  He  can  now  fulfil, 

And  to  the  waves  say,  "  Peace  !  Be  still !" 

Hark  !  He  has  listen'd  while  I  prayed. 
Slowly  the  tempest's  rage  is  stay'd; 
The  yielding  waves  obey  his  will, 
Jesus  hath  bid  them,  "  Peace  !  Be  still !" 


308  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Lord,  I  adore  thy  sovereign  power  ! 
My  Kescuer  from  danger's  hour ; 
Oh,  when  dark  fears  my  bosom  fill, 
Whisper  me  ever,  "Peace!  Be  still!" 

Newton  returned  to  his  native  land  a  new  man, 
not,  as  he  modestly  said,  "  to  all  appearance"  merely, 
but   truly   so  in   heart   and   life.     His  circumstances 
improved  as  his  Christian   character  brightened;  and 
although  his    peculiar   habits,   contracted   uuder   un- 
common circumstances,  kept  him  in  almost  a    secret 
enjoyment   of  inward  religion  for  several   years,   his 
light  could  not  be  hid.     His  Christian  life  was  not 
interrupted  even  by  the  associations    around  him  in 
the   slave  trade,  which,  like  many  good  men   of  his 
day,  he  continued  to   share  in.     While  yet  a  lad  he 
had  conceived  a  pure  and  warm  affection  for  a  young 
girl,   the  daughter  of  his  departed  mother's  nearest 
friends  ;  and  that  affection  which,  like  a  cord  of  heaven's 
weaving,  kept  his  heart  in  gentle  bondage  all  through 
his  seven  years  of  wild,  uneasy  departure  from  God, 
now  drew  him  into  a  happy  marriage  with  the  woman 
who  was   still  the  choice    of  his  soul.     And  now  his 
peaceful  life  was  spent  between  quiet  scenes  at  home 
and  voyaging  and  travelling  abroad.     While  in  the 
country  at  home,  "  Some  hours  every  day/'  he  writes, 
"  I  passed  in  retirement,  when  the  weather  was  fair  ; 
sometimes  in  the  thickest  woods,   sometimes   on  the 
highest   hills,    where    almost    every    step    varied    the 
prospect.     There  it  was  my  custom  for  many  years  to 
perform  my  devotions.      These  rural  scenes  have    a 
tendency  both  to  refresh  and  compose  my  spirits.     A 
beautiful   diversified  prospect  gladdens  my  heart.     I 
consider  myself  as  in  the  great  temple  which  the  Lord 
has  built  for  his   own  honour."     He  was  now  in  easy 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS.  309 

circumstances;  and  what  a  change!  What  a  hush 
was  come  upon  him  !  and  how  the  world  even  had 
altered  its  aspect  towards  him  !  "  I  remember/'  says 
he,  "  that  on  some  of  those  mournful  days  which  I 
spent  on  that  African  island,  I  was  busied  in  planting 
lemon  trees.  The  plants  I  put  into  the  ground  were 
no  larger  than  a  young  gooseberry  bush ;  my  master 
and  his  black  mistress,  passing  by  my  place,  stopped 
awhile  to  look  at  me  ;  at  last,  '  Who  knows/  says  he, 
'  who  knows  but  by  the  time  these  trees  grow  up  and 
bear,  you  may  go  home  to  England,  obtain  the  com- 
mand of  a  ship,  and  return  to  reap  the  fruit  of  your 
labours  ?  we  see  strange  things  sometimes  happen.'' 
This,  as  he  intended  it,  was  a  cutting  sarcasm.  I 
believe  he  thought  it  full  as  probable  that  I  should 
live  to  be  the  king  of  Poland.  Yet  it  proved  a 
prediction,  and  they  (one  of  them  at  least)  lived  to 
see  me  return  from  England,  in  the  capacity  he  had 
mentioned,  and  pluck  some  of  the  first  limes  from 
those  very  trees."  Yes,  his  life  was  a  life  of  wondrous 
change  and  romantic  interest.  His  course  of  life  as  a 
sea-captain  was  equally  remarkable  with  his  adven- 
tures as  a  young  outcast.  On  his  voyages,  he  rubbed 
up  his  Latin,  until  his  classic  reading  was  respectable. 
He  mastered  the  Greek  of  the  New  Testament  and 
the  Septuagint,  so  far  as  to  enjoy  the  sacred  text. 
He  learnt  to  read  the  Hebrew  Pentateuch  and  Psalms 
without  the  aid  of  a  lexicon ;  did  something  in  Syriac ; 
gained  French  enough  to  transact  business  in  foreign 
parts,  and  read  much  of  the  best  English  divinity. 
What  an  interest  gathers  round  the  seafaring  student  ! 
"  To  be  at  sea,"  he  remarks,  ' '  withdrawn  out  of  the 
reach  of  innumerable  temptations,  with  opportunity 
and  a  turn  of  mind  disposed  to  observe  the  wonders 


310  HYMN-WKITEKS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

of  God  in  the  great  deep,  with  the  two  noblest  objects 
of  sight,  the  expanded  heaven,  and  the  expanded 
ocean,  continually  in  view;  and  when  evident  inter- 
positions of  Divine  Providence,  in  answer  to  prayer, 
occur  almost  every  day ; — these  are  helps  to  quicken 
and  confirm  the  life  of  faith,  which  in  a  good  measure 
supply  to  a  religious  sailor  the  want  of  those  advan- 
tages which  can  be  enjoyed  only  upon  the  shore.  I 
never  knew  sweeter  or  more  frequent  hours  of  divine 
communion  than  in  my  last  two  voyages  to  Guinea, 
when  I  was  either  almost  secluded  from  society  on  ship- 
board, or  when  on  shore  amongst  the  natives.  I  have 
wandered  through  the  woods,  reflecting  on  the  singular 
goodness  of  the  Lord  to  me,  in  a  place  where  perhaps 
there  was  not  a  person  that  knew  Him  for  some 
thousand  miles  around  me.  Many  a  time,  upon  these 
occasions,  I  have  restored  the  beautiful  lines  of 
Propertius  to  their  right  owner ;  lines  full  of  blas- 
phemy and  madness  when  addressed  to  a  creature, 
but  full  of  comfort  and  propriety  in  the  mouth  of  a 
believer. 

Sic  ego  desertis  passim  bene  vivcre  sylvis,  etc.  etc. 

paraphrased — 

In  desert  woods  with  Thee,  my  God, 
"Where  human  footsteps  never  trod, 

How  happy  could  I  be : 
Thou  my  repose  from  care,  my  light 
Amidst  the  darkness  of  the  night, 

In  solitude  my  company." 

How  instructive  is  it  to  watch  this  future  pastor 
and  hymnist  through  the  processes  of  his  preparation 
for  the  usefulness   of  his   life's  eventide.     How  the 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATEES.  311 

beauty  of  some  of  his  hymns  brightens,  and  how  much 
more  deeply  they  touch  us,  when  they  are  read  and 
sung  with  the  scenes  in  which  he  learnt  to  sing  vividly 
before  us.  Who  can  follow  the  studious,  prayerful, 
and  poetic  sea-captain  over  the  waters  of  his  change- 
ful life  without  having  a  richer  relish  for  that  sea- 
going hymn  of  his  on  Paul's  voyage — 

If  Paul  in  Caesar's  court  must  stand, 

He  need  not  fear  the  sea ; 
Secured  from  harm  on  every  hand 

By  the  Divine  decree. 

Although  the  ship  in  which  he  sailed 

By  dreadful  storms  was  tossed ; 
The  promise  over  all  prevailed, 

And  not  a  life  was  lost. 

Jesus  the  God,  whom  Paul  ador'd, 

Who  saves  in  time  of  need, 
Was  then  confessed  by  all  on  board, 

A  present  help  indeed. 

Though  neither  sun  nor  stars  were  seen, 

Paul  knew  the  Lord  was  near  ; 
And  faith  preserved  his  soul  serene, 

When  others  shook  for  fear. 

Believers  thus  are  tossed  about, 

On  life's  tempestuous  main ; 
But  grace  assures  beyond  a  doubt, 

They  shall  their  port  attain. 

They  must,  they  shall,  appear  one  day 

Before  their  Saviour's  throne  ; 
The  storms  tkey  meet  with  by  the  way 

But  make  his  power  known. 


312  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Their  passage  lies  across  the  brink 
Of  many  a  threatening  wave  ; 

The  world  expects  to  see  them  sink, 
But  Jesus  lives  to  save. 


Lord,  though  we  are  but  feeble  worms, 

Yet  since  thy  word  is  passed, 
We'll  venture  through  a  thousand  storms, 

To  see  thy  face  at  last. 

Others  besides  old  sailors,  however,  can  sometimes 
give  us  hymns  on  the  waters.  Quiet,  home-keeping 
spirits,  like  Toplady  or  Kelly,  when  they  have  felt  the 
breath  of  that  Spirit  who  "  moved  upon  the  face  of  the 
waters,"  have  given  out  utterances  which  have  been 
caught  "  afar  off  upon  the  sea,"  and  have  fallen  upon 
the  tremulous  half-engulphed  soul  with  hushing  and 
reviving  power,  akin  to  the  voice  "  which  stilleth  the 
noise  of  the  seas,  the  noise  of  the  waves  and  the 
tumult  of  the  people."  "  I  was  once  on  my  way  to 
the  Antipodes,"  said  a  voyager,  who  had  gone  around 
the  world  several  times.  "  The  vessel  was  a  transport ; 
and  we  had  a  large  number  of  troops  on  board.  So 
multitudinous  a  companionship  was  not  exactly  to  my 
taste  on  the  high  seas ;  but  one  must  make  the  best 
of  circumstances ;  and,  on  the  whole,  my  cabin  life 
was  as  pleasant  as  could  be  in  such  a  case.  All  went 
on  very  safely  till  one  night,  the  horrors  of  which  will 
live  to  play  discords  on  my  nerves,  as  long  as  nerves 
are  a  part  of  my  inheritance.  I  had  got  into  my 
berth  and  was  fast  asleep ;  when,  about  the  middle  of 
the  night,  I  was  startled  by  a  shock,  and  then  alarmed 
by  a  strange  hubbub  of  creaking  timbers,  shuffling 
feet,  and  hoarse  voices,  striving  with  the  whistling 
roaring  wind.     And   then,  my  senses  were   scarcely 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATERS.  313 

clear  from  sleep,  when  there  came  a  thundering  crash; 
down  went  the  vessel  on  her  beam-ends,  and  down 
came  the  rushing  sea,  all  but  filling  the  cabins,  and  at 
once  putting  out  the  lights.  There  was  an  awful  hush 
for  a  moment,  and  then  the  first  voice  that  broke  it 
came  from  an  officer  who  leaped  out  of  an  adjoining 
berth  with  imprecations  that  made  my  blood  run  chill, 
and  cried,  '  This  is  like  hell  when  the  fire  is  put  out  V 
One  felt  for  an  instant  as  if  he  were  engulphed  in  hell 
itself,  but  just  then  some  gentle  spirit  seemed  to  touch 
my  tremulous  heart ;  there  came  a  sweet  calm  over 
my  soul.  I  quietly  lay  in  my  berth,  and  felt  as  if 
voices  from  the  better  land  were  singing  to  me  that 
beautiful  hymn — 

Why  those  fears  ?     Behold,  'tis  Jesus 
Holds  the  helm  and  guides  the  ship. 

Spread  the  sails  and  catch  the  breezes, 
Sent  to  waft  us  through  the  deep, 

To  the  regions 
Where  the  mourners  cease  to  weep. 

Led  by  Him,  we  brave  the  ocean ; 

Led  by  Him,  the  storm  defy  ; 
Calm  amidst  tumultuous  motion, 

Knowing  that  our  Lord  is  nigh. 
Waves  obey  Him, 

And  the  storms  before  Him  fly. 

Safe  in  his  most  sure  protection, 

We  shall  pass  the  watery  waste  ; 
Trusting  to  his  wise  direction, 

We  shall  gain  the  port  at  last ; 
And,  with  wonder, 

Think  on  toils  and  dangers  past. 

Oh,  what  pleasures  there  await  us! 
There  the  tempests  cease  to  roar ; 


314  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

There  it  is,  that  they  who  hate  us 
Shall  molest  our  peace  no  more  : 

Trouble  ceases 
On  that  tranquil,  happy  shore  ! 

We  lived  to  outride  the  storm,  but  as  long  as  I  live  I 
shall  feel  that  the  experience  of  that  night  for  ever 
hallowed  to  me  the  memory  of  Thomas  Kelly.  His  long 
life  (from  1769  to  1855,  began  and  ended  in  Dublin) 
was  not  spent  in  vain,  if  that  hymn  alone  bad  been  all 
its  fruit.  One  thinks  with  pleasure  of  his  sixty  years 
of  Christian  usefulness ;  but,  ob,  that  hymn  !  on  that 
night  !  Blessings  on  his  name  !"  As  a  hymnist, 
verily,  Kelly's  ever-living  influence  will  illustrate  his 
own  happy  saying.  Lord  Plunkett,  an  old  school- 
fellow of  bis,  met  him  one  day  in  later  life,  and  said, 
"  You  will  live  to  a  great  age,  Mr.  Kelly  \"  "  Yes/' 
was  his  reply,  "  I  am  confident  I  shall,  as  I  expect 
never  to  die  !" 

The  circumstances  under  which  Kelly's  charming 
verses  came  with  such  soothing  music  to  the  voyager 
amidst  the  horrors  of  the  midnight  squall,  naturally 
send  the  thoughts  to  a  scene  in  "the  last  days  of 
Bishop  Heber."  Archdeacon  Robinson  states  that, 
when  sailing  to  Madras,  they  had  a  detachment  of 
invalid  troops  on  board.  The  good  bishop's  heart  was 
engaged  in  their  behalf,  and  he  claimed  the  privilege 
of  acting  as  their  pastor.  "  I  have  too  little  in  my 
situation,"  he  said,  "  of  those  pastoral  duties,  which 
are  as  useful  to  the  minister  as  to  his  people ;  and  I 
am  delighted  at  the  opportunity  thus  unexpectedly 
afforded  me."  And  so,  with  his  Prayer-book  in  his 
hand,  he  went  below,  from  time  to  time,  to  minister 
to  the  sufferers.  Nor  was  it  in  vain ;  their  hearts 
were  touched.     ' '  Only  think,"  they  said,  "  of  such  a 


HYMNS    ON    THE    WATER?.  315 

great  man  as  the  bishop  corning  between  decks  to 
pray  with  such  poor  fellows  as  we  are."  One  poor 
mother  on  board  had  lost  her  infant ;  the  bishop  com- 
mitted the  little  one  to  the  deep,  and  then  visited  the 
mourner  in  her  cabin,  and  ministered  consolation  to 
her  heart.  "At  intervals/'  says  a  witness,  "  I  hear 
him  weeping  and  praying  for  her  in  his  own  cabin. 
I  have  never  seen  such  tenderness,  never  such  humble 
exercise  of  Christian  love.  Alas  !  how  his  spirit 
shames  us  all  !  I  thank  God  that  I  have  seen  his 
tears,  that  I  heard  his  prayers,  his  conversation  with 
the  afflicted  mother,  and  his  own  private  reflections 
upon  it.  It  has  made  me  love  him  more,  and  has 
given  me  a  lesson  of  tenderness  in  visiting  the 
afflicted  that,  I  trust,  will  not  be  in  vain/''  Happy 
was  it  for  the  transport  ship  in  which  Heber  had  a 
berth.  Xot  that  even  his  gracious  presence  could 
secure  her  from  squalls,  but  his  loving  zeal  could 
minister  life  to  the  souls  on  board  j  and  when  squalls 
came,  his  sanctified  genius  could  teach  his  companions 
in  danger  to  chant  the  disciples'  prayer,  "  Save,  Lord, 
or  we  perish  \" 

\Yken  through  the  torn  sail 

The  wild  tempest  is  streaming, 
When  o'er  the  dark  wave 

The  red  lightning  is  gleaming, 
Xor  hope  lends  a  ray 

The  poor  seaman  to  cherish, 
TVe  fly  to  our  Maker — 

"  Save,  Lord  !  or  we  perish  !" 

0  Jesus  !  once  toss'd 

On  the  breast  of  the  billow, 
Arous'd  by  the  shriek 

Of  despair  from  thy  pillow, 


316  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

High  now  in  thy  glory 
Still  the  mariner  cherish, 

"Who  cries  in  his  anguish, 
"  Save,  Lord !  or  we  perish !" 

And  oh,  when  the  storm 

Of  wild  passion  is  raging, 
When  sin  in  our  hearts 

Its  fierce  warfare  is  waging, 
Arise  in  thy  strength 

Thy  redeemed  to  cherish, 
Kebuke  the  destroyer — 

"  Save,  Lord  !  or  we  perish!" 


©fkptcr  XYIL 


SONGS   OF   THE   MOKNING. 

"  But  I  will  sing  of  thy  power :  yea,  I  will  sing  aloud  of  thy  mercy  in 
the  morning." 


T  is  pleasant  to  sit  in  the  oriel  window  of  an  old 
grammar-school  library,with  the  many-coloured 
light  falling  on  the  open  folio  as  it  lies  on 
the  ponderous  reading- desk,  and  to  hear,  amidst  one's 
musings,  the  music  of  the  boys'  voices  as  their  morning 
hymn  comes  floating  up  along  the  gallery,  gently 
touching  the  soul  with  its  mellow  harmony.  How 
many  a  time  since  the  fourteenth  century,  when 
William  of  Wykeham  opened  his  Winchester  School, 
has  such  morning  music  charmed  the  old  college  of 
that  storied  city.  Bishop  Mant  used  to  think  with 
pleasure  of  the  morning  hymn  which  the  boys  used  to 
sing  in  that  school  in  his  days.  It  was  the  simple, 
beautiful,  and  devout  old  song,  "Jam  lucis  orto 
sidere,"  etc.,  and  nothing  could  be  more  happily 
chosen  as  a  morning  song  for  the  young  scholars. 
Mant  threw  his  whole  soul  into  his  translation 
of  it. 


318  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Brightly  shines  the  morning  star  : 

Pray  we  God  his  grace  to  give, 
That  from  sin  and  danger  far 

We  the  coming  day  may  live. 

That  the  tongue  by  Him  -withheld, 
May  from  sounds  of  strife  refrain  ; 

That  the  eye,  from  roving  quelled, 
Seek  not  sights  corrupt  or  vain;' 

That  the  heart,  with  pureness  fraught, 

May  from  folly  turn  aside  ; 
And  the  flesh,  by  temperance  taught, 

Calm  its  lusts  and  veil  its  pride. 

That,  when  the  day  shall  close, 
And  the  night  successive  bring, 

We,  triumphant  o'er  our  foes, 
May  our  hymn  of  glory  sing ; 

Glory,  Sire  of  all,  to  Thee  ; 

And  to  Thee,  co-equal  Son, 
"With  the  Spirit  glory  be  ; 

One  in  Three,  and  Three  in  One. 

Between  one  and  two  hundred  years  before  Mant's 
time,,  that  same  hymn  was  sung  in  that  same  school, 
and  among  the  rest  of  the  voices  then  swelling  the 
devout  music  there  was  Ken's ;  and  how  far  the  style, 
and  manner,  and  spirit  of  that  ancient  hymn  served  to 
form  that  habit  of  tuneful  expression  which  after- 
wards distinguished  the  good  bishop,  who  can  tell  ? 
Should  we  ever  have  had  his  inimitable  morning  hymn 
but  for  that  early  Winchester  exercise  ?  Probably, 
when  in  after  life  he  used  to  chant  his  own  morning 
and  evening  hymns  to  the  music  of  his  lute,  his  soul 
was  giving  forth  the  echoes  of  the  old  melody  which 
had  so  deeply  touched  his  poetic  soul  while  yet  a  boy. 
To    think    of   morning  songs    is   always    to  think    of 


SONGS    OF    THE    MORNING.  319 

Bishop  Ken,  and,  whether  the  morning  be  bright  or 
dull,  his  hymn  is  always  fresh  : — 

Awake,  my  soul,  and  with  the  sun 
Thy  daily  stage  of  duty  run ; 
Shake  off  dull  sloth,  and  joyful  rise 
To  pay  thy  morning  sacrifice. 

Thy  precious  time  misspent  redeem ; 
Each  present  day  thy  last  esteem  ; 
Improve  thy  talent  with  due  care ; 
For  the  great  day  thyself  prepare. 

In  conversation  be  sincere  ; 
Keep  conscience  as  the  noontide  clear : 
Think  how  all-seeing  God  thy  ways 
And  all  thy  secret  thoughts  surveys. 

By  influence  of  the  light  divine, 
Let  thy  own  light  to  others  shine ; 
Reflect  all  heav'n's  propitious  rays, 
In  ardent  love  and  cheerful  praise. 

"Wake  and  lift  up  thyself,  my  heart, 
And  with  the  angels  bear  thy  part, 
Who  all  night  long  unwearied  sing 
High  praise  to  the  Eternal  King. 

Awake  !  awake  !  ye  heavenly  choir. 
May  your  devotion  me  inspire, 
That  I,  like  you,  my  age  may  spend, 
Like  you,  may  on  my  God  attend. 

May  I,  like  you,  in  God  delight, 
Have  all  day  long  my  God  in  -sight, 
Perform  like  you  my  Maker's  will ! 
Oh  may  I  never  more  do  ill! 

Had  I  your  wings,  to  heaven  I'd  fly ; 
But  God  shall  that  defect  supply ; 
And  my  soul,  wing'd  with  warm  desire, 
Shall  all  day  long  to  heaven  aspire. 


320  HYMN-WRITERS   AND   THEIR   HYMNS. 

All  praise  to  Thee,  who  safe  has  kept, 
And  hast  refreshed  me  while  I  slept ! 
Grant,  Lord,  when  I  from  death  shall  wake, 
I  may  of  endless  light  partake ! 

I  would  not  wake  nor  rise  again, 
Ev'n  heaven  itself  I  would  disdain, 
Wert  Thou  not  there  to  be  enjoy'd 
And  I  in  hymns  to  be  employ'd. 

Heav'n  is,  dear  Lord,  where'er  Thou  art ; 
Oh  never  then  from  me  depart ! 
For,  to  my  soul,  'tis  hell  to  be 
But  for  one  moment  void  of  Thee. 

Lord,  I  my  vows  to  thee  renew  ; 
Disperse  my  sins  as  morning  dew, 
Guard  my  first  springs  of  thought  and  will, 
And  with  thyself  my  spirit  fill. 

Direct,  control,  suggest,  this  day, 

All  I  design,  or  do,  or  say ; 

That  all  my  powers,  with  all  their  might, 

In  thy  sole  glory  may  unite. 

Praise  God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow  ; 
Praise  Him,  all  creatures  here  below ! 
Praise  Him  above,  ye  heavenly  host ; 
Praise  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 


The  best  of  men  are  never  entirely  independent  of 
circumstances.  Our  religious  feelings  and  expressions 
often  take  their  tone  from  the  atmosphere  about  us, 
and  especially  from  the  present  physical  condition  of 
the  outer  man.  Thought  flows  freely,  or  lags  in  heavi- 
ness, just  as  the  subtle  influences  around  us  quicken 
or  oppress.  And  though  no  mere  circumstances  can 
entirely  quench  the  fire  of  genius,  or  prevent  the 
Christian  poet  from  uttering  his  inspirations,  yet  his 


SONGS    OP   THE   MORNING.  321 

hymns  and  songs  will  often  be  sprightly  or  plaintive 
as  outward  changes  pass  over  him,  or  as  the  condition 
of  his  physical  life  is  shadowy  or  bright.  Each  morn- 
ing seems  to  bring  its  own  inspiration  to  every  pious 
hymnist.  The  morning  song  should  be  sprightly  ;  but 
sometimes  even  the  morning  has  shadows  which  give 
a  kind  of  holy  melancholy  to  the  tone  of  praise.  The 
praise  that  should  wing  its  way  upward,  now  and  then 
lingers  in  the  form  of  plaintive  reflection  or  humble 
appeal.  So  in  one  of  Toplady's  songs  of  the  morning. 
Not  far  from  a  spot  in  his  Devonshire  parish,  where 
Cluniac  monks  used  to  sing  such  morning  songs  as 
came  from  their  brother,  Bernard  of  Morlaix,  and 
others,  his  kindred  hymnists,  Toplady  learnt  to  wear 
his  weak  body  down  by  nightly  study,  until  his  morn- 
ing songs  became  rather  sombre  or  languid  at  times, 
so  that  they  touch  our  human  sympathy,  while  they 
have  a  subdued  tone  of  feeling  to  our  worship.  Never- 
theless, that  day  is  well  begun  which  opens  with  a  song 
from  the  author  of  "  Eock  of  Ages"  His  "  Hymn  for 
the  Morning  "  runs  thus — 

Jesus,  by  whose  grace  I  live, 

From  the  fear  of  evil  kept, 
Thou  hast  lengthened  my  reprieve, 

Held  in  being  while  I  slept ; 
With  the  day  my  heart  renew ; 

Let  me  wake  thy  will  to  do. 

Since  the  last  revolving  dawn 
Scattered  the  nocturnal  cloud, 

Oh,  how  many  souls  have  gone, 
Unprepared  to  meet  their  God  ! 

Yet  Thou  dost  prolong  my  breath, 

Hast  not  seal'd  my  eyes  in  death. 

21 


322  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Oh,  that  I  may  keep  thy  word, 

Taught  by  Thee  to  watch  and  pray  ! 

To  thy  service,  dearest  Lord, 
Sanctify  th'  ensuing  day ; 

Swift  its  fleeting  moments  haste  ; 

Doom'd,  perhaps,  to  be  my  last. 

Crucified  to  all  below, 

Earth  shall  never  be  my  care  : 
Wealth  and  honour  I  forego ; 

This  my  only  wish  and  care, 
Thine  in  life  and  death  to  be, 
Now  and  to  eternity. 

There  was  another  hymnist  of  Toplady's  time  of  a 
merrier  constitution  than  lie — more  disposed  to  look 
at  the  bright  side  of  things,  and  having  somewhat 
broader  and  more  pleasant  sympathy  with  the  human 
multitude.  His  religious  notions  would,  perhaps,  have 
a  brighter  influence  on  his  character  and  utterances 
than  those  of  Toplady ;  while  one  at  least  of  his  fixed 
principles,  as  a  Christian  minister,  would  give  a  more 
lively  and  agreeable  effect  to  his  ministrations  both  in 
prose  and  verse.  While  Toplady  was  spending  his 
energies  in  fruitless  controversy,  his  contemporary,  not, 
perhaps,  less  learned,  but  more  practical,  was  acting 
on  his  own  advice  given  to  a  younger  man,  "  Look 
simply  unto  Jesus  for  preaching  food,  and  what  is 
wanted  will  be  given,  and  what  is  given  will  be  blessed, 
■whether  it  be  barley  or  a  wheaten  loaf,  a  crust  or  a 
crumb.  When  your  heart  is  right,  meek,  and  simple, 
-Jesus  will  make  an  orator  of  you;  when  you  grow 
lofty  and  are  pleased  with  your  prattle,  Jesus  will  make 
a  fool  of  you.  Your  mouth  will  be  a  flowing  stream 
or  a  fountain  sealed  according  as  your  heart  is.  Avoid 
all    controversy   in  preaching,    talking,    or    writing; 


BONGS    OF   THE    MORNING.  323 

preach  nothing  down  but  the  devil,  and  nothing  up  but 
Jesus  Christ."  A  man  of  such  views,  such  principles, 
and  such  diction,  when  gifted  with  poetic  genius,  and 
a  faculty  for  writing  hymns,  would  surely  give  out 
pleasant  songs  for  the  common  people — songs  always 
loved,  too,  by  the  cultured  lover  of  pure  Saxon,  strong 
sense,  playful  fancy,  pith,  point,  and  tender  feeling. 
Such  songs  sometimes  come  from  the  heart  and  life  of 
the  amusing  and  lovable  man  who  has  bequeathed  to 
us  a  morning*  hvmn.  His  mornings  were  alwavs  brig-ht, 
it  would  seem,  and  his  hymn  shows  how  his  cheerful 
sense  of  renewed  vigour1  was  in  harmony  with  his 
reverent  reliance  on  his  God. 

Through.  Jesu's  watchful  care 

I  safely  pass  the  night; 
His  providential  arm  was  near, 

And  kept  off  every  fright. 

2so  pains  upon  my  bed 

Prevented  my  repose ; 
But  laying  down  my  weary  head, 

Eefresh'd  with  sleep  I  rose. 

And  here  I  stand  possest 

Of  strength  and  vigour  new ; 
And  with  my  limbs  and  senses  blest. 

Another  morn  I  view, 

From  Thee  my  mercies  flow, 

In  pearly  drops  they  fall ; 
But  give  a  thankful  bosom  too. 

The  sweetest  pearl  of  all. 

Be  Thou  my  guide  to-day. 

^Ly  arm  whereon  to  rest, 
My  sun  to  cheer  me  on  the  way, 

My  shield  to  guard  my  breast. 


324  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

From  Satan's  fiery  dart, 

And  men  of  purpose  base, 
And  from  the  plague  within  my  heart, 

Defend  me  by  thy  grace. 

There  is  an  amusing  story  told  of  the  author  of 
this  hymn.  He  was  one  of  those  clergymen  of  his 
day  who  sometimes  turned  out  from  their  parishes  as 
occasional  itinerant  preachers,  going  up  and  down 
proclaiming  the  gospel  to  the  neglected  masses.  He 
had  come,  it  is  said,  to  a  village  in  the  North  of 
England  on  a  Saturday  evening.  He  must  needs  stay 
there  over  the  Sabbath.  But  always  ready  for  work, 
he  requested  his  host  at  the  inn  to  go  to  the  parson  of 
the  parish  and  state  that  a  clergyman  was  stopping  at 
his  house  who  would  be  glad  to  assist  the  vicar  at  the 
service  to-morrow.  The  vicar  was  cautious.  "We 
must  be  careful,"  said  he,  "  for  you  know  there  are 
many  of  these  wandering  Methodist  preachers  about. 
What  sort  of  a  man  is  he  ?"  "  Oh,  it  is  all  right,  sir," 
was  the  reply;  "just  see  his  nose,  sir,  that  will  tell 
you  he  is  no  Methodist."  "  Well,  ask  him  to  call  on 
me  in  the  morning,"  said  the  parson,  "  and  I  shall 
judge  for  myself." 

The  call  was  made,  and  the  waggish  and  some- 
what rubicund  nose  was  a  sufficient  introduction  to 
the  pulpit.  The  morning  came.  The  congregation 
gathered.  The  vicar  read  prayers,  and  then  the 
stranger  mounted  the  pulpit.  It  must  be  all  right, 
the  vicar  may  have  thought ;  for  there  seemed  to  be 
waggish  thoughts  playing  around  the  corners  of  the 
preacher's  mouth,  and  there  was  that  remarkable 
peaked  and  kindling  nose  which  threatened  to  provoke 
a  laugh  among  his  hearers.  Nor  would  his  first 
address  belie  his  features.     It  seemed  to  be  pleasant 


SONGS    OF    THE    MORNING.  325 

talk  from  the  pulpit.  The  preacher  is  rather  homely 
and  blunt.  But  everybody  listens,  for  everybody 
thinks  and  feels  that  the  parson  is  speaking  to  him. 
By  and  by,  however,  his  home-thrusts  at  the  con- 
science make  his  hearers  somewhat  uneasy ;  but  ere 
they  are  prepared  for  defence,  the  sharp  piercing 
sentences  come  in  such  rapid  succession  that  both 
vicar  and  flock  find  themselves  arrested  as  sinners 
before  God — 

And  fools,  who  came  to  scoff,  remained  to  pray. 

The  service  past,  around  the  pious  man, 

With  steady  zeal,  each  honest  rustic  ran ; 

E'en  children  follow'd  with  endearing  wile, 

And  pluck'd  his  gown,  to  share  the  good  man's  smile. 

The  "good  man's  smile"  was  always  ready  for 
those  who  sought  it,  and  his  loving,  mirthful  heart 
was  always  open  to  those  who  wanted  to  know  more 
about  his  Divine  Lord  and  Master.  The  gifted 
itinerant  was  no  other  than  the  humorous  but  holy 
and  eminently  useful  John  Berridge,  vicar  of  Everton, 
in  Bedfordshire.  His  racy  letters  brimful  of  wit ;  his 
"  Christian  World  Unmasked,"  with  its  union  of 
drollery  and  seriousness ;  the  floating  traditions  about 
his  active  and  holy  life  ;  and  the  still  accumulating 
fruits  of  his  preaching ; — all  serve  to  keep  alive  and 
fresh  the  memory  of  this  early  Methodist  clergyman ; 
this  eccentric  but  sanctified  genius,  who  with  Wesley 
and  others,  worked  in  the  pulpit,  with  his  pen,  at 
home  and  abroad  for  the  religious  renovation  of  his 
country.  He  wrote  his  hymns  as  he  preached  his 
sermons,  for  those  who  needed  them  most;  and  he 
never  failed  to  engage  the  hearts  as  well  as  the  taste 
and  understanding  of  those  to  whom  he  preached  and 


326  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

for  whom  he  wrote.  What  child  of  God  who  has 
learnt  his  "Labourer's  Morning  Hymn,"  will  ever 
cease  to  love  the  name  of  the  man  who  has  helped 
him  to  sing  of  a  morning — 

I  thank  my  Lord  for  kindly  rest 

Afforded  in  the  night ; 
Refresh' d  and  with  new  vigour  blest, 

I  wake  to  view  the  light. 

What  need  I  grieve  to  earn  my  bread, 

When  Jesus  did  the  same  ? 
If  in  my  Master's  steps  I  tread, 

No  harm  I  get  or  shame. 

Oh  let  me  bless  with  thankful  mind, 

My  Saviour's  love  and  care, 
That  I  am  neither  sick,  nor  blind, 

Nor  lame  as  others  are. 

A  trusty  workman  I  would  be, 

And  well  my  task  pursue ; 
Work  when  my  Master  does  not  see, 

And  work  with  vigour  too. 

And  whilst  I  ply  the  busy  foot, 

Or  heave  the  labouring  arm, 
Do  thou  my  withering  strength  recruit, 

And  guard  me  well  from  harm. 

To  sweeten  labour  let  my  Lord 

Look  on,  and  cast  a  smile ; 
For  Jesus  can  such  looks  afford, 

As  well  the  hours  beguile. 

Berridge  was  ready  for  all  work,  and  for  work 
among  all  classes,  for  his  Master's  sake ;  but  in  all  his 
works,  and  among  all  classes,  he  was  the  same  honest, 
transparent,  loving  spirit,  acting  and  speaking  with 
the  most  earnest  purity  amidst  all  the  sparkle  and  play 


SONGS    OF    THE    MORNING.  327 

of  his  humorous  genius ;  always,  and  to  all,  expressing 
himself  in  the  purest,  clearest,  most  pithy,  racy,  and 
proverb-like  style  of  his  native  tongue.  Now,  as  in 
his  "  Christian  World  Unmasked,"  he  says,  "  Gentle 
reader,  lend  me  a  chair,  and  I  will  sit  down  and  talk  a 
little  with  you.  Give  me  leave  to  feel  your  pulse. 
Sick,  indeed,  sir,  very  sick,  of  a  mortal  disease,  which 

infects  your  whole  mass  of  blood Let  me  step 

into  your  closet,  sir,  and  peep  upon  its  furniture.  My 
hands  are  pretty  honest,  you  may  trust  me;  and 
nothing  will  be  found,  I  fear,  to  tempt  a  man  to  be  a 
thief.  Well,  to  be  sure,  what  a  filthy  place  is  here  ! 
never  swept  for  certain  since  you  were  christened  !  and 
what  a  fat  idol  stands  skulking  in  the  corner  ! — a 
darling  sin,  I  warrant  it !  How  it  simpers,  and  seems  as 
pleasant  as*  a  right  eye  !  Can  you  find  a  will  to  part 
with  it,  or  strength  to  pluck  it  out  ?  And  supposing 
you  a  match  for  the  self-denial,  can  you  so  command 
your  heart  as  to  hate  the  sin  you  do  forsake  ?  This  is  cer- 
tainly required;  truth  is  called  for  in  the  inward  parts." 
At  another  time  he  is  writing  to  his  dear  Rowly  (young 
Rowland  Hill),  "  When  I  began  to  itinerate,  a  multi- 
tude of  dangers  seemed  ready  to  engulph  me.  My 
friends  were  up  in  arms,  my  college  was  provoked,  my 
bishop  incensed,  the  clergy  on  fire,  and  the  church 
canons  were  pointing  their  ghastly  mouths  at  me ;  my 
first  diocesan  told  me  that  I  should  soon  be  either  in 
Bedlam  or  in  jail.  But,  through  the  good  blessing  of 
my  God,  I  am  yet  in  the  possession  of  my  senses,  my 
tithes,  and  my  liberty ;  and  He  who  has  hitherto 
delivered,  I  trust  will  yet  deliver  me  from  ecclesiastical 
fires,  and  the  paw  of  worldly  bears.  I  have  suffered 
from  nothing  except  from  lapidations  and  pillory  treats, 
which  yet  have  proved  more  frightful  than  hurtful. 


328  HYMN-WEITEES    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

If  you  are  invited  to  go  out,  and  feel  yourself  inclined 
to  do  so,  take  a  lover's  leap,  neck  or  nothing,  and 
commend  yourself  to  Jesus.  Ask  no  man's  leave  to 
preach  Christ  ;  that  is  unevangelical  and  shameful. 
Seek  not  much  advice  about  it ;  that  is  dangerous. 
Such  advice,  I  find,  generally  comes  the  wrong  way — 
heels  uppermost.  Most  preachers  love  a  snug  church 
and  a  whole  skin,  and  what  they  love  they  will  pre- 
scribe. If  you  are  determined  to  be  evangelically 
regular,  that  is,  secularly  irregular,  then  expect, 
wherever  you  go,  a  storm  will  follow  you,  which  may 
fright  you,  but  will  bring  no  real  harm.  Make  the 
Lord  your  whole  trust,  and  all  will  be  well."  And 
then  again,  from  such  stirring  correspondence  with 
clerical  friends,  we  find  him  turning  to  give  lessons 
in  psalmody  to  such  as  do  not  often  catch"  the  atten- 
tion of  educated  poets — the  domestic  servant.  He 
teaches  her  to  sing  as  she  begins  her  morning  work — 

To  Jesus,  my  dear  Lord,  I  owe 

The  rest  I  had  this  night ; 
By  Him  preserved  from  every  woe, 

I  wake  to  view  the  light. 

Accept,  0  Lord,  my  early  praise, 

It  is  thy  tribute  due ; 
And  let  the  morning  song  I  raise, 

Rise  with  affection  too. 

My  dear  Redeemer,  while  on  earth, 

A  servant  was  to  all ; 
With  ready  foot  He  stepped  forth, 

Attentive  to  each  call. 

If  unto  labour  I  am  bred, 

My  Saviour  was  the  same ; 
Why  then  should  I  a  service  dread, 

Or  count  it  any  shame  ? 


SONGS    OP    THE    MORNING.  329 

Yet,  Lord,  I  need  a  patient  mind, 

And  beg  a  ready  will, 
To  pay  my  master  service  kind, 

And  every  task  fulfil. 

No  saucy  language  I  would  use, 

Nor  act  a  treacherous  part, 
But  serve  him  with  the  purest  views, 

And  work  with  freest  heart. 

Many  labourers  and  many  servants  thank  thee  for 
thy  verses,  happy,  plain-spoken,  kind  "  old  Berridge," 
and  we  hope  to  see  thy  face  some  bright  morning  when 
the  Sabbath  sun  rises  never  to  set  again  !  There  is 
something  about  "  old  Berridge  "  which  reminds  one 
of  George  Wither — the  sympathy  with  all  classes,  with 
human  nature  under  all  circumstances,  the  hearty  readi- 
ness to  employ  the  whole  soul  for  the  good  of  all,  and  the 
wonderful  facility  for  adapting  forms  of  hymnic  expres- 
sion to  the  taste  and  heart  of  those  for  whom  their 
good  feeling  is  engaged.  Wither  has  his  morning 
hymn,  too ;  and  it  is  one  of  his  finest ;  less  rugged, 
and  more  free  from  those  quaint  conceits  and  uncouth 
modes  of  expression  which  suited  the  ear  of  his  times 
better  than  our  own.  It  was  his  way,  and  a  good  way 
it  was,  freely  to  give  "  a  reason  "  not  merely  for  "  the 
hope  within "  him,  but  for  all  the  utterances  of  his 
thought  and  feeling  which  he  put  forth  to  the  world. 
"  Many  dangers  hang  over  us  all  the  day/'  he  says, 
"  therefore,  before  we  adventure  forth  to  follow  our 
affairs,  we  might  be  more  safe  if  we  were  first  charmed 
by  such  invocations  as  these — 

Since  Thou  hast  added  now,  0  God  ! 
Unto  my  life  another  day, 
And  giv'st  me  leave  to  walk  abroad, 
And  labour  in  my  lawful  way ; 

My  walks  and  works  with  me  begin ; 

Conduct  me  forth,  and  bring  me  in. 


330  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

In  ev'ry  power  my  soul  enjoys 

Internal  virtues  to  improve  ; 

In  ev'ry  sense  that  she  employs 

In  her  external  works  to  move, 

Bless  her,  0  God,  and  keep  me  sound, 
From  outward  harm  and  inward  wound. 

Let  sin  nor  Satan's  fraud  prevail, 

To  make  my  eye  of  reason  blind  ; 

Or  faith,  or  hope,  or  love,  to  fail, 

Or  any  virtues  of  the  mind ; 

But  more  and  more  let  them  increase, 
And  bring  me  to  my  end  in  peace. 

Lewd  courses  let  my  feet  forbear, 
Keep  Thou  my  hands  from  doing  wrong  ; 
Let  not  ill  counsel  pierce  mine  ear, 
Nor  wicked  words  defile  my  tongue ; 
And  keep  the  windows  of  each  eye, 
That  no  strange  lusts  climb  in  thereby. 

But  guard  Thou  safe  my  heart  in  chief, 
That  neither  hate,  revenge,  or  fear, 
Nor  vain  desire,  vain  joy,  or  grief, 
Obtain  command  or  dwelling  there. 

And,  Lord,  with  ev'ry  saving  grace, 
Still,  true  to  Thee  maintain  that  place. 

From  open  wrongs,  from  secret  hates, 

Preserve  me  likewise,  Lord,  this  day  ; 

From  slanderous  tongues,  from  wicked  mates, 

From  ev'ry  danger  hi  my  way. 

My  goods  to  me,  secure  Thou  too, 
And  prosper  all  the  works  I  do. 

So  till  the  evening  of  this  morn, 
My  time  shall  then  so  well  be  spent, 
That  when  the  twilight  shall  return, 
I  may  enjoy  it  with  content ; 

And  to  thy  praise  and  honour  say, 
That  this  has  proved  a  happy  day. 


BONGS    OF   THE    MORNING.  331 

But  who,  in  the  course  of  his  morning  devotions, 
can  omit  a  song  which  so  associates  the  first  kindlings 
of  praise  and  thanksgiving  with  balmy  thought  about 
gracious  example,  as  the  hymn  which  comes  to  us 
from  the  reverend,  gentle,  elegant,  and  glowing  Bishop 
Heber  ?  His  eye  falls,  it  may  be,  on  David's  anthem 
of  thanksgiving,  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  who  daily 
loadeth  us  with  benefits,''  and  his  devout  and  tuneful 
spirit  sings  : — 

"What  secret  hand  at  morning  light, 

By  stealth,  unseals  mine  eye  ; 
Draws  back  the  curtain  of  the  night, 

And  opens  earth  and  sky  ? 

"lis  thine,  my  God ! — the  same  which  kept 

My  re. -ting  hours  from  harm  ; 
Xo  ill  came  nigh  me,  for  I  slept 
Beneath  th'  Almighty's  arm. 

'Tis  thine  my  daily  bread  which  brings 

Like  manna  scattered  round ; 
And  clothes  me,  as  the  lily  springs 

In  beauty  from  the  ground. 

This  is  the  Hand  which  saved  my  frame, 

And  gave  my  pulse  to  beat ; 
"Which  bare  me  oft  through  flood  and  flame, 

Through  tempest,  cold,  and  heat. 

In  death's  dark  valley  though  I  stray, 

'Twould  there  my  steps  attend  ; 
Guide  with  the  staff  my  lonely  way, 

And  with  the  rod  defend. 

May  that  dear  Hand  uphold  me  still, 

Through  life's  uncertain  race, 
To  bring  me  to  thy  holy  hill, 

And  to  thy  dwelling-place. 

Have  you  learnt  to  sing  within  yourself  a  hymn 


332  HYMN-WBITEKS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

like  this  as  each  morning  opens  on  yon  ?  If  not,  enter 
on  the  practice  and  pursue  it,  until  it  becomes  your 
morning  habit,  and  you  will  realize  the  habitual  enjoy- 
ment of  a  poor,  but  religiously  intelligent  man,  whose 
very  appearance  and  manners  were  beautifully  illustra- 
tive of  a  peaceful,  happy  religion.  It  was  thought 
that  the  secret  of  his  inward  but  evident  repose,  would 
be  touched  by  one  question;  he  was  asked,  "  I  sup- 
pose your  first  work  of  a  morning  is  to  pray  ?  " 

"  No." 

"No!     What  then  is  it  ?  " 

"  Praise,"  said  he.  "  Praise  is  my  first  act ;  and 
when  the  day  begins  with  praise,  prayer  and  every 
good  thing  comes  in  its  turn ;  for  you  soon  learn  the 
happy  art  of  turning  the  bright  side  of  things  towards 
yourself,  of  looking  at  God's  goodness  until  it  always 
cheers  you,  of  marking  the  blessings  of  each  hour  as 
the  hour  passes,  and  of  communing  with  a  happy 
future  until  you  find  it  possible  to  '  rejoice  evermore, 
pray  without  ceasing,  and  in  everything  give  thanks/ 
Thus  ' joy  in  Christ  Jesus/  passes  into  prayer,  and 
prayer  into  thanks,  and  thanksgiving  brings  the  happy 
soul  back  again  to  the  blessed  Saviour ;  and  so  the 
day  passes,  and  from  hour  to  hour  the  heart  keeps  up 
its  music  like  a  sweet  peal  of  bells ;  yes,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  himself  seems  to  be  ringing  the  changes  in  my 
soul  of  praise  and  prayer,  love  and  joy,  gratitude  and 
peace." 

"  Thank  you,"  said  the  old  man's  friend,  "  thank 
you  for  your  lesson  on  morning  music.  God  gives 
you  the  grace  of  praise  i  new  every  morning ' ;  you 
must  have  some  favourite  morning  hymns." 

"  Oh  yes,  many,  many  a  hymn  and  psalm  come 
springing   up,    an'd    sometimes    I   wonder    how   they 


SONGS    OF   THE    MORNING.  833 

come,  for  I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  took  very  great 
pains  to  learn  them.  Among  them  all  I  have  my 
favourite  verses,  and  they  are  always  fresh;  and  it 
strikes  me  that  they  bring  their  own  tunes  with  them, 
for  the  verses  no  sooner  come  to  my  mind,  than  some 
suitable  tune  flows  from  my  tongue.  Scarcely  a 
morning  opens  but  these  verses  are  forthcoming  from 
my  heart  and  lips  : — 

Christ,  whose  glory  fills  the  skies, 

Christ  the  true,  the  only  light, 
Sun  of  Righteousness,  arise, 

Triumph  o'er  the  shades  of  night. 
Day-spring  from  on  high,  be  near, 
Day-star,  in  my  heart  appear. 

Oh  disclose  thy  lovely  face, 

Quicken  all  my  drooping  powers  ; 

Gasps  my  fainting  soul  for  grace, 
As  a  thirsty  land  for  showers. 

Haste,  my  Lord,  no  more  delay, 

Come,  my  Saviour,  come  away. 

Dark  and  cheerless  is  the  morn, 

Unaccompanied  by  Thee ; 
Joyless  is  the  day's  return, 

Till  thy  mercy's  beams  I  see. 
Till  Thou  inward  light  impart, 
Glad  my  eyes  and  cheer  my  heart. 

Yisit,  then,  this  soul  of  mine, 

Pierce  the  gloom  of  sin  and  grief ; 

Fill  me,  Radiancy  Divine, 
Scatter  all  my  unbelief; 

More  and  more  thyself  display, 

Shining  to  the  perfect  day. 

"  Whose  verses  are  these  ?  " 

1 '  Whose  ?     Why,  Charles  Wesley's  ;    and  they  are 
so  like  him.     Prayer  and  praise  are  always  so  cheer- 


334  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

fully  intermingling  in  his  liymns.  He  must  have  been 
a  cheerful  Christian;  and  I  like  cheerful  Christians, 
they  are  so  consistent  with  their  profession.  If  the 
New  Testament  teaches  anything,  it  is  that  the  dis- 
ciples of  Jesus  are  to  be  happy  ;  and  Charles  Wesley's 
spiritual  songs  appear  to  breathe  that  lively,  happy 
spirit  which  is  so  sweetly  in  tune  with  the  promises  of 
the  new  covenant.  There  is  another  morning  hymn  of 
his  that  I  am  fond  of  singing.  It  tells  out  one's  sense 
of  weakness  and  dependence  so  sweetly,  and  yet  gives 
the  longing  soul  new  fire,  and  makes  it  feel  that  while 
it  kindles  into  warmer  desires  after  God,  everything 
within,  and  everything  without,  brightens  with  spiritual 
joy.     This  is  the  hymn  : — 

Jesus,  the  all-restoring  word, 

My  fallen  spirit's  hope, 
After  thy  lovely  likeness,  Lord, 

Ah,  when  shall  I  wake  up  ? 

Thou,  0  my  G-od  !  Thou  only  art 

The  Life,  the  Truth,  the  Way  ; 
Quicken  my  soul,  instruct  my  heart, 

My  sinking  footsteps  stay. 

Of  all  Thou  hast  in  earth  below, 

In  heaven  above,  to  give, 
Give  me  thy  only  love  to  know, 

In  Thee  to  walk  and  live. 

Fill  me  with  all  the  life  of  love  ; 

In  mystic  union  join 
Me  to  thyself,  and  let  me  prove 

The  fellowship  divine. 

Open  the  intercourse  between 

My  longing  soul  and  Thee, 
Never  to  be  broke  off  again 

To  all  eternity." 


Cfbapier  XYIIL 

SONGS     IN     THE     NIGHT. 
"  Ye  shall  have  a  song,  as  in  the  night  when  a  holy  solemnity  is  kept." 

jHOUGHTS  at  night  are  deepest/'  said  the 
heavenly-minded  Leighton.  And  perhaps 
some  who  are  more  nsed  to  night  watchings 
than  to  "  night  thoughts"  will  be  disposed  to  take  up 
his  style,  and  pronounce  that  music  at  night  is 
sweetest.  At  all  events,  many  of  those  who  have 
known  the  weariness  of  night  watches  will  have  some 
pleasant  recollections  of  times  when  their  spirits  have 
been  cheered  by  a  night  carol,  or  when  some  pipe  or 
flute,  or  horn,  has  given  them  a  strain,  plaintive  or 
merry,  touching  their  jaded  soul  pleasantly  as  it  has 
come  floating  upon  the  calm  air  of  night.  It  has 
seemed  doubly  sweet  in  the  dark  and  dreary  hour ; 
and  has  brought  its  own  welcome  to  the  watcher.  For 
some  reason  or  other  night  music  seems  to  have  a 
more  mellow  richness  and  sweeter  melting  touch  for 
the  soul  when  we  listen  to  it  by  the  seaside.  On  the 
wild  precipitous  coast  of  Northern  Cornwall,  there  are 
the  remains  of  an  ancient  castle.  Tradition  says  it 
was    the    birth-place    of    the    British   King   Arthur. 


336  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

More  certain  records  show  that  as  early  as  1245, 
Richard,  Earl  of  Cornwall,  gave  shelter  there  to  the 
rebellious  David,  Prince  of  Wales;  that  after  wit- 
nessing many  changes  it  became  a  state  prison  under 
Richard  II. ;  that  in  1385,  John  Northampton,  Lord 
Mayor  of  London,  "for  his  unruly  mayoralty  was 
condemned  thither  as  a  perpetual  penitentiary  •/'  and 
that  about  ten  years  later  it  held  as  a  prisoner  Thomas, 
Earl  of  Warwick.  About  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  the  first  and  last  "  antiquary  royal"  of 
England,  John  Leland,  visited  the  spot,  and  says, 
i{  This  castelle  hath  bene  a  marvelus  strong  and 
notable  forteris,  and  almost  situ  loci  inexpugnabile, 
especially  for  the  dungeon,  that  is  on  a  great  high 
terrible  cragge,  environed  with  the  se,  but  having 
a  draw-bridge  from  the  residew  of  the  castelle  into 
it.  Shepe  now  fede  within  the  dungeon.  The 
residew  of  the  buildinges  of  the  castelle  be  sore 
wether-beten  and  yn  mine,  but  it  hath  beene  a  large 
thinge." 

A  somewhat  later  chronicler  describes  it  in  his  day 
— l{  Half  of  the  buildings  were  raised  on  the  continent 
and  the  other  half  on  an  iland,  continued  together 
(within  man's  remembrance)  by  a  drawe  bridge,  but 
now  divorced  by  the  down-fain  steepe  cliffes,  on  the 
farther  side,  which,  though  it  shut  out  the  sea  from 
his  wonted  recourse,  hath  yet  more  strengthened  the 
iland ;  for  in  passing  thither  you  must  first  descend 
with  a  dangerous  declyning,  and  then  make  a  worse 
ascent,  by  a  path,  through  his  stickleness  occasioning, 
and  through  his  steepnesse  threatening,  the  ruin  of 
your  life,  with  the  falling  of  your  foote.  At  the  top, 
two  other  terrifying  steps  give  you  an  entrance  to  the 
hill,  which  supplieth  pasture  for  sheep  and  cowyes; 


SONGS   IN    THE   NIGHT.  337 

upon  the  same  I  saw  a  decayed  chappelle.  Under  the 
iland  runs  a  cove,  throw  which  you  may  rowe  at  ful 
sea,  but  not  without  a  kind  of  horrour  at  the  uncouth  - 
nesse  of  the  place."  A  tourist  who  saw  it  in  the 
reign  of  James  I.,  says  : — "  By  a  very  narrow  rocky e 
and  wyndinge  waye  up  the  steepe  sea  cliffe,  under 
which  the  sea  waves  wallow,  and  so  assayle  the 
foundation  of  the  ile,  as  may  astonish  an  unstable 
brayne  to  consider  the  perill,  for  the  least  slipp  of 
the  foote  sendes  the  whole  bodye  into  the  devouringe 
sea  j  and  the  worste  of  all  is  higheste  of  all,  nere  the 
gate  of  entraunce  into  the  hill,  where  the  offensive 
stones  so  exposed  hang  over  the  head,  as  while  a 
man  respecteth  his  footinge  he  endaungers  his  head  ; 
and  lookinge  to  save  the  head,  endaungers  the 
footinge,  according  to  the  old  proverb,  Incidit  in 
Scyllam  qui  vult  vitare  charybdim — He  must  have  his 
eyes  that  will  scale  Tyntagelle."" 

Not  quite  thirty  years  ago,  an  enthusiastic  band 
of  pedestrians  reached  this  romantic  scene.  It  was 
about  twelve  o'clock  at  night ;  and  the  young  moon 
was  throwing  a  faint  light  over  the  sea,  gently 
touching  the  ruined  walls,  and  half  revealing  the 
mysteries  of  the  "  great  high  terrible  cragge."  All 
the  dangers  which  the  old  chroniclers  had  felt  were 
threatening  still ;  but  they  were  braved,  and  the  green 
sward  within  the  old  bounds  of  the  "  dungeon"  was 
gained.  There  the  band  gathered.  It  was  a  still 
night.  The  sea  far  below  was  whispering  among  the 
caves  and  rocks.  But  the  hush  was  broken  by  the 
sudden  swell  of  a  night  song.  The  voices  of  the 
devout  travellers  were  as  harmonious  as  their  souls, 
while  they  sang  : — 


22 


338  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Join  all  ye  ransomed  sons  of  grace, 

The  holy  joy  prolong, 
And  shout  to  the  Redeemer's  praise 

A  solemn  midnight  song. 

Blessing,  and  thanks,  and  love,  and  might 

Be  to  our  Jesus  given, 
Who  turns  our  darkness  into  light, 

Who  turns  our  hell  to  heaven. 

Thither  our  faithful  souls  He  leads, 

Thither  He  bids  us  rise 
With  crowns  of  joy  upon  our  heads 

To  meet  Him  in  the  skies. 

This  was  the  first  time  probably  that  old  Tintagel 
had  heard  a  midnight  song  like  this.  It  was  one  of 
Charles  Wesley's  "  watch-night"  hymns.  And  what 
holy  associations  gather  around  those  finely-adapted 
"  Songs  of  the  Night  Season."  The  primitive  martyr 
churches  were  in  "watchings  often."  Theirs  were 
nights  of  prayers,  interwoven  with  psalms  and  hymns  ; 
vigils,  sometimes  in  fear  and  sometimes  jubilant. 
And  who  can  chant  the  hymns  that  have  come  down 
to  us  from  the  night  services  of  early  childlike 
generations  of  Christian  households,  without  catching 
a  little  of  their  holy,  watchful  spirit !  The  first 
"watch-night"  among  the  Methodists  was  held  in 
London  on  the  9th  of  April,  1742.  "  The  custom," 
says  a  Methodist  chronicler,  "  was  begun  at  Kingswood 
by  the  colliers  there,  who,  before  their  conversion, 
used  to  spend  every  Saturday  night  at  the  ale-house." 
' '  We  commonly  chose,"  says  Wesley  himself,  "  for 
this  solemn  service,  the  Friday  night  nearest  the  full 
moon,  either  before  or  after,  that  those  of  the  con- 
gregation who  live  at  a  distance  may  have  light  to 
their  several  houses.     The  service  begins  half  an  hour 


SONGS    IX    THE    NIGHT.  :309 

past  eight,  and  continues  till  a  little  after  midnight. 
We  have  often  found  a  peculiar  blessing  at  these 
seasons.  There  is  generally  a  deep  awe  upon  the 
congregation ;  perhaps  in  some  measure,  owing  to  the 
silence  of  the  night — particularly  in  singing  the  hymn 
with  which  we  commonly  conclude  :" — 

Hearken  to  the  solemn  voice, 


The  awful  midnight 


crv : 


Waiting  souls,  rejoice,  rejoice, 
And  see  the  Bridegroom  nigh : 

Lo  !  He  comes  to  keep  his  word, 
Light  aud  joy  his  looks  impart 

Go  ye  forth  to  meet  your  Lord, 
And  meet  Him  in  your  heart. 

Te  who  faint  beneath  the  load 

Of  sin,  your  heads  lift  up  ; 
See  your  great  redeeming  God, 

He  comes  and  bids  you  hope  : 
In  the  midnight  of  your  grief, 

Jesus  doth  his  mourners  cheer ; 
Lo  !  He  brings  you  sure  relief; 

Believe,  and  feel  Him  here. 


Ye,  whose  loins  are  girt,  stand  forth, 

Whose  lamps  are  burning  bright ; 
Worthy,  in  your  Saviour's  worth, 

To  walk  with  Him  in  white  : 
Jesus  bids  your  hearts  be  clean  ; 

Bids  you  all  his  promise  prove  : 
Jesus  comes  to  cast  out  sin, 

And  perfect  you  in  love. 

Wait  we  all  in  patient  hope, 

Till  Christ,  the  Judge,  shall  come ; 

We  shall  soon  be  all  caught  up 
To  meet  the  general  doom : 


340  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

In  an  hour  to  us  unknown, 

As  a  thief  in  deepest  night, 
Christ  shall  suddenly  come  down 

With  all  his  saints  in  light. 

Happy  he  whom  Christ  shall  find 

Watching  to  see  Him  come  ; 
Him,  the  Judge  of  all  mankind 

Shall  bear  triumphant  home. 
Who  can  answer  to  his  word  ? 

Which  of  you  dares  meet  his  day  ? 
"  Eise,  and  come  to  judgment !"     Lord, 

We  rise,  and  come  away. 

A  watch-night  of  great  solemnity  is  always  observed 
by  the  Methodists  on  New  Year's  Eve.  A  sermon  is 
preached,  suitable  addresses  are  given,  and  the  inter- 
vals are  spent  in  singing  and  prayer;  all  kneel,  and 
spend  some  minutes,  immediately  before  and  after  the 
stroke  of  midnight,  in  silent  prayer,  broken  at  length 
by  the  hymn  with  which  they  enter  on  the  New 
Year. 

Between  thirty  and  forty  years  ago,  there  was  an 
English  missionary  and  his  wife  stationed  on  the 
island  of  Zante,  "the  flower  of  the  Levant,"  in  the 
Ionian  Sea.  The  mission  was  a  quiet  one,  and,  like 
most  quiet  things,  it  had  some  lasting  fruit ;  but,  like 
English  rule,  in  more  cases  than  one,  its  duration 
proved  to  be  limited.  The  missionary  came  back 
alone ;  God  had  taken  from  him  the  wife  of  his  youth. 
There  is  one  now  living  who  remembers  how  the  tears 
crept  down  his  cheeks  as  he  listened  to  that  mis- 
sionary's plaintive  and  touching  story.  "  My  wife  and 
I"  said  he,  " entered  on  our  work  in  hope ;  but  we 
soon  felt  that  we  were  pilgrims  indeed  in  a  strange 
land.  We  had  sympathy  from  few ;  none  joined  us  in  our 


S0XG3    IX    THE    NIGHT. 


341 


distinctive  religious  services  ;  but  we  kept  at  our  work. 
Xew  Year's  Eve  came  round,  and  my  dear  wife  and  I 
observed  the  watch-night  by  ourselves.  "We  could 
singr,  both  of  us,  and  our  voices  were  as  one ;  and  we 
prayed  by  turns,  and  sang  together,  as  midnight 
approached,  some  verses  of  Charles  Wesley's  : — 

We  will  not  close  our  wakeful  eyes, 

We  will  not  let  our  eyelids  sleep, 
But  humbly  lift  them  to  the  skies, 

And  all  a  solemn  vigil  keep  : 
So  many  years  on  sin  be.-tow'd, 
Can  we  not  watch  one  night  for  God  ? 

We  can,  0  Jesus,  for  thy  sake 

Devote  our  every  hour  to  Thee : 
Speak  but  the  word,  our  souls  shall  wake, 

And  sing  with  cheerful  melody; 
Thy  praise  shall  our  glad  tongues  employ, 
And  every  heart  shall  dance  for  joy. 

Oh  may  we  all  triumphant  rise, 

With  joy  upon  our  heads  return, 
And  far  above  these  nether  skies, 

By  Thee  on  eagles'  wings  upborne, 
Through  all  yon  radiant  circles  move, 
And  gain  the  highest  heaven  of  love  ! 

The  next  Xew  Year's  Eve  came,  for  years  roll  along 
amidst  all  human  changes,  but,  ah  !  my  wife  was  gone  ! 
I  had  watched  her  across  the  Jordan,  and  I  was  alone. 
What  could  I  do  ?  It  was  the  watch-night.  I  had  to 
watch  alone  with  God.  "Where  could  I  watch  but  by 
my  Mary's  grave-side  ?  There  I  went ;  there  I  wept ; 
there  I  prayed.  I  had  no  soul  to  commune  with  or 
to  speak  to  ;  but  surely,  I  thought,  my  Mary  is  here  ; 
and  better  even  than  that,  my  Jesus  is  here.  I  tried 
to  sing  again  what  we  sang  together  the  year  before, 


342  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    TEJEIR    HYMNS. 

but  tears  choked  my  utterance  till  the  midnight  hour 
struck,  and  then  there  was  a  hush  in  my  soul ;  I  knelt 
by  my  Mary's  grave,  renewed  my  covenant  with 
Christ,  gave  myself  once  more  to  his  will ;  and,  feeling 
as  if  I  were  not  without  blessed  company — yea,  as  if 
I  heard  one  beloved  voice  in  harmony  with  mine — I 
raised  the  old  New  Year's  song,  and  sang  as  in 
company  with  the  glorified — 

Come,  let  us  anew  our  journey  pursue, 

Roll  round  with  the  year, 
And  never  stand  still  till  the  Master  appear. 

His  adorable  will  let  us  gladly  fulfil, 

And  our  talents  improve, 
By  the  patience  of  hope  and  the  labour  of  love. 

Our  life  is  a  dream ;  our  time,  as  a  stream, 

fllides  swiftly  away ; 
And  the  fugitive  moment  refuses  to  stay. 

The  arrow  is  flown ;  the  moment  is  gone ; 

The  millennial  year 
Rushes  on  to  our  view,  and  eternity's  here. 

Oh  that  each  in  the  day  of  his  coming  may  say, 

"  I  have  fought  my  way  through  ; 
I  have  finished  the  work  Thou  didst  give  me  to  do." 

Oh  that  each  from  his  Lord  may  receive  the  glad  word, 

"  "Well,  and  faithfully  done ; 
Enter  into  my  joy,  and  sit  down  on  my  throne." 

This  was  my  last  watch-night  hymn  in  the  Ionian 
Sea ;  and  c  I  call  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the 
night/  and  now  calmly  await  the  call  unto  that  world 
where 

Death,  and  grief,  and  pain, 

And  parting  are  no  more." 


SONGS    IN    THE    NIGHT.  343 

The  lone  missionary  had  his  call  from  above  at  last. 
He  and  his  Mary  join  their  voices  again  now,  not  in 
night  songs,  bnt  in  hymns  of  gratitude  to  Him  who 
once  gave  them  "  songs  in  the  night "  in  the  house  of 
their  pilgrimage.  There  is  one  happy  spirit  with 
whom  they  are  now  associated,  to  whom  thousands  are 
indebted  for  happy  means  of  beguiling  the  wearisome 
hours  of  wakeful  nights  in  sickness  and  languor.  He 
learnt  to  extract  devout  music  from  the  hours  of 
suffering  which  passed  over  him ;  and  thus  solacing 
his  own  soul,  he  has  left  consolation  for  all  true  lovers 
of  sweet  and  soothing  hymns  at  night. 

"What,  in  tears  again,  my  dear  doctor!"  Lady 
Huntingdon  said  more  than  once  of  a  morning,  as  she 
entered  the  room  where  a  very  impersonation  of  meek- 
ness, resignation,  and  love,  was  reclining,  with  a 
tremulous  tear  on  his  cheek. 

"  Yes,"  was  the  reply  ;  "  but  they  are  tears  of  joy, 
my  dear  lady." 

These  tears  of  joy  were  upon  the  placid  counte- 
nance of  Phillip  Doddridge.  His  outward  man  was 
perishing,  but  "  the  inward  man  was  renewed  day  by 
day."  Yes,  and  night  by  night,  for  he  had  caught  the 
spirit  of  Wesley's  night  song — 

0  Thou  jealous  God  !  come  down, 

God  of  spotless  purity ; 
Claim,  and  seize  me  for  Thine  own, 

Consecrate  my  heart  to  Thee  : 
Under  thy  protection  take ; 

Songs  in  the  right  season  give  ; 
Let  me  sleep  to  Thee,  and  wake ; 

Let  me  die  to  Thee,  and  live. 

Only  tell  me  I  am  Thine, 

And  Thou  wilt  not  quit  thy  right ; 


344  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Answer  mo  in  dreams  divine, 

Dreams  and  visions  of  the  night ; 

Bid  me  even  in  sleep  go  on 
Restlessly,  my  God  desire  ; 

Mourn  for  God  in  every  groan. 
God  in  every  thought  require. 

Loose  me  from  the  chains  of  sense, 

Set  me  from  the  body  free ; 
Draw  with  stronger  influence 

My  unfetter'd  soul  to  Thee  : 
In  me.  Lord,  thyself  reveal ; 

Fill  me  with  a  sweet  surprise; 
Let  me  Thee,  when  waking,  feel, 

Let  me  in  thy  image  rise. 

It  was  not  in  vain  that  lie  had  sought  to  hallow  his 
writings  by  using  his  pen  in  private  companionship 
with  his  Saviour.  It  was  not  in  vain  that  the  first 
Monday  in  every  month  was  spent  in  meditation, 
intercession,  and  prayer,  in  that  consecrated  vestry  of 
his  meeting-house  in  Xorthampton.  He  had  become 
so  holily  familiar  with  truth  and  love,  that  his  days  of 
decline  were  blessed  with  tears  of  heavenly  joy,  and 
his  wakeful  nip-lits  became  fruitful  with  hymns  and 
psalms.  How  the  grateful  calmness,  the  spiritual 
repose,  the  Christian  submission,  and  the  heavenly  glow 
of  the  saintly  hynmist's  spirit  continues  to  breathe 
on  us  as  we  chant  with  him  on  the  return  of  night — 

Interval  of  grateful  shade 
Welcome  to  my  weary  head ; 
Welcome  slumber  to  my  eyes, 
Tired  with  glaring  vanities. 

]\XY  great  Master  still  allows 
Needful  periods  of  repose  ; 
By  my  heavenly  Father  blest, 
Thus  I  give  my  powers  to  rest. 


SONGS    IX   THE    NIGHT.  345 

Heavenly  Father  !  gracious  name  ! 
Night  and  day  his  love  the  same ! 
Far  be  each  suspicious  thought, 
Every  anxious  care  forgot. 

Thou,  my  ever-bounteous  God, 
Crown'. st  my  days  with  various  good  ; 
Thy  kind  eye,  that  cannot  sleep, 
These  defenceless  hours  shall  keep. 

What  though  downy  slumbers  flee, 
Strangers  to  my  couch  and  me  ? 
Sleepless,  well  I  know  to  rest, 

Lodged  within  my  Father's  breast. 

"While  the  empress  of  the  night 
Scatters  mild  her  silver  light ; 
While  the  vivid  planets  stray, 
Various  through  their  mystic  way  ; 

While  the  stars  unnumbered  roll 
Round  the  ever-constant  pole, 
Far  above  these  spangled  skies 
All  my  soul  to  God  shall  rise. 

'Mid  the  silence  of  the  night, 
Mingling  with  those  angels  bright, 
Whose  harmonious  voices  raise, 

Ceaseless  love  and  ceaseless  praise. 

Through  the  throng  his  gentle  ear 
Shall  my  tuneless  accents  hear  ; 
From  on  high  doth  He  impart 
Secret  comfort  to  my  heart. 

He  in  these  serenest  hours 
Guides  my  intellectual  powers, 
And  his  Spirit  doth  diffuse 
Sweeter  far  than  midnight  dews, 


346  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Lifting  all  my  thoughts  above, 
On  the  wings  of  faith  and  love  : 
Blest  alternative  to  me, 
Thus  to  sleep,  or  wake  with  Thee. 

What  if  death  my  sleep  invade  ? 
Should  I  be  of  death  afraid  ? 
Whilst  encircled  by  thy  arm, 
Death  may  strike,  but  cannot  harm. 

What  if  beams  of  opening  day 
Shine  around  my  breathless  clay  ? 
Brighter  visions  from  on  high 
Shall  regale  my  mental  eye. 

Tender  friends  awhile  may  mourn 
Me  from  their  embraces  torn  ; 
Dearer,  better  friends  I  have 
In  the  realms  beyond  the  grave. 

See  the  guardian  angels  nigh, 
Wait  to  waft  my  soul  on  high  ! 
See  the  golden  gates  displayed ; 
See  the  crown  to  grace  my  head  ; 

See  a  flood  of  sacred  light, 
Which  no  more  shall  yield  to  night. 
Transitory  world,  farewell ! 
Jesus  calls,  with  Him  to  dwell ! 

With  thy  heavenly  presence  blest, 
Death  is  life,  and  labour  rest ; 
Welcome  sleep  or  death  to  me, 
Still  secure,  for  still  with  Thee. 

Doddridge's  hymns,  and  some  of  his  most  useful 
prose  treatises,  were  produced  in  stray  moments,  or 
what  have  been  called  loose  intervals  of  time.  They 
came  richly  oozing  through  the  crevices  of  the  day  or 
the  night,  the  overflowings  of  a  mind  full  of  goodness 
for  all  who  needed  blessing.     So  when  harder  work 


SONGS    IN    THE    NIGHT.  347 

had  wearied  his  thinking  head,  and  all  but  exhausted 
his  spirits,  his  tuneful  genius  breathed  forth  its  life 
for  his  own  refreshment  in  his  hymn  for  the  night ; 
and  so  his  prose  chapters  on  "  The  Eise  and  Progress 
of  Religion  in  the  Soul"  were  penned  now  and  then 
as  the  happy  thoughts  occurred,  and  welled-up  during 
moments  of  comparative  leisure.  And  it  is  beyond 
our  power  to  say  which  has  instilled  its  saving  unction 
into  the  greater  number  of  human  souls — his  midnight 
hymn,  or  his  "  prayers"  for  the  seeker  of  "  religion  in 
the  soul."  Will  those  who  have  gathered  life  from 
the  daily  study  of  his  prose  pages,  outnumber  the 
sufferers  whose  night  watches  have  been  brightened 
by  the  Divine  music  of  his  hymn  ?  Who  can  tell  ? 
The  fruit  of  both  is  ever  living,  and  is  ever  accu- 
mulating its  harvest  joys.  And  the  fruit  of  the  one  is 
ever  mixing  with  the  kindred  fruit  of  the  other.  The 
holy  work  of  a  few  well-improved  fragments  of  time 
gives  out  a  virtue  which,  like  well-directed  electrical 
influence  conveys  gracious  and  quickening  power  to 
hearts  faraway  in  space,  and  at  the  most  distant  points 
of  time.  Baxter  filled  up  his  remnants  of  hours  by 
writing  his  "  Saint's  Everlasting  Rest" ;  that  book 
touched  the  soul  of  Doddridge,  and  gave  it  life. 
Doddridge,  in  turn,  employed  his  leisure  moments  in 
throwing  off  his  pages  on  "  Religion  in  the  Soul"  ; 
those  pages  touched  the  heart  of  Wilberforce,  and 
engaged  his  intellect  for  Christ.  He  filled  up  spare 
hours  by  writing  his  "  Practical  View  of  Christianity" ; 
that  volume  touched  the  mighty  mind  and  heart  of 
Chalmers  :  and  whose  mind  and  heart  has  not  been, 
and  will  not  be,  touched  by  the  works  of  Chalmers  ? 

"  I  used  to  read  a  great  many  books  in  my  young 
days,"  said  a  languid  sufferer  to  one  who  sat  by  him, 


348  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

"but  of  all  I  ever  read,  nothing  did  me  so  much  good, 
and  so  helped  me  to  see  my  way  clear  to  Christ  as 
Doddridge's  fEise  and  Progress  of  Religion  in  the 
Soul/  I  was  then  feeling  after  God,  and  a  young 
friend  lent  me  the  book  ;  and  oh,  how  thankful  I  shall 
always  be  for  it !  The  prayers  at  the  ends  of  the 
chapters  were  such  gracious  helps  to  me.  I  used  to 
pray  them  over  on  my  knees,  with  many  tears  ;  and 
then  I  learnt  the  happy  art  of  throwing  the  soul 
into  a  suitable  form  of  prayer.  Indeed,  these  forms 
of  prayer  taught  me  to  pray.  And  the  answers  have 
been  coming  upon  me  ever  since.  Here  I  am,  often 
half  the  night  sleepless  and  uneasy ;  but  if  anything 
hushes  me,  it  is  going  over  those  pages,  and  then  in 
turn  humming  a  hymn  to  myself." 

"  What  is  your  favourite  hymn  ?  Do  you  use 
Doddridge's  beautiful  hymn  f  for  the  night'  ?" 

"  No,  I  did  not  know  that  he  had  written  one. 
Had  I  known  it,  I  should  have  chosen  that  above  all ; 
I  love  Doddridge  so  much.  I  wish  I  had  known  his 
hymn.  But  my  favourite  has  been  the  good  old  hymn 
for  midnight,  by  Bishop  Ken." 

Well  did  the  sufferer  call  that  hymn,  "  the  good 
old  hymn."  It  is  good,  and  will  always  be  good ;  it 
is  as  fresh  now  as  when  it  was  first  sung.  The  saintly 
old  bishop,  put  out  of  his  bishopric  for  conscience'  sake, 
had  gone  from  his  residence  at  Longleat,  in  Wiltshire, 
on  a  visit  to  his  nephew,  so  dear  to  those  who  love 
good  biography,  Isaac  Walton,  then  Prebendary  of 
Salisbury.  That  great  storm  which  swept  over  the 
island  in  1 703,  touched  the  old  city  rather  roughly  as 
it  passed,  and  blew  down  a  stack  of  chimneys,  which 
fell  cutting  through  the  bed-room  in  which  Ken  was 
lodged,  without  touching  his  person;  but  rushing  on 


SONGS    IN    THE    NIGHT.  349 

upon  Wells,  it  hurled  another  stack  through  the 
chamber  of  the  bishop  who  had  supplanted  Ken,  and 
killed  him  on  the  spot.  Strange  thoughts  would  per- 
plex some  minds  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  variety  of 
action  by  the  same  storm ;  but  whatever  we  may 
think,  it  may  be  that  we  owe  much  of  the  spirit  and 
power  of  Ken's  midnight  hymn  to  the  effects  of  that 
preserving  presence  which  was  manifest  in  his  case. 
With  what  swelling  feeling  would  he  ever  after  sing 
in  his  night-watch — 

My  God,  now  I  from  sleep  awake, 

The  sole  possession  of  me  take  ; 

From  midnight  terrors  me  secure, 

And  guard  my  heart  from  thoughts  impure  ! 

Bless'd  angels,  while  we  silent  lie, 
You  hallelujahs  sing  on  high  ; 
You  joyful  hymn  the  Ever-blest, 
Before  the  throne,  and  never  rest. 

I,  with  your  choir  celestial  join 
In  offering  up  a  hymn  divine ; 
With  you  in  heaven  I  hope  to  dwell, 
And  bid  the  night  and  world  farewell. 

My  soul,  when  I  shake  off  this  dust, 
Lord,  in  thy  arms  I  will  entrust : 
Oh  make  me  thy  peculiar  care ; 
Some  mansion  for  my  soul  prepare  ! 

Give  me  a  place  at  thy  saints'  feet, 
Or  some  fall'n  angel's  vacant  seat ; 
I'll  strive  to  sing  as  loud  as  they 
"Who  sit  above  in  brighter  day. 

Oh  may  I  always  ready  stand, 
With  my  lamp  burning  in  my  hand ; 
May  I  in  sight  of  heaven  rejoice 
Whene'er  I  hear  the  Bridegroom's  voice. 


350  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

All  praise  to  Thee  in  light  arrayed, 
Who  light  thy  dwelling-place  hast  made ; 
A  boundless  ocean  of  bright  beams 
From  thy  all-glorious  Godhead  streams. 

The  sun  in  its  meridian  height, 

Is  very  darkness  in  thy  sight; 

My  soul  oh  lighten  and  inflame 

With  thought  and  love  of  thy  great  name. 

Blessed  Jesu,  Thou,  on  heaven  intent, 
Whole  nights  hast  in  devotion  spent ; 
But  I,  frail  creature,  soon  am  tired, 
And  all  my  zeal  is  soon  expired. 

My  soul,  how  canst  thou  weary  grow 
Of  antedating  bliss  below ; 
In  sacred  hymns,  and  heavenly  love, 
Which  will  eternal  be  above  ? 

Shine  on  me,  Lord,  new  life  impart, 
Fresh  ardours  kindle  in  my  heart ; 
One  ray  of  thy  all-quickening  light 
Dispels  the  sloth  and  clouds  of  night. 

Lord,  lest  the  tempter  me  surprise, 
Watch  over  Thine  own  sacrifice ; 
All  loose,  all  idle  thoughts  cast  out, 
And  make  my  very  dreams  devout. 

Praise  God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow ; 
Praise  Him,  all  creatures  here  below ; 
Praise  Him  above,  ye  heavenly  host ; 
Praise  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Heaven  has  watched  over  many  a  night-watcher 
besides  Bishop  Ken.  It  is  now  nearly  a  hundred 
years  ago  that  a  poor  girl  in  Ipswich  lost  her  father, 
and  her  mother  being  left  with  a  large  family  unpro- 
vided for,  she,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  went  out  into 


SONGS    IN    THE    NIGHT.  351 

domestic  service.  There,  however,  she  was  seized 
with  a  complicated  disorder,  which  baffled  all  medical 
skill,  and  shut  her  up  to  a  life  of  suffering-.  But  her 
affliction  was  hallowed  to  her.  Christ  revealed  Himself 
as  her  Saviour,  and  became  her  Divine  companion. 
She  taught  herself  to  write,  and  then  solaced  herself 
during  the  weary  days  and  nights  of  languishing  by 
composing  hymns  and  psalms.  Her  songs  were  worthy 
of  notice,  and  were  published  by  her  friends  as  "  Songs 
in  the  Night.-"  Her  genius  and  piety,  spirit  and  ex- 
pression, are  fairly  given  in  an  acrostic  which  reveals 
her  name — 

S  hall  I  presume  to  tell  the  world  my  name  ? 

U  p  to  this  hour  I  glory  in  my  shame  : 

S  o  great  my  weakness,  that  I  boast  of  might, 

A  fool  in  knowledge,  yet  in  wisdom  right ; 

N  o  life,  and  yet  I  live  ;  I'm  sick,  and  well ; 

N"  ot  far  from  heaven,  though  on  the  brink  of  hell, 

A  nd  words  and  oaths,  and  blood,  delight  me  well, 

H  ow  strange  !     I'm  deaf,  and  dumb,  and  lame,  and  blind, 

A  nd  hear,  and  see,  and  walk,  and  talk,  you  find. 

B  obbed  by  my  dearest  friend,  I'm  trnly  poor, 

R  iches  immense  I  always  have  in  store. 

I  'm  fed  by  mortals  ;  but  let  mortals  know 

S  uch  is  my  food,  no  mortal  can  bestow. 

0  h,  how  I  long  to  die,  and  wish  to  live  ! 

N  ow,  if  you  can,  explain  th'  account  I  give. 

Her  songs  are  appropriately  entitled,  {<  Songs  in  the 
Night."  Mere  circum stances  were  all  dark  around 
her;  but  there  was  undying  light  in  her  soul,  and  her 
hymns  breathe  a  reverent  cheerfulness,  a  placid  resig- 
nation, and  a  comfortable  hope.  Her  genius  was  un- 
cultured, but  in  sentiment,  diction,  and  musical  tone, 
many  of  her  hymns  are  worthy  of  being  closet  com- 
panions with  the  night  songs  of  hymnists  bearing  far 


352  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

more  distinguished  names.  The  poor  sufferer  used  to 
sing  as  night  came  on — 

God  of  my  days,  God  of  my  nights, 
Source  of  my  soul's  supreme  delights, 
Come,  manifest  thy  love  to  me, 
And  let  me  close  this  day  with  Thee. 

Nearness  to  Christ  I  fain  would  find, 
Oh  let  not  distance  vex  my  mind ; 
I  long  to  know  my  sins  forgiven, 
To  converse  with  the  God  of  heaven. 

Send,  Source  of  Light,  some  cheering  ray, 
To  turn  my  darkness  into  day ; 
I  mourn,  and  think  thy  absence  long, 
Oh  listen  to  my  evening  song. 

Command  my  blindness  to  depart, 
Still  keep  me  from  a  careless  heart ; 
Lord,  captivate  each  vain  desire, 
And  raise  these  vile  affections  higher. 

Oh  let  the  mercies  of  this  day 
Teach  me  to  praise  as  well  as  pray  : 
Now  take,  my  soul,  on  Jesu's  breast, 
Thy  sweetest,  safest,  surest  rest. 

In  her  last  hours  she  was  truly  "  compassed  about 
with  songs  of  deliverance  "  "  I  have  not  sung  for 
some  time/'  she  said.  "  Sing  with  me,  it  will  not 
hurt  me.     Sing  Dr.  Watts' s  hymn — 

How  sweet  and  awful  is  the  place, 

With  Christ  within  the  doors  ; 
While  everlasting  love  displays 

The  choicest  of  her  stores. 


SONGS    IN    THE    NIGHT.  353 

The  hymn  was  softly  sung  by  her  friends ;   and  then 
she  added,  "  Let  us  sing  again  " — 

Come,  let  us  join  our  cheerful  songs 

With  angels  round  the  throne ; 
Ten  thousand  thousand  are  their  tongues, 

But  all  their  joys  are  one. 

Worthy  the  Lamb  that  died,  they  cry, 

To  be  exalted  thus  ; 
Worthy  the  Lamb,  our  lips  reply, 

For  He  was  slain  for  us. 

Jesus  is  worthy  to  receive 

Honour  and  power  divine ; 
And  blessings  more  than  we  can  give, 

Be,  Lord,  for  ever  Thine. 

Nobody  seemed  able  to  sing  with  her.  Her  voice 
was  like  something  more  than  human,  and  she  waved 
her  arm  exultingly,  as  she  sang.  "  You  do  not  sing 
with  me/'  she  said;  il well,  I  cannot  forbear."  Then 
she  continued  nearly  the  whole  night  warbling  softly, 
though  at  times  apparently  dying.  Her  last  night 
was  full  of  song ;  and  just  before  she  took  her  upward 
flight,  she  pointed  heavenward,  and  said, 
talk,  but  I  shall  soon  sing  there" 


23 


MARRIAGE  SONGS  AND  BIRTH-DAY  HYMNS. 

And  both  Jesus  was  called,  and  his  disciples,  to  the  marriage." 

T  is  said  of  Solomon  that  "his  songs  were  a 
thousand  and  five."  One  of  this  number 
occupies  a  distinguished  place  in  the  sacred 
canon,  and  is  called  "  The  Song  of  Songs,  which  is 
Solomon's/'  or  "  the  most  beautiful  or  excellent  of  his 
songs."  It  was  written  a  thousand  years  before 
Christ — long  before  the  earliest  profane  poets  whose 
works  are  extant ;  but  the  freshness  of  its  unrivalled 
beauty  has  remained  through  all  the  changes  of  time 
and  manners,  while  its  charms  continue  to  exert  their 
power  under  all  the  disadvantages  of  incompetent 
translation.  It  may  be  called  a  pastoral,  in  which  two 
leading  characters  are  represented  as  speaking  and 
acting  throughout  the  poem.  The  one  is  a  king 
called  Shelomoh,  "  The  peaceful,  or  Prince  of  Peace," 
the  other  a  female,  who  from  being  a  rustic  shep- 
herdess becomes  his  queen ;  she  bears  the  name  of 
Shelomith,  which  is  simply  the  feminine  form  of 
Shelomoh.  Whether  this  poem  was  written  by 
Solomon  on  the  occasion  of  his   own  marriage  or  not, 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  355 

it  seems  to  stand  among  the  oracles  of  inspiration  as 
a  seal  of  divine  approbation  on  the  institution  of 
marriage,  or  as  the  fixed  light  of  God's  smile  upon  the 
fervid  but  modest  and  delicate  affection  of  conjugal 
life.  Both  ancients  and  moderns,  Jews  and  Christians, 
have  agreed  that  under  its  face  of  poetic  beauty  an 
allegorical  meaning  is  hid  for  the  instruction  and 
solace  of  the  teachable,  chaste,  and  believing  soul. 
Indeed,  we  cannot  conceive  that  Ezra,  a  man  under 
divine  inspiration,  and  the  members  of  the  great 
synagogue,  or  those  who  assisted  in  collecting  the 
sacred  writings,  would  have  admitted  this  song  into 
the  sacred  canon  if  they  had  not  a  full  conviction  that 
under  its  mysterious  and  luxuriant  imagery  there  lay 
concealed  some  great  truths  bearing  on  the  interests 
of  God's  kingdom  and  people.  It  is  an  Oriental  book, 
written  by  a  highly  poetical  Eastern  monarch,  in- 
tended, in  the  first  place,  for  an  Oriental  people  such 
as  seven-eighths  of  the  human  race  have  been,  and 
such  as  form  one  half  of  the  present  population  of  the 
earth.  The  book  should  therefore  be  interpreted  in 
accordance  with  Eastern  manners  and  rules  of  com- 
position. It  has  always  been  the  universal  custom  in 
the  East  to  represent  spiritual  things  under  such 
figures  as  are  beautifully  sketched  in  the  Song  of 
Solomon.  Numerous  examples  might  be  quoted  from 
mere  heathen  authorities  ;  but  the  Bible  is  full  of 
them.  David,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  the  evangelists, 
apostles,  and  our  Lord  Himself,  all  speak  of  the  inter- 
course of  the  divine  and  the  human  under  the  imagery 
of  marriage  feasts  and  conjugal  communion.  And  in 
this  light  the  Song  of  Solomon  has  always  been 
dewed,  both  by  Jews  and  Christians.  The  Jews 
explained    it   as    a    song   of    Jehovah's   love    for   the 


356  HYHN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

synagogue;  the  Christians,   as   celebrating  the  union 
of  Christ  and  his  Church.     Both  have  agreed,  however, 
that  the  spirit  and  design  of  the  book  can  be  realized 
by  none  but  the  chaste  and  devotional  mind.     The  Jews 
denied   it  to  the  weak  and  the  profane,  as  too  strong 
for  the   one,  and  too  holy  for  the   other.     They  have 
always  guarded  and  honoured  it  not  only  as  holy,  but, 
as  they  say,  "  the  Holy  of  holies"  j  and  have  ever  used 
it  as  an  incentive  to  holy  thought  and  intense  devotion. 
While  the   Christians,  who  have  consulted  it  as  the 
expression   of  Christ's  love  to  the  community  of  the 
faithful,  have  ever  found  in  it  a  refreshing  sweetness 
and  power,  leading  them,  as   it   does,  to  meditate  on 
the  mutual  affection  of  the  Eedeemer  and  his  people, 
associated  with  trials  and  vicissitudes  in  this  life,  but 
promising  perfect  fruition  and  repose  in  the  world  to 
come.     This  may  be  illustrated  by  one  passage  from  a 
personal  history. 

"  Ah  !  my  dear  friend,  is  that  you  ?"  said  a  kind- 
hearted  and  intelligent  Polish  Jew,  as  he  affectionately 
took  the  hand  of  a  Methodist  preacher,  who  had  taken 
his  seat  by  the  side  of  his  sick-bed.  The  two  had 
known  each  other  in  earlier  life,  and  had  learnt  to 
"  love  one  another,"  distinct  as  they  were  in  creed  as 
well  as  by  birth.  After  some  years  of  separation,  the 
Gentile  had  found  out  his  Jewish  brother  and  first 
Hebrew  teacher,  in  his  affliction  ;  and  now  once  more 
they  were  heart  to  heart,  and  entered  into  communion 
about  the  sacred  text  which  they  had  at  one  time  so 
lovingly  studied  together.  The  Jew  was  gentle, 
tender,  and  open  as  a  child,  and  freely  told  out  his 
hope  in  the  mercy  of  that  God  who  had  been  pleased, 
as  he  said,  "  to  put  the  innocent  for  the  uninnocent, 
that  the   sinner  who  was  penitent  over  the   sacrifice 


MARRIAGE    SONGS   AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  357 

and  trusted  there,  might  be  saved. "  And  then  he 
talked  about  divine  love,  how  it  begat  love  in  us  • 
what  a  comfort  it  was  to  him  ;  how  it  helped  him  in 
his  sickness  ;  and  how  it  disposed  him  to  love  every- 
body around  him.  The  holy  texts  from  his  Hebrew 
Bible  (t  came  bubbling  up  in  his  mind/'  he  said,  "  and 
there  were  no  words  which  seemed  to  speak  the 
feelings  of  his  heart  so  happily  as  some  of  the  words 
in  Solomon's  Song/' 

"  Somebody  said  to  me  the  other  day/'  he  re- 
marked, "  '  What  is  the  use  of  Solomon's  Song  ?  I 
cannot  understand  it ;  I  think  it  had  better  be  left  out 
of  the  book  !'  Oh,  I  was  grieved  ;  and  I  said,  that  is 
wicked.  No  !  you  do  nob  see  the  use  of  that  blessed 
book  !  how  can  you  ?  You  do  not  understand  it ; 
how  should  you  ?  Those  who  do  not  love  the  truth 
cannot  see  the  use  of  it  or  understand  it.  You  are 
not  a  spiritual  man  ;  and  you  do  not  see.  There  now 
is  my  box,  poor  looking  box  to  you.  What  is  the  use 
of  it  ?  you  may  say,  it  might  as  well  be  thrown  away. 
Ah !  it  is  locked  !  you  do  not  see  what  is  in  it  ! 
nor  can  you  tell  what  is  the  value  or  the  beauty  of 
the  jewels  that  are  there.  But  if  I  give  you  the  key, 
and  you  open  it,  then  you  may  be  able  to  talk  about 
the  box,  for  you  will  see  and  know  all  that  is  in  it. 
So  you  have  no  key  to  Solomon's  Song ;  none  but 
spiritual  men  have  a  key  to  it  !" 

And  so  the  afflicted  Hebrew  talked.  He  might 
have  communed,  one  would  think,  with  that  disciple 
of  Gamaliel  who  says,  "  The  natural  man  receiveth 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are 
foolishness  to  him ;  neither  can  he  know  them, 
because  they  are  spiritually  discerned.  But  he  that  is 
spiritual  judgeth  all  things."    Nor  could  his  Methodist 


358  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

friend  help  thinking,  at  the  moment,  of  Charles 
Wesley's  metrical  introduction  to  Solomon's  Song. 
There  was  something  so  remarkably  akin  in  the  pure 
simplicity  of  the  poor  Hebrew's  thoughts  and  those  of 
the  Methodist  poet.  Wesley  expresses  what  the  Jew 
thought  and  felt,  with  becoming  purity  and  spirit,  and 
in  a  pleasant  hymnic  form,  thus  : — 

Hence,  ye  profane ;  far  off  remove, 
Ye  strangers  to  redeeming  love ; 
Sinners,  whom  Jesus  never  knew, 
The  Song  of  Songs  is  not  for  you ! 
Away,  ye  worldly  goats  and  swine, 
Who  trample  on  this  pearl  divine, 
Which  only  wisdom's  sons  esteem, 
While  fools  and  infidels  blaspheme. 

With  deepest  shame,  with  humblest  fear, 
I  to  Thine  oracle  draw  near, 
To  meet  Thee  in  the  holiest  place, 
To  learn  the  secret  of  thy  grace. 
Now,  Lord,  explain  the  mystery, 
Display  thy  precious  self  to  me, 
And  when  Thon  dost  the  veil  remove, 
My  heart  shall  sing  the  song  of  love. 

Thou  heavenly  Solomon  divine, 
To  teach  the  Song  of  Songs  is  Thine ; 
Thy  Spirit  alone  the  depth  reveals, 
Opens  the  book,  and  breaks  the  seals  : 
Oh  might  I  find  the  bar  removed, 
And  love  the  Lord  as  I  am  loved, 
This  moment  gain  my  heart's  desire, 
The  next  within  Thine  arms  expire. 

The  Jew  kindled  with  his  theme,  and,  with  that 
charming  intonation  which  is  natural  to  the  children 
of  the  synagogue,  he  gave  voice  to  his  loving  heart  in 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  359 

a  succession  of  stanzas  from  the  "  Song  of  Songs.-" 
He  repeated  again  and  again  with  growing  warmth, 
and  with  a  music  of  expression  that  seemed  like 
the  voice  of  love  itself,  "  Tell  me,  0  Thou  whom  my 
soul  loveth,  where  Thou  feedest,  where  Thou  makest 
thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon  \"  The  afflicted  child  of 
Abraham  had  wandered  long  among  strangers,  and 
was  now  longing  for  rest  with  the  great  Shepherd  to 
whom  his  fathers  had  been  gathered.  By  a  Methodist, 
such  as  his  friend  and  visitor  was,  Charles  Wesley 
was,  of  course,  thought  of  again,  and  that  tender, 
glowing  paraphrase  of  Solomon's  stanza  came,  as  the 
Jew  who  had  quoted  it  said,  "bubbling  up  in  the 
mind"  : — 

Thou  Shepherd  of  Israel  and  mine, 

The  joy  and  desire  of  my  heart, 
For  closer  communion  I  pine, 

I  long  to  reside  where  Thou  art : 
The  pasture  I  languish  to  find, 

"Where  all,  who  their  Shepherd  obey, 
Are  fed,  on  thy  bosom  reclined, 

And  screen'd  from  the  heat  of  the  day. 

Ah !  show  me  that  happiest  place, 

The  place  of  thy  people's  abode, 
Where  saints  in  an  ecstasy  gaze, 

And  hang  on  a  crucified  God. 
Thy  love  for  a  sinner  declare, 

Thy  passion  and  death  on  the  tree  : 
My  spirit  to  Calvary  bear, 

To  suffer  and  triumph  with  Thee. 

Tis  there,  with  the  lambs  of  Thy  flock, 

There  only  I  covet  to  rest, 
To  lie  at  the  foot  of  the  rock, 

Or  rise  to  lie  hid  in  Thy  breast : 


360  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

'Tis  there  I  would  always  abide, 

And  never  a  moment  depart ; 
Conceal'd  in  the  cleft  of  Thy  side, 

Eternally  held  in  Thy  heart. 

"Do  you  think  that  the  f  Song  of  Songs'  was 
written  by  Solomon  on  the  occasion  of  his  own 
marriage  V  said  the  Gentile  visitor  to  the  Jewish 
patient. 

"  Yes,  that  is  my  opinion.  I  think  God  has  given 
it  to  us  as  a  marriage  song,  to  show  that  marriage  is 
his  own  arrangement  and  ordinance  for  our  comfort, 
and  the  purity  and  happiness  of  the  world.  But  it 
means  something  more  than  that ;  it  is  a  song  of  love 
between  the  Messiah  and  his  people.  Ah  !  that  is  a 
mysterious  love;  but  it  is  sweet,  and  he  only  who 
enjoys  it  deeply  can  sing  Solomon's  Song  as  it  was 
intended  to  be  sung." 

In  hearing  this  from  a  Jew,  who  would  not  think  of 
one,  in  earlier  times,  who  was  trained  a  Pharisee ;  but 
becoming,  like  the  suffering  Polish  wanderer,  a  truly 
spiritual  man,  uttered  kindred  thoughts.  "  Husbands, 
love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  also  loved  the  Church, 
and  gave  Himself  for  it ;  that  He  might  sanctify  and 
cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word, 
that  He  might  present  it  to  Himself  a  glorious  Church, 
not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but 
that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish.  So  ought 
men  to  love  their  wives  as  their  own  bodies.  He  that 
loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself.  For  no  man  ever  yet 
hated  his  own  flesh ;  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it, 
even  as  the  Lord  the  Church :  for  we  are  members  of 
his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.  For  this 
cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother,  and 
shall  be  joined  unto  his  wife,  and  they  two  shall  be 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  361 

one   flesh.      This  is   a   great  mystery :    but  I   speak 
concerning  Christ  and  the  Church." 

If,  then,  Solomon's  Song  is  an  inspired  marriage 
song,  having  under  its  beautiful  surface  a  spiritual 
allusion  to  a  still  deeper  mystery  of  love,  marriage 
songs  are  not  unacceptable  to  God,  nor  can  they  be 
out  of  place  at  a  wedding-feast.  They  should,  how- 
ever, emulate  the  spirit  and  tone  of  the  inspired 
exemplar  ;  and  the  hymnist  who  so  happily  introduces 
Solomon's  divine  pastoral,  and  who  has  left  us  so 
many  sweet  little  hymnic  paraphrases  of  favourite 
passages  from  the  "  Song  of  Songs,"  has  furnished  an 
appropriate  song  for  the  bridal  morn.  One  who  so 
deeply  enjoyed  the  chaste  pleasures  of  conjugal  life, 
and  whose  soul  was  so  full  of  hymn  and  song,  would 
certainly  aid  the  newly-married  pair  with  forms  of 
devout  expression.  Here  is  one  of  his  marriage 
hymns  : — 

Thou  God  of  truth  and  love, 
We  seek  thy  perfect  way, 

Ready  thy  choice  to  approve, 
Thy  Providence  to  obey ; 

Enter  into  thy  wise  design, 

And  sweetly  lose  our  will  in  Thine. 

Why  hast  Thou  cast  our  lot 

In  the  same  age  and  place  ? 
And  why  together  brought 

To  see  each  other's  face  ? 
To  join  with  softest  sympathy, 
And  mix  our  friendly  souls  in  Thee  ? 

Didst  Thou  not  make  us  one, 

That  we  might  one  remain, 
Together  travel  on, 

And  bear  each  other's  pain ; 
Till  all  thy  utmost  goodness  prove, 
And  rise  renew'd  in  perfect  love. 


362  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Surely  Thou  didst  uuite 

Our  kindred  spirits  here, 
That  all  hereafter  might 

Before  thy  throne  appear ; 
Meet  at  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb, 
And  all  thy  glorious  love  proclaim. 

Then  let  us  ever  bear 

The  blessed  end  in  view, 
And  join,  with  mutual  care, 

To  fight  our  passage  through  ; 
And  kindly  help  each  other  on, 
Till  all  receive  the  starry  crown. 

Oh  may  the  Spirit  seal 

Our  souls  unto  that  day, 
With  all  thy  fulness  fill, 

And  then  transport  away ! 
Away  to  our  eternal  rest, 
Away  to  our  Redeemer's  breast ! 

Old  George  Withers  would  make  marriage  songs 
as  a  matter  of  course  ;  for  he  made  songs  and  hymns 
about  everything,  for  all  times,  all  conditions,  and  all 
circumstances.  His  "  Halleluiah  "  is  full  of  psalms  for 
days  of  every  name  and  shade,  and  for  every  part  of 
every  day ;  for  nights  starry  and  nights  dark,  for  sea 
and  for  land,  for  storm  and  for  calm,  for  battle  and 
for  peace.  He  has  hymns  for  all  seasons ;  for  workers, 
for  idlers,  for  kinsfolk,  for  strangers,  for  the  bond  and 
the  free,  for  plenty  and  for  famine,  for  kings  and  for 
people,  for  pastors  and  for  flocks,  for  seed-time  and 
harvest,  for  saints  and  for  sinners,  for  young  and  for 
old,  for  every  place,  for  every  calling,  for  all  the 
world,  and  for  "  himself/'  His  marriage  song  must 
have  a  choir  in  advance  and  a  ahoir  in  the  rear.  He 
teaches  us  to  hymn  it  over  a  marriage -contract.  "This 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  363 

hymn,"  says  he,  "  is  tendered  to  those  who  purpose  a 
contract  of  marriage,  in  hope  it  may  so  remember  them 
to  consider  what  they  intend  that  it  shall  keep  them 
from  proceeding  farther  than  they  lawful  may,  and 
from  professing  more  than  they  mean.  Sing  this,"  he 
adds,  "  as  Te  Deum  "  : — 


Lord  !  in  thy  name,  and  in  thy  fear 

Our  faith  we  plighted  have ; 
And  that  our  meanings  are  sincere, 

Thy  witness  now  we  crave. 
We  come  not  only  to  repeat 

Our  vows  before  thy  face, 
But  that  we  may  likewise  entreat 

Thy  favour  and  thy  grace. 

For  mutual  helpers  while  we  live, 

According  to  our  might ; 
Ourselves  we  to  each  other  give, 

So  far  as  we  have  right  ; 
And  we  profess  that  free  we  are, 

For  aught  that  we  do  know, 
To  be  each  other's  wedded  pair, 

If  Thou  permit  it  so. 

We  see  no  contradicting  cause, 

But  that  we  may  be  joined, 
Without  infringement  of  the  laws 

Whereby  we  are  confined. 
iSTor  any  such  infirmity 

In  us  do  we  suspect 
As  that  our  marriage  bond  thereby 

Shall  prove  of  no  effect. 

We  have  no  guileful  dealings  used, 

Our  purpose  to  acquire, 
Xo  one  another's  trust  abused, 

To  gain  what  we  desire. 


364  HYMN-WKITEKS   AND   THEIE   HYMNS. 

But  our  affections  are  sincere, 

And  as  they  have  been  true, 
Upright  those  courses  likewise  are  ! 

By  which  we  them  pursue. 

If  both  have  now,  0  Lord,  professed 

What  may  not  be  denied ; 
Let  our  affections  so  be  blest 

That  nothing  us  divide. 
Let  not  by  beauty,  wit,  or  wealth, 

By  high  or  low  degree, 
By  want  of  riches  or  of  health 

Our  hearts  estranged  be. 

But  if  that  either  of  us  now 

Hath  trod  a  faithless  way, 
Or  shall  infringe  this  holy  vow 

Before  our  wedding  day : 
Lord !  let  the  party  innocent, 

From  blame  and  guilt  be  free ; 
For  truth  a  contract  never  meant, 

Where  naught  but  falsehoods  be. 

Then  out  of  his  full  soul  the  quaint  but  musical  and 
happy  hymnist  pours  forth  a  song  for  the  marriage, 
telling  us  that  "  God  is  hereby  besought  to  bless  the 
marriage  solemnized  to  all  there  present,  and  so  to 
prosper  the  bridegroom  and  bride  in  their  desires  and 
affections,  that  the  waters  of  their  carnal  contentment 
may  be  turned  into  the  wine  of  spiritual  delights  "  : — 

To  grace,  0  Lord !  a  marriage  feast 

In  Cana,  long  ago, 
It  pleased  Thee  to  be  a  guest, 

And  there  thy  power  to  show ; 
For  by  a  miracle  divine, 

When  they  their  wine  had  spent, 
Thou  changedst  water  into  wine, 

Which  did  their  want  prevent. 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  365 

Lord !  let  the  brightness  of  Thy  face 

Among  us  now  appear ; 
So  let  the  bounties  of  Thy  grace 

Be  manifested  here : 
That  neither  bridegroom,  bride,  nor  guest, 

In  body  or  in  mind, 
Of  less  content  may  be  possess'd, 

Than  they  have  hope  to  find. 

All  joys  which  in  a  married  life, 

Well  matched  couples  know, 
On  this  new  wedded  man  and  wife 

Vouchsafe  Thou  to  bestow; 
Fulfil  their  hopes,  prevent  their  fears, 

Grant  them  their  just  desires  ; 
Increase  that  love  which  keeps  off  cares, 

And  warms  with  lawful  fires. 

To  wine  those  heartless  waters  turn 

"Which  in  their  vessels  be ; 
To  give  them  comfort  when  they  mourn, 

And  make  them  glad  in  Thee. 
And  though  the  pleasures  of  their  love 

Have  yet  a  pleasing  taste, 
Yet  let  them  daily  sweeter  prove, 

And  best  of  all  at  last. 

The  dear  old  hyranist  seems  to  have  had  content- 
ment in  marriage,  and  is  willing  that  all  who  are 
blessed  with  like  satisfaction  in  matrimonial  life  should 
never  lack  the  means  of  expressing  their  settled  plea- 
sure in  devout  and  cheerful  psalmody ;  and  he  intro- 
duces his  hymn  "for  one  contentedly  married"  by 
insinuating  some  very  salutary  lessons  to  parties  con- 
cerned. u  The  intent  of  this  ode/'  he  says,  "  is  to 
show  that  our  natural  affections  are  never  fully  satisfied 
in  the  choice  of  our  helpers,  until  God  bring  man  and 
wife  together  by,  as  it  were,  makiug  the  one  out  of  the 
other  through  a  frequent  conversing  together,  and  by 


366  HYHN-WEITERS    AND    THEIE    HYMNS. 

observing  and  approving  each  other's  condition,  which 
is  never  done  till  those  passions  are  cast  into  a  sleep, 
which  make  them  dote  on  wealth,  honour,  beauty,  and 
such  unfit  marriage  makers"  : — 

Since  they  in  singing  take  delight 

Who  in  their  love  unhappy  be, 

"Why  should  not  I  in  song  delight 

Who  froni  their  sorrow  now  are  free  ? 
That  such  as  can  believe  may  know 
What  comforts  are  on  earth  below, 

And  prove  what  blessings  may  be  won 

By  loving  so  as  I  have  done. 

When  first  affection  warmed  my  blood, 
Which  was  ere  wit  could  ripen'd  be, 
And  ere  I  fully  understood 
What  fire  it  was  that  wanned  me ; 
My  youthful  heat  a  love  begat, 
That  love  did  love  I  know  not  what ; 
But  this  I  know,  I  felt  more  pains 
Than  many  a  broken  heart  sustains. 

When  years  informed  me  how  to  see 
What  had  such  wandering  passions  wrought 
The  more  my  knowledge  grew  to  be, 
The  greater  torments  still  it  brought ; 

Then  sought  I  means  to  cure  love's  wound, 
The  more  I  sought  less  ease  I  found ; 
And  milder  pangs  than  I  have  had, 
Makes  many  lovers  sick  and  mad. 

I  have  a  deep-indented  heart, 
Which  no  content  would  let  me  find, 
Until  her  proper  counterpart 
Should  thereunto  be  firmly  joined; 

Ere  far  I  sought  or  searched  much, 

I  many  found  who  seemed  such, 
But  them  when  I  did  nearly  view 
Is  ot  one  in  heart  was  fully  true. 


MAREIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAT    HYMNS.  367 

Alas !  thought  I,  to  what  I  seek 

Why  should  so  many  draw  so  near, 

And  at  the  last  prove  nothing  like 

To  what  at  first  they  did  appear  ? 
So  much  why  do  so  many  please, 
Since  I  was  made  for  none  of  these  ? 

And  why  in  show  have  I  been  one, 

Beloved  much,  yet  loved  of  none. 

Could  wealth  have  bought  my  marriage  bed, 

Or  honour  brought  me  true  delight, 

I  could  these  ways  have  better  sped 

Than  many  do  believe  I  might ; 

Nay,  beauty,  though  none  loves  it  more, 
Nor  proffer'd  loves  though  I  had  store, 

Could  make  me  think  now  found  is  she 

That  proves  a  helper  fit  for  me. 

Nor  ease  nor  pleasure  could  I  find 
In  beauty,  honour,  love,  or  pelf ; 
Nor  means  to  gain  a  settled  mind, 
Till  I  had  found  my  second  self; 

Thus  till  our  grand-dame  Eve  was  made, 

No  helper  our  first  parent  had ; 
Which  proves  a  wife  in  value  more 
Than  all  the  creatures  made  before. 

Half  tired  in  seeking  what  I  sought 
I  fell  into  a  sleep  at  last ; 
And  God  for  me  my  wishes  wrought, 
When  hope  of  them  were  almost  past; 

With  Adam  I  this  favour  had, 

That  out  of  me  my  wife  was  made  ; 
And  when  I  waked  I  espied 
That  God  for  me  had  found  a  bride. 

How  He  this  riddle  brought  to  pass, 
This  curious  world  shall  never  hear ; 
A  secret  work  of  his  it  was, 
Nor  fit  for  ev'ry  vulgar  ear : 


HYMN-WEITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Out  of  each  other  formed  were  we, 
Within  a  third  our  beings  be ; 

And  our  well-being  was  begun, 

By  being  in  ourselves  undone. 

I  have  the  height  of  my  desire, 

In  secret  no  dislike  I  find ; 

Love  warms  me  with  a  kindly  fire, 

No  jealous  pangs  torment  my  mind : 
I  breathe  no  sigh,  I  make  no  moan, 
As  others  do,  and  I  have  done ; 

Nor  do  I  mark,  nor  do  I  care, 

How  fair  or  lovely  others  are. 

My  heart  at  quiet  lets  me  lie, 
And  moves  no  passions  in  my  breast ; 
Nor  tempting  tongue,  nor  speaking  eye, 
Nor  smiling  lip,  can  break  my  rest : 
The  peer  I  sought  by  me  is  found, 
My  earthly  hopes  by  thee  are  crown"  d ; 
And  I  in  one  all  pleasures  find, 
That  may  be  found  in  womankind. 

Each  hath  of  other  like  esteem, 
And  what  that  is  we  need  not  tell ; 
For  we  are  one,  though  two  we  seem, 
And  in  each  other's  hearts  we  dwell : 
There  dwells  He  two  embracing  thus 
By  whom  we  were  endeared  thus ; 
He  makes  us  rich  though  seeming  poor 
And  when  we  want  will  give  us  more. 

Lord !  let  our  love  in  Thee  begun, 
In  Thee,  likewise,  continuance  have  ; 
And  if  thy  will  may  so  be  done, 
Together  lodge  us  in  one  grave  ; 

Then  on  the  Lamb's  great  wedding-day 
Raise  us  together  from  the  clay ; 
And  where  the  Bridegroom  doth  remain 
Let  us  both  live  and  love  again. 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  369 

Another  of  this  prolific  poet's  songs  is  "  a  hymn  for 
house-warming."  "  The  ancient  and  laudable  use  of 
house-warmings  is  here  insinuated,"  as  he  says,  "  for 
in  this  hymn  the  friends  assembled  are  taught  to 
beseech  God  Almighty  to  make  that  habitation  pros- 
perous and  comfortable  to  them  and  theirs,  who  are 
newly  come  thither  to  dwell "  : — 

Among  those  points  of  neighbourhood 

Which  our  forefathers  did  allow, 

That  custom  in  esteem  hath  stood 

Which  we  do  put  in  practice  now. 

For  when  their  friends  new  dwellings  had, 
Them  thus  they  welcome  thither  made  ; 

That  they  the  sooner  might  be  free 

From  strangeness,  where  they  strangers  be. 

To  this  good  end  we  partly  came, 

And  partly  friendship  to  augment ; 

But  if  we  fail  not  in  the  same, 

This  is  the  prime  of  our  intent. 

We  come  with  holy  charms  to  bless 
The  house  our  friends  do  now  possess  ; 

In  hope  that  God  amen  will  say, 

To  that  for  which  we  now  shall  pray. 

Lord  !  keep  this  place,  we  Thee  desire, 

To  these  new-comers  ever  free, 

From  raging  winds,  from  harmful  fire, 

From  waters  that  offensive  be ; 

From  graceless  child,  from  servants  ill, 
From  neighbours  bearing  no  good  will : 

And  from  the  chiefest  plague  of  life, 

A  husband  false,  a  faithless  wife. 

Let  neither  thieves  that  rove  by  night, 
Nor  those  that  sneak  about  by  day, 
Have  pow'r  their  persons  to  affright, 
Or  to  purloin  their  goods  away. 

24 


370  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Let  nothing  here  be  seen  or  heard 

To  make  by  day  or  night  afeard ; 
No  sudden  cries,  no  fearful  noise, 
No  vision  grim  nor  dreadful  voice. 

Let  on  this  house  no  curse  remain, 
If  any  on  the  same  be  laid ; 
Let  no  imposture  pow'r  obtain 
To  make  the  meanest  wit  afraid. 

Let  here  nor  Zim  nor  Dim  be  seen, 

The  fabled  fairy  king  or  queen ; 
Nor  such  delusions  as  are  said 
To  make  the  former  age  afraid. 

Keep  also,  Lord,  we  pray,  from  hence 

As  much  as  frailty  will  allow ; 

The  guiltiness  of  each  offence, 

Which  to  a  crying  sin  may  grow. 

Let  no  more  want,  wealth,  hope,  or  fear, 
Nor  greater  griefs  nor  joys  be  here  ; 

Thou  may  still  keep,  them  in  thy  grace, 

Who  shall  be  dwellers  in  this  place. 

But  that  just  measure  let  them  have 

Of  ev'ry  means  which  may  acquire, 

The  blessedness  which  they  most  crave, 

Who  to  the  truest  bliss  aspire. 
And  if  well-wishers  absent  be, 
Who  better  wish  them  can  than  we, 

To  make  this  blessing  up  entire, 

We  thereto  add  what  they  desire. 

The  composition  of  verses  on  cheerful  themes  has 
not  unfrequently  afforded  refreshment  to  afflicted 
genius.  It  was  so  with  a  hymn- writer  of  the  last 
century.  "  111  health/'  says  lie,  in  a  preface  to  a 
collection  of  hymns,  "  some  years  past,  having  kept 
me  from  travelling  or  preaching,  I  took  up  the  trade 
of  hymn-making,  a  handicraft  much  followed  of  late, 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMXS.  371 

but  a  business  I  was  not  born  or  bred  to,  and  under- 
taken chiefly  to  keep  a  long  sickness  from  preying  on 
my  spirit,  and  to  make  tedious  nights  pass  over  more 
smoothly.  Some  tinkling  employment  was  wanted, 
which  might  amuse  and  not  fatigue  me.  Merry  old 
Berridge  !  even  he,  at  times,  needed  '  some  tinkling- 
employment '  to  keep  his  spirits  up ;  and  even  he 
had  seasons  of  reaction  from  cheerful  excitement, 
during  which  the  good  fruit  of  his  recreation  was  in 
danger  of  being  consigned  to  oblivion.  '  These 
hymns/  he  writes,  ( were  composed  in  a  six  months' 
illness,  and  have  since  laid  neglected  by  me ;  often 
threatened  with  the  fire,  but  have  escaped  that 
martyrdom.  Fatherly  mercy  prevented  that  literary 
death,  for  authors  can  seldom  prove  cruel  to  their  own 
offspring,  however  deformed ;  but  they  came  into  the 
world  naked,  neither  clothed  with  recommendation  or 
correction  of  any  friend.  Such  as  they  are,  I  offer 
them  to  the  reader,  and  suppose  he  may  find  in  them 
the  common  lot  of  human  productions,  some  things  to 
blame  and  some  to  commend.  Some  of  the  hymns 
have  occasionally  rambled  into  magazines,  under  the 
signature  of  '  Old  Everton,'  and  are  now  finding  their 
way  home  again.-"  Among  these  returning  ramblers 
there  is  his  hymn  on  "  a  Christian  wedding/'  and 
those  who  wish  to  enter  on  married  life  with  the  holy 
songs  of  a  hallowed  wedding-day  in  their  hearts  will 
be  thankful  for  the  fruit  of  "  OLd^  Ever  ton  V;  "tink- 
ling employment/'  and  learn  to  sing  with  him — 


Our  Jesus  freely  did  appear 
To  grace  a  marriage-feast ; 

And,  Lord,  we  ask  thy  presence  here, 
To  make  a  wedding  guest. 


372  HYMN- WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Upon  the  bridal  pair  look  down, 

Who  now  have  plighted  hands  ; 
Their  union  with  thy  favour  crown, 

And  bless  the  nuptial  bands. 

With  gifts  of  grace  their  hearts  endow, 

Of  all  rich  dowries  best ! 
Their  substance  bless,  and  peace  bestow, 

To  sweeten  all  the  rest. 

In  purest  love  their  souls  unite, 

And  link'd  in  kindly  care, 
To  render  family  burdens  light, 

By  taking  mutual  share ; 

True  helpers  may  they  prove  indeed 

In  prayer,  and  faith,  and  hope ; 
And  see  with  joy  a  godly  seed 

To  build  the  household  up. 

As  Isaac  and  Rebecca,  give 

A  pattern  chaste  and  kind ; 
So  may  this  new-met  couple  live 

In  faithful  friendship  joined. 

The  joys  and  contentment  of  matrimony  should 
never  interfere  with  the  pleasures  of  commemorating 
one's  birth-day.  The  birth-day  of  wife  or  husband,  of 
son  or  daughter,  affords  an  opportunity  of  cheerful 
congratulation  and  devout  thanksgiving.  Nor  can  we 
forget  to  hang  another  wreath  about  our  memorial  of 
the  man  who  has  done  so  much  to  brighten  the 
changes  of  domestic  and  social  life  with  his  sprightly 
and  instructive  hymns.  "  They  who  observe  their 
birth-days,"  says  the  poet  who  taught  us  to  sing  at  a 
"  house-warming,"  ( '  which  may  anciently  have  done, 
and  some  yet   do,  may  by  this  hymn  be  remembered 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  373 

of  such  meditations  as  are  pertinent  to  their  anni- 
versary^ and  God  may  be  thereby  the  more  often 
praised  for  our  temporal  being  : — 

Lord,  on  this  day  Thou  didst  bestow 

A  breathing  life  on  me  ; 
This  day  an  actor  here  below, 

I  first  began  to  be ; 
And  but  few  rounds  the  sun  hath  made 

Since  I  that  now  am  here, 
Iso  portion  of  an  essence  had 

Except  in  Thee  it  were. 

But  now  there  is  a  part  of  me— 

And,  Lord,  from  Thee  it  springs — 
That  shall  both  named  and  numbered  be 

"With  everlasting  things. 
And  that  which  time  doth  wear  away, 

Time's  ruin  will  restore, 
To  be  rejoined  thereto  for  aye, 

"When  time  shall  be  no  more. 

"We  now  are  Thy  probationers, 

And  as  we  run  this  race, 
The  life  which  is  to  come  prefers 

To  honour  or  disgrace. 
And  they  which  here  the  pathway  miss 

That  unto  virtue  tends, 
Shall  find  no  means  nor  hope  of  bliss 

When  this  brief  lifetime  ends. 

Another  year  is  now  begun, 

And  yet  I  do  not  see 
How  far  the  time  which  forth  has  run, 

I  can  account  to  Thee. 
For  I  confess  I  have  misspent — 

My  longings  to  fulfil — 
The  times  which  unto  me  were  but 

To  execute  Thy  will. 


374  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

And  in  the  days  which  are  behind, 

Behind  if  any  be, 
What  profit  may  I  hope  to  find, 

"What  will  they  pleasure  me  ? 
Since,  though  time  past  I  might  redeem, 

So  much  that  work  will  cost, 
As,  first  or  last,  my  time  will  seem 

In  hazard  to  be  lost. 


Lord,  let  this  day  of  my  first  birth, 

Occasion  yearly  give, 
To  keep  me  mindful  why  on  earth 

My  being  I  receive  ; 
And  of  my  second  birth,  likewise, 

So  mind  Thou  me  thereby, 
That  I  to  life  may  not  arise, 

A  second  death  to  die. 


But  let  this  day,  and  all  the  days, 

Which  I  hereafter  view, 
Employed  be  to  give  Thee  praise, 

To  whom  all  praise  is  due. 
And  thus  let  no  man  say  of  me, 

When  I  to  dust  return, 
Oh,  well  with  him  now  would  it  be, 

If  he  had  ne'er  been  born. 


Charles  Wesley  never  allowed  a  birth- day  to  pass 
without  some  cheerful  hymn.  Like  Wither s,  he  knew 
how  to  extract  sweets  from  every  passing  hour,  and 
never  failed  to  engage  the  inspiration  which  touched 
him  as  times  and  seasons  went  along  in  brightening 
with  songs  every  token  of  our  mortal  state.  No  one 
whom  he  teaches  to  sing  on  his  birth-day  can  forget 
that  hymn  which  closes  with  so  fine  an  allusion  to  the 
beautiful  old  Jewish  tradition  that  God  drew  the  soul 
of  Moses  out  of  his  body  with  a  kiss;    a  tradition 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  375 

founded  on  Dent,  xxxiv.  5,  c '  He  died  according  to  the 
word  of  the  Lord/'  or,  literally,  "at  the  mouth  of 
Jehovah."     The  sprightly  verses  run  thus  : — 

God  of  my  life,  to  Thee 

My  cheerful  soul  I  raise  ; 
Thy  goodness  bade  me  be, 

And  still  prolongs  my  days. 
I  see  my  natal  hour  return, 
And  bless  the  day  that  I  was  born. 

A  clod  of  living  earth, 

Oh  glorify  thy  name, 
From  whom  alone  my  birth, 

And  all  my  blessings  came  ; 
Creating  and  preserving  grace, 
Let  all  that  is  within  me  praise. 

Long  as  I  live  beneath, 

To  Thee,  oh  let  me  live ; 
To  Thee  my  every  breath 

In  thanks  and  praises  give. 
Whate'er  I  have,  whate'er  I  am, 
Shall  magnify  my  Maker's  name. 

My  soul,  and  all  its  powers, 

Thine,  wholly  Thine,  shall  be ; 
All,  all  my  happy  hours 

I  consecrate  to  Thee. 
Me  to  Thine  image  now  restore, 
And  I  shall  praise  Thee  evermore. 

I  wait  thy  will  to  do, 

As  angels  do  in  heaven  ; 
In  Christ  a  creature  new, 

Most  graciously  forgiven. 
I  wait  thy  perfect  will  to  prove, 
All  sanctified  by  spotless  love. 


376  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Then,  when  the  work  is  done — 
The  work  of  faith  with  power — 

Receive  thy  favonred  son, 
In  death's  triumphant  hour, 

Like  Moses  to  thyself  convey, 

And  kiss  my  raptured  soul  away. 

George  Withers  and  Charles  Wesley  have  helped  to 
deck  many  a  bridal  service  with  wreaths  of  song,  and 
to  hallow  the  merriment  of  many  a  grateful  birth- day  ; 
but  there  is  a  name  which  will  ever  be  balmy  to  those 
who  devoutly  hail  the  light  of  a  wedding-day.  The 
tender  simplicity  and  quiet  devotion  of  Keble's  hymn 
on  "  Holy  Matrimony w  will  always  be  welcome  to 
those  who  wish  to  have  their  nuptial  joys  happily 
interwoven  with  prayer  and  praise — 

The  voice  that  breathed  o'er  Eden, 

The  earliest  wedding-day, 
The  primal  marriage  blessing, 

It  hath  not  passed  away. 

Still  in  the  pure  espousal 

Of  Christian  man  and  maid, 
The  Holy  Three  are  with  us, 

The  threefold  grace  is  said  : 

•     For  dower  of  blessed  children, 

For  love  and  faith's  sweet  sake, 
For  high  mysterious  union, 

Which  nought  on  earth  may  break. 

Be  present,  awful  Father, 

To  give  away  this  bride, 
As  Eve  Thou  gav'st  to  Adam, 

Out  of  his  own  pierc'd  side. 

Be  present,  Son  of  Mary, 

To  join  their  loving  hands, 
As  Thou  didst  bind  two  natures 

In  Thine  eternal  bands. 


MARRIAGE    SONGS    AND    BIRTH-DAY    HYMNS.  377 

Be  present,  holiest  Spirit, 

To  bless  them  as  they  kneel ; 
As  Thou,  for  Christ  the  Bridegroom, 

The  heavenly  spouse  doth  seal. 

Oh  spread  thy  pure  wing  o'er  them, 

Let  no  ill  power  find  place, 
"When  onward  to  Thine  altar, 

The  hallow'd  path  they  trace. 

To  cast  their  crowns  before  Thee, 

In  perfect  sacrifice, 
Till  to  the  home  of  gladness, 

"With  Christ's  own  bride  they  rise. 


©filter  XX. 

HYMNS   FROM  BENEATH  THE  CLOUD. 

"  When  gathering  clouds  around  I  view, 
And  days  are  dark,  and  friends  are  few, 
On  Him  I  lean,  who  not  in  vain 
Experienced  every  human  pain  ; 
He  sees  my  wants,  allays  my  fears, 
And  counts  and  treasures  up  my  tears." 

HE  "  mercy- seat "  of  old  was  sometimes 
covered  with  a  mysterious  cloud,  whose  shade 
graciously  qualified  the  lustre  of  Divine 
majesty,  and  from  whose  depths  were  evolved  the 
most  cheering  tokens  of  God's  favour.  From  that 
cloud  Aaron  had  seen  the  fire  of  wrath  shoot  forth 
to  consume  his  unholy  sons,  and  to  him  it  was  now 
like  the  shadow  of  death,  the  fearful  symbol  of  his 
bitterest  trial  as  a  parent  and  as  a  priest.  But  God, 
by  the  mouth  of  Moses,  encouraged  him  to  approach, 
even  to  that  cloud,  with  the  blood  of  a  sin-offering  in 
his  hand,  giving  him  the  promise,  "  I  will  appear  in 
the  cloud  upon  the  mercy-seat."  The  believing  Chris- 
tian, like  Aaron,  has  access  to  the  mercy- seat  of  his 
reconciled  God,  but  sometimes  finds  a  cloud  on  it. 
His  heavenly   Father   occasionally  permits  dark  mys- 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOED.  379 

terious  trials  to  overshadow  his  way  to  the  propitiatory  ; 
trials  which,  though  they  appear  inscrutable,  are 
blessings  in  disguise,  dispensations  of  mercy  in  the 
form  of  mysterious  trial.  He  is  assured,  however, 
that  while  he  comes  by  faith  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
those  very  trials  will  afford  some  of  the  most  satis- 
factory revelations  of  God's  character  and  will,  "I  will 
appear  as  a  cloud  upon  the  mercy-seat."  And  when 
our  clouds  are  around  the  mercy-seat,  in  gracious 
association  with  the  purposes  of  mercy,  and  the  divine 
wisdom  and  power,  goodness,  holiness,  and  love,  are 
opened  upon  the  soul  from  the  very  clouds  which 
overshadow  it,  our  sorrows  are  turned  into  joy,  rather 
than  followed  by  it,  and  our  hearts  are  comforted  with 
hymns  and  "  songs  of  deliverance."  About  forty  years 
ago,  Wilson,  in  his  "Noctes  Ambrosianas,"  says, 
' e  Have  you  seen  a  little  volume  entitled  l  Tales  in 
Verse,  by  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Lyte/  which  seems  to  have 
reached  a  second  edition  ?  Now  that  is  the  right  kind 
of  religious  poetry.  Mr.  Lyte  shows  how  the  sins  and 
sorrows  of  men  flow  from  irreligion,  in  simple  yet 
strong  domestic  narrations,  told  in  a  style  and  spirit 
reminding  one  sometimes  of  Goldsmith  and  sometimes 
of  Crabbe.  A  volume  so  humble  in  its  appearance 
and  pretensions  runs  the  risk  of  being  jostled  off  the 
highway  into  by-paths ;  and,  indeed,  no  harm  if  it 
should,  for  in  such  retired  places  it  will  be  pleasant 
reading — pensive  in  the  shade,  and  cheerful  in  the 
sunshine.     Mr.  Lyte  has  reaped 

The  harvest  of  a  quiet  eye 

That  broods  and  sleeps  on  its  own  heart, 

and  his  Christian  tales  will  be  read  with  interest  and 
instruction   by  many  a  fireside.      '  The  Brothers  '  is 


380  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

exceedingly  beautiful.  He  ought  to  give  us  another 
volume.33  The  gentle  and  unpretending  man  whose 
volume  was  so  beautiful  a  reflection  of  his  own  charac- 
ter, did  "  give  us  another  volume/'  under  the  title  of 
"  Poems,  Chiefly  Keligious."  Some  of  his  poems 
were,  indeed,  hymns  from  under  the  cloud.  Though 
comparatively  young,  he  had  often  found  clouds  "  upon 
the  mercy-seat."  But  God  had  appeared  to  him, 
inspiring  and  hallowing  his  genius,  and  calling  up 
songs  from  his  heart,  that  have  been  peacefully  and 
resignedly  sung  by  many  a  tried  but  happy  Christian. 
Here  is  one  springing  from  "  thoughts  in  weakness," 
and  entitled  "  Submission 3! — 


Yet  think  not,  0  my  sonl,  to  keep 

Thy  progress  on  to  God, 
By  any  road  less  rough  and  steep 

Than  that  thy  fathers  trod. 
In  tears  and  trials  thou  must  sow 

To  reap  in  joy  and  love  ; 
We  cannot  find  our  home  below, 

And  hope  for  one  above. 

Wo ;  here  we  labour,  watch,  and  pray, 

Our  rest  and  peace  are  there  ; 
God  will  not  take  the  thorn  away, 

But  gives  us  strength  to  bear. 
The  holiest,  greatest,  best,  have  thus 

In  wisdom  learnt  to  grow  ; 
Yea,  He  that  gave  Himself  for  us 

Was  perfected  by  woe. 

Thou — Man  of  Sorrows— Thou  didst  not 

The  bitter  cup  decline, 
Why  should  I  claim  a  better  lot, 

A  smoother  path  than  Thine  ? 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  381 

Thou  sought'st  no  treasure  here  on  earth, 

No  glory  'neath  the  skies  ; 
And  what  Thou  dream'dst  so  little  worth 

Shall  I  so  highly  prize  ? 

Did  not  reproach  and  wrong  rain  down 

Upon  thy  hallowed  head  ? 
Didst  Thou  not  strip  off  glory's  crown 

To  wear  the  thorns  instead  ? 
When  foes  reviled,  didst  Thou  reply, 

Or  render  ill  for  ill  ? 
Didst  Thou  for  man  bleed,  faint,  and  die 

And  shall  I  falter  still  ? 

In  early  life  to  Thee  I  was 

Consigned  by  solemn  vow, 
Enlisted  'neath  thy  holy  cross, 

Shall  I  desert  it  now  ? 
I  then  'gainst  ev'ry  hostile  power, 

Engaged  to  follow  Thee  ; 
And  shall  I  at  the  trying  hour, 

Be  found  the  first  to  flee  ? 

Thou  didst  not  flee,  0  King  of  love, 

When  Thou  wert  sorely  tried ; 
When  all  men  fled,  and  God  above 

Appeared  his  face  to  hide, 
Intent  that  guiltless  blood  to  shed, 

That  should  for  guilt  atone, 
The  mighty  winepress  Thou  didst  tread, 

Unshrinking,  though  alone. 

And  shall  I  murmur  or  repine 

At  a^^ght  thy  hand  may  send  ? 
To  whom  should  I  my  cause  resign, 

If  not  to  such  a  friend ; 
Where  love  and  wisdom  deign  to  choose, 

Shall  I  the  choice  condemn, 
Or  dare  the  medicine  to  refuse 

That  is  prescribed  by  them  ? 


382  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Oh,  small  the  gain  when  men  aspire 

Their  Maker  to  control ; 
He  gives,  perhaps,  their  hearts'  desire, 

And  leanness  to  their  sonl. 
Not  his  to  quench  the  smoking  flax, 

Or  break  the  bruised  reed  ; 
Or  with  one  pang  our  patience  tax, 
But  what  He  knows  we  need. 

Yet  must  our  steadfastness  be  tried — 

Yet  must  our  graces  grow 
By  holy  warfare.     What  beside 

Did  we  expect  below  ? 
Is  not  the  way  to  heavenly  gain 

Through  earthly  grief  and  loss  ? 
Rest  must  be  won  by  toil  and  pain — 

The  crown  repays  the  cross. 

As  woods,  when  shaken  by  the  breeze, 

Take  deeper,  firmer  root, 
As  winter's  frosts  but  make  the  trees 

Abound  in  summer  fruit ; 
So  every  heaven-sent  pang  and  throe 

That  Christian  firmness  tries, 
But  nerves  us  for  our  work  below, 

And  forms  us  for  the  skies. 

He  who  sang  like  this  had  all  the  qualifications  of  a 
sweet  pensive  hymnist;  but  his  intellect  and  heart 
must  have  had  long  chastening.  The  cloudy  shadows 
were  often  upon  him.  Though  of  somewhat  gentle 
blood,  coming  into  the  world  at  Kelso,  in  June,  1793, 
and  having  all  the  early  advantage  of  a  much-beloved 
mother's  gentle  influence  and  holy  lessons,  he  was 
soon  made  to  feel  the  misery  of  narrow  resources,  and 
had  to  struggle  hard  for  the  benefit  of  a  liberal  edu- 
cation. His  superior  and  versatile  talent  in  happy 
association  with  firm   integrity  and  amiable   temper 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  383 

opened  his  way  to  academical  honour,  and  at  last  to  a 
"  dreary"  Irish  curacy.     While  tenderly  and  faithfully 
watching  a  brother  clergyman  in  his  last  moments, 
his  own  heart  was  made  free  by  the  truth  which  sus- 
tained the   dying   Christian.     But  watchings    by  the 
sick,  and  subsequent  labours  on  behalf  of  the  bereaved 
widow  and  her  children,  overtaxed  his  system,  and  he 
sank  into  that   consumptive  tendency  which  brought 
frequent   clouds   over  him  all  through  his  remaining 
life.     He   travelled   on   the    Continent ;    and    on   his 
return,  after  trying  the  climate  of  Bristol,  and,  "  after 
being  jostled  about  from  one  curacy  to  another,"  he 
settled  for  a  time  as  lecturer,  in  the  quiet  little  town 
of  Marazion,    on   the   shore  of  the   beautiful   bay  of 
Mount   St.   Michael,  in   Cornwall.     Here  he  married. 
Then,  he  is  found  at  Lymington,  writing  poems  and 
the  tales  that  so  charmed  Professor  Wilson.     Then  on 
the  banks  of  the  Dart,  in  South  Devon.     Those  who 
have  had  the  joy  of  gliding  on   the  waters  of  that 
lovely  river,  well  remember  its    strange    twists   and 
turns — especially  at  one  point,  where  it  turns  back  on 
its  course,  and  where,  in  following  it,  we  seem  now-  to 
be  plunging  into  a  depth  of  oaken  woods,  and  now  are 
suddenly  amidst  an  open  amphitheatre  of  leafy  heights 
rising  one  above  another,  and  opening  here  and  there 
into  bright  green  lawns  and  ferny  slopes.     Around  a 
point,  and  there,   under  the  shelter  of  hills  crowned 
with  bellowy  foliage,  her  line  of  rustic  roofs  just  peep- 
ing  above   the   many   masses   of   copse   and   garden 
verdure,  in  dreamy  stillness,  and  in  simple  and  homely 
beauty,  is  the  village  of  Dittisham.  There  the  wander- 
ing curate  nestled  in  a  cottage ;  going  out  now  and 
then   to    officiate  at   Lower  Brixham.     Brixham  was 
at   last   his   parish;    and    there,    for    twenty   years, 


384  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

he  toiled  in  his  pastorate  under  many  a  cloud — 
clouds  of  personal  suffering,  clouds  of  pastoral 
difficulty  and  discouragement.  To  his  tender  sensi- 
tive nature,  the  peculiar  condition  of  his  flock 
must  frequently  have  been  a  source  of  trial.  His 
charge  was  the  busy,  shrewd,  somewhat  rough,  but 
warm-hearted  population  of  a  fishing  coast  and  sea- 
faring district,  which  had  been  subjected  to  all  the 
corrupting  influences  peculiar  to  the  neighbourhood  of 
naval  and  military  forces  during  the  French  war. 
The  social  character  of  his  flock  had  been  rendered 
still  more  difficult  to  deal  with  by  the  religious  pre- 
judices which  had  sprung  up  amidst  the  doctrinal  strife 
between  the  disciples  of  such  teachers  as  Dr.  Hawker 
of  Plymouth,  and  their  Arminian  opponents.  The 
form  and  face  of  one  old  Arminian  is  still  remembered 
at  Brixham — one  who  was  always  apt  at  argument, 
but  who  was  inexhaustible,  too,  in  his  use  of  sarcasm 
where  argument  seemed  to  be  pointless.  He  was  seen 
one  Sunday  morning  just  outside  the  door  of  the 
Calvinist  chapel  bending  over  the  margin  of  a  filthy 
pool.  As  the  congregation  came  out  he  was  in  the 
act  of  stirring  up  the  stagnant  water  with  a  long  stick. 
"What  are  you  looking  for?"  said  his  theological 
antagonists,  as  they  gathered  around  him.  "1  am 
searching,"  said  he,  without  looking  up,  but  still 
stirring  up  the  mud,  "  I  am  searching  for  the  '  eternal 
decrees 9  \"  Among  a  people  capable  of  such  modes 
of  religious  strife,  and  with  characters  so  complicated, 
and  under  the  sway  of  so  many  influences,  Mr.  Lyte 
would  have  many  a  cloud  passing  over  his  spirits 
during  his  course  of  pastoral  labour.  But  he  never 
shrank  from  work.  His  heart  never  quailed  in  suffer- 
ing.    But  he  solaced  himself,  and  frequently  softened 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  385 

and  subdued  the  hard  natures  around  him  with  hymns 
from  under  the  cloud.  He  made  hymns  for  his  little 
ones,  and  hymns  for  his  hardy  fishermen,  and  hymns 
for  sufferers  like  himself.  How  many  a  cloudy  day 
was  cheered  by  a  song  like  this  ! — 

My  spirit  on  thy  care, 

Blest  Saviour,  I  recline  ; 
Thou  wilt  not  leave  me  to  despair, 

For  Thou  art  love  divine. 

In  Thee  I  place  my  trust, 

On  Thee  I  calmly  rest ; 
I  know  Thee  good,  I  know  Thee  just. 

And  count  Thy  choice  the  best. 

Whate'er  events  betide, 

Thy  will  they  all  perform ; 
Safe  in  Thy  breast  my  head  I  hide, 

Nor  fear  the  commg  storm. 

Let  good  or  ill  befal, 

It  must  be  good  for  me  ; 
Secure  of  having  Thee  in  all, 

Of  having  all  in  Thee. 

The  Brixham  hymnist's  days  were  numbered.  His 
strength  gradually  failed.  The  climate  of  Italy  was 
several  times  tried ;  and  his  life  was  spun  out  for  a 
little  while.  But  the  end  must  come.  The  autumn 
of  .1847  was  approaching,  and  he  must  needs  take  his 
last  journey  to  the  genial  south.  It  was  always  hard 
to  leave  his  dear  Berry  Head.  "  They  tell  me/'  says 
he,  "  that  the  sea  is  injurious  to  me.  I  hope  not ;  for 
I  know  of  no  divorce  I  should  more  deprecate  than 
from  the  lordly  ocean.  From  childhood  it  has  been 
my  friend  and  playmate,  and  never  have  I  been  weary 
of  gazing  on  its  glorious  face.  Besides,  if  I  cannot 
live  by  the  sea,  adieu  to  poor  Berry  Head — adieu  to 

25 


386  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

the  wild  birds,  and  wild  flowers,  and  all  the  objects 
that  have  made  my  old  residence  so  attractive."  Bnt 
by  and  by  he  adds,  ' '  I  am  meditating  flight  again  to 
the  south.  The  little  faithful  robin  is  every  morning 
at  my  window,  sweetly  warning  me  that  autumnal 
hours  are  at  hand.  The  swallows  are  preparing  for 
flight,  and  inviting  me  to  accompany  them ;  and  yet, 
alas  !  while  I  talk  of  flying,  I  am  just  able  to  crawl, 
and  often  ask  myself  whether  I  shall  be  able  to  leave 
England  at  all."  He  did  go,  never  to  return.  Before 
he  went,  he  wished  once  more  to  preach  to  his  people. 
His  family  was  alarmed  at  the  thought ;  but  he  gently 
replied,  "  It  is  better  to  wear  out  than  to  rust  out." 
He  felt  equal  to  this  last  effort,  and  had  no  fear.  He 
preached.  It  was  on  the  "  Holy  Communion,"  and  it 
was  solemnly  significant  to  hear  him  say,  "Oh,  brethren, 
I  can  speak  feelingly,  experimentally  on  this  point ; 
and  I  stand  here  among  you  seasonably  to-day,  as 
alive  from  the  dead,  if  I  may  hope  to  impress  it  upon 
you,  and  induce  you  to  prepare  for  that  solemn  hour, 
which  must  come  to  all,  by  a  timely  acquaintance  with, 
appreciation  of,  dependence  on,  the  death  of  Christ." 
This  was  his  last  appeal.  And  for  the  last  time  he 
dispensed  the  sacred  elements  to  his  sorrowing  flock  ; 
and  then,  exhausted  with  his  effort,  he  retired  with  a 
soul  in  sweet  repose  on  that  Christ  whom  he  had 
preached  with  his  dying  breath.  And  as  the  evening 
drew  on  he  handed  to  a  near  and  dear  relative  those 
undying  verses,  and  his  own  adapted  music  for  the 
hymn — 

Abide  with  me !     Fast  falls  the  eventide ; 
The  darkness  deepens ;  Lord,  with  me  abide  ! 
When  other  helpers  fail,  and  comforts  flee, 
Help  of  the  helpless,  oh  abide  with  me ! 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  387 

Swift  to  its  close  ebbs  out  life's  little  day; 
Earth's  joys  grow  dim ;  its  glories  pass  away ; 
Change  and  decay  in  all  around  I  see  ; 

0  Thou,  who  changest  not,  abide  with  me  ! 

Not  a  brief  glance  I  beg,  a  passing  word, 
But  as  Thou  dwell'st  with  thy  disciples,  Lord, 
Familiar,  condescending,  patient,  free, 
Come,  not  to  sojourn,  but  abide  with  me  ! 

Come  not  in  terrors,  as  the  King  of  kings, 
But  kind  and  good,  with  healing  in  thy  wings  : 
Tears  for  all  woes,  a  heart  for  every  plea, 
Come,  Friend  of  sinners,  and  thus  bide  with  me ! 

Thou  on  my  head  in  early  youth  didst  smile, 
And,  though  rebellious  and  perverse  meanwhile, 
Thou  hast  not  left  me,  oft  as  I  left  Thee, 
On  to  the  close,  0  Lord,  abide  with  me  ! 

1  need  Thy  presence  every  passing  hour, 

"What  but  Thy  grace  can  foil  the  tempter's  power  ; 
Who  like  thyself  my  guide  and  stay  can  be  ? 
Through  cloud  and  sunshine,  oh  abide  with  me ! 

I  fear  no  foe  with  Thee  at  hand  to  bless  : 
Ills  have  no  weight,  and  tears  no  bitterness. 
Where  is  death's  sting  ?  where,  grave,  thy  victory  ? 
I  triumph  still,  if  Thou  abide  with  me. 

Hold  then  Thy  cross  before  my  closing  eyes  ; 
Shine  through  the  gloom,  and  point  me  to  the  skies ; 
Heaven's  morning  breaks,  and  earth's  vain  shadows  flee, 
In  life  and  death,  0  Lord,  abide  with  me  ! 

This  was  his  last  hymn  upon  earth.  He  reached 
Nice,  and  there  his  spirit  entered  into  rest.  He 
pointed  upwards  in  passing,  and  murmured  softly, 
"peace,"  "joy!"  while  his  face  brightened  into 
smiles  as  the  shadow  of  his  last  cloud  melted  before 
the  "  Light  of  Life." 


388  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Lyte  was  not  the  first  pastor  and  preacher  who 
was    used   to    sing    hymns    under    the    cloud.       The 
complex   opinions  and  tempers  of  society  around  him 
in  his  parish,  often  perplexing  his  soul,  and  making  it 
less     easy    to    keep    up    his    spirits    under    personal 
affliction,  might  remind  us  of  the  strange  varieties  of 
religious  and  social  life  which  distinguished  the  times 
of   Eichard    Baxter;    and  probably   aggravated   that 
good    pastor's    sufferings    in    his    own   person.       No 
student    of   curiosities   in    human  life    and   character 
could  possibly  desire  a  more  rare  and  comprehensive 
collection    of    religious    party    freaks,    fancies,    and 
monstrous   delusions,  than  clustered  within  the  range 
of    Eichard  Baxter's   observation.      With   multiform 
battalions  of  Presbyterians,  Independents,  and  Ana- 
baptists, there  were  Fainilists  begotten  in  the  hotbeds 
of    America,     Seekers,    Eanters,    Quakers,    and    the 
stunned  and  astonished  admirers  of  Jacob  Behmen — 
all  pressing  their  bewildering  claims  upon  his  notice. 
How  many  a  trial  of  faith  and  patience  must  he  have 
had   amidst  his   opportunities    of   insight   into    party 
complications  !     If  we  may  judge  from  the  tone  of  his 
remarks  on  parties  at  court,  some  of  his  heaviest  trials 
from  without  must  have  come  upon  him  in  his  inter- 
course  with    Cromwell.      He   had   several  interviews 
with  the  Protector ;  and  he  speaks  of  being  "  wearied" 
with  his  speeches,  and  says,  "  I  told  him  a  little  of 
my  judgment;    and  when  two    of   his   company  had 
spun  out  a  great  deal  more  of  the  time  in  such  tedious 
but  mere  ignorant  speeches,  some  four  or  five  hours 
being  spent,  I  told  him  that  if  he  would  be  at  the 
labour  to  read  it,  I  could  tell  him  more  of  my  mind  in 
writing  on  two  sheets  than  in  that  way  of  speaking  in 
many  days.  .  .  .  He  received  my  paper,  but  I  scarce 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  389 

believe  that  he  ever  read  it ;  for  I  saw  that  what  he 
learned  must  be  from  himself,  being  more  disposed  to 
speak  many  hours  than  to  hear  one  ;  and  little  heeding 
what  another  said  when  he  had  spoken  himself." 
"Who  would  not  like  to  have  had  the  privilege  of  a 
quiet  glance  or  two,  first  at  one  and  then  at  the  other 
of  these  two  great  antagonist  faces,  during  the  grave 
performance  of  this  comical  act  ?  Who  can  pretend 
to  a  conception  of  the  style  in  which  the  political  chief 
kept  up  appearances  ?  Baxter's  visage  would  of 
course  be  true  to  its  mission.  A  remarkable  visage 
was  that  of  his ;  never  to  be  forgotten  if  once  seen. 
Long  it  was,  but  decided.  Hard,  some  would  say, 
but  telling  with  fearful  eloquence  how  bravely  his 
righteous  soul  maintained  a  life  struggle  against  the 
acrid  humours  of  a  diseased  body;  how  superhuman 
labours  for  the  world's  health  had  been  continued 
amidst  losses  of  blood  and  daily  sweats,  brought  upon 
him,  he  tells  us,  by  (( the  acrimonious  medicaments" 
of  stupid  doctors  who  thought  to  save  him  from  the 
effects  of  a  youthful  taste  for  sour  apples,  by  over- 
doses of  "  scurvy  grass,"  wormwood-beer,  horse- 
radish, and  mustard  !  He  looked,  indeed,  like  one 
who,  as  a  last  remedy  for  a  depressing  affliction,  had 
literally  swallowed  a  "  gold  bullet  of  thirty  shillings' 
weight,"  and  having  taken  it,  "knew  not  how  to  be 
delivered  of  it  again  !"  With  all  this,  the  marks  of  a 
confessor  were  traceable  on  the  good  man's  coun- 
tenance. He  had  been  driven  from  place  to  place. 
Xow,  in  prison  for  preaching  at  Acton ;  now,  kept  out 
of  his  pulpit  by  a  military  guard  ;  now,  seized  again, 
and  his  goods  and  books  sold  to  pay  the  fine  for 
preaching  five  sermons — he  being  so  ill  that  he  could 
not  be  imprisoned  without  danger  of  death ;  and  now 


390  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

again,  in  the  King's  Bench  under  a  warrant  from  the 
villanous  Jefferies,  for  writing  a  paraphrase  on  the 
New  Testament.  His  later  life  was  often  "  in  peril" 
for  Christ's  sake,  and  there  must  have  been  something 
deeply  touching  in  that  impress  of  dignified  sorrow 
which  brought  tears  into  the  eyes  of  Judge  Hale  when 
he  saw  the  persecuted  man  standing  before  the  Bench. 
His  presence  must  have  been  felt  wherever  he 
appeared.  Everybody  who  knew  him  acknowledged 
his  mental  and  moral  grandeur.  And  yet  there  was  a 
maziness  about  the  action  of  his  versatile  powers 
which  seems  to  be  for  ever  hindering  us  from  com- 
pleting our  estimate  of  his  character.  Here,  he  is 
seen  searching  for  some  mode  of  effecting  a  compre- 
hension of  religious  parties;  tbere,  he  seems  to  be 
pushing  and  poking  in  every  direction,  just  by  way  of 
keeping  things  around  him  alive;  ever  and  anon, 
however,  stopping  to  make  distinctions,  or  stumbling 
upon  sojue  difficulties  which  keep  him  back  from  his 
object.  Now,  he  is  thundering  in  the  pulpit;  now 
catechizing  children;  now  lecturing  li  the  powers  that 
be";  now,  acting  the  pastor  in  true  plodding  style; 
now,  smelling  out  heresies,  or  scenting  disguised  papists 
and  infidels ;  and  now,  making  reformed  liturgies  for 
all  scrupulous  souls.  How  wondrous  is  the  action  of 
his  pen  !  To-day,  we  see  it  sketching  scenes  of  "  ever- 
lasting rest,"  as  if  it  were  an  ethereal  plume;  to- 
morrow, it  is  waving  to  call  up  terrors  from  beneath 
upon  the  consciences  of  sinners.  Then  again,  he 
wields  it  as  a  polemical  lance,  with  all  the  sharpness 
and  unsparing  dexterity  of  a  Saracen  knight  -  errant ; 
and  then,  as  if  instinct  with  hopeful  submission,  it 
gives  birth  to  a  hymn  from  beneath  clouds  of  trial 
and  suffering,  thus — 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOCD.  SOL 

Xow,  it  belongs  not  to  my  care 

Whether  I  die  or  live ; 
To  love  and  serve  Thee  is  my  share 

And  this  Thy  grace  must  give. 

If  death  shall  bruise  this  springing  seed 

Before  it  come  to  fruit, 
The  will  with  Thee  goes  for  the  deed, 

Thy  life  was  in  the  root. 

"Would  I  long  bear  my  heavy  load, 

And  keep  my  sorrows  long  ? 
Would  I  long  sin  against  my  God 

And  his  dear  mercy  wrong  ? 

How  much  is  sinful  flesh  my  foe, 

That  doth  my  soul  pervert 
To  linger  here  in  sin  and  woe, 

And  steals  froin  God  my  heart ! 

Christ  leads  me  through  no  darker  rooms 

Than  He  went  through  before ; 
He  that  unto  God's  kingdom  comes, 

Must  enter  by  this  door. 

Come,  Lord,  when  grace  hath  made  me  meet 

Thy  blessed  face  to  see; 
For  if  Thy  work  on  earth  be  sweet, 

What  will  Thy  glory  be  ? 

Then  I  shall  end  my  sad  complaints, 

And  weary  sinful  days, 
And  join  with  the  triumphant  saints 

That  sing  Jehovah's  praise. 

My  knowledge  of  that  life  is  small ; 

The  eye  of  faith  is  dim ; 
But  it's  enough  that  Christ  knows  all, 

And  I  shall  be  with  Him. 


This  is  among  the   ever-living   fraits  of   Richard 
Baxters   trials.      He   lived   to   toil   and  sing  amidst 


392  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

clouds  of  all  variety  in  weight  and  shade.  But  one 
cloud  of  more  mysterious  depth  and  more  awful  dark- 
ness came  at  intervals,  in  a  later  period,  upon  a 
gentler  spirit  than  Baxter,  one  who  seemed  far  less 
prepared  to  rejoice  in  tribulation.  What  morbid 
horrors  sometimes  wrapped  the  soul  of  Cowper !  and 
yet  he  sang".  His  hymns  arose  even  from  his  depth  of 
depression  ;  nor  was  there  ever  a  sweeter,  more  simple, 
and  trustful  hymn  from  beneath  .a  cloud  than  this — 

0  Lord,  my  best  desire  fulfil, 

And  help  me  to  resign 
Life,  health,  and  comfort  to  Thy  will, 

And  make  Thy  pleasure  mine. 

Why  should  I  shrink  from  Thy  command, 

Whose  love  forbids  my  fears, 
Or  tremble  at  the  gracious  hand 

That  wipes  away  my  tears  ? 

No,  rather  let  me  freely  yield 

What  most  I  prize  to  Thee, 
Who  never  hast  a  good  withheld, 

Or  wilt  withhold  from  me. 

Thy  favour,  all  my  journey  through, 

Thou  art  engaged  to  grant ; 
What  else  I  want,  or  think  I  do, 

'Tis  better  still  to  want. 

But  ah  !  my  inward  spirit  cries, 

Still  bend  me  to  thy  sway ! 
Else  the  next  cloud  that  veils  the  skies, 

Drives  all  those  thoughts  away. 

Like  Cowper,  "  Theodosia/'  or  Anne  Steele,  spent 
her  life  in  quiet  retirement,  suffering  the  mysterious 
will  of  God  alone,  or  in  a  retreat  to  which  but  few 
kindred  spirits  had  access.  ...  Her  rural  home,  under  the 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  393 

shelter  of  tlie  Hampshire  Downs,  was  to  her  ceaselessly 
overshadowed  by  affliction.  She  was  ever  bending 
beneath  infirmities  which  limited  her  sphere  of  physical 
activity;  but  she  exemplified  the  inspired  truth  that, 
though  "  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be 
joyous,  but  grievous,  nevertheless,  afterward  it  yieldeth 
the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness  unto  them  which 
are  exercised  thereby."  The  fruit  in  her  case,  as  in 
many  others,  was  to  be  perpetually  renewing  itself. 
Many  of  her  best  hymns  were  the  fruit  of  hallowed 
affliction,  and  they  live  to  bring  forth  "  the  peaceable 
fruits  of  righteousness "  in  the  souls  of  chastened 
Christians  from  generation  to  generation.  How  many 
a  heart  "  desiring  resignation  and  thankfulness "  she 
has  taught  to  sing — 

TVhen  I  survey  life's  varied  scene, 

Amid  the  darkest  hours, 
Sweet  rays  of  comfort  shine  between, 

And  thorns  are  mix'd  with  flowers. 

Lord,  teach  me  to  adore  Thy  hand, 

From  whence  my  comforts  flow ; 
And  let  me  in  this  desert  land 

A  glimpse  of  Canaan  know. 

Is  health  and  ease  my  happy  share  ? 

Oh  may  I  bless  my  God ; 
Thy  kindness  let  my  songs  declare, 

And  spread  Thy  praise  abroad. 

While  such  delightful  gifts  as  these 

Are  kindly  dealt  to  me, 
Be  all  my  hours  of  health  and  ease 

Devoted,  Lord,  to  Thee. 

In  griefs  and  pains  thy  sacred  word 

(Dear  solace  of  my  soul !) 
Celestial  comforts  can  afford, 

And  all  them  power  control. 


394  HYMN-WRITERS   AND   THEIR    HYMNS. 

When  present  sufferings  pain  my  heart, 

Or  future  terrors  rise, 
And  light  and  hope  almost  depart 

From  these  dejected  eyes : 

Thy  powerful  word  supports  my  hope, 

Sweet  cordial  of  the  mind  ; 
And  bears  my  fainting  spirit  up, 

And  bids  me  wait  resign'd. 

And  oh,  whate'er  of  earthly  bliss 

Thy  sovereign  hand  denies, 
Accepted  at  Thy  throne  of  grace, 

Let  this  petition  rise : 

"  Give  me  a  calm,  a  thankful  heart, 
From  every  murmur  free  ; 
The  blessings  of  Thy  grace  impart, 
And  let  me  live  to  Thee. 

"  Let  the  sweet  hope  that  Thou  art  mine, 
My  path  of  life  attend ; 
Thy  presence  through  my  journey  shine, 
And  bless  its  happy  end." 

These  childlike  expressions  of  Anne  Steele's  calm 
resignation  and  heavenly  desires  will,  perhaps,  bring 
up  in  many  a  heart  a  feeling  of  gratitude  for  the  songs 
of  many  other  devout  but  suffering  women.  Who  has 
not  been  melted  into  more  perfect  resignation  amidst 
the  sorrows  of  daily  life,  while  singing,  in  harmony 
with  the  family  group  of  an  evening,  Charlotte  Elliott's 
well-known  verses,  "  Thy  will  be  done  \" 

My  God  and  Father,  while  I  stray 
Far  from  my  home  on  life's  rough  way, 
Oh  teach  me  from  my  heart  to  say 
Thy  will  be  done ! 


HYMNS    FROM    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  395 

Though  dark  my  path  and  sad  my  lot, 
Let  me  be  still,  and  murmur  not, 
Or  breathe  the  prayer  divinely  taught, 
Thy  will  be  done  ! 

What  though  in  lonely  grief  I  sigh 
For  friends  beloved,  no  longer  nigh, 
Submissive  still  would  I  reply 
Thy  will  be  done  ! 

Though  Thou  hast  called  me  to  resign, 
What  most  I  prized,  it  ne'er  was  mine, 
I  have  but  yielded  what  was  Thine  ; 
Thy  will  be  done ! 

Should  grief  or  sickness  waste  away 
My  life  in  premature  decay, 
My  Father !  still  I  strive  to  say 
Thy  will  be  done  ! 

Let  but  my  fainting  heart  be  blest 
With  thy  sweet  Spirit  for  its  guest, 
My  God,  to  Thee  I  leave  the  rest ; 
Thy  will  be  done  ! 

Eenew  my  will  from  day  to  day ; 
Blend  it  with  Thine  ;  and  take  away 
All  that  now  makes  it  hard  to  say 
Thy  will  be  done  ! 

Then,  when  on  earth  I  breathe  no  more, 
The  prayer,  oft  mix'd  with  tears  before, 
I'll  sing  upon  a  happier  shore, 
Thy  will  be  done ! 

How  this  hushes  the  tremulous  heart !  and  how 
gently  the  touches  of  its  music  persuade  the  soul  into 
repose  beneath  the  "  cloud  upon  the  mercy-seat "  ! 
Charles  Wesley's  hymns,  entitled  "  Believer's  Suffer- 
ing/' are  of  another  class.  They  lack,  in  most  cases,  that 
tender,  soothing  grace  which  have  distinguished  the 


396  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

songs  of  more  retired  and  less  observed  sufferers; 
but  of  all  hymns  beneath  clouds  of  trial  they  approach 
nearest^  it  may  be,  to  that  triumphant  faith,  unquench- 
able joy,  and  boastful  reliance  on  God,  which  St.  Paul 
exemplifies  and  sets  forth  in  his  teaching.  So  in  those 
fine  verses  of  his — 

Peace!  doubting  heart;  my  God's  I  am! 

Who  form'd  me  man,  forbids  my  fear  : 
The  Lord  hath  call'd  me  by  my  name  ; 

The  Lord  protects  for  ever  near ; 
His  blood  for  me  did  once  atone, 
And  still  He  loves  and  guards  his  own. 

When  passing  through  the  watery  deep, 

I  ask  in  faith  his  promised  aid, 
The  waves  in  awful  distance  keep, 
.     And  shrink  from  my  devoted  head  ; 
Fearless  their  violence  I  dare 
They  cannot  harm,  for  God  is  there. 

To  Hirn  mine  eye  of  faith  I  turn, 

And  through  the  fire  pursue  my  way  ; 

The  fire  forgets  its  power  to  burn, 
The  lambent  flames  around  me  play ; 

I  own  his  power,  accept  the  sign, 

And  shout  to  prove  the  Saviour  mine. 

Still  nigh  me,  0  my  Saviour,  stand  ! 

And  guard  in  fierce  temptation's  hour ; 
Hide  in  the  hollow  of  thy  hand ; 

Show  forth  in  me  thy  Saviour's  power  ; 
Still  be  thy  arms  my  sure  defence  : 
!Nor  earth  nor  hell  shall  pluck  me  thence. 

Since  Thou  hast  bid  me  come  to  Thee, 
(Good  as  Thou  art,  and  strong  to  save ;) 

I'll  walk  o'er  life's  tempestuous  sea, 
Upborne  by  the  unyielding  wave, 

Dauntless,  though  rocks  of  pride  be  near, 

And  yawning  whirlpools  of  despair. 


HYMNS    FE0M    BENEATH    THE    CLOUD.  397 

When  darkness  intercepts  the  skies, 

And  sorrow's  waves  around  us  roll, 
When  high  the  storms  of  passion  rise, 

And  half  overwhelm  my  sinking  soul, 
My  soul  a  sudden  calm  shall  feel, 
And  hear  a  whisper,  "  Peace,  be  still !" 

Though  in  affliction's  furnace  tried, 
Unhurt  on  snares  and  death  I'll  tread, 

Though  sin  assail,  and  hell,  thrown  wide, 
Pour  all  its  flames  upon  my  head  ; 

Like  Moses'  bush,  I'll  mount  the  higher, 

And  flourish  unconsumed  in  fire. 

No  Christian  sufferer  can  sing  this  without  having 
St.  Paul's  utterances  amidst  tribulation  sounding  in 
his  ear  and  in  his  heart,  "  We  rejoice  in  hope  of  the 
glOry  of  God;  and  not  only  so,  but  we  glory  in 
tribulation  also,  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh 
patience;  and  patience,  experience;  and  experience, 
hope ;  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed,  because  the  love 
of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost 

which  is  given  unto  us I  am  exceeding  joyful 

in  all  our  tribulations Who  shall  separate  us 

from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  shall  tribulation,  or  distress, 
or  persecution,  or  famine,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  Nay, 
in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved  us.  For  I  am  persuaded, 
that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principa- 
lities, nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to 
come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature, 
shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God, 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 


IiaifiilMllle  Mil 


m\min  XXI. 

HYMNS  OF  GETHSEMANE  AND  THE  CROSS. 

"  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ." 


HERE  are  some  doctrines  of  Christianity  which 
all  true  believers  acknowledge  as   peculiarly 
sacred — doctrines  whose  proper  place  in  the 
Christian  system  is  far  removed  from  the  inquisitive 
touch  of  mere  reason ;  so  that  they  stand  confessedly 
exempt  from  the  test  of  human  controversy.      Such 
doctrines  seem  to  be  the   " heavenly  things"  which 
answer  to  the  most  hallowed  types  of  former  ages. 
Like  the  consecrated   symbols  of  the  "  holiest  place/' 
they  are  designed  neither  to  gratify  the  eye  of  vain 
curiosity,  nor  to  furnish  the  disputer  with  materials  for 
strife.     No,  they  are  never  to  be  approached  but  for 
purposes  of  devotion.     Among  these  inviolable  truths 
is  the  doctrine  of  the  cross.     This  excites  the  highest 
devotion  of  the  glorified ;  while  it  is  viewed  with  the 
deepest  veneration  by  "  the  holy  church  throughout 
all  the  world."     What  the  ark  or  the  altar  was  to  the 
ancient  Jew,  the  cross  is  to  the  true   Christian,  his 
holiest  thing.     While  he  comes  to  it  as  his  guide  to 


HYMNS  OF  GETHSEMANE  AND  THE  CROSS.     399 

the  mercy-seat,  it  is  his  joy,  his  glory,  his  life ;  but 
when  he  carries  it  into  the  battle-field,  he  loses  his 
Shekinah,  and  that  in  which  he  gloried  is  profaned  by 
the  aliens  of  Askalon  and  Gath.  While  he  comes  to 
the  altar  of  the  cross  with  his  hands  washed  in  inno- 
cency,  he  receives  the  blessings  of  a  propitiation ;  but 
when  he  ventures  to  mutilate  the  altar  that  he  may 
secure  weapons  for  theological  combat,  he  is  in  danger 
of  being  scathed  by  the  fire  which,  but  now  had 
kindled  his  sacrifice.  Hence  there  is  nothing  which 
revelation  so  carefully  guards  as  the  cross  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Around  this  the  angels  make  their  circles, 
with  holy  desire  to  look  into  its  mysteries.  By  this 
Moses  and  the  prophets  take  their  stand,  and  pour 
around  it  the  jasper  light  of  visions  and  the  glory  of 
prophetic  oracles.  Here  are  trains  of  typical  priests, 
attended  by  the  prefigurations  of  bleeding  victims 
and  sacrificial  patterns.  By  the  scene  of  agony  and 
the  cross,  apostles  and  martyrs  bear  witness,  and 
watch,  and  pray.  Of  the  cross  they  write  and  speak, 
for  the  cross  they  toil,  and  suffer,  and  die.  The 
cross  is  their  only  altar,  their  highest  boast,  their 
strength  in  life,  their  hope  in  death,  their  song  in 
heaven.  What  a  mysterious  hush  comes  over  the 
soul  at  the  mention  of  Gethsemane  !  What  a  holy 
charm  is  there  in  the  cross  !  How  deeply  the  heart, 
in  its  best  moments,  responds  to  the  name  of  Christ 
crucified  ! — 

Is  it  not  strange,  the  darkest  hour 
That  ever  dawn'd  on  sinful  earth 
Should  touch  the  heart  with  softer  power 
For  comfort,  than  an  angel's  mirth  ? 
That  to  the  cross  the  mourner's  eye  should  turn, 
Sooner  than  where  the  stars  of  Christmas  burn  ? 


400  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Yet  so  it  is  :  for  duly  there 

The  bitter  herbs  of  earth  are  set, 
Till  temper'd  by  the  Saviour's  prayer, 
And  with  the  Saviour's  life-blood  wet, 
They  turn  to  sweetness,  and  drop  holy  balm, 
Soft  as  imprison'd  martyr's  death-bed  calm. 

But  those  only  know  this  cc  sweetness"  who  have 
felt  the  bitterness  of  sin,  and  have  come  to  Calvary 
hopeless  of  healing  balm  from  every  other  source. 
Nor  has  any  human  psalmist  ever  breathed  the  spirit 
of  Gethsemane  or  the  cross  until  his  own  heart  has 
been  agonized  by  a  sense  of  its  sinfulness,  and,  by 
virtue  of  the  Redeemer's  blood,  has  been  melted  into 
loving  sympathy  with  his  suffering*  Lord.  No  mere 
genius  cau  worthily  sing  of  the  "  agony  and  bloody 
sweat."  No  unhallowed  poetic  intellect  has  ever 
produced  a  hymn  replete  with  the  divine  life  and 
saving  power  of  the  cross.  Those  hymns  of  Geth- 
semane and  the  cross  which  are  most  precious  to 
saintly  hearts,  and  which  will  be  sung  with  deeper 
and  deeper  feeling  by  every  coming  generation  of 
English  Christians,  are  from  the  pens  of  those  whose 
will  and  affections  have  been  most  profoundly  hallowed 
in  fellowship  with  Him  whose  soul,  for  our  sakes,  was 
•'•'exceeding  sorrowful  even  unto  death."  One  of 
these  has  said,  "  The  week  before  Easter,  1757,  I  had 
such  an  amazing  view  of  the  agony  of  Christ  in  the 
garden,  as  I  know  not  well  how  to  describe.  I  was 
lost  in  wonder  and  adoration ;  and  the  impression  was 
too  deep,  I  believe,  ever  to  be  obliterated.  I  shall  say 
no  more  of  this ;  but  only  remark,  that,  notwith- 
standing all  that  is  talked  about  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus,  none  can  know  anything  of  them,  but  by  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  and  I  believe,  that  he  that  knows  most, 


HYMNS    OF    GETHSEMANE    AND    THE    CROSS.  401 

knows  but  very  little.  It  was  then  I  made  the  first 
part  of  my  hymn  '  On  the  Passion/  w  That  hymn 
remains,  thus — 

Come,  all  ye  chosen  saints  of  God 
That  long  to  feel  the  cleansing  blood, 
In  pensive  pleasures  join  with  me 
To  sing  of  sad  Gethsemane. 

Gethsemane,  the  olive  press  ! 
(And  why  so  call'd  let  Christians  guess,) 
Fit  name,  fit  place,  where  vengeance  strove, 
And  grip'd  and  grappled  hard  with  love. 

'Twas  here  the  Lord  of  life  appeared, 

And  sigh'd,  and  groan'd,  and  pray'd,  and  fear'd  ! 

Bore  all  Incarnate  God  could  bear, 

With  strength  enough  and  none  to  spare. 

The  powers  of  hell  united  pressed, 

And  squeezed  his  heart  and  bruised  his  breast. 

"What  dreadful  conflicts  raged  within, 

When  sweat  and  blood  forc'd  through  the  skin  ! 

Despatched  from  heaven  an  angel  stood, 
Amazed  to  find  Him  bathed  in  blood ; 
Ador'd  by  angels,  and  obey'cl ; 
But  lower  now  than  angels  made ! 

He  stood  to  strengthen,  not  to  fight : 
Justice  exacts  its  utmost  mite. 
This  victim  vengeance  will  pursue  : 
He  undertook  and  must  go  through. 

Three  favoured  servants  left  not  far, 
Were  bid  to  wait  and  watch  the  war  ; 
But  Christ  withdrawn,  what  watch  we  keep  ! 
To  shun  the  sight,  they  sank  in  sleep. 

Backwards  and  forwards  thrice  He  ran, 
As  if  He  sought  some  help  from  man: 
Or  wished,  at  least,  they  would  condole 
('Twas  all  they  could)  his  tortured  soul. 

26 


402  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Whate'er  He  sought  for,  there  was  none : 
Our  Captain  fought  the  field  alone. 
Soon  as  the  Chief  to  battle  led, 
That  moment  every  soldier  fled. 

Mysterious  conflict !  dark  disguise  ! 
Hid  from  all  creatures'  peering  eyes. 
Angels  astonish'd  view'd  the  scene, 
And  wonder  yet  what  all  could  mean. 

O  Mount  of  Olives,  sacred  grove ! 

O  garden,  scene  of  tragic  love ! 

What  bitter  herbs  thy  beds  produce ! 

How  rank  their  scent,  how  harsh  their  juice  ! 

Rare  virtues  now  these  herbs  contain ; 
The  Saviour  suck'd  out  all  their  bane. 
My  mouth  with  those  if  conscience  cram, 
I'll  eat  them  with  the  Paschal  Lamb. 

0  Kedron,  gloomy  brook,  how  foul 
Thy  black,  polluted  waters  roll ! 
jSTo  tongue  can  tell,  but  some  can  taste, 
The  filth  that  into  thee  was  cast. 

In  Eden's  garden  there  was  food 
Of  every  kind  for  man  while  good ; 
But  banish'd  hence,  we  flee  to  thee, 
0  garden  of  Gethsemane! 

The  hymnist  who  thus  so  deeply  sympathized  with 
his  agonizing  Lord  was  Joseph  Hart,  who,  from  1 760 
to  1768,  was  the  earnest,  eloquent,  and  much-beloved 
minister  of  the  congregation  which  met  in  the  old 
wooden  meeting-house  in  Jewin  Street,  built  in  1672 
for  the  well-known  William  Jenkyn.  Born  in  London 
about  the  year  1712,  and  brought  up  by  pious  parents, 
he  began,  when  entering  on  manhood,  to  be  deeply 
anxious  about  his  personal  salvation.  For  seven  years 
his  life  was,  as  he  tells  us,  "  an  uneasy,  restless  round 


HYMNS  OF  GETHSEMANE  AND  THE  CROSS.     403 

of  sinning  and  repenting,  working  and  dreading.  At 
length  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  comfort  rne  a  little  by 
enabling  me  to  appropriate,  in  some  measure,  the 
merits  of  the  Saviour  to  my  own  soul.  In  this  blessed 
state  my  continuance  was  but  short,  for,  rushing  im- 
petuously into  notions  beyond  my  experience,  I  hasted 
to  make  myself  a  Christian  by  mere  doctrine,  adopting 
other  men's  opinions  before  I  had  tried  them;  and  set 
up  for  a  great  light  in  religion,  disregarding  the 
internal  work  of  grace  began  in  my  soul  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  This  liberty,  assumed  by  myself  and  not  given 
by  Christ,  soon  grew  to  libertinism,  in  which  I  took 
large  progressive  strides,  and  advanced  to  a  dreadful 
height  both  in  principle  and  practice.  In  a  word,  I 
ran  such  dangerous  lengths  both  of  carnal  and  spiritual 
wickedness,  that  I  even  outwent  professed  infidels,  and 
shocked  the  irreligious  and  profane  with  my  horrid 
blasphemies  and  monstrous  impieties.  ...  In  this 
abominable  state  I  continued  for  more  than  ten  years. 
.  .  .  Then  I  began  by  degrees  to  reform  a  little,  and 
to  live  in  a  more  sober  and  orderly  manner.  .  .  . 
For  several  years  I  went  on  this  easy,  cool,  smooth, 
and  indolent  manner  with  a  lukewarm,  insipid  kind 
of  religion.  .  .  .  But  the  fountains  of  the  great 
deeps  of  my  sinful  nature  were  not  broken  up. 
.  .  .  Nor  was  the  blood  of  Christ  effectually  applied 
to  my  soul.  I  looked  on  his  death,  indeed,  as  the 
grand  sacrifice  for  sin,  but  I  did  not  see  the  ines- 
timable value  of  his  blood  and  righteousness  clearly 
enough  to  make  me  abhor  myself,  and  count  all 
things  but  dung  and  dross.  On  the  contrary,  when  I 
used  to  read  the  Scriptures  (which  I  now  did  con- 
stantly, both  in  English  and  the  original  languages), 
though  my  mind  was   often   affected,   and  my  under- 


404  HYMX-WEITEES    AXP    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Standing  illuminated  by  many  passages  that  treated 
of  the  Saviour,  vet  I  was  so  tar  from  seeing  or  owning 

that  there  was  sueh  a  necessity  for  his  death,  and  that 
it  could  be  of  sueh  infinite  value  as  is  represented, 
that  I  have  often  resolved — oh,  the  horrible  depth  of 
man's  fall,  and  the  desperate  wickedness  of  the  human 
heart ! — that  I  never  would  believe  it.  After  a  time, 
I  fell  into  a  deep  despondency  of  mind,  and,  shunning 
all  company,  I  went  about  alone  bewailing  my  sad  and 
dark  condition.  .  .  .  This  suffering  was  aggravated  by 
physical  infirmity  and  pain,  and  in  this  sad  state  I 
went  moping  about  till  Whit  Sunday,  1757,  when  I 
happened  to  go  in  the  afternoon  to  the  Moravian 
Chapel  in  Fetter  Lane.  The  minister  preached  from 
Rev.  iii.  10.  I  was  much  impressed.  I  thought  of 
hastening  to  Tottenham  Court  Chapel,  but  presently 
altered  my  mind,  and  returned  to  my  own  house.  I 
was  hardly  got  home,  when  I  felt  myself  melting  away 
into  a  strange  softness  of  affection  which  made  me 
fling  myself  on  my  knees  before  God.  My  horrors 
were  immediately  expelled,  and  such  light  and  comfort 
flowed  into  my  heart  as  no  words  can  paint.  The 
Lord,  by  his  Spirit  of  love,  came  not  in  a  visionary 
manner  into  my  brain,  but  with  such  divine  power 
and  energy  into  my  soul,  that  I  was  lost  in  blissful 
amazement.  I  cried  out,  '  What,  me,  Lord  V  His 
Spirit  answered  in  me,  '  Yes,  thee  V  I  objected,  t  But 
I  have  been  so  unspeakably  vile  and  wicked  V  The 
answer  was,  'I  pardon  thee  freely  and  fully  V  The 
alteration  1  then  felt  in  my  soul  was  as  sudden  and 
palpable  as  that  which  is  experienced  by  a  person 
staggering  and  almost  sinking  under  a  burden,  when 
it  is  immediately  taken  from  his  shoulders.  Tears 
ran  in  streams  from  my  eyes  for  a  considerable  while, 


HOOTS   OF   GETH5EXAXE    AXD    THE    CE' 

and  I  so  swallowed  up  in  joy  and  thankfulness 

b  I  hardly  knew  whe:       I  threw  mi 

willingly  into  my  Saviour's  hands ;  lay  weeping  at  his 

his  will,  and  only  begging 
that  I  might,  if  He  were  graciously  pleased  to  permit 
e  of  some  service  L'hurch  and  people.  . 

Him  crucified  is  now  the  only  thing 

sire  to  know.     AH  things  to  me  are  rich   only 

when  they  are  enriched  with  the  blood  of  the  Lamb/' 

In  this  remarkable  course  of  soul  discipline,  and  this 

experience  of  divine  mercy  through  the  sufferings 

and  death  of  the  Sai  whom  he  had  blaspheme 

to  be  found  the  secret  of  that  spiritual  freshness  and 

.  er  of  his  hymn  on  the  "  passion  and  the 

None  but  a  heart  like  his  could  have  uttered 

F::Ii.y — 

Oh !  what  a  sad  and  doleful  night 

Preceded  that  day's  morn, 
When  darkness  seiz'd  the  Lord  of  light, 

Ar  ;  borne ! 

:n  our  intolerable  load 
:  his  soul  was  laid, 
:he  vindictive  wrath  of 


:  queror  well  may  boast : 

7  . ■  .. 
Can  know  how  dear  fch 
How  hardly  a. 


406  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Mock'd,  spat  upon,  and  crown'd  with  thorns, 

A  spectacle  He  stood ; 
His  back  with  scourges  lashed  and  torn, 

A  victim  bath'd  in  blood. 

Nail'd  to  the  cross  through  hands  and  feet, 

He  hung  in  open  view  ; 
To  make  his  sorrows  quite  complete, 

By  God  deserted  too  ! 

Through  nature's  works  the  woes  He  felt 

"With  soft  infection  ran  ; 
The  hardest  things  could  break  or  melt, 

Except  the  heart  of  man ! 

This  day  before  Thee,  Lord,  we  come, 
Oh,  melt  our  hearts,  or  break; 

For,  should  we  now  continue  dumb, 
The  very  stones  would  speak ! 

True,  Thou  hast  paid  the  heavy  debt, 

And  made  believers  clean  ; 
But  he  knows  nothing  of  it  yet 

"Who  is  not  griev'd  at  sin. 

A  faithful  friend  of  grief  partakes  ; 

But  union  can  be  none 
Betwixt  a  heart  like  melting  wax 

And  hearts  as  hard  as  stone ; 

Betwixt  a  head  diffusing  blood, 
And  members  sound  and  whole ; 

Betwixt  an  agonizing  God, 
And  an  unfeeling  soul. 

Lord,  my  long'd  happiness  is  full, 

When  I  can  go  with  Thee 
To  Golgotha :  the  place  of  skull 

Is  heav'n  on  earth  to  me !" 


HYMNS  OF  GETHSEMANE  AND  THE  CROSS.     407 

With,  a  soul  thus  finding  its  heaven  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross,  and  overflowing  with  the  love  of  Christ, 
and  pity  and  compassion  for  those  whose  sins  were 
laid  upon  Jesus,  and  to  whom  his  divine  Master  was 
saying,  "  Come  unto  Me,"  Mr.  Hart  had  Lis  way 
opened  to  the  pulpit  in  Jewin  Street,  where,  for  eight 
years,  he  zealously  and  affectionately  pressed  the 
invitations  of  his  Lord  upon  the  hearts  of  his  fellow- 
men.  Nor  can  the  spirit  of  his  ministry  be  better 
expressed  than  in  his  simple,  warm,  and  persuasive 
hymn,  entitled,  "  Conle,  and  welcome,  to  Jesus 
Christ  :"- 

Come,  ye  sinners,  poor  and  wretched, 
Weak  and  wounded,  sick,  and  sore ; 
Jesus  ready  stands  to  save  you, 
Full  of  pity,  joined  with  pow'r, 

He  is  able, 
He  is  willing ;  doubt  no  more. 

Ho  !  ye  needy,  come,  and  welcome, 

God's  free  bounty  glorify ; 
True  belief,  and  true  repentance, 

Ev'ry  grace  that  brings  us  nigh, 
Without  money, 

Come  to  Jesus  Christ  and  buy. 

Let  not  conscience  make  you  linger, 

Nor  of  fitness  fondly  dream ; 
All  the  fitness  He  requireth, 

Is  to  feel  your  need  of  Him. 
This  He  gives  you  ; 

'Tis  the  Spirit's  rising  beam. 

Come,  ye  weary,  heavy-laden, 

Bruis'd  and  mangled  by  the  fall ; 
If  you  tarry  till  you're  better, 

You  will  never  come  at  all. 
Not  the  righteous, 

Sinners  Jesus  came  to  call. 


408  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

View  Him  gro'lling  in  the  garden, 

Lo  !  your  Maker  prostrate  lies  ; 
On  the  bloody  tree  behold  Him  ! 

Hear  Him  cry  before  He  dies, 
"  It  is  finish'd  !  " 

Sinner,  will  not  this  suffice  ? 

Lo  !  th'  incarnate  God  ascended, 

Pleads  the  merits  of  his  blood ; 
Venture  on  Him,  venture  wholly, 

Let  no  other  trust  intrude. 
None  but  Jesus 

Can  do  helpless  sinners  good. 

Saints  and  angels,  join'd  in  concert, 

Sing  the  praises  of  the  Lamb  ; 
While  the  blissful  seats  of  heaven 

Sweetly  echo  with  his  name. 
Halleluiah ! 

Sinners  here  may  sing  the  same. 

All  who  are  familiar  with  hymns  of  the  cross  will 
always  associate  the  names  of  two  hymnists  in  loving 
companionship  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  the  names  of  two 
men  of  different  training  and  different  temper,  in  some 
things  alike,  and  yet  nnlike — Newton  and  Cowper — 
more  happy  in  their  union  as  hymnists  than  in  the 
fruit  of  their  spiritual  fellowship.  There  was  Newton 
on  the  banks  of  the  Ouse,  with  his  iron  frame  still 
unbroken  by  the  hardships,  changes,  and  excesses  of 
an  ungodly  life,  spent  in  hostile  climates  and  on  ship- 
board, now  giving  his  redeemed  energies  to  Christ, 
and  pouring  forth  the  peace,  and  joy,  and  hope,  and 
love  of  his  regenerated  nature  from  the  pulpit,  and  in 
his  Olney  hymns.  Ever  alive  to  the  virtue  of  the 
atonement,  he  touchingly  records  the  story  of  his  own 


HYMNS  OF  GETHSEMANE  AXD  THE  CROSS.     409 

conversion  in  the  hymn  which  he  teaches  us  to  sing 
while  "  looking  at  the  cross"  : — 

In  evil  long  I  took  delight, 

Unaw'd  by  shame  or  fear  ; 
Till  a  new  object  struck  my  sight 

And  stopp'd  my  wild  career. 

I  saw  one  hanging  on  the  tree, 

In  agonies  and  blood, 
"Who  fix'd  his  languid  eyes  on  me, 

As  near  his  cross  I  stood. 

Sure  never  till  my  latest  breath 

Can  I  forget  that  look  ; 
It  seem'd  to  charge  me  with  his  death, 

Though  not  a  word  He  spoke. 

My  conscience  felt  and  own'd  the  guilt, 

And  plunged  me  in  despair ; 
I  saw  my  sins  his  blood  had  spilt, 

And  help'd  to  nail  Him  there. 

Alas  !  I  knew  not  what  I  did, 

But  now  my  tears  are  vain ; 
AVhere  shall  my  trembling  soul  be  hid  ? 

For  I  the  Lord  have  slain. 

A  second  look  He  gave,  which  said 

"  I  freely  all  forgive; 
The  blood  is  for  thy  ransom  jiaid, 

I  die  that  thou  may'st  live." 

Thus,  while  his  death  my  sin  displays 

In  all  its  blackest  hue, 
(Such  is  the  mystery  of  grace), 

It  seals  my  pardon  too. 

With  pleasing  grief,  and  mournful  joy, 

My  spirit  now  is  fiU'd, 
That  I  should  such  a  life  destroy, 

Yet  live  by  Him  I  kill'd. 


410  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

There,  too,  was  the  timid,  gentle  Cowper,  ever 
tremulous  as  he  thought  of  eternal  woe.  There,  on 
the  banks  of  the  same  quiet  Ouse,  brooding  over  the 
inward  horrors  of  his  diseased  imagination,  yet  ever 
proving  to  those  around  him  the  goodness  of  his  heart, 
and  out  of  his  gracious  treasures  preparing  blessings 
for  the  future  generations  of  those  who  love  purity, 
beauty,  and  truth.  Unhappy,  and  yet  happy  Cowper  ! 
Who  does  not  weep  over  his  sorrows?  Who  does 
not  bless  heaven  for  his  genius,,  his  devotion,  and  his 
works  ?  Who  does  not,  as  he  speeds  past  on  the  rail, 
look  with  a  sigh  and  a  smile  upon  his  quiet  birth- 
place, Berkhampstead,  still  reposing  in  its  verdant 
hollow?  And  few,  perhaps,  as  the  old  tower  of  his 
father's  church  is  lost  to  sight,  will  fail  to  indulge  in 
pensive  thoughts  about  the  pensive  man,  who,  after  a 
youth-tide  spent  ' '  from  morning  to  night  in  giggling 
and  making  giggle,"  was  found  shattered  and  broken 
in  spirits,  victimized  by  morbid  melancholy,  living,  as 
he  tells  us,  like  one  descending  a  ladder  which  dipped 
into  the  infernal  regions,  until  he  hung  on  the  last  frail 
step,  only  needing  a  touch  to  send  him  for  ever  into 
the  fiery  abyss.  Now  at  Huntingdon,  now  at  Olney, 
and  then  at  Weston.  Ministered  to,  as  by  angels,  by 
his  Mary,  Mrs.  Unwin,  Lady  Austen,  and  Lady  Hes- 
keth;  tormented  ever  and  anon  by  dark,  fiendish 
thoughts  about  himself,  he  writes  for  amusement  or 
for  relief ;  and  with  a  fancy  ever  fresh,  a  poetic  genius 
as  pure  and  clear  as  the  morning,  and,  amidst  all  his 
dreadful  fears,  with  a  heart  most  tenderly  alive  to 
good,  and  most  warmly  devoted  to  his  Kedeemer,  he 
graced  his  friend  Newton's  Olney  Hymn-book  with 
many  a  precious  gem,  and  taught  all  who  have  followed 
him  to  the  Cross  to  sing  of  the  Blessed  One  in  whose 


HYMNS   OF    GETHSEMAXE    AHD    THE    CROSS.  411 

divine  presence  he  and  the  kind  companions  of  his 
fitful  life  are  now  for  ever  at  rest.  He  now  realizes 
the  hopes  which  in  one  of  his  happier  moments  on 
earth  he  uttered  in  that  immortal  hymn  of  u  Praise 
for  the  Fountain  Opened ;  "  that  hymn  that  will  always 
be  on  some  happy  lips — 

There  is  a  fountain  fill'd  with  blood, 

Drawn  from  Emmanuel's  veins  ; 
And  sinners  plunged  beneath  that  flood, 

Lose  all  their  guilty  stains. 

The  dying  thief  rejoiced  to  see 

That  fountain  in  his  day ; 
And  there  have  I,  as  vile  as  he, 

"Wash'd  all  my  sins  away. 

Dear,  dying  Lamb,  thy  precious  blood, 

Shall  never  lose  its  power, 
Till  all  the  ransom" d  church  of  God 

Be  saved  to  sin  no  more. 

E'er  since  by  faith  I  saw  the  stream 

Thy  flowing  wounds  supply, 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme,  • 

And  shall  be  till  I  die. 

Then  in  a  nobler,  sweeter  song, 

I'll  sing  thy  power  to  save, 
"When  this  poor  lisping  stamm'ring  tongue 

Lies  silent  in  the  grave. 

Lord,  I  believe  Thou  hast  prepar'd 

(Unworthy  though  I  be) 
For  me  a  blood-bought  free  reward, 

A  golden  harp  for  me ! 

?Tis  strung,  and  tuned,  for  endless  years, 

And  formed  by  power  divine, 
To  sound  in  God  the  Father's  ears 

iSo  other  name  but  Thine. 


412  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Many  consecrated  singers  gather  around  the  cross  ; 
generation  after  generation  they  press  upward  to  the 
holy  scene;  and  each  brings  its  tributary  hymns.  The 
devoted  genius  is  of  all  variety ;  the  manner  of  the 
music  changes  as  the  hymnists  follow  each  other ;  but 
amidst  all  changes  of  time,  all  variations  of  circum- 
stance, rhythm,  rhyme,  metre,  and  tone,  the  theme  is 
the  same,  ever  fresh,  never  exhausted — the  holy,  the 
mysterious,  the  life-giving  cross.  Greek  choristers 
may  pass  away,  Latin  hymnists  may  leave  the  world — a 
Wesley,  a  Toplady,  a  Hart,  a  Newton,  and  a  Cowper, 
may  cease  their  mortal  psalmody,  but  voices  come  on 
still ;  the  hymning  does  not  cease.  Witness  this 
strain  that  floated  across  the  Irish  Channel  a  few 
years  ago  from  one  who  still  lives  to  sing  on  a 
"  Good  Friday,"  "  And  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour, 
and  there  was  darkness  all  over  the  land  until  the 
ninth  hour"  : — 

Dark  and  dim  the  daylight  rose, 
Destined  with  thy  life  to  close ; 
•  With  the  life  Thou  didst  assume 

As  Thy  passport  through  the  tomb ; 
But  a  drop  in  the  great  sea, 
Lord,  of  Thine  eternity. 

On  the  tree  accursed  dying, 

Death  and  hell  beneath  Thee  lying, 

There  their  doom  long  look'd  for  meet, 

Crush'd  beneath  Thy  bruised  feet ; 

Bitter  scorn  and  cruel  pain 

Do  their  worst  with  Thee  in  vain, 

For  Thou  answerest  not  again ! 

Prayers  for  them  are  Thy  replies 
To  Thy  taunting  enemies  ; 
From  Thy  pierced  side  doth  flow 
Mediciue  for  all  our  woe. 


HYMNS  OF  GETHSEMANE  AND  THE  CROSS.     413 

Thy  dear  arms  outstretch'd  we  see, 
Drawing  the  whole  world  to  Thee  ; 
And  that  head  so  meekly  bow'd 
'Neath  the  momentary  cloud, 
Breathes,  with  its  departing  breath, 
Life  accomplished  in  death. 

Lo  !  the  veil  is  rent  asunder, 
Darkness  over  head,  and  under ; 
Graves  are  open'd,  earth  doth  quake, 
And  the  very  dead  awake. 

Angels  who  beside  Thee  kept 
Watch,  and  o'er  Thy  passion  wept, 
Now  before  Thee,  at  the  gate 
Of  Thy  paradise,  do  wait ; 
Hymns  celestial  round  Thee  pouring, 
As  they  bend,  the  might  adoring 
Of  Thy  Godhead  laid  to  rest 
In  the  regions  of  the  blest. 

Saviour  of  Thy  people !     Now, 
With  Thy  wounded  hands  and  brow, 
Gone  to  plead  beside  the  Throne, 
Thy  redemption  for  Thine  own, 
Grace  to  seek  in  large  supplies, 
Even  for  Thine  enemies  ; 

Hear  us  when  to  Thee  we  cry, 
Make  us  feel  that  Thou  art  nigh, 
Help  us  when,  in  time  of  need, 
We  Thy  great  deliv' ranee  plead ; 
Cleanse  us  with  Thy  precious  blood, 
0  Thou  gentle  Lamb  of  God ! 

By  Thy  cross  and  passion  save  us ; 
By  the  hope  those  suff 'rings  gave  us ; 
By  Thine  agony  and  sweat ; 
By  Thy  prayers  on  Olivet ; 
By  Thy  sighs  and  by  Thy  tears  ; 
By  Thy  people's  hopes  and  fears  ; 
By  the  peace  vouchsaf 'd  to  Thee 
When  in  dark  Gethsemane ! 


414  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

By  the  sacramental  tide 
Gushing  from  Thy  wounded  side  ; 
By  the  load  of  others'  sin, 
That  oppress'd  Thy  soul  within  ; 
By  the  wondrous  love  Thou  bore  us, 
That  by  death  Thou  should'st  restore  us ; 
By  that  mercy  and  that  love, 
Hear  us,  Lord,  in  heav'n  above ! 

In  the  midnight  of  our  sadness, 

In  the  noontide  of  our  gladness, 

Through  each  changing  scene  of  life, 

Calm  and  sunshine,  storm  and  strife ; 

At  the  last  dread  parting  hour, 

In  Thy  judgment's  might  and  power — 

Lord,  deliver  and  defend  us, 
Let  Thy  Spirit  still  attend  us  ; 
Be  Thine  eye  our  leading  star, 
Guiding  upward  from  afar  ; 
Here, — the  surety  Thou  art  nigh, 
There, — the  blest  reality  ! 

This  fine  help  to  our  devotion  on  the  anniversary 
of  the  Holy  Cross,  is  from  the  "  Parish  Musings  "  of 
John  S.  B.  Monsell,  now  the  vicar  of  Egham,  in 
Surrey.  And  every  heart  that  has  learnt  to  utter  a 
daily  litany,  and  with  holy  fervour  to  cry,  "  By  Thine 
agony  and  bloody  sweat ;  By  Thy  cross  and  passion, 
Good  Lord  deliver  us  \"  will  ever  think  of  the 
reverend  hymnist  as  one  whose  "Musings"  have 
kindled  holy  fire  in  many,  many  a  heart  beside  his 
own.  Nor  can  our  gratitude  ever  equal  the  blessing 
which  comes  upon  England  in  answer  to  the  metrical 
prayers  of  her  pious  laymen;  laymen  whose  simple 
and  earnest  piety  adorns  many  a  lordly  home  of  the 
land;    laymen,  who   wear   their   knightly  honours  in 


HYMNS    OF    GETHSEMANE   AND    THE    CfiOSS.  415 

humble  dependence  on  their  Saviour ;  and  who,  like 
Sir  Robert  Grant,  have  mind  and  heart  enough  to  lead 
the  devotions  of  the  multitudes  around  them,  in 
solemn  litanies  like  this — 

Saviour,  when  in  dust  to  Thee 
Low  we  bend  the  adoring  knee ; 
"When  repentant  to  the  skies 
Scarce  we  lift  our  weeping  eyes  ; 
Oh !  by  all  the  pains  and  woe 
Suffer'd  once  for  man  below, 
Bending  from  thy  throne  on  high, 
Hear  our  solemn  Litany ! 

By  Thy  helpless  infant  years ; 
By  Thy  life  of  want  and  tears  ; 
By  Thy  days  of  sore  distress 
In  the  savage  wilderness  ; 
By  the  dread  mysterious  hour 
Of  the  insulting  tempter's  power ; 
Turn,  oh,  turn  a  favouring  eye, 
Hear  our  solemn  Litany  ! 

By  the  sacred  griefs  that  wept 
O'er  the  grave  where  Lazarus  slept ; 
By  the  boding  tears  that  flowed 
Over  Salem's  lov'd  abode ; 
By  the  anguish'd  sigh  that  told 
Treachery  lurk'd  within  thy  fold ; 
From  Thy  seat  above  the  sky, 
Hear  our  solemn  Litany  ! 

By  Thine  hour  of  dire  despair ; 
By  Thine  agony  of  prayer ; 
By  the  cross,  the  nail,  the  thorn, 
Piercing  spear,  and  torturing  scorn ; 
By  the  gloom  that  veil'd  the  skies 
O'er  the  dreadful  sacrifice  ; 
Listen  to  our  humble  cry, 
Hear  our  solemn  Litany  ! 


416  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

By  Thy  deep  expiring  groan ; 
By  the  sad  sepulchral  stone  ; 
By  the  vault,  whose  dark  abode 
Held  in  vain  the  rising  God ; 
Oh  !  from  earth  to  heaven  restored, 
Mighty  reascended  Lord, 
Listen,  listen  to  the  cry, 
Of  our  solemn  Litany ! 

Calvary  was  a  scene  of  mournful  attraction  to  the 
"  women  which  followed  Jesus  from  Galilee,  minis- 
tering unto  Him.  Among  which  was  Mary  Magdalene, 
and  Mary  the  Mother  of  James  and  Joses,  and  the 
mother  of  Zebedee's  children."  Blessed  women  !  To 
them  it  was  a  dark  day  indeed.  That  cross  was  to 
them  a  bitter  cross ;  for  it  was  the  cross  of  their 
beloved  Master.  But  they  found  life  in  that  very 
cross ;  and  out  of  that  deep  darkness  came  the  light 
of  life,  healing  for  ever  their  broken  hearts.  Women 
have  never  ceased  to  surround  the  cross.  They  come 
from  age  to  age,  not  from  Galilee  merely,  but  from 
far  off  among  the  Gentiles.  Theirs  has  been  the 
deepest  homage ;  theirs  the  warmest  devotion ;  theirs 
the  profoundest  sympathy;  theirs  the  sweetest  songs. 
Among  the  women,  the  English  women,  who  have 
loved  the  cross,  and  sung  of  its  salvation,  Caroline 
Bowles,  afterwards  Mrs.  South ey,  has  left  one  touching 
proof  of  her  own  living  happy  interest  in  her  Saviour's 
death.  It  comes  to  us  in  a  hymn  which  devoutly 
records  her  own  heart's  experience  on  Calvary ;  while 
it  affords  the  secret  of  that  Christian  tenderness  which 
she  exemplified  as  the  gentle  and  pious  help-meet  of 
the  declining  and  departing  South  ey.  Her  hymn  beau- 
tifully shows  the  harmony  between  reverent  peacefulness 
and  holy  joy  in  all  true  devotion  to  the  cross ;  thus — 


BTMNS    OF    GETHSEMANE    AND    THE    CROSS.  417 

Down  from  the  willow  bough 

My  slumbering  harp  I'll  take, 
And  bid  its  silent  strings 

To  heavenly  themes  awake  ; 
Peaceful  let  its  breathings  be 
When  I  sing  of  Calvary. 

Love,  love  divine,  I  sing ; 

Oh  for  a  seraph's  lyre, 
Bathed  in  Siloa's  stream, 

And  touch' d  with  living  fire  ; 
Lofty,  pure,  the  strain  should  be 
When  I  sing  of  Calvary. 

Love,  love  on  earth  appears, 

The  wretched  throng  his  way ; 
He  beareth  all  their  griefs, 

He  wipes  their  tears  away ! 
Soft  and  sweet  the  strain  should  be, 
Saviour,  when  I  sing  of  Thee. 

He  saw  me  as  He  passed, 

In  hopeless  sorrow  lie, 
Condemned  and  doomed  to  death, 

And  no  salvation  nigh ; 
Loud  and  long  the  strain  should  be, 
When  I  sing  His  love  to  me. 

"I  die  for  thee,"  He  said — 

Behold  the  cross  arise; 
And  lo,  He  bows  His  head — 

He  bows  His  head  and  dies. 
Soft,  my  harp,  thy  breathing  be, 
Let  me  weep  on  Calvary. 

He  lives  !  again  He  lives  ! 

I  hear  the  voice  of  love, 
He  comes  to  soothe  my  fears, 

And  draw  my  soul  above ; 
Joyful  now  the  strain  should  be, 
When  I  sing  of  Calvary. 

27 


©Trot*  xxn. 

FUNERAL      HYMNS. 

"  So  when  even  was  come,  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  ?aith  unto  his 
steward,  call  the  labourers  and  give  them  their  hire." 

HO  has  not  gone  to  the  grave  side  often  enough, 
even  during  a  short  life,  to  become  mournfully 
familiar  with  the  solemn  magnificence  of  our 
English  Burial  Service  ?  It  can  scarcely  be  said 
which  is  the  more  deeply  impressive,  the  holy  fervour, 
reverent  submission,  soaring  faith,  and  heavenward 
swell  of  the  prayers,  or  the  simple  grandeur  of  the 
anthems,  awing  and  melting  us  by  turns.  Now,  the 
soul  kindles ;  and  now,  it  softens  into  tears  ;  and  now 
again,  its  death- song  becomes  intense  with  prayerful 
feeling,  as  the  utterances  rise — 

In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death : 

Of  whom  may  we  seek  for  succour 

But  of  Thee,  0  Lord ! 

Who  for  our  sins  art  justly  displeased. 

Yet,  0  Lord  God  most  holy, 

O  Lord  most  mighty, 

0  holy  and  most  merciful  Saviour, 

Deliver  us  not  into  the  bitter  pains 


FUNEEAL    HYMNS.  419 

Of  eternal  death ! 

Thou  knowest,  Lord,  the  secrets  of  our  hearts  ; 

Shut  not  thy  merciful  ears  to  our  prayer ; 

But  spare  us,  Lord  most  holy, 

0  God  most  mighty, 

0  holy  and  merciful  Saviour, 

Thou  most  worthy  Judge  eternal, 

Suffer  us  not  at  our  last  hour, 

For  any  pains  of  death, 

To  fall  from  Thee  ! 

This  is  an  ancient  hymn.  It  comes  to  us  borne  along 
from  generation  to  generation  by  the  voices  of  nearly 
a  thousand  years.  Just  about  the  beginning  of  the 
tenth  century,  there  was  a  Swiss  monk  in  the  cele- 
brated monastery  of  St.  Gall,  whose  name  was  Xotker. 
If  not  "  slow  of  speech,"  he  lisped,  and  was,  therefore, 
nicknamed  by  his  brethren,  Balbulus.  His  defect  of 
speech,  however,  as  in  the  case  of  many  a  deep  thinker 
and  bright  genius,  was  no  check  upon  his  thoughts; 
he  was  a  quiet  thinker.  Nor  did  it  prevent  the  play 
of  his  somewhat  hallowed  imagination.  As  he  watched 
the  samphire-gatherers  fearfully  pendant  over  the 
brink  of  death  as  they  pursued  their  perilous  calling 
on  the  precipices  around  St.  Gall,  he  caught  the  sug- 
gestion of  l(  death  in  the  midst  of  life"  ;  and  when  he 
saw  the  bridge-builders  at  Martinsbruck  exposing 
themselves  every  moment  to  death,  in  order  to  secure 
for  the  living  a  safe  passage  over  danger,  the  sugges- 
tion ripened  into  a  fruitful  form ;  and  his  monastery 
was  taught  to  sing  or  chant  the  anthem  which  soon 
became  common  to  entire  Christendom.  Notker  him- 
self died,  and  was  buried  in  912 ;  but  his  funeral  hymn 
will  never  die  while  any  European  Christians  live  to 
bury  their  dead  amidst  the  solemnities  of  the  ancient 
service  for  the  grave  side.  Notker' s  hymn  long  formed 


420  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

a  part  of  the  funeral  service  in  Germany;  and  Luther's 
translation  of  it  is  still  with  us,  rendered  into  English 
thus — 

In  the  midst  of  life,  behold 

Death  hath  girt  us  round, 
Whom  for  help  then  shall  we  pray, 

Where  shall  grace  be  fonnd  ? 
In  Thee,  O  Lord,  alone ! 
We  rue  the  evil  we  have  done, 
That  Thy  wrath  on  us  hath  drawn. 

Holy  Lord  and  God ! 

Strong  and  holy  God ! 
Merciful  and  holy  Saviour, 

Eternal  God ! 
Leave  us  not  to  sink  beneath 
Those  dark  pains  of  bitter  death, 

Kyrie  eleison. 

In  the  midst  of  death,  the  jaws 

Of  hell  against  us  gape. 
Who  from  peril  dire  as  this 

Openeth  us  escape  ? 
'Tis  Thou,  0  Lord,  alone ! 
Our  bitter  suffering  and  our  sin 
Pity  from  Thy  mercy  win, 

Holy  Lord  and  God  ! 

Strong  and  holy  God  ! 
Merciful  and  holy  Saviour ! 

Eternal  God ! 
Let  not  dread  our  souls  o'erwhelm, 
Of  the  dark  and  burning  realm, 

Kyrie  eleison. 

In  the  midst  of  hell  would  sin 

Drive  us  to  despair  ; 
Whither  shall  we  flee  away  ? 

Where  is  refuge,  where  ? 
With  Thee,  Lord  Christ,  alone  ! 
For  Thou  hast  shed  Thy  precious  blood, 
All  our  sins  Thou  makest  good. 


FUNERAL    HYMNS.  421 

Holy  Lord  and  God  ! 

Strong  and  holy  God ! 
Merciful  and  holy  Saviour  ! 

Eternal  God, 
Leave  us  not  to  fall  on  death, 
From  the  hope  of  Thy  true  faith, 

Kyrie  eleison ! 

In  the  year  1768,  as  the  month  of  May  was  closing, 
there  was  a  great  gathering  in  the  burial  ground  of 
Bunhill  Fields.  The  crowd  was  densely  packed  around 
an  open  grave,  by  the  side  of  which  stood  the  Eev. 
Andrew  Kinsman,  of  Plymouth.  He  was  delivering  a 
funeral  oration,  in  the  course  of  which  he  said  of  the 
departed,  "  I  had  the  pleasure  of  knowing,  and  I  will 
say  the  honour,  too,  of  preaching  the  gospel  to  his 
aged  parents,  who  both  died  in  the  faith.  I  knew 
him  to  be  the  son  of  many  prayers  years  ago  ;  and 
from  this  knowledge,  as  soon  as  I  had  read  his 
'Experience'  and  hymns  (believing  his  tender  parents' 
earnest  addresses  to  the  throne  of  grace  for  him  were 
in  some  measure  answered),  I  found  my  heart  warmed 
with  the  relation,  and  my  soul  knit  to  the  writer. 
This  love  led  me  eagerly  to  seek  after  a  personal 
interview ;  and  from  the  year  1 759,  a  religious  and 
literary  correspondence  ensued.  Oh  how  full  wTere 
his  epistles  of  sound  experience  !  How  sweetly  did 
he  write  of  Jesus  and  his  great  salvation  !  Since  that 
we  have  loved  as  brethren  and  servants  of  the  same 
Master."  The  address  was  ended,  and  then  the 
multitude  lifted  up  their  voices  and  sang — 

Sons  of  God  by  bless'd  adoption, 

Yiew  the  dead  with  steady  eyes  ; 
What  is  sown  thus  in  corruption, 

Shall  in  incorruption  rise. 


422  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

What  is  sown  in  death's  dishonour, 

Shall  revive  to  glory's  light ; 
What  is  sown  in  this  weak  manner, 

Shall  be  raised  in  matchless  might. 

Earthly  cavern,  to  thy  keeping 

We  commit  our  brother's  dust : 
Keep  it  safely,  softly  sleeping, 

Till  our  Lord  demand  thy  trust. 
Sweetly  sleep,  dear  saint,  in  Jesus  : 

Thou  with  us  shalt  wake  from  death ; 
Hold  he  cannot,  though  he  seize  us  ; 

We  his  power  defy  by  faith. 

Jesus,  Thy  rich  consolations 

To  Thy  mourning  people  send ; 
May  we  all,  with  faith  and  patience, 

Wait  for  our  approaching  end. 
Keep  from  courage,  vain  or  vaunted  ; 

For  our  change  our  hearts  prepare  : 
Give  us  confidence  undaunted, 

Cheerful  hope  and  godly  fear. 

The  funeral  hymn  had  been  written  by  the  one 
whose  dust  was  now  covered.  The  grave  was  closed, 
and  the  stone  which  was  laid  upon  it  is  still  there,  and 
those  who  visit  the  spot  should  linger  awhile,  and  think 
of  the  youthful  errors  and  sins,  the  dark  conflicts,  the 
bitter  tears,  the  spiritual  struggles,  the  sound  conver- 
sion, the  consecrated  talents,  the  faithful  ministry,  and 
the  fresh  and  fruitful  hymns  of  Joseph  Hart ;  and 
when  they  have  caught  the  fragrance  of  his  memory, 
and  hear  the  songs  of  those  who  still  thank  God  for 
his  ministry  in  the  old  meeting-house  of  Jewin  Street ; 
they  may  be  ready  to  chant  the  soothing  and  assuring 
hymn  which  arose,  in  some  solemn  moments,  nearly 
fifty  years  ago,  from  the  heart  of  Henry  Hart  Milman, 


FUNERAL    HYMNS.  423 

whose  venerable  form  is  now  fast  bending  towards  the 
sepulchre  of  his  fathers,  as  if  in  token  that  the  hymn 
will  soon  serve  as  his  own  requiem — 

Brother,  thou  art  gone  before  us,  and  thy  saintly  soul  is  flown 
Where  tears  are  wiped  from  every  eye,  and  sorrow  is  unknown ; 
From  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  and  from  care  and  fear  releas'd, 
"Where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at 

rest. 


The  toilsome  way  thou'st  travelled  o'er,  and  borne  the  heavy 

load ; 
But  Christ  has  taught  thy  weary  feet  to  reach  His  blest  abode : 
Thou'rt  sleeping  now,  like  Lazarus,  upon  his  Father's  breast, 
Where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at 

rest. 


Sin  can  never  taint  thee  now,  nor  doubt  thy  faith  assail, 
Nor  thy  meek  trust  in  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit  fail : 
And  then  thou'rt  sure  to  meet  the  good,  whom  on  earth  thou 

lovedst  best, 
Where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at 

rest. . 

Earth  to  earth,  and  dust  to  dust,  the  solemn  priest  hath  said ; 
So  we  lay  the  turf  above  thee  now,  and  we  seal  thy  narrow 

bed; 
But  thy  spirit,  brother,  soars  away  among  the  faithful  blest, 
Where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at 

rest. 

And  when  the  Lord  shall  summon  us,  whom  thou  has  left 

behind, 
May  we,  untainted  by  the  world,  as  sure  a  welcome  find  ! 
May  each,  like  thee,  depart  in  peace,  to  be  a  glorious  guest, 
Where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at 

rest. 


424  HYMN-WKITEKS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

In  the  same  hallowed  burial-ground  with  Joseph 
Hart  lies  the  body  of  Susanna  Wesley,  the  mother  of 
John  Wesley  and  Charles,  the  Methodist  hymnist. 
She  finished  her  course  in  a  chamber  at  the  very  top 
of  the  old  building  at  Moorfields.  That  chamber, 
during  her  parting  moments,  was  the  scene  of  intense 
devotion ;  all  the  saintly  woman's  daughters  sat  on 
her  bedside,  and  sang  a  requiem  to  her  passing  soul 
— such  a  requiem,  it  may  be,  as  her  own  son  has  given 
us — - 

Happy  soul,  thy  days  are  ended, 

All  thy  mourning  days  below ; 
Go,  by  angel  guards  attended, 

To  the  sight  of  Jesus  go ! 

Waiting  to  receive  thy  spirit, 

Lo,  the  Saviour  stands  above, 
Shows  the  purchase  of  his  merit, 

Reaches  out  the  crown  of  love  ! 

Struggle  through  thy  latest  passion, 
To  thy  dear  Redeemer's  breast, 

To  His  uttermost  salvation, 
To  His  everlasting  rest. 

For  the  joy  He  sets  before  thee, 

Bear  a  momentary  pain, 
Die  to  live  the  life  of  glory  ; 

Suffer,  with  thy  Lord  to  reign  ! 

• 
Her  children's  tremulous  song  ceased,  and  then, 
says  her  own  son  John,  "  She  continued  in  just  the 
same  way  as  my  father  was,  struggling  and  gasping 
for  life,  though,  as  I  could  judge  by  several  signs, 
perfectly  sensible,  till  near  four  o'clock.  I  was  then 
going  to  drink  a  dish  of  tea,  being  faint  and  weary, 


FUNERAL    HYMNS.  425 

when  one  called  me  again  to  tlie  bedside.  It  was  just 
four  o'clock.  She  opened  her  eyes  wide,  and  fixed 
them  upward  for  a  moment.  Then  the  lids  dropped, 
and  the  soul  was  set  at  liberty,  without  one  struggle, 
or  groan,  or  sigh.  We  stood  around  the  bed,  and 
fulfilled  her  last  request,  uttered  a  little  before  she  lost 
her  speech,  '  Children,  as  soon  as  I  am  released,  sing 
a  song  of  praise  to  God/"  What  psalm  they  sang  is 
not  yet  recorded;  but  that  triumphant  death-scene 
would  ever  live  in  the  souls  of  those  who  formed  that 
family  choir  around  the  corpse  of  their  gifted,  loving, 
sainted  mother.  And  in  the  deep,  solemn  joys  of  that 
hour  may  be  found  the  secret  of  the  inspiration  to 
which  we  owe  several  of  Charles  Wesley's  unrivalled 
hymns.  The  " psalm  of  praise  to  God"  which  was 
sung  by  the  bereaved  family  around  the  bed  of  their 
widowed  mother  may  have  given  those  touches  to  the 
hyinnist's  chastened  heart  which  brought  out  his  Hymn 
on  the  Death  of  a  Widow — a  hymn  which  may  be  sup- 
posed to  express  the  triumphant  faith  which  for  the 
moment  subdued  the  more  tender  feelings  of  Susanna 
Wesley's  children,  and  which  has  many  many  a  time 
since  then  gone  swelling*  upwards  from  the  scene  of 
Christian  victory,  until  the  voices  of  resigned  and 
reliant  orphans  have  mingled  with  the  songs  of  the 
reunited  parents  before  God  : — 

Give  glory  to  Jesus  our  Head, 

With  all  that  encompass  his  throne ; 
A  widow,  a  widow  indeed, 

A  mother  in  Israel  is  gone  ! 
The  winter  of  trouble  is  past ; 

The  storms  of  affliction  are  o'er ; 
Her  struggle  is  ended  at  last, 

And  sorrow  and  death  are  no  more. 


426  HYMN-WRITERS   AND   THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  soul  hath  overtaken  her  mate, 

And  caught  him  again  in  the  sky  ! 
Advanced  to  her  happy  estate, 

And  pleasure  that  never  shall  die  ! 
When  glorified  spirits,  by  sight, 

Converse  in  their  holy  abode, 
As  stars  in  the  firmament  bright, 

And  pure  as  the  angels  of  God. 

O  Heaven  !  what  a  triumph  is  there  ! 

Where  all  in  His  praises  agree ; 
His  beautiful  character  bear, 

And  shine  with  the  glory  they  see : 
The  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb 

(While  all  in  the  ecstasy  join), 
Darts  into  their  spiritual  frame, 

And  gives  the  enjoyment  divine. 

In  loud  hallelujahs  they  sing, 

And  harmony  echoes  His  praise  ; 
When,  lo  !  the  Celestial  King 

Pours  out  the  full  light  of  His  face  : 
The  joy  neither  angel  nor  saint 

Can  bear,  so  ineffably  great ; 
But,  lo  !  the  whole  company  faint, 

And  heaven  is  found — at  His  feet. 

It  is  probable,  too,  that  his  mother's  last  words, 
"  Sing  as  soon  as  I  am  released/'  suggested  to  the 
son  the  hymn  which  so  harmonizes  with  the  thoughts 
and  feelings  which  hallowed  her  final  hour  : — 

Blessing,  honour,  thanks,  and  praise, 

Pay  we,  gracious  God,  to  Thee  : 
Thou,  in  Thine  abundant  grace, 

Givest  us  the  victory : 
True  and  faithful  to  Thy  word, 

Thou  hast  glorified  Thy  Son, 
Jesus  Christ,  our  dying  Lord, 

He  for  us  the  fight  hath  won. 


FUNERAL    HYMNS.  427 

Lo  !  the  prisoner  is  released, 

Lighten'd  of  his  fleshly  load ; 
Where  the  weary  are  at  rest, 

He  is  gather'd  unto  God. 
Lo  !  the  pain  of  life  is  past ; 

All  his  warfare  now  is  o'er ; 
Death  and  hell  behind  are  cast, 

Grief  and  suffering  are  no  more. 

Yes,  the  Christian's  course  is  run, 

Ended  is  the  glorious  strife  ; 
Fought  the  fight,  the  work  is  done, 

Death  is  swallow'd  up  of  life  ! 
Borne  by  angels  on  their  wings, 

Far  from  earth  the  spirit  flies, 
Finds  his  God,  and  sits,  and  sings, 

Triumphing  in  Paradise. 

Join  we  then  with  one  accord 

In  the  new,  the  joyful  song  : 
Absent  from  our  loving  Lord 

We  shall  not  continue  long. 
We  shall  quit  the  house  of  clay, 

We  a  better  lot  shall  share  ; 
We  shall  see  the  realms  of  day, 

Meet  our  happy  brother  there. 

Let  the  world  bewail  their  dead, 

Fondly  of  their  loss  complain  ; 
Brother,  friend,  by  Jesus  freed, 

Death  to  Thee,  to  us,  is  gain  : 
Thou  art  enter' d  into  joy  : 

Let  the  unbelievers  mourn  ; 
We  in  songs  our  lives  employ, 

Till  we  all  to  God  return. 

There  are  no  funeral  hymns  equal  on  the  whole  to 
Charles  Wesley's ;  none  which  so  fully  express  that 
sublime  union  of  solemn  awe,  victorious  faith,  and 
overflowing  joy,  which  is  embodied  in  the  writings  and 


428  HYMX-WEITEES    AND    THETE    HYMNS. 

examples  of  inspired  men  and  primitive  saints.     With, 
a  few  exceptions,  they  are  lacking  in  soft  plaintiveness, 
but  in  energy  and  grandeur  they  are  matchless.    None 
but  the   soul  who   enjoys  a  clear  and  deep  interest  in 
eternal  life,  and  has  a  realizing  impression  of  the  near- 
ness of  the  heavenly  world,   can  sing  them  with  the 
spirit  in  which  they  were  written.     To  be  felt  in  the 
fulness  of  their  power  they  should  be  heard  as  they 
have    sometimes   been    sung   by  a   devout    crowd   of 
Cornish  miners  at  the  burial  of  a  departed  comrade. 
As  a  class,  or  race,   Cornish  miners  seem  to  be  dis- 
tinguished by  a  sort  of  religious  instinct  or  taste.     A 
kind  of  devotional  feeling  appears  to  sway  them.     At 
all  events,  their  minds  soon  take  a  pious  turn  under 
the    influence    of  truth    when    suitably    administered, 
especially  in   some  of  its  forms.     They  are  not  to  be 
touched   by   anything    religiously    cold   in    spirit    or 
entirely  bald  in   devotion.     To  them  naked  logic  is 
equally  powerless  with  mere  figurative  swell  or  wordy 
show.     They  must  have  a  union  of  the  sensuous  and 
the   practical.     Their  hearts    are   to    be  reached  and 
moved  most  easily  through  the  understanding.     To 
call    their    intellect   into    pleasurable  exercise   about 
religion  is  most  fully  to  engage  their  affections  on  its 
behalf.     They  are  indeed  religiously  intelligent  in  a 
high    degree ;    and   Mrs.    Schimmelpenninck    showed 
that  her  discrimination  as  an  observer  was  quite  equal 
to  her  power  of  literary  expression,  when  she  said  that 
"  the  Cornishman  who   seeks  religion,   seeks  it  not  to 
inspire    him   in   conversation,  but  to  support  him  in 
adversity,  or  accidents   of  the  most  appalling  nature, 
and  at  the  hour  of  death.     Hence,  his  religion  is  a 
religion  not  of  cant,  but  of  spirit  and  truth. "     Then, 
they  love  music,  too,  especially  sacred  music  ;  and,  for 


FUXEEAL    HYMNS.  429 

the  most  part,  have  voices  which  seem  to  give  out  the 
fine  tone  of  their  Christian  character.  No  people  have 
been  more  richly  benefited  by  the  labours  of  the 
Wesleys  ;  no  men,  as  a  class,  are  better  prepared  to 
appreciate  Charles  Wesley's  funeral  hymns ;  and  none 
have  ever  given  them  more  worthy  expression. 

Those  who  have  rambled  among  the  remarkable 
variations  of  Cornish  scenery  will  remember  the  pic- 
turesque hill  of  Carnbrae.  The  wild  romantic  scramble 
up  among  its  scattered  masses  of  granite  which  lie  in 
heaps  among  the  furze  and  heath,  the  venerable  frag- 
ment of  a  castle  on  the  top,  the  curious  piles  of  weather- 
beaten  rocks  looking  as  if  they  had  been  familiar  with 
the  lights  and  shadows  of  the  world's  childhood,  and 
the  glorious  prospect  of  hill,  and  plain,  and  sea,  which 
opens  around  one — all  contribute  to  give  a  sense  of 
enlargement  and  exhilaration,  strangely  associated  with 
feelings  of  awe,  which  can  never  be  entirely  lost. 
Amidst  the  exciting  varieties  of  the  more  distant 
prospect,  there  is  something  touching  in  the  appear- 
ance of  a  lonely  old  grey  tower  at  the  foot  of  the  hill, 
speaking  to  the  soul,  as  it  does  so  plaintively,  in 
memory  of  a  former  race  of  Cornish  saints.  It  is  the 
parish  steeple  of  Eedruth.  Some  few  years  ago,  of  a 
summer's  evening,  a  long  crowd  was  seen  passing 
down  the  church  path  from  the  town,  pressing  around 
a  bier  as  if  they  would  affectionately  guard  it  in  front, 
and  flank,  and  rear,  and  singing  as  they  moved.  The 
strain  was  measured  like  their  steps,  and  it  was  in  the 
minor  key,  although  it  seemed  at  times  more  like  a 
triumphant  shout  than  a  wail  of  sorrow.  They  w^ere 
keeping  up  the  beautiful  custom  of  their  fathers,  the 
evening  funeral,  and  the  burial  hymn  from  the  house 
of  bereavement  to  the  grave.     They  were  singing  one 


430  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

of  their  grandest  tunes  to   one  of  Charles  Wesley's 
grandest  hymns — 

Rejoice  for  a  brother  deceased, 

Our  loss  is  his  infinite  gain ; 
A  soul  out  of  prison  released, 

And  free  from  its  bodily  chain ; 
With  songs  let  us  follow  his  flight 

And  mount  with  his  spirit  above, 
Escaped  to  the  mansions  of  light, 

And  lodged  in  the  Eden  of  love. 

Our  brother  the  haven  hath  gain'd, 

Out-flying  the  tempest  and  wind  ; 
His  rest  he  hath  sooner  obtained, 

And  left  his  companions  behind 
Still  toss'd  on  a  sea  of  distress, 

Hard  toiling  to  make  the  blest  shore, 
"Where  all  is  assurance  and  peace, 

And  sorrow  and  sin  are  no  more. 

As  the  music  of  the  last  line  melted  away,  there  was 
the  quiet  swell  of  a  calm  but  majestic  voice — "  I  am 
the  resurrection  and  the  life,  saith  the  Lord." — The 
bier  and  the  train  passed  into  the  ancient  sanctuary, 
by  and  by  again  to  appear,  moving  towards  the  grave. 
The  benediction  had  scarcely  closed  the  funeral  service 
before  the  devout  multitude  once  more  lifted  up  its 
voice — it  was  a  full,  a  mighty  voice — and  pressing 
around  the  open  grave,  they  uttered  in  thrilling  tones 
that  glowing  and  impassioned  hymn  that  seems  to 
melt  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly  into  one — 

Come,  let  us  join  our  friends  above, 

That  have  obtained  the  prize, 
And  on  the  eagle  wings  of  love 

To  joys  celestial  rise. 


FUNERAL    HYMXS.  431 

Let  all  the  saints  terrestrial  sing 

With  those  to  glory  gone, 
For  all  the  servants  of  our  King 

In  earth  and  heaven  are  one. 

One  family,  we  dwell  in  Him, 

One  church,  above,  beneath, 
Though  now  divided  by  the  stream, 

The  narrow  stream  of  death. 
One  army  of  the  living  God, 

To  his  command  we  bow  ; 
Part  of  His  host  hath  cross'd  the  flood 

And  part  is  crossing  now. 

Ten  thousand  to  their  endless  home 

This  solemn  moment  fly  : 
And  we  are  to  the  margin  come, 

And  we  expect  to  die ; 
His  militant  embodied  host 

With  wishful  looks  we  stand : 
And  long  to  see  that  happy  coast, 

And  reach  that  heavenly  land. 

Our  old  companions  in  distress 

We  haste  again  to  see, 
And  eager  long  for  our  release 

And  full  felicity  : 
Even  now  by  faith  we  join  our  hands 

With  those  that  went  before. 
And  greet  the  blood-besprinkled  bands 

On  the  eternal  shore. 

Our  spirits  too  shall  quickly  join, 

Like  theirs  with  glory  crown'd, 
And  shout  to  see  our  Captain's  sign, 

To  hear  His  trumpet  sound. 
Oh  !  that  we  now  might  grasp  our  Guide  ! 

Oh !  that  the  word  were  given ! 
Come,  Lord  of  Hosts  !  the  waves  divide, 

And  land  us  all  in  heaven  ! 


432  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The   swell  of  the  closing  appeal  was  thrilling.     The 
men's  voices  were  not  to  be  surpassed.     Their  bass 
tones  were    distinctive   of  their   class.     It  might  be 
supposed  that  the  inimitable  deep  round  fulness,  the 
organ-like  tone  of  a  Cornish  miner's  bass  voice  had 
some    subtle    relation    to    the    peculiar   atmospheric 
influences  to  which  his  lungs  are  subject ;  so  that  the 
music   of    his   voice   would    seem   like   an   unearthly 
remembrancer  of  the  fact  that  a  great  proportion  of 
Cornwall's   subterranean  workmen  are   doomed  to  an 
early  death.     Among  the  singers  at  that  funeral  there 
was  one  young  man  who  appeared  to  be  rapt  while  he 
sang.     It  seemed  as  if  his  music  were  that  of  pure 
spirit.     How  he  kindled  as  he  poured  forth  some  of 
the  last  notes  !     There  was  something  in  his  voice, 
something  in  his  expression,  something  in  the  flow  of 
light  from  his  eye,  which  might  be  thought  to  mark 
him  as  the  next  to  whom  a  summons  from  above  would 
come.     "  Yes/'  thought  one  who  looked  at  him  that 
evening  under  the  calm  light  of  the  setting  sun,  "you 
are  singing  your  own  requiem,  young  man  \"     And  so 
it  was.     The  one  who  noted  the  unmistakable  token 
of  his  nearness  to  the  land  of  his  fathers,  shortly  found 
him  on  his  deathbed.     But  he  had  not  lost  the  spirit 
of  that  triumphant  hymn.     "  I  am  going  \"  said  he, 
"  I  am   going  !  going  early ;  but  God  has  brightened 
my  short  life  into  a  full  one  !     Oh,  those  hymns  !  they 
have  taught  me  to  live  in  the  light  of  the  future  ! 
They  have  been   '  my  songs  in  the  house  of  my  pil- 
grimage' !     How  often  while  I  have  sung  them  down 
deep  in  the  mine  has  the   darkness  been  light  about 
me  !     Never,   since  I  learnt  to  praise  God  from  my 
heart,  have  I  begun  to  work  in  the  rock  for  blasting, 
without  stopping  a  moment  to  ask  myself,  f  Now,  if  the 


FUNERAL    HYMNS.  433 

hole  should  go  off  about  me,  am  I  ready  for  heaven  V 
Sometimes,  sir,  there  has  been  a  little  shrinking  and 
some  doubt,  and  then  I  have  dropped  on  my  knees, 
and  asked  God  to  bless  me  before  I  gave  one  stroke ; 
and  never  did  I  pray  in  vain ;  my  prayer  has  always 
passed  into  praise.  And  those  blessed  hymns  have 
come  bursting  from  my  heart  and  lips  as  I  have  toiled 
at  the  point  of  death  !  Oh,  sir  !  do  you  remember 
our  singing  at  the  last  funeral  V*  "  Yes,"  it  was 
replied,  "and  some  thought  then,  that  you  would 
never  sins:  again  V3  "  Never  sing  again,  sir  !  whv,  I 
shall  sing  for  ever  !  Oh  that  glorious  hymn,  let  us 
sing  it  now  V*     And  he  began — 

Oh  !  that  we  now  might  grasp  our  Guide  ! 

Oh  !  that  the  word  were  given  ! 
Come,  Lord  of  Hosts  !  the  waves  divide, 

And  land  us  .  .  .  land  .  .  .  me  .  .  .  now  in 

"  Heaven!"  he  would  have  sung,  but  he  was  gone! 
He  had  joined  another  choir  ! 

Such  uses  and  such  fruits  of  funeral  psalmody 
might  have  suggested  the  lines  which  a  grandson  of 
good  Dr.  Hawker  of  Plymouth,  Wesley's  contemporary, 
inscribed  on  the  grave-stone  of  one  of  his  young 
parishioners  in  the  quiet  burial  place  of  Morwenstow, 
on  the  Cornish  coast.  The  memorial  verses  are  not 
unworthy  of  their  author,  nor  of  their  title,  ' ( A  Cor- 
nish Death-Song"  : — 


Sing  !  from  the  chamber  to  the  grave, 
Thus  did  the  dead  man  say  : 

A  sound  of  melody  I  crave 
Upon  my  burial  day ! 


434  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Bring  forth  some  tuneful  instrument, 
And  let  your  voices  rise  ; 

My  spirit  listen'd  as  it  went 
To  music  of  the  skies  ! 

Sing  sweetly  as  you  travel  on, 
And  keep  the  funeral  show : 

The  angels  sing  where  I  am  gone, 
And  you  should  sing  below  ! 

Sing  from  the  threshold  to  the  porch, 
Until  you  hear  the  bell ; 

And  sing  you  loudly  in  the  church 
The  psalms  I  love  so  well. 

Then  bear  me  gently  to  the  grave ; 

And  as  you  pass  along, 
Remember  'twas  my  wish  to  have 

A  pleasant  funeral  song  ! 

So  earth  to  earth — and  dust  to  dust — 
And  though  my  bones  decay, 

My  soul  shall  sing  among  the  just, 
Until  the  judgment  day  ! 


~§JkAAAAAA^4 


<Sffeapte  XXIII. 

JUDGMENT    HYMNS. 

"  And  after  these  things  I  heard  a  great  voice  of  much  people  in 
heaven,  saying,  Alleluiah  ;  salvation,  and  glory,  and  honour,  and  power, 
unto  the  Lord  our  God  :  for  true  and  righteous  are  Ins  judgments." 

ROM  age  to  age  the  Christian  Church,  has  been 
listening  in  solemn  awe  to  her  Divine  Master's 
utterance,  "  When  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come 


in  his  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels  with  Him,  then 
shall  He  set  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory ;  and  before 
Him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations."  Nor  at  any  period 
since  the  time  when  the  glory  of  the  descending  Judge 
filled  the  visions  of  apostles,  has  the  Church  entirely 
lost  her  sense  of  the  Bridegroom's  approach,  there  have 
been  seasons  of  slumber,  and  many  have  fallen  asleep ; 
but  watchful  virgins  have  always  kept  their  lamps 
trimmed  and  burning,  with  oil  in  their  vessels,  while 
their  watchful  hours  have  been  kept  vocal  with  suc- 
cessive songs  of  holy  confidence  and  patient  joyful  hope. 
Scarcely  have  the  tones  of  one  hymn  died  away  before 
another  has  been  grandly  swelling  upon  the  ear  of 
Christendom.  In  the  fourteenth  century  the  music  of 
the  Church  was  becoming  faint.     Truth  was  sending 


436  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR   HYMNS. 

out  its  messages  but  in  undertones.     Spiritual  religion 
was  keeping  up  its  struggling  existence  within  narrow 
retreats.     But  even  then,  as  in  every  crisis  of  Christian 
history,   there  came  awakening  voices,  such  as  those 
of  Francis  of  Assissi,  and  his  friend  and  biographer, 
Thomas  of  Celano ;  one,  the  great  father  of  itinerant 
preaching    friars ;    the    other,    that    hymnist    whose 
one  judgment  hymn  roused  the  slumbering  choirs   of 
Europe,  and   still    sends    forth  its   deep    and   solemn 
music,  making  sinners'   ears  tingle,  and  thrilling  the 
heart  of  every  Christian   generation.      The  hymn  is 
the  natural  voice  of  the  times  which  gave  it  birth.     It 
is  the  voice  of  bondage  rather  than  of   freedom,   of 
fearfulness  rather  than  of  joy.     It  is  the  language  of 
a  prodigal  deprecating  his  Father's  wrath  rather  than 
the  utterance  of  a  son  jubilant  in  anticipation  of  his 
inheritance.      Its  tone  is  one  of  deeper  humiliation 
than  that  of  apostolic  days;    it  is  not  equal  to  that 
"full  assurance  of  hope"  which  the   hymns  of  later 
times  express.     But  it  has  doubtless  helped  many  a 
heart  to  prepare  for  judgment,  and  brought   timely 
comfort  to  many  departing  souls  by  its  solemn  and 
unearthly  music.     It  has  gathered  deeper  interest  in 
the  affections  of  many  from  its  association  with  the 
last  moments  of  Sir  Walter  Scott.     He  requested,  as 
he  neared  the   end,  that  a  dear  relative  would  read  to 
him.      ' '  What   book    shall   I   read  V*    it  was   asked, 
1 '  What    book  ?  "    said    he,    ' c  there    is    but    one  !  " 
Blessed  book  !    that  alone  could   show  him  his  way ; 
but  after  hearing   God's  voice,  his  soul  fell  back  upon 
ancient  songs.     Some   of  the   magnificent  old  hymns 
in  which  he  had  delighted  were  now  murmured  by 
the  dying  poet.      Those  who  were   gathered  around 
him  say,  "  We  have  often  heard  distinctly  the  cadence 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  437 

of  the  c  Dies  Irge/  Thomas  of  Celano's  grand  and 
immortal  Song  of  Judgment.  Scott  had  himself 
translated  it  in  part.  No  translation,  however,  among 
the  scores  which  have  been  issued  can  be  called  fully 
adequate  in  all  respects.  The  spirit  and  tone  have 
been  faithfully  and  powerfully  rendered  thus  : — 

Lo,  the  day  of  wrath,  the  day, 
Earth  and  heaven  melt  away, 
David  and  the  Sybil  say. 

Stoutest  heart  with  fear  shall  quiver, 
When  to  Him  that  erreth  never, 
All  must  strict  account  deliver. 

Lo  !  the  trumpet's  wondrous  pealing, 
Rung  through  each  sepulchral  dwelling, 
All  before  the  throne  compelling ! 

Nature  shrinks  appall'd,  and  death, 
When  the  dead  regain  their  breath, 
To  the  Judge  each  answereth. 

Then  the  Written  Book  is  set, 
All  things  are  contain' d  in  it, 
Thence  each  learns  his  sentence  meet. 

When  the  Judge  appears  again, 
Hidden  things  shall  be  made  plain, 
Nothing  unaveng'd  remain. 

What  shall  I,  unworthy,  plead  ? 
Who  for  me  will  intercede, 
When  the  just  will  mercy  need  ? 

King  of  dreadful  majesty, 

Who  sav'st  the  saved  of  mercy  free, 

Fount  of  pity,  save  Thou  me  ! 

Think  of  me,  good  Lord,  I  pray, 
Who  trodd'st  for  me  the  bitter  way, 
Nor  forsake  me  in  that  day. 


400  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Weary  sat'st  Thou,  seeking  me, 
Diedst  redeeming  on  the  tree ; 
Not  in  vain  such  toil  can  be  ! 

Judge  aveuging,  let  me  win 
Free  remission  of  my  sin, 
Ere  that  dreadful  day  begin. 

Sinful  o'er  my  sins  I  groan, 

Guilt  my  crimson'd  face  must  own, 

Spare,  0  God,  thy  suppliant  one. 

Mary  was  by  Thee  forgiven, 

To  the  thief  Thou  open'dst  heaven, 

Hope  to  me,  too,  Thou  hast  given. 

All  unworthy  is  my  prayer ; 
Gracious  One,  be  gracious  there ; 
From  that  quenchless  fire,  oh  spare. 

Place  Thou  me  at  Thy  right  hand, 
'Mongst  Thy  sheep,  oh  make  me  stand, 
Far  from  the  convicted  band. 

When  the  accursed  condemn'd  shall  be 
Doom'd  to  keenest  flames  by  Thee, 
'Midst  the  blessed  call  Thou  me. 

Contrite  suppliant  I  pray 
Ashes  on  my  heart  I  lay, 
Care  Thou  for  me  in  that  day. 

To  write  a  judgment  hymn  with  that  spirit,  and 
power,  and  majesty  which  become  the  theme,  requires 
a  glowing  intellect  under  the  full  command  of  inspired 
truth ;  a  genius  in  deep  sympathy  with  divine  reve- 
lations ;  a  soul  devoutly  familiar  with  spiritual  unseen 
things,  capable,  by  strong  faith,  of  realizing  the 
presence  of  the  Judge,  and  of  expressing  its  sense  of 
that  presence  so  as  to  make  others  see  and  feel  much 
of  what  it  sees  and  feels  itself;  one  indeed  who  lives 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  439 

in  frequent  visions  of  the  unearthly  and  the  divine. 
Hymnists  of  this  class  have  sometimes  sprung  up 
where,  by  most  people,  they  would  not  be  looked  for. 
On  the  morning  of  October  24th,  1753,  a  somewhat 
remarkable  figure  was  seen  walking  out  from  the 
town  of  Bradford,  in  Wiltshire.  He  had  on  a  long 
heavy  great-coat  covering  a  dress  of  dark  blue  of 
primitive  cut,  rather  after  the  style  of  the  ordinary 
dress  of  a  modern  English  bishop.  He  wore  heavy 
riding-boots,  however,  and  had  saddle-bags  filled 
with  books  and  linen  slung  across  his  shoulder.  His 
face  would  arrest  attention ;  the  open,  well-formed 
manly  features,  and  the  ever-kindling  eye  giving 
expression  to  a  rare  combination  of  acute  perception, 
deep  thoughtfulness,  logical  power,  happy  temper, 
quiet  humour,  and  bold  imagination.  It  was  one  of 
Mr.  Wesley' s  itinerant  preachers,  on  his  way  to 
Cornwall,  afoot.  After  many  curious  adventures  on  the 
road,  he  entered  on  his  perilous  (C  round  "  among  the 
then  rude  masses  of  the  extreme  west.  His  own  rare 
bit  of  autobiography  helps  us  to  follow  his  steps.  ' '  As 
to  trials,"  says  he,  "  I  do  not  remember  that  I  had  any 
in  these  parts  which  deserve  that  name.  Indeed,  in 
one  place  the  high  constable  came  to  press  me  for  a 
soldier,  while  I  was  preaching.  He  said,  '  As  you 
preach  so  well,  you  are  very  fit  to  serve  his  Majesty. 
I  therefore  desire  you  will  get  ready  to  go  with  me  to 
a  magistrate  to-morrow  morning.-'  I  answered,  '  Why 
not  to-night  ?  I  am  ready  to  go  with  you  now/  He 
then  said,  fWell!  you  may  first  finish  your  sermon/ 
Accordingly  I  began  again  where  I  had  left  off;  and 
the  constable  and  his  companion  stayed  to  hear  me, 
and  then  went  quietly  away.  The  next  morning  I 
waited  for  his  return,  but  he  never  came;  so  that  in 


440  HYMN- WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

all  probability  what  lie  heard  was  a  means,  at  least,  of 
cooling  his  courage.'" 

The  man  who  could  act  and  write  like  this  was  no 
common  man.  He  was  a  dreamer  at  all  events,  for  he 
tells  us :  "  When  I  was  in  this  neighbourhood,  I 
dreamed  one  night  that  Christ  was  come  in  the  clouds 
to  judge  the  world,  and  also  that  He  looked  exceeding 
black  at  me.  When  I  awoke  I  was  much  alarmed.  I 
therefore  humbled  myself  exceedingly,  with  fastings 
and  prayer ;  and  was  determined  never  to  give  over 
till  my  evidence  of  the  love  of  Christ  was  made  quite 
clear.  One  day  as  I  was  at  prayer  in  my  room,  with 
my  eyes  shut,  the  Lord,  as  it  were,  appeared  to  the 
eve  of  my  mind,  as  standing  just  before  me,  while  ten 
thousand  small  streams  of  blood  seemed  to  issue  from 
every  part  of  his  body.  This  sight  was  so  unex- 
pected, and  at  the  same  time  so  seasonable,  that,  for 
once,  I  wept  aloud  ;  yea,  and  almost  fainted  away.  I 
now  more  fully  believed  his  love  to  me,  and  that,  if 
He  was  then  to  come  to  judgment,  He  would  not 
frown,  but  rather  smile  on  me ;  therefore  I  loved  and 
praised  Him  with  all  my  heart.  Some  years  after  I 
had  a  dream  of  a  quite  different  sort;  I  dreamed  that 
I  was  talking  with  two  women  concerning  the  day  of 
judgment.  Among  other  things,  I  thought  I  told 
them  I  was  certain  it  was  very  near.  On  hearing  this, 
I  thought  they  burst  into  laughter,  and  rejected  all  I 
said.  BeiDg  much  grieved  at  this,  I  told  them,  ( I  will 
go  and  see  if  it  is  not  as  I  said/  Accordingly  I  went 
to  the  door,  and,  on  looking  up  southward,  thought  I 
saw  the  heavens  open,  and  a  stream  of  fire,  as  large  as 
a  small  river,  issuing  forth.  On  seeing  this,  I  thought 
I  ran  back  to  the  women,  and  said,  '  You  would  not 
believe  me ;  but  come  to  the  door,  and  you  will  see 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  441 

with  your  own  eyes  that  the  day  is  come/  On  hearing 
this,  I  thought  they  were  much  alarmed,  and  ran  with 
me  to  the  door.  By  the  time  we  were  got  thither,  I 
thought  the  whole  concave,  southward,  was  filled  with 
an  exceedingly  thick  fiery  mist,  which  swiftly  moved 
northward  in  a  huge  body,  filling  the  whole  space 
between  the  heaven  and  the  earth  as  it  came  along. 
As  it  drew  near,  I  thought,  '  The  day  is  come  of  which 
I  have  so  often  told  the  world,  and  now,  in  a  few 
moments,  I  shall  see  how  it  will  be  with  me  to  all 
eternity/  And  for  a  moment  I  seemed  to  feel  myself 
in  a  state  of  awful  suspense.  When  the  fire  was  come 
close  to  me,  I  was  going  to  shrink  back ;  but  thought, 
'  This  is  all  in  vain,  as  there  is  now  no  place  of  shelter 
left.-'  I  then  pushed  myself  forward  into  it,  and  found 
that  the  lire  had  no  power  to  hurt  me,  for  I  stood  as 
easy  in  the  midst  of  it  as  ever  I  did  in  the  open  air. 
The  joy  I  felt  on  being  able  to  stand  unhurt  and  un- 
dismayed amidst  this  awful  burning  cannot  be  described. 
Even  so  shall  it  be  with  all  who  are  careful  to  enter  in 
at  the  strait  gate,  and  to  walk  closely  and  steadily 
in  the  narrow  way  all  the  days  of  their  life.  All 
these  shall 

Stand  secure,  and  smile, 
Amidst  the  jarring  elements, 
The  wreck  of  matter  and  the  crush  of  worlds  !" 


This  dream  might  remind  us  of  Charles  Wesley's 
grand  hymn — 

Stand  th'  omnipotent  decree  : 

Jehovah's  will  be  done  ! 
Nature's  end  we  wait  to  see, 

And  hear  her  final  groan ; 


442  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Let  this  earth  dissolve,  and  blend 
In  death  the  wicked  and  the  just ; 

Let  those  ponderous  orbs  descend 
And  grind  us  into  dust. 

Rests  secure  the  righteous  man 

At  his  Redeemer's  beck, 
Sure  to  emerge,  and  rise  again, 

And  mount  above  the  wreck ; 
Lo  the  heavenly  spirit  towers, 

Like  flame,  o'er  nature's  funeral  pyre, 
Triumphs  in  immortal  powers, 

And  claps  his  wings  of  fire  ! 

Nothing  hath  the  just  to  lose, 

By  worlds  on  worlds  destroyed, 
Far  beneath  his  feet  He  views 

"With  smiles  the  flaming  void  ; 
Sees  the  universe  renew'd, 

The  grand  millennial  reign  begun, 
Shouts,  with  all  the  sons  of  God, 

Around  the  eternal  throne  ! 

Resting  in  this  glorious  hope 

To  be  at  last  restored, 
Yield  we  now  our  bodies  up 

To  earthquake,  plague,  or  sword. 
Listening  for  the  call  divine, 

The  latest  trumpet  of  the  seven : 
Soon  our  souls  and  dust  shall  join, 

And  both  fly  up  to  heaven. 

The  dreamer  may  have  had  this  hymn  in  his  mind ; 
at  all  events,  the  visions  of  judgment,  the  awful  scenes 
of  the  consummation  entranced  him.  And  whether 
his  dreams  arose  from  the  cherished  imaginations  of 
his  soul  in  its  daily  communion  with  the  future,  or 
whether  the  dream  which  he  records  gave  to  his  con- 
secrated genius  the  inspiring  touches  which  kindled  it 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  443 

into   song,  the  story  of  his   dreams  will  ever  be  asso- 
ciated with  his  immortal  judgment  hymn  : — 

Come,  immortal  King  of  Glory ! 

Now  with  all  Thy  saints  appear ; 
While  astonish' d  worlds  adore  Thee, 

And  the  dead  Thy  clarions  hear. 
Shine  refulgent, 
And  Thy  deity  maintain. 

Hail !  the  world's  adored  Creator ! 

In  Thy  radiant  vesture  seen. 
Hail !  the  Lord  of  life  and  nature  ! 

Hail !  the  Almighty  jMazarene  ! 
They  who  pierc'd  Him, 
Every  eye  shall  see  Him  come. 

But,  how  diverse  the  sensation ! 

Saints  with  joy  and  rapture  filFd, 
Glow  with  holy  exultation, 

To  redemption's  glory  seal'd : 
While  the  wicked 
Wail  His  coming's  dread  design. 

Lo !  He  comes  with  clouds  descending : 
Hark  !  the  trump  of  God  is  blown  : 

And  th'  archangel's  voice  attending, 
Make  the  high  procession  known. 
Sons  of  Adam, 

Rise  and  stand  before  your  God ! 

Crowns  and  sceptres  fall  before  Him, 
Kings  and  conquerors  owu  His  sway, 

Haughtiest  monarchs  now  adore  Him, 
While  they  see  His  lightnings  play. 
How  triumphant 

Is  the  world's  Redeemer  now. 


444  HYHN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Light  primeval  in  its  lustre 
Doth  in  Jesu's  aspect  shine ; 

Blazing  comets  are  not  fiercer 
Than  His  eyes  of  flame  divine. 
Oh,  how  dreadful 

Doth  the  Crucified  appear  ! 

Hear  His  voice  as  mighty  thunder, 
Sounding  in  eternal  roar, 

While  its  echo  rends  in  sunder 

Rocks  and  mountains,  sea  and  shore. 
Hark,  His  accents 

Thro'  th'  unfathom'd  deep  resound ! 

See  His  throne  of  jasper  whiteness ; 

Throne  of  justice  and  of  grace  ; 
See  Jehovah's  equal  brightness 

Shining  in  Emmanuel's  face. 
Saints  exulting 
Shout  with  joy  th'  accomplish'd  prayer. 

"  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  oh  come  quickly," 
Oft  has  pray'd  the  mourning  bride. 

Lo  !  He  answers,  "  I  come  quickly :" 
Who  Thy  coming  may  abide  ? 
All  who  lov'd  Him, 

All  who  long'd  to  see  His  day. 

See  the  awful  expectation  ! 

See  the  heavens  themselves  on  fire  ! 
Melting  in  the  conflagration, 

See  the  elements  expire  ! 
While  the  trumpet 
Blows  around,  "  Ye  dead,  arise  !" 

Lo  !  the  dead  arise,  and  standing 
At  their  great  Creator's  bar : 

While  the  Judge  of  all  commanding, 
Cries,  "  To  meet  your  God  prepare." 
All  whose  judgments 

And  His  ways  are  equal  found ! 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  445 

Xow  the  dreadful  volumes  opening, 

Scenes  of  various  deeds  disclose, 
While  the  Judge  proclaims  the  sentence, 

Eighteous  sentence  on  His  foes  : 
Wrath  to  sinners ; 
To  His  saints  the  crown  of  life ! 

Gather  ye  His  saints  together, 

jSTow  with  Him  in  judgment  sit ; 
See  the  vile  as  stubble  wither, 

Ashes  now  beneath  your  feet ! 
While  His  vengeance 
Seals  their  everlasting  doom. 

Hark  !  the  universal  groaning  ; 

Hark !  the  cries  of  guilt  and  fear ; 
Hear  them  each  his  fate  bemoaning, 

Each  the  cause  bemoaning  hear. 
God  no  longer 
Patient,  merciful,  or  kind. 

"  Come,  ye  mountains,  and  fall  on  us, 

Come,  ye  rocks,  our  heads  conceal, 
For  the  day  is  come  upon  us, 

Day  of  wrath  that  burns  to  hell ; 
Where  the  gnawing 
Worm  of  conscience  never  dies. 

Where  no  more  for  them  remaining, 

Hope  no  more  awaits  their  call ; 
But  in  iron  bonds  detaining, 

Heav'n's  high  justice  binds  up  all. 
While  His  mercy 
To  remorseless  judgment  turns. 

Lo  !  the  God  of  all  contending, 

Calls  the  heavens  from  afar, 
Bids,  0  earth,  thy  sons,  attending, ' 

Hear  Him,  for  Himself,  declare 
All  His  wisdom, 
And  His  righteous  acts  unfold. 


446  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR   HYMNS. 

Stopt  for  ever  all  complaining ; 

Stopt  the  mouth  of  murmuring  pride 
Fools  no  more  their  God  disdaining, 

Atheists  now  no  more  deride. 
But  with  trembling 
Wait  His  judgment's  last  award. 

"  Go  from. Me,"  He  saith,  "ye  cursed," 
Ye  for  whom  I  bled  in  vain, 

Who  my  utmost  grace  resisted  ; 
Go  ye  to  unending  pain. 
Lord  Almighty, 

True  and  righteous  are  Thy  ways  ! 

"  Come,  He  saith,  ye  heirs  of  glory," 
Come,  ye  purchase  of  my  blood, 

Claim  the  kingdom  now  before  you, 
Rise,  and  fill  the  mount  of  God : 
Fix'd  for  ever, 

Where  the  Lamb  on  Sion  stands. 

See  ten  thousand  burning  seraphs 
From  their  thrones  as  lightnings  fly  : 

Take,  they  cry,  your  seats  above  us, 
Nearest  Him  that  rules  the  sky, 
Patient  sufferers, 

How  rewarded  are  ye  now  ! 

E-ansom'd  victors,  see  His  ensign, 
Waving  high  in  purple  air  ! 

Jesus  with  His  ancients  reigning, 
Shall  to  each  His  conquest  share  ; 
He  who  made  them 

More  than  conquerors  thro'  His  blood. 

Now  their  trials  all  are  ended, 
Now  the  dubious  warfare's  o'er : 

Joy  no  more  with  sorrow  blended ; 
They  shall  sigh  and  weep  no  more  : 
God  for  ever 

Wipes  the  tear  from  every  eye, 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  447 

Thro'  His  passion,  all  victorious ; 

Now  they  drink  immortal  wine : 
In  Emmanuel's  likeness,  glorious 

As  the  firmament  they  shine  : 
Shine  for  ever 
With  the  bright  and  morning  star. 

Where  His  sceptre's  sway  extending, 

Jesus  high  His  right  maintains  ; 
Heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell  commanding, 

God  omnipotent  He  reigns  : 
Prince  of  princes ! 
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords ! 

Shining  in  His  bright  expansion, 

King  of  saints  behold  Him  sit ! 
Joy  of  each  adoring  mansion, 

Sunk  for  ever  at  His  feet. 
Lord  of  Grlory  ! 
And  His  kingdom  without  end  ! 

Shout  aloud,  ye  ethereal  choirs, 

Triumph  in  Jehovah's  praise, 
Kindle  all  your  heavenly  fires, 

All  your  palms  of  victory  raise : 
Shout  His  conquests, 
Shout,  "  Salvation  to  the  Lamb." 

See  in  sacred  pomp  ascending, 

Jesus  and  His  glorious  train : 
Countless  myriads  now  attending 

Hail  the  empyrean  plain. 
"  Hallelujah," 
First  and  last  and  Lord  of  all ! 

In  full  triumph  see  them  marching, 

Through  the  gates  of  massy  light : 
While  the  city  walls  are  sparkling, 

With  meridian  glory  bright. 
Oh  how  lovely 
Are  the  dwellings  of  the  Lamb  ! 


448  HYHN-WRITEES    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

See  His  beauty  all  resplendent : 
See  in  Him  the  Godhead  shine  : 

See  Him  above  all  transcendent, 
Full  of  deity  divine. 
Hail !  eternal ! 

Sov'reign  Lord  of  worlds  unknown! 

On  His  throne  of  sapphir'd  azure, 
High  above  all  height  He  reigns  : 

Reigns  the  fount  of  endless  pleasure  ; 
Self-subsistent  He  remains. 
How  diffusive 

Shines  the  uncreated  blaze ! 

Hosts  angelic  all  adore  Him, 
Circling  round  His  orient  seat, 

Elders  cast  their  crowns  before  Him, 
Fall  and  worship  at  His  feet. 
Oh  how  "  holy, 

"  And  how  reverend  is  Thy  name  !" 

Shout  aloud  the  new  creation, 
All  ye  heavenly  arches  ring, 

Echo  to  the  Lord—  salvation, 
"  Glory  to  the  eternal  king !" 
Dread  Jehovah ! 

"  God  with  God  !  and  Son  of  man  !" 

I  am  Alpha  and  Omega, 
I  the  first  and  last  am  He  : 

He  who  was,  and  is  to  come — who 
Am,  and  will  for  ever  be  : 
Jah,  Jehovah, 

Jah,  Jehovah,  is  my  name. 

Hail !  Thou  Alpha  and  Omega  ! 

First  and  last  of  all  alone  t 
He  that  is,  and  was,  and  shall  be, 

And  beside  whom  there  is  none, 
Take  the  glory, 
Great  eternal  Three  in  One  ! 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  449 

Praise  be  to  the  Father  given  : 

Praise  to  the  co-eval  Son  : 
Praise  the  Spirit,  one  and  seven  : 

Praise  the  mystic  Three  in  One, 
Hallelujah ! 
Everlasting  praise  be  Thine. 

The  dreamer  will  be  known  from  his  hymn.     He 
was  no   other  than    Thomas   Olivers,    the  wandering 
Methodist  preacher,   Wesley's   companion,   and  Top- 
lady's   theological    antagonist.     Thomas    Olivers  was 
born    at    Tregonan,    in   Montgomeryshire,    in    1725. 
His  father  died  four  years  after  his  birth ;  in  three 
months  his  mother's  heart  was  broken  by  her  loss ; 
and  he,  with  a  younger  brother,  were  left  to  the  care 
of  his    mother's    friends.     Placed  at  a  neighbouring 
school,    he  "  received  such   learning  as  was  thought 
necessary" ;  but  proved  a  more  apt  scholar  in  vice 
than  in  virtue.     At  eighteen  he  was  apprenticed  to  a 
shoemaker,  and  entered  on  a  course  of  youthful  pro- 
fligacy in  which  he  soon  outstripped  most  of  his  com- 
peers ;  and  was  obliged  at  length  to  fly  from  the  scene 
of  his  wickedness,   in  order   to    escape    from   public 
indignation.     As  a  wanderer  from  place  to  place,  he 
exemplified  the  misery   of  those  wrho   plunge   deeper 
and  deeper  into   sin,  vainly  striving'  to   shake  off,   or 
alleviate  the  terrors   of  an  evil  conscience.     Reduced 
at  last  to  beggary  and  extreme  wretchedness  of  mind 
and  body,  he  found  his  way  to  hear  Whitefield  preach 
at  Bristol.     The  preacher's  text  was,   "  Is   not  this  a 
brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?"     It  was   a  word  in 
season.     Olivers  became  a  new  man,  and  on  the  first- 
Sunday  after,  "  I  went,"  he  says,  "to  the  cathedral  at 
six  in  the  morning.     When  the  Te  JJeum  was  read,  I 
felt  as  if  I  had  done  with  earth  and  was  praising  God 

29 


450  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

before  his  throne.  No  words  can  set  forth  the  joy, 
the  rapture,  the  awe  and  reverence  I  felt."  His  course 
was  altered.  He  joined  the  Methodists.  All  his 
debts  were  gradually  paid.  He  began  to  preach ;  was 
at  length  sent  into  Cornwall  by  Mr.  Wesley;  and 
having  run  a  useful,  happy,  and  honourable  course,  he 
suddenly  departed  in  March,  1  799,  leaving  his  dust  to 
be  deposited  in  Wesley's  own  tomb.  He  has  be- 
queathed to  us  one  of  the  grandest  judgment  hymns 
that  ever  the  church  sang,  or  that  ever  brought  the 
sound  of  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  ears  of  the 
world.  It  is  remarkable  that  Charles  Wesley  and  he 
should  have  the  same  line  in  the  two  hymns  that  so 
strikingly  rival  each  other  in  magnificence.  Each 
sings — 

Lo  !  He  comes  with  clouds  descending. 

Whether  Wesley  caught  the  key  note  from  Olivers,  or 
Olivers  from  Wesley,  they  evidently  breathed  the 
same  inspiration.  Each  hymnist  has  the  same  vivid 
realization  of  the  overwhelming  majesty  of  the  final 
scene  ;  and  neither  of  the  two  hymns  can  be  devoutly 
sung  without  an  ever-deepening  feeling  of  solemn  awe 
and  reverent  hope.  How  striking  and  sublime  is 
Wesley's  third  verse,  in  which  the  Judge  appears  still 
bearing  the  tokens  of  his  passion,  thus  exciting  the 
holy  rapture  of  those  who  have  been  redeemed  by  his 
agony  and  death — 

The  dear  tokens  of  his  passion 

Still  his  dazzling  body  bears  ; 
Cause  of  endless  exultation 

To  his  ransom'd  worshippers  : 
With  what  rapture 
Gaze  we  on  those  glorious  scars! 


JUDGMENT    HYMNS.  451 

Most  of  Charles  Wesley's  judgment  hymns  are  of  the 
highest  class.  Several  of  them  were  written  in  Decem- 
ber, 1755,  just  when  the  public  mind  was  agitated  by 
the  fearful  news  of  the  Lisbon  earthquake  ;  and  while 
the  nation  was  in  tremulous  suspense,  awaiting  the 
threatened  French  invasion.  Some  of  these  have 
special  allusion  to  the  distinguishing  circumstances  of 
the  times  j  but  others  may  be  on  the  lips  and  hearts 
of  all,  in  all  ages,  who  prayerfully  look  for  the  day  of 
account.  Xo  hymn  can  more  graciously  dispose  the 
subjects  of  future  judicial  inspection  for  the  holiest  and 
safest  posture  of  readiness  for  the  trumpet's  voice  than 
this — 

Thou  Judge  of  quick  and  dead, 

Before  whose  bar  severe, 
With  holy  joy  or  guilty  dread, 

We  all  shall  soon  appear ; 
Our  caution'd  souls  prepare 

For  that  tremendous  day  ; 
And  fill  us  now  with  watchful  care, 

And  stir  us  up  to  pray — 

To  pray  and  wait  the  hour, 

That  awful  hour  unknown  ; 
When,  robed  in  majesty  and  power 

Thou  shalt  from  heaven  come  down, 
The  immortal  Son  of  man, 

To  judge  the  human  race, 
With  all  Thy  Father's  dazzling  train, 

With  all  Thy  glorious  grace. 

To  damp  our  earthly  joys, 

To  increase  our  gracious  fears, 
For  ever  let  the  Archangel's  voice 

Be  sounding  in  our  ears ; 
The  solemn  midnight  cry, 

"  Ye  dead,  the  Judge  is  come  ; 
Arise  and  meet  Him  in  the  sky, 

And  meet  your  instant  doom  !" 


452  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Oh  may  we  thus  be  found 

Obedient  to  his  word ; 
Attentive  to  the  trumpet's  sound, 

And  looking  for  our  Lord  ! 
Oh  may  we  thus  ensure 

A  lot  among  the  blest ; 
And  watch  a  moment  to  secure 

An  everlasting  rest ! 

But  among  the  many  judgment  hymns  which  must  be 
ever  precious  to  those  who  "  look  for  their  Lord," 
who  can  forget  one  that  rose  from  Oxford,  about  forty 
years  ago,  kindling  afresh  the  faith  of  English  Chris- 
tians, and  awakening  the  Church  to  brighter  and  holier 
anticipations  of  its  Lord's  descent.  Henry  Hart  Mil- 
man  will  always  be  reverenced  by  the  lovers  of  high 
class  church  history,  and  be  thought  of  with  admiration 
and  thankfulness  by  all  who  enjoy  the  Christian  hymn 
when  it  rises  into  impressive  grandeur.  Dean  Milman, 
now  a  venerable  man  bending  under  the  weight  of 
years,  is  the  son  of  Sir  Francis  Milman,  physician  to 
George  III.  Born  in  1791  ;  educated  at  Eton  and 
Oxford,  he  was  advanced  in  1817  to  the  vicarage  of 
St.  Mary's,  Beading;  and  four  years  after  was  installed 
as  University  Professor  of  Poetry  at  Oxford;  and 
while  filling  that  chair,  he  gave  forth  his  hymn  on 
"  The  Last  Day"— 

The  chariot,  the  chariot !  its  wheels  roll  on  fire, 

As  the  Lord  cometh  down  in  the  pomp  of  his  ire; 

Self-moving,  it  drives  on  its  pathway  of  cloud, 

And  the  heavens  with  the  burthen  of  Godhead  are  bowed. 

The  glory,  the  glory  !  around  Him  are  poured 
The  myriads  of  angels  that  wait  on  the  Lord ; 
And  the  glorified  saints,  and  the  martyrs  are  there, 
And  all  who  the  palm -wreath  of  victory  wear. 


JUDGMENT    HTMHS.  453 

The  trumpet,  the  trumpet !  the  dead  have  all  heard, 
Lo  !  the  depths  of  the  st  i  ed  charnel  are  stirred  ; 

From  the  ocean  and  earth,  from  the  south  and  the  north, 
Lo  !  the  vast  generations  of  ages  come  forth  ! 

The  judgment,  the  judgment !  the  thrones  are  all  set, 
Where  the  Lamb  and  the  white-vested  elders  are  m 
All  flesh  is  at  once  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord, 
And  the  doom  of  eternity  hangs  on  his  -word. 

Oh  mercy,  oh  mercy  !  look  down  from  above, 
Eedeemer,  on  us  Thy  sad  children,  with  love. 
When  beneath,  to  their  darkness  the  wicked  are  driven, 
May  our  sanctified  souls  find  a  mansion  in  heaven. 


n  xxr 


7. 


SONGS    OF    GLOKY. 

"  And  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and  come  to  Sion 
with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads." 

HERE  are  many  who  look  wishfully  for  im- 
mortal pleasures  in  heaven,  while  they  with- 
hold themselves  from  preparatory  religious 
pleasures  upon  earth.  And  some,  too,  who  with  a 
sort  of  instinctive  yearning  for  repose  in  the  future, 
sing  of  eternal  rest,  though  as  yet  they  have  not  been 
fully  submissive  to  Him  who  is  the  only  source  and 
giver  of  rest.  There  are  moments  in  the  life  of  human 
genius  when  divine  and  celestial  realities  assert  their 
claims  on  the  gifted  soul,  and  call  out  from  it  songs 
and  hymns  which  have  a  music  and  a  power  for  minds 
far  more  spiritual  than  the  author's,  a  music  and  a 
power  which  the  hymnist  himself,  perhaps,  never  so 
deeply  felt.  Thomas  Moore,  it  may  be,  though 
expressing  the  aspiration  of  his  own  soul  in  one  of  its 
better  moments,  never  knew  with  how  deep  a  charm 
his  verses  touch  the  more  fully  sanctified  spirit,  who 
patiently  longs  for  the  moment  of  its  upward  spring 
into  eternal  life. 


SONGS    OF    GLOliY.  455 

The  bird  let  loose  in  Eastern  skies 

When  hastening  fondly  home, 
Ne'er  stoops  to  earth  his  wing,  nor  flies 

Where  idle  warblers  roam ; 
But  high  she  shoots  through  air  and  light, 

Above  all  low  delay, 
Where  nothing  earthly  bounds  her  flight, 

Nor  shadow  dims  her  way. 

So  grant  me,  God,  from  every  care, 

And  stain  of  passion  free, 
Aloft,  through  virtue's  purer  air, 

To  hold  my  course  to  Thee ! 
No  sin  to  cloud,  no  lure  to  stay 

My  soul  as  home  she  springs  ; 
Thy  sunshine  on  her  joyful  way, 

Thy  freedom  in  her  wings  ! 

Many  a  heavenly- minded  Christian  with  who*^ 
Moore  would  have  but  little  sympathy,  will  thank  Grod 
for  the  pen  of  the  man  who  has  thus  afforded  him  a 
tuneful  form  of  expressing  what  he  himself  could 
never  so  express,  while  pluming  his  wings  for  a  home- 
ward flight.  So,  the  same  hymnist  has  furnished  a 
song  of  glory  which  those  whose  heavenliness  is  a 
principle  and  habit  rather  than  a  mere  sentiment,  will 
always  sing  with  feelings  richer,  probably,  and  holier, 
than  the  inspiration  which  gave  it  birth — 

This  world  is  all  a  fleeting  show 

For  man's  illusion  given; 
The  smiles  of  joy,  the  tears  of  woe, 
Deceitful  shine,  deceitful  flow  ; 

There's  nothing  true  but  Heaven  ! 

And  false  the  light  on  glory's  plume, 

As  fading  hues  of  eveu  ; 
And  love,  and  hope,  and  beauty's  bloom 
Are  blossoms  gathered  from  the  tomb ; 

There's  nothing  bright  but  Heaven  ! 


456  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Poor  wanderers  of  a  stormy  day, 

From  wave  to  wave  we're  driven ; 
And  fancy's  flash,  and  reason's  ray, 
Serve  but  to  light  the  troubled  way ; 
There's  nothing  calm  but  Heaven ! 

To  those  whoso  heavenly-mindedness  is  pure 
enough  to  long  for  the  future  without  being  em- 
bittered with  the  present,  this  hymn  expresses  a 
Christian's  preference  for  heaven  ;  a  peaceful  and  holy 
superiority  to  the  vanities  of  earth ;  but  on  other  lips 
it  may  have  another  meaning :  it  may  be  the  language 
of  one  who  turns  plaintively  towards  heaven  in  the 
crisis  of  bitter  disappointment  and  vexation  with  the 
falsehoods  of  this  world.  Those  who  can  sing  from 
their  hearts— 

Thou  know'st  in  the  spirit  of  prayer, 

We  long  Thy  appearing  to  see, 
Resign'd  to  the  burden  we  bear, 

But  longing  to  triumph  with  Thee ; 
'Tis  good  at  Thy  word  to  be  here, 

'Tis  better  in  Thee  to  be  gone, 
And  see  Thee  in  glory  appear, 

And  rise  to  a  share  in  Thy  throne ; 

those  who  in  "patience  possess  their  souls/'  while 
they  linger  in  sweet  suspense  on  the  shadowy  borders 
of  time,  love  rather  the  quiet  and  submissive  joyful- 
ness  of  songs  like  Anne  Steele's  hymn  on  "  The 
Promised  Land."  Peacefully  looking  out  into  the 
brightening  distance  from  her  chamber  of  sickness,  or 
from  her  garden  terrace,  where  her  Saviour's  strength 
was  made  perfect  in  her  weakness,  or  from  the  avenue 
of  fir-trees  where  whispers  of  mortal  strife  sometimes 
touched  her  ear,  she  used  to  sing — 


SONGS    OF    GLORY.  457 

Far  from  those  narrow  scenes  of  night 

Unbounded  glories  rise, 
And  realms  of  infinite  delight, 

Unknown  to  mortal  eyes. 

Far  distant  land  !  could  mortal  eyes 

But  half  its  joys  explore, 
How  would  our  spirits  long  to  rise, 

And  dwell  on  earth  no  more  ! 

There  pain  and  sickness  never  come, 

And  grief  no  more  complains  ! 
Health  triumphs  in  immortal  bloom. 

And  endless  pleasure  reigns  ! 

From  discord  free  and  war's  alarms, 

And  want,  and  pining  care  ; 
Plenty  and  peace  unite  their  charms, 

And  smile  unchanging  there. 

There  rich  varieties  of  joy 

Continual  feast  the  mind  ; 
Pleasures  which  fill,  but  never  cloy, 

Immortal  and  refin'd  ! 

ISTo  factious  strife,  no  envy  there, 

The  sons  of  peace  molest ; 
But  harmony  and  love  sincere 

Fill  every  happy  breast. 

]^o  cloud  those  blissful  regions  know, 

For  ever  bright  and  fair  ! 
For  sin,  the  source  of  mortal  woe, 

Can  never  enter  there. 

There  no  alternate  night  is  known, 

Nor  sun's  faint  sickly  ray  ; 
But  glory  from  the  sacred  throne 

Spreads  everlasting  day. 

The  glorious  monarch  there  displays 

His  beams  of  wondrous  grace ; 
His  happy  subjects  sing  his  praise, 

And  bow  before  His  face. 


458  HYMN-WEITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Oh  may  the  heavenly  prospect  fire 

Our  hearts  with  ardent  love, 
Till  ways  of  faith  and  strong  desire 

Bear  every  thought  above. 

Prepare  us,  Lord,  by  grace  divine, 

For  thy  bright  courts  on  high  ; 
Then  bid  our  spirits  rise  and  join 

The  chorus  of  the  sky. 

Who  can  sing  of  Canaan  without  recalling  some 
lovely  scenes  of  southern  England ;  and  thinking  of 
one  whose  harp  was  often  strung  in  praise  of — 

Sweet  fields  beyond  the  swelling  flood  ? 

In  the  year  1782,  there  was  a  deacon  of  the  Inde- 
pendent church  at  Southampton,  whose  son,  in  his 
eighteenth  year,  felt,  now  and  then,  during  the 
Sunday  psalm  or  hymn,  somewhat  like  a  finely  sen- 
sitive ear  feels  at  the  sound  of  a  file  sharpening  a  saw ; 
and  he  complained  that  the  old  hymnists  were  sadly 
out  of  taste.  "  Give  us  something  better,  young 
man/-'  was  the  reply.  The  young  man  did  it ;  and 
the  church  was  invited  to  close  its  evening  service 
with  a  new  hymn,  thus — 

Behold  the  glories  of  the  Lamb 

Amidst  his  Father's  throne  ; 
Prepare  new  honours  for  His  name, 

And  songs  before  unknown. 

Let  elders  worship  at  His  feet, 

The  church  adore  around, 
With  vials  full  of  odours  sweet, 

And  harps  of  sweeter  sound. 

Those  are  the  prayers  of  the  saints, 

And  those  the  hymns  they  raise  : 
Jesus  is  kind  to  our  complaints, 

He  loves  to  hear  our  praise. 


SONGS    OF    GLORY.  459 

Eternal  Father,  who  shall  look 

Into  thy  secret  will  ? 
Who  but  the  Son  shall  take  that  book, 

And  open  every  seal  ? 

He  shall  fulfil  thy  great  decrees, 

The  Son  deserves  it  well ; 
Lo,  in  His  hand  the  sov'reign  keys 

Of  heaven,  and  death,  and  hell  ! 

Now  to  the  Lamb  that  once  was  slain, 

Be  endless  blessings  paid ; 
Salvation,  glory,  joy  remain 

For  ever  on  Thy  head. 

Thou  hast  redeem'd  our  souls  with  blood, 

Hast  set  the  pris'ners  free, 
Hast  made  us  kings  and  priests  to  God, 

And  we  shall  reign  with  Thee. 

The  worlds  of  nature  and  of  grace 

Are  put  beneath  Thy  pow'r ; 
Then  shorten  these  delaying  days, 

And  bring  the  promis'd  hour  ! 

This  was  Isaac  Watts' s  first  hymn ;  a  new  vein  of 
song  was  opened;  the  little  hymnist  had  struck  a 
chord  which  gave  birth  to  fresh  harmonies  in  the 
church.  Hymn  followed  hymn  until  the  young  essayist 
published  his  first  and  successful  edition  of  "  Hymns 
and  Spiritual  Songs."  Young  poets  are  susceptible 
of  love  and  beauty,  and  Isaac  soon  paid  court  to  the 
accomplished  and  pious  Elizabeth  Singer,  afterwards 
better  known  as  Mrs.  Eowe.  She  told  her  suitor  that 
she  loved  the  jewel,  but  could  not  admire  the  casket, 
and  thus  lost  the  honour  of  being  Mrs.  Watts ;  while 
she  sent  the  grieved  young  Christian  poet  to  his 
Saviour's  feet,  devoutly  to  consecrate  himself  for  life 
to  science,  philosophy,  literature,   and  the  service  of 


460  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

holy  song.     How  sweetly  his  disappointment  in   the 
creature  melts  in  devotion  to  his  Lord — 

How  vain  are  all  things  here  below  ! 

How  false  and  yet  how  fair  ! 
Each  pleasure  hath  its  poison  too, 

And  every  sweet  a  snare. 

The  brightest  things  below  the  sky 
.  Give  but  a  flatt'ring  light ; 
We  should  suspect  some  danger  nigh 
Where  we  possess  delight. 

Our  dearest  joys  and  nearest  friends, 

The  partners  of  our  blood, 
How  they  divide  our  wav'ring  minds, 

And  leave  but  half  for  God. 

The  fondness  of  a  creature's  love, 

How  strong  it  strikes  the  sense  ! 
Thither  the  warm  affections  move, 

Nor  can  we  call  them  thence. 

Dear  Saviour !  let  Thy  beauties  be 

My  soul's  eternal  food, 
And  grace  command  my  heart  away 

From  all  created  good. 

Thus  driven  back  from  the  pursuit  of  conjugal 
j3leasures,  he  turns  to  the  future  with  more  entire 
affection.  Heaven  brightens  on  him  as  earth  with- 
holds its  smile,  and  sitting  at  his  parlour  window, 
looking  out  upon  the  waters  of  the  Itchen,  with  the 
Isle  of  Wight  in  the  distance,  and  the  rich  landscape 
opening  its  inviting  beauties  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river,  he  thought  of  Canaan,  and  the  Jordan,  and  the 
final  passage,  and  the  calm  and  immortal  repose  of  the 
inheritance  beyond ;  and  then  arose  that  soothing  and 
cheering  hymn  which,  as  long  as  Christianity  expresses 


SONGS    OF    GLORY.  461 

its  hopes  in  the  English  language,,  will  pleasantly 
sustain  its  title  in  the  hearts  of  God's  children,  and 
assure  them  that  "  a  prospect  of  heaven  makes  death 
easy."  How  many  souls  have  felt  this  prospect 
brightening  as  they  sang — 

There  is  a  land  of  pure  delight, 

Where  saints  immortal  reign  ; 
Infinite  day  excludes  the  night, 

And  pleasures  banish  pain. 

There  everlasting  spring  abides, 

And  never -withering  flowers  ; 
Death,  like  a  narrow  sea,  divides 

This  heavenly  land  from  ours. 

Sweet  fields,  beyond  the  swelling  flood, 

Staud  dress'd  in  living  green  ; 
So  to  the  Jews  old  Canaan  stood, 

While  Jordan  rolled  between. 

But  tim'rous  mortals  start  and  shrink 

To  cross  this  narrow  sea  ; 
And  linger,  shivering  on  the  brink, 

And  fear  to  launch  away. 

Oh  !  could  we  make  our  doubts  remove, 

Those  gloomy  doubts  that  rise, 
And  see  the  Canaan  that  we  love 

With  unbeclouded  eyes  ! 

Could  we  but  climb  where  Moses  stood, 

And  view  the  landscape  o'er, 
Xot  Jordan's  stream  nor  death's  cold  flood, 

Should  fright  us  from  the  shore. 

Watts  passed  from  the  mortal  shore,  and  happily 

crossed  the   river,  in  his    seventy-fifth    year,   after    a 

season  of 

Calm  decay  and  peace  divine. 


462  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

The  beautiful  retirement  and  holy  friendships  of 
Abney  Park,  the  last  retreat  of  Watts,  would  be  asso- 
ciated in  the  mind  who  loves  sweet  songs  of  glory 
with  a  picture  once  exhibited  in  the  Royal  Academy — 
a  picture  of  George  Herbert  in  his  garden  at  Bemerton. 
That  garden  was  the  little  earthly  paradise  where 
Herbert  used  to  sing  of  a  brighter  land,  and  pour 
forth  his  warm  desires  for  freedom  to  wing  his  way  to 
rest.  His  paradise  at  Bemerton  detained  him  but  a 
little  more  than  two  years.  Just  before  his  soul 
ceased  to  be 

An  entangled,  hampered  thing, 

he  put  a  small  manuscript  into  a  friend's  hand,  saying, 
' '  Sir,  I  pray  deliver  this  little  book  to  my  dear  brother 
Farrer,  and  tell  him  he  shall  find  in  it  a  picture  of  the 
many  spiritual  conflicts  that  have  passed  betwixt  God 
and  my  soul  before  I  would  subject  mine  to  the  will  of 
Jesus  my  Master,  in  whose  service  I  have  now  found 
perfect  freedom.  Desire  him  to  read  it,  and  then,  if 
he  can  think  it  may  turn  to  the  advantage  of  any 
dejected  poor  soul,  let  it  be  made  public ;  if  not,  let 
him  burn  it,  for  I  and  it  are  less  than  the  least  of 
God's  mercies."  "  Brother  Farrer  "  did  not  burn  it : 
it  was  too  precious  a  legacy ;  and  were  there  nothing 
else  in  it  but  his  hymn  of  desire  after  God  and  his 
"  Home,"  it  would  be  truly  "  the  precious  life-blood  of 
a  master  spirit,  embalmed  and  treasured  up  on  purpose 
to  a  life  beyond  life."  The  song  has  a  quaintness, 
here  and  there,  which  scarcely  suits  the  modern  taste ; 
there  are  little  curious  conceits  and  grotesque  allu- 
sions, which  to  us  do  not  appear  as  natural  as  they 
really  were  to  the  writer  himself;  but  the  exquisite 
fancy,  the  rich  imagination,  the  pregnant  thought,  the 


SOXGS    OF    GLORY.  463 

spiritual  music,  and  the  intensely  holy  feeling  which 
show  themselves  in  "  the  Temple/'  all  combine  in  his 
rhythmical  prayer  for  the  freedom  of  "  Home/'  and 
invite  ns  to  chant — 

Come,  Lord,  my  head  doth  burn,  my  heart  is  sick, 

While  Thou  dost  ever,  ever  stay ; 

Thy  long  deferrings  wound  me  to  the  quick, 

My  spirit  gaspeth  night  and  day. 

Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 

Or  take  me  up  to  Thee ! 

Yet  if  Thou  stayest  still,  why  must  I  stay  ? 

My  God,  what  is  this  world  to  me  ? 
This  world  of  woe  ?     Hence,  all  ye  clouds,  away, 
Away,  I  must  get  up  and  see. 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me. 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee  ! 

What  is  this  weary  world,  this  meat  and  drink, 

That  chains  us  by  the  teeth  so  fast  ? 
What  is  this  woman -kind,  which  I  can  wink 
Into  a  blackness  and  distaste  ? 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee ! 

With  one  small  sigh  Thou  gavest  me  th'  other  day 

I  blasted  all  the  joys  about  me  ; 
And  scowling  on  them  as  they  pined  away, 
Xow  come  again,  said  I,  and  plant  me. 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee  ! 

Nothing  but  drought  and  dearth,  but  bush  and  brake, 

"Which  way  soe'er  I  look,  I  see. 
Some  may  dream  merrily,  and  when  they  wake, 
They  dress  themselves  and  come  to  Thee. 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee ! 


464  HYMN-WEITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

We  talk  of  harvests  ;  there  are  no  such  things, 

But  when  we  leave  our  corn  and  hay ; 
There  is  no  fruitful  year,  but  that  which  brings 
The  last  and  loved,  though  dreadful  day. 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee  ! 

Oh  loose  this  frame,  this  knot  of  man  untie, 

That  my  free  soul  may  use  her  wing, 
Which  now  is  pinion'd  with  mortality, 
As  an  entangled,  hampered  thing. 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee  ! 

What  have  I  left,  that  I  should  stay  and  groan  ? 

The  most  of  me  to  heaven  is  fled ; 
My  thoughts  and  joys  are  all  pack'd  up  and  gone, 
And  for  their  old  acquaintance  plead. 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee  ! 

Come,  dearest  Lord,  pass  not  this  holy  season, 

My  flesh  and  bones  and  joints  do  pray  ; 
And  even  my  verse,  when  by  the  rhyme  and  reason 
The  word  is  stay,  says  ever,  come. 
Oh  show  Thyself  to  me, 
Or  take  me  up  to  Thee ! 

Herbert's  hymn  found  an  echo  from  the  parish  of 
another  country  parson.  John  Mason  may  have  heard 
the  voice  from  Bemerton  in  his  rectory  at  Water- 
Stratford.  At  all  events  he  breathed  the  spirit  of 
Herbert ;  his  manner  is  somewhat  akin,  and  his  diction 
marks  his  brotherhood.  '  Like  his  predecessor  in 
quaint  but  hallowed  song,  the  secret  of  Mason's  sweet- 
ness and  power  in  divine  melody,  was  found  in  his 
private  devotion.  Six  times  a  day  he  went  aside  to 
wrestle  with  his  Lord  in  prayer;  and  his  character  and 
life  exemplified  the  saying,  "  When  thou  prayest  enter 


SONGS   OF    GLORY.  465 

into  thy  closet,  and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door, 
pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret ;  and  thy  Father 
which  seeth  in  secret  shall  reward  thee  openly/''  The 
reward  came  on  Mason  in  his  strength  to  labour,  and 
his  grace  to  sing ;  in  the  fruit  of  his  happy  toil  among 
his  parishioners,  and  in  the  joys  which  his  songs  of 
praise  called  up  around  him  while  he  lived,  and  per- 
petuated in  the  heart  of  successive  generations  with 
whom,  though  dead,  he  yet  sings.  His  voice  is  still  in 
our  ears  in  his  "  Song  of  Praise  for  the  Hope  of 
Glory"— 

I  sojourn  in  a  vale  of  tears, 

Alas,  how  can  I  sing  ? 
My  harp  doth  on  the  willows  hang, 

Distun'd  in  every  string. 
My  music  is  a  captive's  chains, 

Harsh  sounds  my  ears  do  fill ; 
How  shall  I  sing  sweet  Sion's  song 

On  this  side  Sion's  hill  ? 

Yet  lo !  I  hear  a  joyful  sound, 

Surely  I  quickly  come  ; 
Each  word  much  sweetness  doth  distil, 

Like  a  full  honey- comb. 
And  dost  Thou  come,  my  dearest  Lord  ? 

And  dost  Thou  surely  come  ? 
And  dost  Thou  surely  quickly  come  ? 

Methinks  I  am  at  home. 

Come  then,  my  dearest,  dearest  Lord, 

My  sweetest,  surest  Friend ; 
Come,  for  I  loathe  these  Kedar  tents, 

The  fiery  chariots  send. 
What  have  I  here  ?  my  thoughts  and  joys 

Are  all  pack'd  up  and  gone  ; 
My  eager  soul  would  follow  them 

To  Thine  eternal  throne. 

30 


466  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

"What  have  I  in  this  barren  land  ? 

My  Jesus  is  not  here ; 
Mine  eyes  will  ne'er  be  blest,  until 

My  Jesns  doth  appear. 
My  Jesus  is  gone  up  to  heaven 

To  get  a  place  for  me ; 
For  'tis  His  will  that  where  He  is, 

There  should  His  servants  be. 

Canaan  I  view  from  Pisgah's  top, 

Of  Canaan's  grapes  I  taste  ; 
My  Lord,  who  sends  unto  me  here, 

Will  send  for  me  at  last. 
I  have  a  God  that  changeth  not, 

"Why  should  I  be  perplext  ? 
My  God  that  owns  me  in  this  world, 

"Will  own  me  in  the  next. 

Go  fearless  then,  my  soul,  with  God 

Into  another  room ; 
Thou,  who  hast  walked  with  Him  here 

Go  see  thy  God  at  home. 
Yiew  death  with  a  believing  eye, 

It  hath  an  angel's  face  ; 
And  this  kind  angel  will  prefer 

Thee  to  an  angel's  place. 

The  grave  is  but  a  fining  pot 

Unto  believing  eyes, 
For  there  the  flesh  shall  lose  its  dross 

And  like  the  sun  shall  rise. 
The  world  which  I  have  known  too  well, 

Hath  mocked  me  with  its  lies ; 
How  gladly  could  I  leave  behind 

Its  vexing  vanities ! 

My  dearest  friends  they  dwell  above, 

There  will  I  go  to  see  ; 
And  all  my  friends  in  Christ  below 

Will  soon  come  after  me. 


SONGS    OF   GLORY.  467 

Fear  not  the  trump's  earth-rending  sound, 

Dread  not  the  day  of  doom, 
For  He  that  is  to  be  thy  Judge 

Thy  Saviour  is  become. 

Blest  be  my  God  that  gives  me  light, 

Who  in  the  dark  did  grope ; 
Blest  be  my  God,  the  God  of  love, 

Who  causeth  me  to  hope. 
Here's  the  Word's  signet,  comfort's  staff, 

And  here  is  grace's  chain  ; 
By  these  thy  pledges,  Lord,  I  know 

My  hopes  are  not  in  vain. 

There  are  some  modern  songs  of  glory  which 
are  in  sweet  harmony  with  Herbert's  mnsic  about 
"  Home/'  and  with  the  echoes  of  that  music  from  the 
soul  of  the  saintly  Mason.  There  are  "  Parish 
Musings"  which,  as  the  musing  hymnist  modestly 
says,  claim  no  merit  but  this,  <(  that  they  are  practical, 
not  theoretical ;  not  the  cold  musings  of  th  e  head  of 
one  at  ease ;  but  the  warm  gushings  of  the  heart  of 
one  toiling  himself,  and  striving  to  lead  others  amid 
the  dust  and  conflict  of  the  journey  of  life.-"  Ears 
that  are  finely  tuned  may,  even  in  the  passing  bell,  hear 
the  Master's  voice,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence  ;"  but  the 
voice,  though  solemn,  is  happy,  for  it  calls  us  towards 
"  Home"— 

Deep  tolls  the  muffled  bell 

With  its  voice  of  woe ; 
Bidding  solemn — sad  farewell 
To  all  things  below  ; 
Home,  home ! 
Come  home ! 
Thus  it  seems  to  say — 
Where  rest 
Awaits  the  blest, 
In  eternal  day ! 


468  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Sweet  sounds  the  Sabbath  bell, 

Summoning  to  prayer, 
Bidding  cheerful — glad  farewell ' 
To  all  worldly  care ; 

Oh !  enter  in, 

And  from  sin, 
Thus  it  seems  to  say — 

Here  rest 

Where  the  blest 
Come  to  kneel  and  pray ! 

Lord !  so  true  to  Thee  alone, 
Tune  this  discordant  soul, 
That  with  the  same  soft  Sabbath  tone 
"Whenever  it  may  toll ; 
That  sweet  bell 
Of  joy  may  tell ; 
And  ever  seem  to  say — 
Home,  home ! 
Come  home ! 
Come  to  Christ  away  ! 

Do  we  cry  in  childlike  longing,  "  When,  Lord?"  and 
"  How  long  V3  The  same  sweet  psalmist  gives  the 
answer,  i(  Soon  and  for  ever  \"  "  Go  thou  thy  way 
till  the  end  be  ;  for  thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy 
lot  at  the  end  of  the  days."  Mr.  Monsell  brings  a 
holy  song  out  of  "  a  dying  Christian's  last  words," 
thus — 

"  Soon  and  for  ever," 

Such  promise  our  trust, 
Tho'  ashes  to  ashes, 

And  dust  unto  dust : 
"  Soon  and  for  ever," 
Our  union  shall  be 
Made  perfect,  our  glorious 

Eedeemer,  in  Thee ; 
When  the  sins  and  the  sorrows 
Of  time  shall  be  o'er, 


SONGS   OF    GLOEY.  469 

Its  pangs  and  its  partings 

Remembered  no  more ; 
Where  life  cannot  fail, 

And  -where  death  cannot  sever, 
Christians  with  Christ  shall  be 

"  Soon  and  for  ever." 

"  Soon  and  for  ever," 

The  breaking  of  day 
Shall  drive  all  the  night  clouds 

Of  sorrow  away : 
"  Soon  and  for  ever," 

We'll  see  as  we're  seen, 
And  learn  the  deep  meaning 

Of  things  that  have  been ; 
When  fightings  without  us, 

And  fears  from  within, 
Shall  weary  no  more 

In  the  warfare  with  sin ; 
Where  fears,  and  where  tears, 

And  where  death  shall  be  never ; 
Christians  with  Christ  shall  be 

"  Soon  and  for  ever." 

"  Soon  and  for  ever," 

The  work  shall  be  done ; 
The  warfare  accomplish' d, 

The  victory  won : 
"  Soon  and  for  ever." 

The  soldier  Lay  down 
His  sword  for  a  harp, 

And  his  cross  for  a  crown. 
Then  droop  not  in  sorrow, 

Despond  not  in  fear  ; 
A  glorious  to-morrow. 

Is  brightening  and  near ; 
When  (blessed  reward 

Of  each  faithful  endeavour), 
Christians  with  Christ  shall  be 

"  Soon  and  for  ever." 


470  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Mr.  Monsell  is  always  sweet  and  pleasant,  though  his 
music  has  mostly  a  plaintive  toue,  even  when  he 
sings  of  heaven.  To  some  spirits  this  tone  is  always 
welcome ;  to  others  the  future  is  full  of  bright,  cheer- 
ful, and  exultant  songs.  In  dispensing  "  psalms  and 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs,"  the  inspiring  Spirit  deals 
with  us  according  to  our  faith. 

"  I  remember/-'  said  an  old  man,  the  other  day, 
his  face  brightening  with  the  recollections  which  he 
was  calling  up ;  (C  I  remember  some  years  ago,  a  minis- 
ter coming  into  our  neighbourhood  to  preach.  He 
was  a  good  man,  and  a  good  preacher ;  but  I  can 
mind  his  singing  much  better  than  his  sermons.  He 
used  to  preach  not  far  from  where  I  lived ;  and  when 
I  saw  the  people  flocking  to  the  chapel,  I  used  to  go 
to  hear  the  famous  singer.  Ah,  he  was  a  singer  ! 
And  I  believe  one  great  secret  of  his  music  was  that 
his  heart  was  in  it.  His  voice  was  like  an  anger's,  as 
they  say,  though  I  never  heard  an  angel  sing ;  but  I 
can  scarcely  think  that  an  angel  or  any  other  singer 
could  beat  that  happy-looking  preacher.  He  was  a 
man  with  a  long  face,  and  a  high  bald  head.  And  his 
eyes  used  to  sparkle  as  he  sang,  as  if  the  hymns  were 
coming  up  from  his  soul,  and  so  they  did.  There  was 
one  hymn  I  always  liked  to  hear  him  sing,  he  would 
sing  it  after  the  sermon;  it  was  one  of  his  own  com- 
posing, and  the  tune  was  his,  too.  I  learnt  to  sing  it 
myself,  and  I  taught  my  boy  to  sing  it;  and  sometimes, 
long  after  that  singing  preacher  was  gone  to  his  own 
'  Jerusalem  divine/  my  boy  and  I,  and  three  or  four 
more,  used  to  get  together  of  an  evening,  and  sing  it 
in  full  harmony.  Oh,  it  was  so  rich ;  and  it  seemed 
to  lift  one  towards  heaven  while  we  sang.  This  was 
the  hymn" — 


SONGS    OF   GLORY.  471 

Jerusalem  divine, 

When  shall  I  call  thee  mine  ? 
And  to  thy  holy  hill  attain, 

Where  weary  pilgrims  rest, 

And  in  thy  glories  blest, 
With  God  Messiah  ever  reign. 

There  saints  and  angels  join 

In  fellowship  divine, 
And  rapture  swells  the  solemn  lay : 

While  all  with  one  accord 

Adore  their  glorious  Lord, 
And  shout  his  praise  in  endless  day. 

May  I  but  find  the  grace 

To  fill  an  humble  place 
In  that  inheritance  above  ; 

My  tuneful  voice  I'll  raise 

In  songs  of  loudest  praise, 
To  spread  thy  fame,  Redeeming  Love  ! 

Reign,  true  Messiah,  reign  ! 

Thy  kingdom  shall  remain 
When  stars  and  sun  no  more  shall  shine, 

Mysterious  Deity, 

Who  ne'er  began  to  be, 
To  sound  thy  endless  praise  be  mine  ! 


The  musical  preacher  and  hynmist  left  nappy  im- 
pressions upon  very  many  souls,  besides  the  old  man 
who  recorded  his  music.  The  preacher  was  Benjamin 
Rhodes,  the  son  of  a  schoolmaster  at  Hexborough,  in 
the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  He  was  born  in  the 
year  1743,  and  had  the  advantage  of  a  pious  training 
by  godly  parents.  Before  he  was  eleven  years  of  age, 
his  father  took  him  to  hear  Mr.  Whitefield ;  he  was 
melted  into  tears,  and  received  religious  impressions 


472  HYMN-WRITERS    AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

which,  though  dimmed  occasionally  during  his  youthful 
course,  finally  led  him  to  Christian  decision  and  eminent 
devotedness  to  Christ.  When  about  nineteen,  his 
religious  enjoyments  were  great.  "In  this  happy 
season/'  he  tells  us,  ffmy  joy  frequently  prevented 
my  sleep,  while  my  soul  was  taken  up  with  Him  who 
is  altogether  lovely,  and  in  ecstasies  of  joy,  in  the 
stillness  of  the  night,  I  often  sang  my  great  Deliverer's 
praise."  Thus  his  native  musical  powers,  and  his 
talent  as  a  hymnist,  were  hallowed  by  religious  delight. 
In  the  year  1766,  he  was  employed  by  Mr.  Wesley  as 
an  itinerant  preacher,  and  was  faithful  and  happy  in 
that  calling  for  about  half  a  century.  His  end 
answered  to  the  simplicity  of  his  character  and  the 
integrity  of  his  life ;  it  was  peace.  He  is  now  honoured 
as  the  author  of  that  one  hymn,  the  latter  part  of 
which  the  old  man  used  to  sing  with  such  pleasure. 
Mr.  Rhodes  was  not  a  rival  of  -Charles  Wesley,  but  his 
( '  Jerusalem  divine  "  may  be  a  companion  hymn  for 
Wesley's  songs  of  glory,  the  songs  which,  probably, 
come  nearest  to  the  apostolic  standard  of  Christian 
hope.  One  of  them  melted  the  judge  and  the  entire 
court  in  Exeter  Castle  about  twelve  or  thirteen  years 
ago.  A  good  young  woman  had  been  set  upon  by 
a  villain  on  her  way  from  the  Sunday  school,  and  was 
left  for  dead  by  the  roadside.  On  being  discovered, 
she  was  restored  to  consciousness  so  far  as  to  identify 
the  perpetrator  of  the  crime ;  and  then  she  died, 
singing  one  of  Charles  Wesley's  triumphant  anthems 
of  hope : — 

How  happy  every  child  of  grace, 

Who  knows  his  sins  forgiven! 
This  earth,  he  cries,  is  not  my  place, 

I  seek  my  place  in  heaven ; 


SONGS    OF    GLORY.  473 

A  country  far  from  mortal  sight ; — 

Yet,  oh  !  by  faith  I  see 
The  land  of  rest,  the  saints'  delight, 

The  heaven  prepared  for  me. 

A  stranger  in  the  world  below, 

I  calmly  sojourn  here ; 
Nor  can  its  happiness  or  woe 

Provoke  my  hope  or  fear  : 
Its  evils  in  a  moment  end, 

Its  joys  as  soon  are  past ; 
But,  oh  !  the  bliss  to  which  I  tend 

Eternally  shall  last. 

To  that  Jerusalem  above 

"With  singing  I  repair ; 
"While  in  the  flesh  my  hope  and  love, 

My  heart  and  soul  are  there ; 
There  my  exalted  Saviour  stands, 

My  merciful  High  Priest, 
And  still  extends  His  wounded  hands 

To  take  me  to  His  breast. 

What  is  there  here  to  court  my  stay, 

Or  hold  me  back  from  home, 
"While  angels  beckon  me  away, 

And  Jesus  bids  me  come  ? 
Shall  I  regret  my  parted  friends 

Still  in  the  vale  confined  ? 
Nay,  but  whene'er  my  soul  ascends, 

They  will  not  stay  behind. 

The  race  we  all  are  running  now  ; 

And  if  I  first  attain, 
They  too  their  willing  head  shall  bow, 

They  too  the  prize  shall  gain. 
Xow  on  the  brink  of  death  we  stand ; 

And  if  I  pass  before, 
They  all  shall  soon  escape  to  land, 

And  hail  me  on  the  shore. 


474  HYMN-WRITERS   AND    THEIR    HYMNS. 

Then  let  me  suddenly  remove, 

That  hidden  life  to  share ; 
I  shall  not  lose  my  friends  above, 

But  more  enjoy  them  there. 
There  we  in  Jesu's  praise  shall  join, 

His  boundless  love  proclaim, 
And  solemnize  in  songs  divine 

The  marriage  of  the  Lamb. 


Oh,  what  a  blessed  hope  is  ours  ! 

While  here  on  earth  we  stay, 
We  more  than  taste  the  heavenly  powers, 

And  antedate  that  day : 
We  feel  the  resurrection  near, 

Our  life  in  Christ  conceal'd, 
And  with  His  glorious  presence  here 

Our  earthen  vessels  fill'd. 


Oh,  would  He  more  of  heaven  bestow, 

And  let  the  vessel  break, 
And  let  our  ransom'd  spirits  go 

To  grasp  the  God  we  seek : 
In  rapturous  awe  on  Him  to  gaze 

Who  bought  the  sight  for  me ; 
And  shout,  and  wonder  at  His  grace, 

Through  all  eternity ! 


The  counsel  for  the  prosecution  at  the  murderer's 
trial,  in  his  appeal  to  the  jury,  described  the  death 
scene,  and  rehearsed  the  hymn,  a  part  of  which  the 
dying  girl  sang  on  her  upward  flight.  The  judge,  the 
jury,  all  but  the  prisoner,  wept.  Who  could  help  it  ? 
To  hear,  in  that  solemn  court,  the  youthful  martyr's 
song  of  glory  !  and  such  a  song  !  Many  hearts  there 
on  that  day  were  ready  to  repeat  the  last  song  of  the 
young  murdered  Christian — 


SONGS    OF    GLORY.  475 

Oh,  would  He  more  of  heaven  bestow, 

And  let  the  vessel  break, 
And  let  our  ransom'd  spirits  go 

To  grasp  the  God  we  seek  ! 


THE    END. 


HAREILD,   PBINTEE,   LOXDON. 


INDEX  TO  THE  HYMNS, 


PAGE 

A  sure  stronghold  our  God  is  He Luther    14 

All  praise  to  Thee,  my  God,  this  night Ken 68 

A  hymn  of  glory  let  us  sing Bede    103 

Away  with  our  sorrow  and  fear C.Wesley  201 

Almighty  Father !  the  rolling  year  is  full  of 

,    Thee Thompson 231 

All  thanks  be  to  God    C.Wesley... 280 

All  praise  to  the  Lord C.Wesley  304 

Awake,  my  soul,  and  with  the  sun Ken 319 

Among  those  points  of  neighbourhood Wither    369 

Abide  with  me !     Fast  falls  the  eventide Henry  F.Lytc  386 

Before  thy  heavenly  Word  revealed    Mrs.  Jul  ins  Coll  ins  24 

Bright  the  vision  that  delighted Mant  , 40 

Babe,  the  gift  of  God's  sweet  mercy Ephrem  Syrus 77 

By  cool  Siloam's  shady  rill Heber 81 

Before  the  need-fare Bede    101 

Before  Jehovah's  awful  throne  Watts 205 

Blest  day  of  God,  most  calm,  most  bright   Mason.... 265 

Blest  day  by  God  in  mercy  given  Mant  270 

Brightly  shines  the  morning  star Translation  by  Mant  31b 

Brother,  thou  art  gone  before  us   Milman 423 

Blessing,  honour,  thanks,  and  praise C.  Wesley  426 

Behold  the  glories  of  the  Lamb    Watts 458 

Christ,  Thou  the  champion  of  that  war-worn 

host  Loioenstern    15 

Christ,  my  God,  I  come  to  praise  Thee    Gregory  of  Nazianzen  66 

Christ,  our  day,  our  brightest  light  St.  Augustine's  time  70 

31 


478  INDEX    TO    THE    HYMNS. 

PAGE 

Come,  Holy  Ghost,  our  souls  inspire Gregory  I.  93 

Can  I  my  fate  no  more  withstand  Queen  Maria  of  Hungary  134 

Come,  then,  Thou  great  Deli verei',  come C.Wesley  196 

Come  let  us  join  our  friends  above  C  Wesley  201,430 

Come  ye  that  love  the  Lord    Watts 203 

Come,  oh  come !  in  pious  lays Wither    "223 

Come,  Thou  all  victorious  Lord C.Wesley  278 

Come,  Divine  Immanuel  come    C.Wesley  283 

Come,  O  Thou  traveller  unknown C.Wesley  289 

Come,  Thou  fount  of  every  blessing Robinson    293 

Come,  let  us  anew  our  journey  pursue C.Wesley  342 

Come,  let  us  join  our  cheerful  songs Watts 353 

Come  all  ye  chosen  saints  of  God Joseph  Hart 401 

Come,  ye  sinners  poor  and  wretched   Joseph  Hart  407 

Come,  immortal  king  of  glory    T.Olivers  443 

Come,  Lord,  my- head  doth  burn,  my  heart  is 

sick    Herbert  463 

Christ,  whose  glory  fills  the  sky C.Wesley  333 

Dear  is  the  hallowed  morn  to  me Allan  Cunningham  272 

Dark  and  dim  the  daylight  rose Monsell  412 

Down  from  the  willow  bough Caroline  Bowles  ...  416 

Deep  tolls  the  muffled  bell  Monsell  467 

From  our  midnight  sleep  uprising    Early  Christian  ...  41 

Fix,  oh  fix  each  crimson  wound St.  Bernard  117 

Fear  not,  oh  little  flock,  the  foe Altenburg  133 

Father  of  mercies,  in  thy  Word Anne  Steele  235 

Far  from  these  narrow  scenes  of  night; Anne  Steele    457 

Gentle  Jesus,  meek  and  mild C.  Wesley 88 

God  save  our  gracious  Queen Dr.  John  Bull  146 

Glory,  and  honour,  and  praise    Theodidf  of  Orleans  151 

Great  God,  here  at  ease   Madame  Guion 160 

God  is  a  name  my  soul  adores Watts 214 

God  of  my  days,  God  of  my  nights   Susan  n  a  Harrison  352 

God  of  my  life,  to  Thee   C.Wesley  375 

Give  glory  to  Jesus  our  Head C.Wesley  425 

Here  from  afar  the  finished  height C.Wesley  60 

Hear  us  now,  O  King  eternal Gregory  of  Nazianzen  64 


LNDEX    TO    THE    HYMNS.  479 

I'iGE 

Holy  art  Thou,  holy From  the  Saxon  in  the  "  Codt  -''  97 

Hence  in  thy  truth  tliy  Church  delights  Mount   107 

High  the  angel  choirs  are  raising  Thomas  d  Kenvpis  127 

Holy  Spirit,  come,  we  pray King  Robert  of  Fra/n  ce  131 

Has  David  Christ  to  come  foreshow' d   Sa/rrwel  Wesley,  Jim.  173 

Hail  to  the  Lord's  anointed James  Montgomery  180 

He  dies,  the  Friend  of  sinners  dies    Watts 203 

How  happy  is  the  pilgrim's  lot  John  Wesley 207 

High  in  the  heavens,  eternal  God Watts 213 

How  shall  the  young  secure  their  hearts Watts 251 

Hail,  thou  bright  and  sacred  morn    Mrs.  Lyte   254 

Hearken  to  the  solemn  voice  C.  Wesley 339 

How  sweet  and  awful  is  this  place Watts 352 

Hence,  ye  profane,  far  off  remove 0.  Wesley  358 

Happy  soul,  thy  days  are  ended O.Wesley   424 

How  vain  are  all  things  here  below  Watts 460 

How  happy  every  child  of  grace    C.Wesley  472 

I  love  (and  have  some  cause  to  love)  the  earth      Quarles  109 

I,  whom  of  late Wither   166 

H  thy  verse  do  bravely  tower Wither   168 

Inspirer  of  the  ancient  seers    C.  Wesley  241 

In  age  and  feebleness  extreme    C.Wesley  292 

I  hear  the  tempest's  awful  sound  Newton   307 

If  Paul  in  Ctesar's  court  must  stand Newton    307 

I  thank  my  Lord  for  kindly  rest    Berridge 323 

Interval  of  grateful  shade    Doddridge  344 

Is  it  not  strange,  the  darkest  hour Keble  399 

In  evil  long  I  took  delight  Newton   409 

In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death Notker 418 

In  the  midst  of  life,  behold Luther    420 

I  sojourn  in  a  vale  of  tears Mason 465 

Just  as  I  am,  without  one  plea Charlotte*  Elliott  ...  51 

Jesus,  my  Lord,  in  thy  dear  name  unite  Anne  Steele  52 

Jesus,  the  only  thought  of  Thee    St.  Bernard   Ill 

Jesus,  my  .Redeemer,  lives  , 

Louisa  Henrietta,  Electress  ofBranderibwrgh...  136 

Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul C.Wesley  198 

Jesus,  cast  a  look  on  me  Berridge 206 

Jesu !  bless  our  slender  boat  Wordsworth  298 


480  INDEX   TO   THE   HYMNS. 

PAGE 

Jesus,  by  whose  grace  I  live   Toplady 321 

Jesus,  the  all-restoring  Word C.Wesley  334 

Join,  all  ye  ransomed  sons  of  grace  C.  Wesley  338 

Jerusalem  divine    B.  Rhodes  471 

Jerusalem  the  golden    Bernard;  of  Morlaix  123 

Jerusalem,  my  happy  home Francis  Baker  153 

Lokd,  Thou  art  God First  Christians  ...  20 

Long-sufFring  Jesus,  precious  Jesus Early  Christian  ...  43 

Lead,  Holy  One,  lead  Clement  of  Alexandria  61 

Lamb  of  God,  I  look  to  Thee C.  Wesley 89 

Let  me  true  communion  know    St.  Bernard  120 

Leave  all  to  God Anthony  Ulric,  Duke  of  Brunswick  138 

Lord,  thy  best  blessing  shed  Henry  F.  Lyte 149 

Let  earth  and  heaven  agree    C.Wesley 196 

Lord,  when  my  raptured  thought  surveys  Anne  Steele  226 

Lamp  of  our  feet,  whereby  we  trace Bernard  Barton   . . .  248 

Listed  into  the  cause  of  sin C.  Wesley 286 

Launch  thy  bark,  mariner  Caroline  Bowles  ...  299 

Lord,  whom  winds  and  seas  obey  C.  Wesley 304 

Lord  in  thy  name  and  in  thy  fear      Wither  363 

Lord,  on  this  day  Thou  didst  bestow    Wither  373 

Lo,  the  day  of  wrath,  the  day    Thomas  of  Celano  437 

My  fatherland  alone  to  me  remains Gregory  of  Nazianzen  65 

Maker  of  all,  the  Lord Ambrose  of  Milan...  70 

My  dearest  Protector,  see  how  they  detain Madame  Guion    ...  161 

My  Shepherd  will  supply  my  need  Watts 182 

My  Lord,  my  love  was  crucified     Mason 267 

My  God,  now  I  from  sleep  awake Ken 349 

My  spirit  on  thy  care    Henry  F.  Lyte  385 

My  God  and  Father,  while  I  stray   Charlotte  Elliott  ...  394 

Now  it  belongs  not  to  my  care  Richard  Baxter 391 

O  King  of  glory    Bede    101 

O  Thou,  the  first,  the  greatest  friend   Burns 188 

O  Love  divine,  how  sweet  thou  art  C.Wesley  199 

Oh,  what  a  gloomy,  cheerless  scene Monsell  218 

Oh  book!  infinite  sweetness !  letmyheart Herbert   250 

Oh  day  most  calm,  most  bright Herbert    260 


INDEX   TO    THE    HYMNS.  481 

PAGE 

On  this  first  day,  when  heaven  and  earth... From  Latin  hymn,  by  Mant  268 

0  Thou  who  didst  prepare  C.Wesley 302 

O  Thou  jealous  God !  comedown C.Wesley 343 

Our  Jesus  freely  did  appear    Berridge 371 

O  Lord,  my  best  desire  fulfil  Cowper  392 

0 !  what  a  sad  and  doleful  night    Joseph  Hart 405 

Praised  be  thy  name  for  ever,  0  our  King    ...  Synagogue  Service  22 

Praise  to  God,  immortal  praise  Letitia,  Barba uld  . . .  229 

Precious  Bible !  what  a  treasure   Newton  245 

Peace !  doubting  heart ;  my  God's  I  am !    C.Wesley 396 

Eock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me Toplady 45 

Eedeemer  of  the  nations  come    Ephrem  Syrus 80 

Eaise  the  conquering  martyr's  song Bede    104 

Eejoice  for  a  brother  deceased  C.Wesley 430 

Sixg  uuto  the  Lord  !    Ancient  Israel  2 

Sweet  hymns  I  attune Synagogue  Hymn  of  Glory  22 

Sleep  well,  my  dear ;  sleep  safe  and  free Luther    82 

Sleep  baby,  sleep ;  what  ails  thee,  dear  ?    Wither   83 

See  how  great  a  flame  aspires    C.Wesley  275 

Since  Thou  hast  added  now,  O  God  !    Wither  329 

Since  they  in  singing  take  delight Wither    366 

Sons  of  God  by  bless' d  adoption    Joseph  Hart 421 

Sing  from  the  chamber  to  the  grave R.  S.  Haiuker    433 

Stand  th' omnipotent  decree  ! C  Wesley 441 

Saviour,  when  in  dust  to  Thee    Robert  Grant    414 

Soon  and  for  ever Monsell 467 

The  God  of  Abraham  praise T.Olivers  32 

The  godly  grief,  the  pleasing  smart C.Wesley  43 

Thou  lovely  source  of  true  delight    Anne  Steele  52 

'Tis  gone  that  bright  and  orbed  blaze  Keble  71 

To  Thee,  O  God,  be  praises    Ephrem  Syrus  75 

They  say 'tis  a  sin  to  sorrow  R.  S.  Hatcher    76 

'T was  silence  in  thy  temple,  Lord Keble  94 

This  is  joy,  this  is  true  pleasure    Elizabeth,  Queen  of  Bohemia  142 

The  spacious  firmament  on  high    Addison 173 

Thee,  O  Lord,  the  good,  the  just C.Wesley  185 

The  busy  tribes  of  flesh  and  blood  Watts 189 


482  INDEX    TO    THE    HYMNS. 

PAGE 

The  Lord  is  our  refuge,  the  Lord  is  our  guide       Henry  F.  Lyte 191 

The  royal  ensigns  onward  go Venantius  Fortunatus  99 

That  great  day  of  wrath  is  coming Early  Judgrn  ent  Hymn  106 

The  world  is  old  and  sinful Bernard  ofMorlaix  121 

Thou  art,  0  God,  the  life  and  light  T.Moore 216 

There  is  a  book,  who  runs  may  read Keble  221 

The  table  of  my  heart  prepare  O.Wesley 239 

The  Spirit  breathes  upon  the  word    Cowper  243 

Thousands,  O  Lord  of  Hosts,  to-day Heber 258 

Thou  God  of  glorious  majesty    C.  Wesley  282 

Through  Jesu's  watchful  care Berridge 323 

To  Jesus,  my  dear  Lord,  I  owe  Berridge 328 

Thou  Shepherd  of  Israel  and  mine   C.Wesley 359 

Thou  God  of  truth  and  love    C.Wesley 361 

To  grace,  0  Lord,  a  marriage  feast  Wither 364 

The  voice  that  breathed  o'er  Eden    Keble 376 

There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood Cowper  411 

Thou  Judge  of  quick  and  dead  C.Wesley 451 

The  chariot,  the  chariot !  its  wheels  roll  on  fire    Milman 452 

The  bird  let  loose  in  Eastern  skies   T.Moore 455 

The  world  is  all  a  fleeting  show T.  Moore 455 

Thou  know'st  in  the  spirit  of  prayer    C.  Wesley  456 

There  is  a  land  of  pure  delight Watts 461 

We  sat  down  and  wept  by  the  waters  Byron 26 

When  Israel  of  the  Lord  beloved Walter  Scott 30 

We  adore  thy  pure  image Early  Christian  ...  43 

Why  should  our  garments,  made  to  hide Watts 86 

When  Jesus  left  his  Father' s  throne James  Montgomery  90 

When  my  dying  hour  must  be    St.  Bernard  116 

When  ransom' d  Israel  came   Samuel  Wesley, Sen.  174 

What  though  the  spicy  breezes Heber 257 

Who  are  these  that  come  from  far C.  Wesley 276 

Where  the  remote  Bermudas  ride Andrew  Marvel    ...  297 

Why  those  fears  ?  behold, 'tis  Jesus Kelhj  313 

When  through  the  torn  sail    Heber  315 

What  secret  hand  at  morning  light  Heber 331 

We  will  not  close  our  wakeful  eyes    C.Wesley 341 

When  I  survey  life's  varied  scene Anne  Steele  393 

Yet  think  not,  0  my  soul,  to  keep Henry  F.  Lyte  380 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


PAGE 

Ancient  Israel's  hymn    2 

Africa's  first  love,  and  songs  13 

Anonymous  hymns  in  the  early  church    41 

Augustine's  recollections  of  early  hymnology    78 

Above  the  clouds,  in  the  west  of  England 212 

A  noble  and  gifted  widow   134 

Addison's  thoughts  about  Psalm  cxiv. :  his  boyhood 175 

Anne  Steele's  home  in  Hampshire    225 

Albert  the  good:  his  last  hymn 16 

A  happy  pilgrim,  hymning  on  his  way 254 

Allan  Cunningham's  songs  and  hymns 271 

A  poet's  visit  to  Portland,  and  its  results 277 

Andrew  Marvel :  his  character,  satires,  and  hymns 296 

A  prodigal  rescued  in  a  storm    306 

A  Christian  bishop  on  shipboard  314 

Awful  scene  in  a  transport  ship 312 

Amusing  story  of  a  clerical  hymnist 324 

Antidote  for  daily  dangers  329 

An  old  Christian's  account  of  his  morning  music 333 

A  calm  and  holy  sunset  to  life    337 

A  great  Puritan:  his  versatile  powers 390 

Apostolic  style  of  singing  under  trial   396 

Abney  Park,  Watts' s  last  retreat   462 

Assize  Court  in  tears 474 

Approach  of  the  Bridegroom  felt  by  the  Church  435 

Baxter  and  his  psalm-singing  flock  at  Kidderminster... 10 

Byron,  Scott,  and  Olivers,  a  trio    26 

Byron  at  Falmouth,  and  the  lesson  he  received     27 


484  GENEKAL   INDEX. 

PAGE 

Burgundy  and  its  saintly  hymnists    113 

Bernard  of  Morlaix  in  his  monastic  home  120 

Brunswick  family  and  its  hymnists   137 

Brixham,  an  interesting  scene  in  its  parish  church   146 

Burns  in  his  better  time  as  a  psalm-writer 187 

Berridge's  hymn  on  Psalm  exxxi.  2,  spoiled    206 

Broughton,  and  its  pastor    228 

Boat  scene  and  bridal  party  at  Hull  in  the  olden  time  295 

Bishop  Burnet's  good  advice  to  a  graceless  pastor 228 

Barbauld,  Anna  Letitia :  her  character  and  pursuits   228 

Beautiful  and  impressive  passage  in  Wesley's  experience   238 

Bernard  Barton:  his  character  and  poems 247 

Bright  and  cheerful  piety  in  ahymnist    323 

Berridge's  racy  letters  and  essays 326 

Beautiful  finish  to  a  suffering  life 353 

Baxter,  and  his  complex  times   388 

Bunhill  Fields,  and  a  funeral  oration  in  1768 421 

Bemerton,  and  Herbert's  rich  bequest 462 

Benjamin  Rhodes,  preacher  and  hymnist    471 

Christianity  cheerful  in  its  nature 4 

Cornish  psalmody  and  religious  life  12 

Cobden's  last  hours  15 

Collins,  Mrs.  Julius  :  her  translations 24 

Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  Wesley 60 

Challenge  for  a  new  style  of  hymn  458 

Cornish  mother's  lament 76 

Chanting  hymns  of  praise  on  a  hill-side 223 

Cowper  and  Newton,  unlike  and  yet  one 242 

Charles  Wesley's  eye  for  beauties  by  the  way   274 

Charles  Lamb's  warning  to  Bernard  Barton  247 

Cornwall :  one  of  its  pits  as  seen  by  a  Romish  tourist 279 

Cornish  rhyme  in  honour  of  Charles  Wesley 279 

Christian  genius  in  its  last  moments  on  earth    292 

Caroline  Bowles  as  Mrs.  Southey  at  Keswick    299 

Circumstances  in  their  influence  on  a  poet 320 

Call  from  a  waggish-looking  parson,  and  its  results 324 

Chain  of  conversions 347 

Classic  divinity  of  England:  its  centre  the  Bible 233 

Contentment  in  marriage 365 

Clouds  upon  the  mercy-seat    378 


GENERAL    INDEX.  485 

PAGB 

Cromwell  and  Kichard  Baxter  face  to  face 389 

Cowper's  sufferings  and  songs    392 

Christian  tenderness  learnt  on  Calvary    416 

Carnbrae,  and  its  surrounding  scenery , 429 

Cornish  death-song   433 

Christian  sympathy  with  the  beauties  and  harmonies  of  nature    220 

Devonian  scenes,  poetic  pilgrims  172 

Danvers,  Jane:  her  love  for  Herbert  262 

Doddridge  in  tears,  yet  happy    343 

Dreams  suggestive  of  hymns 440 

Dean  Milman,  family  and  course   452 

Disappointment  of  Watts,  and  its  happy  issue   460 

Egypt,  her  scenes  and  songsters    57 

Evening  songs,  their  succession  in  the  Church 66 

Elizabeth  Singer' s  response  to  her  poetic  suitor   459 

England's  second-birth  time 107 

England' s  renovation  in  the  seventeenth  century 108 

Easter  reflections  and  feelings   400 

First  Latin  missionaries  to  England   97 

F.  B.  P.  in  the  Tower,  and  his  long  hymn  153 

Foolish  Dick,  the  happy  pilgrim   209 

Fragments  of  time  well  filled 347 

Funeral  hymns  excelling  in  grandeur  and  power  428 

Frequent  prayer  the  secret  of  Mason's  sweetness  and  grace 464 

Germans,  and  their  love  of  psalmody 14 

Gregory  of  Nazianzen,  scenes  of  his  life  and  times 63 

George  Wither' s  portrait     85 

Gregory  the  Great :  his  character  and  works 95 

Germ  of  the  "Dies  Irae"    106 

Gustavus  Adolphus  :  his  character  and  victories  132 

Guion,  Madame  :  her  conversion,  trials,  songs,  and  death  156 

Grave  side  anthems  418 

Hymnic  style  of  early  language 1 

Hymns  in  their  influence  on  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Church 3 

Hymns  favourites  with  children 5 

Hallelujah  victories  9 

Hugh  Capet  of  France,  and  his  son  Eobert 129 


486  GENEEAL    INDEX. 

PAGE 

Hymn-menders  instructed  and  reproved 195 

Hymn-books  for  all  classes 195 

Holy  Scripture  in  its  influence  on  great  writers    237 

Herbert :  bis  person,  sbort  and  full  career 249 

Hencbman's  plaintive  record  of  Herbert's  Hfe 249 

Heber  :  bis  last  cbarge 257 

Heaven  in  a  little  cbamber  of  sickness 259 

Hymn-composing  in  tbe  saddle  :  its  dangers  and  fruits  275 

Hymnists  gatbering  songs  from  tbe  deep 301 

Hebrew  talk  about  tbe  secrets  of  trutb    357 

Hymns  for  everybody,  by  George  Witber    362 

House-warming  in  old  tunes   369 

Hart  tbe  bymnist :  bis  experience  and  ministry 402 

Henry  H.  Milman  in  bis  decbne 423 

Heaven  seen  from  tbe  sick  cbamber 456 

"Home,"  a  summons  from  tbe  muffled  bell    467 

Itinerant  life,  and  its  adventures    439 

Irisb  bymn-menders 199 

"  In  tbe  midst  of  life  we  are  in  deatb"    419 

James  Montgomery  on  tbe  cbildbood  of  Jesus  91 

John  Bull  tbe  autbor  of  tbe  National  Antbem  146 

Jobn  Wesley  as  a  bymnist  207 

Jewisb  consolation  on  a  sick-bed   356 

Josepb  Hart's  funeral  421 

Ken  :  bis  trials  and  character 67 

Keble,  in  barmony  witb  the  music  of  former  ages    71 

Kingly  students  and  bymn- writers    129 

Keble' s  beautiful  interweaving  of  nature  and  grace 22L 

Kennicott's  thirty  years'  labour  on  bis  Hebrew  Bible:  his  gifted 

"  help-meet,"  and  how  she  helped  him 235 

Kelly  and  Lord  Plunkett,  old  schoolfellow 314 

Ken's  recollections  of  Winchester    318 

King  Arthur's  castle  in  North  Cornwall 335 

Lasting  influence  of  hymns  learnt  in  childhood    5 

Lullabies,  and  their  authors    82 

Lichfield,  private  chat  and  public  services  92 

Lichfield,  audits  Cathedral  Close 176 


GEXEEAL    INDEX.  487 

PAGE 

Louisa  Henrietta  of  Brandenburgh  and  her  hushing  song  136 

Lady  Aletta,  St.  Bernard's  mother  Ho 

Land's  End:  its  grandeurs 282 

Leighton's  time  for  deepest  thought 335 

Loneliness  on  New  Year's  Eve 342 

Lady  Huntingdon  and  Dr.  Doddridge 343 

Lyte,  Henry  F. :  his  birthplace  and  beautiful  career 382 

Lyte  :  his  preaching  and  hymns 147 

Laymen's  hallowed  genius  414 

Last  words  suggestive  to  consecrated  genius  426 

Last  Sunday  of  a  parson 263 

Last  words  of  a  departing  Christian 468 

Last  moments  of  a  murdered  Sunday-school  teacher    472 

Melancholy  Christians 3 

Mesopotamia:  its  psalmists  and  psalmody  74 

Monkish  monarchs  and  martial  rulers  132 

Maria  of  Hungary,  and  her  hymn  in  bereavement 134 

Marriages  of  princes  by  lot    139 

Meditation  about  departed  worthies 177 

Montgomeiw's  fine  version  of  Psalm  lxxii 180 

Mysteries  in  the  history  of  old  books  184 

Moore's  Irish  Melodies,  and  his  Wiltshire  cottage  215 

Monsell,  and  his  "  Parish  Musings"    219 

Milton  and  John  Bunyan,  their  obligation  to  the  Bible  237 

Mason's  character,  by  Richard  Baxter 264 

Mason  and  Herbert  alive  in  piety  and  genius    267 

Mant,  as  a  translator  of  Latin  hymns 269 

Mant,  ignorant  of  those  about  whom  he  lectured 270 

Morning  hymn  in  Mant's  school  days  317 

Methodist  clergyman  of  early  times 325 

Missionary  sorrows  in  the  Island  of  Zante 341 

Methodist  preacher  and  Polish  Jew  in  happy  companionship    356 

Medical  skill  in  Baxter's  times  389 

Mystery  and  joy  of  the  cross 398 

Monsell,  and  his  sanctified  muse  414 

Monica  and  St.  Ambrose    79 

National  character  swayed  by  popular  songs  8 

National  anthems  and  their  power  10 

Nature  and  grace  in  harmony    217 


488  GENERAL   INDEX. 

PAGE 

Newton's  illustration  of  variety  in  Christian  character  and  calling . . .  243 

Newton's  eventful  life 308 

Night  scenes  in  the  Ionian  Sea 340 

Northampton,  monthly  devotion  in  its  old  meeting-house 344 

Nuptial  joys  interwoven  with  praise  and  prayer    376 

Notker,  and  his  immortal  hymn    419 

Old  age  melted  and  hallowed  by  renewal  of  early  impressions 7 

Our  English  Bible,  and  what  is  in  it    234 

" Old Everton"  on  a  "Christian  wedding" 371 

Olivers  the  hymnist  and  companion  of  Wesley 449 

Old  hymnists  out  of  taste  458 

Old  man's  story  about  a  tuneful  preacher 470 

Pastoral  recollections  of  first  hymn  lessons 6 

Primitive  Christian  psalmody  in  relation  to  that  of  the  Synagogue ...  20 

Poetic  gifts  hallowed  for  the  good  of  the  Church 25 

Pomeroy,  Dr. :  his  interesting  story  about  Armenian  psalmody 45 

Palm-Sunday  at  Mentz  in  the  time  of  Louis  Debonnaire    151 

Psalm  from  a  prison  window 151 

Patmos,  and  its  songs 152 

Psalms  "  done  into  metre" 171 

Prolific  hymnists  and  fast  poets 181 

Peace  and  joy  in  affliction  256 

Piety  associated  with  some  false  notions 264 

Portland,  and  its  people  277 

Praise  as  the  first  act  in  the  morning  332 

Poverty,  piety,  and  genius  in  a  girl  350 

Praise  for  the  fountain  opened,  from  a  sufferer 410 

Parish  musings  on  Good  Friday    412 

Piety  and  taste  in  Cornwall    428 

"  Queen  of  Hearts :"  her  parentage,  life,  character,  and  hymn 140 

Eobekt  Hall,  an  incident  in  his  history    39 

Robinson  of  Cambridge :  an  adventure  in  a  stage-coach 292 

Robert  Hall's  opinion  of  Robinson  294 

Romantic  adventures  of  a  hymnist  305 

"Rock  of  Ages  :"  its  birthplace 321 

Romantic  scene  in  pilgrim  life   337 

"  Rise  and  Progress  of  ReHgion  in  the  Soul"  348 

Requiem  by  the  bed-side  of  a  departing  saint  425 


GENERAL   INDEX.  489 

PAGB 

Redruth  Churchyard,  and  its  burial  hymns    429 

Remarkable  traveller  in  1753 439 

Sono  of  a  persecuted  girl  in  Cornwall    13 

St.  Paul's  view  of  spiritual  song   18 

Synagogue  hymns 22 

Scott,  Walter:  his  faithfulness  to  Byron 29 

Scotch  mothers,  and  the  happy  fruit  of  their  psalmody 155 

Saxon  slaves  in  the  Roman  market  97 

St.  George  and  the  Dragon    97 

Saxon  hymnology 97 

St.  Bernard's  birthplace,  parentage,  character,  and  happy  death 113 

Sea  Captain's  death  song 197 

Scene  from  the  top  of  an  old  tower 213 

Songs  above  the  storm     213 

Songs  from  old  Ireland    218 

Scotland  the  birthplace  of  genius 230 

Shaftesbury's  "  Characteristics  :"  their  mischievous  influence  245 

Sympathy  of  the  soul  with  the  outer  world 253 

Stories  of  other  days,  by  an  old  Cornishman 284 

Sabbath  peace  on  the  waters 303 

Secret  of  happy  and  useful  preaching 322 

Suffering  mingled  with  songs  in  the  night 348 

Solomon's  Song  :  its  claims  and  design  354 

Sweets  extracted  from  birthdays  374 

Songs  of  suffering  women   392 

Susanna  Wesley's  last  charge 424 

Southampton  psalmody  in  early  times 458 

Scene  in  Exeter  Castle  during  the  Assizes  472 

Song  of  a  murdered  young  Christian    474 

Toplad Y  and  Olivers  as  controversialists  and  hymnists  35 

"  Ter  Sanctus,"  "  Gloria  in  excelsis,"  and  the  "  Te  Deum  "  38 

Toplady's  parish  :  his  life  and  character 46 

"  Theodosia :"  her  thoughts  and  hymns 55 

Theodulph  of  Orleans  152 

Tiverton  Grammar  School  and  its  old  master    173 

"  The  spirit  of  the  Psalms,"  by  H.  F.  Lyte    190 

Thomas  a  Kempis :  his  cloister  life,  his  "imitation  of  Christ,"  and 

his  hymns    125 

Thompson's  character  :  his  grand  closing  hymn    231 


490  GENEKAL    INDEX. 

PAGE 

Talk  in  a  sea-side  cottage    256 

Tintagel  ruins  by  the  sea 336 

Tinkling  employment  for  a  merry  old  man 371 

Tales  in  verse 379 

The  decrees,  and  where  to  find  them  :  a  queer  story   384 

The  young  miner  singing  his  own  requiem 432 

Triumphant  song  with  the  last  breath 433 

Thomas  of  Celano's  judgment  hymn 436 

Thomas  Moore's  better  moments  and  upward  looks 454 

"  Veni  Creator  Spiritus  :"  its  author  95 

Venantius  Fortunatus  :  his  character  and  friends 98 

Venerable  Bede  at  Wearniouth :  his  last  hours,  etc 100 

Winchester  School 68 

Watts  and  Wesley  :  their  comparative  merits  in  children's  hymns  ...  87 

Wither,  George,  his  sympathy  with  prisoners    164 

Wesley,  Samuel,  sen. :  his  version  of  psalms  174 

Wesley,  Charles,  as  a  psalmist    183 

Wesley's  dictionary  and  the  preface  to  his  hymn-book    192 

Wesley  as  a  hymn-mender  : 203 

Women's  voices  in  songs  of  creation    224 

Walton's  beautiful  sketch  of  Herbert's  conjugal  life    262 

"  Wrestling  Jacob,"  by  C.  Wesley,  remarkably  illustrated 288 

Wordsworth  at  Heidelberg  and  on  the  Neckar      298 

William  of  Wykeham  and  his  school    317 

Watch  night  services  among  old  Methodists 338 

Wilson  and  his  "  Noctes  Ambrosianae  "  : 379 

Women  at  the  cross 415 

Walter  Scott's  last  breathings    436 

Watts's  first  essay  at  hymn  writing  459 

Women  devoted  to  song  49 

Youthful  suffering  hushed  by  Bernard's  hymn  122 

Yearning  for  future  repose 454 


BAEKILD,  PBINTEB,   LONDON. 


^XJ 


imns 


