F.B.Meyer 


■M 


'  - 


U  Jul}  lilt. 


^ 


M 


e.ye.Y 
•X.VK 


I   PROMISE 


?BB 


KEty 


VcllO^ 


CllBk 


AHyI 


ASTq 


^°£"  Fa'n^Ox 


f-ou 


*JDA 


I'o*« 


REV.    F.    B.    MEYER. 


rnr 


I  Promise 


A- 


By 
Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.  A. 

Author  of  "  Saved  and  Kept,"  "  Light 
on  Life's  Duties,"  "The  Shep- 
herd Psalm,"  "  Christian 
Living,"  etc. 


United  Society  of  Christian  Endeavor 
Boston  and  Chicago 


TF  YORK 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

74.1-  $  o<3 

ASTOR,  LENOX  AND 
TILDfcN  FOUNDATIONS 

r  1916  L 


Copyright,  i8gg 

BY   THE 

United  Society  of  Christian  Endeavor 


Colonial  Press : 
Electrotyped  and  Printed  by 
C.  H.  Simonds  &*  Co. 
Boston,  Mass.,  U.  S.  A. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.      Salvation  and  Trust     ...        9 

II.      Winning  God's  Attention      .  .18 

III.  God   Speaking         .          .          .  25 

IV.  "What  Would  Jesus  Do?"  .      34 
V.      Our  Duty   .          .          .          .  .42 

VI.      Conscience    .          .          .          .  51 


INTRODUCTION. 

I  am  exceedingly  glad  that  Rev.  F.  B. 
Meyer  has  given  this  little  volume  to  the 
public.  I  feel  that  so  far  as  Christian  En- 
deavorers  are  concerned  his  pen  could  not 
possibly  have  found  employment  upon  a 
more  important  theme,  and  I  am  equally 
confident  that  there  is  no  one  whose  wise 
and  winning  words  will  be  listened  to  more 
eagerly,  or  heeded  more  willingly.  The  man 
and  the  theme  have  been  united  in  a  most 
happy  way,  and  the  result  is  a  little  volume 
of  exceeding  value.  The  prayer-meeting 
Covenant  Pledge  is  the  mainstay  of  Christian 
Endeavor.  It  is  to  Christian  Endeavorers 
what  Magna  Charta  was  to  British  liberty, 
what  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 
is  to  the  American  patriot,  what  the  May- 
flower compact  was  to  the  Puritans,  what 
the  National  Covenant  was  to  the  Covenant- 
ers. The  societies  that  adopt  and  live  up  to 
the  covenant  pledge  with  reasonable  fidelity 

vii 


viii  INTRODUCTION. 

have  always  prospered.  No  society  that  has 
ignored  or  weakened  the  pledge  has  long 
continued  to  do  a  conspicuously  good  work. 
Whatever  theories  or  prejudices  may  exist 
concerning  it,  the  facts  of  the  history  of  the 
eighteen  years  of  Christian  Endeavor  are  all 
on  the  side  of  the  Christian  Endeavor  pledge. 
To  have  this  fundamental  feature  of  Chris- 
tian Endeavor  expounded,  explained,  and 
illuminated  by  such  an  author,  is  indeed  a 
boon  to  the  Christian  Endeavor  world.  I 
trust  that  this  little  volume  will  be  jead  by 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  Christian  Endeavor- 
ers,  that  those  who  are  faithful  and  true  will 
be  strengthened  in  their  fidelity,  that  any 
who  are  weak  and  wavering  may  be  braced 
by  these  chapters  to  new  and  more  strenuous 
endeavor,  and  that  all,  as  they  see  the  reason- 
ableness, scripturalness,  and  absolute  neces- 
sity of  our  covenant  pledge  to  our  best 
endeavor,  will  with  renewed  zeal,  trusting 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  go  forward  in  his 
strength  to  do  whatever  he  would  like  to 
have  them  do.  Francis  E.  Clark. 

Boston,  April,  1899. 


I    PROMISE. 


i. 

SALVATION    AND    TRUST. 

"Relying  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  salvation." 

How  grateful  these  words  must  be 
to  our  Master,  Christ,  as  they  are  said 
week  by  week  by  hundreds  of  thou- 
sands of  young  lips  !  It  seems  as  if 
there  were  a  murmur  of  such  words 
always  rising  from  the  world  like  sweet 
incense,  which  must  do  something  to 
counterbalance  the  hoarse  sounds  of 
blasphemy    and    rejection.      At   times, 

9 


IO  /  PROMISE. 

of  course,  the  murmur  becomes  a  great 
shout,  when  there  gathers  a  conven- 
tion of  Christian  Kndeavorers  in  their 
tens  of  thousands.     But  probably  there 

not  a  single  minute  in  any  part  of 
the   twenty-four   hours   in  which    some 

ce  or  voices  are  not  professing  reli- 
ance on  the  Lord  K  ( 'hrist  for  sal- 
vation. He  is  crowned  with  many 
crowns ;  to  him  multitudes  of  knees 
are  bowing,  and  tongues  confessing 
that  he  is  Lord  to  the  glory  or  God 
the    Father. 

Personally,  I  greatly  rejoice  in  the 
distinction  which  is  made  between  reli- 
ance on  Christ  for  salvation,  and  the 
trust  for  dailv  strength  to  live  a  godly 
and  a  righteous   life.      It   reminds  one 

the  distinction  of  the  Psalmist,  who 
said,  "  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my 
salvation,  whom  shall  I  fear?  The 
I  .jrd    is   the   strength    of   my    life,    of 


SALVATION  AND    TRUST.  \\ 

whom  shall  I  be  afraid?'  Salvation 
deals  with  our  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  sin,  which  would  check  and 
hinder  our  fellowship  with  God,  whilst 
trust  for  daily  strength  looks  toward 
the  positive  side  of  Christian  living,  in 
virtue  of  which  we  are  able  to  do  great 
exploits  for  God  in  the  world.  Wc  are 
saved  that  we  may  serve,  but  salvation 
is  one  thing  and  service  another. 

For  Salvation.  —  "Salvation"  is  a 
great  word.  It  is  conjugated  in  three 
tenses.  There  is  the  past  tense,  "  we  are 
saved  "  ;  at  the  moment  when  we  first 
trusted  Christ.  Saved  from  the  wrath  of 
God;  saved  from  the  curse  of  a  broken 
law ;  saved  from  the  consequences  of 
being  born  from  a  sinful  race,  and  hav- 
ing committed  many  grievous  sins 
against  God.  This  salvation  is  a  dis- 
tinct and  definite  matter,  which  is  ours 
at  the  moment  we  exercise  simple  faith 


II  /  PROMISE. 

in  Jesus.  "  Being,  therefore,  justified  by 
his  blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from  the 
wrath  of  God  through  him." 

There  is  the  present  tense  of  salva- 
tion. To  us  who  "  are  being  saved," 
Christ  is  the  power  of  God.  The 
Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  "  those 
that  were  being  saved."  Such  is  the 
accurate  rendering  of  i  Cor.  i  :  18,  and 
Acts  1 147.  We  are  being  saved  per- 
petually from  the  love  and  power  of 
sin.  The  disinfectant  of  Christ's  pres- 
ence is  ever  warding  off  the  germs  of 
deadly  temptation.  The  mighty  arm 
of  the  divine  Keeper  is  always  holding 
the  door  against  the  attempts  of  the 
adversary.  The  water  is  always  flowing 
over  the  eye  to  remove  the  least  grit  or 
mote  that  may  alight.  "  We  are  being 
saved  by  his  life." 

There  is  the  future  tense.  He  will 
appear  a  second  time  without  sin  unto 


SALVATION  AND    TRUST.  1 3 

salvation.  We  are  being  kept  by  the 
power  of  God  unto  a  salvation  which 
waits  to  be  revealed  in  all  its  majesty 
and  fulness  in  the  last  time.  Much  as 
Jesus  can  do  for  his  saints  in  this  life, 
there  is  a  point  beyond  which  even  his 
love  and  power  cannot  go,  since  they 
must  bear  about  with  them  the  body 
of  their  humiliation,  which  will  finally, 
unless  he  come  first,  return  to  its  dust. 
Salvation  in  all  its  completeness  can, 
therefore,  only  be  secured  when  at  his 
coming,  though  we  were  dead,  yet  shall 
we  live,  and  those  that  live  and  believe 
in  him  shall  never  die. 

Is  not  "  salvation  "  a  great  word  ?  It 
includes  the  forgiveness  that  remembers 
sin  no  more ;  deliverance  from  the  curse 
and  penalty  of  our  evil  ways;  emanci- 
pation from  the  thrall  of  evil  habit ;  the 
elimination  and  destruction  of  self-love; 
the  gradual  refinement  and  elevation  of 


14  I  PROMISE. 

the  tastes  of  the  soul ;  its  growing  con- 
formity to  the  image  of  Christ ;  and  the 
final  resurrection  of  the  body  in  spirit- 
ual beauty  and  energy,  to  be  forever  the 
companion  and  vehicle  of  the  redeemed 
spirit. 

Relying.  —  This  is  a  personal  word. 
It  implies  that  there  has  been  some 
kind  of  contact  between  spirit  and 
spirit,  person  and  person,  the  client 
and  the  patron,  the  friend  and  the 
friend,  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour. 
There  is  a  great  distinction  between 
believing  about  Christ  and  believing 
in  him.  The  devils  have  the  former, 
and  tremble ;  redeemed  sinners  the  lat- 
ter, and  are  at  rest. 

In  reliance  there  are  three  steps. 
First,  we  must  know  something  about 
the  person  in  question.  Secondly,  we 
must  put  our  case  definitely  into  his 
hand,  and  believe  that  he  undertakes. 


SALVATION  AND    TRUST. 


17 


lives.  He  must  be  this,  for  only  if 
thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth 
Jesus  as  Lord,  shalt  thou  be  saved. 
(Rom.   10 :  9.) 


II. 

WINNING    GOD'S    ATTENTION. 
"  To  pray  to  him  ..." 

I  think,  young  people,  that  I  under- 
stand a  little  better  than  formerly  what 
it  is  to  pray.  Of  course  we  are  all  little 
children,  feeling  our  way  gradually  into 
the  heart  of  the  great  mysteries  of  earth 
and  heaven.  The  best  of  us  know  but 
little  as  we  ought  and  shall. 

There  is  an  experience  which  many 
of  us  are  passing  through,  or  have 
passed  through,  in  which  we  think 
that  we  shall  be  heard  for  our  much 
asking,  our  intensity,  the  passionate 
vehemence  with  which  we  press  our 
prayers  on  God.  There  is  some  justi- 
fication for  such  a  conception  of  prayer 


WINNING    GOD'S  ATTENTION 


10 


when  we  read  the  words  of  our  Lord 
about  the  violent  taking  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  by  force,  and  of  the  apostle 
who  tells  us  that  God  does  exceedingly 
abundantly  according  to  the  power  that 
worketh  in  us. 

But  there  is  another  aspect  of  prayer 
which  seems  to  precede  that,  and  with- 
out which  the  one  just  described  is 
mistaken  and  harmful. 

Permit  me  to  speak  of  it  in  the  first 
person.  When  I  kneel  before  God 
.-  and  say,  <c  Father,"  it  seems  as  if  the 
entire  nature  of  God  were  instantly  on 
the  alert,  and  quick  to  catch  the  next 
words.  It  is  good  to  say,  "Father"; 
better  to  say, cc  my  Father  "  ;  best  to  say, 
"  our  Father."  In  the  latter  we  embrace 
all  our  brethren  and  sisters,  throughout 
the  world ;  and,  above  all,  enter  his 
holy  presence  in  company  with  the  Son 
of  his   love,  our  Brother  and  Saviour 


20  I  PROMISE. 

and  Lord.  But  is  it  not  wonderful 
that,  just  as  the  least  whisper  of  her 
name  will  bring  the  mother  to  her 
child's  side,  so  the  tiniest  whisper  of 
the  word  "  Father "  awakens  the  in- 
stant interest  and  audience  of  Him  who 
was  before  time,  and  shall  be  after  it, 
who  fills  the  whole  of  space  as  his 
temple  and  home  ? 

What  a  wonderful  thing  it  is  to  at- 
tract the  attention  and  enchain  the 
interest  of  God,  so  much  so,  with  such 
absorbing  interest,  that  for  the  time  it 
is  as  if  he  had  nothing  else  to  do  than 
just  listen  to  the  sorrowful  complaints 
or  the  eager  entreaties  of  his  child ! 

But,  if  this  is  so,  how  great  must  be 
the  disappointment  we  cause  him  when 
we  begin  to  say  over  to  him  words 
which  we  have  learned  by  rote  through 
constant  repetition,  which  were  once  the 
mould  of  burning  thoughts,  but  from 


WINNING   GOD'S  ATTENTION       21 

which  all  glow  has  long  since  vanished  ! 
From  such  prayers,  so  formal,  so  heart- 
less, so  destitute  of  any  right  apprecia- 
tion of  the  greatness  of  our  opportunity, 
the  divine  nature  must  often  turn  aside 
(if  a  very  anthropomorphic  phrase  may 
be  permitted)  sick  at  heart. 

Equally  disappointing  it  must  be 
when  the  suppliant  uses  the  precious 
moments  of  prayer  as  an  opportunity 
for  pouring  into  the  ear  of  God  a  string 
of  petitions  for  personal  comfort  and 
emolument,  never  staying  to  utter  one 
word  of  reverent  and  loving  devotion. 
In  human  intercourse  it  is  not  custom- 
ary to  use  every  moment  in  trying  to 
elicit  as  much  help  as  possible  from  our 
friend.  The  most  selfish  will  say  some  ' 
kind  words  of  greeting,  or  make  some 
personal  inquiries,  before  launching  out 
on  the  errand  which  has  brought  about 
the  interview.     But  how  often  do  we 


11  I  PROMISE. 

rush  into  God's  presence  and  pour  a 
string  of  entreaties  into  his  ear  without 
one  word  of  filial  greeting  and  loving 
appreciation ! 

Whilst  we  are  praying  we  are  often 
thinking  about  our  business  or  pleas- 
ure, and  wishing  to  be  gone ;  nothing 
but  a  sense  of  propriety  keeps  us. 
Often  it  would  be  almost  better  not 
to  pray  at  all  than  pray  as  we  do,  as 
a  sop  to  conscience,  a  piece  of  perfunc- 
tory duty. 

As  one  reviews  one's  prayer  life,  one 
is  perfectly  horrified  and  ashamed  of 
the  way  one  has  made  God  suffer,  or, 
to  use  the  Bible  phrase,  grieved  his 
Holy  Spirit  by  the  sins  of  one's  pray- 
ers. How  greatly  must  angels  wonder 
to  see  the  way  in  which  we  abuse  the 
greatest  privilege  within  our  reach,  for 
in  the  whole  range  of  our  life  there 
cannot  be  a  higher  act  than  to  enter 


WINNING   GOD'S  ATTENTION.        23 

into  the  presence  of  God  our  Father, 
and  to  speak  to  him  simply  and  natu- 
rally about  anything  we  need. 

Too  often  we  condone  our  failures, 
or  attempt  to,  by  mentioning  at  the 
end  of  the  prayer,  like  a  cabalistic 
formulary,  "  For  Jesus  Christ's  sake," 
as  if  that  fulfilled  the  condition  of 
prayer  in  the  nature  of  Christ,  which 
is  tantamount  to  Christ's  nature  pray- 
ing through  us. 

How  often,  therefore,  missing  the 
point  of  the  injunction  to  pray  in 
Christ's  name,  we  pour  a  pile  of 
prayers  into  the  divine  nature,  much 
as  an  applicant  for  charity  will  pour 
a  sackful  of  circulars  into  the  letter- 
box, hoping  that  some  may  bring  a 
response,  but  not  counting  on  more 
than,  say,  one  in  ten. 

All  this  is  mistaken,  and  will  be  cor- 
rected if  you  remember  that  your  first 


24  I  PROMISE. 

cry,  "  Father/'  attracts  instantly  the 
notice  and  attention  of  God.  You  will 
recollect  yourself  before  you  rush  into 
his  presence,  considering  what  you  are 
going  for  and  what  you  shall  ask.  You 
will  order  your  petitions  aright.  You 
will  let  the  nature  of  Christ  assert  itself 
in  and  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  You 
will  preface  your  prayers  by  a  few  words 
of  thanksgiving  and  appreciation,  which 
will  probably  become  more  extended  as 
the  years  pass  and  you  know  more  of 
God.  You  will  talk  to  him  in  the  sim- 
plest and  most  artless  style,  not  with 
clamor  and  strife.  He  may  lead  you 
on  to  the  pouring  out  of  soul  and  the 
vehemence  of  an  unrestrainable  desire ; 
but,  if  not,  you  will  realize  that  the 
merest  appeal  to  the  divine  nature  will 
bring  a  marvellous  response,  as  scratch- 
ing a  tropical  soil  secures  a  prolific 
harvest. 


III. 

GOD    SPEAKING. 

"And  read  the  Bible  every  day." 

That  is  indispensable.  Indeed,  I 
have  often  said,  and  always  felt,  that, 
if  the  time  is  so  limited  that  we  are 
obliged  to  shorten  one  or  the  other,  it 
is  every  way  wiser  and  better  to  curtail 
our  prayer,  in  which  we  speak  to  God, 
than  our  Bible  reading,  in  which  God 
speaks  to  us. 

It  does  not  matter  so  much  what 
method  you  adopt  in  your  Bible  read- 
ing ;  but  it  is  all-important  that  you 
should  enter  into  your  closet  and  shut 
your  door,  and  read  the  Bible  thought- 

25 


2  6  I  PROMISE. 

fully,  reverently,  devotionally ;  that 
through  the  words  you  may  feed  on 
the  Word,  and  extract  for  yourself 
that  living  virtue  which  has  passed 
into  their  texture  from  the  Spirit  of 
God. 

Forgive  me,  but  I  greatly  question 
whether  all  the  helps  which  are  given 
nowadays  so  profusely  to  assist  us  in 
the  study  of  Scripture  really  help  us  as 
much  as  we  suppose.  Of  course,  it 
is  perfectly  right  to  get  all  the  in- 
formation possible  about  the  geography, 
manuscripts,  botany,  and  contempo- 
raneous history  of  the  Bible ;  but  a 
man  may  have  all  this,  and  yet  miss 
the  vital  principle  on  which  alone  the 
spirit's  life  can  be  nurtured.  Not  for 
a  moment  would  I  dissuade  you  from 
obtaining  such  information,  but  I  would 
warn  you  against  supposing  that  it  nat- 
urally   carries    with    it,  and    implies,  a 


GOD  SPEAKING. 


<27 


right  use  of  the  word  of  God ;  and 
also  against  spending  in  ■  such  studies 
the  precious  minutes,  which  are  as 
much  as  you  can  spare  in  the  early 
morning. 

It  is  often  stated  that  many  Chris- 
tians rarely  open  the  Bible  in  the  morn- 
ing watch  ;  they  drop  on  their  knees 
for  a  few  moments  before  hurrying  off 
for  the  duties  of  the  day,  but  carry  no 
word  of  light  and  strength  for  the  day's 
needs.  It  is  said  that  a  large  number 
of  others  are  content  to  catch  up  a  text- 
book, and  rapidly  scan  over  a  few  verses, 
which  are  forgotten  almost  as  soon  as 
read.  It  seems  difficult  to  believe  such 
statements,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that 
they  are  greatly  exaggerated.  But  some 
color  of  truth  is  given  to  them  by  the 
ease  with  which  many  amongst  us  are 
overcome  by  the  insidious  errors  of  the 
present  day.     Nothing  would  do  more 


2  8  /  PROMISE. 

to  rebut  the  infidelity  and  reliance  on 
mere  outward  rites,  which  are  blighting 
our  English  Protestantism,  so  much  as 
a  revival  of  Bible  love,  Bible  reading, 
and  Bible  memorizing. 

The  rules  for  Bible  reading  are  as 
follows : 

i.  Read  consecutively ;  the  Old  Testa- 
ment at  one  time  of  the  day,  the  New  at 
another;  this  will  enable  you  to  read 
the  New  twice  and  more  to  one  reading 
of  the  Old. 

i.  Use  the  references.  For  this  pur- 
pose I  like  to  use  two  Bibles,  one  to 
lie  open  with  the  margin  well  filled  with 
references,  to  which  I  turn  in  the  smaller 
pocket  Bible  which  I  hold  in  my  hand. 
All  I  know  of  the  Bible  is  based  on  the 
use  of  marginal  references. 

3 .  Be  more  careful  to  read  a  few  verses 
deeply  than  to  skim  two  or  three  chap- 
ters.    There  are  times,  of  course,  when 


GOD  SPEAKING.  29 

we  pass  rapidly  over  whole  tracts  of 
Scripture  to  discover  the  lay  of  the 
landscape,  and  the  direction  of  the 
main  thoroughfares.  But  for  devo- 
tional reading,  a  little,  thoroughly  mas- 
ticated and  digested,  is  to  be  preferred 
to  a  large  amount  bolted.  The  artist 
who  confines  himself  to  one  tiny  bit  of 
scenery  probably  enjoys  himself  best, 
and  extracts  most  thorough  instruction 
and  inspiration  from  what  he  sees. 

4.  Be  thankful  if  the  morning  and  even- 
ing study  crystallines  about  some  theme. 
Often  it  will  be  so.  As  you  quietly 
muse  on  some  verse  or  paragraph  be- 
neath the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
you  will  find  kindred  passages  suggested 
to  your  mind  where  the  same  thought 
occurs  under  slightly  different  forms ; 
and  these  will  lead  to  more  ;  and  as 
you  close  the  Book  you  will  find  your 
mind  rewarded  by  one  mastering  theme. 


3° 


/  PROMISE. 


Be  very  thankful  for  this,  although  it 
may  have  led  you  far  away  from  the 
original  chapter,  and  interfered  with 
your  reading  as  much  as  usual. 

5.  Have  your  pen  at  bandy  that  you 
may  note  such  references  as  occur  to 
you  in  the  margin,  and  that  you  may 
be  able  to  indicate  any  passage  which 
has  shone  out  like  a  star  to  your  soul. 
I  think  I  could  tell  the  history  of  my 
life  in  a  series  of  verses,  selected  from 
every  part  of  the  sacred  Book,  which 
have  been  my  beacon-lights  all  along 
its  course. 

As  we  approach  the  study  of  the 
Bible,  there  should  be  a  reverent  bow- 
ing down  of  the  soul  on  the  threshold 
of  the  temple  of  Scripture  ;  a  putting 
off  of  the  shoes  from  our  feet ;  a  cleans- 
ing ourselves  of  all  filthiness  of  the 
flesh  and  spirit;  a  deep  and  hallowed 
consciousness  of  the  presence  of  God ; 


GOD  SPEAKING.  3  I 

a  simple,  childlike,  humble,  a^-d  obedient 
spirit,  which  listens  with  hashed  awe, 
like  the  child  Samuel  in  the  sanctuary 
of  old,  for  the  accents  of  the  voice  of 
God. 

Souls  that  love  most  deeply  most 
truly  understand  love.  Pure  eyes 
carry  with  them  the  flames  of  fire  by 
which  they  see.  Spirit  recognizes  and 
reads  spirit.  Those  who  are  most  de- 
vout, most  like  the  saintly  souls  through 
whom  the  voice  of  God  spake,  will  be 
best  able  to  understand  and  interpret 
the  yearnings  of  desire,  the  paeans  of 
triumph,  the  wailings  of  disappointed 
hope,  which  fill  the  pages  of  Scripture 
with  their  various  and  abundant  expres- 
sion. 

Above  all,  we  must  obey.  We  must 
not  be  satisfied  with  looking  into  the 
perfect  law ;  we  must  continue  therein. 
It  is  not  the  hearer  that  forgetteth,  but 


32  I  PROMISE. 

the  doer  that  worketh,  who  is  blessed 
in  his  doing.  God's  Spirit  tests  us  by 
revealing  truth.  If  we  obey,  he  reveals 
more.  If  we  refuse,  he  takes  from  us 
what  we  know.  The  accumulation  of 
neglected  commands  gathers  over  our 
eyes  as  scales.  From  the  morasses 
and  swamps  of  our  disobedience  the 
mists  arise  that  obscure  the  blue  sky 
above  and  the  everlasting  hills. 

We  should  never  open  our  Bibles 
without  first  lifting  up  our  hearts  to  the 
gracious  Spirit  by  whose  inspiration  and 
movement  holy  men  were  led  to  write. 
Heartfelt  ejaculatory  prayer  to  him  will 
unlock  treasures  which  all  the  diction- 
aries and  helps  in  creation  could  never 
reach.  Beneath  his  touch  rocks  will 
yield  water,  blank  pages  become  cov- 
ered with  lettering,  fountains  arise 
where  before  the  whole  tract  seemed 
sere  and  barren.     The  deep  things  of 


i 


GOD  SPEAKING. 


33 


God  are  revealed  to  those  only  who 
have  received  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God. 
Two  good  rules  each  morning,  to 
finish  with  :  Never  speak  to  man  till 
you  have  spoken  to  God  ;  never  read 
a  line  of  man's  books  till  you  have  read 
God's  Book. 


IV. 


"WHAT    WOULD   JESUS    DO? 


ft  To  lead  a   Christian  life." 

It  is  no  small  matter  that  we  prom- 
ise when  we  repeat  these  words.  The 
word  "  Christian  "  is  Greek  in  an  Eng- 
lish dress,  and  to  understand  it  we  must 
go  back  to  old  Antioch,  on  the  Orontes, 
whose  witty,  volatile  people,  arrested  by 
the  increasing  number  of  disciples,  and 
anxious  to  label  them,  called  them  after 
the  name  that  was  most  often  on  their 
lips.  They  were  always  talking  about 
Jesus  Christ,  who  had  been  crucified 
under  Pilate,  but  who,  these  people 
asserted,  was  living  still  as  their  Prince 

34 


"WHAT   WOULD  JESUS  DO?"        35 

and  Saviour.  His  name  was  heard  so 
often  from  those  who  were  becoming  a 
real  power  in  the  gay  city,  that  it  sug- 
gested their  appellation,  "  Christian." 

Of  course,  "Christ"  means  "an- 
ointed," and  "  Christians  "  should  mean 
"  anointed  ones,"  those  on  whom  the 
chrism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  has  been 
poured  —  the  holy  anointing  oil,  which 
was  bestowed  on  Jesus  at  his  baptism 
constituting  him  the  Christ,  and  ena- 
bling him  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
poor,  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted, 
to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and 
the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that 
were  bound.  O  that  we  might  be 
anointed  as  he  was,  and  by  his  hand, 
that  we  might  go  forth  to  continue  his 
work  in  the  world  until  he  come  ! 

But,  after  all,  to  live  a  Christian  life 
implies  that  we  should  walk  as  he 
walked,  and   be  in  all   things  a  sweet 


36 


/  PROMISE. 


savor  of  Christ,  so  that  as  our  lives 
are  scrutinized  they  might  have  the 
effect  of  recalling  Christ,  as  a  sweet 
scent  will  recall  the  person  or  place 
with  which  we  first  associated  it. 

I  suppose  there  is  no  question  that 
should  be  more  often  on  our  hearts 
than  the  inquiry,  "  What  would  Jesus 
do  ? "  And  there  is  none  which,  if 
properly  answered,  would  sooner  secure 
the  Christian  life,  for  which,  in  our  best 
hours,  we  so  eagerly  yearn.  Would 
you  live  a  true  Christian  life,  then  let 
this  be  the  line  and  plummet  by  which 
you  test  every  bit  of  masonry  that  you 
build  into  the  structure  of  your  charac- 
ter :  "  What  would  Jesus  do  ?  "  Not, 
"  What  is  c  good  form  '  ?  "  not,  "  What 
will  secure  recognition  and  advance- 
ment ?  "  not,  "  What  will  curry  favor 
with  the  wealthy  and  influential  ?  "  but 
always  and  everywhere,  "  Would  Jesus 


"  WHAT   WOULD  JESUS  1)0?"        jy 

do  this  if  he  were  here  ?  What  would 
Jesus  do  ?  " 

A  story-book  with  this  question  as 
its  theme  is  having  a  large  circulation 
on  each  side  of  the  Atlantic.  I  am  told 
that  a  well-known  minister  has  disposed 
of  four  hundred  copies  in  his  church, 
and  that  a  revival  has  been  the  result 
of  an  extensive  reading  of  its  pages  by 
his  leading  people.  Here  are  some 
incidents  :  — 

The  newspaper  proprietor  cuts  out 
all  puffing  advertisements,  and  several 
items,  such  as  the  police-court  and 
divorce  proceedings,  the  gambling  and 
betting  news,  the  obscene  and  unhealthy 
elements  which  had  helped  to  give  his 
paper  a  wide  circulation  among  certain 
classes,  because  they  would  not  stand 
the  test  of  the  question,  "  What  would 
Jesus  do  ? " 

The  girl  who  was  training  her  voice 


38  /  PROMISE. 

for  the  opera  feels  that  henceforth  it 
must  be  used  for  Jesus,  and  goes  down 
to  a  low  part  of  the  town  to  sing  the 
gospel,  till  the  melody  of  her  voice 
charms  a  pandemonium  into  a  congre- 
gation, and  transforms  in  time  a  moral 
desert  into  paradise  ;  and  all  because 
she  resolved  that  she  would  be  gov- 
erned by  the  one  inquiry,  "  What 
would  Jesus  do  ?  " 

A  manufacturer  begins  to  care  for  his 
employees,  whom  he  formerly  regarded 
as  so  many  machines  for  the  produc- 
tion of  his  wealth,  giving  them  a  share 
in  the  profits,  and  manifesting  a  living 
interest  in  their  well-being;  and  all 
because  of  the  magic  potency  of  the 
inquiry,  "  What  would  Jesus  do  ?  ' 

Necessarily  the  entire  town  becomes 
transformed.  It  is,  of  course,  a  fancy 
picture.  No  community  of  people  is 
to  be  found  that  literally  obeys  Christ's 


"WHAT   WOULD  JESUS  DO?"        JQ 

precepts,  though  for  these  many  cen- 
turies the  church  has  taught  us  to  ex- 
pect that  if  we  reflect  as  in  a  glass 
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  shall  be 
changed  into  his  image  from  glory  to 
glory. 

To  lead  a  Christian  life,  then,  de- 
mands that  we  shall  act  in  a  way  that 
is  becoming  to  the  gospel  we  profess ; 
so  that  it  shall  not  be  brought  into  dis- 
repute, or  people  feel  that  we  are  not 
worthy  of  Him  whose  name  we  bear. 
We  must  maintain  the  honor  of  the 
household.  We  must  walk  worthily 
of  Him  who  has  called  us  out  of  dark- 
ness into  his  marvellous  light. 

Of  course  this  demands  incessant 
watchfulness,  both  in  what  we  avoid 
and  in  what  we  do.  To  take  a  simple 
illustration  from  my  own  life.  I  am 
obliged  to  use  cabs  pretty  freely  to  save 
valuable  time,  and  at  the  end  of  the  ride 


4Q 


/  PROMISE. 


there  is,  of  course,  the  question  of  pay- 
ment ;  and  one  of  two  courses  may  be 
followed.  Either  you  may  give  the 
exact  fare,  or  you  may  add  a  little 
extra,  say  sixpence,  in  recognition  of 
the  many  demands  which  must  be  met 
by  your  driver  before  he  can  take  his 
earnings  home.  The  first  is  just,  the 
second  generous.  The  latter  is  my 
general  rule,  because  my  clerical  garb 
suggests  that  I  am  a  servant  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  I  am  bound  to  keep  up  the 
honor  of  the  family.  Forgive  this 
egotism ;  my  one  desire  is  to  show 
how  at  every  moment  when  two  courses 
offer  themselves  we  are  bound  to  take 
that  which  we  think  Jesus  would  have 
taken,  and  to  do  those  things  which 
will  make  people  think  most  highly  of 
his  kingdom. 

Of  course,   this  is   not  the   popular 
side.     It   will    often    involve   us    in    a 


"WHAT   WOULD  JESUS  DO?"        41 

touch  of  the  dislike  and  persecution 
and  cross-bearing  which  ultimately  led 
to  his  death  ;  but  through  all  this  we  may 
glorify  him.  <c  If  any  man  suffer  as  a 
Christian,  let  him  not  be  ashamed,  but 
glorify  God  on  this  behalf."  If  they 
have  called  the  master  of  the  house 
Beelzebub,  how  much  more  them  of 
his  household  ? 

Do  you  shrink  from  living  this  life 
because  of  its  cost  ?  Then  remember 
that  no  soldier  goes  to  the  warfare  at 
his  own  charges.  Our  Father  will 
enable  us  to  maintain  a  life  which 
will  honor  and  glorify  him ;  just  as 
the  government  will  find  all  that  is 
necessary  to  enable  its  representatives 
to  live  as  they  ought  in  some  foreign 
court.  "  God  is  able  to  make  all  grace 
abound,  that  ye,  having  all  sufficiency 
in  all  things,  may  abound  to  every 
good  work." 


\ 


V. 

OUR    DUTY. 

tl  I  promise  to  be  true  to  all  my  duties." 

It  is  well  to  inquire  what  those  du- 
ties may  be  before  making  this  solemn 
pledge  ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  bind  our- 
selves thus,  and  violate  our  promise, 
without  suffering  moral  injury.  Better 
never  to  make  this  promise  than  make 
to  break  it.  And  in  assuming  new  du- 
ties it  would  be  well  to  consider  them 
in  the  light  of  these  words,  for  if  we 
cannot  be  true  to  them  it  is  undesirable 
to   undertake   them ;    first,  because  we 

may  shut  out  of  office  some  one  who 

42 


OUR  DUTY. 


43 


could  do  them ;  and  second,  because 
infidelity  to  trust  is  apt  to  grow  with 
insidious  but  rapid  strides  from  less  to 
more. 

The  methodical  and  faithful  fulfil- 
ment of  the  simple  duties  which  are 
demanded  of  most  Endeavorers  is  more 
important  than  the  most  of  us  suppose, 
as  will  appear  in  the  light  of  the  follow- 
ing considerations. 

Employers  of  labor  are  always  on 
the  outlook  for  likely  young  men  and 
women  who  give  promise  of  suitability 
for  advancement  to  positions  of  trust. 
Great  businesses  are  carried  on,  not  by 
the  millionaire  who  finances,  or  the  or- 
ganizer who  assigns  the  various  posts, 
but  by  the  great  mass  of  the  rank  and  file 
and  the  more  promising  spirits  who  are 
appointed  to  positions  of  trust.  It  is  not 
the  general  who  wins  the  battle,  but  the 
soldiers ;  and  success  is  largely  depend- 


44  7  PROMISE. 

ent  on  the  subaltern  officers  and  the 
faithfulness  with  which  they  have  drilled 
their  men  when  in  barracks. 

But  no  shrewd  capitalist  or  manu- 
facturer will  take  one  from  the  ranks, 
and  put  him  over  others,  unless  he  has 
approved  himself  of  faithfulness  to  some 
minor  duties  that  may  have  devolved 
upon  him.  Supposing  a  man  is  con- 
stantly absent  from  his  place,  or  comes 
to  it  after  the  bell  has  ceased  ringing, 
or  injures  his  tools,  or  spoils  the  mate- 
rials given  out  to  him  —  is  it  likely  that 
he  will  be  placed  over  his  fellow  work- 
men ?  Supposing  a  lad  is  always  idling 
and  loitering,  and  doing  his  work  in 
a  perfunctory  and  superficial  manner, 
careless  so  long  as  he  just  escapes  cen- 
sure, keen  on  his  own  interests,  indif- 
ferent to  his  master's  —  is  it  probable 
that  he  will  be  promoted  to  a  position 
of  greater  responsibility  ?     He  that  is 


OUR  DUTY. 


45 


unfaithful  in  what  is  least  will  be  un- 
faithful in  much. 

It  would  be  folly  to  give  the  oppor- 
tunity of  repeating  on  a  large  scale  the 
incompetence  and  wastefulness  which 
are  only  too  patent  on  the  small.  How 
little  do  men  and  lads  realize  that  their 
every  act  is  being  scrutinized  with  ref- 
erence to  their  future  !  They  do  not 
know  what  is  in  the  mind  of  their  em- 
ployer, or  how  some  ill-considered  trifle 
may  mar  their  entire  career. 

It  is  he  who  is  true  to  his  duties  in 
the  least  who  is  presently  promoted  to 
the  opportunity  of  being  true  in  the 
greatest.  He  that  is  faithful  in  the  least 
is  faithful  also  in  much.  The  lad  who 
cared  for  the  sheep,  and  delivered  them 
from  lion  and  bear,  was  made  ruler  and 
shepherd  of  Israel.  And  Paul,  who 
flinched  not  from  witness-bearing  among 
his  own  people,  was  summoned  to  stand 


46  /  PROMISE. 

in   Caesar's   pillared   hall  where  all  the 
Gentiles  might  hear. 

How  little  we  realize  the  attention 
with  which  God  regards  us  !  Not  as 
a  Judge,  but  as  a  Father ;  and  yet  with 
full  cognizance  of  the  great  possibilities 
of  our  lives.  He  allows  us  to  begin  in 
some  small  sphere  in  which  the  duties 
seem  commonplace  and  trying,  such  as 
standing  at  the  door  to  open  and  close 
it,  or  giving  out  hymn-books,  or  sitting 
on  some  committee.  It  is  not  what  we 
do,  but  the  way  in  which  we  do  it,  that 
reveals  our  true  character.  If  we  say 
that  it  is  too  trifling  to  be  worthy  of 
our  notice,  if  we  slur  the  work  over  or 
neglect  it,  if  we  allow  ourselves  to  be 
eaten  up  with  jealousy  of  others,  and 
ambition  to  attract  attention,  if  we  are 
unfaithful  and  untrue,  we  show  our- 
selves unfit  to  assume  the  great  bur- 
dens which  God  lays  on  elect  spirits ; 


OUR  DUTY. 


47 


and  we  induce  in  ourselves  habits  and 
conceptions  of  life  and  duty  which  are 
entirely  foreign  to  the  reposing  of  heav- 
ier confidences.  Do  you  think  that 
God  could  have  said  of  Abraham,  "  I 
know  him  that  he  will  command  his 
children  after  him,"  unless  there  had 
been  some  indubitable  signs,  on  Abra- 
ham's part,  of  absolute  loyalty  and 
trustworthiness  ? 

I  think  that  Sunday-school  teachers, 
and  Christian  Endeavorers,  and  all 
whose  destiny  is  as  yet  unfixed,  would 
be  much  more  accurate  and  careful, 
more  painstaking  and  punctual,  more 
persistent  and  persevering,  if  they  real- 
ized that  the  great  crises  of  their  lives 
were  being  settled  amid  the  obscurity 
and  simplicity  of  their  first  and  earliest 
duties.  The  young  life  takes  on  its 
color  and  direction  in  its  first  start. 

There  is  this  further  thought.     We 


48  /  PROMISE. 

are  all  apt  to  do  our  best  on  great  occa- 
sions when  the  world  is  staring  at  us, 
and  to  be  careless  enough  when  there 
is  no  special  stimulus  of  excitement  and 
expectation.  Most  of  us  ministers,  for 
instance,  will  preach  great  sermons  on 
great  occasions,  but  think  that  anything 
will  do  for  the  few  poor  people  who 
gather  to  a  cottage  meeting.  But  surely 
the  cottage  meeting,  rather  than  the 
great  occasion,  reveals  what  we  really 
are.  It  is  not  what  a  girl  is  when  the 
house  is  full  of  friends,  but  when,  in 
the  gray  morning,  she  is  late  at  the 
breakfast-table,  and  irritable  to  the 
younger  children,  that  shows  her  true 
self.  It  is  not  what  we  do  on  the  oc- 
casion of  the  anniversary  of  our  society, 
but  what  we  are  on  wintry  and  rainy 
nights  when  the  attendance  is  scant, 
that  really  tests  us.  It  is  the  way  in 
which  we  fulfil  the  least  duties  which 


OUR   DUTY.  49 

manifests  us  best.  Any  one  can  be 
a  martyr  when  the  blood  is  stirred  by 
the  expectation  of  myriads,  but  the  true 
martyr  spirit  burns  brightest  where  the 
young  soul  suffers  day  by  day  the  in- 
sults of  an  obscure  office  humbly  and 
uncomplainingly. 

If  we  would  be  really  true  to  all  our 
duties  we  must  abide  in  Him  who  is 
the  truth.  He  will  deliver  us,  from 
eye-service  and  insincerity ;  from  time- 
serving and  place-seeking  ;  from  super- 
ficiality and  obsequiousness.  Putting 
away  lying  and  hypocrisy,  he  will  en- 
able us  to  speak  and  act  truly. 

We  must,  moreover,  perform  all  our 
duties  for  him,  seeking  his  approval 
and  blessing,  and  remembering  that  he 
gladly  accepts  the  most  trivial  service 
if  it  is  done  with\  an  eye  to  his  <c  Well 
done."  Thus  all  life  may  become 
great,  because    actuated   by  great    mo- 


5° 


/  PROMISE. 


tives.  There  is  nothing  common  or 
unclean  in  itself  unless  the  motives  that 
prompt  our  behavior  are  so.  If  we  are 
always  inspired  by  high  and  lofty  aims, 
we  lift  the  lowest  and  meanest  duties  to 
the  level  of  those  aims.  To  receive  a 
prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  is  to 
win  a  prophet's  reward ;  to  give  a  cup 
of  cold  water  in  the  name  of  Christ  is 
to  secure  the  smile  that  makes  heaven's 
day. 


VI. 

CONSCIENCE. 

"Some  reason  which  I  can  conscientiously  give." 

Conscience  holds  the  mirror  to  the 
inner  life,  and  shows  us  just  what  we 
are  in  the  light  of  God's  infinite  purity 
and  righteousness.  The  word  itself  is 
derived  from  the  Latin,  con,  with ;  scio, 
to  know.  Conscience  is  what  a  man 
knows  with  or  against  himself. 

Sometimes  we  meet  ourselves  with 
a  smile ;  this  is  what  we  know  as  a  good 
conscience.  At  other  times  we  do  not 
like  to  meet  ourselves,  but  avert  our 
faces,  and  hide  our  eyes ;  this  is  the 
case    of  a    bad  conscience.      And    the 

51 


§1  I  PROMISE. 

worst,  or  the  best>  is,  that  we  cannot 
deceive  ourselves,  or  hoodwink  con- 
science. We  know,  and  we  know  that 
we  know,  that  this  is  right  and  that 
wrong,  this  good  and  that  evil.  Con- 
cerning the  expediency  or  inexpediency, 
the  wisdom  or  unwisdom,  of  a  course, 
conscience  is  silent :  this  is  not  her 
province ;  these  causes  must  be  settled 
in  the  other  courts  of  the  soul.  But 
whenever  the  question  is  raised  of  the 
Tightness  or  wrongness  of  any  course 
of  action,  or  train  of  thought,  conscience 
arises,  and  speaks  authoritatively  and 
decisively,  pronouncing,  as  with  the 
voice  of  God,  an  irrevocable  judgment. 
It  is  very  necessary  to  keep  on  good 
terms  with  your  conscience.  Conscience 
is  an  ill  bedfellow,  the  old  proverb  says  ; 
and  when  troubled  with  evil  dreams, 
turning,  tossing,  and  starting,  rest  is 
impossible.     We  do  not  wonder,  there- 


CONSCIENCE.  $2 

fore,  that  the  apostle  made  it  his  aim  to 
preserve  a  conscience  void  of  offence 
toward  God  and  man. 

There  is  an  element  in  Christian 
living  which  does  not  enter  into  the 
ethical  code  of  others.  All  men  have 
a  conscience ;  else  God  could  not  judge 
them.  There  would  be  no  standard 
by  which  to  try  or  convict.  But  in 
most  cases  conscience  is  uninstructed. 
It  judges  rightly,  so  far  as  it  knows ; 
but  its  knowledge  is  scant,  and  its 
power  of  making  accurate  distinctions 
is  limited.  The  Christian  conscience 
is  illumined  and  instructed  by  the  light 
that  falls  on  it  from  the  face  of  Christ. 
Apart  from  Christ,  it  is  like  a  diamond 
or  crystal  in  the  twilight ;  with  Christ 
it  is  a  jewel  bathed  and  saturated  in  an 
ocean  of  sunlight.  See  to  it  that  your 
conscience  is  constantly  corrected  by 
Christ's  words  and  life,  so  that  its  stand- 


54 


/  PROMISE. 


ard  may  be  raised,  and  its  power  of 
judging  between  things  that  differ  may 
become  more  acute  and  accurate. 

When,  therefore,  we  Christian  En- 
deavorers  say,  in  the  latter  part  of  our 
pledge,  that  we  will  take  some  part> 
aside  from  singing,  in  every  meeting; 
and  that  we  will  be  present  at  every 
meeting,  unless  hindered  by  a  reason 
which  we  can  conscientiously  give  to  our 
Lord  and  Master ',  we  are  binding  our- 
selves to  abide  by  the  decision  of  th^ 
most  august  tribunal  possible.  We 
pledge  ourselves  to  judge  ourselves. 
But  that  "  we "  is  our  true  self,  oui 
best  self,  our  God-taught  self:  nays 
more  and  better,  it  is  the  voice  of  God 
within  us;  it  is  the  echo  of  the  judg- 
ment which  the  Son  of  God  is  passing 
upon  us,  and  will  utter  audibly  one  day 
from  his  judgment-seat,  when  we  give 
in  our  account. 


CONSCIENCE. 


55 


There  will  be  times  in  our  experi- 
ence when  conscience  will  refuse  to 
receive  the  excuse  that  we  give  for 
omitting  our  attendance.  It  will  win- 
now away  the  chaff  of  vain  excuse ;  it 
will  cast  a  searching  shaft  of  light  on  our 
evasions  and  subterfuges ;  it  will  dis- 
miss our  apologies  with  scorn.  It  will 
be  useless  to  argue  that  absence  from 
a  meeting  cannot  constitute  a  sin,  be- 
cause it  will  instantly  insist  that  there 
was  no  necessity  to  assume  this  pledge ; 
but,  as  it  has  been  deliberately  adopted, 
it  must  be  accurately  observed,  until 
there  has  been  a  disavowal  of  it  as 
public  as  was   the   original   profession. 

If  the  weather  is  wet  and  stormy,  if 
the  fireside  party  be  attractive,  if  some 
favorite  author  solicits,  we  dare  not  yield, 
lest  we  be  unable  to  meet  the  calm, 
clear  gaze  of  conscience  searching  us. 
Or  if  we  yield  and  sink  back  into  the 


5  6  /  PROMISE. 

arms  of  ease,  we  shall  spend  a  miserable 
hour  of  bitter  reproach  and  contro- 
versy, our  Eden  will  have  vanished  and 
become  a  wild  desert,  and  we  shall  ex- 
perience the  gnawings  of  the  worm. 
From  the  confusion  and  self-reproach 
of  such  a  time  we  shall  never  wish  to 
be  absolved  till  we  have  obtained  for- 
giveness from  our  Master,  and  have 
made  an  up-and-down  confession  to 
at  least  the  leader  of  our  society. 

It  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the 
importance  of  frank  confession  of  fail- 
ure when  it  concerns  others  as  well  as 
ourselves.  We  are  bidden  to  confess 
our  faults,  not  to  a  priest,  but  to  one 
another.  And  whilst  confession  is  with- 
held, it  is  clear  that  not  all  the  black 
poison  is  purged  from  our  system. 

Never  tamper  with  conscience,  nor 
gag  her  protestations,  nor  drown  her 
voice.     Never  say  it  does  not  matter 


CONSCIENCE. 


57 


for  once  in  a  way.  Never  slur  over  her 
reproof,  never  dare  to  let  her  voice  wear 
itself  out.  To  behave  thus  is  to  tamper 
with  the  most  delicate  moral  machinery 
in  the  universe.  Obeyed,  it  may  con- 
duct to  the  highest  realms  of  bliss  ;  dis- 
owned and  dishonored,  it  will  land  you 
in  the  bottomless  pit. 


THE    END. 


THE   SURRENDERED   LIFE 

Quiet  Hour  Meditations 


BY 


REV.  J.  WILBUR  CHAPMAN,  D.  D. 

AUTHOR    OF 

"  And  Peter/'  "  Received  Ye  the  Holy 
Ghost?"  etc. 

"A  little  book,  'The  Surrendered  Life:  Quiet  Hour 
Meditations,'  by  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Chapman,  D.  D.,  inculcates 
the  lesson  of  thoroughgoing  and  loyal  fellowship  with  Christ. 
That  it  specially  addresses  young  people  makes  it  the  more 
necessary  to  qualify  its  teaching  that  '  it  is  not  a  good  thing 
for  one  to  make  plans  for  his  own  life,'  but  rather  to  find 
God's  plan  for  us  and  follow  it.  It  is  only  by  endeavor  to 
find  out  what  we  can  best  do,  and  trying  to  do  it,  that  we  find 
out  what  God  would  have  us  to  do." — The  Outlook. 

<M 

Daintily  bound  in  cloth.     Price,  jo  cents,  postpaid. 
UNITED  SOCIETY  OF  CHRISTIAN   ENDEAVOR, 


Tremont  Temple, 
Boston,  Mass. 


155  La  Salle  St., 
Chicago,  Ills. 


r\%y 


K& 


Recent  Publications* 

A  Daily  Message  for  Christian  Endeavored  By  Mrs. 
Francis  E.  Clark.  With  introduction  by  Dr.  Clark. 
Beautifully   illustrated.     Boxed.     384  pages.      Price,  only 

$1.00. 

This  is  a  book  for  the  Quiet  Hour,  the  Prayer  Meeting,  and  the  Birthday. 
It  is  three  books  in  one.  There  is  a  page  for  every  day  in  the  year,  filled 
with  the  choicest  thoughts  of  the  best  writers,  that  will  enrich  and  deepen 
the  spiritual  life  of  every  reader.  The  collection  is  the  result  of  years  of 
careful  reading,  and  most  of  the  selections  will  be  found  peculiarly  appro- 
priate for  use  in  prayer  meetings.  The  index  of  subjects  will  enable  one  to 
find  choice  quotations  on  almost  any  topic.  A  new  feature  in  books  of  this 
kind  is  the  place  for  birthday  entries,  space  being  given  under  every  day  in 
the  year.     The  choicest  gift-book  of  the  year. 

The  Morning  "Watch.  Or  Thoughts  for  the  Quiet  Hour. 
By  Belle  M.  Brain.  Cloth.  Beautifully  illustrated. 
Boxed.     414  pages.     Price,  $  1.00. 

Here  are  366  diamonds  of  the  rarest  color  and  brilliancy,  gems  from  the 
heart  and  brain  and  hand  of  the  saints  of  God  of  all  ages.  With  this  book 
in  your  possession,  you  can  live  for  a  month  and  hold  daily  conversation 
with  Andrew  Murray,  F.  B.  Meyer,  A.  J.  Gordon,  Francis  E.  Clark,  D.  L. 
Moody,  J.  R.  Miller,  and  others.  They  will  speak  to  you  from  the  hours 
of  their  richest  and  deepest  experience.  If  you  want  to  draw  near  to  God, 
you  can  have  no  better  help  than  the  daily  message  from  his  word  and  from 
his  servant  that  this  book  will  bring  you. 

The  Great  Secret.     By   Rev.   Francis   E.  Clark,   D.  D. 

Dainty  cloth  binding.     Price,  only  30  cents. 

The  secret  of  Health,  Beauty,  Happiness,  Friend-Making,  Common 
Sense,  and  Success  are  all  explained  in  "  The  Great  Secret."  These  articles 
attracted  wide-spread  attention  as  they  appeared  in  Tlie  Golden  Rule,  and 
were  so  helpful  to  many  that  numerous  requests  were  received  for  their 
publication  in  book  form.  The  secret  of  life  and  peace  and  blessedness  is 
told  in  such  a  charming  and  convincing  way  that  the  reader  is  swept  along 
to  the  author's  own  conclusion ;  and,  as  he  closes  the  book,  says,  "  I,  too, 
will  'practise  the  presence  of  God.'" 

Send  all  orders  with  remittance  to 

UNITED   SOCIETY  OF   CHRISTIAN   ENDEAVOR 

Tremont  Temple,  J55  La  Salle  St., 

Boston,  Mass*  Chicago,  Ills* 


Classics  of  the  Quiet  Hour* 

Each  book,  25  cents.     Dainty  cloth  bindings. 

These  books  give  the  choicest  thoughts  from  the  best 
works  of  the  foremost  devotional  writers.  The  complete 
works  of  these  great  authors  are  too  formidable  for  many 
readers,  but  Dr.  Clark  has,  with  great  care,  selected  their 
best  thoughts,  and  has  also  written  for  each  volume  a  bright 
introduction,  giving  an  exceedingly  helpful  and  interesting 
sketch  of  the  author's  life  and  works. 

The  Presence  of  God.     By  Francis  E.  Clark,  D.  D. 

Selections  from  the  devotional  works  of  Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor. 

Living  and  Loving.     By  Francis  E.  Clark,  D.  D. 

Selections  from  the  devotional  works  of  Prof.  A.  Tholuck. 

The  Golden  Alphabet.     By  Francis  E.  Clark,  D.  D. 

Selections  from  the  works  of  Master  John  Tauler. 

The  Kingdom  Within.     By  Francis  E.  Clark,  D.  D. 

Selections  from  "  Imitation  of  Christ,"  by  Thomas  a  Kempis. 


Quaint  Thoughts.      By   Belle   M.    Brain.      Fifty  quaint 
selections  from  an  old-time  army  chaplain,  Thomas  Fuller. 

A  very  delightful  book  with  this  title  has  been  made  up  by  Miss  Brain 
from  the  writings  of  that  famous  old  army  chaplain,  Thomas  Fuller.  Cole- 
ridge said  that,  next  to  Shakespeare,  Thomas  Fuller  excited  in  him  "  the 
sense  and  emulation  of  the  marvellous." 

UNITED  SOCIETY  OF  CHRISTIAN  ENDEAVOR. 


Boston 
Tremont  Temple. 


Chicago 
155  La  Salle  Street 


BOOKS 


BY 


REV.  FRANCIS  E.  CLARK,  D.D. 


PRICE 


The  Presence  of  God $0.25 

Living  and  Loving 25 

The  Kingdom  Within 25 

The  Golden  Alphabet 25 

The  Great  Secret 30 

Young  People's  Prayer  Meetings 75 

Looking  Out  on  Life 75 

A  Book  for  Young  Women. 

Danger  Signals .75 

A  Book  for  Young  Men. 

Mossback  Correspondence 1,00 

Some  Christian  Endeavor  Saints        .        .        .        .1.00 
Ways  and  Means 125 


Sent  on  receipt  of  price  by 
UNITED  SOCIETY  OF   CHRISTIAN   ENDEAVOR 


Tremont  Temple 
Boston.  Mass. 


155  La  Salle  Street 
Chicago,  Ills* 


Our  Workers'  Library. 

Helpful  Books  for  Christian  Workers. 

Bound  in  Cloth.    Only  35  Cts,  Each,  postpaid. 


SOCIAL.  EVENINGS.  By  Amos  R.  Wells.  This  is  the  most 
widely  used  collection  of  games  and  social  entertainments  ever 
made.  No  social  committee  is  at  all  well  equipped  without  a  copy. 
Invaluable  also  for  individual  use. 

SOCIAL  TO  SAVE.  By  Amos  R.  Wells.  A  companion  volume 
to  "  Social  Evenings."  Everything  new  and  fresh.  A  mine  of 
enjoyment  for  the  society  and  home  circle. 

WEAPONS     FOR     TEMPERANCE     WARFARE.        By 

Belle  M.  Brain.  Full  of  ammunition  for  temperance  meetings. 
Hundreds  of  facts,  illustrations,  suggestions,  bright  programmes, 
quotations,  statistics.  Everything  practical  and  to  the  point.  No 
more  dry  temperance  meetings. 

FUEL,  FOR  MISSIONARY  FIRES.  By  Belle  M.  Brain. 
115  pages.  A  beautiful  book,  packed  full  of  practical  plans  for 
missionary  committees.  Everything  tried  and  proved.  It  will 
make  your  missionary  meetings  the  brightest  you  ever  held.  It 
will  rouse  your  society  to  a  burning  interest  in  this  greatest  of  all 
great  endeavors, —  the  world  for  Christ. 

PRAYER-MEETING  METHODS.  By  Amos  R.Wells.  This 
book  contains  by  far  the  most  comprehensive  collection  of  prayer- 
meeting  plans  ever  made. 

OUR  UNIONS.  By  Amos  R.  Wells.  The  only  book  ever  pub- 
lished wholly  devoted  to  Christian  Endeavor  unions  of  all 
kinds,  their  officers,  work,  and  conventions.  The  convention  sug- 
gestions alone  are  worth  the  price  of  the  book. 

NEXT  STEPS.  By  Rev.  W.  F.  McCauley.  Here  is  a  book  for 
every  Christian  Endeavor  worker.  It  is  a  storehouse  of  sugges- 
tions. It  deals  not  with  theories,  but  with  practical,  workable 
methods.  As  a  statement  of  Christian  Endeavor  principles  and 
methods,  it  is  unexcelled.  If  you  want  to  help  some  earnest  work- 
ers, make  them  a  present  of  this  book. 

CITIZENS  IN  TRAINING.  By  Amos  R.  Wells.  A  complete 
manual  of  Christian  Citizenship,  written  especially  for  Christian 
Endeavorers  that  desire  to  make  their  country  better.  Tells  just 
what  to  do  and  how  to  do  it.  Twelve  chapters.  Eighty-five  sep- 
arate articles  and  plans. 


ONLY  35  CENTS  EACH,  POSTPAID. 


Send  orders  with  remittance  to 

United  Society  of  Christian  Endeavor, 

Tremont  Temple,  155  La  Salle  Street, 

Boston,  Mass.  Chicago,  111. 


THE  NEW 

REF 

This  book  is 
tak 

YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

ERENCE   DEPARTMENT 

under  no  circumstances  to  be 
en  from  the  Building 

form  4iu 

1 

