r- 


-%  •    u  • 


>;  %it^'  '>j: 


:>-; 

-'/" 


V.-- 


nK."T^\/4g,?,5 

Book  -;  O  G  o 

GoipgM? . 

CDPifRIGHT  DEPOSm 


Sept  24,  1883. 


Price,  26  Cents. 


Tssned 
onnigbtly. 


Copyright,  1883,  by  Fume  &  Waonallb. 
Est«nd  la  New  Tork  PoBt-Offlc«  m  MOood-clAu  mail  matte/. 


Sabseriptlon  price,    i 
per  year,  |5.  ^ 


The  second  half  of  the  Subscription  JPrice  for  the 
STANnAHn  LIBRARY,  1883  Series,  was  due  July  2. 
On  that  date  No.  13  was  issued. 

Subscribers  will  please  remit  at  once. 


%  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 


CP 

1 

=3 


By  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON. 

This  is  is  a  book  of  much  quaintness  and  rare  interest.  From  the  twenty-two 
volumes  of  the  staunch  Puritan,  Thomas  Manton,  the  renowned  editor  has  culled  a 
collection  of  figures  and  metaphors  rich  in  thought  and  fertile  in  illustration.  The 
terse  sentences  and  pithy  phrases  of  the  old  writer  have  a  freshness  about  them  that  is 
morally  invigorating.  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  added  to  each  saying  brief  remarks  of  his 
own,  lending  additional  interest  to  the  original  selections.  An  Index  of  texts  and 
another  of  subjects  accompanies  the  volume  and  will  be  helpful  to  public  speakers  and 
writers. 


CP 

C.E 

nrgeoD 


FUNK 
IGNAUSI 


PAXTON  HOOD'S  LIFE  OF  CROMWELL.  No.  80,  Standard  Library  (No.  1, 
1883  Series).    Price,  25  cents. 

SCIENCE  IN  SHORT  CHAPTERS.  By  W.  Mattieu  Williams,  F.R.S.A., 
F.C.S.    No.  81,  Standard  Library  (No.  %  1883  Series).    Price,  25  cents. 

AMERICAN  HUMORISTS.  By  R.  H.  Haweis.  No.  82,  Standard  Library 
0{o.  3,  1883  Series).     Price,  15  cents. 

LIVES  OP  ILLUSTRIOUS  SHOEMAKERS.  By  William  Edward  Winks. 
No.  83,  Standard  Library  (No,  4, 188:3  Series).    Price,  25  cents. 

FLOTSAM  AND  JETSAJVI.  By  Thomas  Gibson  Bowles.  No.  84,  Standard 
Library  (No.  5, 1883  Series).     Price,  25  cents. 

THE  HIGHWAYS  OF  LITERATURE  ;  or,  What  to  Read  and  How  to  Read. 
By  David  Pryde,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  F.S.A.,  etc.  No.  85,  Standard  Library 
(No.  6,  18S3  Series).     Price,    15  cents. 

COLIN  CLOUT'S  CALENDAR.  A  Record  of  a  Summer.  By  Grant  Allen. 
No.  86,  Standard  Library  (No.  7,    1883  Series).    Price,  25  cents. 

THE  ESSAYS  OF  GEORGE  ELI01\  Complete.  Collected  and  arranged,  with 
an  Introduction  on  her  "Analysis  of  Motives."  By  Nathan  Sheppard.  No.  87, 
Standard  Library  (No.    8,  188:3  Seriei?).    Price,  25  cents. 

AN  HOUR  WITH  CHARLOTTE  BRONTE ;  or.  Flowers  frosi  a  Yorkshire 
Moor.  By  Laura  C.  Hollow  ay.  No.  88,  Standard  Llbrary  (No.  9, 1883  Series^. 
Price  15  cents. 

SAM  HOBA.RT.  By  Justin  B.  Fulton,  D.D.  No.  89,  Standard  Library  (No. 
10,  1883  Series).    Price,   25  cents. 

SaCCESSFUL  MEN  OF  TO-DAY.  By  W.  F.  Crafts.  No.  90,  Standard  Li- 
brary (No.  11,  1883  Series).      Pr  ce,  25  cents. 

NATURE  STUDIES.  By  Grant  Allen,  Andrew  Wilson,  Thomas  Foster, 
Edward  Clodd,  and  Richard  A.  Proctor.  No.  91  Standard  Library  (^o.  12, 
1SS3  Series).    Price,  25  cents 

INDIA,  WHA.T  CAN  IT  TEACH  US  ?  By  Max  Muller.  No.  92,  Standard 
Library  (No.  13,   1883  Series).    Price,  25  cents. 

WINTER  IN  INDIA.  By  the  Rt.  Hon.  W.  B.  Baxter,  M.P.  No.  93,  Standard 
Library  (No.  14,   1883  Sebtes).     Price,  25  cents. 

SCOTTISH  CHARACTERISTICS.  By  Paxton  Hood.  No.  94,  Standard  Li- 
brary (No.  15,  1883  Series).    Price,  25  centc 

HISTORICAL  AND  OTHER  SKETCHES.  By  Jas.  Anthony  Froude.  No. 
95  Stavdard  Library  (No.  16,  1883  Series).     Price,  25  centP. 

JEWISH  ARTISAN  LIFE  IN  THE  TIME  OF  CHRIST.  By  Franz  Delitzsch, 
D.D     No.  96.  Standard  Library  (No.  17,  1883  Series).    Price.  15  cents. 

SCIENTIFIC  SOPHISMS.  By  Samuel  Wainwright,  D.D.  No.  97,  Standard 
Library  (No.  18,  1883  Series).    Price,  25  cents. 


K    ■ 

V 


Illustrations  and  Meditations; 

OR.  .A^lL. 

FLOWERS 

FEOM    A   PTJEITAN'S    GAEDE]Sr, 

DISTILLED  AND  DISPENSED 


BT 

c.  TEL.  spxjuaEonsr. 


NEW  YORK: 

FUNK   &  WAGNALLS,   Publishers, 

10  AHD  13  Det  Street. 


PREFACE. 


While  commenting  upon  the  One  Hundred  and 
Nineteenth  Psalm,  I  was  brought  into  most  intimate 
communion  with  Thomas  Manton,  who  has  discoursed 
upon  that  marvellous  portion  of  Scripture  with  great 
fulness  and  power.  I  have  come  to  know  him  so  well 
that  I  could  choose  him  out  from  among  a  thousand 
divines  if  he  were  again  to  put  on  his  portly  form,  and 
display  among  modern  men  that  countenance  wherein 
was  a  "  great  mixture  of  majesty  and  meekness."  His 
works  occupy  twenty-two  volumes  in  the  modern  re- 
print :  a  mighty  mountain  of  sound  theology.  They 
mostly  consist  of  sermons  ;  but  what  sermons  !  They 
are  not  so  sparkling  as  those  of  Henry  Smith,  nor  so 
profound  as  those  of  Owen,  nor  so  rhetorical  as  those  of 
Howe,  nor  so  pithy  as  those  of  Watson,  nor  so  fascinat- 
ing as  those  of  Brooks  ;  and  yet  they  are  second  to  none 
of  these.  For  soHd,  sensible  instruction  forcibly  de- 
livered, they  cannot  be  surpassed.  Manton  is  not  brill- 
iant, but  he  is  always  clear  ;  he  is  not  oratorical,  but  he  is 
powerful  ;  he  is  not  striking,  but  he  is  deep.  There  is 
not  a  poor  discourse  in  the  whole  collection  :  he  is  even- 
ly good,  constantly  excellent.  Ministers  who  do  not 
know  Manton  need  not  wonder  if  they  are  themselves 
unknown. 

Inasmuch  as  Manton  used  but  a  few  figures  and  illus- 
trations, it  came  into  my  head  to  mark  them  all,  for  I 


IV  PKEFACE. 

felt  sure  that  tliey  would  be  very  natural  and  forcible  : 
I  will  give  you  tlie  reasoning  of  which  this  volume  is 
the  result.  I  thought  that  here  we  should  find  a  set  of 
w^orkable  illustrations.  It  never  occurred  to  this  good 
man  to  introduce  a  metaphor  by  way  of  ornament  ;  he 
was  too  intent  upon  telling  his  message  to  think  about 
how  his  sentences  might  be  adorned,  and  hence  it  fell 
out  that  if  he  did  use  a  simile,  it  was  because  one  was 
absolutely  needful,  or,  at  least,  because  it  was  the  pre- 
ferable mode  of  making  himself  understood.  Here, 
then,  is  a  man  whose  figures  will  be  sure  to  be  usable  by 
the  earnest  preacher  who  has  forsworn  the  baubles  of 
rhetoric,  and  aims  at  nothing  but  the  benefit  of  his 
hearers.  I  thought  it  worth  w^hile  to  go  through  volume 
after  volume,  and  mark  the  metaphors  ;  and  then  I 
resolved  to  complete  the  task  by  culling  all  the  best 
figures  out  of  the  whole  of  Manton's  works.  Thus  my 
communing  with  the  great  Puritan  ends  in  my  clearing 
his  house  of  all  his  pictures,  and  hanging  them  up  in 
new  frames  of  my  own.  As  I  leave  his  right  to  them 
unquestioned  and  unconcealed,  I  do  not  rob  him,  but  I 
bless  him  by  giving  him  another  opportunity  of  speak- 
ing. 

One  kind  of  work  leads  on  to  another,  and  labor  is 
lightened  by  being  diversified  :  had  it  not  been  for 
"  The  Treasury  of  David"  I  had  not  been  found  among 
the  metaphors  of  Manton. 

I  see  it  is  thirteen  years  ago  since  I  issued  a  volume  of 
illustrations  ;  I  may  surely  take  the  liberty  to  put  forth 
another.  Tlie  former  was  entitled,  "  Feathers  for  Ar- 
rows ;"  it  has  met  with  a  large  sale,  and  it  may  be 
presumed  to  be  useful,  seeing  it  has  been  appropriated, 
almost  every  scrap  of  it,  by  the  compilers  of  Cyclopaedias 
of  Illustrations. 


PREFACE.  V 

To  make  this  little  book  more  generally  acceptable,  I 
have  thrown  it  into  a  somewhat  devotional  form,  using 
Manton's  figures  as  texts  for  brief  meditations  :  this  I 
humbly  hope  may  be  found  profitable  for  reading  in  the 
chamber  of  private  worship.  The  latter  half  of  the 
work  was  composed  in  the  gardens  and  olive-groves  of 
Mentone,  where  1  found  it  a  pleasure  to  muse,  and 
compose.  How  I  wish  that  I  could  have  flooded  my 
sentences  with  the  sunlight  of  that  charming  region  ! 
As  it  is,  I  have  done  my  best  to  avoid  dulness,  and  to 
aim  at  edification.  If  a  single  practical  truth  is  the 
more  clearly  seen  through  my  endeavors,  I  shall  be 
grateful;  and  doubly  so  if  others  are  helped  to  make 
their  teaching  more  striking. 

It  is  my  design  to  bring  out  a  third  volume,  consist- 
ing of  illustrations  which  I  have  long  been  collecting  at 
home  and  abroad,  and  patiently  jotting  down  in  pocket- 
books  till  leisure  should  be  found  for  their  proper  shap- 
ing and  arranging.  Time  is  short,  and  it  behooves  each 
one  to  be  working  for  his  Lord,  that  when  he  is  called 
home  he  may  leave  behind  him  something  for  the  gen- 
erations following.  Highly  shall  we  be  favored  if  the 
gracious  Master  shall  accept  our  service  now,  and  grant 
us  the  consciousness  of  that  acceptance  ;  happier  still  if 
we  may  hope  to  hear  him  say,  "  Well  done." 

That  all  my  readers  may  meet  with  so  great  a  bless- 
ing is  the  earnest  prayer  of 

Their  grateful  Servant, 


Westwood,  January,  1883. 


v^-4-ri 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 


BIED  TIED  BY  A  STRING. 

"  A  bird  that  is  tied  by  a  string  seems  to  have  more  liberty  than  a 
bird  in  a  cage  ;  it  flutters  up  and  down,  and  yet  it  is  held  fast." 

When  a  man  thinks  that  he  has  escaped  from  the 
bondage  of  sin  in  general,  and  yet  evidently  remains 
under  the  power  of  some  one  favored  lust,  he  is  woefully 
mistaken  in  liis  judgment  as  to  his  spiritual  freedom. 
He  may  boast  that  he  is  out  of  the  cage,  but  assuredly 
the  string  is  on  his  leg.  He  who  has  his  fetters  knocked 
off,  all  but  one  chain,  is  a  prisoner  still.  "  Let  not  any 
iniquity  have  dominion  over  me"  is  a  good  and  wise 
prayer  ;  for  one  pampered  sin  will  slay  the  soul  as  surely 
as  one  dose  of  poison  will  kill  the  body.  There  is  no 
need  for  a  traveller  to  be  bitten  by  a  score  of  deadly 
vipei's,  the  tooth  of  one  cobra  is  quite  sufBcient  to  insure 
his  destruction.  One  sin,  like  one  match,  can  kindle 
the  fires  of  hell  within  the  soul. 

The  practical  application  of  this  truth  should  be  made 
by  the  professor  who  is  a  slave  to  drink,  or  to  covetous- 
ness,  or  to  passion.  How  can  you  be  free  if  any  one  of 
these  chains  still  holds  you  fast  ?  We  have  met  with 
professors  who  are  haughty,  and  despise  others  ;  how  can 
these  be  the  Lord's  free  men  while  pride  surrounds 
them  ?  In  will  and  intent  we  must  break  every  bond  of 
siu;  and  we  must  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the 


8  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

Lord,  or  we  cannot  hope  that  the  Son  has  made  us  free. 

0  thou  who  art  the  free  Spirit,  break  every  bond  of  sin, 

1  beseech  thee. 

-  FADING  FLOWEKS. 
"  The  flowers  whicli  grow  in  earth's  garden  wither  in  our  hands 
while  we  smell  at  them." 

They  are  as  frail  as  they  are  fair.  They  grow  out  of 
the  dust,  and  to  the  dust  must  they  return.  As  Herbert 
says, 

"  Their  root  is  ever  in  their  grave, 
And  they  must  die." 

How  speedy  is  their  withering,  they  are  gathered  by  the 
hand,  and  laid  before  us,  and  they  wilt  and  become 
sickly,  fainting,  decaying  objects.  At  the  very  longest, 
their  lives  smile  through  a  day  or  two,  and  all  is  over. 

Which  of  earth's  joys  is  better  than  her  flowers  ? 
Health  flies,  wealth  takes  to  itself  wings,  honor  is  a  puff 
of  air,  and  pleasure  is  a  bubble.  Only  from  heaven  can 
we  expect  '  ^  pleasure  forever  more,"  and  '^everlasting 
joy."  The  Rose  of  Sharon  blooms  through  all  the  ages, 
and  the  Lily  of  the  Yalley,  which  is  Jesus  himself,  out- 
lasts all  time, — ^yea,  this  is  the  only  Everlasting  Flower, 
for  he  only  hath  immortality.  Why,  then,  should  we 
seek  for  the  living  among  the  dead,  or  search  for  sub- 
stance in  the  land  of  shadows  ?  Henceforth,  my  soul, 
gather  thy  Hearts-ease  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  pluck 
thy  Forget-me-nots  from  beds  which  Christ  has  planted, 
and  look  for  thy  Crown-Lnperial  only  in  the  Paradise 
above. 

The  flowers  of  the  field  are  children's  adornments.  See 
how  the  little  ones  garland  themselves,  and  fashion  chap- 
lets  with  the  buttercups  and  daisies.  Earth's  loveliest 
joys  are  good  child's  play  ;  but,  my  soul,  thou  hast  to 
act  a  nobler  part  :  seek  thou  the  bliss  which  fadeth  not 


Fl>lUTA]Sr'S    GAKDEX.  9 

away.  Turn  thou  to  God,  thine  exceeding  joy,  and 
then  if  thy  years  be  multipHed  upon  earth  thou  shalt 
have  a  hfe-long  possession,  or  if  thou  be  caught  away 
suddenly  thou  shalt  carry  with  thee  in  thy  bosom  the 
rosebud  of  a  life  which  will  open  to  perfection  in  the 
land  where  fading  and  withering  are  things  unknown. 

DEAD   FISH. 
"  They  are  dead  fish  which  are  carried  down  the  stream.'* 

Living  fish  may  go  with  the  stream  at  times,  but  dead 
fish  must  always  do  so.  There  are  plenty  of  such  in  all 
waters  :  dead  souls,  so  far  as  the  truest  life  is  concerned, 
and  these  are  always  drifting,  drifting,  drifting  as  the 
current  takes  them.  Their  first  inquiry  is — w^hat  is  cus- 
tomary ?  God's  law  is  of  small  account  to  them,  but  the 
unwritten  rules  of  society  have  a  power  over  them  which 
they  never  think  of  resisting.  Like  the  Vicar  of  Bray, 
they  can  twist  round  and  round  if  the  stream  is  running 
in  an  eddy  ;  or,  like  the  sluggard,  they  can  remain  at 
their  ease  if  the  waters  are  stagnant.  They  stand  in  awe 
of  a  fool's  banter,  and  ask  of  their  neighbor  leave  to 
breathe. 

Is  this  a  right  state  to  be  in  ?  Each  one  of  us  must 
give  an  account  for  himself  before  God  :  should  not  each 
one  act  for  himself  ?  If  we  follow  a  multitude  to  do 
evil,  the  multitude  will  not  excuse  the  evil  nor  diminish 
the  punishment.  Good  men  have  generally  been  called 
upon  to  walk  by  themselves.  We  can  sin  abundantly  by 
passively  yielding  to  the  course  of  this  world  ;  but  to  be 
holy  and  gracious  needs  many  a  struggle,  many  a  tear. 

Where,  then,  am  I  ?  Am  I  sailing  in  that  great  fleet 
which  bears  the  black  flag,  under  Rear- Admiral  A  poll- 
yon,  who  commands  the  ship  Fashion  ?  If  so,  when  all 
these   barks    come  to  destruction  I  shall  be   destroyed 


10  FLOWERS   FKOM   A 

with  them.     Better  part  company,   hoist  another  flag, 
and  serve  another  sovereign. 

Come,  my  heart,  canst  thou  go  against  stream  ?  It  is 
the  way  of  life.  The  opposing  waters  will  but  wash  and 
cleanse  thee,  and  thou  shalt  ascend  to  the  eternal  river- 
head,  and  be  near  and  like  thy  God.  O  thou  who  art 
Lord  of  the  strait  and  narrow  way,  aid  me  to  force  a  pas- 
sage to  glory  and  immortality. 

THE   BRIGHT  COUNTERFEIT. 

"  A  counterfeit  coin  may  look  better  and  brighter  than  the  true 
piece  of  money,  and  yet  be  almost  or  altogether  worthless." 

And  in  the  same  manner  a  base  professor  may  for  a 
while  seem  to  be  brighter  than  a  true  Christian.  He  is 
not  downcast,  for  he  has  none  of  those  inward  strivings 
which  cause  sincere  believers  so  much  anguish  of  soul. 
He  is  not  sad,  for  he  has  no  penitence  of  heart  at  the 
remembrance  of  those  shortcomings  which  humble  the 
living  child  of  God.  Doubts  and  fears  he  has  none,  for 
these  are  the  moss  which  grows  upon  faith,  and  of  this 
grace  he  is  quite  destitute.  Failures  in  holiness,  loss  of 
communion,  non-success  in  prayer,  smitings  of  con- 
science, all  of  which  happen  to  the  elect  of  God,  come 
not  near  to  him,  for  he  is  a  stranger  to  the  inward,  sensi- 
tive principle  of  which  these  are  the  tokens. 

Sad  sons  of  God,  be  not  utterly  dispirited  by  these 
men's  equable  tempers  and  quiet  assurances,  for  they 
will  be  troubled  indeed  when  the  testing  hour  shall  come. 
As  for  you,  your  gracious  disquietudes  and  holy  anxieties 
are  a  proof  of  the  reality  of  your  spiritual  life,  and  evi- 
dences of  grace  which  ought  to  afford  you  comfort. 
Dead  men  do  not  suffer  from  changes  of  weather,  and 
mere  imitations  of  life,  such  as  paintings  and  statues, 
know  nothing  of  the  a»ehes  and  pains  of  living  men. 


puritan's   GAKDEif.  11 

Pity  tliose  wlio  are  never  in  soul  trouble,  and  bless  the 
Lord  that  he  has  not  left  you  to  their  vainglorious  peace. 
Better  be  dim  gold  than  shining  brass.  Do  you  not 
think  so  ? 

SULPHUK  IN  THE   INCENSE. 
**  How  often  do  we  mingle  sulphur  with  our  incense  !'* 

A  strong  expression,  but  most  sadly  true.  When  we 
offer  prayer,  is  there  not  at  times  a  sorrowful  mixture  of 
self-will,  petulance,  and  impatience  ?  Does  not  unbelief, 
which  is  quite  as  obnoxious  as  brimstone,  too  often  spoil 
the  sweet  odor  of  our  supplications  ?  When  we  offer 
praise,  is  it  all  pure  spices  after  the  art  of  the  heavenly 
apothecary  ?  Do  not  self -laudation  and  pride  frequently 
spoil  the  holy  frankincense  and  myrrh  ?  Alas,  we  fear 
that  the  charge  must  lie  against  us,  and  force  us  to  a  sor- 
rowful confession. 

As  the  priests  of  God,  our  whole  life  should  be  the 
presentation  of  holy  incense  unto  God,  and  yet  it  is  not 
so.  The  earthly  ambitions  and  carnal  lustings  of  our 
nature  deteriorate  and  adulterate  the  spices  of  our  lives, 
and  Satan,  with  the  sulphur  of  pride,  ruins  the  delicate 
perfume  of  perfect  consecration. 

What  grace  the  Lord  displays  in  accepting  our  poor, 
imperfect  offerings  !  What  rich  merit  abides  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  !  What  sweet  savor  beyond  expression 
dwells  in  him,  to  drown  and  destroy  our  ill-savors,  and 
to  make  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved  !  Glory  be  unto 
our  glorious  High  Priest,  whose  perfect  life  and  sin- 
atoning  death  is  so  sweet  before  the  Divine  Majesty  that 
the  Lord  is  well  pleased  for  his  righteousness'  sake,  and 
accepts  us  in  him  with  our  sweet  savor. 


13  PLOWERS   FROM   A 

THE  SHIP  WHICH  IS  ALWAYS  SAILING  ON. 

**  The  ship  holds  on  her  course,  and  makes  for  the  desired  port, 
whether  they  on  board  sit,  lie  or  walk,  eat  or  sleep." 

Thus  time  is  at  all  times  bearing  us  onward  to  the  land 
where  time  shall  be  no  more.  There  is  never  a  pause  in 
our  progress  toward  eternity,  whether  we  trifle  or  are  in 
earnest.  Even  while  we  read  these  lines  the  great  ship 
is  still  speeding  onward  at  the  same  rapid  and  unvarying 
rate.  We  shall  soon  see  the  shore  of  eternity  ;  far 
sooner  than  we  think  !  It  becomes  us  to  be  ready  for 
the  landing,  and  for  the  weighty  business  which  will  then 
engage  us,  namely,  judgment  at  the  hands  of  Christ. 

If  we  could  lie  becalmed  a  while  and  make  no  move- 
ment toward  eternity  we  could  afl[ord  to  sport ;  but  if  we 
look  over  the  ship's  stem  we  may  see  by  her  shining 
wake  how  she  is  cutting  through  the  waves.  Past  time 
urges  us  to  diligence,  for  it  has  reported  us  in  heaven  ; 
and  future  time  calls  us  to  earnestness,  for  it  must  be 
short,  and  may  end  this  very  day.     And  then  ! 

MAN'S  TAILOEING. 

"  Men  make  laws  as  tailors  make  garments— to  fit  the  crooked 
bodies  they  serve  for,  to  suit  the  humors  of  the  people  who  are  to  be 
governed  by  those  laws.'* 

This  is  man's  poor  tailoring,  and  it  betrays  the  sinful- 
ness both  of  those  who  frame  laws  and  of  those  for 
whom  they  are  made  :  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  acts  on 
other  principles.  God  has  ordained  his  law  according 
to  the  rule  of  perfect  equity,  and  he  will  not  adapt  it  to 
our  prejudices  and  deformities.  Some  men  treat  the 
law  and  testimony  of  the  Lord  as  if  it  were  like  plaster 
of  Paris,  to  be  poured  over  their  features  to  take  the 
cast  of  their  own  boasted  loveliness.  Religion  is  to 
them  a  matter  of  opinion  and  not  of  fact ;  they  talk 


puritan's  gardek.  13 

about  their  ^Wiews/'  and  their  ideas,  as  if  Christians 
were  no  longer  believers  but  inventors,  and  no  more 
disciples  but  masters.  This  cometh  of  evil,  and  leadeth 
on  to  worse  consequences.  Our  sentiments  are  hke  a 
tree,  which  must  be  trained  to  the  wall  of  Scripture  ; 
but  too  many  go  about  to  bow  the  wall  to  their  tree, 
and  cut  and  trim  texts  to  shape  them  to  their  mind. 
Let  us  never  be  guilty  of  this.  Reverence  for  the 
perfect  word  should  prevent  our  altering  even  a  syllable 
of  it.  ' '  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the 
soul  ;' '  let  it  convert  us,  but  never  let  us  try  to  pervert 
it.  Our  ideas  must  take  the  mould  of  Scripture — this  is 
wisdom  :  to  endeavor  to  mould  Scripture  to  our  ideas 
would  be  presumption. 

THE  TRAYELLEE  AND  THE  MERCHANT. 

*'  A  traveller  :and  a  merchant  differ  ;  thus  :  a  traveller  goes  from 
place  to  place  that  he  may  see  ;  but  a  merchant  goes  from  port  to 
port  that  he  may  take  in  his  lading,  and  grow  rich  by  traffic." 

Thus  there  are  travelling  hearers  who  merely  observe 
and  criticise,  and  go  their  way  very  little  the  better  for 
what  they  have  heard  ;  and  there  are  also  merchant- 
hearers  who  listen  to  profit  and  make  a  gain  to  their 
souls  out  of  every  sermon.  O  Lord,  put  me  among  the 
wise  merchantmen,  and  in  my  trading  may  1  find  the 
one  pearl  of  great  price,  even  Jesus,  thy  Son. 

EACH  BIED  FKOM  ITS  OWN  EGG. 

"  It  would  be  monstrous  for  the  eggs  of  one  creature  to  bring 
forth  a  brood  of  another  kind,  for  a  crow  or  a  kite  to  come  from  the 
egg  of  a  hen.  It  is  as  unnatural  a  production  for  a  new  creature  to 
sin." 

Each  creature  brings  forth  after  its  own  kind  :  the  old 
nature  being  radically  evil  continues  to  produce  and  to 
Bend  forth  swarms  of  sins  ;  it  is  not  reconciled  to  God, 


14  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

neither  indeed  can  be,  and  therefore  its  thoughts  and 
acts  are  those  of  rebellion  and  hatred  toward  God.  On 
the  other  hand  the  new  nature  ''  cannot  sin  because  it  is 
born  of  God  ;' '  it  must  have  its  fruit  unto  holiness,  for 
it  is  holiness  itself.  Out  of  a  dove's  nest  we  expect 
only  doves  to  fly.  The  heavenly  life  breeds  birds  of 
paradise,  such  as  holy  thoughts,  desires,  and  act^  ;  and 
it  cannot  bring  forth  such  unclean  birds  as  lust,  and 
envy,  and  malice.  The  life  of  God  iiif ased  in  regenera- 
tion is  as  pure  as  the  Lord  by  whom  it  was  begotten, 
and  can  never  be  otherwise.  Blessed  is  the  man  who 
has  this  heavenly  principle  within,  for  it  must  appear  in 
his  life,  and  cause  him  to  abound  in  holiness,  to  the 
glory  of  God.  Reader,  have  you  this  divine  seed  within 
you,  or  do  you  remain  under  the  dominion  of  corrupt 
nature  ?  This  question  deserves  a  present  and  thought- 
ful reply. 

THE  CEACKED  POT. 

**  The  unsoundness  of  a  vessel  is  not  seen  when  it  is  empty,  but 
when  it  is  filled  with  water,  then  we  shall  see  whether  it  wiU  leak  or 
no.'* 

It  is  in  our  prosperity  that  we  are  tested.  Men  are 
not  fully  discovered  to  themselves  till  they  are  tried  by 
fulness  of  success.  Praise  finds  out  the  crack  of  pride, 
wealth  reveals  the  flaw  of  selfishness,  and  learning  dis- 
covers the  leak  of  unbehef.  David's  besetting  sin  was 
little  seen  in  the « tracks  of  the  wild  goats,  but  it  became 
conspicuous  upon  the  terraces  of  his  palace.  Success  is 
the  crucible  of  character.  Hence  the  prosperity  which 
some  welcome  as  an  unmixed  favor  may  far  more  rightly 
be  regarded  as  an  intense  form  of  test.  O  Lord,  pre- 
serve us  when  we  are  full  as  much  as  when  we  are 
empty. 


PURITAN'S  GARDEK.  15 

THE  BEST   OF  WAYS  TO   THE  BEST   OF  POSSESSIONS. 

**  If  a  man  should  offer  a  lordship  or  a  farm  to  another,  and  he 
should  say,  The  way  is  dirty  and  dangerous,  and  the  weather  very 
troublesome,  I  will  not  look  after  it  ;  would  you  not  accuse  the  man 
of  folly  who  thus  loved  his  ease  and  pleasure  ?  But,  now,  if  this 
man  were  assured  of  a  pleasant  path  and  a  good  way  if  he  would  but' 
take  a  little  pains  to  go  over  and  see  it,  it  were  gross  folly  indeed  to 
refuse  it." 

Such  is  the  folly  of  those  who  refuse  the  great  in- 
heritance of  God.  It  were  worth  while  to  spend  a  life- 
time in  prison  if  thereby  we  could  obtain  the  Kingdom  of 
God  ;  but  we  are  not  called  to  such  suffering,  the  way 
to  eternal  life  by  Christ  Jesus  is  made  plain  and  easy  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  who  bids  us  believe  and  live.  To  believe 
that  which  is  most  surely  true  cannot  be  unpleasant  to  a 
sincere  mind  ;  to  trust  in  One  who  cannot  he  cannot  be 
a  hardship  to  an  honest  heart.  In  fact,  the  way  of  true 
religion  is  the  path  of  wisdom,  and  we  know  that  her 
ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are 
peace.  Who  would  not  go  to  heaven  when  Christ  is  the 
way  ? — the  dearest,  holiest,  and  happiest  way  that  can 
be  conceived.  Since  the  way  to  heaven  is  heavenly, 
and  the  road  to  bliss  is  bliss,  who  will  not  become  a 
pilgrim  ?  My  soul,  be  thou  in  love  with  the  way  as 
well  as  with  the  end,  since  thy  Lord  is  the  one  as  well  as 
the  other. 

lYY  IN  THE   WALL. 

"  Man's  corrupt  nature  has  been  compared  to  a  wild  fig-tree,  or  to 
ivy  growing  upon  a  w^all,  of  which  you  may  cut  off  the  body,  boughs, 
sprigs,  and  branches,  yet  still  there  will  be  something  that  will  be 
sprouting  out  again  until  the  wall  be  digged  down." 

When  we  think  that  we  have  fairly  done  with  sin  it 
suddenly  sprouts  again  and  seems  as  vigorous  as  ever. 
As  it  is  said  of  a  tree,  '^  at  the  scent  of  water  it  will 
bud,"  so  is  it  true  of  our  corrupt  nature,  at  the  first 


16  FLOWEKS   FltOM   A 

opportunity  it  will  shoot  forth.  Vainglorious  professors 
have  talked  of  their  being  free  from  all  likelihood  of 
sinning,  but  experienced  believers  in  the  depth  of  their 
hearts  are  made  to  feel  the  evil  of  their  nature  and 
therefore  they  walk  humbly  with  God  and  cry  to  him  to 
keep  them  from  evil.  Often  does  it  happen  that  the 
boaster  is  tripped  up  by  the  enemy  whom  he  thought  to 
be  dead  and  buried,  while  the  watchful,  careful  Chris- 
tian is  preserved  in  the  midst  of  the  fiercest  temptations 
and  enabled  to  maintain  his  integrity. 

We  may  well  believe  in  the  vitality  of  evil  when  we 
see  how  it  survives  the  efforts  of  grace  ;  and  yet  the 
Lord  Jesus  can  and  will  destroy  it,  root  and  branch,  and 
we  shall  forever  adore  him  when  this  marvelloas  work 
is  accomplished.  Divine  Master,  uproot  in  me  the  root 
of  bitterness,  and  tear  away  the  follies  which  twine 
about  my  soul. 

UNJUST  BALANCES. 

*'In  a  pair  of  scales,  though  the  weights  be  equal,  yet  if  the  scales 
be  not  equal  there  may  be  wrong  done  :  so,  though  the  arguments 
used  be  powerful,  yet,  if  the  heart  be  biassed  by  unhallowed  affec- 
tions, the  scale  will  not  be  turned  according  to  truth  and  righteous- 
ness." 

Many  instances  of  this  false  w^eighing  may  be  quoted. 
Eternal  realities  appear  to  be  mere  trifles  when  the  heart 
is  hot  after  some  engrossing  pleasure.  The  most  falla- 
cious estimates  are  made  under  the  influence  of  corrupt 
desires.  Like  a  judge  that  has  been  bribed,  the  under- 
standing gives  a  false  verdict.  In  one  scale  lies  eternity 
with  endless  joy  or  bliss,  and  in  the  other  lies  a  passing 
gain  of  gold  or  honor.  The  comparison  needs  no  study- 
ing, it  is  as  a  ton  to  an  ounce,  and  yet  the  balances  are 
so  false  that  the  ounce  is  declared  to  have  greater  weight 
than  the  ton.     God  hateth  unjust  balances,  and  we  may 


puritan's   GARDEN".  17 

wisely  do  the  same  when  we  see  how  souls  are  mined  by 
the  insane  trickery  with  whicli  a  man  cheats  himself  out 
of  his  own  soul. 

O  Lord  of  truth,  teach  my  conscience  the  law  of 
truth,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Hold  my  hand  while  I  hold  the 
scales,  and  let  me  weigh  all  things  in  the  balances  of  the 
sanctuary. 

TKEASON  IN  COINING  FAKTHINGS. 
"  There  is  as  much  felony  in   coining  pence,    as   shiUings  and 
ponnds." 

The  principle  is  the  same,  whatever  the  value  of  the 
coin  may  be  :  the  prerogative  of  the  Crown  is  trenched 
upon  by  the  counterfeiter,  even  if  he  only  imitates  and 
utters  the  smallest  coin  of  the  realm.  He  has  set  the 
royal  sign  to  his  base  metal,  and  the  small  money- value 
of  his  coinage  is  no  excuse  for  his  oifence. 

Any  one  sin  wilfully  indulged  and  persevered  in  is 
quite  sufficient  to  prove  a  man  to  be  a  traitor  to  his 
God.  Though  he  may  neither  commit  murder  nor 
adultery — which  would  be  like  counterfeiting  the  larger 
coins,  he  may  be  as  surely  a  felon  in  the  sight  of  heaven 
if  he  deliberately  utters  falsehood  or  indulges  pride — 
which  some  think  as  lightly  of  as  if  they  were  but  the 
counterfeits  of  pence.  The  spirit  of  rebellion  is  the 
same  whatever  be  the  manner  of  displaying  it.  A  gianfc 
may  look  out  through  a  very  small  window,  and  so  may 
great  obstinacy  of  rebellion  manifest  itself  in  a  little  act 
of  wilfulness. 

How  careful  should  this  consideration  make  us  ! 
How  earnestly  should  we  watch  against  what  are  thought 
to  be  minor  offences.  The  egg  of  mischief  is  smaller 
than  that  of  a  midge  ;  a  world  of  evil  lurks  in  a  drop  of 
rebellion.  Lord,  keep  us  from  pence  transgressions  and 
then  we  shall  not  commit  the  pound  offences. 


18  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

A  CHILD'S  FAILING. 
"  A  father  out  of  indulgence  may  pass  by  a  failing  when  his  son 
waits  upon  him  ;  for  instance,  suppose  he  should  spill  the  wine  and 
break  the  glass  ;  but  surely  he  will  not  allow  him  to  throw  it  down 
carelessly  or  wilfully." 

Every  one  can  see  tliat  there  is  a  grave  distinction 
between  sins  of  infirmity  and  wilful  transgressions.  A 
man  may  splash  us  very  badly  with  the  wheel  of  his  car- 
riage, as  he  passes  by,  and  we  may  feel  vexed,  but  the 
feeling  would  have  been  very  much  more  keen  if  he  had 
thrown  mud  into  our  face  with  deliberate  intent.  By 
the  grace  of  God,  we  do  not  sin  wilfully.  Our  wrong- 
doing comes  of  ignorance  or  of  carelessness,  and  causes 
us  many  a  pang  of  conscience,  for  we  would  fain  be 
blameless  before  our  God.  Wilfully  to  offend  is  not 
according  to  our  mind.  In  this  the  children  of  God  are 
manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil.  Deliberation 
and  delight  in  sin  are  sure  marks  of  the  heirs  of  wrath. 
Sin  in  believers  is  a  terrible  evil,  but  there  is  this  mitiga- 
tion of  it,  that  they  do  not  love  it,  and  cannot  rest  in  it. 
The  true  son  does  not  wish  to  do  damage  to  his  father's 
goods  ;  on  the  contrary,  he  loves  to  please  his  father, 
and  he  is  himself  grieved  when  he  causes  grief  to  one 
whom  he  so  highly  honors.  O  my  Lord,  I  pray  thee  let 
me  not  sin  carelessly,  lest  I  come  to  sin  presumptuously. 
Make  me  to  be  watchful  against  my  infirmities,  that  I 
may  not  fall  by  httle  and  little. 

ESTHER   GOING  IN  UNTO   THE   KING. 

'*  Queen  Esther  would  go  into  the  king's  presence,  even  though 
there  might  be  no  golden  sceptre  held  forth  ;  so,  believer,  venture 
into  God's  presence  when  you  have  no  smile  and  no  light  from  the 
countenance  of  your  God.     Trust  in  a  withdrawing  God." 

A  good  child  will  believe  in  his  father's  love  even 
when  his  father  is  angry.  We  believe  in  the  sun  when 
he  is  under  a  cloud,  and  shall  we  not  believe  in  God 


puritan's  gardet^.  19 

when  he  hidetli  himself  ?  "When  the  door  of  mercy  is 
shut,  then  is  the  time  for  knocking.  When  the  blessing 
appears  to  be  lost,  then  is  the  season  for  seeking  ;  and 
when  favors  seem  to  be  denied,  then  is  the  hour  for 
importunate  asking.  When  we  have  had  many  denials 
we  should  be  the  more  earnest  in  prayer,  that  the  hin- 
drance may  be  removed.  Esther  succeeded  in  lier  suit 
though  she  went  without  a  call,  and  much  more  sliall  we 
if  we  boldly  come  unto  the  King  of  kings,  from  whom 
no  sincere  petitioner  ever  was  dismissed  unheard.  If  we 
knew  the  worst  time  for  prayer  had  come,  we  ought  still 
to  pray.  Come,  my  soul,  get  thee  to  thy  chamber  and 
seek  the  King's  face,  for  thou  hast  great  need. 

MEADOWS  AND   MARSHES. 
*'  Meadows  may  be  oecasionaUy  flooded,   but    tlie  marshes  are 
drowned  by  the  tide  at  every  return  thereof," 

There  is  all  this  difference  between  the  sins  of  the 
righteous  and  those  of  the  ungodlj^.  Surprised  by 
temptation,  true  saints  are  flooded  with  a  passing  out- 
burst of  sin  ;  but  the  wicked  delight  in  transgression 
and  live  in  it  as  in  their  element.  The  saint  in  his 
errors  is  a  star  under  a  cloud,  but  the  sinner  is  darkness 
itself.  The  gracious  may  fall  into  iniquity,  but  the  grace- 
less run  into  it,  wallow  in  it,  and  again  and  again  return 
to  it.  Lord,  grant  that  we  may  be  uplifted  by  thy 
grace,  so  that  the  great  water-floods  of  temptation  may 
not  come  near  us  ;  and  if  through  the  prevalence  of  our 
inward  corruption  the  enemy  should  come  in  like  a 
flood,  O  Lord,  deliver  thy  servants  by  thy  great  power. 

THE  NEEDLE  AND   ITS   POLE, 
**  The  needle  that  hath  been  touched  with  the  loadstone  may  be 
shaken  and  agitated,  but  it  never  rests  until  it  turns  toward  the  pole." 

Thus  our  heart's  affections  when  once  magnetized  by 


A^O  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

the  love  of  Clirist  find  no  rest  except  thy  turn  to  him. 
The  cares  and  labors  of  the  day  may  carry  the  thoughts 
to  other  objects,  even  as  a  finger  may  turn  the  needle  to 
the  east  or  west,  but  no  sooner  is  the  pressure  removed 
than  the  thoughts  fly  to  the  Well-beloved  just  as  the 
needle  moves  to  its  place.  We  are  unable  to  rest  any- 
where but  in  Jesus.  The  new  birth  has  disqualified  us 
for  contentment  with  the  world,  and  hence  w^e  have  no 
choice  but  to  find  our  all  in  Christ.  Blessed  necessity  ! 
Driven  to  Jesus  by  an  unrest  which  finds  no  remedy 
elsewhere  !  Drawn  to  Jesus  by  an  impulse  which  we 
have  no  desire  to  resist  !  It  is  our  life's  business  and 
our  heart's  delight  to  point  to  him  so  plainly  that  if  any 
would  see  Jesus  they  have  only  to  look  in  the  direction 
in  which  our  whole  being  is  always  pointing.  We  are 
subject  to  many  deflections  and  disturbances,  but  thou 
knowest,  O  Lord,  that  bur  inmost  soul  seeks  after  thy- 
self. 

IMPLICIT  OBEDIENCE. 
"  John  Cassian  makes  mention  of  one  who  willingly  fetched  water 
near  two  miles  every  day  for  a  whole  year  together,  to  pour  it  upon  a 
dead,  dry  stick,  at  the  command  of  his  superior,  when  no  reason  else 
could  be  given  for  it.  And  of  another  it  is  recorded,  that  he  pro- 
fessed that  if  he  were  enjoined  by  his  superior  to  put  to  sea  in  a  ship 
which  had  neither  mast,  tackling,  nor  any  other  furniture,  he  would 
do  it  ;  and  when  he  was  asked  how  he  could  do  this  without  hazard 
of  his  discretion,  he  answered.  The  wisdom  must  be  in  him  that 
hath  power  to  command,  not  in  him  that  hath  power  to  obey." 

These  are  instances  of  implicit  obedience  to  a  poor 
fallible  human  authority,  and  are  by  no  means  to  be 
imitated.  But  when  it  is  God  who  gives  the  command, 
we  cannot  carry  a  blind  obedience  too  far,  since  there 
can  be  no  room  for  questioning  the  wisdom  and  goodness 
of  any  of  his  precepts.  At  Christ's  command  it  is  wise 
to  let  down  tiie  net  at  the  very  spot  where  we  have 


rUiUTAN's    GARDKN.  21 

toiled  ill  vain  all  the  night.  If  God  bids  us,  we  can 
sweeten  water  ^dth  salt,  and  destroy  poison  with  meat, 
yea,  we  may  w^alk  the  waves  of  the  sea,  or  the  flames  of 
a  furnace.  Well  said  the  Blessed  Virgin,  "  Whatsoever 
he  saith  unto  you,  do  it."  My  heart,  I  charge  thee 
follow  thy  Lord's  conunand  without  a  moment's  ques- 
tion, though  he  bid  thee  go  forward  into  the  Red  Sea, 
or  onward  into  a  howling  wilderness. 

SUN-DIAL  WITHOUT   THE   SUN. 
'*  A  sun-dial  may  be  weU  and  accurately  set,  and  yet,  if  the  sun 
shines  not,  we  cannot  teU  the  time  of  day." 

Our  evidences  of  grace  are  in  much  the  same  condi- 
tion :  they  are  good  signs,  but  we  cannot  see  them  unless 
the  grace  of  God  shines  upon  them,  and  then  we  can 
almost  do  w^ithout  them,  even  as  an  observant  person 
can  tell  the  time  of  day  without  a  sun-dial,  by  looking 
to  the  Sim  itself.  Present  faith  in  a  present  Saviour  is 
better  than  all  the  marks  and  evidences  in  the  world. 
Yet  let  no  man  be  content  if  the  marks  of  a  child  of 
God  are  absent  from  his  life,  for  they  ought  to  be  there, 
and  must  be  there.  The  presence  of  sensible  evidences 
must  not  be  too  much  relied  on  ;  but  the  absence  of  them 
should  cause  great  searching  of  heart.  Our  main  con- 
cern should  be  to  look  daily  and  hourly  unto  Jesus, 
trusting  in  A^V;^,  and  not  in  evidences  ;  judging  the 
progress  of  our  soul's  day,  rather  by  our  view  of  the 
Sun  of  righteousness  than  by  our  own  sun-dial.  If 
Jesus  be  gone,  all  is  gone  :  without  his  love  we  are 
darkness  itself.  What  a  sun-dial  is  without  the  sun, 
that  is  the  fairest  character,  the  choicest  past  experience, 
and  the  maturest  knowledge  without  Jesus'  fellowship. 
Kise,  O  Sun  of  my  soul  ;  end  my  doubts,  if  I  Imve  any  ; 
prevent  them,  if  I  have  none. 


22  PLOWERS   FROM  A 

WINDING  UP  THE   CLOCK. 

"  The  conscience  of  a  sinner  is  like  a  clock,  dull,  calm,  and  at 
rest,  when  the  weights  are  down  ;  but  when  wound  up,  it  is  full  of 
motion." 

Sometimes  God  winds  up  conscience  in  this  life,  and 
then  it  works  vigorously,  and  strikes  the  time  of  day  in 
the  sinner's  ears.  Shame  attends  his  sin,  and  he  trem- 
bles in  secret.  A  dreadful  sound  is  in  his  ears,  and  like 
the  troubled  sea  he  cannot  rest.  This  is  far  better  than 
a  dead  calm.  Alas,  in  many  cases  the  clock  runs  down, 
conscience  is  again  still,  and  the  man  returns  to  his  false 
peace.     Of  all  states  this  is  most  dangerous. 

In  the  world  to  come  the  ceaseless  activity  of  con- 
science will  be  the  torture  of  hell.  Rendered  sensitive 
by  the  removal  of  hardening  influences,  the  lost  soul 
will  find  memory  accusing,  and  conscience  condemning 
forever,  and  no  advocate  at  hand  to  suggest  a  defence. 
A  man  had  better  be  shut  up  with  a  bear  robbed  of  her 
whelps,  than  live  with  an  accusing  conscience.  No 
racks  or  fires  can  equal  the  misery  of  being  consciously 
guilty,  and  seeing  no  way  of  escape  from  sin.  May  the 
Lord  make  our  conscience  to  be  an  alarum  to  us  here 
that  it  be  not  a  torment  to  us  hereafter. 

ElVIPTY  THE  BUCKET. 
**  Empty  the  bucket  before  you  go  to  the  fountain/* 

Wise  advice.  If  the  pail  be  full  of  the  best  and 
cleanest  water  it  is  idle  to  carry  it  to  the  well,  for  its 
fulness  disqualifies  it  for  being  a  receiver.  Those  who 
think  themselves  full  of  grace  are  not  likely  to  pray 
aright,  for  prayer  is  a  beggar's  trade,  and  supposes  the 
existence  of  need.  What  does  a  full  bucket  want  with 
the  well  ?  Let  it  stay  where  it  is.  Fitness  for  mercy  is 
not  found  in  self-sufficiency,  but  in  emptiness  and  want. 


PUKITAIN^'S    GAKDEK.  23 

He  can  and  will  receive  most  of  tlie  Lord  who  lias  legist 
of  liis  own. 

If  the  bucket  is  full  of  foul  water,  it  is  wise  to  throw 
it  away  as  we  go  to  the  crystal  spring.  "We  must  not 
come  to  the  Lord  with  our  minds  full  of  vanity,  lust, 
covetousness,  and  pride.  ^'If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my 
heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me. "  He  will  not  make 
his  grace  the  medium  of  floating  our  unclean  desires. 
Grace  will  cleanse  out  sin,  but  it  will  not  mix  with  it, 
neither  may  we  desire  such  a  dishonorable  compromising 
of  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord  our  God.  Let  the  bucket 
of  the  heart  be  turned  upside  down  and  drained  of  the 
love  of  sin,  and  then  prayer  will  be  heard,  and  Jesus 
will  come  in  and  fill  it. 

Lord,  empty  me  of  self,  of  pride,  of  worldliness,  of 
unbelief,  and  then  fill  me  with  all  the  fulness  of  God, 

THE   HYPOCRITE'S   TEICKS. 
"  A  hypocrite  has  been  likened  to  one  who  should  go  into  a  shop 
to  buy  a  pennyworth,  and  should  steal  a  pound's  worth  ;  or  to  one 
who  is  punctual  in  paying  a  small  debt,  that  he  may  get  deeper  into 
our  books  and  cheat  us  of  a  greater  sum.' ' 

Hypocrites  make  much  ado  about  small  things  that 
they  may  be  more  easy  in  their  consciences  while  living 
in  great  sins.  They  pay  the  tithe  of  mint  to  a  fraction, 
but  rob  God  of  his  glory  by  their  self-righteousness. 
Punctilious  to  the  utmost  about  ritual  and  rubric,  they 
set  up  their  own  righteousness  in  the  place  of  Christ, 
and  rob  him  of  his  crown,  while  all  the  while  they 
pretend  to  be  serving  him.  They  honor  him  with  their 
church  adornments,  in  the  way  of  pictures  and  images, 
and  thereby  insult  him  with  idolatry.  In  the  mass  they 
pretend  to  great  devotion  for  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  yet 
the  sum  of  it  is  that  they  put  a  piece  of  bread  into  the 
throne  of  his  eternal  Godliead.     In  a  word,  they  give 


24  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

God  the  shells,  and  steal  the  kernels  for  their  own  pride 
and  self-will.  Christ  may  have  their  names,  and  they 
will  be  his  disciples  if  they  can  turn  a  penny  thereby, 
either  for  their  purse  or  their  pride,  but  all  the  while 
they  are  robbing  him  of  his  glory.  O  Lord,  whatever  I 
may  be,  let  me  not  be  a  hypocrite.  Sufier  me  to  be  the 
least  among  thy  true  children,  rather  than  the  chief 
among  pretenders. 

THE  WEAK  STRONG,  AND  THE  STRONG  WEAK. 

"  It  is  related  of  Laurence  Saunders  the  martyr,  that  one  day  in 
the  country,  meeting  his  friend  Dr.  Pendleton,  an  earnest  preacher 
in  King  Edward's  reign,  they  debated  upon  what  they  had  best  do  in 
the  dangerous  time  that  Mary's  accession  had  brought  upon  them. 
Saunders  confessed  that  his  spirit  was  ready,  but  he  felt  the  flesh 
was  at  present  too  weak  for  much  suffering.  But  Pendleton  ad- 
monished him,  and  appeared  all  courage  and  forwardness  to  face 
every  peril.  They  both  came,  under  the  control  of  circumstances,  to 
London,  and  there,  when  danger  arose,  Pendleton  shrunk  from  the 
cross,  and  Saunders  resolutely  took  it  up." 

The  reader  has  probably  met  with  this  story  before, 
but  it  will  not  harm  him  to  learn  its  lesson  again.  We 
are  certainly  stronger  when  we  feel  our  weakness  than 
when  we  glory  in  om*  strength.  Our  pastoral  observa- 
tion over  a  very  large  church  has  led  us  to  expect  to  see 
terrible  failures  among  those  who  carry  their  heads  higii 
among  their  brethren.  Poor  timid  souls  who  are  afraid 
to  put  one  foot  before  another,  for  fear  they  should  go 
an  inch  astray,  go  on  from  year  to  year  in  lovely,  bashful 
holiness,  and  at  the  same  time  the  very  professors  who 
condemned  them,  and  distressed  them  by  their  confident 
pretensions,  fall  like  Lucifer,  never  to  hope  again. 

The  fault  which  has  happened  to  others  may  be  yet 
seen  in  me,  unless  the  Lord  shall  guard  me  from  it.  It 
is  no  time  for  boasting  while  we  are  still  in  the  enemy's 
country. 


puritan's  garde.  25 

THE   SUN  IN  WINTER. 

**  A  summer's  snn,  even  when  beclouded,  yields  more  comfort  and 
warmth  to  the  earth  than  a  winter's  sun  that  shines  brightest." 

Tl)e  comforts  of  the  Spirit  at  their  lowest,  are  far 
superior  to  the  joys  of  the  world  at  their  highest  pitch. 
When  saints  are  mourning,  their  inward  peace  is  still 
superior  to  that  of  worldhngs,  when  their  mirth  and 
revelry  overflow  all  bounds.  Lord,  I  had  rather  take 
the  worst  from  thee  than  the  best  from  thine  enemy. 
Only  do  thou  graciously  shine  within  me,  and  let  mine 
outward  condition  be  as  dull  as  thou  pleasest. 

THE  NURSE  AND  THE   FALLING  CHILD. 

**  The  nurse  lets  the  child  get  a  knock  sometimes,  in  order  to  make 
it  more  cautious." 

Thus  does  the  Lord  in  Providence  allow  his  children 
to  suffer  by  their  sins,  that  they  may  be  more  thoughtful 
in  future.  He  has  no  hand  in  their  sin  ;  but,  since  the 
sin  is  in  them,  he  allows  circumstances  to  occur  by  which 
the  evil  is  made  manifest  in  open  acts,  which  cause  them 
sorrow.  When  a  physician  sees  a  person  suffering  from 
an  inward  complaint,  he  may  think  it  wise  so  to  deal 
with  his  patient  that  the  disease  is  brought  to  the  sur- 
face ;  and  thus  also  God  may  permit  the  sins  of  his 
j)eople  to  come  to  an  open  sore,  that  they  may  be  aware 
of  them,  and  seek  for  healing.  The  nurse  does  not 
make  the  child  careless  or  cause  it  to  tumble,  but  she 
withdraws  her  interposing  care  for  the  best  of  reasons, 
namely,  that  the  little  one  may  learn  to  avoid  danger  by 
a  measure  of  suffering  on  account  of  it.  It  would  be 
blasphemous  to  attribute  sin  to  God  ;  but  it  is  a  matter 
of  fact  that,  by  smarting  for  one  fault,  gracious  men 
learn  to  avoid  others. 


26  FLOWERS  FROM  A 

GEACE  FOE  USE,  AND  NOT  TO  BE  PLAYED  WITH. 

**  Grace  is  Dot  only  dommi,  but  talenium.  Grace  is  not  given,  as  a 
piece  of  money,  to  a  child  to  play  withal,  but  as  we  give  money  to 
factors,  to  trade  withal  for  us." 

Everytliing  is  practical  in  the  great  gifts  of  God.  He 
plants  liis  trees  that  they  may  bear  fruit,  and  sows  his 
seed  that  a  harvest  may  come  of  it.  We  may  trifle  and 
speculate  ;  God  never  does  so.  When  a  man  imagines 
that  grace  is  given  merely  to  make  him  comfortable,  to 
give  him  a  superiority  over  his  fellows,  or  to  enable  him 
to  avoid  deserved  censure,  he  knows  not  the  design  of 
the  Lord  in  the  bestowal  of  grace,  and,  indeed,  he  is  a 
stranger  to  the  grand  secret.  God  works  in  us  that  we 
may  work,  he  saves  us  that  we  may  serve  him,  and 
enriches  us  with  grace  that  the  riches  of  his  glory  may 
be  displayed. 

Are  we  putting  out  our  talents  to  proper  interest  ? 
Do  we  use  the  grace  bestowed  upon  us  ?  "  He  givetli 
more  grace,"  but  not  to  those  who  neglect  what  they 
have.  Men  do  not  long  trust  ill  stewards.  Lord,  help 
us  so  to  act  that  we  may  render  our  account  with  joy 
and  not  with  grief. 

STUDY  MUST  BE  FOLLOWED  UP  BY  MEDITATION. 

"  The  end  of  study  is  information,  the  end  of  meditation  is  prac- 
tice, or  a  work  upon  the  affections.  Study  is  like  a  winter's  sun 
that  shineth  but  warmeth  not  ;  but  meditation  is  like  blowing  up 
the  fire,  where  we  do  not  mind  the  blaze,  but  the  heat."    ' 

Meditation  being  thus  the  more  practical  of  the  two, 
should  not  be  placed  second  to  study,  but  should  even 
take  precedence  of  it. 

*'  In  study  we  are  rather  like  vintners,  who  take  in  wine  to  store 
for  sale  ;  in  meditation,  like  those  who  buy  wine  for  their  own  use 
and  comfort.  A  vintner's  cellar  may  be  better  stored  than  a  noble- 
man's. The  student  may  have  more  of  notion  and  knowledge,  but 
the  practical  Christian  hath  more  of  taste  and  refreshment.'* 


puritan's   GARDEN".  27 

The  stndentj  therefore,  is  in  a  sad  case  if  lie  go  no 
further,  for  his  soul  may  starve,  notwithstanding  his 
stores,  if  he  does  not  nse  them.  How  miserable  to  die 
of  cold  while  your  cellar  is  full  of  coals  !  To  perish 
with  hunger  when  your  granary  is  full  of  corn  !  This  is 
a  species  of  suicide  which  many  commit.  For  want  of 
due  examination  and  meditation  the  precious  truth  of 
God  is  of  no  ;4vail  ;  but  the  blame  lietli  at  the  man's 
own  door  because  he  would  not  consider  and  turn  unto 
the  Lord.  My  soul,  see  to  it  that  thy  knowledge  is  well 
used  for  thy  sustenance  and  growth.  Retire  more  than 
thou  hast  done  and  chew  the  cud  by  meditation.  Thou 
hast  had  too  little  of  this.  Be  zealous,  therefore,  and 
mend  thy  ways  in  this  respect.      ^ 

CLEAN  VESSELS  FOE  CHOICE  LIQUOES. 

"  As  precious  liquors  are  best  kept  in  clean  vessels,  so  is  the  mys- 
tery of  faith  in  a  i^nre  conscience." 

Who,  indeed,  would  knowingly  pour  a  choice  wine 
into  a  tainted  cask  ?  It  would  be  no  instance  of  his 
wisdom  if  he  did  so.  When  we  hear  of  men  living  in 
sin  and  yet  claiming  to  be  the  ministers  of  God,  we  are 
disgusted  with  their  pretences,  but  we  are  not  deceived 
by  their  professions.  In  the  same  manner,  we  care  little 
for  those  who  are  orthodox  Christians  in  creed  if  it  is 
clear  that  they  are  heterodox  in  life.  lie  who  l)elieves 
the  truth  should  himself  be  true.  How  can  we  expect 
others  to  receive  our  religion  if  it  leaves  us  foul,  false, 
malicious,  and  selfish  ?  We  sicken  at  the  sight  of  a 
dirty  dish,  and  refuse  even  good  meat  when  it  is  placed 
thereon.  So  pure  and  holy  is  the  doctrine  of  the  cross 
that  he  who  hears  it  aright  will  have  liis  ear  cleansed,  he 
who  believes  it  will  have  his  heart  purged,  and  he  who 
preaches  it  should  have  his  tongue  purified.     Woe  unto 


28  FLOWERS   FKOM   A 

that  man  who  brings  reproach  upon  the  gospel  by  an 
luihallowed  walk  and  conversation. 

Lord,  evermore  make  lis  vessels  fit  for  thine  own  use, 
and  then  fill  us  with  the  pure  blood  of  the  grapes  of 
sound  doctrine  and  wholesome  instruction.  Suffer  us 
not  to  be  such  foul  cups  as  to  be  only  fit  for  the  wine  of 
Sodom. 

THE  EHODIANS. 

Plutarch  tells  us  that  the  Rhodians  appealed  to  the 
Romans  for  help,  and  one  suggested  that  they  should 
plead  the  good  turns  which  they  had  done  for  Rome. 
This  was  a  plea  difficult  to  make  strong  enough,  very 
liable  to  be  disputed,  ^and  not  at  all  likely  to  influence 
so  great  a  people  as  the  Romans,  who  would  not  readily 
consider  themselves  to  be  debtors  to  so  puny  a  state  as 
that  of  Rhodes.  The  Rhodians  were,  however,  wiser 
than  their  counsellor,  and  took  up  another  line  of  argu- 
ment, which  was  abundantly  successful  :  they  pleaded 
the  favors  which  in  former  times  the  Romans  had  be- 
stowed upon  them,  and  urged  these  as  a  reason  why  the 
great  nation  should  not  cast  off  a  needy  people  for  whom 
they  had  already  done  so  much. 

Herein  is  wisdom.  How  idle  it  would  be  for  us  to 
plead  our  good  works  with  the  great  God  !  What  we 
have  done  for  him  is  too  faulty  and  too  questionable  to 
be  pleaded  ;  but  what  he  has  done  for  us  is  grand  argu- 
ment, great  in  itself  and  potent  with  an  immutable 
Benefactor.  Legal  pleading  soon  meets  a  rebuff  ;  yea, 
it  trembles  even  before  it  leaves  the  pleader's  mouth, 
and  makes  him  ashamed  while  he  is  yet  at  his  argument. 
Far  otherwise  fares  it  with  the  humble  gratitude  which 
gathers  strength  as  it  recalls  each  deed  of  love,  and  com- 
forts itself  with  a  growing  assurance  that  he  who  has 


puritan's   GARDEN".  29 

done  so  mucli  will  not  lose  his  labor,  but  will  do  even 
more,  till  he  has  perfected  that  which  concerneth  us. 
Sinners  run  fearful  risks  wlien  they  appeal  to  justice  : 
their  wisdom  is  to  cast  themselves  upon  free  grace.  Our 
past  conduct  is  a  logical  reason  for  our  condemnation  ;  it 
is  in  God's  past  mercy  to  us  that  we  have  accumulated 
argument  for  hope.  The  Latin  sentence  hath  great 
truth  in  it,  Deus  donando  dehet^  God  by  giving  one 
mercy  pledges  himself  to  give  another  ;  he  is  not  in- 
debted to  our  merit,  his  only  obhgation  is  that  which 
arises  out  of  his  own  covenant  promise,  of  which  his 
gifts  are  pledges  and  bonds.  Let  us  remember  this 
when  next  we  urge  our  suit  with  him. 

CHOKING  THE   WEEDS. 

"  The  way  to  destroy  iU  weeds  is  to  plant  good  herbs  that  are  con- 
trary." 

We  have  all  heard  of  weeds  choking  the  wheat ;  if  we 
were  wise  we  should  learn  from  our  enemy,  and  endeavor 
to  choke  the  weeds  by  the  wheat.  Preoccupation  of 
mind  is  a  great  safeguard  from  temptation.  Fill  a 
bushel  with  corn,  and  you  will  keep  out  the  chaff  :  have 
the  heart  stored  with  holy  things,  and  the  vanities  of  the 
world  will  not  so  readily  obtain  a  lodging-place. 

Herein  is  wisdom  in  the  training  of  children.  Plant 
the  mind  early  with  the  truths  of  God's  word,  and  error 
and  folly  will,  in  a  measure,  be  forestalled.  The  false 
will  soon  spring  up  if  we  do  not  early  occupy  the  mind 
with,  the  true.  He  who  said  that  he  did  not  wish  to 
prejudice  his  boy's  mind  by  teaching  him  to  pray,  soon 
discovered  that  the  devil  was  not  so  scrupulous,  for  his 
boy  soon  learned  to  swear.  It  is  well  to  prejudice  a 
field  in  favor  of  wheat  at  the  first  opportunity. 

In  the  matter  of  amusements  for  the  young,  it  is  much 


30  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

better  to  provide  than  to  prohibit.  If  we  find  the  lads 
and  lasses  interesting  employments  they  will  not  be  so 
hungry  after  the  gayeties  and  ensnarements  of  this  wicked 
world.  If  we  are  afraid  that  the  children  will  eat  un- 
wholesome food  abroad,  let  us  as  much  as  possible  take 
the  edge  from  their  appetites  by  keeping  a  good  table  at 
home. 

BROKEN  BONES  COMPLAINING. 

'*  Old  bruises  may  trouble  us  long  after,  upon  every  change  of 
weather,  and  new  afflictions  revive  the  sense  of  old  sins." 

We  know  one  who  broke  his  arm  in  his  youth,  and 
though  it  was  well  set,  and  soundly  healed,  yet  before  a 
rough  season  the  bones  cry  out  bitterly  ;  and  even  so, 
though  early  vice  may  be  forsaken,  and  heartily  repented 
of,  and  the  mind  may  be  savingly  renewed,  yet  the  old 
habits  will  be  a  lifelong  trouble  and  injury.  The  sins  of 
our  youth  will  give  us  many  a  twist  fifty  years  after  they 
have  been  forgiven.  How  happy,  then,  are  those  who 
are  preserved  from  the  ways  of  ungodliness,  and  brought 
to  Jesus  in  the  days  of  their  youth,  for  they  thus  escape 
a  thousand  regrets.  It  is  well  to  have  a  broken  bone 
skilfully  set,  but  far  better  never  to  have  had  it  broken. 
The  fall  of  Adam  has  battered  and  bruised  us  all  most 
sadly  ;  it  is  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness  that  w^e  should 
incur  further  damage  by  our  own  personal  falls.  The 
aches  and  pains  of  age  are  more  than  suflicient  when 
every  limb  is  sound,  and  recklessly  to  add  the  anguish 
of  fractures  and  dislocations  would  be  folly  indeed. 
Young  man,  do  not  run  up  bills  which  your  riper  years 
will  find  it  hard  to  pay  ;  do  not  eat  to-day  forbidden 
morsels,  which  may  l^reed  you  sorrow  long  after  their 
sweetness  has  been  forgotten. 


puritan's  garden.  31 

THE   CHAKIOT   OF  THE   SPIRIT. 

'*  The  Spirit  of  God  rides  most  triumphantl}^  in  his  own  chariot." 

That  is  to  say,  he  is  best  pleased  to  convey  conviction 
and  comfort  by  means  of  his  own  word.  God's  word, 
not  man's  comment  on  God's  word,  is  the  most  nsiial 
means  of  conversion.  This  is  done  to  put  honor  upon 
tlie  divine  revelation,  and  to  make  us  prize  it  with  all 
our  hearts.  Our  Lord  said  not  only,  "  Sanctify  them," 
but,  ''  sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  ;"  and  then  he 
added,  ^' thy  word  is  truth."  Our  author  does  well  to 
liken  the  Scriptures  to  a  chariot,  because  they  are  the 
ordinary  means  by  which  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  to  us, 
but  they  are  only  the  chariot,  and  without  the  quicken- 
ing Spirit  they  bring  us  no  good.  The  Scriptures  do 
not  make  our  hearts  burn  till  the  Spirit  kindles  them 
into  flames,  and  then  we  say,  "  Did  not  our  hearts  burn 
within  us  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  way,  and  while 
he  opened  to  us  the  Scriptures."  Let  us  reverence  Holy 
Scripture  because  the  Holy  Ghost  is  its  author,  expositor, 
preserver,  and  applier.  We  cannot  too  often  use  the 
weapon  which  the  Spirit  himself  calls  his  sword. 

COVETOUSNESS  AS  A  SERVANT. 

**  CoYetoTisness  may  be  entertained  as  a  servant,  where  it  is  not 
entertained  as  a  master — entertained  as  a  servant  to  jDrovide  oil  and 
fuel  to  make  other  sins  burn." 

Where  avarice  is  the  absolute  master,  the  man  is  a 
miser  ;  but  even  he  is  not  more  truly  miserable  than  the 
man  whose  gainings  only  furnish  opportunity  for  indulg- 
ing in  vice.  Such  persons  are  greedy  that  they  may 
become  guilty.  Their  money  buys  them  the  means  of 
their  own  destruction,  and  they  are  eager  after  it. 
Winning  and  saving  with  them  are  but  means  for  prof- 
ligacy, and  therefore  they  think  themselves  fine  liberal 


32  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

fellows,  and  despise  the  penurious  habits  of  the  miser. 
Yet  in  what  respects  are  they  better  than  he  ?  Their 
example  is  certainly  far  more  injurious  to  the  common- 
wealth, and  their  motive  is  not  one  whit  better.  Selfish- 
ness is  the  mainspring  of  action  in  each  case  ;  the 
dift'erence  lies  in  the  means  selected  and  not  in  the  end 
proposed.  Both  seek  their  own  gratification,  the  one  by 
damming  up  the  river,  and  the  other  by  drowning  the 
country  with  its  floods.  Let  the  profligate  judge  for 
himself,  whether  he  is  one  grain  better  than  the  greediest 
skinflint  whom  he  so  much  ridicules. 

Lord,  help  us  to  live  for  thee  and  not  for  self,  and 
both  in  giving  and  in  spending  may  thy  glory  be  our 
only  aim. 

UNDISTUKBED  DEVOTION. 

''It  is  a  strange  constancy  of  fixedness  that  is  attribnted  to  the 
priests  at  Jerusalem,  who,  when  Faustiis,  Cornelius,  Furius,  and 
Fabius  broke  into  the  city  with  their  troops,  and  rushed  into  the 
temple  ready  to  kill  them,  yet  they  went  on  with  the  rites  of  the 
temple,  as  if  there  had  been  no  assault.  And  strange  is  that  other 
instance  of  the  Spartan  youth,  that  held  the  censer  to  Alexander 
whii3  he  offered  sacrifice.  A  coal  lighting  upon  his  arm,  he  suffered 
it  to  burn  there  rather  than  that  any  crying  out  of  his  should  disturb 
the  worship." 

These  instances  are  a  shame  to  Christians,  that  we  do 
not  more  intensely  fix  our  hearts  when  we  are  in  the 
service  of  God  ;  instead  of  which,  many  may  be  seen 
looking  hither  and  thither,  and  turning  their  heads  to 
the  door  to  observe  every  new  comer.  Even  in  our 
private  devotions,  how  soon  we  are  distracted  and  carried 
away  from  the  point  in  hand.  Our  minds  flit  and  fly 
like  birds  on  the  hedges,  which  have  scarcely  time  to 
settle,  for  as  one  passenger  moves  along  the  road  and 
then  another,  they  are  ready  for  flight  at  once.     At  the 


33 


BOTind  of  every  footstep  the  bird  is  on  the  wing,  and  thus 
some  hearts  are  the  prey  of  every  triflhig  circumstance. 
Saints  have  been  undisturbed  amid  a  crowd,  while  otliers 
find  their  prayers  crowded  out  when  they  are  alone. 

O  Lord, V  assist  me  in  my  communion  with  tliee,  that 
my  whole  soul  may  be  set  upon  it,  and  not  a  single 
thought  may  wander  from  thee.  Let  not  even  pain  and 
care  prevent  my  whole  heart  from  adoring  thee. 

EAKE   EXOTICS  NEED   CAEE. 

**  The  more  supernatural  things  are,  the  more  we  need  diligence  to 
preserve  them.  A  strange  plant  [an  exotic]  requires  more  care  than 
a  native  of.  the  soil.  Worldly  desires,  like  nettles,  breed  of  their 
own  accord  ;  but  spiritual  desires  need  a  great  deal  of  cultivating.** 

The  more  spiritual  the  duty,  the  sooner  the  soul 
wearies  of  it.  An  illustration  of  this  is  seen  in  the  case 
of  Moses,  whose  hands  grew  weary  in  prayer,  while  we 
never  read  that  Joshua's  hands  hung  down  in  fight. 
Spirituahty  is  a  tender  plant,  and  without  great  care  it 
soon  flags,  Avhile  sin  needs  neither  hoeing  nor  watering, 
but  will  spring  up  in  the  dark,  and  flourish  even  amid 
the  wintry  frosts  of  trouble.  The  fair  flower  of  grace, 
is,  however,  so  precious  that  God  himself  has  promised 
to  tend  it.  TV  hat  must  be  the  value  of  that  plant  of 
which  the  Lord  hath  said,  "  I  Avill  water  it  every 
moment  ;  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and 
day?"  Let  us  watch  and  pray,  and  never  dream  that 
things  will  go  v/ell  with  us  if  we  neglect  these  necessary 
duties.  No  spiritual  grace  will  thrive  if  we  neglect  it. 
We  ought  to  be  very  diligent  in  our  spiritual  husbandry  ; 
nor  should  our  labor  be  grudged,  for  the  fruit  will  well 
reward  our  pains. 


34  FLOWERS    FROM   A 


THE  MAKTYE  AND   THE   CHAIN. 

**  When  Hooper,  the  blessed  martyr,  was  at  the  stake,  and  the 
officers  came  to  fasten  him  to  it,  he  cried,  '  Let  me  alone  ;  God  that 
hath  called  me  hither  will  keep  me  from  stirring  ;  and  yet,'  said  he, 
upon  second  thought,  *  because  I  am  but  flesh  and  blood,  I  am  will- 
ing.    Bind  me  fast,  lest  I  stir.'  " 

Some  plead  tliat  tliej  have  no  need  of  the  holdfasts  of 
an  outward  profession,  and  the  solemn  pledges  of  the 
two  great  ordinances,  for  the  Holy  Spirit  will  keep  them 
faithful ;  yet  surely,  like  this  man  of  God,  they  may 
well  accept  those  cords  of  love  wherewith  heavenly 
wisdom  would  bind  us  to  the  horns  of  the  altar.  Our 
infirmities  need  all  the  helps  which  divine  love  has 
devised,  and  we  may  not  be  so  self-sufficient  as  to  refuse 
them. 

Pledges,  covenants,  and  vows  of  human  devising 
should  be  used  with  great  caution  ;  but  where  the  Lord 
ordains  we  may  proceed  without  question,  our  only  fear 
being  lest  by  neglecting  them  we  should  despise  the 
command  of  the  Lord,  or  by  relying  uj)on  them  v/e 
should  wrest  the  precept  from  its  proper  intent.  What- 
ever will  prove  a  check  to  us  when  tempted,  or  an 
incentive  when  commanded,  must  be  of  use  to  us,  how- 
ever strong  we  may  conceive  ourselves  to  be.  "  Bind 
the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even  with  cords  to  the  horns  of 
the  altar. ' ' 

Lord,  cast  a  fresh  band  about  me  every  day.  Let  the 
constraining  love  of  Jesus  hold  me  faster  and  faster. 

**  Oh,  to  grace  how  great  a  debtor, 
Daity  I'm  constrained  to  be  ! 
Let  that  grace,  Lord,  like  a  fetter, 
Bind  my  wandering  heart  to  thee." 


puritan's  garden.  35 

BEGGING  OF  THE   EICH. 

"  Beggars  in  the  streets,  if  they  see  a  poor  man,  meanly  clad,  they 
let  him  alone  ;  but  when  they  see  a  man  of  quality  and  fashion  they 
rouse  up  themselves,  and  besiege  him  with  importunate  entreaties 
and  clamors,  and  will  not  let  him  go  until  he  hath  left  something 
with  them.' ' 

Tims  should  we  do  in  our  spiritual  begging.  Vain  is 
the  help  of  man,  and  therefore  we  should  ask  little  of 
him  :  he  is  as  j^oor  as  we  are,  and  it  will  be  a  waste  of 
time  to  wait  upon  such  a  pauper.  As  for  the  Lord 
Jesus,  he  is  so  rich  that  if  all  the  beggars  in  the  universe 
would  call  at  his  door,  he  would  not  refuse  one  of  them, 
but  would  set  open  the  doors  of  his  granaries  and  the 
hatches  of  his  butteries,  and  feast  the  world.  He  is  the 
heir  of  all  things.  There  is  no  bottom  to  his  treasuries. 
He  is  the  true  Solomon,  and  his  daily  provision  is  not 
only  enough  for  all  his  household,  but  for  all  those  who 
lie  starving  on  the  highways  and  in  the  hedges.  The 
wealth  of  nations  is  nothing  to  the  wealth  of  Jesus. 
Come,  then,  my  heart,  beg  largely  of  thy  Lord,  and 
when  he  hears  thee,  beg  again.  His  quality  and  fashion 
invite  thee  to  follow  him  with  importunity  withersoever 
he  goeth. 

SOUR   GRAPES. 
"  Ungodly  men  are   too  impatient  to  wait  for  solid  and  eternal 
pleasures,  but  snatch  at  the  pleasures  of  sin,  which  are  but  for  a 
season.     These  resemble  children  who  cannot  tarry  till  the  grapes 
are  ripe,  and  therefore  eat  them  sour  and  green.'* 

Pleasure  lies  mainly  in  hope,  and  yet  some  men  will 
not  give  space  for  hope  to  grow  in  :  it  must  be  now  or 
never  ;  all  to-day,  and  to  morrow  may  starve.  Li  busi- 
ness, men  put  out  their  money,  foregoing  its  use  them- 
selves, that  it  may,  after  a  while,  return  to  them  with 
increase  ;  3ut  carnal  men  are  all  for  keeping  the  bird 
in  the  hand,  and  cannot  wait  for  joys  to  come. 


36  FLOWERS   FKOM   A 

Yet  tliese  hasty  delights  are  not  satisfying.  Man  was 
not  made  to  find  his  heaven  npon  earth,  nor  can  he  do 
so,  even  though  he  labors  after  it.  The  grapes  plucked 
in  this  untimely  season  cause  ere-long  a  griping  of  the 
heart,  and  a  gnawing  within  the  soul.  We  are  not  ready 
for  fulness  of  joy,  nor  is  the  joy  ready  for  us.  Our 
wisdom  is  to  be  preparing  for  eternal  bliss  by  present 
holiness,  believing  that  he  who  is  making  us  ready  for 
heaven  is  making  heaven  ready  for  us.  This  is  the 
surest  way  to  present  satisfaction,  which  must  always  be 
found  in  careful  obedience  to  the  divine  will  from  day 
to  day,  and  in  a  believing  expectation  of  glory  to  be 
revealed. 

O  thou  who  art  ^'the  God  of  hope,"  grant  that,  by 
thy  hope  which  thou  hast  wrought  in  us,  we  may  be 
daily  purified,  and  set  free  from  the  defilement  of  this 
present  evil  world. 

THE   SINGLE   MILLSTONE. 
*'  Tlie  Egj^ptians,  in  their  hieroglyphics,  expressed  the  unprofit- 
ableness of  a  solitary  man  by  a  single  millstone,  which,  being  alone, 
grind eth  no  meal,  though  with  its  fellow  it  would  be  exceedingly 
profitable  for  that  purpose." 

Let  this  serve  as  a  symbol  to  those  unsociable  Christians 
who  endeavor  to  Vvalk  alone,  and  refuse  to  enter  into  the 
fellowship  of  the  saints.  They  are  comparatively  use- 
less. The  Lord  has  made  us  dependent  upon  each  other 
for  usefulness.  Our  attainments  are  not  put  to  their 
right  use  till  they  supply  the  deficiencies  of  others  :  this 
is  one  side  of  our  necessity  for  fellowship — we  need  to 
associate  with  the  w^eak,  that  we  may  find  a  sphere  in 
which  to  trade  with  our  talents,  by  helping  them.  On 
the  other  hand,  our  infirmities  and  deficiencies  are  meant 
to  draw  us  into  association  with  stronger  brethren,  from 
whom  we  may  receive  help  and  direction.     Whether  we 


puritan's  garden.  37 

be  of  tlie  stronger  or  the  feebler  sort,  we  have  an  eqnal 
reason  for  seeking  Cliristian  communion.  It  is  of  the 
nature  of  the  Lord's  people  to  assemble  themselves 
together,  and  live  in  companies  :  wild  beasts  may  roam 
the  woods  alone,  but  sheep  go  in  flocks.  David  said, 
"  I  am  a  companion  of  all  them  that  fear  thee,"  and  he 
showed  his  piety  not  only  by  being  select  in  his  company, 
but  in  loving  such  fellowship  when  he  found  it. 

O  thou  who  didst  call  thy  disciples  ^'friends,"  give 
me  ever  the  friendly  spirit,  and  make  me  to  love  all 
those  whom  thou  lovest. 

KAIMENT,    THE   BODY,    THE   SOUL. 

*^  A  man  who  is  wounded,  and  cut  through  his  clothes  and  skin 
and  aU,  wiU  be  more  anxious  to  have  the  wound  closed  up  in  his 
body  than  to  have  the  rent  in  his  garment  mended." 

His  body  is  much  more  himself  than  the  garment  with 
which  he  covers  it,  and,  therefore,  he  gives  it  his  first 
attention.  Now,  on  the  same  principle,  we  should  take 
more  care  of  the  soul  than  of  the  body,  for  the  soul  is 
more  truly  the  man  than  tlie  mere  flesh  and  blood  which 
he  inhabits.  As  a  man  may  get  a  new  coat,  so  shall  he 
obtain  a  new  body  at  the  resurrection  ;  but  his  spirit, 
which  is  his  real  self,  abides  the  same  as  to  identity,  and 
should,  therefore,  be  carefully  guarded.  Yet  what  fools 
the  most  of  men  are  ;  they  spend  a  lifetime  in  providing 
for  a  body  which  will  soon  be  worms'  meat,  and  their 
immortal  soul  is  left  imcared  for,  to  go  before  God, 
naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable.  If  there  were  as  much 
as  a  pennyworth  of  wisdom  to  be  found  among  ten  thou- 
sand sinners  they  would  no  longer  neglect  their  own 
souls. 

O  Lord,  heal  thou  my  soul  ;  and  as  for  the  rents  in 
my  garments,  they  shall  give  me  small  concern. 


38  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

THE  IMAGE  NOT  THE    MAN. 

**  As  Michal  laid  a  statue  in  David's  bed,  and,  covering  it  with 
David's  apparel,  made  Saul's  messengers  believe  it  was  David  him- 
self sick  in  bed  ;  so,  many  persons  cover  themselves  with  certain  ex- 
ternal actions  belonging  to  religion,  and  the  world  believeth  them 
truly  sanctified  and  spiritual,  whereas,  indeed,  they  are  but  statues 
and  apparitions  of  devotton  to  God." 

Formalism  is  a  vain  show,  and  will,  in  the  end,  be 
discovered,  and  the  cheat  will  cease  to  impose  upon  any 
one.  Of  all  matters,  religion  is  the  very  worst  to  play 
with.  It  may  be  easy  to  mimic  it,  but  the  price  to  be 
paid  for  such  fooling  will  be  terrible.  If  men  must  act 
a  borrowed  part,  let  them  ape  the  princes  of  this  world, 
but  let  them  not  put  such  an  affront  upon  the  princes  of 
the  blood  royal  of  heaven.  Let  them  go  to  their  theatres 
if  they  would  wear  a  mask  ;  to  do  so  in  the  house  of 
God  is  an  insult  which  the  Lord  will  not  brook.  The 
best  imitation  of  religion  will  make  its  possessor  wail  for- 
ever when  the  hand  of  eternal  truth  shall  lay  bare  its 
falsehood. 

O  thou  who  art  ''the  truth,"  deliver  me  from  all 

seeming,  and  let  me  be  in  truth  that  which  I  profess 

to  bo. 

RUNAWAY  KNOCKS. 

*'  Watch  in  prayer  to  see  what  cometh.  Foolish  boys,  that  knock 
at  a  door  in  wantonness,  will  not  stay  till  somebody  cometh  to  open 
to  them  ;  but  a  man  that  hath  business  will  knock,  and  knock  again, 
till  he  gets  his  answer." 

To  pray  and  not  to  look  for  an  answer  argues  either  a 
mere  formality  in  prayer,  and  that  makes  the  prayer  to 
be  dead  ;  or  else  unbelief  as  to  the  truth  of  God,  and 
that  makes  the  prayer  to  be  corrupt.  lie  who  presents 
a  check  at  the  banker's  looks  to  have  money  for  it  ;  if 
not,  he  is  not  a  business  man,  but  a  mere  tritier.  So  in 
our  pleadings  of  the  divine  promise  we  expect  a  fulfil- 


puritak's  garden.  39 

ment,  or  otherwise  we  do  but  play  with  God.  Ilow 
many  runaway  knocks  we  give  at  mercy's  gate  !  Let  us 
put  away  such  childish  things,  and  treat  prayer  as  a 
reality  :  then  shall  we  be  answered  of  a  truth.  ''  I  will 
direct  my  prayer  unto  thee,  and  will  look  up." 

lie  who  vv rites  these  lines  bears  witness  that  he  lias 
never  knocked  in  vain  at  the  Lord's  door,  and  he  begs 
the  reader  to  make  trial  of  that  which  he  has  found  so 
effectual.     ''  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you." 

THE  EUSSET   COAT. 

**  Man  is  a  proud  creature,  and  would  fain  establish  his  own  right- 
eousness,  and  have  somewhat  wherein  to  glory  in  himself.  Rom.  x. 
3.  Our  proud  heart  takes  up  the  old  proverb  and  thinketh — A  russet 
coat  of  our  own  is  better  than  a  silken  garment  that  is  borrowed  of 
another." 

Man  would  sooner  wear  his  own  rags  than  Christ's  fine 
white  linen.  Pride,  however,  is  too  expensive  a  luxury 
w^hen  a  man  must  give  up  all  hope  of  heaven  in  order  to 
indulge  it.  Such  is  the  case.  There  can  be  no  feasting 
with  the  King  unless  we  wear  the  wedding-garment 
which  he  supplies.  Our  own  silk  and  satin  would  not 
suit  his  courts,  much  less  our  russet  and  our  corduroy. 
We  must  accept  the  righteousness  of  God,  or  be  un- 
righteous forever.  Surely  we  shall  be  worse  than  mad- 
men if  we  insist  upon  going  naked  rather  than  put  on 
the  royal  apparel  of  free  grace.  Lord,  I  cannot  longer 
err  in  this  fashion,  for  I  perceive  my  righteousnesses  to 
be  filthy  rags,  and  I  am  heartily  glad  to  be  rid  of  them. 
Clothe  me,  I  pray  thee,  with  the  righteousness  divine. 

FIKE   SPEEADING. 

**  A  good  man  is  always  seeking  to  make  others  good,  as  fire  turn- 
eth  aU  things  about  it  into  fire." 

You  cannot  make  fire  stay  where  it  is,  it  will  spread 
as  opportunity  serves  it.     It  will  subdue  all  its  surround- 


40  TLOWEKS    FKOM    A 

ings  to  itself.  Carljle  says  that  "  man  is  emphatically 
a  proselytizing  creature/'  and  assuredly  the  new  creature 
is  such.  Life  grows,  and  so  invades  the  regions  of 
death,  and  spiritual  life  is  most  of  all  intense  in  its  grow- 
ing and  spreading.  Liberty  to  hold  our  opinions  but 
not  to  spread  them  is  no  liberty,  for  one  of  our  main 
opinions  is  that  w^e  should  bring  all  around  us  to  Jesus, 
and  to  obedience  to  the  truth.  Lord,  help  us  ever  to  be 
doing  this,  subduing  the  earth  for  thee  by  spreading  on 
all  sides  the  name  of  Jesus.  Let  our  hfe  burn  till  the 
whole  world  is  on  a  blaze. 

NO   OLD  AGE   IN   GEACE. 

**  We  have  our  infancy  at  our  first  conversion,  when  liable  to  child- 
ish ignorance  and  many  infirmities  ;  we  have  our  youth  and  growing 
age,  when  making  progress  in  the  way  of  grace  toward  perfection  • 
and  lastly,  we  have  our  perfect  manlj^  age  when  we  are  come  to  our 
full  pitch,  when  grace  is  fully  perfected  in  glory.  In  Scripture  there 
is  nothing  said  of  a  fading  and  declining  time  of  old  age  in  grace." 

The  fact  being  that,  imlike  the  natural  life,  the 
spiritual  life  does  not  conclude  in  declining  strength  and 
inevitable  decrepitude,  but  continues  its  progress  even 
beyond  the  grave.  We  go  from  strength  to  strength, 
not  from  strength  to  v/eakness.  The  old  age  of  grace  is 
maturity,  not  decay  ;  advancement,  not  decline  ;  perfec- 
tion, not  imbecility.  In  the  advanced  years  of  nature 
we  lose  many  of  our  faculties,  but  in  advanced  grace 
our  spiritual  senses  are  more  quick  and  discerning  than 
ever.  The  aged  man  feels  the  grasshopper  to  be  a 
burden,  and  the  clouds  return  after  the  rain  ;  but  to  the 
advanced  believer  the  greatest  loads  are  light  and  the 
rain  is  over  and  gone.  Old  age  goes  down  to  death,  but 
ripe  grace  ascends  to  everlasting  life.  Lord,  let  me 
grow  ripe  but  not  rotten,  maturing  but  not  decaying, 
for  thy  glory's  sake. 


1  puritan's  garden.  41 

INFANTS  AND   SICK  FOLK. 

*'  Thongh  we  cannot  love  their  weaknesses,  yet  we  must  love  tlie 
weak,  and  bear  with  their  infirmities,  not  breaking  the  brnised  reed. 
Infants  must  not  be  turned  out  of  the  family  because  they  cry,  and 
are  unquiet  and  troublesome  ;  though  they  be  jDeevish  and  froward, 
yet  we  must  bear  it  with  gentleness  and  patience,  as  we  do  the  fro- 
wardness  of  the  sick  ;  if  they  revile  we  must  not  revile  again,  but 
must  seek  gently  to  restore  them,  notwithstanding  all  their  cen- 
sures.*' 

This  patience  is  far  too  rare.  "Wo  do  not  make  allow- 
ances enough  for  our  fellows,  but  sweepingly  condemn 
those  whom  we  ought  to  cheer  with  our  sympathy.  If 
we  are  out  of  temper  ourselves^  we  plead  the  weather, 
or  a  headache,  or  our  natural  temperament,  or  aggravat- 
ing circumstances  ;  we  are  never  at  a  loss  for  an  excuse 
for  ourselves,  why  should  not  the  same  ingenuity  be  used 
by  our  charity  in  inventing  apologies  and  extenuations 
for  others  ?  It  is  a  pity  to  carry  on  the  trade  of  apology- 
making  entirely  for  home  consumption  ;  let  us  supply 
others.  True,  they  are  very  provoking,  but  if  we 
suffered  half  as  much  as  some  of  our  irritable  friends 
have  to  endure  we  should  be  even  more  aggravating. 
Think  in  many  cases  of  their  ignorance,  their  unfortu- 
nate bringing  up,  their  poverty,  their  depression  of 
spirit,  and  their  home  surroundings,  and  pity  will  come 
to  the  help  of  patience.  We  are  tender  to  a  man  who 
has  a  gouty  toe,  cannot  we  extend  the  feeling  to  those 
who  have  an  irritable  soul  ? 

Our  Lord  will  be  angry  with  us  if  we  are  harsh  to  his 
little  ones  whom  he  loves  ;  nor  will  he  be  pleased  if  we 
are  unkind  to  his  poor  afflicted  children  with  whom  he 
would  have  us  be  doubly  tender.  We  ourselves  need 
from  him  ten  times  more  consideration  than  we  show  to 
our  brethren.  For  his  sake  we  ought  to  be  vastly  more 
forbearing  than  we  are.     Think  how  patient  he  has  been 


42  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

to  US,  and  let  our  hard-lieartedness  be  confessed  as  no 
light  sin. 

PILLS. 

*'  We  should  not  expect  to  see  a  reason  for  everything  which  we 
believe,  for  many  doctrines  are  mysteries,  and  we  must  receive  them 
as  we  do  pills.  We  do  not  chew  pills,  but  swallow  them  ;  and  so  we 
must  take  these  truths  into  our  souls  upon  the  credit  of  the  revealer." 

This  indeed  is  true  faith — this  taking  truth  upon  trust 
because  of  the  divine  authority  of  the  revelation  which 
contains  it.  We  are  j)ersuaded  that  the  Lord  cannot  He, 
and  so  we  believe,  for  this  sole  reason,  that  "  thus  saith 
the  Lord."  Why  should  we  chew  the  pill  by  wishing 
to  know  more  than  is  revealed  ?  Must  our  Father  ex- 
plain everything  to  us  on  pain  of  not  being  believed  if 
he  reserves  any  point  in  his  proceedings  ?  Would  not 
such  a  demand  savor  more  of  a  proud,  rebellious  spirit 
than  of  humble,  childlike  love  ?  Has  a  man  any  faith 
in  God  if  he  will  believe  no  more  than  his  reason  proves  ? 

Many  a  truth  when  taken  into  the  soul  as  a  whole  has 
proved  to  be  very  sweet  to  the  heart.  We  could  not 
understand  it  ;  but  no  sooner  had  we  believed  it  than  we 
were  conscious  of  its  delightful  influence  upon  the  inner 
nature.  •  Who  can  understand  the  twofold  nature  of  our 
Lord's  person,  or  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  in  Unity, 
or  the  predestination  which  does  not  violate  free  agency  ? 
And  yet  what  a  delight  these  truths  create  in  minds 
which  cheerfully  accept  them.  My  soul,  thou  canst  not 
know  or  understand  all  things,  else  wert  thou  omnis- 
cient, and  that  is  the  prerogative  of  God  alone.  Be  it 
thine,  therefore,  to  beheve  the  testimony  of  thy  God, 
and  then  his  omniscience  will  be  all  at  thy  disposal.  He 
will  teach  thee  what  else  thou  couldst  never  learn,  if  thou 
art  but  willing  to  sit  at  his  feet  and  receive  of  his  word. 
We  sometimes  speak  of  a  scholarly  man  ;  in  the  best 


puritan's   GARDEN".  43 

sense  every  Christian  should  be  scholarly  y  that  is,  will- 
ing to  be  a  scholar. 

HAED   BEGINNINGS. 

**  Some  beginners  are  discouraged  in  their  first  attempts  at  a  godly 
life,  and  so  give  over  throngh  despondency.  They  should  remember 
that  the  bullock  is  most  unruly  at  the  first  yoking,  and  that  the  fire 
at  first  kindling  casts  forth  most  smoke." 

They  forget  this,  and  therefore  are  tempted  to  give 
over  religion  and  its  graces  as  hopeless.  When  a  man  is 
new  to  the  ways  of  God  those  duties  are  difficult  which 
afterward  become  easy.  Use  in  common  life  is  called 
second  nature,  and  in  gracious  matters  it  helps  our 
second  nature.  Gracious  habit  gives  impetus  to  gracious 
action.  Self-denials,  which  seem  hard  at  first,  become 
delights  in  due  season,  so  that  we  even  wonder  that  we 
thought  them  denials.  Some  things  there  are  which  are 
most  easy  in  our  first  days  of  grace,  but  other  things 
will  be  found  to  improve  as  we  proceed  upon  the  way : 
let  not  the  young  beginner  be  discouraged,  but  fully 
believe  that  ''  it  is  better  on  before. '^  We  have  heard 
persons  talk  of  the  days  of  childhood  as  the  happiest  in 
mortal  life,  but  we  do  not  agree  with  them  :  the  sorrows 
of  childhood  take  a  very  intense  possession  of  the  little 
ones,  and  in  their  grief  everything  seems  lost,  whereas 
the  full-grown  mind  is  divided  in  sorrow,  and  other  con- 
siderations come  in  to  temper  the  wind  of  trouble. 
Even  so,  childhood  in  grace  is  by  no  means  our  best 
time ;  for  its  trials,  though  less  in  themselves,  are 
greater  to  our  weakness  and  rawness  of  mind.  The 
yoke  will  be  easier  soon,  and  the  fire  will  yet  burn  with 
a  clearer  blaze. 

Lord,  help  thy  babe.  Nurse  mo  into  vigor  by  thy 
good  Spirit, 


44  FLOWERS    FROM    A 

LEAD. 

"  Lead  is  lead  still,  whatever  stamp  it  beareth." 
A  change  of  form  is  a  very  different  thing  from  a 
cliange  of  substance.  You  may  cast  lead  into  the  shape 
of  a  shining,  but  you  cannot  make  silver  of  it.  Now, 
the  only  change  which  can  save  us  is  a  thorough  trans- 
formation of  nature,  and  this  is  as  clearly  beyond  human 
power  as  the  turning  of  lead  into  silver.  When  we  see 
a  great  moral  improvement  in  any  man  we  ought  to  be 
glad,  and  to  admire  the  power  of  conscience  ;  but  if  the 
man's  heart  remains  the  same,  the  alteration  is  only 
casting  a  lump  of  lead  into  a  pretty  form.  When  the 
man's  nature  and  disposition  are  radically  altered,  we 
may  then  exclaim,  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God" — this  is 
transmuting  lead  into  silver.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again  :" 
nothing  less  will  suffice. 

Lord,  grant  that  I  may  truly  know  this  change.  If  I 
am  mistaken  and  have  never  been  regenerated,  be  pleased 
to  exercise  thy  gracious  power  upon  me  now,  for  Jesus' 
sake. 

WHY  A  CANDLE  IS  LIT. 

**  God  seldom  lighteth  a  candle,  but  he  hath  some  lost  groat  to 
seek/' 

This  is  assuredly  true,  and  its  practical  bearings  are 
worthy  of  our  attention.  If  God  raises  up  a  preacher  or 
any  other  useful  worker,  we  may  conclude  that  he  has  a 
people  to  be  sought  out  and  won  for  his  kingdom.  All 
capacities  and  abilities  in  the  Church  are  intended  for 
this  great  purpose — the  finding  of  the  lost  treasure.  The 
same  is  true  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  the  ordi- 
nances, and  the  promises  :  these  are  all  lights  kindled 
with  the  view  of  finding  lost  souls.  The  whole  Script- 
ure has  an  eye  in  tliis  direction.  By  one  text  one  man 
is  found,  and  by  another  passage  another  is  discovered. 


puritan's    UAllDEJSr.  45 

Each  Scripture  has  its  own  raj,  and  by  its  means  its 
own  lost  piece  is  perceived.  Some  texts  are  great 
candles,  and  have  found  out  many  ;  but  probably  there 
is  not  one  tiny  taper  of  Holy  Writ  which  has  not  shed 
its  saving  beams  on  some  one  or  other  of  the  Lord's 
precious  ones.  Certainly  every  Hght  which  the  Lord  has 
given  has  a  gracious  design,  and  will  be  used  for  a  saving 
purpose. 

Lord,  use  me  also,  though  I  be  but  a  poor  rushlight, 
and  find  out  some  poor  lost  sinner  by  my  means. 

THE   KING'S   EXAMPLE. 

"  Alexander,  when  his  army  grew  sluggish  because  laden  with  the 
spoils  of  their  enemies,  to  free  them  from  this  incumbrance,  com- 
inar.  iod  all  his  own  baggage  to  be  set  on  fire,  that  when  they  saw  the 
king  iiimself  devote  his  rich  treasures  to  the  flames  they  might  not 
murmur  if  their  mite  and  pittance  were  consumed  also.  So,  li  Jhrist 
had  taught  us  contempt  of  the  world,  and  had  not  given  us  an  instance 
of  it  in  his  own  person,  his  doctrine  had  been  less  powerful  and 
effectual." 

But  what  an  example  we  now  find  in  him,  seeing  he 
had  not  where  to  lay  his  head  in  life,  nor  a  rag  to  cover 
him  in  death,  nor  anything  but  a  borrowed  grave  in 
burial.  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all 
unselfishness  when  we  have  such  a  Lord  !  He  hath  not 
said  to  us  in  matters  of  self-denial,  "  Take  up  thy  cross 
and  go,"  but  "  Come,  take  up  thy  cross,  and  follow 
me."  Fired  by  the  heroic  self-sacrifice  of  our  King,  the 
sternest  abnegation  of  self  and  the  severest  renunciation 
of  the  world  should  become  an  easy  matter.  Well  may 
the  soldiers  endure  hardness  when  the  King  himself 
roughs  it  among  us,  and  suffers  more  than  tlie  meanest 
private  in  our  ranks. 

My  soul,  I  charge  thee,  endure  hardness,  and  look  not 
for  ease  where  Jesus  found  death. 


46  FLOWERS  PROM   A 

THE  BEST  WEATHER  FOR   ME. 

'*The  same  weather  does  not  fit  every  soil  ;  that  drought  which 
burneth  up  the  hotter  grounds  comforteth  those  that  are  more  chill 
and  cold.  If  one  man  had  another's  blessings  he  would  soon  run 
wild,  as  another  would  grow  desperate  if  he  had  our  crosses.  There- 
fore the  infinite  wisdom  of  the  great  Governor  of  the  world  allots 
every  one  his  portion." 

It  may  be,  my  soul,  that  tliou  art  a  dry  and  tliirsty 
plot  which,  will  never  yield  a  harvest  at  all  unless  thou 
art  continually  under  the  watery  sign.  For  thee  the 
clouds  must  return  after  the  rain,  and  rough  weather 
last  long  and  come  again.  Thou  hast  had  little  sunshine, 
but  thy  long  glooms  are  wisely  appointed  thee,  for 
perhaps  a  stretch  of  summer  weather  would  have  made 
thee  as  a  parched  land  and  a  barren  wilderness.  Thy 
Lord  knows  best,  and  he  has  the  clouds  and  the  sun  at 
his  disposal.  Let  me  therefore  bless  him  for  such 
weather  as  he  sends  to  me  from  day  to  day,  for  foul  is 
fair  to  me  if  the  Lord  appoints  it  in  love. 

Let  me  not  envy  those  whom  the  sun  shines  on.  May 
be  they  need  it  all  to  make  them  fruitful.  Why  should 
they  not  have  it  ?  There  is  all  the  more  sunshine  for  me 
when  it  shines  for  others.  Lord,  I  bless  thee  for  other 
men's  joys,  and  I  will  not  repine  if  I  am  denied  an 
equal  share  with  them.  I  have  thee  ;  and  what  more 
can  I  ask  ? 

THE  PAPER-STAINER  AND   THE   ARTIST. 

'*  A  paper-stainer  will  think  a  painter  too  curious,  because  his  own 
work  is  but  *a  little  daubing.  The  broad  way  pleaseth  the  world 
best,  but  the  narrow  way  leadeth  to  life." 

Our  author  means  that  the  maker  of  wall-papers  gets 
over  a  great  deal  of  ground  as  compared  Avith  the  artist 
who  is  producing  a  masterly  painting.  Of  rough  daub- 
ing there  is  plenty  to  be  had,  and  there  is  a  great  market 
for  it  ;  and  yet,  though  thoroughly  fine  art  is  scarce,  it 


puiutan's  garden.  47 

is  infinitely  more  precious  than  daubing.  That  religion 
which  needs  no  care,  and  takes  no  trouble,  is  in  great 
demand  in  the  world  ;  it  is  produced  by  the  acre,  and 
may  be  seen  spread  over  the  surface  everywhere.  Not 
so  the  religion  of  grace  ;  it  costs  many  a  tear,  and  a 
world  of  anxious  thought,  and  solemn  heart-searching, 
and  it  is  but  slow  work  at  the  best  ;  but  then  it  is  of 
great  price,  and  is  not  only  acceptable  with  God,  but 
even  men  perceive  that  there  is  a  something  about  it  to 
which  the  common  religious  daubers  never  attain.  If 
we  let  the  boat  drift  with  the  stream,  and  leave  our 
religion  to  random  influences,  without  care  or  thought, 
what  can  we  look  for  but  slovenliness  and  worthless- 
ness  ?  If  we  would  please  God  we  must  watch  every 
stroke  and  touch  upon  the  canvas  of  our  lives,  and  we 
may  not  think  that  we  can  lay  it  on  with  a  trowel  and 
yet  succeed.  We  ought  to  live  as  miniature-painters 
work,  for  they  watch  every  line  and  tint.  O  for  more 
careful  work,  more  heart  work  !  Otherwise  we  shall 
lose  that  which  we  have  wrought. 

SAVE  THE  JEWELS. 
*  *  As  men  in  a  great  fire  and  general  conflagration  wiU  hazard  their 
lumber  to  preserve  their  treasure,  their  money,  or  their  jewels,  so 
should  we  take  care,  if  we  must  lose  one  or  the  other,  that  the  better 
part  be  out  of  hazard.  Whatever  we  lose  by  the  way,  let  us  make 
sure  that  we  come  well  to  the  end  of  our  journey." 

Herein  is  wisdom.  See  how  men  throw  overboard 
the  lading  of  the  ship  when  it  becomes  a  question  of 
saving  their  lives.  Keason  teaches  them  that  the  less 
precious  must  go  first  :  they  do  not  throw  over  first 
their  gold  and  then  their  corn,  neither  do  they  lose  their 
lives  to  save  their  ingots.  So  let  us,  above  all  things, 
care  for  our  souls  and  their  eternal  interests.  He  whose 
house  was  burned  to  ashes  kneeled  down  and  thanked 


48  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

the  Lord  because  his  child  was  safe  ;  and  he  who  loses 
the  whole  world  but  obtains  eternal  salvation  has  so 
much  to  rejoice  in  that  he  would  waste  his  tears  if  he 
shed  them  over  his  losses.  Suppose  it  were  said  that 
Virgil  died  worth  half  a  million  of  money,  it  is  so  long 
ago  that  it  would  be  stale  intelligence,  and  if  the  same 
were  said  of  a  man  who  died  yesterday  there  would 
really  be  no  more  in  it  ;  yet  if  the  soul  of  Yirgil's  slave 
was  saved,  though  he  never  owned  a  single  gold  coin, 
heaven  has  not  ceased  to  ring  with  joy  concerning  his 
salvation.  The  soul  should  be  our  main  care.  It  is  our 
all,  for  it  is  ourself.  Lord,  teach  men  this  wisdom  ; 
teach  me  this  wisdom. 

THECAEYER  FOR  HIMSELF. 

**  He  that  wiU  be  his  own  carver  seldom  carveth  out  a  good  portion 
to  himself.  Wilful  spirits  who  would  fain  be  their  own  providence 
intrench  upon  God' s  prerogative,  and  take  the  work  out  of  his  hands  ; 
and,  therefore,  no  Avonder  if  their  wisdom  be  turned  into  folly." 

It  is  God's  business  to  regulate  providence,  and  when 
we  attempt  it  we  cause  confusion  and  trouble.  Not 
only  does  the  carver  for  himself  get  a  poor  portion,  but 
he  frequently  cuts  his  lingers,  and  spoils  his  clothes  by 
spilling  the  contents  of  the  dish.  Israel  went  into 
Canaan  well  enough  when  the  Lord  led  the  way  ;  but 
when  the  people  before  the  set  time  presumed  to  go  up 
of  their  own  head,  they  brought  defeat  upon  them- 
selves. It  is  never  well  either  to  run  before  the  cloud, 
or  to  stay  behind  it  :  in  either  case  we  may  expect  to 
fall  under  clouds  of  another  sort,  which  will  darken  our 
way  and  becloud  our  peace. 

Cannot  we  trust  the  Lord  with  his  own  business  ? 
Can  we  supplement  infallible  wisdom,  or  improve  upon 
infinite  goodness  ?     Have  we  not  enough  to  do  if  we 


pukitak's  garden.  49 

earnestly  endeavor  to  obey  our  Lord  ?  Do  Ave  want  to 
be  rulers  ?  Are  we  tired  of  being  disciples  and  fol- 
lowers ?  Why  do  we  strain  after  things  too  high  for  us, 
intruding  into  spheres  which  belong  to  God  alone  ? 

My  soul,  stand  thou  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of 
God  !  He  is  at  the  helm,  and  is  well  able  to  pilot  the 
vessel.  Keep  thy  hand  off  the  tiller.  Down  with  thee, 
unbelief,  what  hast  thou  to  do  while  God  himself  pro- 
vides for  his  people  ? 

THE   GHOST. 

'  *  Gnilt  raked  ont  of  its  grave  is  more  frightful  than  a  ghost,  or  one 
risen  from  the  dead.*' 

Nor  is  the  terror  which  sin  excites  in  the  awakened 
conscience  at  all  an  idle  one.  There  is  in  evil  a  horror 
greater  than  can  be  found  in  hobgoblin,  sprite,  or  ap- 
parition. Great  is  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  and  he  who 
comes  imder  its  spell  will  have  no  joy  of  his  life  till  the 
ghost  is  laid  in  the  lied  Sea  of  Jesus'  precious  blood. 
Blessed  be  God,  our  Lord  has  done  this  for  us  ;  and  we 
are  not  afraid  of  being  haunted  by  sins  which  are  buried 
in  his  grave. 

NO   DAY  Vv^ITHOUT  THE   SUN. 

""  When  the  sun  is  gone  all  the  candles  in  the  world  cannot  make 
it  day." 

Vain  would  be  the  attempt,  though  we  should  kindle 
a  mountain  of  wax.  So  Vvdien  the  Lord  denies  comfort 
to  a  man,  neither  wealth,  nor  honor,  nor  power  can 
enlighten  the  darkness  of  his  mind.  We  can  procure 
our  own  sorrow,  but  we  cannot  produce  our  own  com- 
fort. A  secret  curse  eats  out  the  heart  of  earthly  joys 
when  God  does  not  smile  upon  them.  Without  God 
the  world  is,  says  Mantoii,  "  <:i  J,-^nf  )i/tff.  u^hich  ice  cracky 


50  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

hut  find  nothing  in  it  hut  dust ^  Vanity  of  vanities,  all 
is  vanity,  till  the  Lord  becomes  our  all  in  all.  Reader^ 
do  you  know  this  by  personal  experience  ? 

AKE   THEY  HAPPY? 

"  Do  yoTi  account  him  a  happy  man  who  is  condemned  to  die, 
because  he  hath  a  plentiful  allowance  till  his  execution  ?  Or  him  a 
happy  man  that  makes  a  fair  show  abroad  and  puts  a  good  face  upon 
his  ruinous  and  breaking  condition,  while  at  home  he  is  pinched  with 
want  and  misery,  which  is  ready  to  come  upon  him  like  an  armed 
man  ;  one  who  revels  in  all  manner  of  pleasure  to-day,  but  is  to  die 
at  night  ?  Then  those  who  remain  in  the  guilt  of  their  sins  may  be 
happy." 

If  we  view  unpardoned  sinners  aright  we  shall  heartily 
pity  them.  Let  their  condition  be  what  it  may,  at  this 
present  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them,  and  they  are 
''  condemned  already  ;"  and  as  for  the  future,  it  is  black 
with  certain  doom.  Alas  for  the  unhappy  man  against 
whom  God  sets  his  face  !  What  misery  can  be  greater 
than  to  be  reserved  against  the  great  day  of  the  wrath 
of  God  ?  We  wonder  at  the  mirth  of  men  condemned 
to  hell,  their  infatuation  is  terrible  to  behold. 

Hence  we  cannot  join  with  them  in  tlieir  carnal  mirth. 
Sinners  may  dance,  but  it  will  not  be  to  our  piping. 
They  may  revel  and  riot,  but  we  dare  not  countenance 
them  in  their  jollity,  for  we  know  that  their  day  is 
coming.  Let  no  desire  to  share  their  base  delights  lurk 
in  your  mind  if  you  be  indeed  a  child  of  God.  Be  not 
envious  at  the  transgressors.  Who  would  envy  a  criminal 
about  to  be  executed  his  last  draught  of  wine  ?  Let  not 
their  frivolities  attract  you.  Every  sensible  man  pities 
the  wretch  who  can  dance  under  the  gallows.  Sinners 
on  the  road  to  hell  sporting  and  jesting  are  worse  than 
mad,  or  tlieir  singing  would  turn  to  sighing. 


puritan's  garden.  51 

THE  SUN  ECLIPSED. 

"  To  put  out  a  candle  is  no  great  matter  ;  bnt  to  have  the  sun 
eclipsed,  ^yhicll  is  the  fountain  of  light,  that  sets  the  world  a-\vonder- 
ing  !  For  poor  creatures  to  lose  their  comforts  is  no  great  wonder, 
who,  though  they  live  in  God,  are  so  many  degrees  distant  from  him  ; 
but  for  Christ,  who  was  God-man  in  one  person,  to  be  forsaken  of 
God,  that  is  a  difficulty  to  our  thoughts  and  a  wonder  indeed,  for  by 
this  means  he  was  so  far  deprived  of  some  part  of  himself." 

Yes,  indeed,  this  is  the  wonder  of  wonders,  the  miracle 
of  miracles,  at  which  my  mind  would  forever  stand 
amazed.  That  the  thrice  Holy  One  should  take  the 
sinner's  place,  and,  coming  under  the  sinner's  doom, 
should  be  smitten  of  God,  is  a  mystery  past  finding  out  ! 
Hell  is  horribly  amazing,  but  the  death  of  Jesus  is  far 
more  astounding,  and  especially  that  in  death  he  should 
cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?" 
Only  the  Son  of  God  could  endure  this  great  grief  ;  yet 
is  it  a  mystery  of  mysteries,  that  so  divine  a  person 
should  be  capable  of  enduring  it.  The  marvel  is  thought 
to  be  that  a  man  should  be  able  to  suffer  so  much  ;  but 
the  real  marvel  is  that,  being  God,  he  should  suffer  at 
all  that  which  was  the  very  essence  of  his  grief — tlie 
being  forsaken  by  the  Father. 

My  soul,  adore  and  love  ;  understand  thou  canst  not. 
Behold  the  eclipse  of  thy  soul's  Sun,  and  know  that, 
had  not  this  been,  thou  wouldst  have  been  in  the  dark 
forever. 

THE   ASS   WISER   THAN   THE   SINNER. 

"  You  cannot  drive  a  dull  ass  into  the  fire  that  is  kindled  before 
his  eyes." 

The  ungodly  are  far  more  brutish,  for  they  choose  the 
way  of  destruction,  and  rush  with  eagerness  into  the 
flames  of  hell.  "  Surely  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the 
sight  of  any  bird,"  and  yet  men  see  the  net,  and  hasten 


52  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

into  it.  Sinners  take  more  pains  to  go  to  hell  than  the 
saints  to  go  to  heaven.  They  are  more  bold  to  destroy 
themselves  than  saints  are  in  their  salvation.  What 
greater  proof  can  we  have  of  the  madness  of  their  hearts, 
and  what  plainer  evidence  that  salvation  is  not  by  the 
will  of  man,  but  by  grace  alone  ? 

Lord,  save  me  and  mine  from  that  obstinate  love  of 
sin  which  makes  men  more  brutish  than  the  ox  and  the 
ass. 

SUPwFACE  MELTING. 

*'  Some  are  frightened  into  a  little  religiousness  in  their  straits  and 
deep  necessities,  but  it  is  poor  work  and  superficial  work.  They  are 
like  ice  in  thawing  weather,  soft  at  top  and  hard  at  bottom." 

They  melt,  but  to  no  very  great  extent.  It  is  upon 
the  surface  only  that  they  yield  to  heavenly  influences. 
This  is  a  sorry  state  of  things,  for  it  generally  ends  in  a 
harder  frost  than  before,  and  the  bonds  of  cold  indiffer- 
ence bind  the  very  soul.  Let  those  in  whom  there  are 
any  meltings  of  holy  feeling  take  heed,  for  their  danger 
lies  in  being  content  with  ?<.  partial  subjection  to  gracious 
influences.  Grace  will  be  all  or  nothing  :  the  ice  must 
all  melt,  and  the  soul  must  flow  like  a  river.  Jesus  did 
not  come  to  create  temporary  and  partial  religious  feel- 
ing, but  to  make  new  creatures  of  us.  He  will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  those  Ephraimites  who  are  as  half- 
done  cakes,  which  are  black  on  one  side  with  too  much 
baking,  but  have  never  been  turned  so  as  to  feel  the  fire 
on  the  other  side.  The  centre  of  the  heart  must  feel 
the  warmth  of  divine  love,  or  nothing  is  done. 

Lord,  shine  on  my  soul  till  I  am  wholly  melted,  and 
all  my  ice  has  vanished.  Thou  alone  canst  break  up 
nature's  frost,  but  thou  canst  do  it.  Shine  on  mc,  most 
patient  Lord. 


puritan's   GARDEIS".  53 

THE  DRUNKEN  SERVANT  STILL  A  SERVANT. 

"  A  drunken  servant  is  a  servant,  and  bound  to  do  his  work  ;  *his 
master  loseth  not  his  right  bj^  his  man's  default." 

It  is  a  mere  assumption,  tlioiigli  some  state  it  with 
much  confidence,  that  inabihty  removes  responsibihty. 
As  our  author  shows,  a  servant  may  be  too  drunk  to  do 
his  master's  bidding,  but  his  service  is  still  his  master's 
due.  If  responsibility  began  and  ended  with  ability,  a 
man  would  be  out  of  debt  as  soon  as  he  was  unable  to 
pay  ;  and  if  a  man  felt  that  he  could  not  keep  his  temper 
he  would  not  be  blamable  for  being  angry.  A  man  may 
be  bound  to  do  what  he  cannot  do  :  the  habitual  liar  is 
bound  to  speak  the  truth,  though  his  habit  of  falsehood 
renders  him  incapable  of  it.  Every  sin  renders  the 
sinner  less  able  to  do  right,  but  the  standard  of  his  duty 
is  not  lowered  in  proportion  to  the  lowering  of  his 
capacity  to  come  up  to  it,  or  it  would  follow  that  the 
more  a  man  is  depraved  by  sin  the  less  guilty  his  actions 
become,  wdiicli  is  absurd. 

Every  Christian  will  confess  that  it  is  his  duty  to  be 
perfect,  and  yet  he  mourns  over  his  inability  to  be  so. 
It  never  enters  into  the  Christian's  head  to  excuse  his 
failings  by  pleading  the  incapacity  of  his  nature  ;  nay, 
this  is  another  cause  for  lamentation. 

The  standard  of  responsibility  is  the  command  of 
God.  The  law  cannot  be  lowered  to  our  fallen  state. 
It  is  sin  to  neglect  or  break  a  divine  command.  All  the 
theology  which  is  based  upon  the  idea  that  responsibility 
is  to  be  measured  by  moral  ability  or  inability  has  the 
taint  of  error  about  it. 

Lord,  make  me  to  know  my  obligation,  that  I  may  be 
humbled,  and  help  me  to  adore  thy  grace,  by  which 
alone  holiness  can  be  wrought  in  me. 


54  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

CYPKESS  TKEES. 

"  Some  talk,  but  do  nothing  ;  like  cypress  trees,  tall  and  beautiful, 
but  unfruitful  ;  or,  like  the  carbuncle,  afar  off  seeming  all  on  fire, 
but  the  touch  discovers  it  to  be  key-cold  :  their  zeal  is  more  in  their 
tongues  than  their  actions." 

These  are  a  numerous  race,  and  never  more  so  than  at 
this  time.  Persecution  is  an  unhealthy  season  for  false 
professors,  who  prefer  to  flourish  in  the  piping  times  of 
peace,  when  godliness  is  gain,  and  it  pays  to  get  Christ 
to-day  and  sell  him  to-morrow.  The  cypress  tree  is  an 
excellent  emblem  of  the  more  prominent  specimens  of 
this  class.  They  are  conspicuous,  and  aim  to  be  so  : 
rising  above  their  fellows,  they  invite  attention  ;  but 
when  you  turn  your  eyes  toward  them  you  cannot  dis- 
cover even  a  tiny  apple  upon  them,  or  any  other  useful 
fruit.  Certainly  they  are  shapely  and  stately,  and  when 
you  have  said  that  you  have  said  all.  They  look  most 
at  home  near  the  grave,  and  a  melancholy  air  surrounds 
them,  but  still  they  are  not  half  as  valuable  as  the  more 
lowly  fruit-bearers  which  flourish  unobserved  with  a 
cheerful  verdure.  Certain  professors  whom  we  know 
are  prim,  stiff,  orderly,  and  melancholy,  but  we  are  not 
fond  of  their  neighborhood  ;  for  they  yield  no  refreshing 
shade  or  nourishing  fruit,  and  make  us  feel  doleful  to 
the  last  degree. 

Lord,  let  me  be  as  low  and  unnoticed  as  thou  pleasest, 
but  do  enable  me  to  bear  fruit,  to  the  honor  of  thy  name 
and  to  the  comfort  of  thy  people. 

THE   EMPTY  BRAG. 
'*  A  Roman  bragged  '  that  he  had  never  been  reconciled  with  his 
mother,'  implying  that  he  had  never  disagreed  with  her.     So,  some 
say  they  were  never  comforted,  they  never  needed  it  ;  they  lay  noth- 
ing to  heart." 

Of  this  company  are  those  who  were  born  free,  and 
were  never  in  bondage  to  apy  man,  and  yet,  by  their 


puritan's  gardei^.  55 

boastings,  set  the  fetters  of  their  pride  a-clankiiig.  Those 
who  were  never  wounded,  and  therefore  have  never 
been  healed,  may  glory  in  their  state,  but  the  time  will 
come  when  they  will  wish  it  were  otherwise  with  them, 
and  envy  the  very  least  of  those  broken-hearted  ones 
whom  Jesus  has  bound  up.  A  day  shall  da^vn  when  the 
self-righteous,  who  are  now  at  ease  in  Zion,  would  gladly 
exchange  places  with  those  whom  they  now  despise  as 
morbid  and  melancholy. 

Lord,  let  me  be  among  those  who  confess  that  they 
were  once  thine  enemies,  and  have  been  reconciled  to 
thee  by  tlie  death  of  thy  Son.  Let  me  be  numbered 
among  those  who  were  the  servants  of  sin,  but  have, 
through  thy  grace,  obeyed  from  the  heart  the  doctrine  of 
thy  word.  Let  me  ever  vividly  perceive  that  I  have 
undergone  a  radical  change,  which  I  greatly  needed,  and 
without  which  I  should  have  been  an  heir  of  wrath,  even 
as  others. 

THE   HEDGE   OF   THORNS. 
**  Wicked  men  are  preserved  in  reference  to  the  godly  ;  they  are 
but  as  a  defence  of  thorns  about  a  garden  of  roses.     Now,  when  the 
roses  are  cropped  off,  what  win  becorae  of  the  thorns  ?" 

This  is  a  solemn  question,  and  should  arouse  the  care- 
less. Ungodly  men  are  a  sort  of  scaffold  to  God's  house, 
and  when  the  house  is  finished  they  must  be  pulled 
down.  The  husk  is  needful  to  tlie  wheat  at  a  certain 
time,  but  when  the  corn  is  ripe  the  husk  is  useless  chaff, 
and  must  be  separated  from  it.  An  ungodly  mother  is 
to  a  pious  son  as  the  chaff  to  the  wheat,  and  ere-long  the 
chaff  must  be  driven  away.  What  think  ye  of  this,  ye 
unsaved  parents  of  godly  children  ?  What  think  ye  of 
this,  ye  unregenerate  brothers  and  friends,  by  whom  the 
godly  are  succored,  while  you  yourselves  remain  un- 
saved ? 


56  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

When  good  men  die  the  wicked  should  reflect  that 
there  is  so  much  the  less  salt  left  to  preserve  society. 
There  is  one  pleader  less  for  the  preservation  of  the 
barren  tree.  Every  saint  taken  home  brings  the  world 
so  much  nearer  its  end.  Much  as  they  may  despise  the 
godly,  the  deaths  of  righteous  men  ought  to  be  solemn 
w\arnings  to  the  thoughtless  world,  as  they  reflect  upon 
wdiat  must  happen  to  the  world  when  those  who  are  its 
hglit  and  its  salt  are  taken  away. 

THE   UNUSED   KEY. 
"  A  key  rusteth  that  is  seldom  turned  in  the  lock." 

It  becomes  hard  work  to  stir  it,  for  it  becomes  rusted 
into  its  place.  Neglect  of  prayer  makes  prayer  become 
hard  work,  whereas  it  should  be  a  privilege  and  a 
delight.  We  cannot  restrain  prayer,  and  yet  enjoy 
prayer.  Frequency  in  this  matter  helps  fervor,  and 
constancy  in  it  brings  out  the  comfort  of  it. 

Am  I  becoming  slack  in  devotion  ?  O  Lord,  forgive 
me,  and  save  me  from  this  grave  neglect  before  it  begins 
to  eat  into  my  soul  and  corrode  my  heart  ! 

THE  SERPENT'S  EGG. 
'^  It  is  easier  to  crush  the  egg  than  to  kill  the  serpent.'* 
It  is  prudent  to  break  up  all  the  eggs  we  can  find 
before  the  reptiles  are  hatched.  Far  greater  wisdom 
will  be  shown  in  early  dealing  with  an  error  or  a  tempta- 
tion than  in  allowing  it  time  to  make  headway.  In  our 
own  cases,  it  Vv^ill  be  best  to  correct  ourselves  betimes, 
and  unhesitatingly  to  stamp  out  the  first  sparks  of  ill 
desire,  before  passion  rises  to  a  flame.  A  serpent's  egg 
a  child  can  break,  but  who  is  to  contend  with  the 
venomous  creature  which  may  be  hatched  from  it,  if  it 
be  left  unbroken  ?     So  is  it  with  that  vice  which  stingeth 


puritan's  gakden.  57 

like  a  viper.  Tlie  first  glass  can  readily  be  refused  ;  it 
is  quite  anotlier  matter  to  stop  when  the  wine  has  entered 
the  brain.  The  iirst  impropriety  we  may  readily  avoid  ; 
but  when  unclean  desires  are  fully  aroused,  who  shall 
bridle  them  ? 

O  Lord,  of  thy  o;race,  teach  me  to  crush  sin  betimes, 
lest  it  should  gather  strength  and  crush  me. 

INVISIBLE   INK. 
"  Things  written  with  the  juice  of  a  lemon,  when  they  are  brought 
to  the  fire  are  plain  and  legible  ;  so  when  wicked  men  draw  near  to 
the  fires  of  hell,  their  secret  sins  stand  out  before  them,  and  they  cry 
out  upon  their  beds." 

The  prospect  of  eternity  discovers  those  secret  beliefs 
and  inward  fears  which  they  labored  so  hard  to  deny 
and  conceal.  Few  men  can  keep  up  a  deceit  when  they 
approach  their  end.  The  skeleton  hand  readily  tears  oflE 
the  mask.  A  death-bed  is  not  always  free  from  hypoc- 
risy ;  but,  assuredly,  it  is  hard  for  the  dying  sinner  to 
keep  up  his  deceit.  The  fire  of  his  approaching  doom 
brings  out  the  secret  writing  upon  his  soul,  which  even 
he  himself  had  not  before  cared  to  read,  and  then  he 
who  thought  himself  a  firmly  rooted  sceptic  finds  out 
that  he  had  after  all  an  inward  conviction  which  he 
could  not  stifle,  and  a  fear  in  his  heart  which  ho  could 
not  smother.  O  that  men  would  seek  to  kno^v  them- 
selves, for  it  might  turn  out  that  the  defiant  blas23hemy 
of  their  tongues  is  not,  by  any  means,  a  sure  index  that 
their  heart  is  at  rest  in  unbelief. 

What  must  be  that  man's  condition  whose  very  in- 
fidelity is  feigned  ?  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  be  a  sham 
Christian,  but  what  must  be  the  worthlessness  of  a 
hypocritical  infidel  ?  When  the  genuine  metal  is  worth- 
less, what  shall  we  say  of  its  counterfeit  ?  Yet  we  doubt 
not  that  thousands  of  sceptics,  in  their  inmost  hearts, 


58  FLOWERS   FROM    A 

believe  wliat  they  blusteringly  deny,  and  the  day  will 
come  wlien,  like  him  whose  children  they  are,  they  will 
believe  and  tremble. 

Lord,  help  me  to  read  my  own  heart.  Let  me  know 
my  true  state,  and  let  that  state  be  such  as  thou  wilt 
approve. 

ONE   EAINY  DAY. 

*'  All  the  tedionsness  of  the  present  life  is  but  like  one  rainy  day  to 
an  everlasting  sunshine." 

How  readily,  then,  should  we  bear  these  shortlived 
troubles  !  They  are  but  for  a  moment  ;  just  a  passing 
shower,  and  then  the  sun  will  shine  out  forever.  Time 
is  nothing  when  compared  with  eternity.  To  a  believer, 
this  sorrowful  life  is  hke  one  drop  of  grief  lost  in  a  sea 
of  glory,  one  speck  of  rain  in  a  year  of  fair  weather. 
These  light  and  momentary  afflictions  are  not  worthy  to 
be  compared  with  the  eternal  bliss  which  awaits  us. 

THE   TRUMPET  AND   THE   PIPE. 

"  There  is  a  time  for  the  trumpet  as  well  as  the  pipe." 
We  must  sometimes  sound  an  alarm  ;  we  should  be 
traitors  to  men's  souls  and  to  our  Master  if  we  always 
piped  to  dulcet  music.  He  who  is  always  comforting 
his  people  will  find  no  comfort  when  he  is  called  to 
answer  for  it  before  his  God  another  day.  Many  souls 
need  Boanerges  more  than  Barnabas,  thunder  more  than 
dew.  By  many  who  think  themselves  great  judges  the 
trumpet  discourse  is  judged  to  be  too  harsh,  and  the 
piper  is  commended  for  his  pleasant  strains  ;  and  yet  the 
Lord  may  distribute  the  praise  and  the  blame  very 
differently. 

My  heart,  be  not  thou  always  craving  for  soft  nmsic. 
Be  wilhng  to  be  startled  and  stimulated.  Life  is  a 
conflict,  and  thou  ncedest  battle  music  to  keep  thee  up 


59 


to  figliting  pitch.  Let  those  who  dance  with  the  world 
pay  the  pipers  who  play  to  them  ;  as  for  thee,  give  thine 
car  to  the  King's  trumpeters. 

POISONED   MEAT. 

**If  a  man  had  poison  mixed  with  his  meat,  although  the  excel- 
lence of  his  digestion  or  the  strength  of  his  constitution  might  bear 
him  through,  yet  he  would  run  great  hazard." 

Thus  a  soul  may  survive  grave  doctrinal  error  ;  it  is 
possible  for  it  to  struggle  out  of  the  power  of  a  strong 
dose  of  Popery,  or  Socinianism,  or  "  Modern  Thought  ;" 
but  it  runs  great  risks,  of  a  character  so  violent  that  no 
one  should  lightly  venture  upon  them.  Our  safest 
course  is  to  take  heed  what  we  hear,  and  partake  of 
nothing  which  comes  from  doubtful  quarters. 

O  my  Lord,  do  thou  feed  me  with  the  bread  of  life. 
Suffer  me  not  to  taste  of  Satan's  dainties.  1  have  no 
strength  to  spare.  I  orbid  that  1  should  test  it  by  im- 
bibing the  deadly  teachings  of  those  who  err  from  thy 
truth. 

TASTE. 
"  Love  maketh  faith  more  operative  ;  there  is  a  knowledge  by 
sight,  and  a  knowledge  by  taste.  A  man  may  guess  at  the  goodness 
of  wine  by  the  color,  but  more  by  the  taste  ;  that  is  a  more  refresh- 
ing apprehension.  Augustine  prayeth,  *  Lord,  make  me  taste  by  love 
what  I  perceive  by  knowledge.'  Surely,  we  are  never  sound  in 
Christianity  till  all  the  light  that  we  receive  be  turned  into  love." 

It  is  so.  Love  comes  to  close  dealings  with  truth,  and 
gets  a  truer  knowledge  of  it  than  any  other  grace.  A 
hot  iron,  even  though  blunt,  will  penetrate  further  into 
a  board  than  a  cold  tool,  though  it  be  sharp  ;  and  so  love 
enters  further  into  truth  than  mere  thought  or  study  can 
do.  David  would  have  us  ''taste  and  see;''  for  the 
palate  sees  more  into  the  essence  of  things  than  the  eye 
can  do  ;  love  discovers  more  than  reason  can  ever  know. 


60  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

That  which  love  learns  is  also  more  useful  than  the  cold 
notions  of  the  brain,  for  it  sets  men  working  for  Jesus, 
and  leads  them  to  follow  him,  and  makes  them  willing 
to  suffer  for  him.  We  have  heard  of  some  who  could 
not  dispute  for  their  Lord,  and  yet  they  died  for  him, 
and  were  not  such  among  the  best  of  his  followers  ?  He 
who  only  knows  truth  in  the  light  of  it,  is  not  worthy  to 
be  compared  with  the  behever  who  receives  truth  in  the 
love  of  it. 

O  Lord,  let  me  never  use  thy  gospel  as  a  pillow  for 
my  head,  but  as  a  medicine  for  my  heart.  Do  not  suffer 
me  to  be  content  with  mere  knowing  ;  cause  me  always 
to  be  deeply  in  love  with  thy  word. 

FAR  OFF  LOOKS  SMALL. 
"  Look,  as  the  stars,  those  vast  globes  of  light,  by  reason  of  the 
distance  between  us  and  them,  do  seem  but  as  so  many  spangles  ;  so 
we  have  but  a  weak  sight  of  things  which  are  set  at  a  great  distance, 
and  their  operation  on  us  is  usually  but  small." 

Hence  the  need  of  faith,  by  which  things  are  brought 
near  to  us,  and  made  to  stand  out  in  their  reality.  A 
far-off  hell  is  the  dread  of  no  man,  and  a  far-off  heaven 
is  scarce  desired  by  any  one.  God  himself,  while  thought 
of  as  far  away,  is  not  feared  or  reverenced  as  he  should 
be.  If  we  did  but  use  our  thoughts  upon  the  matter  we 
should  soon  see  that  a  mere  span  of  time  divides  us  from 
the  eternal  world,  while  the  Lord  our  God  is  nearer  to 
us  than  our  souls  are  to  our  bodies.  Strange  that  the 
brief  time  which  intervenes  between  us  and  eternity 
sliould  appear  to  the  most  of  men  to  be  so  important, 
while  eternity  itself  they  regard  as  a  trifling  matter. 
They  use  the  microscope  to  magnify  the  small  concerns 
of  time  ;  O  that  they  would  use  the  telescope  upon  the 
vast  matters  of  eternity!  How  differently  would  they 
order  tlieir  lives  with  judgment  felt  to  be  at  their  doors  ! 


puritan's  garden.  •         01 

How  would  tliey  seek  to  escai^c  from  infinite  wrath,  if 
tliey  felt  it  to  be  nigli  ! 

Lord,  arouse  me,  and  all  around  me,  to  a  due  estimate 
of  eternal  matters.  Enable  me  to  project  my  soul  into 
the  infinite.  Break  me  free  of  this  narrow  present,  and 
launch  my  soul  upon  the  wide  and  open  sea  of  the  ages 
to  come.  Thou  art  in  eternity,  and  let  my  soul  even 
now  dwell  there  with  thee. 

PLEADING   THE   HANDWKITING. 

"  We  have  a  strong  tie  upon  God,  because  he  giveth  us  the  prom- 
ise, which  is  our  ground  of  hope.  Surely  we  may  put  his  bonds 
in  suit,  and  say,  *  Thy  handwriting  is  placed  before  thee,  O  Lord.'  '* 

We  say  among  men — we  have  it  in  black  and  white, 
and  there  is  no  getting  over  it  :  a  man's  handwriting 
binds  him.  Now,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  Lord  will 
never  deny  his  own  writing,  nor  run  back  from  a  bond 
given  under  his  own  hand  and  seal.  Every  promise  of 
Scripture  is  a  writing  of  God,  which  may  be  pleaded 
before  him  with  this  reasonable  request,  ^'  Do  as  thou 
hast  said."  The  Creator  will  not  cheat  his  creature  who 
depends  upon  his  truth  ;  and,  far  more,  the  heavenly 
Father  will  not  break  his  word  to  his  own  child.  '^  Ee- 
inember  the  word  unto  thy  servant,  on  which  thou  hast 
caused  me  to  hope,"  is  most  prevalent  pleading.  It  is  a 
double  argument  :  it  is  thy  wordy  wilt  thou  not  keep  it  ? 
Why  hast  thou  spoken  it  if  thou  wilt  not  make  it  good  ? 
Thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope  in  it,  wilt  thou  disappoint 
tlie  hope  wliich  thou  liast  thyself  begotten  in  me  ? 

How  sure  are  thy  promises,  O  my  God.  Forgive  me 
that  I  ever  doubt  them,  and  give  me  more  faith,  that  I 
may  treat  them  as  the  blessings  wliich  they  guarantee, 
even  as  men  pass  checks  and  notes  from  hand  to  hand  as 
if  they  were  the  gold  they  stand  for. 


62  ^  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

KEEPING   OUT   THE   COLD. 
**Aman  that  "wonld  keep  out  the  cold  in  winter  shutteth  all  his 
doors  and  windows,  yet  the  wind  will  creep  in,  though  he  doth  not 
leave  any  open  hole  for  it." 

We  must  leave  no  inlet  for  sin,  but  stop  up  every  liole 
and  cranny  by  which  it  can  enter.  There  is  need  of 
great  care  in  doing  this,  for  when  our  very  best  is  done 
sin  will  find  an  entrance.  During  the  bitter  cold  weather 
w^e  hst  the  doors,  put  sandbags  on  the  windows,  draw 
curtains,  and  arrange  screens,  and  yet  we  are  made  to 
feel  that  w^e  live  in  a  northern  climate  :  in  the  same  way 
must  wc  be  diligent  to  shut  out  sin,  and  we  shall  find 
abundant  need  to  guard  every  point,  for  after  w^e  have 
done  all,  we  shall,  in  one  way  or  another,  be  made  to 
feel  that  we  live  in  a  sinful  world. 

Well,  what  must  we  do  ?  We  must  follow  the  meas- 
ures w^hich  common  prudence  teaches  us  in  earthly 
matters.  We  must  drive  out  the  cold  by  keeping  up  a 
good  fire  within.  The  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
the  soul  can  so  warm  the  heart  that  worldliness  and  sin 
will  be  expelled,  and  we  shall  be  both  holy  and  happy. 
The  Lord  grant  it,  for 'Jesus'  sake. 

THE   TRAITOK   WITHIN. 

*^  A  garrison  is  not  free  from  danger  while  it  hath  an  enemy  lodged 
within." 

You  may  bolt  all  your  doors,  and  fasten  all  your 
windows,  but  if  the  thieves  have  placed  even  a  little 
child  within  doors,  who  can  draw^  the  bolts  for  them, 
the  house  is  still  unprotected.  xVll  the  sea  outside  a  ship 
cannot  do  it  dama£>:e  till  the  water  enters  w^ithin  and  fills 
the  hold.  Hence,  it  is  clear,  our  greatest  danger  is  from 
within.  All  the  devils  in  hell  and  tempters  on  earth 
could  do  us  no  injury  if  there  w^ere  no  corruption  in  our 
nature.      The  sparks  will  fall  harmlessly  if  there  is  no 


puritan's  garden.  63 

'  tinder.     Alas,  our  heart  is  our  greatest  enemy  :  this  is 
the  little  home-born  thief. 

Lord,  save  me  from  that  evil  man,  myself. 

FIEE   FROM  HEAVEN. 

' '  The  heathens  connted  that  the  fire  which  was  enkindled  by  a 
sunbeam  was  more  fit  and  pure  for  their  altars  than  a  coal  taken  from 
a  common  hearth." 

Herein  they  blindly  stumbled  upon  the  image  of  a  great 
spiritual  truth.  The  right  lire  for  a  preacher  of  the 
gospel  is  fire  from  God  himself.  All  else  defiles  the 
sacrifice,  and  is  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  die  out.  When 
we  speak yb?'  God  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  speak  through 
God.  Excitement  arising  from  animal  spirits  is  a  poor 
substitute  for  the  Holy  Ghost.  Far  worse  is  the  stimulus 
of  wine  or  strong  drink,  which  is  an  absolute  profanation 
of  holy  things  and  a  presumptuous  provocation  of  God. 
To  attempt  to  serve  God  under  the  influence  of  the 
''  mocker"  is  to  mock  the  Most  Holy  One. 

To  preach  under  the  stimulus  of  anger  is  horrible,  and 
to  do  so  from  motives  of  a^mbition  is  equally  so.  .  Nadab 
and  Abihu  died  before  the  Lord  for  offering  strange  fire, 
and  this  should  be  a  perpetual  warning  to  all  who  bear 
the  vessels  of  the  Lord. 

O  fire  of  God,  touch  our  lips,  yea,  burn  in  our  hearts. 
Let  no  strange  fire  come  near  us  :  neither  from  the 
furnace  of  anger,  nor  from  the  flames  of  ambitious 
desire,  nor  from  the  flash  of  carnal  excitement  may  we 
ever  borrow  our  fires,  when  we  wait  at  thine  altar,  O 
Lord. 

PETER  ]^/IAilTYE'S  ILLUSTEATION. 

Celius  Secundus  Curio  hath  a  notable  passage  in  the 
Life  of  Galiacius  Caracciolas,  as  to  the  occasion  of  his 


64  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

conversion.  One  John  Francis  Casarta,  who  was  en- 
lightened with  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  was  very- 
urgent  with  this  nobleman,  his  consin,  to  come  and  hear 
Peter  Martyr,  who  then  preached  at  Naples.  One  day, 
by  much  entreaty,  he  was  drawn  to  hear  him,  not  so 
much  with  a  desire  to  learn  and  profit  as  out  of  curiosity, 

Peter  Martyr  was  then  opening  the  First  Epistle  to 
the  Corinthians,  and  showing  how  much  the  judgment 
of  the  natural  understanding  is  mistaken  in  things 
Bpiritual.  Among  other  things,  he  used  this  similitude  : 
'^  If  a  man,  riding  in  an  open  country,  should,  afar  off, 
see  men  and  women  dancing  together,  and  should  not 
hear  their  music,  according  to  which  they  dance  and 
tread  out  their  measures,  he  would  think  them  to  be  a 
company  of  fairies  or  madmen,  appearing  in  such  various 
motions  and  antic  postures  ;  but  if  he  came  nearer,  and 
heard  the  musical  notes,  according  to  which  they  exactly 
danced,  he  would  find  that  to  be  art  which  before  he 
thought  madness.  The  same  happeneth  to  him  who  at 
first  sees  a  change  of  life,  company,  and  fashions  in  his 
former  companions  ;  he  thinketh  they  are  brain-sick  and 
foolish  ;  but  when  he  cometh  more  intimately  to  weigh 
the  thing,  and  what  an  exact  harmony  there  is  between 
such  a  life  and  conversation  and  the  motions  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit  and  the  directions  of  his  v/ord,  he  findeth 
that  to  be  the  highest  reason  which  before  he  judged 
madness  and  folly.'' 

This  similitude  stuck  in  the  mind  of  the  noble  marquis 
(as  he  was  wont  to  relate  it  to  his  familiar  friends),  that 
ever  afterward  he  wholly  applied  his  mind  to  the  search 
of  the  truth  and  the  practice  of  holiness,  and  left  all  his 
honors  and  vast  possessions  for  a  poor  life,  in  the  profes- 
sion of  the  gospel,  at  Geneva. 

This  needs  not  a  word  from  us.     If  ungodly  men  could 


puritak's  CtARDe:n".  65 

only  hear  the  music  to  which  we   dance,  they  would 
dance  too. 

THE   INWABD  KEGISTEAE. 

**  If  conscience  speaketli  not,  it  writetli  ;  for  it  is  not  only  a  witness, 
but  a  register,  and  a  book  of  record  :  '  The  sin  of  Judali  is  written 
with  a  pen  of  iron,  and  the  point  of  a  diamond,'  Jer.  xvii.  1,  We 
know  not  what  conscience  writeth,  being  occupied  and  taken  up  with 
carnal  vanities,  but  we  shall  know  hereafter,  when  the  books  are 
opened,  Sev.  xx.  12.  Conscience  keepeth  a  diary,  and  sets  down 
everything.  This  book,  though  it  be  in  the  sinner's  keeping,  cannot 
be  razed  and  blotted  out.  Well,  then,  a  sleepy  conscience  will  not 
always  sleep  •  if  we  suffer  it  not  to  awaken  here,  it  will  awaken  in 
hell  ;  for  the  present  it  sleepeth  in  many,  in  regard  of  motion,  check, 
or  smiting,  but  not  in  regard  of  notice  and  observation." 

Let  those  who  forget  their  sins  take  note  of  this. 
There  is  a  chiel  within  you  taking  notes,  and  he  will 
pnbKsh  all  where  all  will  hear  it.  Never  say,  "  Nobody 
will  see  me,"  for  yon  will  see  yourself,  and  your  con- 
science will  turn  king's  evidence  against  you. 

What  a  volume  Mr.  Recorder  Conscience  has  written 
abeady  !  How  many  blotted  pages  he  has  in  store,  to 
be  produced  upon  my  trial.  O  thou  who  alone  canst 
erase  this  dreadful  handwriting,  look  on  me  in  mercy, 
as  I  now  look  on  thee  by  faith. 

STUDY   PEOPORTIONS. 
"  A    drop   of  honey    is   not   enough   to   sweeten   a   hogshead   of 
vinegar." 

Under  great  troubles  we  need  great  grace  to  console 
us.  We  must  seek  the  special  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  be  more  dilisjent  and  fervent  in  prayer,  for  the 
eternal  consolation  of  the  Covenant.  A  proportion  must 
be  maintained  :  as  he  who  sets  out  upon  a  long  journey 
takes  all  the  more  money  with  him,  so,  in  prospect  of  a 
great  trial,  we  should  seek  extraordinary  grace.  The 
heavier  the  wagon,  the  more  horses  the  farmer  puts  into 


66  FLOWERS    FROM    A 

the  team  ;  and  so,  the  more  difficult  our  service,  the 
more  grace  must  we  bring  to  bear  upon  it. 

Lord,  when  we  have  much  sorrow,  let  us  taste  more 
of  thy  love,  and  the  vinegar  wdll  become  sweet  wine. 
If  now  thou  dost  try  us  severely,  be  pleased  also  to  com- 
fort us  richly. 

THE  HEN  WHICH  DOES  NOT  SIT  ON  HEK  EGGS. 

'*  A  sudden  glance  at  trutJi  without  meditation  upon  it  bringeth 
nothing  to  perfection  ;  as  a  hen  that  soon  leaveth  her  nest  never 
hatcheth  her  chicks." 

How  can  she  ?  Patience  is  needed,  and  the  quiet  self- 
denial  by  which  she  renders  up  the  warmth  of  her  heart, 
otherwise  her  eggs  will  lie  as  dead  as  stones.  The  value 
of  truth  will  never  be  known  by  those  who  look  at  it 
and  hurry  on  :  they  must  brood  over  it,  and  cover  it 
with  their  heart's  love,  or  it  will  never  become  living 
truth  to  their  souls.  We  must  apply  ourselves  to  a 
doctrine,  giving  our  whole  soul  and  heart  to  it,  or  we 
shall  miss  the  blessing.     Herein  is  wisdom. 

Lord,  when  I  hear  a  sermon,  or  read  in  a  good  book, 
let  me  not  be  as  the  partridge  which  sitteth  on  eggs  and 
hatcheth  them  not  ;  but  make  me  to  see  life  and  power 
in  thy  word,  and  to  rejoice  over  it  as  one  that  findeth 
great  spoil. 

THE  THIEF  AND  THE  CANDLE. 

**  A  thief  is  always  desirous  to  have  the  candles  put  out.'* 
His  trade  is  best  carried  on  in  the  dark.  This  is  the 
reason  why  Satan  is  so  dead  set  against  faithful  preachers 
and  teachers  :  he  can  rob  the  church,  and  plunder  souls 
so  much  better  when  the  light  of  the  gospel  is  with- 
drawn. How  mucli  better  could  the  Pope  pick  jur 
purses  with  his  purgatory,  indulgences,  and  relics,  if  the 
gospel  light  vrere  quenched  among  us  !     The  old-fash- 


puritan's  garde]^.         *  C7 

ioned  doctrines  of  grace  are  the  candles  of  the  Lord^  and 
we  must  keep  these  well  alight  among  the  people,  or  we 
shall  soon  find  the  Romish  thieves  busy  among  us. 

This  is  one  reason  why  creeds  and  catechisms  are  so 
much  detested  by  men  of  the  modern  school  :  these 
candles  are  not  to  their  mind,  for  they  prevent  their 
robbing  us  of  the  treasures  of  divine  truth. 

Lord,  I  bless  thee  for  the  light,  and  I  pray  that  I  may 
not  quench  even  the  tiniest  taper  by  which  thou  dost 
enlighten  me. 

AUGUSTINE'S  STORY. 

**  Take  heed  of  giving  \7ay  to  sin.  The  heart  that  was  easily  trou- 
bled before,  when  once  it  is  inured  to  sin,  loseth  all  its  sensitiveness 
and  tenderness,  and  what  seemed  intolerable  at  first  grows  into  a 
delight.  Alipius,  St.  Austin's  friend,  first  abhorred  the  bloo% 
spectacles  of  the  gladiators,  bnt  gave  himself  leave,  through  the  im- 
portunity of  friends,  to  be  present  for  once.  He  would  not  so  much 
as  open  his  eyes  at  first  ;  but  at  length,  when  the  people  shouted, 
he  gave  himself  liberty  to  see,  and  then  not  only  beheld  the  specta- 
cles with  delight,  but  drew  others;  to  behold  what  himself  once 
loathed." 

The  story  has  had  its  counterpart  in  thousands  of 
instances.  Men  who  shuddered  at  the  sight  of  a  dead 
bird  have,  by  familiarity  with  cruelty,  come  to  commit 
murder  without  compunction.  Those  who  sipped  half  a 
glass  of  wine  have  come  to  drink  by  the  gallon.  Stanch 
Protestants  have  given  way  to  some  little  form  and  cere- 
mony, and  become  more  Popish  than  the  Romanists 
themselves.  There  is  no  safety  if  we  venture  an  inch 
over  the  boundary  line  ;  indeed,  little  allowances  are 
more  dangerous  than  greater  compliances,  since  con- 
science does  not  receive  a  wound,  and  yet  the  man  is 
undone,  and  falls  by  little  and  little. 

Come,  my  soul,  leave  sin  altogether.  Do  not  give 
Sodom  so  much  as  a  look,  nor  take  from  it  so  much  as  a 


68  •  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

thread.  Do  not  set  a  foot  within  her  doors,  for  God 
abhors  the  abode  of  sin,  and  would  have  his  people 
refrain  their  foot  from  it. 


V  SLEEPING  BY  WATEEFALLS. 

Things  to  which  we  are  Tised  do  not  work  upon  ns  ;  we  are  no6 
much  moved  with  them.  Custom  maketh  men  sleep  qnietly  by  tho 
falls  of  great  waters,  which  much  noise  is  ;  and  some  parts  of  tho 
body  grow  callons,  brawny,  dry,  and  dead,  as  the  laborer's  hand  and 
the  traveller's  heel,  by  much  nse/^ 

So  doth  the  consciQjice  gradually  lose  its  force.  At 
first,  like  a  cataract,  its  great  roar  astounds  the  soul,  and 
eflfectually  prevents  its  slumbers  of  carnal  security  ;  but 
by  and  by  its  noise  is  scarcely  heard,  and  men  are  even 
lulled  to  sleep  by  its  sound.  Now,  this  is  to  be  dreaded 
exceedingly,  for  it  is  the  forerunner  of  doom.  No  more 
warnings  are  heard,  because  sentence  lias  gone  forth,  and 
the  man's  destruction  is  sealed. 

Even  on  a  smaller  scale,  it  is  a  serious  thing  to  have 
conscience  lose  its  tenderness.  Christian  men,  by  asso- 
ciation with  the  world,  and  by  a  want  of  tliorough 
consideration,  may  come  to  do  svhh.  impunity  things 
which  would  shock  them  if  their  consciences  Avere  in  a 
healthy  state.  It  is  dangerous  for  a  steam-engine  when 
the  tell-tale  does  not  act  ;  and  no  one  knows  w^hat 
mischief  may  come  through  the  failure  of  the  soul's 
indicator.  We  wish  to  know  w^hat  is  evil  that  wo  may 
avoid  it  ;  and  it  is  a  serious  calamity  w^hen  the  warning 
faculty  has  become  dulled  and  silent  through  continuance 
in  sin.  Better  far  to  live  in  perpetual  anxiety  to  be 
right,  than  to  remain  at  ease  while  doing  wrong. 

Lord,  make  my  conscience  tender  as  the  apj^le  of  my 
eye.     Awaken  it,  and  keep  it  awake. 


puritan's  garden.  69 

THE  DECOY. 
"  As  a  fowler  catcKes  many  birds  by  one  decoy,  a  bird  of  tlie  same 
feather,  so  G'od  bringeth  ns  to  himself  by  men  of  the  same  nature, 
and  subject  to  the  sam-e  temptations  and  the  same  commands.  He 
attracts  us  to  himself  by  men  with  whom  v/ie  may  ha^^e  ordinary  and 
visible  commerce,  and  not  by  angels,  that  might  affright  us.  He  calls 
us  by  our  fellow-creatures,  who  are  concerned  in  the  message  as 
much  as  we  are  ;  men  that  know  the  heart  of  a  man  by  experience, 
and  know  our  preju4ices  and  teaiptations. " 

In  tliis  choice  of  means,  wisdom  and  condescension  are 
equally  manifest,  for  which  we  are  bound  to  render 
grateful  adoration.  Blessed  be  God  that  he  calls  men  by 
men,  adc^3ting  thus  the  kindest  and  most  effectual  mode 
of  dealing  with  us.  We  should  also  learn  wisdom,  and 
receive  practical  guidance  from  this  act  of  God  :  when 
we  would  win  our  fellow-men  for  Jesus  let  us  show 
ourselves  to  be  near  of  kin  to  them.  If,  by  a  lofty  and 
distant  bearing,  we  act  as  if  we  belonged  to  another  race, 
we  shall  be  poor  decoy-birds.  The  poor  bird  fascinates 
its  like  by  being  of  their  kith  aSid  kin,  and  we  must 
capture  hearts  for  Jesus  by  showing  that  we  are  of  like 
passions  with  them,  and  love  them  much.  Love  men  to 
Jesus — that  is  the  art  of  soul- winning. 

Blessed  Lord  Jesus,  thou  didst  thus  win  my  heart,  for 
I  had  never  loved  thee  and  trusted  thee  if  I  had  not 
perceived  thee  to  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  my  in- 
firmity. Thy  sympathetic  manhood  draws  my  manhood 
to  thee,  and  I  am  won  to  thy  Father  by  thy  brotherly 
love, 

A   DISLOCATED   BONE. 
"  When  a  bone  is  out  of  joint,  the  longer  the  setting  is  forborne 
the  greater  wiU  the  pain  of  the  patient  be  ;  yea,  it  may  be  so  long 
neglected  that  no  skill  nor  art  can  set  it  right  again.     80  it  is  in  the 
cure  of  a  wounded  spirit  and  a  bleeding  conscience." 

Fly,  then,  O  wounded  one,  to  the  Lord  thy  Saviour, 
at  once.     When  delays  are  dangerous  as  well  as  painful, 


70  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

who  would  linger  ?  For  the  most  part,  injured  persons 
are  anxious  to  be  carried  to  the  surgeon  at  once  :  they 
dread  the  inflammatory  action  which  may  be  set  up  in 
the  injured  parts.  In  spiritual  wounds  the  fever  of  fear 
soon  heats  into  despair,  unless  the  divine  Healer  is 
fetched  in.  When  Jesus  comes  he  saflPers  no  delay  ; 
speedily  he  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up 
their  wounds.  Unbelief  pulls  off  the  bandages,  and 
presumption  declares  that  the  limb  is  as  sound  as  ever  ; 
but  humble  faith  waits  only  upon  the  Lord,  and  cries  to 
him  to  make  haste  for  her  deliverance. 
O  Lord,  heal  me  speedily,  I  beseech  thee. 

DEINKING  TO  DEOWN   CAKE. 
"  He  is  a  mountebank  who  strives  to  make  men  forget  their  spirit- 
ual sorrows  instead  of  leading  them  to  the  true  cure.     This  is  like  a 
man  in  debt  who  drinks  to  drown  his  thoughts  ;  but  this  neither 
pays  the  debt  nor  postpones  the  reckoning." 

When  conscience  is  uneasy,  it  is  foolish  as  well  as 
wicked  to  attempt  to  smother  its  cries  with  worldly 
merriment.  Nay,  let  us  hear  it  patiently.  If  we  be  in 
debt  let  us  know  it,  and  set  about  meeting  our  liabihties 
like  honest  men  ;  but  to  burn  the  ledger  and  discharge 
the  clerk  is  a  madman's  way  of  going  to  work.  O  soul, 
be  true  to  thyself.  Face  thine  own  case,  however  bad  it 
may  be  ;  for  refusing  to  know  and  consider  the  sure  facts 
will  not  alter  or  improve  them.  He  is  a  cruel  doctor 
who  tells  the  afflicted  patient  that  he  ails  nothing,  and 
thus  sets  him  for  the  time  at  his  ease,  at  the  terrible  cost 
of  future  disease,  rendered  incurable  by  delay. 

Lord,  bring  me  to  the  bar  of  my  conscience  now,  lest 
I  stand  condemned  at  thy  bar  of  judgment  hereafter. 

THE   HEN  AND   HEK  EGGS. 
**  To  be  careless  of  the  degree  of  our  grace  makes  way  for  the  loss 
of  the  whole.     Christians  are  like  a  hen  when  many  eggs  are  taken 


puritan's    GARDEN".  71 

out  of  the  nest ;  as  long  as  one  or  two  remaineth,  she  taketh  no 
notice  of  it,  and  forsaketh  not  the  nest.  Be  no^t  thus  foolish,  but 
consider  whether  there  be  not  abatement  of  some  degree  of  your 
grace,  though  a  little  may  remain  with  you  still.  Content  not  your- 
selves that  all  is  not  lost  because  something  remains  ;  but  seek  to 
have  grace  in  as  great  a  proportion  as  formerly. ' ' 

A  miser  would  not  be  content  to  miss  a  part  of  his 
gold  because  a  pile  still  remained  ;  the  woman  in  the 
parable  was  not  easy  because  she  had  many  pieces  of 
money  left  ;  neither  should  we  be  comfortable  if  a  grain 
of  grace  is  lost  by  us,  even  though  we  may  be  well 
assured  that  a  saving  portion  still  remains.  Why  should 
we  lose  any  measure  of  grace  ?  "We  shall  need  it  all. 
At  our  strongest  we  are  weak  enough.  We  have  never 
one  whit  of  love  to  spare  ;  what  a  pity  that  we  should 
lose  a  fragment  of  it. 

JS^o  man  is  more  sure  of  being  poor  than  he  who  loses 
his  estate  insensibly.  Yqu  may  stop  a  leak  if  you  per- 
ceive it,  but  what  can  save  a  ship  which  sinks  imper- 
ceptibly. We  may  heal  a  wound,  but  when  life  oozes 
away  in*secret  who  can  save  us  ? 

Lord,  help  us  to  perceive,  to  lament,  and  to  recover 
the  least  loss  in  gracious  matters. 

THE   LITTLE   WISP. 

"  Little  sticks  set  the  great  ones  on  fire,  and  a  Little  wisp  is  often 
used  to  enkindle  a  great  block  of  wood." 

Thus  have  we  known  persons  of  small  talent  and 
position  influence  their  superiors  by  their  zeal.  Though 
themselves  able  to  do  but  little,  they  have  been  full  of 
fervor,  and  so  have  ventured  further  than  the  more  solid 
and  prudent  felt  at  first  inclined  to  do.  Some  of  us 
have  had  to  thank  God  for  our  weaker  brethren  who 
have  been  more  eager  and  venturesome  than  we  were  : 
these  wisps  and  bunches  of  firewood,  though  they  could 
not  keep  up  the  fire,  came  in  very  opportunely  to  give 


"^S  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

the  flames  a  start.  Even  rash  suggestions  have  their 
value.  Fools  who  are  all  alive  may  do  good  service  to 
wise  men,  when  they  are  sluggish  and  slow.  It  is  right 
to  get  good  out  of  all  good  men.  When  we  meet  with 
persons  of  little  substance  but  of  considerable  kindhng 
power,  let  us  put  them  together  like  m-atches  and 
sphnters  of  wood,  for  the  commencement  of  an  enter- 
prise, and  when  we  find  others  to  be  hke  heavy  old  logs, 
let  us  put  them  to  use  when  the  flame  has  taken  good 
hold,  for  if  they  once  get  thoroughly  alight  they  will 
sustain  the  fire  long  after  the  straw  and  the  shavings 
have  passed  away. 

Reader,  which  are  you,  a  wisp  or  a  log?  In  either 
case  there  is  a  place  for  you,  and  be  it  your  ambition,  in 
some  way  or  other,  to  be  consumed  for  your  Lord's 
service. 

IVIATTOCKS   OF   GOLD. 

**  To  prefer  onr  own  ease,  quiet,  profit,  before  the  glory  of  God,  is 
madness.  Would  it  not  be  insanity  to  dig  for  iron  with  mattocks  of 
gold?" 

Our  author  means  that  it  must  always  be  unreasonable 
to  make  the  means  greater  than  the  end.  When  man 
lives  for  the  glory  of  God  he  spends  his  strength  for 
something  far  beyond  himself  in  value,  and  thus  he  acts 
as  reasonably  as  when  men  dig  for  gold  with  mattocks  of 
iron  ;  but  when  an  immortal  mind  spends  itself  upon 
decaying  objects,  such  as  transient  gain  and  pleasure,  it 
is  occupied  beneath  itself,  and  is  like  a  mattock  of  gold 
used  in  searching  for  base  metal.  It  is  a  misapplication 
of  forces  for  the  nobler  to  spend  itself  upon  the  meaner. 
Men  do  not  usually  care  to  spend  a  pound  in  the  hope  of 
getting  back  a  groat  and  no  more,  and  yet,  when  the 
mwl  is  given  up  for  the  sake  of  worldly  gain,  the  loss  is 
greater  still,  and  not  even  the  groat  remains. 


puritan's  garde]S".  73 

Lord,  arouse  me  from  the  folly  of  grovelling  among 
earthly  things.  Make  my  soul  reasonable,  that  it  may 
devote  itself  to  worthy  pursuits  ;  and  what  can  be  so 
worthy  of  me  as  thyself  !  Thou  art  above  all,  and 
infinitely  better  than  all  ;  to  thee  I  devote  my  whole 
being.  O  help  me  to  live  alone  for  thy  glory.  Thy 
grace  I  need  ;  let  thy  grace  come  to  me  with  power. 

TKEES  MAKKED   FOR   THE   AXE. 

"  To  fix  our  confidence  upon  a  dying  world  is  folly.  It  is  as  if  we 
were  building  our  nests  when  the  tree  is  being  cut  down,  or  decorat- 
ing our  cabin  when  the  ship  is  likely  to  be  dashed  in  pieces  or  is 
already  sinking. ' ' 

Is  it  a  time  to  drive  a  trade  for  ourselves  when  we  are 
just  leaving  earth,  and  hope  soon  to  be  in  heaven  ?  Yet 
too  many  among  professors  are  doing  this.  Their  hearts 
are  set  upon  their  money,  they  build  their  nest  in  the 
golden  grove  ;  or  they  are  wrapt  up  in  their  children,  and, 
as  it  were,  nestle  down  among  those  who  spring  up  as  wil- 
lows by  the  watercourses.  The  axe  is  laid  at  the  root  of  all 
earthly  comforts,  and,  therefore,  those  who  are  taught  of 
God  soar  aloft,  and  make  their  eyries  on  the  Rock  of 
Ages.  What  is  our  friend  doing  whose  eyes  are  now 
scanning  this  page  ?  Where  is  your  heart  ?  What  is 
its  dear  delight  and  joy  ?  Is  it  of  earth  ?  Then  be  sure 
that  to  earth  it  will  return.  Is  your  joy  a  thing  of 
heaven  ?     Then  alone  is  it  stable  and  sure. 

My  soul,  the  world  is  passing  away,  set  not  thy  love 
upon  it.  The  ship  is  sinking,  care  little  about  the  little 
luxuries  of  the  berth  which  thou  hast  for  a  while  occu- 
pied in  it.  Up  and  away  !  This  is  not  thy  rest.  See, 
before  thine  eyes  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away  ; 
look  to  eternity  and  to  thy  God,  for  there  alone  is  solid 
bliss. 


74  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

THE   SPIEE. 

"The  best  of  God's  people  have  abhorred  themselves.  Like  the 
spire  of  a  steeple,  ininimus  in  summo,  we  are  least  at  the  highest. 
David,  a  king,  was  yet  like  a  weaned  child." 

Manton  is  not  very  clear  about  the  steeple,  but  he 
means  that  the  higher  a  spire  rises  toward  heaven  the 
smaller  it  becomes,  and  thus  the  more  elevated  are  our 
spirits  the  less  shall  we  be  in  our  own  esteem.  Great 
thoughts  of  self  and  great  grace  never  go  together. 
Self-consciousness  is  a  sure  sign  that  there  is  not  much 
depth  of  grace.  He  who  overvalues  himself  under- 
values his  Saviour.  He  who  abounds  in  piety  is  sure  to 
be  filled  with  humility.  Light  things,  such  as  straws 
and  feathers,  are  borne  aloft  ;  valuable  goods  keep  their 
places,  and  remain  below,  not  because  they  are  chained 
or  riveted  there,  but  by  virtue  of  their  own  weight. 
When  we  begin  to  talk  of  our  perfection,  our  imperfec- 
tion is  getting  the  upper  hand.  The  more  full  we 
become  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord  the  more  shall  we 
sink  in  our  own  esteem,  even  as  laden  vessels  sink  down 
to  their  water-mark,  while  empty  ships  float  aloft. 

Lord,  make  and  keep  me  humble.  Lift  me  nearer 
and  nearer  to  heaven,  and  then  I  shall  grow  less  and  less 
in  my  own  esteem. 

CHAFF   AND   WHEAT   GONTKASTED. 

''  Light  chaff  is  blown  up  and  down  by  every  wind,  when  solid 
grain  hitcheth  in,  and  resteth  on  the  floor  where  it  is  winnowed." 

Constancy  is  one  of  the  evidences  of  worth.  Those 
who  change  their  religion  generally  need  to  be  changed 
by  their  religion  before  they  will  have  any  religion  worth 
the  having.  Fickle  professors  are  ready  to  be  the  prey 
of  every  new  teacher  ;  his  breath  is  enough  to  blow  them 
according  to  his  pleasure.  They  are  everything  by 
turns,   and  nothing  long.     Depend  upon  it,  he  knows 


puritan's  garden.  75 

nothing  of  the  preciousness  of  truth,  who  is  ready  to 
stand  and  deliver  to  every  footpad  of  heresy  who  chal- 
lenges him  :  he  who  has  about  him  doctrines  which  he 
esteems  to  be  a  treasure  vnll  fight  for  them,  and  send  the 
robber  to  the  rightabouts. 

We  know  one  of  whom  we  usually  ask,  whenever  we 
see  him,  "  What  are  yoxi  now  f "  Yet  are  there  some 
good  points  about  him,  and  he  has  a  mind  open  to 
conviction,  too  open  a  great  deal  to  be  a  fit  casket  for 
the  jewels  of  truth.  We  have  seeii  a  child  in  a  field  of 
flowers,  filling  its  little  hand  eagerly,  and  then  dropping 
its  posy,  not  for  better  but  for  other  flowers.  Many 
professors  are  such  children. 

A  heart  which  is  fickle  in  its  love  is  not  likely  to  make 
a  marriage  with  the  truth.  Lord,  fix  my  heart  in  thy 
truth,  and  never  let  it  be  removed. 

THE  DEATH-BLOW  OF  POPERY. 

*'  When  Dr.  Day  discoursed  with  Stephen  Gardiner  concerning  free 
justification  by  Christ,  saith  he,  *  O,  Mr.  Doctor,  open  that  gap  to 
the  people,  and  we  are  undone  ! '  The  more  gospel  there  is  dis- 
covered, the  more  Antichrist  is  discovered.  Free  grace  puts  the 
foundation  of  Popery  out  of  course." 

The  doubtful  doctrine  of  many  Protestants  is  a  greater 
encouragement  to  Romanism  than  all  her  own  finery  can 
bring  to  her.  Rome  has  gained  more  by  Oxford  than 
by  all  her  cardinals.  The  glorious  doctrines  of  grace 
are  the  great  guns  with  which  the  Papal  galleys  may  be 
blown  out  of  the  water.  Grace  is  a  word  which  is  as 
obnoxious  to  Popery  as  the  name  of  Jesus  to  the  devil. 
Reptiles  cannot  bear  salt,  nor  can  Jesuits  and  priests 
endure  sovereign  grace.  Their  trade  is  gone  when 
salvation  is  free.  Their  honor  is  gone  when  Christ  is 
all.  When  people  think  much  of  Jesus  and  his  redemp- 
tion, they  are  sure  to  think  little  of  priests  and  their 


76  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

fiddle-faddle.  It  was  not  Liither^s  arguments,  but 
Luther's  plain  teaching  of  justification  by  faith,  which 
shook  the  corner-stone  of  the  Vatican.  If  men  are  saved 
by  believing,  they  are  not  likely  to  waste  money  on 
purgatory  pick-purse,  nor  on  any  other  of  the  papal 
schemes  for  enriching  the  Church. 

Let  us  then  keep  gospel  truth  always  to  the  front,  for 
in  our  own  hearts  the  best  preservative  against  error  is  a 
hearty  acceptance  of  the  living  Christ  and  his  own  sure 
gospel. 

PEAKLS  AND   SWINE. 
*'  Pearls  do  not  lose  their  worth  though  swine  trample  upon  them." 

Scriptural  truth  is  none  the  less  worthy  to  be  held  and 
proclaimed  because  foolish  and  depraved  men  pervert  it 
to  their  own  destruction.  A  knife  is  a  very  useful 
article  ;  and,  though  some  have  committed  suicide  by 
its  means,  it  is  no  reason  why  knives  should  be  discarded. 
The  doctrines  of  grace  are  pearls  even  after  Antinomians 
have  turned  them  over.  Justification  by  faith  is  the 
crown-jewel  of  the  gospel,  though  hypocrites  abuse  it. 
Every  truth  is  perverted  by  polluted  minds,  but  this  is 
no  reason  for  our  renouncing  what  God  has  revealed  ; 
rather  is  it  a  strong  argument  for  adorning  the  doctrine 
of  our  Saviour  in  all  things. 

My  heart,  see  thou  to  it  that  the  doctrines  of  grace  are 
honored  at  thy  hands.  Since  so  many  pour  contempt 
upon  them,  do  thou  hold  them  in  high  esteem,  and  by 
thy  life  make  them  to  be  esteemed  by  others. 

PEESONAL   WITNESS. 
*'  A  report  of  a  report  is  a  cold  thing  and  of  small  value  ;  but  a 
report  of  what  we  have  witnessed  and  experienced  ourselves  comes 
warmly  upon  men's  hearts." 

So  a  mere  formal  description  of  faitli  and  its  blessings 


PURITA;Nr'S    GARDEN".  77 

falls  flat  on  the  ear  ;  but  wlien  a  sincere  believer  tells  of 
liis  own  experience  of  the  Lord's  faithfulness,  it  has  a 
great  charm  about  it.  We  like  to  hear  the  narrative  of 
a  journey  from  the  traveller  himseK.  In  a  court  of  law 
they  will  have  no  hearsay  evidence.  Tell  us,  says  the 
judge,  not  what  your  neighbor  said,  but  what  you  saw 
yourseK.  Personal  evidence  of  the  power  of  grace  has 
a  wonderfully  convincing  force  upon  the  conscience. 
"  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me,"  is  better  argu- 
ment than  all  the  Butler's  Analogies  that  will  ever  be 
written,  good  as  they  are  in  their  place. 

Lord,  make  me  ever  prompt  to  bear  my  personal 
witness  for  thee,  and  eager  to  magnify  thy  grace,  of 
which  I  have  been  made  a  partaker.  Never  permit  me 
to  be  ashamed  of  thy  salvation,  but  make  me  openly  to 
proclaim  thy  matchless  grace  to  me. 

FKEE,  YET  NOT  WITHOUT  LABOR. 

**  There  is  a  difference  between  merit  and  means  ;  a  schoolmaster 
may  teach  a  child  gratis,  and  yet  the  boj^  must  himself  take  pains  to 
get  his  learning.  There  is,  moreover,  a  difference  between  cause  and 
effect,  and  the  mere  order  of  coming.  Mercy  is  never  obtained  but 
in  the  use  of  means  :  wisdom's  dole  is  dispensed  at  wisdom's  gate." 
(Prov.  viii.  34.) 

This  is  a  very  important  remark,  and  tends  to  screen 
from  the  charge  of  legality  those  who  earnestly  exhort 
men  to  gospel  duties.  There  is  no  merit  in  seeking  the 
Lord  ;  but  we  may  not  hope  to  find  him  without  it. 
Prayer  does  not  deserve  an  answer,  and  yet  we  are  to 
pray  without  ceasing,  neither -may  we  hope  to  have  if 
we  refuse  to  ask.  The  cup  must  be  held  under  the 
flowing  fountain  or  it  will  not  be  filled,  yet  the  cup  does 
not  create  the  water  or  purchase  it.  All  the  exertion 
which  a  man  makes  in  running  the  heavenly  race  will 
not  merit  the  prize  of   eternal  life  ;  but  it  would  not 


78  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

therefore  be  right  for  him  to  lie  in  bed  and  hope  to  win 
it.  The  Father  freely  gives  the  bread  of  heaven  without 
money  and  without  price,  and  yet  Jesus  bade  men  labor 
for  it. 

Lord,  thou  hast  taught  me  to  see  a  great  distinction 
between  the  idea  of  meriting  thy  favor  and  the  truth 
that  earnest  effort  is  necessary  to  salvation.  Help  me  to 
work  as  if  my  salvation  depended  on  my  working,  and 
then  keep  me  trusting  in  thee  alone,  as  if  I  worked  not 
at  all.  Thou  givest  me  all  things,  the  end  and  the 
means  to  that  end.  That  measure  of  holy  labor  which  I 
put  forth  is  first  wrought  in  me,  and  therefore  would  I 
be  doubly  diligent.  I  would  work  because  thou  workest 
in  me,  and  strive  for  victory  because  thou  givest  me  both 
the  strength  and  the  crown. 

BEATEN  SPICES. 
"  Spices  are  most  fragrant  when  burnt  and  bruised,  so  have  saving 
graces  their  chiefest  fragrancy  in  hard  times.  The  pillar  that  con- 
ducted the  Israelites  appeared  as  a  cloud  by  day,  but  as  fire  by  night. 
The  excellency  of  faith  is  beclouded  till  it  be  put  upon  a  thorough 
trial.'' 

Herein  lies  one  of  the  benefits  of  afiliction,  it  fetches 
out  latent  sweetness  and  light.  Certain  herbs  yield  no 
smell  till  they  are  trodden  on,  and  certain  characters  do 
not  reveal  their  excellence  till  they  are  tried.  The 
developing  power  of  tribulation  is  very  great  :  faith, 
patience,  resignation,  endurance,  and  steadfastness  are 
by  far  the  best  seen  when  put  to  the  test  by  adversity, 
pain,  and  temptation.  God  has  created  nothing  in  vain 
in  the  new  creation  any  more  than  in  the  old,  hence  one 
of  the  sweet  necessities  of  trial  is  to  bring  forth  and  use 
those  precious  graces  which  else  had  been  uneihployed. 
God  is  not  glorified  by  unused  graces,  for  'these  lie 
hidden  and  bring  him  no  honor  ;  may  we  not,  therefore, 


puritan's   GARDEl!^.  79 

rejoice  in  tribulation,  because  it  fetches  out  our  secret 
powers,  and  enables  us  to  give  glory  to  the  Lord  whom 
we  love  ?  Yes,  blessed  be  the  pestle  which  bruises  us, 
and  the  mortar  in  which  we  lie  to  be  beaten  into  fra- 
grance. Blessed  be  the  burning  coals  which  liberate  our 
sweet  odors  and  raise  them  up  to  heaven  like  pillars  of 
smoke.  Can  we  not  say  this  ?  Then  it  is  time  we 
could,  and  perhaps  our  present  affliction  has  been  sent 
for  that  very  end — that  we  may  learn  the  way  of  com- 
plete consecration,  and  be  made  perfect  through  suffer- 
ing. 

STAES  AND   THEIR   STRANGE   NAMES. 

*'  As  the  astronomers  call  the  glorious  stars  bulls,  snakes,  dragons, 
and  other  strange  things,  so  do  ungodly  men  miscall  the  most  shining 
and  glorious  graces.  Zeal  is  fury  ;  strictness,  nicety  ;  and  patience, 
folly!" 

So  far  as  the  astronomers  are  concerned,  the  names 
which  they  give  to  the  constellations  are  no  dishonor  to 
the  lamps  of  heaven  ;  it  were  well  if  the  other  misnomers 
were  equally  indifferent.  II]  names  are,  however,  a 
kind  of  persecution,  a  part  of  the  ''cruel  mockings" 
which  are  employed  by  the  graceless.  Evil  comes  of  it, 
too,  over  and  abov^e  the  grieving  of  pious  men,  for  weak 
minds  avoid  zeal  when  it  is  stigmatized  as  fanaticism, 
and  many  despise  patience  when  it  is  maligned  as  mean- 
ness of  spirit.  Since  the  weak-minded  are  so  many,  this 
is  a  great  evil  which  every  man  who  loves  his  fellows 
should  endeavor  to  correct.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  a 
name  after  all.  A  great  falsehood  may  be  wrapped  up 
in  a  short  word,  and  a  current  misnomer  may  produce 
widespread  evil.  Let  us  call  things  by  their  right 
names,  and  stand  up  for  all  that  is  lovely  and  of  good 
repute.  Why  should  men  bear  false  witness  against  the 
virtues,  and  villify  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  ?     If  they 


80  FLOWERS   FROM    A 

will  do  so^  let  us  not  be  so  cowardly  as  to  be  silent  ;  let 
lis  speak  out  boldly^  and  avow  our  hearty  appreciation 
of  that  which  the  world  despises.  Yie  will  call  the  stars 
stars,  and  let  the  world  call  them  bears,  and  crabs,  and 
scorpions,  if  they  will.  i 

THE   OHILD   WANTING  A  KNIFE.  ^ 

"  God  knoweth  what  is  best  for  us.  Like  foolish  children,  we 
desire  a  knife  ;  but,  like  a  wise  father,  he  giveth  us  bread." 

It  would  be  a  most  unfatherly  thing  for  a  man  to  give 
his  son  that  which  would  cause  his  death.  The  largest 
generosity  must  refuse  some  requests  when  it  is  a  higher 
kindness  to  withhold  than  to  bestow.  The  limit  which 
is  set  to  ,prayer — namely,  that  if  we  ask  anything  in 
accordance  with  God^s  will  he  heareth  us,  is  just  such 
a  limit  as  love  on  God's  part  must  fix,  and  as  prudence 
on  our  part  must  approve.  Would  we  have  the  Lord 
act  according  to  our  ignorance  or  according  to  his  own 
wisdom  ?  Shall  our  uninstructed  self  become  the  arbiter 
of  God's  providence  ?  Assuredly  no  Christian  in  his 
senses  would  propose  such  an  arrangement.  If  it  could 
be  proposed  and  carried  out  it  would  place  us  in  daily 
jeopardy,  and  work,  at  its  very  best,  most  sadly  to  our 
loss. 

If  we  could  have  our  own  will  absolutely  it  would  be 
wise  not  to  have  it,  but  to  divest  ourselves  of  the  hor- 
rible privilege.  How  much  more  restful  are  our  minds, 
now  that  we  know  that  our  Father  arranges  all  things, 
than  could  possibly  be  the  case  if  the  responsibility  of 
management  rested  with  ourselves.  Like  Phaeton,  who 
sought  to  drive  the  chariot  of  the  sun,  we  should  soon 
perish  by  our  own  folly  if  the  reins  of  providence  were 
placed  in  our  feeble  hands.  It  is  better  far  that  the 
rule  should  be,  ''  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wdlt." 


puritan's  gardek.  81 

Lord,  give  me  not  what  I  ask,  but  what  I  should  ask, 
yea,  what  thou  seest  to  be  most  for  thy  glory 

THE   STBIPPED   STALK. 

"  *  AU  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of 
grass.'  Many  times  the  flower  is  gone  when  the  stalk  remaineth  ;  so 
man  ofttimes  seeth  all  that  he  hath  been  gathering  a  long  time  soon 
dissipated  by  the  breath  of  providence,  and  he,  like  a  withered,  rot- 
ten stalk,  liveth  scorned  and  neglected." 

Alas,  for  such  an  one  !  What  is  the  daffodil  without 
its  golden  crown,  or  the  crocus  without  its  cup  of  sun- 
shine ?  Such  is  man  without  the  object  of  his  life. 
What  is  the  thorn  without  its  rose,  or  the  tree  without 
its  leaves,  or  the  wood  without  the  birds  of  song  ?  Such 
is  man  without  the  comforts  and  joys  of  his  being.  It  is 
ill  to  exist  when  life  is  dead,  to  eat  and  drink  when  the 
taste  has  departed,  to  move  among  men  when  the  heart 
is  broken  :  yet  are  there  thousands  in  this  condition  :  a 
blight  is  on  them,  their  flower  and  glory  are  withered, 
and  they  are  as  those  who  go  down  into  the  pit.  So 
have  we  seen  a  tree  smitten  by  lightning  standing  still 
among  its  fellows,  but  no  longer  adding  to  the  verdure 
of  the  forest.  It  has  been,  and  this  is  all  that  we  can 
say  of  it,  for  its  continuance  is  but  in  semblance.  Who 
has  not  seen  men  in  a  like  condition  ?  Alas  !  for  those 
who  have  no  hereafter  when  this  present  faileth  them, 
for  they  fall  indeed,  and  wither  with  a  vengeance. 

Blessed  is  the  man  who  lives  in  God,  for  no  such 
withering  shall  happen  to  him.  God  is  his  crown  and 
glory,  the  flower  of  his  true  being,  and  God  cannot  fail 
him.  He  shall  be  as  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of 
water,  and  not  so  much  as  his  leaf  shall  wither. 

Lord,  make  me  to  live  on  thy  word,  which  abideth  for- 
ever, and  then  when  flesh,  like  grass,  shall  fade,  1  shall 
find  eternal  joy  in  thee. 


82  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

THE   SWORD   IN   A   CHILD'S   HAND. 
**  Sometimes  truth  is  like  a  keen  weapon  in  a  child's  hand,  it 
maketh  little  impression  because  it  is  weakly  wielded." 

Do  not  therefore  blame  the  truth,  but  the  weak  hand. 
In  many  cases  of  controversy  the  apparent  victory  of 
error  has  been  due  to  the  unfitness  of  the  warrior  who 
championed  truth.  It  may  for  some  men  be  their  truest 
service  to  the  good  cause  to  leave  it  in  stronger  hands. 
We  do  not  send  women  and  children  to  our  battle-fields, 
nor  do  we  march  our  recruits  to  war  before  they  have 
been  trained  ;  neither  should  we  expect  raw  youths  and 
timid  maidens  to  put  on  armour  at  once  and  face  the 
adversaries  of  the  gospel.  It  has  happened  times  with- 
out number  that  a  blustering  infidel  has  posed  a  new 
convert  with  his  sophistical  arguments,  and  then  he  has 
shouted  as  if  he  had  gained  a  triumph  over  the  truth  ; 
whereas  his  boasting  only  proved  the  weakness  of  his 
cause,  or  the  childishness  of  his  own  mind.  He  who 
could  crow  so  loudly  over  so  slender  a  success  must  be 
conscious  of  inherent  feebleness,  and  therefore  he  is 
astonished  and  elated  at  the  semblance  of  victory. 

Let  us  all  pray  to  be  strengthened,  that  our  inner  life, 
growing  day  by  day,  may  reach  a  fulness  of  stature  and 
a  firmness  of  strength  worthy  of  the  heavenly  weapon 
which  the  Lord  has  put  into  our  hand.  O  sacred  Spirit, 
make  us  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his 
might ! 

C^SAE   KILLED   WITH  BODKINS. 

'*  Not  only  do  great  sins  ruin  the  soul,  but  lesser  faults  will  do  the 
same.  Dallying  with  temptation  leads  to  sad  consequences.  Csesar 
was  killed  with  bodkins." 

A  dagger  aimed  at  the  heart  will  give  as  deadly  a 
wound  as  a  huge  two  handed  sword,  and  a  little  sin 
unrepented  of  will  be  as  fatal  as  a  gross  transgression. 


83 


Brutus  and  Cassins  and  the  rest  of  tlie  conspirators  conld 
not  have  more  surely  ended  Caesar's  life  with  spears 
than  they  did  with  daggers.  Death  can  hide  in  a  drop, 
and  ride  in  a  breath  of  air.  Our  greatest  dangers  lie 
hidden  in  little  things.  Milton  represents  thousands  of 
evil  spirits  as  crowded  into  one  hall  ;  and  truly  the  least 
sin  may  be  a  very  Pandemonium,  in  which  a  host  of 
evils  may  be  concealed — a  populous  hive  of  mischiefs, 
each  one  storing  death. 

Believer,  thous^h  thou  be  a  little  Caesar  in  thine  own 
sphere,  beware  of  the  bodkins  of  thine  enemies.  Watch 
and  pray,  lest  thou  fall  by  little  and  Kttle.  Lord,  save 
me  from  sins  which  call  themselves  little. 

A  STITCH   IN  TIME. 
"  He  who  keeps  a  house  in  constant  repair  prevents  aU  fear  of  its 
falling  to  ruin  ;  by  stopping  each  hole  and  chink  as  he  finds  it  he 
keeps  off  greater  mischief.' ' 

We  shall  do  well  to  use  the  same  economy  with  our 
spiritual  nature.  No  great  decays  of  spirit  will  occur  if 
we  look  to  each  of  our  graces,  and  lament  the  first  sign 
of  declension  in  any  one  of  them.  A  loose  stone  here, 
and  a  fallen  tile  there,  and  a  rotting  timber  in  a  third 
place,  will  soon  bring  on  a  total  ruin  to  a  tenement,  but 
the  hand  of  diligence  maintains  the  fabric.  Thus  must 
we  watch  our  spiritual  house,  lest  we  fall  by  little  and 
little.  Are  there  no  repairs  wanted  at  this  time  ?  Does 
not  my  soul  show  a  number  of  flaws  and  decays  ?  Come, 
my  heart,  look  about  thee,  and  pray  the  Lord  to  restore 
that  which  has  fallen. 

BUCKETS   IN  A   WELL. 

*'  The  life  of  sin  and  the  life  of  a  sinner  are  like  two  buckets  in  a 
"weU — if  the  one  goeth  up,  the  other  must  come  down.  If  sin  liveth, 
the  sinner  must  die." 

It  is  only  when  sin  dies  that  a  man  begins  truly  to 


84  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

live.  Yet  we  cannot  persuade  our  neighbors  that  it  is 
so,  for  their  hearts  are  bound  up  in  their  sins,  and  they 
think  themselves  most  alive  when  they  can  give  fullest 
liberty  to  their  desires.  They  raise  up  their  sins,  and  so 
sink  themselves.  If  they  could  be  persuaded  of  the 
truth,  they  would  send  the  bucket  of  sin  to  the  very 
bottom  that  their  better  selves  might  rise  into  eternal 
salvation. 

Lord,  make  my  fellow-men  wise,  that  they  may  do 
this,  and  teach  me  the  same  lesson.  I  would  fain  sink 
every  evil  and  selfish  desire  that  my  heart  may  rise  to 
holiness,  to  heaven,  to  thee. 

THE  UPKIGHT  COLUMN. 

**  A  straight  pillar,  the  more  you  lay  npon  it,  the  straighter  it  is, 
and  the  more  stable  ;  but  that  which  is  crooked  boweth  under  the 
superincumbent  weight  :  so  the  more  God  loadeth  the  godly  the 
more  doth  he  hold  fast  his  integrity,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
more  the  Lord  casteth  in  upon  carnal  men,  the  more  is  their  spirit 
perverted." 

A  little  leaning  from  the  right  line  is  a  serious  thing  : 
uprightness  alone  is  safety.  As  our  author  well  says,  an 
upright  column  will  bear  anything  ;  it  would  be  hard 
with  any  known  force  to  crush  an  erect  pillar.  So, 
when  a  man  is  upright  before  God,  neither  the  weight 
of  good  or  of  ill  can  overthrow  him  :  he  stands  in  his 
integrity  alike  under  prosperity  and  adversity,  under 
f awnings  or  frownings.  When  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  are  removed,  he  bears  up  the  pillars  thereof.  He 
is  like  Mount  Zion,  which  can  never  be  moved,  but 
abideth  forever.  ^'  Let  uprightness  and  integrity  pre- 
serve me  :' '  these  are  a  sure  preservative  in  the  day  of 
trial. 

The  man  who  gives  w^ay  to  leanings  or  inclinations  out 
of  the  straight  line  is  never  safe.     It  is  only  necessary  to 


puritan's  garden.  85 

supply  sufficient  pressure  and  lie  falls.  Whether  he  be 
loaded  with  wealth  or  pressed  with  poverty,  he  will  come 
to  the  ground  with  equal  certainty  in  due  time.  He  is 
out  of  the  perpendicular,  and  he  must  fall  sooner  or 
later. 

O  Lord,  give  me  to  stand  before  thee  in  perfect  up- 
rightness of  heart  I  Take  from  me  any  inclination  to 
the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  and  establish  me  upon  the 
eternal  basis  of  thy  grace,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Upright 
Lord,  thou  alone  canst  set  me  upright,  and  keep  me  so  ; 
hearken  to  my  prayer,  I  beseech  thee. 

THE  MISER'S  BAG  OF  MONEY. 

**  Affection  is  a  great  friend  to  memory  ;  men  remember  what  they 
care  for  :  an  old  man  will  not  forget  where  he  laid  his  bag  of  gold. 
Delight  and  love  are  always  renewing  and  reviving  their  object  upon 
onr  thoughts.  David  often  asserteth  his  delight  in  the  law,  and 
because  of  this  delight  it  was  always  in  his  thoughts  (Ps.  cxix.  97). 
*  O  how  love  I  thy  law  !    It  is  my  meditation  all  the  day.'  " 

By  this,  then,  we  may  judge  ourselves  whether  we 
have  a  true  and  lively  love  to  God  and  his  kingdom.  If 
from  day  to  day  we  have  no  thought  of  him  or  of  his 
ways,  we  may  be  sure  that  our  affection  to  him,  if  it  be 
sincere,  is  a.s&uredly  by  no  means  fervent.  A  man  hath 
little  love  to  his  espoused  if  he  thinks  of  others  more 
than  of  her.  Where  the  thoughts  fly,  there  doth  the 
heart  he.  JSIot  that  we  c^i  be  always  thinking  of  divine 
things,  for  we  could  not  perform  the  duties  of  our  call- 
ing if  we  gave  no  thought  to  them,  and  especially  in 
certain  pursuits  of  life  the  mind  must  for  the  time  be 
concentrated  upon  the  work  in  hand  ;  but  still  our  mind 
must  be  ready  to  fly  to  Jesus  as  soon  as  the  pressure  is 
removed.  Love  will  break  over  all  laws,  and  rules,  and 
engrossments  to  have  a  word  with  its  beloved,  and  so 
will  the  soul  do  when  Jesus  is  truly  its  delight.     It  will 


86  PLOAVERS   FKOM   A 

fly  to  revel  in  liis  clianns  as  the  miser  liastens  to  count 
his  money. 

Come,  my  heart,  take  thyself  to  task  !  Is  it  not  true 
that  if  thou  wert  warmer  thy  memory  would  be  more 
retentive  ?  Be  penitent,  then,  because  thou  art  con- 
victed of  coolness  to  thy  Well-beloved.  Thy  frequent 
forgetfulness  of  him  proves  the  slackness  of  thy  love. 

STOKY   OF   THE   KNIGHT. 

"  Thuanus  reporteth  of  Lndovicus  Marsacus,  a  tnight  of  France, 
■when  he  was  led,  with  other  martyrs  that  were  bound  with  cords,  to 
execntion,  and  he  for  his  dignity  was  not  bound,  he  cried,  '  Give  me 
my  chains,  too  ;  let  me  be  a  knight  of  the  same  order.'  " 

Certainly,  it  is  an  honor  to  be  made  vile  for  God  ; 
David  purposed  to  abound  in  such  vileness  (2  Sam. 
6  :  22).  Shame  for  Christ's  sake  is  an  honor  no  more 
to  be  declined  than  the  highest  dignity  a  mortal  man  can 
wear.  Among  the  early  Christians  the  relatives  of  mar- 
tyrs were  a  sort  of  aristocracy,  and  the  martyrs  them- 
selves were  regarded  as  the  nobility  of  the  Church.  We 
need  a  ^pice  of  the  same  spirit  at  this  day.  A  true 
believer  should  tremble  when  the  world  commends  him, 
but  he  should  feel  complimented  when  it  utterly  despises 
him. 

What  do  we  suffer,  after  all  ?  The  most  of  us  are  but 
feather-bed  soldiers.  Our  ways  are  strewn  with  roses 
compared  with  those  who  endured  hardness  in  the  olden 
time.  We  are  poor  and  mean  successors  of  noble  an- 
cestors— ennobled  by  their  supreme  sufferings.  If  we 
cannot  reach  their  superior  dignity,  nor  hope  to  wear  the 
ruby  crown  of  martyrdom,  at  least  let  us  not  shun  such 
glory  as  may  be  obtainable,  but  accept  with  cheerful 
patience  whatever  of  opprobrium  this  worthless  world 
may  honor  us  with. 


puritan's  garden.  87 

BEKNARD'S  CHARITY. 

**  \VTien  Bernard  chanced  to  espy  a  poor  man  meanly  apparelled, 
he  would  say  to  himself,  '  Truly,  Bernard,  this  man  hath  more 
patience  beneath  his  cross  than  thou  hast  ; '  but  if  he  saw  a  rich  man 
delicately  clothed,  then  he  would  say,  '  It  may  be  that  this  man, 
under  his  delicate  clothing,  hath  a  better  soul  than  thou  hast  under 
thy  religious  habit ! '  " 

This  showed  an  excellent  charity  !  Oh,  that  we  could 
learn  it  !  It  is  easy  to  think  evil  of  all  men,  for  there  is 
sure  to  be  some  fault  about  each  one  which  the  least 
discerning  may  readily  discover  ;  but  it  is  far  more 
worthy  of  a  Christian,  and  shows  much  more  nobility  of 
soul,  to  spy  out  the  good  in  each  fellow-believer.  This 
needs  a  larger  mind  as  well  as  a  better  heart,  and  hence 
it  should  be  a  point  of  honor  to  practise  ourselves  in  it 
till  we  obtain  an  aptitude  for  it.  Any  simpleton  might 
be  set  to  sniff  out  offensive  odors  ;  but  it  would  require 
a  scientific  man  to  bring  to  us  all  the  fragrant  essences 
and  rare  perfumes  which  lie  hid  in  field  and  garden. 
Oh,  to  learn  the  science  of  Christian  charity  !  It  is  an 
art  far  more  to  be  esteemed  than  the  most  lucrative  of 
human  labors.  This  choice  art  of  love  is  the  true 
alchemy.  Charity  toward  others,  abundantly  practised, 
w^ould  be  the  death  of  envy  and  the  Hfe  of  fellowship, 
the  overthrow  of  self  and  the  enthronement  of  grace. 

Charity,  be  thou  my  classics,  my  poetry,  my  science, 
my  music,  for  thou  art  more  to  be  desired  than  all  these. 
Thou  art  a  Godlike  thing,  and  I  would  be  filled  with 
thee. 

A  SWORD  NOT   TO  BE   JUDGED  BY  THE  BELT. 

*'  We  do  not  judge  a  sword  to  be  good  merely  because  it  hangs  by 
a  golden  belt,  or  because  it  is  set  in  a  jewelled  hilt." 

Neither  is  a  doctrine  to  be  valued  because  a  fine  orator 
delivers  it  in  gorgeous  speech  with  glittering  words.  A 
lie  is  none  the  better  for  being  bespangled  with  poetic 


88  FLOWEES   FROM   A 

phrases  and  liigli-soimding  periods.  Yet  half  our  people 
forget  this,  and  glittering  oratory  fascinates  them.  Alas, 
poor  simpletons  ! 

The  same  blunders  are  made  about  men,  who  should 
ever  be  esteemed  according  to  their  native  worth,  and 
not  according  to  their  position  and  office.  What  mis- 
takes we  should  make  if  we  considered  all  the  hangers- 
on  of  great  men  to  be  themselves  great,  or  all  the  fol- 
lowers of  good  men  to  be  themselves  necessarily  good. 
Alas  !  the  Lord  himself  had  his  Judas,  and  to  this  day 
swords  of  brittle  metal  hang  at  the  golden  girdle  of  his 
Church.  A  man  is  not  a  saint  because  he  occupies  a 
saintly  office,  or  repeats  saintly  words. 

No  ;  the  test  of  a  sword's  goodness  is  to  be  found  in 
battle.  Will  its  edge  turn  in  the  fray,  or  will  it  cut 
through  a  coat  of  mail  ?  Will  our  faith  bear  affliction  ? 
Will  it  stand  us  in  good  stead  when  we  are  hand  to  hand 
with  the  enemy  ?  Will  it  avail  us  in  the  dying  hour  ? 
If  not,  we  may  suspend  it  on  the  glittering  belt  of  great 
knowledge,  and  hold  it  by  the  jewelled  hilt  of  a  high 
profession  ;  but  woe  unto  us  ! 

Lord,  give  me  the  true  Jerusalem  blade  of  childlike 
faith  in  thee,  and  may  I  never  rest  content  with  a  mere 
imitation  thereof. 

THE  MOON  ECLIPSED  ONLY  AT  THE  FULL. 

"  The  moon  is  never  eclipsed  but  when  it  is  at  the  fuU.  Certainly 
God's  people  are  then  in  most  danger." 

When  all  goes  well  with  them  in  house  and  field,  in 
basket  and  in  store,  then  should  they  look  lest  they  be 
full  and  forget  the  Lord,  and  so  become  eclipsed.  For 
the  world  to  come  between  us  and  our  Lord  is  very  easy 
but  very  terrible.  When  all  is  apparently  prosperous  as 
to  soul  matters,  and  neither  doubt,  nor  fear,  nor  tempta- 
tion comes  in,  then  also  should  the  heart  look  well  to  its 


puritan's   GARDE2!f.  89 

bearings  lest  at  this  very  moment  some  evil  should  inter- 
pose between  God  and  the  soul^  and  darkness  should  be 
the  fearful  result. 

Kemember  this,  dear  reader  :  eclipses  happen  at  the 
full  moon.  Look  to  thyself,  then,  in  thy  moments  of 
greatest  happiness  and  peace,  for  then  is  the  time  of 

peril. 

Whene'er  becalmed  I  lie, 

And  storms  forbear  to  toss  ; 
Be  thou,  dear  Lord,  still  nigh. 
Lest  I  should  suffer  loss. 
Far  more  the  treacherous  calm  I  dread, 
Than  tempests  thundering  overhead, 

EAGLES  AND  FLIES. 
*'  Walk  worthy  of  God,  who  hath  called  you  unto  his  kingdom. 
(1  Thess.  2  :  12.)  Live  as  kings,  commanding  your  spirits,  judging 
your  souls  to  be  above  ordinary  pursuits.  It  is  not  for  eagles  to  catch 
flies.  As  of  old  it  was  said,  *  Cogita  te  Csesarem  esse  ? ' — '  Remember 
that  thou  art  Cessar, '  so  say  we  to  each  believer,  '  Remember  that 
thou  shalt  one  day  be  a  king  with  God  in  glory,  and  therefore  walk 
becomingly.' " 

This  is  important  teaching,  and  much  needed  in  these 
days.  Many  who  declare  themselves  to  be  eagles  spend 
the  most  of  their  lives  in  hawking  for  flies  :  we  even 
hear  of  professing  Christians  frequenting  the  theatre. 
Instead  of  acting  like  kings,  many  who  claim  to  be  the 
sons  of  God  act  as  meanly  as  if  they  were  sculh'ons  in 
the  kitchen  of  Mammon.  They  do  not  judge  them- 
selves to  be  Csssars,  but  they  demean  themselves  as  if 
they  were  Caesar's  slaves,  living  upon  his  smile,  and 
asking  his  leave  to  move.  What  separation  from  the 
world,  what  brave  holiness,  what  self-denial,  what 
heavenly  walking  with  God  ought  to  be  seen  in  those 
who  are  chosen  to  be  a  peculiar  people,  the  representa- 
tives of  God  on  earth,  and  courtiers  of  the  new  Jeru- 
salem above  !     As  the  world  waxes  worse  and  worse,  it 


90  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

becomes  men  of  God  to  become  better  and  better.  If 
sinners  stoop  lower,  saints  must  rise  higher,  and  show 
them  that  a  regenerate  hf e  cannot  share  in  the  general 
corruption. 

O  Lord,  1  know  that  in  Christ  Jesns  thou  hast  made 
me  a  king  ;  help  me,  then,  to  live  a  right  royal  life. 
Lay  home  to  my  conscience  that  question — What  manner 
of  persons  ought  we  to  be  ?  and  may  I  so  answer  it  that 
I  may  live  worthy  of  my  high  calling. 

BEIDLES   FOE  OLD   HOKSES. 
*'  Not  only  colts,  but  horses  already  broken,  need  a  bridle." 

Indeed  they  do,  and  so  also  do  we  who  are  advanced 
in  years  and  full  of  experience.  Old  men  are  not  always 
wise  men.  Passions  which  should  have  been  by  this 
time  quite  subdued  still  need  bit  and  bridle,  or  they  may 
hurry  us  into  fatal  errors.  Flesh  does  not  improve  by 
keeping,  nor  do  corruptions  sweeten  by  the  lapse  of 
years.  New  converts  need  to  watch  in  the  morning  of 
their  days,  but  old  saints  must  be  equally  on  their  guard, 
for  the  hours  become  no  safer  as  they  draw  toward 
evening.  We  are  all  within  gunshot  of  the  enemy  as 
long  as  we  are  this  side  of  Jordan. 

"  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,"  is  as  true  of  strong 
men  as  of  babes  in  grace.  Temptation,  like  fire,  will 
burn  where  the  wood  is  green,  and  certainly  it  hath  no 
less  power  where  the  fuel  is  old  and  sere.  We  shall 
need  to  be  kept  by  grace  till  we  are  actually  in  glory. 
Those  who  think  themselves  at  heaven's  gate  may  yet 
sin  their  souls  into  the  deepest  hell,  unless  the  unchanging 
love  and  power  of  God  shall  uphold  them  even  to  the 
end.  Lord,  bit  and  bridle  me,  I  pray  thee,  and  never  let 
me  break  loose  from  thy  divine  control.  Conduct  me 
every  mile  of  the  road  till  I  reach  my  everlasting  home. 


puritan's   GARDE2f.  91 

THE   COMPASSES. 
*'  As  in  a  pair  of  compasses,  one  part  is  fixed  in  the  centre,  whilst 
the  other  foot  wandereth  about  in  the  circumference,  so  whatever 
subjects  we  may  think  upon,  the  soul  must  stay  on  Christ,  and  be 
fixed  on  him." 

While  we  search  after  evidences  and  additional  com- 
forts we  must  not  leave  onr  simple  trust  in  Jesus. 
Whatever  sweep  our  knowledge  may  take  as  we  advance 
in  years,  we  must  retain  most  fixedly  the  one  and  only 
centre  which  is  worthy  of  a  regenerated  soul,  namely, 
our  Lord  Jesus.  If  the  circle  of  our  energies  should 
encompass  all  the  world,  still  must  the  heart  stay  with 
delightful  continuance  with  the  Well-Beloved,  Im- 
movable and  steadfast  must  we  be,  our  willing  soul 
unswervingly  loyaLto  its  sole  object  of  trust  and  love, 
the  one  and  only  Lord  of  our  whole  being,  the  chief 
among  ten  thousand,  the  altogether  lovely. 

To  whom  else  can  we  go  ?  Where  else  is  there  rest 
for  us  ?  Let  us  then  abide  in  Christ  Jesus.  Fix  the 
centre  with  the  whole  force  of  a  resolute  heart,  nay, 
more,  with  the  whole  power  of  divine  grace,  l^ever 
tolerate  the  idea  of  novelty  in  this  matter.  Here  there 
can  be  no  advance  ;  we  are  in  him  rooted  and  grounded. 
Only  so  can  we  strike  out  the  true  circle  of  life  :  with- 
out a  fixed  centre  the  sphere  can  never  be  true. 

O  thou  who  art  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for- 
ever, hold  me  fast  forever,  and  bid  me  sing,  ''  O  God, 
my  heart  is  fixed,  my  heart  is  fixed  !" 

THE  LAKE  AND   THE   FOWLER. 
''  Men  of  abstracted  conceits  and  sublime  speculations  are  but  wise 
fools  ;  like  the  lark,  that  soareth  high,  peering  and  peering,  but  yet 
falleth  into  the  net  of  the  fowler.     Knowledge  without  wisdom  may 
be  sOon  discerned  ;  it  is  usually  curious  and  censorious." 

This  is  abundantly  seen  in  many  who  pretend  to  inter- 
pret seals  and  vials,  and  yet  neglect  family  devotion  and 


92  FLOWERS    FROM    A 

the  plain  precepts  of  the  Word.  Such  are  found  oc- 
cupying their  time  in  hair-sphtting  over  difficult  points, 
but  they  do  not  labor  to  maintain  the  unity  of  the  body 
of  Christ.  They  are  very  acute  upon  speculative  topics 
of  no  consequence  whatever,  but  they  divide  on  the 
slightest  pretext  from  the  rest  of  the  brotherhood.  We 
have  enough  to  do  with  watching  over  our  own  hearts 
and  endeavoring  to  bring  sinners  to  Christ  without  be- 
coming more  nice  than  wise  upon  matters  of  theological 
subtlety  and  word^spinning.  The  wide  difference  be- 
tween wisdom  and  knowledge  is  forgotten  by  many  : 
they  hoard  up  knowledge  of  a  peculiar  sort  like  coUectoi^s 
of  coins,  and  yet  they  use  it  not  as  merchants  use  money, 
but  keep  it  for  show,  a  rarity  to  be  tooked  at,  labelled, 
put  away  in  a  glass  case  and  exhibited  to  those  who  are 
admirers  of  curios  and  rarities. 

Lord  !  help  me  to  soar  like  the  lark,  but  keep  me 
clear  of  the  net.  Make  me  practical,  and  let  not  my 
head  swim  with  airy  notions  till  I  rush  upon  my  own 
destruction. 

SATAN  CASTING  OUT  SATAN. 
*'  Lusts  are  contrary  one  to  another,  and  therefore  jostle  for  the 
throne,  and  -asiiaUy  take  it  by  tiirns.  As  our  ancestors  sent  for  the 
Saxons  to  drive  out  the  Picts,  so  do  carnal  men  drive  out  one  lust  by 
<*nother,  and,  like  the  lunatic  in  the  Gospel  (Matt,  xvii.)  fall  some- 
times into  the  water,  and  sometimes  into  the  fire.'* 

Of  what  use  then  can  reforms  be  which  are  wrought 
by  an  evil  agency  ?  If  sobriety  be  the  fruit  of  pride,  it 
grows  upon  a  pernicious  root,  and  though  the  body  be 
no  longer  intoxicated,  the  mind  will  be  drunken.  If 
revenge  be  forsworn  from  considerations  of  avarice,  the 
meanness  of  the  miserly  is  a  small  gain  upon  the  fury  of 
the  passionate.  If  outward  irreligion  be  abandoned  out 
of  a  desire  to  gain  human  applause,  the  Pharisee  will  be 


puritan's   aAKDEK.  96 

a  very  slender  improvement  upon  tlie  prodigal.  Satan's 
casting  out  of  Satan  is  deceitful  work  :  liis  intent  no 
doubt  is  to  establish  his  empire  bj  pretending  to  over- 
throw it. 

W05  there  must  be  another  power  at  work,  or  little  is 
accomplished.  Any  fancied  good  which  one  devil  may 
bring  another  is  sure  to  take  away,  and  the  last  end  of 
the  man  whom  Satan  mends  is  always  worse  than  the 
first.  A  stronger  than  he  must  enter  in  by  force  of 
grace,  and  hurl  him  out  by  divine  force,  and  take  full 
possession,  or  the  man  maybe  another  man  but  not  a 
new  man. 

Lord  Jesus,  cast  out  all  the  devils  from  mv  soul  at 
once,  and  never  permit  one  of  them  to  return. 

THE  DOG. 
*'  Satan  is  like  a  dog  that  standeth  wagging  his  tail  and  looking  to 
receive  somewhat  from  those  that  sit  at  table  ;  but  if  nothing  be 
thrown  out,  he  goeth  his  way.  So  doth  Satan  watch  for  otav  consent, 
as  Benhadad's  servants  did  for  the  word  *  brother.'  He  looketh  for  a 
passionate  speech,  an  unclean  glance,  gestures  of  wrath,  or  words  of 
discontent,  and  if  he  findeth   none  of  these,  he  is  discouraged." 

It  would  be  a  great  shame  to  please  the  dog  of  hell. 
Nay,  let  him  look  and  long,  but  let  him  have  never  a 
look,  or  a  word,  from  us  to  stir  his  wicked  heart.  O  for 
grace  !  to  starve  him  out,  and  to  bid  him  begone  to  his 
own  den.  "  Neither  give  place  to  the  devil,"  says  the 
apostle.  We  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices.  To  tempt 
him  to  tempt  us  is  indeed  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness. 
Let  this  serpent  eat  his  own  meat,  which  is  the  dust  ;  by 
no  means  let  us  turn  servitors  to  wait  upon  our  enemy. 

We  have  need  to  watch  and  pray  in  the  presence  of 
this  crafty  one.  When  he  came  to  our  Lord,  he  found 
nothing  in  him,  but  in  us  he  sees  much  which  favors 
him.     O  Lord,   bid  him  get  behind  thee   once  again  ! 


94  FLOWERS   FROM    A 

Deliver  iis  from  the  evil  one,  and  bid  liim  depart  from 
US.     This  we  hmnblj  entreat  of  thee. 

GIBEONITES. 
^'  Make  your  sorrows  to  draw  water  for  the  sanctuary.     Our  natural 
affections,  like  the  Gibeonites,  must  not  be  exterminated,  but  kept 
for  temple  service." 

The  Stoic  slays  his  emotions,  the  Christian  sanctifies 
them  to  noblest  ends.  It  is  like  a  brute  not  to  feel,  it  is 
like  a  man  to  feel  tenderly,  and  it  is  like  a  Christian  to 
feel  in  a  chastened  manner.  We  may  weep,  and  we 
may  rejoice,  and  when  our  weeping  is  in  sympathy  with 
the  afflicted,  and  our  rejoicing  is  in  brotherly  fellowship 
with  the  joyful,  the  Gibeonites  are  indeed  made  hewers 
of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  for  the  sanctuary. 

Business,  marriage,  travelling,  recreation,  literatiu'e, 
music,  art,  should  all  be  placed  in  the  same  subordinate 
condition.  They  are  not  distinctly  spiritual,  and  as  mere 
human  matters  they  may  be  either  right  or  wrong  ;  but 
it  is  ours  to  lay  the  yoke  upon  them,  and  make  them 
serve  our  spiritual  designs.  They  w^ill  make  admirable 
servants  ;  we  can  never  allow  them  to  be  our  masters. 
The  Gibeonites  might  not  be  killed,  but  they  were  to  be 
placed  under  the  yoke,  and  made  to  be  useful,  and  the 
same  must  be  done  with  the  matters  which  we  have 
mentioned.  It  would  be  foolish  to  endeavor  to  put 
these  things  down,  for  they  are  incidental  to  human 
existence  ;  it  is  wise  therefore  to  subdue  them  to  do 
servile  work  for  the  Lord. 

O  Lord,  give  me  ever  so  to  use  worldly  things  as 
never  to  be  worldly  myself  :  rather  may  I  sanctify  them 
by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer  ! 

EXPENSIVE  ECONOMY. 

"  The  inhabitants  of  Constantinople  would  afford  no  money  to  the 
Emperor  Consttintinus  Pala^logus,  when  he  begged  from  door  to  door 


95 


for  a  sup'pl}^  for  his  soldiers  ;  but  what  was  the  issue  ?  The  balrbarous 
enemy  won  the  city  and  got  all.  The  like  story  there  is  of  Musteat- 
zem,  the  covetous  caliph  of  Babylon,  who  was  such  an  idolater  of 
his  wealth  and  treasures  that  he  would  not  spend  anything  for  the 
necessary  defence  of  his  city,  whereupon  it  was  taken,  and  the  caliph 
famished  to  death,  and  his  mouth  by  Haalon,  the  Tartarian  con- 
queror, was  filled  with  melted  gold." 

Such  economy  is  evidently  most  extravagant.  May 
not  the  like  be  said  of  those  who  give  grudgingly  to  the 
cause  of  God,  and  of  those  v^ho  ruin  their  souls  in  order 
to  increase  their  peK  ?  They  refuse  to  be  losers  for 
Christ,  and  so  lose  their  souls.  Religion  might  cost 
them  a  loss  in  business,  by  leading  them  to  close  the 
shop  on  the  Sabbath,  or  to  act  with  strict  uprightness  : 
this  they  cannot  afford,  and  so  they  throw  away  their 
souls  in  order  to  keep  their  coppers.  Yerily,  the  race 
of  fools  has  not  yet  died  out.  Thousands  still  think  it 
profitable  to  gain  the  world  and  lose  their  own  souls. 

O  Lord,  teach  me  true  wisdom  !  Make  me  willing  to 
lose  wealth,  and  health,  and  home,  yea,  and  my  life  also, 
in  order  that  I  may  follow  Jesus  and  possess  his  salva- 
tion. 

SAMSON'S  LOCKS. 
'*  Single  prayers  are  like  the  single  hairs  of  Samson  ;  but  the 
prayers  of  the  congregation  are  like  the  whole  of  his  bushy  locks, 
wherein  his  strength  lay.  Therefore  you  should,  in  TertuUian's 
phrase,  quasi  manu  facta,  with  a  holy  conspiracy,  besiege  heaven, 
and  force  out  a  blessing  for  your  pastors." 

This  is  a  fine  metaphor  wherewith  to  set  forth  united 
prayer.  One  prayer  is  a  hair  of  Samson,  hat  our  united 
supplications  are  as  the  seven  locks  of  that  hero's  head. 
May  God  grant  that  the  church  may  never  be  shorn  of 
the  locks  of  prayer,  wherein  her  great  strength  lieth, 
and  her  great  beauty  also. 

The  cumulative  power  of  prayer  is  well  worthy  of 
notice.     Abraham  alone  could  not  by  intercession  save  a 


96  FLOWERS   FKOM   A 

Single  city  of  the  plain,  though  his  pleas  were  very 
weighty.  Lot's  poor  prayer  was  to  Abraham's  as  an 
ounce  to  a  ton,  and  yet  that  last  ounce  turned  the  scale, 
and  Zoar  was  preserved  from  the  burning.  The  agree- 
ment  of  two  saints  is  a  grand  force  against  which  very 
few  obstacles  can  stand  ;  and  when  it  comes  to  a  praying 
band,  all  the  smiths  in  Jerusalem  cannot  make  bolts  for 
the  doors,  or  chains  for  the  wrists,  sufficiently  strong  to 
hold  Peter  in  prison.  Come,  then,  to  the  meetings  for 
prayer,  for  there  is  the  strength  of  the  church,  and  there 
are  her  Samson's  locks. 

IMPERIAL  EEYENUES,  AND  SMALL  CHARGES. 

"  It  is  foUy  to  think  that  an  emperor's  revemie  will  not  pay  a 
beggar's  debt.  Christ  hath  undertaken  to  satisfy  for  the  sinner's 
debt,  and  he  hath  money  enough  to  pay.' ' 

Delightful  thought  !  Great  as  is  my  debt  before  the 
justice  of  God,  it  can  assuredly  be  met  by  the  riches  in 
glory  which  belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  an  over- 
whelming debt  to  me,  but  now  that  my  Redeemer  has 
shed  his  blood,  it  will  be  as  nothing  to  him.  A  Csesar's 
revenue  would' discharge  a  poor  man's  liabilities  and 
would  scarcely  suffer  diminution  ;  far  more  will  the 
infinite  merits  of  Jesus  discharge  my  sins,  and  remain 
infinitely  full.  Where,  then,  can  unbelief  find  an  ex- 
cuse for  its  existence  ?  There  can  be  no  real  ground  for 
fear.  Come,  my  heart,  look  not  so  much  at  thy  present 
and  urgent  need  as  at  thy  Lord's  suppHes  which  are 
boundless,  and  all  thine  own. 

WHY  MEN   ATE   ACOENS. 
"  The  main  reason  why  men  dote  upon  the  world  is  becanse  they 
are  not  acquainted  with  a  higher  glory.     Men  ate  acorns  till  they 
were  acquainted  with  the  use  of  corn  ;  a  candle  is  much  ere  the  sun 
riseth." 

Now  it  has  happened  unto  us  to   eat  the   bread  of 


PURITAK'S   GARDEN".  97 

angels,  and  to  see  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  and  never 
again  can  we  find  content  in  baser  things.     All  the  joys  of 
the  world  are  now  but  beggarly  elements  to  us,  compared 
with  our  delight  in   Christ   Jesus    our   Lord.     Carnal 
wisdom  has  become  folly  in  our  esteem  ;  the  mirth  of 
fools  is  a  weariness  ;  and  the  pomp  and  glory  of  earth 
are  mere  baby  toys,  scarce  worthy  of  a  glance.     What 
grace  is  this  which  has  revealed  such  precious  things  to 
us  !     Worldly-wise  men  think  us  fanatics  and  fools,  but 
we  know  what  they  are,  and  where  the  folly  really  lies. 
Oh  that  their  eyes  were  opened  to  join  with  us  in  the 
joys  which  they  ridicule  !     If  they  will  persist  in  their 
bhndness  it  shall  not  be  for  want  of  plain  testimony  on 
our  part,  for  we  are  bold  to  declare  in  all  companies  that 
there  is  more  satisfaction  in  Christ's  worst  things  than  in 
sm's  best  things,  and  that  a  half -hour  of  his  presence  is 
better  than  all  the  feasting  of  royal  courts  for  a  lifetime. 
Oh  that  they  would  believe  us  so  far  as  to  try  for  them- 
selves !    Alas,  they  munch  their  acorns,  and  scorn  the 
bread  of  life  ! 

NEW  LEAVES  PUSHING  OFF  THE  OLD 
"  Old  leaves.  i£  they  remain  upon  the  trees  through  the  autumn 
and  the  winter,  fall  off  in  the  spring." 

We  have  seen  a  hedge  all  thick  with  dry  leaves 
throughout  the  winter,  and  neither  frost  nor  wind  has 
removed  the  withered  foliage,  but  the  spring  has  soon 
made  a  clearance.  The  new  life  dislodges  the  old, 
pushing  it  away  as  unsuitable  to  it.  So  our  old  corrup- 
tions are  best  removed  by  the  growth  of  new  graces. 

Old  things  are  passed  away  ;  behold  all  things  are 
become  new."  It  is  as  the  new  life  buds  and  opens 
that  the  old  worn-out  things  of  our  former  state  are 
compelled  to  quit  their  hold  of  us.  Our  wisdom  lies  in 
hvmg  near  to  God,  that  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit 


98  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

all  our  graces  may  be  vigorous,  and  may  exercise  a  sin- 
expelling  power  over  onr  lives  :  the  new  leaves  of  grace 
pushing  off  our  oA  sere  affections  and  habits  of  sin. 

With  converts  from  the  world  it  is  often  better  not  to 
lay  down  stringent  rules  as  to  worldly  amusements,  but 
leave  the  new  life  and  its  holier  joys  to  push  off  the  old 
pleasures.  Thus  it  will  be  done  more  naturally  and 
more  effectively. 

Lord,  let  thy  life  in  me  push  off  the  relics  of  my 
former  death,  that  1  may  put  on  the  b^w  man,  and 
manifest  the  energy  of  thy  grace. 

THE   KING  AND  HIS  ATTENDANTS. 
"  Those  who  entertain  a  king,  reckon  upon  receiving  his  train." 

It  is  not  fit  that  he  should  come  alone.  So  those  who 
receive  Jesus  by  faith  into  their  hearts,  receive  also  his 
church,  his  ministers,  his  word,  and  his  cause.  They 
take  the  Saviour  and  all  his  belongings.  As  the  old 
proverb  hath  it,  "  Love  me,  love  my  dog,"  so  they  love 
all  who  belong  to  Jesus  for  their  Lord's  sake. 

Where  Jesus  comes  with  pardon,  he  brings  all  the 
graces  with  him,  and  we  are  right  glad  to  entertain  them 
all  :  not  only  faith,  but  love,  hope,  patience,  courage, 
zeal,  and  the  whole  band  of  virtues.  It  would  be  idle 
to  say,  "  Christ  is  in  me,"  if  none  of  the  graces  of  his 
Spirit  lodged  within  our  souls.  Come  in,  great  Lord, 
and  dwell  in  my  heart,  and  bring  all  thy  disciples  with 
thee,  and  all  thy  belongings,  yea,  and  thy  cross  itself. 

AN  IMAGINAKY  CAEPENTEE. 
'*  Peter  Martyr  sets  forth  the  holiness  of  God,  by  this  comparison  : 
*  Take  a  carpenter  when  he  hath  chalked  and  drawn  his  line,  then  he 
goes  and  chops  the  timber.  Sometimes  he  chops  right,  and  some- 
times amiss.  Why  ?  Because  he  hath  an  outward  rule,  a  line  outside 
of  himself  according  to  which  he  cuts  the  timber.  But  if  you  could 
suppose  a  carpenter  that  could  never  chop  amiss,  but  his  hand  should 


puritan's  garden.  99 

be  his  line  and  rnle  ;  if  he  had  such  an  equal  poise  and  touch  of  his 
hand,  that  his  very  stroke  is  a  rule  to  itself,  then  he  could  not  err.' 
By  this  plain  and  homely  comparison  he  did  set  forth  the  holiness  of 
God  and  the  creature.  The  holiness  of  the  creature  is  a  rule  without 
us,  therefore  sometimes  we  chop  amiss  ;  but  God's  holiness  is  his. 
inward  rule,  it  is  his  nature,  he  can  do  nothing  amiss." 

This  is  an  instructive  simile,  and  may  be  carried 
further.  Sanctification  is  a  renewal  of  the  heart,  which 
creates  such  a  rule  within  us.  The  Holy  Spirit  works 
in  us,  according  to  our  measure,  a  law  of  our  nature,  so 
that  it  cannot  sin  because  it  is  born  of  God  ;  for,  after 
all,  it  is  the  nature  of  the  man  which  determines  the 
nature  of  his  deeds.  The  fruit  is  according  to  the  tree. 
The  evil  of  our  life  arises  from  the  living  evil  within. 
If  we  could  he  perfect,  we  should  act  perfectly.  Hence 
the  man  himself  is  first  to  be  looked  to. 

Lord,  purge  us,  yea,  make  us  new  creatures  in  Christ 
Jesus,  that  out  of  us  good  may  come  because  thou  hast 
made  us  good. 

RECORDS  OF  LIFE. 
"  The  story  of  our  lives  is  all  engraven  upon  the  heart,  and  when 
God  awakeneth  the  conscience,  it  tells  of  past  sin.  God  will  open 
the  sinner's  eyes  in  the  next  world,  not  by  a  holy  illumination,  but 
by  a  forced  conviction.  We  are  told  in  Rev.  20  :  12,  *  The  books 
were  opened,'  and  one  of  these  books  is  conscience,  and  though  it 
be  in  the  sinner's  keeping,  and  therefore  may  become  blurred  and 
defaced,  yet  our  story  will  be  legible  enough,  and  forgotten  sins  will 
stare  us  in  the  face  :  *  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out.'  (Num. 
32  :  23.)  We  forget  it  now,  and  think  we  shall  never  hear  of  it 
more  ;  but  God  can  make  all  occur  to  memory  as  fresh  as  if  newly 
committed,  and  in  an  instant  represent  the  story  of  an  ill-spent  life, 
and  show  us  all  the  thoughts,  words,  and  actions  that  ever  we  have 
been  guilty  of.  The  paper  goeth  white  into  the  printing-house  ;  but 
within  one  instant  it  is  marked  within  and  without,  and  cometh 
forth  stamped  with  words,  and  lines,  and  sentences,  which  were  in 
no  way  legible  there  before  ;  even  so  will  it  be  with  the  soul  when 
conscience  is  aroused  at  the  last." 

Our  lives  to-day  are  like  the  picture  upon  the  photog- 


100  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

rapher's  plate  before  he  develops  it  ;  God  liatli  but  to 
put  tlie  soul  into  a  bath  prepared  according  to  his  divine 
art,  and  all  the  sins  of  his  whole  existence  will  stand  out 
clear  before  the  sinner's  astonished  gaze.  Nothing  can 
be  forgotten  :  all  the  past  must  live  again.  Let  the 
unconverted  tremble  as  they  think  of  this,  and  let  the 
saved  ones  bless  the  Lord  Jesus  who  has  so  blotted  out 
their  sins  that  no  power  or  process  can  ever  bring  them 
again  to  remembrance. 

THE   APPLES  DISPLAY  THE   SAP. 

"  The  apples  appear  when  the  sap  is  not  seen.  It  is  the  operative 
and  lively  graces  that  will  discover  themselves.  A  man  may  think 
well,  or  speak  well  ;  but  it  is  that  grace  which  governeth  his  actions 
which  most  showeth  itself." 

There  could  be  no  apples  if  there  were  no  sap,  but 
the  sap  itself  has  no  manifestation  except  in  the  leaves 
and  fruit.  If  we  have  inward  grace  it  is  well  for  our- 
selves ;  but  others  cannot  see  it  or  profit  by  it  till  it 
works  itself  into  our  daily  life.  This  it  is  bound  to  do, 
and  we  may  not  think  lightly  of  such  a  result,  for  as  it 
would  be  a  token  that  something  ailed  the  sap  of  the  tree 
if  it  brought  forth  no  fruit  in  its  season,  so  it  would  be 
a  mournful  proof  of  spiritual  declension  if  our  conversa- 
tion yielded  none  of  the  graces  of  the  Spirit.  It  is-  all 
very  fine  to  plead  as  some  have  done  that  they  are  doing 
inside  work  ;  if  their  fruit  is  all  within  they  will  have 
to  be  cut  down  that  it  may  be  got  at.  A  true  epistle  of 
Christ  is  not  written  in  invisible  ink,  and  then  sealed  up, 
but  it  is  known  and  read  of  all  men.  A  tree  of  the 
Lord's  right-hand  planting  bears  fruit  to  his  honor  and 
glory,  visible  to  those  who  are  round  about  him. 

Lord,  make  me  one  that  can  bear  to  be  looked  at. 
Make  my  inward  grace  to  be  so  vigorous  that  my  outer 
life  may  be  fruitful  to  thy  praise.     May  no  one  have  to 


PURITAK'S   GA.RDE:Nr.  101 

enquire  about  the  sap  ;  may  they  see  so  many  baskets  of 
frait  that  they  may  be  quite  sure  about  the  hfe  of  the 
tree. 

THE  MADMAN  OF  ATHENS. 

r  *'  As  the  madman  at  Athens  challenged  all  the  ships  that  came  into 
the  harbor  for  his  own,  so  carnal  men  claim  an  interest  in  heavenly 
things  which  are  none  of  theirs.  Deceived  hearts  believe  they  are 
running  to  heaven  when  they  are  posting  to  heU  ;  like  rowers  in 
a  boat,  they  look  one  way,  and  go  contrary." 

Eeligious  delusions  may  be  very  comfortable  while 
they  last,  but  what  will  be  the  misery  of  their  breaking 
up  !  To  have  all  your  fancied  godhness  vanish  like  the 
mists  before  the  sun  will  be  grievous  indeed.  In  pro- 
portion to  the  confidence  inspired  will  be  the  desjDair 
involved.  The  poor  madman  in  Bedlam  in  the  olden 
time  placed  a  straw  crown  upon  his  head,  and  issued 
orders  like  a  Caesar  ;  it  was  liis  madness  which  made 
such  a  farce  a  comfort  to  him.  In  the  next  world  the 
sinner's  madness  will  be  over,  he  will  be  sobered  by  his 
despair  :  what  then  will  he  think  of  his  former  fancies 
and  fond  self  flatteries  !  What  an  awaking,  from  the 
dreams  of  bhss  to  the  realities  of  hell  ! 

O  my  soul,  see  thou  to  it  that  all  thy  hopes  are  well 
grounded  !  Call  not  Christ  thine,  and  heaven  thine,  if 
they  are  not  so.  Do  not  play  the  fool  with  eternal 
things,  but  get  a  sure  title  to  everlasting  blessedness. 

THE  UNFAITHFUL  STEWARD. 

**  We  shall  be  called  to  an  account,  what  we  have  done  with  our 
time,  and  talents,  and  interests,  and  opportunities  :  *  At  his  coming 
our  Lord  will  require  his  own  with  usury.'  (Luke  19  :  23.)  Ah, 
unfaithful  ones,  what  will  you  say,  when  you  cannot  shift  and  lie  ? 
Will  this  be  an  answer  :  I  spent  my  time  in  serving  my  own  lusts  ? 
This  will  not  avail  you.  If  a  factor  (or  steward),  that  is  sent  to  a 
mart  or  fair,  should  stay  guzzling  in  an  inn,  or  ale-house,  and  there 
spend  all  his  money,  which  was  to  be  employed  in  traffic,  could  he 
excuse  himself  by  pleading  that  he  was  busy  with  his  cups  ?    Oh, 


102  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

what  a  dreadful  account  will  poor  souls  make,  that  have  spent  their 
time  either  doing  nothing,  or  nothing  to  purpose,  or  that  which  is 
worse  than  nothing,  even  sin  which  will  undo  them  forever  !" 

Come,  my  heart,  call  thyself  to  account.  What  hast 
thou  been  at  ?  Hast  thou  served  thy  Lord,  or  hast 
thou  wasted  his  goods  and  his  time  ?  The  Lord  will 
require  this  of  thee  before  long,  therefore  require  it  of 
thyself.  How  would  it  fare  with  thee  if  the  judgment- 
day  commenced  to-morrow,  and  on  leaving  thy  bed  in 
the  morning  thou  shouldst  find  the  dread  assize  already 
commenced  ?  Say,  my  soul,  if  thou  wert  at  this  instant 
called  away,  how  stand  accounts  between  thee  and  thy 
Lord  ? 

THE  SUNFLOWEK  AND  THE  AQUEDUCT. 

'*  As  the  flower  of  the  sun  doth  follow  the  sun,  and  openeth  and 
shutteth  according  to  the  absence  of  that  luminary  ;  so  doth  the 
heart  of  a  Christian  move  after  God.'* 

The  divine  nature  within  us  followeth  hard  after  the 
divine  nature,  and  longeth  to  drink  in  its  warmth  and 
light.  Everything  acteth  according  to  its  nature.  ''  We 
say^  '  Aqua  in  tantum  ascendit  ; '  and  it  is  true  that 
neither  water  nor  nature  riseth  higher  than  its  spring- 
head and  centred 

So  when  self  is  our  principle  and  end,  we  rise  no 
higher  than  ourselves  ;  but  when  God  becometh  the 
life  of  our  soul  we  follow  after  him,  and  rise  far  above 
the  highest  point  to  which  nature  could  conduct  us. 
His  grace  in  us  strives  to  rise  to  the  point  from  which  it 
came,  and  it  will  never  rest  till  it  does  so.  This  argues 
a  high  destiny  for  the  believer,  and  is  the  foretaste  of  it. 
Hence  the  need  to  have  a  good  and  true  beginning,  and 
to  draw  our  life  from  the  eternal  fountains  above  ;  for, 
apart  from  this,  there  will  be  no  rising  up  to  heaven. 

How  sweet  it  is  to  find  our  mind  and  heart  turning 


PUKITAK'S   GARDEN".  103 

Godward,  as  the  lieliotrope  seeks  tlie  sun  !  To  find  our 
joys  begin  and  end  with  manifestations  of  Jesus'  love  ! 
It  is  well  to  pine  till  the  Lord's  face  be  revealed^  and 
only  to  flourish  when  he  imparts  his  gracious  influences. 
It  is  wise  to  turn  away  from  all  things  in  which  God  is 
not  evidently  present,  but  carefully  to  follow  each 
movement  of  his  shining  face  that  we  may  always  front 
his  love,  and  bask  in  the  beams  of  his  favor. 

Whatever  partakes  largely  of  the  light  of  Jesus  sliould 
be  prized  by  us,  whether  it  be  fashioned  after  our  own 
favorite  model  or  no  :  the  sun  is  there,  and  we  must 
turn  to  it.  ''  Anything  of  Jesus"  should  be  a  sufficient 
attraction  to  us.  A  gleam  of  his  sunlight  should  be 
prized,  for  it  is  far  more  than  we  deserve  ;  and  we 
should  joyously  receive  it  as  the  crocus  drinks  in  the 
rich  gold  of  the  spring  sun,  and  brims  its  cup  therewith. 
What  will  it  be  to  dwell  above,  where  the  light  no  more 
goeth  down,  and  the  flowers  feel  no  cold  drops  of  the 
night  ? 

A  DECAYING  BOOT  HAS  WITHERING  BRANCHES. 

'*  As  when  the  root  of  a  tree  perisheth,  the  leaves  keep  green  for  a 
little,  but  within  a  while  they  wither  and  fall  off  ;  so  love,  which  is 
the  root  and  heart  of  all  other  duties,  when  that  decayeth,  other 
things  decay  with  it.  The  first  works  go  off  with  the  first  love  ;  at 
least,  are  not  carried  on  with  such  care,  and  delight,  and  compla- 
cency, as  they  should  be." 

Swiftly  other  works  follow,  withering  in  their  turn  ; 
for  the  fatal  blow  has  been  struck,  and  failure  of  every 
good  thing  is  but  a  matter  of  time.  Could  the  love  of 
saints  to  Jesus  utterly  die  out,  all  their  virtues  must  die 
also,  for  love  is  the  root  of  all.  The  outward  form  of 
piety  might  survive,  as  the  wretched  counterfeit  of  holi- 
ness, but  what  would  be  its  worth  ?  Even  this  in  many 
cases  passes  away,  for  some  men  are  bravely  consistent 


104  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

in  their  wickedness,  and  do  not  care  to  keep  np  the 
name  to  live  when  the  life  of  God  is  not  within  their 
souls. 

Our  main  concern  must  be  as  to  the  root.  The  heart 
must  be  alive  with  gracious  gratitude,  or  the  leaf  cannot 
long  be  green  with  living  holiness.  How  is  it  with 
thee,  my  soul  ?  Is  there  root-life  in  thee  ?  Is  Jesus 
precious  ?  Is  the  Father's  name  most  swe*et  ?  Does 
the  Holy  Spirit  move  thee  to  ardent  affection  ?  A  chill 
love,  whose  very  existence  is  questionable,  means  a 
miserable  experience.  He  who  doubts  his  own  love  to 
Jesus  generally  doubts  Jesus'  love  to  him.  O  love,  be 
thou  the  living  root  in  me,  and,  through  thy  quickening 
and  nourishing  energy,  may  the  branches  of  my  con- 
secrated life  grow  exceedingly  ! 

ONE  NAIL  DEIVES  OUT  ANOTHER. 

"  Men  will  not  be  frightened  from  self-love  ;  it  must  be  another 
more  powerful  love  which  must  draw  them  from  it  ;  as  one  nail 
driveth  out  another. ' ' 

This  is  true  philosophy.  Love  to  God  can  alone  expel 
the  love  of  sin.  Many  forget  this,  and  set  to  work  ex- 
tracting the  old  love  :  a  very  tedious  task  ;  ijnpossible, 
indeed,  with  such  poor  tools  as  we  possess.  They  tor- 
ture the  body  and  torment  the  mind,  but  the  old  nail  of 
BcK-love  is  rusted  in,  and  will  not  stir.  They  might 
sooner  break  up  the  fabric  of  their  manhood  than  tear 
out  its  old  deep-seated  affections  ;  the  self -nail  has 
been  driven  well  home,  and  clinched  besides,  and  what 
can  we  do  ? 

It  is  wonderful  to  see  how  love  to  Christ  fetches  out 
the  love  of  self  from  its  lodging.  At  the  first  it  shakes 
and  loosens  it  ;  by  and  by  it  drives  it  a  little  from  its 
place,  and  at  last  it  drives  it  out  altogether.  Self  is  at 
first  somewhat  denied,   then  it  is  chastened  and  kept 


puritan's  gardeit.  105 

Tinder,  and  finally  it  is  crucified  with  Christ  sa  com- 
pletely that  the  man  finds  pleasure  in  warring  against  it, 
and  glories  in  the  submission  of  the  flesh  to  suffering 
and  loss. 

O  blessed  hand  of  Jesus,  drive  in  the  nail  of  divine 
love  !  Smite  hard,  Lord.  Force  out  the  rusted  iron  of 
my  selfishness.  Let  not  a  fragment  of  it  remain.  Love 
alone  can  vanquish  love.  Thyself  alone  can  conquer 
self  in  me.  No  secondary  force  will  suffice.  My  God, 
thou  must  display  thy  Godhead's  power  of  love,  or  my 
vile  heart  will  never  part  with  self. 

THE  PERFUMED   GALE. 

"  As  the  odors  and  sweet  smell  s  of  Arabia  are  carried  by  the  winds 
and  air  into  the  neighboring  provinces,  so  that  before  travellers  come 
thither  they  have  the  scent  of  that  aromatic  country  ;  so  the  joys  of 
heaven  are  by  the  sweet  breathings  and  gales  of  the  Holy  Ghost  blown 
into  the  hearts  of  believers,  and  the  sweet  smells  of  the  upper  para- 
dise are  conveyed  into  the  gardens  of  the  churches.  Those  joys 
which  are  stirred  up  in  us  by  the  Spirit  before  we  get  to  heaven  are 
a  pledge  of  what  we  may  expect  hereafter. 

Oh  that  we  had  more  of  these  heavenly  gales  laden 
with  the  spices  of  Iinmanuel's  land  !  Gracious  Lord, 
cause  such  a  celestial  wind  to  awake  at  this  very  hour  ! 
I  am  already  accepted  in  Christ  Jesus,  adopted,  and 
beloved  in  him  :  this  is  a  foretaste  of  heaven.  In  him 
I  am  secure,  immortal,  triumphant  :  these  also  are 
heavenly  privileges.  In  Jesus  I  have  peace,  and  rest, 
and  profound  confidence  :  is  not  this  also  something  of 
paradise  ?  In  my  Lord  I  have  fellowship  with  God,  and 
exceeding  joy  in  his  love  :  surely  the  wind  is  blowing 
from  the  glory  quarter,  and  has  taken  up  much  of  the 
aroma  of  the  beds  of  spices  whereon  the  saints  recHne. 
The  Holy  Ghost  hath  revealed  unto  us  in  our  inward  ex- 
perience much  of  the  bliss  which  the  Lord  hath  prepared 
for  them  that  love  him.     The  hfe  of  the  believer  on 


106  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

earth  is  the  same  as  that  which  will  be  in  him  throiighont 
eternity,  and  the  joy  with  w^hich  the  Lord  favors  him 
below  is  of  the  same  nature  as  that  which  shall  fill  him 
forever.  When  Jesus  reveals  himself  to  my  soul,  the 
winds  are  blowing  from  heaven  ;  I  can  discern  the 
fragrance.  All  around  me  delight  is  poured  forth,  and 
my  heart  is  singing  all  the  time. 

DREAMS,  BUT  NOT  DREAMS. 
**  Carnal  men  hear  of  the  beauty  of  holiness,  of  the  excellency  of 
Christ,  of  the  preciousness  of  the  covenant,  of  the  rich  treasures  of 
grace,  as  if  they  were  in  a  dream.  They  look  upon  such  things  as 
mere  fancies,  like  to  foolish  dreams  of  golden  mountains,  or  showers 
of  pearls." 

'^  This  their  way  is  their  folly."  When  scientific 
men  describe  to  us  their  curious  experiments  and  singu- 
lar discoveries,  we  know  them  to  be  persons  of  credit, 
and  therefore  accept  their  testimony  :  why  do  not  men 
of  the  world  do  us  the  like  justice,  and  believe  what  we 
tell  them  ?  We  are  as  sane  as  they,  and  as  observant  of 
the  law  of  truth  ;  why,  then,  do  they  not  believe  us 
when  we  declare  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  our  souls  ? 
Why  is  our  experience  in  the  spiritual  world  to  be 
treated  as  a  fiction  any  more  than  their  discoveries  in 
chemistry  or  geography  ?  There  is  no  justice  in  the 
treatment  with  which  our  witness  is  received. 

'Yet  the  Christian  man  need  not  complain,  for  in  the 
nature  of  things  he  may  expect  it  to  be  so,  and  the  fact 
that  it  is  so  is  a  confirmation  of  his  own  beliefs.  In  a 
world  of  blind  men,  an  elect  race,  to  whom  eyes  had 
been  given,  would  be  sure  to  be  regarded  as  either  mad 
or  false.  How  could  the  sightless  majority  be  expected 
to  accept  the  witness  of  the  seeing  few  ?  Would  it  not 
touch  their  dignity  to  admit  that  others  possessed  facul- 
ties of  which  they  were  destitute  ?     And  would  it  not  be 


puritan's  GARDEiq-.  107 

highly  probable  that  the  blind  would  conspire  to  regard 
the  men  of  eyes  as  fanatical  dreamers  or  deluded  fools  ? 
Unrenewed  men  know  not  the  things  which  are  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  it  is  by  no  means  a  strange  thing  that 
they  should  deride  what  they  cannot  understand.  It  is 
sad  that  those  who  are  dreamers  in  the  worst  sense 
should  think  others  so,  but  it  is  by  no  means  so  ex- 
traordinary as  to  cause  surprise. 

O  my  Lord,  whatever  others  may  think  of  me,  let  me 
be  more  and  more  sensible  of  thy  presence,  and  of  the 
glorious  privileges  and  hopes  which  are  created  in  the 
heart  by  thy  grace  !  If  men  should  even  say  of  me,  as 
of  Joseph,  "  Behold,  this  dreamer  cometh,"  it  will  not 
grieve  me  so  long  as  thou  art  with  me,  and  thy  favor 
makes  me  blest. 

AEROWS  SHOT  AT  RANDOM. 

"  Continued  meditation  brings  great  profit  to  the  soul.  Passant 
and  transient  thoughts  are  more  pleasant,  but  not  so  profitable. 
Deliberate  meditation  is  of  most  use  because  it  secures  the  return  of 
the  thoughts.  Sudden  thoughts  pass  away  from  us,  and,  as  a  rule, 
they  do  not  return  to  benefit  us  ;  as  children  shoot  away  their  arrows 
at  rovers,  and  do  not  look  after  them  ;  or  as  a  ball  stricken  in  the 
open  field  goes  out  from  us,  whereas  a  baU  struck  against  a  waU  doth 
return  to  our  hand  again." 

We  need  more  meditation,  more  of  this  shooting  of 
thought-arrows  at  a  mark  on  which  they  will  strike  and 
stick,  more  of  this  throwing  the  thought-ball  at  the  wall 
that  we  may  catch  it  again.  This  would  create  for  us  a 
better  style  of  teachers  and  preachers,  and  train  a  more 
solid  race  of  Christian  men  and  women.  People  do  not 
think,  and  yet  thinking  is  living,  and  one  of  the  nearest 
approaches  to  death  is  to  be  without  thought.  Gentle 
reader,  do  you  never  think  ?  Are  you  too  busy  to 
meditate  ?  Is  your  time  occupied  from  morning  to 
night  ?     Then  stay  a  moment  while  we  whisper  in  your 


108  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

ear  :  if  you  are  very  busy,  tliink  and  pray  all  tlie  more, 
or  your  work  will  wear  and  weary  you,  and  drag  you 
away  from  God.  For  your  work's  sake,  break  away 
from  it,  and  give  the  soul  a  breathing  time.  Get  a  holy 
subject  and  keep  to  it  till  you  have  drawn  somewhat 
from  it  to  feed  your  soul  upon,  and  then  you  will  do 
your  lifework  with  less  fatigue  because  you  will  have 
more  strength  to  spend  upon  it. 

THE  BURNING-GLASS. 

"  When  the  beams  of  the  sun  are  contracted  by  a  burning-glass, 
upon  one  spot,  then  they  cause  fire  ;  so  when  our  thoughts  are  con- 
centrated on  one  object  they  warm  the  heart  and  at  last  burn  the 
truth  into  it.'* 

This  is  the  reason  why  so  many  sermons  and  addresses 
are  so  cold  and  ineffective  ;  they  are  not  sufiiciently 
f ocussed  upon  one  point.  There  are  many  rays  of  light, 
but  they  are  scattered.  We  get  a  Httle  upon  many 
things,  while  what  is  wanted  is  one  great  truth,  and  so 
much  upon  it  as  shall  fix  it  on  the  heart,  and  set  the 
soul  blazing  with  it.  This  is  the  fault  of  many  lives  : 
they  are  squandered  upon  a  dozen  objects,  whereas  if 
they  were  economized  for  one,  they  w^ould  be  mighty 
lives,  known  in  the  present  and  honored  in  the  future. 
''  This  one  thing  I  do"  is  a  necessary  motto  if  we  are  to 
accomplish  anything. 

Our  friend  lay  basking  in  the  sunshine,  and  the  beams 
of  the  sun  did  not  disturb  him  for  a  moment.  In  a 
mirthful  moment  we  crept  to  his  side,  and  holding  up  a 
burning-glass,  we  formed  a  little  bright  spot  on  the  back 
of  his  hand.  He  started  in  an  instant  as  if  touched  with 
a  hot  iron,  and  was  some  little  time  before  he  quite 
appreciated  our  lecture  upon  concentrated  energies. 
He  did  not  invite  a  repetition  of  the  interesting  experi- 
ment,   but    confessed   that   he   should   throughout   life 


puritan's   GAllDEN".  109 

dread  a  man  whose  strength  all  converged  to  one  point, 
and  that  when  next  he  wished  to  arouse  a  careless  mind, 
he  would  try  what  concentration  would  do. 

Great  Lord,  teach  thou  me  how  to  accomphsh  some- 
what for  thy  glory  ;  and,  to  that  end,  enable  me  to  live 
for  thee  with  my  undivided  being,  that  what  little  light 
and  heat  I  have  may  be  so  focussed  that  I  may  burn  my 
way  to  successful  service. 

THE  ALL-SUPPOETING  NAIL. 

"  The  creatnres  hang  upon  God  as  a  garment  upon  a  nail  ;  take 
away  the  nail  and  the  garment  falls  down.'* 

The  emblem  is  simple  but  accurate.  All  the  weight 
falls  upon  the  nail,  and  all  the  need  of  the  creature's 
existence  hangs  upon  the  Omnipotent  One.  What 
power  must  he  have  from  whom  all  power  is  derived  ! 
All  that  we  see  around  us  of  force  and  might  is  but  God 
in  action.  There  is  no  such  deity  as  "  Nature  :"  nature 
is  the  Lord  at  work. 

Do  all  things  depend  upon  God  ?  Then  the  law  of 
faith  is,  after  all,  no  novelty,  no  intrusion,  no  exception 
to  general  rule.  A  sort  of  passive  faith  is  the  life  of  all 
created  things.  Dependence  is  the  faith  of  irrational 
objects,  and  the  believer's  trust  is  this  dependence 
gifted  with  eyes  and  will.  It  should  then  be  an  easy 
thing  for  my  creature-life  to  hang  upon  its  Creator. 
Had  it  not  been  for  sin,  faith  would  have  been  my  very 
nature,  dependence  upon  God  a  constitutent  quality  of 
my  existence.  Who,  then;  are  they  that  laugh  at  faith  ? 
Rationalists  ?  Nay  ;  irrational  men,  at  war  w^ith  one  of 
nature's  first  and  most  essential  laws.  Let  them  laugh 
on,  for  my  heart  is  w^ell  assured  that  confidence  in  God 
is  the  highest  reason,  and  trust  in  my  Maker  the  finest 
common-sense. 


110  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

O  Lord  !  I  bless  thee  that  the  nail  on  which  creation 
hangs  can  never  fail,  for  thoa  faintest  not  ;  neither  will 
my  confidence  be  put  to  shame,  for  it  hangs  where  hang 
the  worlds.  Till  thou  dost  thyself  cease  from  thine 
almightiness,  my  soul's  hope  is  safe  beyond  question, 
for  it  rests  only  upon  thee. 

THE  WATCHMAKEK. 

"  He  that  makes  a  watch,  can  mend  it  when  it  is  broken  and  dis- 
arranged." 

So  it  is  certain  that  the  best  physician  for  the  body  is 
the  Maker  of  the  human  frame.  This  is  too  much 
forgotten,  and  faith  is  placed  in  men  and  medicines,  and 
the  great  Lord  is  forgotten.  We  would  not  have  men 
decline  the  aid  of  physic  and  surgery,  but  yet  we  count 
it  a  sort  of  idolatry  to  trust  in  these  and  make  no  appeal 
to  the  Lord  himself.  It  is  unwise  to  neglect  the  means, 
but  be  not  so  utterly  foolish  as  to  leave  out  of  mind  the 
First  Cause  and  true  Author  of  all  good.  It  is  best  to 
trust  in  the  Lord  and  use  medicine  too,  but  of  the  two 
evils — faith  in  God  and  no  use  of  means,  or  u^e  of 
means  and  no  faith  in  God — we  should  certainly  prefer 
the  former. 

With  regard  to  the  soul,  none  can  do  anything  to 
purpose  in  putting  it  into  order  save  the  Creator  himself. 
All  merely  human  attempts  at  the  repair  of  the  spiritual 
nature  are  a  kind  of  tinkering  which  injures  more  than 
it  benefits.  The  Lord  can  set  mainspring,  and  balance- 
wheel,  and  lever,  and  hands  in  good  working  order.  He 
can  cleanse,  repair,  and 'regulate  ;  and  what  he  does  is 
done  to  purpose.  We  have  known  a  child  wash  a 
watch  till  it  was  spoiled,  and  so  may  a  reformer  purge 
a  man  till  he  makes  a  hypocrite  of  him.  An  ingenious 
young  man  repaired  a  watch  so  that  it  would  never  go 


puritan's   GARDEIT.  Ill 

again  ;  and  so  may  tlie  superstitions  impress  men  with 
foolish  fancies  till  they  lose  all  capacity  for  true  religion. 
God  himself  must  put  his  hand  to  the  business,  or  it 
will  be  a  total  failure. 

Lord,  with  all  my  imperfections  and  irregularities,  it 
gives  me  joy  to  know  that  I  am  in  thy  hands,  and  that 
thou  wilt  set  me  right.  No  case  has  ever  baffled  thee  ; 
neither  will  mine.  Thou  wilt  yet  make  me  perfect  in 
every  good  work  to  do  thy  will. 

THE  DISH  FOR  ME. 

**  As  at  a  feast,  \^hen  there  is  a  dish  for  which  we  have  a  great 
liking  set  upon  the  table,  though  all  the  company  be  welcome  to 
partake  of  it,  yet  we  say,  '  Here  is  a  dish  for  me. '  So  should  you 
apply  and  take  to  yourselves  your  own  portion  of  the  word.  Though 
it  be  propounded  generally,  yet,  when  God  directeth  the  tongue  of 
his  messengers  to  speak  expressly  to  your  case,  you  should  say, 
*  This  is  for  me.'  This  is  aU  the  calling  by  name  which  you  can  look 
for." 

How  often  has  this  been  the  case  when  reading  the 
word  of  God,  or  hearing  it  !  We  have  felt  an  inward 
relish  and  delight  in  divine  truth,  and  our  spiritual  in- 
stincts have  taught  us  that  it  was  intended  for  us.  A 
man  may  be  misled  by  his  natural  appetite,  but  the 
spiritual  man's  holy  taste  never  deceives  liim.  If  he 
can  feed  upon  the  word,  this  is  clear  evidence  that  it  is 
''  food  convenient  for  him,"  and  that  the  Lord  intends 
it  for  him.  The  Holy  Ghost  has  said,  '^  Eat  ye  that 
wliich  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fat- 
ness," plainly  indicating  that  the  truth  which  gives 
delight  to  the  renewed  soul  may  be  safely  feasted  on, 
and  that  we  have  full  license  to  enjoy  it  without  stint. . 

My  heart,  here  is  good  news  for  thee  !  Be  not  slow 
to  avail  thyself  of  the  divine  permit.  At  the  feast  of 
love,  eat  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet,  and  bless  the  Lord 
who  satisfleth  thy  mouth  with  good  things. 


112  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

A  PRINCE  IN  A  DITCH. 

**  If  you  saw  a  man  laboring  in  filthy  ditches,  and  soiling  himself 
as  poor  men  do,  would  you  believe  that  he  was  heir-apparent  to  a 
crown,  called  to  inherit  a  kingdom  ?  Who  will  believe  in  your 
heavenly  calling  when  you  stick  in  the  mud  of  worldly  pleasures, 
and  are  carried  away  with  carking  care  for  secular  interests?" 

Princes  should  behave  as  princes.  Their  haunts 
should  be  in  palaces,  and  not  amid  dung-heaps.  How, 
then,  is  it  that  some  who  profess  and  call  themselves 
Christians  are  found  raking  in  questionable  amusements 
to  discover  pleasure,  and  many  others  groping  amid 
sordid  avarice  to  find  satisfaction  in  wealth  ?  What  are 
they  at  to  be  thus  disgracing  the  blood  royal  ?  How 
dare  they  drag  the  name  of  the  ^^  Blessed  and  only 
Potentate' '  through  the  mire  ?  A  prince  of  the  blood 
acting  as  a  beggar  would  dishonor  not  only  himself  but 
all  the  royal  house.  Nobility  has  obligations.  Race, 
which  is  the  eminent  nobility  of  saints,  lays  them  under 
heavy  bonds  to  act  as  the  true  aristocracy  of  the  uni- 
verse. Come,  my  soul,  dost  thou  carry  thyself  royally  ? 
I  am  made  a  king  by  Jesus  Christ — are  my  bearing  and 
conversation  answerable  to  the  dignity  laid  upon  me  ? 

Lord,  thou  must  teach  thy  poor  child.  He  has  so 
long  been  a  vagabond  and  an  outcast  that  unless  thou 
teach  him  the  majestic  manners  of  thy  holy  courts,  he 
will  dishonor  both  himself  and  thee. 

VICTIMS  LED  TO  THE  SLAUGHTEE. 

**  Tho  heathen  were  wont  to  hang  garlands  around  the  necks  of 
the  beasts  which  were  about  to  be  slain  at  the  altar,  and  to  crown 
them  with  roses  as  they  led  them  to  sacrifice." 

Many  ai-e  thus  decked  with  the  ornaments  of  wealth 
and  mirth  who  are  on  the  way  to  the  slaughter.  Un- 
godly men  may  be  garlanded  with  social  distinctions, 
scientific  attainments,  and  courtly  honors,  and  yet  be  no 


puritan's  garden.  113 

better  than  bullocks  devoted  to  the  axe,  at  the  altar  of 
the  god  of  this  world.  How  little  availed  the  roses  to 
the  creature  doomed  to  die  !  If  men  were  wise  they 
would  regard  with  equal  disesteem  those  earthly  honors 
and  possessions  which  do  but  deck  out  a  condemned 
criminal,  and  adorn  a  wretch  over  whom  the  wrath  of 
God  is  hovering.  O  silly  men,  to  rejoice  in  the  tokens 
of  your  destruction,  and  to  glory  in  your  shame  ! 

Lord,  it  is  better  to  bear  thy  cross,  and  march  heaven- 
ward with  the  blessed  burden,  than  to  be  smothered  in 
flowery  pleasures  and  to  be  led  down  to  hell.  I  pray 
thee,  bring  my  unregenerate  neighbors  to  be  of  the  same 
mind. 

THE  GIDDY  THINK  THE  EABTH  MOVES. 
"  The  earth  is  never  the*  more  unsettled  because  to  giddy  brains  it 
seemeth  to  run  round." 

Even  so  the  salvation  of  the  saints  is  sure,  though  to 
their  trembling  hearts  it  may  seem  to  be  in  terrible 
jeopardy.  A  passenger  on  crossing  the  Channel  is  none 
the  less  in  safety  because  he  himself  feels  ready  to  give 
up  the  ghost  with  the  nausea  brought  on  by  the  rolling 
of  the  vessel.  Our  feehngs  are  poor  judges  of  facts. 
Some  who  felt  sure  of  heaven  are  now  in  hell,  and  others 
who  had  almost  lost  hope  are  now  glorified  in  heaven. 
My  brain  may  whirl  and  make  me  think  all  things  are 
running  round,  and  yet  1  know  those  very  things  to  be 
steadfast  as  the  hills,  and  therefore  I  do  not  believe  my 
feelings,  but  trust  the  facts  ;  and  so,  when  my  poor  silly 
heart  imagines  that  the  eternal  promises  will  fail,  I  must 
chide  its  folly,  and  fall  back  upon  the  everlasting  verities. 

Yes,  Lord,  thou  art  immovable  and  immutable  !  This 
I  know  of  a  surety.  Therefore  give  me  grace  never  to 
doubt  thee,  or  to  distrust  thy  faithfulness  to  all  those 
who  put  their  trust  in  thee. 


114  FLOWERS   PUOM   A 

METEORS  NOT  STARS. 

'*  Meteors  are  soon  spent,  and  fall  from  heaven  like  lightning, 
"while  stars  keep  their  course  and  station. " 

When  a  meteor  darts  across  tlie  sky  children  say  tliat 
a  star  has  fallen,  but  it  is  not  so.  Look  through  the 
telescope,  and  you  will  find  Jupiter,  and  Saturn,  and 
Yenus,  each  one  in  its  place,  shining  as  usual  ;  yea, 
even  the  tiniest  satellite  is  in  its  predestined  sphere, 
fulfilling  its  times  and  seasons.  So,  too,  w^e  hear  men 
say  that  a  Christian  has  fallen  from  grace,  a  saint  has 
"become  an  apostate.  This  also  is  an  error.  The  saints 
are  in  their  places  still,  for  it  is  w^ritten,  "  the  righteous 
shall  hold  on  his  way  :' '  those  who  have  fallen  were 
meteors,  not  stars  ;  professors,  but  not  genuine  posses- 
sors of  the  heavenly  light.  The  seven  stars  are  in  a 
hand  out  of  which  nothing  falls  :  '^  all  the  saints  are  in 
thy  hand."  Jesus  says,  ^'  he  that  believeth  in  me  hath 
everlasting  life,"  and  therefore  we  are  sure  that  they 
will  not  die. 

O  my  blessed  Saviour;  give  me  no  temporary  salva- 
tion !  Make  me  a  star  whose  brightness  shall  never  be 
quenched.  To  be  enlightened  for  a  time  will  not  serve 
my  turn  ;  grant  me  light  which  Satan  cannot  extinguish. 
Let  me  be  ^^  saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting 
salvation. ' ' 

ALL  BLOSSOMS  DO  NOT  BECOME  FEUIT. 

*'  Plenty  of  blossoms  do  not  always  foretell  great  store  of  fruit." 

Few  knit  out  of  the  many  flowers  which  make  promise 
of  apples.  It  has  ever  been  so,  and  he  is  an  unwise 
man  who  dreams  that  his  trees  will  be  exempted  from 
the  universal  law.  The  same  rule  holds  good  in  all 
earthly  matters.  Out  of  many  liopeful  results  which  we 
look  for  from  our  plans  and  labors  some  must  fail  us. 


puritak's  gardek.  115 

Because  we  make  appointments  for  ourselves,  and  forget 
the  appointments  of  God,  we  meet  with  many  more 
disappointments  than  would  otherwise  fall  to  our  lot. 
It  is  of  no  use  reckoning  that  every  egg  in  our  basket 
will  become  a  chicken,  for  it  will  not  so  happen,  and 
our  over-anticipation  will  be  the  cause  of  needless  sorrow 
to  us.  Every  prudent  merchant  reckons  upon  a  certain 
amount  of  bad  debt  and  loss  in  his  trading,  and  when  it 
comes  he  writes  it  off  as  a  part  of  his  estimated  charges, 
and  is  not  broken-hearted  :  our  wisdom  lies  in  doing  the 
same  with  all  earthly  hopes,  and  even  with  the  visible 
results  of  our  service  for  the  Lord.  Whether  this  or 
that  will  prosper  we  must  leave  with  the  Master,  it  is 
ours  to  sow  with  unwearied  hand  both  at  morning  and  at 
night. 

THE  LEAVEN  IN  THE  BREAB. 
*'  Jude  saith  we  are  *  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus.'  There  is  a  close 
union  between  Christ  and  ns  :  we  are  '  in  him,'  and  because  of  this 
union  we  are  eternally  preserved.  Look  1  As  it  is  impossible  to 
sever  the  leaven  and  the  dough  when  they  are  once  mingled  and 
kneaded  together  ;  so  Christ  and  a  believer,  when  they  are  united 
together,  there  is  no  parting  them  any  more,  and  while  one  lasts  the 
other  must  endure.' ' 

This  is  indeed  the  sure  ground  of  the  final  preserva- 
tion of  the  saints  :  their  union  with  their  Lord  is  of  an 
indissoluble  nature,  so  that  the  apostle  inquires,  '^  Who 
shall  separate  us  ?"  It  is  as  the  union  of  the  body  with 
the  head,  which  cannot  be  sundered  without  death  to 
both.  "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also"  is  our  guran- 
tee  of  life  eternal.  What  more  do  we  require  ?  If 
Christ  be  in  us,  and  we  in  him,  the  union  is  of  the  most 
intense  kind,  and  the  security  which  follows  from  it  is 
of  the  most  certain  sort.  '  ^  He  that  is  joined  to  the 
Lord  is  one  spirit;"  what  closer  and  more  abiding 
union  can  be  imagined  ? 


116  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

Lord,  let  there  be  no  doubt  as  to  my  union  with  thee. 
Cause  my  fellowship  to  be  so  constant  and  so  sweet  that 
the  oneness  of  soul  to  thy  sacred  person  may  be  most 
evident.  So  shall  I  be  with  thee  here,  and  with  thee 
where  thou  art  for  ever. 

A  SAYING  OF  THE  FATHEES. 

"  I  remember  one  of  the  fathers  bringeth  in  the  flesh,  saying  of 
believers,  ^  JEgo  deficiam,  I  wiU  surely  fail  them  and  make  the  mis- 
carry ;  and  the  world.  Ego  dedpiam,  I  wiU  deceive  them  and  entice 
them  ;  and  Satan,  M^o  eripiam,  I  wiU  snatch  them  and  carry  them 
away  ;  but  God  saith,  Ego  custodiam,  I  will  keep  them,  I  will  never 
fail  them  nor  forsake  them.*    Here  lieth  our  safety  and  security." 

In  other  words,  the  flesh  saith,  ''  I  will  deceive  ;" 
the  world,  ''  1  will  defile  ;''  the  devil,  ''  I  will  destroy  ;" 
but  the  Lord  saith,  ^'1  y/ill  defend;"  and  that  one 
word  of  God  takes  the  sting  from  all  the  rest.  The 
flesh  is  as  a  drawn  sword,  the  world  as  a  sharp  spear,  and 
Satan  as  a  poisoned  arrow  ;  but  the  Lord  God  is  a  shield, 
and  this  baffles  all.  The  flesh  is  much,  the  world  is 
more,  and  Satan  is  most  of  all ;  but  God  is  all  in  all. 
The  flesh  must  die,  the  world  must  pass  away,  Satan 
must  be  overthrown  ;  but  the  word  of  our  God  abideth 
forever  ;  and  as  the  word  of  God  is  the  life  of  the 
saints,  they  shall  also  abide  world  without  end.  What  a 
rest  this  affords  us  when  we  are  looking  out  of  the 
windows  of  the  future  !  The  Lord  will  be  our  succor  in 
the  days  to  come  ! 

THE  TIGHT-ROPE  DANCER. 

*'  They  weaken  Christian  comfort  who  make  believers  walk  with 
Christ  like  dancers  upon  a  rope,  every  moment  in  fear  of  breaking 
their  necks.*' 

Those  who  deny  the  doctrine  of  the  final  perseverance 
of  the  saints  deserve  this  censure.  We  cannot  tell 
whence  these  brethren  derive  their  comfort.     Our  notion 


puritan's   GARDEN".  117 

of  trasting  Christ  includes  in  it  a  reliance  upon  him  for 
tlie  present  and  the  future  as  well  as  for  the  sins  of  the 
past.  It  is  to  us  the  glory  of  the  gospel  that  it  gives  us 
now,  at  this  very  moment,  a  j)resent  and  everlasting 
salvation.  Once  grasped  in  the  hand  of  Jesus,  what  can 
pluck  us  thence  or  cause  us  to  perish  ?  Tight-rope 
dancing  suits  not  our  poor  head,  we  prefer  to  be/'  safe 
in  the  arms  of  Jesus." 

My  soul,  let  others  say  what  they  will,  do  thou  accept 
thy  Lord's  word  for  it,  and  believe  that  he  will  keep  the 
feet  of  his  saints.  A  temporary,  questionable  salvation 
may  suffice  those  who  know  not  thy  Lord  ;  but  as  for 
thee,  do  thou  abide  by  his  eternal,  unchangeable  love, 
and  fear  no  final  fall. 

OLIVIAN'S  DYING  SAYING. 

'^  Olivian,  -when  dying,  comforted  himself  with  that  promise  (Isa. 
54  :  10),  '  The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed  ; 
but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee. '  Being  in  the  agonies 
of  death,  he  said,  '  Sight  is  gone,  speech  and  hearing  are  departing, 
feeling  is  almost  gone,  but  the  lovingkindness  of  God  will  never 
depart. '  The  Lord  give  us  such  a  confidence  in  that  day  that  we 
may  die  glorying  in  the  preservation  of  our  Eedeemer." 

To  this  end  let  us  live  in  the  like  assurance.  It  is 
certain  that  God  can  never  leave  those  who  put  their 
trust  in  him,  and  it  becomes  us  to  be  certain  of  this 
certainty.  The  security  of '  the  saints  is  grounded,  not 
upon  their  own  faithfulness,  but  upon  the  faithfulness  of 
him  to  whose  keeping  they  have  committed  their  souls. 
If  the  Lord  can  depart  from  his  people  they  will  assuredly 
depart  from  him  and  perish  ;  their  comfort  is  that  ho 
bas  said  in  his  covenant,  '^  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their 
hearts,  and  they  shall  not  depart  from  me,"  Our  soul 
may  live  and  die  on  this  one  sui'o  promise. 


118  FLOWERS   PROai   A 

THE  PLAISTEE  AND  THE  HAND. 

**  The  gospel  is  a  sovereign  plaister,  but  Christ's  own  hand  mnst 
make  it  stick.'* 

How  true  is  this  !  The  woilnded  heart  cannot  by  its 
OAVii  unaided  power  avail  itself  of  the  promise  though  it 
be  evidently  adapted  to  its  need.  Instead  of  grasping 
consolation,  the  soul  refuses  to  be  comforted.  Nor  can 
the  most  loving  of  ministers  apply  the  balm  ;  awakened 
consciences  are  usually  more  cunning  at  putting  from 
them  the  reasons  for  hope  than  we  are  in  applying  them. 
They  think  us  flatterers  when  we  bring  them  cheering 
news.  It  will  even  happen  that  when  a  gracious  word 
seems  to  strike  them  and  to  stick  upon  their  minds,  they 
will  with  a  cruel  diligence  and  suicidal  resolution  tear  it 
off  lest  it  should  work  their  cure. 

Abundant  facts  prove  that  according  to  our  author's 
statement — 

***When  wounded  sore  the  stricken  soul. 
Lies  bleeding  and  unbound, 
One  only  hand,  a  pierced  hand. 
Can  salve  the  sinner's  wound.*' 

Therefore,  O  Lord,  doth  my  soul  love  thee  because 
thou  didst  not  only  provide  a  salvation  for  me,  but 
thou  didst  also  apply  it  to  me  ;  and  at  this  hour  thou 
dost  not  only  lay  up  comfort  in  store  for  me,  but  tliou 
dost  actually  cheer  and  sustain  my  spirit.  Thou  art 
])oth  Physician  and  physic.  Comforter  and  comfort,  yea, 
thou  art  all  in  all. 

BONES  STKONGER  FOU  HAYING  BEEN  BROKEN. 
"  Our  reconciliation  with  God  is  like  the  soldering  of  a  vessel,  " 
which  is  henceforth  strongest  in  the  crack  ;  or  as  a  leg  broken,  if 
well  set,  it  is  the  stronger  :  so  are  we  upon  firmer  terms  than  we 
were  in  innocency  ;  there  was  before  the  fall  a  possibility  of  being 
at  odds  with  God,  which  is  now  taken  away." 

This  is  a  gracious  fact.     Under  the  covenant  of  works 


puritan's    GARDEiq".  119 

it  would  liave  been  always  possible  for  obedience  to  fail, 
and  then  the  reward  would  have  been  forfeited  ;  bnt 
now,  under  the  new  covenant,  our  Lord  Jesus  has  settled 
and  fixed  all  that  was  contingent  in  it  by  perfecting  his 
part  of  the  agreement,  and  therefore  all  the  rest  stands 
sure,  and  all  believers  must  receive  covenanted  mercies. 
Adam  might  have  fallen,  and  we  in  him,  even  had  he 
stood  for  a  thousand  years.  The  second  Adam  has 
ended  his  probation  both  for  himself  and  all  his  seed, 
and  now  nothing  can  intervene  to  deprive  his  people  of 
the  earned  and  purchased  inheritance.  Innocence  seemed 
sure,  but  perfection  is  surer.  It  is  something  not  to. 
have  broken  the  law  ;  it  is  far  more  to  have  fulfilled  it 
and  honored  it,  so  as  to  be  able  to  say  as  our  Lord  has 
said,  ''  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me 
to  do." 

Fitly  and  justly  did  Watts  say  : 

*'  He  raised  me  from  the  deeps  of  sin, 
The  gates  of  gaping  heU, 
And  fix'  d  my  standing  more  secure 
Than  'twas  before  I  feU." 

My  soul,  be  thou  doubly  dih'gent  to  magnify  thy 
Saviour's  name.  If  the  bones  which  God  has  broken 
shall  rejoice,  much  more  the  bones  which  he  has  set.  If 
he  rejoices  more  over  the  lost  sheep  which  he  has  found 
than  over  that  which  never  went  astray,  count  thyself 
the  happiest  and  most  indebted  of  beings  to  be  thus 
prized  by  thy  gracious  God. 

DIETY  COENEKS. 
*'  Sluttish  corners  are  not  seen  in  the  dark.     Things  are  naught 
that  cannot  brook  an  open  investigation." 

Lord,  let  me  have  a  religion  which  will  bear  the  light 
of  day,  the  light  of  self-examination,  the  light  of  the 
throne   of  judgment.     If   I   hide   my  sin,   how   can  I 


120  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

prosper  ?     If  1  cannot  bear  to  be  judged  of  men,  how 
sliall  I  endure  to  be  judged  at  tliy  appearing  ? 

THE  CLUCKING  HEN. 
"  As  a  hen  when  she  hath  found  a  worm,  or  a  barleycorn,  clucks 
for  her  chickens,  that  they  may  come  and  partake  of  it  with  her  ;  so 
a  man  acquainted  with  Christ,  who  hath  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious,  he  cannot  hold,  he  will  be  calling  upon  his  friends  and 
relations  to  come  and  share  with  him  of  the  same  grace." 

It  is  SO  much  an  instinct  with  real  Christians  to  do 
this,  that  those  who  do  not  so  may  well  question  their 
own  sincerity.  Common  humanity  leads  a  man  to  in- 
form his  fellow  of  that  which  will  benefit  him,  and  how 
can  he  be  a  gracious  man  who  is  not  even  commonly 
humane  ?  In  certain  crafts  and  trades  there  are  selfish 
reasons  for  keeping  their  knowledge  a  secret,  but  noth- 
ing of  this  kind  can  appertain  to  the  profession  of  godli- 
ness. Having  found  this  honey,  so  abundant  and  so 
free  to  all  comers,  nature  itself  bids  us  call  our  brethren 
to  see  our  treasure,  and  urge  them  to  partake  in  its 
sweetness. 

Hasten,  reader,  to  call  in  thy  friends  and  neighbors  to 

rejoice  with  thee  if  thou  hast  indeed  found  the  Lord 

Jesus. 

THE  ECHO. 

"  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us.  Love  is  like  an  echo,  it 
returneth  what  it  receiveth  :  there  is  no  echo  till  the  sound  is  heard. 
Our  love  to  God  is  a  reflex,  a  reverberation,  or  a  casting  back  of 
God's  beam  and  flame  upon  himself.  The  cold  wall  sendeth  back 
no  reflex  of  heat  till  the  sun  shines  upon  it,  and  warms  it  first  ;  so 
neither  do  we  love  God  till  our  soul  is  first  filled  with  a  sense  of  his 
love." 

Hence  the  impossibility  of  producing  love  while  we 
are  under  a  legal  spirit  ;  it  will  not  come  to  order,  it 
will  only  rise  to  the  bidding  of  its  like.  Love  alone 
begets  love.  Purchase  price  for  it  there  is  none  ;  the 
bribe  would  be  scorned. 


PURITAX'S    GARDEN".  121 

Love  is  not  the  result  of  effort  on  onr  part.  As  the 
fountain  rises  freely  in  the  valley,  pouring  forth  its 
crystal  flood  with  spontaneous  eagerness,  so  doth  love 
sparkle  and  flash  forth  in  the  soul.  Secret  reservoirs, 
far  up  in  the  mountains,  supply  the  water-springs  ;  and 
eternal  deeps  of  boundless  love  in  the  everlasting  hills 
supply  the  love-springs  of  the  believer's  soul.  Is  it  not 
written,  ''  All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  thee  ?" 

O  my  heart,  take  care  that  thou  answer  to  the  Lord 
like  an  echo  !  When  he  saith,  ^^My  love,"  do  thou 
answer  with  the  selfsame  title.  Be  as  the  rocks  which 
glow  beneath  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  give  forth  warmth 
themselves.  Love  as  long  as  thou  livest,  for  love  is  the 
cream  of  life,  and  all  of  it  is  due  to  thy  Lord. 

COURTIEES*  PRIVILEGES. 
**  It  would  be  a  great  favor  if  a  king  shonld  give  leave  to  one  of  his 
meanest  subjects  to  have  the  key  of  his  privy  chamber,  to  come  to 
him  and  visit  him,   and  be  familiar  with  him  when   he   pleaseth. 
How  would  such  a  favor  be  talked  of  in  the  world  !' ' 

Yet  this  is  but  a  faint  image  of  what  the  believer  is 
admitted  to.  He  may  come  not  merely  to  the  palace  of 
mercy,  and  the  throne  of  grace,  but  to  the  very  heart 
of  God.  Confidences  such  as  ours  surpass  all  the 
familiarities  of  friendship,  and  yet  they  are  permitted, 
nay  commanded,  between  the  All-glorious  Lord  and  our 
poor  sinful  selves.  We  may  well  copy  the  example  of 
David  when  he  went  in  and  sat  before  the  Lord,  and 
said,  "  Who  am  I,  O  Lord  God,  and  what  is  my  house  ? 
And  is  this  the  manner  of  man,  O  Lord  God?"  The 
intimate  intercourse  between  the  glorious  sovereign  of 
the  Canticles  and  his  sunburnt  bride  is  an  inspired 
symbol  of  the  near  and  dear  communion  between  Christ 
and  his  people.  What  can  be  more  honoring  to  the 
soul,  and  what  can  more  wonderfully  prove  the  bound- 


122  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

less  condescension  of  the  Lord  ?  He  stoops  like  a  God  ! 
There  is  as  mnch  of  Deity  in  the  favor  which  he  dis- 
plays to  the  undeserving  as  in  the  matchless  splendors 
of  his  celestial  conrts.  Happy  are  the  people  who  have 
such  a  God  ;  shall  tlxej  not  accept  with  rapture  the 
goodness  which  he  sets  before  them  so  benignly  ? 

O  my  most  tender  God  and  Father,  I  can  never  fully 
estimate  the  stoop  of  thy  majesty  in  deigning  to  love 
me,  nor  the  greatness  of  thy  generosity  in  inviting  me 
to  have  fellowship  with  thee.  Give  me,  I  pray  thee, 
grace  to  value  such  priceless  goodness,  and  every  day  to 
live  in  habitual  fellowship  with  thee.  Since  thou  makest 
me  free  of  thy  courts,  teach  me  how  to  be  a  resident 
courtier,  going  no  more  out  forever. 

WATEE  POUBED  INTO  A  PUMP. 
**  Love  must  be  paid  in  kind.     As  water  is  cast  into  a  pump,  when 
the  springs  lie  low,  to  bring  up  more  water,  so  God  sbeddeth  abroad 
his  love  into  our  hearts,  that  our  love  may  rise  up  to  him  again  by 
way  of  gratitude  and  recompense." 

How  idle  is  it,  then,  to  hope  to  chide  ourselves  into 
loving  God  !  The  price  of  love  is  love  ;  the  origin  of 
it  is  not  found  in  law  or  in  a  sense  of  duty,  but  in  love, 
or  a  return  of  gratitude.  When  the  sun  of  eternal  love 
melts  the  glaciers  of  the  soul,  then  the  rivers  of  affection 
flow  ;  but  if  the  rocks  of  ice  could  all  be  broken  to 
shivers  with  hammers,  not  a  drop  of  affection  would 
stream  forth.  Only  a  sense  of  divine  love  will  ever 
create  love  to  God  in  the  heart. 

How  vain  also  is  the  attempt  to  recompense  the  mercy 
of  God  by  mechanical  acts  of  religion  or  works  of  legal 
service!  ''Love  must  be  paid  in  kind."  No  other 
coin  is  current  in  love's  empire  but  that  which  bears  her 
own  image  and  superscription.  Do  what  we  ^ill,  even 
to  martyrdom,  if  we  have  not  love,  it  profiteth  us  noth- 


puritak's  gardek.  123 

ing.  In  this  case  it  is  specially  true,  ^^  If  a  man  sliould 
give  all  tlie  substance  of  his  house  for  love,  it  would 
utterly  be  contemned." 

Come,  my  heart,  does  thy  love  run  dry  ?  Then  pray 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  shed  abroad  the  love  of  God  within 
thee.  Pour  this  living  water  into  thy  dry  pump,  and 
thou  wilt  soon  pour  forth  a  plentiful  stream. 

THE  FELLOW-COUNTKYMAN. 

"  A  man  who  is  traveUing  in  foreign  lands  is  glad  to  meet  with  his 
own  countrymen." 

This  we  know  by  experience.  Sweet  is  the  music  of 
the  English  tongue  when  heard  amid  the  clatter  of 
foreign  speech.  We  feel  our  heart  warmed  at  the  sight 
of  a  costume  which  we  can  recognize  as  covering  a  true 
Briton.  Such  are  the  feelings  of  a  Christian  when  he 
falls  in  with  a  true  believer,  and  by  his  speech  and 
conduct  knows  him  to  be  a  citizen  of  heaven.  He 
detects  him  at  once  as  being,  hke  himself,  "  a  stranger 
in  the  land  ;"  he  seeks  him  out  and  cultivates  his  com- 
pany, and  in  that  company  he  finds  a  solace  for  his 
loneliness  among  the  aliens  around  him.  Those  who 
dwell  in  warm-hearted  churches,  surrounded  by  Christian 
society,  little  know  the  value  of  a  single  godly  friend  to 
those  who  dwell  among  worldlings.  To  such,  a  man  of 
God  is  more  precious  than  the  gold  of  Ophir.  Think 
for  a  moment  :  if  you  had  been  condemned  to  dwell  in 
a  lions'  den,  what  a  relief  it  would  have  been  to  find  a 
Daniel  sitting  among  the  ferocious  creatures  !  Such  is 
the  consolation  which  a  single  holy  companion  may  yield 
to  a  lonely  soul  compelled  to  sojourn  among  those  who 
know  not  God. 

Lord,  make  me  one  whom  thy  saints  may  be  glad  to 
meet  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  when  I  pine  because  I 


124  FLOWERS   FROM    A 

am  exiled  from  my  heavenly  home,  permit  me  to  hear 
the  voice  of  a  fellow-countryman^  that  I  may  be  of  good 
cheer. 

WAITING  FOE  THE  KEY  OF  THE  HOUSE. 

*'  He  that  made  the  sonl  hath  most  right  to  dwell  in  it  ;  it  is  a 
most  curious  house,  of  God's  own  framing,  and  there  ought  he  to 
well.  But  he  will  not  enter  by  force  and  violence,  but  by  consent  ; 
he  expecteth  love  to  give  up  the  keys  (Kev.  3  :  20) — ^  Behold,  I 
stand  at  the  door,  and  knock  :  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open 
the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him.*  Why 
should  Christ  stand  at  the  door  and  knock,  and  ask  leave  to  enter 
into  his  own  house  ?  He  hath  right  enough  to  enter,  only  he  waiteth 
till  we  open  to  him." 

Here  our  author  admirably  expresses  the  Lord's 
respect  to  the  nature  and  constitution  which  he  has 
impressed  upon  man.  Inanimate  matter  obeys  tlie 
divine  law  by  force,  but  a  human  being  can  only  obey 
God  with  his  will^  since  unwilling  obedience  would  bo 
no  obedience  at  all.  There  can  be  no  such  thing  as 
umvilling  love,  unwilling  trust,  or  unwilling  holiness. 
Yoluntariness  enters  into  the  essence  of  a  moral  act. 
Having,  therefore,  so  fashioned  man,  the  Lord  doth  not 
forget  this  fact,  but  ever  treats  man  as  a  free  agent. 
The  divine  compulsions  of  his  grace  are  only  such  as  are 
congruous  wntli  a  willing  and  nilling  creature.  Man  is 
sweetly  led  to  repentance  and  faitli,  and  by  mighty 
arguments  drawn  to  trust  and  love  the  Lord  Jesus.  We 
do  not  surrender  our  hearts  to  Jesus  otherwise  than  with 
our  own  full  and  free  consent.  We  are  riglit  glad  to 
become  his  disciples,  and  to  be  taught  the  way  of  service. 
He  does  not  break  in  like  a  burglar,  but  he  enters  the 
castle  of  the  soul  like  a  conqueror  to  whom  the  governor 
in  all  lowliness  hands  the  keys. 

My  heart,  it  is  hard  for  a  theologian  to  explain  how 
grace  overcomes  the  will,  and  yet  never  violates  it,  and 


puritan's  garden.  125 

yet  tlioii  dost  understand  it  perfectly  by  experience. 
Christ's  love  wooed  thee  and  won  thee,  and  led  thee 
captive^  and  yet  never  was  a  will  more  free  than  thine 
when  thou  vv^ast  altogether  bound  to  thy  Beloved. 

THE  PKINCELY  SUBSTITUTE. 

'*  If  a  prince,  passing  by  an  execution,  should  take  the  malefactor's 
chains,  and  suffer  in  his  stead,  this  would  be  a  wonderful  instance 
indeed.** 

The  deed  would  ring  through  all  history,  and  be 
quoted  as  an  amazing  instance  of  heroic  pity  ;  and  well 
deserved  would  be  all  the  words  of  praise  and  sonnets  of 
admiration  which  would  record  and  eulogize  it.  Yet 
our  Lord  Jesus  did  this  and  infinitely  more  for  those 
who  were  not  merely  malefactors,  but  enemies  to  his 
own  throne  and  person.  This  is  a  wonder  of  wonders  ! 
But,  alas,  it  meets  with  small  praise.  The  most  of  men 
around  us  have  heard  of  it  and  treated  it  as  an  idle  tale, 
and  multitudes  more  regard  it  as  a  pious  legend,  worthy 
to  be  repeated  as  a  venerable  fable,  and  then  forgotten 
as  an  unpractical  myth.  Even  those  who  know,  be- 
lieve, and  admire,  are  yet  cold  in  their  emotions  with 
regard  to  the  story  of  the  cross.  Herein  is  love  which 
ought  to  set  our  hearts  on  fire,  and  yet  we  scarcely 
maintain  a  smouldering  spark  of  enthusiasm.  Lord 
Jesus,  be  more  real  to  our  apprehensions,  and  so  be 
more  completely  the  Master  of  our  affections. 

TRYING  THE  KEYS. 

''  As  one  that  would  gladly  open  a  door,  trieth  key  after  key  till  he 
hath  tried  every  key  in  the  bunch,  so  doth  God  try  one  method  after 
another  to  work  upon  man's  heart." 

His  persevering  grace  will  not  be  baffled.  He  fre- 
quently begins  with  the  silver  key  of  a  mother's  tearful 
prayers  and  a  father's  tender  counsels.     In  turn,  he  uses 


126  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

the  church-keys  of  his  ordinances  and  his  ministers,  and 
these  are  often  found  to  move  the  bolt  ;  but  if  they  fail, 
he  thrusts  in  the  iron  key  of  trouble  and  affliction  which 
has  been  known  to  succeed  after  all  others  have  failed. 
He  has,  however,  a  golden  master-key,  which  excels  all 
others  :  it  is  the  operation  of  his  own  most  gracioas 
Spirit  by  which  entrance  is  effected  into  hearts  w^hich 
seemed  shut  up  forever. 

Wonderful  is  the  patience  and  long-suffering  of  the 
Lord,  or  he  would  long  since  have  left  hardened  and 
careless  sinners  to  themselves.  He  is  importunate, 
whether  we  are  so  or  not.  We  take  pains  to  resist 
his  heavenly  grace,  but  he  abideth  faithful  to  his  own 
name  of  love. 

O  Lord,  we  bless  thee  that  thou  hast  opened  our 
hearts,  and  w^e  pray  thee  now  that  thou  hast  entered, 
abide  in  our  souls  forever,  as  a  king  in  his  own  palace- 
halls  ! 

LIFE  PROVED  BY  GEOWTH. 

'*  Wiiere  there  is  life  tliere  will  be  growth,  and  if  grace  be  true,  it 
will  surely  increase.  A  painted  flower  keepeth  always  at  the  same 
pitch  and  stature  ;  the  artist  may  bestow  beauty  upon  it,  but  he 
cannot  bestow  life.  A  painted  child  will  be  as  little  ten  years  hence 
as  it  is  now." 

What  need  there  is  to  observe  the  wide  distinction 
between  the  picture  and  the  living  thing  !  Of  painted 
likenesses  of  Christians  we  have  more  than  enough  ;  nor 
is  the  manufacture  of  portraits  a  difficult  operation  : 
what  we  want  is  the  real  thing  and  not  the  artistic  imita- 
tion. Manton  saitli  w^ell  that  growth  is  the  test.  Many 
professors  must  be  forever  beginning  again  :  they  stick 
where  they  were,  or  thought  tliey  were.  They  were 
anxious  about  their  souls,  and  are  so  still.  They  were 
trying  and  wishing,  and  with  tries  and  wishes  they  are 
resting  contented.     If   they  were  saved  and  knew  it, 


puritan's  garden.  127 

tliey  would  find  themselves  making  some  measure  of 
advance  :  not  always  advancing  at  the  same  rate,  for  all 
life  is  not  equally  rapid  in  its  growth,  but  still  progress- 
ing somewhat,  forgetting  the  things  behind,  and  reach- 
ing forth  to  that  wdiich  is  beyond. 

Reader,  how  do  you  stand  under  this  test  ?  Come, 
search  yourself,  and  see  whether  you  are  adding  to  your 
faith,  courage  ;  and  to  courage,  brotherly  kindness  ; 
and  to  brotherly  kindness,  love.  If  there  be  no  growth, 
it  may  be,  nay,  surely  it  must  be,  that  you  are  not  a 
child  born  into  the  family  of  God,  but  a  pretty  picture, 
which  may  adorn  a  room,  but  which  cannot  perform  any 
of  the  actions  of  life.  It  is  a  sad  thing  if  such  be  your 
case,  for  heaven  is  not  a  portrait-gallery  ;  it  is  the  home 
of  loving,  living  souls,  whom  grace  has  quickened  with 
eternal  life. 

THE  OPENED  TKEASUEY  AND  THE  BAGS. 

**  If  a  mighty  king  should  open  his  treasure,  and  bid  men  come 
and  bring  their  bags,  and  take  as  much  as  they  would  ;  do  you  think 
they  would  neglect  this  occasion  of  gain  ?  Surely  no  ;  they  would 
run  and  fetch  bag  after  bag,  and  never  cease.  Thus  doth  the  Lord 
act  toward  us  in  the  covenant  of  grace." 

He  makes  ov^er  all  its  fulness  to  his  people,  and  saith, 
"  All  are  yours."  We  are  not  straitened  in  him.  The 
bags  will  come  to  an  end  long  before  the  treasure  is 
exhausted.  Let  us  come,  then,  to  the  throne  of  grace 
w^itli  enlarged  desires  and  widened  expectations  :  the 
Lord  does  not  stint  us,  why  should  we  put  ourselves 
upon  short  commons  ?  "  lie  saith,  eat  and  drink,  yea, 
drink  abundantly,  O  beloved."  Why,  then,  do  we  sit 
at  the  table  and  starve,  or  rise  from  it  hmigry  ?  Let  us 
by  faith  suck  of  the  abundance  of  the  sea  of  grace,  and 
partake  largely  of  the  hid  treasure  wliich  the  Lord  has 
laid  np  for  us. 


128  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

THE  PHYSICIAN  IN  THE  GAKDEN. 

'*  Plutarch,  in  his  treatise  on  growth  in  moral  virtue,  wherein  are 
manj^  things  applicable  to  growth  in  grace,  saith  that  a  man  that 
hath  made  some  progress  in  virtue  is  like  a  physician,  who,  when  he 
comes  into  a  garden,  doth  not  consider  flowers  for  their  beauty,  as 
gallants  do,  but  for  their  use  and  virtue  in  medicine.  So  the  grown 
believer  doth  not  consider  speech  for  its  fineness,  but  fitness  and 
seasonableness  for  present  use." 

The  same  lioldeth  good  also  concerning  growth  in 
grace  ;  the  more  we  grow  the  more  we  regard  the 
spiritual  part  of  the  word,  and  such  Scriptures  and 
truths  as  are  of  practical  use  and  personal  concern. 
Hence  it  is  that  experienced  believers  cannot  put  up 
with  the  mere  ornaments  of  speech  which  yield  so  much 
satisfaction  to  youthful  minds.  They  want  solid,  prac- 
tical, gospel  doctrine,  and  they  must  have  it.  Their 
craving  is  for  herbs  for  their  healing,  and  not  for  bou- 
quets for  their  button-hole.  My  heart,  go  thou  with 
the  wise  men,  and  learn  from  them  what  is  the  way  of 
wisdom. 

BARKING  DOGS  CATCH  NO  GAME. 

*'  Hard  speeches  have  an  evil  influence  in  controversy,  and  do 
exasperate  rather  than  convince.  The  dog  that  followeth  the  game 
with  barking  and  bawling  loseth  the  prey  ;  and  there  is  not  a  more 
likely  way  to  undermine  the  truth  than  an  unseemly  defence  of  it. 
Satan  is  mightily  gratified,  if  men  had  eyes  to  see  it,  with  the  ill 
managing  of  God's  cause." 

This  lesson  is  a  needful  one.  Zealots  are  apt  to  mis- 
take hard  words  for  arguments.  The  more  in  earnest 
we  are,  the  more  are  we  tempted  to  speak  bitterly,  and 
to  overlook  the  better  side  of  our  opponent's  cause. 
Many  who  think  with  us  applaud  us  most  for  those  very 
utterances  which  deserve  the  censure  of  the  wise  ;  and 
this  foohsh  commendation  is  apt  to  egg  us  on  in  the 
same  unprofitable  direction.  They  would  be  more 
judicious  if,  while  approving  our  zeal,  they  hinted  that 


puritan's  garde]s\  129 

we  might  use  a  sweeter  method  and  be  none  the  less 
strong. 

We  hoj)e  as  we  grow  older  to  be  able  to  hunt  more 
quietly,  with  surer  scent  but  with  less  barking.  Cer- 
tainly as  we  grow  in  grace  we  shall  more  cai-efully 
distinguish  between  holy  ardor  which  is  kindled  by  the 
Spirit,  and  carnal  heat,  v/hich  is  the  wild-fire  of  unre- 
newed nature.  God  grant  that  as  we  grow  prudent  we 
may  not  also  become  lukewarm  ;  else  we  may  gain  one 
Nvay  and  lose  another.  "We  are  poor  creatures,  for  when 
we  try  to  avoid  an  evil  we  generally  swing  like  a  pen- 
dulum to  the  opposite  quarter,  and  commit  another 
folly.  The  middle  point,  the  golden  mean  of  virtue, 
we  do  not  readily  reach. 

TAKEK  IN  THE  BEIEES. 

*'  Most  that  are  acquainted  with  God  are  taken  in  the  briers. 
Jesus  Christ  in  the  days  of  his  flesh  had  never  heard  of  many,  if 
their  necessities  had  not  brought  them  to  him/' 

Free  grace  is  a  harbor  into  which  few  ships  ever  run 
except  through  stress  of  weather.  ''  Then  they  cry  unto 
the  Lord  in  their  trouble  :"  that  is  to  say,  when  they 
are  well-nigh  wrecked  and  are  altogether  at  their  wits' 
end.  Till  the  end  of  the  creature  is  reached,  men  will 
not  seek  to  their  Creator,  even  as  the  prodigal  never 
thought  of  home  till  he  had  spent  all,  and  there  was  a 
mighty  famine  in  the  land.  Our  author  refers  to 
Manasseh  who  was  taken  among  the  thorns,  and  surely 
he  was  an  instructive  type  of  the  great  majority  of  those 
who  are  saved  from  sin. 

Lord,  be  pleased  of  thy  great  mercy  to  overrule  the 
vast  amount  of  poverty  and  suffering  which  is  now  in 
this  land,  that  men  may  be  driven  to  thee  thereby.  Let 
thy  black  dogs  fetch  home  thy  wandering  sheep.  Let 
thy  fierce,  breaking  tempests  compel  full  many  a  wanton 


130  FLOWERS   FROM    A 

voyager  to  reef  the  sails  of  pleasurable  sin,  and  steer  for 
the  haven  of  forgiving  love. 

CHESSBOARD. 

*'Be  watchfnl  ;  the  "world  is  the  devil's  chessboard;  you  can 
hardl}^  move  backward  or  forvrard,  but  he  is  ready  to  attack  you  by 
some  temptation." 

Those  who  play  at  the  game  of  chess  know  that  great 
circumspection  is  needed.  Your  opponent  is  working 
toward  a  design  of  which  yon  know  nothing,  and  while 
yon  imagine  that  yon  are  doing  exceedingly  well  he  is 
entrapping  you.  The  game  of  life,  as  against  Satan,  is 
one  in  which  his  age,  his  long  practice,  his  superior  skilly 
and  his  unscrupulousness  give  him  an  immense  advantage 
over  our  poor  self-conceited  folly.  Lord,  help  us,  lest 
we  lose  our  souls  while  we  are  dreaming  of  happiness. 
Thou  knowest  our  adversary,  be  pleased  to  deliver  us 
out  of  his  hand. 

THE  DUMB  BEGGAR. 

"  A  dumb  beggar  gets  an  alms  at  Christ's  gate  if  he  can  but  make 
signs,  when  his  tongue  cannot  plead  for  him." 

This  is  a  cheering  sentence  for  the  many  poor  souls 
who  feel  that  they  cannot  find  words  wherewith  to  pray. 
Sit  down  at  mercy's  gate,  and  show  your  sores,  and 
groan,  and  sigh.  Let  your  rags  ask  for  raiment,  and 
your  hunger  plead  for  bread.  Wounds  are  eloquent 
orators  with  a  tender-hearted  surgeon  ;  expose  your 
wounds  to  Jesus,  and  he  will  bind  them  up.  Misery  is 
mercy's  best  constraint.  When  the  psalmist  could  not 
pray  a  set  prayer,  he  says,  ''  I  opened  my  mouth  and 
panted."  He  declares  in  another  place  that  he  panted 
like  a  thirsty  hart  :  there  is  nothing  articulate  in  pant- 
ing, and  yet  no  one  ever  misunderstood  the  meaning  of 
the  act.  Come,  then,  ye  dumb  beggars,  and  learn  the 
language  of  signs.     Come  and  pant,  come  and  spread 


puritan's   GARDEN".  131 

your  misery  before  the  eyes  of  mercy,  and  doubt  not 
that  he  who  knows  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  will  readily 
understand  you  and  speedily  grant  your  desires. 

CALVIN  AND  HIS  LOKD. 

''  *  What  if  my  master  should  come  and  find  me  idle  ?'  said  Calvin 
to  his  friends,  who  demanded  of  him  why  he  wasted  his  body  in 
such  constant  labors.  Few  are  like-minded  so  as  to  put  this  question 
to  their  souls,  *  Am  I  as  I  would  wish  to  be  should  Christ  come  ?  '  " 

This  question  may  serve  as  a  test  as  to  our  manner  of 
life  :  Am  1  in  such  a  state  as  I  would  wish  to  be  in 
should  my  Lord  appear  ?  If  we  can  answer  this  to  our 
comfort,  all  is  well ;  but  if  not,  by  all  means  let  us 
mend  matters,  get  out  of  our  deshabille  and  stand  ready 
to  meet  our  coming  Lord.  Bravely  did  Calvin  fight  on 
under  a  heap  of  disorders,  and  if  we  would  be  approved 
at  the  last  we  must  imitate  him  in  a  constant  diligence, 
born  of  ^^seeing  him  who  is  invisible." 

Lord,  make  me  to  hear  thy  footfall  evermore,  and 
cause  me  so  to  live  as  though  I  heard  thee  at  the  door. 

INVENTION  OF  FRESH  WEAPONS. 

•^  As  in  war,  as  the  arts  of  battery  and  methods  of  destruction  do 
increase,  so  also  doth  skill  in  fortification  ;  so  in  the  Church,  God 
still  bestoweth  gifts  for  the  further  explication  of  truth." 

We  are  glad  to  see  our  author  writing  so  cheerily,  for 
at  this  present  it  seems  to  us  that  our  adversaries  have 
been  far  more  acute  in  assailing  the  gospel  than  the 
Church  in  defending  it.  Still  on  God's  side  it  is  true 
that  though  his  ministers  may  not  be  as  faithful  as  they 
should  be,  yet  he  raises  up  one  and  another  to  stand  as 
bulwarks  for  the  truth,  and  so,  after  all,  the  grand  old 
cause  is  not  quite  overborne.  To  the  end  of  the  cam- 
paign it  will  be  so,  and  there  is  no  real  cause  for  despair, 
or  even  for  despondency.  The  fortress  of  the  gospel  is 
still  unconquered.     Her  motto  is  invicta.     The  gospel 


132  FLOWERS   FROM  A 

has  survived  the  brutal  ignorance  of  many  ages,  and  if 
now  the  world  Las  changed  its  fashions  and  professes 
itself  to  be  wise,  the  same  eternal  system  of  truth  will 
continue  to  baffle  its  designs.  The  assaults  of  sceptics 
are  a  gain  to  believers,  for  they  produce  a  clearing  and 
opening  up  of  the  truth.  Opposition  directs  attention 
to  neglected  doctrines,  and  heresy  calls  for  orthodox 
replies,  and  so  our  defences  become  stronger  as  our 
enemies  become  more  furious.  Happy  citizens,  to  be 
thus  shielded  from  the  foe. 

HO]MEWARD  BOUND. 

"  A  poor  beast  that  is  going  homeward  goeth  cheerfuUy.*' 
See  how  the  horse  pricks  up  his  ears  and  quickens  his 
pace  when  you  turn  his  head  to  his  stable.  The  proverb 
saith  that  even  the  dull  ass  doth  the  same.  Much  more 
then  should  intelligent  Christian  men  feel  the  attrac- 
tions of  their  heavenly  home.  Courage,  brothers  and 
sisters ;  we,  too,  are  homeward  bound.  Every  hour 
brings  us  nearer  to  the  many  mansions.  We  are  not 
going  froin  home,  or  we  might  hang  our  heads  :  our 
way  is  toward  the  Father' s  house  on  high,  therefore  let 
us  rejoice  at  every  step  we  take. 

MAETHA  CO]\IPLAINING  OF  IVLiRY. 

**  St.  Bernard  hath  a  pretty  note  of  Martha's  complaining  of  Mary, 
that  she  sat  at  Jesus'  feet,  while  herself  was  employed  in  all  the 
business  of  the  family.  *0h,'  saith  St.  Bernard,  Hhat  is  a  happy 
family  where  Martha  complains  of  Mary  1 '  Oh,  how  few  families  do 
thus  complain  !  The  world  eats  up  our  time,  our  care,  and  our 
thoughts,  and  God  hath  but  a  little  share,  little  worship,  little 
reverence." 

For  the  most  part  in  our  households  Mary  might  well 
complain  of  Martha,  for  family  cares  still  cumber  many 
and  keep  them  away  from  Jesus'  feet.  Yery  seldom 
are  Christians  nowadays  too  much  in   the  closet,    too 


puritan's   GARDEN".  133 

much  with  their  Bibles,  too  ranch  at  prayer-meetings. 
Alas,  the  most  of  them  are  all  hack  for  the  world,  the 
shop,  or  the  evening  party.  Martha,  Martha,  we  may 
well  complain  to  the  Master  of  thee,  for  thou  leavest 
him  alone,  and  forsakest  his  teaching,  and  all  for  this 
,  poor,  cumbering  world  ! 

Lord,  help  us  to  balance  our  duties,  and  thus  may  we 
serve  thee  after  the  best  manner,  through  thy  grace. 

THE  C0:VIET  AND  THE  SUN. 
**  We  gaze  more  on  a  comet  than  on  the  snn." 

This  is  the  reason  why  erratic  teachers  are  for  a  while 
popular,  and  attract  public  attention.  It  is  given  out 
that  they  are  ''some  great  one,"  and  all  the  town  is 
staring  with  open  mouth.  The  nine  days'  wonder  is 
every  day's  talk.  The  new  teaching  is  something  mar- 
vellous, and  the  old  creed  is  to  be  driven  out  of  the 
land.  New  lights  are  to  eclipse  the  old  ;  at  least,  so  we 
are  told.  Let  us  wait  a  while,  however,  and  the  comet 
will  have  vanished,  and  the  half- forgotten  fixed  stars  will 
be  seen  to  be  shining  on  with  unfading  splendor. 

May  the  Lord  give  us  such  fixed  and  established  judg- 
ments that  no  novelties  of  doctrine  may  ever  dazzle  us. 
Children  are  fond  of  new^  toys  ;  let  us  be  men  and  keep 
to  the  tried  word  of  the  Lord. 

VIOLET  AND  NETTLE. 

"  Laden  boughs  hang  low.  The  nettle  mounteth  above  its  fellow 
vreeds,  but  the  violet  lieth  shrouded  under  its  leaves,  and  is  only 
found  out  by  its  own  scent. ' ' 

Walking  one  day  by  a  stream  we  were  conscious  of  a 
delicious  perfume,  and  only  then  did  we  perceive  the 
little  blue  eyes  which  were  looking  up  to  us  so  meekly 
from  the  ground  on  which  we  stood.  Virtue  is  always 
modest,  and  modesty  is  itself  a  virtue.     He  who  is  dis- 


134  PLOWERS   FROM   A 

covered  by  his  real  excellence,  and  not  by  his  egotistical 
advertisement  of  his  own  perfections,  is  a  man  worth 
knowing  :  the  other  is  a  mere  nettle  who  is  sure  to  be 
forgotten,  unless  indeed  his  blustering  pride  should  sting 
some  tender  spirit,  and  secure  a  wretched  kind  of  re- 
membrance. 

0  that  I  may  ever  be  more  gracious  than  I  seem  to 
be.  Never  may  it  be  any  concern  of  mine  to  be  ob- 
served of  men,  and  yet  let  me  so  live  that  1  need  not 
fear  to  be  read  and  known  of  all. 

THE  SWOLLEN  AKM. 

**  Certainly  a  prond  spirit  is  no  great  spirit,  any  more  than  a 
swollen  arm  can  be  accounted  to  be  strong." 

Many  mistakes  are  made  on  this  matter  both  as  to  men 
and  language.  Boasters  are  by  foolish  persons  reckoned 
at  their  declared  value  :  no  mistake  can  be  greater ;  a 
proud  spirit  is  of  necessity  small  and  mean  in  the  judg- 
ment of  truth.  Language  is  thouglit  to  be  forcible 
because  it  is  hard,  severe,  and  blustering  ;  and  yet  there 
is  little  power  in  such  speaking  except  to  provoke 
opposition  and  furnish  motives  and  weapons  for  the 
opposer.  Judge,  then,  between  swelling  and  strength  : 
avoid  the  one  and  prudently  aim  at  the  other.  True 
humility  is  beloved  of  God,  and  he  ever  comes  to  its  aid. 

1  must  be  less  and  less  in  my  own  esteem  if  I  would 
have  power  with  God  and  prevalence  with  men.  It 
seemeth  not  so,  and  yet  so  it  is.  Lord,  write  the  lesson 
on  my  heart. 

ONLY  A  LINK. 
**  The  first  appearances  of  error  are  many  times  modest.     There  is 
a  chain  of  truths  ;  the  devil  taketh  out  a  link  here  and  a  link  there, 
that  all  may  fall  to  pieces.'" 

The  argument  of  '^charity"  is  used  to  screen  those 
who  are  robbing  us  of  the  gospel.     We  are  bidden  to  be 


puiutan's  garden.  135 

cautions  liow  we  condemn  those  who  only  differ  on  small 
points  ;  whereas  the  truths  which  they  would  take  away 
from  us  have  important  bearings  upon  other  truths,  and 
cannot  be  denied  without  a  serious  break-up  of  the 
whole  doctrinal  chain.  Let  us  not  give  up  a  single  link 
of  the  divine  system,  for  if  we  did  so,  we  should  prove 
traitors  to  the  whole  plan  of  revealed  truth. 

In  these  times  the  illustration  given  above  is  exceed- 
ingly instructive.  Satan  knows  that  we  would  never 
consent  to  give  up  a  wheel  of  the  gospel  chariot,  and 
therefore  in  his  craftiness  he  only  asks  for  the  linch-pins 
to  be  handed  over  to  him.  May  God  grant  wisdom  to 
his  servants  that  none  of  them  may  be  beguiled  by  the 
cunning  of  the  adversary.  Long  ages  may  have  to  rue 
the  defalcations  of  this  day,  if  we  sell  the  precious  gospel 
to  its  foes.  Until  the  Lord  shall  come  we  are  put  in 
trust  with  the  gospel  :  will  we  be  fraudulent  trustees  ? 
Can  we  dare  to  play  fast  and  loose  with  that  which 
concerns  God's  glory,  and  the  destiny  of  immortal 
souls  ? 

THE  LUNGS, 
"  Some  graces,  like  the  Inngs,  are  always  in  use." 
'*  Pray  without  ceasing  ;"  ''be  thou  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  all  the  day  long;"  and  such  like  exhortations 
appertain  to  continuous  duties.  Thus  David  says,  "  I 
have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me  ;"  he  was  always 
living  in  the  presence  of  God.  Other  parts  of  the 
human  frame  are  exercised  occasionally,  but  the  lungs 
are  always  at  work,  and,  even  so,  certain  of  the  graces 
are  in  active  motion  in  their  appointed  seasons,  but  faith 
never  ceases  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  it  is  essen- 
tial to  spiritual  vitality.  Hence  we  ought  never  to  go 
where  we  shall  be  out  of  the  atmosphere  of  heaven. 
Lungs  must  have  air,  and  cannot  endure  a  dense  smoke 


136  FLOWERS    FllOM   A 

or  a  poisonous  gas  ;  nor  can  faith  bear  error,  false  doc- 
trine,  and  evil  conversation.  Since  we  always  need  the 
pure  air  of  heaven,  let  ns  not  go  where  it  cannot  be 
found.  Who  in  his  senses  would  desire  to  have  been  in 
the  Black  Hole  of  Calcutta  ?  Who  wishes  to  dwell 
where  drunkenness  and  loose  living  abound  ?  How  can 
faith  breathe  in  such  a  suffocating  atmosphere  ? 

Lord,  keep  thou  my  faith  alive,  that  it  may  keep  me 
alive,  and  that  I  may  live  to  thee. 

FEUIT  WITHOUT  THE  SUN. 
*'  Fruit  that  liath  but  little  sun  can  never  be  ripe." 

We  have  had  practical  proof  of  this,  for  during  the 
year  1879,  there  being  a  scant  measure  of  sunshine,  the 
fruit  was  never  properly  ripened,  and  was  therefore 
destitute  of  flavor  and  sweetness.  Whatever  might  be 
its  outward  appearance,  the  berry  was  insipid  and  al- 
together unlike  what  the  sun  would  have  made  it  had  he 
smiled  upon  the  swelling  fruit. 

Thus,  without  communion  with  God,  no  soul  can 
develop  its  graces,  neither  can  those  graces  become  what 
they  should  be.  JSTo  measure  of  care  or  effort  can  make 
up  for  the  light  of  the  Father's  face  ;  neither  can 
attendance  upon  means  of  grace  nor  the  use  of  religious 
exercises  supply  the  lack.  Fellov/ship  with  God  we 
must  have,  or  the  essential  honey  of  love  will  be  de- 
ficient, the  bloom  of  joy  will  be  wanting,  the  aroma  of  ■ 
zeal  and  earnestness  will  be  missed.  We  may  have  the 
virtues  by  name,  and  we  may  exhibit  som_e  feeble,  insipid 
imitation  of  them,  but  the  secret  savor  and  mystic 
richness  of  grace  v/ill  not  be  in  us  unless  we  abide  in 
the  full  light  of  divine  love. 

Lord,  evermore  be  as  the  sun  unto  our  souls,  that  we 
may  be  as  fruit  fully  ripe,  attaining  to  all  the  jjerfec- 
tion  and  maturity  of  v/hicli  our  nature  is  capable. 


puritan's  garde]^.  137 

FIEE  !  FIRE  ! 
"  When  a  fire  is  kindled  in  a  city  we  do  not  say  coldly,  '  Yonder 
is  a  great  fire,  I  pray  God  it  do  no  harm.'  In  times  of  public  defec- 
tion we  are  not  to  read  tame  lectures  of  contemplative  divinity,  or 
fight  with  ghosts  and  antiquated  errors,  but  to  oppose  with  all 
earnestness  the  growing  evils  of  the  world,  whatever  it  may  cost  us." 

If  men  valued  tratli  as  they  do  tlieir  goods  and  their 
houses,  they  would  not  regard  error  with  such  cool  con- 
tentment. The  cant  of  the  present  day  cries,  "  Charity, 
charity."  As  if  it  were  not  the  truest  charity  to  grow 
indignant  with  that  which  ruins  souls.  It  is  not  un- 
charitable to  warn  men  against  poisonous  adulterations 
of  their  food,  or  invasions  of  tlieir  rights  ;  and  surely  it 
cannot  be  more  uncharitable  to  put  them  upon  their 
guard  against  that  which  will  poison  or  rob  their  souls. 
Lukewarmness  of  love  to  truth  is  the  real  evil  to  be  de- 
precated in  these  times.  We  have  new  doctrines  among 
us,  full  of  practical  mischief,  and  against  these  there  is 
need  to  raise  an  earnest  outcry,  lest  they  gain  so  great  a 
head  that  both  church  and  state  should  be  set  on  fire. 

Lord,  arouse  thy  watchmen,  and  bid  them  arouse  all 
thy  saints,  for  the  times  are  full  of  danger. 

THE  GLASS  WITHOUT  A  FOOT. 
"We    derive  aU  our  strength  from  Christ.     We  are  like  glasses 
without  feet  ;  they  cannot  stand  of  themselves  ;  neither  can  we." 

Such  glasses  are  not  ordinarily  used  now,  but  they 
were  common  enough  in  former  times.  A  man  must 
hold  the  glass  in  his  hand,  or  it  would  be  of  no  use  to 
him,  for  he  could  not  set  it  down  on  the  table,  since  it 
could  not  stand  alone,  but  rolled  over,  and  spilt  its 
contents.  We  are  something  in  the  hand  of  Jesus,  but 
nothing  out  of  it  ;  we  cannot  even  hold  the  water  of 
life  unless  our  Lord  holds  us.  What  poor  creatures  men 
are,  and  yet  they  dare  to  boast  ! 


138  FLOWEUS    FKOM    A 

THE  STONE  AND  THE  CHIP. 

"  A  great  deal  of  fire  falleth  "upon  a  stone  and  it  burnetii  not,  but 
a  dry  chijD  soon  taketh  fire." 

According  to  our  condition  we  are  affected  by  the  fire 
of  the  gospel.  Hearts  of  stone  are  not  kindled  by  the 
most  vehement  preaching  of  the  word,  nor  will  they 
ever  be  till  grace  works  a  change  in  their  nature.  The 
same  sermons  which  are  powerless  with  them  are, 
througii  divine  grace,  most  potent  with  souls  prepared 
of  the  Lord  to  feel  the  flame.  The  failures  of  minis- 
ters are  often  traceable  to  tlie  sinful  state  of  their  hearers 
— what  is  a  man  to  do  who  labors  to  kindle  a  fire  with 
stones  ?  Must  he  not  labor  in  vain  ?  He  may  blow  as 
long  as  he  pleases,  and  burn  his  heart  out  with  fervor, 
and  yet  his  hearers'  hearts  will  not  catch  the  flame  ;  and 
he  may  even  die  in  very  anguish  ;  but  so  long  as  the 
natural  mind  remains  what  it  is  he  cannot  effect  his 
])urpose. 

Lord,  I  thank  thee  not  only  for  the  heavenly  fire,  but 
for  the  power  to  be  affected  by  it.  It  is  thy  grace  which 
makes  me  capable  of  grace,  and  unto  thee  be  all  the 
praise. 

THE  ANT-HILL. 
*'  The  world  is  a  great  theatre,  and  the  spectators  are  God  and 
angels.  I  confess  we  little  think  of  it  ;  there  is  a  foolish  levity  in 
our  minds.  As  to  us,  the  world  is  like  a  hill  of  ants  ;  you  stand  by, 
and  they  run  up  and  down,  and  do  not  think  of  your  being  there  ; 
so  the  Lord  stands  by  and  observes  all  our  motions,  and  we  run  up 
and  down  like  busy  ants,  and  do  not  think  of  God's  presence  among 
us.  We  live  in  a  great  hurry  and  clatter  of  business,  and  have  but 
few  thoughts  of  God.  The  Psalmist  gives  a  description  of  carnal 
men  in  these  words  (Ps.  86  :  14),  '  They  have  not  set  thee  before 
them.'" 

Lord,  let  me  not  be  a  mere  ant  on  the  world's  hill  ; 
but  as  thou  hast  given  me  an  understanding,  help  me  to 
use  it  upon  thyself,  that  so  I  may  rise  to  the  true  level 


puritan's  garden.  139 

of  an  intelligent  and  immortal  being.  How  can  I  dis- 
regard my  God,  my  Father,  my  all  ?  How  can  I  be 
taken  up  with  these  trifles  whilst  thou  art  so  near  me, 
asking  my  love,  and  proving  thy  right  to  it  by  daily 
loading  me  with  benefits  ?  What  a  mere  insect  I  am  ! 
Why  am  I  thus  ?  Why  should  I  live  hke  an  emmet 
when  thou  hast  made  me  a  little  lower  than  an  angel  ? 
I  shall  never  rise  to  what  I  ought  to  be  unless  thou 
reveal  thyself  in  me  and  to  me  by  thy  good  Spirit. 
Deliver  me  from  that  foolish  levity  of  which  thy  servant 
speaks,  which  makes  me  fill  my  mind  with  contemptible 
vanities,  and  let  me  seriously  remember  thee,  and  the 
day  when  1  shall  stand  before  thy  judgment-seat. 

WANDERING  SHEEP  NEED  GENTLE  HANDLING. 

**  Though  swine  or  dogs  be  driven  with  violence,  yet  poor  stray 
lambs  must  be  brought  home,  as  the  shepherd  brought  home  his  lost 
sheep  *  upon  his  shoulders  rejoicing,'  Luke  15.  Many  well-meaning 
men  may  err  ;  be  not  too  severe  with  them,  lest  prejudice  make  them 
obstinate,  and  so  from  '  erring  brethren,'  they  become  heretical." 

Sound  advice  this.  It  is  true  that  certain  troublesome 
heretics  need  to  be  rebuked  sliarply  that  they  may  be 
sound  in  the  faith,  but  discretion  is  needed,  and  a  loving 
spirit  to  guide  the  discretion  :  the  sheep  must  not  be 
driven  as  if  they  were  swine.  The  tendency  of  stern 
orthodoxy  is  to  act  toward  an  erring  one  as  cruel  fathers 
do  when  they  whip  their  boys  without  mercy,  for  they 
drive  ten  devils  in  while  they  think  they  are  whipping 
one  out.  A  doubter  m^ay  be  worried  into  a  heretic 
before  we  are  aware  of  it.  Certain  minds  will  learn 
anything  from  those  they  love,  and  nothing  from  those 
who  are  masterful  with  them.  The  gentleness  of  Christ 
is  a  choice  qualification  for  a  pastor.  Heresies  are  better 
kept  out  by  a  full  gospel  than  driven  out  by  fierce  con- 
troversy.    Sheep  may  be  worried  into  worse  strayings, 


140  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

but  they  can  be  held  by  their  teeth  most  securely  if  they 
are  led  into  plentifnl  pasture.  O  for  the  Holy  Spirit's 
direction  in  dealing  with  weak  and  nnstable  minds. 

DRY  STICKS  KIXBLING  THE  GREEN. 
"  Two  dry  sticks  will  set  a  green  one  on  fire.     Can  you  blame  tho 
children  of  God,  then,  if  they  mourn  and  enter  their  protest  against 
the  iniquity  of  the  times  ?'* 

They  see  how  the  prevalence  of  sin  affects  those 
who  would  fain  be  innocent,  and  how  the  fashion  of 
evil  sweeps  along  with  it  those  who  at  first  had  better 
manners  ;  and  this  frets  them  sorely.  We  tremble  at 
the  mischief  which  can  be  done  by  men  who  are  hard- 
ened in  iniquity  ;  those  dry  sticks,  so  eager  for  the  flame, 
are  onr  terror  ;  when  such  are  laid  together  we  know  how 
fierce  will  be  the  burning.  Companionship  in  evil  leads 
to  a  high  pitch  of  sin.  Hands  joined  in  hand  draw  on 
with  great  force  those  who  seemed  reluctant  to  go  in  the 
way  of  evil.  O  that  our  young  people  would  be  warned 
of  the  danger  of  bad  example  !  If  we  could  keep  the 
green  sticks  out  of  the  way  of  the  dry  we  should  have 
little  to  fear  for  our  sons  and  daughters  ;  but,  alas,  the 
wicked  are  often  more  attractive  than  the  righteous,  and 
fair  speech  and  gay  habits  fascinate  the  inexperienced. 
The  amiable  but  undecided  of  our  youth  are  beguiled 
by  the  pleasant  manners  of  worldly  people,  and  before 
they  are  aware  they  become  like  their  betrayers. 

Lord,  save  us  from  evil  men,  and  when  we  are  called 
in  the  order  of  providence  to  be  in  their  presence,  let  us 
remember  that  we  are  also  in  thy  presence,  and  so  let  us 
escape  the  contagion  of  their  company. 

TUNING  AN  INSTRUMENT. 
**  If  we  could  learn  to  frame  our  minds  to  our  estates,  as  the  skil- 
ful musician  letteth  down  the  strings  a  peg  lower  when  the  tune 
requireth  it,  we  should  pass  to  heaven  more  comfortably.'* 


PUJilTAX'S    GARDEN.  141 

Yes,  we  are  as  a  rule  pitched  too  high.  We  look  for 
more  in  this  life  than  it  will  ever  yield  us.  If  we  could 
be  satisfied  witli  less  we  should  be  less  dissatisfied.  It  is 
a  great  pity  when  men  try  to  live  above  their  means,  for 
it  often  ends  in  tlieir  hardly  having  the  means  to  live  at 
all.  Probably  there  is  as  much  happiness  in  one  station 
of  life  as  in  another  if  it  is  suitable  to  us,  and  we  are 
able  to  fill  it  :  the  misery  of  life  must  be  when  a  man 
has  a  little  less  than  he  needs  and  a  great  deal  less  than  he 
aspires  to.  Contentment  is  the  crown  jewel  of  a  happy 
life.  We  shall  have  enough,  for  the  promise  guarantees 
us  our  portion  ;  why  need  we  fret  after  more  ?  "  Here 
little  and  hereafter  much,"  as  Bunyan  says,  is  best  for  us. 

O  Lord,  grant  me  grace  to  live  above  this  world  ;  and 
wherein  I  must  live  upon  it,  and  think  about  it,  help  me 
to  have  few  desires  and  no  cares.  Tune  my  nature  so 
that  without  fail  my  life  may  make  music  to  thy  praise. 

PKINTERS'  PKOOFS.  U 

'*  O  ye  ministers  of  the  word,  consider  weU  that  you  are  the  first 
sheets  from  the  King's  press  ;  others  are  printed  after  your  copy.  If 
the  first  sheet  be  weU  set,  a  thousand  more  are  stamped  with  ease. 
See,  then,  that  the  power  of  religion  prevail  over  your  own  hearts, 
lest  you  not  only  lose  your  own  souls,  but  cause  the  ruin  of  others." 

Correcting  for  the  press  is  work  which  has  to  be  done 
with  great  care,  since  thousands  of  copies  will  be  faulty 
if  the  proof-sheet  be  not  as  it  should  be.  So  should  the 
minister  of  a  congregation  be  seriously  earnest  to  be 
right,  because  his  people  will  imitate  him.  Like  priest, 
like  people  ;  the  sheep  will  follow  the  shepherd.  What 
need  there  is  that  the  pastor  should  order  his  steps  aright 
lest  he  lead  a  whole  flock  astray  !  If  the  town-clock  be 
wrong  half  the  watches  in  the  place  will  be  out  of  time. 

We  have  all  an  influence  over  others.  Even  the  least 
one  among  us  lias  some  individual  beneath  his  power  to 


/ 


142  FLOWERS   FPwOM   A 

whom  he  serves  as  an  example,  for  whom,  indeed,  he  is 
a  sort  of  proof-sheet.  O  that  the  good  Lord  would  make 
ns  correct  in  all  points,  lest  we  be  propagators  of  sin 
through  the  influence  of  onr  fanlts.  By  self-examination 
let  us  labor  to  correct  the  proofs. 

THE  LAPWING. 

*'  Usually  complainers  do  least.  The  crafty  lapv/ing  will  go  tip 
and  dov/n  fluttering  and  crying,  to  draw  the  fowler  from  her  own 
nest.  We  have  some  secret  nest  of  our  own,  and  we  are  loath  it 
should  be  rifled  and  exposed  to  public  view,  and  therefore  we  raise 
an  alarm  about  other  matters." 

This  we  may  be  doing  without  being  aware  of  it,  for 
self-deceit  is  easy.  We  may  be  amusing  ourselves  with 
zeal  for  political  reforms  when  in  truth  our  own  personal 
habits  need  reforming,  or  we  may  be  exclaiming  against 
the  errors  of  the  church  while  our  own  private  life  far 
more  needs  our  attention.  It  is  a  pity  to  be  cheating 
our  own  selves. 

Our  author,  however,  is  very  shrewd  in  his  judgment 
of  complainers.  Our  own  experience  leads  us  to  the 
conclusion  that  critics  of  others,  and  noisy  talkers  of  all 
kinds,  have  usually  some  design  of  their  own,  and  are 
working  to  their  own  hand.  If  we  were  to  press  them 
home  we  should  probably  discover  that  they  are  no 
better  than  they  should  be.  Their  pretence  of  being 
wounded  and  hurt  by  the  sins  of  others  is  a  crafty 
scheme  for  drawing  away  observation  from  their  own 
failings.  Lapwings  are  plentiful  enough  all  around  us, 
and  not  a  few  are  still  deceived  by  their  practices. 

O  Lord,  save  me  from  all  deceit,  and,  above  all, 
prevent  my  deceiving  myself. 

THE  CHANGED  BED. 
'*  A  sick  man  thinketh  to  have  ease  in  another  bed,  in  another 
room  ;  carry  him  thither,  his  pain  continueth.     If  a  carnal  man  had 


puritan's   GARDEN".  143 

lived  in  the  prophets'  times  or  the  apostles'  times,  he  would  have 
been  the  same  as  now  ;  see  Matt.  23  :  29,  30.  A  brier  is  a  brier 
wherever  it  groweth  ;  change  of  times  will  not  avail  without  a  change 
of  heart.  Adam  sinned  in  Paradise  ;  the  ctpostate  angels  in  heaven  ; 
hot  was  unchaste  in  the  mountains,  where  were  none  but  his  own 
family  ;  in  a  howling  wilderness,  where  they  had  no  outward  entice- 
ments, the  Israelites  were  given  to  fleshly  lusts." 

This  is  a  needful  rebuke  of  a  very  common  folly ;  let 
the  reader  see  that  he  fall  not  into  the  error.  We  ought 
not  blame  our  occupation,  but  our  disposition.  We  may 
not  saddle  our  poverty  or  our  wealth  with  the  sin  which 
is  purely  of  ourselves,  for  this  is  only  an  oblique  way  of 
blaming  God  for  our  faults.  Change  of  place  is  not 
wanted,  but  change  of  heart.  If,  dear  friend,  you  are 
unholy  where  you  are,  you  would  be  the  same  in  any 
othe'r  position  in  life.  The  fault  is  not  in  your  stars, 
but  in  yourself,  that  you  are  still  an  impenitent  sinner. 
Lay  this  to  heart  ;  abandon  all  idle  excuses  and  seek 
your  Saviour. 

DEEP  FOUNDATIONS. 

**  The  Lord  diggeth  deep  when  he  meaneth  to  raise  the  building 
high  ;  and  when  he  would  give  men  to  know  much  of  Christ,  he 
first  bringeth  them  out  of  themselves  by  godly  sorrow. " 

We  see  many  to  be  but  low  and  mean  in  point  of 
grace,  not  rising  like  towers  toward  heaven,  but  lying 
low  upon  the  earth  :  these  have  never  been  digged  out 
by  a  deep  sense  of  sin,  nor  excavated  by  profound  soul- 
trouble,  and  hence  it  would  not  be  safe  to  build  high 
with  so  shallow  a  foundation.  If  we  could  read  the 
secret  history  of  dwarfed  Christians  we  should  find  that 
they  never  had  much  humbling  of  heart.  They  tell  us 
there  is  as  much  of  a  tree  under  as  above  ground,  and 
certainly  it  is  so  with  a  believer ;  his  visible  life  would 
soon  wither  were  it  not  for  his  secret  life,  and  his  high 
enjoyments  would  fall  over  to  his  ruin  were  they  not 


144  FLOWERS   FROxM   A 

balanced  by  his  inward  humiliations.  There  must  be 
deep  foundations  if  we  are  to  have  high  walls  ;  we  must 
be  emptied  of  self,  and  everything  of  human  strength, 
or  we  shall  never  be  filled  with  the  love  of  God. 

O  my  heart,  be  ready  to  be  trenched  deep  if  this  be 
the  necessary  preparation  for  being  built  up  aloft. 
Welcome  pain  and  down-casting  if  edification  is  to 
follow. 

GOOD  DIET  IN  UNHEALTHY  PLACES. 
"  When  the  air  is  infections  we  are  the  more  carefnl  of  onr  diet." 

In  sickly  times  and  places  men  endeavor  to  keep  up 
the  strength  of  their  bodies  by  nourishing  food,  and  they 
strive  to  avoid  sickness  by  wholesome  meat.  In  this 
they  act  wisely,  and  according  to  the  rules  of  prudence. 
An  equal  care  should  be  exercised  over  our  souls. 
When  the  very  air  seems  to  be  laden  with  error  and 
vice,  believers  should  set  a  double  watch  as  to  what  they 
hear,  and  where  they  go.  Sin  is  as  subtle  and  as  deadly 
as  the  foul  gas  which  bears  within  it  the  seeds  of  plague, 
and  therefore  the  utmost  caution  must  be  used  that  we 
keep  as  far  from  its  occasions  and  temptations  as  we 
possibly  can.  We  must  also  live  nearer  to  God  than 
ever,  and  feed  more  upon  Christ,  and  seek  more  of  his 
Spirit  than  at  any  former  time,  that  we  may  be  fortified 
against  the  unusual  dangers  of  the  age.  So  shall  we  be 
error-proof  and  vice-proof,  and,  though  a  thousand  fall 
at  our  side,  the  spiritual  death  shall  not  come  nigh  unto 
UB.  Errors,  like  diseases,  prey  upon  the  feebler  sort, 
and  though  they  bring  no  good  even  to  the  strong, 
yet  these  are  able  to  cast  off  their  deleterious  influences, 
even  as  a  man  in  armor  shakes  off  the  arrows  which  else 
would  wound  liim  grievously.  To  be  strong  in  the  Lord 
is  the  best  preservative  against  the  ills  of  our  age,  and 
the  perils  of  our  surroundings. 


145 


O  Lord,  we  would  dwell  in  thy  secret  place,  that 
abiding  under  thy  shadow  we  may  live  unharmed  even 
where  Satan's  seat  is,  should  thy  providence  there  pitch 
our  tent. 

HEAVEN'S  CEMENT. 

"  Love  is  a  grace  that  wiU  make  us  industrious  for  the  good  of 
others,  and  therefore  we  read  of  the  '  labor  of  love '  (1  Thess.  1  :  3). 
It  is  gluten  animarum,  the  glue  of  souls,  the  cement  and  solder  of  the 
church  :  the  jointing  that  runneth  throughout  all  the  living  and 
squared  stones  (Col.  3  :  14).  By  this  souls  are  mingled,  and  all 
mutual  offices  are  cheerfully  performed." 

O  for  more  of  this  sacred  cement.  The  walls  of 
many  churches  gape  with  huge  cracks  for  lack  of  it. 
Building  with  untempered  mortar  is  an  ancient  fault, 
but  nowadays  some  build  w^ith  no  mortar  at  all.  Pro- 
fessors seem  to  be  piled  together  like  a  load  of  bricks, 
without  life,  love,  or  living  truth  to  unite  them  ;  and 
the  promise  is  forgotten,  "  I  will  lay  thy  stones  wdth  fair 
colors."  Will  not  our  reader,  if  he  be  a  believer,  en- 
deavor to  furnish  his  portion  of  the  sacred  cement  of 
love,  which  is  the  perfect  bond  ?  This  will  be  far  more 
useful  than  complaining  of  the  lack  of  unity,  for  this 
complaint  often  creates  the  evil  which  it  deplores. 
Critics  pick  out  from  betvreen  the  stones  the  mortar,  of 
which  there  is  little  enough  already  ;  but  loving  hearts 
fill  up  the  cracks,  and  do  their  best  to  keep  the  struct- 
ure whole.      ''  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers." 

How  am  I  acting  ?  Am  I  a  bond  in  the  building,  or 
do  I,  like  the  foolish  woman  in  the  Proverbs,  pluck 
down  the  house  with  my  hands  ?  O  Lord  of  peace, 
make  me  more  and  more  a  lover  of  peace. 

LAY-FIGUKES. 
*'  You  would  all  judge  it  to  be  an  affront  to  the  majesty  of  God  if 
a  man  should  send  his  clothes  stuffed  with  straw,  or  a  puppet  dressed 
up  instead  of  himself,   into  the  assemblies  of   God's  people,  and 


146  FLOWEKS    FROM    A 

think  that  this  wonlcl  do  instead  of  his  personal  presence.  Yet  our 
clothes  stuffed  with  straw  would  be  less  offensive  to  God  than  our 
bodies  without  our  souls.  The  absence  of  the  spirit  is  the  absence 
of  the  more  noble  part." 

Think  of  this,  ye  whose  hearts  are  with  your  flocks 
and  herds,  and  shops,  and  ships,  when  you  are  in  your 
churches  and  chapels.  Will  ye  longer  insult  the  Lord 
who  will  have  only  those  to  worship  him  who  worship 
him  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ?  A  mind  stuffed  with  vanity 
and  unbelief  must  be  worse  than  clothes  stuffed  with 
straw.  Reader,  have  you  never  set  up  this  abomination 
before  the  very  eyes  of  the  Eternal  ? 

CLOWNS  AND  PEINCES. 

*'  It  is  not  a  wonder  for  a  clown,  that  hath  not  been  acquainted 
with  dainties,  to  love  garlic  and  onions  ;  but  for  a  prince,  that  hath 
been  acquainted  with  better  diet,  to  leave  the  dainties  of  his  father's 
table  for  such  base  feeding,  that  were  strange.  I  do  not  wonder  at 
carnal  men,  that  they  are  delighted  with  carnal  objects  :  they  never 
knew  better  ;  but  for  a  child  of  God,  that  hath  tasted  how  gracious 
and  sweet  God  in  Christ  is,  to  find  sap  and  savor  in  coarser  fare,  this 
is  wonderful. '  * 

Yet  were  our  author  now  alive  he  might  weep  his 
eyes  out  as  he  saw  professing  Christians  craving  for  the 
ball- room  and  the  theatre.  The  carrion  which  professors 
can  now  feed  upon  is  disgusting  to  the  very  thought  of 
a  real  Christian.  Entertainments  are  got  up  among 
religious  people  which  are  unworthy  even  of  decent 
worldlings.  Many  true  hearts  are  deeply  wounded  by 
this  terrible  degeneracy.  Were  it  not  for  a  small  rem- 
nant we  had  been  as  Sodom,  and  been  made  like  unto 

Gomon*ah. 

PAINT  FOE  PAINT. 

"A  ministry  that  stayeth  in  the  paint  of  words  will  beget  but 
painted  grace." 

If  it  is  not  a  real,  hearty  ministry  of  grace,  inspired 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  end  in  nothing.     Fine  words 


purita:n^'s  garden.  147 

neither  wonnd  nor  lieal.  Oratory  may  amuse,  but  it 
cannot  convert  ;  and  rhetoric  may  astonish,  but  it  will 
never  save.  We  must  have  more  than  mere  words, 
however  striking — paint  will  not  do  ;  we  want  living 
preaching,  by  men  in  downright  earnest,  attended  by 
the  living  Spirit,  or  else  life  will  never  be  created  or 
sustained  by  it.  What  is  the  use  of  coloring  the  cheek 
of  the  dead  ?  The  hue  of  life  is  a  mockery  while  death 
reigns  within.  That  is  evil  preaching  which  creates  the 
semblance  of  piety,  but  never  imparts  the  substance. 

Lord,  save  me  from  being  the  imitation  of  a  Christian, 
the  produce  of  a  mimic  gospel.  Give  me  thoroughness 
and  sincerity,  and  let  not  my  religion  be  a  painted 
pageantry  for  me  to  go  to  hell  in.  Create  in  me  a  clean 
heart,  OGod  ! 

SLUGGAKDS  HATE  LIGHT. 

"  The  lazy  world  would  fain  lie  upon  the  bed  of  ease,  draw  the 
curtains  and  rest  ;  and  therefore  light  is  troublesome  to  it.  In  these 
days  men  begin  to  tire  of  gospel  music,  and  thirst  and  pant  for  the 
old  unsavorj^  moral  strains,  which  deal  with  sin  in  general,  and  do 
not  irritate  men  by  close  personal  applications." 

Faithful  preachers  are  like  those  men  whose  business 
it  is  to  arouse  slumbering  workmen  and  call  them  to 
their  labors.  The  sound  is  not  welcome  to  those  who 
desire  a  little  more  slumber  ;  they  wish  no  blessings 
upon  the  head. of  the  noisy  watchman.  Yet  if  they  be 
aroused  and  reach  their  work  betimes  they  have  a  good 
Vv^ord  in  the  end  for  him  who  caused  them  to  be  up  and 
doing.  The  watchman  should  not  take  notice  of  a  hasty 
word  from  one  half  awake  ;  he  may  rest  content  that  he 
will  have  their  good  word  by  and  by. 

Manton  was  right  in  his  suspicion  that  mere  moral 
preaching  would  continue  to  have  its  admirers.  Many 
nowadays  reckon  it  a  crime  for  the  preacher  to  be  rous- 


148  FLOAVEKS    FROM    A 

iDg  and  personal;  they  prefer  a  good  sound  moralist 
who  Avill  tell  servants  their  duty,  and  let  their  masters 
and  mistresses  sleep.  O  that  men  were  wise,  for  then 
they  would  count  him  to  be  the  best  preacher  who  the 
most  earnestly  calls  them  out  of  their  beds  of  sinful  ease 
to  seek  and  find  salvation.  None  do  this  but  spiritual, 
gospel  preachers.  Your  '^  moral"  teacher  pretends  to 
be  very  practical,  and  yet  if  you  watch  for  the  results  of 
his  efforts,  what  will  you  see  ?  When  you  hav^e  looked 
through  a  microscope  you  will  only  say,  "  There  is  noth- 
ing," for  truly  there  are  no  results  worth  mentioning. 
Sin  is  a  serpent  which  these  moralists  cannot  tame, 
charm  they  never  so  wisely. 

Lord,  help  us  to  cry  aloud,  and  spare  not  till  the 
slumberers  arise  ;  and  let  us  use  thy  truth  as  the  best 
awakener.  Let  thy  light  shine  on  sluggards  and  awaken 
them.  If  these  things  suffice  not,  0  Lord,  thunder  at 
them,  and  by  some  means  break  their  death-sleep. 

THE  LONG  GARMENT. 
*'  A  garment  which  is  too  long  trails  in  the  mire  and  soon  becomes 
a  dirty  rag  ;  and  it  is  easy  for  large  estates  to  become  much  the 
same.  It  is  a  hard  lesson  to  *  learn  to  abound '  (Phil.  -4  :  12).  We 
say  such  a  one  would  do  well  to  be  a  lord  or  a  lady  ;  but  it  is  a 
harder  thing  than  we  think  it  to  be. " 

It  is  hard  to  carry  a  full  cup  with  a  steady  hand. 
High  places  are  dizzy  places,  and  full  many  have  fallen 
to  their  eternal  ruin  through  climbing  aloft  without 
liaving  grace  to  look  up.  The  simile  of  the  trailing 
garment  used  by  Manton  is  simple,  but  instructive. 
Such  robes  raise  a  dust,  and  gather  upon  themselves  all 
sorts  of  filthiness,  besides  being  subjected  to  needless 
wear  and  tear.  A  man  may  have  so  much  of  this  world 
that  he  misses  the  next.  His  long  robe  may  trip  him 
up  in  the  race  for  the.  heavenly  prize,  and  he  may  fall  a 


pukitak's  garde:n".  149 

victim  to  the  wealth  he  idolized.  Alas,  for  the  poor 
rich  !  Faring  sumptuously  every  day,  and  yet  full  often 
strangers  to  that  deep  and  peerless  joy  which  belongs  to 
those  who,  in  the  deep  waters  of  poverty,  find  a  bound- 
less bliss  in  trusting  God.  When  the  rich  are  saved 
they  should  count  it  a  miracle  of  grace,  and  feel  great 
gratitude  to  him  who  enables  a  camel  to  go  through  the 
eye  of  a  needle,  notwithstanding  his  hump. 

Lord,  give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches  ;  or,  rather, 
be  thou  my  riches,  and  give  thyself  to  me.  As  for  ail 
else,  I  would  leave  myself  without  reserve  in  thy  hands. 

CKIPPLES  MOCKING. 
**  If  cripples  mock  iis  for  going  upright,  we  pity  them." 

If  worldlings  rail  at  us  for  endeavoring  to  lead  godly 
and  sober  lives,  we  should,  not  be  angry,  but  rather 
sorrow  over  their  infatuation.  No  wise  man  will  swerve 
an  inch  from  his  path  to  please  those  who  are  mad  with 
sin,  nor  will  he  break  his  heart  because  idiotic  sinners 
make  a  jest  of  his  uprightness. 

BIKD  CATCHING  BY  NIGHT. 

**  This  is  the  Devil's  device,  first  to  maze  people,  as  birds  are  with 
a  light  and  a  bell  in  the  night,  and  then  to  drive  them  into  the  net. 
If  you  would  keep  to  wholesome  doctrine,  keep  to  a  form  of  whole- 
some words,  and  do  not  jDlace  religion  in  conceited  speaking." 

Would  to  God  that  this  advice  v/ould  be  heeded  ! 
We  have  those  about  us  who  are  forever  inventino; 
some  new  thing,  and  using  the  old  orthodox  terms  in  an 
altogether  novel  sense.  Their  hearers  are  first  dazzled 
with  the  clever  candle-light,  and  cannot  make  (uit  what 
the  novel  brilliance  means  ;  and  when  they  are  thorough- 
ly bewildered,  a  great  noise  and  tinkling  is  made  of 
pretended  wisdom  and  deep  thought,  so  that  the  poor 
souls   are   ready  to  fly  anywhere   and   anyhow.     Thus 


150  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

the  fowler's  business  is  effectually  done,  and  by  tins 
means,  if  it  were  possible,  they  would  ensnare  the  very 
elect.  The  safest  way  for  simple  souls  is  to  keep  to  a 
definite  and  decided  gospel  ministry.  If  you  do  not 
know  the  voice  of  the  shepherd,  do  not  follow  him.  Of 
course  joii  will  avoid  a  wolf,  for  his  howl  is  your  warn- 
ing ;  but  be  doubly  careful  to  keep  clear  of  the  false 
shepherd,  and,  to  make  quite  sure  of  your  man,  count 
him  to  be  false  who  is  not  evidently  true. 

Lord,  preserve  my  poor  silly  mind  from  being  dazed 
and  dazzled,  and  let  me  follow  thy  truth  step  by  step 
even  to  the  end. 

DWELLEES  IN  MAESHES. 
**  In  marshy  countries  we  do  not  expect  a  clear  air  ;  so  sensual 
persons  have  seldom  any  clear  and  elevated  thoughts  of  God.     Men 
given  to  pleasures  can  taste  meats  and  drinks,  but  not  doctrines." 

Hence  the  folly  of  being  swayed  by  their  censures. 
Learned  men  are  to  be  respected  when  they  express 
opinions  upon  subjects  which  they  understand  ;  but 
when  they  are  knov/n  to  be  without  grace  and  spiritual 
light  their  opinions  upon  divine  truth  are  not  to  be 
regarded.  They  have  not  the  capacity  to  appreciate 
such  things,  and  they  had  better  let  them  alone.  A 
blind  man  may  be  a  first-rate  musician,  and  in  his  own 
department  he  may  be  a  master,  but  if  he  ventures  to 
dogmatize  upon  color  and  artistic  portraiture  he  is  more 
worthy  of  ridicule  than  of  reverence.  Carnal  men  have 
not  the  needful  taste  by  which  divine  doctrine  is  dis- 
cerned. Their  minds  are  as  to  religion  a  mere  marsh 
land,  breeding  fog  and  mist,  and  to  hope  for  clear  and 
expansive  views  of  the  gospel  from  them  is  in  vain. 
May  God  of  his  great  mercy  uplift  the  great,  sunken 
intellects  of  our  day,  and  give  a  holy  taste  and  discern- 
ment to  those  who  now  knov/  nothing  of  the  bread  of 


puritan's   GARDEN".  151 

heaven  or  the  new  wine  of  the  gospel.  Meanwhile  it 
will  be  as  well  to  take  as  little  notice  as  possible  of  their 
opinions  npon  rehgion,  which  must  of  necessity  be 
valueless. 

THE  UNFINISHED  HOUSE. 
**  We  shaU  not  keep  what  we  have  received  if  we  do  not  labor  to 
increase  it,  as  a  house  begun  to  be  built  goeth  to  decay,  and  droppeth 
down  more  and  more,  if  we  do  not  go  on  to  finish  it." 

Have  we  not  all  seen  what  are  commonly  called  house- 
carcasses  standing  in  desolation,  a  blot  upon  the  street, 
and  a  dead  loss  to  the  builder  ?  To-day  the  slates  are  fall- 
ing, to-morrow  the  windows  are  broken,  and  anon  timber 
after  timber  falls.  Just  such  are  tliey  who  having  begun 
to  build  in  the  matter  of  religion  have  failed  to  count  the 
cost,  and  so  come  to  a  stand -still,  and  speedily  arrive  at 
a  ruin.  We  believe — not  in  the  continuance  of  un- 
progressive  grace,  but  in  the  perseverance  and  progress 
of  saints  even  to  the  end.  Blessed  are  they  who  have 
this  persevering  progress,  for  these  are  habitations 
builded  of  God.  Others,  who  abide  in  their  immovable 
self-content,  are  ruined  by  degrees,  and  prove  them- 
selves to  be  mere  carcasses,  within  which  the  living  graces 
have  never  taken  up  their  residence. 

Remember  this,  O  my  soul,  and  pray  the  Lord  to 
build  thee  up  by  his  Spirit,  and  complete  in  thee  the 
work  of  grace  with  power. 

SOLDIERS  AND  SAILORS. 
"  If  because  you  are  Christians  you  promise  yourselves  a  long 
lease  of  temporal  happiness,  free  from  troubles  and  afflictions,  it  is 
as  if  a  soldier  going  to  the  wars  should  promise  himself  peace  and 
continual  truce  with  the  enemy  ;  or  as  if  a  mariner  committing  him- 
self to  the  sea  for  a  long  voyage,  should  promise  himself  nothing 
but  fair  and  calm  weather,  without  waves  and  storms  ;— so  irrational 
it  is  for  a  Christian  to  promise  himself  rest  here  upon  earth.' ' 

Experience   abundantly  confirms    this,  and  yet  who 


152  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

would  not  be  a  soldier  of  the  cross  ?  And,  being  so, 
who  would  wish  to  be  a  feather-bed  soldier,  never  flush- 
ing one's  sword,  or  smelling  powder.  If  there  be  no 
war  there  can  be  no  victory  ;  ease  is  tlierefore  our  loss 
and  hindrance.  What  we  need  is  not  freedom  from  con- 
flict, but  abundance  of  faith.  Trials  would  little  try  us 
if  we  had  more  confidence  in  God,  and  afflictions  would 
have  small  power  to  afflict  us  if  we  laid  up  our  heart's 
joy  and  confidence  in  the  Lord  alone.  Nearness  to  God 
is  the  one  desideratum. 

O  Lord,  draw  us  very  near  thee,  and  then  we  shall 
dwell  in  peace  though  the  whole  world  should  battle 
with  us. 

BURNING  A  HOUSE  TO  KILL  MICE. 
**  If  a  man  should  fire  a  house  to  destroy  the  mice  in  it,  we  should 
think  him  to  be  fairly  mad.'* 

Yet  those  who  consider  themselves  to  be  reasonable 
men  will  set  a  church  in  a  blaze  about  the  merest  trifle. 
Meeting  after  meeting  will  be  called,  and  angry  discus- 
sions provoked,  and  holy  work  overturned  about  the 
smallest  mistake  of  the  preacher,  or  the  minutest  fault 
of  a  deacon.  One  would  think  that  heaven  itself  was 
endangered,  and  yet  it  turns  out  to  be  a  .question  of 
infinitesimal  importance.  Societies  which  were  doing 
great  service  have  even  been  broken  up  by  the  crazy 
Vv^himsies  of  good  brethren,  who  made  much  ado  about 
nothing,  and  did  great  harm  in  trying  to  do  a  little  good. 

But  the  mice  are  a  nuisance  !  Of  course  they  are, 
and  we  must  buy  a  cat  or  set  a  trap,  but  we  certainly 
shall  not  burn  the  house  down  when  a  simple  means  will 
accomplish  our  purpose.  We  aim  at  reformation,  not  at 
desolation.  We  see  no  wisdom  in  so  perpetually  im- 
proving a  church  or  a  good  society  that  in  the  end  it  is 
improved  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth.     Religion  lias 


PUIUTAX'S    GARDEN.  153 

been  thought  to  be  sick,  and  fools  liave  doctored  it  till 
they  brought  it  to  death's  door  by  tlieir  poisons. 
Prudence  is  to  be  used,  even  when  our  object  is  wortlii- 
est  of  zeal  ;  and  never  ought  we  to  endanger  a  really 
good  thing  for  the  sake  of  making  it  a  little  better. 

Lord,  make  me  wise  as  a  serpent  and  harmless  as  a 
dove,  and  if  I  am  called  to  protest  against  error  or  sin, 
help  me  to  do  it  in  the  spirit  of  my  Lord. 

CLOSING  THE  FLOOD-GATES. 
"  Anj^  fool  can    open   the  flood-gates,   but  when  the  waters  have 
once  broken  out,  who  can  recaU  them  ?" 

A  question  well  worthy  to  be  weighed  by  those  who 
create  strife.  They  can  with  a  few  hasty  words  set 
loose  a  torrent  of  anger  and  nncharitableness,  and  cause 
the  sweeping  away  of  much  good  service  and  sweet 
fellowship,  but  who  shall  rule,  restrain,  or  call  back  the 
raging  flood.  O  meddler,  pause  ere  thy  sad  work  be 
actually  commenced,  for  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom 
the  offence  cometh  ! 

So,  too,  a  stream  of  dangerous  doctrine  may  easily 
enough  be  set  flowing  among  a  people.  Doubtful  words 
and  curious  questions  may  soon  let  out  a  ruinous  deluge 
of  infidelity  and  false  teaching,  and  he  who  at  the  first 
drew  np  the  flood-gate  may  never  have  dreamed  what 
would  come  of  it  ;  he  may  even  wring  his  hands  at 
horror  of  his  own  deed,  and  yet  may  be  utterly  power- 
less to  stay  the  mischief.  Be  cautious,  therefore,  O 
speculating  teacher.  Carry  thine  inventive  faculties 
into  a  less  dangerous  region.  Let  the  old  barriers  stand, 
and  be  not  thou  Satan's  tool  to  do  a  mischief  which  an 
age  may  rue. 

THE  SPIDER. 

'*  The  blind  hope  that  is  fonnd  in  men  ignorant  and  presnmptnous 
will  certainly  fail  ihem  ;  it  ].s   compared  to  '  a  spider's  web/   Job 


154  FLOWEKS    FROM    A 

8  :  14.  The  spider  spinneth  a  web  out  of  her  own  bowels,  which  is 
swept  away  as  soon  as  the  besom  cometh  ;  so  do  carnal  men  conceive 
a  few  rash  and  ungrounded  hopes  ;  but  when  death  cometh,  or  a 
little  trouble  of  conscience,  these  vain  conceits  are  swept  away." 

Let  US  not  spin  a  hope  of  heaven  out  of  ourselves,  or 
our  own  works,  feelings,  or  professions.  Such  a  w^eb 
of  confidence  may  be  very  ingeniously  contrived,  but  it 
must  be  very  frail  and  will  inevitably  be  swept  away. 
What  is  a  man  full  of  self -righteousness  but  a  dark  room 
full  of  cobwebs  ?  Good  liousekeepers  do  not  care  for 
the  clever  w^orks  of  this  poor  insect,  but  are  eager  to 
destroy  them,  for  they  are  a  detriment,  and  not  an 
ornament.  Neither  spiders  nor  their  webs  are  accept- 
able to  us  ;  and  even  so  we  may  depend  upn  it  that 
when  we  have  finished  the  web  of  our  legal  hopes  and 
worked  hard  at  our  will  worship,  God  will  have  no  more 
respect  to  us  and  our  proud  doings  than  we  have  to 
spiders  and  their  constructions.  Let  proud  Pharisees 
think  of  this  and  be  humbled.  The  bee  is  our  example, 
for  she  builds  a  house,  but  fetches  all  the  material  from 
abroad,  and  it  is  from  the  flowers  of  the  garden,  and  not 
from  herself,  that  she  procures  the  honey  with  which 
she  stores  her  cells.  Spiders  suck  no  flowers  as  bees  do, 
their  productions  are  from  their  own  bowels.  True 
believers  get  all  the  substance  and  sweetness  of  their 
hopes  from  the  flowers  of  the  promises,  and  dare  not  live 
upon  themselves,  or  anything  that  they  can  do  or  be. 

BIEDS  ON  THE  WING. 
*'  Birds  are  seldom  taken  in  their  flight  ;  the  more  we  are  ajjon 
the  wing  of  heavenly  thoughts,  the  more  we  escape  snares." 

O  that  we  would  remember  this,  and  never  tarry  long 
on  the  ground  lest  the  fowler  ensnare  us.  We  need  to 
be  much  taken  up  with  divine  things,  rising  in  thought 
above  these  temporal  matters,  or  else  the  world  will  en- 


155 


tangle  us,  and  we  shall  be  like  birds  held  with  limed 
twigs,  or  encompassed  in  a  net.  Holy  meditation  can 
scarely  be  overdone  ;  in  this  age  we  fear  it  never  is. 
We  are  too  worldly,  and  think  too  much  of  the  fleeting 
trifles  of  time,  and  so  the  enemy  gets  an  advantage  of 
us,  and  takes  a  shot  at  us.  O  for  more  wing  and  more 
use  of  the  flio:ht  we  have  !  Communion  with  Jesus  is 
not  only  sweet  in  itself,  but  it  has  a  preserving  power 
by  bearing  us  aloft,  above  gun-shot  of  the  enemy. 
Thoughts  of  heaven  prevent  discontent  with  our  present 
lot,  delight  in  God  drives  away  love  to  the  world,  and 
joy  in  our  Lord  Jesus  expels  pride  and  carnal  pleasure  : 
thus  we  escape  from  many  evils  by  rising  above  them. 

Up,  then,  my  heart.  Up  from  the  weedy  ditches  and 
brierj^  hedges  of  the  world  into  the  clear  atmosphere  of 
heaven.  There  where  the  dews  of  grace  are  born,  and 
the  sun  of  righteousness  is  Lord  paramount,  and  the 
blessed  wind  of  the  Spirit  blows  from  the  everlasting 
hills,  thou  wilt  find  rest  on  the  wing,  and  sing  for  joy 
where  thine  enemies  cannot  even  see  thee. 

YALENTINIAN  AND  THE  SPOTTED  GARMENT. 

* '  There  is  a  story  of  Valentinian  in  Theodoret,  that  when  he 
accompanied  Julian  the  Apostate  to  the  temple  of  Fortune,  those 
that  had  charge  of  the  house  sprinkled  their  holy  water  upon  the 
emperor,  and  a  drop  feU  upon  Valentinian's  garment.  He  beat  the 
officer,  saying  that  he  was  poUuted,  not  purged,  and  tore  off  the 
piece  of  his  garment  upon  which  the  drop  lighted,  *  hating,'  saith 
the  historian,  '  the  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh.'  " 

•  The  man  was  decided  and  outspoken,  and  this  may 
well  make  ns  lenient  toward  his  rough  way  of  showing 
it.  The  story  is  narrated,  not  that  we  may  imitate 
Yalentinian  in  his  violence,  but  that  we  may  regard  it 
as  a  figure  of  the  holy  horror  which  ought  to  inspire  us 
when  so  much  as  a  spot  of  sin  defiles  us.      We  are  to 


156  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world  ;  not  only  free 
from  great  smears  and  daubs,  but  even  from  spots.  O 
for  a  deep  hatred  of  sin,  and  a  determination  to  part 
vrith  anything  and  everything  which  bears  its  stain. 
Let  us  rend  off  a  polluting  habit  and  utterly  abstain 
from  it,  however  pleasing  it  may  have  been.  Sins  of 
the  flesh  especially  are  so  apt  to  grow  that  the  least 
approach  to  impurity  must  be  regarded  as  a  plague-spot  ; 
here  there  must  be  no  dallying  with  evil,  or  winking  at 
the  appearance  of  it.  The  same  is  true  of  all  other 
forms  of  evil,  the  smallest  seed  will  bring  forth  a  terrible 
harvest.  From  the  least  error,  the  least  wrong,  the 
least  falsehood  we  must  be  purged  if  we  would  walk 
with  Christ  and  be  accepted  of  him  as  his  '^  disciples 
indeed." 

Lord,  cleanse  thou  me,  that  I  may  be  without  fault 
before  thy  throne. 

COUETIEKS'  COUETESY. 
*'  Courtiers  are  more  polite  in  their  manners  than  ordinary  sub- 
jects, because  they  are  more   in  their  prince's  eye   and  company. 
The  oftener  we  are  in  God's  court  the  more  holy  shall  we  become." 

The  company  of  the  Lord's  holy  servants  raises  the 
tone  of  our  thought  and  makes  us  aspire  after  a  sanctity 
beyond  what  w^e  possess,  and  therefore  we  may  be  sure 
that  communion  with  their  Lord  will  be  still  more  bene- 
ficial to  us.  If  we  learn  good  manners  from  the  man, 
what  may  we  expect  from  being  wnth  the  Master  !  From 
Jesus  we  shall  learn  gentleness  and  love,  purity  and  self- 
sacrifice,  and  so  acquire  the  courtly  manners  of  the 
Prince  of  Peace,  shaking  off  at  the  same  time  the 
boorish  ways  which  cling  to  us  from  having  dwelt  in 
Mesecli  and  tabernacled  in  the  tents  of  Kedar.  There 
is  no  preparation  for  heaven  like  abiding  wdth  heaven's 
Lord. 


PUlUTAi^'S    GARDEN.  157 

Come,  my  heart,  art  thou  now  walking  with  God  ? 
How  long  since  thou  hast  spoken  with  thy  sovereign  ? 
Arise  and  get  thee  to  his  royal  courts,  and,  once  there,  go 
no  more  out  forever.  Thy  heaven  and  thy  preparation 
for  heaven  both  lie  in  thy  Lord. 

FINE  SPUN  THEEAD. 

**  When  the  thread  of  the  gospel  is  too  fine  spun,  it  wiU  not  clothe 
a  naked  soul." 

Nice  distinctions  and  technical  phrases  may  hide  the 
fulness  of  the  word  of  God,  and  the  simple  truth  may 
be  treated  in  such  a  philosophical  manner  that  its  strength 
and  substance  may  be  taken  away.  Some  men  preach 
the  gospel,  but  there  is  very  little  of  it.  It  is  the  right 
wool,  but  it  is  spun  too  fine.  They  give  milk,  it  is 
true,  but  the  water  of  their  own  notions  so  dilutes  it 
that  a  man  might  sooner  be  drowned  in  it  than  nourished 
by  it.  O  to  preach  a  full  gospel  fully  ! — to  give  it  out 
with  the  richness  and  freeness  which  »poor  sinners  need. 
This  is  one  of  the  great  demands  of  the  day.  Men  are 
very  liberal  in  their  views,  but  they  are  not  liberal  in 
dealing  out  the  precious  things  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
Cold  is  this  world  and  bitter  are  the  blasts  of  conscience, 
and  while  they  are  shivering  in  their  sins,  poor  awakened 
souls  need  all  the  gospel  of  grace,  and  all  the  grace  of 
the  gospel.  O  that  our  brethren  would  give  up  their 
fine  spinning  and  wire-drawing  of  the  doctrines  of  grace, 
and  give  us  something  substantial  from  the  storehouse 
of  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  plenty  of  it.  Alas,  too 
many  despise  the  old-fashioned  word,  and  in  their  heart 
of  hearts  hate  the  very  doctrine  which  they  pretend  to 
uphold.  We  know  some  w^ho  have  no  more  right  in  the 
Christian  ministry  than  Mahometans,  and  yet  they  say 
they  are  followers  of  Jesus.  We  have  not  so  learned 
Christ. 


158  PLOWERS   FROM   A 

THE  FKIGHTENED  WOLF. 

"A  wolf  may  be  scared  from  his  prey,  but  yet  lie  keepeth  bis 
preying  and  devouring  nature." 

He  has  not  lost  his  taste  for  lambs,  though  he  was 
obliged  to  drop  the  one  which  he  had  seized.  So  a 
sinner  may  forego  his  beloved  lust,  and  yet  remain  as 
truly  a  sinner  as  before.  He  gives  tip  tlie  drink  for  fear 
of  losing  his  situation,  or  dying  of  disease,  but  he  would 
be  at  his  liquor  again  if  he  dared.  The  fear  of  hell 
whips  him  off  some  favorite  vice,  and  yet  his  heart  pines 
for  it,,  and  in  imagination  he  gloats  over  it.  While  this 
is  the  case  the  man  in  the  sight  of  God  is  as  his  heart  is  : 
the  muzzled  wolf  is  still  a  wolf,  the  silenced  swearer  is 
still  profane  in  lieart,  the  lewd  thinker  is  still  an  adul- 
terer. 

Something  is  done  when  a  wolf  is  scared,  or  a  trans- 
gressor driven  out  of  his  evil  ways,  yet  nothing  is  done 
which  will  effectually  change  the  wolf  or  renew  the 
ungodly  heart.  A  frightened  sinner  is  a  sinner  still. 
Like  the  frightened  dog,  he  will  return  to  his  vomit  ; 
and  like  the  sow  that  was  washed,  he  will  wallow  in  the 
mire  again  as  soon  as  opportunity  offers.  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again  :" — this  is  the  only  effectual  cure  for  sin. 
While  the  natiu-e  is  unchanged  it  is  but  the  outside  of 
the  cup  and  platter  which  is  washed.  ''  Truth  in  the 
inward  parts"  is  that  which  God  desireth,  and  till  that 
IS  given  we  remain  under  wrath.  Any  thief  will  turn 
honest  under  the  gallows,  and  yet  if  he  were  set  free  he 
would  rob  the  first  house  he  came  to.  A  scare  is  not  a 
conversion.  A  sinner  may  be  frightened  into  hypocrisy, 
but  he  must  be  wooed  to  repentance  and  faith.  Love 
tames  and  grace  transforms  ;  may  the  God  of  all  grace 
deal  thus  with  each  of  us. 


puritan's  garden.  159 

THE  FALLEN  SOT. 
*'  A  sottish  drunkard,  that  is  overpoised  with  his  own  excess,  lieth 
where  he  falleth,  and  except  some  friendly  hand  lift  him  up,  there 
he  perisheth  ;  and  just  so  it  is  with  sinners,  they  are  pleased  with 
their  condition,  and  if  they  be  not  soundly  roused  up  and  awakened, 
they  lie  and  die,  and  fry  in  their  sins.  Oh  !  then,  pluck  them  out  of 
the  fire,  warn  them  to  llee  from  the  wrath  to  come. " 

Be  in  earnest  with  them  !  Exhort,  rebuke,  entreat. 
Do  not  leave  them  to  perish  in  their  sins.  Use  a  holy 
violence  with  them,  and  pull  them  out  of  the  mire. 
Common  humanity  would  lead  us  to  help  a  sheep  which 
had  fallen  into  a  ditch,  and  shall  we  come  to  the  rescue 
of  an  immortal  soul  ?  The  sottishness  and  folly  of  the 
ungodly  must  not  dispirit  us  ;  we  must  take  that  into  the 
account,  and  we  shall  not  wonder  at  their  uncouth  and 
ungrateful  treatment  of  us.  As  a  drunken  man  does 
not  want  to  be  helped,  and  curses  those  who  would  servo 
him,  so  is  it  often  with  those  ungodly  ones  who  most  of 
all  require  our  aid.  Let  us  not  be  put  off  by  them,  but 
labor  to  save  them  even  though  they  are  resolved  to 
destroy  themselves.  Whatever  evil  expressions  they  use 
toward  us  now,  they  will  think  and  speak  very  different- 
ly if  they  are  saved  by  our  means.  We  will  appeal  from 
the  verdict  of  their  present  drunkenness  to  the  thank- 
fulness of  their  future  sobriety. 

Blessed  Master,  make  us  more  concerned  to  win  souls, 
and  let  us  never  give  over,  however  bad  men  may  be. 
How  can  we  let  them  perish  when  we  remember  that 
thou  wouldst  not  leave  us  to  die  in  our  sins,  though  we 
were  as  far  gone  as  any  of  those  around  us  1 

THE  CLOCK  OF  PROVIDENCE. 
*'  There  is  a  clock  with  which  Providence  keepeth  time  and  pace, 
and  God  himself  setteth  it." 

So  that  everything  happens  with  divine  punctuality. 
Israel  came  out  of  Egypt  on  the  selfsame  night  in  which 


160  FLOWEIiS    FROM    A 

tlie  redemption  was  appointed,  and  afterward  wandered 
in  the  wilderness  till  the  hour  had  come  when  the  in- 
icjuity  of  the  Amorites  was  full.  Our  time  is  always 
come,  for  we  are  in  selfish  haste  ;  but  our  Lord  when 
on  earth  had  his  set  times  and  knew  how  to  wait  for 
them.  The  great  God  is  never  before  his  time,  and 
never  too  late.  We  may  well  admire  the  punctuality  of 
heaven. 

Our  trials  come  in  due  season,  and  go  at  the  appointed 
moment.  Our  fretfulness  will  neither  hasten  nor  delay 
the  purpose  of  our  God.  We  are  in  hot  haste  to  set  the 
world  right,  and  to  order  all  affairs  :  the  Lord  hath  the 
leisure  of  conscious  power  and  unerring  wisdom,  and  it 
w^ill  be  w^ell  for  us  to  learn  to  wait.  The  clock  will  not 
strike  till  the  hour  ;  but  when  the  instant  cometh  we 
shall  hear  the  bell.  My  soul,  trust  thou  in  God,  and 
wait  patiently  when  he  says,  "  My  time  is  not  yet  come." 

THE  HOUSE  ON  FIEE. 

*'  If  a  man  set  Ms  house  on  fire,  lie  is  liable  to  the  law  ;  if  it  be 
fired  by  others,  or  by  an  ill  accident,  he  is  pitied  and  relieved. " 

We  are  to  take  up  our  cross  when  laid  upon  our 
shoulders  by  God's  providence  ;  but  we  are  not  to  make 
trouble  for  ourselves.  We  are  not  to  fill  our  own  cup 
with  gall  and  wormwood,  but  to  drink  it  off  when  God 
puts  a  bitter  draught  into  our  hand.  We  are  to  meet 
temptation  and  overcome  it  ;  but  w^e  may  not  venture 
into  temptation  on  our  own  account,  or  we  may  have  to 
rue  our  foolhardiness. 

The  figure  of  the  burning  house  is  a  very  apt  one,  and 
capable  of  many  illustrations.  A  man  who  partakes  of 
wine  or  strong  liquors  wilfully  fires  his  own  hoiise^  and, 
whatever  may  be  the  result  of  his  intemperance,  he  can 
only  blame  himself.     He  who  reads  sceptical  works,  or 


puritan's  gardex.  161 

frequents  infidel  society,  cannot  be  j^itied  if  he  loses 
faith  and  comfort,  for  he  runs  a  wanton  and  useless  risk. 

To  be  taken  at  unawares  by  a  tierce  temptation,  is  to 
be  like  a  building  fired  by  a  malicious  hand,  and  this  is  a 
grievous  calamity  ;  but  to  go  wilfully  into  temptation  is 
another  matter,  and  is  comparable  to  the  crime  of  arson, 
in  which  a  man  collects  combustible  materials  and  secret- 
ly kindles  them,  that  his  house  may  be  burned  down. 

Lord,  evermore  keep  me  from  being  my  own  de- 
stroyer. Let  me  not,  like  Absalom,  grow  my  hair  for 
my  own  hanging.  "  Let  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion 
over  me." 

A  KNOCK  BORNE  FOR  THE  SAKE  OF  A  CROWN. 
*' A  man  win  venture  a  knock  that  is  in  reach  of  a  crown.'* 

The  ambitious  will  run  all  risks  of  cruel  w^ounds,  and 
death  itself,  to  reach  a  throne  ;  the  prize  hardens  thenx 
against  all  hazards.  Even  so  will  every  wise  man  en- 
counter all  difticulties  for  the  crown  of  life  ;  and  when, 
by  faith,  he  sees  it  within  reach,  he  will  count  all  afflic- 
tions light  through  which  he  wades  to  glory.  ' '  If  we 
suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  w4th  him." 

PROVISION  FOR  A  JOURNEY. 
*'  He  that  is  in    a  journey  to  heaven  must  be  provided  for  aU 
weathers  ;  for  though  it  be  sunshine  when  he  first  sets  forth,  a  storm 
win  overtake  him  before  he  cometh  to  his  journey's  end." 

Very  small  must  be  the  number  who  have  had  fair 
weather  all  the  way  to  glory  :  it  is  questionable  if  ever 
one  has  been  so  favored.  Hence  we  ought,  every  one 
of  us,  to  be  prepared  for  tempest  and  hurricane,  or  we 
may  be  found  in  an  evil  plight  in  the  day  of  our  calamity. 
The  presence  of  God  is  the  only  universal  preservative. 
When  he  is  with  us  the  sun  shall  not  hurt  us  by  day, 
nor  the  moon  by  night.  God,  all-sufficient,  meets  every 
contingency,  seen  or  unseen.     Faith  nmst  take  her  God 


162  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

to  herself,  and  tlien  prudently  look  forward  to  occasions 
for  making  test  and  proof  of  the  endless  uses  to  which 
the  Divine  presence  can  be  turned.  A  man  who  has 
made  ample  provision  for  all  weathers  is  rather  glad 
than  sorry  to  be  driven  to  use  what  he  has  provided, 
and,  even  so,  trials  are  well-nigh  welcomed  by  the  man 
who  is  fully  armed  against  them.  He  feels  that  it  would 
be  a  kind  of  waste  to  be  well  stored  and  then  never  have 
to  draw  upon  the  supply — a  sort  of  superfluity  to  be 
fully  armed  and  yet  never  to  meet  an  enemy. 

Have  faith  in  Christ  and  you  are  ready  for  anything, 
thankful  for  everything,  afraid  of  nothing.  "  Ye  are 
complete  in  him." 

MAKING  A  NOISE  BY  CRYING  ''SILENCE." 

*'  A  crier  in  the  court,  that  is  often  commanding  silence,  dis- 
tiirbeth  the  court  more  than  they  that  make  the  noise  ;  so,  disputing 
with  our  distractions  increaseth  them.  They  are  better  avoided  by 
a  severe  contempt." 

That  is  to  say,  when  Satan  would  disturb  us  at  our 
devotions  by  injecting  blasphemous  thoughts  or  trifling 
ideas,  we  had  better  keep  right  on,  and  as  much  as  pos- 
sible disregard  his  interruptions.  As  blind  Bartimeus 
cried  all  the  more  because  ofTicious  persons  sought  to 
silence  him,  so  should  we  be  the  more  vehement  in  our 
supplications  when  the  devil  seeks  to  take  us  off  from 
them.  When  he  knocks  let  us  fasten  another  bolt,  and 
let  him  knock  till  he  grows  weary.  Our  business  is  with 
the  Lord,  and  let  us  give  our  whole  heart  to  seeking  his 
face,  for  if  we  turn  away  to  answer  the  enemy  he  will  at 
once  have  gained  his  point.  When  he  paints  images  on 
our  fancy,  if  we  steadfastly  refuse  to  look  at  them  he 
will  cease  from  the  unprofitable  work,  and  betake  him- 
self to  work  upon  some  more  foolish  folk,  who  will  turn 
aside  from  prayer  to  answer  his  vile  insinuations.     Let 


GARDEN.  163 

liim  howl  as  he  pleases  ;  if  we  do  not  regard  him  his 
pride  will  be  hurt  more  severely  than  by  any  blow  that 
we  can  aim  at  him. 

**  Satan  trembles  when  he  sees 
The  weakest  saint  upon  his  knees." 

Therefore,  let  us  keep  to  our  praying,  and  let  him 
keep  to  his  tempting  till  he  has  had  enough  of  it,  "  Get 
thee  behind  me,  Satan"  is  as  much  attention  as  he  de- 
serves. Herein  is  wisdom,  and  he  that  hath  understand- 
ing will  learn  from  it. 

KIPENING  COKN. 
*'  Before  corn  be  ripened  it  needeth  aU  kinds  of  weather.     The 
husbandman  is  glad  of  showers  as  well  as  sunshine  ;  rainy  weather 
is  troublesome,  but  sometimes  the  season  requireth  it.*' 

Eveii  so  the  various  conditions  of  man's  life  are  need- 
ful to  ripen  him  for  the  life  to  come.  Sorrows  and 
joys,  deprcv^sions  and  exhilarations,  have  all  their  part  to 
play  in  the  completion  of  Christian  cliaracter.  Were 
one  grief  of  a  believer's  career  omitted,  it  may  be  he 
would  never  be  prepared  for  lieaven :  the  slightest 
change  might  mar  the  ultimate  result.  God,  who 
knows  best  how  to  ripen  both  corn  and  men,  ordereth 
all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  will,  and  it  is 
our  wisdom  to  believe  in  the  infallible  prudence  which 
arrano;es  all  the  details  of  a  believino;  life.  "  All  thinors 
work  together  for  good." 

LOOKING  FOR  AN  EXPECTED  GUEST. 
"  Wlien  we  expect  any  one,  we  turn  our  eyes  that  way,  as  the 
wife  looks  toward  the  sea,  when  she  expects  her  husband's  return/' 

Surely,  then,  if  we  look  for  Christ  to  come  we  shall 
keep  our  eyes  lieaven  ward,  and  our  minds  occupied  with 
the  country  from  which  he  cometli.  If  we  mind  eartiily 
things,  it  will  be  evidence  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
lias  no  power  over  us. 


164  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

Yet  a  good  wife  does  not  sit  idly  by  the  sea  watching 
for  a  sail,  but  she  sets  the  house  in  order  for  her  hus- 
band's return.  She  wlio  should  sit  looking  out  of 
window,  or  studying  almanacs,  and  have  no  provision 
made  for  the  home-coming,  would  show  but  scant  love 
for  her  lord.  We  should  watch,  but  we  should  also 
stand  with  cmv  loins  girt,  and  do  the  duty  of  the  hour^ 
that  when  our  Lord  comes  he  may  not  blame  our 
neghgence  in  his  service.  If  we  know  little  of  the 
prophecies,  we  can  sliovv^  our  expectancy  by  keeping  the 
precepts. 

PAYMENT  IN  GOLD  INSTEAD  OF  COPPEK. 

"  Though  Christ  paid  the  same  debt  as  that  which  is  due  from  lost 
souls,  yet,  through  the  excellency  of  his  person,  it  was  done  in  a 
shorter  time.  A  payment  in  gold  is  the  same  sum  as  a  payment  in 
silver  or  brass  ;  only,  through  the  excellency  of  the  metal,  it  taketh 
up  less  room." 

Thus  do  w^e  clearly  see  how  the  one  death  of  Jesus^ 
Avas  a  fit  and  full  substitute  for  the  eternal  woe  of  many. 
How  precious  does  it  appear  in  that  light  !  We  are 
redeemed  w4th  a  price  inconceivable  !  Gold  and  silver 
are  corruptible  tilings  in  comparison  therewith.  How 
we  ought  to  prize  the  adorable  person  of  our  Lord  ! 
What  high  thoughts  we  ought  to  entertain  of  him,  seeing 
that  it  is  "  by  liimself  "  that  lie  purged  our  sins  !  His 
own  intrinsic  excellence  was  the  essential  value  of  the 
great  price  which  he  had  paid.  Had  he  been  less  illus- 
trious his  sufferings  had  been  insufficient.  Precious 
blood  !  yea,  more  precious  Lord  Jesus,  from  whose  pre- 
ciousness  the  finished  w^ork  derives  its  infinite  efficacy. 

SLOW  SHOWERS  AEE  BEST. 
*'  We  would  have  speedy  riddance  of  trouble,  but  God  thinketh 
not  lit  to  grant  our  request.     Showers  that  come  by  drops  soak  into 
the  earth  better  than  those  that  come  in  a  tempest  and  hurricane." 

The  gradualness  and  long  continuance  of  a  trial,  which 


puritan's  gauden.  165 

are  its  sliarpness  and  bitterness,  are  also,  to  a  large  extent, 
tlie  causes  of  its  usefulness.  If  the  atHiction  came  and 
departed  with  a  rash,  we  should  be  rather  swept  away 
by  it  than  softened  and  saturated  by  its  influence.  To 
push  a  crucible  among  the  glowing  coals  and  snatch  it 
forth  again  would  answer  no  purpose  in  refining  :  the 
metal  must  tarry  in  the  furnace  till  the  fire  has  done  its 
work. 

Perhaps  the  reader  has  long  lived  in  a  perpetual  drip 
of  trouble,  and  now  feels  himself  to  be  quite  weary  of 
the  endless  torture.  Let  him  not  faint  under  the 
lengthened  process  :  the  highest  degree  of  benefit  is 
accruing  to  him  from  the  continuance  of  his  adversity. 
In  the  later  part  of  a  trial  every  stroke  tells  with  tenfold 
result,  and  operates  with  a  greatly  increased  eflicacy.  It 
would  be  a  pity  for  the  Lord  to  stay  his  hand  when  it  is 
working  with  such  special  and  marked  result.  All  the 
preceding  affliction  has  only  worked  the  heart  into  a  fit 
condition  to  receive  the  master-strokes  of  the  Divine 
Artist.  The  ground  colors  havf^  hitherto  been  laid  on, 
but  the  second  and  finishing  touch  is  now  being  given  ; 
therefore,  ask  not  the  hand  to  cease,  but  rather  pray  that 
its  work  may  be  carried  on  with  power,  and  the  Lord's 
glory  be  seen  in  it  all.  It  will  not  cease  raining  yet  ; 
and  why  should  it  so  long  as  the  soil  is  being  softened, 
saturated,  and  fertilized  by  the  falling  drops  ?  Let 
patience  have  her  perfect  work  ;  and  how  can  that  be 
useless  the  tribulation  runs  its  full  time  ? 

Lord,  make  me  ready  to  tarry  for  the  vision,  however 
long  it  may  be  delajed.  Thy  way  of  trying  me  is  the 
best.     I  would  not  Iiurry  thy  hand  if  I  could. 

GERMAN  CHILDREN  DIPPED  IN  THE  RHINE. 

"  God  seeth  it  fitting  sometimes,  at  our  first  setting  forth,  as  the 
old  Germans  were  want  to  dip  their  children  in  the  Rhine  to  harden 


166  PLOWERS   FROM   A 

them,  go  to  season  ns  for  our  whole  course  by  plunging  ns  in  trouble. 
Saints  must  bear  the  yoke  from  their  youth,  or  first  acquaintance 
with  God  (Heb.  10  :  32),  for  this  is  good  for  them." 

Some  of  lis  can  indorse  this  opinion  from  our  own 
experience.  Sliarp  trials  in  our  early  days  hardened  us 
for  our  life's  warfare.  Abused  and  misrepresented  botli 
by  good  and  bad,  we  learned  to  set  small  store  by  the 
judgment  of  men,  so  that  when  praise  and  flattery  fol- 
lowed, we  had  an  antidote  for  .the  poisons.  Pain  and 
depression  of  spirit,  endured  in  early  life,  have  prepared 
many  to  sympathize  with  the  unhappy,  and  to  live  a  life 
of  benevolence.  A  baptism  into  fire  is,  for  young  con- 
verts, a  terrible  ordeal,  and  yet  an  incalculable  blessing. 
The  whole  Church  endured  this  baptism  for  ages,  and 
thereby  gathered  a  strength  much  needed  in  these  last 
days. 

Let  us  never  despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord. 
Should  he  seem  to  dip  us  in  the  Styx  itself,  let  us 
believe  that  it  is  for  our  good,  and  stand  to  Job's  resolve, 
^'  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  1  trust  in  him." 

THE  TKADESMAN  MISSING  HIS  CUSTOMER. 

"  You  that  are  tradesmen  are  troubled  if  you  happen  to  be  abroad 
when  a  good  customer  cometh  to  deal  with  you  :  the  ordinances  of 
God  are  the  market  for  your  souls  ;  if  you  had  not  been  abroad  with 
Esau  you  might  have  received  the  blessing,  and  gone  away  richly 
laden  from  a  prayer-meeting,  from  the  word,  and  the  Lord's  Supper  ; 
but  you  lose  your  advantages  for  want  of  attention." 

With  what  diligence  should  we  use  the  means  of 
grace,  ''  not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves 
together  as  the  manner  of  some  is  ;"  and  when  we  are 
there,  we  sliould  be  like  the  shopkeeper — on  the  lookout 
for  business  ;  not  half  asleep,  or  wandering  in  our  minds. 
If  we  were  more  lively  at  sermons,  we  should  find  them 
more  lively.  Nothing  profits  a  man  which  is  done 
carelessly  ;  when  our  minds  are  not  in  our  business  we 


puritan's   GARDEN".  167 

cannot  prosper  in  it,  and  we  may  be  even  more  sure 
that  we  cannot  profit  by  sacred  exercises  if  we  are  not 
intensely  earnest  in  them.  If  customers  call,  and  find 
the  tradesman  away,  he  loses  all  hope  of  gain  ;  and 
when  grace  and  blessing  come,  and  our  hearts  are  not 
on  the  watch,  we  miss  heavenly  treasure,  and  remain  in 
a  poor  and  miserable  condition.  My  soul,  bestir  thyself. 
Lord,  quicken  thou  me  in  thy  ways. 

BEADY  TO  SAIL. 

*'  A  Christian  should  be  always  as  a  ship  that  hath  taken  in  its 
lading,  and  is  prepared  and  furnished  with  all  manner  of  tackling, 
ready  to  set  sail,  only  expecting  the  good  wind  to  carry  him  out  of 
the  haven/' 

Would  to  God  it  were  always  so  with  us.  We  are 
fully  stored  and  equipped  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  yet  we 
-do  not  always  enjoy  the  holy  quiet  which  ought  to 
spring  out  of  so  divine  a  fact.  All  is  well.  Why  do 
we  not  feel  that  it  is  so  ?  Why  do  we  fear  to  depart  ? 
There  remains  nothing  for  us  but  to  obey  the  call,  let 
loose  the  cable,  and  float  into  the  heavenly  haven  ;  but 
we  act  as  if  it  were  not  so,  and  often  dread  the  time  for 
commencing  the  last  voyage.  It  is  more  important  to 
be  prepared  to  live  aright  than  to  be  in  an  ecstasy  at  the 
thought  of  death  ;  but,  still,  v/hile  we  are  ready  for 
service,  it  is  sweet  also  to  be  ready  for  glory.  The 
thought  of  death  should  never  put  us  in  a  flurry.  It 
should  be  every-day  work  to  die  :  indeed,  we  should  be 
always  dead  with  Christ.  Where  this  is  realized  death 
is  dead,  and  as  children  are  not  afraid  of  a  dead  lion,  so 
we  also  are  not  disturbed  at  the  prospect  of  departing 
out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father. 

*'  All  that  remains  for  me 
Is  but  to  love  and  sing, 
And  wait  until  the  angels  come 
To  bear  me  to  my  king. ' ' 


168  FLOWERS   PKOM   A 

THAT  WHICH  WILL  FILL  A  SEA  WILL  FILL  A  BUCKET. 

"  God  is  satisfied  with  himself,  and  sufficient  to  his  own  happi- 
ness. Therefore,  surely,  there  is  enough  in  him  to  fill  the  creature. 
That  which  fills  an  ocean  will  fill  a  bucket  ;  that  which  will  fill  a 
gallon  will  fill  a  pint  ;  those  revenues  which  will  defray  an  emperor's 
expenses  are  enough  for  a  beggar  or  poor  man." 

Good  reasoning.  God  all  sufficient  is  assuredly 
more  than  sufficient  for  me.  What  said  Paul  ?  "  My 
God  shall  fill  up  all  your  needs,  according  to  his  riches 
in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus." 

CONTRARY  TO  BIAS. 
**  A  man  may  act  from  a  violent  impression  contrary  to  nature,  as 
a  stone  moveth  upward,  or  a  bowl  thrown  with  great  strength  will  so 
run  that  it  is  clear  that  the  bias  is  overruled  ;  so  a  wicked  man  may 
do  a  good  action  or  two,  as  Saul  forced  himself  ;  but  the  bent  and 
natural  inclination  is  another  thing.'* 

A  fish  now  and  then  leaps  out  of  the  water,  but  it  is 
not  a  bird  ;  and  a  swallow  touches  the  brook  with  its 
wing,  but  it  is  not  a  fish.  Occasional  actions  and  deeds 
done  under  pressure  are  no  evidences  of  a  man's  condi- 
tion one  Avay  or  another.  Even  a  life  of  pure  morality 
may  not  be  a  sure  proof  of  a  gracious  heart  ;  for  circum- 
stances and  surroundings  may  have  restrained  the  natural 
tendency  of  the  mind,  and  it  may  be  secretly  as  impure 
as  that  of  the  man  who  riots  in  open  crime.  A  young 
leopard  seemed  to  be  perfectly  tame  for  years,  but  it 
once  had  an  opportunity  of  tasting  blood,  and  straight- 
v\'ay  its  innate  ferocity  was  aroused.  Some  men  only 
need  to  be  assailed  by  a  fitting  temptation,  and  we  should 
soon  see  that  Satan's  power  within  them  is  in  full  force. 
The  ball  must  be  cured  of  its  bias,  or  else  the  next  throw 
may  reveal  its  inability  to  move  in  a  straight  line  ;  and 
so  we  must  be  renewed  in  heart,  or  our  next  action  or 
thought  may  manifest  our  depravity. 

Lord,  make  me  to  do  good  freely  and  naturally  because 


purita:s^'s  garde]S".  169 

I  delight  to  do  it  ;  for  nothing  less  than  this  will  prove 
that  thou  hast  renewed  me  by  thy  Spirit. 

THE  HOLDER  OF  THE  KEYS  KNOCKING  AT  THE  DOOR. 

**  What  strange  condescension,  that  he  who  hath  the  key  of  David 
shonld  knock  at  the  Father's  gate,  and  receive  his  own  heaven  by 
gift  and  entreaty  !*' 

These  are  Manton's  words  of  surprise  at  the  first 
sentences  of  our  Lord's  prayer  in  John  17  :  ''  Father, 
glorify  thy  Son."  Even  to  Jesus  it  is  said,  ''Ask  of 
me."  God  had  one  Son  without  sin,  but  never  a  son 
who  did  not  pray.  The  cry  of  "  Abba,  Father  !"  is  the 
mark  of  sonship.  True  prayer  is  the  sign  of  a  true-born 
child  of  God  :  "  Behold,  he  prayeth"  is  the  token  by 
which  each  heir  of  glory  is  known. 

"What,  then,  must  be  the  condition  of  such  as  never 
pray  ?  How  dwelleth  sonship  in  them  ?  All  who  call 
upon  the  Lord  in  spirit  and  in  truth  may  say,  "  Our 
Father  :"  it  is  as  ''  the  Father"  that  God  seeketh  such 
to  worship  him. 

O  my  heart,  dread  above  all  things  a  prayerless  spirit  ! 
Thon  hast  not  the  key  of  David  ;  how,  then,  canst  thou 
enter  into  glory  without  knocking  ?  He  who  had  power 
to  enter  of  himself  yet  asked  that  he  might  receive. 
Rouse  thee,  my  soul,  to  renewed  supplication,  and  may 
the  Father  hear  thee  at  this  hour,  for  Jesus'  sake. 

CHILD'S  PLAY. 
*'  To  rule  a  kingdom  is  a  nobler  design  than  to  play  with  children 
for  pins  or  nuts/' 

What,  then,  is  the  folly  of  the  worldling's  choice 
when  he  prefers  to  be  contending  among  men  for  earthly 
toys,  instead  of  seeking  those  things  which  are  above  ! 
How  great  the  degradation  of  professing  Christians  when 
their  minds  are  taken  up  with  fashionable  trivialities 
instead  of  living  alone  to  glorify  their  God,  and  acting 


170  FLOWERS   FRO])I   Jl 

as  tliose  whom  Jesus  has  made  to  be  kings  and  priests  I 
Who  cares  for  pebbles  when  jewels  glitter  before  him  ? 
Who  would  choose  toys  and  rattles  when  the  wealth  of 
the  Indies  is  offered  him  ?  Let  us  be  no  longer  children 
or  fools,  but  act  as  men  who  have  put  away  childish 
things. 

THE  PEICELESS  PEICE. 
"  The  satisfaction  must  carry  proportion  with  the  merit  of  the 
offence.  A  debt  of  a  thousand  pounds  is  not  discharged  by  two  or 
three  brass  farthings.  Creatures  are  finite,  their  acts  of  obedience 
are  already  due  to  God,  and  their  sufferings  for  one  another,  if  they 
had  been  aUowed,  would  have  been  of  limited  influence.'* 

Jesus  alone,  as  the  Son  of  God,  could  present  a  sub- 
stitution sufficient  to  meet  the  case  of  men  condemned 
for  their  iniquities.  The  majesty  of  his  nature,  his 
freedom  from  personal  obligation  to  the  law,  and  the 
intensity  of  his  griefs,  all  give  to  his  atonement  a  virtue 
which  elsewhere  can  never  be  discovered.  ITone  of  the 
sons  of  men  ' '  can  by  any  means  redeem  his  brother,  nor 
give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him. "  Jesus  only  could  stand 
in  our  soul's  stead,  and  pay  the  dreadful  price. 

What  sinners  we  are  !  What  a  sacrifice  has  been 
presented  for  us  !  No  brass  farthings  were  our  price  ; 
nay,  gold  and  silver  are  called  '^corruptible  things" 
when  compared  with  the  precious  blood  which  has  paid 
our  ransom. 

PHIDIAS  AND  HIS  NAME. 

**  Like  Phidias,  who  in  his  image  carved  his  own  name,  there  is 
God  engraven  upon  every  creature." 

Not  in  characters  of  human  writing  is  it  written,  but 
in  the  character  of  the  work.  Phidias  needed  not  to 
have  written  the  word  PHIDIAS  in  so  many  letters,  for 
the  master's  hand  had  a  cunning  of  its  own  which  none 
could  counterfeit.  An  ^  instructed  person  had  only  to 
look  at  a  statue  and  say  at  once,  ^'  Phidias  did  this,  for 


puritak's  gardek.  171 

no  other  hand  conld  have  chiselled  such  a  countenance  ;'* 
and  believers  have  only  to  look  either  at  creation,  provi- 
dence, or  the  divine  word,  and  they  will  cry  instinctive- 
ly, "  This  is  the  finger  of  God."  Yet,  alas,  man  has 
great  powers  of  wilful  bh'ndness,  and  these  are  aided  by 
the  powers  of  darkness,  so  that,  being  both  blind  and  in 
the  dark,  man  is  unable  to  see  his  God,  though  his 
presence  is  as  clear  as  that  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens. 

EXPEDIENT  ABSENCE. 
"  It  is  better  for  ns  that  Christ  should  be  in  heaven  than  with  us 
upon  earth.     A  woman  had  rather  have  her  husband  live  with  her 
than  go  to  the  Indies  ;  but  she  yieldeth  to  his  absence  when  she 
considereth  the  profit  of  his  traffic.'* 

The  figure  is  well  selected.  Let  us  dwell  on  it  a 
while,  and  think  of  the  amazing  profit  which  this  journey 
of  our  best  Beloved  is  bringing  in  to  us.  He  is  pleading 
in  the  place  of  authority  :  what  an  enrichment  to  us  to 
have  an  Intercessor  at  the  throne  of  grace,  through 
whom  every  true  prayer  is  accepted  !  He  is  ruling  on 
the  seat  of  empire,  arranging  all  providences  for  the 
success  of  his  church  :  what  a  gain  to  have  our  Head 
and  Leader  raised  above  all  principalities  and  powers  ! 
He  is  preparing  a  place  for  his  people  :  what  a  boon  to 
have  such  a  Foreruimer,  Representative,  and  Preparer  ! 
Moreover,  by  his  departure  we  have  received  the  Holy 
Ghost,  of  whose  divine  value  what  pen  shall  write  ! 
He  is  with  us  and  in  us,  our  Instructor,  Quickener, 
Purifier,  and  Comforter. 

Even  upon  these  few  points  we  are  great  gainers  by 
his  bodily  absence  ;  but  there  is  much  more.  If  our 
Lord  judged  it  to  be  expedient  that  he  should  go,  then 
expedient  it  is  in  the  highest  sense,  and  therefore  let  us 
solace  ourselves  in  his  present  bodily  absence  from  us 
*'  till  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away." 


173  FLOWBBIB   FROM   A 

THE  EMPTY  HOPPER. 

*'  The  mind  is  like  a  mill :  when  it  wanteth  com  it  grindeth  npon 
itself." 

And  tliis  is  the  cause  of  miicli  of  the  mental  depression 
which  afflicts  mankind  ;  many  people  have  nothing  to 
think  of  outside  of  themselves,  and  so  their  thoughts 
prey  upon  their  own  hearts.  Occupation  is  the  remedy 
for  many  an  internal  sorrow.  The  study  of  the  Script- 
ures would  prevent  brooding  over  imaginary  ills.  Try 
it,  good  friend,  and  see  !  Fill  the  hopper  of  thy  mind's 
will  with  holy  instruction,  and  thou  shalt  get  for  thyself 
good  corn  instead  of  wear  and  tear  and  grit. 

THE  LOVING  WIDOW. 
**  A  woman,  that  only  bemoaneth  the  loss  of  her  husband  in  com- 
pany, but  banisheth  all  thoughts  of  him  when  alone,  might  justly  be 
suspected  to  act  a  tragedian's  part,  and  to  pretend  sorrow  rather  than 
feel  it.'* 

Tlie  moral  is,  that  one  who  only  has  Christ  upon  his 
tongue  in  public,  and  has  no  thought  of  him  when  alone, 
is  a  mere  actor  and  hypocrite.  Secret  religion  is  the 
very  soul  of  godliness.  What  we  are  alone,  that  alone 
we  are.  Private  communion  with  Jesus  is  a  better  sign 
of  grace  than  all  the  outward  sacraments  that  were  ever 
attended.  It  is  not  likely  that  a  hypocrite  will  dehght 
in  solitary  devotion  ;  there  is  nothing  in  it  to  pay  him 
for  his  trouble  ;  for  his  reward  is  the  praise  of  man. 
Judgment  upon  ourselves  will  be  much  more  likely  to 
be  correct,  if  we  examine  our  hidden  life  than  if  we 
measure  ourselves  by  that  which  is  seen  of  men. 

THE  HUNTING  DOG. 

"  A  good  dog  hunts  by  sight  as  long  as  he  can  see  his  game  ;  but 
when  that  is  lost  he  hunts  by  scent. ' ' 

So  in  prayer  we  are  to  pursue  the  blessing  while  we 
are  encouraged  to  seek  it,  but  we  are  not  to  cease  when 


PURITAX'S    GARDEN.  173 

the  likelihood  of  success  is  gone.  We  must  hunt  by 
a  spiritual  scent  when  sight  quite  fails  us.  The  odor  of 
the  promise  must  direct  our  way  when  the  mercy  is 
numbered  with  the  ''  things  not  seen  as  yet."  It  would 
be  a  sad  degeneration  if  faith  became  nothing  better 
than  a  conclusion  drawn  from  preponderating  probabil- 
ities :  we  must  hope  against  hope,  and  believe  in  the 
truth  of  the  promise  against  all  likelihood  of  its  perform- 
ance, or  we  know  nothing  of  the  crown  and  glory  of 
faith. 

0  for  a  quick  nostril,  that  we  may  follow  after  those 
heavenly  things  which  the  eye  seeth  not  and  the  ear 
heareth  not.  These  will  repay  the  chase  ;  whereas  the 
tilings  seen  of  the  eye  turn  out,  when  overtaken,  to  be 
mere  gaudy  butterflies  which  are  spoiled  in  the  act  of 
grasping  them. 

THE  DWAEF. 

**  A  child,  if  he  should  continue  a  child,  and  an  infant  still,  would 
be  a  monster. " 

However  pleased  the  parents  had  been  with  the  little 
one  when  it  was  a  babe,  they  would  soon  be  deeply 
distressed  if  year  after  year  it  still  remained  a  tiny  thing  : 
indeed,  they  would  consider  it  a  great  calamity  to  be 
the  parents  of  a  dwarf.  What,  then,  shall  we  say  of 
those  in  our  churches  who  never  grow  ?  They  are  no 
forwarder  after  fifty  years  !  Infants  at  sixty  years  of 
a2:e  ! 

1  have  in  my  house  a  singular  picture  which  is  made 
up  of  the  portraits  of  my  sons,  taken  on  their  birthdays 
for  twenty-one  years.  They  begin  in  the  perambulator, 
and  end  as  fuU-gro^vn  young  men.  This  is  interesting 
and  according  to  nature  ;  but,  alas,  I  have  spiritual 
children  whom  I  wheeled  about  in  the  perambulator  of 
tender  comfort  twenty  years  ago,  and  they  are  babies 


174  FLOWERS    FROM    A 

still,  needing  as  much  care  as  ev^er,  and  are  as  little  able 
to  run  alone.  Ah  me,  that  so  many  who  ought  to  be 
warriors  are  weaklings,  that  those  who  should  be  men  of 
six  feet  high  are  so  stunted  as  to  be  mere  Tom  Thumbs 
in  grace. 

O  for  grace  to  grow  in  grace,  and  especially  in  the 
knowledge  of  my  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  God 
save  us  from  a  life  which  does  not  grow,  and  from  a 
growth  which  is  not  healthy. 

WHETTING  THE  SCYTHE. 
*'  CertaiDly  the  best  of  our  hours  should  be  taken  up  about  the 
best  business,  and  not  in  recreations.     Those  are  to  be  blamed  who 
as  soon   as  they  rise  think   about   amusements,  knit  pleasure  to 
pleasure,  and  wear  away  the  scythe  in  whetting,  not  in  working." 

This  is  a  specially  wise  hint.  Doubtless  many  occupy 
the  chief  of  their  thoughts  upon  mere  sport  and  pastime, 
and  wear  out  their  minds  by  anxiously  considering  that 
which  can  only  be  allowable  as  a  relief  from  anxious 
consideration.  To  expend  more  pains  upon  their  pleas- 
ures than  upon  their  duties  is  the  mark  of  ungodly  men, 
and  the  sign  of  folly.  That  which  should  be  a  rest  from 
thought  is  made  to  be  the  theme  of  thought,  and  so  a 
second  wear  and  tear  is  created  by  the  very  process 
which  ought  to  have  prevented  it  :  the  scythe  is  not 
only  worn  away  by  its  cutting,  but  by  its  whetting. 

Christian  man,  remember  this.  Let  not  allowable 
diversions  become  occasions  for  transgression.  This  they 
will  be  if  they  cause  waste  of  time  ;  for  in  such  a  case 
you  will  be  reported  to  your  Master  as  a  steward  who 
has  wasted  his  goods.  Nor  will  you  be  blameless  if 
your  recreations  weary  the  brain  and  heart,  and  cause  a 
new  and  unremunerative  expenditure  of  force.  Above 
all,  you  will  be  greatly  censurable  if  there  is  the  slightest 
tinge  of  sin  about  the  amusement  :  ^'  Abstain  from  all 


puritan's  garden.  175 

appearance  of  evil."     ''Happy  is  he  that  condemneth 
not  liimself  in  that  which  he  alloweth." 

SHIP  BUILDING. 
*'  He  that  buildeth  a  ship  doth  not  make  his  work  of  such  a  sort 
that  it  may  avoid  all  waves  and  billows,  that  is  impossible  ;  but  he  so 
builds  it  that  it  may  be  tight  and  stanch,  and  able  to  endure  all 
weathers.*' 

Even  so  the  very  frame  and  construction  of  the  spirit- 
ual life  were  formed  with  a  view  to .  trials.  Jerusalem 
was  walled  because  enemies  were  expected  ;  David  built 
towers  and  armories  because  he  looked  for  war  ;  and 
what  mean  the  graces  of  faith  and  patience  unless  afflic- 
tion is  to  be  reckoned  on  ?  Our  glorious  Leader  would 
never  have  armed  and  armored  all  his  followers  if  there 
had  not  been  allotted  to  them  a  wrestling  with  princi- 
paHties  and  powers.  See  how  Paul,  in  the  same  chapter 
in  which  he  tells  us  of  the  panoply  of  God,  reminds 
us  of  the  adversaries  whom  we  shall  surely  encounter. 

Has  the  Lord  made  thee,  my  brother,  to  be  strong  in 
faith  and  brave  in  heart  ?  Then  be  not  surprised  if  thy 
stout  ship  is  sent  to  traverse  stormy  seas.  God  doth  not 
throw  away  strength  by  putting  it  where  it  wdll  never 
be  needed.  Storms  will  surely  come  where  grace  is 
given  to  bear  them,  and  through  these  storms  grace  will 
develop  into  glory. 

ONE  BIRD  SETTING  THE  OTHERS  CHIRPING. 

"  It  is  of  advantage  to  others  when  we  use  vocal  prayer,  for  it 
quickens  them  to  the  same  exercise,  as  one  bird  setteth  all  the  rest  a 
chirping." 

Often  one  who  has  been  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  has 
stirred  his  friend  out  of  a  cold  and  lifeless  frame,  and 
set  him  all  on  a  glow.  Yea,  and  a  whole  company  of 
believers  have  been  roused  to  hearty  devotion  by  the 
fervor  of  one  man. 


176  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

The  simile  used  by  our  author  is  very  beautiful.  Ere 
the  sun  has  risen,  one  bird  awakes,  and,  with  a  clear 
tuneful  note,  calls  to  his  mate.  Whereupon  another 
follows  in  the  same  manner,  and  a  rivahy  begins  between 
the  first  two  songsters.  These  bestir  birds  of  every  wing, 
and  in  a  few  minutes  the  whole  grove  is  vocal,  the  air  is 
full  of  music,  and  the  sun  rejoices  to  arise  amid  a  concert 
of  happy  minstrels.  Earth  has  nothing  sweeter  than  its 
spring  sonnets,  which  make  that  season  of  the  year  like 
the  first  creation,  when  the  morning  stars  sang  together 
and  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.  Blessed  is  the 
bird  which  thus  leads  the  choir,  and  happy  is  that  pray- 
ing or  praising  man  whose  holy  expressions  awaken  his 
fellows  to  the  like  sacred  exercise.  It  is  well  worth 
while  to  shake  off  natural  timidity,  w^hich  would  make  a 
good  man  to  be  as  though  he  were  dumb,  and  deprive 
him  of  half  of  his  usefulness.  To  pray  in  private  is 
essential,  but  to  be  able  to  pray  in  public  is  profitable. 
We  are  not  to  live  unto  ourselves  in  anything,  and  cer- 
tainly not  in  those  matters  which  are  the  crown  and 
glory  of  our  highest  life  :  therein  it  is  well  to  edify 
saints  as  well  as  to  benefit  ourselves. 

Lord,  open  thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth  shall  show 
forth  thy  praise. 

THE  ROMAN  SENATE  AND  CHRIST. 
"  The  story  goeth,  that  the  Roman  Senate,  hearing  of  the  miracles 
in  Judea,  decreed  divine  worship  to  Christ  ;  but  Tiberius  the  emperor 
crossed  it,  when  he  heard  that  he  would  be  worshipped  alone." 

There  is  the  edge  of  the  controversy  between  Christ 
and  the  world.  The  Christian  religion  interferes  with 
no  man's  liberty,  but  leaves  every  conscience  free  and 
accountable  only  to  God  ;  and  yet  it  has  no  tolerance  for 
false  doctrine,  and  enters  upon  no  compact  or  truce  with 
error.     It  does  not  claim  to  be  one  form  of  truth  which 


PUR1TA2!T'S    GAKDE2H".  .  177 

exists  side  by  side  with  a  dozen  others,  but  it  reveals 
Christ  as  ''the  truth."  We  do  not  beheve  in  many 
ways  to  heaven,  for  we  know  that  there  is  only  one  way, 
and  we  do  not  acknowledge  two  foundations  for  faith,  for 
we  know  Christ  to  be  the  one  and  only  foundation,  and 
we  dare  not  say  otherwise.  Christ  is  not  one  among 
many  Saviours,  he  is  the  only  Redeeemer  of  men.  The 
popular  fiction  of  "  comparative  religions"  is  a  delusion  ; 
there  is  but  one  truth,  and  that  which  does  not  agree 
with  it  is  a  lie. 

In  my  heart,  great  Lord,  many  lords  have  had  dominion 
aforetime,  but  now  thy  name  alone  shall  bear  rule  over 
my  nature.  Let  me  never  insult  thee  by  enduring  a 
rival ;  let  me  nev^er  ruin  myself  by  dividing  my  allegiance. 

LOOSE  STONES  IN  THE  FOUNDATION. 
**  It  is  dangerous  when  foundation-stones  lie  loose." 

Indeed  it  is.  Never  was  this  danger  greater.  Men 
are  denying  the  full  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  frittering 
away  the  atonement,  carping  at  justification  by  faith,  and 
questioning  the  proper  deity  of  our  blessed  Lord.  It  is 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  establish,  ground,  and 
settle  his  people  in»  foundation  truths,  and  there  is  reason 
to  fear  from  the  dubious  preaching  of  certain  "  intellect- 
ual" persons  that  they  have  little  or  no  acquaintance 
with  his  inward  teachings.  "  If  the  foundations  be 
destroyed,  what  can  the  righteous  do  ?"  The  ungodly 
may  triumph,  but  we  weep  and  lament  when  we  see  the 
glorious  doctrines  of  truth  assailed  by  those  who,  though 
they  know  it  not,  are  the  enemies  both  of  God  and  man. 
O  Lord,  visit  thy  church,  and  restore  a  martyr's  faith 
among  us.  Meanwhile  we  rejoice  that  ''  the  foundation 
of  God  standeth  sure." 


178  FLOWER&  FROM   A 

THE  QUEEN  CROAVNED  WITH  THE  KING. 

"  We  are  made  prophets,  priests,  and  kings  :  prophets  meet  to 
declare  God's  praises,  priests  fit  for  holy  ministering,  kings  to  reign 
over  our  corruptions  here,  and  with  Christ  forever  in  glory.  As  the 
queen  is  crowned  with  the  king,  so  shall  the  church  reign  with 
Christ. '* 

What  a  joy  it  is  thus  to  receive  our  honors  in  connec- 
tion with  our  Lord  !  "  Crowned  with  the  King" — this 
is  a  vast  increase  of  joy  !  It  makes  our  seat  in  the 
heavenlies  the  more  glorious  when  we  remember  that 
we  are  made  to  sit  there  together  %oUK  Kim.  To  rise  in 
his  resurrection,  to  live  because  he  lives,  to  be  crowned 
in  his  coronation,  and  to  be  glorified  with  his  glory,  this 
is  a  double,  yea,  a  sevenfold  bliss.  The  queen's  corona- 
tion with  the  king  is  much  more  joyous  to  her  than  if 
she  were  crowned  alone  ;  for  all  her  husband's  honors 
are  her  delight,  and  give  her,  as  it  were,  another  corona- 
tion better  than  her  own. 

O  Lord,  it  seems  too  great  a  thing  that  such  a  worth- 
less, unworthy  creature  as  I  am  should  be  glorified  at 
all ;  but  to  be  with  thee  and  like  thee  is  a  greater  glory 
than  even  heaven  itself  would  have  been  if  it  could  have 
been  enjoyed  apart  from  thyself. 

THE  CIVET  BOX.  ^ 

"  After  the  worship  of  the  Lord's  Day,  and  especially  after  the 
Lord's  Supper,  we  should  continue  in  devotion,  and  make  the  whole 
day  a  post-communion.  As  civet  boxes  retain  their  scent  when  the 
civet  is  taken  out,  so,  when  the  act  of  visible  communion  is  over, 
our  thoughts  and  discourse  and  actions  should  still  savor  of  the 
solemnity.  Certainly  it  is  an  argument  of  much  weakness  to  be  all 
for  flashes  and  sudden  starts." 

This  retaining  of  their  perfume  by  boxes  and  drawers 
in  which  sweet  scents  have  been  placed  is  a  fragrant 
figure  of  the  abiding  nature  of  grace  in  a  heart  wherein 
it  has  once  been  stored  up.  If  ordinances  yield  the 
influence  designed  by  them,  their  savor  will  remain  in 


^  PURITAl^'S   GARDEN.  179 

our  lives,  and  if  our  conversion  be  indeed  a  passing  from 
death  unto  life,  the  effect  of  it  will  be  seen  as  long  as 
we  dwell  among  men. 

We  cannot  come  away  from  real  communion  with  Christ 
without  carrying  some  of  the  delightful  odor  of  his  good 
ointments.  Grace  will  reveal  itself  by  its  fragrance  if  it 
be  genuine,  and  that  fragrance  will  be  a  perfume  of 
everlasting  continuance,  a  sweetness  indestructible.  It 
should  be  said  of  every  believer,  in  his  measure,  even  as 
it  is  written  of  his  Lord,  "  All  thy  garments  smell  of 
myrrh,  and  aloes,  and  cassia,  out  of  the  ivory  palaces, 
whereby  they  have  made  thee  glad."  The  hypocrite 
has  a  temporary  perfume,  with  which  he  takes  care  to 
odorize  himself  when  he  goes  into  the  outward  sanc- 
tuary ;  but  the  true  believer  is,  by  grace,  made  inherent- 
ly fragrant,  and  the  heavenly  spices  have  so  thoroughly 
saturated  his  garments,  that  they  shed  their  savor  abroad 
even  when  he  is  engaged  in  his  worldly  calling,  yea,  as 
long  as  he  lives,  and  wherever  he  goes. 

Sweet  Lord  Jesus,  do  thou  so  anoint  me  that  I  may 
always  bear  about  with  me  the  fragrance  of  thine  infinite 
perfections,  and  be  a  savor  of  life  unto  life  among  my 
neighbors. 

BEGGAE  W^ITH  TEEMBLING  HAND. 
**  We  give  a  beggar  an  alms,  though  he  receives  it  with  a  trem- 
bling, palsied  hand  ;  and  if  he  lets  it  fall,  we  let  him  stoop  for  it.'* 

So  doth  the  Lord  give  even  to  our  weak  faith,  and  in 
his  great  tenderness  permits  us  afterward  to  enjoy  what 
at  first  we  could  not  grasp.  The  trembling  hand  is  part 
of  the  poor  beggar's  distress,  and  the  weakness  of  our 
faith  is  a  part  of  our  spiritual  poverty  ;  therefore  it 
moves  the  divine  compassion,  and  is  an  argument  with 
heavenly  pity.  As  a  sin,  unbelief  grieves  the  Spirit^ 
but  as  a  weakness,  mourned  and  confessed,  it  secures  his 


180  FLOWERS   JFROM   A 

help.  ''  Lord,  I  believe/'  is  a  confession  of  faith  which 
loses  none  of  its  acceptableness  when  it  is  followed  by 
the  prayer,  "  help  thou  mine  unbelief.'^ 

CYEUS  AND  THE  RIVEE. 
**  Cyrus,  in  Herodotus,  going  to  fight  against  Scythia,  coming  to  a 
broad  river,  and  not  being  able  to  pass  over  it,  cut  and  divided  it 
into  divers  arms  and  sluices,  and  so  made  it  passable  for  all  his 
army.  This  is  the  devil's  policy  ;  he  laboreth  to  divide  the  people 
of  God,  and  separate  us  into  divers  sects  and  factions,  that  so  he 
may  easily  overcome  us." 

This  needs  no  comment.  What  is  needed  is  that  by  a 
spirit  of  brotherly  love  we  promote  the  unity  of  all  the 
churches,  and  the  peace  and  concord  of  that  to  which  we 
belong.  May  the  peace  of  the  church  be  ^^  as  a  river." 
Unity  is  strength.  "  Divide  and  conquer"  is  Satan's 
watchword  to  his  myrmidons  ;  but  Christ  teaches  us  that 
the  world  will  be  won  when  his  disciples  are  one. 

WINDOW^S  AND  TILES  WOETHY  OF  CAKE. 

"  Some  say—*  fundamentals  are  few  ;  believe  them,  and  live  well, 
and  you  are  saved.'  This  is  as  if  a  man  in  building  should  be  only 
careful  to  lay  a  good  foundation,  and  care  nothing  for  roof,  windows, 
or  walls.  If  a  man  should  untile  your  house,  and  tell  you  the 
foundation  and  the  main  buttresses  are  safe,  you  would  not  be 
pleased.     Why  should  you  be  more  careless  in  spiritual  things  ?" 

This  is  well  spoken.  The  least  particle  of  diamond  is 
diamond,  and  the  least  grain  of  truth  is  truth,  and  there- 
fore to  be  prized  above  the  rarest  gems.  That  which  is 
not  essential  to  salvation  may  yet  be  essential  to  comfort, 
and  necessary  to  our  complete  spiritual  manhood.  Our 
Lord  threatens  those  who  teach  men  to  disregard  the 
least  of  his  commandments  that  they  shall  be  called  the 
least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  becomes  not  servants 
to  trifle  with  the  smallest  commands  of  a  perfect  master. 
How  can  the  church  ever  be  a  perfect  house  of  God  if 
one  of  the  parts,  which  are  '^  fitly  framed  together," 


puritak's  gakdex.  181 

Bhould  through  our  neglect  be  left  out  ?  No,  we  must 
receive  all  the  truth,  that  we  may  be  built  up  ^^  a  holy 
temple  in  the  Lord."  Grave  errors  have  been  suggested 
and  nurtured  by  what  at  first  appeared  to  be  trifling 
departures  from  scriptural  rule,  therefore  we  ought  to 
give  earnest  heed  even  to  minor  precepts.  Future  ages 
may  have  to  mourn  over  the  defalcations  of  to-day,  un- 
less we  are  careful  to  do  the  building  of  the  Lord's  house 
with  faithfulness.  ^^ 

Lord,  make  me  watchful  in  little  matters,  lest  I  grow 
careless  in  weightier  concerns.  Thou  didst  speak  con- 
cerning the  pins  and  cords  of  the  tabernacle,  and  ordain 
that  all  should  be  made  to  pattern,  and  by  this  I  perceive 
that  thou  regardest  even  the  small  things  of  thy  service  ; 
I  pray  thee,  therefore,  give  me  both  clear  light,  a  keen 
eye,  and  a  tender  heart,  that  in  all  things  I  may  please 
thee. 

FLINT  AND  STEEL. 

"  God's  seasons  are  not  at  your  beck.     If  the  first  stroke  of  the 
flint  doth  not  bring  forth  the  fire,  you  must  strike  again. " 

That  is  to  say,  God  will  hear  prayer,  but  he  may  not 
answer  it  at  the  time  which  we  in  our  own  minds  have 
appointed  ;  he  will  reveal  himself  to  our  seeking  hearts, 
but  not  just  when  and  where  we  have  settled  in  our 
own  expectations.  Hence  the  need  of  perseverance  and 
importunity  in  supplication.  In  the  days  of  flint  and 
steel  and  brimstone  matches  we  had  to  strike  and  strike 
again,  dozens  of  times,  before  we  could  get  a  spark  to 
live  in  the  tinder  ;  and  we  were  thankful  enough  if  we 
succeeded  at  last.  Shall  we  not  be  as  persevering  and 
hopeful  as  to  heav^enly  things  ?  We  have  more  certainty 
of  success  in  this  business  than  we  had  with  our  flint  and 
steel,  for  we  have  God's  promise  at  oar  back.  Never 
let  us  despair.     God's  time  for  mercy  will  come  ;  yea. 


183  FLOWERS  from:  a 

it  lias  come,  if  onr  time  for  believing  has  arrived.  Ask 
in  faith,  nothing  wavering  ;  but  never  cease  from  peti- 
tioning because  the  king  'delays  to  reply.  Strike  the 
steel  again.  Make  the  sparks  fly  and  have  your  tinder 
ready  :  you  will  get  a  light  before  long. 

CATCHING  AT  A  BOUGH. 
"  As  a  man  faUing  into  a  river  espieth  a  botigli  of  a  tree,  and 
catches  at  it  with  all  his  might,  and  as  soon  as  he  hath  fast  hold  of 
it  he  is  safe  though  troubles  and  fears  do  not  presently  vanish  out  of 
his  mind  ;  so  the  soul,  espying  Christ  as  the  only  means  to  save  him, 
and  reaching  out  the  hand  to  him,  is  safe,  though  it  be  not  presently 
quieted  and  pacified." 

The  soul's  grasp  of  Jesus  saves  even  when  it  does  not 
comfort.  If  we  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment  we  are 
healed  of  our  deadly  disease,  though  our  heart  may  still 
be  full  of  trembling.  We  may  be  in  consternation^  but 
we  cannot  be  under  condemnation  if  we  have  believed  in 
Jesus  ;  even  as  the  man  who  has  grasped  the  branch 
may  be  wetted,  but  cannot  be  drowned.  Safety  is  one 
thing,  and  assurance  of  it  is  another.  Whether  the 
believer  in  Christ  Jesus  is  able  to  rejoice  in  his  safety, 
or  is  still  under  bondage  to  fear,  the  word  of  the  Lord 
standeth  true  beyond  all  question — "  He  that  believeth 
in  him  hath  everlasting  life.'' 

THE  com  AND  THE  PKIKCE. 
"  In  the  Scriptures  there  is  a  draught  of  God,  but  in  Christ  there 
is  God  himself.     A  coin  bears  the  image  of  Csesar,  but  Caesar's  son  is 
his  lively  resemblance.     Christ  is  the  living  Bible." 

We  rightly  call  the  Scriptures  "  The  Word  of  God,'' 
and  yet  in  the  deepest  and  truest  sense  Christ  only  is 
''THE  WORD." 

What  reverence,  then,  is  due  to  him,  and  how  im- 
portant it  is  that  we  get  beyond  all  the  outward  signs 
and  symbols  of  religion,  and  even  beyond  the  letter  of 


puritan's  garden.  183 

Scripture,  to  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God  himself.  His 
promise  of  rest  is  to  those  who  come  to  himself — '^  Come 
unto  ine^  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden  ;"  for  it 
is  in  himself  that  the  divine  power  is  centred.  He  tells 
lis,  ''  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  ;"  but 
the  eye  of  the  mind  has  never  yet  beheld  the  glory  of 
God,  or  known  him  in  any  true  sense  until  it  has  gazed 
upon  Immanuel,  God  with  us;  for  he  alone  is  '^the 
brightness  of  his  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image 
of  his  person. ' ' 

God  is  in  every  covenant  blessing,  but  not  as  he  is  in 
Christ,  for  '^  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head bodily." 

A  man  had  better  have  the  prince  for  a  friend  than 
possess  a  thousand  images  of  the  king  his  father  upon 
gold  and  silver  ;  and  so  it  is  a  happier  thing  for  us  to 
know  that  Christ  is  ours  than  to  possess  all  other  bless- 
ings, however  much  of  God  there  may  be  about  them. 
'^  Christ  is  all,"  and  he  is  more  than  all.  To  his  people 
lie  is  all  in  all,  for  such  is  God. 

My  soul,  let  this  endear  Jesus  to  thee  beyond  all  else, 
and  let  it  make  thee  urgent  and  eager  to  draw  very  near 
to  him.  Here  lies  thy  way  to  God,  for  God  is  in  him, 
and  nowhere  else  canst  thou  ever  find  him.  What  a 
happy  thing  for  thee  that  thy  God,  thy  heaven,  thy  all, 
are  treasured  up  in  one  so  accessible  to  thee  as  thy 
Mediator  and  Friend. 

THE  ANGLER  AND  THE  HUNTER. 

**  TiU  we  sin  Satan  is  a  parasite  ;  but  when  once  we  are  in  the 
devil's  hands  he  turns  tyrant.  As  an  angler,  when  the  fish  hath 
swallowed  the  bait,  discovers  himself  ;  or  as  a  hunter  lies  out  of 
sight  till  the  beast  is  gotten  into  the  toils,  and  then  he  shouts  and 
triumphs  over  his  prey,  so  the  evil  one  lets  not  his  enmity  be  seen 
till  he  has  deceived  his  dupe." 

How  often  have  I  seen  this.     A  soul  tempted  by  the 


.184  FLOWERS   mOM   A 

pleasures  of  sin  one  day,  and  driven  to  despair  by  re- 
morse for  it  the  next  !  Satan  first  acts  as  deceive.r  and 
then  as  accuser.  While  men  can  be  made  to  suck  down 
sin  he  will  make  it  sweet  in  their  mouths  ;  but  when  the 
poison  is  down  he  makes  it  bitter  in  their  bowels.  At 
the  first  he  tells  them  that  there  is  no  punishment,  and 
by  and  by  that  there  is  no  mercy. 

Lord,  teach  us  how  to  baffle  Satan's  arts,  and  rescue 
men  from  his  wiles.  No  mere  human  wisdom  can 
match  his  subtlety  ;  instruct  us,  then,  by  thy  Spirit  that 
We  may  be  as  wise  to  win  souls  as  he  is  crafty  to  destroy 
them. 

WEDGES. 
**  WTien  a  man  cleaves  a  block  he  first  pierces  it  with  small  wedges, 
and  then  with  greater  ;  and  so  doth  the  devil  make  entrance  into  the 
soul  by  degrees.  Judas  first  purloineth  and  stealeth  out  of  the  bag  ; 
then  censureth  Christ  as  profusely  lavishing.  What  needs  this 
waste  ?  This  was  not  only  a  check  to  the  woman,  but  to  Christ  him- 
self. Lastly,  upon  Christ's  rebuke  he  hates  him,  and  then  betrays 
him  to  his  enemies." 

There  is  no  dealing  with  the  devil  except  at  arm's 
length.  Those  little  wedges  of  his  are  terribly  insinuat- 
ing because  they  are  so  little.  Keep  them  out,  or  worse 
Vvdll  follow.  Occasional  glasses  lead  on  to  drunken 
orgies  ;  occasional  theatre-going  grows  into  wantonness 
and  chambering  ;  trifling  pilfering  soon  grows  to  down- 
right theft  ;  secret  backslidings  end  in  public  abomina- 
tions. The  egg  of  all  mischief  is  as  small  as  a  mustard 
seed.  It  is  with  the  transgressor  as  with  the  falling 
stone,  the  further  he  falls  the  faster  he  falls.  Again  we 
say — beware  of  the  httle  wedges,  for  they  are  in  crafty 
hands,  and  our  utter  destruction  may  be  compassed  by 
them.  Even  iron  safes  have  been  forced  when  little 
wedges  have  made  room  for  the  burglar's  lever.  Take 
heed  of  the  plea,  '^  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?" 


PURITA:N^^S   GARDEi^.  185 

O  my  Saviour,  let  me  not  fall  by  little  and  little,  or 
think  myself  able  to  bear  the  indulgence  of  any  known 
sin  because  it  seems  so  insignificant.  Keep  me  from 
sinful  beginnings,  lest  they  lead  me  on  to  sorrowful 
endings. 

THE  EIDEE  AND  THE  FOOTMAN. 
**  "We  expect  he  should  come  sooner  that  rideth  on  horseback  than 
he  that  travelleth  on  foot." 

Privileges  have  their  responsibilities.  To  whom  much 
is  given,  of  him  much  shall  be  required.  Five  talents 
must  bring  in  more  interest  than  one,  or  their  possessor 
will  prove  to  be  a  slothful  servant. 

How  is  it  with  us  ?  Have  we  more  talents  than 
others  ?  Then  our  Master  asks,  "  What  do  ye  more  than 
others?" 

LIGHT  CARKIED  BY  A  BLACK  MAN. 
*  *  A  torch  giveth  never  the  less  light  though  carried  by  a  blacka- 
moor ;  nor  is  the  gospel  less  efficacious  because  managed  by  carnal 
instruments." 

It  is  not  God's  will  that  any  one  who  is  himself  living 
in  sin  should  proclaim  the  gospel,  or  be  an  oflScer  in  his 
church,  and  yet  when  it  so  happens,  the  gospel  itself  is 
still  a  divine  light,  and  those  w^ho  see  it  live  thereby. 
The  faults  of  the  preacher  are  very  grievous  ;  but  if  the 
truth  of  God  be  dehvered  by  him,  we  should  not  be  so 
foolish  as  to  reject  the  doctrine,  though  we  censure  the 
man.  The  church  itself  may  be  like  Laodicea,  in  an  ill 
state  ;  but  it  is  not  for  us  to  quarrel  with  the  Scriptures 
on  that  account.  Young  persons  are  greatly  stumbled 
when  they  hear  of  the  fall  of  an  eminent  professor,  and 
yet  they  need  not  be  surprised,  for  there  have  been 
hypocrites  in  all  ages.  We  must  not  rest  our  faith  upon 
men  nor  believe  in  God  because  we  have  confidence  in  a 
minister  ;  that  would  be  a  sorry  reason  for  faith,  and 


186  FLOWERS    FROM    A 

would  vitiate  its  nature.     No,  if  the  torcli-bearer  turns 
black  as  soot  we  will  still  rejoice  in  the  light. 

Fit  is  it,  however,  that  none  but  gracious  men  should 
touch  the  work  of  the  Lord  ;  ail  others  are  intruders. 
"  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."  "  To 
the  wicked  God  saith,  "What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare 

my  statutes  ?" 

THE  EIVER  LOSING  DEPTH. 
''  Salvian  observeth  that  the  church,  like  a  river,  loseth  in  depth 
what  it  gaineth  in  breadth." 

Yet  Salvian  could  not  prove  that  it  needs  to  do  so.  It 
is  to  be  feared  that  the  case  is  occurring  even  now  ;  but 
it  ought  not  so  to  be.  When  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,  we  shall 
look  for  depth  as  well  as  breadth,  or  the  figure  will  not 
be  complete.  The  New  Jerusalem  lieth  four  square, 
and  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth  ;  "  the  length 
and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal." 

THE  WOODEN  LEG. 
'  *  Wicked  men  may  supply  the  needs  of  an  office,  as  Judas  for  a 
while  did  duty  as  an  apostle.     A  wooden  leg  may  be  a  stay  to  the 
body,  though  it  be  not  a  true  member." 

Quaint,  but  true.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  our  churches 
have  many  wooden  legs,  in  the  form  of  lifeless  ministers, 
graceless  deacons,  and  unregenerate  elders.  The  body 
may  move  with  these,  but  her  walk  must  be  limping, 
painful,  slow,  and  ungainly.  As  for  the  wooden  limb 
itself,  its  end  is  to  be  burned.  It  will  be  a  fearful  thing 
to  turn  out  to  be  a  dead  member  of  a  living  body — a 
false  arm,  or  a  glass  eye.  Such  shams  can  never  be  part 
of  the  body  of  Christ.  O  for  living,  loving,  lasting 
union  with  the  living  Head  ! 

THE  MISFIT. 
**  A  garment  too  short  will  not  cover  our  nakedness,  and  a  garment 
too  long  will  be  a  dirty  rag  to  trip  up  our  heels.     God  is  bound  in 


PURITAN^S   GARDEN".  187 

covenant  only  to  do  what  is  convenient  for  ns,  and  that  we  must 
leave  to  Grod  to  judge.  The  sheep  must  not  choose  the  pastures,  but 
the  shepherd," 

O  for  contentment  !  "  Too  mucli,"  we  see  by  tlie 
figure  used  above,  has  its  inconveniences  as  well  as  ''  too 
little. "  Enough  is  the  word,  and  God  knows  best  when 
we  are  at  that  point.  We  see  around  us  those  who  are 
much  hindered  in  holy  living  by  the  fact  of  their  being 
wealthy,  and  yet  perhaps  we  are  pining  to  run  in  their 
silken  sack.  Others  we  see  who  are  impeded  by  their 
poverty,  and  yet  this  need  not  be,  for  some  of  the  Lord's 
poor  are  far  ahead  of  other  runners,  and  keep  up  all  the 
better  pace  because  they  have  so  little  to  carry. 

Come,  my  heart,  be  satisfied.  It  should  be  no  hard 
task  to  thee  to  be  content,  seeing  all  things  are  thine, 
and  thy  Father  acts  as  thy  steward,  and  deals  out  daily 
*'  things  convenient"  for  thee.  The  garment  which  he 
puts  around  thee  fits  thee  in  every  part  ;  blessed  art  thou 
if  thou  canst  wear  it  becomingly  and  praise  him  for  it. 

TIMBER.     SHEEP.     WAX, 
*'  We  warp  in  the  sunshine,  a  shower  does  us  good.     The  dog  is 
let  loose  that  the  sheep  may  rtin  together.     A  piece  of  wax,  when  it 
is  broken,  put  it  together  never  so  often,  it  wiU  not  close  ;  but  put 
it  into  the  candle  and  the  ends  will  stick  close  together." 

Thus  by  three  figures  we  see  the  danger  of  prosperity 
and  the  benefit  of  affliction. 

The  first  metaphor  is  impressive.  Timber  warps  if 
it  be  exposed  to  noontide  heat,  and  men  are  all  too  apt 
to  be  influenced  one  way  or  another  by  success.  Poor 
fools  that  we  are,  we  cannot,  while  on  earth,  bear  too 
much  happiness.  It  is  our  tendency  to  warping  which 
often  necessitates  our  weeping.  The  Lord  will  sooner 
damp  us  with  showers  of  sorrow  than  allow  us  to  be 
spoiled. 


188  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

The  dog  to  fetch  back  the  wandering  sheep  is  a  well- 
known  illustration.  Some  need  to  feel  the  dog's  teeth 
before  they  will  mind  him,  and  God  has  dogs  which  will 
bite  if  barking  is  not  enough.  Our  good  Shepherd  will 
sooner  worry  ns  with  the  dog  of  afiiiction  than  leave  us 
to  the  wolf  of  apostasy. 

The  broken  stick  of  wax  prettily  shows  how  we  need 
suffering  if  we  are  to  be  set  right  after  the  fractures  of 
temptation.  How  well  the  broken  heart  of  a  sinner 
unites  with  the  heart  of  the  suffering  Saviour  !  There 
must  be  melting,  or  there  will  not  be  union.  Blessed 
be  God  for  any  experience  by  which  he  unites  our  heart 
to  fear  his  name. 

THE  TKAIL  OF  A  SNAIL. 

"  As  a  snail  leavetli  a  frothy  slime  npoii  the  fairest  flowers,  so  do 
unthankful  persons  leave  their  own  slime  upon  the  rich  mercies  of 
God  vouchsafed  to  them." 

Pining  for  things  denied  them,  they  undervalue  favors 
bestowed  upon  them.  Like  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  if 
they  cannot  have  flesh  to  feed  their  lusts  they  call  even 
angels'  food  '^ight  bread.''  By  feasting  to  the  full, 
and  wasting  their  substance  in  luxury,  many  persons  do 
more  mischief  with  the  bounties  of  providence  than  slugs 
and  snails  can  do  among  the  plants  in  a  garden.  Yet, 
when  their  festivals  are  over,  or  even  while  their  wine  is 
yet  on  the  board,  they  grumble  and  murmur  as  if  they 
were  more  hardly  done  by  than  any  other  men  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth  :  thus  a  second  time  they  besmear 
God's  goodness  by  their  thankless  conduct.  They  abuse 
the  gift  and  then  abuse  the  Giver.  They  climb  the 
wall,  and  spurn  the  ladder  by  which  they  climbed  ;  they 
drink,  and  then  defile  the  spring  ;  they  rise  upward  to 
the  sky,  and  then,  like  clouds,  obscure  the  heavens. 

My  God,  grant  that  I  may  never  abuse  thy  gifts,  nor 


PUSITAX'S   GARDE>y\  189 

even  dare  to  use  them  without  gratefully  praising  thee 
for  them.  Moses  warned  the  Jews  that  the  lizard,  the 
snail,  and  the  mole  are  unclean,  and  I  would  not  be  like 
to  any  one  of  them.  David  said  concerning  the  wicked, 
^^  As  a  snail  which  melteth,  let  every  one  of  them  pass 
away."  God  forbid  that  I  should  come  under  that 
curse,  and  so  pour  out  my  life  in  complaining,  leaving 
behind  me  a  trail  of  repining  wherever  I  may  move. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  PICTUEE  OF  A  SHEEP. 

*'  A  wolf  doth  not  worry  a  painted  sheep,  nor  does  the  world 
annoy  a  mere  professor.  But  when  any  are  holy  indeed,  and  of  a 
strict  innocency,  they  are  hated,  and  contradicted,  and  spoken 
against." 

No  one  fights  with  a  statue,  but  living  soldiers  are 
often  in  the  wars  :  living  Christians  are  sure  to  be 
assailed  in  one  way  or  another.  Let  us  therefore  for 
once  gather  figs  of  thistles,  and  find  comfortable  fruit 
upon  the  thorns  and  briers  of  persecution.  The  world  is 
no  fool ;  it  would  not  be  so  fierce  against  us  if  it  did 
not  see  something  about  us  contrary  to  itself  ;  its  enmity 
therefore  is  part  evidence  that  we  are  the  children  of 
God.  When  we  see  wolves  worrying  the  picture  of  a 
sheep  we  shall  expect  to  see  the  ungodly  scoffing  at  those 
who  are  like  them.  '^  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the 
world  would  love  his  own." 

SIVIALL  VESSELS  AND  A  GKEAT  FOUNTAIN. 
'*  Our  communion  with  Christ  is  not  now  full.  There  is  a  defect 
both  in  the  pipe  and  in  the  Tessel  ;  we  cannot  contain  aU  that  he 
is  able  to  give  out,  nor  can  the  means  convey  it  all  to  us.  The 
means  are  as  narrow  conduits  from  the  fountain,  or  as  creeks  from 
the  sea.  The  fountain  could  send  forth  more  water,  but  the  pipe  or 
conduit  can  convey  no  more." 

Yet  the  means  of  grace  could  convey  much  more  than 
we  are  usually  ready  to  receive,  and  Dr.  Manton  must 
not  blame  the  pipe  so  much  as  the  poor,  cracked  earthen 


100  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

vessel,  so  narrow  at  the  mouth,  and  so  stinted  in  every 
direction.  Ministries  and  ordinances  would  be  far  more 
profitable  if  we  were  prepared  to  be  profited.  At  the 
same  time,  if  we  dwell  where  outward  privileges  are 
scanty,  we  need  not  therefore  be  famished.  Our  Lord 
can  pour  his  grace  into  us  altogether  apart  from  the 
means  :  we  are  not  straitened  in  him — the  straitness  is 
in  ourselves  alone.  We  are  shallow  and  narrow  creeks, 
and  how  can  the  great  sea  of  divine  love  pour  its  fulness 
into  us  ?  O  Lord,  enlarge  our  hearts  till  we  shall  be 
"  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.'' 

TRAVELLING  MUCH  MOKE  DIFFICULT  THAN  LOOKING  AT 

MAPS. 
*'  When  we  look  at  towns  on  a  map,  we  think  the  way  to  them 
easy,  as  if  our  foot  were  as  nimble  as  our  thoughts  ;  but  we  are  soon 
discouraged  and  tired,  when  we  meet  with  dangerous  and  craggy 
passages,  and  come  to  learn  the  diif  erence  between  glancing  at  the 
way  and  serious  endeavors  to  traverse  it.  So  in  matters  of  religion, 
he  that  endeavors  to  bring  Christ  and  his  soul  together,  before  he 
hath  done,  will  be  forced  to  sit  down  and  cry,  Lord,  help  me  !" 

He  means  that  faith  is  no  such  child's  play  as  some 
dream  :  it  appears  easy  enough,  and  yet  when  the 
awakened  soul  comes  to  seek  the  Lord  in  earnest,  it 
finds  out  its  own  insuJBSciency.  It  is  well  when  this 
discovery  comes  speedily,  and  is  clearly  made,  so  that 
the  heart  early  in  the  morning  casts  itself  on  God  for 
everything,  and  does  not  waste  the  day  in  searching  for 
water  in  its  own  broken  cisterns.  We  need  as  much  to 
look  to  Christ /br  faith  as  hy  faith. 

Our  author  also  sets  forth  the  difference  between 
theory  and  experience.  Grace  in  the  book  is  one  thing, 
and  grace  in  the  heart  is  another.  To  build  on  paper  by 
drawing  elaborate  plans  has  been  the  amusement  of  many 
a  fool  who  could  not  lay  one  brick  upon  another.  We 
must  beware  of  resting  in  mere  words  and  confiding  in 


puettak's  GARDE]^.  191 

head  knowledge,  and  we  mnst  come  to  solid,  substantial 

facts.     A  man  may  dream  that  he  is  among  the  stars, 

and  may  suddenly  wake  to  find  that  he  has  battered  his 

face  against  the  post  of  his  bed  :  dreaming,  doting,  and 

theorizing  are  poor  substitutes  for  "  real"  experience  of 

divine  tilings. 

KNOCKING  THE  BAKEEL. 

"  By  knocking  npon  the  vessel  we  see  whether  it  be  full  or  empty, 
cracked  or  sound  ;  so  by  the  knocks  of  providence  given  us  in  afflic- 
tion we  are  discovered.' ' 

The  figure  may  be  varied  by  remembering  the  manner 
in  which  wheels  are  'tapped  with  a  hammer  on  the  rail- 
way^  that  their  soundness  may  be  tested.  Not  only  does 
affliction  thus  try  our  characters,  but  prosperity  does  the 
same.  Approbation  is  a  testing  blow  to  many  a  man  ; 
for  he  who  could  have  borne  opposition  gallantly  too 
often  yields  at  the  touch  of  praise,  and  is  found  to  be 
empty,  vain,  and  devoid  of  stability. 

When  we  are  afflicted  it  is  wise  to  watch  the  result 
upon  ourselves.  Can  our  faith  bear  trial,  or  is  it  a  mere 
counterfeit  ?  Do  we  love  a  taking  as  well  as  a  giving 
God  ?  Do  we  cleave  to  Christ  when  under  a  cloud,  or 
is  our  religion  only  a  fair-weather  amusement  ?  Heart- 
searching  may  thus  be  greatly  helped,  and  we  shall  run 
less  danger  of  self-deception.  It  will  be  an  awful  thing 
/  to  be  mere  empty  barrels,  and  never  know  it  till  death 
deals  a  blow  with  his  rod  of  iron,  and  we  answer  to  it 
with  hollow  sounds  of  despair. 

THE  BKOOK  AND  THE  EIVER. 

**  A  traveUer  may  easily  pass  over  the  head  of  a  brook  ;  but  when 
he  goeth  down,  thinking  to  find  it  narrower,  it  is  so  broad  that  he 
cannot  pass  at  aU.  Every  delay  brings  on  a  new  degree  of  hardness 
of  heart  on  our  part,  and  a  new  desertion  on  God's  part." 

Never  will  his  sin  be  less  powerful  than  at  this 
moment,  though  the  ungodly  man  should  wait  for  fifty 


192  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

years.  The  domination  of  evil  is  ever  growing,  never 
waning.  Manton  well  points  out  the  two  dangers  of 
delay — our  own  hardening,  and  the  Holy  Spirit's  with- 
drawal. Either  of  these  may  well  cause  fear  and  trem- 
bling  in  seM-confident  hearts. 

To-day  let  the  anxious  soul  pass  the  brook  by  God's 
gracious  help  ;  to-morrow  the  stream  will  be  hard  to 
ford,  and  anon  the  torrent  will  sweep  all  before  it. 
Tarry  not,  O  thou  who  wouldst  be  saved. 

COMMEKCE. 
"  Divers  cotintries  have  divers  commodities,  and  one  needeth  what 
another  prodnceth  ;  one  abonndeth  with  wines,  some  have  spices, 
others  have  skins,  and  commodities  of  other  kinds  ;  and  aU  this  is  so 
ordered  that  by  commerce  and  traffic  there  might  be  society  main- 
tained among  mankind. '  So  God  in  his  chnrch  hath  given  to  one 
gifts,  to  another  graces,  to  each  one  somewhat  which  is  not  possessed 
by  his  feUow,  to  maintain  a  holy  society  and  spiritual  commerce 
among  themselves." 

Brethren  who  will  not  commune  with  one  another 
upon  spiritual  subjects  are  as  traders  who  shut  up  their 
shops  and  \^11  neither  buy  nor  sell.  Too  wise  to  be 
taught,  and  too  idle  to  teach,  they  live  isolated  lives, 
like  the  man  in  the  iron  mask,  without  joy  to  themselves 
or  benefit  to  others. 

We  shall  all  be  beggars  together  if  we  shut  ourselves 
up  like  hermits,  and  cry  "  every  man  for  himself."  We 
have  seen  a  little  of  this  ''  protection"  in  spiritual  goods, 
and  we  witness  that  it  tendeth  to  poverty.  Fellowship 
is  pleasant,  mutual  help  is  profitable  ;  let  us  not  look 
every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on 
the  things  of  others.  Time  was  v/lien  they  that  feared 
the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another,  and  that  was  the 
best  of  times.  Let  us  hold  mutual  discourse  upon  our 
experiences,  make  pleasant  exchange  of  our  knowledge, 
and  aid  each  other  by  our  gifts.     Among  idolaters  we 


puritan's   GARDEN".  193 

read  that  ^^  the  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsmith,  and 
he  that  smoothed  with  the  hammer  him  that  smote  the 
anvil,"  and  surely  sncli  co-operation  ought  to  be  even 
more  evident  among  the  servants  of  the  true  God.  We 
wish  it  could  be  said  of  all  church  work,  "  They  helped 
every  one  his  neighbor,  and  every  one  said  to  his  brother, 
'  Be  of  good. courage.'  "  When  shall  all  rivalry  cease, 
and  every  Christian  seek  to  advance  the  interests  of  his 
brethren?  We  want  no  more  ^^  exclusive  brethren," 
whoever  they  may  be  ;  but  we  need  communicating 
brethren,  whose  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with 
the  Son,  and  with  all  the  saints. 

THE  BIED  AFKAID  OF  THE  SCAEECBOW. 
"  If  an  nnregenerate  man  should  leave  off  sin  under  fear  of  death 
or  heU,  it  would  not  be  out  of  hatred  to  sin,  but  out  of  the  fear  of 
the  punishment,  as  the  bird  is  kept  from  the  bait  by  the  scarecrow." 

Much  of  this  scarecrow  work  is  going  on  around  us, 
and  if  it  prevents  the  stealing  of  the  wheat  we  may  be 
glad  of  it.  Still,  it  is  a  poor  state  of  things  for  a  man  to 
refrain  from  sin  merely  and  only  because  he  is  afraid  of 
smarting  for  it.  If  the  heart  wouldy  but  the  hand  dares 
not^  the  person  will  be  judged  by  what  he  desires  rather 
than  by  his  actions.  We  are  before  God  what  in  our 
hearts  we  wish  to  be.  The  raven  is  not  a  dove  so  long 
as  it  longs  for  carrion,  even  though  it  may  sit  in  a  cage, 
and  act  like  the  gentlest  of  birds.  Christ  did  not  come 
to  scare  us  from  sin,  but  to  save  us  from  it.  Even  if 
there  were  no  hell,  true  saints  would  hate  sin,  and  strive 
after  holiness. 

ON  THE  TKEE  AND  IN  THE  STILL. 

**  The  rose  is  not  so  sweet  on  the  tree  as  in  the  still.** 

Yes,  Mr.  Manton,  it  is  just  as  sweet,  but  it  does  not 
so  fully  pour  forth  its  perfume.  Thanks  to  the  fire,  the 
fragrance  cannot  lie  latent  when  the  leaves  are  distilled. 


194  FLOWERS   FROM   A     . 

Thus  is  it  with  the  believing  soul  under  adversity,  the 
heart  then  yields  up  to  God  the  sweetness  which  else 
had  laid  dormant. 

Some  of  us  owe  more  than  we  can  tell  to  what  Manton 
calls  ^'the  still."  The  furnace,  the  anvil,  and  the 
hammer  have  been  the  making  of  our  lives  under  the 
guiding  wdsdom  of  the  great  Worker's  hand.  We  can- 
not enjoy  the  process  while  we  undergo  it  ;  but  the 
results  are  such  that  we  are  ready  to  fall  in  Iqvc  w^ith 
suffering.  O  rose,  were  it  not  for  the  still,  thine  essence 
had  not  made  fragrant  the  robes  of  queens  ;  but  now  art 
thou  in  king's  palaces,  and  a  drop  of  thy  soul's  inmost 
ichor  is  of  more  worth  than  gold.  Even  so,  we  had 
never  been  so  near  our  Lord,  the  Prince  Immanuel,  had 
we  not,  after  our  measure,  been  made  to  drink  of  his 
cup,  and  to  be  baptized  with  his  baptism. 

We  bless  thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  that  thou  doest,  whether 

thou  load  us  with  favor  till  we  are  as  flowers  gemmed 

with  dew,  or  pluck  away  our  beauty,  and  sever  us  from 

our  delights  till  we  are  as  roses  cut  off  and  cast  into  the 

still.     All  that  thou  doest  is  good,  and  for  all  thou  shalt 

be  extolled. 

CALLING  OFF  THE  DOG. 

*'  A  stranger  cannot  call  off  a  dog  from  the  flock,  but  the  shepherd 
can  do  so  with  a  word  ;  so  the  Lord  can  easity  rebuke  Satan  when 
he  finds  him  most  violent." 

0  Lord,  when  I  am  worried  by  my  great  enemy,  call 
him  off,  I  pray  thee.  Let  me  hear  a  voice  saying,  "  The 
Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan  ;  even  the  Lord  that  hath, 
chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee."  By  thine  election  of 
me,  rebuke  him,  T  pray  thee,  and  deliver  me  from  the 
power  of  the  dog. 

HEWING  STONES  AND  PEUNING  VINES. 

*'  There  is  more  squaring,  and  hewing,  and  hacking  used  about  a 
stone  that  is  to  be  set  in  a  stately  palace  than  that  which  is  placed 


puritan's  garden.  195 

in  an  ordinary  building  ;  and  the  vine  is  pruned  when  the  bramble 
is  not  looked  after,  but  let  alone  to  grow  to  its  full  length." 

Tlus  should  reconcile  belie  v^ers  to  their  chastisements. 
It  is  a  well-worn  figure  ;  but  it  is  well  put.  Brambles 
certainly  have  a  fine  time  of  it,  and  grow  after  their  own 
pleasure.  We  have  seen  their  long  shoots  reaching  far 
and  wide,  and  no  knife  has  threatened  them  as  they 
luxuriated  upon  the  commons  and  waste  lands.  The 
poor  vine  is  cut  down  so  closely  that  little  remains  of  it 
but  bare  stems.  Yet,  when  clearing-time  comes,  and  the 
brambles  are  heaped  for  their  burning,  who  would  not 
rather  be  the  vine  ? 

Ah,  Lord  !  Let  me  never  sigh  for  ease,  but  always 
seek  for  usefulness.  Square  me  till  I  am  fit  for  a  place 
in  thy  temple  ;  prune  me  till  I  yield  my  utmost  fruit.  I 
know  not  what  this  prayer  may  invoh^e  ;  but  if  I  did,  I 
would  pray  to  be  helped  to  pray  it,  and  I  would  entreat 
thee  to  fulfil  it  to  the  letter. 

THE  SINGEB. 
**  In  a  choir  or  concert  of  voices  he  is  commended  that  sings  well. 
Whether  he  sings  the  bass,  or  the  mean,  or  the  treble,  that  is  nothing, 
so  he  singeth  his  part  well  ;  but  he  is  despised  and  disallowed  that 
sings  amiss,  whatever  voice  he  useth.  Even  thus  doth  God  apj)rove, 
accept,  and  reward  his  people  that  serve  and  glorify  him  in  any 
state,  whether  it  be  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  eminent  or  obscure." 

Yes,  it  is  not  our  rank  or  estate,  but  the  right  using 
of  our  position  which  is  the  point  to  be  thought  of — the 
point  by  which  we  shall  be  judged  at  the  last.  If  called 
in  poverty  to  sing  bass,  blessed  is  he  who  sings  so  as  to 
please  the  ear  of  God  ;  he  shall  be  fully  as  accepted  as 
his  neighbor  who  exalts  his  voice  upon  a  higher  key. 
So  long  as  the  music  of  his  life  was  true  to  the  score  of 
duty  no  man  will  be  censured  because  his  notes  were  not 
so  strong,  or  high,  or  many  as  those  of  another  in  the 
company.     It  is  not  the  loftiness  of  our  place,  but  the 


196  PLOWERS   FROM   A 

worthy  occupying  of  it,  which  will  bring  acceptance  to 
our  work  before  the  Lord. 

0^  my  great  Master  and  Teacher,  help  me  to  remember 
this,  and  let  me  be  far  more  anxious  to  ,sing  my  part 
correctly  than  to  sit  in  this  seat  or  that,  among  the  rich 
or  the  great. 

WAGONS  NOT  MO\^D  BY  WIND,  NOK  SHIPS  DEAWN  BY 

HORSES. 

"  The  wise  use  right  means,  such  as  will  bring  them  to  their  desired 
end.  We  do  not  use  to  draw  ships  in  the  sea  with  horses,  nor  draw 
wagons  with  the  wind.  We  must  not  use  contrary  means,  nor  in- 
sufficient means.  We  cannot  go  to  the  bottom  of  a  well  that  is  thirty 
foot  deep  with  a  line  that  is  but  ten  foot." 

Why,  then,  do  men  try  to  win  heaven  by  their  own 
merits  ?  This  short  line  will  never  reach  so  far.  Wliy 
do  they  endeavor  to  save  sonls  by  noise  and  carnal  ex- 
citement instead  of  crying  for  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  What 
is  this  but  refusing  to  spread  the  sail  for  the  heavenly 
breeze,  and  relying  npon  the  tramp  of  horses,  and  the 
strength  of  flesh  and  blood  ?  How  is  it  that  so  many 
look  to  obtain  blessing  through  ceremonies  of  man's 
invention  ?  This  is  an  endeavor  to  move  a  mountain  by 
dancing  before  it. 

If  the  means  must  be  adequate  to  the  end,  then  noth- 
ing short  of  the  merits  of  Jesus  can  cause  a  sinner  to 
enter  heaven,  and  nothing  but  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  can  make  men  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  If 
the  means  must  be  adapted  to  the  end,  then  we  must  have 
mercy  to  comfort  misery,  love  to  rescue  lost  sinners, 
divine  goodness  for  despairing  hearts,  and  power  from 
on  high  for  souls  dead  in  trespasses  and  sin. 

Next  time  we  hear  a  man  try  to  convert  people  by 
fine  language,  we  shall  remember  Manton's  saying,  that 
wagons  are  not  moved  by  wind. 


puritait's  garde:n".  197 

THE  PRICK  OF  A  PIN  AND  A  HEAVY  BLOW. 
*'  The  prick  of  a  pin  maketh  a  man  start,  but  a  heavy  blow  stun- 
neth  him.     David,  when  he  cut  off  the  lap  of  Saul's  garment,  his 
heart  smote  him  ;  but  when  he  fell  into  adultery  and  blood,  he  was 
like  one  in  a  swoon." 

Tims  it  is  that  a  slight  departure  from  right  will  startle 
the  unsophisticated  conscience,  while  a  gross  sin  may 
stun  it  into  a  horrible  insensibility.  Much  serious 
thought  is  suggested  by  this  most  striking  simile. 
Amono;  other  thino^s  it  teaches  us  to  dread  a  benumbed 
or  swooning  conscience,  for  it  may  have  been  brought 
into  that  condition  by  a  terrible  sin.  Better  far  to  be 
morbidly  sensitive,  and  condemn  one's  self  needlessly, 
than  to  be  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin. 
A  quick  and  tender  conscience  is  among  the  best  gifts  of 
grace  ;  let  those  who  have  it  guard  its  delicacy  with 
jealous  care. 

Lord,  let  my  conscience  be  as  tender  as  the  apple  of 
my  eye.  As  well-balanced  scales  are  tremulous  at  the 
fall  of  a  single  grain  of  dust,  so  let  the  minutest  sin  set 
me  on  the  move.  Never,  I  beseech  thee,  permit  me  to 
become  heavy  with  the  intoxication  caused  by  a  deep 
draught  of  evil:  ''Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from 
presumptuous  sins  ;  let  them  not  have  dominion  over 
me. " 

TO  DIE  FIGHTING. 

*'  Sometimes  God  letteth  his  people  alone  till  their  latter  days, 
and  their  season  of  fighting  cometh  not  till  they  are  ready  to  go  out 
of  the  world,  that  they  may  die  fighting  and  be  crowned  in  the  field. 
But  first  or  last  the  cross  cometh,  and  there  is  a  time  to  exercise  our 
faith  and  patience  before  we  inherit  the  promises." 

It  has  been  observed  that  many  of  those  who  begin 
their  spiritual  career  with  severe  mental  conflicts  are 
afterward  filled  with  peace,  and  are  left  unmolested  for 
years.     Others  have  their  battle  in  middle  life,  and  find 


198  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

tlie  heat  of  their  noontide  sun  to  be  their  severest  trial ; 
while  a  third  class  suffer,  as  our  author  tells  us,  at  the 
very  close  of  their  pilgrimage.  No  rule  can  be  laid 
down  as  to  the  varied  experiences  of  the  saints  ;  but  we 
suspect  that  few  make  the  voyage  to  heaven  over  a  per- 
petually glassy  sea  ;  the  vast  majority,  at  some  time  or 
other,  are  "  tossed  with  tempest  and  not  comforted. '' 

What  if  we  also  must  die  fighting  ?  We  shall  fall 
amid  the  shouts  of  victory.  How  surprising  will  heaven 
be  to  us  !  One  moment  almost  wrecked,  and  the  next 
in  "the  Fair  Havens."  Wrestling  one  moment,  and 
resting  the  next  wdth  the  crown  about  our  brows  !  ^^  At 
eventide  it  shall  be  light.'' 

TRADING  OK  A  IVIAN'S  WORD. 
*'  If  a  man  promise,  they  reckon  much  of  that  ;  they  can  tarry 
apon  man's  security,  but  count  God's  word  nothing  worth.  They 
3an  trade  with  a  factor  beyond  seas,  and  trust  all  their  estate  in  a 
nan's  hands  whom  they  have  never  seen  ;  and  yet  the  word  of  the 
nfallible  God  is  of  little  regard  and  respect  with  them,  even  then 
jvhen  he  is  willing  to  give  an  earnest  of  the  promised  good." 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  ordinary  life  small  matters  of 
business  are  transacted  by  sight,  and  articles  valued  by 
pence  are  paid  for  over  the  counter  :  for  larger  things  we 
yive  checks  which  are  really  nothing  but  pieces  of  paper 
nade  valuable  by  a  man's  name  ;  and  in  the  heaviest 
transactions  of  all,  millions  change  from  hand  to  hand 
tvithout  a  coin  being  seen,  the  whole  depending  upon 
:lie  honor  and  worth  of  those  who  sign  their  hands. 
W^hat  then  ?  shall  not  the  Lord  be  trusted  ?  Ay,  with 
)ur  whole  being  and  destin3\  It  ought  to  be  the  most 
latural  thing  in  all  the  world  to  trust  God  ;  and  to  those 
w\\o  dwell  near  him  it  is  so.  Where  should  we  trust  but 
n  him  who  has  all  power  and  truth  and  love  within 
limself  ?     We  commit  ourselves  into  the  hands  of  our 


puritan's  gardejs".  199 

faithfal  Creator  and  feel  ourselves  secure.     ^'  Blessed  is 
he  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord 

is." 

THE  CHILD  AND  THE  FATHEB. 

"  A  young  child  does  not  know  his  father's  strength.  We  are 
poor,  weak  creatures,  and  cannot  conceive  fully  of  the  perfections  of 
God  ;  we  know  not  what  the  power  of  God  can  do  for  us.'* 

It  would  be  the  height  of  absurdity  for  the  child  to 
think  and  speak  of  its  father  as  if  he  were  a  child  too, 
and  could  do  no  more  than  the  boy's  playmates.  Yet 
this  is  the  common  error  of  the  children  of  God.  We 
do  not  raise  our  thoughts  to  a  godlike  level.  We  think 
our  own  thoughts  of  God,  and  straightway  we  doubt. 
Oh,  that  we  rose  to  God's  thoughts,  and  tried  to  con- 
ceive how  IIE  looks  upon  matters  !  Surely  he  taketh 
up  the  isles  as  a  very  httle  thing,  and  the  mountains  he 
weighs  in  scales.  If  our  troubles  were  set  in  the  light 
of  God's  power,  and  love,  and  faithfulness,  and  wisdom, 
they  would  become  to  us  small  burdens  :  why  should  we 
not  so  regard  them  ?  Why  nmst  we  reckon  as  children  ? 
Why  not  compute  our  load  by  our  Father's  measure- 
ment, and  then  see  how  easily  it  will  be  carried  ? 
Estimating  divine  strength  by  human  standards  is  one  of 
the  childish  things  which  we  must  put  away. 

O  Lord,  forgive  me  for  having  often  limited  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel,  and  teach  me  never  again  to  judge  after 
the  flesh. 

THE  GILDED  POTSHERD. 
**  A  gilded   potsherd  may  shine  till  it  cometh  to  scouring,  then 
the  varnish  is  speedily  worn  off." 

May  this  never  be  my  character,  but  may  I  be  solid 
gold,  which  will  bear  not  only  rubbing  but  burning. 
Alas,  when  I  am  impatient  under  affliction,  or  cowardly 
under  persecution,  or  weary  in  holy  service,  have  I  not 
good  reason  to   suspect   myseK  ?    It  may  be  that  my 


200  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

religion  is  only,  a  mere  surface  film,  and  not  part  and 

parcel  of  my  being  ;  and  if  so,  it  will  go  ill  with  me. 

I  shall  ere-long  be  like  a  broken  vessel,  cast  away  upon 

the  dunghill  of  everlasting  contempt. 

O  Lord,  of  thy  mercy  save  me  from  being  a  mere 

piece  of  gilded  clay,  by  giving  me  truth  in  the  inward 

parts. 

HOLDING  ON  WITH  THE  TEETH. 

''  He  who  is  spoken  of  in  the  story  first  holds  the  boat  with  his 
right  hand,  and  that  being  cut  off,  he  takes  hold  with  his  left  hand, 
and  when  that  is  cut  off,  he  fastens  on  with  his  teeth.  So  when  one 
help  is  cut  off,  and  then  another,  yet  faith  doth  fasten  upon  God  as 
long  as  it  hath  his  word  to  fasten  on.  When  God  makes  breach  after 
breach,  then  to  depend  upon  him  is  faith  indeed." 

Well  may  we  maintain  onr  hold  upon  our  God,  come 
what  may  ;  for  who  else  is  fit  to  be  our  soul's  holdfast  ? 
With  us  it  must  be  Christ  or  nothing,  for  other  refuge 
there  is  none.  Trying  times  make  us  desperately  re- 
solved to  trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  hazards.  A  sense  of 
sin  snatches  away  one  promise,  and  another  ;  and  then 
we  betake  ourselves  to  such  words  of  grace  as  were 
expressly  given  to  the  most  unworthy  :  there  we  resolve 
to  perish,  if  perish  we  must.  Our  grasp  at  such  times 
does  not  embrace  much  of  the  truth,  but  it  is  intense, 
and  takes  fast  hold  on  what  it  has  reached.  We  cannot, 
we  will  not,  let  go  the  Saviour.  Like  Joab,  we  will  die 
at  the  horns  of  the  altar,  if  we  must  die.  He  who,  like 
the  man  in  the  story,  has  lost  both  his  hands  and  yet 
holds  by  his  teeth,  is  safe  enough  :  God  will  never  leav6 
such  a  man  to  drown.  Let  us  refuse  to  despair,  or  even 
to  despond  ;  since  there  is  no  just  cause  for  distress 
while  we  can  truly  say,  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I 

trust  in  him." 

GONE  AT  THE  BOOT. 
*'  As  when  the  root  of  a  tree  perisheth,  the  leaves  keep  green  for  a 
while,  but  within  a  while  they  wither  and  fall  off  ;  so  love  is  the 


puritak's  GARDEiq-.  201 

root  and  heart  of  all  other  duties,  and  when  that  decayeth,  other 
things  decay  with  it." 

What  would  the  virtues  be  if  they  could  remain  with- 
out love  ?  A  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal. 
But,  as  a  rule,  they  do  not  long  remain.  First  one 
drops  off  and  then  another,  like  falling  leaves  ;  and  by 
and  by  the  man  is  as  a  bare  branch,  only  fit  to  be  cut 
down  and  cast  into  the  fire.  Some,  who  once  professed 
great  things,  have  now  hardly  enough  rags  of  morality 
left  decently  to  go  to  hell  in,  and  all  because  they  were 
without  true  love,  and  therefore  were  rotten  at  the  core. 

Evil  in  the  heart  is  a  deadly  wound,  but  it  is  usually 
unperceived  till  it  has  done  its  work.  No  axe  has  been 
lifted  against  the  man's  morals,  no  great  strokes  liav^e 
gashed  his  visible  character,  and  yet  the  end  has  been 
certain,  the  ruin  has  been  complete  :  the  spiritual  life-sap 
ceased  to  flow,  the  branch  of  usefulness  withered,  and  at 
last  the  tree  fell  over,  to  lie  prone  among  the  spoils  of 
death.  We  have  seen  it — seen  it  so  often,  that  our  mxost 
solemn  warnings  are  reserved  for  secret  declensions. 
There  is  something  nobler  in  falling  by  the  woodman's 
strokes  than  in  perishing  by  a  little  worm  at  the  root. 
The  meanness  of  decaying  into  corruption,  while  stand- 
ing in  the  midst  of  a  church,  is  awful. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,   and  keep  us  from  this 

evil.     Amen. 

CHESSIMEN  IN  THE  BAG. 

"  As  chessmen  are  all  thrown  into  the  bag  together,  so  in  the  grave 
there  is  no  distinction  ;  skulls  wear  no  wreaths,  and  corpses  carry  no 
marks  of  honor." 

The  bishop  and  the  knight  tumble  into  the  box  with 
the  pawns,  and  the  king  and  the  queen  fare  no  better. 
Death  is  a  terrible  leveller.  It  is  a  pity  that  some  men 
carry  their  heads  so  high  above  their  fellows  all  the  day, 
for  they  will  have  to  sleep  at  night  in  the  same  bed  of 


203  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

clay  with  those  whom  they  despise.     With  uncouth  verse 
the  poet  tells  the  like  story  : 

*'  Beauty,  and  strength,  and  wit,  and  wealth,  and  power, 
Have  their  short  flourishing  hour  ; 
And  love  to  see  themselves  and  smile, 
And  joy  in  their  pre-eminence  awhile. 
Ev'n  so  in  the  same  land, 
Poor  weeds,  rich  corn,  gay  flowers  together  stand  : 
Alas  !  death  mows  down  all  with  an  impartial  hand.*' 

THE  BITER  BITTEN. 
*'  Persecution  and  oppression  are  like  an  iron  in  the  fire,  which, 
heated  too  hot,  burneth  their  fingers  that  hold  it/* 

The  nations  on  the  continent  which  drove  out  the 
Huguenots  were  ruined  in  their  trade  by  the  loss  of  their 
most  intelligent  and  industrious  artisans.  The  Romish 
Church  itself  became  the  object  of  popular  hatred  by  its 
burnings  of  godly  men  and  women.  As  Pharaoh  was 
glad  at  last  to  be  rid  of  the  Israelites  whom  he  had 
oppressed,  so  are  persecutors  frequently  pleased  if  they 
can  sneak  out  of  their  persecutions,  and  wash  their  hands 
of  the  business.  Playing  with  edged  tools  is  dangerous 
work,  and  so  is  slandering  the  saints  of  God.  Hammers 
have  smitten  the  patient  anvil  until  they  have  been  worn 
out,  and  have  become  more  weary  of  the  anvil's  endur- 
ance than  it  was  of  their  blows. 

If  any  reader  is  opposing  the  church  of  God,  let  him 
consider  what  he  is  doing.  He  will  find  it  hard  to  kick 
against  the  pricks.  It  will  end  as  did  the  famous  battle 
of  the  tow  with  the  fire,  and  the  stubble  with  the  flame. 
No  honor  is  to  be  gained  by  the  conflict,  but  a  blot  will 
fall  on  the  persecutor's  escutcheon,  and  his  portion  shall 
be  everlasting  contempt. 

THE  GIANT  AND  THE  STRAW. 
"  A  giant  striking  with   a   straw  cannot  put  forth   his  strength 


puritan's  garde:n".  203 

with  it.     So  in  blessing,  no  creature  nor  ordinance  can  convey  all 
the  goodness  of  God  to  us." 

The  best  preacher  is  no  better  than  a  straw,  in  and  of 
himself.  God  shows  his  omnipotence  by  accomplishing 
anything  with  such  poor  tools  as  we  are.  Were  he  not 
Almighty  the  infirmities  of  his  servants  wonld  cause  him 
to  fail  in  every  design  in  which  he  employs  them.  As  it 
is,  the  fact  of  our  unfitness  should  greatly  enhance  our 
sense  of  his  glory.  This  feebleness  on  the  part  of  the 
fittest  instrument  makes  it  imperative  that  the  Lord's 
own  Spirit  should  work  in  men's  hearts  over  and  above 
his  working  through  the  means.  New  hearts  cannot  be 
created  by  mere  human  voices  :  these  are  more  qualified 
to  call  beasts  to  their  fodder  than  dead  souls  out  of  their 
spiritual  graves.  The  Holy  Ghost  must  himself  breathe 
life  and  infuse  strength  into  men  ;  for  his  ministers  are 
little  better  than  the  staff  of  Elijah,  which  was  laid  upon 
the  dead  child,  but  neither  hearing  nor  answering  re- 
sulted from  it. 

The  figure  of  a  ^iant  using  a  straw  as  a  cudgel  is  not, 
however,  perfect  unless  we  picture  him  as  able  to 
strengthen  the  straw,  till  he  strikes  with  it  as  with  a 
hammer  and  dashes  rocks  in  pieces  ;  for  even  thus  the 
Lord  doth  by  his  feeble  servants.  Hath  he  not  said, 
''  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Israel ;  I 
will  help  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  and  thy  Redeemer,  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel.  Behold,  I  will  make  thee  a  new 
sharp  threshing  instrument  having  teeth  :  thou  shalt 
thresh  the  mountains,  and  beat  them  small,  and  shalt 
make  the  hills  as  chaff.  Thou  shalt  fan  them,  and  the 
wind  shall  carry  them  away,  and  the  whirlwind  shall 
scatter  them  :  and  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and 
shalt  glory  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  ?" 

O   thou   Almighty    One,    continue   to   display    thine 


204  FLOWEKS   FROM   A 

onmipotence  by  using  me,  even  me,  the  least  and  fee- 
blest of  all  tbine  instruments. 

EYEKYTHING  ACCOKDING  TO  ITS  NATUKE. 
"A  bowl  used  on  the  green  must  be  made  round  before  it  can  run 
round  ;  a  musical  instrument  must  be  framed  and  strung,  and  put  in 
tune  before  it  can  make  melody  ;  a  tree  must  first  be  made  good 
before  we  can  expect  any  good  fruit  from  it." 

Precisely  so  ;  and  yet  this  fact  is  seldom  considered. 
Men  are  loath  to  believe  that  their  errors  arise  out  of 
themselves,  and  that  they  must  themselves  be  improved 
before  their  hves  will  be  bettered.  Their  circumstances 
and  associations  are  blamed,  whereas  the.  fault  lies  in 
themselves,  only  they  will  not  believe  it.  They  will  not 
admit  that  there  is  a  bias  in  the  ball  itself,  but  they 
blame  the  hand  which  threw  it  ;  the  harp -strings  they 
will  not  attend  to,  but  complain  of  the  musician's  touch  ; 
the  tree  they  will  not  chide  for  bearing  crabs,  it  is  the 
soil,  the  season,  or  the  gardener.  Most  guilty  men, 
when  their  crimes  are  exposed,  blame  their  ill-luck,  and 
not  their  evil  hearts.  The  world  has  come  to  call  an 
unchaste  woman  '^unfortunate;"  and  this  is  but  one 
open  expression  of  what  it  secretly  believes  as  to  all  sin  : 
it  reckons  our  transgression  to  be  our  misfortune  rather 
than  our  fault.  We  are  poor  erring  mortals,  and  are 
more  to  be  pitied  than  punished — this  is  the  secret  creed 
of  mankind,  and  there  is  a  floating  tradition  abroad  that 
we  ourselves  are  right  enough,  but  our  position  renders 
error  unavoidable. 

When  will  our  fellow-men  give  up  this  falsehood,  and 
perceive  that  if  the  vessels  leaks,  it  is  because  it  is 
broken  ;  and  if  foul  water  drips  from  it,  it  is  because  its 
contents  are  unclean  ?  Oh,  that  they  would  blame  them- 
selves, and  seek  a  change  of  heart  ;  for  nothing  short  of 
this  can  set  the  matter  right. 


puritan's  gardej^.  205 

ALEXANDER  AND  APELLES. 
"  Alexander  wonld  be  painted  by  none  but  Apelles,  and  carved  by 
none  but  Lysippus.  Domitian  would  not  have  his  statue  made  but 
in  gold  or  silver.  God,  the  great  king,  will  be  served  with  the  best 
of  our  affections.  When  we  care  not  what  we  offer  to  God,  how  will 
he  accept  us  ?' ' 

It  is  but  ordinary  manners  that,  when  we  entertain  a 
friend  who  is  greatly  our  superior,  we  should  at  least  do 
our  best  and  set  before  him  all  that  our  house  and  purse 
can  afford,  with  many  an  apology  that  it  is  no  better.  If 
our  queen  came  to  sup  with  us,  we  should  do  our  very 
best  to  please  her  majesty  ;  how  much  more  ought  we  to 
be  devoutly  intent  to  offer  fit  homage  to  the  King  of 
kings  ! 

O  my  Lord,  teach  me  to  give  thee  the  choicest  product 
of  my  being,  and  instruct  me  how  to  do  this  in  the  most 
acceptable  manner.  May  I  never  play  the  sloven  vritli 
thee.  Angels  cannot  serve  thee  as  thou  deservest  to  be 
served,  and  shall  I  think  to  please  thee  with  hap  hazard 
offerings  ?  If  I  sing  to  thee,  make  me  earnest  and 
hearty  in  spirit,  and  as  musical  in  utterance  as  my  harsh 
voice  permits.  When  I  pray,  forbid  that  I  should  even 
seem  to  be  chill  and  dull.  If  I  am  honored  to  preach 
thy  gospel,  may  I  plead  for  thee  with  my  whole  heart, 
and  speak  even  to  a  few  as  zealously  as  if  thousands 
waited  for  my  words.  It  is  meet  that  the  best  should 
have  the  best  ;  that  thou,  the  most  loving  of  Lords, 
shouldst  have  my  most  loyal  services. 

TWO  WAYS  OF  PUTTING  OUT  FIKE. 

*'  Fire  is  quenched  by  pouring  on  water  or  by  withdrawing  fuel  ; 
so  tlie  Spirit  is  quenched  by  living  in  sin,  which  is  like  pouring 
water  on  a  fire  ;  or  by  not  improving  our  gifts  and  graces,  which  is 
like  withdrawing  fuel  from  the  hearth." 

Many  are  found  carefully  avoiding  outward  sin,  and 
yet  they  daily  neglect  the  gifts  of  grace  !     What  folly  I 


206  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

Will  it  not  come  to  the  same  thing  in  the  end  with  the 
fire  upon  my  hearth  whether  I  pour  water  on  the  logs  or 
refuse  to  place  fresh  brands  thereon  ?  It  will  die  out 
with  equal  certainty,  w^hichever  is  my  mode  of  pro- 
cedure. So  will  it  be  with  the  fire  in  my  heart.  To  be 
careless  is  as  dangerous  as  to  be  disobedient.  I^ot  to  do 
good  is  to  do  evil.  Sins  concerning  neglected  grace  and 
omitted  duty  are  as  mischievous  to  us  as  actual  wrong- 
doing. 

This  is  a  caution  to  thousands  ;  possibly  to  the  reader  ; 
certainly  to  the  writer.  Oh  for  grace  to  attend  to  the 
state  of  the  inward  fires,  lest  Satan  should  get  an  ad- 
vantage over  us  by  our  neglect  !  Though  he  may  have 
been  foiled  in  every  attempt  to  lead  us  into  active 
rebellion  against  God,  the  enemy  may  yet  prevail  by 
bringing  us  into  a  negative  state  of  indifference  and 
apatiiy.  There  is  a  passive  disobedience,  which  is  ex- 
ceedingly injurious  to  the  soul.  The  Lord  save  us  from 
this  great  peril.  Let  us  hear  him  say,  ''  Quench  not  the 
Spirit,"  and  yet  again,  ^'  Stir  up  the  gift  which  is  in 

thee." 

SETTLING  THE  EXPENDITUEE. 

*^  W^hen  a  man  hath  allotted  so  much  for  building  a  house,  so  long 
as  he  keeps  within  the  bounds  of  his  allotment  he  parteth  with  his 
money  freely  ;  but  when  that  is  gone  he  parts  with  every  penny  with 
grudging.  It  is  good  to  make  Christ  large  allowance  at  the  first  so 
that  we  do  not  afterward  grudge  our  bargain  and  contract." 

Good,  Dr.  Manton  !  Yery  good  !  When  some  of  us 
began  with  the  Lord  Jesus  we  meant  to  place  all  that  we 
had  at  his  disposal,  and  ever  since  it  has  been  a  great  joy 
to  feel  that  everything  we  are  and  have  belongs  to  him. 
What  we  can  give  to  his  cause  we  regard  as  children  do 
their  spending  money  ;  we  lay  it  out  with  eagerness,  and 
wish  it  were  a  hundred  times  as  much.  No  silver  slips 
from  our  hand  so  joyfully  as  that  which  goes  to  God. 


PURITAN^S    GARDEN.  207 

No  gold  IS  SO  readily  parted  with  as  that  which  is  spent 
upon  his  cause.  Grudging  is  far  from  us,  when  God's 
cause  is  near  to  us.  Surely,  some  of  our  friends  started 
with  other  notions,  and  put  the  Lord  on  short  commons 
at  the  first  estimate,  for  they  need  to  be  hardly  pressed 
ere  they  will  give  to  his  cause. 

Dear  reader,  is  this  so  with  you  ?  Do  you  look  a  score 
times  at  every  sixpence  you  spend  upon  the  Lord  ?  If 
so,  revise  your  contract.  Make  your  Beloved  a  more 
liberal  allowance.  ^^  He  that  soweth  sparingly  shall 
reap  also  sparingly." 

THE  SHAKING  OP  THE  TKEE. 
"  When  the    tree  is  soundly  shaken,  rotten  apples    fall  to    the 
ground  ;  so  in  great  trials  guile  of  spirit  will  fail." 

This,  then,  is  the  purpose  of  affliction  :  first,  to  test 
me^  that  I  may  see  how  far  my  supposed  graces  are  real 
and  vital.  Those  which  are  not  sound  will  soon  be  lost  ; 
only  the  living  and  growing  graces  will  remain.  Can  I 
bear  the  test  ?     How  have  1  borne  it  ? 

Secondly,  trials  relieve  me^  for  it  is  a  hurtful  thing  to 
the  tree  and  to  its  living  fruit  to  be  cumbered  with 
rottenness,  in  which  may  breed  noxious  worms,  which 
when  they  multiply  may  come  to  be  devourers  of  the 
tree's  life.  We  are  enriched  when  we  lose  fictitious 
virtues.  Stripping  of  filthy  rags  is  an  advance  toward 
cleanliness,  and  what  are  counterfeit  graces  but  mere 
rags,  worthy  to  be  torn  off  and  cast  into  the  fire  ? 

In  the  end  such  a  result  of  affliction  also  heautijies  me  * 
for  as  rotten  apples  disfigure  the  tree,  so  would  the  mere 
pretence  of  virtue  mar  my  character  in  the  sight  of  God 
and  good  men.  It  is  always  better  to  be  openly  without 
an  attainment  than  to  bear  the  form  of  it  without  in 
reality  possessing  it.  A  sham  is  a  shame  :  an  unreal 
virtue  is  an  undoubted  vice. 


208  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

Lord,  I  thank  thee  for  shaking  me,  since  1  now  per- 
ceive that  all  this  good  and  much  more  is  designed  by 
the  process,  and  is,  I  trust,  in  some  measure  accomplished 
thereby.  Oh  that  thy  Holy  Spirit  may  bless  my  adver- 
sities to  this  end,  and  then  they  will  not  be  adverse  to 
me,  but  the  very  reverse  ! 

THIESTY  MEN  DKINKING  WITHOUT  LOOKING. 
"  As  men  in  a  deep  thirst  swallow  their  drink  before  they  know 
the  nature  of  it,  or  discern  the  taste  of  it ;  so  when  we  are  under  a 
great  thirst,  or  tinder  great  famishment  as  to  spiritual  comfort,  and 
have  great  troubles  upon  us,  we  take  up  with  comfortable  notions  of 
Christ  and  salvation  by  him,  and  easily  drink  in  these  and  other 
truths,  catching  at  them  without  looking  into  the  grounds  or  reasons 
of  them.  Afterward  we  see  the  need  of  care  and  watchfulness  of 
soul,  to  strengthen  our  assent  and  fortify  ourselves  against  those 
doubts  of  mind  which  shake  us.  Then  we  desire  to  settle  our  hearts 
in  those  supreme  truths  which  in  our  necessity  we  accepted  without 
discussion." 

This  is  a  very  natural  figure.  See  how  the  thirsty 
man  turns  up  the  cup  and  drinks  the  contents  at  a 
draught  ;  he  cares  little  what  it  is,  so  that  it  quenches 
his  raging  thirst.  "  Behold,  he  drinketh  up  a  river,  and 
hasteth  not  :  he  trusteth  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan 
into  his  mouth."  But  now,  mark  him  in  cooler  mo- 
ments !  He  is  careful  of  his  drinking,  lest  he  be  made 
top-heavy,  or  become  nauseated.  A  simple,  receptive 
faith  is  a  fine  thing  for  the  speedy  removal  of  the  soul's 
thirst  ;  but  if  it  were  not  soon  qualified  by  spiritual 
discernment  it  would  lead  to  credulity,  and  the  man 
would  be  ready  to  take  in  anything  which  might  be  set 
before  him.  The  rapid  believer  would  soon  become  the 
victim  of  superstition.  The  more  study  of  the  Script- 
ures, and  testing  of  doctrines  thereby,  the  better. 
Careful  investigation  may  save  the  mind  from  being 
injured  by  poisonous    teaching,   and    it    will   certainly 


PUKITAi^'S    GAEDEjq".  209 

endear  the  truth  to  ns,  and  strengthen  our  confidence 
in  it. 

What  a  draught  was  that  which  some  of  us  had  at  the 
first  !  Little  enough  we  knew  ;  but  our  enjoyment  of 
what  we  did  know  was  intense  !  Lord,  thou  hast  now 
revealed  to  us  the  ingredients  of  tliat  divine  cup  ;  grant 
that  this  may  give  us  a  new  and  deeper  joy  ;  but  do  not 
allow  us  to  forget  the  bliss  of  satisfied  thirst  because  we 
are  gifted  with  fuller  knowledge.  Such  a  gain  would 
be  a  loss  most  serious. 

CHILDREN  CAERIED  BY  THEIR  FATHER. 
"  We  must  look  upon  Christ  as  a  father  carrying  all  his  children 
on  his  back,  or  lapped  up  in  his  garment,  through  a  deep  river, 
through  which  they  must  needs  pass,  and,  as  it  were,  saying  to 
them,  Fear  not,  I  will  set  you  safe  on  land.  Look  upon  Christ 
wading  with  all  his  children  through  the  floods  of  death  and  hell, 
and  saying,  Fear  not,  worm  Jacob  ;  fear  not,  poor  souls,  I  will  set 
you  safe.'* 

This  is  not  very  poetically  put.  It  is  the  old  Chris- 
topher story  in  a  more  common  dress.  The  good  Lord 
waits  at  the  river  to  bear  us  over,  lest  the  water-floods 
prevail  against  us.  He  hath  made,  and  he  will  bear, 
even  he  will  carry.  Here  is  our  safety  :  He  shall  gather 
the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom. 

O  my  gracious  Lord,  be  pleased  to  carry  me  among 
thine  own  in  life  and  in  death.  Yea,  set  me  safe  on 
the  further  short  to  sing  forever  of  thy  saving  power. 

GOING  TO  BED  TO  EISE  AGAIN. 
"  A  man  goes  to  bed  willingly  and  cheerfully,  because  he  knows  he 
shall  rise  again  the  next  morning,  and  be  renewed  in  his  strength. 
Confidence  in  the  resurrection  would  make  us  go  to  the  grave  as 
cheerfully  as  we  go  to  our  beds  ;  it  would  make  us  die  more  comfort- 
ably, and  sleep  more  quietly,  in  the  bosom  of  the  Lord  than  we  rest 
in  our  own  beds." 

This  is  a  choice  word  ;  a  flower  which  smells  sweet, 


210  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

and  blossoms  in  tibe  dust.     It  needs  not  a  line  from  ns  ; 

it  only  requires  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  us  to  enjoy  its 

fragrance. 

THE  KING'S  LODGING. 

"  If  an  earthly  king  lie  but  a  night  in  a  house,  what  care  is  there 
taken  that  nothing  be  offensive  to  him,  but  that  all  things  be  neat, 
clean,  and  sweet  ?  How  much  more  ought  you  to  be  careful  to  get 
and  keep  your  hearts  clean,  to  perform  service  acceptably  to  him  ;  to 
be  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  love,  and  other  graces,  that  you  may 
entertain,  as  you  ought,  your  heavenly  King,  who  comes  to  take  up 
his  continual  abode  and  residence  in  your  hearts  !" 

We  know  a  house  in  which  an  empress  rested  for  a 
very  short  time,  and  the  owner  henceforth  refused  to 
admit  other  inmates.  Such  is  his  devotion  to  his  royal 
guest  that  no  one  may  now  sit  in  her  chair  or  dine  at  the 
table  which  she  honored.  Our  verdict  is  that  he  makes 
loyalty  into  absurdity  by  this  conduct  ;  but  if  we  imitate 
him  in  this  procedure  in  reference  to  the  Lord  Jesus  we 
shall  be  wise.  Let  our  whole  being  be  set  apart  for 
Jesus,  and  for  Jesus  only.  We  shall  not  have  to  shut 
up  the  house  ;  for  our  beloved  Lord  will  inhabit  every 
chamber  of  it,  and  make  it  a  permanent  palace.  Let  us 
see  to  it  that  all  be  holy,  all  pure,  all  devout. 

Help  us,  O  Purifier  of  the  temple,  to  drive  out  all 
intruders,  and  reserve  our  soul  in  all  the  beauty  of  holi- 
ness for  the  Blessed  and  Only  Potentate. 

BANKKUPTS. 
**  A  man  is  a  man,  though  he  be  a  bankrupt ;  he  has  a  being, 
though  his  well-being  is  lost." 

So  a  believer  may  be  truly  alive  unto  God,  though  by 
his  carelessness  he  has  lost  all  the  wealth  of  the  spiritual 
life,  and  has  fallen  into  soul  poverty.  Such  a  man 
should  not  despair,  but  with  deep  humiliation  he  should 
begin  again.  A  tradesman  who  has  failed  will  take  to 
a  humble  calhng  to   earn  his*  bread,  and  so  should  a 


211 


Christian  who  has  broken  down  in  his  spiritual  estate 
take  a  lowly  position,  and  with  all  diligence  labor  to 
glorify  the  Lord  better  than  before. 

O  my  Lord,  give  me  good  speed  in  heavenly  business, 
lest  I  fail,  and  do  an  injury  to  thy  cause.  But  if  1  have 
already  made  a  miscarriage  of  my  life's  endeavors,  then 
set  me  on  my  feet  again,  for  I  am  still  thy  child.  "  1 
have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep  ;  seek  thy  servant ; 
for  I  do  not  forget  thy  commandments." 

INFECTED  AIE. 
"  The  devil  is  called  *  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.*    Infected 
air  is  drawn  into  the  lungs  without  pain,  and  we  get  a  disease  before 
we  feel  it,  and  so  die  of  a  pestilential  air." 

Thus  doth  Satan  injure  and  destroy  men's  souls  by  an 
influence  so  subtle  and  painless  that  ere  a  man  is  aware 
of  it  he  is  inflicted  with  error  or  iniquity,  and  falls  a 
victim  to  the  evil.  Whole  cities  have  been  carried  off 
by  pests  arising  from  causes  which  the  sick  ones  never 
suspected,  and  w^hole  classes  of  men  perish  from  wild 
passions  which  only  the  devil  could  have  excited  to  such 
a  pitch.  No  gas  is  so  impalpable,  so  penetrating,  so  all- 
pervading,  so  deadly,  as  the  influence  of  Satan.  In 
these  days  it  is  not  polite  to  speak  of  him  ;  it  would 
seem  that  he  is  so  much  respected  by  his  own  children 
that  they  cannofc  endure  to  hear  a  word  against  him. 
The  common  doubt  of  his  existence  is  a  proof  of  his 
powerful  cunning  ;  nothing  will  serve  his  turn  better 
than  for  silly  men  to  dream  that  he  is  dead  or  incapaci- 
tated. He  laughs  in  his  sleeve,  for  he  is  surrounding 
the  very  men  who  deny  him,  and  for  him  they  live  and 
move.  His  subtlety  slays  without  leaving  the  stain  of 
blood  to  alarm  other  victims  :  who  knoweth  the  depth 
of  his  cunning  !  Alas,  that  so  many  should  be  so  igno- 
rant of  his  devices  as  to  be  unsuspicious  of  the  deadly 


212  FLOWERS    FROM    A 

influence   which    he   breathes    into    the    moral   atmos- 
phere ! 

May  the  health-giving  Spirit  of  the  Lord  preserve  all 
new-born  hearts^  so  that  they  may  pass  through  this 
pestiferous  world'  unharmed.  Surely  we  may  give  a 
spiritual  as  well  as  a  natural  meaning  to  that  promise  in 
the  psalm,  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  pestilence 
which  walketh  in  darkness.  A  thousand  shall  fall  at 
thy  side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right  hand  ;  but  it 
shall  not  come  nigh  thee."  Doth  not  the  Scripture 
expressly  say,  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  V^ 
Under  the  protection  of  this  assurance  we  may  pursue 
our  callings  in  the  midst  of  this  evil  generation,  and  yet 
remain  in  vigorous  health  of  soul.  God  grant  it,  for 
Jesus^  sake.     Amen. 

INFECTION  EASY. 

"  We  easily  catch  an  infectious  disease  from  one  another,  but  no 
man  receiveth  health  from  another's  company." 

Too  true.  Evil  communications  inevitably  corrupt 
good  manners  ;  but  good  communications  do  not  so 
necessarily  improve  evil  manners.  We  more  readily 
learn  evil  than  good,  and  we  are  also  more  forcible  in 
communicating  sin  than  virtue.  Both  as  to  the  giving 
out  and  the  receiving,  the  aptness  lies  on  the  wrong 
side.  What  a  proof  of  our  natural  depravity  !  "What  a 
change  must  grace  w^ork  in  us  before  we  shall  be  fully 
like  our  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  incapable  of  being  inocu- 
lated by  sin,  but  abundantly  able  to  communicate  good- 
ness ;  for  healing  virtue  proceeded  from  him.  When 
shall  we  become  disseminators  of  holiness  by  our  very 
presence  ?  When  shall  we  dwell  where  every  companion 
shall  minister  to  our  soul's  health  ?  Such  a  place  Jesus 
is  preparing  for  us^  and  thither  is  he  bringing  his 
redeemed  oues. 


GARDEN-.  213 

THE  EYEKY-DAY  SUIT. 

"  Godliness  is  not  a  holiday  suit,  but  apparel  that  is  for  constant 
wear." 

This  illustrates  a  very  important  truth.  Some  people 
seem  to  fancy  that  they  can  put  their  religion  on  and 
off  as  they  do  their  Sunday  clothes.  Such  religion  is 
better  put  off  once  for  all.  He  who  is  not  godly  every 
day  is  not  godly  any  day.  We  should  aim  at  serving 
God  with  all  our  hearts  on  the  Sabbath,  in  songs,  and 
prayers,  and  sermons  ;  but  if  these  are  to  be  acceptable, 
we  must  also  serve  God  on  all  the  week-days  in  an 
honest,  upright,  holy  conversation.  True  Christians  will 
endeavor  to  make  their  houses  temples,  their  meals 
sacraments,  their  garments  vestments,  and  all  their  days 
holy-days.  That  profession  which  is  merely  on  the  sur- 
face, like  the  gilt  upon  the  gingerbread  at  a  country  fair, 
is  too  poor  a  thing  to  enter  heaven. 

Lord,  make  me  to  wear  thy  righteousness  within  me, 
and  then  1  cannot  leave  it  off.  Make  me  like  the  king's 
daughter,  "  all  glorious  within."  Weave  thy  grace  into 
the  warp  and  weft  of  my  being.  Even  on  earth  let  me 
ever  be  with  the  Lord. 

WOEKING  BY  CONTEAEIES. 

**  God  many  times  worketh  contrary  to  outward  likelihoods.  When 
the  bricks  were  doubled,  who  would  look  for  deliv^erance  ?  As  the 
Hebrew  tongue  must  be  read  backv/ard,  or  as  the  sun  going  back  ten 
degrees  in  Ahaz's  dial  was  a  sign  of  Hezekiah's  recovery,  so  is  provi- 
dence to  be  read  backward.  Joseph  was  made  a  slave  that  he  might 
be  made  a  favorite.  W'ho  would  have  thought  that  the  dungeon 
had  been  the  way  to  the  court,  that  error  is  a  means  to  clear  truth, 
and  bondage  maketh  way  for  liberty  ?" 

Thus  have  we  found  sickness  work  for  our  health  and 
poverty  promote  our  wealth.  Our  worst  days  have 
turned  out  to  be  our  best  days,  and  our  low  estate  has 
lifted  us  on  high.     When  storms  come  we  may  welcome 


214  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

them,  for  they  bring  blessing  on  their  wings  ;  l3nt  when 
onr  cahn  is  long  and  deep  we  ought  to  be  on  our  watch, 
lest  stagnation  and  disease  should  come  of  it.  Science 
talks  of  curing  by  likes  ;  but  the  Heavenly  Physician 
lieals  both  by  likes  and  by  contraries  ;  in  fact,  he  bends 
all  things  to  his  gracious  purpose.  To  judge  his  pro- 
ceedings is  folly  and  ingratitude.  What  can  we  know  ? 
Especially  what  can  we  know  of  his  design  and  purpose 
while  his  work  is  yet  on  the  anvil  ?  Our  judgments  at 
their  best  are  only  moderated  foolishness.  We  are 
neither  prophets  nor  sons  of  prophets,  and  it  wonld  be 
wise  if  we  would  no  more  speculate  upon  the  results  of 
divine  operations,  but  firmly  believe  and  patiently  wait 
till  the  providence  comes  to  the  flower  and  to  the  seed, 
and  God  becomes  his  own  interpreter. 

LIFE  IS  THE  MAIK  MATTER. 
'*A  corpse  may  be  laid  in  state,  and  sumptuously  adorned,  but 
there  is  no  life  within/' 

Adornments  are  out  of  place  in  the  chamber  of  death  ; 
they  do  but  make  the  scene  the  more  ghastly.  We  have 
heard  of  a  dead  prince  who  was  place  upon  a  throne, 
dressed  in  imperial  purple,  crowned,  and  sceptred  ! 
How  pitiful  the  spectacle  !  The  courtiers  mustered  to 
so  wretched  a  travesty  of  state  must  have  loathed  the 
pageantry. 

So  is  it  when  a  man's  religion  is  a  dead  profession  ;  its 
ostentations  zeal  and  ceremonious  display  are  the  grim 
trappings  which  make  the  death  appear  more  manifest. 
When,  like  Jehu,  a  man  cries,  "  Come  with  me,  and  see 
my  zeal  for  the  Lord,"  his  false  heart  betrays  itself. 
The  more  he  decorates  his  godliness  the  more  does  the 
Iiypocrite's  spiritual  death  appear.  It  is  not  possible  to 
supply  the  lack  of  the  divine  life.  There  is  an  essential 
difference  between  a  dead  child  at  its  best  and  a  living 


puRiTAi^'s  gakde:^^.  215 

cliild  at  its  worst,  and  it  needs  no  Solomon  to  see  it. 
Unless  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  give  life,  sustain  life,  and 
perfect  life,  none  of  us  can  ever  dwell  with  the  living 
God.  This  is  the  point  to  look  to  :  the  vestments  and 
trappings  are  a  secondary  business. 

"WINDFALLS. 
**  When  the  tree  is  shaken  the  rotten  apples  fall." 

When  religion  is  at  a  discount,  and  godliness  is 
derided,  then  hypocrites  and  unsound  professors  desert 
the  cause.  It  is  astonishing  what  a  little  shake  will  get 
rid  of  the  commonplace  members  of  our  churches.  Let 
but  a  minister  die,  or  remove,  or  a  couple  of  leading 
men  fall  out — off  they  go.  A  warm  south  wind,  blow- 
ing from  the  cathedral,  or  the  manor-house,  or  the 
public-house,  and  dropping  a  gentle  shower  of  gifts,  will 
cause  many  rotten  ones  to  fall  into  the  lap  of  bribery. 
Sound  believers,  who  are  full  of  life,  and  untouched  by 
the  worm  of  insincerity,  hold  to  the  church  of  God  in 
all  weathers.  May  more  of  these  be  produced  every 
year  to  God's  glory  ! 

Rougher  winds  than  these  try  other  professors.  Stag- 
nation in  business,  pressure  for  money,  and  the  tempta- 
tion to  speculate  fetch  down  many  rotten  Christians. 
The  fashion  of  the  world,  the  luxuries  of  life,  and  the 
habits  of  wealthy  society  also  shake  off  others  from  their 
visible  profession.  When  they  fall,  the  loss  is  all  their 
own  :  the  church  may  apparently  lose  by  their  apostasy, 
but  it  is  not  a  real  injury  ;  in  fact,  it  may  be  in  God's 
sight  a  gain  to  it.  God  thinks  no  better  of  a  tree  for 
being  burdened  with  rotten  fruit,  nor  of  a  church  for 
being  swollen  in  numbers  by  base  pretenders. 

Lord,  make  me  true  to  the  core,  and  keep  me  so. 


216  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

THE  BAKEE  AND  HIS  OVEN. 
"  The  baker  watcheth  when  his  oven  is  hot,  and  then  pntteth  in 
his  bread." 

Thus  should  we  seize  the  best  opportunity  for  a  good 
work.  Let  us  pray  most  when  w^e  feel  we  can  pray 
best  ;  and  labor  most  in  our  holy  calling  when  God  is 
giving  us  precious  opportunities,  for  the  old  proverb 
bids  us  make  hay  while  the  sun  shines.  To  everything 
there  is  a  season,  and  much  depends  upon  seizing  tliat 
season,  and  utilizing  it.  Oh,  worker  for  God,  take  the 
tide  at  its  flood,  and  the  occasion  at  its  full  !  Preach 
the  gospel  at  all  times,  but  specially  bring  it  in  when 
men's  minds  are  tender  through  affliction  or  thoughtful- 
ness.  If  tlie  oven  be  cold,  heat  it  ;  but  when  it  is 
heated,  do  not  lose  your  fuel.  Work  up  the  conversa- 
tion till  it  reaches  a  fit  stage  for  bringing  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  and  saving  truth  ;  but  be  sure  that  you  never  get 
men's  minds  ready,  and  then  fail  to  do  that  which  you 
are  aiming  at.  As  the  baker  would  not  forget  to  put  in 
the  bread,  so  never  forget  to  introduce  the  word  of  faith, 
the  gospel  of  our  salvation,  before  the  interview  is  over. 
Have  we  not  already  suffered  many  a  hot  oven  to  cool  ? 
Let  us  mend  our  ways,  and  be  more  diligent  in  our 
Master's  business. 

THE  BENUMBED  SNAKE. 
"  It  is  trne  that  natural  corruption  doth  not  break  out  in  all  with  a 
like  violence  ;  but  a  benumbed  snake  is  a  snake  ;  a  sow  washed  is  not 
changed.     As  when  the  liver  groweth,  other  parts  languish,  so  great 
lust  intercepteth  the  nourishment  of  other  corruptions." 

It  seems,   then,  that  there  may  be   a  winter  to  our 

corruptions  as  well  as  to  animal  and  vegetable  life,  and 

then  the  sin  wliich  dwelleth  in  us  may  be   quiet,   as 

,  though  frozen  into  a  rigid  powerlessness  :  but  what  of 

that  ?     The  weather  will  change,  and  then  the  nest  of 


puritan's  garde]^'.  217 

vipers  will  be  all  astir  again,  each  one  with  venomed 
tooth  aiming  to  destroy.  Experience  has  also  taught  the 
wise  observer  that  sin  may  be  bound  by  sin,  and  one 
ruling  passion  may  hold  the  rest  in  check.  One  man  is 
kept  from  licentiousness  by  covetousness :  he  would  be 
glad  to  revel  in  vice  if  it  were  not  so  expensive  ;  another 
would  be  a  rake  and  a  spendthrift,  but  then  it  would  not 
be  respectable,  and  thus  his  pride  checks  his  passions. 
This  restraint  of  sin  by  sin  is  no  proof  that  the  nature  is 
one  jot  the  better,  but  that  it  puts  on  a  fairer  appear- 
ance, and  is  more  likely  to  deceive.  When  Satan  casts 
out  Satan  it  is  a  deep  game  ;  but  we  must  not  be  de- 
ceived by  the  diabolical  trick.  When  the  devil's  work 
seems  good  it  is  at  its  worst. 

Nothing  will  answer  w^ith  inbred  sin  but  the  killing  of 
it.  When  Joshua  had  the  five  kings  in  the  cave  at 
Makkedah,  he  was  not  content  to  shut  them  in  with 
great  stones.  No,  he  too  special  pains  to  fetch  them 
out,  and  hang  them  up.  The  condemned  race  must  die, 
and  then  Israel  can  breathe  freely.  Sin  will  be  our 
death  if  we  do  not  put  it  to  death.  Checks  and  restraints 
are  of  small  value  ;  what  is  needed  is  the  root-and-branch 
cure — crucifixion  with  Christ.  To  cure  sin  by  sin  is  a 
mere  piece  of  stage- playing,  which  will  never  answer 
before  God.  We  need  to  be  purged  of  the  cause  of  sin, 
yea,  of  all  sin,  or  we  can  never  enter  heaven. 

O  thou  destroyer  of  the  serpent  and  his  seed,  break 
the  head  of  sin  within  me,  so  that  it  may  never  lift  up 
its  usurped  power  within  my  soul.  Let  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit  do  a  thorough  work  within  my  nature,  till  not 
a  single  rebel  lust  shall  remain  alive  in  the  wide  domains 
of  my  being.  Furlu'sh  thy  sword,  O  Captain  of  the 
Host,  and  do  thine  office  within  me,  for  I  cannot  rest 
till  sin  is  slain. 


218  FLOWERS   FROM   A  ---  ..^ 

BUTTERFLIES. 

"  As  children  catch  at  butterflies  the  gaudy  wings  melt  away  in 
their  fingers,  and  there  remaineth  nothing  but  an  ngly  worm." 

Such  is  the  end  of  all  earthly  ambitions  :  they  cost  us 
a  weary  pursuit,  and  if  we  gain  our  desire  it  is  destroyed 
in  the  grasping  of  it.  Alas,  poor  rich  man,  who  has 
wealth  but  has  lost  the  powxr  to  enjoy  it  !  Alas,  poor 
famous  man,  who  in  hunting  for  honor  has  learned  its 
emptiness  !  Alas,  poor  beautiful  woman,  who  in  making 
a  conquest  of  a  false  heart  has  pierced  her  own  with 
undying  sorrow  !  A  butterfiy-hunt  takes  a  child  into 
danger,  wearies  him,  throws  him  down,  and  often  ends 
in  his  missing  the  pretty  insect  ;  if,  however,  the  boy  is 
able  to  knock  down  his  victim  with  his  hat,  he  has 
crushed  the  beauty  for  which  he  undertook  the  chase, 
and  his  victory  defeats  him.  The  parallel  is  clear  to 
every  eye.  For  my  part,  let  me  sooner  be  the  school- 
hoj,  dashing  after  the  painted  fly,  than  his  father  worry- 
ing and  wearying  to  snatch  at  something  more  deceptive 
still. 

Lord,  it  is  time  I  had  done  with  all  butterfly-hunting, 
for  my  years  are  warning  me  that  I  may  hope  soon  to  be 
among  the  angels,  and  see  greater  beauties  than  this 
w^hole  creation  can  set  before  me.  I  am  now  bent  on 
pursuing  nothing  but  that  which  is  eternal  and  infinite. 
Keep  me  to  this  resolve,  I  pray  thee. 

SPECTACLES  USELESS  TO  THE  BLIND. 
*'  When  unrenewed  nature  putteth  on  the  spectacles  of  art  she  is 
stiU  blind." 

Nowadays  men  must  needs  be  philosophers,  and  reason 
and  argue  ;  but  their  conclusions  as  to  spiritual  things, 
wherein  they  come  into  conflict  with  divine  revelation, 
are  not  one  whit  more  to  be  respected  than  the  conclu- 
sions of  utter  ignorance.     Blind  men  blunder  enough  in 


PURITAi^r's    GARDEK.  219 

the  dark  ;  add  Uglit,  and  they  see  no  better  ;  add  spec- 
tacles^ and  the  case  is  not  altered  ;  what  is  needed  is  the 
seeing  eye.  Till  God  gives  eyes  it  is  in  vain  for  opticians 
to  lend  their  glasses.  So  nnregenerate  men,  when  they 
are  ignorant,  are  fnll  of  error  ;  set  them  in  the  light  of 
the  gospel,  they  are  in  truth  no  wiser,  for  they  have  no 
spiritual  perception  of  it  ;  then  add  learning  and  sharp 
reasoning,  and  the  case  is  by  no  means  altered  ;  they 
see  no  more  than  before,  for  they  are  still  stone-blind. 
We  have  in  this  day  many  famous  learned  men,  whose 
talk  about  the  things  of  God  is  as  idle  as  that  of  illiterate 
blasphemers.  "Whatever  they  know  as  to  other  matters, 
they  can  know  nothing  of  divine  truths,  for  they  have 
no  faculty  with  which  to  perceive  them.  Let  them  put 
on  their  great  goggles  of  science,  they  see  no  more  of 
spirituals  with  them  than  Avithout  them. 

Lord  !  let  me  not  go  about  to  fit  spectacles  to  blind 
eyes  ;  but  whenever  I  meet  with  a  birth-blind  Bartimeus, 
help  me  to  bring  him  to  thee,  for  it  is  a  mark  of  thy 
Messiahship  that  from  thee  the  blind  receive  their  sight. 

AT  HOME,  YET  NOT  AT  HOII^CG. 

''Jerusalem  from  above  is  the  mother  of  ns  all.  Heaven  is  the 
believer's  native  country,  and  therefore,  though  the  man  be  at  home, 
yet  the  Christian  is  not  ;  he  is  out  of  his  proper  place." 

Hence  our  position  is  a  paradox.  We  were  in  literal  fact 
born  out  of  our  native  country,  and  whilst  we  are  at  home  we 
are  abroad.  We  can  say,  ^  ^  Lord,  thou  has  been  our  dwelllDg- 
place  in  all  generations,"  and  yet  we  often  cry,  "  Oh  that  I 
knew  where  I  might  fi ad  him  !"  We  are  exiles  in  spirit  while 
we  are  at  home  in  the  body  ;  and  we  shall  never  be  at  home 
till  we  have  left  our  native  land,  and  have  returned  to  the 
country  which  we  have  never  yet  seen.  We  are  living  para- 
doxes and  contradictions,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  men  know 
us  not,  for  we  scarcely  know  ourselves. 


220  TLOWERS   FROM    A 

HOKSE  WITH  HALTEE. 

"  A  beast  escaped  with  a  baiter  is  easily  caught  again  ;  so  a  lust 
indulged  will  bring  us  into  our  old  bondage." 

Nothing  is  harder  to  bury  tlian  the  tail  of  a  habit  ;  bat 
unless  we  do  bury  it,  tail  and  all,  the  viper  will  wriggle  out  of 
its  grave.  A  clear,  clean,  and  complete  escape  is  the  only  true 
deliverance  from  an  evil  practice  which  has  long  been  indulged. 
A  drunkard,  is  not  safe  from  the  drink  while  he  takes  his 
occasional  glass  with  a  friend.  A  man  who  allows  himself  any 
one  sin  will  be  sure  to  allow  another  ;  where  one  dog  comes 
into  the  room,  another  may  follow.  A  fish  is  not  free  for  his 
life  while  a  hook  is  in  his  mouth,  and  a  line  holds  him  to  the 
rod.  However  thin  the  connecting  medium,  it  will  be  the 
death  of  the  fish,  if  it  holds  ;  and,  however  slight  the  bond 
which  links  a  man  to  evil,  it  will  be  his  sure  ruin. 

Oh  for  grace  to  war  with  every  sin  !  So  long  as  one 
Amalekite  remains,  Israel  is  not  free  from  peril  from  the  ac- 
cursed race.  Let  us,  like  Samuel,  hew  the  delicate  Agag  in 
pieces  before  the  Lord.  lie  may  have  a  gentle  speech  and 
pleasing  manners,  but  he  is  the  very  king  of  the  band,  and 
must  not  be  spared.  We  must  not  let  our  heart  go  after  one 
of  its  idols,  or  it  will  be  in  bondage  to  it,  and  afterward  in 
servitude  to  everv  other  form  of  sin. 

Lord,  set  me  free  from  the  last  link  of  my  chain.  Suffer 
me  not  to  drag  behind  me  even  a  fragment  of  my  betters. 
Free  to  obey,  free  to  be  holy — this  is  what  I  crave  ! 

THE  SUNBEAM  ON  THE  DUNGHILL. 

**  God  can  by  no  means  be  looked  upon  as  the  direct  author  of 
sin,  or  the  proper  cause  of  that  obliquity  that  is  in  the  actions  of  the 
creatures  ;  for  his  providence  is  conversant  about  sin  without  sin,  as 
a  sunbeam  lighteth  upon  a  dunghill  without  being  stained  by  it.' ' 

This  is  a  grand  truth  most  clearly  set  forth.  It  will  help  us 
to  answer  many  a  gainsayer.  Evil  is  in  God's  world,  but  God 
is  good,  and  only  good. 


puritak's  garden.  221 

IRON  IN  THE  FIRE  MADE  LIKE  FIRE. 

"In  a  stamp  impressed,  the  wax  receiveth  only  the  form  and 
figure,  without  any  real  quality  ;  as  a  golden  seal  leaveth  no  tincture 
of  gold,  nor  a  brazen  seal  the  property  of  brass.  In  a  glass,  besides 
figure  and  proportion,  there  is  a  representation  of  motion,  but  no 
other  real  qualities.  But  here,  as  iron  in  the  fire  seemeth  to  be 
fire,  we  are  like  our  Lord  in  holiness  and  happiness." 

Thus,  0  my  soul,  be  thou  in  Christ  as  the  iron  in  the  fire, 
thyself  transformed  into  his  very  nature  and  spirit.  Is  it  so 
with  thee  now  ?  Alas,  not  as  it  should  be.  Yet  he  that  hath 
wrought  us  to  the  self -same  thing  thus  far  is  the  Lord,  and  he 
will  not  cease  his  work  till  he  hath  perfected  it.*"  Keiining  fire 
go  through  my  heart  until  I,  also,  burn  and  glow.  Lord,  I  cry 
to  thee  for  this,  and  surely  that  which  is  already  in  my  desire 
will  soon  be  in  my  possessfbn.  I  leave  myself  in  thy  hands. 
Change  me  wholly  into  thine  image,  I  beseech  thee. 

THORNS  AND  BURRS. 

"  Ears  of  corn  do  not  catch  our  clothes  and  hang  about  them,  but 
thorns  and  burrs  will  do  so." 

In  passing  through  the  midst  of  this  crooked  and  perverse 
generation,  we  are  far  more  likely  to  learn  evil  than  good.  It 
is  well  to  keep  our  clothes  well  brushed  when  traversing  this 
world's  dusty  roads,  for  it  is  not  a  fragrant  spice,  but  a  defiling 
^ust,  which  we  gather  in  our  journeying.  Often  have  we  gone 
for  a  walk  and  brought  home  mire  upon  our  shoes,  but  we 
never  remember  to  have  come  home  with  our  clothing  im- 
proved by  our  perambulations.  The  tendency  of  all  around 
is  to  soil  us,  and  mar  the  beauty  of  our  holiness.  The  Lord 
help  us  to  be  very  careful  on  this  point.  May  we  be  among 
those  of  whom  there  were  a  few  even  in  Sardis,  ' '  who  have 
not  defiled  their  garments  ;''  for  the  Lord  Jesus  says  of  them, 
^' they  shall  walk  wdth  me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy." 
What  a  walk  will  that  be  !  What  joy  had  Enoch  in  such  a 
walk  on  earth  !  What  honor  will  be  given  us  by  such  a  walk 
in  heaven  ! 


222  FLOWERS   FKOM   A 

SERVANTS  AND  HEIRS. 

"  A  servant  must  have  something  in  hand,  he  must  have  his 
pay  from  quarter  to  quarter,  or  from  week  to  week.  He  is  not 
expecting  to  receive  his  master's  possessions,  and,  therefore,  seeks 
a  present  wage  ;  but  an  heir  waiteth  till  the  estate  falls  in  to  him, 
and  looks  not  for  present  gains.'' 

Thus  may  we  discern  between  the  mere  hireling  and  the 
true-born  child  :  the  one  deserts  the  Lord's  service  when  it 
does  not  pay  down  on  the  nail  ;  the  other  never  expects  reward 
till  glory  shall  crown  his  labors.  It  is  a  sad  thing  for  any  sort 
of  people  when  Jesus  can  say  of  them,  "  Verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  tkej/  have  their  reward.''  They  cannot  expect  to  be  paid 
twice,  and  as  their  account  is  discharged  in  full,  what  have 
they  to  look  for  ? 

Blessed  shall  we  be  if  we  are  enabled  to  imitate  the  example 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  served  the  Father  in  .the  spirit  of 
Sonship.  Love  made  liim  rise  above  all  idea  of  present  rec- 
ompense :  he  waited  the  Father's  time,  and  he  still  waits  for 
his  complete  reward  till  the  hour  of  his  Second  Advent  shall 
arrive. 

"  A  servant,"  according  to  Job,  ''  earnestly  desireth  the 
shadow"  of  evening,  when  his  task  will  be  ended  ;  *'  and  the 
hireling  looketh  for  the  reward  of  his  work  :"  this  is  nothing 
more  than  natural,  for  they  have  no  interest  in  the  work 
beyond  their  pay.  But  the  heir  loveth  his  father,  and  worketh 
and  waiteth  patiently,  for  the  father  saith  to  him,  ''  All  that  I 
have  is  thine."  In  serving  the  cause  of  God  we  are  really 
serving  ourselves,  for  we  are  partakers  in  this  great  cause,  even 
as  the  interest  of  sons  is  one  with  that  of  their  father.  Can  we 
not,  therefore,  ''  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for  the  salvation 
of  the  Lord?" 

HOUSES  AND   SHIPS  PREPARED   FOR   STORMS. 

"  He  that  buildeth  a  house,  doth  not  take  care  that  the  rain  should 
not  descend  upon  it,  or  the  storm  should  not  beat  upon  it  :  there  is 
no  fencing  against  these  things,  they  cannot  be  prevented  by  any 
care  of  ours  ;  but  he  takes  care  that  the  house  may  be  able  to  endure 
all  weathers  without  damage.     And  he  that  buildeth  a  ship,  doth  not 


puritan's   GARDEi^.  223 

make  this  his  work,  that  it  should  never  meet  with  waves  and  bil- 
lows ;  that  is  impossible  ;  but  that  it  may  be  tight  and  stanch,  and 
able  to  endure  all  tempests.  A  man  that  taketh  care  for  his  body, 
doth  not  desire  that  he  meet  with  no  change  of  weather,  hot  or 
cold  ;  but  he  prepareth  his  dress  that  his  body  may  bear  all  inclemen- 
cies. Thus  should  Christians  do  :  they  should  not  so  much  take 
care  how  to  avoid  afflictions  as  to  be  ready  to  bear  them  with  an  even 
and  quiet  mind." 

Let  me  then  seek  steadfastness  that  I  may  stand  in  every 
storm,  strength  that  I  may  brave  every  tempest,  and  all  the 
graces  of  the  Spirit  that  I  may  be  liappy  in  every  condition.  I 
may  not  pray  to  be  kept  from  the  flood  and  the  wind,  but  that 
my  house  may  be  built  upon  a  rock.  I  may  not  ask  that  no 
tempest  may  assault  my  bark,  but  that  Jesus  may  be  nlvvays 
in  the  vessel.  I  may  not  beg  the  Lord  to  change  the  arrange- 
ments of  his  providence,  and  neither  try  me  with  the  heat  of 
prosperity  nor  the  cold  of  adversity,  but  I  must  see  to  it  that 
I  buy  of  him  raiment  that  I  may  be  clothed  amid  all  the 
changes  of  my  circumstances. 

Herein  is  wisdom.  Let  us  learn  it,  even  as  the  prudent 
woman  of  the  Proverbs  had  learned  it,  of  whom  we  read, 
'*  She  is  not  afraid  of  the  snow  for  her  household,  for  all  her 
household  are  clothed  with  scarlet."  Better  to  be  prepared 
for  trial  than  to  be  flying  hither  and  thither  to  avoid  it. 
Come,  my  soul,  thou  must  make  a  passage  across  a  rough  sea, 
nerve  thyself  to  it  by  grace  divine,  and  the  Lord  shall  yet  be 
glorified  in  thee.  A  battle  awaits  thee.  Do  not  attempt  to 
run  from  the  figbt,  but  look  to  thine  armor,  and  unsheath  thy 
sword. 

HEAET-DISEASE   THE   WORST   DISEASE. 

''  "What  would  we  think  of  a  man  who  complained  of  the  tooth- 
ache, or  of  a  cut  finger,  when  all  the  while  he  was  wounded  at  the 
heart  ?     Would  it  not  seem  very  strange  ?" 

Yet  men  will  lament  anything  sooner  than  the  depravity  of 
their  hearts.  Many  will  confess  their  wandering  thoughts  in 
prayer,  but  will  not  acknowledge  the  estrangement  of  their  hearts 
from  God.     They  will  be  sorry  for  having  spoken  angrily,  but 


22i  FLOWERS    FROM    A 

not  for  having  a  passionate  heart.  They  will  own  to  Sabbath- 
breaking,  but  never  lament  their  want  of  love  to  Jesus,  which 
is  a  heart-matter.  The  evil  of  their  hearts  seems  nothing  to 
them  :  their  tongues,  hands,  feet  are  all  that  they  notice. 
What  !  will  they  cry  over  a  cut  finger,  and  feel  no  fear  when 
they  have  a  dagger  thrust  into  their  bowels  ?  Oh,  madness  of 
sinners,  that  they  trifle  most  with  that  disease  which  is  the 
most  dangerous,  and  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  other  ills.  God's 
great  complaint  of  men  is  that  they  set  up  in  their  hearts  idols 
which  they  themselves  think  nothing  of.  Ezek.  14  :  3,  5. 
Certain  in  our  day  are  so  far  gone  that  they  even  deny  that  the 
human  heart  is  diseased.  What  then  ?  It  does  but  prove  the 
intimate  connection  betwen  the  heart  and  the  eyes.  A  per- 
verted heart  soon  creates  a  blinded  eye.  Of  course  a  depraved 
heart  does  not  see  its  own  depravity.  Oh  that  v/e  could  lead 
men  to  think  and  feel  aright  about  their  hearts  ;  but  this  is 
the  last  point  to  which  we  can  bring  them  !  They  beat  about 
the  bush,  and  mourn  over  any  and  every  evil  except  the  source 
and  fountain  of  it  all. 

Lord,  teach  me  to  look  wdthin.  May  I  attend  even  more  to 
myself  than  to  my  acts.  Purge  thou  the  spring,  that  the 
stream  may  no  longer  be  defiled.  I  would  begin  where  thou 
dost  begin,  and  beseech  thee  to  give  me  a  new  heart.  Thou 
sayest,  "  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart."  Lord,  I  do  give  it 
to  thee,  but  at  the  same  time  I  pray,  "  Lord,  give  me  a  new 
heart  ;"  for  without  this  my  heart  is  not  worth  thy  having. 

THE  JUDGE'S  YEKDICT  ALONE  TO  BE  EEGAEDED. 

'^  It  is  no  matter  what  standers-by  say  of  the  runner,  so  the  judge 
of  the  race  doth  approve  of  his  running." 

Yet  we  all  make  too  much  of  the  approval  or  disapproval  of 
our  fellow-men,  who  are,  after  all,  only  the  spectators,  and  not 
the  umpires,  of  the  race.  AVhat  folly  this  is  !  What  injuries 
it  inflicts  !  We  are  elevated  by  human  opinion  if  it  be  favor- 
able to  us,  and  this  betrays  us  into  the  weakness  of  pride  ; 
which  weakness  soon  shows  itself  in   faint-heartedness,  when 


pukitan's  gakdex.  225 

that  unstable  opinion  veers  round,  and  blows  a  cold  blast  of 
fault-finding.  If  we  were  steadily  **  looking  unto  Jesus, '^  this 
would  not  happen,  and  our  running  would  be  more  regular  and 
less  disturbed.  Be  it  our  endeavor  to  live  above  men,  in  the 
conscious  presence  of  God.  Who  and  what  are  men  that  we 
should  live  upon  the  breath  of  their  nostrils  ?  Their  judgment 
is  a  small  matter  ;  the  judgment  of  God  is  all  in  all. 

Lord,  thou  hast  said,  *'  Walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  per- 
fect,'' and  from  this  I  learn  that  I  cannot  hope  for  perfection 
unless  I  set  thee  always  before  me,  and  rate  thine  approval  at 
an  infinitely  higher  price  than  the  judgment  of  those  about 
me.  Enable  me  to  say  with  thy  servant  David,  ^'  I  have  set 
the  Lord  always  before  me  ;  because  he  is  at  my  right  hand,  I 
shall  not  be  moved." 

PRUNING  UNPRUNED  TREES. 

*'  Trees  long  nnpruned  have  the  more  cuts  of  the  knife  when  the 
gardener  begins  with  them.' ' 

,  The  ground  is  strewn  with  their  offshoots,  and  they  present 
a  sorry  figure  :  one  might  even  think  that  the  gardener  was 
quite  destroying  them.  So  have  we  seen  our  Father,  who  is 
the  Husbandman,  cut  and  slash  terribly  with  those  who  have 
been  long  prosperous,  and  have,  therefore,  borne  little  of  the 
fruit  of  grace,  and  much  of  the  wood  of  worldliness.  See  how 
their  wealth  diminishes,  their  health  declines,  their  family 
sickens  !  Providence  multiplies  their  trials  till  they  feel  that 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone  out  against  them.  Does  the 
gardener  hate  the  apple-tree  when  he  prunes  so  remorselessly  ? 
Far  from  it  :  he  knows  it  to  be  a  choice  tree,  and,  therefore, 
he  would  have  fruit  from  it  :  he  would  not  thus  wear  away  his 
knife  upon  a  crab.  Abounding  trials  prove  their  own  necessity 
and  the  Lord's  sagacity.  If  it  clearly  appears  that  we  have  not 
been  able  to  bear  seasons  of  worldly  ease,  it  is  the  stern  order 
of  heavenly  love  that  we  must  lose  the  unprofitable  luxuriance 
of  our  unregulated  joys.  Is  it  not  well  that  it  should  be  so  ? 
O  Lord,  I  thank  thee  for  all  the  wounds  thou  hast  hitherto 


226  FLOWERS    FKOM    A 

seen  it  wise  to  inflict  npon  me.  If  I,  too,  Lave  enjoyed  too 
much  repose,  and  have  spent  my  strength  nnprofitably  in  con- 
sequence thereof,  I  rejoice  to  think  that  I  am  in  good  hands. 
Deal  with  me  even  as  thou  wilt.  I  ask  not  for  affliction,  but 
I  beg  thee  to  make  me  fruitful  unto  thyself,  let  the  means  be 
what  they  may. 

LIKE   WILL   TO   LIKE. 
''  Everything  tendeth  to  the  place  of  its  original.     Men  love  their 
native  soil  ;  things  bred  in  the  water  delight  in  that  element  ;  inani- 
mate things  tend  to  their  centre  ;  a  stone  will  fall  to  the  gronnd 
though  broken  in  pieces  by  the  fall." 

Thus  I  may  judge  of  my  nature  by  my  inclination.  What 
delights  me  ?  For  where  my  delight  is  my  heart  is.  If  I  take 
pleasure  in  the  ways  of  the  world,  then  I  am  of  the  world.  If 
I  find  myself  at  home  in  sin,  then  I  am  still  the  servant  of  sin. 
Doubtless  many  hasten  to  evil  with  such  desperate  speed  that 
they  will  be  broken  in  the  fall  ;  yet  to  evil  they  must  needs 
go,  and  he  who  would  hinder  them  gets  a  wound  for  his  pains. 

Come,  my  heart,  what  say  est  thou  of  thyself  ?  Art  thou 
inclined  to  holiness  or  to  lewdness,  to  grace  or  to  covetousness  ? 
How  much  hangs  on  this  !  Yet  take  heart,  for  if  thou  hast  a 
nature  which  came  from  heaven  it  will  rise  to  heaven.  If 
Jesus  is  the  source  of  thy  life,  that  life  will  rise  as  high  as  the 
place  where  Jesus  dwells.      Is  not  this  a  rich  encouragement  ? 

SAILING  LONG,  BUT   NOT   FAR. 

*'  A  man  may  abide  long  in  the  \yorld  till  he  be  eaten  out  of  life  by 
his  own  rust,  or  droppeth  like  rotten  fruit  ;  but  he  cannot  be  said  to 
have  a  long  life  ;  as  a  man  may  be  long  at  sea,  but  if  he  is  driven  to 
and  fro  by  the  waves  he  cannot  be  said  to  make  a  long  voyage  when 
he  is  at  last  driven  back  into  the  port  out  of  which  he  sailed  at  first." 

Yes,  life  is  not  to  be  measured  by  mere  lapse  of  time,  but 
by  the  real  headway  which  a  man  makes.  The  mass  of  man- 
kind voyage  to  no  known  port,  but  are  the  sport  of  winds  and 
waves.  Compass  or  chart  they  no  more  consult  than  do  the 
sea-birds  or  the  dolphins.  Thus  it  happens  that  in  advanced 
years  men  are  no  forwarder  than  in  youth,  for  they  never  con- 


.PUKITA2^'S   GARDEN.  227 

tin  lie  in  one  line,  having  no  object  before  them  :  they  have  not 
lived,  but  existed.  Nothing  has  been  attempted,  much  less 
accomplished  ;  their  years  have  rusted  them  into  infirmity,  but 
otherwise  they  are  unaltered.  Here's  the  respect  which  makes 
calamity  of  so  much  wasted  life. 

O  my  blessed  Lord,  preserve  thy  servant  from  spending  his 
sojourn  here  after  the  manner  of  the  idler.  Let  mine  be  a 
real  life.  May  I  not  be  a  mere  strainer  of  meat  and  drink,  or 
a  walking  clothes-horse,  or  a  cipher  ;  but  may  I  so  live  on 
earth  that  it  may  seem  wise  to  thee  to  bid  me  continue  my  life 

forever. 

DOUBLE  BENEFIT. 

*'  A  malefactor  that  hath  a  leprosy  on  hiin  needs  not  only  a  pardon, 
but  a  medicine  ;  and  in  a  broken  leg,  not  only  ease  of  the  pain  is  de- 
sirable, but  that  the  bone  be  set  right.  So  we  need  both  justification 
and  sanctification." 

Justification  saves  the  malefactor,  and  sanctification  cures 
him  of  his  spiritual  disease  :  are  they  not  equally  desirable  ? 
Who  would  wish  to  miss  the  one  or  the  other  if  in  need  of 
them  ?  Pardon  removes  the  pain  of  our  broken  bones,  but 
spiritual  renewal  reduces  the  fracture.  Let  us  not  be  content 
with  half  a  gospel,  but  obtain  a  whole  Christ  for  our  broken 
hearts.  Renewal  of  life  is  every  way  as  desirable  as  forgive- 
ness of  sin.  As  well  be  full  of  guilt  as  full  of  guile.  If  a 
child  has  eaten  unhealthy  food,  it  is  well  to  cure  the  disease 
which  is  occasioned  by  it,  but  it  is  equally  desirable  to  break 
him  of  the  habit  which  led  him  to  such  foul  feeding. 

Lord,  thy  poor  servant  is  by  nature  both  malefactor  and 
leper  ;  and  nothing  will  serve  my  turn  but  a  double-handed 
blessing.  I  pray  thee  absolve  me,  and  cure  me  too.  Let  me 
know  of  a  surety  that  both  these  blessings  are  mine  beyond  all 
question,  mine  in  immediate  and  experienced  possession. 

GRAVEL   IN   THE   SHOE. 
*'  Who  will  pity  the  man  who  complains  of  soreness  and  pain  in 
walking,  and  yet  doth  not  take  the  gravel  out  of  his  shoe  ?     If  you 
wound  and  gore  yourselves,  no  question  but  your  smart  and  trouble 


228  FLOWERS   FROM   A    . 

are  real,  you  do  not  complain  in  hypocrisy  ;  but  who  is  to  be  blamed  ? 
Your  business  is  to  remove  the  cause." 

Many  of  the  trials  of  our  spiritual  life  are  preventible  :  if  we 
indulge  a  sin  we  invite  a  sorrow.  Others  are  curable  :  if  we 
refuse  a  remedy  we  rivet  a  disease.  All  that  we  can  do  for 
ourselves  we  are  bound  to  do.  We  must  put  away  evil  habits, 
and  not  content  ourselves  with  whining  out  our  regrets.  We 
must  get  away  from  temptation,  and  not  sit  near  the  fire  and 
complain  of  the  heat.  There  is  too  much  of  this  insincerity 
abroad.  W^hat  should  we  have  thought  of  the  prodigal  if  he 
had  lamented  his  destitution,  but  had  continued  in  the  far 
country  ?  What  do  we  now  think  of  the  drunkard  who  mourns 
over  the  redness  of  his  eyes,  and  yet  tarries  long  at  the  wine  ; 
or  of  the  lascivious  man  who  bemoans  his  vice,  and  yet  fre- 
quents the  house  of  the  strange  woman  ? 

By  gracious  instruction,  I  pray  thee,  O  Lord,  teach  me  to 
be  practical  in  going  to  the  bottom  of  things,  that  I  may  not 
waste  time  in  regretting  evils  which  it  is  my  duty  to  prevent. 
Let  me  not  mourn  my  doubt,  and  yet  refuse  to  believe  thy 
faithful  word  ;  neither  permit  me  to  cry  over  my  chastisement, 
and  yet  continue  in  my  folly.  Lord,  make  me  to  know  wis- 
dom. To  this  end,  make  me  mindful  of  little  things.  Help 
me  to  look  to  the  little  stone,  or  tiny  dust  in  my  shoe,  for  this 
may  cause  me  many  a  blister,  and  even  lame  me,  so  that  I 
cannot  hold  on  my  way. 

AN  UNUSUAL  COMPLAINT. 
'  *  I  have  read  in  the  lives  of  the  fathers  of  a  devout  man  that,  be- 
ing one  year  without  any  trial,  cried  out,  ^Vomine,  reliquisti  me,  quia 
non  me  visitasti,  hoc  anno,'' — Lord  !  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and  for  a 
whole  year  hast  not  appointed  me  upon  any  exercise  of  patience." 

We  would  not  recommend  any  one  of  our  readers  to  unite 
with  this  devout  but  mistaken  expression.  We  should  count 
it  all  joy  when  we  fall  into  divers  trials,  but,  at  the  same  time, 
we  ought  to  be  thankful  if  we  do  not  fall  into  them.  If  a  cross 
be  laid  upon  us,  let  us  take  it  up  cheerfully  ;  but  it  would  be 
folly  to  make  a  cross  for  ourselves,  or  go  out  of  our  way  to 


puritan's  garden.  229 

look  for  one.  He  must  be  a  very  foolish  child  who  begs  to  be 
whipped.  ^'  Lead  us  not  into  temptation/'  is  a  prayer  of  our 
Lord's  own  teaching,  and  we  prefer  to  keep  to  it  rather  than 
follow  this  devout  man  in  w^hat  reads  very  like  a  prayer  for 
temptation.  Those  who  cry  for  chastisement  will  have  enough 
of  it  before  all  is  over.  Be  it  ours  to  leave  our  correction  and 
probation  in  our  Lord's  hands,  and  never  let  us  be  so  unwise 
as  to  desire  more  trials  than  his  infinite  wisdom  appoints  us. 

THE   TAP  AND   THE   LIQUOE. 
"The  tap  ranneth  according  to  the  liquor  with  which  the  vessel  is 
fiUed." 

The  tongue  babbleth  out  that  which  occupies  the  mind. 
We  shall  never  hear  much  pious  conversation  till  we  have  more 
thorough  conversions.  Taps  will  never  run  with  pure  water 
while  the  barrels  are  bursting  with  fermented  liquors.  Change 
the  contents  of  the  heart,  and  you  alter  at  once  the  droppings 
of  the  mouth.  From  a  sweet  fountain  of  thought  we  shall 
have  sweet  waters  of  talk.  Even  the  involuntary  utterances  of 
gracious  men  are  gracious  :  the  mere  drippings  of  common 
speech  reveal  the  heart  of  the  man.  The  leakings  of  a  tap 
show  the  contents  quite  as  surely  as  the  proper  runnings  of  it. 

Lord,  grant  that  even  my  dreams  may  be  pure,  that  my 
playful  thoughts  may  be  godly,  and  my  chance  words  accept- 
able before  thee.  Fill  me  with  thyself,  and  then  nothing  but 
good  can  come  from  me. 

BRASS  FARTHINGS  AND  GOLD  IN  THE   POCKET. 
'*He  that  hath  in  his  pocket  more  store  of  gold  than  of  brass 
farthings  will  at  every  draught  bring  out  more  gold  than  farthings." 

Of  course  the  hand  fetches  out  the  various  kinds  of  coins  in 
proportion  as  they  exist  in  the  place  from  which  it  takes  them. 
Now,  our  works  are  our  hand,  and  this,  by  action,  fetches  out 
of  us  that  which  is  in  us.  Li  a  child  of  God  there  is  a  measure 
of  natural  evil,  and  a  more  abounding  measure  of  grace  ;  and 
so  it  will  come  to  pass  that,  in  his  life,  holiness  will  be  more 
conspicuous  than  sin.      His  life  has  its  failings,  but  much  more 


230  PLOWERS    FROM   A 

its  virtues.  Peter  brought  out  brass  farthings  of  boasting  and 
impetuous  folly  at  times  ;  but  he  also  brought  forth  so  much 
true  gold  that  his  Lord  said,  ^'  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar- 
jona."  When  he  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost  he  brought 
out  much  more  gold  ;  but  even  then  a  farthing  came  out  now 
and  then,  for  Paul  withstood  him  because  he  was  to  be  blamed. 

When  the  believer's  tongue  also  makes  a  dip  into  the  pocket 
of  the  heart  there  may  come  forth  some  of  those  wretched 
brass  farthings  in  the  form  of  idle  words  ;  but  much  more  will 
the  gold  be  poured  forth  in  edifying  discourse.  Paul  saith  that 
foolish  talking  is  not  befitting,  but  he  commends  giving  of 
thanks  ;  now,  if  somewhat  of  our  folly  has  come  forth  in  our 
talk,  let  us  give  heed  that  far  more  of  our  gratitude  shall  be 
brought  out  also.  We  ought  daily  to  grow  richer  in  grace, 
and  so  have  more  gold,  and  less  of  the  baser  sort. 

Lord,  help  me  to  get  rid  of  these  miserable  brass  counters, 
and  do  thou  fill  up  their  places  with  the  precious  metal  of  thine 
own  holiness  and  truth.  Am  I  not  thy  child  ?  Wilt  thou  not 
supply  me  within  with  that  which  will  be  fit  to  be  brought  out 
into  my  life  ?  Oh  that  I  might  be  ^'  filled  with  all  the  fulness 
of  God,''  that  my  poor  empty  things  may  no  more  appear  ! 

KAVENS  LOVING  THE   SCENT' OF   CAKKION. 

"  If  yon  wo-iiid  be  free  from  sin,  avoid  the  temptations  that  lead  to 
it.  If  ravens  or  crows  be  driven  away  from  carrion,  they  love  to 
abide  within  scent  of  it.'* 

This  last  sentence  is  a  grim  parable,  but  all  too  true.  If 
human  nature  cannot  yield  an  ell  to  self-indulgence,  it  will  give 
its  full  inch.  We  have  seen  those  who  dared  not  enter  the 
devil's  house  linger  long  and  lovingly  around  the  doors.  The 
old  woman  in  the  fable,  who  could  find  no  wine  in  the  jar,  yet 
loved  to  smell  at  it.  It  is  a  clear  proof  of  the  love  of  human 
nature  to  evil  that,  when  restrained  from  actual  sin,  men  will 
rehearse  their  former  exploits,  and  dote  on  the  lusts  which  they 
indulged  years  ago.  If  they  cannot  have  a  fresh  dish  from 
Satan's  garden  they  will  have  ''  the  cauld  kail  het  again" 
sooner  than  go  without. 


puritan's  gakde>^.  231 

Our  antlior  gives  sage  advice  at  the  outset,  when  he  says  — 
to  avoid  sin,  avoid  temptation.  He  who  would  not  be 
wounded  should  keep  out  of  battle  ;  he  who  would  not  be 
tossed  about  should  not  go  to  sea  ;  he  who  would  not  be 
heated  should  keep  away  from  the  fire.  If  men  will  get  into 
the  train  which  runs  to  the  terminus  of  iniquity,  they  must 
expect  to  be  carried  to  their  journey's  end.  He  who  desires 
to  keep  awake  should  not  go  to  bed.  If  I  stand  in  the  way  of 
sinners  I  shall  soon  run  with  them.  Oh  to  possess  a  godly 
fear,  which  shall  lead  me  rather  to  go  ten  miles  round  about, 
than  pass  by  the  place  of  temptation  !  It  is  well  to  keep  out 
of  the  smell  of  sin,  for  the  very  odor  of  it  is  baneful. 

If  we  seek  a  temptation  we  shall  soon  find  it  ;  and  within  it, 
like  a  kernel  in  a  nut,  we  shall  meet  with  sin.  Oh  that  our 
young  people  had  the  wit  to  see  this,  and  were  more  firmly 
resolved  not  to  stand  in  the  broad  road,  or  even  near  it,  lest 
they  should  become  regular  travellers  upon  it  !  Lord,  give 
them  prudence.  Yea,  give  me  prifdence,  and,  as  I  would  not 
devour  the  carrion  of  sin,  give  me  such  a  renewed  nature  that 
the  most  distant  scent  of  it  shall  at  once  sicken  me,  and  cause 
me  to  urge  my  steps  as  far  from  it  as  possible. 

TONGS  FOR  HANDLING   HOT   HION. 
**  Chrysostom  hath  the  following  comparison:  *  A  smith  that  taketh 
up  his  red-hot  iron  with  his  hands,  and  not  with  his  tongs,  what  can 
he  expect  but  to  burn  his  fingers  ?     So  we  destroy  our  souls  when 
we  judge  of  the  mysteries  of  faith  by  the  laws  of  common  reason." 

Common  enough  is  this  error.  Men  must  needs  comprehend 
when  their  main  business  is  to  apprehend.  That  which  God 
reveals  to  us  is,  to  a  large  extent,  beyond  the  reach  of  under- 
standing, and,  therefore,  in  refusing  to  believe  until  we  can 
understand,  we  are  doing  ourselves  and  the  truth  a  grievous 
wrong.  Our  wisdom  lies  as  much  in  taking  heed  lioio  we 
receive  as  in  being  careful  what  we  receive.  Spiritual  truth 
must  be  received  by  a  spiritual  faculty  ;  namely,  by  faith. 
As  well  hope  to  grasp  a  star  by  the  hand,  as  divine  truth  by 
reason.     Faith  is  well  likened  to  the  golden  tongs,  with  which 


232  FLOWERS   PROM    A 

we  may  carry  live  coals  ;  and  carnal  reason  is  the  burned  hand, 
which  lets  fall  the  glowing  mass,  which  it  is  not  capable  of 
carrying. 

Let  it  not,  however,  be  thought  that  faith  is  contrary  to 
reason.  No  :  it  is  not  unreasonable  for  a  little  child  to  believe 
its  father's  statements,  though  it  be  quite  incapable  of  per- 
ceiving all  their  bearings.  It  is  quite  reasonable  that  a  pupil 
should  accept  his  master's  principles  at  the  beginning  of  his 
studies  ;  he  will  get  but  little  from  his  discipleship  if  he  begins 
by  disputing  with  his  teacher.  How  are  we  to  learn  anything 
if  we  will  not  believe  ?  In  the  gloriously  sublime  truths  of 
Godhead,  Incarnation,  Atonement,  Regeneration,  and  so  forth, 
we  must  beheve,  or  be  forever  ignorant  :  these  masses  of  the 
molten  metal  of  eternal  truth  must  be  handled  by  faith,  or  let 
alone. 

All-gracious  Lord,  this  one  thing  thou  hast  done  for  me — 
thou  hast  made  me  a  willing  believer.  Let  but  thine  authority 
be  at  the  back  of  a  statement,  and  it  stands  instead  of  reason  : 
in  fact,  thy  word  is  to  me  the  surest  evidence,  and  to  believe  it 
is  my  soundest  common-sense.  0  Lord,  thy  logos  is  my 
logic ;  thy  Testament  is  my  argument ;  thy  Word  is  my 
warrant.  In  the  day  which  shall  reveal  all  things  it  shall  be 
seen  that  man's  reasonings  are  but  childish  folly,  and  God's 
revelation  is  wisdom  at  its  height. 

GKEEN-  WOOD. 

**  Green  wood,  which  is  wet  and  full  of  sap,  cannot  be  kindled  by 
a  flash  or  a  spark,  but  needeth  much  care  and  blowing  ere  it  will 
burn." 

When  we  are  dealing  with  young  and  thoughtless  minds, 
w^e  must  remember  this,  and  be  patient  and  persevering.  Such 
will  not  readily  take  fire  when  we  apply  our  match  ;  we  had 
better  go  down  on  our  knees  while  we  are  trying  to  light  the 
fire  of  attention  in  them,  and  if  we  use  the  warm  breath  of  our 
anxious  love  we  shall  all  the  sooner  do  the  work. 

Lord,  as  I  have  seen  my  servant  thus  doing  my  work,  help 
me  as  thy  servant  to  copy  her,  and  succeed  in  thy  work. 

GAMBLING. 
''In  gaming  there  is  a  secret  witchery.     A  man  will  play  a  little, 
and  only  venture  a  small  sum  ;  but  soon  he  is  wormed  in,  and  more 
and  more  entangled  ;  and  so  men  think  it  is  no  great  matter  to  sin  a 
little,  and  yet  that  little  leadeth  on  to  more." 

The  illustration  is  most  forcible.     Many  persons  have  put 


puritan's  garden.  233 

down  a  piece  of  silver  on  the  gaming-table  when  passing 
through  the  room,  and  from  that  moment  their  ruin  has  been 
sealed.  They  will  be  seen  from  day  to  day  staking  their 
hundreds,  till  the  last  fatal  roll  of  the  ball  leaves  them  penni- 
less. For  the  while  gamblers  live,  and  move,  and  have  their 
being  in  the  game  :  their  eyes  are  quick,  and  their  brains  are 
sharp,  to  see  each  turn  of  the  play  :  they  are  the  willing, 
abject  slaves  of  what  is  called  amusement.  Thus  doth  sin 
begin  with  littles,  and  glide  into  more  serious  faults  ;  till  the 
sinner  is  spellbound,  and  finds  himself  engrossed  with  folly, 
which  he  has  no  will  to  leave.  Be  it  ours  to  give  no  place  to 
the  devil.  Let  him  not  have  a  spot  whereon  to  set  up  his 
enchantment  and  work  his  diabolical  arts.  If  we  never  venture 
a  farthing  upon  Satan^s  table,  we  shall  never  be  made  beggars 
by  his  devices.  If  he  is  not  allowed  to  spin  a  spider's  web 
about  us,  he  will  never  be  able  to  hold  us  with  the  cords  of 
iniquity.  If  we  never  wade  into  sin  we  shall  never  drown  in 
it.     Lord,  keep  us  from  the  appearance  of  evil. 

mWAED  BLEEDING. 
'*  ]Many  die  of  inward  bleeding  as  well  as  by  ontward  wounds." 
Every  surgeon  can  give  give  instances  of  such  deaths.  Not 
an  abrasion  of  the  skin  was  visible  :  the  dying  man  had  neither 
gash,  nor  cut,  nor  even  a  pin's  prick,  and  yet  his  life  oozed 
away  in  secret.  Thus,  without  an  open  fault,  a  man's  soul 
may  perish.  If  wrath  rage  within,  it  is  fatal,  though  no 
revengeful  act  has  been  perpetrated  ;  if  lust  be  burning  in  the 
heart,  the  man  is  lost,  though  he  has  never  advanced  to  a 
lascivious  deed  ;  if  unbelief  proves  an  inward  enmity  against 
God,  the  man  is  condemned  already,  though  no  blasphemous 
word  has  crossed  his  lip.  Sin  is  a  bleeding  at  the  heart.  It  is 
a  disease  which  destroys  the  true  life  within,  as  well  as  the 
fruit  of  it  without  ;  therefore  let  every  man  beware  of  flattering 
himself  that  he  is  right  with  God  because  no  glaring  vice  is 
manifest  in  his  daily  conversation.  The  worm  none  the  less 
surely  destroys  the  apple  because  its  first  operations  are  at  the 
core,  and  quite  out  of  sight.  If  fire  be  utterly  hidden  among 
combustible  materials,  it  will  not  therefore  be  any  the  less  sure 
and  rapid  in  its  devouring  work. 

*'  Sin,  which  dwelleth  in  me,"  is  the  enemy  that  I  must 
fight  against,  as  well  as  sin  which  goeth  out  of  me.  O  Lord, 
help  me  to  be  healthy  in  the  fountain  of  my  being.  Heal  my 
heart,  and  so  I  shall  be  healed.     Heart-disease  baffles  all  phy- 


234  PLOWERS   FROM   A 

siciatis  but  thyself.  This,  however,  is  thy  speciaUte,  Lord, 
display  thy  sovereign  power  and  skill  in  the  centre  of  my 
being. 

A  CHILD  ASKING  AN  APPLE. 

*'  Prayers  to  God  for  spiritual  things  are  the  most  acceptable,  but 
prayers  for  temporals  are  not  despised.  A  child  pleaseth  his  father 
more  when  he  desireth  him  to  teach  him  his  book  than  when  he  begs 
for  an  apple  ;  yet  this  request  is  not  refused  when  it  will  do  him  no 
ill  to  grant  it.  '* 

A  pretty,  simple  picture,  rightly  drawn  upon  divine  author- 
ity ;  for  the  Lord  himself  teaches  us  to  judge  what  our  heaven- 
ly Father  will  do  for  us  by  that  which  we  would  do  for  our 
children.  If  I  go  to  God,  and  ask  for  spiritual  blessings,  he 
will  be  pleased  with  my  request,  and  most  surely  grant  it,  even 
as  a  father  will  readily  give  his  boy  a  lesson  in  some  useful 
work  or  book.  But  I  may  also  beg  for  temporal  mercies,  as  a 
child  asks  for  its  bread  and  butter.  More  than  this,  as  a  child 
may  ask  for  an  apple,  or  a  sweet,  so  may  I  make  request  for 
that  which  I  desire.  Only  in  this  latter  case  I  am  bound  to 
remember  that  a  child  is  not  hidden  to  ask  for  the  apple,  though 
he  is  allowed  to  do  so.  ''  Give  me  this  day  my  daily  bread,'' 
is  a  petition  prescribed  :  if  I  ask  for  more  it  must  be  as  a 
petition  permitted.  Moreover,  the  child's  request  is  one  which 
must  be  left  entirely  to  the  Father's  own  discretion  :  he  is 
bound  by  promise  to  give  his  offspring  necessaries,  but  he  is 
under  no  bonds  to  grant  them  luxuries.  Here  is  a  difference 
ever  to  be  noted  between  prayers  commanded  and  prayers 
tolerated.  As  we  are  children  of  the  great  Father,  we  have  a 
large  liberty  of  request  ;  if  we  delight  ourselves  in  the  Lord 
he  will  give  us  the  desires  of  our  hearts  ;  but  still  when  we  are 
praying,  it  is  well  for  us  to  press  our  suit  just  so  far  as  it  may 
be  pressed,  and  no  further.  A  child  asking  for  necessary  food 
may  be  vehement  even  unto  tears  ;  but  if  what  he  wishes  for  is 
only  a  sugar-stick,  he  will  be  a  naughty  child  if  he  be  passion- 
ately importunate.  Mind  this,  ye  babes  in  grace,  when  next 
ye  pray.  Ask,  seek,  knock,  according  as  the  promise  invites  ; 
but  in  temporal  matters  consider  the  way  of  the  Lord's  house, 
and  submit  your  will  unto  the  will  of  the  Father. 

THE  SHOWMAN'S  JEST. 
**  Austin  speaketh  of  a  jester  who  boasted  that  at  the  next  fair  he 
would  undertake  to  show  every  one  what  they  did  desire  ]  and  when 
there  was  a  great  concourse  and  expectation,  he  told  them,  ^Hoc 
(yinnes  vuliis,  vili  emere,  et  caro  vendere,' — You  all  desire  to  buy  cheap 
and  sell  dear.     Another  showman,  on  like  occasion,  said,  *  Ye  all  de- 


puritan's    GARDE]Sr.  235 


sire  to  be  jDraised. '  But  Austin  saith  rightly,  these  were  but  foolish 
answers,  because  many  good  men  desire  neither,  the  one  being 
against  justice,  and  the  other  against  sincerity  ;  but,  saith  he,  '  SI 
dixisset,  omnes  beaii  esse  vultis,  If  he  had  said, — Ye  all  desire  to  be 
happy,  he  had  said  right.  Every  one  may  find  this  disposition  in 
his  own  heart,  every  man  desireth  happiness." 

No  doubt  this  is  true,  and  it  is  equally  true  that  the  notion 
of  happiness  is  as  varied  as  the  wish  for  it  is  universal.  What 
is  my  view  of  happiness  ?  This  is  a  question  of  the  highest 
importance  ;  for  as  I  am  sure  to  seek  after  that  which  I  desire, 
and  am  sure  to  desire  that  which  I  conceive  to  be  happiness,  it 
is  clear  that  my  conception  of  happiness  will  largely  regulate 
my  whole  course  of  life.  Remember  this,  O  my  soul,  and 
take  good  heed  that  thou  seek  not  happiness  apart  from  holi- 
ness, nor  rest  apart  from  Jesus,  nor  pleasure  apart  from  pleas- 
ing God. 

Lord,  teach  men  that  thou  art  their  bliss,  and  then  draw" 
them  to  seek  after  thee  with  their  whole  hearts. 

CONSCIENCE  LIKE   THE  EYE   OR  THE  STOIVIACH. 

'*The  least  dust,  if  it  get  into  the  eye,  will  pain  it  ;  so  will  con- 
science at  first  smite  us  for  lesser  failings  and  excesses  ;  but  after- 
ward when  you  make  bold  with  it,  it  is  like  the  stomach  of  the 
ostrich,  which  digesteth  iron  ;  or  like  a  part  or  member  of  the  body 
which  is  seared  with  a  hot  iron,  it  hath  no  feeling  (1  Tim.  4  :  2)  ;  or, 
like  freezing  water,  which  at  first  will  not  bear  a  pin,  but  afterward 
it  freezeth,  and  freezeth,  till  it  bear  a  cart-load.  Some  men  lose 
their  tender  sense  of  sin  by  frequency  of  sinning." 

If  our  offending  against  right  did  us  no  worse  turn  than  this 
it  would  be  bad  enough,  for  to  lose  sensitiveness  of  conscience 
is  to  lose  the  excellence  of  our  being.  What  is  the  eye  worth 
when  it  can  no  longer  feel  pain,  or  the  hand  when  its  touch  is 
gone,  or  the  head  when  sensation  has  departed  ?  As  well  take 
away  from  the  goldsmith  all  his  tests  as  from  man  his  con- 
science. What  is  the  use  of  a  watchman  who  is  in  a  dead 
sleep  ?  How  far  any  one  of  us  may  be  proceeding  in  this 
direction  it  will  be  prudent  for  us  to  know  at  once,  that  by 
repentance  we  may  arrest  the  process,  and  by  faith  may  put 
ourselves  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  he  may  give 
back  to  us  the  heart  of  flesh.  Let  us  entreat  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  continue  his  softening  operations  even  to  the  end. 

*'  Sin  has  been  hammering  my  heart 
Unto  a  hardness  void  of  love  : 
Let  suppling  grace  to  cross  its  art 
Drop  from  above." 


236  FLOAVERS  fro:m  a 

THE  EAE-RING. 
"  Reproof  is  an   ear- jewel  ;  now  an   ear- jewel  mnsfc  not  be  too 
"weighty  and  heavy,  lest  it  tear  and  rend,  rather  than  adorn  the  ear." 

Rebuke  requires  delicacy.  It  is  never  wise  to  box  a  man  on 
the  ear  to  win  his  attention  to  a  whisper.  Too  much  zeal  in 
this  case  is  its  own  hindrance.  It  is  only  a  dainty  bit  of  pure 
gold,  garnished  with  a  rare  jewel,  that  a  lady  will  think  fit  for 
her  ear  :  it  would  be  idle  to  offer  her  a  quoit,  or  even  a 
curtain-ring.  It  was  said  of  a  good  man  that  if  he  wished  to 
brush  off  a  fly  from  a  friend^s  forehead  he  would  look  round  for 
a  beetle  and  wedges  ;  and  of  another  that  he  washed  off  spots 
from  a  brother's  face  with  scalding  water.  A  man  should 
note  how  reproofs  affect  himself,  and  lie  may  from  this  ob- 
servation discover  that  they  need  to  be  administered  very 
tenderly.  The  rebukes  of  the  righteous  should  always  be  as  a 
precious  ointment,  sweet  and  gentle  ;  never  should  they  break 
the  head.  Whenever  it  is  our  reader's  duty  to  attend  to  this 
painful  business,  let  him  remember  Manton's  figure  of  the  ear- 
ring, and  act  accordingly.  A.  friend  who  wished  a  lady  to 
wear  an  ear-ring  would  go  down  to  the  jeweller^s,  and  with 
dainty  fingers  examine  various  jewels,  and  select  one  of  the 
best,  suited  for  that  exquisite  piece  of  living  coral  which  is 
such  an  adornment  to  a  fair  head.  This  he  would  not  fling  at 
the  lady,  nor  force  into  her  ear  with  violence,  but  he  would 
proffer  it  with  due  courtesy,  and  leave  her  to  fix  it  in  its  place 
herself.  If  a  reproof  be  thus  selected,  and  be  really  precious, 
it  should  be  wisely  presented  to  the  person  for  whom  it  is 
intended  ;  and  much  of  the  application  must  be  adroitly  left 
to  the  person's  own  conscience.  Thus  will  the  gem  reach  the 
ear,  and  the  reproof  reach  the  heart. 

Lord,  make  us  wise  in  this  and  all  other  things  by  thy  Spirit. 
Let  us  not  shun  the  duty  of  reproof,  but  help  me  to  do  it  >vell, 
lest  I  do  harm  when  I  mean  to  do  good,  and  thus  myself  need 
to  be  rebuked. 

THE  YOKE  LINED. 
"  The  yoke  of  Christ  will  be  more  easy  than  we  think  of,  especially 
when  it  is  lined  with  grace.'* 

We  well  remember  an  old  man  who  carried  pails  with  a 
yoke,  and  as  he  was  infirm,  and  tender  about  the  shoulders,  his 
yoke  was  padded,  and  covered  with  w^iite  flannel  where  it 
touched  him.  But  what  a  lining  is  ^'  love  !"  A  cross  of 
iron,  lined  with  love,  would  never  gall  the  neck,  much  less  will 
Christ's    wooden    cross.      Lined    with    Christ's   love   to   us  ! 


237 


Covered  with  our  love  to  him  !     Truly  the  yoke  is  easy,  and 
the  burden  is  light. 

Whenever  the  shoulder  becomes  sore  let  us  look  to  the 
lining..  Keep  the  lining  right,  and  the  yoke  will  be  no  more 
a  burden  to  us  than  wings  are  to  a  bird,  or  her  wedding-ring  is 
to  a  bride.  0  love  divine,  line  my  whole  life,  my  cares,  my 
griefs,  my  pains  ;  and  what  more  can  I  ask  ? 

PRESCRIPTIONS  NOT  TO  BE  ALTERED. 

*'  The  prescriptions  of  a  physician  must  not  be  altered,  either  by 
the  apothecary  or  the  patient  ;  so  we,  the  preachers,  must  not  alter 
God's  prescriptions,  neither  must  you,  the  hearers.  We  must  not 
shun  to  declare,  nor  you  to  receive,  *  The  whole  counsel  of  God.'  " 

It  is  as  much  as  a  man's  soul  is  worth  to  alter  a  word  of  the 
Lord's  own  writing  :  to  take  away  from  the  book,  or  to  add 
to  it,  is  forbidden  ;  and  threatened  with  the  heaviest  penalties. 

It  is  not  ours  to  improve  the  gospel,  but  to  repeat  it  when 
we  preach,  and  obey  it  when  we  hear.  The  gospel,  the  whole 
gospel,  and  nothing  but  the  gospel,  must  be  our  religion,  or 
we  are  lost  men.  Imagine  a  dispenser  altering  the  ingredients 
of  a  medicine  to  suit  his  own  notions  !  We  should  soon  have 
him  on  trial  for  manslaughter  ;  and  surely  he  would  deserve  to 
be  tried  on  a  still  higher  charg'e  should  a  patient  die  through 
his  folly.  The  gospel  prescription  is  such  that  an  omission  or 
an  addition  may  soon  make  that  which  was  ordained  to  life  to 
be  unto  death.  We  may  not  attempt  to  be  wiser  than  God, 
for  the  idea  involves  constructive  blasphemy.  No,  it  is  ours 
to  follow  our  copy  to  the  letter,  come  what  may  of  it. 

Lord,  in  my  teaching  I  have  ever  kept  to  what  thou  hast 
said  ;  and  therefore  men  think  me  old-fashioned,  and  behind 
the  age.  Give  me  grace  to  continue  so.  Never  may  I  aspire 
to  practise  a  new  pharmacy,  but  may  I  faithfully  dispense  thine 
own  ancient  and  unvarying  prescription  of  salvation  by  grace 
through  faith. 

•  TRUSTING   AFTER   FAILURE. 

"  As  a  prodigal,  that  hath  once  broken  after  he  hath  been  set  up, 
is  not  trusted  with  a  like  stock  again  ;  so  God's  children  may  not  re- 
cover that  largeness  of  spirit,  and  fulness  of  inward  strength  and 
comfort,  which  they  had  before.  Many  after  a  great  disease  do  not 
regain  that  pitch  of  health  which  formerly  they  had,  but  they  carry 
the  fruits  of  their  disease  with  them  to  their  graves." 

This  is  not  always  the  case,  for  it  may  happen,  as. with 
Peter,  that  the  bankrupt  believer  may  so  prosper  in  grace  as  to 
be  richer  than  before  his  failure  ;  but  we  fear  that  Manton 


238  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

here  mentions  the  general  rule.  Men  do  not  care  to  ride  a 
broken-kneed  horse  :  if  it  has  been  down  once,  it  may  be 
down  again.  A  wise  father  does  not  care  to  restore  a  son  to 
a  position  for  which  he  bas  proved  himself  to  be  unlit.  Even 
so  has  the  Lord  dealt  with  many  backsliding  ones  :  like  David, 
they  have  been  restored,  but  never  to  their  former  peace, 
prosperity,  and  power.  Into  the  army  of  our  Lord  the  deserter 
is  received  with  gladness  ;  but  he  must  begin  in  the  ranks, 
and  must  prove  his  fidelity  before  he  is  again  intrusted  with  a 
commission.  A  fallen  one,  when  restored,  may  have  gained 
in  self-knowledge,  but  he  must  necessarily  be  a  loser  in  many 
other  respects. 

A  little  boy,  who  had  fallen  into  the  habit  of  falsehood,  was 
made  by  his  father  to  drive  a  nail  into  a  post  every  time  he 
had  exaggerated,  or  told  a  Jie.  At  last  the  habit  was  con- 
quered, and  in  several  trials  the  boy  had  displayed  complete 
truthfulness.  Then  his  father  allowed  him  to  draw  out  some 
of  the  nails,  and  this  was  repeated  till  no  nail  was  left  in  the 
post.  The  little  fellow,  so  far  from  being  proud  when  every 
nail  was  gone,  exclaimed,  "  Alas,  father,  the  holes  are  there, 
where  the  nails  used  to  be  !''  Just  so  does  evil  leave  its 
marks.  However  fully  restored,  the  fallen  professor  seldom  loses 
the  memory  of  impurity,  and  does  not  easily  regain  his  injured 
influence.  He  is  always  weak  in  those  points  which  led  to  his 
former  fall,  and,  for  the  most  part,  weaker  all  round. 

O  Lord  !  if  thou  hast  counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into 
thy  service,  I  pray  thee  keep  me  from  being  either  unfaithful  to 
my  charge,  or  negligent  in  my  life.  Let  me  be  so  upheld  that 
I  shall  not  have  need  to  be  picked  out  of  the  mire,  and  set  on 
my  feet  again. 

THE   DEN   OF   THE    COCKATRICE. 
"  If  we  play  about  the  cockatrice's  hole,  no  wonder  we  are  bitten." 

An  old  proverb  advises  us  not  to  play  with  edged  tools  lest 
we  cut  our  fingers.  It  is  a  sin  to  trifle  with  sin.  If  we  must 
play,  we  had  better  find  harmless  toys  :  that  evil  which  caused 
Christ  a  bloody  sweat  is  no  fit  theme  for  any  man's  sport. 
Playing  with  wickedness  is  a  hazardous  game.  Sooner  or  later, 
if  we  pluck  the  lion  of  sin  by  the  beard,  it  will  arouse  itself, 
and  we  shall  be  torn  in  pieces.  This  is  true  of  indulgence  in 
strong  drink  :  *'  Look  not  thou  upon  the  wine  when  it  is  red, 
when  it  giveth  his  color  in  the  cup,  when  it  moveth  itself 
aright.   At  the  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth  like  an 


puritan's    GARDEiH^.  239 

adder."  It  is  equally  true  of  all  other  forms  of  evil,  especially 
of  the  lusts  of  the  fiesh.  Lewd  words  soon  lead  to  foul  deeds. 
Yet  such  is  the  folly  of  men  that  they  run  -dreadful  risks  in 
sheer  wantonness,  as  though  asps  and  cobras  were  fine  play- 
mates, and  devils  rare  merry-makers. 

^'  Lord,  keep  back  thy  servant  from  presumptuous  sins  ;  let 
them  not  have  dominion  over  me  ;  then  shall  I  be  upright, 
and  I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great  transgression. ' ' 

SUNSHINE  WITH  EAIN. 
"  As  many  times  the  sun  shineth  when  the  rain  falleth,  so  there 
may  be  in  the  soul  a  mixture  of  spiritual  rejoicing  and  holy  mourn- 
ing ;  a  deep  sense  of  God's  love,  and  yet  a  mourning  because  of  the 
relics  of  corruption. " 

All  spiritual  persons  understand  this.  The  inexperienced 
ask  how  a  man  can  be  ^^  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing." 
But  this  is  no  puzzle  to  a  Christian.  Our  life  is  a  paradox. 
Never  in  the  world  elsewhere  is  there  such  sunshine  of  delight 
as  we  enjoy,  and  never  such  rain  as  that  which  damps  our 
joys.  It  seems  at  times  as  if  heaven  and  hell  met  in  our 
experience.  Ours  is  a  joy  unspeakable,  and  yet  an  agony 
unutterable.  We  rise  to  the  heavenlies  in  Christ,  and  sink  to 
the  abyss  in  ourselves.  Those  who  have  seen  fire  burning  on 
the  sea,  trees  living  and  flourishing  upon  a  rock,  feathers  flying 
against  the  wind,  and  doves  vanquishing  eagles,  have  begun  to 
see  a  list  of  marvels,  all  of  which  are  to  be  found  within  the 
believer,  and  much  more  of  equal  or  greater  singularity. 

Lord,  when  my  own  experience  puzzles  me,  let  me  be  com- 
forted by  the  thought  that  it  does  not  puzzle  thee.  What  I 
know  not  now  thou  hast  promised  to  make  me  know  hereafter  ; 
and  there  I  leave  it. 

THE   SHIP  AND   ITS  PASSENGERS. 
**  Look,  as  in  a  ship  some  sleep,  and  some  walk  contrary  to  the 
ship's  motion,  so  in  the  world  ;  some  men  are  negligent,  others  keep 
bustling  and  stirring,  and  seek  to  resist  the  designs  of  God  ;  but  the 
ship  goes  on,  and  the  world  goes  on." 

Yes,  a  passenger  may  walk  to  the  north  along  the  deck,  but 
the  ship  keeps  on  due  south  ;  he  may  sleep,  but  the  vessel 
speeds  over  the  waves  ;  he  may  denounce  its  motion,  but  it 
holds  on  its  way.  So  the  heathen  may  rage,  and  the  people 
imagine  a  vain  thing,  but  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  fast 
forever.  Men  are  free  to  will  and  to  act,  but  omnipotent 
wdsdom  rules  over  them  despite  their  free  agency.  Not  as  if 
they   were  togs   and    stones    does   God   govern    men,    but  as 


240  FLOWERS    FR03I   A 

rational,  intelligent,  free  agents  he  permits  them  to  do  their 
own  will,  and  works  his  ow^n  purposes  notwithstanding.  This 
is  a  great  marvel.  Men  are  as  free  as  if  there  were  no  pre- 
destination, and  predestination  is  accomplished  as  surely  as  if 
there  were  no  free  agents  in  the  universe.  AVe  are  full  of 
wonder  at  this,  but  it  is  true. 

The  figure  before  us  is  not  perfect,  but  it  has  many  merits  ; 
and,  at  any  rate,  it  sets  out  the  one  idea  that  the  rebellions  and 
wilfulnesses  of  mankind  do  not  thwart  the  eternal  purposes  of 
the  Most  High.  The  royal  vessel  pursues  its  way  whether 
men  delight  in  its  glorious  progress,  or  rail  against  it,  ''  The 
Lord  reigneth  ;  let  the  earth  rejoice." 

THE   INSULTED  MEKCHANT. 
**  A  mercliaiit  that  hath  a  precious  commodity,  and  one  biddeth  a 
mean  price,  he  foldeth  up  his  wares  with  indignation." 

We  have  seen  the  exhibitor  turn  away  in  utter  disgust  when 
some  uninitiated  spectator  has  offered  pence  where  pounds 
would  not  have  been  accepted.  The  jeweller  or  artist  has 
been  as  much  offended  as  if  he  had  been  personally  insulted 
by  such  a  depreciation  of  his  valuables.  Do  you  wonder  that 
the  Lord  God  is  grieved  when  men  set  a  base  price  upon  his 
priceless  grace,  and  begin  to  bargain  and  chaffer  as  to  what 
sins  they  will  give  up,  and  what  duties  they  will  perform  ? 
Do  you  wonder  that  he  should  take  his  gospel  away  from  such 
a  people,  and  turn  to  others  who  will  set  more  store  by  his 
goodness  ?  Not  forever  will  Jesus  cast  his  pearls  before 
swine.  Woe  to  that  man  who  at  last  angers  his  God  into 
turning  from  him,  and  taking  the  despised  gospel  elsewhere  ! 
He  well  deserves  to  perish  who  counts  eternal  life  to  be  of  less 
value  than  a  passing  pleasure,  or  reckons  the  righteousness  of 
God  to  be  no  better  than  his  own  poor  works. 

PROVISIONED  FOR  A  SIEGE. 
**  When  a  city  is  besieged,  the  prince  who  would  defend  it  doth 
not  leave  it  to  its  ordinar}^  strength  and  the  standing  provisions 
which  it  had  before,  but  sendeth  in  fresh  supplies  of  soldiers, 
victuals,  and  ammunition,  and  such  things  as  the  present  exigence 
calleth  for.  So  doth  God  deal  with  his  people  ;  his  Spirit  cometh  in 
with  a  new  supply,  that  they  may  better  repel  sin,  and  stand  out  in 
the  hour  of  trial.  '^ 

What  supplies  of  food,  medicine,  and  ammunition  are 
poured  into  a  city  which  has  to  sustain  a  siege  ;  and  seldom 
do  they  prove  to  be  more  than  are  required  !  Even  so,  in  our 
time   of  temptation,   the  Lord  bestows  vast   stores   of    grace, 


PUEITAI^'S    GAEDEJ^.  241 

strength,  comfort,  and  wisdom  ;  and  yet  there  is  need  of  them 
all  ere  the  assault  is  over.  It  were  well  if  we  had  a  clearer 
idea  of  the  needs  of  a  beleaguered  soul.  We  think  far  too 
lightly  of  the  necessities  which  arise  out  of  the  attacks  of 
Satan,^  and  the  blockade  of  the  flesh.  The  City  of  Mansoul 
has  no  provision  within  itself,  and  if  its  commerce  with  heaven 
be  cut  off,  black  famine  stares  the  inhabitants  in  the  face. 
While  the  coast  is  clear  it  will  be  well  to  get  in  stores,  and 
specially  on  those  great  market-days,  the  Sabbaths.  None  can 
fit  us  to  stand  a  siege  but  that  Universal  Provider  who  daily 
feeds  countless  myriads  of  needy  creatures. 

Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  knowest  when  next  my 
nature  shall  be  beleaguered  by  the  adversary.  Provision  me,  I 
pray  thee,  against  the  siege.  Give  me  to  rejoice  because  thou 
hast  prayed  for  me  that  my  faith  fail  not. 

BLOWN  INTO  HAEBOR. 
"  Men  in  a  tempest  are  sometimes  cast  upon  a  place  of  safety 
which  they  had  not  made  for  by  intention  and  foresight." 

Happy  mariner,  who  is  forced  into  port  !  Blessed  is  that 
wave  which  throws  the  drowning  sailor  upon  the  rock  of 
safety  !  Such  propitious  forces  are  abroad  at  times,  and 
especially  in  the  spiritual  world.  We  mean  not  to  exclude 
the  agency  of  the  will  when  we  speak  of  certain  compulsions 
w^hich  have  driven  men  into  a  happiness  for  which  they  had 
not  looked.  *'  Had  I  not  lost  my  eyes,"  said  one,  "  I  had 
never  seen  my  Saviour."  Another  attributed  his  spiritual 
riches  to  the  fact  that  he  lost  all  his  property,  and  so  was 
driven  to  his  God  for  consolation.  The  utmost  faith  in  God 
has  sometimes  been  created  by  the  Holy  Spirit  by  means  of 
the  utter  and  entire  failure  of  all  visible  help.  Many  a  way- 
ward mind  has  been  set  free  from  the  bonds  of  its  own 
obstinate  will  by  being  yet  more  firmly  bound  by  a  sacred 
impulse  which  would  not  be  denied. 

When  we  reach  the  heights  of  glory  we  shall  ascribe  our 
felicity,  not  to  our  own  will  or  merit,  but  to  those  sweet  forces 
which  drew  us  to  heaven  with  cords  of  love  and  bands  of  a 
man  ;  and  perhaps  not  less  to  certain  ruder  agencies,  which 
beat  like  hurricanes  upon  our  pride,  and  sank  our  self-con- 
fidence in  the  floods,  wrecking  us  into  rest,  destroying  us  into 
salvation. 

A  PEAEL   OF   TO^KNOWN  VALUE. 

**If  a  man  find  a  pearl  of  great  price,  and  knowcth  not  what  it  is, 
he  maketh  no  more  esteem  of  it  than  of  a  piece  of  glass  or  a  common 


24:2  FLOWERS    FEOM    A 


bead,  and  is  ready  to  sell  it  for  a  few  pence.  But  if  upon  the  offer 
of  it  to  a  skilful  lapidary,  the  jeweller  at  first  sight  biddeth  two  or 
three  thousand  crowns  for  it,  doth  he  not  change  his  mind,  and  think 
this  jewel  is  of  greater  value  than  he  took  it  to  be  ?  So  here  :  a  man 
knows  not  the  value  of  his  soul,  and  does  not  greatly  set  by  it. 
Adam  lost  his  own  soul  and  the  souls  of  all  his  posterity  for  an  apple, 
and  we  sell  our  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  But  when  Christ, 
who  made  souls,  and  knoweth  the  value  of  them,  came  to  recover  lost 
souls,  he  gave  himself  for  us  ;  did  he  not  hereb}^  teach  us  to  set  a 
higher  price  upon  them  ;  for  nothing  but  his  precious  blood  could 
redeem  them  ?*' 

This  is  a  suggestive  simile,  and  may  suggest  the  frainework  of 
a  sermon  on  "  the  estimate  which  men  set  upon  their  souls, 
and  the  hints  which  God  has  given  them  as  to  their  real  value 
by  what  he  has  done  in  reference  thereto. ' '  In  the  shop  of  a 
diamond-merchant  at  Amsterdam  we  saw  great  machinery  and 
much  power  all  brought  to  bear  on  what  seemed  to  be  a  small 
piece  of  glass.  One  might  be  sure  of  the  value  of  that  trans- 
parent morsel  if  he  would  but  look  around  and  see  what  skill 
and  labor  were  being  expended  upon  it.  God  has  laid  out  for 
the  good  of  a  soul  the  watchfulness  of  angels,  the  providence 
of  this  world,  the  glory  of  the  next,  the  councils  of  eternity, 
liimself  and  all  that  he  hath,  the  Holy  Spirit  and  all  his  divine 
influences — yea,  he  spared  not  his  only  Son.  Say,  soul,  what 
must  thou  be  worth  thus  to  have  all  heaven's  thought,  and 
power,  and  love  laid  out  for  thee  ?  *'  What  shall  a  man  give 
in  exchange  for  his  soul  F'  Let  not  a  man  attempt  to  answer 
the  question  till  he  hath  heard  the  Lord  himself  say,  *'  I  gave 
Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia  and  Seba  for  thee. ' ' 

A  POOR  IMAN  EOBBED. 

'*  If  a  poor  man  be  robbed  of  twenty  or  thirty  shillings,  no  wonder 
if  he  cry  and  take  on,  because  he  hath  no  more  to  help  himself  with  ; 
but  now,  if  a  rich  man  be  robbed  of  such  a  sum,  he  is  not  much 
troubled,  because  he  hath  more  at  home.  So  a  man  that  is  justified 
by  faith,  and  hath  assurance  of  the  favor  of  God,  he  can  comfortably 
bear  up  against  all  the  troubles  and  crosses  he  meets  with  in  his  way 
to  heaven." 

Remember  the  apostle's  reckoning  in  Romans  8  :  18  :  ''  For 
I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy 
to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us.'' 
He  was  so  rich  in  grace  that  all  his  losses  were  as  nothing  to 
him.  One  of  old  got  his  living  by  his  losses,  for  he  said, 
''  By  these  things  men  live,  and  in  all  these  things  is  the  life 
of  my  spirit  :"  thus  spiritual  riches  enable  us  to  bear  temporal 
losses  with  great  patience.     It  is  far  otherwise  with  the  world- 


puritan's  garden.  243 

ling,  wLos<5  goods  are  his  god  ;  for  when  these  are  taken  he 
cries  out  like  Micah,  "  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods  which  I 
made,  and  what  liave  I  more  ?"  He  to  whom  God  is  all  things 
cannot  be  robbed,  for  who  can  overcome  and  despoil  the 
Almighty  ? 

Lord,  lead  me  to  count  nothing  my  treasure  but  thyself,  and 
then  I  may  defy  the  thief.  If  I  have  suffered  loss,  let  me 
make  a  gain  thereby  by  prizing  thee  the  more. 

A  TANNED  FACE. 

*'  As  a  man  that  walks  in  the  sun,  unawares,  before  he  thinks  of 
it,  his  countenance  is  tanned  ;  so  our  hearts  are  defiled  by  the  slight- 
est contact  with  sin." 

We  have  seen  men  who  were  quite  fair  where  their  hats 
covered  their  foreheads,  and  thoroughly  bronzed  where  the 
sun  had  looked  upon  them.  A  man's  heart  had  need  be 
covered  with  a  veil  of  holy  carefulness  all  over,  or  the  world 
will  get  at  it,  and  brown  it  with  evil.  Some  trades  and 
callings  are  like  a  tropical  climate,  and  their  blackening  effect 
is  soon  visible  :  certain  companies  are  still  more  so  ;  they 
make  their  mark  upon  the  best  of  men,  and  that  mark  is  not 
to  their  improvement.  With  difficulty  can  a  man  prevent  the 
world's  influencing  him  for  evil  ;  evil  communications  will 
corrupt  good  manners  unless  a  sacred  remedy  is  heartily  used. 
See  the  effect  of  evil  upon  professors  in  Jeremiah's  day  ;  he 
says  :  '^  Her  Nazarites  were  purer  than  snow,  they  were  whiter 
than  milk,  they  were  more  ruddy  in  body  than  rubies,  their 
polishing  was  of  sapphire  :  their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  coal  ; 
they  are  not  known  in  the  streets  :  their  skin  cleaveth  to  their 
bones  ;  it  is  withered,  it  is  become  like  a  stick." 

Let  us,  as  much  as  we  can,  keep  ourselves  to  ourselves,  and 
go  quietly  through  life.  A  man  of  eminence,  who  outlived 
the  French  Revolution,  v/as  asked  how  he  escaped  the  guillo- 
tine, and  he  replied,  ''  I  made  myself  of  no  reputation,  and 
kept  silence."  Let  us,  like  him,  stay  within  doors.  If  v/e 
must  go  forth  abroad,  it  is  well  to  walk  on  the  shady  side  of 
the  street,  by  keeping  as  much  out  of  the  world's  influence  as 
we  can  ;  and  it  is  also  wise  to  carry  with  us  such  holy 
thoughts  and  feelings  as  may  act  as  a  screen  to  ward  off  the 
excessive  power  of  evil.  We  have  no  wish  to  become  as  black 
as  the  inhabitants  of  this  sun-burnt  clime,  seeing  we  are  not 
numbered  with  them,  but  are  here  as  strangers  and  foreigners. 

Wash  me,  most  blessed  Jesus,  in  that  sacred  bath  which 
thou  hast  prepared  ;  for  it  will  make  me  fair  forever.     Black 


244  FLOWEKS   FROM   A 

as  I  now  am,  I  shall  then  be  whiter  than  snow.     Renew  me, 
and  I  shall  be  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing. 

THE   FOOT-BACE. 

''  A  true  racer  does  not  use  to  stand  still,  or  look  behind  him,  to 
see  how  much  of  the  way  is  already  past,  or  to  see  how  much  the 
other  runners  come  short  of  him,  but  he  sets  to  his  business  to  get 
through  the  remainder  of  the  race." 

The  claim  to  perfection,  which  some  have  started,  raises  a 
serious  question  as  to  whether  they  have  ever  entered  that  race, 
of  which  the  apostle  Paul  said,  ''  Brethren,  I  count  not  myself 
to  have  apprehended  :  but  this  one  thing  I  do,  forgetting 
those  things  which  are  behind  and  reaching  forth  unto  those 
things  which  are  before,  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize 
of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus/*'  Surely  these 
men  must  be  of  another  order  to  St.  Paul,  or  must  be  upon 
another  race-course.  He  saw  much  which  he  had  not  attained, 
and  they  see  nothing  ;  he  w^as  all  for  pressing  on,  and  they  are 
at  the  mark  already.  They  speak  fluently  of  their  perfection, 
and  he  groaned  over  his  imperfection. 

As  for  us,  we  have  no  belief  in  these  pretenders,  nor  do  we 
wish  to  think  about  them.  We  would  have  nothing  to  con- 
sider but  the  goal  and  the  prize.  We  may  not  rest  in  what  we 
are,  we  must  hasten  on  to  w^hat  we  ought  to  be.  Attainments 
and  successes  will  breed  no  pride  if  we  treat  them  as  Paul  did, 
when  he  regarded  them  as  ''things  which  are  behind,''  and 
therefore  forgot  them.  ''  Onward  "  be  our  watchword.  Satis- 
faction, glorying,  ease— these  are  not  to  be  m.entioned  among 
us.  Swift  as  arrows  from  the  bow  we  would  speed  toward  the 
mark  of  our  hio'h  calling.  The  last  thing  that  a  man  may  utter 
is  that  fatal  ''  Rest  and  be  thankful  ;"  for  it  marks  the  end  of 
a  progress  which  ought  to  last  through  life. 

Lord,  if  I  am  ever  tempted  to  be  satisfied,  scourge  me  into 
a  holy  restlessness^  and  make  the  very  ground  beneath  me 
burning  to  my  feet.  With  my  Lord  before  me,  I  am  a  traitor 
to  him  if  I  chink  the  pieces  of  silver  in  my  hand,  and  accept 
a  present  satisfaction  in  barter  for  higher  things. 

THE  WAERIOR'S  THOUGHTS. 
*'  A  certain  Grecian  warrior,  wherever  he  walked,  was  thinking  of 
battles  ;  he  asked  himself  continually,  if  he  should  be  assaulted  on 
such  a  piece  of  ground  how  he  would  model  and  dispose  his  army  for 
his  defence.  A  Christian  should  be  thinking  of  heaven,  how  he  may 
get  thither,  and  what  he  shall  enjoy  there." 

To  be  engrossed  in  a  pursuit  is  the  readiest  way  to  success 


PURTTAK'S   GARDEN".  M5 

in  it.  We  are  thoroughly  alive  unto  God  when  we  get  so  far 
as  even  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  sleep  eternal  life.  Where  our 
treasure  is  there  will  our  heart  be  also.  The  object  which  is 
supreme  in  our  heart  will  continually  make  itself  prominent  in 
our  life.  When  Joshua  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  he  gave 
him  a  military  challenge,  for  his  whole  soul  was  in  the  war. 
The  color  of  our  chosen  occupation  will  tinge  our  whole 
existence.  *' For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,''  saith  the  apostle. 
The  musician  will  be  moving  his  fingers  upon  the  table  as  if 
he  were  playing  a  tune  ;  the  sailor  will  roll  about  in  his  walk 
on  shore  as  if  he  were  still  on  board  ship  ;  and  even  so  will  the 
soul  that  communes  with  God  rehearse  its  joys  when  it  is  busy 
with  other  matters.  When  God  and  heaven  bear  our  thoughts 
away,  it  is  good  evidence  that  we  are  preparing  for  eternal 
felicity  ;  for  he  must  needs  be  soon  in  heaven  who  already 
hath  heaven  in  him.  When  heavenly  things  take  up  our  souls, 
our  souls  will  soon  be  taken  up  to  heaven. 

Lord,  let  me  think  of  thee  and  thy  word  all  the  while  I  am 
awake  ;  and  when  I  sleep,  if  I  dream  at  all,  let  my  imagination 
still  tend  thy  way.  Oh  that  I  were  fully  and  only  filled  with 
thee,  till  everywhere  and  at  all  times  my  every  thought  were 
thine  !     With  all  thy  ransomed  ones  I  would  sing — 

*'  In  full  and  glad  surrender  we  give  ourselves  to  thee, 
Thine  utterly,  and  only,  and  evermore  to  be  1 
O  Son  of  God,  who  lovest  us,  we  will  be  thine  alone, 
And  all  we  are,  and  all  wq  have,  shall  henceforth  be  thine  own  !'* 

NATUKE  TENDS  TO  ITS  AUTHOE. 

**  Trees,  that  receive  life  from  the  earth  and  the  sun,  send  forth 
their  branches  to  receive  the  sun,  and  spread  their  roots  into  the 
earth,  which  brought  them  forth.  Fishes  will  not  live  out  of  the 
water  that  breedeth  them.  Chickens  are  no  sooner  out  of  the  shell 
but  they  shroud  themselves  under  the  feathers  of  the  hen  by  whom 
they  were  at  first  hatched.  The  little  lamb  runneth  to  its  dam, 
though  there  be  a  thousand  sheep  of  the  same  wool  and  color  ;  as  if 
it  said,  '  Here  I  received  that  which  I  have,  and  here  will  I  seek  that 
which  I  want.'  By  such  a  native  inbred  desire  do  the  saints  run  to 
God  to  seek  a  supply  of  strength  and  nourishment." 

This  is  an  excellent  lesson  for  every  believer.  All  our 
instincts  should  lead  us  to  our  God.  We  ought  not  to  need 
so  much  as  directing,  much  less  impelling,  toward  the  great 
source  of  our  spiritual  life.  We  ought  as  naturally  to  seek 
after  the  Lord  from  day  to  day  as  the  spark  seeks  the  sun,  or 
the  river  the  ocean,  or  the  sheep  its  pasture,  or  the  bird  its 
nest.     ''  O  God,  thou  art  my  God  ;  early  will  I  seek  thee," 


246  FLOWERS   FKOM   A 

should  be  the  perpetual  cry  of  our  heart.  Onward  and  up- 
ward be  still  our  movement,  a  secret  ardor  ever  burning  in  us 
toward  the  Lord  our  God. 

To  whom  else  should  we  go  ?  This  question  has  never 
received  an  answer,  and  never  will  receive  one.  We  are 
bound  to  dwell  in  God  or  perish.  As  we  find  all  in  God,  so 
we  find  nothing  out  of  him.  What  the  fish  would  be  without 
water,  or  the  chick  without  the  hen,  or  the  tree  without  the 
earth — that  we  should  be  without  our  God.  It  is  the  height 
of  folly  for  us  to  attempt  a  thought  alone  ;  there  is  but  one 
greater  absurdity,  and  that  is  to  venture  upon  an  act  without 
him.  ''  Abide  in  me"  is  the  voice  of  him  in  whom  our  life 
abides.     Let  us  not  be  deaf  to  his  tender  warning. 

SUNSHINE. 

*' A  little  sunshine  enliveneth  the  poor  creatures,  the  birds  fMi 
a-singing  that  were  melancholy  and  sad  before  in  cloudy  weather ; 
all  things  are  cheered  and  comforted  when  the  sun  shines." 

Just  so.  How  often  have  we  seen  the  change  which  is 
wrought  by  clear  shining  after  rain  !  It  has  seemed  as  though 
heaven  had  come  down  in  love  to  dry  earth's  tears  and  bedeck 
her  with  raiment  of  fair  colors.  Spiritually,  the  type  is 
carried  out  in  delightful  fashion.  The  Lord's  appearing  sheds 
a  glory  upon  our  infirmities,  and  transforms  our  trials  into 
triumphs.  His  presence  removes  the  dulness  which  else  hangs 
like  a  cloud  on  the  best  of  our  conditions,  and  in  this  way 
lightens  all  our  glooms.  His  countenance  is  to  his  saints  as  a 
morning  without  clouds,  it  brings  with  it  a  surprise  of  joy. 
Till  Jesus  communed  with  me  I  did  not  know  that  I  could  be 
so  happy.  I  heard  more  birds  singing  in  my  soul  than  I  had 
ever  dreamed  could  have  dwelt  within  me.  Never  had  my  sad 
soul  imagined  that  human  life  was  half  as  capable  of  divine 
bliss,  or  earth  within  a  thousand  leagues  so  near  to  heaven. 
Truly  it  is  worth  while  to  have  lived,  if  for  nothing  more  than 
to  hav^e  had  an  hour's  fellowship  with  the  Well-beloved. 
Earthly  joy  is  no  more  to  be  compared  with  it  than  a  lamp  in 
a  coal-mine  can  be  likened  to  the  sun  in  the  heavens. 

Oh,  my  God,  I  thank  thee  for  having  made  me,  because 
thou  hast  made  me  able  to  walk  in  the  light  of  thy  counte- 
nance. Now  thou  dost  shine  upon  me,  my  summer-tide  has 
come. 


247 


DOGS  AND   CATS  WHEEE   THERE   AEE   NO   CHILDEEN. 

**  They  that  lack  children  take  pleasure  in  little  dogs  and  cats." 

We  have  known  houses  turned  into  stables  or  menageries  by 
those  whose  love,  which  should  hav^e  gone  out  to  human  beings, 
went  out  to  dogs  and  cats.  People  must  have  objects  of  affec- 
tion, and  if  they  have  not  the  better  they  choose  the  worse. 
Those  who  disdain  to  live  for  God  will  live  for  their  own 
bellies.  Those  who  do  not  care  for  the  great  doctrines  of 
revelation  are  usually  disputatious  over  trifling  opinions. 
Those  who  do  not  spend  their  time  and  strength  in  winning 
souls  for  Jesus  often  attach  an  inordinate  importance  to  a 
national  habit  or  a  sanitary  regulation.  If  we  do  not  live  in 
all  seriousness  for  a  noble  object,  the  probability  is  tbat  we 
shall  industriously  trifle  our  lives  away  in  doing  nothing.  Are 
we  prepared  for  this  ?  Will  we  be  numbered  with  cat-wor- 
shippers and  dog- adorers  ? 

My  God,  grant  me  grace  to  love  thy  children,  and  make 
much  of  them.  Save  me  from  petty  and  paltry  objects.  May 
the  objects  of  my  life's  pursuit  be  worthy  of  an  immortal 
spirit,  worthy  of  an  heir  of  heaven.  Deliver  me  from  whims 
and  hobbies,  and  nerve  me  for  the  infinite  possibilities  which 
are  opening  up  before  me  ! 

THE   GARDENER  AND   THE   ROOTS. 
''  A  gardener  knoweth  what  roots  are  in  the  ground  long  before 
they  appear,  and  what  flowers  they  will  produce." 

Look  over  the  garden  in  winter,  and  you  will  not  know  that 
there  is  any  preparation  for  spring  ;  but  the  gardener  sees  in 
his  mind's  eye=— here  a  circle  of  golden  cups,  as  if  set  out  for  a 
royal  banquet,  and  there  a  cluster  of  snow-white  beauties, 
drooping  with  excess  of  modest  purity.  His  eye  knows  where 
the  daffodils  and  anemones  lie  asleep,  waiting  to  rise  in  all 
their  loveliness  ;  and  he  has' learned  the  secret  of  the  primroses 
and  the  violets,  who  wait  in  ambush  till  the  first  warm  breath 
of  spring  shall  bid  them  reveal  themselves.  Even  thus  doth 
the  Lord  know  his  hidden  ones  long  before  the  day  of  their 
manifestation  with  him.  He  sees  his  church  before  his  min- 
isters see  it,  and  declares  concerning  heathen  Corinth,  ^'  I  have 
much  people  in  this  city.'' 

The  figure  may  be  applied  to  the  garden  of  the  soul  What 
graces  are  planted  in  the  renewed  heart,  waiting  their  season, 
the  Creator  of  those  graces  knows  right  well  !  He  sees  our 
faith,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  patience,  long  before  we  can  see 


248  FLOWERS   PROH   A 

them  ;  yea,  and  lie  discerns  tbem  when  we  ourselves  question 
their  existence.  He  not  only  knows  them  that  are  his,  but  all 
that  is  his  within  them.  Nothing  of  his  implanting  is  hidden 
from  his  inspection.  Bulbs  and  seeds  of  holiness  are  sown  in 
the  righteous,  and  therefore  are  out  of  their  sight  ;  but  he  that 
placed  them  where  they  are  has  marked  the  spot,  and  not  one 
of  them  shall  die.  Expectantly  he  waits  to  see  his  people's 
lives  become  ''  as  beds  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers." 

Lord,  it  is  because  thou  knowest  all  things  that  thou  knowest 
that  I  love  thee.  Wert  thou  not  omniscient,  I  fear  thou  hadst 
not  discovered  my  sadly  feeble  love,  buried  r^  it  is  beneath  so 
much  sin  and  carnality.  Lord,  cause  the  sacred  seed  to  grow, 
and  then  I  too  shall  be  assured  of  its  existence,  and  my  present 
questions  and  doubts  shall  flee  away  ! 

KESPONSIBILITY  OF  SEEVANTS. 

'*  If  a  rich  farmer  set  a  poor  man  to  work  to  dig  a  ditch,  or  cast  tip 
a  bank  ;  if  he  be  afterward  troubled  for  it,  his  master  is  concerned  to 
bear  him  harmless.  David  saith,  '  O  Lord,  txulj  I  am  thy  servant  ; 
I  am  thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thine  handmaid  :  thou  hast  loosed 
my  bonds.'  While  we  are  engaged  about  our  Master's  business,  and 
in  his  work,  he  is  engaged  to  protect  us,  and  bear  us  out  in  it." 

If  what  we  do  is  done  under  the  command  of  God,  the 
responsibility  of  its  result  does  not  lie  with  us.  He  who  made 
the  law  will  answer  for  those  who  keep  it.  If  a  man  should, 
through  obedience  to  the  law  of  the  Sabbath,  lose  his  situation, 
his  poverty  would  be  no  fault  of  his.  If  through  strict  honesty 
he  should  be  despised  of  his  employer,  and  forfeit  his  place, 
he  need  not  blame  himself  for  his  dismission.  These  things 
are  to  be  taken  joyfully  as  a  part  of  our  living  sacrifice  to  God. 
We  need  not  fear  that  God  w^ill  fail  to  justify  us  if  we  walk  in 
the  way  of  his  commandments.  Our  quarrel  is  his  quarrel  if  it 
be  occasioned  by  our  following  his  orders.  Jesus  asks  of  every 
persecutor,  *'  Why  persecutest  thou  me  ?''  When  his  servants 
are  molested  he  is  wounded.  He  will  see  us  through  with  the 
business,  and  teach  our  opposers  that  in  us  they  oppose  him 
also. 

When  we  go  a  way  of  our  own  choosing,  w^e  must  bear  our 
own  hazard  ;  but  when  our  path  is  mapped  out  for  us,  we  have 
the  Lord  engaged  with  us,  and  his  name  and  honor  would  be 
compromised  should  we  fail.  Oh,  happy  condition  !  We 
are  in  the  same  boat  with  Jesus.  lie  bade  us  trust,  promising 
us  salvation  by  faith,  and,  as  we  have  trusted,  he  must  and 
will  save  us.     He  bade  us  come  out  from  the  world,  and,  as 


249 


we  have  come  out,  lie  must  be  a  Father  unto  us.  He  bids  us 
preach  the  gospel,  and,  as  we  do  preach  it,  he  must  save  men 
thereby.  Let  us  more  and  more  pledge  the  honor  of  his  name, 
resting  sure  that  he  will  never  allow  his  orders  to  be  dis- 
credited. 

ASKING  IN  A  PERSON'S  NAIVIE. 

"  If  you  send  a  child  or  servant  to  a  friend  for  a  thing  in  your 
name,  the  request  is  yours  ;  and  he  that  denieth  the  child  or  servaiit, 
denieth  you.  Jesus  Christ  hath  bidden  you  ask  in  his  name  ;  so  that 
in  effect  your  request  becomes  Christ's  request.  God  can  no  more 
deny  your  request  in  Christ's  name  than  he  can  deny  Christ  himself." 

This  is  the  true  meaning  of  asking  in  Christ's  name.  It  is  a 
higher  plea  than  —  for  Jesus'  sake.  The  one  pleads  the 
Saviour's  merit  as  a  penitent  sinner  ;  the  other  urges  his  au- 
thority as  a  favored  friend.  Jesus  permits  his  disciple  to  make 
request  in  his  Master's  stead,  using  the  name  and  dignity  of 
Christ  as  his  warrant.  Armed  w^ith  this  argument  our  prayers 
become  akin  to  the  intercession  of  the  Lord  himself.  Herein 
lies  at  once  the  power  of  prayer  and  also  its  limit.  For  who 
will  dare  to  use  "•  the  name  which  is  above  every  name"  except 
with  surest  right  to  do  so  ?  I  may  beg  for  Christ's  sake  when 
my  petition  is  somewhat  doubtful  ;  but  the  royal  seal  must  only 
be  set  to  requests  which  the  most  searching  examination  com- 
mends to  our  judgment  as  according  to  the  divine  promise,  and 
needful  for  God's  glory.  We  are  trusted  with  the  Prince's 
signet-ring,  but  gracious  discretion  must  be  used  in  its  employ- 
ment. Vv  hen  the  Spirit  of  God  prompts  the  desire,  and  faith 
sees  how  well  Jesus  deserves  the  blessing,  and  how  surely  he 
himself  would  have  sought  it  of  the  Father,  then  prayer  is 
power  invincible,  for  it  is  the  pierced  hand  held  open  before 
the  Father's  approving  heart.  Cannon  have  been  called  "  the 
last  arguments  of  kings  ;"  but  the  name  of  Jesus  is  the 
master -argument  of  the  King's  children. 

Lord  Jesus,  cause  me  to  know  in  my  daily  experience  the 
glory  and  sweetness  of  thy  name,  and  then  teach  me  how  to 
use  it  in  my  prayer,  so  that  I  may  be  even  like  Israel,  a  prince 
prevailing  wnth  God.  Thy  name  is  my  passport,  and  secures 
me  access  ;  thy  name  is  my  plea,  and  secures  me  answer  ;  thy 
name  is  my  honor,  and  secures  me  glory.  Blessed  name,  thou 
ait  honey  in  my  mouth,  music  in  my  ear,  heaven  in  my  heart, 
and  all  in  all  to  all  my  being  ! 


250  FLOWERS   PROM   A 

A  FATHEE'S  LOYE   AND  A   CHILD'S  LOYE. 
'  *  A  father  cannot  forget  how  many  children  he  hath.     He  that 
leadeth  us  by  the  hand  wherever  we  go  knoweth  where  and  how  we 
go."    ^     ^ 

This  is  a  very  simple  statement,  but  exceedingly  full  of 
consolation.  We,  being  evil,  do  not  forget  our  children  ;  we 
know  our  own,  and  do  not  omit  even  the  last  little  one  from 
our  tender  memory  ;  how  much  more  shall  our  heavenly 
Father  think  upon  all  his  own,  and  have  them  under  his 
watchful  eye  !  It  is  a  pleasure  to  us  to  think  of  our  children, 
for  they  are  parts  of  ourselves.  We  could  almost  as  soon 
cease  to  be  as  cease  to  remember  them.  Our  Father  above  is 
all  a  Father  can  be  and  more  :  we  are  poor  and  needy,  yet  the 
Lord  thinketh  upon  us. 

It  were  well  if  the  converse  of  all  this  were  true.  We,  alas  ! 
as  children,  too  often  forget  our  Father,  and  bear  ourselves 
toward  him  otherwise  than  is  meet.  If  we  treated  our  God  as 
good  children  do  a  loving  father,  our  conduct  toward  him 
would  lead  us  to  a  holy,  happy  life.  We  should  long  to  be 
with  him,  and  to  be  happy  in  his  company  ;  we  should  be 
jealous  for  the  honor  of  his  name,  and  feel  pleased  when  we 
heard  others  extol  him.  He  would  be  our  rest,  confidence, 
pattern,  love,  and  delight.  Miss  Havergal,  in  her  own  sweet 
way,  has  worked  out  the  ideal  treatment  of  a  father,  and  we  can 
readily  spiritualize  it. 

'  *  How  do  you  love  your  father  ? 
Oh,  in  a  thousand  ways  ! 
I  think  there's  no  one  like  him 

So  worthy  of  my  praise. 
I  tell  him  all  my  troubles, 

And  ask  him  what  to  do  ; 
I  know  that  he  will  give  to  me 
His  counsel  kind  and  true." 

Nor  does  the  relationship  merely  lead  us  to  expect  from  him, 
it  helps  us  to  yield  to  him  anything  which  he  desires  from  us. 

"  Then  every  little  service 

Of  hand,  or  pen,  or  voice, 
Becomes,  if  he  has  asked  it, 

The  service  of  my  choice. 
And  from  my  own  desires 

'Tis  not  so  hard  to  part, 
If  once  I  know  I  follow  so 

His  wiser  will  and  heart." 

How  it  helps  us  in  the  hour  of  trial  to  find  a  father  near  in 
all  the  tenderness  of  his  love  !  The  same  charming  poetess 
tells  us  in  a  succeeding  verse — 


puritan's  garde]^'.  251 

*  *  Once  I  was  ill  and  suffering 

Upon  a  foreign  shore, 
And  longed  to  see  my  father 

As  I  never  longed  before. 
He  came  :  his  arm  around  me  ; 

I  leaned  upon  his  breast  ; 
I  did  not  long  to  feel  more  strong. 

So  sweet  that  childlike  rest." 

Whatsoever  a  tender  daughter  would  be  to  a  kind,  con- 
siderate father,  that  we  should  spiritually  be  unto  our  Lord. 
Let  us  muse  over  the  model,  and  learn  from  it  what  our  highest 
relationship  deserves  at  our  hand. 

Lord,  I  would  reflect  thy  love  !  Help  me  to  remember 
thee,  because  thou  dost  withoat  fail  remember  me. 

LOOKERS-ON  AND   PLAYERS. 

' '  They  that  stand  upon  the  shore  may  easily  say  to  those  that  are 
in  the  midst  of  the  waves,  and  conflicting  for  life  or  death,  Sail  thus 
and  sail  thus  !  But  what  of  that  r  When  we  are  well  we  give  coun- 
sel to  the  sick  ;  but,  if  we  were  ill  ourselves,  how  should  we  act  ?' ' 

Yes,  we  are  usually  ready  with  our  good  advice  for  others  ; 
but  w^hat  are  we  willing  to  do  ourselves  ?  Men  who  never  smelt 
powder  know  exactly  how  a  commander  should  have  acted  in  a 
battle  ;  probably  they  would  themselves  have  run  away  at  the 
first  shot.  Safely  on  land,  the  wiseacre  decides  most  positive- 
ly how  the  pilot  should  steer  —  which  sail  should  be  hoisted, 
and  which  should  be  put  away.  If  he  were  on  board  the 
laboring  bark,  he  w^ould  be  lying  down  below,  forgotten  as  a 
dead  man  out  of  mind.  This  ought  to  render  us  a  little  more 
difiident  in  our  advising.  It  is  rather  aw^kward  when,  after 
having  prescribed  for  others,  we  fall  sick  ourselves,  and  then 
refuse  our  own  remedies  :  yet  many  have  done  so.  It  is  sad 
when  the  preacher  of  patience  is  himself  petulant,  and  the 
advocate  of  faith  is  himself  dubious.  No  :  we  must  teach 
more  by  our  example  than  by  our  advice,  or  else  we  shall  be 

;  poor  pleaders  for  the  right. 

i  Few  things  are  more  galling  than  to  be  at  our  wits^  end  in 
managing  a  diflScult  matter,  and  then  to  be  charged  and  coun- 
selled by  some  intermeddling  novice  who  could  not  even  under- 
stand our  difiiculty,  much  less  assist  us  out  of  it.  When 
Balaam's  ass  spoke,  it  uttered  sound  sense,  and  we  shall  never 
welcome  the  speech  of  another  such  animal  until  it  has  as 
weighty  a  message  to  deliver.  Alas  !  we  do  not  always  suffer 
fools  gladly  :  though  suifer  them  we  do.     We  have  wished 


252  FLOWERS   FKOM   A 

ourselves  deaf  at  times  when  the  most  idle  nonsense  has  been 
proffered  us  in  the  moment  of  greatest  suspense. 

O  Lord  Jesus,  we  bless  thee  that  thy  counsel  comes  to  us  as 
that  of  experience  !  Thou  art  on  the  sea  with  us.  Thou  hast 
the  tone  and  manner  of  one  who  is  tied  in  us  and  with  us. 
Our  Counsellor  art  thou  ;  and  thus  our  surest  helper,  because 
thy  counsel  is  infallible. 

\/  THE   LUTE  UNTUNED. 

*'  As  a  lute  that  is  not  played  upon,  but  hangs  by  the  wall,  soon 
grows  out  of  order  for  want  of  use  ;  so,  if  we  do  not  constantly  and 
diligently  exercise  ourselves  in  godliness,  our  hearts  grow  dead  and 
vain." 

It  is  the  old  story  of  the  unused  key.  It  would  seem  that 
there  is  no  worse  abuse  of  a  good  thing  than  to  abstain  from 
its  use.  While  it  lies  idle  it  lies  ill.  Grace  must  be  exercised 
toward  God  in  devout  contemplation,  wrestling  prayer,  or 
adoring  praise  ;  and  it  must  be  exercised  among  men  in 
patience,  zeal,  charity,  and  holy  example  ;  or,  like  an  arm 
which  has  long  been  bound  by  a  man's  side,  it  will  become 
withered.  Some  enemies  were  left  in  Canaan  for  the  sole 
reason  that  the  armies  of  Israel  might  not  forget  the  art  of 
war  ;  and  we,  too,  may  expect  troubles  to  exercise  our  graces 
in  conflict,  if  we  do  not  ourselves  exercise  them  in  happier 
service.  The  Lord  will  not  allow  the  inner  life  of  his  people 
to  degenerate  because  of  inaction  ;  nor  ought  we  to  allow  it. 
Loud  calls  to  energy  are  sounding  forth  on  every  hand.  A 
curse  will  come  upon  us,  like  that  invoked  upon  Meroz  of  old, 
if  we  come  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the 
Lord  against  the  mighty. 

To  return  to  our  author's  figure.  Are  we  like  a  lute  upon 
the  wall  ?  Are  the  strings  all  out  of  order  ?  Tune  us.  Lord, 
and  then  bring  music  out  of  us.  AYhy  should  a  single  instru- 
ment in  the  w^hole  concert  be  silent  when  the  Lord  is  to  be 
praised  ?  ^'  Awake  up,  my  glory  ;  awake,  psaltery  and  harp  : 
I  myself  will  awake  early." 

**  Be  near  me,  Lord,  and  tune  my  notes, 

And  make  them  sweet  and  strong, 
To  waft  thy  words  to  many  a  heart. 

Upon  the  wings  of  song. 
I  know  that  men  will  listen, 

For  my  very  heart  shall  sing. 
And  it  shall  be  thy  praise  alone. 

My  glorious  Lord  and  King.'* 


PURITAiT'S    GARDEJ^.  253 

THE   FISH  IN  A  PAIL. 

'*  We  are  now  imperfect  and  straitened  ;  like  a  fisji  in  a  pail,  or 
small  vessel  of  water,  which  cannot  keep  it  alive  :  it  would  fain  be  in 
the  ocean,  or  swimming  in  the  broad  and  large  rivers.  So  we  are 
pent  lip,  and  cannot  do  what  we  would  ;  but  we  long  for  a  larger 
estate,  namely,  to  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.  That  holi- 
ness which  we  have  now,  maketh  us  look  and  long  for  more  ;  and, 
surely,  this  desire  after  holiness  was  never  designed  for  our  torment  ; 
there  must  be  something  to  answer  to  the  desire  excited." 

It  is  even  so  ;  we  are  now  cribbed,  cabined,  and  confined, 
and  our  renewed  spirit  feels  itself  in  bondage.  The  fish  cannot 
half  so  much  desire  the  river  as  we  desire  a  nobler  sphere 
wherein  the  better  life  may  have  due  scope  and  range.  As  a 
lion  goeth  to  and  fro  in  his  den,  impatient  of  restraint,  so  doth 
our  spirit  move  restlessly  after  better  thing's.  We  are  not 
content  with  the  measure  of  our  liberty,  the  tether  of  our 
range.  We  are  like  the  young  chick  which  is  pecking  at  the 
shell  which  shuts  it  in  ;  we  perceive  that  there  is  very  much 
outside  of  our  prison-wall,  and  we  are  anxious  to  break  forth. 
Is  not  this  the  testimony  of  all  saintly  men  ?  Are  not  the 
bonds  felt  ?     Are  we  not  groaning  under  them  ? 

The  argument  of  our  author  is  well'  drawn,  and  incontro- 
vertible. God  does  not  create  desires  without  also  providing 
corresponding  objects  :  for  thirst  there  is  drink,  for  hunger 
there  is  food,  for  the  eye  there  is  light.  So  also  for  the  soul 
which  huno;ers  and  thirsts  after  righteousness  there  is  a  fillino;. 
The  renewed  heart  shall  yet  see  the  perfection  for  which  it 
pines,  and  the  holy  mind  shall  enjoy  the  communion  with  God 
for  which  it  pants. 

Be  glad,  O  my  heart,  because  of  thine  own  pangs  !  If  thou 
wert  now  content,  there  w^ould  be  in  thee  no  ensigns  and 
evidences  of  better  things  yet  to  be  revealed.  Thy  groanings 
and  yearnings  are  prophecies  of  guaranteed  perfection.  If 
thou  wert  of  the  earth,  thou  wouldst  be  satisfied  with  earth  ; 
but  because  thou  hast  a  higher  nature,  thou  art  not  at  home 
amid  these  lower  things.  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  for 
thee,  a  home  for  thee,  a  heaven  for  thee. 

THE   SENTINEL. 

"  ^Vhen  a  sentinel  is  set  upon  the  watch,  he  must  not  come  off 
without  the  commander's  leave,  and  till  he  is  discharged  by  author- 
ity. God  hath  set  us  in  a  vv^atch,  and  we  must  not  leave  our  ground 
till  we  have  done  all  that  is  enjoined  upon  us,  and  receive  a  fair  dis- 
charge." 

The  instance  of  the  sentinel  in  Pompeii,  whose  skeleton  was 


254  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

found  erect  at  the  city  gate,  when  all  but  he  had  fled,  need  not 
be  repeated  in  words  ;  but  it  should  be  copied  by  each  one  of 
us  in  his  life.  If  the  earth  should  reel,  it  is  ours  to  keep  our 
place.  If  set  to  preach  the  gospel,  let  us  maintain  the  truth, 
though  philosophy  should  thin  the  number  of  our  comrades  till 
we  remain  alone.  If  commanded  to  teach  a  few  little  children, 
let  us  be  as  faithful  to  our  trust  as  if  we  had  been  set  to  lead  a 
legion  of  angels.  Imagine  what  the  universe  would  be  if  the 
stars  forsook  their  marches,  and  the  sun  forbore  to  shine  ;  yet 
this  would  only  be  among  inanimate  objects  an  imitation  of  the 
conduct  of  men  who  quit  their  posts,  and  leave  their  work 
undone.  This  is  the  spirit  out  of  which  fiends  are  made  :  first 
neglect,  then  omission,  then  treachery  and  rebellion. 

It  is  such  an  honor  to  bear  his  Majesty's  commission  that 
King  Jesus  should  have  around  him  the  most  joyously  faithful 
band  of  servants.  ''  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it'' 
was  Mary's  advice  in  her  day,  and  the  spirit  of  it  should  abide 
with  all  Christians  to  the  end  of  time.  Where  God's  command 
has  fixed  us,  there  let  us  abide  at  all  hazards.  Our  life,  our 
honor,  and  our  heaven  lie,  not  in  rising  out  of  the  place  which 
our  Master  has  allotted  to  us,  but  in  fulfilling  its  duties  to  the 
uttermost.  A  sentinel  must  not  leave  his  post  even  to  gather 
pearls  or  diamonds  ;  nor  must  we  forsake  our  duty  in  order  to 
acquire  the  highest  honors.  It  matters  nothing  how  well  we 
have  done  other  things  if  we  neglect  the  thing.  God  bids  us 
do  this,  and  if  we  fail  it  will  be  no  excuse  to  be  able  to  say — 
we  have  done  that.  If  the  watcher  forsakes  his  post  it  will 
not  avail  that  he  climbed  a  mountain,  or  swam  a  river  :  he  was 
not  where  he  was  ordered  to  be. 

MAETYKS  IN  BEAES'  SKINS. 
*'It  was  a  fashion,  in  the  primitive  persecutions,  to  invest  Chris- 
tians with  bears'  skins,  and  then  to  bait  them  as  bears  ;  and  it  is  a 
usual  practice  of  Satan  and  his  instruments,  first  to  blast  the  reputa- 
tion of  religious  persons,  and  then  to  persecute  them  as  offenders." 

It  is  written  of  the  worthies  of  old  that  *'  they  had  trial  of 
cruel  mockings."  Teitullian  says  that  in  the  primitive  times 
the  saints  were  called  herds  of  asses,  vile  fellows,  the  disciples 
of  a  man  crucified,  Galileans,  Nazarites,  eaters  of  men's  flesh, 
and  drinkers  of  men's  blood.  The  heathen  painted  the  God 
of  the  Christians  with  the  head  of  an  ass,  and  with  a  book  in 
his  hand,  to  signify  that,  though  Christians  pretended  to 
knowledge,  they  were  a  company  of  fools. 

The  like  custom  remains  still.     Good  men  are  first  slandered 


PURITA^T^S    GARDE>s".  255 

and  then  censured.  They  lay  to  our  charge  deeds  which  we 
never  dreamed  of,  and  then  they  pile  on  the  adjectives  of 
denunciation,  and  condemn  us  without  mercv.  Thanks  be  to 
God,  a  saint  in  a  bear's  skin  is  none  the  less  a  saint  :  the  Lord 
knows  the  wolf  in  the  sheep's  skin,  and  the  sheep  in  the  bear's 
skin  :  he  is  not  deceived  by  falsehood  so  as  to  judge  his 
children  unjustly.  Not  even  for  the  present  are  the  reputa- 
tions of  the  godly  injured  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  as  for  the 
future,  they  shall  suffer  no  tarnishing.  Soon  there  shall  be  a 
resurrection  of  good  names  as  well  as  of  bodies  :  the  Lord  shall 
restore  the  honor  and  renown  of  each  slandered  believer. 

Meanwhile,  let  us  not  be  so  easily  led  into  harsh  judgments 
as  we  have  been.  Let  us  refuse  to  regard  our  own  brethren  as 
wild  beasts  because  wicked  men  thrust  the  bear's  skin  upon 
them.  From  us,  at  least,  let  them  receive  tokens  of  the 
charity  which  thinketh  no  evil.  Persistently  let  each  follower 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  say  of  reproach  cast  upon  a  brother,  ''  I 
will  not  believe  it."  A  believer  in  Christ  should  be  an  un- 
believer in  the  world' i  many  lies  :  this  rule  would  rob  slander 
of  half  its  power.  By  holy  confidence  in  our  fellow-Christians 
we  should  snap  the  bowstring  of  malice,  and  burn  its  arrows  in 
the  fire. 

As  for  ourselves,  we  are  not  made  of  such  pliant  stuff  that 
we  would  alter  our  course  to  escape  the  calumny  of  men.  AYe 
will  not  move  a  hair's-breadth  because  of 

*'  the  dread  of  tyrant  custom,  and  the  fear 
Lest  fops  shoTild  censure  us,  and  fools  should  sneer." 

PRIMING. 

* '  A  lower  degree  of  faith  maketh  way  for  a  higher,  as  the  priming 
of  the  wood  maketh  it  receptive  of  other  colors." 

Painters  often  use  a  paint  at  the  first  which  is  to  be  the 
preparation  for  quite  another  color  ;  red  is  commonly  thus 
employed.  So,  in  the  work  of  grace,  there  may  come  first  a 
dogmatical  faith  (as  Manton  calls  it),  which  receives  the  doc- 
trine of  the  word  of  God  as  truth.  This  does  not  save  the 
soul,  but  it  is  a  needful  preparative  for  that  receptive  and 
trusting  faith,  by  which  salvation  is  actually  received.  Dog- 
matic faith  is  the  priming  upon  which  faith  of  a  saving  color  is 
laid  by  the  Master-workman. 

Much  the  same  is  true  of  those  gracious  mfluences  by  which 
a  man  is  made  a  willing  and  attentive  hearer,  and  a  respecter  of 
the  Sabbath  and  of  the  worship   of  God.     All  this  may  exist 


256  FLOWERS    PKOM    A 

and  yet  there  may  be  no  saving  faitli  ;  still  it  is  the  *'  priming" 
for  the  higher  work.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing.  Hence  the 
value  of  all  healthy  moral  influence,  instruction,  and  example. 
None  of  these  can  save,  but  they  may  lead  up  to  salvation. 
The  paralyzed  man  was  not  cured  by  his  friends,  or  by  the 
bed,  or  by  the  ropes,  but  these  brought  him  where  Jesus  was, 
and  so  he  was  healed.  Make  a  man  sober,  and  he  is  all  the 
more  likely  to  mind  the  preacher's  admonitions  :  give  him  the 
power  to  read,  and  he  may  study  the  Scriptures.  Tliese  things 
are  not  grace,  but  they  may  be  stepping-stones  to  grace  :  they 
are  not  the  permanent  color,  but  only  the  priming  ;  yet  it 
would  never  do  to  neglect  them  for  that  reason.  He  would  be 
an  unwise  painter  who  put  on  the  woodwork  nothing  but  the 
priming  ;  and  he  would  be  far  more  unwise  who  rested  content 
with  mere  preparatory  reforms.  Yet  in  order  to  avoid  this 
evil  it  is  not  necessary  to  forego  the  priming  altogether,  or  to 
neglect  anything  by  which  a  man  is  made  even  the  least  better. 
Oh  that  I  may  be  willing  to  do  anything  by  which  souls 
may  be  helped  to  a  blessing  !  If  I  cannot  actually  heal  the 
man's  wounds,  let  me  not  refuse  to  wash  them,  or  to  set  the 
wounded  man  upon  my  beast.  He  who  w^ill  only  do  those 
works  which  are  of  the  highest  and  utmost  use  is  not  so  humble 
as  he  should  be.  Lord,  make  mo  willing  to  wash  men's  feet, 
if  for  the  present  I  cannot  w^in  their  souls.  Incline  me,  my 
Lord,  to  teach  a  child  his  letters,  or  to  reason  with  a  drunkard, 
or  to  instruct  a  peasant  in  thrift,  since  any  one  of  these  may 
help  to  something  better  ;  for  I  know  that  everything  which  is 
pure  and  honest  is  on  the  side  of  Christ  and  his  salvation. 

MALICIOUS   WASTE. 

*' He  would  be  a  cruel  man  who  should  cast  his  proyisions  and 
superflaities  into  the  street,  and  deny  them  to  the  poor  ;  or  should 
allow  his  drink  to  run  into  the  kennel,  rather  than  that  the  thirsty 
should  taste  a  drop  of  it.  Such  are  we  to  God  ;  we  know  not  what 
to  employ  our  thoughts  upon,  and  yet  we  will  not  think  of  his  name. 
We  will  go  musing  upon  vanity  all  the  day  long,  and  thus  grinding 
chaff  rather  than  we  will  take  good  corn  into  the  mill." 

Well  put  !  We  meet  with  persons  upon  whose  hands  time 
hangs  heavily  ;  they  have  nothing  to  do,  and  are  dying  of 
ennui,  AVhy  will  they  thus  spend  their  time  in  waste  ?  Yet 
all  the  while  they  give  not  God  a  thought,  nor  spend  a  little 
time  in  reading  his  word,  or  in  conversing  with  him  in  prayer. 
Have  they  all  their  days  on  hand,  and  yet  will  they  not  afford 
their  God  an  hour  ?     Are  they  full  of  time  even  to  a  surfeit, 


PURITA]S^'S   GARDEK.  257 


and  yet  cannot  they  give  ten  minutes'  space  to  tlieir  Maker  ? 
Well  does  our  author  speak  of  cruelty.  Was  ever  such  cruelty 
on  earth  as  this  denial  of  an  hour  of  our  superfluous  time  to 
God  ?  AVill  we  rather  waste  it,  or  defile  it,  than  give  him  a 
portion  of  it  ?  Must  we  invent  pastimes  to  pass  time  away,  and 
yet  refuse  ten  minutes  for  meditation  ? 

Oh  t?iat  this  little  parable  might  meet  some  careless  eye, 
and  through  the  eye  pierce  the  heart  !  What,  will  you  sooner 
kill  time  at  cards,  or  with  a  novel,  or  in  utter  idleness,  than  do 
your  greatest  Benefactor  the  honor  of  thinkiug  of  him  ?  Is  he 
so  distasteful  to  you  that  you  count  it  a  bore,  a  burden,  a  bug- 
bear even  to  hear  his  sacred  name  ?  Come,  do  thyself  this 
favor — to  give  the  next  hour  to  God  and  to  thine  own  soul. 
Your  cruelty  to  your  God  will  prove  to  be  cruelty  to  yourself. 
Do  not  persevere  in  it,  but  yield  to  your  heavenly  Friend  a 
portion  of  your  weary  time.  May  be  you  will  thus  find  out  a 
way  of  never  being  weary  again  in  this  fashion — find  out,  in 
fact,  the  way  to  make  time  pass  like  a  river  which  flows  over 
golden  sands,  with  a  paradise  on  either  bank. 

SQUABBLING  WITH  A  SERVANT. 
^'  Many  a  time  a  brabble  falleth.  out  between  a  man  and  his  lusts  ; 
but  he  delayeth,  and  all   cometh  to  nothing.     In  a  heat  we  bid  a 
naughty  servant  begone  ;  but  he  lingereth,  and  before  the  next  morn- 
ing all  is  cool  and  quiet,  and  he  is  again  in  favor." 

Ungodly  men  have  their  quarrels  with  their  favorite  sins  on 
various  accounts  ;  but  these  are  like  children's  pets  with  one 
another,  soon  over,  because  they  come  of  passion,  and  not 
from  principle.  An  unholy  person  will  fall  out  with  sin 
because  it  has  injured  his  health  or  his  credit,  or  has  brought 
him  into  difficulties  with  his  neighbors  ;  but  when  these 
temporary  results  are  ended  he  falls  in  love  again  with  the 
same  iniquity.  Thus  we  have  seen  the  drunkard  loathing  his 
excess  when  his  eyes  were  red,  and  his  head  was  aching  ;  but 
ere  the  sun  went  down  the  quarrel  was  ended,  and  he  and 
Bacchus  were  rolling  in  the  gutter  together.  Our  enmity  to 
sin  should  be  based  upon  sound  knowledge  and  solid  reason, 
and  be  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  then  it  vv^ill  lead 
us  to  join  in  solemn  league  with  the  Lord  who  hath  war  with 
Amalek  throughout  all  generations.  AVe  must  have  no  peace 
with  sin  ;  nay,  not  with  the  least  sin.  Our  hate  of  evil  must 
be  as  everlasting  as  the  love  of  God. 

Of  old,  converted  Israelites  cast  their  idols  to  the  moles  and 
to  the  bats — away  from  sight  with  the  moles,  away  from  light 


258  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

with  the  bats.  Our  detestation  must  lead  us  to  put  sin  among 
the  dead  and  the  forgotten.  So  far  from  ever  entering  into 
amity  with  it,  we  must  regard  it  as  a  dead  and  corrupted  thing, 
forever  abandoned  to  silence  and  the  worm.  As  heaven  and 
hell  will  never  unite,  so  must  it  be  plain  that  a  saint  and  sin 
wull  never  come  together  on  any  terms  whatever. 

Lord,  I  pray  thee  keep  me  ever  in  desperate  earnest  in  my 
war  with  sin.  Forbid  that  I  should  trifle  in  this  conflict,  or 
grow  cold  in  it.  Let  me  be  bound  to  never-ending  warfare 
v/ith  my  own  sin,  and  never  may  I  be  pacified  till  Christ  has 
utterly  crushed  the  foe.  Like  thy  servant  David,  I  would  hate 
every  false  way. 

THE  RIVER  SWOLLEN  BY  BEING  DAMMED. 

**  Corruption,  the  more  it  is  opposed  the  more  it  stormeth  and 
groweth  outrageous  ;  as  a  river  swell eth  by  reason  of  dams  and 
banks,  which  are  raised  against  it.  Corruptions  rage  against  re- 
straints till  the  floods  break  loose." 

This  figure  is  a  good  one.  Corrupt  desires  will  often  lie 
quiet  till  they  are  earnestly  opposed,  and  then  they  swell  and 
rage.  The  gracious  man  sets  himself  with  resolution  to  over- 
come a  habit,  and,  like  a  beast  at  bay,  it  fights  tooth  and  nail 
as  if  for  dear  life.  The  more  he  prays,  the  more  he  mortifies 
himself;  the  more  he  avoids  the  sin,  the  more  does  it  appear 
to  force  itself  upon  him.  The  water  flows  easily  enough  down 
the  unimpeded  bed  of  the  river,  and  it  will  readily  enough 
overflow  and  cover  the  meadows  ;  but  once  put  up  an  embank- 
ment, or  attempt  to  stem  the  torrent,  and  it  chafes  and  rages, 
and  displays  all  its  force.  So  sin  may  be  quiet  ;  but  when 
grace  enters  the  heart  it  revives,  resists,  and  raises  rebellion, 
setting  the  soul  into  a  horrible  tumuU. 

We  must  not  think  that  the  work  of  sanctification  has  ceased 
because  impetuous  passions  are  more  clearly  perceived,  and  the 
power  of  the  flesh  is  more  deeply  deplored.  It  is  possible  that 
the  energy  of  inbred  sin  may  become  all  the  more  apparent 
because  through  divine  grace  it  is  more  strenuously  resisted. 
When  the  vital  energy  is  grer.t,  it  throws  out  upon  the  surface 
diseases  which,  with  a  feebler  vitality,  would  have  lain  smoulder- 
ing within  :  when  spiritual  life  is  forceful,  it  hunts  to  the 
surface  evils  which  else  would  have  festered  in  the  heart. 

There  are  times  v/ith  the  ungodly  man  when  all  goes  smooth- 
ly, and  the  current  of  his  life  flows  placidly  ;  but,  neverthe- 
less, the  whole  stream  is  polluted  from  the  fountain-head  to  the 
outfall,  though  he  knows  it  not.     With  the  godly  man  life's 


259 


inward  stream  is  seldom  thus  deceitfully  smooth.  The  Chris- 
tian's old  nature  is  opposed  at  every  turn  by  his  faith,  repent- 
ance, prayers,  and  other  dams  and  embankments  of  grace  ; 
and  hence  the  dashing  of  the  waves,  and  the  roaring  and  the 
swelling  of  the  evil  torrent.  Even  the  pure  stream  of  the  river 
of  the  water  of  life,  which  flows  into  him  from  the  throne  of 
God,  for  a  while  only  creates  a  greater  tumult.  The  waters  will 
not  blend,  and  hence  they  contend  one  with  another  till  the 
man  is  placed  in  the  position  of  Paul's  ship  when  it  fell  into  a 
place  where  two  seas  met.  Truly,  the  entrance  of  Christ  into 
the  heart,  though  it  ends  in  ultimate  rest,  yet  for  a  while 
brings  not  peace,  but  a  sword. 

When  a  man  dreams  that  he  is  perfect,  and  therefore  ceases  to 
fight  against  his  secret  sins,  all  seems  well  ;  but  let  him  look 
into  the  depths  of  his  heart,  and  behold  the  corruptions  which 
jsl umber  there,  and  let  him  seek  to  expel  them  ;  and  a  battle 
■will  begin,  compared  with  which  the  strife  of  the  warrior  and 
the  garments  rolled  in  blood  are  as  nothing.  The  heart  is  rent 
in  pieces  by  the  opposing  parties,  neither  does  it  seem  possible 
to  live  because  of  the  conflict.  Let  us  not  despair  while  this 
fierce  contest  is  going  on  :  we  are  but  suffering  with  the 
universe  of  which  we  form  a  part,  for  ' '  the  whole  creation 
groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now."  These 
groans  and  pangs  are  bringing  on  that  glorious  birth  out  of 
which  shall  come  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth.  Even 
so  it  is  with  us  :  our  inward  travail  and  sore  conflict  will  work 
out  an  immortal  perfection,  which  is  the  consummation  of  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul.  When  the  waves  rage  terribly, 
let  us  remember  that  "  the  Lord  on  high  is  mightier  than  the 
noise  of  many  waters,  yea,  than  the  mighty  waves  of  the  sea. ' ' 
He  will  quell  the  opposition,  and  in  due  time  dry  up  the  rivers 
of  inbred  sin,  destroying  the  very  fountains  thereof,  and  giving 
to  his  people  ineffable  rest  and  unutterable  delight. 

O  my  Lord,  give  me  grace  to  curb  every  evil  tendency 
within  myself,  and  the  more  I  perceive  that  these  evil  affec- 
tions chafe  and  rebel,  the  more  determined  may  I  be  that  I 
will  dam  them  up,  and  that  they  shall  not  hav^e  their  way. 
Only  help  thou  me,  and  as  the  struggle  grows  more  arduous, 
let  thy  grace  become  more  plenteous.  Surely  in  this  conflict 
all  power  must  come  from  thee,  for  thou  alone  canst  impart 
the  strength  that  I  need.  Hast  thou  not  said,  ^'  Behold,  at 
my  rebuke  I  dry  up  the  sea,  I  make  the  rivers  a  wilderness  ?" 
Arise,  0  Lord,  let  not  sin  prevail,  but  get  to  thyself  the  victory 
in  me. 


260  FLOWERS   FHOM   A 

BABBI  JOSEPH'S  LOVE  TO  THE  SYNAGOGUE. 

*'  I  have  once  and  again  read  of  one  Kabbi  Joseph,  who,  being 
allured  by  the  hope  of  great  gain,  to  teach  Hebrew,  at  a  place  where 
there  was  no  synagogue,  is  said  to  have  brought  forth  this  Scripture 
as  his  reason  for  refusing  :  *  The  law  of  thy  mouth  is  better  unto  me 
than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver." 

Well  done,  Rabbi  Joseph  !  We  greatly  fear  that  there  are 
few  of  thy  kindred  who  are  of  thy  mind  ;  for  the  heart  of 
Israel  seems  to  be  set  upon  the  precious  metals.  Nor  can  we 
blame  Israel  much,  for  the  same  is  ail  too  true  concernincr  those 
who  call  themselves  Christians.  The  chink  of  guineas  is  rare 
music  even  to  them. 

The  greatest  worldly  advantages  cannot  compensate  for  the 
loss  of  spiritual  privileges,  and  yet  we  know  many  who  scarcely 
take  this  matter  into  consideration  in  the  choice  of  their  pur- 
suits and  positions  in  life. 

A  tradesman  is  earning  a  competence,  and  is  able  to  attend 
the  house  of  God,  and  to  give  part  of  his  time  and  talents  to 
the  service  of  the  church  ;  and  yet  he  thinks  it  to  be  advisable 
to  cumber  himself  with  extra  worldly  servitude,  and  thereby  to 
render  himself  unable  either  to  profit  the  church  or  to  be 
profited  himself  by  the  services  of  the  Lord's  house.  Is  this 
the  way  of  wisdom  ?  Can  this  man  say  that  God's  words  are 
more  desired  by  him  than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold  ? 

A  young  man  is  in  a  fair  position,  where  he  has  godly 
surroundings,  and  every  opportunity  for  spiritual  progress  ; 
and  yet,  for  the  sake  of  a  few  prounds  more  he  puts  himself 
into  an  un-Christian  household,  and  loses  every  opportunity  of 
uniting  with  his  brethren  in  holy  work  and  worship.  Is  this 
as  it  should  be  ?  Does  not  Rabbi  Joseph  greatly  shame  such  a 
backsliding  Ephraim  ? 

If  I  were  to  choose  a  dwelling-house  I  would  wish  to  be 
known  as  Justus  was — for  he  was  "  a  man  that  worshipped 
God,  whose  house  joined  hard  to  the  synagogue."  I  would 
hope  to  reverse  the  proverb,  and  prove  that  the  nearer  the 
church  the  nearer  to  God.  Of  course  one's  calling,  health,  or 
circumstances  might  compel  another  choice  ;  but  I  would  ever 
give  preference  to  a  habitation  near  to  a  gospel  ministry.  If 
I  were  to  choose  a  trade,  I  would  select  one  which  gave  me 
leisure  for  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  I  had  the  option 
of  my  condition  in  life,  I  would  rather  have  less  earth  and 
more  heaven  than  more  earth  and  less  heaven.  It  argues  a 
poor  state  of  spiritual  health  when  the  mass  of  Christian  pro- 
fessors estimate  their  position  solely  and  entirely  by  the  money 


which  it  yields  them.  Surely  they  know,  unless  they  are 
hypocrites  ingrain,  that  a  man's  life  consists  far  more  in  the 
devotion  \vhicii  he  enjoys  than  in  the  treasure  which  he  ac- 
cumulates. 

My  God,  grant  me  grace  ever  to  put  the  first  first,  and  the 
last  last.  Let  me  use  Paul's  scales,  which  were  the  balances  of 
the  sanctuary,  and  reckon  that  gain  to  be  loss  which  is  gained 
by  loss  of  communion  with  thee,  and  that  profit  to  be  unprofit" 
able  which  renders  me  less  profitable  to  thee. 

A  LEAN-TO  shed; 
"  Many  men  owe  their  religion,  not  to  grace,  but  to  the  favor  of 
the  times  ;  they  follow  it  because  it  is  in  fashion,  and  they  can  pro- 
fess it  at  a  cheap  rate,  because  none  contradict  it.  They  do  not 
build  upon  the  rock,  but  set  up  a  shed  leaning  to  another  man's 
house,  which  costs  them  nothing." 

The  idea  of  a  lean-to  religion  is  somewhat  rough,  but 
eminently  suggestive.  Weak  characters  cannot  stand  alone, 
like  mansions  ;  but  must  needs  lean  on  others,  like  the  miser- 
able shops  which  nestle  under  certain  Continental  cathedrals. 
Lender  the  eaves  of  old  customs  many  build  their  plaster  nests, 
like  swallows.  Such  are  good,  if  good  at  all,  because  their 
patrons  made  virtue  the  price  of  their  patronage.  They  love 
honesty  because  it  prov^es  to  be  the  best  policy,  and  piety 
because  it  serves  as  an  introduction  to  trade  with  saints.  Their 
religion  is  little  more  than  courtesy  to  other  men's  opinions, 
civility  to  godliness. 

Alas  for  an  age  when  this  sort  of  thing  abounds  !     It  is  an 

injury  to  the  architecture  of  godliness  to  be  encumbered  with 

these  pitiful  hovels.     As  parasites  suck  the  life  out  of  the 

goodly  tree,  so  do  these  pretenders  injure  those  to  whom  they 

cling  with  the  servile  homao-e  of  hirelino-  adulation.     To  them- 

11..  .      ^  ® 

selves  their  vain  profession  and  man-pleasing  are  a  presag'e  of 

destruction  :  for  at  the  last  day  all  must  fall  into  eternal  ruin 

which  has  not  its  own  foundation  on  the  rock.     Our  lives  will 

be  weighed  one  by  one  in  personal  judgment,  and  no  other 

man  can  add  an  ounce  to  aid  us  if  we  are  found  wanting.     The 

well-founded  and  well-compacted    structure    of   the    sincerely 

gracious  will  survive  the  time  when  once  more  the  Lord  shall 

shake  not  only  earth  but  also  heaven  ;  but  that  frail  fabric 

which  leans  on  mortal  aid  will  perish  in  that  dread  convulsion. 

Lord,  make  me  a  self-contained  man.     Supported  by  thee, 

and  by  thee  alone,  may  I  be   unmoved,  though  all  other  men 

should  leave  thee,   and  though  the  fashion  of   my  company 


362  FLOWERS   FROM  A 

should  be  opposed  to    all  godliness.     Then  sbalt  thou  have 
glory  through  me. 

EICHES  OF  CHILDEEN  AND  IVIEN. 
"  The  more  abundance  of  truly  valuable  things  a  man  hath,  the 
mora  he  hath  of  true  riches  ;  a  child  counteth  himself  rich  when  he 
hath  a  great  many  pins,  and  points,  and  cherry-stones,  for  these  suit 
his  childish  age  and  fancy  ;  a  worldly  man  counteth  himself  rich 
when  he  hath  a  great  store  of  gold  and  silver,  or  lands  and  heritages, 
or  bills  and  bonds  ;  but  a  child  of  God  counteth  himself  rich  v/hen 
he  hath  God  for  his  Portion,  Christ  to  be  his  Kedeemer,  and  the 
Spirit  for  his  Guide,  Sanctifier,  and  Comforter  ;  v/hich  is  as  much 
above  a  carnal  man's  estate  in  the  world,  as  a  carnal  man's  estate  is 
above  a  child's  toys  and  trifles  ;  yea,  infinitely  more." 

It  is  above  all  things  desirable  that  we  adopt  a  correct  scale 
of  estimates.  When  we  make  our  personal  audit,  w^e  shall  fall 
into  gTievous  error  if  the  principles  of  our  reckoning  are  not 
thoroughly  accurate.  If  we  reckon  brass  as  silver,  and  silver 
as  gold,  we  shall  dream  that  we  are  rich  w^hen  we  are  in 
penury.  In  taking  stock  of  our  own  condition,  let  us  be  sure 
only  to  reckon  that  for  riches  which  is  really  riches  to  us. 
"Wealth  to  the  worldling  is  not  wealth  to  the  Christian.  His 
currency  is  different,  his  vaulables  are  of  another  sort. 

Am  I  to-day  poorer  in  money  than  I  was  ten  years  ago  ; 
and  am  I  at  the  same  time  more  humble,  more  patient,  more 
earnest,  more  believing  ?  Then  set  me  down  as  a  richer  man. 
Have  my  worldly  goods  largely  increased  during  the  last  few 
years  ?  Am  I  some  thousands  of  pounds  in  advance  of  my 
former  position  ?  but  am  I  also  more  proud,  more  carnal- 
minded,  more  lukewarm,  more  petulant  ?  Then  I  must  write 
myself  down  as  a  poorer  man,  whatever  men  may  think  of  my 
estate.  A  Christian's  riches  are  within  him.  External  belong- 
ings are  by  no  means  a  sure  gain  to  a  man.  A  horse  is  none 
the  better  off  for  gilded  trappings  ;  and  a  man  is,  in  very 
truth,  none  the  richer  for  sumptuous  surroundings.  Paul  w^as 
richer  than  Croesus,  when  he  w^as  able  to  say,  *'  I  know  both 
ho^v  to  be  abased,  and  I  know  how"  to  abound  :  everywhere 
and  in  all  things  I  am  instructed  both  to  be  full  and  to  be 
hungry,  both  to  abound  and  to  suffer  need. ' '  Such  contentment 
sii! passes  riches.  Outwardly  Paul  was  ''  poor,''  but  inasmuch 
as  he  was  ^'  making  many  rich''  he  must  have  been  rich  him- 
self ;  for  nothing  can  come  out  of  a  man  which  is  not  in  him. 
Solomon  was  a  very  Lazarus,  when,  after  summing  up  all  his 
possessions  and  delights,  he  was  compelled  to  add,  ''  Vanity  of 
vanities,  all  is  vanity  !" 


GARDEN.  263 

If  a  man  should  labor  to  be  rich  after  the  African  fashion, 
and  should  accumulate  a  large  store  of  shells  and  beads  ;  yet 
when  he  came  home  to  England  he  would  be  a  beggar,  even 
though  he  had  a  shipload  of  such  rubbish.  So  he  who  gives  his 
heart  and  soul  to  the  accumulation  of  gold  and  silver  coin  is  a 
beggar  when  he  comes  into  the  spiritual  realm,  where  such 
round  medals  are  reckoned  as  mere  forms  of  earth,  non-current 
in  heaven,  and  of  less  value  than  the  least  of  spiritual  blessings. 

AYe  have  read  that  when  Bernard  visited  a  monastery  of 
ascetic  monks,  they  were  shocked  because  the  saddle  on  which 
he  rode  was  most  sumptuously  adorned.  They  thought  that 
this  ill  became  his  profession  as  a  meek  and  lowly  man.  Judge 
of  their  surprise  and  satisfaction  when  he  told  them  that  he 
had  never  so  much  as  noticed  what  it  was  whereon  he  sat. 
The  fact  was,  that  the  horse  and  saddle  were  not  his  own,  but 
had  been  lent  to  him  by  his  uncle,  and  their  nature  had  not 
been  perceived  by  him  during  the  whole  of  his  journey.  This 
is  the  way  to  use  all  earthly  treasure,  making  small  account 
w^hether  we  have  it  or  not  ;  even  as  Paul  says,  * '  It  remaineth, 
that  both  they  that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none  ; 
and  they  that  weep,  as  though  they  wept  not  ;  and  they  that 
rejoice,  as  though  they  rejoiced  not  ;  and  they  that  buy,  as 
though  they  possessed  not  ;  and  they  that  use  this  world,  as 
not  abusing  it  :  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away." 
Our  goods  are  good  if  we  do  not  account  them  our  highest 
good.  Even  Jonah's  gourd  did  him  good  until  he  quarrelled 
with  God  about  it. 

O,  my  Lord,  let  me  not  merely  talk  thus,  and  pretend  to 
despise  earthly  treasure,  when  all  the  while  I  am  hunting  after 
it  ;  but  grant  me  grace  to  live  abov^e  these  things,  never  setting 
my  heart  upon  them,  nor  caring  whether  I  have  them,  or  have 
them  not  ;  but  exercising  all  ray  energy  in  pleasing  thee,  and 
in  gaining  those  things  which  thou  dost  hold  in  esteem.  Give 
me,  I  pray  thee,  the  riches  of  thy  grace  that  I  may  at  last 
attain  to  the  riches  of  thy  glory,  through  Christ  Jesus. 

A  PBINCELY   CAEATEE. 

**  To  be  carved  for  at  table  by  a  great  prince  would  be  counted  as 
great  a  favor  as  the  meal  itself.  To  take  outward  blessings  out  of 
God's  hand,  to  see  that  he  remembereth  us,  and  sendeth  in  our  pro- 
vision at  every  turn  ;  this  endeareth  the  mercy,  and  increaseth  onr- 
delight  therein." 

What,  indeed,  would  most  men  give  if  they  could  say, 
*'  The  Queen  herself  carved  for  me,  and  was  most  anxious  that 


2G4  PLOWERS   FROM   A 

I  should  be  well  supplied  V^  But  each  believer  has  the  Lord 
himself  for  his  Provider.  He  loads  our  table,  aad  fills  ours 
cup.  Providence  is  no  other  than  God  providing.  He  meas- 
ures out  our  joys,  weighs  our  sorrows,  appoints  our  labors,  and 
selects  our  trials.  There  is  no  morsel  on  the  saint's  plate  which 
is  not  of  the  Lord's  carving,  unless  he  has  been  so  foolish  as  to 
put  forth  his  hand  unto  iniquity. 

Is  it  not  delightful  to  know  that  our  Father's  hand  broke 
for  us  the  bread  which  we  have  eaten  this  day;  that  the 
Saviour's  own  fingers  mingled  our  cup,  and  that  every  blessing 
has  come  direct  from  God's  own  table  ?  Surely  we  are  as  dear 
to  God  as  the  little  ewe  lamb  in  Nathan's  parable  was  to  the 
poor  man  ;  for  we  are  told  that  ''  he  had  nourished  it  up,  and 
it  grew  up  together  with  him,  and  with  his  children  ;  it  did 
eat  of  his  own  meat,  and  drank  of  his  own  cup,  and  lay  in  his 
bosom."  Does  not  this  make  our  meat,  and  drink,  and 
lodging  more  than  royal  ?  Are  we  not  more  than  cootent 
with  such  fare  ? 

Yea,  Lord,  my  portion  tastes  of  love,  for  thy  hand  has 
sweetened  it.  A  sacred  perfume  is  on  my  raiment  and  in  my 
chamber,  for  thou  hast  prepared  both  for  me.  And  this  would 
be  true  if  I  wore  rags,  and  lay  in  a  dungeon,  in  sore  sickness. 
What  a  heritage  is  mine  !  One  said,  '^  I  am  poor  and  needy, 
yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me. ' ' 

In  this  passage  the  second  sentence  underwrote  the  first,  and 
undermined  its  meaning  :  how  can  he  be  poor  and  needy  of 
whom  it  can  be  said  that  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  him  ?  0 
Lord,  thou  art  my  all,  and  my  all  in  all  :  my  all  is  more  than 
all  because  it  comes  of  thee,  and  is  dealt  out  to  me  by  thine 
own  self. 

SNOW  SOFT,  BUT   SOAKING. 

*'  Passionate  outcries  do  only  frighten  easy  and  over-credulous 
souls,  and  that  only  for  the  present  ;  proofs  and  arguments  do  a 
great  deal  more  good.  Snow  that  falleth  soft  soaketh  deep.  In  the 
tempest,  Christ  slept  ;  when  passion  is  up,  true  zeal  is  usually 
asleep." 

How  gently  fall  the  snowflakes,  but  how  surely  they  pene- 
trate into  the  ground  ;  a  driving  rain  hath  not  half  such 
efficacy  !  The  voice  of  the  snowflakes  is  not  heard,  but  their 
iufluence  is  felt.  Proofs  from  Scripture,  winsomely  put,  carry 
all  before  them,  because  Jesus  loves  to  reach  men's  minds  by 
such  means,  and  not  by  wrath  and  fury. 

This  is  a  word  to  hasty  disputants.     Violent  words  appear  to 


puritan's  garden-.  265 

them  to  be  forcible,  but  they  are  not.  Hard  arguments  are 
best  couched  in  soft  language  ;  the  force  of  the  lightning  is 
not  increased  by  the  thunder.  Wrath  weakens  reason,  but 
gentleness  gives  double  force  to  arguments.  Alas,  we  too  often 
forget  this,  and  call  in  our  evil  passions  to  aid  our  holy  prin- 
ciples. Then  the  Christ  within  us  sleeps,  and  the  devil  is  wide 
awake.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  Protestantism  has  been  rather 
hindered  than  furthered  by  the  ferocity  with  which  some  have 
maintained  it. 

Our  present  controversies  are  some  of  them  essential  to 
fidelity  ;  but  it  will  be  well  if  we  all  remember  that  to  be 
faithful  to  truth  we  aeed  not  be  wrathful  toward  opponents. 
Truth  and  charity  are  of  the  same  heavenly  family,  and  are 
loveliest  when  they  walk  hand  in  hand.  It  has  happened  that 
some  have  been  so  charitable  that  they  would  not  lift  a  finger 
to  save  truth's  life  lest  they  should  wound  one  of  another 
opinion.  This  is  a  sad  practical  error.  But  we  shall  not  mend 
matters  if  we  fight  truth's  battles  so  savagely  that  we  hurl  shot 
and  shell  upon  the  abode  of  love. 

Lord,  teach  us,  for  we  are  fearfully  apt  to  err  in  this  matter. 
Give  us  bold  and  clear  words,  taken  from  thine  own  word  ; 
and  let  us  use  these  with  the  lowly  confidence  which  comes  of 
being  filled  with  thy  Spirit  ;  but  never  allow  our  own  spirit  to 
get  the  upper  hand,  so  that  we  breathe  out  threatenings  and 
utter  bitter  expressions.  Let  our  sword  be  always  like  that 
which  Cometh  out  of  Christ's  mouth  ;  sharp  but  salutary  ; 
flaming,  but  only  with  the  fire  of  love. 

THE   MALICIOUS   GUEST. 

''  Sin  is  an  ill  guest,  for  it  always  sets  its  lodging  on  fire." 
Entertained  within  the  human  breast,  and  cherished  and 
fondled,  it  makes  its  host  no  return  but  an  evil  one.  It  places 
the  burning  coals  of  evil  desire  within  the  soul  with  evident 
intent  to  fire  the  whole  man  with  fierce  passions.  Let  these 
passions  be  suffered  to  rage,  and  the  flame  will  burn  even  to 
the  lowest  hell. 

AVho  would  not  shut  his  door  on  such  a  guest  ?  Or  if  he  be 
known  to  be  lurking  within,  who  would  not  drag  him  out  ? 
How  foolish  are  those  who  find  delight  in  such  an  enemy,  and 
treat  him  with  more  care  than  their  best  friend  ! 

KEEPING  UP  A  SUIT. 

' '  Keep  up  the  suit,  and  it  will  come  to  a  hearing-day  ere  it  be 
long." 


266  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

In  a  suit  at  law  there  are  many  and  grievous  delays,  and  j-et 
the  man  who  has  been  forced  into  the  court  does  not  dream  of 
relinquishing  his  case.  He  urges  on  his  solicitor,  and  entreats 
him  to  lose  no  opportunity  of  getting  the  business  settled  ;  but 
he  does  not  in  a  pet  take  the  case  out  of  his  hands,  for  he 
expects  that  the  judge  will  sooner  or  later  decide  the  matter. 
It  would  be  a  pity  not  to  continue  steadfast  in  prayer,  for  it  is 
certain  that  now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed. 
Ever)^  hour  of  importunity  brings  us  nearer  to. the  time  when 
the  Judge  shall  avenge  his  own  elect.  To  waste  all  the  cost  of 
former  tears  and  entreaties,  and  to  let  months  of  praying  go 
for  nothing  would  be  a  sad  waste  of  effort.  Let  us  hope  in 
the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him,  abiding  still  at  the  mercy- 
seat.  Has  he  not  himself  said,  ''  Though  the  vision  tarry^ 
wait  for  it  ;  because  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry  V^ 

Sometimes,  before  we  call,  God  hears  us,  and  while  we  are 
yet  speaking  he  answers  us.  This  is  to  encourage  us  to  a 
further  trust  in  him  ;  perhaps  to  prepare  us  for  waiting  times. 
Frequently  the  richest  answers  are  not  the  speediest.  Ships 
may  return  all  the  more  quickly  because  they  have  a  slender 
lading  ;  and  a  prayer  may  be  all  the  longer  on  its  voyage 
because  it  is  bringing  us  a  heavier  freight  of  blessing.  De- 
layed answers  are  not  only  trials  of  faith,  but  they  give  us 
an  opportunity  of  honoring  God  by  our  steadfast  confidence  in 
him  under  apparent  repulses. 

He  that  will  only  believe  because  he  sees  the  answer  to  his 
prayer  immediately  hath  but  little  faith.  He  is  the  man  after 
God's  own  heart  who  can  cry  day  and  night  unto  the  Lord  by 
the  month  together,  and  yet  never  swerve  from  the  full  con- 
viction that  God  is  good  to  Israel,  and  that  in  waiting  upon 
him  there  is  great  reward.  David  says,  * '  I  waited  patiently 
for  the  Lord,  and  he  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry.'^ 
This  patience  in  waiting  is  the  attribute  of  the  full-grown  saint, 
and  perhaps  it  gives  more  glory  to  God  than  the  songs  of 
cherubim  and  seraphim.  Jonah  says,  "'  When  my  soul  fainted 
within  me  I  remembered  the  Lord  :  and  my  prayer  came  in 
unto  thee,  into  thine  holy  temple.^' 

Desponding  brother,  keep  up  the  suit.  Perhaps  this  very 
day  may  be  the  hearmg-day.  Go  again  seven  times.  The 
little  cloud,  like  a  man's  hand,  may  be  visible  on  that  last  time 
of  asking.  Knock,  and  knock  again,  till  the  gate  of  heaven 
reverberates  your  blows.  The  door  must  open,  and  it  will 
open  all  the  wider  because  you  have  knocked  so  long.     *  *  Wait 


PURITAiq^'S    GARDEX.  267 

on  the  Lord  :  be  of  good  courage,   and  lie    shall  strengthen 
thine  heart.     Wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord/' 

CLOSE  WEITING. 
'*  When  men  have  much  to  say  in  a  letter,  and  perceive  that  they 
have  little  paper  left,  they  write  closely." 

Looking  at  the  shortness  of  life,  and  the  much  that  has  to 
be  written  upon  its  tablets,  it  becomes  us  also  to  do  much  in  a 
short  space,  and  so  to  write  closely.  ''  No  day  without  a 
line,''  is  a  good  motto  for  a  Christian.  A  thoroughly  useful 
life  is  multum  in  parvo  :  it  is  necessarily  little,  for  it  is  bat  a 
span  ;  but  how  much  may  be  crowded  into  it  for  God,  our 
souls,  the  Church,  our  families,  and  our  fellows  !  We  cannot 
afford  wide  blanks  of  idleness  ;  we  should  not  only  live  by  the 
day  but  by  the  twenty  minutes,  as  Wesley  did.  He  did  not 
keep  a  diary,  but  a  horary  ;  and  each  hour  was  divided  into 
three  parts.  So  scanty  is  our  space  that  we  must  condense, 
and  leave  out  superfluous  matter  ;  giving  room  only  to  that 
which  is  weighty,  and  of  the  first  importance. 

Lord,  whether  I  live  long  or  not,  I  leave  to  thee  ;  but  help 
me  to  live  while  I  live,  that  I  may  live  much.  Thou  canst 
give  life  more  abundantly  ;  let  me  receive  it,  and  let  my  life  be 
filled,  yea,  packed  and  crammed,  with  all  manner  of  holy 
thoughts  and  words  and  deeds  to  thy  glory. 

THE   jVnKROE. 

'*  Take  a  looking-glass  and  put  it  toward  heaven  ;  there  yon  shall 
see  the  figure  of  heaven,  the  clouds  and  things  above.  Turn  it  down- 
ward toward  the  earth,  you  shall  see  the  figure  of  the  earth,  trees, 
meadows,  men.  So  doth  the  soul  receive  a  figure  from  the  things  to 
which  it  is  set.  If  the  heart  be  set  toward  heaven,  that  puts  thee 
into  a  heavenly  frame  ;  if  thou  appliest  it  to  earthly  objects,  thou  art 
a  man  of  the  earth." 

Are  our  thoughts  and  our  affections  full  of  worldliness  ? 
Let  us  make  good  use  of  Manton's  figure,  and  turn  the  looking- 
glass  the  other  way.  Our  mind  will  readily  enough  reflect 
divine  things  if  we  turn  it  in  that  direction.  Let  us  see  if  it 
be  not  so.  Reach  down  the  Bible,  look  at  the  biography  of  a 
holy  man,  or  some  lively  book  of  devotion,  and  see  if  the  heart 
be  not  straightway  filled  with  holy  and  heavenly  images.  At 
any  rate,  if  we  spend  our  time  on  the  newspaper,  or  sit  hour 
after  hour  reading  trashy  novels,  we  have  no  reason  to  wouder 
that  thought  and  heart  go  after  vanity.  This  turning  of  the 
mind  upward  is  half  the  battle.  We  cannot  expect  it  to  reflect 
that  toward  which  it  does  not  turn.     Those  who  mind  earthly 


268  FLOWEKS    FROM    A 

things  are  earthly,  those  who  set  their  affection  upon  things 
above  are  heavenly,  Paul  shows  how  practically  useful  it  is  to 
turn  the  mind  God- ward  when  he  says  that  denying  ungodliness 
and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and 
godly  in  this  present  world,  "  looking  for  that  blessed  hope, 
and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ. ' ' 

We  may  well  cry  concerning  this  matter,  *'  Turn  us,  O 
Lord,  and  we  shall  be  turned."  If  we  cannot  see  divine  truth 
to  our  enjoyment,  let  us  nevertheless  look  that  way  ;  for  that 
eye  is  blessed  which  looks  in  the  direction  of  the  light.  It  is 
well  to  have  our  window  open  toward  Jerusalem.  He  who 
w^ould  behold  the  sun  at  his  rising  must  not  look  to  the  west. 
He  that  would  see  God  to  his  delight  must  look  God-ward. 
If  the  mirror  of  the  soul  be  resolutely  set  toward  the  Lord,  we 
shall  all  with  open  face  behold,  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the 
Lord,  and  be  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory, 
even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 

O,  my  blessed  Master,  help  me  I  pray  thee  to  keep  the 
mirror  of  my  mind  in  the  right  position,  that  evermore  I  may 
see  thee.  True,  it  vnll  be  but  as  in  a  glass  darkly,  but  even 
that  will  be  a  marvellous  preparation  for  beholding  thee  face  to 
face. 

THE  OLD  HOUSE  TAKEN  DOWN  TO  BE  REBUILT. 

"  If  we  lived  in  a  house  of  our  own,  and  the  walls  became  decayed, 
and  the  roof  ready  to  drop  down  upon  our  heads,  we  would  desire  to 
remove  and  depart  for  a  while,  but  we  should  not  therefore  give  up 
the  ground,  and  the  materials  of  the  house.  No,  we  would  have  it 
built  up  in  a  better  manner." 

Even  thus  the  soul  desires  to  leave  the  poor  frail  tenement  of 
the  body,  but  not  that  the  body  may  be  utterly  destroyed  :  it 
quits  it  with  the  hope  of  having  the  house  of  clay  rebuilt  in 
more  glorious  form.  '*  Not  that  we  would  be  unclothed/' 
saith  the  apostle,  "  but  clothed  upon  wdtli  our  house  which  is 
from  heaven  ;"  not  that  we  would  be  turned  out  of  house  and 
home  ;  but  that  we  would  enter  upon  our  better  and  permanent 
abode,  which  the  Lord  will  surely  provide  for  us. 

The  Lord  doth  not  despise  this  house  of  clay  :  he  will  re- 
build it,  and  we  shall  inhabit  it  forever.  Wherefore  let  us  be 
comforted  when  the  wind  blows  through  the  chinks,  and  the 
rain  drips  through  the  roof  ;  it  will  all  the  sooner  come  down, 
and  all  the  sooner  will  it  be  restored.  The  little  while  in  which 
we  shall  be  unhoused  will  cause  us  no  inconvenience,  for  even 


puritan's   GAP.DEIS^.  269 

then  we  shall  be  with  the  Lord  ;  wherefore  let  us  in  all  things 
be  of  good  cheer. 

O,  my  Lord,  thou  hast  made  me  to  know  that  this  body  will 
soon  cease  to  be  a  body  for  me,  therefore  I  will  not  pamper  it. 
But  thou  promises!  it  a  resurrection,  therefore  T  will  not  defile 
it.  Teach  me  how,  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body,  to  dwell 
in  thee,  and  honor  thy  holy  name. 

CHILDPtEN  THANKING  THE  TAILOE  FOE  THEIR  CLOTHES. 

*'  As  cMldren  Y/ill  thank  the  tailor,  and  think  they  owe  their  new 
clothes  to  him  rather  than  to  their  parent's  bounty,  so  we  look  to  the 
next  hand,  and  set  up  that  instead  of  God." 

Second  causes  must  never  be  made  to  stand  before  the  first 
cause.  Friends  and  helpers  are  all  very  well  as  servants  of  our 
Father,  but  our  Father  must  have  all  our  praise. 

There  is  a  like  evil  in  the  matter  of  trouble.  We  are  apt  to 
be  angry  with  the  instrument  of  our  affliction,  instead  of  seeing 
the  hand  of  God  over  all,  and  meekly  bowing  before  it.  It 
was  a  great  help  to  David  in  bearing  with  railing  Shimei,  when 
he  saw  that  God  had  appointed  this  provocation  as  a  chastise- 
ment. He  would  not  suffer  his  hasty  captains  to  take  the 
scoffer's  head,  but  meekly  said,  ''  Let  him  alone,  and  let  him 
curse,  for  the  Lord  hath  bidden  him.''  A  dog  when  he  is 
struck  will  bite  the  stick  ;  if  he  were  wise,  he  would  observe 
that  the  stick  only  moves  as  the  hand  directs  it.  When  we 
discern  God  in  our  tribulations  we  are  helped  to  be  quiet  and 
endure  with  patience. 

Let  us  not  act  like  silly  children,  but  trace  matters  to  their 
fountain-head,  and  act  accordingly.  May  the  Spirit  of  wisdom 
make  us  men  in  understanding. 

PASSING  SHIPS  AT  SEA. 
"  YvTien  we  are  on  board  ship,  if  another  vessel  passes  us  at  sea, 
we  think  that  it  is  sailing  more  swiftly  than  we  are.  Though  both 
ships  are  passing  along  at  the  same  rate,  we  do  not  so  clearly  discern 
our  ov\^n  motion.  In  like  manner  we  see  that  others  are  mortal,  but 
we  do  not  number  our  own  days." 

This  is  an  ordinary  observation  concerning  that  which  is 
really  an  extraordinary  piece  of  folly.  What  can  it  matter  to 
us  how  other  men's  lives  are  going  ?  Our  main  concern  is  our 
own  conduct,  and  the  spending  of  our  own  days.  Come, 
friend,  you  too  are  getting  old  ;  snowflakes  here  and  there 
upon  those  once  raven  locks  are  prophetic  of  coming  winter. 
Those  spectacles,  too  !  ''  First  sight,"  you  say.  Just  so  ; 
but  you  were  not  once  dependent  on  them.      Why,  you  will 


270  FLOAVERS    FROM    A 

never  see  fifty  again  !     Half  a  century  have  you  lived,   and 
more  :  surely  it  is  time  to  be  wise. 

Friend  Brown  is  getting  quite  the  old  man.  No  doubt  ;  but 
you  are  moving  onward,  too.  Brown  does  not  get  a  year 
older  in  less  time  than  you  do.  We  are  all  sailing  at  the  same 
rate.  Is  it  not  time  that  we  took  observations,  and  found  out 
cur  longitude  and  latitude  ?  At  any  rate,  it  were  well  to  know 
what  port  we  are  bound  for.  Some  have  not  even  so  much 
knowledge  as  this  implies. 

PLEASUEE  FOEGETS  LABOE. 
**In  hunting,  fowling,  and  fishing,  though  there  be  as  much  labor 
as  in  our  ordinary  employments,  yet  we  count  the  toil  nothing,  be- 
cause of  the  delight  we  have  in  them." 

It  is  wonderful  what  fatigue  men  will  bear  to  hunt  a  fox  or 
shoot  a  partridge,  and  yet  they  make  nothing  of  it,  but  call  it 
sport.  In  like  manner  many  a  zealous  worker  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  will  preach,  and  teach,  and  labor,  and  call  it  his  recrea- 
tion, with  which  he  fills  up  his  leisure  hours.  We  know  many 
such,  and  we  hope  w^e  shall  yet  know  more.  Love  makes  labor 
light.  Men  will  do  voluntarily  that  which  they  would  never 
undertake  for  pay,  and  they  will  keep  up  freely  under  an 
amount  of  pressure  which  would  crush  the  hireling.  There 
lies  the  grand  secret.  Make  holy  service  a  delight,  and  you 
can  do  any  amount  of  it. 

Lord,  thy  servant  has  no  need  to  reckon  thy  service  to  be 
this  pleasure,  for  it  is  indeed  so.  Could  he  but  serve  thee 
perfectly,  without  hindrance  and  without  mistake,  it  would  be 
heaven  to  him.  No  avocation  is  like  our  divine  vocation  for 
pure  delightfulness.  It  would  be  far  more  wearisome  not  to 
serve  thee,  0  my  God,  than  it  ever  can  be  to  perform  the  most 
arduous  labor  for  thy  love's  sake. 

IN   TEAINING. 

"By  running  and  breathing  yourselves  every  daj^,  you  are  the 
fitter  to  run  in  a  race  ;  so  the  oftener  you  come  into  God's  presence 
the  greater  confidence,  and  freedom,  and  enlargement  it  will  bring." 

No  doubt  by  praying  we  learn  to  pray,  and  the  more  we 
pray  the  oftener  we  can  pray,  and  the  better  we  can  pray.  He 
who  prays  by  fits  and  starts  is  never  likely  to  attain  to  that 
effectual,  fervent  prayer  which  availeth  much.  Prayer  is 
good,  the  habit  of  prayer  is  better,  but  the  spirit  of  prayer  is 
the  best  of  all.  It  is  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  that  we  pray 
w^ithout  ceasing,  and  this  can  never  be  acquired  by  the  man 
who  ceases  to  pray. 


271 


Tt  is  wonderful  what  distances  men  can  run  who  have  long 
practised  the  art.  and  it  is  equally  marvellous  for  what  a  length 
of  time  they  can  maintain  a  high  speed  after  they  have  once 
acquired  stamina,  and  skill  in  using  their  muscles.  Great 
power  in  prayer  is  within  our  reach,  but  we  nmst  go  to  work 
to  obtain  it.  Let  us  never  imagine  that  Abraham  could  have 
interceded  so  successfully  for  Sodom  if  he  had  not  been  all  his 
lifetime  in  the  practice  of  communion  with  God.  Jacob's  all- 
night  at  Peniel  was  not  the  first  occasion  upon  which  he  had 
met  his  God.  We  may  even  look  upon  our  Lord's  most  choice 
and  wonderful  prayer  with  his  disciples  before  his  Passion  as 
the  flower  and  fruit  of  his  many  nights  of  devotion,  and  of  his 
often  rising  up  a  great  while  before  day  to  pray. 

A  man  who  becomes  a  great  runner  has  to  put  himself  in 
training,  and  to  keep  himself  in  it  ;  and  that  training  consists 
very  much  of  the  exercise  of  running.  Those  who  have 
distinguished  themselves  for  speed  have  not  suddenly  leaped 
into  eminence,  but  have  long  been  runners.  If  a  man  dreams 
that  he  can  become  mighty  in  pra^^er  just  when  he  pleases,  he 
labors  under  a  great  mistake.  The  prayer  of  Elias,  which  shut 
up  heaven  and  afterward  opened  its  floodgates,  was  one  of  a 
long  series  of  mighty  prevailings  with  God.  Oh  that  Christian 
men  would  reruember  this  !  Perseverance  in  prajer  is  necessary 
to  prevalence  in  prayer.  Those  great  intercessors,  who  are  not 
so  often  mentioned  as  they  ought  to  be  in  connection  with 
confessors  and  martyrs,  were  nevertheless  the  grandest  bene- 
factors of  the  church  ;  but  it  was  only  by  abiding  at  the  mercy- 
seat  that  they  attained  to  be  such  channels  of  mercy  to  men. 
We  must  pray  to  pray,  and  continue  in  prayer  that  our  prayers 
may  continue. 

O  thou,  by  whom  we  come  to  God,  seeing  thou  hast  thyself 
trodden  the  way  of  prayer,  and  didst  never  turn  from  it,  teach 
me  to  remain  a  suppliant  as  long  as  I  remain  a  sinner,  and  to 
wrestle  in  prayer  so  long  as  I  have  to  wrestle  with  the  powers 
of  evil.  Whatever  else  I  may  outgrow^  may  I  never  dream 
that  I  may  relax  my  supplications  ;  for  well  I  know  that — 

*^  Long  as  they  live  should  Christians  pray, 
For  only  while  they  pray  they  live." 

TASTEKS,    NOT   BUYEES. 
"The  hearer's  life  is  the  preacher's  best  commendation.     They 
that  praise  the  man  but  do  not  practise  the  matter  are  like  those  that 
taste  wines  that  they  may  commend  them,  not  buy  them." 

What  a  worry  such  folk  are  to  dealers  who  are  in  earnest  to 


372  FLOWERS   FROM   A 

do  business  !  Time  is  wasted,  labor  lost,  hopes  disappointed. 
Oh  that  these  loafers  and  idlers  would  tate  themselves  off  from 
our  market  !  We  set  forth  the  precious  produce  of  heaven's 
own  vintage,  and  hope  that  they  will  buy  of  us  ;  but  no,  they 
lift  the  glass,  and  talk  like  thorough  connoisseurs,  and  then  go 
off  without  coming  to  a  bargain.  Sermons  which  we  have 
studied  with  care,  delivered  with  travail,  prayed  over,  and  wept 
over,  are  praised  for  such  minor  matters  as  taste,  accuracy, 
and  diction,  and  the  truth  they  contain  is  not  received.  We 
cannot  bring  our  hearers  to  a  decided  bargain,  though  our 
wares  are  the  best  that  heaven  can  supply.  Will  it  always  be 
so  ?     Reader,  has  it  been  so  with  you  ?     Is  it  to  be  so  still  ? 

THE   PLAISTEE. 

*'  A  plaister  may  be  of  sovereign  efficacy,  but  when  yon  are  still 
pulling  it  off  and  on  it  doth  you  no  good.' ' 

Faith  applies  Christ  to  the  soul  ;  but  what  if  unbelief  tears 
him  away  ?  A  promise  is  a  great  heal-all,  but  what  if  we 
believe  and  disbelieve,  trust  and  distrust  ?  How  can  the  surest 
promise  comfort  us  ?  Men  turn  to  God  in  their  fashion,  and 
before  any  benefit  can  come  of  it  they  turn  away  from  him. 
What  do  they  expect  from  such  folly  ?  Instability  in  saving 
concerns  is  a  deadly  evil,  a  mockery  of  God.  and  a  robbery  of 
ourselves. 

Lord,  thy  Son's  atonement  is  the  blessed  plaister  which  has 
healed  my  souFs  sore.  Thou  hast  applied  it,  and  I  will  keep 
it  on  my  heart  forever,  whatever  may  happen,  and  whoever 
may  ridicule.  This  hope  I  have  by  thy  grace,  and  none  shall 
take  it  from  me. 

A  MEETING-HOUSE   FOK  BEGGAKS. 

''  If  a  charitable  man  should  see  a  company  of  beggars  wandering 
in  the  street  during  the  time  of  worship,  under  pretence  that  there 
was  no  room  for  them,  and  he  should  build  a  chapel  for  them,  they 
would  then  be  without  excuse.  God  hath  been  at  so  great  a  cost  to 
provide  a  throne  of  grace,  that  we  must  not  now  neglect  prayer." 

The  mercy-seat  under  the  law  v/as  overlaid  with  pure  gold 
to  foreshadow  the  costliness  of  its  antitype.  It  cost  the  death 
of  Christ  to  erect  a  mercy-seat  for  men.  To  neglect  it  is  a 
shameful  ingratitude  to  God,  and  a  wanton  rejection  of  one  of 
his  costliest  blessings.  If  there  were  no  throne  of  grace,  men 
might  die  of  despair  because  they  could  not  approach  to  God  ; 


PURITAiq^'S   GARDEl!ir.  273 

but  now  that  God  has  prepared  a  way  of  access  for  all  who 
desire  to  approach  hira,  the  refusal  to  draw  near  must  rank 
among  the  grossest  and  most  wilful  of  rebellions.  There  is  no 
conceivable  excuse  for  the  prayerless.  A  man  who  dies  of 
starvation  with  bread  before  him,  and  perishes  with  disease 
w^Len  the  remedy  is  in  his  hand,  deserves  no  pity  ;  and  he  who 
sinks  down  to  hell  beneath  the  burden  of  his  sins  because  he 
will  not  pray,  ''  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  deserves  all 
that  damnation  means.  Pardon,  life,  salv^ation,  heaven,  are 
all  to  be  had  for  the  asking  ;  and  if  he  that  asketh  not  receiveth 
not,  who  shall  blame  either  the  justice  or  the  mercy  of  God  ? 

Reader,  has  this  day  passed  without  a  prayer  from  your 
heart?  Tremble  lest  it  should  bring  wrath  upon  you.  One 
said,  '^  Perhaps  the  day  in  which  the  world  shall  perish  will  be 
the  day  unsanctified  by  a  prayer."  What  if  the  day  of  your 
death  and  final  ruin  should  be  a  day  in  which  you  did  not  even 
turn  a  glance  toward  heaven  ? 

A  PIECE   OF  BAKK,   NOT  THE   TEEE. 

"  A  man  that  keeps  the  law  only  outwardly,  can  no  more  be  said 
to  keep  the  law,  than  he  that  hath  undertaken  to  carry  a  tree,  and 
only  takes  up  a  little  piece  of  the  bark." 

The  essence  of  the  law  lies  in  the  things  of  the  heart  : 
external  acts  are  as  the  outward  bark.  The  Pharisees  were 
great  barkmongers,  but  the  solid  timber  was  too  heavy  for 
their  shoulders.  David  was  the  man  to  carry  the  whole  of 
the  blessed  load.  He  said,  ''  I  will  delight  myself  in  thy 
commandments,  which  I  have  loved.  My  hands  also  will  I 
lift  up  unto  thy  commandments,  which  I  have  loved  ;  and  I 
will  meditate  in  thy  statutes. ' ' 

He  who  does  not  love  the  whole  law  is  not  holy.  He  who 
does  not  regard  the  law  in  his  heart  has  no  heart  to  the  law. 
As  he  is  not  a  Jew  who  is  only  one  outwardly,  so  he  is  not  a 
doer  of  the  law  who  only  attends  to  its  externals.  He  would 
not  have  sacrificed  a  bullock  unto  the  Lord,  who  should  only 
have  brought  its  horns  and  hoofs  ;  and  he  has  not  yielded 
himself  as  a  servant  unto  the  Most  High,  who  only  brings  his 
lips  and  hands. 

O  Lord,  I  w^ould  love  all  thy  law,  but  especially  those  pre- 
cepts of  it  which  concern  my  inward  parts.  I  beseech  thee, 
therefore,  to  write  thy  law  upon  my  heart,  and  engrave  it  upon 
my  mind.  Let  its  spiritual  commands  have  full  command  of 
my  spirit. 


274  FLOWERS    FROM   A 

THE    DOLE. 

**  Wisdom's  dole  is  given  at  wisdom's  gates." 

Those  who  wish  for  it  must  go  there  for  it.  Go  to  the  gate 
of  hearing  if  you  would  obtain  the  gift  of  faith.  Resort  to 
the  beautiful  porch  of  the  teraple  if  you  would  obtain  that 
healing  which  is  given  by  the  gospel.  Search  the  Scriptures 
if  you  would  find  eternal  life.  Hasten  humbly  to  the  gate  of 
prayer  if  you  would  obtain  God's  covenant  blessings.  Above 
all,  wait  at  the  cross-foot  for  the  purchased  boons  of  Jesus' 
love.  The  dole  is  free  and  large,  but  God  hath  his  place 
appointed  for  its  distribution  :  be  often  there. 

Lord,  I  would  not  be  out  of  the  way  when  thine  alms  are 
being  distributed,  for  I  am  as  poor  as  poverty  itself.  See,  I 
am  even  now  waiting  at  the  portal  of  thy  grace.  Give  me,  I 
pray  thee,  my  daily  bread  from  heaven,  and  send  me  on  my 
way  rejoicing. 

EEADY  FOR  THE  BREEZE. 

**  By  tacking  about  men  get  the  wind,  not  by  lying  still  ;  many 
times  a  supply  of  grace  cometh  ere  we  are  aware. '' 

When  we  do  not  seem  to  have  the  favoring  gale  in  our 
voyage  toward  heaven,  let  us  not  therefore  cast  anchor,  and 
idly  lie  still,  but  let  us  use  what  wind  we  have,  employing  that 
measure  of  grace  which  is  vouchsafed  to  us.  Let  us  put  up 
the  sail  to  catch  side  winds,  that  we  may  be  aided  by  indirect 
helps  till  we  get  where  more  propitious  breezes  blow. 

If  I  cannot  pray,  let  me  read  a  chapter.  It  may  be  that  while 
I  hear  God  speak  to  me  I  shall  learn  how  to  speak  to  him. 
If  in  my  private  reading  I  feel  no  unction  upon  the  word,  let 
me  go  forth  and  attend  the  meeting  of  the  saints  ;  perhaps 
God  intends  to  bless  me  by  the  ear,  or  in  company  with  others. 
If  this  fails,  let  me  go  and  visit  the  sick,  or  perform  some 
deed  of  charity.  Perhaps  in  helping  others  I  may  find  succor 
for  my  own  soul  :  God  has  often  saved  a  man  from  freezing 
by  setting  him  to  rub  a  brother  into  warmth  and  life.  If  all 
this  shall  not  have  succeeded,  let  nie  hold  converse  with  some 
choice  servant  of  God  ;  and  if  this  should  fail  me,  let  me  get 
to  my  knees  again,  or  begin  to  sing  a  psalm,  or  tell  to  others 
what  I  have  experienced  of  God's  love  in  times  past. 

How  often  it  will  happen  that  or  ever  I  am  aware  my  soul 
will  make  me  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib.  ^^  While  I 
was  musing,''  said  one,  *' the  fire  burned.''  *^  The  wind 
bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  and  a  heavenly  gale   often   comes 


puritan's  gardek.  275 

upon  a  sudden  ;  but  it  seldom  or  never  comes  to  idle  souls,  or 
to  those  who  are  indifferent  about  it,  listless,  inactive,  dead, 
careless  whether  it  comes  or  not.  Come  then,  brother,  tack 
about.  Complain  not  of  the  want  of  heavenly  wind,  rather 
complain  of  want  of  consecrated  energy.  Lord,  grant  that 
what  I  preach  to  others  I  may  always  practise  myself. 

MILK  FOR  BABES. 

"  As  warm  milk  is  fitter  to  nourish  a  babe  than  that  which  is  cold, 
so  the  word  of  God  delivered  by  a  lively  voice  hath  a  greater  congru- 
ity  and  suitableness  to  the  work  of  grace." 

Moreover,  there  is  no  milk  for  a  babe  like  that  which  comes 
warm  from  the  mother's  breast.  Reading  the  word,  or  hearing 
a  borrowed  sermon,  is  like  a  child's  sucking  from  a  bottle  ; 
but  as  that  child  grows  best  which  takes  its  nutriment  fresh 
from  the  mother,  so  hearing  warm-hearted  discourses,  fresh 
from  the  preacher's  heart,  is  the  most  nourishing  to  the  child 
of  God.  There  is  no  warmth  like  heart-warmth,  and  no  testi- 
mony like  that  of  experience. 

This  is  the  grand  distinction  between  one  preaching  and 
another.  One  sermon  is  delivered  with  a  cold  propriety,  as  if 
the  preacher  had  no  concern  in  it,  nor  his  hearers  either,  and 
as  a  rule  it  fails  to  satisfy  the  soul.  Another  discourse  may 
have  less  food  in  it  than  the  first,  but  as  it  comes  from  the 
preacher's  inmost  soul,  and  he  speaks  it  with  warmth  of  zeal 
and  melting  affection,  it  enters  into  the  auditor,  is  assimilated 
by  him,  and  makes  him  grow  thereby.  Surely  there  can  be  no 
greater  farce  than  dull,  lifeless  preaching.  As  by  taking  the 
soul  out  of  a  man  we  cause  him  to  become  a  loathsome  and 
offensive  corpse,  so  has  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  when  it  has 
been  divorced  from  the  affection  of  the  minister,  become  a 
heartless  creed,  bringing  more  of  bondage  to  men's  intellects 
than  of  sustenance  to  their  souls.  If  the  shepherd  is  not  alive, 
what  will  the  sheep  be  ?  If  men  are  compelled  to  feed  upon 
ice,  and  to  dwell  among  icebergs,  they  will  be  frozen  ;  while 
those  who  are  warmed  by  an  ardent  ministry  are  likely  to 
become  fervent  Christians. 

Lord,  let  me  rather  be  dumb  than  so  preach  thy  word  as  to 
deprive  it  of  that  holy  warmth  which  makes  it  nourishing  food 
for  thy  children.  Let  me  not  set  thy  sick  ones  down  to  cold 
meats  for  which  they  will  have  no  stomach.  If  I  be  not 
eloquent,  yet  let  me  be  affectionate  ;  if  I  cannot  speak  with 


276  FLOWEKS   FKOM   A 


the  wisdom  of  a  father,  yet  let  me  speak  with  the  heart  of  a 
brother. 

COMPLEXION. 

"  We  do  not  judge  of  men's  complexions  by  the  color  they  have 
when  they  sit  before  the  nre.  We  cannot  judge  of  a  man  by  a  holy 
fit  which  he  hath  when  he  is  under  the  influence  of  a  sermon,  or  in 
good  company  ;  but  when  at  all  times  he  labors  to  keep  np  a  warmth 
of  heart  toward  God." 

If  all  were  truly  good  who  are  occasionally  good,  good 
men  would  not  be  scarce.  See  how  people  weep  under  a 
moving  sermon  !  Think  not,  therefore,  that  their  hearts  are 
changed,  for  even  n)arble  drips  in  certain  weathers.  A  man 
fresh  from  a  revival-meeting  looks  like  a  zealous  Christian  ; 
but  see  him  when  he  goes  to  market.  As  a  face  rendered  red 
by  the  fire  soon  loses  all  its  ruddiness,  so  do  numbers  lose  all 
their  godliness  when  they  quit  the  society  of  the  godly. 

Lord,  let  me  never  be  what  I  cannot  be  forever.  Give  me 
a  complexion  which  1  shall  wear  all  my  lifetime,  and  when 
time  shall  be  no  more. 

THE   MASTEK'S  EYE. 

'*  As  soldiers  fight  best  in  their  general's  presence,  and  scholars 
ply  their  books  most  attentively  when  under  their  master's  eye,  so, 
by  living  always  in  the  sight  of  God,  w^e  are  the  more  studious  to 
please  him.  The  oftener  we  consider  the  Lord,  the  more  we  see  that 
no  service  can  be  holy  enough  or  good  enough  for  such  a  God  as  he 
is." 

This  needs  no  comment,  but  it  needs  to  be  realized.  See, 
soldier  of  the  cross,  the  eye  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  is 
fixed  upon  thee  !  Jesus  cries,  ''  I  know  thy  works."  AVill 
not  this  incite  thee  to  valorous  deeds,  and  make  a  hero  of 
thee  ?     If  not,  what  will  ? 

A  BLIND  EYE  AS  DANGEKOUS  AS  A  LAME  FOOT. 

**  "We  should  as  carefully  avoid  errors  as  vices  ;  a  blind  eye  is  even 
worse  than  a  lame  foot  ;  yea  a  blind  eye  may  cause  a  lame  foot,  for 
he  that  hath  not  light  is  apt  to  stumble." 

Very  few  seem  to  think  so,  but  there  is  solemn  truth  in  this 
statement.  Men  fancy  that  their  minds  are  their  own,  and  that 
they  may  do  what  they  will  with  them,  thinking  and  believing 
just  as  their  conceit  suggests.  But  who  gave  them  a  release 
from  the  authority  of  God  as  to  this  part  of  their  nature  2 
True,  they  are  not  bound  by  the  opinions  of  their  fellow-men  ; 


pukitan's  gardens-.  277 

but  does  this  give  them  a  dispensation  from  the  supremacy  of 
God  ?  There  are  revealed  truths  :  have  we  license  to  receive 
or  reject  them  at  our  pleasure  ?  If  we  set  up  our  own  concep- 
tions as  equal  or  superior  to  the  teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
are  we  justified  in  so  doing  ?  One  would  fancy  from  the  talk 
of  the  wiseacres  of  the  period  that  God  did  not  know  his  own 
mind  when  he  wrote  the  Scriptures,  or  that,  like  an  old 
almanac,  divine  revelation  is  out  of  date,  and  superseded  by 
**  modern  thought." 

Doctrinal  laxity  has  led  to  moral  license  :  professors  now 
wander  in  ways  which  their  sober  forefathers  would  have 
shuddered  at.  They  will  soon  be  given  over  to  return  to  the 
old  idolatries  of  Rome,  since  they  are  growing  weary  of  the 
grand  truths  of  Protestantism.  Falsehoods  of  belief  are  fitly 
followed  by  superstitions  in  ritual  :  those  who  slay  the  doc- 
trines are  not  ashamed  to  mangle  the  ordinances.  We  wonder 
what  next,  and  next  ! 

O  Lord,  I  am  willing  to  be  thought  a  simpleton  for  believing 
as  reformers,  confessors,  and  martyrs  believed,  and  as  thy  word 
teaches.  Do  not  allow  me  to  be  blind  to  thy  truth,  lest  I 
stumble  in  my  daily  life,  and  become  scandalous  as  well  as 
heretical. 

A  LONG  LEASE  ENHANCES  VALUE. 

"  If  a  man  might  have  a  cottage  on  a  hundred  years'  lease,  he 
would  prize  it  much  more  than  the  possession  of  a  palace  for  a  day." 

Of  course  he  would  ;  and  this  it  is  which  adds  so  much 
preciousness  to  the  joys  of  heaven,  for  they  are  eternal.  The 
pleasures  of  this  world,  however  bright  they  seem,  are  but  for 
this  one  day  of  life,  which  is  already  half  over.  If  they  were 
all  they  profess  to  be,  and  a  thousand  times  more,  they  would 
not  be  worthy  to  be  mentioned  in  comparison  with  *^  pleasures 
for  evermore^'  at  God's  right  hand. 

O  Thou  who  fillest  eternity,  impress  me  with  the  solemn 
import  of  that  word,  and  let  me  feel  that  all  timers  fleeting 
cares  and  caresses  are  as  dreams  ;  while  the  things  of  eternity 
alone  have  substance  in  them.  Give  me  thy  grace  that  I  may 
**  lay  hold  on  eternal  life." 

THE    END. 


HDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


PAGE 

Absence  of  Christ  expedient,  The. .  171 

Acorns,  Why  Men  ate 96 

Advice,  On  giving 254 

Affections  the  Test  of  Character. .  272 
Affliction,  The  Benefits  of  {see  also 

Trials),  78, 129,   163, 165,  166, 187 

194,  195 
Alexander  —  Contempt     for     the 

World,  Illustrated 45 

and  Apelles 205 

Ambition  218 

Angler  and  the  Hunter,  The 183 

Ant-hill,  Tlie 138 

Apple,  Child  asking  for  an 234 

Apples  display  the  Sap 100 

Aqueduct  and  the  Sunflower,  The.  102 

Arm,  The  svv'ollen  134 

Arrows  shot  at  random 107 

Artist  and  the  Paper-stainer,  The . .    48 

Asking  in  a  Person's  Name 251 

Aspirations,  Spiritual 255 

Ass  wiser  than  the  Sinner,  The 51 

Atonement,  The  {see  also  Christ) 170 

Augustine's  story  of  Alipius 67 

Axe,  Men  like  Trees  marked  for 

the 73 

Backsliders,  How  to  deal  with 139 

likened  to  Bankrupts 210,  238 

Balances,  Unjust 16 

Bankrupts,  Spiritual 210 

Bark  not  the  Tree,  A  Piece  of 279 

Barrel,  Knocking  the ..  191 

Bed,  Going  to— a  Simile 209 

The,  changed 142 

Beggar,  The  Dumb 130 

with  trembling  Hand,  The....  179 

Beggars  and  the  Throne  of  Grace.  278 
Begging,  The  Art  of  spiritual. .   ...    35 

Beginnings,  the  Difficulty  of 43 

Believers  a,re  Heirs,  not  Hirelings..  222 

How  conformed  to  Christ 220 

How  they  should  walk 89 

Life—'*  Sunshine  with  Rain  "..  240 

Pilgrims  and  Strangers  here..  219 

Safe,    though   lacking  assur- 
ance    182 

Believers  should  "  set  their  affec- 
tions on  things  above  " 247,  248 

Support  under  Losses 244 

Watchword—"  Onward  " 246 


PAGE 

Bernard's  Charity.  87 

Best  of  Ways  to  the  Best  of  Pos- 
sessions, The 15 

Bias,  Contrary  to 168 

Bird,  from  its  own  Egg,  Each 13 

Onesetteth  another  chirping.  175 

tied  by  a  string.  The 7 

catching  by  Night 149 

Birds  on  the  Wing 15t 

Biter  Bitten,  The 202 

Blind  Eye  and  Lame  Foot,  The. . . .  282 
Blossoms  do    not  become   Fruit, 

All 114 

Blown  into  Harbor 243 

Boasters 54,  134 

Bone  dislocated,  The 69 

Bones      stronger,     though     once 

broken 118 

Brag,  the  Roman's  empty 54 

Brass  Farthings  and  Gold 229 

Briers,  Taken  in  the 129 

Bridles  for  old  Horses 90 

Broken  Bones  complaining 30 

Brook  and  the  River,  The 191 

Bucket  and  the  Sea,  The 168 

Empty,  The 22 

Buckets  in  a  Well— a  Simile 83 

Burning-glass,  The 108 

Caesar  killed  with  bodkins 82 

Calvin  and  his  Lord 131 

Candle  is  lighted  for  a  purpose,  A.    44 

The  Thief  and  the 66 

Care,  a  Hindrance  to  Grace  132 

Carpenter's  Line  and  Rule,  The 98 

Carver,  The  (Two  Similes) 48,  268 

Catching  at  a  Bough 182 

Cement  of  Heaven,  Love  is  the 145 

Chaff  and  Wheat  contrasted 74 

Changeability,  a  bad  Sign 74 

"  Charity  "—A  cry  to  be  suspected, 

133,  137 

Charity  that  thinketh  no  evil 87 

Chastisement 195 

Chessboard,  The 130 

Chessmen  in  a  Bag 201 

Child  and  the  Father,  The 199 

wanting  a  Knife,  The 80 

Child's  Play 169 

Children  and  the  Tailor 274 

carried  by  their  Father 209 


280 


MDEX    OF   SUBJECTS. 


PAGB 

Christ  and  his  Truth,  The  Supre- 
macy of 176 

God  in 182 

our  Example 45 

Christ  ReceiviDg 98 

The  Absence  of,  expedient,  115,  171 

the  Centre  of  the  Soul 91 

the  Magnet  of  the  Believer. . .     19 

The  liiches  of,  a  Ground  of 

Confidence 96 

The  sufferings  of,  their  value, 

51,  164,  170 

the  Sinner's  Substitute 125 

the  Yoke  of,  lined 237 

Union  of  Saints  with 115,  178, 

Christ's  Name,  Asking  in 251 

Christian  Fellowship,  a  Necessity, 

36,  191 
Christians  should  be  Evangelists. .  120 
Christians,  Some  are    like    Bank- 
rupts  210 

Dwarfs 173 

Churcjh,  How^  to  promote  the  Unity 

of  the 180 

Disturbers •. 152 

its  Defences 131 

Civet  Box,  The 178 

Clean  Vessels,  Choice  Liquors  re- 
quire      27 

Clock  of  Providence,  The 159 

Clock,  Winding  up  the 22 

Clowns  and  Princes  146 

Coin  and  the  Prince,  The 182 

Cold,  How  to  keep  out  the 62 

Column,  The  Upright 84 

Comet  and  the  Sun,  The 133 

Comfort,  Christ  the  Giver  of 118 

Creatures  cannot  give 49 

Commerce 192 

Communion  with  God....  121,  136,  153 

of  Saints 123 

Company,  Sinful  (see  Evil,  Sin) 212 

Compasses,  The 91 

Complaint,  An  Unusual 228 

Complexion,  The 282 

Concentration  of  Purpose 108 

Conflict,  Spiritual 261 

Consecration  of  our  Substance  . . .  206 
Conscience,  Sin  indulged  in  hardens 

the.... 67 

Tenderness  of.   197 

The  folly  of  Stifling. 70 

What  it  is  like 22,  65,  236 

Contentment 140,  186 

Contraries,  God  working  by  seem- 
ing  213 

Controversy,  How  to  conduct,  128,  239 
Conviction  Is  not  Regeneration. 52,  282 

Corn  ripening 163 

Counterfeit,  The  Bright 10 

Courtiers' Courtesy 156 

Privileges 121 

Covenant,  The  Better 118 

Covetousness 31,  94 

Cripples  mocking 149 

Crown,  A  Knock  borne  for  a. .  .143,  161 
Cypress,  Some  Professors  like  the.  54 
Cyrus  and  the  Biver 180 


PAGE 

Dead  Fish 9 

Death  a  Final  Conflict 197 

a  terrible  Leveller 201 

Christ  with  Saints  in 209 

dissipates  Deceit 57 

How  Christians  should  regard  167 

Spiritual 200,  223,  233 

Declensions  in  Grace 66,  82,  185 

Decoy,  The 69 

Den  of  the  Cockatrice,  The 239 

Desires  of  the  New  Creature,  The.  256 

Devotion,  Undisturbed. 32 

Diet,  Good,  in  unhealthy  places. ..  144 

Dirty  Corners 119 

Disappointment,  the  lot  of  mortals  114 

Dish  forme.  The lU 

Distractions,  How  to  deal  with 162 

Dog,  Calling  off  the 194 

The  devil  compared  to  a 93 

The  Hunting 172 

Dogs,  Barking,  catch  no  game 128 

and  Cats  versus  Children 249 

Doubts  and  Fears.. ,..  113 

Dreams,  but  not  Dreams ,  106 

Drinking  to  drown  Care ..........    70 

Drunkard,  The  Fallen 159 

Dry  Sticks  kindling  the  green 140 

Dwarf,  The 173 

Eagles  and  Flies 89 

Ear-ring,  The 236 

Echo,  The 120 

Economy,  Expensive 94 

Egg,  Sin  like  to  a  Serpent's 56 

Earnestness 137 

Error,  The  Danger,  Sin  and  Punish- 
ment of 59,  133,  134,  177,  282 

The  Need  of  Protest  against. .  137 

Spiritual  Nutriment,  the  Pre- 
servative from 144 

Errorists,  The  Satanic  Devices  of.  149 
Esther  going  in  unto  the  King.  ...  18 
Eternal   Realities   and   Temporal 

Vanities 59,  283 

Evidences  of  Grace 21 

Evil,  The  Infectious  Character  of, 

140,  211,  212,  221,  254 

Exotics,  their  Need  of  Care 33 

Eye,  The  Master's 282 

Fading  Flowers 8 

Failing,  A  Child's 18 

Faith  and  Spiritual  Discernment. . ,  208 

Implicit 20 

its  Sphere  in  Mysteries 42 

the  least,  is  Saving 182 

to  be  exercised  when  Light  is 

absent 18,  172,  231 

Trial  of,  Precious .191,  270 

Weak,  and  Divine  Tenderness.  179 

False  Hopes,  Illustrated    100,  153 

Far-off  looks  small 60 

Fathers,  A  Saying  of  the 110 

Fault-finding 142 

Feelings,  Untrustworthiness  of 113 

Fellow-countryman,  The 123 

Firel  Firel...   137 

Fire  from  Heaven,  The  Need  of . . .    63 


IKDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


281 


PAGE 

The  House  on 160 

Two  Wavs  of  Putting  out 205 

will  Spread 39 

Fish  in  a  Pail,  The 255 

Flint  and  Steel 181 

Floodgates,  Closing  the 153 

Foot-race,  The 246 

Formalists  and  Hypocrites 23,  38 

Foundation,  Loose  Stones  in  the..  177 

Foundations,  Deep 143 

Free-will  and  Effectual  Grace 124 

Fruit  cannot  ripen  without  the  Sun  136 

Gambling 233 

Gardener  and  the  Roots,  The 249 

Garment,  The  long 148 

Ghost,  Guilt  of  Conscience  like  a. .    49 

Giant  and  the  Straw,  The 202 

Gibeonites,  Worldly  things  to  be 

treated  as 94 

Giddy  think  the  Earth  moves,  The  113 

Gifts— their  Design 44,  192 

Gilded  Postherd,  The 199 

Giving,  Christian —  -. 206 

Glass  without  a  foot.  The 137 

God  All-sufficient 22 

as  our  Judge,  to  be  regarded.  224 

"  by  whom  all  things  consist"  109 

Faithfulness  of 116 

God  is  Engraven  on  every  Creature  170 

"  Jehovah  Rophi " 110 

Man's  Disregard  of 138 

not  Second  Causes,  to  be  eyed  274 

Omniscience  of,  a  comfortable 

Reflection  from  the 250 

Our  Father 252 

Presence  of,  likened  to  Sun- 
shine  248 

Pruning  the  Prosperous 225 

Sovereignty  of  and  Free  Agen- 
cy   241 

The  New  Nature   tends    to, 

102,  247,  272 

to  be  served  with  our  best 205 

Trust  in,  in  Extremity 200 

Ways  of,  not  to  be  measured 

by  Human  Standards 199 

Godliness  demands  care  and 

thought 46,  190 

God's  Appointments,  The  duty  of 

acquiescing  in 46 

Gold  instead  of  Copper  Payment. .  164 

Gospel  Light,  Errorists  hate 68 

Unholy  Preachers  and  the 185 

Grace,  Design  of   the  Means  of, 

45,  77,  125 

Free,  and  Free-will 124 

Free,     The     Death-blow     of 

Popery 75 

Growth  in 126,  173 

How  to   Discover  Evidences 

of 21,  100 

is  for  use  26,  255 

is  the  best  Plea 28 

its  abundance,  and  our  need, 

127,  189 

Preparatives  to. 259 

Proportioned  to  Trials 65 


PAGE 

The  Covenant  of 118 

The  Doom  of  Despisers  of 241 

The  Fragrance  of 178 

The  Sweet  Compulsions  of 243 

There  is  no  Old  Age  in 40 

Young  and  Old  need  the  re- 
straints of    90 

Grapes,  Sour 35 

Gravel  in  the  Shoe 227 

Green  Wood 232 

Guest,  Looking  for  an  expected. . .  163 

Sin,  a  Malicious 270 

Guilt  of  Conscience,  its  Terror 49 

Handwriting,    We    should    plead 

God's 61 

Happiness 235 

Hearers  of  the  Word  Disappointing 

the  Preacher 277,  282 

should  be  like  Traders 12 

Need  Heart-preparation 138 

Heart,  Change  of,  needed 143,  204 

Heart,  Disease 201,  223,  233 

Heart-fixedness,   The  Blessedness 

of 32 

Purity,  An  Argument  for 210 

Heaven,  Foretastes  of 105 

"  No  Cross,  No  Crown" 161 

The  Saint's  Home 132,  219,  255 

The  Road  to.  Difficult. .   . .  95,  161 

Hedge  of  Thorns,  the  ungodly  a . . .    55 

Hen  and  her  Eggs,  The 66,  70 

The  clucking 120 

Hewing  Stones  and  pruning  Vines.  194 
Holder  of  the  Keys  knocking  at  the 

Door,  The 16 

Holding  on  by  the  Teeth 200 

Holiness,  how  promoted 156 

of  God,  The.... 99 

Homeward-bound 132 

Hooper  the  Martyr  at  the  Stake. . .    34 

Hopper,  The  Empty 172 

Horse  with  Halter,  The 220 

House  on  Fire,  The 160 

Taking  down  the  Old 273 

The  Unfinished 151 

Humilitv,  a  Mark  of  Grace 74 

Hypocrisy  ;  Hypocrites... 23,  38,  57,  199 

Ice,  half-melted,  Some  Souls  like..    52 

Image,  not  the  Man,  The 38 

Imperial     Revenues     and     small 

Charges 96 

Inclinations  show  Character 226 

Industry,  An  Incentive  to  Holy 131 

:  Infants   and   Sick   Folk,  How  to 

j  Infection  of  Sin,' The..  *.'.'...   .'.'.211*,  212 
'  Instability  of  Earthly  Things,  The.  114 

Instrumentality,     God's    Wisdom 
i         displayed  in  using  human 69 

Invisible    Ink— Secret     Sin    illus- 
trated     57 

Inward  Bleeding 233 

Ivy  in  the  Wall— a  Simile 15 

Jewels,  Save  the 47 

Joys  of  Earth  are  Fading  Flowers.      8 


2S2 


i:^rDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


PAGE 

Judprment  of  the  Natural  Man  is 
False,  The 16 

Judgment-Day,  The,  Sins  unpar- 
doned will  appear  at 99 

"  The  Unfaithful  Steward." . . .  101 

Justification  and  Sanctification— 
both  needed 227 

Key,  The  Unused 56 

of  the  House,  Waiting  for  the.  124 

Keys,  Trying  the 125 

King's  Lodging,  The 210 

Knock  borne  for  a  Crown,  A IGl 

Knowledge,  Speculative,  a  Snare. .    91 

Lapwing,  The 142 

Lark  and  the  Fowler,  The 91 

Law  of  God,  On  Keeping  the 279 

the  Rule  of  Life,  The 12 

Lay- Figures 145 

Lead,  Unrenewed  Nature  likened 

to 44 

Lean-to  Shed,  The 2C5 

Leaven  in  the  Bread,  The 115 

Leaves,  New,  push  off  the  Old 97 

Life,  Christian  known  by  his 229 

God's  Judgment  of  our 195 

Picture  of  a  blighted 81 

proved  by  Growth 126 

to  be  measured  by  Results  —  226 

TheFrailtyof 12 

The  true  Purpose  of 72,  73 

Light  carried  by  a  Black  Man 185 

Like  will  to  Like  222 

Link,  Only  a 134 

Long  Lease  enhances  Value,  A 283 

Lookers-on  and  Players 254 

Losses,  Temporal,  How  Saints  bear  244 

Love,  a  Touchstone 85 

Brotherly  180 

illustrated 120, 122,  252 

its  Power  in  Service 275 

the  Root  Grace 103,  145,  201 

to  God  expelling  Love -of  Sin. .  104 

Ludovicus  Marsacus,  The  story  of.    86 

Lungs,  The 135 

Lute,  The  Untuned 255 

Madman  of  Athens,  The 101 

Man  unrenewed,  Spiritually  Blind. 

04,  93 

Marshes,  Dwellers  in 150 

Martha  complaining  of  Mary 132 

Martyr  and  the  Chain,  The 34 

Martyrs  in  Bears'  Skins 257 

Mattocks  of  Gold 72 

Meadows  and  Marshes • 19 

Means     useless     v/ithout     Divine 

Power 203 

of  Grace  to  be  prized. .106,  233,  279 

On  the  Choice  of  right 196 

Meditation 26,  66,  107 

Merchant,  The  Insulted 241 

Mercy  Free,  but  Means  to  be  used.    77 

Misery  the  best  Plea  with., 130 

Merit  and  Means  77 

The  Modesty  of  real 133 

Meteors,  not  Stars 114 


Pi-GE 

Mice,  Burning  a  House  to  kill  the. .  152 

Milk  for  Babes 281 

Millstone,  The  Single 36 

Mind,  Occupation  a  necessity  for 

the ^172 

Ministers,  The  Example  of 141 

Ministry,  The  Need  of  a  living 118 

Mirror,  The 272 

Miser  and  his  Bag  of  Money,  The. .    85 

Misfit,  The  186 

Moon  is  eclipsed  at  the  Full,  The..  88 
Mortality,  Delusive  Thoughts  on. . .  275 
INIusteatzem  of  Babylon,  The  Story 

of 95 

Nail,  One,  drives  out  another 104 

The  All-supporting 109 

Nature,  Everything  acts  according 

to  its 204 

tends  to  its  Author 247 

Need  the  best  Fitness  for  Grace. . .    22 

Needle  and  its  Pole,  The 19 

Nurse  and  the  Falling  Child,  The . .    25 

Obedience,  Implicit —    20 

Olivian's  Dying  Saying 117 

One  Rainy  Day,  Trouble  but  as 58 

Oven,  The  Baker  and  his 216 

Paint  for  Paint  146 

Pal«logus,  the  Emperor,  a  Beggar,    95 

Patience  under  Trials 159 

Pearl,  The  Soul  a  Priceless 243 

Pearls  and  Swine 76 

Perfectionism 246 

Perfumed  Gale,  The 105 

Persecution  for  righteousness'  sake, 

86, 189,  202,  258 
Perseverance  of  the  Saints,  114-117,  151 

Peter  Martyr's  Ilhistration 63 

Phideas  and  his  Name 170 

Physician  in  the  Garden,  The 128 

Pills,  Some  Truths  to  be  received 

as 42 

Pin,  The   prick  of,  and   a  heavy 

blow 191 

Plaister  and  the  Hand,  The 118,  277 

Poisoned   Meat,  Error  dangerous 

as 59 

Poor  Man  Robbed,  A 244 

Popery,  The  Death-blow  of 75 

Position  no  Criterion  of  Worth 87 

Pot,  The  Cracked  14 

Practical  I  se  to  be  considered 128 

Prayer,  Companionship  in 95,  175 

Encouragement  for  .   35,  278 

for  Spirituals  and  Temporals. .  2^34 

How  to  attain  I*ower  in 276 

Importunate 38, 172. 181,  270 

in  Submission  to  the  Divine 

AVill 80 

Neglect  of 50,  278 

of  the  Son  and  sons  of  God. ..  169 

Preachers  must  alarm  as  well  as 

comfort  {see  also  Sermons)..  .58,  147 
Preachers  need  Fire  from  Heaven, 

63,281 
Prescriptions  not  to  be  altered —  238 


li^DEX   OP   SUBJECTS. 


283 


PAGE 

Pinming:,  or.  Preparatives  to  Grace,  258 

Prince  in  a  Ditch,  The 112 

Printers' Proofs 141 

Procrastination 191 

Profession    and    Possession    con- 
trasted   10,  192,  213,  248,  265 

Professors,  Graceless 23,  54,  2-S2 

Promises,  How  to  plead  the 61 

Proportions  to  be  studied 65 

Prosperity,  a  Test  of  Character...?,  14 

The  Dangers  of 88 

Providence 159,  268 

Provision  for  a  Journey 161 

Provisioned  for  a  Siege 242 

Pump,  Water  poured  into  a. 122 

Queen  crowned  with  the  King,  The.  178 

Rabbi  Joseph  and  the  Synagogue. .  263 
Raiment.  Soul  and  Body  more  than.   37 
Ravens  Loving  the  Scent  of  Car- 
rion   230 

Ready  to  Sail 167,  233 

Reason,  its  Inability  to  solve  Di- 
vine Mysteries 231 

Records  of  Life    99 

Recreation  112, 146 

Reformation  is  not  Regeneration, 

44,  158,  260 
Registrar,  Conscience  the  inward. .    65 

Religion,  "  A  Lean-to  Shed." 265 

Heartless 146 

Secret,  the  Soul  of  Godliness .  172 

True,  is  Intolerant  of  Error. . .  176 

Repentance,  Temporary 158,  260 

Reproof,  How  to  administer 236 

Responsibility,  how  measured. .  .53,  185 

of  God's  Servants 250 

Resurrection  of  the  Body,  The. 209,  273 

Rhine,  Children  dipped  in  the 165 

Rliodians,  The 28 

Riches,  ensnaring  (see  Prosperity) . .  148 

of  Saints  and  Sinners,  The 266 

Rider  and  the  Footman,  The 185 

River  swollen  by  being  dammed. 

The 261 

River  losing  Depth,  The 188 

Roman  Senate  and  Christ,  The 176 

Root  and  the  Branches,  The 103 

Rose  on  the  Tree  and  in  the  Still, 

A 193 

Runavrav  Knocks 38 

Russet  Coat,  The 39 

Saints.  God  the  Carver  for  his. . .   .  268 

Hatred  of  the  World  to. . . .149,  189 

Honored  with  Christ 178 

Safety  of  the 115 

Should  be  mutual  helps. . . .123,  192 

Soldiers  under  Christ's  Eye  ...  282 

Sometimes  die  Fighting 197 

Small  Vessels  — God  a   great 

Fountain 189 

sufferings  for  Sin  corrective. . .     25 

Salvation,  the  End  of  all  the  Means 

of  Grace 44 

Things  which  precede 258 

Salvation,  Where  to  be  Obtained..  280 


PAGE 

Samson's  Locks 95 

Sanctification 27,  240 

Satan,  the  Lord  Rebuking 194 

Satan's  Devices 92,  93,"  185 

Scarecrow,  The  Bird  afraid  of  the.  193 

Scythe,  Whetting  the 174 

Scripture  Knowledge,  a  Preserva- 
tive     29 

like  a  Sword. 82 

Seasons  of  Grace  to  be  utilized 216 

Second  Coming  of  Christ,  The 163 

Self  denial,  Christ  the  Example  of.    45 
Self-reliance,     its     Danger     and 

Folly 48 

Self-righteousness .    ...39,  153 

Self-sufficiency,  The  Danger  of ... .    24 

Sentinel,  The 256 

Sermons,  Good  and  bad 146,  157 

Servant,  The  Drunken 53 

Squabbling  with  a 260 

Servants  and  Heirs 222 

Settling  the  Expenditure 205 

Shaking  of  the  Tree,  The 207 

Shame  for  Christ's  sake  is  Honor..    86 

Sheep  and  Sheep-dog,  The 187 

Sheep,  How  to  treat  wandering...  139 

Ship  and  its  Passengers,  The 241 

Building 175 

Ships  are  not   drawn  by  Horses, 

12,  222,  226 

Ships,  Similes  from. 12,  274 

Showers,  Slow,  are  best l&i 

Showman's  Jest,  The 235 

"  Silence,"  Making  a  noise  by  cry- 
ing   162 

Sin,  "  a  Malicious  Guest " 270 

Christ  in  the  Heart  expels    ...    02 

compared  to    a    benumbed 

Snake 210 

compared  to  Ivy 15 

Fear  of  Punishment  for 193 

Hardening  character  of 67 

Indwelling  mars  our  Service . .    11 

"  our  worst  Enemy, 

66,  261 

Infectious  Character  of 135 

is  seen  in  Little  Things 230 

Its  Effects  on  Conscience 197 

must  be  mortified  in  its  begin- 
nings   56,  155 

must  be  slain,  or  it  will  slay.. 7,    83 

Pleasures  of,  like  Sour  Grapes    35 

Presumptuous.   239 

Secret,  Danger  of  119 

The  Danger  of  One 184,  220 

Sinner,  The,  less  wise  than  the  Ass,    51 
Sinners,  The  Sad  Case  of  Unfor- 

given 50 

The  Throne  of  Grace  for 278 

Singer,  The —  195 

Sins  of  Infirmity  illustrated 17,  229 

seemingly  little  are  deadly 82 

of  the  Righteous 19 

Slander  the  Persecutor's  Weapon .  257 
Slandering  Holy  things.  The  Sin  of    79 

Sleeping  by  Waterfalls -     68 

Sluggards  hate  Light 147 

Snail,  The  Trail  of  a 187 


284 


IKDEX    OF   SUBJECTS. 


PAGE 

Snake,  The  Benumbed 216 

Snow,  Soft  but  Soaking 269 

Soldiers  and  Sailors 151 

Sorrows  of  Saints  preferable  to  the 

Joys  of  Worldlings,  The 25 

Soul,  Preciousness  of  the — 37,  47,  243 

Trouble 143 

Spectacles  useless  to  the  Blind —  218 
Speech,  Fine,  not  Gospel-preach- 
ing   157 

Spices  beaten,  Afiaictions  likened 

to 78 

Spider,  The 153 

Spire,  The— a  simile 71 

Spirit,  The  Holy,  liow  Quenched..  205 

''  helps  Saints 242 

"  Scripture  used  by    31 

Spiritual   and   Natural    Life   and 

their  fruits 13,  214 

Conflict 201 

Exercises 33 

Life  is  aggressive 39 

Maladies  require  prompt  At- 
tention       69 

Spirituality,  Decline  of 186 

Stalk,  The  Stripped 81 

Stars  and  their    Strange  Names, 

The 79 

Steadfastness 256 

Steward,  The  Unfaithful 101 

Stitchin  Time,  A 83 

Stone  and  the  Chip,  The 138 

Storms,  Preparation  for 222 

Strife 153 

Study,  Meditation  must  follow 26 

Substitute,  The  Princely 125 

Suit,  Godliness  an  Every-day 213 

Keeping  up  a  270 

Sulphur  in  the  Incense  —   11 

Sun  alone  can  make  Day,  The 49 

Dial,  The,  without  the  Sun  ...    21 

Eclipsed— Christ's  Sufferings..    51 

Sun  in  Winter 25 

Sunflower  and  the  Aqueduct,  The.  102 

Sunshine   248 

Sunshine  with  Rain 240 

Sword  in  a  Child's  Hand,  The 82 

not  to  be  judged  by  the  Belt. .    87 

Tailoring,  Man's 12 

Talent  and  Influence,  Small 71 

Tanned  Face,  A. 245 

Tap  and  the  Liquor,  The 229 

Taste  the  best  Test 59 

Tasters,  not  Buyers 277 

Temptation 160,  245 

Communion  with  God  baffles  .  154 

Testimony,  The  Power  of  Person- 
al  , 76 

Thief  and  the  Candle,  The 66 

Thirsty  Men,  How  they  drink 208 

Thorns  and  Burrs 221 

Thoughtless,    How  to   deal  with 

the 232 

Thread,  Fine-spun 157 

Tight-rope  Dancer,  The 116 

Timber  in  Sun  and  Shower 187 

Time,  Preciousness  of ,,....  12,  174 


PAGE! 

Tongs  for  Handling  Hot  Iron kA 

Tongue,  the  Index  of  the  Mind 2-29 

Tradesman   losing   his    Customer, 

The 166 

Trading  on  a  Man's  Word 198 

Training  for  Prayer 276 

Traitor  within,  Corruption  the 62 

Traveller  and  the  ^Merchant,  The. .  13 
Travelling,  Looking  at  Maps  is  not.  190 

Treason  in  Coining  Farthings 17 

Treasury     and     the     Bags,     The 

Opened  127 

Tree,  The  Shaken 207 

Trees,  Pruning  Unpruned 225 

Trials,  Saints'  need  of 151,  163 

Fi-eedom  from 228 

Preventible 227 

Some  Uses  of 129 

Trouble  short-lived  to  a  Believer. .    58 

Long-continued 164 

Trumpet  and   Pipe,  each   has  its 

Use 58 

Trust  in  God,  Illustrated 198 

in  Trial 200 

Trusting  after  Failure 238 

Truth  must  be  loved  as  well   as 

learned 59 

spoken  in  Love 128,  269 

is   precious    though   Sinners 

pervert  it 76 

The  least,  to  be  prized 134,  180 

Tuning  an  Instrument 140 

Unbelief,  The  Mischief  of 277 

Unconverted,  Care  for  the 159 

Spiritually  Blind 106,  218 

Unthankf ulness  for  Mercies 188 

Uprightness  alone  is  Safety 84 

Yalentinian's  Polluted  Garment. . .  155 
Vanity  of  Earthly  Things,  The..  .  218 
Verities,  not  Vanities,  should  be 

the  Objects  of  Life 73 

Vessels,  Small,  and  a  great  Foun- 
tain   189 

Victims  led  to  the  Slaughter 112 

Vines,  Pruning 194 

Violet  and  Nettle 133 

Wagons  are  not  moved  by  Wind..  196 

Warrior's  Thoughts,  The 247 

Waste,  Malicious 260 

Watchmaker,  The 110 

Wax,  The  broken  Stick  of 187 

Way  to  Heaven,  The 15 

Weak,  strong  ;  and  the  Strong  weak    24 

We  should  bear  with  the. .  .41,  139 

Weapons,  Invention  of  fresh 131 

Weather  varied  to  suit  the  Soil, 

The 46 

Wedges 184 

Weeds  must  be  choked 29 

Wicked,  The,  Prosperity  of 112 

"     why  preserved 55 

Widow,  The  loving 172 

Windfalls,  Professors  likened  to..  215 
AVindows  and  Tiles  worthy  of  care  180 
Wisp,  The  little 71 


INDEX    OF   SUBJECTS. 


285 


PAGE 

Witness-Bearing  for  Clirist 76 

Wolf,  The  frightened 158 

"     and   the   Picture  of   a 

Sheep    189 

Wooden  Leg,  The 186 

Word  of  a  :Man,  Trading  on  the. . ,  198 
Word  of  God  not  to  be  altered. . . .  238 
"        Personal   Experience 

of Ill 

Words,  Hasty,  The  Mischief  of 153 

Works,  Good  255 

World,  The,  not  the  Believer's  Rest  151 
Worldlings,  the  Pursuits  of....  169,  249 


PAGE 

Worldly  Conformity,  a  Mark  of  Un- 

regenerac3^ 9 

Things    should   be    made   to 

serve  Spiritual  Ends 94 

Worship,  Public 263 

Worthless 144 

Writing  Close 271 

Yoke  Lined,  The %7 

of  Christ,  easy  by  use 243 

Young,  On  Training  the 29 

Zeal,  Intemperate 152 


287 

THE  STANDARD  LIBRARY. 

WHAT    REPKESENTATIVB    CliEKGYMEN    SAY 

OF  IT. 

I   Chas.  K.   Hall,   D.D.,  Holy  Trinity  Episcopal  Church,  Brooklyn, 

V  says  : 

\  "  Great  book  monopolies,  like  huge  railroad  syndicates,  are  now  the  ma« 
f  narcbical  relics  against  which  the  benevolence  and  radicalism  of  the  age, 
\  from  ditfereat  standpoints,  are  bound  to  wage  war.  Each  source  will  have 
its  own  motives  and  arguments,  but  each  will  resolve  to  conquer  in  the  long 
ruD.  At  one  end  of  the  scale  we  have  the  Life  of  Dickens  offered  for  $800, 
that  some  one  wealthy  man  may  enjoy  the  comfort  of  his  proud  privilege 
of  wealth  in  having  what  no  other  mortal  possesses  ;  at  the  other,  we  find 
the  volume  offered  at  10  or  30  cents,  which  any  newsboy  or  thoughtful 
laborer  uses  in  common  with  thousands.  In  the  great  strife  for  the  great- 
est o;ood  of  the  largest  number,  put  me  down  as  on  the  side  of  the  last.  I 
enclose  my  subscription  order  for  a  year.'* 

Key.   Chas*  W.  Cushing,    I>.I>«,    First  M.  E.  Church,  Rochester, 

N.  Y.,  says : 
"  One  of  the  most  pernicious  sources  of  evil  among  our  young  people 
is  the  books  they  read.  When  I  can  get  a  young  man  interested  in  subsian- 
tied  books ^  I  have  great  hope  of  him.  For  this  reason  1  have  been  deepl\ 
Interested  in  your  effort  to  make  good  books  as  cheap  as  bad  ones.  I  meuv 
tioned  the  matter  from  ni}''  pulpit.  As  a  result  I  at  once  got  fifty-four  sub- 
scribers for  the  full  set,  and  more  to  come." 

J.  O.  Feck,  D.I>«9  First  M.  E.  Church,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  says: 

*'  Your  effort  is  commendable.  You  ought  to  liave  the  co-operation  of 
all  good  men.     It  is  a  moral,  heroic,  and  humane  enterprise." 

Pres,  Mark  Hopkius,  D^D.^  of  Williams  College,  says: 

'^  The  attempt  of  Messrs.  Funk  and  Wagnalls  to  place  good  literature 
within  reach  of  the  masses  is  worthy  of  all  commendation  aud  encourage- 
ment. If  the  plan  can  be  successfully  carried  out,  it  will  be  a  great  boon 
to  the  country." 

Geo.  C«  liOrrimer,  D.D.,  Baptist  Church,  Chicago,  says  : 

''  I  sincerely  ho])e  your  endeavors  to  circulate  a  wholesome  and  elevat- 
ing class  of  books  will  prove  successful.     C^rtainlv,  clerirymen,  and  Chris- 
.  tians  generally,  can aot  afford  that  it  should  fail.  '  In  proof  of  my  personal 
interest  in  your  endeavors,  I  subscribe  for  a  year." 

J.  P.  Newmaa,   D.D.,  New  York,  says: 

•*  I  have  had  faith  from  the  bearinning  in  the  mission  of  Messrs.  Funk  & 
Wagnalls.  It  required  great  faith  on  their  part,  and  their  success  is  in 
proof  that  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth.  They  have  done 
for  the  public  what  long  was  needed,  but  what  other  Dublishers  did  not 
venture  to  do." 

Henry  J.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.,  Presbyterian  Church,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y., 

says: 
"  Good  books  are  gfreat  blessings.     They  drive  out  darkness  by  letting 
In  light.     Your  ])]an  oii2:ht  not  to  fail  for  lack  of  support.    Put  my  name 
on  Uie  list  of  subscribers." 


288 

T.  W.  Chambers,  D.D.,  Collegiate  Reformed  Church,  New  York,  says; 
"  The  plan  seems  to  me  both  praiseworthy  and  feasible.    I  trust  it  will 
meet  with  speedy  and  abundant  success." 

Sylvester  F.  Scovel,  D.D.,    Pirst  Presbyterian  Church,    Pittsburgh, 

Pa.,  says  :  . 

"  Your  plans  deserve  a  place  in  the  category  of  moral  reforms.  The 
foes  they  meet,  the  width  of  the  battle-ground  they  can  be  expanded  to 
cover,  tlie  manifold  incidental  blessings  they  may  convey  to  thousands  of 
households,  the  national  and  international  currents  of  thought  they  may 
set  in  motion,  entitle  them  beyond  all  question  to  prompt  and  efficient  aid 
irom  clergymen  and  the  whole  Christian  Church.'' 

£zra  Abbot,  D.D.,  lili.D.,  of  Harvard  College,  says: 

"  I  heartily  approve  of  your  project.  I  shall  be  glad  to  receive  and 
commend  the  volumes  to  buyers.    I  send  you  my  subscription." 

Thos.  Armitage,   J}*!}.,  Fifth  Avenue  Baptist    Church,  New  York, 

says : 
"  Your  plan  is  grand  and  philanthropic.    I  wish  you  success,  and  ask 
you  to  put  me  down  for  one  set,  with  the  assurance  thdt  I  will  aid  you  by 
every  kind  word  which  opportunity  suggests." 

William  M.  Taylor,  D.D.,  Broadway  Tabernacle,  New  York,  says  : 

''  The  success  of  the  plan  depends  very  much  on  the  character  of  the 
books  selected  ;  but  if  you  are  wise  in  that  particular,  as  I  have  no  doubt, 
you  will  be  benefactors  to  many  struggling  readers  in  whose  experience  a 
new  book  is  one  of  the  rarest  treats.  I  am  glad  to  see,  too,  that  you  are 
making  arrangements  with  the  English  publishers,  so  that  in  conferring 
a  boon  upon  readers  here  you  will  not  be  doing  Injustice  to  authors  across 
the  sea." 

James  Eells,  D.D.,  Lane  Theological  Seminary,  Cincinnati,  O.,  says  : 
"  From  the  reputation  of  your  house  I  am  ready  to  believe  that  you  will 
publish  only  worthy  books.    I  heartily  wish  you  success." 

E.  J.  Wolf,  D.D«,  of  the  Lutheran  Seminary,  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  says: 

"  A  more  laudable  project  I  can  hardly  conceive  of.  Vicious  literature 
has  long  had  the  advantage  in  that  it  was  put  within  easy  reach  of  the 
masses.  The  poverty  of  many  who  fain  would  use  the  very  best  books  has 
often  distressed  me.  I  feel  in  my  heart  that  the  noble  enterprise  of  your 
house  is  deserving  of  the  most  liberal  encouragement." 

Bishop  Samuel  Fallows,    Reformed  Episcopalian  Church,   Chicago, 

says : 
*' Your  plan  for  supplying  the  masses  with  the  best  reading  at  such  a 
nominal  price  cannot  be  too  highly  commended." 

J.  L.  Burrows,  D.D.,  Baptist  Church,  Norfolk,  Va.,  says  : 

"  Every  endeavor  to  supersede  poison  by  food  for  the  people  deserves 
encouragement." 

Rev.  W.  F.  Crafts,  Lee  Avenue  Congregationalist  Church,  Brooklyn, 

says  : 
**In  the  West  they  displace  the  worthless  prairie  grass  by  sowing  blue 
grass.  The  soil  is  too  rich  to  be  inactive.  It  will  have  a  right  or  wrong 
activity.  So  about  the  love  of  reading  in  the  young.  It  is  prime  soil  and 
will  bear  tall  wire  grass  if  we  do  not  give  it  blue  grass.  It  will  have  bad 
reading,  if  the  good,  equally  cheap  and  attractive,  is  not  provided." 


THE    STANDARD    SBRIES. 

Best    Books    fbr    a    Tirifle. 

THBfiB  books  are  printed  in  readable  type,  on  fair  paper,  and  are  bound  in  postal 
card  manllla. 

These  books  are  printed  wholly  without  abridgment,  exc^t  Canon  Farrar's  "  Life 
of  Ohrist "  and  his  '*  Life  of  Paul." 


Ne.  Price. 

1.  John  Ploughman's  Talk.    C.  H. 

Sporgeon.    On  Choice  of  Books. 

Thomas  Carlyle. '  4to.  Both ....  $0  12 
8.  Manliness   of    Christ.     Thomas 

Hughes.    4to 10 

3.  Essays.  Lord  Macaulay.  4to...  15 
4-  Li>rht  of  Asia.  Edwin  Arnold.  4to.  15 
5.  Imitation  of  Christ.    Thomas  a 

Kempis.    4to 15 

6-7.  Life  of  Christ.    Canon  Farrar. 

4to 50 

8.  EtJSays.  Thomas  Carlyle.  4to..  20 
9-10.  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul. 

Canon  Farrar.  4to  2  parts,  both  50 
11.  Self -Culture.    Prof.  J.  S,  Blackie. 

4to.    2  parts,  both 10 

12-19.  Popular  History  of  England. 

Chas.  Knight.    4to 2  80 

20-21.  Ruskin's  Letters  to  Workmen 

and  Laborer?.   4to.   2  parts,  both       30 

22.  Idyls  of  the  King.    Alfred  Tenny- 
son.   4to 20 

23.  Life  of  Rowland  Hill.    Rev.  V.  J. 
Charlesworth.    4to 15 

24.  Town  Geology.    Charles  Kings- 
ley.    4to 15 

25.  Alfred  the  Great.   Thos.  Hughes. 

4to 20 

26.  Outdoor  Life  in  Europe.    Rev.  E. 

P.  Thwing.    4to SO 

27.  Calamities  of  Authors.    I.  D'ls- 
raeli.    4to 20 

28.  Salon  of  Madame  Necker.    Part  I. 

4to 15 

29.  Ethics  of  the  Dust.  John  Buskin. 

4to 15 

30-31.  Memories  of  My  Exile.    Louis 

Kossuth.    4to 40 

32.  Mister  Horn  and  His  Friends. 

Illustrated.    4to 15 

33-^4.  Orations  of  Demosthenes.  4to.        40 

35.  Frondes  Agrestes.     John  Rus- 

kin.    4to 15 

36.  Joan  of  Arc.    Alphonse  de  La- 
martine.    4to 10 

37.  Thoughts  of  M.  Aurelius  Anto- 
ninus.   4to 15 

38.  Salon  of  Madame  Necker.    Part 

IL    4to 15 

39.  The  HormitP.  Chas.  King8ley.4to.       15 

40.  John  Ploughman's  Pictures.    C. 

H.  Spura:eon.    4to 15 

41.  Pulpit  Tabie-Talk.    Dean  Ram- 
say.   4to  . . 10 

42.  Bible   and  Newspaper.     C.   H. 
Spurgeon.    4to 15 

48.  Lacon.    Rev.  C.  C.  Colton.    4to.       20 


Ko.  Fdce. 

44.  Goldsmith's  Citizen  of  the  World. 

4to ^  20 

45.  America  Revisited.  George  Au- 
gustus Sala.    4to 20 

46.  Life  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    8vo. . . .       20 

47.  John  Calvin.    M.  Guizot    4to...        15 
4&-49.  Dickens'     Christmas    Books. 

Illustrated.    8vo SO 

50.  Shairp's  Culture  and  Religion.  8vo.     15 
51-52.  Godet's  Commentary  on  Luke. 
Ed.  by  Dr.  John  Hall.  8vo,  2  parts, 

both 200 

53.  Diary  of  a  Minister's  Wife.    Part 

L    8vo 15 

54-57.  Van  Dorei#8  Suggestive  Com- 
mentary on  Luke.  Kew  edition, 
enlarged.    8vo 

58.  Diary  of  a  Minister's  Wife.  Part 
IL    8vo 

59.  The  Nutritive  Cure.  Dr.  Robert 
Walter.    8vo 

60.  Sartor  Resartus.  Thomas  Car- 
lyle.   4to 

61-^2.  Lothair.  Lord  Beaconsfield. 
8vo 

63.  The  Persian  Queen  and  Other 
Pictures  of  Truth.  Rev.  E.  P. 
Thwing.    8vo 

64.  Salon  of  Madame  Necker.  Part 
IIL    4to 

65-66.  The  Popular  History  of  Eng- 
lish Bible  Trani^lation.  H.P.Co- 
nant.    8vo.    Price  both  part»«... 

67.  I agersoU  Answered.  Joseph  Par- 
ker, D.D.    8vo 

68-69.  Studies  in  Mark.  D.  C. 
Hughes.    8vo,  in  two  parts 

70.  Job's  Comforters.  A  Religious 
Satire.  Joseph  Parker, D.D.  (Lon- 
don.)   12mo 

71.  The  Revl-ers' English.  G.  Wash- 
ington Moon,  F.R.S.L.    12mo.. 

72.  TheConversion  of  Children.  Rev. 
Edward  Payson  Hammond.  12mo 

73.  New  Testament  Helps.  Rev.  W. 
F.  Crafts,    8vo 

74.  Opium— England's  Coercive  Poli- 
cy.   Rev.  Jno.  Liggins.    6vo 

75.  Blood  of  Jesus.  Rev.  Wm.  A, 
Reid.    With  Introduction  by  E. 

P.  Hammond.    12mo 10 

76.  Les«on  in  the  Closet  for  1883. 
Charles  F.  Deems,  D.D.    i2mo..        20 

77-78.  Heroes  and  Holidava.      Rev. 

W.  F.  Crafts.   13mo.  2  pts.,  both       30 
79.  Reminiscences   of   Rev.    Lyman 

Eeecher,  D.D.    8vo 10 


FUNK  Sl  VVAGNALLS,  10  and  12  Dey  St.,  NEW  YORK, 


'm^mmmm^^m^:mmmm: 


PERNICIOUS  BOOKS. 

The  following  are  forcible  arguments  in  favor  of  our  cheap  STAND- 
ARD BOOKS — nearly  every  newspaper  chronicles  similar  ones  :  A  boy 
in  Ohio  went  into  the  yard  and  blew  out  his  brains  with  a  shotgun  after 
the  manner  described  *'  m  a  sensational  novel  he  had  been  reading."  A 
half-dozen  boys  in  New  York  formed  themselves  into  a  gang  of  "  Road 
Agents."  fully  armed  with  pistols  and  revolvers,  but  were  luckily  arrested 
before  they  had  opportunity  to  rob  and  murder  on  the  model  of  the 
**Road  Agents"  on  the  Western  frontier,  so  graphically  pictured  in  the 
popular  "  blood  and  thunder"  fiction  of  the  day.  Another  boy  shot  his 
stepmother.  He  said :  '*  I  don't  see  anything  wrong  in  that  kind  of 
thing.  It's  dead  sure  to  make  me  the  hero  of  a  novel,  with  my  picture 
in  it."  We  might  multiply  these  incidents  ad  infinitum.  Read  what 
Anthony  Comstock  has  printed  about  the  evil  wrought  by  bad  books. 
Tens  of  thousands  of  boys  and  girls  are  growing  into  a  worthless  man- 
hood and  womanhood,  the  victims  of  misdirected  reading.  Books  fit  for 
the  young  to  read  must  be  made  as  cheap  and  of  as  easy  access  as  are 
worthless  books. 


)  ttmvitmM'tv  jtWMpm^iJiinnmmmfmtm^m^ 


THE  HOYT-WARD  CYCLOPyEDIA  OF  QUOTATIONS 


dO,000  ClUOTATIONS,  50,000  LINES  OF  CONCORDANCE. 

THE  STANDARD  BOOK  OF  QUOTATIONS. 

"  The  compilationa  of  AlUbone  (over  which  we  have  often  grown  wrathy  fnough)  and 

Bartlett  (which  it  drains  to  the  dregs)  are  quite  out  of  competition.'"--^.  Y.  Christian  Union. 

"  This  is  by  long  odds  the  best  book  of  quotations  xn  existence:* --^e^  York  Herald. 


Hon.  JUDGE  EDMUNDS,  U.S.  Senator: 

the  kind." 


'*The  most  complete  and  best  work  of 

OLIVER  WENDELL  HOLMES:    "A  massive  and  teeming  volume." 

WENDELL  PHILLIPS:    "It  is  of  rare  value  to  the  scholar." 

Gen    STEWART  L.  WOODFORD:    "The  most  complete  and  accurate  book  of  the 

kind." 
Ex-Speaker  RANDALL:    **I  consider  it  the  best  book  of  quotations." 
GEO.  WASHINGTON   CHILDS:    **  Anv  one  who  dips  into  it  will  at  once  make  a 

place  for  it  among  his  well-choaen  books." 
HENRY  WARD  BEECHER:    "Good  aU  the  way  through." 
Maj.-Gen.  McCLELLAN:    "A  work  that  should  be  in  every  library." 
ABRAM  S.  HEWITT:    "The  c#mpleteneB8  of  its  indices  is  simply  astonishing.'* 
GEORGE  W.  CURTIS:    **A  most  serviceable  companion." 
HENRY  W.   LONGFELLOW :    " Can  hardly  fail  to  be  a  very  successful  and  favorite 

volume." 

Vricea:  JRoyal  8vo,  over  900  pp.^  Heavy  Paper  and  Cloth  Binding,  $S$ 
Sheepi  $0.50  i  Malf  Morocco,  $8;  Full  Morocco,  $10. 


RA.^ir 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Oct.  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  1 6066 
(724)779-2111 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


^^Mm. 


'.y''^' 


