tihvaxy  of  CKe  theological  ^tmimxy 

PRINCETON  .  NEW  JERSEY 

FROM  THE  LIBRARY  OF 
ROBERT  ELLIOTT  SPEER 


BV  4225  .S63  15  1883 
Spurgeon,  C.  H.  1834-1892 
Illustrations  and 
meditations 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS, 


^ 


A?,"!  w  rw,i 


rWA'Cf^ 


APR    1 


9)9 


^A,, 


ILLUSTRATIOl»eicAL  st.^ 


AND 


MEDITATIONS: 

OK, 

FLOWERS    FROM    A    PURITAN'S    GARDEN. 
Sistillcti  anU  IBispenseti 

C.   H.   Spurgeon. 


London  : 

Passmore   c\:   Alabaster,  Paternoster  Buildings. 

1883 


^4 


All  7-iWils  resefvcd. 


LONDON  : 

PRINTED   BY  ALABASTER,    PASSMORE,    AND   SONS, 

FANN  STREET,   ALDERSGATE  STREET,   E.G. 


PREFACE. 


jHILE  commenting  upon  the  One  Hmidred-and-Nine- 
teenth  Psalm,  I  was  brought  into  most  intimate 
communion  with  Thomas  Manton,  who  has  dis- 
coursed upon  that  marvellous  portion  of  Scripture 
with  great  fulness  and  power.  I  have  come  to  know  him  so 
well  that  I  could  choose  him  out  from  among  a  thousand  divines 
if  he  were  again  to  put  on  his  portly  form,  and  display  among 
modern  men  that  countenance  wherein  was  a  "great  mixture 
of  majesty  and  meekness."  His  works  occupy  twenty-two 
volumes  in  the  modern  reprint :  a  mighty  mountain  of  sound 
theology.  They  mostly  consist  of  sermons  ;  but  what  sermons ! 
They  are  not  so  sparkling  as  those  of  Henry  Smith,  nor  so 
profound  as  those  oif  Owen,  nor  so  rhetorical  as  those  of  Howe, 
nor  so  pithy  as  those  of  Watson,  nor  so  fascinating  as  those  of 
Brooks ;  and  yet  they  are  second  to  none  of  these.  For  solid, 
sensible  instruction  forcibly  delivered  they  cannot  be  surpassed. 
Manton  is  not  brilliant,  but  he  is  ahvays  clear ;  he  is  not  ora- 
torical, but  he  is  powerful ;  he  is  not  striking,  but  he  is  deep. 
There  is  not  a  poor  discourse  in  the  whole  collection:  he  is 
evenly  good,  constantly  excellent.  Ministers  who  do  not  know 
Manton  need  not  wonder  if  they  are  themselves  unknown. 

Inasmuch  as  Manton  used  but  few  figures  and  illustrations,  it 
came  into  my  head  to  mark  them  all,  for  I  felt  sure  that  they 
would  be  very  natural  and  forcible.  I  will  give  you  the  con- 
siderations of  which  this  volume  is  the  result.  I  thought  that  here 
we  should  find  a  set  of  workable  illustrations.  It  never  occurred 
to  this  good  man  to  introduce  a  metaphor  by  way  of  ornament  ; 
he  was  too  intent  upon  telling  his  message  to  think  about  how  his 


vi.  PREFACE. 

sentences  might  be  adorned ;  and  hence  it  fell  out  that  if  he  did 
use  a  simile,  it  was  because  one  was  absolutely  needful,  or,  at 
least,  because  it  was  the  preferable  mode  of  making  himself 
understood.  Here,  then,  is  a  man  whose  figures  will  be  sure  to  be 
usable  by  the  earnest  preacher  who  has  forsworn  the  baubles  of 
rhetoric,  and  aims  at  nothing  but  the  benefit  of  his  hearers.  I 
thought  it  worth  while  to  go  through  volume  after  volume,  and 
mark  the  metaphors ;  and  then  I  resolved  to  complete  the  task 
by  culling  the  best  figures  out  of  the  whole  of  Manton's  works. 
Thus  my  communing  with  the  great  Puritan  ends  in  my  clearing 
his  house  of  all  his  pictures,  and  hanging  them  up  in  new  frames 
of  my  own.  As  I  leave  his  right  to  them  unquestioned  and 
unconcealed,  I  do  not  rob  him ;  the  rather  I  increase  his  wealth 
by  giving  him  another  opportunity  of  speaking. 

One  kind  of  work  leads  on  to  another,  and  labour  is  lightened 
by  being  diversified :  had  it  not  been  for  "The  Treasury  of  David" 
I  had  not  been  found  among  the  metaphors  of  Manton. 

I  see  it  is  thirteen  years  ago  since  I  issued  a  volume  of  illus- 
trations ;  I  may  surely  take  the  liberty  to  put  forth  another.  The 
former  was  entitled,  "  Feathers  for  Arrows"*;  it  has  met  with  a 
large  sale,  and  it  may  be  presumed  to  be  useful,  seeing  it  has 
been  appropriated,  almost  every  scrap  of  it,  by  the  compilers  of 
Cyclopaedias  of  Illustrations.  The  present  volume  is  marked 
with  two  stars  on  the  back,  because  it  is  intended  to  be  the 
second  of  a  series,  which,  if  health  permit,  I  hope  to  continue. 
It  is  my  desire  to  produce  a  set  of  books  intended  to  help 
preachers  and  teachers,  by  supplying  them  with  parables  and 
comparisons.  I  have  already  issued  three  volumes  for  students,t 
and  these  will  be  a  further  contribution  to  their  needs. 


*  Feathers  for  Arrows  ;  or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and  Teachers.  From  my 
Note  Book.    Price  2s.  6d. 

+  Lectures  to  my  Students.  First  Series.  Price  25^.  6d.  Second  Series  of  Lectures 
to  my  Students.  With  Illustrations  of  Posture  and  Action.  Price  2J.  6d.  Com- 
menting and  Commentaries. _  Two  Lectures;  together  with  a  Catalogue  of  Bible 
Commentaries  and  Expositions.  Price  -zs.  td.  The  above  are  published  by 
Passmoke  &  Alabaster,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings. 


PREFACE.  VU. 

To  make  this  little  book  more  generally  acceptable  I  have 
thrown  it  into  a  somewhat  devotional  form,  using  Manton's 
figures  as  texts  for  brief  meditations  :  this  I  humbly  hope  may 
be  found  profitable  for  reading  in  the  chamber  of  private  worship. 
The  latter  half  of  the  work  was  composed  in  the  gardens  and 
olive-groves  of  Mentone,  where  I  found  it  a  pleasure  to  muse,  and 
compose.  How  I  wish  that  I  could  have  flooded  my  sentences 
with  the  sunlight  of  that  charming  region!  As  it  is,  I  have 
done  my  best  to  avoid  dulness,  and  to  aim  at  edification.  If  a 
single  practical  truth  is  more  clearly  seen  through  my  endeavours, 
I  shall  be  grateful ;  and  doubly  so  if  others  are  helped  to  make 
their  teaching  more  striking. 

It  is  my  design  to  bring  out  a  third  volume,  consisting  of 
illustrations  which  I  have  long  been  collecting  at  home  and 
abroad,  and  patiently  jotting  down  in  pocket-books  till  leisure 
can  be  found  for  their  proper  shaping  and  arranging.  Time 
is  short,  and  it  behoves  each  one  to  be  so  working  for  his  Lord 
that  when  he  is  called  home  he  may  leave  behind  him  something 
for  the  generations  following.  Highly  shall  we  be  favoured  if 
the  gracious  Master  shall  accept  our  service  now,  and  grant  us 
the  present  consciousness  of  that  acceptance ;  happier  still  if  we 
may  hope  to  hear  him  say  at  the  last,  "Well  done." 

That  all  my  Readers  may  meet  with  so  great  a  blessing  is  the 
earnest  prayer  of 

Their  grateful  Servant, 


Westwood, 

February^  1883. 


Ts^^^ 


Klltt$tptiatt$  m\i  '^dMmi^, 


BIRD  TIED  BY  A  STRING. 

"  A  bird  that  is  tied  by  a  string  seems  to  have  inoi'e  libei'ty 
iJiaii  a  bird  in  a  cage;  it  flutters  7ip  and  down^  aJid  yet  it  is  held 
fastP  When  a  man  thinks  that  he  has  escaped  from  the  bondage 
of  sin  in  general,  and  yet  evidently  remains  under  the  power  of 
some  one  favoured  lust,  he  is  woefully  mistaken  in  his  judg- 
ment as  to  his  spiritual  freedom.  He  may  boast  that  he  is  out  of 
the  cage,  but  assuredly  the  string  is  on  his  leg.  He  who  has 
his  fetters  knocked  off,  all  but  one  chain,  is  a  prisoner  still.  ^'  Let 
not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over  me "  is  a  good  and  wise 
prayer;  for  one  pampered  sin  will  slay  the  soul  as  surely  as  one 
dose  of  poison  will  kill  the  body.  There  is  no  need  for  a 
traveller  to  be  bitten  by  a  score  of  deadly  vipers,  the  tooth  of 
one  cobra  is  quite  sufficient  to  ensure  his  destruction.  One  sin, 
like  one  match,  can  kindle  the  fires  of  hell  within  the  soul. 

The  practical  application  of  this  truth  should  be  made  by  the 
professor  who  is  a  slave  to  drink,  or  to  covetousness,  or  to  passion. 
How  can  you  be  free  if  any  one  of  these  chains  still  holds  you 
fast  ?  We  have  met  with  professors  who  are  haughty,  and  despise 
others;  how  can  these  be  the  Lord's  free  men  while  pride  sur- 
rounds them  ?  In  will  and  intent  we  must  break  every  bond  of 
sin,  and  we  must  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  or  we 
cannot  hope  that  the  Son  has  made  us  free.  O  thou  who  art 
the  free  Spirit,  break  every  bond  of  sin,  I  beseech  thee. 


2  -  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

FADING  FLOWEES. 

"The  Jloiucrs  ivliich  grow  in  ea7^th^s  gardeii  wither  in  our 
hands  while  we  smell  at  thein.^^  They  are  as  frail  as  they  are 
fair.  They  grow  out  of  the  dust,  and  to  the  dust  must  they 
return.     As  Herbert  says, 

*'  Their  root  is  ever  in  their  grave, 
And  they  must  die." 

How  speedy  is  their  withering,  they  are  gathered  by  the  hand, 
and  laid  before  us,  and  they  wilt  and  become  sickly,  fainting, 
decaying  objects.  At  the  very  longest,  their  lives  smile  through 
a  day  or  two,  and  all  is  over. 

Which  of  earth's  joys  is  better  than  her  flowers  ?  Health 
flies,  wealth  takes  to  itself  wings,  honour  is  a  puff  of  air,  and 
pleasure  is  abubble.  Only  from  heaven  can  we  expect  "pleasure 
for  evermore,"  and  "everlasting  joy."  The  Rose  of  Sharon 
blooms  through  all  the  ages,  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valley,  which  is 
Jesus  himself,  outlasts  all  time, — yea,  this  is  the  only  Everlasting 
Flower,  for  he  only  hath  immortality.  Why,  then,  should  we 
seek  for  the  living  among  the  dead,  or  search  for  substance  in 
the  land  of  shadows?  Henceforth,  my  soul,  gather  thy 
Hearts-ease  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  pluck  thy  Forget-me- 
nots  from  beds  which  Christ  has  planted,  and  look  for  thy 
Crown-Imperial  only  in  the  Paradise  above. 

The  flowers  of  the  field  are  children's  adornments.  See  how 
the  little  ones  garland  themselves,  and  fashion  chaplets  with 
the  buttercups  and  daisies.  Earth's  loveliest  joys  are  good 
child's  play  ;  but,  my  soul,  thou  hast  to  act  a  nobler  part :  seek 
thou  the  bliss  which  fadeth  not  away.  Turn  thou  to  God,  thine 
exceeding  joy,  and  then  if  thy  years  be  multiplied  upon  earth 
thou  shalt  have  a  life-long  possession,  or  if  thou  be  caught 
away  suddenly  thou  shalt  carry  with  thee  in  thy  bosom  the 
rosebud  of  a  life  which  will  open  to  perfection  in  the  land  where 
fading  and  withering  are  things  unknown. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   :\IEDITATIONS.  3 

DEAD  FISH. 

"  They  are  dead  Jish  ivJiich  are  carried  down  the  streamP 
Living  fish  may  go  with  the  stream  at  times,  but  dead  fish 
must  always  do  so.  There  are  plenty  of  such  in  all  waters : 
dead  souls,  so  far  as  the  truest  life  is  concerned,  and  these 
are  always  drifting,  drifting,  drifting  as  the  current  takes 
them.  Their  first  enquiry  is — what  is  customary  .^  God's  law 
is  of  small  account  to  them,  but  the  unwritten  rules  of  society 
have  a  power  over  them  which  they  never  think  of  resisting. 
Like  the  Vicar  of  Bray,  they  can  twist  round  and  round  if 
the  stream  is  running  in  an  eddy;  or,  like  the  sluggard,  they 
can  remain  at  their  ease  if  the  waters  are  stagnant.  They 
stand  in  awe  of  a  fool's  banter,  and  ask  of  their  neighbour 
leave  to  breathe. 

Is  this  a  right  state  to  be  in  ?  Each  one  of  us  must  give  an 
account  for  himself  before  God  :  should  not  each  one  act  for 
himself.?  If  we  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil,  the  multitude  will 
not  excuse  the  evil  nor  diminish  the  punishment.  Good  men 
have  generally  been  called  upon  to  walk  by  themselves.  We 
can  sin  abundantly  by  passively  yielding  to  the  course  of  this 
world ;  but  to  be  holy  and  gracious  needs  many  a  struggle, 
many  a  tear. 

Where,  then,  am  I  ?  Am"  I  sailing  in  that  great  fleet  which 
bears  the  black  flag,  under  Rear-Admiral  ApoUyon,  who  com- 
mands the  ship  Fashion  ?  If  so,  when  all  these  barques  come 
to  destruction  I  shall  be  destroyed  with  them.  Better  part 
company,  hoist  another  flag,  and  serve  another  sovereign. 

Come,  my  heart,  canst  thou  go  against  stream?  It  is  the 
way  of  life.  The  opposing  waters  will  but  wash  and  cleanse 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  ascend  to  the  eternal  river-head,  and  be 
near  and  like  thy  God.  O  thou  who  art  Lord  of  the  strait 
and  narrow  way,  aid  me  to  force  a  passage  to  glory  and 
immortality. 


4  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  BRIGHT  COUNTEPwFEIT. 

"A  counterfeit  coin  may  look  better  and  brighter  than  the 
trne  piece  of  money,  and  yet  be  almost  or  altogether  worthless^' 
and  in  the  same  manner  a  base  professor  may  for  a  while  seem  to 
be  brighter  than  a  true  Christian.  He  is  not  downcast,  for  he  has 
none  of  those  inward  strivings  which  cause  sincere  behevers  so 
much  anguish  of  soul.  He  is  not  sad,  for  he  has  no  penitence 
of  heart  at  the  remembrance  of  those  shortcomings  which 
humble  the  living  child  of  God.  Doubts  and  fears  he  has  none, 
for  these  are  the  moss  which  grows  upon  faith,  and  of  this  grace 
he  is  quite  destitute.  Failures  in  holiness,  loss  of  communion, 
non-success  in  prayer,  smitings  of  conscience,  all  of  which 
happen  to  the  elect  of  God,  come  not  near  to  him,  for  he  is  a 
stranger  to  the  mward,  sensitive  principle  of  which  these  are 
the  tokens. 

Sad  sons  of  God,  be  not  utterly  dispirited  by  these  men's 
equable  tempers,  and  quiet  assurances,  for  they  will  be  troubled 
indeed  when  the  testing  hour  shall  come.  As  for  you,  your 
gracious  disquietudes  and  holy  anxieties  are  a  proof  of  the 
reality  of  your  spiritual  life,  and  evidences  of  grace  which  ought 
to  afford  you  comfort.  Dead  men  do  not  suffer  from  changes  of 
weather,  and  mere  imitations  of  life,  such  as  paintings  and  statues, 
know  nothing  of  the  aches  and  pains  of  living  men.  Pity  those 
who  are  never  in  soul  trouble,  and  bless  the  Lord  that  he  has 
not  left  you  to  their  vainglorious  peace.  Better  be  dim  gold 
than  shining  brass.     Do  you  not  think  so  ? 

SULPHUR  IN  THE  INCENSE. 

'■'■How  often  do  we  mingle  siilphtcr  with  07tr  incense  .f^  A. 
strong  expression,  but  most  sadly  true.  When  we  offer  prayer,  is 
there  not  at  times  a  sorrowful  mixture  of  self-will,  petulance, 
and  impatience  ?  Does  not  unbelief,  which  is  quite  as  obnoxious 
as  brimstone,  too  often  spoil  the  sweet  odour  of  our  supplica- 
tions ?  When  we  offer  praise,  is  it  all  pure  spices  after  the  art 
of  the  heavenly  apothecary  ?     Do  not  self-laudation  and  pride 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  O 

frequently  spoil  the  holy  frankincense  and  myrrh  ?  Alas,  we 
fear  that  the  charge  must  lie  against  us,  and  force  us  to  a 
sorrowful  confession. 

As  the  priests  of  God,  our  whole  life  should  be  the  presentation 
of  holy  incense  unto  God,  and  yet  it  is  not  so.  The  earthly 
ambitions  and  carnal  lustings  of  our  nature  deteriorate  and 
adulterate  the  spices  of  our  lives,  and  Satan,  with  the  sulphur 
of  pride,  ruins  the  dehcate  perfume  of  perfect  consecration. 

What  grace  the  Lord  displays  in  accepting  our  poor,  imperfect 
offerings  !  What  rich  merit  abides  in  our  Lord  Jesus  !  What 
sweet  savour  beyond  expression  dwells  in  him,  to  drown  and 
destroy  our  ill-savours,  and  to  make  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved ! 
Glory  be  unto  our  glorious  High  Priest,  whose  perfect  life  and 
sin-atoning  death  is  so  sweet  before  the  Divine  Majesty  that  the 
Lord  is  well  pleased  for  his  righteousness'  sake,  and  accepts  us 
in  him  with  our  sweet  savour. 

THE  SHIP  WHICH  IS  ALWAYS  SAILING  ON. 

"77/6'  ship  holds  on  her  course,  and  makes  for  the  desired  port, 
whether  they  on  board  sit,  lie  or  walk,  eat  or  sleep!''  Thus  time 
is  at  all  times  bearing  us  onward  to  the  land  where  time  shall 
be  no  more.  There  is  never  a  pause  in  our  progress  towards 
eternity,  whether  we  trifle  or  are  in  earnest.  Even  while  we 
read  these  hnes  the  great  ship  is  still  speeding  onward  at  the 
same  rapid  and  unvarying  rate.  We  shall  soon  see  the  shore 
of  eternity ;  far  sooner  than  we  think  !  It  becomes  us  to  be 
ready  for  the  landing,  and  for  the  weighty  business  which  will 
then  engage  us,  namely,  judgment  at  the  hands  of  Christ. 

If  we  could  lie  becalmed  a  while  and  make  no  movement  to- 
wards eternity  we  could  afford  to  sport ;  but  if  we  look  over  the 
ship's  stern  we  may  see  by  her  shining  wake  how  she  is  cutting 
through  the  waves.  Past  time  urges  us  to  diligence,  for  it  has 
reported  us  in  heaven ;  and  future  time  calls  us  to  earnestness, 
for  it  must  be  short,  and  may  end  this  very  day.     And  then  ! 


a  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

MAN'S  TAILOEING. 
"Me?i  make  laws  as  tailors  make  garments — to  fit  the  crooked 
bodies  they  serve  for,  to  stilt  the  humours  of  the  people  who  are 
to  be  governed  by  those  laws^  This  is  man's  poor  tailoring, 
and  it  betrays  the  sinfulness  both  of  those  who  frame  laws  and 
of  those  for  whom  they  are  made  :  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
acts  on  other  principles.  God  has  ordained  his  law  according 
to  the  rule  of  perfect  equity,  and  he  will  not  adapt  it  to  our 
prejudices  and  deformities.  Some  men  treat  the  law  and 
testimony  of  the  Lord  as  if  it  were  like  plaster  of  Paris,  to  be 
poured  over  their  features  to  take  the  cast  of  their  own  boasted 
loveliness.  Religion  is  to  them  a  matter  of  opinion  and  not  of 
fact ;  they  talk  about  their  "  views,"  and  their  ideas,  as  if 
Christians  were  no  longer  believers  but  inventors,  and  no  more 
disciples  but  masters.  This  cometh  of  evil,  and  leadeth  on  to 
worse  consequences.  Our  sentiments  are  like  a  tree,  which 
must  be  trained  to  the  wall  of  Scripture  ;  but  too  many  go  about 
to  bow  the  wall  to  their  tree,  and  cut  and  trim  texts  to  shape  them 
to  their  mind.  Let  us  never  be  guilty  of  this.  Reverence  for 
the  perfect  word  should  prevent  our  altering  even  a  syllable  of 
it.  "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul"  ;  let 
it  convert  us,  but  never  let  us  try  to  pervert  it.  Our  ideas  must 
take  the  mould  of  Scripture — this  is  wisdom :  to  endeavour  to 
mould  Scripture  to  our  ideas  would  be  presumption. 

THE  TRAVELLER  AND  THE  MERCHANT. 

"yi  traveller  a7id  a  merchant  differ  J  Urns:  a  traveller  goes  fro7n 
place  to  place  that  he  may  see;  but  a  merchaiit  goes  from  poi't  ta 
port  that  he  may  take  in  his  lading,  and  grow  rich  by  traffic.'^ 
Thus  there  are  travelling  hearers  who  merely  observe  and 
criticize,  and  go  their  way  very  little  the  better  for  what  they  have 
heard  ;  and  there  are  also  merchant-hearers  who  listen  to  profit 
and  make  a  gain  to  their  souls  out  of  every  sermon.  O  Lord^ 
put  me  among  the  wise  merchantmen,  and  in  my  trading  may  I 
find  the  one  pearl  of  great  price,  even  Jesus,  thy  Son. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  7 

EACH  BIRD  FROM  ITS  OWN  EGG. 

"  It  would  be  monstrous  for  the  eggs  of  one  creature  to  bring 
f^^rth  a  brood  of  another  kind,  for  a  crow  or  a  kite  to  come  from 
iJie  egg  of  a  hen.  It  is  as  unnatural  a  productio7i  for  a  new 
creature  to  sifi"  Each  creature  brings  forth  after  its  own  kind  : 
the  old  nature  being  radically  evil  continues  to  produce  and  to 
send  forth  swarms  of  sins ;  it  is  not  reconciled  to  God,  neither 
indeed  can  be,  and  therefore  its  thoughts  and  acts  are  those  of 
rebellion  and  hatred  towards  God.  On  the  other  hand  the  new 
nature  "cannot  sin  because  it  is  born  of  God"  ;  it  must  have 
its  fruit  unto  holiness,  for  it  is  hoHness  itself.  Out  of  a  dove's 
nest  we  expect  only  doves  to  fly.  The  heavenly  life  breeds  birds 
of  paradise,  such  as  holy  thoughts,  desires,  and  acts ;  and  it 
cannot  bring  forth  such  unclean  birds  as  lust,  and  envy,  and 
malice.  The  life  of  God  infused  in  regeneration  is  as  pure  as 
the  Lord  by  whom  it  was  begotten,  and  can  never  be  otherwise. 
Blessed  is  the  man  who  has  this  heavenly  principle  within,  for  it 
must  appear  in  his  life,  and  cause  him  to  abound  in  holiness,  to 
the  glory  of  God.  Reader,  have  you  this  divine  seed  within 
you,  or  do  you  remain  under  the  dominion  of  corrupt  nature  ? 
This  question  deserves  a  present  and  thoughtful  reply. 

THE  CRACKED  POT. 

"  The  unsoundness  of  a  vessel  is  not  seen  when  it  is  empty, 
but  whe7i  it  is  filled  with  water,  then  we  shall  see  whether  it 
will  leak  or  noT  It  is  in  our  prosperity  that  we  are  tested.  Men 
are  not  fully  discovered  to  themselves  till  they  are  tried  by 
fulness  of  success.  Praise  finds  out  the  crack  of  pride,  wealth 
reveals  the  flaw  of  selfishness,  and  learning  discovers  the  leak  of 
unbelief.  David's  besetting  sin  was  little  seen  in  the  tracks  of  the 
wild  goats,  but  it  became  conspicuous  upon  the  terraces  of  his 
palace.  Success  is  the  crucible  of  character.  Hence  the  pros- 
perity which  some  welcome  as  an  unmixed  favour  may  far  more 
rightly  be  regarded  as  an  intense  form  of  test.  O  Lord,  preserve 
us  when  we  are  full  as  much  as  when  we  are  empty. 


8  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  BEST  OF  WAYS  TO  THE  BEST  OF  POSSESSIONS. 

"  //" «  7na7i  sJiotdd  offer  a  lordship  or  a  farm  to  aiiothcr,  and 
he  should  say,  The  way  is  dirty  and  danger'oiis,  and  the  weather  very 
troublesome,  I  will  not  look  after  it;  would  you  not  accuse  the 
man  of  folly  who  thus  loved  his  ease  and  pleasu7'e?  But,  now, 
if  this  man  were  assured  of  a  pleasant  path  and  a  good  way  if  he 
would  but  take  a  little  pains  to  go  over  and  see  it,  it  we7'e  gross 
folly  indeed  to  refuse  itP  Such  is  the  folly  of  those  who  refuse  the 
great  inheritance  of  God.  It  were  worth  while  to  spend  a  life- 
time in  prison  if  thereby  we  could  obtain  the  Kingdom  of  God  ; 
but  we  are  not  called  to  such  suffering,  the  way  to  eternal  life  by 
Christ  Jesus  is  made  plain  and  easy  by  the  Holy  Spirit  who  bids 
us  believe  and  live.  To  believe  that  which  is  most  surely  true 
cannot  be  unpleasant  to  a  sincere  mind ;  to  trust  in  One  who 
cannot  lie  cannot  be  a  hardship  to  an  honest  heart.  In  fact,  the 
way  of  true  religion  is  the  path  of  wisdom,  and  we  know  that  her 
ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness  and  all  her  paths  are  peace.  Who 
would  not  go  to  heaven  when  Christ  is  the  way  ? — the  dearest, 
holiest,  and  happiest  way  that  can  be  conceived.  Since  the 
way  to  heaven  is  heavenly,  and  the  road  to  bliss  is  bhss,  who  will 
not  become  a  pilgrim  .^  My  soul,  be  thou  in  love  with  the  way 
as  well  as  with  the  end,  since  thy  Lord  is  the  one  as  well  as  the 
other. 

IVY  IN  THE  WALL. 

"  AIa7i's  cor7'upt  7iature  has  bee7i  co7npaTcd  to  a  wild  fig  tree, 
or  to  ivy  growi7tg  tipo7i  a  wall,  of  which  you  7nay  cut  off  the 
body,  boughs,  sprigs,  a7idbra7iches, yet  still  there  will  be  so77iething 
that  will  be  sprouti7tg  out  agai7i  U7itil  the  wall  be  digged  down.'' 
When  we  think  that  we  have  fairly  done  with  sin  it  suddenly 
sprouts  again  and  seems  as  vigorous  as  ever.  As  it  is  said  of  a 
tree,  "  at  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud,"  so  is  it  true  of  our  cor- 
rupt nature,  at  the  first  opportunity  it  will  shoot  forth.  Vain- 
glorious professors  have  talked  of  their  being  free  from  all  like- 
lihood of  sinning,  but  experienced  believers  in  the  depth  of  their 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  9 

hearts  are  made  to  feel  the  evil  of  their  nature  and  therefore 
they  walk  humbly  with  God  and  cry  to  him  to  keep  them  from 
evil.  Often  does  it  happen  that  the  boaster  is  tripped  up  by  the 
enemy  whom  he  thought  to  be  dead  and  buried,  while  the 
watchful,  careful  Christian  is  preserved  in  the  midst  of  the 
fiercest  temptations  and  enabled  to  mantain  his  integrity. 

We  may  well  believe  in  the  vitality  of  evil  when  we  see  how  it 
survives  the  efforts  of  grace  ;  and  yet  the  Lord  Jesus  can  and 
will  destroy  it,  root  and  branch,  and  we  shall  for  ever  adore  him 
when  this  marvellous  work  is  accomplished.  Divine  Master, 
uproot  in  me  the  root  of  bitterness,  and  tear  away  the  follies 
which  twine  about  my  soul. 

UNJUST  BALANCES. 

"/;2  a  j)air  of  scales y  thoicgh  the  weights  be  equal,  yet  if  the 
scales  be  not  equal  there  may  be  wrong  done:  so,  though  the 
arguments  used  be  poiuerful,  yet,  if  the  heart  be  biassed  by  un- 
hallowed affections,  the  scale  will  not  be  turned  according  to  truth 
and  righteousness."  Many  instances  of  this  false  weighing 
may  be  quoted.  Eternal  realities  appear  to  be  mere  trifles 
when  the  heart  is  hot  after  some  engrossing  pleasure.  The 
most  fallacious  estimates  are  made  under  the  influence  of 
corrupt  desires.  Like  a  judge  that  has  been  bribed,  the  under- 
standing gives  a  false  verdict.  In  one  scale  lies  eternity  with 
endless  joy  or  bliss,  and  in  the  other  lies  a  passing  gain  of  gold 
or  honour.  The  comparison  needs  no  studying,  it  is  as  a  ton  to 
an  ounce,  and  yet  the  balances  are  so  false  that  the  ounce  is 
declared  to  have  greater  weight  than  the  ton.  God  hateth  un- 
just balances,  and  we  may  wisely  do  the  same  when  we  see  how 
souls  are  ruined  by  the  insane  trickery  with  which  a  man  cheats 
himself  out  of  his  own  soul. 

O  Lord  of  truth,  teach  my  conscience  the  law  of  truth,  for 
Jesus'  sake.  Hold  my  hand  while  I  hold  the  scales,  and  let  me 
weigh  all  things  in  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary. 


10  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

TREASON  IN  COINING  FARTHINGS. 

*•'  There  is  as  much  felony  in  coining  pence,  as  shillitigs  and 
poundsP  The  principle  is  the  same,  whatever  the  value  of  the 
coin  may  be  :  the  prerogative  of  the  Crown  is  trenched  upon  by 
the  counterfeiter,  even  if  he  only  imitates  and  utters  the  smallest 
coin  of  the  realm.  He  has  set  the  royal  sign  to  his  base  metal, 
and  the  small  money-value  of  his  coinage  is  no  excuse  for  his 
offence. 

Any  one  sin  wilfully  indulged  and  persevered  in  is  quite 
sufficient  to  prove  a  man  to  be  a  traitor  to  his  God.  Though  he 
may  neither  commit  murder  nor  adultery — which  would  be  like 
counterfeiting  the  larger  coins,  he  may  be  as  surely  a  felon  in 
the  sight  of  heaven  if  he  deliberately  utters  falsehood,  or  indulges 
pride — which  some  think  as  lightly  of  as  if  they  were  but  the 
counterfeits  of  pence.  The  spirit  of  rebellion  is  the  same  what- 
ever be  the  manner  of  displaying  it.  A  giant  may  look  out 
through  a  very  small  window,  and  so  may  great  obstinacy  of 
rebellion  manifest  itself  in  a  little  act  of  wilfulness. 

How  careful  should  this  consideration  make  us  !  How  earnestly 
should  we  watch  against  what  are  thought  to  be  minor  offences. 
The  ^'g'g  of  mischief  is  smaller  than  that  of  a  midge  ;  a  world  of 
evil  lurks  in  a  drop  of  rebellion.  Lord,  keep  us  from  pence 
transgressions  and  then  we  shall  not  commit  the  pound  offences. 

A  CHILD'S  FAILING. 

"y^  father  out  of  indulgence  may  pass  by  a  failing  when  his 
son  waits  np07i  him ;  for  ittsta?tce,  sitppose  he  should  spill  the 
wine  and  break  the  glass;  but  surely  he  will  not  allow  him  to 
throw  it  down  carelessly  or  wilfullyT  Everyone  can  see  that 
there  is  a  grave  distinction  between  sins  of  infirmity  and  wilful 
transgressions.  A  man  may  splash  us  very  badly  with  the 
wheel  of  his  carriage,  as  he  passes  by,  and  we  may  feel  vexed, 
but  the  feeling  would  have  been  very  much  more  keen  if  he  had 
thrown  mud  into  our  face  with  deliberate  intent.     By  the  grace 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  11 

of  God,  we  do  not  sin  wilfully.  Our  wrong-doing  comes  of 
ignorance  or  of  carelessness,  and  causes  us  many  a  pang  of 
conscience,  for  we  would  fain  be  blameless  before  our  God. 
Wilfully  to  offend  is  not  according  to  our  mind.  In  this  the 
children  of  God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil. 
Deliberation  and  delight  in  sin  are  sure  marks  of  the  heirs  of 
wrath.  Sin  in  believers  is  a  terrible  evil,  but  there  is  this  miti- 
gation of  it,  that  they  do  not  love  it,  and  cannot  rest  in  it.  The 
true  son  does  not  wish  to  do  damage  to  his  father's  goods ;  on 
the  contrary,  he  loves  to  please  his  father,  and  he  is  himself 
grieved  when  he  causes  grief  to  one  whom  he  so  highly  honours. 
O  my  Lord,  I  pray  thee  let  me  not  sin  carelessly,  lest  I  come  ta 
sin  presumptuously.  Make  me  to  be  watchful  against  my  infirm- 
ities, that  I  may  not  fall  by  little  and  little. 

ESTHER  GOING  IN  UNTO  THE  KING. 

"  Queen  Esther  would  go  into  the  king's  ;prese7icc^  even  though 
there  might  be  no  golden  sceptre  held  forth;  so,  believer,  venture 
into  Gods  presence  when  yoic  have  no  smile  and  no  light  from 
the  cotmtenance  of  your  God.  Trust  in  a  withdrawing  God" 
A  good  child  will  believe  in  his  father's  love  even  when  his 
father  is  angry.  We  believe  in  the  sun  when  he  is  under  a 
cloud,  and  shall  we  not  believe  in  God  when  he  hideth  himself? 
When  the  door  of  mercy  is  shut,  then  is  the  time  for  knocking. 
When  the  blessing  appears  to  be  lost,  then  is  the  season  for 
seeking ;  and  when  favours  seem  to  be  denied,  then  is  the 
hour  for  importunate  asking.  When  we  have  had  many  denials 
we  should  be  the  more  earnest  in  prayer,  that  the  hindrance 
may  be  removed.  Esther  succeeded  in  her  suit  though  she 
went  without  a  call,  and  much  more  shall  we  if  we  boldly  come 
unto  the  King  of  kings,  from  whom  no  sincere  petitioner  ever 
was  dismissed  unheard.  If  we  knew  the  worst  time  for  prayer 
had  come,  we  ought  still  to  pray.  Come,  my  soul,  get  thee  to 
thy  chamber  and  seek  the  King's  face,  for  thou  hast  great  need. 


12  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

MEADOWS  AND  MAESHES. 

"Meadows  may  be  occasionally  Jlooded,  htf  the  marshes  are 
drowned  by  the  tide  at  every  return  thereof P  There  is  all  this 
difference  between  the  sins  of  the  righteous  and  those  of  the 
imgodly.  Surprised  by  temptation,  true  saints  are  flooded  with 
a  passing  outburst  of  sin;  but  the  wicked  delight  in  transgression 
and  live  in  it  as  in  their  element.  The  saint  in  his  errors  is  a 
star  under  a  cloud,  but  the  sinner  is  darkness  itself.  The 
gracious  may  fall  into  iniquity,  but  the  graceless  run  into  it, 
wallow  in  it,  and  again  and  again  return  to  it.  Lord,  grant  that 
we  may  be  uplifted  by  thy  grace,  so  that  the  great  water-floods 
of  temptation  may  not  come  near  us  ;  and  if  through  the  pre- 
valence of  our  inward  corruption  the  enemy  should  come  in  like 
a  flood,  O  Lord,  deliver  thy  servants  by  thy  great  power. 

THE  NEEDLE  AND  ITS  POLE. 

"  The  needle  that  hath  been  touched  with  the  loadstone  may  be 
shaken  and  agitated,  but  it  never  rests  until  it  turns  towards  the 
^ole.^^  Thus  our  heart's  affections  when  once  magnetized  by  the 
love  of  Christ  find  no  rest  except  they  turn  to  him.  The  cares 
and  labours  of  the  day  may  carry  the  thoughts  to  other  objects, 
even  as  a  finger  may  turn  the  needle  to  the  east  or  west,  but  no 
sooner  is  the  pressure  removed  than  the  thoughts  fly  to  the 
Well-beloved  just  as  the  needle  moves  to  its  place.  We  arc 
unable  to  rest  anywhere  but  in  Jesus.  The  new  birth  has  dis- 
qualified us  for  contentment  with  the  world,  and  hence  we  have 
no  choice  but  to  find  our  all  in  Christ.  Blessed  necessity! 
Driven  to  Jesus  by  an  unrest  which  finds  no  remedy  elsewhere ! 
Drawn  to  Jesus  by  an  impulse  which  we  have  no  desire  to  resist ! 
It  is  our  life's  business  and  our  heart's  delight  to  point  to  him 
so  plainly  that  if  any  would  see  Jesus  they  have  only  to  look  in 
the  direction  in  which  our  whole  being  is  always  pointing.  We 
are  subject  to  many  deflections  and  disturbances,  but  thou 
knowest,  O  Lord,  that  our  inmost  soul  seeks  after  thyself. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  13 

IMPLICIT  OBEDIENCE. 

"  John  Cassian  makes  mention  of  one,  ivho  lutllvtgly  fetched 
ivater  near  two  miles  every  day  for  a  whole  year  together,  to  j)oicr 
it  upon  a  dead,  dry  stick,  at  the  commaiid  of  his  superior,  when 
no  reasoji  else  could  be  given  for  it.  And  of  another  it  is  re- 
corded, that  he  professed  that  if  he  were  enjoined  by  his  superior 
to  put  to  sea  i7i  a  ship  which  had  neither  mast,  tackling,  nor  any 
other  fitrniture,  he  woidd  do  it;  and  when  he  was  asked  how  he 
could  do  this  without  hazard  of  his  discretion,  he  answered. 
The  wisdom  must  be  in  him  that  hath  power  to  coinmand,  not  in 
him  that  hath  power  to  obey. ^^  These  are  instances  of  implicit 
obedience  to  a  poor  fallible  human  authority,  and  are  by  no 
means  to  be  imitated.  But  when  it  is  God  who  gives  the  com- 
mand, we  cannot  carry  a  blind  obedience  too  far,  since  there  can 
be  no  room  for  questioning  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  any  of 
his  precepts.  At  Christ's  command  it  is  wise  to  let  down  the  net 
at  the  very  spot  where  we  have  toiled  in  vain  all  the  night.  If 
God  bids  us,  we  can  sweeten  water  with  salt,  and  destroy  poison 
with  meat,  yea,  we  may  walk  the  waves  of  the  sea,  or  the  flames 
of  a  furnace.  Well  said  the  Blessed  Virgin,  "  Whatsoever  he 
saith  unto  you,  do  it."  My  heart,  I  charge  thee  follow  thy  Lord's 
command  without  a  moment's  question,  though  he  bid  thee  go 
forward  into  the  Red  Sea,  or  onward  into  a  howling  wilderness. 

SUN-DIAL  WITHOUT  THE  SUN. 

"yi  su7i-dial  may  be  well  a7id  accurately  set,  and  yet,  if  the  sun 
shines  not,  we  cannot  tell  the  time  of  day"  Our  evidences  of 
grace  are  in  much  the  same  condition  :  they  are  good  signs,  but 
we  cannot  see  them  unless  the  grace  of  God  shines  upon  them, 
and  then  we  can  almost  do  without  them,  even  as  an  observant 
person  can  tell  the  time  of  day  without  a  sun-dial,  by  looking  to 
the  sun  itself.  ,  Present  faith  in  a  present  Saviour  is  better  than 
all  the  marks  and  evidences  in  the  world.  Yet  let  no  man  be 
content  if  the  marks  of  a  child  of  God  are  absent  from  his  life, 


14  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

for  they  ought  to  be  there,  and  must  be  there.  The  presence  of 
sensible  evidences  must  not  be  too  much  rehed  on  ;  but  the 
absence  of  them  should  cause  great  searching  of  heart.  Our 
main  concern  should  be  to  look  daily  and  hourly  unto  Jesus, 
trusting  in  him^  and  not  in  evidences ;  judging  the  progress  of 
our  soul's  day,  rather  by  our  view  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness 
than  by  our  own  sun-dial.  If  Jesus  be  gone,  all  is  gone :  without 
his  love  we  are  darkness  itself  What  a  sun-dial  is  without  the 
sun,  that  is  the  fairest  character,  the  choicest  past  experience, 
and  the  maturest  knowledge  without  Jesus'  fellowship.  Rise,  O 
Sun  of  my  soul ;  end  my  doubts,  if  I  have  any ;  prevent  them,  if 
I  have  none. 

WINDING  UP  THE  CLOCK. 

"  The  conscience  of  a  sinner  is  like  a  clock,  dull,  calm,  and  at 
rest,  when  the  weights  are  down;  bict  when  wound  up,  it  is  full 
of  motion"  Sometimes  God  winds  up  conscience  in  this  life, 
and  then  it  works  vigorously,  and  strikes  the  time  of  day  in  the 
sinner's  ears.  Shame  attends  his  sin,  and  he  trembles  in  secret. 
A  dreadful  sound  is  in  his  ears,  and  like  the  troubled  sea  he 
cannot  rest.  This  is  far  better  than  a  dead  calm.  Alas,  in 
many  cases  the  clock  runs  down,  conscience  is  again  still,  and 
the  man  returns  to  his  false  peace.  Of  all  states  this  is  most 
dangerous. 

In  the  world  to  come  the  ceaseless  activity  of  conscience  will 
be  the  torture  of  hell.  Rendered  sensitive  by  the  removal  of 
hardening  influences,  the  lost  soul  will  find  memory  accusing, 
and  conscience  condemning  for  ever,  and  no  advocate  at  hand 
to  suggest  a  defence.  A  man  had  better  be  shut  up  with  a  bear 
robbed  of  her  whelps,  than  live  with  an  accusing  conscience. 
No  racks  or  fires  can  equal  the  misery  of  being  consciously 
guilty,  and  seeing  no  way  of  escape  from  sin.  May  the  Lord 
make  our  conscience  to  be  an  alarum  to  us  here  that  it  be  not  a 
torment  to  us  hereafter. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  15 

EMPTY  THE  BUCKET. 

^'^ Empty  the  bucket  before  yoit  go  to  the  founiainP  Wise 
advice.  If  the  pail  be  full  of  the  best  and  cleanest  water  it  is 
idle  to  carry  it  to  the  well,  for  its  fulness  disqualifies  it  for  being 
a  receiver.  Those  who  think  themselves  full  of  grace  are  not 
likely  to  pray  aright,  for  prayer  is  a  beggar's  trade,  and  supposes 
the  existence  of  need.  What  does  a  full  bucket  want  with  the 
well?  Let  it  stay  where  it  is.  Fitness  for  mercy  is  not  found  in 
self-sufficiency,  but  in  emptiness  and  want.  He  can  and  will 
receive  most  of  the  Lord  who  has  least  of  his  own. 

If  the  bucket  is  full  of  foul  water,  it  is  wise  to  throw  it  away 
as  we  go  to  the  crystal  spring.  We  must  not  come  to  the  Lord 
with  our  minds  full  of  vanity,  lust,  covetousness,  and  pride.  "If 
I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  He 
will  not  make  his  grace  the  medium  of  floating  our  unclean 
desires.  Grace  will  cleanse  out  sin,  but  it  will  not  mix  with  it, 
neither  may  we  desire  such  a  dishonourable  compromising  of 
the  holy  name  of  the  Lord  our  God.  Let  the  bucket  of  the 
heart  be  turned  upside  down  and  drained  of  the  love  of  sin, 
and  then  prayer  will  be  heard,  and  Jesus  will  come  in  and  fill  it. 

Lord,  empty  me  of  self,  of  pride,  of  worldliness,  of  unbelief, 
and  then  fill  me  with  all  the  fulness  of  God. 

THE  HYPOCKITE'S  TRICKS. 

^^A  hypocrite  has  been  likened  to  one  who  should  go  into  a 
shop  to  buy  a  pennyworth,  and  should  steal  a  pound's  worth; 
or  to  one  who  is  picnctual  in  paying  a  small  debt,  that  he  may  get 
deeper  into  our  books  and  cheat  us  of  a  greater  sum."  Hypocrites 
make  much  ado  about  small  things  that  they  may  be  more  easy 
in  their  consciences  while  living  in  great  sins.  They  pay  the 
tithe  of  mint  to  a  fraction,  but  rob  God  of  his  glory  by  their 
self-righteousness.  Punctilious  to  the  utmost  about  ritual  and 
rubric,  they  set  up  their  own  righteousness  in  the  place  of 
Christ,  and  rob  him  of  his  crown,  while  all  the  while  they  pretend 


16  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

to  be  serving  him.  They  honour  him  with  their  church  adorn- 
ments, in  the  way  of  pictures  and  images,  and  thereby  insult 
him  with  idolatry.  In  the  mass  they  pretend  to  great  devotion 
for  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  yet  the  sum  of  it  is  that  they  put 
a  piece  of  bread  into  the  throne  of  his  eternal  Godhead.  In  a 
word,  they  give  God  the  shells,  and  steal  the  kernels  for  their 
own  pride  and  self-will.  Christ  may  have  their  names,  and  they 
will  be  his  disciples  if  they  can  turn  a  penny  thereby,  either  for 
their  purse  or  their  pride,  but  all  the  while  they  are  robbing  him 
of  his  glory.  O  Lord,  whatever  I  may  be,  let  me  not  be  a 
hypocrite.  Suffer  me  to  be  the  least  among  thy  true  children, 
rather  than  the  chief  among  pretenders. 

THE  WEAK  STRONG,  AND  THE  STRONG  WEAK. 

"//  is  related  of  Laurence  Saimdejs  the  martyr,  that  one  day 
in  the  coimtry,  meeting  his  friend  Dr.  Pendleto7t,  an  earnest 
preacher  in  King  Edward^ s  reigjt^  they  debated  upon  what  they 
had  best  do  in  the  danget'ous  tiine  that  Mary's  accession  had 
brought  tipon  them.  Saunders  confessed  that  his  spi^'it  was 
ready,  bnt  he  felt  the  flesh  was  at  present  too  weak  for  much 
sttffering.  But  Pe7idleton  admonished  him,  and  appeared  all 
courage  aitd  forwardness  to  face  evejy  pei^il.  They  both  came, 
wider  the  control  of  circumstajices,  to  London,  and  there,  when 
danger  arose,  Pendleton  slo'imk  from  the  c7'oss,  and  Saimdei's 
resolutely  took  it  up.^'  The  reader  has  probably  met  with  this 
story  before,  but  it  will  not  harm  him  to  learn  its  lesson  again. 
We  are  certainly  stronger  when  we  feel  our  weakness  than  when 
we  glory  in  our  strength.  Our  pastoral  observation  over  a  very 
large  church  has  led  us  to  expect  to  see  terrible  failures  among 
those  who  carry  their  heads  high  among  their  brethren.  Poor 
timid  souls  who  are  afraid  to  put  one  foot  before  another,  for 
fear  they  should  go  an  inch  astray,  go  on  from  year  to  year  in 
lovely,  bashful  holiness,  and  at  the  same  time  the  very  professors 
who  condemned  them,  and  distressed  them  by  their  confident 
pretensions,  fall  like  Lucifer,  never  to  hope  again. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  17 

The  fault  which  has  happened  to  others  may  be  yet  seen  in 
me,  unless  the  Lord  shall  guard  me  from  it.  It  is  no  time  for 
boasting  while  we  are  still  in  the  enemy's  country. 

THE  SUN  IN  WINTER. 

"^  sum7ne7^s  sun,  eve7t  when  bedojided,  yields  more  comforf 
and  warmth  to  the  earth  than  a  wi?iter's  sim  that  shines 
brightest^  The  comforts  of  the  Spirit  at  their  lowest,  are  far 
superior  to  the  joys  of  the  world  at  their  highest  pitch.  When 
saints  are  mourning,  their  inward  peace  is  still  superior  to  that 
of  worldlings,  when  their  mirth  and  revelry  overflow  all  bounds. 
Lord,  I  had  rather  take  the  worst  from  thee  than  the  best  from 
thine  enemy.  Only  do  thou  graciously  shine  within  me,  and 
let  mine  outward  condition  be  as  dull  as  thou  pleasest. 

THE  NUESE  AND  THE  FALLING  CHILD. 

"  The  mirse  lets  the  child  get  a  k7iock  sometimes,  in  order  to 
make  it  more  cautious^  Thus  does  the  Lord  in  Providence 
allow  his  children  to  suffer  by  their  sins,  that  they  may  be  more 
thoughtful  in  future.  He  has  no  hand  in  their  sin ;  but,  since 
the  sin  is  in  them,  he  allows  circumstances  to  occur  by  which 
the  evil  is  made  manifest  in  open  acts,  which  cause  them 
sorrow.  When  a  physician  sees  a  person  suffering  from  an 
inward  complaint,  he  may  think  it  wise  so  to  deal  with  his 
patient  that  the  disease  is  brought  to  the  surface ;  and  thus  also 
God  may  permit  the  sins  of  his  people  to  come  to  an  open  sore, 
that  they  may  be  aware  of  them,  and  seek  for  healing.  The 
nurse  does  not  make  the  child  careless  or  cause  it  to  tumble, 
but  she  withdraws  her  interposing  care  for  the  best  of  reasons, 
namely,  that  the  little  one  may  learn  to  avoid  danger  by  a 
measure  of  suffering  on  account  of  it.  It  would  be  blasphemous 
to  attribute  sin  to  God;  but  it  is  a  matter  of  fact  that,  by 
smarting  for  one  fault,  gracious  men  learn  to  avoid  others. 

2 


18  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

GRACE  FOR  USE,  AND  NOT  TO  BE  PLAYED  WITH. 

"Grace  is  not  only  donum,  but  talentum.  Grace  is  not 
given,  as  a  apiece  of  money,  to  a  child  to  play  withal,  but  as  we 
give  money  to  factors,  to  trade  withal  for  us.'*  Everything  is 
practical  in  the  great  gifts  of  God.  He  plants  his  trees  that 
they  may  bear  fruit,  and  sows  his  seed  that  a  harvest  may  come 
of  it.  We  may  trifle  and  speculate  ;  God  never  does  so.  When 
a  man  imagines  that  grace  is  given  merely  to  make  him  com- 
fortable, to  give  him  a  superiority  over  his  fellows,  or  to  enable 
him  to  avoid  deserved  censure,  he  knows  not  the  design  of  the 
Lord  in  the  bestowal  of  grace,  and,  indeed,  he  is  a  stranger  to 
the  grand  secret.  God  works  in  us  that  we  may  work,  he  saves 
us  that  we  may  serve  him,  and  enriches  us  with  grace  that  the 
riches  of  his  glory  may  be  displayed. 

Are  we  putting  out  our  talents  to  proper  interest  ?  Do  we 
use  the  grace  bestowed  upon  us  ?  "  He  giveth  more  grace,"  but 
not  to  those  who  neglect  what  they  have.  Men  do  not  long 
trust  ill  stewards.  Lord,  help  us  so  to  act  that  we  may  render  our 
account  with  joy  and  not  with  grief. 

STUDY  MUST  BE  FOLLOWED  UP  BY  MEDITATION. 

"The  end  of  study  is  information,  the  end  of  7iieditatio)L  is 
practice,  or  a  work  upon  the  affectiotis.  Study  is  like  a  winter's 
sun,  that  shineth  but  warmeth  not;  but  meditation  is  like  blowing 
tip  the  fire,  where  we  do  not  mind  the  blaze  but  the  heai.'^ 
Meditation  being  thus  the  more  practical  of  the  two,  should  not 
be  placed  second  to  study,  but  should  even  take  precedence  of  it. 

"  hi  study  zue  are  rather  like  vi?itners,  who  take  in  wine  to 
store  for  sale;  in  meditation,  like  those  who  btiy  wine  for  iheir 
own  use  and coinfort.  A  vintners  cellar  may  be  better  stored 
than  a  nobleman^ s.  The  student  may  have  more  of  notion  and 
knowledge,  but  the  practical  Christia7i  hath  7nore  of  taste  and 
refreshmentl*  The  student,  therefore,  is  in  a  sad  case  if  he  go 
no  further,  for  his  soul  may  starve,  notwithstanding  his  stores,  if 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  19 

he  does  not  use  them.  How  miserable  to  die  of  cold  while  your 
cellar  is  full  of  coals  !  To  perish  with  hunger  when  your  granary 
is  full  of  corn !  This  is  a  species  of  suicide  which  many  com- 
mit. For  want  of  due  examination  and  meditation  the  precious 
truth  of  God  is  of  no  avail ;  but  the  blame  lieth  at  the  man's 
own  door  because  he  would  not  consider  and  turn  unto  the 
Lord.  ]\Iy  soul,  see  to  it  that  thy  knowledge  is  well  used 
for  thy  sustenance  and  growth.  Retire  more  than  thou  hast 
done  and  chew  the  cud  by  meditation.  Thou  hast  had  too 
little  of  this.  Be  zealous,  therefore,  and  mend  thy  ways  in  this 
respect. 

CLEAN  VESSELS  FOR  CHOICE  LIQUORS. 

"As  precious  liquors  are  best  kept  ijt  clean  vessels,  so  is  the 
mystery  of  faith  in  a  pure  conscietice^^  Who,  indeed,  would 
knowingly  pour  a  choice  wine  into  a  tainted  cask?  It  would  be 
no  instance  of  his  wisdom  if  he  did  so.  When  we  hear  of  men 
living  in  sin  and  yet  claiming  to  be  the  ministers  of  God,  we  are 
disgusted  with  their  pretences,  but  we  are  not  deceived  by  their 
professions.  In  the  same  manner,  we  care  little  for  those  who 
are  orthodox  Christians  in  creed  if  it  is  clear  that  they  are 
heterodox  in  life.  He  who  believes  the  truth  should  himself  be 
true.  How  can  we  expect  others  to  receive  our  religion  if  it 
leaves  us  foul,  false,  malicious,  and  selfish  ?  We  sicken  at  the 
sight  of  a  dirty  dish,  and  refuse  even  good  meat  when  it  is 
placed  thereon.  So  pure  and  holy  is  the  doctrine  of  the  cross 
that  he  who  hears  it  aright  will  have  his  ear  cleansed,  he  who 
believes  it  will  have  his  heart  purged,  and  he  who  preaches  it 
should  have  his  tongue  purified.  Woe  unto  that  man  who 
brings  reproach  upon  the  gospel  by  an  unhallowed  walk  and 
conversation. 

Lord,  evermore  make  us  vessels  fit  for  thine  own  use,  and 
then  fill  us  with  the  pure  blood  of  the  grapes  of  sound  doctrine 
and  wholesome  instruction.  Suffer  us  not  to  be  such  foul  cups 
as  to  be  only  fit  for  the  wine  of  Sodom. 


20  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  RHODIANS. 

Plutarch  tells  us  that  the  Rhodians  appealed  to  the  Romans 
for  help,  and  one  suggested  that  they  should  plead  the  good 
turns  which  they  had  done  for  Rome.  This  was  a  plea  difficult 
to  make  strong  enough,  very  liable  to  be  disputed,  and  not  at  all 
likely  to  influence  so  great  a  people  as  the  Romans,  who  would 
not  readily  consider  themselves  to  be  debtors  to  so  puny  a  state 
as  that  of  Rhodes.  The  Rhodians  were,  however,  wiser  than 
their  counsellor,  and  took  up  another  line  of  argument,  which 
was  abundantly  successful :  they  pleaded  the  favours  which  in 
former  times  the  Romans  had  bestowed  upon  them,  and  urged 
these  as  a  reason  why  the  great  nation  should  not  cast  off  a 
needy  people  for  whom  they  had  already  done  so  much. 

Herein  is  wisdom.  How  idle  it  would  be  for  us  to  plead  our 
good  works  with  the  great  God  !  What  we  have  done  for  him 
is  too  faulty  and  too  questionable  to  be  pleaded  ;  but  what  he 
has  done  for  us  is  grand  argument,  great  in  itself  and  potent 
with  an  immutable  Benefactor.  Legal  pleading  soon  meets  a 
rebuff ;  yea,  it  trembles  even  before  it  leaves  the  pleader's 
mouth,  and  makes  him  ashamed  while  he  is  yet  at  his  argument. 
Far  otherwise  fares  it  with  the  humble  gratitude  which  gathers 
strength  as  it  recalls  each  deed  of  love,  and  comforts  itself  with 
a  growing  assurance  that  he  who  has  done  so  much  will  not 
lose  his  labour,  but  will  do  even  more,  till  he  has  perfected  that 
which  concerneth  us.  Sinners  run  fearful  risks  when  they  appeal 
to  justice  :  their  wisdom  is  to  cast  themselves  upon  free  grace. 
Our  past  conduct  is  a  logical  reason  for  our  condemnation  ;  it  is 
in  God's  past  mercy  to  us  that  we  have  accumulated  argument 
for  hope.  The  Latin  sentence  hath  great  truth  in  it,  Dcus 
donaiido  debet^  God  by  giving  one  mercy  pledges  himself  to  give 
another  ;  he  is  not  indebted  to  our  merit,  his  only  obligation  is 
that  which  arises  out  of  his  own  covenant  promise,  of  which  his 
gifts  are  pledges  and  bonds.  Let  us  remember  this  when  next 
we  ursre  our  suit  with  him. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  21 

CHOKING  THE  WEEDS. 

^^The  way  to  destroy  ill  weeds  is  to  plant  good  herbs  that  are 
contraryT  We  have  all  heard  of  weeds  choking  the  wheat ;  if 
we  were  wise  we  should  learn  from  our  enemy,  and  endeavour 
to  choke  the  weeds  by  the  wheat.  Pre-occupation  of  mind  is 
a  great  safeguard  from  temptation.  Fill  a  bushel  with  corn,  and 
you  will  keep  out  the  chaff :  have  the  heart  stored  with  holy 
things,  and  the  vanities  of  the  world  will  not  so  readily  obtain  a 
lodging-place. 

Herein  is  wisdom  in  the  training  of  children.  Plant  the  mind 
early  with  the  truths  of  God's  word,  and  error  and  folly  will,  in 
a  measure,  be  forestalled.  The  false  will  soon  spring  up  if  we  do 
not  early  occupy  the  mind  with  the  true.  He  who  said  that  he 
did  not  wish  to  prejudice  his  boy's  mind  by  teaching  him  to 
pray,  soon  discovered  that  the  devil  was  not  so  scrupulous,  for 
his  boy  soon  learned  to  swear.  It  is  well  to  prejudice  a  field  in 
favour  of  wheat  at  the  first  opportunity. 

In  the  matter  of  amusements  for  the  young,  it  is  much  better 
to  provide  than  to  prohibit.  If  we  find  the  lads  and  lasses 
interesting  employments  they  will  not  be  so  hungry  after  the 
gaieties  and  ensnarements  of  this  wicked  world.  If  we  are 
afraid  that  the  children  will  eat  unwholesome  food  abroad,  let 
us  as  much  as  possible  take  the  edge  from  their  appetites  by 
keeping  a  good  table  at  home. 

BROKEN  BONES  COMPLAINING. 

^''Old  bruises  may  trouble  us  lotig  after,  upon  every  change  of 
weather^  and  new  afflictions  revive  the  sense  of  old  sins"  We 
know  one  who  broke  his  arm  in  his  youth,  and  though  it  was 
well  set,  and  soundly  healed,  yet  before  a  rough  season  the 
bones  cry  out  bitterly  ;  and  even  so,  though  early  vice  may  be 
forsaken,  and  heartily  repented  of,  and  the  mind  maybe  savingly 
renewed,  yet  the  old  habits  will  be  a  lifelong  trouble  and  injury. 
The  sins  of  our  youth  will  give  us  many  a  twist  fifty  years  after 


22  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

they  have  been  forgiven.  How  happy,  then,  are  those  who  are 
preserved  from  the  ways  of  ungodhness,  and  brought  to  Jesus 
in  the  days  of  their  youth,  for  they  thus  escape  a  thousand 
regrets.  It  is  well  to  have  a  broken  bone  skilfully  set,  but  far 
better  never  to  have  had  it  broken.  The  fall  of  Adam  has 
battered  and  bruised  us  all  most  sadly  ;  it  is  a  superfluity  of 
naughtiness  that  we  should  incur  further  damage  by  our  own 
personal  falls.  The  aches  and  pains  of  age  are  more  than 
sufficient  when  every  limb  is  sound,  and  recklessly  to  add  the 
anguish  of  fractures  and  dislocations  would  be  folly  indeed. 
Young  man,  do  not  run  up  bills  which  your  riper  years  will  find 
it  hard  to  pay ;  do  not  eat  to-day  forbidden  morsels,  which 
may  breed  you  sorrow  long  after  their  sweetness  has  been 
forgotten, 

THE  CHARIOT  OF  THE  SPIRIT. 

"  The  Spirit  of  God  fides  most  tninnphantly  in  his  own 
cha7'iot"  :  that  is  to  say,  he  is  best  pleased  to  convey  conviction 
and  comfort  by  means  of  his  own  word.  God's  word,  not  man's 
comment  on  God's  word,  is  the  most  usual  means  of  conversion. 
This  is  done  to  put  honour  upon  the  divine  revelation,  and  to  make 
us  prize  it  with  all  our  hearts.  Our  Lord  said  not  only,  *'  Sanctify 
them,"  but,  "sanctify  them  through  thy  truth";  and  then  he 
added,  "  thy  word  is  truth."  Our  author  does  well  to  liken  the 
Scriptures  to  a  chariot,  because  they  are  the  ordinary  means  by 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  to  us,  but  they  are  only  the 
chariot,  and  without  the  quickening  Spirit  they  bring  us  no  good. 
The  Scriptures  do  not  make  our  hearts  burn  till  the  Spirit 
kindles  them  into  flames,  and  then  we  say,  "Did  not  our  hearts 
burn  within  us  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  way,  and  while  he 
opened  to  us  the  Scriptures."  Let  us  reverence  Holy  Scripture 
because  the  Holy  Ghost  is  its  author,  expositor,  preserver,  and 
applier.  We  cannot  too  often  use  the  weapon  which  the  Spirit 
himself  calls  his  sword. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  23 

COVETOUSNESS  AS  A  SERVANT. 

*^Covetotesness  may  be  entertained  as  a  servant^  where  it  is  not 
entertained  as  a  master — entertained  as  a  servant  to  provide  oil 
and  fuel  to  7nake  other  sins  burn"  Where  avarice  is  the  absolute 
master,  the  man  is  a  miser ;  but  even  he  is  not  more  truly- 
miserable  than  the  man  whose  gainings  only  furnish  opportunity 
for  indulging  in  vice.  Such  persons  are  greedy  that  they  may 
become  guilty.  Their  money  buys  them  the  means  of  their  own 
destruction,  and  they  are  eager  after  it.  Winning  and  saving 
with  them  are  but  means  for  profligacy,  and  therefore  they  think 
themselves  fine  liberal  fellows,  and  despise  the  penurious  habits 
of  the  miser.  Yet  in  what  respects  are  they  better  than  he  ? 
Their  example  is  certainly  far  more  injurious  to  the  common- 
wealth, and  their  motive  is  not  one  whit  better.  Selfishness  is 
the  mainspring  of  action  in  each  case ;  the  difference  lies  in  the 
means  selected  and  not  in  the  end  proposed.  Both  seek  their 
own  gratification,  the  one  by  damming  up  the  river,  and  the  other 
by  drowning  the  country  with  its  floods.  Let  the  profligate 
judge  for  himself,  whether  he  is  one  grain  better  than  the 
greediest  skinflint  whom  he  so  much  ridicules. 

Lord,  help  us  to  live  for  thee  and  not  for  self,  and  both  in 
giving  and  in  spending  may  thy  glory  be  our  only  aim. 

UNDISTURBED  DEVOTION. 

"/^  is  a  strange  co?tstancy  of  fixedness  that  is  attributed  to 
the  p7'iests  at  ferusalein^  who,  when  Fatistus,  Cor?ielittSj  Furius, 
and  Fabius  broke  into  the  city  with  their  troops,  and  rushed  into 
the  temple  ready  to  kill  them,  yet  they  we?it  on  with  the  rites  of 
the  tetnple,  as  if  there  had  bee?i  no  assault.  And  strange  is 
that  other  instaftce  of  the  Spartan  youth,  that  held  the  ce?tser  to 
Alexander  while  he  offered  sacrifice.  A  coal  lighti?ig  tipon  his 
arm,  he  suffered  it  to  burn  there  rather  than  that  any  cryifig  out 
of  his  should  disturb  the  worship.^''    These  instances  are   a 


24  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

shame  to  Christians,  that  we  do  not  more  intensely  fix  our  hearts 
when  we  are  in  the  service  of  God ;  instead  of  which,  many- 
may  be  seen  looking  hither  and  thither,  and  turning  their  heads 
to  the  door  to  observe  every  new  comer.  Even  in  our  private 
devotions,  how  soon  we  are  distracted  and  carried  away  from 
the  point  in  hand.  Our  minds  flit  and  fly  like  birds  on  the 
hedges,  which  have  scarcely  time  to  settle,  for  as  one  passenger 
moves  along  the  road  and  then  another,  they  are  ready  for 
flight  at  once.  At  the  sound  of  every  footstep  the  bird  is  on 
the  wing,  and  thus  some  hearts  are  the  prey  of  every  trifling 
circumstance.  Saints  have  been  undisturbed  amid  a  crowd, 
while  others  find  their  prayers  crowded  out  when  they  arc 
alone. 

O  Lord,  assist  me  in  my  communion  with  thee,  that  my  whole 
soul  may  be  set  upon  it,  and  not  a  single  thought  may  wander 
from  thee.  Let  not  even  pain  and  care  prevent  my  whole 
heart  from  adoring  thee. 

EARE  EXOTICS  NEED  CARE. 

^'■The  more  superyiatural  things  are,  the  more  we  need  diligence 
to  preserve  them.  A  strange  plant  [an  exotic]  reqtcires  more  care 
than  a  native  of  the  soil.  Worldly  desires,  like  nettles,  breed  of 
their  own  accord;  but  spiritual  desires  need  a  great  deal  of  ctclti- 
vating."  The  more  spiritual  the  duty,  the  sooner  the  soul 
wearies  of  it.  An  illustration  of  this  is  seen  in  the  case  of 
Moses,  whose  hands  grew  weary  in  prayer,  while  we  never  read 
that  Joshua's  hands  hung  down  in  fight.  Spirituality  is  a  tender 
plant,  and  without  great  care  it  soon  flags,  while  sin  needs 
neither  hoeing  nor  watering,  but  will  spring  up  in  the  dark,  and 
flourish  even  amid  the  wintry  frosts  of  trouble.  The  fair 
flower  of  grace  is,  however,  so  precious  that  God  himself  has 
promised  to  tend  it.  What  must  be  the  value  of  that  plant  of 
which  the  Lord  hath  said,  "  I  will  water  it  every  moment ;  lest 
any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day"?    Let  us  watch  and 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  25 

pray,  and  never  dream  that  things  will  go  well  with  us  if  we 
neglect  these  necessary  duties.  No  spiritual  grace  will  thrive 
if  we  neglect  it.  We  ought  to  be  very  diligent" in  our  spiritual 
husbandry ;  nor  should  our  labour  be  grudged,  for  the  fruit  will 
well  reward  our  pains. 

THE  MAETYR  AND  THE  CHAIN. 

"  When  Hooper,  the  blessed  martyr,  nuas  at  the  stake,  and  the 
officers  came  to  fasten  him  to  it,  he  cried,  ''Let  me  alone;  God 
that  hath  called  7ne  hither  will  keep  me  from  stirring;  and  yet,' 
said  he,  upo7t  second  thoughts,  '■because  I  am  bjit  flesh  and  blood, 
I  am  willitig.  Bind  me  fast,  lest  I  stir  J"  Some  plead  that  they 
have  no  need  of  the  holdfasts  of  an  outward  profession,  and  the 
solemn  pledges  of  the  two  great  ordinances,  for  the  Holy  Spirit 
will  keep  them  faithful ;  yet  surely,  like  this  man  of  God,  they 
may  well  accept  those  cords  of  love  wherewith  heavenly  wisdom 
would  bind  us  to  the  horns  of  the  altar.  Our  infirmities  need 
all  the  helps  which  divine  love  has  devised,  and  we  may  not  be 
so  self-sufficient  as  to  refuse  them. 

Pledges,  covenants,  and  vows  of  human  devising  should  be 
used  with  great  caution ;  but  where  the  Lord  ordains  we  may 
proceed  without  question,  our  only  fear  being  lest  by  neglecting 
them  we  should  despise  the  command  of  the  Lord,  or  by  relying 
upon  them  we  should  wrest  the  precept  from  its  proper  intent. 
Whatever  will  prove  a  check  to  us  when  tempted,  or  an  incentive 
when  commanded,  must  be  of  use  to  us,  however  strong  we  may 
conceive  ourselves  to  be.  **  Bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even 
with  cords  to  the  horns  of  the  altar." 

Lord,  cast  a  fresh  band  about  me  every  day.  Let  the  con- 
straining love  of  Jesus  hold  me  faster  and  faster. 

"  Oh,  to  grace  how  great  a  debtor, 
Daily  I'm  constrained  to  be  ! 
Let  that  grace,  Lord,  like  a  fetter. 
Bind  my  wandering  heart  to  thee." 


26  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

BEGGING  OF  THE  KICH. 

^^ Beggars  in  the  streets^  if  they  see  a  poor  man,  meanly  clad, 
they  let  hi?n  alone;  bttt  when  they  see  a  man  of  quality  and 
fashioit  they  roztse  tip  themselves,  and  besiege  hijn  with  impor- 
iunate  ent7'eaties  and  clamotcrs,  and  will  7iot  let  him  go  until  he 
hath  left  something  with  the7n"  Thus  should  we  do  in  our 
spiritual  begging.  Vain  is  the  help  of  man,  and  therefore  we 
should  ask  little  of  him  :  he  is  as  poor  as  we  are,  and  it  will  be 
a  waste  of  time  to  wait  upon  such  a  pauper.  As  for  the  Lord 
Jesus,  he  is  so  rich  that  if  all  the  beggars  in  the  universe  would 
call  at  his  door  he  would  not  refuse  one  of  them,  but  would  set 
open  the  doors  of  his  granaries  and  the  hatches  of  his  butteries, 
and  feast  the  world.  He  is  the  heir  of  all  things.  There  is  no 
bottom  to  his  treasuries.  He  is  the  true  Solomon,  and  his  daily 
provision  is  not  only  enough  for  all  his  household,  but  for  all 
those  who  lie  starving  on  the  highways  and  in  the  hedges.  The 
wealth  of  nations  is  nothing  to  the  wealth  of  Jesus.  Come, 
then,  my  heart,  beg  largely  of  thy  Lord,  and  when  he  hears 
thee,  beg  again.  His  quality  and  fashion  invite  thee  to  follow 
him  with  importunity  whithersoever  he  goeth. 

SOUR  GRAPES. 

"Ungodly  men  are  too  impatient  to  wait  for  solid  ajid  eternal 
pleasures,  but  snatch  at  the  pleasures  of  sin,  which  are  but  for  a 
season.  These  resemble  children  who  cannot  tarry  till  the  grapes 
are  ripe,  and  therefore  eat  them  sotir  and  gree7ij*  Pleasure  lies 
mainly  in  hope,  and  yet  some  men  will  not  give  space  for  hope 
to  grow  in  :  it  must  be  now  or  never  ;  all  to-day,  and  to-morrow 
may  starve.  In  business,  men  put  out  their  money,  foregoing 
its  use  themselves,  that  it  may,  after  a  while,  return  to  them  with 
increase ;  but  carnal  men  are  all  for  keeping  the  bird  in  the 
hand,  and  cannot  wait  for  joys  to  come. 

Yet  these  hasty  delights  are  not  satisfying.     Man  was  not 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  27 

made  to  find  his  heaven  upon  earth,  nor  can  he  do  so,  even 
though  he  labours  after  it.  The  grapes  plucked  in  this  untimely- 
season  cause  ere  long  a  griping  of  the  heart,  and  a  gnawing  within 
the  soul.  We  are  not  ready  for  fulness  of  joy,  nor  is  the  joy 
ready  for  us.  Our  wisdom  is  to  be  preparing  for  eternal  bliss 
by  present  holiness,  believing  that  he  who  is  making  us  ready 
for  heaven  is  making  heaven  ready  for  us.  This  is  the  surest 
way  to  present  satisfaction,  which  must  always  be  found  in 
careful  obedience  to  the  divine  will  from  day  to  day,  and  in  a 
believing  expectation  of  glory  to  be  revealed. 

O  thou  who  art  "  the  God  of  hope,"  grant  that,  by  thy  hope 
which  thou  hast  wrought  in  us,  we  may  be  daily  purified,  and 
set  free  from  the  defilement  of  this  present  evil  world. 

THE  SINGLE  MILLSTONE. 

"77/^  Egyptians,  in  their  hieroglypJiics,  expressed  the  unprofit- 
ableness of  a  solitary  mail  by  a  sifigle  millstone,  which,  being 
alone,  grindeth  no  meal,  though  with  its  fellow  it  would  be 
exceedi7igly  profitable  for  that  pU7'poseP  Let  this  serve  as  a 
symbol  to  those  unsociable  Christians  who  endeavonr  to  walk 
alone,  and  refuse  to  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  They 
are  comparatively  useless.  The  Lord  has  made  us  dependent 
upon  each  other  for  usefulness.  Our  attainments  are  not  put 
to  their  right  use  till  they  supply  the  deficiencies  of  others :  this 
is  one  side  of  our  necessity  for  fellowship, — we  need  to  associate 
with  the  weak,  that  we  may  find  a  sphere  in  which  to  trade 
with  our  talents,  by  helping  them.  On  the  other  hand,  our 
infirmities  and  deficiencies  are  meant  to  draw  us  into  associa- 
tion with  stronger  brethren,  from  whom  we  may  receive  help 
and  direction.  Whether  we  be  of  the  stronger  or  the  feebler 
sort,  we  have  an  equal  reason  for  seeking  Christian  com- 
munion. It  is  of  the  nature  of  the  Lord's  people  to  assemble 
themselves  together,  and  live  in  companies :  wild  beasts  may- 
roam  the  woods  alone,  but  sheep  go  in  flocks.     David  said,  "I 


28  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

am  a  companion  of  all  them  that  fear  thee,"  and  he  showed 
his  piety  not  only  by  being  select  in  his  company,  but  in  loving 
such  fellowship  when  he  found  it. 

O  thou  who  didst  call  thy  disciples  "friends,"  give  me  evcF 
the  friendly  spirit,  and  make  me  to  love  all  those  whom  thou 
lovest. 

RAIMENT,  THE  BODY,  THE  SOUL. 

"A  7nan  ivJio  is  luounded,  and  ait  through  his  clothes  atid  skin 
and  all,  will  be  more  anxious  to  have  the  wound  closed  up  in  his 
body  tha?i  to  have  the  rent  iti  his  garment  77iendedr  His  body  is 
much  more  himself  than  the  garment  with  which  he  covers  it, 
and,  therefore,  he  gives  it  his  first  attention.  Now,  on  the  same 
principle,  we  should  take  more  care  of  the  soul  than  of  the 
body,  for  the  soul  is  more  truly  the  man  than  the  mere  flesh  and 
blood  which  he  inhabits.  As  a  man  may  get  a  new  coat,  so 
shall  he  obtain  a  new  body  at  the  resurrection  ;  but  his  spirit, 
which  is  his  real  self,  abides  the  same  as  to  identity,  and  should, 
therefore,  be  carefully  guarded.  Yet  what  fools  the  most  of 
men  are  ;  they  spend  a  lifetime  in  providing  for  a  body  which 
will  soon  be  worms'  meat,  and  their  immortal  soul  is  left  uncared 
for,  to  go  before  God,  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable.  If  there 
were  as  much  as  a  pennyworth  of  wisdom  to  be  found  among 
ten  thousand  sinners  they  would  no  longer  neglect  their  own 
souls. 

O  Lord,  heal  thou  my  soul;  and  as  for  the  rents  in  my 
garments,  they  shall  give  me  small  concern. 

THE  IMAGE  NOT  THE  MAN. 

^''  As  Michal  laid  a  statue  i7i  David's  bed,  a7td,  covering  it  with 
Davids  apparel,  made  Saul's  7nessengers  believe  it  was  David 
Mmself  sick  i7i  bed;  so,  7na7iy  perso7ts  cover  themselves  with 
certain  exter7ial  actio7is  belo7iging  to  religion,  and  the  world 
believeth  ihe7n  irtcly  sanctified  and  spiritual,  whereas^  indeed, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  29 

llicy  are  btit  statues  and  apparitions  of  devotion  to  God." 
Formalism  is  a  vain  show,  and  will,  in  the  end,  be  discovered,  and 
the  cheat  will  cease  to  impose  upon  any  one.  Of  all  matters, 
religion  is  the  very  worst  to  play  with.  It  maybe  easy  to  mimic 
it,  but  the  price  to  be  paid  for  such  fooling  will  be  terrible.  If 
men  must  act  a  borrowed  part  let  them  ape  the  princes  of  this 
world,  but  let  them  not  put  such  an  affront  upon  the  princes  of 
the  blood  royal  of  heaven.  Let  them  go  to  their  theatres  if  they 
would  wear  a  mask  ;  to  do  so  in  the  house  of  God  is  an  insult 
which  the  Lord  will  not  brook.  The  best  imitation  of  religion 
will  make  its  possessor  wail  for  ever  when  the  hand  of  eternal 
truth  shall  lay  bare  its  falsehood. 

O  thou  who  art  "  the  truth,"  deliver  me  from  all  seeming,  and 
let  me  be  in  truth  that  which  I  profess  to  be. 

RUNAWAY  KNOCKS. 

"  Watch  in  prayer  to  see  what  cometh.  Foolish  boys,  that 
knock  at  a  door  in  wantonness,  will  not  stay  till  somebody  cometh 
to  open  to  them;  btct  a  man  that  hath  business  will  kiiock,  and 
knock  agai?t,  till  he  gets  his  a7iswerP  To  pray  and  not  to  look 
for  an  answer  argues  either  a  mere  formality  in  prayer,  and  that 
makes  the  prayer  to  be  dead  ;  or  else  unbelief  as  to  the  truth  of 
God,  and  that  makes  the  prayer  to  be  corrupt.  He  who  presents 
a  cheque  at  the  banker's  looks  to  have  money  for  it ;  if  not,  he  is 
not  a  business  man,  but  a  mere  trifler.  So  in  our  pleadings  of 
the  divine  promise  we  expect  a  fulfilment,  or  otherwise  we  do  but 
play  with  God.  How  many  runaway  knocks  we  give  at  mercy's 
gate  !  Let  us  put  away  such  childish  things,  and  treat  prayer  as 
a  reality  :  then  shall  we  be  answered  of  a  truth.  "  I  will  direct 
my  prayer  unto  thee,  and  will  look  up." 

He  who  writes  these  lines  bears  witness  that  he  has  never 
knocked  in  vain  at  the  Lord's  door,  and  he  begs  the  reader  to 
make  trial  of  that  which  he  has  found  so  effectual.  "  Knock, 
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you." 


30  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  RUSSET  COAT. 

^^  Man  is  a  proud  creattcre,  and  would  fain  establish  his  own 
righteousness^  and  have  somewhat  wherein  to  glory  in  hi?nself. 
Rom.  X.  3.  Our  proud  heart  takes  up  the  old  proverb  and 
thi7iketh — A  russet  coat  of  our  own  is  better  thaft  a  silke?i 
garment  that  is  borrowed  of  another^  Man  would  sooner  wear 
his  own  rags  than  Christ's  fine  white  linen.  Pride,  however,  is 
too  expensive  a  luxury  when  a  man  must  give  up  all  hope  of 
heaven  in  order  to  indulge  it.  Such  is  the  case.  There  can  be 
no  feasting  with  the  King  unless  we  wear  the  wedding-garment 
which  he  supplies.  Our  own  silk  and  satin  would  not  suit  his 
courts,  much  less  our  russet  and  our  corduroy.  We  must  accept 
the  righteousness  of  God,  or  be  unrighteous  for  ever.  Surely 
we  shall  be  worse  than  madmen  if  we  insist  upon  going  naked 
rather  than  put  on  the  royal  apparel  of  free  grace. 

Lord,  I  cannot  longer  err  in  this  fashion,  for  I  perceive  my 
righteousnesses  to  be  filthy  rags,  and  I  am  heartily  glad  to  be  rid 
of  them.  Clothe  me,  I  pray  thee,  with  the  righteousness 
divine. 

FIRE   SPREADING. 

"  A  good  man  is  always  seeking  to  make  others  good,  as  fire 
turneth  all  things  about  it  into  fire"  You  cannot  make  fire 
stay  where  it  is,  it  will  spread  as  opportunity  serves  it.  It  will 
subdue  all  its  surroundings  to  itself.  Carlyle  says  that  "  man 
is  emphatically  a  proselytizing  creature,"  and  assuredly  the  new 
creature  is  such.  Life  grows,  and  so  invades  the  regions  of 
death,  and  spiritual  life  is  most  of  all  intense  in  its  growing  and 
spreading.  Liberty  to  hold  our  opinions  but  not  to  spread  them 
is  no  liberty,  for  one  of  our  main  opinions  is  that  we  should 
bring  all  around  us  to  Jesus,  and  to  obedience  to  the  truth. 
Lord,  help  us  ever  to  be  doing  this,  subduing  the  earth  for 
thee  by  spreading  on  all  sides  the  name  of  Jesus.  Let  our  life 
burn  till  the  whole  world  is  on  a  blaze. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  31 

NO  OLD  AGE  IN  GRACE. 

"  We  have  our  infancy  at  our  first  conversion,  tvlien  liable  to 
childish  ignorance  and  many  infirmities ;  we  have  oicr  youth  and 
growing  age  ^  when  making  progress  in  the  way  of  grace  towards 
perfection;  and  lastly,  we  have  our  perfect  matily  age  when  we 
are  come  to  our  full  pitch,  when  grace  is  fully  perfected  in  glory. 
In  Scripticre  there  is  nothing  said  of  a  fading  and  decli7iing 
time  of  old  age  in  graced  The  fact  being  that,  unhke  the 
natural  hfe,  the  spiritual  life  does  not  conclude  in  declining 
strength  and  inevitable  decrepitude,  but  continues  its  progress 
even  beyond  the  grave.  We  go  from  strength  to  strength, 
not  from  strength  to  weakness.  The  old  age  of  grace  is 
maturity,  not  decay ;  advancement,  not  decline  ;  perfection,  not 
imbecility.  In  the  advanced  years  of  nature  we  lose  many  of 
our  faculties,  but  in  advanced  grace  our  spiritual  senses  are 
more  quick  and  discerning  than  ever.  The  aged  man  feels 
the  grasshopper  to  be  a  burden,  and  the  clouds  return  after  the 
rain  ;  but  to  the  advanced  believer  the  greatest  loads  are  light 
and  the  rain  is  over  and  gone.  Old  age  goes  down  to  death, 
but  ripe  grace  ascends  to  everlasting  life.  Lord,  let  me  grow 
ripe  but  not  rotten,  maturing  but  not  decaying,  for  thy  glory's 
sake. 

INFANTS  AND  SICK  FOLK. 

^'  Though  we  cajmot  love  their  weaknesses,  yet  we  must  love  the 
weak,  a7td  bear  with  their  ijtfirtnities,  7iot  breaking ,  the  bruised 
reed.  Infants  must  not  be  turyied  out  of  the  family  because  they 
cry,  ajtd  are  unquiet  and  troubleso7ne ;  thotigh  they  be  peevish 
a7id  froward,  yet  we  77iust  bear  it  with  ge7itle7iess  a7id  patie7ice, 
as  we  do  the  froward7iess  of  the  sick;  if  they  revile  we  77itist 
7iot  revile  again,  but  77iust  seek  ge7ttly  to  restore  the77t,  7iotwith- 
standins:  all  their  ce7tsures.^'  This  patience  is  far  too  rare.  We 
do  not  make  allowances  enough  for  our  fellows,  but  sweepingly 


32  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS, 

condemn  those  whom  we  ought  to  cheer  with  our  sympathy. 
If  we  are  out  of  temper  ourselves,  we  plead  the  weather,  or 
a  headache,  or  our  natural  temperament,  or  aggravating  cir- 
cumstances ;  we  are  never  at  a  loss  for  an  excuse  for  ourselves, 
why  should  not  the  same  ingenuity  be  used  by  our  charity  in 
inventing  apologies  and  extenuations  for  others?  It  is  a  pity  to 
carry  on  the  trade  of  apology-making  entirely  for  home  con- 
sumption ;  let  us  supply  others.  True,  they  are  very  provoking, 
but  if  we  suffered  half  as  much  as  some  of  our  irritable  friends 
have  to  endure  we  should  be  even  more  aggravating.  Think 
in  many  cases  of  their  ignorance,  their  unfortunate  bringing 
up,  their  poverty,  their  depression  of  spirit,  and  their  home 
surroundings,  and  pity  will  come  to  the  help  of  patience.  We 
are  tender  to  a  man  who  has  a  gouty  toe,  cannot  we  extend  the 
feeling  to  those  who  have  an  irritable  soul.? 

Our  Lord  will  be  angry  with  us  if  we  are  harsh  to  his  little 
ones  whom  he  loves;  nor  will  he  be  pleased  if  we  are  unkind  to 
his  poor  afflicted  children  with  whom  he  would  have  us  be 
doubly  tender.  We  ourselves  need  from  him  ten  times  more 
consideration  than  we  show  to  our  brethren.  For  HIS  sake  we 
ought  to  be  vastly  more  forbearing  than  we  are.  Think  how 
patient  HE  has  been  to  us,  and  let  our  hard-heartedness  be 
confessed  as  no  light  sin. 

PILLS. 

''  We  slwtild  not  expect  to  see  a  reason  for  everyiliing  which  ive 
believe,  for  many  doctrines  are  mysteries,  and  ive  must  receive  them 
as  ive  do  pills.  We  do  not  chew  pills,  bnt  swallow  them;  ajid 
so  we  must  take  these  truths  i?tto  otcr  souls  upon  the  credit  of 
the  revealery  This  indeed  is  true  faith — this  taking  truth  upon 
trust  because  of  the  divine  authority  of  the  revelation  which 
contains  it.  We  are  persuaded  that  the  Lord  cannot  lie,  and  so 
we  believe,  for  this  sole  reason,  that  "  thus  saith  the  Lord." 
Why  should  wc  chew  the  pill  by  wishing  to  know  more  than 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  33 

is  revealed  ?  Must  our  Father  explain  everything  to  us  on  pain 
of  not  being  beheved  if  he  reserves  any  point  in  his  proceed- 
ings? Would  not  such  a  demand  savour  more  of  a  proud, 
rebellious  spirit  than  of  humble,  childlike  love  ?  Has  a  man 
any  faith  in  God  if  he  will  believe  no  more  than  his  reason 
proves  ? 

Many  a  truth  when  taken  into  the  soul  as  a  whole  has  proved 
to  be  very  sweet  to  the  heart.  We  could  not  understand  it ;  but 
no  sooner  had  we  believed  it  than  we  were  conscious  of  its 
delightful  influence  upon  the  inner  nature.  Who  can  under- 
stand the  twofold  nature  of  our  Lord's  person,  or  the  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity  in  Unity,  or  the  predestination  which  does  not 
violate  free  agency  ?  And  yet  what  a  delight  these  truths  create  in 
minds  which  cheerfully  accept  them.  My  soul,  thou  canst  not 
know  or  understand  all  things,  else  wert  thou  omniscient,  and 
that  is  the  prerogative  of  God  alone.  Be  it  thine,  therefore,  to 
believe  the  testimony  of  thy  God,  and  then  his  omniscience  will 
be  all  at  thy  disposal.  He  will  teach  thee  what  else  thou  couldst 
never  learn,  if  thou  art  but  willing  to  sit  at  his  feet  and  receive 
of  his  word.  We  sometimes  speak  of  a  scholarly  man ;  in  the 
best  sense  every  Christian  should  be  scholarly;  that  is,  willing 
to  be  a  scholar. 

HABD  BEGINNINGS. 

"  Some  beginners  are  discouraged  in  their  first  attempts  at  a 
godly  life,  and  so  give  over  through  despondeiicy.  They  shotdd 
remetnber  that  the  bid  lock  is  most  unridy  at  the  first  yoking,  ajtd 
that  the  fire  at  first  kindling  casts  forth  most  sniokeP  They  forget 
this,  and  therefore  are  tempted  to  give  over  religion  and  its  graces 
as  hopeless.  When  a  man  is  new  to  the  ways  of  God  those  duties 
are  difficult  which  afterwards  become  easy.  Use,  in  common 
life,  is  called  second  nature,  and  in  gracious  matters  it  helps  our 
second  nature.  Gracious  habit  gives  impetus  to  gracious  action. 
Self-denials,  which  seem  hard  at  first,  become  delights  in  due 

3  , 


34  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

season,  so  that  we  even  wonder  that  we  thought  them  denials. 
Some  things  there  are  which  are  most  easy  in  our  first  days  of 
grace,  but  other  things  will  be  found  to  improve  as  we  proceed 
upon  the  way  :  let  not  the  young  beginner  be  discouraged,  but 
fully  believe  that  "  it  is  better  on  before."  We  have  heard  per- 
sons talk  of  the  days  of  childhood  as  the  happiest  in  mortal  life, 
but  we  do  not  agree  with  them  :  the  sorrows  of  childhood  take 
a  very  intense  possession  of  the  little  ones,  and  in  their  grief 
everything  seems  lost,  whereas  the  full-grown  mind  is  divided  in 
sorrow,  and  other  considerations  come  in  to  temper  the  wind  of 
trouble.  Even  so,  childhood  in  grace  is  by  no  means  our  best 
time ;  for  its  trials,  though  less  in  themselves,  are  greater  to  our 
weakness  and  rawness  of  mind.  The  yoke  will  be  easier  soon, 
and  the  fire  will  yet  burn  with  a  clearer  blaze. 

Lord,  help  thy  babe.  Nurse  me  into  vigour  by  thy  good 
Spirit. 

LEAD. 

'■''Lead  is  lead  stilly  whatever  stamp  it  bearethP  A  change  of 
form  is  a  very  different  thing  from  a  change  of  substance.  You 
may  cast  lead  into  the  shape  of  a  shilling,  but  you  cannot  make 
silver  of  it.  Now,  the  only  change  which  can  save  us  is  a 
thorough  transformation  of  nature,  and  this  is  as  clearly  beyond 
human  power  as  the  turning  of  lead  into  silver.  When  we  see 
a  great  moral  improvement  in  any  man  we  ought  to  be  glad,  and 
to  admire  the  power  of  conscience ;  but  if  the  man's  heart 
remains  the  same,  the  alteration  is  only  casting  a  lump  of  lead 
into  a  pretty  form.  When  the  man's  nature  and  disposition 
are  radically  altered,  we  may  then  exclaim,  "  This  is  the  finger 
■of  God " — this  is  transmuting  lead  into  silver.  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again":  nothing  less  will  suffice. 

Lord,  grant  that  I  may  truly  know  this  change.  If  I  am  mis- 
taken and  have  never  been  regenerated,  be  pleased  to  exercise 
thy  gracious  power  upon  me  now,  for  Jesus'  sake. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  36 

WHY  A  CANDLE  IS  LIT. 

'•  God  seldom  Ughteth  a  candle,  but  he  hath  some  lost  groat  to 
seeky  This  is  assuredly  true,  and  its  practical  bearings  are 
worthy  of  our  attention.  If  God  raises  up  a  preacher  or  any 
other  useful  worker,  we  may  conclude  that  he  has  a  people  to  be 
sought  out  and  won  for  his  kingdom.  All  capacities  and 
abilities  in  the  church  are  intended  for  this  great  purpose — the 
finding  of  the  lost  treasure.  The  same  is  true  of  the  doctrines 
of  the  gospel,  the  ordinances,  and  the  promises  :  these  are  all 
lights  kindled  with  the  view  of  finding  lost  souls.  The  whole 
Scripture  has  an  eye  in  this  direction.  By  one  text  one  man  is 
found,  and  by  another  passage  another  is  discovered.  Each 
Scripture  has  its  own  ray,  and  by  its  means  its  own  lost  piece  is 
perceived.  Some  texts  are  great  candles,  and  have  found  out 
many ;  but  probably  there  is  not  one  tiny  taper  of  Holy  Writ 
which  has  not  shed  its  saving  beams  on  some  one  or  other  of 
the  Lord's  precious  ones.  Certainly  every  light  which  the  Lord 
has  given  has  a  gracious  design,  and  will  be  used  for  a  saving 
purpose. 

Lord,  use  me  also,  though  I  be  but  a  poor  rushlight,  and  find  out 
some  poor  lost  sinner  by  my  means. 

THE  KING'S  EXAMPLE. 

^^Alexajider,  when  his  army  grew  sluggish  because  laden  with 
the  spoils  of  their  enemies^  to  free  the?nfrom  this  incumbrance, 
commanded  all  his  own  baggage  to  be  set  on  fire,  that  when 
they  saw  the  king  himself  devote  his  rich  treasures  to  the  flames 
they  inight  not  nmrmicr  if  their  inite  aiid pittance  were  co7isumed 
also.  So,  if  Christ  had  taught  us  co7itempt  of  the  world,  and  had 
not  given  tcs  an  instance  of  it  in  his  owft  person,  his  doctrine  had 
been  less  powerful  and  effecttialP  But  what  an  example  we  now 
find  in  him,  seeing  he  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head  in  life,  nor 
a  rag  to  cover  him  in  death,  nor  anything  but  a  borrowed  grave 
in  burial.     What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all 


38  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

unselfishness  when  we  have  such  a  Lord  !  He  hath  not  said  to 
us  in  matters  of  self-denial, ''Take  up  thy  cross  and  go/' but 
"  Come,  take  up  thy  cross,  and  follow  me."  Fired  by  the  heroic 
self-sacrifice  of  our  King,  the  sternest  abnegation  of  self  and  the 
severest  renunciation  of  the  world  should  become  an  easy  matter. 
Well  may  the  soldiers  endure  hardness  when  the  King  himself 
roughs  it  among  us,  and  suffers  more  than  the  meanest  private 
in  our  ranks. 

My  soul,  I  charge  thee,  endure  hardness,  and  look  not  for  ease 
where  Jesus  found  death. 

THE  BEST  WEATHER  FOR  ME. 

'''■The  same  weather  docs  not  fit  every  soil;  that  drought  which 
bicrneth  up  the  hotter  grounds  coviforteth  those  that  are  more 
chill  and  cold.  If  one  man  had  anothefs  blessiiigs  he  would 
soon  ru7i  wild,  as  another  would  grow  desperate  if  he  had  our 
crosses.  Therefore  the  infinite  wisdom  of  the  great  Governor  of 
the  world  allots  every  one  his  portion^  It  may  be,  my  soul, 
that  thou  art  a  dry  and  thirsty  plot  which  will  never  yield  a 
harvest  at  all  unless  thou  art  continually  under  the  watery  sign. 
For  thee  the  clouds  must  return  after  the  rain,  and  rough 
weather  last  long  and  come  again.  Thou  hast  had  little  sun- 
shine, but  thy  long  glooms  are  wisely  appointed  thee,  for  perhaps 
a  stretch  of  summer  weather  would  have  made  thee  as  a  parched 
land  and  a  barren  wilderness.  Thy  Lord  knows  best,  and  he  has 
the  clouds  and  the  sun  at  his  disposal.  Let  me  therefore  bless 
him  for  such  weather  as  he  sends  to  me  from  day  to  day,  for 
foul  is  fair  to  me  if  the  Lord  appoints  it  in  love. 

Let  me  not  envy  those  whom  the  sun  shines  on.  May  be 
they  need  it  all  to  make  them  fruitful.  Why  should  they  not 
have  it  ?  There  is  all  the  more  sunshine  for  me  when  it  shines 
for  others.  Lord,  I  bless  thee  for  other  men's  joys,  and  I  will 
not  repine  if  I  am  denied  an  equal  share  with  them.  I  have 
thee  :  and  what  more  can  I  ask  t 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  37 

THE  PAPER-STAINER  AND  THE  ARTIST. 

"A  paper-stai7ier  will  think  a  painter  too  cKriotis,  because 
Ids  Q-dOJi  work  is  but  a  little  daubing.  The  broad  way  pleaseth 
the  world  best,  but  the  narrow  way  leadeth  to  life."  Our 
author  means  that  the  maker  of  wall-papers  gets  over  a  great 
deal  of  ground  as  compared  with  the  artist  who  is  producing  a 
masterly  painting.  Of  rough  daubing  there  is  plenty  to  be  had, 
and  there  is  a  great  market  for  it ;  and  yet,  though  thoroughly 
fine  art  is  scarce,  it  is  infinitely  more  precious  than  daubing. 
That  religion  which  needs  no  care,  and  takes  no  trouble,  is  in 
great  demand  in  the  world ;  it  is  produced  by  the  acre,  and 
may  be  seen  spread  over  the  surface  everywhere.  Not  so  the 
religion  of  grace  ;  it  costs  many  a  tear,  and  a  world  of  anxious 
thought,  and  solemn  heart-searching,  and  it  is  but  slow  work  at 
the  best ;  but  then  it  is  of  great  price,  and  is  not  only  accept- 
able with  God,  but  even  men  perceive  that  there  is  a  something 
about  it  to  which  the  common  religious  daubers  never  attain. 
If  we  let  the  boat  drift  with  the  stream,  and  leave  our  religion 
to  random  influences,  without  care  or  thought,  what  can  we 
look  for  but  slovenliness  and  worthlessness  ?  If  we  would  please 
God  v/e  must  watch  every  stroke  and  touch  upon  the  canvas 
of  our  lives,  and  we  may  not  think  that  we  can  lay  it  on  with  a 
trowel  and  yet  succeed.  We  ought  to  live  as  miniature-painters 
work,  for  they  watch  every  line  and  tint.  O  for  more  careful 
work,  more  heart  work !  Otherwise  we  shall  lose  that  which 
we  have  wrought. 

SAVE  THE  JEWELS. 

"As  men  in  a  great  fire  and  gejieral  confiagration  will  hazard 
their  lumber  io  preserve  their  treasure^  their  money,  or  their 
jewels,  so  shotdd  we  take  care,  if  we  must  lose  one  or  the 
other,  that  the  better  part  be  out  of  hazard.  Whatever  we  lose 
by  the  way,  let  tts  make  sure  that  we  cojne  well  to  the  end  of  our 

See  how  men  throw  overboard 


38  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

the  lading  of  the  ship  when  it  becomes  a  question  of  saving 
their  lives.  Reason  teaches  them  that  the  less  precious  must  go 
first :  they  do  not  throw  over  first  their  gold  and  then  their  corn, 
neither  do  they  lose  their  lives  to  save  their  ingots.  So  let  us, 
above  all  things,  care  for  our  souls  and  their  eternal  interests. 
He  whose  house  was  burned  to  ashes  kneeled  down  and  thanked 
the  Lord  because  his  child  was  safe  ;  and  he  who  loses  the 
whole  world  but  obtains  eternal  salvation  has  so  much  to  rejoice 
in  that  he  would  waste  his  tears  if  he  shed  them  over  his  losses. 
Suppose  it  were  said  that  Virgil  died  worth  half-a-million  of 
money,  it  is  so  long  ago  that  it  would  be  stale  intelligence,  and 
if  the  same  were  said  of  a  man  who  died  yesterday  there  would 
really  be  no  more  in  it ;  yet  if  the  soul  of  Virgil's  slave  was 
saved,  though  he  never  owned  a  single  gold  coin,  heaven  has  not 
ceased  to  ring  with  joy  concerning  his  salvation.  The  soul 
should  be  our  main  care.  It  is  our  all,  for  it  is  ourself.  Lord^ 
leach  men  this  wisdom ;  teach  me  this  wisdom. 

THE  CARVER  FOR  HIMSELF. 

''^He  that  will  be  Ms  qw7i  carver  seldom  carveth  out  a  good 
portion  to  himself.  Wilful  spirits  who  luoiildfain  be  their  own 
providence  intreiich  upon  Gods  prerogative,  and  take  the  work 
out  of  his  hands  J  and,  therefore,  no  wonder  if  their  wisdom 
be  tu?'ned  into  folly."  It  is  God's  business  to  regulate  providence, 
and  when  we  attempt  it  we  cause  confusion  and  trouble.  Not 
only  does  the  carver  for  himself  get  a  poor  portion,  but  he  fre- 
quently cuts  his  fingers,  and  spoils  his  clothes  by  spilling  the 
contents  of  the  dish.  Israel  went  into  Canaan  well  enough 
when  the  Lord  led  the  way ;  but  when  the  people  before  the 
set  time  presumed  to  go  up  of  their  own  head,  they  brought 
defeat  upon  themselves.  It  is  never  well  either  to  run  before 
the  cloud,  or  to  stay  behind  it :  in  either  case  we  may  expect 
to  fall  under  clouds  of  another  sort,  which  will  darken  our  way 
and  becloud  our  peace. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  3D 

Cannot  we  trust  the  Lord  with  his  own  business  ?  Can  we 
supplement  infallible  wisdom,  or  improve  upon  infinite  goodness  ? 
Have  we  not  enough  to  do  if  we  earnestly  endeavour  to  obey  our 
Lord  ?  Do  we  want  to  be  rulers  ?  Are  we  tired  of  being  dis- 
ciples and  followers  ?  Why  do  we  strain  after  things  too  high 
for  us,  intruding  into  spheres  which  belong  to  God  alone  ? 

My  soul,  stand  thou  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  God  !  He 
is  at  the  helm,  and  is  well  able  to  pilot  the  vessel.  Keep  thy 
hand  off  the  tiller.  Down  with  thee,  unbelief,  what  hast  thou 
to  do  while  God  himself  provides  for  his  people  ? 

THE  GHOST. 

^^  Guilt  raked  out  of  its  grave  is  vioi^e  frightful  than  a  ghost,  or 
one  risen  fro7n  the  dead.^^  Nor  is  the  terror  which  sin  excites  in 
the  awakened  conscience  at  all  an  idle  one.  There  is  in  evil  a 
hoiTor  greater  than  can  be  found  in  hobgoblin,  sprite,  or  appari- 
tion. Great  is  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  and  he  who  comes  under 
its  spell  will  have  no  joy  of  his  life  till  the  ghost  is  laid  in  the  Red 
Sea  of  Jesus'  precious  blood.  Blessed  be  God,  our  Lord  has 
done  this  for  us ;  and  we  are  not  afraid  of  being  haunted  by 
sins  which  are  buried  in  his  grave. 

NO  DAY  WITHOUT  THE  SUN. 

"  When  the  stm  is  gone  all  the  candles  in  the  world  caimot 
make  it  day."  Vain  would  be  the  attempt,  though  we  should 
kindle  a  mountain  of  wax.  So  when  the  Lord  denies  comfort 
to  a  man,  neither  wealth,  nor  honour,  nor  power  can  enlighten 
the  darkness  of  his  mind.  We  can  procure  our  own  sorrow, 
but  we  cannot  produce  our  own  comfort.  A  secret  curse  eats 
out  the  heart  of  earthly  joys  when  God  does  not  smile  upon 
them.  Without  God  the  world  is,  says  Manton,  "a  deaf  nut y 
which  we  crack,  but  find  nothing  in  it  but  dust."  Vanity  of 
vanities,  all  is  vanity,  till  the  Lord  becomes  our  all  in  all.  Reader, 
do  you  know  this  by  personal  experience  } 


40  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

AEE  THEY  HAPPY? 

"Do  you  accotmt  him  a  happy  ma7i  who  is  co7ideimied  to  die, 
because  he  hath  a  plejitiful  allowance  till  his  execution  ?  Or  him 
a  happy  man  that  makes  a  fair  show  abroad  and  puts  a  good 
face  upon  his  ruinous  and  breaking  conditioji,  while  at  home  he 
is  pinched  with  wantaiidmiseiy,  which  is  ready  to  come  upon  him 
like  a7t  armed  man;  one  who  revels  i7i  all  manner  of  pleasure 
to-day^  but  is  to  die  at  7iight  ?  Theii  those  who  renmin  ifi  the 
giiilt  of  their  si7is  may  be  happy^  If  we  view  unpardoned 
sinners  aright  we  shall  heartily  pity  them.  Let  their  condition 
be  what  it  may,  at  this  present  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
them,  and  they  are  "condemned  already  " ;  and  as  for  the  future, 
it  is  black  with  certain  doom.  Alas  for  the  unhappy  man  against 
Avhom  God  sets  his  face !  What  misery  can  be  greater  than 
to  be  reserved  against  the  great  day  of  the  wrath  of  God  ?  We 
wonder  at  the  mirth  of  men  condemned  to  hell,  their  infatuation 
is  terrible  to  behold. 

Hence  we  cannot  join  with  them  in  their  carnal  mirth. 
Sinners  may  dance,  but  it  will  not  be  to  our  piping.  They 
may  revel  and  riot,  but  we  dare  not  countenance  them  in  their 
jollity,  for  we  know  that  their  day  is  coming.  Let  no  desire  to 
share  their  base  delights  lurk  in  your  mind  if  you  be  indeed  a 
child  of  God.  Be  not  envious  at  the  transgressors.  Who 
would  envy  a  criminal  about  to  be  executed  his  last  draught  of 
wine?  Let  not  their  frivolities  attract  you.  Every  sensible 
man  pities  the  wretch  who  can  dance  under  the  gallows. 
Sinners  on  the  road  to  hell  sporting  and  jesting  are  worse  than 
mad,  or  their  singing  would  turn  to  sighing. 

THE  SUN  ECLIPSED. 

''^  To  put  out  a  ca7idle  is  no  great  77iatter;  but  to  have  the  stm 
eclipsed,  which  is  the  fou7itai7i  of  light,  that  sets  the  world 
a-wonderi7ig !  For  poor  creatures  to  lose  their  co77iforts  is  no 
great  wonder,  who,  though  they  live  iti  God,  are  so  many  degrees 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  41 

distant  f?'om  hiin;  bict  for  Christ,  who  was  God-7na7i  i7t  one 
person  J  to  be  forsaken  of  God,  that  is  a  diffictdty  to  otcr  thoughts 
ajid  a  wo7ider  i7ideed,  for  by  this  7nea7is  he  was  so  far  deprived 
of  so7ne  part  of  hi7nself"  Yes,  indeed,  this  is  the  wonder  of 
wonders,  the  miracle  of  miracles,  at  which,  my  mind  would  for 
ever  stand  amazed.  That  the  thrice  Holy  One  should  take  the 
sinner's  place,  and,  coming  under  the  sinner's  doom,  should  be 
smitten  of  God,  is  a  mystery  past  finding  out !  Hell  is  horribly 
amazing,  but  the  death  of  Jesus  is  far  more  astounding,  and 
especially  that  in  death  he  should  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Only  the  Son  of  God  could  endure 
this  great  grief;  yet  is  it  a  mystery  of  mysteries,  that  so  divine 
a  person  should  be  capable  of  enduring  it.  The  marvel  is 
thought  to  be  that  a  man  should  be  able  to  suffer  so  much ; 
but  the  real  marvel  is  that,  being  God,  he  should  suffer  at  all 
that  which  was  the  very  essence  of  his  grief— the  being  forsaken 
by  the  Father. 

My  soul,  adore  and  love  ;  understand  thou  canst  not.  Behold 
the  eclipse  of  thy  soul's  Sun,  and  know  that,  had  not  this  been, 
thou  wouldst  have  been  in  the  dark  for  ever. 

THE  ASS  WISER  THAN  THE  SINNER. 

^^Yotc  ca7i7ioi  drive  a  didl  ass  i7ito  the  fire  that  is  kindled  before 
his  eyes"  The  ungodly  are  far  more  brutish,  for  they  choose 
the  way  of  destruction,  and  rush  with  eagerness  into  the  flames 
of  hell.  "  Surely  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the  sight  of  any 
bird,"  and  yet  men  see  the  net,  and  hasten  into  it.  Sinners  take 
more  pains  to  go  to  hell  than  the  saints  to  go  to  heaven.  They 
are  more  bold  to  destroy  themselves  than  saints  are  in  their 
salvation.  What  greater  proof  can  we  have  of  the  madness  of 
their  hearts,  and  what  plainer  evidence  that  salvation  is  not 
by  the  will  of  man,  but  by  grace  alone  ? 

Lord,  save  me  and  mine  from  that  obstinate  love  of  sin  which 
makes  men  more  brutish  than  the  ox  and  the  ass. 


42  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

SURFACE  MELTING. 

"So?}ie  are  frightened  into  a  little  religiotisness  in  their  straits 
and  deep  necessities,  but  it  is  poor  ivork  a7id  superficial  work. 
They  are  like  ice  in  thawing  weather,  soft  at  top  and  hard  at 
bottojn."  They  melt,  but  to  no  very  great  extent.  It  is  upon 
the  surface  only  that  they  yield  to  heavenly  influences.  This  is 
a  sorry  state  of  things,  for  it  generally  ends  in  a  harder  frost 
than  before,  and  the  bonds  of  cold  indifference  bind  the  very 
soul.  Let  those  in  whom  there  are  any  meltings  of  holy  feeling 
take  heed,  for  their  danger  lies  in  being  content  with  a  partial 
subjection  to  gracious  influences.  Grace  will  be  all  or  nothing: 
the  ice  must  all  melt,  and  the  soul  must  flow  like  a  river.  Jesus 
did  not  come  to  create  temporary  and  partial  religious  feeling, 
but  to  make  new  creatures  of  us.  He  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  those  Ephraimites  who  are  as  half-done  cakes,  which  are 
black  on  one  side  with  too  much  baking,  but  have  never  been 
turned  so  as  to  feel  the  fire  on  the  other  side.  The  centre  of 
the  heart  must  feel  the  warmth  of  divine  love,  or  nothing  is 
done. 

Lord,  shine  on  my  soul  till  I  am  wholly  melted,  and  all  my  ice 
has  vanished.  Thou  alone  canst  break  up  nature's  frost,  but 
thou  canst  do  it.     Shine  on  me,  most  patient  Lord. 

THE  DRUNKEN  SERVANT  STILL  A  SERVANT. 

"yi  drunken  servant  is  a  servant,  and  bound  to  do  his  work; 
his  master  loseth  not  his  right  by  his  man's  defatdt."  It  is  a  mere 
assumption,  though  some  state  it  with  much  confidence,  that 
inability  removes  responsibility.  As  our  author  shows,  a  servant 
may  be  too  drunk  to  do  his  mastei-'s  bidding,  but  his  sei*vice  is 
still  his  master's  due.  If  responsibility  began  and  ended  with 
ability,  a  man  would  be  out  of  debt  as  soon  as  he  was  unable  to 
pay ;  and  if  a  man  felt  that  he  could  not  keep  his  temper  he 
would  not  be  blamable  for  being  angry.     A  man  may  be  bound 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  43 

to  do  what  he  cannot  do :  the  habitual  liar  is  bound  to  speak  the 
truth,  though  his  habit  of  falsehood  renders  him  incapable  of 
it.  Every  sin  renders  the  sinner  less  able  to  do  right,  but  the 
standard  of  his  duty  is  not  lowered  in  proportion  to  the  lowering 
of  his  capacity  to  come  up  to  it,  or  it  would  follow  that  the 
more  a  man  is  depraved  by  sin  the  less  guilty  his  actions  become, 
which  is  absurd. 

Every  Christian  will  confess  that  it  is  his  duty  to  be  perfect, 
and  yet  he  mourns  over  his  inability  to  be  so.  It  never  enters 
into  the  Christian's  head  to  excuse  his  failings  by  pleading  the 
incapacity  of  his  nature;  nay,  this  is  another  cause  for 
lamentation. 

The  standard  of  responsibility  is  the  command  of  God.  The 
law  cannot  be  lowered  to  our  fallen  state.  It  is  sin  to  neglect 
or  break  a  divine  command.  All  the  theology  which  is  based 
upon  the  idea  that  responsibility  is  to  be  measured  by  moral 
ability  or  inability  has  the  taint  of  error  about  it. 

Lord,  make  me  to  know  my  obligation,  that  I  may  be  humbled, 
and  help  me  to  adore  thy  grace,  by  which  alone  holiness  can 
be  wrought  in  me. 

CYPRESS  TREES. 

^'Sovie  talk,  but  do  nothing;  like  cypress  trees,  tall  and 
beautiful,  but  unfruitful;  or,  like  the  carbuncle,  afar  off  seeming 
all  on  fire,  but  the  touch  discovers  it  to  be  key -cold:  their  zeal  is 
more  i7t  their  tongues  than  their  actions"  These  are  a  numerous 
race,  and  never  more  so  than  at  this  time.  Persecution  is  an 
unhealthy  season  for  false  professors,  who  prefer  to  flourish  in 
the  piping  times  of  peace,  when  godliness  is  gain,  and  it  pays  to 
get  Christ  to-day  and  sell  him  to-morrow.  The  cypress  tree  is 
an  excellent  emblem  of  the  more  prominent  specimens  of  this 
class.  They  are  conspicuous,  and  aim  to  be  so  :  rising  above 
their  fellows,  they  invite  attention ;  but  when  you  turn  your  eyes 
towards  them  you  cannot  discover  even  a  tiny  apple  upon  them, 
or  any  other  useful  fruit.   Certainly  they  are  shapely  and  stately, 


44  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

and  when  you  have  said  that  you  have  said  all.  They  look  most 
at  home  near  the  grave^  and  a  melancholy  air  surrounds  them, 
but  still  they  are  not  half  as  valuable  as  the  more  lowly  fruit- 
bearers  which  flourish  unobserved  with  a  cheerful  verdure. 
Certain  professors  whom  we  know  are  prim,  stiff,  orderly,  and 
melancholy,  but  we  are  not  fond  of  their  neighbourhood  ;  for 
they  yield  no  refreshing  shade  or  nourishing  fruit,  and  make  us 
feel  doleful  to  the  last  degree. 

Lord,  let  me  be  as  low  and  unnoticed  as  thou  pleasest,  but 
do  enable  me  to  bear  fruit,  to  the  honour  of  thy  name  and  to 
the  comfort  of  thy  people. 

THE  EMPTY  BRAG. 

"yi  Roma7i  bragged  ^that  he  had  never  bee7i  reco7iciled  with  his 
mother ' ;  iinplying  that  he  had  never  disagreed  with  her.  So, 
some  say  they  were  never  comforted,  they  never  needed  itj  they 
lay  nothing  to  hearts  Of  this  company  are  those  who  were 
born  free,  and  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man,  and  yet,  by 
their  boastings,  set  the  fetters  of  their  pride  a-clanking.  Those 
who  were  never  wounded,  and  therefore  have  never  been  healed, 
may  glory  in  their  state,  but  the  time  will  come  when  they  will 
wish  it  were  otherwise  with  them,  and  envy  the  very  least  of 
those  broken-hearted  ones  whom  Jesus  has  bound  up.  A  day 
shall  dawn  when  the  self-righteous,  who  are  now  at  ease  in 
Zion,  would  gladly  exchange  places  with  those  whom  they  now 
despise  as  morbid  and  melancholy. 

Lord,  let  me  be  among  those  who  confess  that  they  were  once 
thine  enemies,  and  have  been  reconciled  to  thee  by  the  death  of 
thy  Son.  Let  me  be  numbered  among  those  who  were  the 
servants  of  sin,  but  have,  through  thy  grace,  obeyed  from  the 
heart  the  doctrine  of  thy  word.  Let  me  ever  vividly  perceive 
that  I  have  undergone  a  radical  change,  which  I  greatly  needed, 
and  without  which  I  should  have  been  an  heir  of  wrath,  even  as 
others. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  45 

THE  HEDGE  OF  THORNS. 

'*  Wicked  men  are  preserved  in  reference  to  the  godly;  they  are 
but  as  a  defence  of  thorns  about  a  garden  of  roses.  Now,  whe7i 
the  roses  are  cropped  off,  what  will  become  of  the  thorns?^' 
This  is  a  solemn  question,  and  should  arouse  the  careless.  Un- 
godly men  are  a  sort  of  scaffold  to  God's  house,  and  when  the 
house  is  finished  they  must  be  pulled  down.  The  husk  is  needful 
to  the  wheat  at  a  certain  time,  but  when  the  corn  is  ripe  the  husk 
is  useless  chaff,  and  must  be  separated  from  it.  An  ungodly 
mother  is  to  a  pious  son  as  the  chaff  to  the  wheat,  and  ere 
long  the  chaff  must  be  driven  away.  What  think  ye  of  this,  ye 
unsaved  parents  of  godly  children .?  What  think  ye  of  this,  ye 
unregenerate  brothers  and  friends,  by  whom  the  godly  are 
succoured,  while  you  yourselves  remain  unsaved  ? 

When  good  men  die  the  wicked  should  reflect  that  there  is  so 
much  the  less  salt  left  to  preserve  society.  There  is  one 
pleader  less  for  the  preservation  of  the  barren  tree.  Every  saint 
taken  home  brings  the  world  so  much  nearer  its  end.  Much  as 
they  may  despise  the  godly,  the  deaths  of  righteous  men  ought 
to  be  solemn  warnings  to  the  thoughtless  world,  as  they  reflect 
upon  what  must  happen  to  the  world  when  those  who  are  its 
light  and  its  salt  are  taken  away. 

THE  UNUSED  KEY. 

">?  key  rusteth  that  is  seldom  turned  in  the  lock."  It  becomes 
hard  work  to  stir  it,  for  it  becomes  rusted  into  its  place.  Neglect 
of  prayer  makes  prayer  become  hard  v/ork,  whereas  it  should  be 
a  privilege  and  a  delight.  We  cannot  restrain  prayer,  and  yet 
enjoy  prayer.  Frequency  in  this  matter  helps  fervour,  and  con- 
stancy in  it  brings  out  the  comfort  of  it. 

Am  I  becoming  slack  in  devotion .?  O  Lord,  forgive  me,  and 
save  me  from  this  grave  neglect  before  it  begins  to  eat  into  my 
soul  and  corrode  my  heart ! 


46  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  SERPENT'S  EGG 

"//  is  easier  to  crush  the  egg  than  to  kill  the  serpent P  It  is 
prudent  to  break  up  all  the  eggs  we  can  find  before  the  reptiles 
are  hatched.  Far  greater  wisdom  will  be  shown  in  early  dealing 
with  an  error  or  a  temptation  than  in  allowing  it  time  to  make 
headway.  In  our  own  cases,  it  will  be  best  to  correct  ourselves 
betimes,  and  unhesitatingly  to  stamp  out  the  first  sparks  of  ill 
desire,  before  passion  rises  to  a  flame.  A  serpent's  o-g^  a  child 
can  break,  but  who  is  to  contend  with  the  venomous  creature 
which  may  be  hatched  from  it,  if  it  be  left  unbroken  ?  So  is  it 
with  that  vice  which  stingeth  like  a  viper.  The  first  glass  can 
readily  be  refused ;  it  is  quite  another  matter  to  stop  when  the 
wine  has  entered  the  brain.  The  first  impropriety  we  may 
readily  avoid  ;  but  when  unclean  desires  are  fully  aroused,  who 
shall  bridle  them  ? 

O  Lord,  of  thy  grace,  teach  me  to  crush  sin  betimes,  lest  it 
should  gather  strength  and  crush  me. 

INVISIBLE  INK. 

^^  Things  written  with  the  juice  of  a  leinojt^  when  they  are 
brought  to  the  fire  are  plaijt  and  legible;  so  when  wicked  7Jien 
draw  near  to  the  fires  of  hell,  their  secret  sins  siajid  out  before 
theviy  and  they  cry  out  upon  their  beds.^^  The  prospect  of 
eternity  discovers  those  secret  beliefs  and  inward  fears  which 
they  laboured  so  hard  to  deny  and  conceal.  Few  men  can  keep 
up  a  deceit  when  they  approach  their  end.  The  skeleton  hand 
readily  tears  off  the  mask.  A  death-bed  is  not  always  free  from 
hypocrisy ;  but,  assuredly,  it  is  hard  for  the  dying  sinner  to  keep 
up  his  deceit.  The  fire  of  his  approaching  doom  brings  out  the 
secret  writing  upon  his  soul,  which  even  he  himself  had  not 
before  cared  to  read,  and  then  he  who  thought  himself  a  firmly 
rooted  sceptic  finds  out  that  he  had  after  all  an  inward  con- 
viction which  he  could  not  stifle,  and  a  fear  in  his  heart  which 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  47 

he  could  not  smother.  O  that  men  would  seek  to  know  them- 
selves, for  it  might  turn  out  that  the  defiant  blasphemy  of  their 
tongues  is  not,  by  any  means,  a  sure  index  that  their  heart  is 
at  rest  in  unbelief. 

What  must  be  that  man's  condition  whose  very  infidelity  is 
feigned?  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  be  a  sham  Christian,  but 
what  must  be  the  worthlessness  of  a  hypocritical  infidel? 
When  the  genuine  metal  is  worthless,  what  shall  we  say  of  its 
counterfeit  ?  Yet  we  doubt  not  that  thousands  of  sceptics,  in 
their  inmost  hearts,  believe  what  they  blusteringly  deny,  and 
the  day  will  come  when,  like  him  whose  children  they  are, 
they  will  believe  and  tremble. 

Lord,  help  me  to  read  my  own  heart.  Let  me  know  my  true 
state,  and  let  that  state  be  such  as  thou  wilt  approve. 

ONE  RAINY  DAY. 

'■^  All  the  iediousness  of  the  present  life  is  but  like  one  rainy 
day  to  an  everlasti?ig  sunshine ^  How  readily,  then,  should  we 
bear  these  shortlived  troubles  !  They  are  but  for  a  moment ; 
just  a  passing  shower,  and  then  the  sun  will  shine  out  for  ever. 
Time  is  nothing  when  compared  with  eternity.  To  a  believer, 
this  sorrowful  life  is  like  one  drop  of  grief  lost  in  a  sea  of  glory, 
one  speck  of  rain  in  a  year  of  fair  weather.  These  light  and 
momentary  afflictions  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the 
eternal  bliss  which  awaits  us. 

THE  TRUMPET  AND  THE  PIPE. 

^^  There  is  a  tiine  for  the  trumpet  as  well  as  the  pipe T  We 
■must  sometimes  sound  an  alarm  ;  we  should  be  traitors  to  men's 
souls  and  to  our  Master  if  we  always  piped  to  dulcet  music.  He 
who  is  always  comforting  his  people  will  find  no  comfort  when 
he  is  called  to  answer  for  it  before  his  God  another  day.  Many 
souls  need  Boanerges  more  than  Barnabas,  thunder  more  than 
dew.     By  many  who  think  themselves  great  judges  the  trumpet 


48  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

discourse  is  judged  to  be  too  harsh,  and  the  piper  is  commended 
for  his  pleasant  strains ;  and  yet  the  Lord  may  distribute  the 
praise  and  the  blame  very  differently. 

My  heart,  be  not  thou  always  craving  for  soft  music.  Be 
willing  to  be  startled  and  stimulated.  Life  is  a  conflict,  and  thou 
needest  battle  music  to  keep  thee  up  to  fighting  pitch.  Let 
those  who  dance  with  the  world  pay  the  pipers  who  play  to 
them;  as  for  thee,  give  thine  ear  to  the  King's  trumpeters. 

POISONED  MEAT. 

'■^If  a  man  Jtad  poison  mixed  with  his  meat,  althotcgh  the 
excellence  of  his  digestion  or  the  strejigth  of  his  constitution 
might  bear  him  through,  yet  he  would  7'icn  great  hazard'^  Thus 
a  soul  may  survive  grave  doctrinal  error  ;  it  is  possible  for  it  to 
struggle  out  of  the  power  of  a  strong  dose  of  Popery,  or  Soci- 
nianism,  or  '' Modern  Thought " ;  but  it  runs  great  risks,  of  a 
character  so  violent  that  no  one  should  lightly  venture  upon 
them.  Our  safest  course  is  to  take  heed  what  we  hear,  and 
partake  of  nothing  which  comes  from  doubtful  quarters. 

O,  my  Lord,  do  thou  feed  me  with  the  bread  of  life.  Suffer 
me  not  to  taste  of  Satan's  dainties.  I  have  no  strength  to  spare. 
Forbid  that  I  should  test  it  by  imbibing  the  deadly  teachings  of 
those  who  err  from  thy  truth. 

TASTE. 

"Love  maketh  faith  more  operative;  there  is  a  knowledge  by 
sight,  and  a  knowledge  by  taste.  A  man  may  guess  at  the  good- 
ness of  wine  by  the  colour,  but  more  by  the  taste;  that  is  a  more 
7'efreshing  apprehensioft.  Atigustine  prayeth,  ^Lord,  make  me 
taste  by  love  what  I  perceive  by  k7towledge.^  Surely,  we  are 
never  sotmd  in  Christianity  till  all  the  light  that  we  7'eceive  be 
turned  into  love"  It  is  so.  Love  comes  to  close  dealings  with 
truth,  and  gets  a  truer  knowledge  of  it  than  any  other  grace.  A 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  49 

hot  iron,  even  though  blunt,  will  penetrate  further  into  a  board 
than  a  cold  tool,  though  it  be  sharp ;  and  so  love  enters  further 
into  truth  than  mere  thought  or  study  can  do.  David  would 
have  us  "  taste  and  see "  ;  for  the  palate  sees  more  into  the ' 
essence  of  things  than  the  eye  can  do  ;  love  discovers  more 
than  reason  can  ever  know.  That  which  love  learns  is  also 
more  useful  than  the  cold  notions  of  the  brain,  for  it  sets  men 
working  for  Jesus,  and  leads  them  to  follow  him,  and  makes ' 
them  willing  to  suffer  for  him.  We  have  heard  of  some  who 
could  not  dispute  for  their  Lord,  and  yet  they  died  for  him,  and 
were  not  such  among  the  best  of  his  followers  ?  He  who  only 
knows  truth  in  the  light  of  it,  is  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with 
the  believer  who  receives  truth  in  the  love  of  it. 

O  Lord,  let  me  never  use  thy  gospel  as  a  pillow  for  my  head, 
but  as  a  medicine  for  my  heart.  Do  not  suffer  me  to  be  content 
with  mere  knowing ;  cause  me  always  to  be  deeply  in  love  with 
thy  word. 

FAE  OFF  LOOKS  SMALL. 

^''Looky  as  the  stars,  those  vast  globes  of  light,  by  reason  of  the 
distance  between  its  and  them,  do  seem  but  as  so  inaiiy  spangles; 
so  we  have  btU  a  weak  sight  of  things  which  are  set  at  a  great 
distance,  and  their  operation  on  its  is  usually  but  small T  Hence 
the  need  of  faith,  by  which  things  are  brought  near  to  us,  and 
made  to  stand  out  in  their  reality.  A  far-off  hell  is  the  dread 
of  no  man,  and  a  far-off  heaven  is  scarce  desired  by  any  one. 
God  himself,  while  thought  of  as  far  away,  is  not  feared  or 
reverenced  as  he  should  be.  If  we  did  but  use  our  thoughts 
upon  the  matter  we  should  soon  see  that  a  mere  span  of  time 
divides  us  from  the  eternal  world,  while  the  Lord  our  God  is 
nearer  to  us  than  our  souls  are  to  our  bodies.  Strange  that 
the  brief  time  which  intervenes  between  us  and  eternity  should 
appear  to  the  most  of  men  to  be  so  important,  while  eternity 
iiself  they  regard  as  a  trifling  matter.     They  use  the  microscope 


£0  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

to  magnify  the  small  concerns  of  time  ;  O  that  they  would  use 
the  telescope  upon  the  vast  matters  of  eternity  !  How  differently 
would  they  order  their  lives  with  judgment  felt  to  be  at  their 
doors  !  How  would  they  seek  to  escape  from  infinite  wrath,  if 
they  felt  it  to  be  nigh ! 

Lord,  arouse  me,  and  all  around  me,  to  a  due  estimate  of 
eternal  matters.  Enable  me  to  project  my  soul  into  the  infinite. 
Break  me  free  of  this  narrow  present,  and  launch  my  soul  upon 
the  wide  and  open  sea  of  the  ages  to  come.  Thou  art  in  eternity, 
and  let  my  soul  even  now  dwell  there  with  thee. 

PLEADING  THE  HANDWRITING. 

*'  We  have  astrongtie  up07i  God,  because  hegiveth  lis  the  promise, 
which  is  our  ground  of  hope.  Surely  we  may  put  his  bojids  in 
suit,  ajid  say,  ''Thy  handwriting  is  placed  bcforx  thee,  O  Lord.'" 
We  say  among  men — we  have  it  in  black  and  white,  and  there  is 
no  getting  over  it  :  a  man's  handwriting  binds  him.  Now,  we 
may  be  sure  that  the  Lord  will  never  deny  his  own  writing,  nor 
run  back  from  a  bond  given  under  his  own  hand  and  seal.' 
Every  promise  of  Scripture  is  a  writing  of  God,  which  may  be 
pleaded  before  him  with  this  reasonable  request,  "  Do  as  thou 
hast  said."  The  Creator  will  not  cheat  his  creature  who  depends 
upon  his  truth;  and,  far  more,  the  heavenly  Father  will  not 
break  his  word  to  his  own  child.  "  Remember  the  word  unto 
thy  servant,  on  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope,"  is  most 
prevalent  pleading.  It  is  a  double  argument :  it  is  thy  word, 
wilt  thou  not  keep  it?  Why  hast  thou  spoken  it  if  thou  wilt 
not  make  it  good  ?  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope  in  it,  wilt  thou 
disappoint  the  hope  which  thou  hast  thyself  begotten  in  me  ? 

How  sure  are  thy  promises,  O  my  God.  Forgive  me  that  I 
ever  doubt  them,  and  give  me  more  faith,  that  I  may  treat  them 
as  the  blessings  which  they  guarantee,  even  as  men  pass 
cheques  and  notes  from  hand  to  hand  as  if  they  were  the  gold 
they  stand  for. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  51 

KEEPING  OUT  THE  COLD. 

"A  majt  that  ivoicld  keep  out  the  cold  in  winter  shteftetJi  all 
his  doors  and  windows,  yet  the  wind  will  creep  in,  though  he 
doth  ftot  leave  any  open  hole  for  itP  We  must  leave  no  inlet  for 
sin,  but  stop  up  every  hole  and  cranny  by  which  it  can  enter. 
There  is  need  of  great  care  in  doing  this,  for  when  our  very  best 
is  done  sin  will  find  an  entrance.  During  the  bitter  cold 
weather  we  list  the  doors,  put  sand-bags  on  the  windows,  draw 
■curtains,  and  arrange  screens,  and  yet  we  are  made  to  feel  that 
we  live  in  a  northern  climate :  in  the  same  way  must  we  be 
diligent  to  shut  out  sin,  and  we  shall  find  abundant  need  to 
•guard  every  point,  for  after  we  have  done  all,  we  shall,  in  one 
way  or  another,  be  made  to  feel  that  we  live  in  a  sinful  world. 

Well,  what  must  we  do  ?  We  must  follow  the  measures  which 
common  prudence  teaches  us  in  earthly  matters.  We  must 
drive  out  the  cold  by  keeping  up  a  good  fire  within.  The 
presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  soul  can  so  warm  the  heart 
that  worldliness  and  sin  will  be  expelled,  and  we  shall  be  both 
holy  and  happy.     The  Lord  grant  it,  for  Jesus'  sake. 

THE  TRAITOR  WITHIN. 

"yi  garrison  is  not  free  from  danger  while  it  hath  ati  enemy 
lodged  within"  You  may  bolt  all  your  doors,  and  fasten  all  your 
windows,  but  if  the  thieves  have  placed  even  a  little  child  within 
doors,  who  can  draw  the  bolts  for  them,  the  house  is  still  unpro- 
tected. All  the  sea  outside  a  ship  cannot  do  it  damage  till  the 
water  enters  within  and  fills  the  hold.  Hence,  it  is  clear,  our 
greatest  danger  is  from  within.  All  the  devils  in  hell  and 
tempters  on  earth  could  do  us  no  injury  if  there  were  no 
corruption  in  our  nature.  The  sparks  will  fall  harmlessly  if 
there  is  no  tinder.  Alas,  our  heart  is  our  greatest  enemy; 
this  is  the  little  home-born  thief. 

Lord,  save  me  from  that  evil  man,  myself. 


52  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

FIRE  FROM  HEAVEN. 

"The  heathens  counted  that  the  fire  which  ivas  enkindled  by  a 
sunbeam  was  more  fit  and  pure  for  their  altars  than  a  coal  taken 
from  a  common  hearthP  Herein  they  blindly  stumbled  upon 
the  image  of  a  great  spiritual  truth.  The  right  fire  for  a  preacher 
of  the  gospel  is  fire  from  God  himself.  All  else  defiles  the 
sacrifice,  and  is  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  die  out.  When  we  speak 
for  God  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  speak  tht'oit^h  God.  Excitement 
arising  from  animal  spirits  is  a  poor  substitute  for  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Far  worse  is  the  stimulus  of  wine  or  strong  drink, 
which  is  an  absolute  profanation  of  holy  things  and  a  presump- 
tuous provocation  of  God.  To  attempt  to  serve  God  under  the 
influence  of  the  "mocker"  is  to  mock  the  Most  Holy  One. 

To  preach  under  the  stimulus  of  anger  is  horrible,  and  to  do 
so  from  motives  of  ambition  is  equally  so.  Nadab  and  Abihu 
died  before  the  Lord  for  offering  strange  fire,  and  this  should  be 
a  perpetual  warning  to  all  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord. 

O  fire  of  God,  touch  our  lips,  yea,  burn  in  our  hearts.  Let 
no  strange  fire  come  near  us  :  neither  from  the  furnace  of  anger, 
nor  from  the  flames  of  ambitious  desire,  nor  from  the  flash  of 
carnal  excitement  may  we  ever  borrow  our  fires,  when  we  wait 
at  thine  altar,  O  Lord. 

PETER  MARTYR'S  ILLUSTRATION. 

Celius  Sccundus  Curio  hath  a  notable  passage  in  the  Life  of 
Galiacius  Caracciolas,  as  to  the  occasion  of  his  conversion. 
One,  John  Francis  Casarta,  who  was  enlightened  with  the  know- 
ledge of  the  gospel,  was  very  urgent  with  this  nobleman,  his 
cousin,  to  come  and  hear  Peter  Martyr,  who  then  preached  at 
Naples.  One  day,  by  much  entreaty,  he  was  drawn  to  hear 
him,  not  so  much  with  a  desire  to  learn  and  profit  as  out  of 
curiosity. 

Peter   IMartyr  was  then    opening  the   First   Epistle  to  the 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  53 

Corinthians,  and  showing  how  much  the  judgment  of  the  natural 
understanding  is  mistaken  in  things  spiritual.  Among  other 
things,  he  used  this  similitude  :  "  If  a  man,  riding  in  an  open 
country,  should,  afar  off,  see  men  and  women  dancing  together, 
and  should  not  hear  their  music,  according  to  which  they  dance 
and  tread  out  their  measures,  he  would  think  them  to  be  a 
company  of  fairies  or  madmen,  appearing  in  such  various 
motions  and  antic  postures ;  but  if  he  came  nearer,  and  heard 
the  musical  notes,  according  to  which  they  exactly  danced,  he 
would  find  that  to  be  art  which  before  he  thought  madness.  The 
same  happeneth  to  him  who  at  first  sees  a  change  of  life,  com- 
pany, and  fashions  in  his  former  companions ;  he  thinketh  they 
are  brain-sick  and  foolish ;  but  when  he  cometh  more  intimately 
to  weigh  the  thing,  and  what  an  exact  harmony  there  is  between 
such  a  life  and  conversation  and  the  motions  of  God's  Holy 
Spirit  and  the  directions  of  his  word,  he  findeth  that  to  be  the 
highest  reason  which  before  he  judged  madness  and  folly." 

This  similitude  stuck  in  the  mind  of  the  noble  marquis  (as  he 
was  wont  to  relate  it  to  his  familiar  friends),  that  ever  afterward 
he  wholly  applied  his  mind  to  the  search  of  the  truth  and  the 
practice  of  holiness,  and  left  all  his  honours  and  vast  possessions 
for  a  poor  life,  in  the  profession  of  the  gospel,  at  Geneva. 

This  needs  not  a  word  from  us.  If  ungodly  men  could  only 
hear  the  music  to  which  we  dance,  they  would  dance  too. 

THE  INWARD  REGISTRAR. 

*'7^  conscience  speaketh  not,  it  writethj  for  it  is  not  only  a 
'Witness,  but  a  register^  and  a  book  of  record:  ''The  sin  ofjtcdah 
is  written  with  a  pen  of  iron,  and  the  point  of  a  diamond^ : 
Jer.  xvii.  i.  We  know  not  what  conscience  write th,  being 
occupied  and  taken  tip  with  carnal  vajuties,  but  we  shall  know 
hereafter,  whe?t  the  books  are  opened :  Rev.  xx.  12.  Conscience 
keepeth  a  diary,  and  sets  down  everything.  This  book,  though  it 
be  in  the  sinner^ s  keeping,  cannot  be  razed  and  blotted  out.   Well, 


54  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS 

thc7i,  a  sleepy  conscience  will  7iot  always  sleep;  if  we  suffer  it 
not  to  awakeji  here,  it  will  awake?i  in  hell;  for  the  pre  ^e?if  it 
sleepeth  i?i  via7ty,  in  regai'd  of  motion,  check,  or  smiting,  bid  not 
in  7'egard  of  7iotice  and  observatio7i."  Let  those  who  forget  their 
sins  take  note  of  this.  There  is  a  chiel  within  you  taking  notes, 
and  he  will  publish  all  where  all  will  hear  it.  Never  say, 
"nobody  will  see  me,"  for  you  will  see  yourself,  and  your 
conscience  will  turn  king's  evidence  against  you. 

What  a  volume  Mr.  Recorder  Conscience  has  written  already  1 
How  many  blotted  pages  he  has  in  store,  to  be  produced  upon 
my  trial.  O  thou  who  alone  canst  erase  this  dreadful  hand- 
writing, look  on  me  in  mercy,  as  I  now  look  on  thee  by  faith. 

STUDY  PROPORTIONS. 

"A  drop  of  honey  is  7iot  ciwiigh  to  sweeteii  a  hogshead  of 
vinegar.^''  Under  great  troubles  we  need  great  grace  to  console . 
us.  We  must  seek  the  special  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  be 
more  diligent  and  fervent  in  prayer,  for  the  eternal  consolation 
of  the  Covenant.  A  proportion  must  be  maintained :  as  he  who- 
sets  out  upon  a  long  journey  takes  all  the  more  money  with  him, 
so,  in  prospect  of  a  great  trial,  we  should  seek  extraordinary 
grace.  The  heavier  the  waggon,  the  more  horses  the  farmer  puts 
into  the  team ;  and  so,  the  more  difficult  our  service,  the  more 
grace  must  we  bring  to  bear  upon  it. 

Lord,  when  we  have  much  sorrow,  let  us  taste  more  of  thy  love, 
and  the  vinegar  will  become  sweet  wine.  If  now  thou  dost  try 
us  severely,  be  pleased  also  to  comfort  us  richly. 

THE  HEN  WHICH  DOES  NOT  SIT  ON  HER  EGGS. 

"^  sudde7i  glaiice  at  truth  withottt  77ieditatio7i  up07t  it  bri7igeth 
nothi7ig  to  pc7fectio7i;  as  a  he7i  that  soo7i  leaveth  her  7iest  7iever 
liatcheth  her  chicks^  How  can  she  ?  Patience  is  needed,  and 
the  quiet  self-denial  by  which  she  renders  up  the  warmth  of  her 
heart;  otherwise  her  eggs  will  lie  as  dead  as  stones.    The  value 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  55 

of  truth  will  never  be  known  by  those  who  look  at  it  and  hurry- 
on  :  they  must  brood  over  it,  and  cover  it  with  their  heart's  love, 
or  it  will  never  become  living  truth  to  their  souls.  We  must  ap- 
ply ourselves  to  a  doctrine,  giving  our  whole  soul  and  heart  to 
it,  or  we  shall  miss  the  blessing.     Herein  is  wisdom. 

Lord,  when  I  hear  a  sermon,  or  read  in  a  good  book,  let  me 
not  be  as  the  partridge  which  sitteth  on  eggs  and  hatcheth  them 
not ;  but  make  me  to  see  life  and  power  in  thy  word,  and  to  re- 
joice over  it  as  one  that  findeth  great  spoil. 

THE  THIEF  AND  THE  CANDLE. 

"A  ihief  is  always  desirous  to  have  the  ca7idlcs  put  outP  His 
trade  is  best  carried  on  in  the  dark.  This  is  the  reason  why 
Satan  is  so  dead  set  against  faithful  preachers  and  teachers :  he 
can  rob  the  church,  and  plunder  souls  so  much  better  when  the 
light  of  the  gospel  is  withdrawn.  How  much  better  could  the 
Pope  pick  our  purses  with  his  purgatory,  indulgences,  and  rehcs, 
if  the  gospel  light  were  quenched  among  us  !  The  old-fashioned 
doctrines  of  grace  are  the  candles  of  the  Lord,  and  we  must 
keep  these  well  alight  among  the  people,  or  we  shall  soon  find 
the  Romish  thieves  busy  among  us. 

This  is  one  reason  why  creeds  and  catechisms  are  so  much 
detested  by  men  of  the  modern  school  :  these  candles  are  not 
to  their  mind,  for  they  prevent  their  robbing  us  of  the  treasures 
of  divine  truth. 

Lord,  I  bless  thee  for  the  light,  and  I  pray  that  I  mcy  not 
quench  even  the  tiniest  taper  by  which  thou  dost  enlighten  me. 

AUGUSTINE'S  STOEY. 

"Take  heed  of  giving  way  to  sin.  The  heart  that  was  easily 
troubled  before,  when  otice  it  is  imired  to  sin,  loseth  all  its  sensi- 
tiveness a7id  tenderness,  and  what  seemed  intolerable  at  first 
grows  into  a  delight.  Alipius,  St.  Atisiin's  friend,  first 
abhorred  the  bloody  spectacles  of  the  gladiators,  but  gave  hi77iself 


56  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

leave f  through  the  importunity  of  friends,  to  be  present  for  once. 
He  would  not  so  much  as  open  his  eyes  at  first;  but  at  length,  when 
the  people  shouted,  he  gave  himself  liberty  to  see,  and  then  not 
07ily  beheld  the  spectacles  with  delight^  but  drew  others  to  behold 
what  himself  once  loathed"  The  story  has  had  its  counterpart 
in  thousands  of  instances.  Men  who  shuddered  at  the  sight  of 
a  dead  bird  have,  by  famiharity  with  cruelty,  come  to  commit 
murder  without  compunction.  Those  who  sipped  half-a-glass 
of  wine  have  come  to  drink  by  the  gallon.  Staunch  Protestants 
have  given  way  to  some  little  form  and  ceremony,  and  become 
more  Popish  than  the  Romanists  themselves.  There  is  no  safety 
if  we  venture  an  inch  over  the  boundary  line ;  indeed,  little  allow- 
ances are  more  dangerous  than  greater  compliances,  since 
conscience  does  not  receive  a  wound,  and  yet  the  man  is  undone, 
and  falls  by  little  and  little. 

Come,  my  soul,  leave  sin  altogether.  Do  not  give  Sodom  so 
much  as  a  look,  nor  take  from  it  so  much  as  a  thread.  Do  not 
set  a  foot  within  her  doors,  for  God  abhors  the  abode  of  sin,  and 
would  have  his  people  refrain  their  foot  from  it. 

SLEEPING  BY  WATERFALIS. 

"Things  to  which  we  are  tcsed  do  not  work  upoJi  us;  we  aj-e 
not  much  moved  with  thein.  Custom  maketh  men  sleep  quietly 
by  the  falls  of  great  waters,  where  much  7ioise  is;  and  some 
parts  of  the  body  grow  callous,  brawny,  dry,  and  dead,  as  the 
labourer's  hand  and  the  travellers  heel,  by  much  use^  So  doth 
the  conscience  gradually  lose  its  force.  At  first,  like  a  cataract, 
its  great  roar  astounds  the  soul,  and  effectually  prevents  its 
slumbers  of  carnal  security ;  but  by-and-by  its  noise  is  scarcely 
heard,  and  men  are  even  lulled  to  sleep  by  its  sound.  Now,  this 
is  to  be  dreaded  exceedingly,  for  it  is  the  forerunner  of  doom. 
No  more  warnings  are  heard,  because  sentence  has  gone  forth, 
and  the  man's  destruction  is  sealed. 

Even  on  a  smaller   scale,  it  is  a  serious    thing   to   have 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  57 

conscience  lose  its  tenderness.  Christian  men,  by  association 
with  the  world,  and  by  a  want  of  thorough  consideration,  may 
come  to  do  with  impunity  things  which  would  shock  them  if 
their  consciences  were  in  a  healthy  state.  It  is  dangerous  for 
a  steam-engine  when  the  tell-tale  does  not  act;  and  no  one 
knows  what  mischief  may  come  through  the  failure  of  the  soul's 
indicator.  We  wish  to  know  what  is  evil  that  we  may  avoid 
it ;  and  it  is  a  serious  calamity  when  the  warning  faculty  has 
become  dulled  and  silent  through  continuance  in  sin.  Better 
far  to  live  in  perpetual  anxiety  to  be  right,  than  to  remain 
at  ease  while  doing  wrong. 

Lord,  make  my  conscience  tender  as  the  apple  of  my  eye. 
Awaken  it,  and  keep  it  awake. 

THE  DECOY. 

"As  the  fowler  catcJies  many  birds  by  one  decoy ^  a  bU'd  of  the 
same  feather,  so  God  bringeth  us  to  himself  by  men  of  the  same 
nature,  and  subject  to  the  saine  temptatio7is  attd  the  same  com- 
maiids.  He  attracts  us  to  himself  by  me7i  with  whom  we  may 
have  ordinary  and  visible  commerce,  and  7iot  by  angels,  that 
might  affright  tis.  He  calls  7cs  by  our fellow-creatm'es,  who  arc 
cojicerned  i?t  the  message  as  much  as  we  are;  7ne7i  that  kfiow 
the  heart  of  a  77ian  by  experie7ice,  and  k7iow  our  prejudices  a7id 
ie7nptatio7is.^^  In  this  choice  of  means,  wisdom  and  condescen- 
sion are  equally  manifest,  for  which  we  are  bound  to  render 
grateful  adoration.  Blessed  be  God  that  he  calls  men  by  men, 
adopting  thus  the  kindest  and  most  effectual  mode  of  dealing 
with  us.  We  should  also  learn  wisdom,  and  receive  practical 
guidance  from  this  act  of  God  :  when  we  would  win  our  fellow- 
men  for  Jesus  let  us  show  ourselves  to  be  near  of  kin  to  them. 
If,  by  a  lofty  and  distant  bearing,  we  act  as  if  we  belonged  to 
another  race,  we  shall  be  poor  decoy-birds.  The  poor  bird 
fascinates  its  like  by  being  of  their  kith  and  kin,  and  we  must 
capture  hearts  for  Jesus  by  showing  that  we  are  of  like  passions 


68  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

with  them,  and  love  them  much.     Love  men  to  Jesus, — that  is 
the  art  of  soul-winning. 

Blessed  Lord  Jesus,  thou  didst  thus  win  my  heart  for  I  had 
never  loved  thee  and  trusted  thee  if  I  had  not  perceived  thee  to 
be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  my  infirmity.  Thy  sympathetic 
manhood  draws  my  manhood  to  thee,  and  I  am  won  to  thy 
Father  by  thy  brotherly  love. 

A  DISLOCATED  BONE. 

"Whejt  a  bo7ie  is  out  of  joint,  the  longer  the  setting  isforborjie 
the  gj^eater  will  the  pain  of  the  patieiii  be;  yea,  it  7nay  be  so  long 
neglected  that  no  skill  nor  a7't  can  set  it  right  again.  So  it  is  ijt 
the  cure  of  a  'wounded  spirit  ajtd  a  bleeding  conscie^ice"  Fly, 
then,  O  wounded  one,  to  the  Lord  thy  Saviour,  at  once. 
When  delays  are  dangerous  as  well  as  painful,  who  would 
linger  ?  For  the  most  part,  injured  persons  are  anxious  to  be 
carried  to  the  surgeon  at  once :  they  dread  the  inflammatory 
action  which  may  be  set  up  in  the  injured  parts.  In  spiritual 
wounds  the  fever  of  fear  soon  heats  into  despair,  unless  the 
divine  Healer  is  fetched  in.  When  Jesus  comes  he  suffers  no 
delay;  speedily  he  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth 
up  their  wounds.  Unbelief  pulls  off  the  bandages,  and  pre- 
sumption declares  that  the  limb  is  as  sound  as  ever;  but 
humble  faith  waits  only  upon  the  Lord,  and  cries  to  him  to  make 
haste  for  her  deliverance. 

O  Lord,  heal  me  speedily,  I  beseech  thee. 

DKINKING  TO  DEOWN  CARE. 

"He  is  a  viounteba7ik  who  strives  to  make  men  forget  their 
spiritual  sorrows  instead  of  leading  them  to  the  true  cicre.  This 
is  like  a  man  in  debt  who  drinks  to  drown  his  thoughts;  biit  this 
neither  pays  the  debt  nor  postpones  the  reckoning.^'  When 
conscience  is  uneasy,  it  is  foolish  as  well  as  wicked  to  attempt 
to  smother  its  cries  with  worldly  merriment.    Nay,  let  us  hear  it 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  59 

patiently.  If  we  be  in  debt  let  us  know  it,  and  set  about  meeting 
our  liabilities  like  honest  men  ;  but  to  burn  the  ledger  and  dis- 
charge the  clerk  is  a  madman's  way  of  going  to  work.  O  soul 
be  true  to  thyself.  Face  thine  own  case,  however  bad  it  may 
be ;  for  refusing  to  know  and  consider  the  sure  facts  will  not  alter 
or  improve  them.  He  is  a  cruel  doctor  who  tells  the  afflicted 
patient  that  he  ails  nothing,  and  thus  sets  him  for  the  time  at 
his  ease,  at  the  terrible  cost  of  future  disease,  rendered  incurable 
by  delay. 

Lord,  bring  me  to  the  bar  of  my  conscience  now,  lest  I  stand 
condemned  at  thy  bar  of  judgment  hereafter. 

THE  HEN  AND  HER  EGGS. 

"Z<5'  be  careless  of  the  degree  of  our  grace  makes  way  for  the 
loss  of  the  whole.  Christians  are  like  a  hen  when  many  eggs 
ai-e  takeft  oict  of  the  nest;  as  long  as  one  or  two  remainetJt,^  she 
iaketh  no  notice  of  it,  and forsaketh  not  the  nest.  Be  not  thus 
foolish  J  but  consider  whether  there  be  not  abateme7it  of  some 
degree  of  your  grace,  though  a  little  may  remain  with  you  still. 
Content  not  yourselves  that  all  is  not  lost,  because  somethi?tg 
remaiiis;  but  seek  to  have  grace  in  as  great  a  p7'opo7'tion  as 
formerly P  A  miser  would  not  be  content  to  miss  a  part  of  his 
gold  because  a  pile  still  remained ;  the  woman  in  the  parable 
was  not  easy  because  she  had  many  pieces  of  money  left; 
neither  should  we  be  comfortable  if  a  grain  of  grace  is  lost  by 
us,  even  though  we  may  be  well  assured  that  a  saving  portion 
still  remains.  Why  should  we  lose  any  measure  of  grace  1  We 
shall  need  it  all.  At  our  strongest  we  are  weak  enough.  We 
have  never  one  whit  of  love  to  spare  ;  what  a  pity  that  we  should 
lose  a  fragment  of  it. 

No  man  is  more  sure  of  being  poor  than  he  who  loses  his 
estate  insensibly.  You  may  stop  a  leak  if  you  perceive  it,  but 
what  can  save  a  ship  which  sinks  imperceptibly.  We  may  heal 
a  wound,  but  when  life  oozes  away  in  secret  who  can  save  us  ? 


60  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

Lord,  help  us  to  perceive,  to  lament,  and  to  recover  the  least 
loss  in  gracious  matters. 

THE  LITTLE  WISP. 

"  Little  sticks  set  the  great  ones  on  fire,  and  a  little  ivisp  is 
cfteji  used  to  enkindle  a  great  block  of  luood^  Thus  have  we 
known  persons  of  small  talent  and  position  influence  their 
superiors  by  their  zeal.  Though  themselves  able  to  do  but  little, 
they  have  been  full  of  fervour,  and  so  have  ventured  further 
than  the  more  solid  and  prudent  felt  at  first  inclined  to  do. 
Some  of  us  have  had  to  thank  God  for  our  weaker  brethren  who 
have  been  more  eager  and  venturesome  than  we  were  :  these 
wisps  and  bunches  of  firewood,  though  they  could  not  keep  up 
the  fire,  came  in  very  opportunely  to  give  the  flames  a  start. 
Even  rash  suggestions  have  their  value.  Fools  who  are  all 
alive  may  do  good  service  to  wise  men,  when  they  are  sluggish , 
and  slow.  It  is  right  to  get  good  out  of  all  good  men.  When 
we  meet  with  persons  of  little  substance  but  of  considerable 
kindling  power,  let  us  put  them  together  like  matches  and 
splinters  of  wood,  for  the  commencement  of  an  enterprise,  and 
Avhen  we  find  others  to  be  like  heavy  old  logs,  let  us  put  them 
to  use  when  the  flame  has  taken  good  hold,  for  if  they  once  get 
thoroughly  alight  they  will  sustain  the  fire  long  after  the  straw 
and  the  shavings  have  passed  away. 

Reader,  which  are  you,  a  wisp  or  a  log  ?  In  either  case  there 
is  a  place  for  you,  and  be  it  your  ambition,  in  some  way  or 
other,  to  be  consumed  for  your  Lord's  service. 

MATTOCKS  OF  GOLD. 

^^ To  prefer  our  oivn  ease,  quiet,  profit,  before  the  glory  of  God, 
is  madness.  Would  it  not  be  insanity  to  dig  for  iron  with 
7nattocks  of  gold  f"  Our  author  means  that  it  must  always  be 
unreasonable  to  make  the  means  greater  than  the  end.  When 
man  lives  for  the  glory  of  God  he  spends  his  strength  for  some- 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  61 

thing  far  beyond  himself  in  value,  and  thus  he  acts  as  reason- 
ably as  when  men  dig  for  gold  with  mattocks  of  iron ;  but  when 
an  immortal  mind  spends  itself  upon  decaying  objects,  such  as 
transient  gain  and  pleasure,  it  is  occupied  beneath  itself,  and  is 
like  a  mattock  of  gold  used  in  searching  for  base  metal.  It  is  a 
misapphcation  of  forces  for  the  nobler  to  spend  itself  upon  the 
meaner.  Men  do  not  usually  care  to  spend  a  pound  in  the  hope 
of  getting  back  a  groat  and  no  more,  and  yet,  when  the  soul  is 
given  up  for  the  sake  of  worldly  gain,  the  loss  is  greater  still, 
and  not  even  the  groat  remains. 

Lord,  arouse  me  from  the  folly  of  grovelling  among  earthly 
things.  Make  my  soul  reasonable,  that  it  may  devote  itself  to 
worthy  pursuits ;  and  what  can  be  so  worthy  of  me  as  thyself ! 
Thou  art  above  all,  and  infinitely  better  than  all ;  to  thee  I  de- 
vote my  whole  being.  O  help  me  to  live  alone  for  thy  glory. 
Thy  grace  I  need ;  let  thy  grace  come  to  me  with  power. 

TREES  MARKED  FOR  THE  AXE. 

^^  To  fix  oitr  confidence  ttpon  a  dying  world  is  folly.  It  is  as  if 
lue  were  buildijig  oitr  nests  when  the  tree  is  being  cut  down,  or 
decoj'ating  our  cabin  when  the  ship  is  likely  to  be  dashed  in  pieces 
or  is  already  sinking^  Is  it  a  time  to  drive  a  trade  for  ourselves 
when  we  are  just  leaving  earth,  and  hope  soon  to  be  in  heaven  ? 
Yet  too  many  among  professors  are  doing  this.  Their  hearts 
are  set  upon  their  money,  they  build  their  nest  in  the  golden 
grove ;  or  they  are  wrapt  up  in  their  children,  and,  as  it  were, 
nestle  down  among  those  who  spring  up  as  willows  by  the 
watercourses.  The  axe  is  laid  at  the  root  of  all  earthly  comforts, 
and,  therefore,  those  who  are  taught  of  God  soar  aloft,  and 
make  their  eyries  on  the  Rock  of  Ages.  What  is  our  friend 
doing  whose  eyes  are  now  scanning  this  page  ?  Where  is  your 
heart  ?  What  is  its  dear  delight  and  joy .?  Is  it  of  earth  1  Then 
be  sure  that  to  earth  it  will  return.  Is  your  joy  a  thing  of 
heaven  ?    Then  alone  is  it  stable  and  sure. 


62  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

My  soul,  the  world  is  passing  away,  set  not  thy  love  upon  it. 
The  ship  is  sinking,  care  little  about  the  httle  luxuries  of  the 
berth  which  thou  hast  for  a  while  occupied  in  it.  Up  and  away! 
This  is  not  thy  rest.  See,  before  thine  eyes  the  fashion  of  this 
world  passeth  away ;  look  to  eternity  and  to  thy  God,  for  there 
alone  is  solid  bliss. 

THE  SPIRE. 

"77/5  best  of  God's  people  have  abho7'red  themselves.  Like  the 
spire  of  a  steeple^  minimus  in  summo,  lue  are  least  at  the  highest. 
David,  a  king,  was  yet  like  a  weaned  child."  Manton  is  not 
very  clear  about  the  steeple,  but  he  means  that  the  higher  a 
spire  rises  towards  heaven  the  smaller  it  becomes,  and  thus  the 
more  elevated  are  our  spirits  the  less  shall  we  be  in  our  own 
esteem.  Great  thoughts  of  self  and  great  grace  never  go 
together.  Self-consciousness  is  a  sure  sign  that  there  is  not  • 
much  depth  of  grace.  He  who  over-values  himself  under- values 
his  Saviour.  He  who  abounds  in  piety  is  sure  to  be  filled  with 
humility.  Light  things,  such  as  straws  and  feathers,  are  borne 
aloft ;  valuable  goods  keep  their  places,  and  remain  below,  not 
because  they  are  chained  or  riveted  there,  but  by  virtue  of  their 
own  weight.  When  we  begin  to  talk  of  our  perfection,  our  im- 
perfection is  getting  the  upper  hand.  The  more  full  we  become 
of  the  presence  of  the  Lord  the  more  shall  we  sink  in  our  own 
esteem,  even  as  laden  vessels  sink  down  to  their  water-mark, 
while  empty  ships  float  aloft. 

Lord,  make  and  keep  me  humble.  Lift  me  nearer  and  nearer 
to  heaven,  and  then  I  shall  grow  less  and  less  in  my  own 
esteem. 

CHAFF  AND  WHEAT  CONTRASTED. 

"'Light  chaff  is  blown  tip  and  dow7i  by  every  wind,  when  solid 
grain  hitcheth  in,  and  resteth  on  the  floor  where  it  is  wifinowed.^' 
Constancy  is  one  of  the  evidences  of  worth.  Those  who  change 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  63 

their  religion  generally  need  to  be  changed  by  their  religion 
before  they  will  have  any  religion  worth  the  having.  Fickle 
professors  are  ready  to  be  the  prey  of  every  new  teacher;  his 
breath  is  enough  to  blow  them  according  to  his  pleasure.  They 
are  everything  by  turns,  and  nothing  long.  Depend  upon  it,  he 
knows  nothing  of  the  preciousness  of  truth,  who  is  ready  to 
stand  and  deliver  to  every  footpad  of  heresy  who  challenges 
him :  he  who  has  about  him  doctrines  which  he  esteems  to  be  a 
treasure  will  fight  for  them,  and  send  the  robber  to  the  right- 
abouts. 

We  know  one  of  whom  we  usually  ask,  whenever  we  see  him, 
"  What  are  you  now?^'  Yet  are  there  some  good  points  about 
him,  and  he  has  a  mind  open  to  conviction,  too  open  a  great 
deal  to  be  a  fit  casket  for  the  jewels  of  truth.  We  have  seen  a 
child  in  a  field  of  flowers,  filling  its  little  hand  eagerly,  and  then 
dropping  its  posy,  not  for  better  but  for  other  flowers.  Many 
professors  are  such  children. 

A  heart  which  is  fickle  in  its  love  is  not  likely  to  make  a 
marriage  with  the  truth.  Lord,  fix  my  heart  in  thy  truth,  and 
never  let  it  be  removed. 

THE  DEATH-BLOW  OF  POPERY. 

"  When  Dr.  Day  discoursed  with  Stephen  Gardiner  co7icerning 
free  jicstification  by  Christy  saith  he,  '  O,  Mr.  Doctor,  open  that 
gap  to  the  people,  and  we  are  undone  /  '  The  more  gospel  there 
is  discovered,  the  more  Anti-Christ  is  discovered.  Free  grace 
puts  the  fou7idation  of  Popery  out  of  course?'  The  doubtful 
doctrine  of  many  Protestants  is  a  greater  encouragement  to 
Romanisn  than  all  her  own  finery  can  bring  to  her.  Rome  has 
gained  more  by  Oxford  than  by  all  her  cardinals.  The  glorious 
doctrines  of  grace  are  the  great  guns  with  which  the  Papal 
galleys  may  be  blown  out  of  the  water.  Grace  is  a  word  which 
is  as  obnoxious  to  Popery  as  the  name  of  Jesus  to  the  devil. 
Reptiles  cannot  bear  salt,  nor  can  Jesuits  and  priests  endure 


64  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

sovereign  grace.  Their  trade  is  gone  when  salvation  is  free. 
Their  honour  is  gone  when  Christ  is  all.  When  people  think 
much  of  Jesus  and  his  redemption,  they  are  sure  to  think  little 
of  priests  and  their  fiddle-faddle.  It  was  not  Luther's  arguments, 
but  Luther's  plain  teaching  of  justification  by  faith,  which  shook 
the  corner-stone  of  the  Vatican.  If  men  are  saved  by  believing, 
they  are  not  likely  to  waste  money  on  purgatory  pick-purse,  nor 
on  any  other  of  the  papal  schemes  for  enriching  the  church. 

Let  us  then  keep  gospel  truth  always  to  the  front,  for  in  our 
own  hearts  the  best  preservative  against  error  is  a  hearty  accept- 
ance of  the  living  Christ  and  his  own  sure  gospel. 

PEARLS  AND  SWINE. 

'■^Pearls  do  not  lose  their  worth  thotigh  swine  irainple  upon 
them"  Scriptural  truth  is  none  the  less  worthy  to  be  held  and 
proclaimed  because  foolish  and  depraved  men  pervert  it  to  their 
own  destruction.  A  knife  is  a  very  useful  article  ;  and,  though 
some  have  committed  suicide  by  its  means,  it  is  no  reason  why 
knives  should  be  discarded.  The  doctrines  of  grace  are  pearls 
even  after  Antinomians  have  turned  them  over.  Justification 
by  faith  is  the  crown-jewel  of  the  gospel,  though  hypocrites 
abuse  it.  Every  truth  is  perverted  by  polluted  minds,  but  this 
is  no  reason  for  our  renouncing  what  God  has  revealed  ;  rather 
is  it  a  strong  argument  for  adorning  the  doctrine  of  our  Saviour 
in  all  things. 

My  heart,  see  thou  to  it  that  the  doctrines  of  grace  are 
honoured  at  thy  hands.  Since  so  many  pour  contempt  upon 
them,  do  thou  hold  them  in  high  esteem,  and  by  thy  life  make 
them  to  be  esteemed  by  others. 

PERSONAL  WITNESS. 

"-4  repoj-t  of  a  repoi't  is  a  cold  thing  a7id  of  small  vahie;  but 
a  rep07't  of  what  we  have  witnessed  a?id  experienced  ottrselves 
comes  wannly  7tpon  men^s  hearts."   So  a  mere  formal  description 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  6,'> 

of  faith  and  its  blessings  falls  flat  on  the  ear ;  but  when  a  sincere 
believer  tells  of  his  own  experience  of  the  Lord's  faithfulness,  it 
has  a  great  charm  about  it.  We  like  to  hear  the  narrative  of  a 
journey  from  the  traveller  himself.  In  a  court  of  law  they  will 
have  no  hearsay  evidence.  Tell  us,  says  the  judge,  not  what 
your  neighbour  said,  but  what  you  saw  yourself.  Personal 
evidence  of  the  power  of  grace  has  a  wonderfully  convincing 
force  upon  the  conscience.  "  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard 
me,"  is  better  argument  than  all  the  Butler's  Analogies  that  will 
ever  be  written,  good  as  they  are  in  their  place. 

Lord,  make  me  ever  prompt  to  bear  my  personal  witness  for 
thee,  and  eager  to  magnify  thy  grace,  of  which  I  have  been 
made  a  partaker.  Never  permit  me  to  be  ashamed  of  thy  sal- 
vation, but  make  me  openly  to  proclaim  thy  matchless  grace  to 
me. 

FREE,  YET  NOT  WITHOUT  LABOUR. 

''^  There  is  a  difference  between  merit  and  means j  a  school- 
master may  teach  a  child  gratis,  a7id  yet  the  boy  must  himself 
take  pains  to  get  his  learning.  There  is,  moreover,  a  diff'erence 
between  cause  a?id  effect,  and  the  mere  order  of  coming.  Mercy  is 
never  obtained  but  in  the  use  of  means  :  wisdom! s  dole  is  dispejised 
at  wisdom's  gate P  {Prov.  viii.  34.)  This  is  a  very  important  re- 
mark, and  tends  to  screen  from  the  charge  of  legality  those  who 
earnestly  exhort  men  to  gospel  duties.  There  is  no  merit  in 
seeking  the  Lord ;  but  we  may  not  hope  to  find  him  without  it. 
Prayer  does  not  deserve  an  answer,  and  yet  we  are  to  pray 
without  ceasing,  neither  may  we  hope  to  have  if  we  refuse  to 
ask.  The  cup  must  be  held  under  the  flowing  fountain  or  it  will 
not  be  filled,  yet  the  cup  does  not  create  the  water  or  purchase 
it.  All  the  exertion  which  a  man  makes  in  running  the  heavenly 
race  will  not  merit  the  prize  of  eternal  life ;  but  it  would  not 
1  herefore  be  right  for  him  to  lie  in  bed  and  hope  to  win  it.  The 
lather  freely  gives  the  bread  of  heaven  without  money  and 
without  price,  and  yet  Jesus  bade  men  labour  for  it. 


G6  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

Lord,  thou  hast  taught  me  to  see  a  great  distinction  between 
the  idea  of  meriting  thy  favour  and  the  truth  that  earnest  effort 
is  necessary  to  salvation.  Help  me  to  work  as  if  my  salvation 
depended  on  my  working,  and  then  keep  me  trusting  in  thee 
alone,  as  if  I  worked  not  at  all.  Thou  givest  me  all  things,  the 
end  and  the  means  to  that  end.  That  measure  of  holy  labour 
which  I  put  forth  is  first  wrought  in  me,  and  therefore  would 
I  be  doubly  diligent.  I  would  work  because  thou  workest  in  me, 
and  strive  for  victory  because  thou  givest  me  both  the  strength 
and  the  crown. 

BEATEN  SPICES. 

^^ Spices  a7'e  most  fragraiit  ivJien  burnt  and  bniised,  so  have 
saving  graces  their  chiefest  fragrajicy  in  hard  times.  The  pillar 
that  conducted  the  Israelites  appeared  as  a  cloud  by  day,  but  as 
fire  by  flight.  The  excellency  of  faith  is  beclouded  till  it  be  put 
upon  a  thorough  tt'ialP  Herein  lies  one  of  the  benefits  of 
affliction,  it  fetches  out  latent  sweetness  and  light.  Certain 
herbs  yield  no  smell  till  they  are  trodden  on,  and  certain 
characters  do  not  reveal  their  excellence  till  they  are  tried. 
The  developing  power  of  tribulation  is  very  great :  faith,  pa- 
tience, resignation,  endurance,  and  steadfastness  are  by  far  the 
best  seen  when  put  to  the  test  by  adversity,  pain,  and  tempta- 
tion. God  has  created  nothing  in  vain  in  the  new  creation  any 
more  than  in  the  old,  hence  one  of  the  sweet  necessities  of  trial 
is  to  bring  forth  and  use  those  precious  graces  which  else  had 
been  unemployed.  God  is  not  glorified  by  unused  graces,  for 
these  lie  hidden  and  bring  him  no  honour  ;  may  we  not,  there- 
fore, rejoice  in  tribulation,  because  it  fetches  out  our  secret 
powers,  and  enables  us  to  give  glory  to  the  Lord  whom  we 
love  ?  Yes,  blessed  be  the  pestle  which  bruises  us,  and  the 
mortar  in  which  we  he  to  be  beaten  into  fragrance.  Blessed 
be  the  burning  coals  which  liberate  our  sweet  odours  and  raise 
them  up  to  heaven  like  pillars  of  smoke.     Can  we  not  say  this  ? 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  67 

Then  it  is  time  we  could,  and  perhaps  our  present  affliction  has 
been  sent  for  that  very  end, — that  we  may  learn  the  way  oi 
complete  consecration,  and  be  made  perfect  through  suffering. 

STARS  AND  THEIR  STRANGE  NAMES. 

''As  the  astrojtoitiers  call  the  glorious  stars  biells,  snakes, 
drago7is,  and  other  strange  thi7tgs,  so  do  tmgodly  men  miscall 
the  most  shifting  and  glorious  graces.  Zeal  is  fu7yj  strictness, 
nicety;  ajid  patience,  folly  P''  So  far  as  the  astronomers  are 
concerned,  the  names  which  they  give  to  the  constellations  are 
no  dishonour  to  the  lamps  of  heaven  ;  it  were  well  if  the  other 
misnomers  were  equally  indifferent.  Ill  names  are,  however, 
a  kind  of  persecution,  a  part  of  the  '■'  cmel  mockings  "  which  are 
employed  by  the  graceless.  Evil  comes  of  it,  too,  over  and 
above  the  grieving  of  pious  men,  for  weak  minds  avoid  zeal 
when  it  is  stigmatized  as  fanaticism,  and  many  despise  patience 
when  it  is  maligned  as  meanness  of  spirit.  Since  the  weak- 
minded  are  so  many,  this  is  a  great  evil  which  every  man  who 
loves  his  fellows  should  endeavour  to  correct.  There  is  a  great 
deal  in  a  name  after  all.  A  great  falsehood  may  be  wrapped  up 
in  a  short  word,  and  a  current  misnomer  may  produce  wide- 
spread evil.  Let  us  call  things  by  their  right  names,  and  stand 
up  for  all  that  is  lovely  and  of  good  repute.  Why  should  men 
bear  false  witness  against  the  virtues,  and  viUify  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit  ?  If  they  will  do  so,  let  us  not  be  so  cowardly  as  to  be 
silent;  let  us  speak  out  boldly,  and  avow  our  hearty  appreciation 
of  that  which  the  world  despises.  We  will  call  the  stars  stars, 
and  let  the  world  call  them  bears,  and  crabs,  and  scorpions,  if 
they  will. 

THE  CHILD  WANTING  A  KNIFE. 

"God  knoweth  what  is  best  for  lis.  Like  foolish  child7'e7i,  we 
desire  a  k7iife;  but,  like  a  wise  father,  he  giveth  its  bread."  It 
would  be  a  most  unfatherly  thing  for  a  man  to  give  his  son 


68  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

that  which  would  cause  his  death.  The  largest  generosity 
must  refuse  some  requests,  when  it  is  a  higher  kindness  to  with- 
hold than  to  bestow.  The  limit  which  is  set  to  prayer — namely, 
that  if  we  ask  anything  tn  accordance  with  God's  ivill  he  heareth 
us,  is  just  such  a  limit  as  love  on  God's  part  vmst  fix,  and  as  pru- 
dence on  our  part  must  approve.  Would  we  have  the  Lord  act 
according  to  our  ignorance  or  according  to  his  own  wisdom  ? 
Shall  our  uninstructed  self  become  the  arbiter  of  God's  pro- 
vidence ?  Assuredly  no  Christian  in  his  senses  would  propose 
such  an  arrangement.  If  it  could  be  proposed  and  carried  out 
it  would  place  us  in  daily  jeopardy,  and  work,  at  its  very  best^ 
most  sadly  to  our  loss. 

If  we  could  have  our  own  will  absolutely  it  would  be  wise  not 
to  have  it,  but  to  divest  ourselves  of  the  horrible  privilege. 
How  much  more  restful  are  our  minds,  now  that  we  know  that 
our  Father  arranges  all  things,  than  could  possibly  be  the  case  if 
the  responsibility  of  management  rested  with  ourselves.  Like 
Phaeton,  who  sought  to  drive  the  chariot  of  the  sun,  we  should 
soon  perish  by  our  own  folly  if  the  reins  of  providence  were 
placed  in  our  feeble  hands.  It  is  better  far  that  the  rule  should 
be,  "  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

Lord,  give  me  not  what  I  ask,  but  what  I  should  ask,  yea, 
what  thou  seest  to  be  most  for  thy  glory. 

THE  STRIPPED  STALK. 

'"'''' All  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  floiuer 
of  grass  J  Majiy  times  the  flower  is  gone  when  the  stalk  re- 
mainethj  so  man  oft-times  seeth  all  that  he  hath  been  gathering 
a  long  time  soon  dissipated  by  the  breath  of  ^providence,  and  he, 
like  a  withej-ed,  rotten  stalk,  liveth  scorned  and  necrlectedP  Alas, 
for  such  an  one  !  What  is  the  daffodil  without  its  golden  crown, 
or  the  crocus  without  its  cup  of  sunshine  ?  Such  is  man  without 
the  object  of  his  life.  What  is  the  thorn  without  its  rose,  or  the 
tree  without  its  leaves,  or  the  wood  without  the  birds  of  song  ? 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  6!) 

Such  is  man  without  the  comforts  and  joys  of  his  being.  It 
is  ill  to  exist  when  life  is  dead,  to  eat  and  drink  when  the 
taste  has  departed,  to  move  among  men  when  the  heart  is 
broken  :  yet  are  there  thousands  in  this  condition :  a  blight  is 
on  them,  their  flower  and  glory  are  withered,  and  they  are  as 
those  who  go  down  into  the  pit.  So  have  we  seen  a  tree 
smitten  by  lightning  standing  still  among  its  fellows,  but  no 
longer  adding  to  the  verdure  of  the  forest.  It  has  been,  and 
this  is  all  that  we  can  say  of  it,  for  its  continuance  is  but  in 
semblance.  Who  has  not  seen  men  in  a  like  condition  ?  Alas  ! 
for  those  who  have  no  hereafter  when  this  present  faileth  them, 
for  they  fall  indeed,  and  wither  with  a  vengeance. 

Blessed  is  the  man  who  lives  in  God,  for  no  such  withering 
shall  happen  to  him.  God  is  his  crown  and  glory,  the  flower 
of  his  true  being,  and  God  cannot  fail  him.  He  shall  be  as  a 
tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  and  not  so  much  as  his  leaf 
shall  wither. 

Lord,  make  me  to  live  on  thy  word,  which  abideth  for  ever, 
and  then  when  flesh,  like  grass,  shall  fade,  I  shall  find  eternal 
joy  in  thee. 

THE  SWORD  IN  A  CHILD'S  HAND. 

'■^Sometimes  truth  is  like  a  keen  iveapoit  in  a  child's  handj 
it  viaketh  little  impression  because  it  is  weaJdy  wielded"  Do 
not  therefore  blame  the  truth,  but  the  weak  hand.  In  many 
cases  of  controversy  the  apparent  victory  of  error  has  been  due 
to  the  unfitness  of  the  warrior  who  championed  truth.  It  may 
for  some  men  be  their  truest  service  to  the  good  cause  to  leave  it 
in  stronger  hands.  We  do  not  send  women  and  children  to  our 
battle-fields,  nor  do  we  march  our  recruits  to  war  before  they 
have  been  trained  ;  neither  should  we  expect  raw  youths  and 
timid  maidens  to  put  on  armour  at  once  and  face  the  ad- 
versaries of  the  gospel.  It  has  happened  times  without 
number  that  a  blustering  infidel  has  posed  a  new  convert  with 


70  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

his  sophistical  arguments,  and  then  he  has  shouted  as  if  he  had 
gained  a  triumph  over  the  truth;  whereas  his  boasting  only 
proved  the  weakness  of  his  cause,  or  the  childishness  of  his  own 
mind.  He  who  could  crow  so  loudly  over  so  slender  a  success 
must  be  conscious  of  inherent  feebleness,  and  therefore  he  is 
astonished  and  elated  at  the  semblance  of  victory. 

Let  us  all  pray  to  be  strengthened,  that  our  inner  life,  growing 
day  by  day,  may  reach  a  fulness  of  stature  and  a  firmness  of 
strength  worthy  of  the  heavenly  weapon  which  the  Lord  has 
put  into  our  hand.  O,  sacred  Spirit,  make  us  strong  in  the 
Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might ! 

C^SAE  KILLED  WITH  BODKINS. 

''  Not  only  do  great  sins  ruin  the  soul,  but  lesse?' faults  will  do 
the  same.  Dallying  with  temptation  leads  to  sad  conseqitences. 
CcEsar  was  killed  with  bodkins."  A  dagger  aimed  at  the  heart 
will  give  as  deadly  a  wound  as  a  huge  two-handed  sword,  and 
a  little  sin  unrepented  of  will  be  as  fatal  as  a  gross  transgression. 
Brutus  and  Cassius  and  the  rest  of  the  conspirators  could  not 
have  more  surely  ended  Caesar's  life  with  spears  than  they  did 
with  daggers.  Death  can  hide  in  a  drop,  and  ride  in  a  breath 
of  air.  Our  greatest  dangers  lie  hidden  in  little  things.  Milton 
represents  thousands  of  evil  spirits  as  crowded  into  one  hall ; 
and  truly  the  least  sin  may  be  a  very  Pandemonium,  in  which 
a  host  of  evils  may  be  concealed, — a  populous  hive  of  mischiefs, 
each  one  storing  death. 

Believer,  though  thou  be  a  little  C^sar  in  thine  own  sphere, 
beware  of  the  bodkins  of  thine  enemies.  Watch  and  pray,  lest 
thou  fall  by  little  and  little.  Lord,  save  me  from  sins  which  call 
themselves  little. 

A  STITCH  IN  TIME. 

"He  who  keeps  a  house  in  constant  repair  prevents  all  fear  of 
its  falling  to  ruin  :  by  stopping  each  hole  and  chink  as  he  finds 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  71 

it  he  keeps  off  greater  mischief. ^^  We  shall  do  well  to  use 
the  same  economy  with  our  spiritual  nature.  No  great  decays 
of  spirit  will  occur  if  we  look  to  each  of  our  graces,  and  lament 
the  first  sign  of  declension  in  any  one  of  them.  A  loose  stone 
here,  and  a  fallen  tile  there,  and  a  rotting  timber  in  a  third 
place,  will  soon  bring  on  a  total  ruin  to  a  tenement,  but  the 
hand  of  diligence  maintains  the  fabric.  Thus  must  we  watch 
our  spiritual  house,  lest  we  fall  by  little  and  little.  Are  there  no 
repairs  wanted  at  this  time  ?  Does  not  my  soul  show  a  number 
of  flaws  and  decays  ?  Come,  my  heart,  look  about  thee,  and 
pray  the  Lord  to  restore  that  which  has  fallen. 

BUCKETS  IN  A  WELL. 

"  The  life  of  sin  and  the  life  of  a  sijiner  are  I i Ice  two  buckets  in 
a  well — if  [the  one  gocth  ttp,  the  other  must  come  down.  If 
sin  liveth,  the  si7iner  must  die."  It  is  only  when  sin  dies  that  a 
man  begins  truly  to  live.  Yet  we  cannot  persuade  our  neigh- 
bours that  it  is  so,  for  their  hearts  are  bound  up  in  their 
sins,  and  the/  think  themselves  most  alive  when  they  can 
give  fullest  liberty  to  their  desires.  They  raise  up  their  sins, 
and  so  sink  themselves.  If  they  could  be  persuaded  of  the 
truth,  they  would  send  the  bucket  of  sin  to  the  very  bottom 
that  their  better  selves  might  rise  into  eternal  salvation. 

Lord,  make  my  fellow  men  wise,  that  they  may  do  this,  and 
teach  me  the  same  lesson.  I  would  fain  sink  every  evil  and  selfish 
desire  that  my  heart  may  rise  to  holiness,  to  heaven,  to  thee. 

THE  UPRIGHT  COLUMN. 

^^  A  straight  pillar,  the  more  you  lay  tipon  it,  the  siraighicr  it 
is,  and  the  more  stable;  but  tJiat  which  is  crooJzed  bowetJi  under 
the  super-incumbent  weight :  so  the  more  God  loadeth  the  godly 
the  more  doth  he  hold  fast  his  integrity,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  jnore  the  Lord  caste th  in  upon  cariial  men,  the 
more  is  their  spirit  perverted."     A  little  leaning  from  the  right 


72  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

line  is  a  serious  thing  :  uprightness  alone  is  safety.  As  our 
author  well  says,  an  upright  column  will  bear  anything  ;  it  would 
be  hard  with  any  known  force  to  crush  an  erect  pillar.  So,  when 
a  man  is  upright  before  God,  neither  the  weight  of  good  or  of  ill 
can  overthrow  him  :  he  stands  in  his  integrity  alike  under  pros- 
perity and  adversity,  under  fawnings  or  frownings.  When  the 
foundations  of  the  earth  are  removed,  he  bears  up  the  pillars 
thereof.  He  is  like  Mount  Zion,  which  can  never  be  moved, 
but  abideth  for  ever.  "  Let  uprightness  and  integrity  preserve 
me":  these  are  a  sure  preservative  in  the  day  of  trial. 

The  man  who  gives  way  to  leanings  or  inclinations  out  of  the 
straight  line  is  never  safe.  It  is  only  necessary  to  supply  sufficient 
pressure  and  he  falls.  Whether  he  be  loaded  with  wealth  or 
pressed  with  poverty,  he  will  come  to  the  ground  with  equal  cer- 
tainty in  due  time.  He  is  out  of  the  perpendicular,  and  he  must 
fall  sooner  or  later. 

O  Lord,  give  me  to  stand  before  thee  in  perfect  uprightness  of 
heart !  Take  from  me  any  inclination  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the 
left,  and  establish  me  upon  the  eternal  basis  of  thy  grace,  for 
Jesus'  sake.  Upright  Lord,  thou  alone  canst  set  me  upright, 
and  keep  me  so  ;  hearken  to  my  prayer,  I  beseech  thee. 

THE  MISER'S  BAG  OF  MONEY. 

"  Affection  is  a  great  friend  to  7neinory ;  men  remember  luliat 
they  care  for  :  an  old  man  luill  not  forget  ivhere  he  laid  his  bag 
of  gold.  Delight  and  love  are  always  renewing  ajid  revtvimf 
their  object  tipon  our  thoughts.  David  often  asserteth  his 
delight  in  the  law,  and  because  of  this  delight  it  was  always  in 
his  thoughts  (Ps.  cxix.  97).  '  O  how  love  I  thy  law  !  It  is  my 
meditation  all  the  day.'"  By  this,  then,  we  may  judge  our- 
selves whether  we  have  a  true  and  Hvely  love  to  God  and 
his  kingdom.  If  from  day  to  day  we  have  no  thought  of 
him  or  of  his  ways,  we  may  be  sure  that  our  affection 
to  him,  if  it  be  sincere,  is  assuredly  by  no  means   fervent. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  73 

A  man  hath  Httle  love  to  his  espoused  if  he  thinks  of  others 
more  than  of  her.  Where  the  thoughts  fly,  there  doth  the 
heart  lie.  Not  that  we  can  be  always  thinking  of  divine 
things,  for  we  could  not  perform  the  duties  of  our  calling  if  we 
gave  no  thought  to  them,  and  especially  in  certain  pursuits  of 
life  the  mind  must  for  the  time  be  concentrated  upon  the  work 
in  hand ;  but  still  our  mind  must  be  ready  to  fly  to  Jesus  as 
soon  as  the  pressure  is  removed.  Love  will  break  over  all  laws, 
and  rules,  and  engrossments  to  have  a  word  with  its  beloved, 
and  so  will  the  soul  do  when  Jesus  is  truly  its  delight.  It  will  fly 
to  revel  in  his  charms  as  the  miser  hastens  to  count  his  money. 
Come,  my  heart,  take  thyself  to  task!  Is  it  not  true  that  if 
thou  wert  warmer  thy  memory  would  be  more  retentive  ?  Be 
penitent,  then,  because  thou  art  convicted  of  coolness  to  thy 
Well-beloved.  Thy  frequent  forgetfulness  of  him  proves  the 
slackness  of  thy  love. 

STORY  OF  THE  KNIGHT. 

'*  Thuanus  reporteih  of  Ludovicus  Marsacus,  a  knight  of 
France,  when  he  was  led,  with  other  martyrs  that  were  bound 
with  cords,  to  executioji,  ajid  he  for  his  dignity  was  not  bound, 
he  cried, '  Give  me  my  chains,  too;  let  me  be  a  knight  of  the 
sa?ne  order ^ "  Certainly,  it  is  an  honour  to  be  made  vile  for 
God  ;  David  purposed  to  abound  in  such  vileness  (2  Sam.  vi.  22). 
Shame  for  Christ's  sake  is  an  honour  no  more  to  be  declined 
than  the  highest  dignity  a  mortal  man  can  wear.  Among  the 
early  Christians  the  relatives  of  martyrs  were  a  sort  of  aristo- 
cracy, and  the  martyrs  themselves  were  regarded  as  the 
nobility  of  the  Church.  We  need  a  spice  of  the  same  spirit  at 
this  day.  A  true  believer  should  tremble  when  the  world  com- 
mends him,  but  he  should  feel  complimented  when  it  utterly 
despises  him. 

What  do  we  suffer,  after  all  ?  The  most  of  us  are  but  feather- 
bed soldiers.     Our  ways  are  strewn  with  roses  compared  with 


74  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS 

those  who  endured  hardness  in  the  olden  time.  We  are  poor 
and  mean  successors  of  noble  ancestors, — ennobled  by  their 
supreme  sufferings.  If  we  cannot  reach  their  superior  dignity, 
nor  hope  to  wear  the  ruby  crown  of  martyrdom,  at  least  let  us 
not  shun  such  glory  as  may  be  obtainable,  but  accept  with 
cheerful  patience  whatever  of  opprobrium  this  worthless  world 
may  honour  us  with. 

BERNAED'S  CHARITY. 

"  W/icn  Bernard  chanced  to  espy  a  poor  man  meanly  ap- 
pmrelled,  he  would  say  to  himself,  *  Truly,  Bernard,  this  man 
hath  more  patie7tce  beneath  his  cross  than  thou  hast; '  but  if  he 
saw  a  rich  ma7i  delicately  clothed,  then  he  would  say,  '  //  may  be 
that  this  man,  under  his  delicate  clothing,  hath  a  better  soul  than 
thou  hast  under  thy  religious  habit! ' "  This  showed  an  excellent 
charity  !  Oh,  that  we  could  learn  it !  It  is  easy  to  think  evil  of 
all  men,  for  there  is  sure  to  be  some  fault  about  each  one  which 
the  least  discerning  may  readily  discover ;  but  it  is  far  more 
worthy  of  a  Christian,  and  shows  much  more  nobility  of  soul, 
to  spy  out  the  good  in  each  fellow-believer.  This  needs  a 
larger  mind  as  well  as  a  better  heart,  and  hence  it  should  be  a 
point  of  honour  to  practise  ourselves  in  it  till  we  obtain  an 
aptitude  for  it.  Any  simpleton  might  be  set  to  sniff  out 
offensive  odours  ;  but  it  would  require  a  scientific  man  to  bring 
to  us  all  the  fragrant  essences  and  rare  perfumes  which  lie  hid 
in  field  and  garden.  Oh,  to  learn  the  science  of  Christian 
charity !  It  is  an  art  far  more  to  be  esteemed  than  the  most 
lucrative  of  human  labours.  This  choice  art  of  love  is  the 
true  alchemy.  Charity  towards  others,  abundantly  practised, 
would  be  the  death  of  envy  and  the  life  of  fellowship,  the  over- 
throw of  self  and  the  enthronement  of  grace. 

Charity,  be  thou  my  classics,  my  poetry,  my  science,  my 
music,  for  thou  art  more  to  be  desired  than  all  these.  Thou 
art  a  God-like  thing,  and  I  would  be  filled  with  thee. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  75 

A  SWORD  NOT  TO  BE  JUDGED  BY  THE  BELT. 

"  IJ'c  do  not  judge  a  sword  to  be  good  merely  because  it  hangs 
by  a  golden  belt,  or  because  it  is  set  in  a  jewelled  hilt."  Neither 
is  a  doctrine  to  be  valued  because  a  fine  orator  delivers  it  in 
gorgeous  speech  with  glittering  words.  A  lie  is  none  the  better 
for  being  bespangled  with  poetic  phrases  and  high-sounding 
periods.  Yet  half  our  people  forget  this,  and  glittering  oratory 
fascinates  them.     Alas,  poor  simpletons  ! 

The  same  blunders  are  made  about  men,  who  should  ever  be 
esteemed  according  to  their  native  worth,  and  not  according  to 
their  position  and  office.  What  mistakes  we  should  make  if  we 
considered  all  the  hangers-on  of  great  men  to  be  themselves 
great,  or  all  the  followers  of  good  men  to  be  themselves 
necessarily  good.  Alas !  the  Lord  himself  had  his  Judas,  and 
to  this  day  swords  of  brittle  metal  hang  at  the  golden  girdle 
of  his  Church.  A  man  is  not  a  saint  because  he  occupies  a 
saintly  office,  or  repeats  saintly  words. 

No  ;  the  test  of  a  sword's  goodness  is  to  be  found  in  battle. 
Will  its  edge  turn  in  the  fray,  or  will  it  cut  through  a  coat  of 
mail  ?  Will  our  faith  bear  affliction  ?  Will  it  stand  us  in  good 
stead  when  we  are  hand  to  hand  with  the  enemy  ?  Will  it  avail 
us  in  the  dying  hour  ?  If  not,  we  may  suspend  it  on  the  ghtter- 
ing  belt  of  great  knowledge,  and  hold  it  by  the  jewelled  hilt  of  a 
high  profession  ;  but  woe  unto  us  ! 

Lord,  give  me  the  true  Jerusalem  blade  of  child-like  faith  in 
thee,  and  may  I  never  rest  content  with  a  mere  imitation  thereof. 

THE  MOON  ECLIPSED  ONLY  AT  THE  FULL. 

"  The  moon  is  never  eclipsed  but  when  it  is  at  the  full.  Cer- 
tainly Gods  people  are  then  in  most  danger."  When  all  goes 
well  with  them  in  house  and  field,  in  basket  and  in  store,  then 
should  they  look  lest  they  be  full  and  forget  the  Lord,  and  so 
become  eclipsed.  For  the  world  to  come  between  us  and  our 
Lord  is  very  easy  but  very  terrible.     When  all  is  apparently 


7C  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

prosperous  as  to  soul  matters,  and  neither  doubt,  nor  fear,  nor 
temptation  comes  in,  then  also  should  the  heart  look  well  to 
its  bearings  lest  at  this  very  moment  some  evil  should  interpose 
between  God  and  the  soul,  and  darkness  should  be  the  fearful 
result. 

Remember  this,  dear  reader  :  echpses  happen  at  the  full  moon. 
Look  to  thyself,  then,  in  thy  moments  of  greatest  happiness  and 
peace,  for  then  is  the  time  of  peril. 

Whene'er  becalmed  I  lie, 

And  storms  forbear  to  toss  ; 
Be  thou,  dear  Lord,  still  nigh. 
Lest  I  should  suffer  loss. 
Far  more  the  treacherous  calm  I  dread, 
Than  tempests  thundering  over  head. 

EAGLES  AND  FLIES. 

"  Wai^  luorihy  of  God,  who  hath  called  yoic  unto  his  king- 
dom, (i  Thess.  ii.  12)  Live  as  kings,  co?n?}zanding your  spirits, 
judgifig  your  souls  to  be  above  ordinary  pursuits.  It  is  7iot  for 
eagles  to  catch  flies.  As  of  old  it  was  said, '  Cogita  te  Cassarem 
esse  ? '  — ^  Remember  that  thou  art  Ccesar^  so  say  we  to  each 
believer,  ^Remember  that  tJiou  shall  one  day  be  a  kitigwith  God  i7i 
glory,  and  therefore  walk  becomingly."  This  is  important  teach- 
ing, and  much  needed  in  these  days.  Many  who  declare  them- 
selves to  be  eagles  spend  the  most  of  their  lives  in  hawking 
for  flies  :  we  even  hear  of  professing  Christians  frequenting 
the  theatre.  Instead  of  acting  like  kings,  many  who  claim 
to  be  the  sons  of  God  act  as  meanly  as  if  they  were  scullions 
in  the  kitchen  of  Mammon.  They  do  not  judge  themselves 
to  be  Csesars,  but  they  demean  themselves  as  if  they  were 
Caesar's  slaves,  living  upon  his  smile,  and  asking  his  leave  to 
move.  What  separation  from  the  world,  what  brave  holiness, 
what  self-denial,  what  heavenly  walking  with  God  ought  to  be 
seen  in   those  who  are  chosen  to  be   a  peculiar  people,  the 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  77 

representatives  of  God  on  earth,  and  courtiers  of  the  new 
Jerusalem  above  !  As  the  world  waxes  worse  and  worse,  it 
becomes  men  of  God  to  become  better  and  better.  If  sinners 
stoop  lower,  saints  must  rise  higher,  and  show  them  that  a 
regenerate  life  cannot  share  in  the  general  corruption. 

O  Lord,  I  know  that  in  Christ  Jesus  thou  hast  made  me  o 
king,  help  me,  then,  to  live  a  right  royal  life.  Lay  home  to  my 
conscience  that  question — What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to 
be  ?  and  may  I  so  answer  it  that  I  may  live  worthy  of  my  high 
calling. 

BRIDLES  FOR  OLD  HORSES. 

*'A/^oi  only  coifs,  but  horses  already  broken,  need  a  bridle.'' 
Indeed  they  do,  and  so  also  do  we  v/ho  are  advanced  in  years 
and  full  of  experience.  Old  men  are  not  always  wise  men. 
Passions  which  should  have  been  by  this  time  quite  subdued 
still  need  bit  and  bridle,  or  they  may  hurry  us  into  fatal  errors. 
Flesh  does  not  improve  by  keeping,  nor  do  corruptions  sweeten 
by  the  lapse  of  years.  New  converts  need  to  watch  in  the 
morning  of  their  days,  but  old  saints  must  be  equally  on  their 
guard  for  the  hours  become  no  safer  as  they  draw  towards 
evening.  We  are  all  within  gunshot  of  the  enemy  as  long  as 
we  are  this  side  of  Jordan. 

"  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,"  is  as  true  of  strong  men  as 
of  babes  in  grace.  Temptation,  like  fire,  will  burn  where  the 
wood  is  green,  and  certainly  it  hath  no  less  power  where  the 
fuel  is  old  and  sere.  We  shall  need  to  be  kept  by  grace  till  we 
are  actually  in  glory.  Those  who  think  themselves  at  heaven's 
gate  may  yet  sin  their  souls  into  the  deepest  hell,  unless  the  un- 
changing love  and  power  of  God  shall  uphold  them  even  to  the 
end. 

Lord,  bit  and  bridle  me,  I  pray  thee,  and  never  let  me  break 
loose  from  thy  divine  control.  Conduct  me  every  mile  of  the 
road  till  I  reach  my  everlasting  home. 


78  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  COMPASSES. 

"As  in  a  pair  of  compasses,  one  part  is  fixed  in  the  centre, 
whilst  the  other  foot  wandereth  abo2it  iii  the  circ2i?nference,  so 
whatever  subjects  we  may  thijik  npon,  the  soul  must  stay  on 
Christ,  and  be  fixed  oji  himP  Whilst  we  search  after  evidences 
and  additional  comforts  we  must  not  leave  our  simple  trust 
in  Jesus.  Whatever  sweep  our  knowledge  may  take  as  we 
advance  in  years  we  must  retain  most  fixedly  the  one  and 
only  centre  which  is  worthy  of  a  regenerated  soul,  namely,  our 
Lord  Jesus.  If  the  circle  of  our  energies  should  encompass  all 
the  world,  still  must  the  heart  stay  with  delightful  continuance 
with  the  Well-Beloved.  Immovable  and  steadfast  must  we  be, 
our  willing  soul  unswervingly  loyal  to  its  sole  object  of  trust  and 
love,  the  one  and  only  Lord  of  our  whole  being,  the  chief  among 
ten  thousand,  the  altogether  lovely. 

To  whom  else  can  we  go?  Where  else  is  there  rest  for  us? 
Let  us  then  abide  in  Christ  Jesus.  Fix  the  centre  with  the 
whole  force  of  a  resolute  heart,  nay,  more,  with  the  whole 
power  of  divine  grace.  Never  tolerate  the  idea  of  novelty  in 
this  matter.  Here  there  can  be  no  advance ;  we  are  in  him 
rooted  and  grounded.  Only  so  can  we  strike  out  the  true  circle 
of  life :  without  a  fixed  centre  the  sphere  can  never  be  true. 

O  thou  who  art  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  hold 
me  fast  for  ever,  and  bid  me  sing,  "  O  God,  my  heart  is  fixed, 
my  heart  is  fixed  ! " 

THE  LARK  AND  THE  FOWLER. 

"  Men  of  abstracted  conceits  and  snblime  spec2tlatio7is  are  but 
wise  fools;  like  the  lark,  that  soareth  high,  pce-ring  a7id  peeri7ig, 
but  yet  falleth  into  the  7iet  of  the  fowler.  Knowledge  without 
wisdom  may  be  soon  discerned;  it  is  usually  curio2is  a?ul 
censorious y  This  is  abundantly  seen  in  many  who  pretend  to 
interpret  seals  and  vials  and  yet  neglect  family  devotion  and  the 
plain  precepts  of  the  Word.     Such  are  found  occupying  their 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  79 

time  in  hair-splitting  over  difficult  points,  but  they  do  not 
labour  to  maintain  the  unity  of  the  body  of  Christ.  They  are 
very  acute  upon  speculative  topics  of  no  consequence  whatever, 
but  they  divide  on  the  slightest  pretext  from  the  rest  of  the 
brotherhood.  We  have  enough  to  do  with  watching  over  our 
own  hearts  and  endeavouring  to  bring  sinners  to  Christ  without 
becoming  more  nice  than  wise  upon  matters  of  theological 
subtlety  and  word- spinning.  The  wide  difference  between 
wisdom  and  knowledge  is  forgotten  by  many:  they  hoard  up 
knowledge  of  a  peculiar  sort  like  collectors  of  coins,  and  yet 
they  use  it  not  as  merchants  use  money,  but  keep  it  for  show, 
a  rarity  to  be  looked  at,  labelled,  put  away  in  a  glass  case  and 
exhibited  to  those  who  are  admirers  of  curios  and  rarities. 

Lord !  help  me  to  soar  like  the  lark,  but  keep  me  clear  of  the 
net.  Make  me  practical,  and  let  not  my  head  swim  with  airy 
notions  till  I  rush  upon  my  own  destruction. 

SATAN  CASTING  OUT  SATAN. 

*'  Lusts  are  contrary  ojie  to  another,  and  therefore  jostle  for 
the  throjie,  a7id  usually  take  it  by  turns.  As  otir  ancestors  scfit  for 
the  Saxons  to  drive  out  the  Pzcts,  so  do  carnal  men  drive  ottt  one 
Inst  by  a7tother,  and,  like  the  lunatic  in  the  Gospel  (Matt,  xvii.) 
fall  sometimes  i?ito  the  water,  and  sometimes  into  the  fire. ^^  Of 
what  use  then  can  reforms  be  which  are  wrought  by  an  evil 
agency.^  If  sobriety  be  the  fruit  of  pride,  it  grows  upon 
a  pernicious  root,  and  though  the  body  be  no  longer  in- 
toxicated, the  mind  will  be  drunken.  If  revenge  be  forsworn 
from  considerations  of  avarice,  the  meanness  of  the  miserly 
is  a  small  gain  upon  the  fury  of  the  passionate.  If  outward 
irreligion  be  abandoned  out  of  a  desire  to  gain  human  applause, 
the  Pharisee  will  be  a  very  slender  improvement  upon  the 
prodigal.  Satan's  casting  out  of  Satan  is  deceitful  work  :  his 
intent  no  doubt  is  to  establish  his  empire  by  pretending  to 
overthrow  it. 


80  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

No,  there  must  be  another  power  at  work,  or  little  is  accom- 
plished. Any  fancied  good  which  one  devil  may  bring  another 
is  sure  to  take  away,  and  the  last  end  of  the  man  v/hom  Satan 
mends  is  always  worse  than  the  first.  A  stronger  than  he  must 
enter  in  by  force  of  grace,  and  hurl  him  out  by  divine  force,  and 
take  full  possession,  or  the  man  may  be  another  man  but  not  a 
new  man. 

Lord  Jesus,  cast  out  all  the  devils  from  my  soul  at  once  and 
never  permit  one  of  them  to  return. 

THE  DOG. 

'■''SatMi  is  like  a  dog  that  standeth  ivagjing  his  tail  and 
looking  to  receive  someivhat  from  those  that  sit  at  table;  but  if 
nothing  be  thrown  out,  he  goeth  his  way.  So  doth  Satari  watch 
for  our  conse?it,  as  Benhadads  servants  did  for  the  word 
^  brother^  He  looketh  for  a  ^passionate  speech,  an  unclea7i 
glance,  gestures  of  wrath,  or  words  of  discontent,  a}id  if  he 
findeth  none  of  these,  he  is  discouraged."  It  would  be  a  great 
shame  to  please  the  dog  of  hell.  Nay,  let  him  look  and  long, 
but  let  him  have  never  a  look,  or  a  word,  from  us  to  stir  his 
wicked  heart.  O  for  grace!  to  starve  him  out,  and  to  bid 
him  begone  to  his  own  den.  *' Neither  give  place  to  the  devil," 
says  the  apostle.  We  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices.  To  tempt 
him  to  tempt  us  is  indeed  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness.  Let 
this  serpent  eat  his  own  meat,  which  is  the  dust ;  by  no  means 
let  us  turn  servitors  to  wait  upon  our  enemy. 

We  have  need  to  watch  and  pray  in  the  presence  of  this 
crafty  one.  When  he  came  to  our  Lord,  he  found  nothing  in 
him,  but  in  us  he  sees  much  which  favours  him.  O  Lord,  bid 
him  get  behind  thee  once  again  !  Deliver  us  from  the  evil  one, 
and  bid  him  depart  from  us.     This  we  humbly  entreat  of  thee. 

GIBEONITES. 

,  "UTake  your  sorrows  to  draiu  water  for  the  sanctuary.     Our 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  81 

natural  affections^  like  the  Gibeonites,  mtcst  not  be  exicrfninated, 
but  kept  for  temple  serviced  The  Stoic  slays  his  emotions,  the 
Christian  sanctifies  them  to  noblest  ends.  It  is  like  a  brute  not 
to  feel,  it  is  like  a  man  to  feel  tenderly,  and  it  is  like  a  Christian 
to  feel  in  a  chastened  manner.  We  may  weep,  and  we  may 
rejoice,  and  when  our  weeping  is  in  sympathy  with  the  afflicted, 
and  our  rejoicing  is  in  brotherly  fellowship  with  the  joyful,  the 
Gibeonites  are  indeed  made  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of 
water  for  the  sanctuary. 

Business,  marriage,  travelling,  recreation,  literature,  music, 
art,  should  all  be  placed  in  the  same  subordinate  condition. 
They  are  not  distinctly  spiritual,  and  as  mere  human  matters 
they  may  be  either  right  or  wrong ;  but  it  is  ours  to  lay  the  yoke 
upon  them,  and  make  them  serve  our  spiritual  designs.  They 
will  make  admirable  servants  ;  we  can  never  allow  them  to  be 
our  masters.  The  Gibeonites  might  not  be  killed,  but  they 
were  to  be  placed  under  the  yoke,  and  made  to  be  useful,  and 
the  same  must  be  done  with  the  matters  which  we  have 
mentioned.  It  would  be  foolish  to  endeavour  to  put  these 
things  down,  for  they  are  incidental  to  human  existence  ;  it  is 
wise  therefore  to  subdue  them  to  do  servile  work  for  the  Lord. 

O  Lord,  give  me  ever  so  to  use  worldly  things  as  never  to  be 
worldly  myself:  rather  may  I  sanctify  them  by  the  word  of  God 
and  prayer  ! 

EXPENSIVE  ECONOMY. 

"  The  inhabitants  of  Constantinople  would  afford  no  money  to 
the  Emperor  Constantimis  Palczlogus,  when  he  begged  from  door 
to  door  for  a  supply  for  his  soldiers  j  but  what  was  the  issue  ? 
The  barbarous  e7iei7iy  wo7i  the  city  and  got  all.  The  like  story 
there  is  of  Musteatze?n,  the  covetous  caliph  of  Babylon,  who  was 
such  an  idolater  of  his  wealth  ajid  treasures,  that  he  would  not 
spend  a7iything  for  the  necessary  defe7ice  of  his  city,  whereup07t 
it  was  taken,  and  the  caliph  fa77tished  to  death,  and  his  fnmcth 

6 


82  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

by  Haalon,  the  Tartarian  co?igtieror,  was  filled  with  melted 
goldP  Such  economy  is  evidently  most  extravagant.  May  not 
the  hke  be  said  of  those  who  give  grudgingly  to  the  cause  of 
God,  and  of  those  who  ruin  their  souls  in  order  to  increase  their 
pelf?  They  refuse  to  be  losers  for  Christ,  and  so  lose  their 
souls.  Religion  might  cost  them  a  loss  in  business,  by  leading 
them  to  close  the  shop  on  the  Sabbath,  or  to  act  with  strict 
uprightness  :  this  they  cannot  afford,  and  so  they  throw  away 
their  souls  in  order  to  keep  their  coppers.  Verily,  the  race  of 
fools  has  not  yet  died  out.  Thousands  still  think  it  profitable  to 
gain  the  world  and  lose  their  own  souls. 

O  Lord,  teach  me  true  wisdom !  Make  me  willing  to  lose 
wealth,  and  health,  and  home,  yea,  and  my  life  also,  in  order 
that  I  may  follow  Jesus  and  possess  his  salvation. 

SAMSON'S  LOCKS. 

*^Single  prayers  are  like  the  si?igle  hairs  of  Sainso7t;  but  the 
prayers  of  the  congregation  are  like  the  whole  of  his  bushy  locks, 
wherein  his  strength  lay.  Therefore  you  shoicld,  in  Tertullian^s 
phrase,  quasi  manu  facta,  with  a  holy  conspiracy,  besiege  heaven, 
and  force  out  a  blessing  for  your  pastors.^^  This  is  a  fine 
metaphor  wherewith  to  set  forth  united  prayer.  One  prayer  is  a 
hair  of  Samson,  but  our  united  supplications  are  as  the  seven 
locks  of  that  hero's  head.  May  God  grant  that  the  church 
may  never  be  shorn  of  the  locks  of  prayer,  wherein  her 
great  strength  lieth,  and  her  great  beauty  also. 

The  cumulative  power  of  prayer  is  well  worthy  of  notice. 
Abraham  alone  could  not  by  intercession  save  a  single  city  of 
the  plain,  though  his  pleas  were  very  weighty.  Lot's  poor  prayer 
was  to  Abraham's  as  an  ounce  to  a  ton,  and  yet  that  last  ounce 
turned  the  scale,  and  Zoar  was  preserved  from  the  burning. 
The  agreement  of  two  saints  is  a  grand  force  against  which  very 
few  obstacles  can  stand  ;  and  when  it  comes  to  a  praying  band, 
all  the  smiths  in  Jerusalem  cannot  make  bolts  for  the  doors,  or 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  83 

chains  for  the  wrists,  sufficiently  strong  to  hold  Peter  in  prison. 
Come,  then,  to  the  meetings  for  prayer,  for  there  is  the  strength 
of  the  church,  and  there  are  her  Samson's  locks. 

IMPERIAL  REVENUES,  AND  SMALL  CHARGES. 

"//  is  folly  to  think  that  an  emperor's  revejiite  will  not  pay  a 
beggar's  debt.  Christ  hath  2indertaken  to  satisfy  for  the  sinners 
debt,  and  he  hath  mo7iey  enough  to  pay."  Delightful  thought ! 
Great  as  is  my  debt  before  the  justice  of  God,  it  can  assuredly 
be  met  by  the  riches  in  glory  which  belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 
It  is  an  overwhelming  debt  to  me,  but  now  that  my  Redeemer 
has  shed  his  blood,  it  will  be  as  nothing  to  him..  A  Csesar's 
revenue  would  discharge  a  poor  man's  liabilities  and  would 
scarcely  suffer  diminution  ;  far  more  will  the  infinite  merits  of 
Jesus  discharge  my  sins,  and  remain  infinitely  full.  Where, 
then,  can  unbelief  find  an  excuse  for  its  existence  ?  There  can 
be  no  real  ground  for  fear.  Come,  my  heart,  look  not  so  much 
at  thy  present  and  urgent  need  as  at  thy  Lord's  supplies  which 
are  boundless,  and  all  thine  own. 

WHY  MEN  ATE  ACORNS. 

"  The  main  reason  why  men  dote  upon  the  world  is  because 
ihey  are  7wt  acguaittted  with  a  higher  glory.  Meii  ate  acorns  tilt 
they  were  acquainted  with  the  use  of  corn;  a  candle  is  micch 
£re  the  sim  riseth."  Now  it  has  happened  unto  us  to  eat  the 
bread  of  angels,  and  to  see  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  and  never 
again  can  we  find  content  in  baser  things.  All  the  joys  of  the 
world  are  now  but  beggarly  elements  to  us,  compared  with  our 
delight  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  Carnal  wisdom  has  become 
folly  in  our  esteem  ;  the  mirth  of  fools  is  a  weariness ;  and  the 
pomp  and  glory  of  earth  are  mere  baby  toys,  scarce  worthy  of  a 
glance.  What  grace  is  this  which  has  revealed  such  precious 
things  to  us  !  Worldly-wise  men  think  us  fanatics  and  fools, 
but  we  know  what  they  are,  and  where  the  folly  really  lies.     Oh, 


84  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

that  their  eyes  were  opened  to  join  with  us  in  the  joys 
which  they  ridicule  I  If  they  will  persist  in  their  bhndness  it 
shall  not  be  for  want  of  plain  testimony  on  our  part,  for  we  are 
bold  to  declare  in  all  companies  that  there  is  more  satisfaction  in 
Christ's  worst  things  than  in  sin's  best  things,  and  that  a  half- 
hour  of  his  presence  is  better  than  all  the  feasting  of  royal 
courts  for  a  lifetime.  Oh  that  they  would  believe  us  so  far  as  to 
try  for  themselves  !  Alas,  they  munch  their  acorns,  and  scorn 
the  bread  of  life  ! 

NEW  LEAVES  PUSHING  OFF  THE  OLD. 

'-^ Old  leaves^  if  they  remain  tipon  the  trees  through  the  autttnin 
and  the  winter,  fall  off  in  the  springJ^  We  have  seen  a  hedge 
all  thick  with  dry  leaves  throughout  the  winter,  and  neither 
frost  nor  wind  has  removed  the  withered  foliage,  but  the 
spring  has  soon  made  a  clearance.  The  new  life  dislodges 
the  old,  pushing  it  away  as  unsuitable  to  it.  So  our  old 
corruptions  are  best  removed  by  the  growth  of  new  graces. 
"Old  things  are  passed  away;  behold  all  things  are  become 
new.''  It  is  as  the  new  life  buds  and  opens  that  the  old 
worn-out  things  of  our  former  state  are  compelled  to  quit  their 
hold  of  us.  Our  wisdom  lies  in  living  near  to  God,  that  by  the 
power  of  his  Holy  Spirit  all  our  graces  may  be  vigorous,  and 
may  exercise  a  sin-expelling  power  over  our  lives  :  the  new  leaves 
of  grace  pushing  off  our  old  sere  affections  and  habits  of  sin. 

With  converts  from  the  world  it  is  often  better  not  to  lay 
down  stringent  rules  as  to  worldly  amusements,  but  leave  the 
new  life  and  its  hoher  joys  to  push  off  the  old  pleasures.  Thus 
it  will  be  done  more  naturally  and  more  effectively. 

Lord,  let  thy  life  in  me  push  off  the  relics  of  my  former  death, 
that  I  may  put  on  the  new  man,  and  manifest  the  energy  of  thy 
grace. 

THE  KING  AND  HIS  ATTENDANTS. 

^^  Those  ivho    entertain  a  king,  rec/con    npon  receiving  his 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  85 

trains  It  is  not  fit  that  he  should  come  alone.  So  those  who 
receive  Jesus  by  faith  into  their  hearts,  receive  also  his  church, 
his  ministers,  his  word,  and  his  cause.  They  take  the  Saviour 
and  all  his  belongings.  As  the  old  proverb  hath  it,  "Love  me, 
love  my  dog,"  so  they  love  all  who  belong  to  Jesus  for  their 
Lord's  sake. 

Where  Jesus  comes  with  pardon,  he  brings  all  the  graces 
with  him  and  we  are  right  glad  to  entertain  them  all :  not 
only  faith,  but  love,  hope,  patience,  courage,  zeal,  and  the 
whole  band  of  virtues.  It  would  be  idle  to  say,  "Christ  is  in 
me,"  if  none  of  the  graces  of  his  Spirit  lodged  within  our  souls. 
Come  in,  great  Lord,  and  dwell  in  my  heart,  and  bring  all  thy 
disciples  with  thee,  and  all  thy  belongings,  yea,  and  thy  cross 
itself. 

AN  IMAGINARY  CARPENTER. 

^^Peter  Martyr  sets  forth  the  holiness  of  God,  by  this  com- 
parison : — '  Take  a  carpenter  when  he  hath  chalked  and  drawn 
his  line,  theft  he  goes  and  chops  the  timber.  Sometimes  he  chops 
right,  and  sometimes  amiss.  Why  ?  Because  he  hath  an  outward 
rule,  a  line  outside  of  hiinself  accordifig  to  which  he  cuts  the 
tifjiber.  But  if  you  could  suppose  a  carpenter  that  could  never  chop 
amiss,  but  his  hand  shotild  be  his  lijie  ajid  rule;  if  he  had  such 
a?i  equal  poise  and  touch  of  his  hand,  that  his  very  stroke  is  a  rule 
to  itself  the?i  he  could  not  err.^  By  this  plaiit  and  homely  com- 
parison  he  did  set  forth  the  holiness  of  God  and  the  creature. 
The  holiness  of  the  creature  is  a  rule  without  us,  therefore  some- 
times we  chop  and  miss;  but  Gods  holiness  is  his  inward  rule,  it 
is  his  nature,  he  can  do  nothing  a?niss."  This  is  an  instructive 
simile,  and  may  be  carried  further.  Sanctification  is  a  renewal 
of  the  heart,  which  creates  such  a  rule  within  us.  The  Holy 
Spirit  works  in  us,  according  to  our  measure,  a  law  of  our 
nature,  so  that  it  cannot  sin  because  it  is  born  of  God ;  for,  after 
all,  it  is  the  nature  of  the  man  which  determines  the  nature 


86  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

of  his  deeds.  The  fruit  is  according  to  the  tree.  The  evil  of 
our  hfe  arises  from  the  hving  evil  within.  If  v/e  could  be 
perfect,  we  should  act  perfectly.  Hence  the  man  himself  is 
first  to  be  looked  to. 

Lord,  purge  us,  yea,  make  us  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus, 
that  out  of  us  good  may  come  because  thou  hast  made  us  good. 

RECORDS  OF  LIFE. 

"  The  story  of  our  .  lives  is  all  engraven  tipon  the  hearty 
and  when  God  awakeneth  the  conscience,  it  tells  of  past  sin. 
God  will  open  the  sinnei^s  eyes  in  the  7iext  world,  7iot  by  a 
holy  illuviination,  but  by  a  forced  convictio7i:  We  are  told 
in  Rev.  xx.  12  — '  The  books  were  opefied,^  and  one  of  these 
books  is  co7iscience,  a7id  though  it  be  in  the  si7i7ie7^s  keepi7ig, 
a7id  therefore  77iay  beco77ie  bhai^ed  a7id  defaced,  yet  our  story  will 
be  legible  e7iough^  and  forgotte7i  si7is  will  stare  us  in  the  face: 
'■Be  sitre  your  si7i  will  find  you  out^  (Num.  xxxii.  23.)  We 
forget  it  710W,  a7id  think  we  shall  never  hear  of  it  77iore;  but  God 
ca7i  77iake  all  occur  to  77ie77i07y  as  fresh  as  if  7tewly  co77wiitted, 
and  i7i  a7t  i7ista7it  represe7it  the  story  of  a7i  ill-spe7it  life,  a7td 
show  tis  all  the  thoughts,  words,  and  actio7ts  that  ever  we  have 
bee7i  guilty  of  The  paper  goeth  white  i7ito  the  pri7iting-house; 
but  witlmi  07ie  i7ista7it  it  is  77iarked  withi7i  a7id  without,  a7id 
C077ieth  forth  sta77iped  with  words,  a7id  li7ies,  a7id  se7ite7ices, 
which  were  i7i  710  way  legible  there  before,  eve7i  so  will  it  be 
with  the  soul  when  co7iscie7ice  is  aroused  at  the  last  J'  Our  lives 
to-day  are  like  the  picture  upon  the  photographer's  plate  before 
he  develops  it ;  God  hath  but  to  put  the  soul  into  a  bath  pre- 
pared according  to  his  divine  art,  and  all  the  sins  of  his  whole 
existence  will  stand  out  clear  before  the  sinner's  astonished 
gaze.  Nothing  can  be  forgotten  :  all  the  past  must  live  again. 
Let  the  unconverted  tremble  as  they  think  of  this,  and  let 
the  saved  ones  bless  the  Lord  Jesus  who  has  so  blotted  out 
their  sins  that  no  power  or  process  can  ever  bring  them  again  to 
remembrance. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  87 

THE  APPLES  DISPLAY  THE  SAP. 

"  The  apples  appear  when  the  sap  is  ?wt  seen.  It  is  the  operative 
and  lively  graces  that  will  discover  themselves,  A  man  may 
think  well,  or  speak  well;  hit  it  is  that  grace  which  governeth 
his  actions  which  most  showeth  itself P  There  could  be  no 
apples  if  there  were  no  sap,  but  the  sap  itself  has  no  manifesta- 
tion except  in  the  leaves  and  fruit.  If  we  have  inward  grace  it 
is  well  for  ourselves  ;  but  others  cannot  see  it  or  profit  by  it  till 
it  works  itself  into  our  daily  life.  This  it  is  bound  to  do,  and 
we  may  not  think  lightly  of  such  a  result,  for  as  it  would  be  a 
token  that  something  ailed  the  sap  of  the  tree  if  it  brought  forth 
no  fruit  in  its  season,  so  it  would  be  a  mournful  proof  of  spiritual 
declension  if  our  conversation  yielded  none  of  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit.  It  is  all  very  fine  to  plead  as  some  have  done  that  they 
are  doing  inside  work  ;  if  their  fruit  is  all  within  they  will  have 
to  be  cut  down  that  it  may  be  got  at.  A  true  epistle  of  Christ 
is  not  written  in  invisible  ink,  and  then  sealed  up,  but  it  is 
known  and  read  of  all  men.  A  tree  of  the  Lord's  right-hand 
planting  bears  fruit  to  his  honour  and  glory,  visible  to  those 
who  are  round  about  him. 

Lord,  make  me  one  that  can  bear  to  be  looked  at.  Make  my 
inward  grace  to  be  so  vigorous  that  my  outer  life  may  be  fruitful 
to  thy  praise.  May  no  one  have  to  enquire  about  the  sap  ;  may 
they  see  so  many  baskets  of  fruit  that  they  may  be  quite  sure 
about  the  life  of  the  tree. 

THE  MADMAN  OF  ATHENS. 

^^As  the  madfnan  at  A  thefts  challefiged  all  the  ships  that  came 
into  the  harbour  for  his  own,  so  carnal  men  claim  a7t  interest  in 
heavenly  thi?tgs  which  are  no7ie  of  theirs.  Deceived  hearts  believe 
they  are  runfiing  to  heavejt  when  they  are  postiitg  to  hell;  like 
rowers  in  a  boat,  they  look  one  way,  and  go  cofitrary."  Religious 
delusions  may  be  very  comfortable  while  they  last,  but  what  will 
be  the  misery  of  their  breaking  up  !     To  have  all  your  fancied 


88  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

godliness  vanish  like  the  mists  before  the  sun  will  be  grievous 
indeed.  In  proportion  to  the  confidence  inspired  will  be  the 
despair  involved.  The  poor  madman  in  Bedlam  in  the  olden 
time  placed  a  straw  crown  upon  his  head,  and  issued  orders  like 
a  Caesar ;  it  was  his  madness  which  made  such  a  farce  a  comfort 
to  him.  In  the  next  world  the  sinner's  madness  will  be  over,  he 
will  be  sobered  by  his  despair :  what  then  will  he  think  of  his 
former  fancies  and  fond  self  flatteries  !  What  an  awaking,  from 
the  dreams  of  bliss  to  the  realities  of  hell ! 

O  my  soul,  see  thou  to  it  that  all  thy  hopes  are  well  grounded  ! 
Call  not  Christ  thine,  and  heaven  thine,  if  they  are  not  so.  Do 
not  play  the  fool  with  eternal  things,  but  get  a  sure  title  to 
everlasting  blessedness. 

THE  UNFAITHFUL  STEWARD. 

"  We  shall  be  called  to  an  accotmt,  what  we  have  done  ivith  our 
time,  and  talents,  and  interests,  and  opportunities:  ^  At  his 
coming  our  Lord  will  reqtiire  his  own  with  usury. ^  (Luke 
xix.  23.)  Ah,  unfaithful  ones,  what  will  you  say,  wheft  you 
ca7inot  shift  and  lie?  Will  this  be  an  answer:  I  spejit  viy 
time  in  serving  7ny  own  lusts?  This  will  not  avail  you. 
If  a  factor,  (or  steward,)  that  is  sent  to  a  mart  or  fair,  should 
stay  guzzling  in  an  i7in,  or  ale-house,  and  there  spend  all  his 
money,  which  was  to  be  employed  in  traffic,  could  he  excuse 
himself  by  pleading  that  he  was  busy  with  his  cups?  Oh,  what 
a  dreadful  account  will  poor  souls  make,  that  have  spettt  their 
time  either  doing  7iothijtg,  or  7iothi7ig  to  ptapose,  or  that  which 
is  worse  than  7iothi7ig,  eve7i  si7i  which  willtitido  them  for  ever  P^ 

Come,  my  heart,  call  thyself  to  account.  What  hast  thou  been 
at?  Hast  thou  served  thy  Lord,  or  hast  thou  wasted  his 
goods  and  his  time  ?  The  Lord  will  require  this  of  thee  before 
long,  therefore  require  it  of  thyself.  How  would  it  fare  with 
thee  if  the  judgment-day  commenced  to-morrow,  and  on  leaving 
thy  bed  in  the  morning  thou  shouldst  find  the  dread  assize 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  89 

already  commenced  ?     Say,  my  soul,  if  thou  wert  at  this  instant 
called  away,  how  stand  accounts  between  thee  and  thy  Lord  ? 

THE  SUNFLOWER  AND  THE  AQUEDUCT. 

"  As  ihefioiver  of  the  sun  doth  follow  the  sun,  and  openeth  and 
shutteih  according  to  the  absence  of  that  hnnmary;  so  doth  the 
heart  of  a  Christia7i  move  after  GodJ'  The  divine  nature  within 
us  followeth  hard  after  the  divine  nature,  and  longeth  to  drink 
in  its  warmth  and  light.  Everything  acteth  according  to  its 
nature.  ^^ We  say,  'Aqua  in  tantum  ascendit';  a?td  it  is  trice 
that  7ieither  water  7ior  nature  riseth  higher  thaji  its  spring-head 
and  cejttre." 

So  when  self  is  our  principle  and  end,  we  rise  no  higher 
than  ourselves ;  but  when  God  becometh  the  life  of  our  soul  we 
follow  after  him,  and  rise  far  above  the  highest  point  to  which 
nature  could  conduct  us.  His  grace  in  us  strives  to  rise  to  the 
point  frorri  which  it  came,  and  it  will  never  rest  till  it  does  so. 
This  argues  a  high  destiny  for  the  believer,  and  is  the  foretaste 
of  it.  Hence  the  need  to  have  a  good  and  true  beginning,  and 
to  draw  our  life  from  the  eternal  fountains  above ;  for,  apart 
from  this,  there  will  be  no  rising  up  to  heaven. 

How  sweet  it  is  to  find  our  mind  and  heart  turning  Godward, 
as  the  heliotrope  seeks  the  sun  !  To  find  our  joys  begin  and 
end  with  manifestations  of  Jesus'  love  !  It  is  well  to  pine  till 
the  Lord's  face  be  revealed,  and  only  to  flourish  when  he 
imparts  his  gracious  influences.  It  is  wise  to  turn  away  from 
all  things  in  which  God  is  not  evidently  present,  but  carefully 
to  follow  each  movement  of  his  shining  face  that  we  may  always 
front  his  love,  and  bask  in  the  beams  of  his  favour. 

Whatever  partakes  largely  of  the  light  of  Jesus  should  be  prized 
by  us,  whether  it  be  fashioned  after  our  own  favourite  model  or 
no:  the  sun  is  there,  and  we  must  turn  to  it.  ''Anything  of 
Jesus''  should  be  a  sufficient  attraction  to  us.  A  gleam  of  his 
sunlight  should  be  prized,  for  it  is  far  more  than  we  deserve ; 


90  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

and  we  should  joyously  receive  it  as  the  crocus  drinks  in  the 
rich  gold  of  the  spring  sun,  and  brims  its  cup  therewith.  What 
will  it  be  to  dwell  above  where  the  light  no  more  goeth  down, 
and  the  flowers  feel  no  cold  drops  of  the  night  ? 

A  DECAYINa  BOOT  HAS  WITHERING  BRANCHES. 

"  As  when  the  root  of  a  tree  perisheth,  the  leaves  keep  g7'eenfor 
a  little,  but  within  a  while  they  wither  and  fall  off;  so  love, 
which  is  the  root  and  heart  of  all  other  duties,  when  that  de- 
cay eth,  other  things  decay  with  it.  The  first  works  go  off  with 
the  first  love;  at  least,  are  not  carried  on  with  such  care,  and 
delight,  and  cojnplacency,  as  they  should  be"  Swiftly  other 
works  follow,  withering  in  their  turn ;  for  the  fatal  blow  has 
been  struck,  and  failure  of  every  good  thing  is  but  a  matter 
of  time.  Could  the  love  of  saints  to  Jesus  utterly  die  out, 
all  their  virtues  must  die  also,  for  love  is  the  root  of  all.  Tlie 
outward  form  of  piety  might  survive,  as  the  wretched  counter- 
feit of  holiness,  but  what  would  be  its  worth  ?  Even  this  in 
many  cases  passes  away,  for  some  men  are  bravely  consistent  in 
their  wickedness,  and  do  not  care  to  keep  up  the  name  to  live 
when  the  life  of  God  is  not  within  their  souls. 

Our  main  concern  must  be  as  to  the  root.  The  heart  must  be 
alive  with  gracious  gratitude,  or  the  leaf  cannot  long  be  green 
with  living  holiness.  How  is  it  with  thee,  my  soul?  Is  there 
root-life  in  thee  ?  Is  Jesus  precious  }  Is  the  Father's  name  most 
sweet?  Does  the  Holy  Spirit  move  thee  to  ardent  affection?  A 
chill  love,  whose  very  existence  is  questionable, means  a  miserable 
experience.  He  who  doubts  his  own  love  to  Jesus  generally 
doubts  Jesus'  love  to  him.  O  love,  be  thou  the  living  root  in 
me,  and,  through  thy  quickening  and  nourishing  energy,  may 
the  branches  of  my  consecrated  life  grow  exceedingly  ! 

ONE  NAIL  DRIVES  OUT  ANOTHER. 

"Men  will  not  be  frightened  from  self-love;  it  must  be  another 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  91 

more  powerftil  love  which  inust  draw  them  from  it;  as  one  nail 
driveth  out  a?totherP  This  is  true  philosophy.  Love  to  God 
can  alone  expel  the  love  of  sin.  Many  forget  this,  and  set  to 
work  extracting  the  old  love :  a  very  tedious  task  ;  impossible, 
indeed,  with  such  poor  tools  as  we  possess.  They  torture  the 
body  and  torment  the  mind,  but  the  old  nail  of  self-love  is  rusted 
in,  and  will  not  stir.  They  might  sooner  break  up  the  fabric  of 
their  manhood  than  tear  out  its  old  deep-seated  affections  ;  the 
self-nail  has  been  driven  well  home,  and  clinched  besides,  and 
what  can  we  do .? 

It  is  wonderful  to  see  how  love  to  Christ  fetches  out  the  love 
of  self  from  its  lodging.  At  the  first  it  shakes  and  loosens  it ; 
by-and-by  it  drives  it  a  little  from  its  place,  and  at  last  it 
drives  it  out  altogether.  Self  is  at  first  somewhat  denied,  then  it 
is  chastened  and  kept  under,  and  finally  it  is  crucified  with  Christ 
so  completely  that  the  man  finds  pleasure  in  warring  against  it, 
and  glories  in  the  submission  of  the  flesh  to  suffering  and  loss. 

O  blessed  hand  of  Jesus,  drive  in  the  nail  of  divine  love  ! 
Smite  hard.  Lord.  Force  out  the  rusted  iron  of  my  selfishness. 
Let  not  a  fragment  of  it  remain.  Love  alone  can  vanquish  love. 
Thyself  alone  can  conquer  self  in  me.  No  secondary  force  will 
suffice.  My  God,  thou  must  display  thy  Godhead's  power  of 
love,  or  my  vile  heart  will  never  part  with  self. 

THE  PERFUMED  GALE. 

''^  As  the  odours  and  sweet  smells  of  Arabia  are  carried  by  the 
luiiids  and  air  into  the  neighbotcring  provinces^  so  that  before 
travellers  come  thither  they  have  the  scent  of  that  aromatic 
country;  so  the  joys  of  heaven  are  by  the  sweet  breathings  and 
gales  of  the  Holy  Ghost  blown  into  the  hearts  of  believers,  ana 
the  sweet  smells  of  the  tipper  paradise  are  conveyed  into  the 
gardens  of  the  churches.  Those  joys  which  are  stirred  up  in  us 
by  the  Spirit  before  we  get  to  heaven  are  a  pledge  of  what  we  may 
expect  hereafter r     Oh  that  we  had  more  of  these  heavenly  gales 


92  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

laden  with  the  spices  of  Immanuers  land  !  Gracious  Lord,  cause 
such  a  celestial  wind  to  awake  at  this  very  hour !  I  am  already 
accepted  in  Christ  Jesus,  adopted,  and  beloved  in  him :  this  is 
a  foretaste  of  heaven.  In  him  I  am  secure,  immortal,  triumphant : 
these  also  are  heavenly  privileges.  In  Jesus  I  have  peace,  and 
rest,  and  profound  confidence  :  is  not  this  also  something  of 
paradise  ?  In  my  Lord  I  have  fellowship  with  God,  and  exceed- 
ing joy  in  his  love  :  surely  the  wind  is  blowing  from  the  glory 
quarter,  and  has  taken  up  much  of  the  aroma  of  the  beds  of 
spices  whereon  the  saints  recline.  The  Holy  Ghost  hath 
revealed  unto  us  in  our  inward  experience  much  of  the  bliss 
which  the  Lord  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him.  The  life 
of  the  believer  on  earth  is  the  same  as  that  which  will  be  in  him 
throughout  eternity,  and  the  joy  with  which  the  Lord  favours 
him  below  is  of  the  same  nature  as  that  which  shall  fill  him 
for  ever.  When  Jesus  reveals  himself  to  my  soul,  the  winds  are 
blowing  from  heaven ;  I  can  discern  the  fragrance.  All  around 
me  delight  is  poured  forth,  and  my  heart  is  singing  all  the  time. 

DREAMS,  BUT  NOT  DREAMS. 

"  Carnal  mc7i  hear  of  the  beatity  of  holitiess,  of  the  excellency 
of  Christ  J  of  the  preciottsness  of  the  covena?it,  of  the  rich  treastircs 
of  grace,  as  if  they  were  in  a  dreain.  They  look  tipon  stich  things 
as  mere  fancies,  like  to  foolish  dreajns  of  golden  vwimtains,  or 
showers  of  pearls'^  "  This  their  way  is  their  folly."  When 
scientific  men  describe  to  us  their  curious  experiments  and  sin- 
gular discoveries,  we  know  them  to  be  persons  of  credit,  and 
therefore  accept  their  testimony  :  why  do  not  men  of  the  world 
do  us  the  like  justice,  and  believe  what  we  tell  them  ?  We  are 
as  sane  as  they,  and  as  observant  of  the  law  of  truth  ;  why,  then, 
do  they  not  believe  us  when  we  declare  what  the  Lord  has  done 
for  our  souls  ?  Why  is  our  experience  in  the  spiritual  world  to 
be  treated  as  a  fiction  any  more  than  their  discoveries  in 
chemistry  or  geography  ?  There  is  no  justice  in  the  treatment 
with  which  our  witness  is  received. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  93 

Yet  the  Christian  man  need  not  complain,  for  in  the  nature  of 
things  he  may  expect  it  to  be  so,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  so  is  a 
confirmation  of  his  own  behefs.  In  a  world  of  blind  men,  an 
elect  race,  to  whom  eyes  had  been  given,  would  be  sure  to  be 
regarded  as  either  mad  or  false.  How  could  the  sightless 
majority  be  expected  to  accept  the  witness  of  the  seeing  few  ? 
Would  it  not  touch  their  dignity  to  admit  that  others  possessed 
faculties  of  which  they  were  destitute  ?  And  would  it  not  be 
highly  probable  that  the  blind  would  conspire  to  regard  the  men 
of  eyes  as  fanatical  dreamers  or  deluded  fools  ?  Unrenewed  men 
know  not  the  things  which  are  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  it  is  by 
no  means  a  strange  thing  that  they  should  deride  what  they 
cannot  understand.  It  is  sad  that  those  who  are  dreamers  in 
the  worst  sense  should  think  others  so,  but  it  is  by  no  means  so 
extraordinary  as  to  cause  surprise. 

O  my  Lord,  whatever  others  may  think  of  me,  let  me  be  more 
and  more  sensible  of  thy  presence,  and  of  the  glorious  privileges 
and  hopes  which  are  created  in  the  heart  by  thy  grace  !  If  men 
should  even  say  of  me,  as  of  Joseph,  "Behold,  this  dreamer 
cometh,"  it  will  not  grieve  me  so  long  as  thou  art  with  me,  and 
thy  favour  makes  me  blest. 

ARROWS  SHOT  AT  RANDOM. 

*'  Cojitimied  meditation  brings  great  profit  to  the  soul.  Pas- 
sant and  tra7isient  thoughts  are  more  ;pleasa7it,  but  not  so  pro- 
fitable. Deliberate  meditatiofi  is  of  most  use  because  it  secures 
the  return  of  the  thoughts.  Suddefi  thoughts  pass  away  fro7n  us, 
a?td,  as  a  rule^  they  do  not  retztrn  to  be7tefit  us ;  as  childre7t  shoot 
away  their  arrows  at  rovers,  a7id  do  7iot  look  after  tJie77ij  or  as 
a  ball  stricke7i  i7t  the  open  field  goes  out  fro7Ji  us,  whereas  a  ball 
struck  agai7ist  a  wall  doth  retur7i  to  our  hand  again:'  We 
need  more  meditation,  more  of  this  shooting  of  thought-arrows 
at  a  mark  on  which  they  will  strike  and  stick,  more  of  this 
throwing  the  thought-ball  at  the  wall  that   we  may   catch  it 


94  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

again.  This  would  create  for  us  a  better  style  of  teachers  and 
preachers,  and  train  a  more  solid  race  of  Christian  men  and 
women.  People  do  not  think,  and  yet  thinking  is  living,  and 
one  of  the  nearest  approaches  to  death  is  to  be  without  thought. 
Gentle  reader,  do  you  never  think  ?  Are  you  too  busy  to  medi- 
tate ?  Is  your  time  occupied  from  morning  to  night  ?  Then  stay 
a  moment  while  we  whisper  in  your  ear  :  if  you  are  very  busy, 
think  and  pray  all  the  more,  or  your  work  will  wear  and  weary 
you,  and  drag  you  away  from  God.  For  your  work's  sake,  break 
away  from  it,  and  give  the  soul  a  breathing  time.  Get  a  holy 
subject  and  keep  to  it  till  you  have  drawn  somewhat  from  it  to 
feed  your  soul  upon,  and  then  you  will  do  your  life-work  with 
less  fatigue  because  you  will  have  more  strength  to  spend  upon 
it. 

THE  BURNING-GLASS. 

"  When  the  beams  of  the  sun  are  co7itracted  by  a  burning-glass, 
ttpon  one  spot,  theji  they  cause  fire;  so  when  our  thoughts  are 
concentrated  on  07ie  object  they  warm  the  heart  aiid  at  last  burn 
the  truth  into  itP  This  is  the  reason  why  so  many  sermons  and 
addresses  are  so  cold  and  ineffective,  they  are  not  sufficiently 
focussed  upon  one  point.  There  are  many  rays  of  light,  but 
they  are  scattered.  We  get  a  little  upon  many  things,  while 
what  is  wanted  is  one  great  truth,  and  so  much  upon  it  as  shall 
fix  it  on  the  heart,  and  set  the  soul  blazing  with  it.  This  is  the 
fault  of  many  lives  :  they  are  squandered  upon  a  dozen  objects, 
whereas  if  they  were  economized  for  one,  they  would  be  mighty 
lives,  known  in  the  present  and  honoured  in  the  future.  "  This 
one  thing  I  do ''  is  a  necessary  motto  if  we  are  to  accomplish 
anything. 

Our  friend  lay  basking  in  the  sunshine  and  the  beams  of  the 
sun  did  not  disturb  him  for  a  moment.  In  a  mirthful  moment 
we  crept  to  his  side,  and  holding  up  a  burning  glass,  we  formed 
a  little  bright  spot  on  the  back  of  his  hand.  He  started  in  an 
instant  as  if  touched  with  a  hot  iron,  and  was  some  little  time 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  95 

before  he  quite  appreciated  our  lecture  upon  concentrated 
energies.  He  did  not  invite  a  repetition  of  the  interesting  ex- 
periment, but  confessed  that  he  should  throughout  life  dread  a 
man  whose  strength  all  converged  to  one  point,  and  that  when 
next  he  wished  to  arouse  a  careless  mind,  he  would  try  what  con- 
centration would  do. 

Great  Lord,  teach  thou  me  how  to  accomplish  somewhat  for 
thy  glory ;  and,  to  that  end,  enable  me  to  live  for  thee  with  my 
undivided  being,  that  what  little  light  and  heat  I  have  may  be 
so  focussed  that  I  may  burn  my  way  to  successful  service. 

THE  ALL-SUPPOETING  NAIL. 

"  The  creatures  hang  upon  God  as  a  garinejit  ttpoji  a  nail; 
take  away  the  nail  and  the  garment  falls  down.^^  The  emblem  is 
simple  but  accurate.  All  the  weight  falls  upon  the  nail,  and  all 
the  need  of  the  creature's  existence  hangs  upon  the  Omnipotent 
One.  What  power  must  he  have  from  whom  all  power  is 
derived !  All  that  we  see  around  us  of  force  and  might  is  but 
God  in  action.  There  is  no  such  deity  as  "Nature":  nature  is 
the  Lord  at  work. 

Do  all  things  depend  upon  God  ?  Then  the  law  of  faith  is, 
after  all,  no  novelty,  no  intrusion,  no  exception  to  general  rule. 
A  sort  of  passive  faith  is  the  life  of  all  created  things.  De- 
pendence is  the  faith  of  irrational  objects,  and  the  believer's  trust 
is  this  dependence  gifted  with  eyes  and  will.  It  should  then  be 
an  easy  thing  for  my  creature-life  to  hang  upon  its  Creator.  Had 
it  not  been  for  sin,  faith  would  have  been  my  very  nature,  de- 
pendence upon  God  a  constituent  quality  of  my  existence.  Who, 
then,  are  they  that  laugh  at  faith  1  Rationalists  1  Nay ; 
irrational  men,  at  war  with  one  of  nature's  first  and  most 
essential  laws.  Let  them  laugh  on,  for  my  heart  is  well  assured 
that  confidence  in  God  is  the  highest  reason,  and  trust  in  my 
Maker  the  finest  common  sense. 

O  Lord !   I  bless  thee  that  the  nail  on  which  creation  hangs 


96  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

can  never  fail,  for  thou  faintest  not ;  neither  will  my  confidence 
be  put  to  shame,  for  it  hangs  where  hang  the  worlds.  Till  thou 
dost  thyself  cease  from  thine  almightiness,  my  soul's  hope  is  safe 
beyond  question,  for  it  rests  only  upon  thee. 

THE  WATCHMAKER. 

"  He  that  mahes  a  ivaich,  can  7nend  it  when  it  is  hrokeji  and 
disarranged."  So  it  is  certain  that  the  best  physician  for  the 
body  is  the  Maker  of  the  human  frame.  This  is  too  much  for- 
gotten, and  faith  is  placed  in  men  and  medicines,  and  the  great 
Lord  is  forgotten.  We  would  not  have  men  decline  the  aid  of 
physic  and  surgery,  but  yet  we  count  it  a  sort  of  idolatry  to  trust 
in  these  and  make  no  appeal  to  the  Lord  himself.  It  is  unwise 
to  neglect  the  means,  but  be  not  so  utterly  foolish  as  to  leave  out 
of  mind  the  First  Cause  and  true  Author  of  all  good.  It  is  best  to 
trust  in  the  Lord  and  use  medicine  too,  but  of  the  two  evils- 
faith  in  God  and  no  use  of  means,  or  use  of  means  and  no  faith 
in  God — we  should  certainly  prefer  the  former. 

"With  regard  to  the  soul,  none  can  do  anything  to  purpose  in 
putting  it  into  order  save  the  Creator  himself.  All  merely 
human  attempts  at  the  repair  of  the  spiritual  nature  are  a  kind 
of  tinkering  which  injures  more  than  it  benefits.  The  Lord  can 
set  mainspring,  and  balance-wheel,  and  lever,  and  hands  in 
good  working  order.  He  can  cleanse,  repair,  and  regulate;  and 
what  he  does  is  done  to  purpose.  We  have  known  a  child  wash 
a  watch  till  it  was  spoiled,  and  so  may  a  reformer  purge  a  man 
till  he  makes  a  hypocrite  of  him.  An  ingenious  young  man 
repaired  a  watch  so  that  it  would  never  go  again  ;  and  so  may 
the  superstitious  impress  men  with  foolish  fancies  till  they  lose 
all  capacity  for  true  religion.  God  himself  must  put  his  hand 
to  the  business,  or  it  will  be  a  total  failure. 

Lord,  with  all  my  imperfections  and  irregularities,  it  gives  me 
joy  to  know  that  I  am  in  thy  hands,  and  that  thou  wilt  set  me 
right.  No  case  has  ever  baffled  thee ;  neither  will  mine.  Thou 
wilt  yet  make  me  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  do  thy  will. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  97 

THE   DISH  FOE  ME. 

"As  at  a  feast  ^  ivJieii  there  is  a  dish  for  which  we  have  a  great 
liking  set  upon  the  table,  though  all  the  company  be  welcome  to 
partake  of  it,  yet  we  say,  '  Here  is  a  dish  for  7ne'  So  shoidd 
you  apply  and  take  to  yourselves  your  own  portio?i  of  the  word. 
Though  it  be  propounded  generally,  yet,  when  God  directeth  the 
tongue  of  his  messengers  to  speak  expressly  to  your  case,  you 
should  say,  '  This  is  for  7ne!  This  is  all  the  calling  by  jianie 
which  you  can  look  for P  How  often  has  this  been  the  case 
when  reading  the  word  of  God,  or  hearing  it  !  We  have  felt  an 
inward  reHsh  and  dehght  in  divine  truth,  and  our  spiritual 
instincts  have  taught  us  that  it  was  intended  for  us.  A  man 
may  be  misled  by  his  natural  appetite,  but  the  spiritual  man's 
holy  taste  never  deceives  him.  If  he  can  feed  upon  the  word, 
this  is  clear  evidence  that  it  is  "  food  convenient  for  him,"  and 
that  the  Lord  intends  it  for  him.  The  Holy  Ghost  has  said, 
"  Eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in 
fatness,"  plainly  indicating  that  the  truth  which  gives  delight 
to  the  renewed  soul  may  be  safely  feasted  on,  and  that  we 
have  full  hcense  to  enjoy  it  without  stint. 

My  heart,  here  is  good  news  for  thee!  Be  not  slow  to  avail 
thyself  of  the  divine  permit.  At  the  feast  of  love,  eat  the  fat  and 
drink  the  sweet,  and  bless  the  Lord  who  satisfieth  thy  mouth 
with  good  things. 

A  PEINCE  IN  A  DITCH. 

'■'■  If  yoic  saw  a  7nan  labouring  in  filthy  ditches,  and  soiling 
himself  as  poor  men  do,  would  you  believe  that  he  was  heir- 
apparent  to  a  crown,  called  to  inherit  a  kingdom  ?  Who  will 
believe  in  your  heavenly  calling  wJien  you  stick  in  the  mud  of 
worldly  pleasures,  and  ar-e  carried  away  with  carking  care  for 
sectdar  interests  ?  "  Princes  should  behave  as  princes.  Their 
haunts  should  be  in  palaces,  and  not  amid  dung-heaps.  How, 
then,  is  it  that  some  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians 

7 


98  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

are  found  raking  in  questionable  amusements  to  discover 
pleasure,  and  many  others  groping  amid  sordid  avarice  to  find 
satisfaction  in  wealth  ?  What  are  they  at  to  be  thus  disgracing 
the  blood  royal  ?  How  dare  they  drag  the  name  of  the  "  Blessed 
and  only  Potentate  "  through  the  mire  ?  A  prince  of  the  blood 
acting  as  a  beggar  would  dishonour  not  only  himself  but  all  the 
royal  house.  Nobility  has  obligations.  Grace,  which  is  the 
eminent  nobility  of  saints,  lays  them  under  heavy  bonds  to  act 
as  the  true  aristocracy  of  the  universe.  Come,  my  soul,  dost 
thou  carry  thyself  royally  ?  I  am  made  a  king  by  Jesus  Christ, — 
are  my  bearing  and  conversation  answerable  to  the  dignity  laid 
upon  me? 

Lord,  thou  must  teach  thy  poor  child.  He  has  so  long  been 
a  vagabond  and  an  outcast  that  unless  thou  teach  him  the 
majestic  manners  of  thy  holy  courts  he  will  dishonour  both 
himself  and  thee. 

VICTIMS  LED  TO  THE  SLAUGHTER. 

"77/<?  heathen  were  wont  to  hang  garlands  aroiind  the  necks  of 
the  beasts  which  were  about  to  be  slain  at  the  altar,  and  to  crown 
them  with  roses  as  they  led  them  to  sacj-ijice^^  Many  are  thus 
decked  with  the  ornaments  of  wealth  and  mirth  who  are  on  the 
way  to  the  slaughter.  Ungodly  men  may  be  garlanded  with 
social  distinctions,  scientific  attainments,  and  courtly  honours, 
and  yet  be  no  better  than  bullocks  devoted  to  the  axe,  at  the 
altar  of  the  god  of  this  world.  How  little  availed  the  roses  to 
the  creature  doomed  to  die !  If  men  were  wise  they  would 
regard  with  equal  dis-esteem  those  earthly  honours  and  posses- 
sions which  do  but  deck  out  a  condemned  criminal,  and  adorn 
a  wretch  over  whom  the  wrath  of  God  is  hovering.  O  silly  men, 
to  rejoice  in  the  tokens  of  your  destruction,  and  to  glory  in  your 
shame  ! 

Lord,  it  is  better  to  bear  thy  cross,  and  march  heavenward 
with  the  blessed  burden,   than  to  be   smothered  in  flowery 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  99 

pleasures  and  to  be  led  down  to  hell.     I  pray  thee,  bring  my 
unregenerate  neighbours  to  be  of  the  same  mind. 

THE   GIDDY  THINK   THE  EARTH  MOVES. 

"  The  earth  is  never  the  more  tmsettled  because  to  giddy  braiits 
it  seeineth  to  run  roiind^^  Even  so  the  salvation  of  the  saints  is 
sure,  though  to  their  trembling  hearts  it  may  seem  to  be  in 
terrible  jeopardy.  A  passenger  on  crossing  the  Channel  is  none 
the  less  in  safety  because  he  himself  feels  ready  to  give  up 
the  ghost  with  the  nausea  brought  on  by  the  rolling  of  the 
vessel.  Our  feehngs  are  poor  judges  of  facts.  Some  who  felt 
sure  of  heaven  are  now  in  hell,  and  others  who  had  almost  lost 
hope  are  now  glorified  in  heaven.  My  brain  may  whirl  and 
make  me  think  all  things  are  running  round,  and  yet  I  know 
those  very  things  to  be  steadfast  as  the  hills,  and  therefore  I  do 
not  believe  my  feelings,  but  trust  the  facts  ;  and  so,  when  my 
poor  silly  heart  imagines  that  the  eternal  promises  will  fail,  I 
must  chide  its  folly,  and  fall  back  upon  the  everlasting  verities. 

Yes,  Lord,  thou  art  immovable  and  immutable !  This  I  know 
of  a  surety.  Therefore  give  me  grace  never  to  doubt  thee,  or 
to  distrust  thy  faithfulness  to  all  those  who  put  their  trust  in 
thee. 

METEORS  NOT   STARS. 

^'■Meteors  a7'e  soon  spent  ^  and  fall  from  heavcji  like  lightning, 
^cvhile  stars  keep  their  course  and  station P  When  a  meteor 
darts  across  the  sky  children  say  that  a  star  has  fallen,  but  it  is 
not  so.  Look  through  the  telescope,  and  you  will  find  Jupiter, 
and  Saturn,  and  Venus,  each  one  in  its  place,  shining  as  usual ; 
yea,  even  the  tiniest  satellite  is  in  its  predestined  sphere,  fulfilling 
its  times  and  seasons.  So,  too,  we  hear  men  say  that  a  Christian 
has  fallen  from  grace,  a  saint  has  become  an  apostate.  This 
also  is  an  error.  The  saints  are  in  their  places  still,  for  it  is 
written,  *'  the  righteous  shall  hold  on  his  way"  :  those  who  have 


100  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

fallen  were  meteors,  not  stars  ;  professors,  but  not  genuine 
possessors  of  the  heavenly  light.  The  seven  stars  are  in  a  hand 
out  of  which  nothing  falls  :  "  all  the  saints  are  in  thy  hand." 
Jesus  says,  "he  that  believeth  in  me  hath  everlasting  life,"  and 
therefore  we  are  sure  that  they  will  not  die. 

O  my  blessed  Saviour,  give  me  no  temporary  salvation ! 
Make  me  a  star  whose  brightness  shall  never  be  quenched.  To 
be  enlightened  for  a  time  will  not  serve  my  turn ;  grant  me  light 
which  Satan  cannot  extinguish.  Let  me  be  "  saved  in  the  Lord 
with  an  everlasting  salvation." 

ALL  BLOSSOMS  DO  NOT  BECOME  FRUIT. 

"  Plenty  of  blossoms  do  not  always  foretell  great  store  of 
f7'uit!^  Few  knit  out  of  the  many  flowers  which  make  promise 
of  apples.  It  has  ever  been  so,  and  he  is  an  unwise  man  who 
dreams  that  his  trees  will  be  exempted  from  the  universal  laW. 
The  same  rule  holds  good  in  all  earthly  matters.  Out  of  many 
hopeful  results  which  we  look  for  from  our  plans  and  labours 
some  must  fail  us.  Because  we  make  appointments  for  our- 
selves, and  forget  the  appointments  of  God,  we  meet  with  many 
more  disappointments  than  would  otherwise  fall  to  our  lot.  It 
is  of  no  use  reckoning  that  every  ^gg  in  our  basket  will  become 
a  chicken,  for  it  will  not  so  happen,  and  our  over  anticipation 
will  be  the  cause  of  needless  sorrow  to  us.  Every  prudent  mer- 
chant reckons  upon  a  certain  amount  of  bad  debt  and  loss  in 
his  trading,  and  when  it  comes  he  writes  it  off  as  a  part  of  his 
estimated  charges,  and  is  not  broken-hearted  :  our  wisdom  lies 
in  doing  the  same  with  all  earthly  hopes,  and  even  with  the 
visible  results  of  our  service  for  the  Lord.  Whether  this  or  that 
will  prosper  we  must  leave  with  the  Master,  it  is  ours  to  sow 
with  unwearied  hand  both  at  morning  and  at  night. 

THE  LEAVEN  IN  THE  BREAD. 

"  Jtide  saith  we  are  ^preserved  in  Christ  fesiisJ  There  is  a 
close  union  between  Christ  and  us :  we  are  '  in  hivi^  and  because 


IIXUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  lOl 

of  this  nnion  we  are  eternally  preserved.  Look!  As  it  is 
iinpossible  to  sever  the  leaven  and  the  dough  when  they  a7'e  once 
mingled  and  kneaded  together;  so  Christ  and  a  believer^  when 
they  are  united  together,  there  is  710  parti7tg  the7n  a7iy  77iore,  a7id 
while  07ie  lasts  the  other  7/mst  e7td2i7'e"  This  is  indeed  the  sure 
ground  of  the  final  preservation  of  the  saints:  their  union 
with  their  Lord  is  of  an  indissoluble  nature,  so  that  the  apostle 
enquires,  ''  Who  shall  separate  us  ?  "  It  is  as  the  union  of  the 
body  with  the  head,  which  cannot  be  sundered  without  death  to 
both.  "•  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also"  is  our  guarantee  of 
life  eternal.  What  more  do  we  require  1  If  Christ  be  in  us,  and 
we  in  him,  the  union  is  of  the  most  intense  kind,  and  the  security 
which  follows  from  it  is  of  the  most  certain  sort.  "  He  that 
is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit":  what  closer  and  more 
abiding  union  can  be  imagined  ? 

Lord,  let  there  be  no  doubt  as  to  my  union  with  thee.  Cause 
my  fellowship  to  be  so  constant  and  so  sweet  that  the  oneness 
of  soul  to  thy  sacred  person  may  be  most  evident.  So  shall  I 
be  with  thee  here,  and  with  thee  where  thou  art  for  ever. 

A  SAYING  OF  THE  FATHERS. 

"  /  re7ne77iber  07ie  of  the  fathers  bri7igeth  i7i  the  flesh,  sayi7ig 
€f  believers,  *Ego  deficiam,  /  will  surely  fail  the77i  a7id  7nakc 
ihein  7niscarry;  and  the  world,  Ego  decipiam,  /  will  deceive 
ihe77i  and  e7itice  the77i;  a7id  Sata7i,  Ego  eripiam,  /  will  S7iatch 
the77t  and  carry  the77i  away ;  but  God  saith,  Ego  custodiam,  / 
will  keep  the77t,  I  will  7iever  fail  thein  7ior  forsake  the77z'  Here 
lieth  our  safety  a7id  security.'^  In  other  words,  the  flesh  saith, 
"  I  will  deceive  ;"  the  world,  ''  I  will  defile  ;"  the  devil,  ''  I  will 
destroy;"  but  the  Lord  saith,  "I  will  defend";  and  that  one 
word  of  God  takes  the  sting  from  all  the  rest.  The  flesh  is  as 
a  drawn  sword,  the  world  as  a  sharp  spear,  and  Satan  as  a 
poisoned  arrow ;  but  the  Lord  God  is  a  shield,  and  this  baffles 
all.    The  flesh  is  much,  the  world  is  more,  and  Satan  is  most 


102  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

of  all ;  but  God  is  all  in  all.  The  flesh  must  die,  the  world  must 
pass  away,  Satan  must  be  overthrown  ;  but  the  word  of  our  God 
abideth  for  ever  ;  and  as  the  word  of  God  is  the  life  of  the  saints, 
they  shall  also  abide  world  without  end.  What  a  rest  this 
affords  us  when  we  are  looking  out  of  the  windows  of  the  future  ! 
The  Lord  will  be  our  succour  in  the  days  to  come  ! 

THE  TIGHT-ROPE  DANCER. 

"  They  weaken  Christiajt  comfort  who  77iake  believers  walk 
with  Christ  like  daiicers  up07i  a  rope,  eve7'y  77i077ie7it  i7i  fear  of 
breaki7tg  their  7iecks"  Those  who  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
final  perseverance  of  the  saints  deserve  this  censure.  We 
cannot  tell  whence  these  brethren  derive  their  comfort.  Our 
notion  of  trusting  Christ  includes  in  it  a  reliance  upon  him  for 
the  present  and  the  future  as  well  as  for  the  sins  of  the  past.  It  is 
to  us  the  glory  of  the  gospel  that  it  gives  us  now,  at  this  very 
moment,  a  present  and  everlasting  salvation.  Once  grasped  in 
the  hand  of  Jesus,  what  can  pluck  us  thence  or  cause  us  to 
perish  ?  Tight-rope  dancing  suits  not  our  poor  head,  we  prefer 
to  be  "safe  in  the  arms  of  Jesus." 

My  soul,  let  others  say  what  they  will,  do  thou  accept  tliy 
Lord's  word  for  it,  and  believe  that  he  will  keep  the  feet  of  his 
saints.  A  temporary,  questionable  salvation  may  suffice  those 
who  know  not  thy  Lord  ;  but  as  for  thee,  do  thou  abide  by  his 
eternal,  unchangeable  love,  and  fear  no  final  fall. 

OLIVIAN'S  DYING   SAYING. 

"  Olivia7i,  whe7i  dyi7ig,  co777forted  hi7>iself  with  that  pro77iisey 
(Isa.  liv.  lo,)'  The  77ioimtai7is  shall  depart,  a7idthc  hills  be  re77ioved; 
but  77iy  ki7id7iess  shall  7iot  depart  fro77i  thee.'  Bei7ig  i7i  the 
agonies  of  death,  he  said,  ''Sight  is  go7ie,  speech  a7id  heari7tg  a7'e 
departi7ig,feeli7ig  is  al77iost  go7ie,  but  the  lovingki7id7icss  of  God 
will  7iever  depart  J  The  Lord  give  21s  such  a  co72fide7ice  i7i  that 
day  that  we  77iay  die  glorying  i7i  the   prese7'vatio7i   of  our 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  103 

Redeemer P  To  this  end  let  us  live  in  the  like  assurance.  It 
is  certain  that  God  can  never  leave  those  who  put  their  trust  in 
him,  and  it  becomes  us  to  be  certain  of  this  certainty.  The 
security  of  the  saints  is  grounded,  not  upon  their  own  faithful- 
ness, but  upon  the  faithfulness  of  him  to  whose  keeping  they 
have  committed  their  souls.  If  the  Lord  can  depart  from  his 
people  they  will  assuredly  depart  from  him  and  perish  ;  their 
comfort  is  that  he  has  said  in  his  covenant,  "  I  will  put  my  fear 
in  their  hearts,  and  they  shall  not  depart  from  me."  Our  soul 
may  live  and  die  on  this  one  sure  promise. 

THE  PLAISTER  AND  THE  HAND, 

"  The  gospel  is  a  sovereigji  plaister^  hit  Christ's  owjt  ha7td 
must  make  it  stick"  How  true  is  this !  The  wounded  heart 
cannot  by  its  own  unaided  power  avail  itself  of  the  promise 
though  it  be  evidently  adapted  to  its  need.  Instead  of  grasping 
consolation,  the  soul  refuses  to  be  comforted.  Nor  can  the  most 
loving  of  ministers  apply  the  balm  ;  awakened  consciences  are 
usually  more  cunning  at  putting  from  them  the  reasons  for  hope 
than  we  are  in  applying  them.  They  think  us  flatterers  when 
we  bring  them  cheering  news.  It  will  even  happen  that  when 
a  gracious  word  seems  to  strike  them  and  to  stick  upon  their 
minds,  they  will  with  a  cruel  diligence  and  suicidal  resolution 
tear  it  off  lest  it  should  work  their  cure. 

Abundant  facts  prove  that  according  to  our  author's  state- 
ment— 

"  When  wounded  sore  the  stricken  soul. 
Lies  bleeding  and  unbound, 
One  only  hand,  a  pierced  hand, 
Can  salve  the  sinner's  wound." 

Therefore,  O  Lord,  doth  my  soul  love  thee  because  thou  didst 
not  only  provide  a  salvation  for  me,  but  thou  didst  also  apply  it 
to  me  ;  and  at  this  hour  thou  dost  not  only  lay  up  comfort  in 
store  for  me,  but  thou  dost  actually  cheer  and  sustain  my  spirit. 


104  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

Thou  art  both  Physician  and  physic,  Comforter  and  comfort, 
yea,  thou  art  all  in  all. 

BONES  STEONGEE  FOE  HAVING  BEEN  BEOKEN. 

"  Our  reco7idliation  with  God  is  like  the  soldering  of  a  vessel, 
'which  is  henceforth  strongest  in  the  crack;  or  as  a  leg  broken^  if 
well  set,  it  is  the  stronger  :  so  are  we  upon  firmer  terms  than  we 
were  in  innoce7icyj  there  was  before  the  fall  a  possibility  of  being 
at  odds  with  God,  which  is  now  taken  awayP  This  is  a  gracious 
fact.  Under  the  covenant  of  works  it  would  have  been  always 
possible  for  obedience  to  fail,  and  then  the  reward  would  have 
been  forfeited  ;  but  now,  under  the  new  covenant,  our  Lord  Jesus 
has  settled  and  fixed  all  that  was  contingent  in  it  by  perfecting 
his  part  of  the  agreement,  and  therefore  all  the  rest  stands  sure, 
and  all  believers  must  receive  covenanted  mercies.  Adam 
might  have  fallen,  and  we  in  him,  even  had  he  stood  for  a 
thousand  years.  The  second  Adam  has  ended  his  probation  both 
for  himself  and  all  his  seed,  and  now  nothing  can  intervene  to 
deprive  his  people  of  the  earned  and  purchased  inheritance. 
Innocence  seemed  sure,  but  perfection  is  surer.  It  is  something 
not  to  have  broken  the  law  ;  it  is  far  more  to  have  fulfilled  it 
and  honoured  it,  so  as  to  be  able  to  say  as  our  Lord  has  said, 
"  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do." 

Fitly  and  justly  did  Watts  say  : 

*'  He  raised  me  from  the  deeps  of  sin, 
The  gates  of  gaping  hell, 
And  fix'd  my  standing  more  secure 
Than  'twas  before  I  fell." 

My  soul,  be  thou  doubly  diligent  to  magnify  thy  Saviour's 
name.  If  the  bones  which  God  has  broken  shall  rejoice,  much 
more  the  bones  which  he  has  set.  If  he  rejoices  more  over 
the  lost  sheep  which  he  has  found  than  over  that  which  never 
went  astray,  count  thyself  the  happiest  and  most  indebted  of 
beings  to  be  thus  prized  by  thy  gracious  God. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  105 

DIRTY  COENESS. 

^^  Skittish  cor?ters  are  not  see7i  in  the  dark.  Things  are 
naught  that  cannot  brook  a7i  open  investigation^  Lord,  let  me 
have  a  religion  which  will  bear  the  light  of  day,  the  light  of  self- 
examination,  the  light  of  the  throne  of  judgment.  If  I  hide  my 
sin,  how  can  I  prosper?  If  I  cannot  bear  to  be  judged  of  men, 
how  shall  I  endure  to  be  judged  at  thy  appearing? 

THE  CLUCKING  HEN. 

"  As  a  hen  when  she  hath  found  a  worjn,  or  a  barleycorn, 
clucks  for  her  chickejis,  that  they  may  come  and  partake  of  it 
with  her  J  so  a  man  acquainted  with  Christ,  who  hath  tasted  that 
the  Lord  is  gracious,  he  cajmot  hold,  he  will  be  calling  tipon  his 
frie7tds  and  relations  to  coine  and  share  with  him  of  the  sauie 
grace"  It  is  so  much  an  instinct  with  real  Christians  to  do  this, 
that  those  who  do  not  so  may  well  question  their  own  sincerity. 
Common  humanity  leads  a  man  to  inform  his  fellow  of  that 
which  will  benefit  him,  and  how  can  he  be  a  gracious  man  who 
is  not  even  commonly  humane  ?  In  certain  crafts  and  trades 
there  are  selfish  reasons  for  keeping  their  knowledge  a  secret, 
but  nothing  of  this  kind  can  appertain  to  the  profession  of  god- 
liness. Having  found  this  honey,  so  abundant  and  so  free  to 
all  comers,  nature  itself  bids  us  call  our  brethren  to  see  our 
treasure,  and  urge  them  to  partake  in  its  sweetness. 

Hasten,  reader,  to  call  in  thy  friends  and  neighbours  to 
rejoice  with  thee  if  thou  hast  indeed  found  the  Lord  Jesus. 

THE  ECHO. 

"  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  tis.  Love  is  like  an  echo, 
it  rettirneth  what  it  receiveth  :  there  is  no  echo  till  the  sotnid  is 
heard.  Our  love  to  God  is  a  reflex,  a  reverberation,  or  a  casting 
back  of  God^s  beam  and  flame  upo?t  himself  The  cold  wall 
sendeth  back  no  reflex  of  heat  till  the  sun  shines  upott  it^  and 


106  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

warms  it  first;  so  neither  do  we  love  God  till  our  soul  is  first 
filled  with  a  sense  of  his  love"  Hence  the  impossibility  of 
producing  love  while  we  are  under  a  legal  spirit ;  it  will  not 
come  to  order,  it  will  only  rise  to  the  bidding  of  its  like.  Love 
alone  begets  love.  Purchase  price  for  it  there  is  none  ;  the 
bribe  would  be  scorned. 

Love  is  not  the  result  of  effort  on  our  part.  As  the  fountain 
rises  freely  in  the  valley,  pouring  forth  its  crystal  flood  with 
spontaneous  eagerness,  so  doth  love  sparkle  and  flash  forth  in 
the  soul.  Secret  reservoirs,  far  up  in  the  mountains,  supply  the 
water-springs ;  and  eternal  deeps  of  boundless  love  in  the  ever- 
lasting hills  supply  the  love-springs  of  the  believer's  soul.  Is 
it  not  written,  "  All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  thee  "  ? 

O  my  heart,  take  care  that  thou  answer  to  the  Lord  like  an 
echo  !  When  he  saith,  "  My  love,"  do  thou  answer  with  the 
selfsame  title.  Be  as  the  rocks  which  glow  beneath  the  heat  of 
the  sun,  and  give  forth  warmth  themselves.  Love  as  long  as 
thou  livest,  for  love  is  the  cream  of  life,  and  all  of  it  is  due  to 
thy  Lord. 

COURTIEKS'  PRIVILEGES. 

"//  would  be  a  great  favour  if  a  kijtg  should  give  leave  to 
one  of  his  meanest  subjects  to  have  the  key  of  his  privy  chamber, 
to  come  to  him  and  visit  him,  and  be  familiar  with  him  when 
he  pleaseth'  How  would  such  a  favour  be  talked  of  hi  the 
world!"  Yet  this  is  but  a  faint  image  of  what  the  believer  is 
admitted  to.  He  may  come  not  merely  to  the  palace  of  mercy, 
and  the  throne  of  grace,  but  to  the  very  heart  of  God.  Confi- 
dences such  as  ours  surpass  all  the  familiarities  of  friendship, 
and  yet  they  are  permitted,  nay  commanded,  between  the  All- 
glorious  Lord  and  our  poor  sinful  selves.  We  may  well  copy 
the  example  of  David  when  he  went  in  and  sat  before  the  Lord, 
and  said,  "  Who  am  I,  O  Lord  God,  and  what  is  my  house  ? 
And  is  this  the  manner  of  man,  O  Lord  God  ? ''  The  intimate 
intercourse  between  the  glorious  sovereign  of  the  Canticles  and 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  107 

his  sunburnt  bride  is  an  inspired  symbol  of  the  near  and  dear 
communion  between  Christ  and  his  people.  What  can  be  more 
honouring  to  the  soul,  and  what  can  more  wonderfully  prove  the 
boundless  condescension  of  the  Lord-f*  He  stoops  like  a  God  ! 
There  is  as  much  of  Deity  in  the  favour  which  he  displays  to 
the  undeserving  as  in  the  matchless  splendours  of  his  celestial 
courts.  Happy  are  the  people  who  have  such  a  God ;  shall 
they  not  accept  with  rapture  the  goodness  which  he  sets 
before  them  so  benignly  ? 

O  my  most  tender  God  and  Father,  I  can  never  fully  estimate 
the  stoop  of  thy  majesty  in  deigning  to  love  me,  nor  the 
greatness  of  thy  generosity  in  inviting  me  to  have  fellowship 
with  thee.  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  grace  to  value  such  priceless 
goodness,  and  every  day  to  live  in  habitual  fellowship  with  thee. 
Since  thou  makest  me  free  of  thy  courts,  teach  me  how  to  be  a 
resident  courtier,  going  no  more  out  for  ever. 

WATER  POURED  INTO  A  PUMP. 

^^  Love  must  be  paid  in  kind.  As  water  is  cast  into  a  pump, 
wheji  the  springs  lie  low,  to  bring  tip  more  water,  so  God  sheddeth 
abroad  his  love  i7ito  our  hearts,  that  our  love  may  rise  up  to  hi7?i 
again  by  way  of  gratitude  aiid  reco??ipense"  How  idle  is  it, 
then,  to  hope  to  chide  ourselves  into  loving  God !  The  price  of 
love  is  love ;  the  origin  of  it  is  not  found  in  law  or  in  a  sense  of 
duty,  but  in  love,  or  a  return  of  gratitude.  When  the  sun  of 
eternal  love  melts  the  glaciers  of  the  soul,  then  the  rivers  of 
affection  flow  ;  but  if  the  rocks  of  ice  could  all  be  broken  to 
shivers  with  hammers,  not  a  drop  of  affection  would  stream 
forth.  Only  a  sense  of  divine  love  will  ever  create  love  to  God 
in  the  heart. 

How  vain  also  is  the  attempt  to  recompense  the  mercy  of  God 
by  mechanical  acts  of  rehgion  or  works  of  legal  service  !  "  Love 
must  be  paid  in  kind."  No  other  coin  is  current  in  love's 
empire  but  that  which  bears  her  own  image  and  superscription. 


108  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

Do  what  we  will,  even  to  martyrdom,  if  we  have  not  love,  it 
profiteth  us  nothing.  In  this  case  it  is  specially  true, "  If  a  man 
should  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love,  it  would 
utterly  be  contemned." 

Come,  my  heart,  does  thy  love  run  dry?  Then  pray  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  shed  abroad  the  love  of  God  within  thee.  Pour  this 
living  water  into  thy  dry  pump,  and  thou  wilt  soon  pour  forth  a 
plentiful  stream. 

THE  FELLOW-COTTNTRYMAN. 

'^A  viait  who  is  travelling  ijt  foreign  lands  is  glad  to  meet 
with  his  own  coimtrymenP  This  we  know  by  experience. 
Sweet  is  the  music  of  the  English  tongue  when  heard  amid 
the  clatter  of  foreign  speech.  We  feel  our  heart  warmed  at  the 
sight  of  a  costume  which  we  can  recognise  as  covering  a  true 
Briton.  Such  are  the  feelings  of  a  Christian  when  he  falls  in 
with  a  true  believer,  and  by  his  speech  and  conduct  knows  him 
to  be  a  citizen  of  heaven.  He  detects  him  at  once  as  being,  like 
himself,  "a  stranger  in  the  land ;"  he  seeks  him  out  and  cultivates 
his  company,  and  in  that  company  he  finds  a  solace  for  his  loneli- 
ness among  the  aliens  around  him.  Those  who  dwell  in  warm- 
hearted churches,  surrounded  by  Christian  society,  little  know 
the  value  of  a  single  godly  friend  to  those  who  dwell  among 
worldhngs.  To  such,  a  man  of  God  is  more  precious  than  the 
gold  of  Ophir.  Think  for  a  moment :  if  you  had  been  con- 
demned to  dwell  in  a  lions'  den,  what  a  relief  it  would  have  been 
to  find  a  Daniel  sitting  among  the  ferocious  creatures !  Such 
is  the  consolation  which  a  single  holy  companion  may  yield  to 
a  lonely  soul  compelled  to  sojourn  among  those  who  know  not 
God. 

Lord,  make  me  one  whom  thy  saints  may  be  glad  to  meet ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  when  I  pine  because  I  am  exiled  from 
my  heavenly  home,  permit  me  to  hear  the  voice  of  a  fellow- 
countryman,  that  I  may  be  of  good  cheer. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  109 

WAITING  FOR  THE  KEY  OF  THE  HOUSE. 

"  He  that  made  the  sotil  hath  most  right  to  dwell  in  it;  it  is 
a  most  ctirioiis  house,  of  God's  ow7i  framing,  and  there  ought  he 
to  dwell.  But  he  will  not  enter  by  force  and  violence,  but  by 
conse7it;  he  expecteth  love  to  give  up  the  keys,  (Rev.  iii.  20) — ^Be- 
hold, I  stand  at  the  door,  a?id  hiock  :  if  ajiy  77ian  hear  my  voice, 
and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  a?id  will  snp  with  him  J 
Why  should  Christ  stand  at  the  door  and  hiock,  and  ask  leave  to 
e7tter  i7ito  his  ow7i  house  ?  He  hath  right  enough  to  enter,  only 
he  waiteth  till  we  ope7i  to  hi77i"  Here  our  author  admirably 
expresses  the  Lord's  respect  to  the  nature  and  constitution 
which  he  has  impressed  upon  man.  Inanimate  matter  obeys 
the  divine  law  by  force,  but  a  human  being  can  only  obey  God 
with  his  will,  since  unwiUing  obedience  would  be  no  obedience 
at  all.  There  can  be  no  such  thing  as  unwilling  love,  unwilling 
trust,  or  unwilling  holiness.  Voluntariness  enters  into  the 
essence  of  a  moral  act.  Having,  therefore,  so  fashioned  man, 
the  Lord  doth  not  forget  this  fact,  but  ever  treats  man  as  a  free 
agent.  The  divine  compulsions  of  his  grace  are  only  such  as 
are  congruous  with  a  willing  and  nilling  creature.  Man  is 
sweetly  led  to  repentance  and  faith,  and  by  mighty  arguments 
drawn  to  trust  and  love  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  do  not  surrender 
our  hearts  to  Jesus  otherwise  than  with  our  own  full  and  free 
consent.  We  are  right  glad  to  become  his  disciples,  and  to  be 
taught  the  way  of  service.  He  does  not  break  in  like  a  burglar, 
but  he  enters  the  castle  of  the  soul  like  a  conqueror  to  whom 
the  governor  in  all  lovvliness  hands  the  keys. 

My  heart,  it  is  hard  for  a  theologian  to  explain  how  grace 
overcomes  the  will,  and  yet  never  violates  it,  and  yet  thou  dost 
understand  it  perfectly  by  experience.  Christ's  love  wooed  thee 
and  won  thee,  and  led  thee  captive,  and  yet  never  was  a  will 
more  free  than  thine  when  thou  wast  altogether  bound  to  thy 
Beloved. 


110  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  PRINCELY  SUBSTITUTE. 

"  7/"  «2  prince,  passing  by  an  execution,  sJwitld  take  the  male- 
factor's chains,  and  suffer  in  his  stead,  this  woitld  be  a  wojiderfnl 
instance  i^ideed"  The  deed  would  ring  through  all  history,  and 
be  quoted  as  an  amazing  instance  of  heroic  pity  ;  and  well 
deserved  would  be  all  the  words  of  praise  and  sonnets  of  ad- 
miration which  would  record  and  eulogize  it.  Yet  our  Lord 
Jesus  did  this  and  infinitely  more  for  those  who  were  not 
merely  malefactors  but  enemies  to  his  own  throne  and  person. 
This  is  a  wonder  of  wonders  !  But,  alas,  it  meets  with  small 
praise.  The  most  of  men  around  us  have  heard  of  it  and 
treated  it  as  an  idle  tale,  and  multitudes  more  regard  it  as  a 
pious  legend,  worthy  to  be  repeated  as  a  venerable  fable,  and 
then  forgotten  as  an  unpractical  myth.  Even  those  who 
know,  believe,  and  admire,  are  yet  cold  in  their  emotions  with 
regard  to  the  story  of  the  cross.  Herein  is  love  which  ought 
to  set  our  hearts  on  fire,  and  yet  we  scarcely  maintain  a 
smouldering  spark  of  enthusiasm.  Lord  Jesus,  be  more  real  to 
our  apprehensions,  and  so  be  more  completely  the  Master  of 
our  affections. 

TRYING  THE  KEYS. 

"  As  one  that  would  gladly  ope7i  a  door,  trieth  hey  after  key 
till  he  hath  tried  every  key  in  the  bunch,  so  doth  God  try  one 
method  after  another  to  work  7ip07i  ma7is  hearts  His  per- 
severing grace  will  not  be  baffled.  He  frequently  begins  with 
the  silver  key  of  a  mother's  tearful  prayers  and  a  father's  tender 
counsels.  In  turn,  he  uses  the  church-keys  of  his  ordinances 
and  his  ministers,  and  these  are  often  found  to  move  the  bolt ; 
but  if  they  fail,  he  thrusts  in  the  iron  key  of  trouble  and  affliction 
which  has  been  known  to  succeed  after  all  others  have  failed. 
He  has,  however,  a  golden  master-key,  which  excels  all  others  : 
it  is  the  operation  of  his  own  most  gracious  Spirit  by  which 
entrance  is  effected  into  hearts  which  seemed  shut  up  for  ever. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  Ill 

Wonderful  is  the  patience  and  long-suffering  of  the  Lord,  or 
he  would  long  since  have  left  hardened  and  careless  sinners 
to  themselves.  He  is  importunate,  whether  we  are  so  or  not.  We 
take  pains  to  resist  his  heavenly  grace,  but  he  abideth  faithful 
to  his  own  name  of  love. 

O  Lord,  we  bless  thee  that  thou  hast  opened  our  hearts,  and 
we  pray  thee  now  that  thou  hast  entered,  abide  in  our  souls  for 
ever,  as  a  king  in  his  own  palace-halls  ! 

LIFE  PROVED  BY  GROWTH. 

"  Where  there  is  life  there  will  be  growth,  and  if  grace  be  triie^ 
it  will  surely  increase.  A  paijited flower  keepeth  always  at  the 
same  pitch  and  stature;  the  artist  may  bestow  beauty  upon  it^ 
but  he  caiinot  bestow  life.  A  painted  child  will  be  as  little  ten 
years  hence  as  it  is  nozvP  What  need  there  is  to  observe  the 
wide  distinction  between  the  picture  and  the  living  thing  !  Of 
painted  likenesses  of  Christians  we  have  more  than  enough  ; 
nor  is  the  manufacture  of  portraits  a  difficult  operation  :  what 
we  want  is  the  real  thing  and  not  the  artistic  imitation.  Manton 
saith  well  that  growth  is  the  test.  Many  professors  must  be  for 
ever  beginning  again  :  they  stick  where  they  were,  or  thought  they 
were.  They  were  anxious  about  their  souls,  and  are  so  still. 
They  were  trying  and  wishing,  and  with  tries  and  wishes  they 
are  resting  contented.  If  they  were  saved  and  knew  it,  they 
would  find  themselves  making  some  measure  of  advance  :  not 
always  advancing  at  the  same  rate,  for  all  life  is  not  equally  rapid 
in  its  growth,  but  still  progressing  somewhat,  forgetting  the 
things  behind,  and  reaching  forth  to  that  which  is  beyond. 

Reader,  how  do  you  stand  under  this  test  ?  Come,  search 
yourself,  and  see  whether  you  are  adding  to  your  faith,  courage ; 
and  to  courage,  brotherly  kindness  ;  and  to  brotherly  kindness, 
love.  If  there  be  no  growth,  it  may  be,  nay,  surely  it  must  be, 
that  you  are  not  a  child  born  into  the  family  of  God,  but  a 
pretty  picture,  which  may  adorn  a  room,  but   which   cannot 


112r  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

perform  any  of  the  actions  of  life.  It  is  a  sad  thing  if  such  be 
your  case,  for  heaven  is  not  a  portrait-gallery  ;  it  is  the  home  of 
loving,  living  souls,  whom  grace  has  quickened  with  eternal  life. 

THE  OPENED  TKEASTJEY  AND  THE  BAGS. 

^^  If  a  mighty  king  sho7ild  open  his  h^eastire,  aiid  bid  7nen  come 
and  brifig  their  bags,  and  take  as  mnch  as  they  wotdd;  do  you 
think  they  zuould  neglect  this  occasion  of  gai?i?  Surely  710; 
they  would  run  and  fetch  bag  after  bag,  and  fiever  cease.  Thus 
doth  the  Lord  act  towards  us  in  the  cove?ia?it  of  grace"  He 
makes  over  all  its  fulness  to  his  people,  and  saith,  "  All  are 
yours."  We  are  not  straitened  in  him.  The  bags  will  come 
to  an  end  long  before  the  treasure  is  exhausted.  Let  us  come, 
then,  to  the  throne  of  grace  with  enlarged  desires  and  widened 
expectations  :  the  Lord  does  not  stint  us,  why  should  we  put 
ourselves  upon  short  commons  ?  "  He  saith,  eat  and  drink,  yea, 
drink  abundantly,  O  beloved."  Why,  then,  do  we  sit  at  the 
table  and  starve,  or  rise  from  it  hungry  ?  Let  us  by  faith  suck 
of  the  abundance  of  the  sea  of  grace,  and  partake  largely  of 
the  hid  treasure  which  the  Lord  has  laid  up  for  us. 

THE  PHYSICIAN  IN  THE  GARDEN. 

"Plutarch,  in  his  treatise  on  growth  in  7noral  virtue,  wherein 
are  majiy  thiiigs  applicable  to  growth  in  grace,  saith  that 
a  7nan  that  hath  7tiadc  some  progress  i7i  virtue  is  like  a 
physiciait,  who,  whe7i  he  co7nes  into  a  gardc7i,  doth  7iot  consider 
flowers  for  their  beauty,  as  galla7its  do,  but  for  their  use  and 
virttie  in  7nedici7ie.  So  th^  grow?i  believer  doth  not  consider 
speech  for  its  fineness,  but  fitness  a7td  seaso7table7iess  for  prese7it 
7iseP  The  same  holdeth  good  also  concerning  growth  in  grace  ; 
the  more  we  grow  the  more  we  regard  the  spiritual  part  of  the 
word,  and  such  Scriptures  and  truths  as  are  of  practical  use  and 
personal  concern.  Hence  it  is  that  experienced  believers  can- 
not put  up  with  the  mere  ornaments  of  speech  which  yield  so 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  113 

much  satisfaction  to  youthful  minds.  They  want  soHd,  practical, 
gospel  doctrine,  and  they  must  have  it.  Their  craving  is  for  herbs 
for  their  heahng,  and  not  for  bouquets  for  their  button-hole. 
My  heart,  go  thou  with  the  wise  men,  and  learn  from  them  what 
is  the  way  of  wisdom. 


BARKING  DOGS  CATCH  NO  GAME. 

"  Hard  speeches  have  a7i  evil  influoice  in  controversy,  and  do 
exasperate  rather  than  convince.  The  dog  that  followeth  the 
gaine  with  barking  and  bawling  loseth  the  prey;  and  there  is 
not  a  more  likely  way  to  under7nine  the  truth  tha7i  an  unseemly 
defence  of  it.  Satan  is  mightily  gratified,  if  men  had  eyes  to  see 
it,  with  the  ill  managing  of  Gods  cause:'  This  lesson  is  a  needful 
one.  Zealots  are  apt  to  mistake  hard  words  for  arguments.  The 
more  in  earnest  we  are,  the  more  are  we  tempted  to  speak 
bitterly,  and  to  overlook  the  better  side  of  our  opponents'  cause. 
Many  who  think  with  us  applaud  us  most  for  those  very  utter- 
ances which  deserve  the  censure  of  the  wise  ;  and  this  foolish 
commendation  is  apt  to  ^g<g  us  on  in  the  same  unprofitable 
direction.  They  would  be  more  judicious  if,  while  approving 
our  zeal,  they  hinted  that  we  might  use  a  sweeter  method  and 
be  none  the  less  strong. 

We  hope  as  we  grow  older  to  be  able  to  hunt  more  quietly, 
with  surer  scent  but  with  less  barking.  Certainly,  as  we  grow 
in  grace  we  shall  more  carefully  distinguish  between  holy  ardour 
which  is  kindled  by  the  Spirit,  and  carnal  heat,  which  is  the 
wild-fire  of  unrenewed  nature.  God  grant  that  as  we  grow  pru- 
dent we  may  not  also  become  lukewarm  ;  else  we  may  gain  one 
way  and  lose  another.  We  are  poor  creatures,  for  when  we 
try  to  avoid  an  evil  we  generally  swing  like  a  pendulum  to  the 
opposite  quarter,  and  commit  another  folly.  The  middle  point, 
the  golden  mean  of  virtue,  we  do  not  readily  reach. 


114  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

TAKEN  IN  THE  BRIARS. 

"  Most  that  are  acquauited  with  God  are  taken  zn  the  briars, 
yesus  Christ  in  the  days  of  his  flesh  had  never  heard  of  7na7iy,  if 
their  necessities  had  not  brought  them  to  himP  Free  grace  is  a 
harbour  into  which  few  ships  ever  run  except  through  stress  of 
weather.  "  Then  they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble":  that 
is  to  say,  when  they  are  well-nigh  wrecked  and  are  altogether  at 
their  wits'  end.  Till  the  end  of  the  creature  is  reached,  men 
will  not  seek  to  their  Creator,  even  as  the  prodigal  never  thought 
of  home  till  he  had  spent  all,  and  there  was  a  mighty  famine 
in  the  land.  Our  author  refers  to  Manasseh  who  was  taken 
among  the  thorns,  and  surely  he  was  an  instructive  type  of 
the  great  majority  of  those  who  are  saved  from  sin. 

Lord,  be  pleased  of  thy  great  mercy  to  overrule  the  vast 
amount  of  poverty  and  suffering  which  is  now  in  this  land,  that 
men  may  be  driven  to  thee  thereby.  Let  thy  black  dogs  fetch 
home  thy  wandering  sheep.  Let  thy  fierce,  breaking  tempests 
compel  full  many  a  wanton  voyager  to  reef  the  sails  of  pleasur- 
able sin,  and  steer  for  the  haven  of  forgiving  love. 

CHESSBOARD. 

"  Be  watchful ;  the  world  is  the  deviVs  chess-board;  yotc  can 
hardly  move  backward  or  forward,  but  he  is  ready  to  attack 
you  by  some  temptatioji.'"  Those  who  play  at  the  game  of  chess 
know  that  great  circumspection  is  needed.  Your  opponent  is 
working  towards  a  design  of  which  you  know  nothing,  and  while 
you  imagine  that  you  are  doing  exceedingly  well  he  is  entrap- 
ping you.  The  game  of  life,  as  against  Satan,  is  one  in  which  his 
age, his  long  practice,  his  superior  skill,  and  his  unscrupulousness 
give  him  an  immense  advantage  over  our  poor  self-conceited 
folly.  Lord,  help  us,  lest  we  lose  our  souls  while  we  are  dream- 
ing of  happiness.  Thou  knowest  our  adversary,  be  pleased  to 
deliver  us  out  of  his  hand. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  Il5 

THE  DUMB  BEGGAR. 

"A  dumb  beggar  gets  an  alms  at  Chris  fs  gate  if  he  can  but 
make  signs,  when  his  tongue  carinot  plead  for  hitnr  This  is  a 
cheering  sentence  for  the  many  poor  souls  who  feel  that  they 
cannot  find  words  wherewith  to  pray.  Sit  down  at  mercy's 
gate,  and  show  your  sores,  and  groan,  and  sigh.  Let  your  rags 
ask  for  raiment,  and  your  hunger  plead  for  bread.  Wounds  are 
eloquent  orators  with  a  tender-hearted  surgeon ;  expose  your 
wounds  to  Jesus  and  he  will  bind  them  up.  Misery  is  mercy's 
best  constraint.  When  the  psalmist  could  not  pray  a  set  prayer, 
he  says,  "I  opened  my  mouth  and  panted."  He  declares  in 
another  place  that  he  panted  like  a  thirsty  hart  :  there  is 
nothing  articulate  in  panting,  and  yet  no  one  ever  misunderstood 
the  meaning  of  the  act.  Come,  then,  ye  dumb  beggars,  and  learn 
the  language  of  signs.  Come  and  pant,  come  and  spread  your 
misery  before  the  eyes  of  mercy,  and  doubt  not  that  he  who 
knows  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  will  readily  understand  you  and 
speedily  grant  your  desires. 

CALVIN  AND  HIS  LORD. 

''^''What  if  my  master  should  cojne  and  find  fjie  idlef  said 
Calvin  to  his  friends,  who  demanded  of  hint  why  he  wasted  his 
body  iji  such  constant  labours.  Few  are  like-minded  so  as  to 
put  this  question  to  their  souls,  ^  Am  I  as  I  would  wish  to  be 
shoidd  Christ  come .?'  "  This  question  may  serve  as  a  test  as  to 
our  manner  of  life  : — Am  I  in  such  a  state  as  I  would  wish  to  be 
in  should  my  Lord  appear.^  If  we  can  answer  this  to  our 
comfort,  all  is  well :  but  if  not,  by  all  means  let  us  mend  matters, 
get  out  of  our  deshabille  and  stand  ready  to  meet  our  coming 
Lord.  Bravely  did  Calvin  fight  on  under  a  heap  of  disorders, 
and  if  we  would  be  approved  at  the  last  we  must  imitate  him  in 
a  constant  diligence,  born  of  "  seeing  him  who  is  invisible." 

Lord,  make  me  to  hear  thy  footfall  evermore,  and  cause  me  so 
to  live  as  though  I  heard  thee  at  the  door. 


116  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

INVENTION  OF  FEESH  WEAPONS. 

"As  in  zvar,  as  the  arts  of  battery  and metliods  of  destritctio7t 
do  i?icrease,  so  also  doth  skill  in  fortificatioii ;  so  in  the  ChtircJiy 
God  still  besto'wcth  gifts  for  the  further  explication  of  truth  r 
We  are  glad  to  see  our  author  writing  so  cheerily,  for  at  this 
present  it  seems  to  us  that  our  adversaries  have  been  far  more 
acute  in  assailing  the  gospel  than  the  church  in  defending  it. 
Still  on  God's  side  it  is  true  that  though  his  ministers  may  not 
be  as  faithful  as  they  should  be,  yet  he  raises  up  one  and  another 
to  stand  as  bulwarks  for  the  truth,  and  so,  after  all,  the  grand  old 
cause  is  not  quite  overborne.  To  the  end  of  the  campaign  it 
will  be  so,  and  there  is  no  real  cause  for  despair,  or  even  for 
despondency.  The  fortress  of  the  gospel  is  still  unconquered. 
Her  motto  is  invicta.  The  gospel  has  survived  the  brutal 
ignorance  of  many  ages,  and  if  now  the  world  has  changed 
its  fashions  and  professes  itself  to  be  wise,  the  same  eternal 
system  of  truth  will  continue  to  baffle  its  designs.  The  assaults 
of  sceptics  are  a  gain  to  believers,  for  they  produce  a  clearing 
and  opening  up  of  the  truth.  Opposition  directs  attention  to 
neglected  doctrines,  and  heresy  calls  for  orthodox  replies,  and 
so  our  defences  become  stronger  as  our  enemies  become  more 
furious.      Happy  citizens,  to  be  thus  shielded  from  the  foe. 

HOMEWARD  BOUND. 

''  A  poor  beast  that  is  going  homeivard goeth  cheerfnlly."  See 
how  the  horse  pricks  up  his  ears  and  quickens  his  pace  when 
you  turn  his  head  to  his  stable.  The  proverb  saith  that  even 
the  dull  ass  doth  the  same.  Much  more  then  should  intelligent 
Christian  men  feel  the  attractions  of  their  heavenly  home. 
Courage,  brothers  and  sisters;  we,  too,  are  homeward  bound. 
Every  hour  brings  us  nearer  to  the  many  mansions.  We  are 
not  going  from  home,  or  we  might  hang  our  heads  :  our  way 
is  towards  the  Father's  house  on  high,  therefore  let  us  rejoice  at 
every  step  we  take. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  117 

MARTHA  COMPLAINING  OF  MAEY. 

"  Si.  Bernard  hath  a  pretty  note  of  Martha's  complainmg  of 
Mary,  that  she  sat  at  fesits'  feet,  while  herself  was  e7nployed  in 
all  the  business  of  the  family.  *  Oh^  saith  St.  Bernard.,  '  that  is 
a  happy  family  where  Martha  complains  of  Mary  / '  Oh,  how 
few  fa7mlies  do  thtcs  complain  /  The  world  eats  tip  otir  time, 
our  care,  and  our  thoughts ,  and  God  hath  but  a  little  share,  little 
worship,  little  reverence.^''  For  the  most  part  in  our  households 
Mary  might  well  complain  of  Martha,  for  family  cares  still 
cumber  many  and  keep  them  away  from  Jesus'  feet.  Very 
seldom  are  Christians  nowadays  too  much  in  the  closet,  too 
much  with  their  Bibles,  too  much  at  prayer-meetings.  Alas,  the 
most  of  them  are  all  hack  for  the  world,  the  shop,  or  the 
evening  party.  Martha,  Martha,  we  may  well  complain  to  the 
Master  of  thee,  for  thou  leavest  him  alone,  and  forsakest 
his  teaching,  and  all  for  this  poor,  cumbering  world ! 

Lord,  help  us  to  balance  our  duties,  and  thus  may  we  serve 
thee  after  the  best  manner,  through  thy  grace. 

THE  COMET  AND  THE  SUN. 

"  We  gaze  more  on  a  comet  than  on  the  sun^  This  is  the 
reason  why  erratic  teachers  are  for  a  while  popular,  and  attract 
public  attention.  It  is  given  out  that  they  are  "  some  great 
one,"  and  all  the  town  is  staring  with  open  mouth.  The  nine 
days'  wonder  is  every  day's  talk.  The  new  teaching  is  some- 
thing marvellous,  and  the  old  creed  is  to  be  driven  out  of  the 
land.  New  lights  are  to  eclipse  the  old;  at  least,  so  we  are 
told.  Let  us  wait  a  while,  however,  and  the  comet  will  have 
vanished,  and  the  half-forgotten  fixed  stars  will  be  seen  to  be 
shining  on  with  unfading  splendour. 

May  the  Lord  give  us  such  fixed  and  established  judgments 
that  no  novelties  of  doctrine  may  ever  dazzle  us.  Children  are 
fond  of  new  toys ;  let  us  be  men  and  keep  to  the  tried  word  of 
the  Lord. 


118  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

VIOLET  AND  NETTLE. 

^^  Laden  boughs  ha7i^  low.  The  nettle  mounieth  above  its 
fellow  weeds,  but  the  violet  lieth  shrouded  under  its  leaves,  and 
is  only  fotmd  out  by  its  own  sce?tt."  Walking  one  day  by  a 
stream  we  were  conscious  of  a  delicious  perfume,  and  only  then 
did  we  perceive  the  little  blue  eyes  which  were  looking  up  to  us 
so  meekly  from  the  ground  on  which  we  stood.  Virtue  is  always 
modest,  and  modesty  is  itself  a  virtue.  He  who  is  discovered 
by  his  real  excellence,  and  not  by  his  egotistical  advertisement 
of  his  own  perfections,  is  a  man  worth  knowing  :  the  other  is  a 
mere  nettle  who  is  sure  to  be  forgotten,  unless  indeed  his 
blustering  pride  should  sting  some  tender  spirit,  and  secure  a 
wretched  kind  of  remembrance. 

0  that  I  may  ever  be  more  gracious  than  I  seem  to  be. 
Never  may  it  be  any  concern  of  mine  to  be  observed  of  men, 
and  yet  let  me  so  live  that  I  need  not  fear  to  be  read  and  known 
of  all. 

THE  SWOLLEN  ARM. 

"  Certainly  a  proud  spirit  is  no  great  spirit,  any  more  than  a 
siuollen  arm  can  be  accounted  to  be  strong.^^  Many  mistakes  are 
made  on  this  matter  both  as  to  men  and  language.  Boasters 
are  by  foolish  persons  reckoned  at  their  declared  value  :  no 
mistake  can  be  greater,  a  proud  spirit  is  of  necessity  small  and 
mean  in  the  judgment  of  truth.  Language  is  thought  to  be 
forcible  because  it  is  hard,  severe,  and  blustering  ;  and  yet  there 
is  little  power  in  such  speaking  except  to  provoke  opposition  and 
furnish  motives  and  weapons  for  the  opposer.  Judge,  then, 
between  swelling  and  strength  :  avoid  the  one  and  prudently 
aim  at  the  other.  True  humility  is  beloved  of  God,  and  he  ever 
comes  to  its  aid. 

1  must  be  less  and  less  in  my  own  esteem  if  I  would  have 
power  with  God  and  prevalence  with  men.  It  seemeth  not  so, 
and  yet  so  it  is.     Lord,  write  the  lesson  on  my  heart. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  IID 

ONLY  A  LINK. 

"  The  first  appeaj-ances  of  eri'or  are  many  times  modest.. 
There  is  a  chain  of  truths j  the  devil  taketh  out  a  link  here  a?id 
a  link  there,  that  all  may  fall  to  pieces."  The  argument  of 
"charity"  is  used  to  screen  those  who  are  robbing  us  of  the  gospel. 
We  are  bidden  to  be  cautious  how  we  condemn  those  who  only 
differ  on  small  points  ;  whereas  the  truths  which  they  would 
take  away  from  us  have  important  bearings  upon  other  truths, 
and  cannot  be  denied  without  a  serious  break-up  of  the  whole 
doctrinal  chain.  Let  us  not  give  up  a  single  link  of  the  divine 
system,  for  if  we  did  so,  we  should  prove  traitors  to  the  whole 
plan  of  revealed  truth. 

In  these  times  the  illustration  given  above  is  exceedingly 
instructive.  Satan  knows  that  we  would  never  consent  to  give 
up  a  wheel  of  the  gospel  chariot,  and  therefore  in  his  craftiness 
he  only  asks  for  the  linch-pins  to  be  handed  over  to  him.  May 
God  grant  wisdom  to  his  servants  that  none  of  them  may  be 
beguiled  by  the  cunning  of  the  adversary.  Long  ages  may  have 
to  rue  the  defalcations  of  this  day,  if  we  sell  the  precious  gospel 
to  its  foes.  Until  the  Lord  shall  come  we  are  put  in  trust  with 
the  gospel :  will  we  be  fraudulent  trustees  ?  Can  we  dare  to 
play  fast  and  loose  with  that  which  concerns  God's  glory,  and 
the  destiny  of  immortal  souls  ? 

THE  LUNGS. 

*'  Some  graces,  like  the  limgs,  are  always  in  tiseP  "  Pray 
without  ceasing  "  ;  "  be  thou  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day 
long";  and  such  like  exhortations  appertain  to  continuous 
duties.  Thus  David  says,  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before 
me";  he  was  always  living  in  the  presence  of  God.  Other 
parts  of  the  human  frame  are  exercised  occasionally,  but  the 
lungs  are  always  at  work,  and,  even  so,  certain  of  the  graces  are 
in  active  motion  in  their  appointed  seasons,  but  faith  never 
ceases  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  it  is  essential  to  spiritual 


120  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

vitality.  Hence  we  ought  never  to  go  where  we  shall  be  out  of 
the  atmosphere  of  heaven.  Lungs  must  have  air,  and  cannot 
endure  a  dense  smoke  or  a  poisonous  gas ;  nor  can  faith  bear 
error,  false  doctrine,  and  evil  conversation.  Since  we  always 
need  the  pure  air  of  heaven,  let  us  not  go  where  it  cannot  be 
found.  Who  in  his  senses  would  desire  to  have  been  in  the 
Black  Hole  of  Calcutta  ?  Who  wishes  to  dwell  where  drunken- 
ness and  loose  living  abound?  How  can  faith  breathe  in  such 
a  suffocating  atmosphere  ? 

Lord,  keep  thou  my  faith  alive,  that  it  may  keep  me  alive, 
and  that  I  may  live  to  thee. 

FRUIT  WITKOTJT  THE  SUN. 

^'  Fruit  that  hath  but  little  sun  can  never  be  ripeP  We  have 
had  practical  proof  of  this,  for  during  the  year  1879,  there 
being  a  scant  measure  of  sunshine,  the  fruit  was  never  properly 
ripened,  and  was  therefore  destitute  of  flavour  and  sweetness. 
Whatever  might  be  its  outward  appearance,  the  berry  was 
insipid  and  altogether  unlike  what  the  sun  would  have  made 
it  had  he  smiled  upon  the  swelling  fruit. 

Thus,  without  communion  with  God,  no  soul  can  develop  its 
graces,  neither  can  those  graces  become  what  they  should  be. 
No  measure  of  care  or  effort  can  make  up  for  the  light  of  the 
Father's  face  ;  neither  can  attendance  upon  means  of  grace  nor 
the  use  of  religious  exercises  supply  the  lack.  Fellowship  with 
God  we  must  have,  or  the  essential  honey  of  love  will  be 
deficient,  the  bloom  of  joy  will  be  wanting,  the  aroma  of  zeal  and 
earnestness  will  be  missed.  We  may  have  the  virtues  by  name, 
and  we  may  exhibit  some  feeble,  insipid  imitation  of  them,  but 
the  secret  savour  and  mystic  richness  of  grace  will  not  be  in  us 
unless  we  abide  in  the  full  light  of  divine  love. 

Lord,  evermore  be  as  the  sun  unto  our  souls,  that  we  may  be 
as  fruit  fully  ripe,  attaining  to  all  the  perfection  and  maturity  of 
which  our  nature  is  capable. 


ILLUSTRATIO^'S  AND   MEDITATIONS.  121 

FIRE!    FIRE! 

"  Whe?i  afire  is  kmdlcd  in  a  city  we  do  not  say  coldly ^ '  Yonder 
is  a  great  fire,  I  pray  God  it  do  no  harm.'  In  iiines  of  public 
defection  we  are  not  to  read  tame  lectures  of  conte7nplative 
divinity,  or  fight  with  ghosts  and  antiquated  errors,  but  to 
oppose  with  all  earnestness  the  growing  evils  of  the  world, 
whatever  it  may  cost  usP  If  men  valued  truth  as  they  do  their 
goods  and  their  houses  they  would  not  regard  error  with  such 
cool  contentment.  The  cant  of  the  present  day  cries,  "  Charity, 
Charity."  As  if  it  were  not  the  truest  charity  to  grow  indignant 
with  that  which  ruins  souls.  It  is  not  uncharitable  to  warn  men 
against  poisonous  adulterations  of  their  food,  or  invasions  of 
their  rights  ;  and  surely  it  cannot  be  more  uncharitable  to  put 
them  upon  their  guard  against  that  which  will  poison  or  rob 
their  souls.  Lukewarmness  of  love  to  truth  is  the  real  evil  to 
be  deprecated  in  these  times.  We  have  new  doctrines  among 
us,  full  of  practical  mischief,  and  against  these  there  is  need  to 
raise  an  earnest  outcry  lest  they  gain  so  great  a  head  that  both 
church  and  state  should  be  set  on  fire. 

Lord,  arouse  thy  watchmen,  and  bid  them  arouse  all  thy 
saints,  for  the  times  are  full  of  danger. 

THE  GLASS  WITHOUT  A  FOOT. 

"  We  derive  all  our  strength  from  Christ.  We  are  like  glasses 
without  feet  J  they  cannot  stand  of  themselves  ;  neither  can 
we:' 

Such  glasses  are  not  ordinarily  used  now,  but  they  were 
common  enough  in  former  times.  A  man  must  hold  the  glass 
in  his  hand,  or  it  would  be  of  no  use  to  him,  for  he  could  not 
set  it  down  on  the  table,  since  it  could  not  stand  alone,  but 
rolled  over,  and  spilt  its  contents.  We  are  something  in  the 
hand  of  Jesus,  but  nothing  out  of  it ;  we  cannot  even  hold  the 
water  of  life  unless  our  Lord  holds  us.  What  poor  creatures 
men  are,  and  yet  they  dare  to  boast  ! 


122  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  STONE  AND  THE  CHIP. 

"  A  great  deal  of  fire  falleth  upon  a  sto?ze  and  it  burneth  not, 
but  a  dry  chip  soo?i  takethfireT  According  to  our  condition  we 
are  affected  by  the  fire  of  the  gospel.  Hearts  of  stone  are  not 
kindled  by  the  most  vehement  preaching  of  the  word,  nor  will 
they  ever  be  till  grace  works  a  change  in  their  nature.  The  same 
sermons  which  are  powerless  with  them  are,  through  divine  grace, 
most  potent  with  souls  prepared  of  the  Lord  to  feel  the  flame. 
The  failures  of  ministers  are  often  traceable  to  the  sinful  state  of 
their  hearers — what  is  a  man  to  do  who  labours  to  kindle  a  fire 
with  stones  ?  Must  he  not  labour  in  vain?  He  may  blow  as 
long  as  he  pleases,  and  burn  his  heart  out  with  fervour,  and  yet 
his  hearers'  hearts  will  not  catch  the  flame ;  and  he  may  even 
die  in  very  anguish  ;  but  so  long  as  the  natural  mind  remains 
what  it  is  he  cannot  effect  his  purpose. 

Lord,  I  thank  thee  not  only  for  the  heavenly  fire  but  for  the 
power  to  be  affected  by  it.  It  is  thy  grace  which  makes  me 
capable  of  grace,  and  unto  thee  be  all  the  praise. 

THE  ANT-HILL. 

''  The  world  is  a  great  theatre,  ajtd  the  spectators  are  God  and 
angels.  I  confess  ijue  lictle  think  of  it;  there  is  a  foolish  levity  in 
otir  minds.  As  to  21s,  the  world  is  like  a  hill  of  ants ;  you  stand 
by,  and  they  rwi  up  and  down,  and  do  7iot  think  of  your 
being  there;  so  the  Lord  stands  by  and  observes  all  our  motions, 
and  we  rim  7ip  and  down  like  busy  ants,  and  do  not  think  of 
Gods  presence  amo7ig  2is.  We  live  in  a  great  hurry  and  clatter 
of  busi?iess,  and  have  but  few  thoitghts  of  God.  The  Psalmist 
gives  a  descriptiojt  of  carjial  me7i  i?i  these  words  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  14)^ 
*  They  have  not  set  thee  before  them^ "  Lord,  let  me  not  be  a 
mere  ant  on  the  world's  hill;  but  as  thou  hast  given  me  an 
understanding,  help  me  to  use  it  upon  thyself,  that  so  I  may 
rise  to  the  true  level  of  an  inteUigent  and  immortal  being. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  123 

How  can  I  disregard  my  God,  my  Father,  my  all  ?  How  can  I 
be  taken  up  with  these  trifles  whilst  thou  art  so  near  me, 
asking  my  love,  and  proving  thy  right  to  it  by  daily  loading  me 
with  benefits  ?  What  a  mere  insect  I  am !  Why  am  I  thus  ? 
Why  should  I  live  like  an  emmet  when  thou  hast  made  me  a 
little  lower  than  an  angel  ?  I  shall  never  rise  to  what  I  ought 
to  be  unless  thou  reveal  thyself  in  me  and  to  me  by  thy  good 
Spirit.  Dehver  me  from  that  foolish  levity  of  which  thy  servant 
speaks,  which  makes  me  fill  my  mind  with  contemptible 
vanities,  and  let  me  seriously  remember  thee,  and  the  day  when 
I  shall  stand  before  thy  judgment-seat. 

WANDERING  SHEEP  NEED  GENTLE  HANDLING. 

"  Though  swi?ie  or  dogs  be  driven  with  viole7tce,yet  poor  stray 
lambs  must  be  brought  home,  as  the  shepherd  brought  home  his 
lost  sheep  '  tipoti  his  shoulders  rejoicing^  Luke  xv.  Many  well- 
meaning  men  may  err;  be  not  too  severe  with  them,  lest  prejudice 
make  them  cbstinate,  ajid  so  from  '  erriiig  brethreji,'  they  become 
heretical^  Sound  advice  this.  It  is  true  that  certain  trouble- 
some heretics  need  to  be  rebuked  sharply  that  they  may  be 
sound  in  the  faith,  but  discretion  is  needed,  and  a  loving  spirit 
to  guide  the  discretion :  the  sheep  must  not  be  driven  as  if  they 
were  swine.  The  tendency  of  stern  orthodoxy  is  to  act  towards  an 
erring  one  as  cruel  fathers  do  when  they  whip  their  boys  without 
mercy,  for  they  drive  ten  devils  in  while  they  think  they  are 
whipping  one  out.  A  doubter  may  be  worried  into  a  heretic 
before  we  are  aware  of  it.  Certain  minds  will  learn  anything 
from  those  they  love,  and  nothing  from  those  who  are  masterful 
with  them.  The  gentleness  of  Christ  is  a  choice  qualification 
for  a  pastor.  Heresies  are  better  kept  out  by  a  full  gospel 
than  driven  out  by  fierce  controversy.  Sheep  may  be  worried 
into  worse  strayings,  but  they  can  be  held  by  their  teeth  most 
securely  if  they  are  led  into  plentiful  pasture.  O  for  the  Holy 
Spirit's  direction  in  dealing  with  weak  and  unstable  minds. 


124  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

DRY  STICKS  KINDLING  THE  GREEN. 

"  Two  dry  sticks  will  set  a  greejt  one  on  fire.  Can  yotc  blame 
the  children  of  God,  then,  if  they  mourn  and  enter  their  protest 
against  the  iniquity  of  the  ti7nes?"  They  see  how  the  preva- 
lence of  sin  affects  those  who  would  fain  be  innocent,  and  how 
the  fashion  of  evil  sweeps  along  with  it  those  who  at  first  had 
better  manners  ;  and  this  frets  them  sorely.  We  tremble  at  the 
mischief  which  can  be  done  by  men  who  are  hardened  in 
iniquity  ;  those  dry  sticks,  so  eager  for  the  flame,  are  our 
terror  ;  when  such  are  laid  together  we  know  how  fierce  will  be 
the  burning.  Companionship  in  evil  leads  to  a  high  pitch  of 
sin.  Hands  joined  in  hand  draw  on  with  great  force  those  who 
seemed  reluctant  to  go  in  the  way  of  evil.  O  that  our  young 
people  would  be  warned  of  the  danger  of  bad  example !  If  we 
could  keep  the  green  sticks  out  of  the  way  of  the  dry  we  should 
have  little  to  fear  for  our  sons  and  daughters;  but,  alas,  the 
wicked  are  often  more  attractive  than  the  righteous,  and  fair 
speech  and  gay  habits  fascinate  the  inexperienced.  The  amiable 
but  undecided  of  our  youth  are  beguiled  by  the  pleasant 
manners  of  worldly  people,  and  before  they  are  aware  they  be- 
come like  their  betrayers. 

Lord,  save  us  from  evil  men,  and  when  we  are  called  in  the 
order  of  providence  to  be  in  their  presence,  let  us  remember 
that  we  are  also  in  thy  presence,  and  so  let  us  escape  the 
contagion  of  their  company. 

TUNING    AN    INSTRUMENT. 

"  If  we  cotild  learn  to  frame  our  minds  to  otcr  estates,  as  the 
sJdlfcl  musician  lettcth  down  the  striitgs  a  peg  lower  when  the 
tune  requireth  it,  we  should  pass  to  heaven  7nore  comfortably T 
Yes,  we  are  as  a  rule  pitched  too  high.  We  look  for  more  in 
this  life  than  it  will  ever  yield  us.  If  we  could  be  satisfied  with 
less  we  should  be  less  dissatisfied.  It  is  a  great  pity  when  men 
try  to  live  above  their  means,  for  it  often  ends  in  their  hardly 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  125 

having  the  means  to  live  at  all.  Probably  there  is  as  much 
happiness  in  one  station  of  hfe  as  in  another  if  it  is  suitable  to 
us,  and  we  are  able  to  fill  it  :  the  misery  of  life  must  be  when  a 
man  has  a  little  less  than  he  needs  and  a  great  deal  less  than 
he  aspires  to.  Contentment  is  the  crown  jewel  of  a  happy  life. 
We  shall  have  enough,  for  the  promise  guarantees  us  our 
portion  ;  why  need  we  fret  after  more  ?  "  Here  little  and  here- 
after much,"  as  Bunyan  says,  is  best  for  us. 

O  Lord,  grant  me  grace  to  live  above  this  world ;  and  wherein 
I  must  live  upon  it,  and  think  about  it,  help  me  to  have  few 
desires  and  no  cares.  Tune  my  nature  so  that  without  fail  my 
life  may  make  music  to  thy  praise. 

PRINTERS'  PROOFS. 

"  O  ye  ministers  of  the  word,  consider  well  that  you  are  the  first 
sheets  from  the  King^s  press  :  others  are  pri7ited  after  your  copy. 
If  the  first  sheet  be  well  set,  a  thousand  more  are  stamped  with 
case.  See,  the?t,  that  the  power  of  religion  prevail  over  your 
own  hearts  lest  you  not  only  lose  yottr  ow7t  souls,  but  cause  the 
rui7i  of  others P  Correcting  for  the  press  is  work  which  has  to  be 
done  with  great  care,  since  thousands  of  copies  will  be  faulty  if 
the  proof-sheet  be  not  as  it  should  be.  So  should  the  minister 
of  a  congregation  be  seriously  earnest  to  be  right,  because  his 
people  will  imitate  him.  Like  priest,  like  people  ;  the  sheep  will 
follow  the  shepherd.  What  need  there  is  that  the  pastor  should 
order  his  steps  aright  lest  he  lead  a  whole  flock  astray  !  If  the 
town-clock  be  wrong  half  the  watches  in  the  place  will  be  out  of 
time. 

We  have  all  an  influence  over  others.  Even  the  least  one 
among  us  has  some  individual  beneath  his  power  to  whom  he 
serves  as  an  example,  for  whom,  indeed,  he  is  a  sort  of  proof 
sheet.  O  that  the  good  Lord  would  make  us  correct  in  all 
points,  lest  we  be  propagators  of  sin  through  the  influence  of  our 
faults.     By  self-examination  let  us  labour  to  correct  the  proofs. 


126  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  LAPWING. 

"  Usually  compJai7iers  do  least.  The  crafty  lapwing  will  go 
itp  and  down  fluttering  and  cryitig,  to  draw  the  fowler  from 
her  own  nest.  We  have  some  secret  nest  of  otir  ow7t,  and  we 
are  loath  it  should  be  rifled  and  exposed  to  public  view,  ajid 
therefore  we  raise  an  alarm  about  other  mattersP  This  we  may 
be  doing  without  being  aware  of  it,  for  self-deceit  is  easy.  We 
may  be  amusing  ourselves  with  zeal  for  political  reforms  when 
in  truth  our  own  personal  habits  need  reforming,  or  we  may  be 
exclaiming  against  the  errors  of  the  church  while  our  own 
private  life  far  more  needs  our  attention.  It  is  a  pity  to  be 
cheating  our  own  selves. 

Our  author,  however,  is  very  shrewd  in  his  judgment  of 
complainers.  Our  own  experience  leads  us  to  the  conclusion 
that  critics  of  others,  and  noisy  talkers  of  all  kinds,  have 
usually  some  design  of  their  own,  and  are  working  to  their  own 
hand.  If  we  were  to  press  them  home  we  should  probably 
discover  that  they  are  no  better  than  they  should  be.  Their 
pretence  of  being  wounded  and  hurt  by  the  sins  of  others  is  a 
crafty  scheme  for  drawing  away  observation  from  their  own 
failings.  Lapwings  are  plentiful  enough  all  around  us,  and  not 
a  few  are  still  deceived  by  their  practices. 

O  Lord,  save  me  from  all  deceit,  and,  above  all,  prevent  my 
deceiving  myself. 

THE  CHANGED  BED. 

"  A  sick  man  thinketh  to  have  ease  i7i  ajiother  bed,  in  another 
room  :  carry  him  thither,  his  pain  continueth.  If  a  carnal  man 
had  lived  in  the  prophets^  times  or  the  apostles^  ti?nes,  he  would 
have  been  the  same  as  now;  see  Matt,  xxiii.  29,  30.  A  briar  is  a 
briar  wherever  it  groweth;  change  of  tinies  will  not  avail 
without  a  chaiige  of  heart.  Adam  simted  in  Paradise;  the 
apostate  angels  in  heave?ij  Lot  was  unchaste  ifi  the  mountains, 
where  were  none  but  his  own  family  ;  in  a  howling  wilderness 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  127 

luhere  they  had  no  outward  ejiiicements,  the  Israelites  were  given 
to  fleshly  lusts"  This  is  a  needful  rebuke  of  a  very  common 
folly,  let  the  reader  see  that  he  fall  not  into  the  error.  We 
ought  not  blame  our  occupation,  but  our  disposition.  We  may 
not  saddle  our  poverty  or  our  wealth  with  the  sin  which  is 
purely  of  ourselves,  for  this  is  only  an  oblique  way  of  blaming 
God  for  our  faults.  Change  of  place  is  not  wanted,  but  change 
of  heart.  If,  dear  friend,  you  are  unholy  where  you  are,  you 
would  be  the  same  in  any  other  position  in  life.  The  fault  is 
not  in  your  stars,  but  in  yourself,  that  you  are  still  an  impeni- 
tent sinner.  Lay  this  to  heart ;  abandon  all  idle  excuses  and 
seek  your  Saviour. 

DEEP   FOUNDATIONS. 

"  The  Lord  diggeth  deep  when  he  meaneth  to  raise  the  building 
Jiighj  a7id  when  he  would  give  men  to  know  much  of  Christ, 
he  first  bringeth  them  out  of  themselves  by  godly  sorrow."  We 
see  many  to  be  but  low  and  mean  in  point  of  grace,  not  rising 
like  towers  towards  heaven,  but  lying  low  upon  the  earth  :  these 
have  never  been  digged  out  by  a  deep  sense  of  sin,  nor  exca- 
vated by  profound  soul-trouble,  and  hence  it  would  not  be  safe 
to  build  high  with  so  shallow  a  foundation.  If  we  could  read 
the  secret  history  of  dwarfed  Christians  we  should  find  that  they 
never  had  much  humbling  of  heart.  They  tell  us  there  is  as 
much  of  a  tree  under  as  above  ground,  and  certainly  it  is  so 
with  a  believer,  his  visible  life  would  soon  wither  were  it  not  for 
his  secret  life,  and  his  high  enjoyments  would  fall  over  to 
his  ruin  were  they  not  balanced  by  his  inward  humiliations. 
There  must  be  deep  foundations  if  we  are  to  have  high  walls  ; 
we  must  be  emptied  of  self,  and  everything  of  human  strength, 
or  we  shall  never  be  filled  with  the  love  of  God. 

O  my  heart,  be  ready  to  be  trenched  deep  if  this  be  the 
necessary  preparation  for  being  built  up  aloft.  Welcome  pain  and 
down- casting  if  edification  is  to  follow. 


128  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

GOOD  BIET  IN  UNHEALTHY  PLACES. 

"  When  the  air  is  infectioiis  ivc  a7'e  the  more  careful  of  our 
diet"  In  sickly  times  and  places  men  endeavour  to  keep  up  the 
strength  of  their  bodies  by  nourishing  food,  and  they  strive  to 
avoid  sickness  by  wholesome  meat.  In  this  they  act  wisely,  and 
according  to  the  rules  of  prudence.  An  equal  care  should  be 
exercised  over  our  souls.  When  the  very  air  seems  to  be  laden 
with  error  and  vice,  believers  should  set  a  double  watch  as  to 
what  they  hear,  and  where  they  go.  Sin  is  as  subtle  and  as 
deadly  as  the  foul  gas  which  bears  within  it  the  seeds  of  plague, 
and  therefore  the  utmost  caution  must  be  used  that  we  keep  as 
far  from  its  occasions  and  temptations  as  we  possibly  can.  We 
must  also  live  nearer  to  God  than  ever,  and  feed  more  upon 
Christ,  and  seek  more  of  his  Spirit  than  at  any  former  time,  that 
we  may  be  fortified  against  the  unusual  dangers  of  the  age.  So 
shall  we  be  error-proof  and  vice-proof,  and,  though  a  thousand 
fall  at  our  side,  the  spiritual  death  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  us. 
Errors,  like  diseases,  prey  upon  the  feebler  sort,  and  though  they 
bring  no  good  even  to  the  strong,  yet  these  are  able  to  cast  off 
their  deleterious  influences,  even  as  a  man  in  armour  shakes  off 
the  arrows  which  else  would  wound  him  grievously.  To  be 
strong  in  the  Lord  is  the  best  preservative  against  the  ills  of  our 
age,  and  the  perils  of  our  surroundings. 

O  Lord,  we  would  dwell  in  thy  secret  place,  that  abiding 
under  thy  shadow  we  may  live  unharmed  even  where  Satan's 
seat  is,  should  thy  providence  there  pitch  our  tent. 

HEAVEN'S  CEMENT. 

"  Love  is  a  grace  that  will  make  us  industrious  for  the  good 
of  others,  and  therefore  we  read  of  the  '■labour  of  love^ 
(i  Thess.  i.  3.)  It  is  gluten  animarum,  the  glue  of  souls,  the 
cement  and  solder  of  the  church;  the  joiiitijig  that  rimneth 
throughout  all  the  living  and  squared  stones  (Col.  iii.  14.)  By 
this  souls  are  mingled,  and  all  mutual  offices  are  cheejfully 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  129 

^erformedP  O  for  more  of  this  sacred  cement.  The  walls  of 
many  churches  gape  with  huge  cracks  for  lack  of  it.  Building 
with  untempered  mortar  is  an  ancient  fault,  but  nowadays 
some  build  with  no  mortar  at  all.  Professors  seem  to  be  piled 
together  like  a  load  of  bricks,  without  life,  love,  or  living  truth 
to  unite  them  ;  and  the  promise  is  forgotten,  "  I  will  lay  thy 
stones  with  fair  colours.'^  Will  not  our  reader,  if  he  be  a  believer, 
endeavour  to  furnish  his  portion  of  the  sacred  cement  of  love, 
which  is  the  perfect  bond  ?  This  will  be  far  more  useful  than 
complaining  of  the  lack  of  unity,  for  this  complaint  often  creates 
the  evil  which  it  deplores.  Critics  pick  out  from  between  the 
stones  the  mortar,  of  which  there  is  little  enough  already  ;  but 
loving  hearts  fill  up  the  cracks,  and  do  their  best  to  keep  the 
structure  whole.     '^  Blessed  are  the  peace-makers." 

How  am  I  acting  1  Am  I  a  bond  in  the  building,  or  do  I,  like 
the  foolish  woman  in  the  Proverbs,  pluck  down  the  house  with 
my  hands  ?  O  Lord  of  peace,  make  me  more  and  more  a  lover 
of  peace. 

lAY-FIGURES. 

.  "  You  would  all  judge  it  to  be  an  affront  to  the  7najesty  of  God 
if  a  man  should  send  his  clothes  sttiffed  with  straw ,  or  a  puppet 
dressed  tip  instead  ofhij?iself  into  the  assemblies  of  God^s  people, 
and  think  that  this  wotild  do  ifistead  of  his  personal  prese?ice. 

Yet  our  clothes  stuffed  with  straw  would  be  less  offensive  to  God 
than  our  bodies  without  our  souls.  The  absence  of  the  spirit  is 
the  absence  of  the  7nore  noble  part."  Think  of  this  ye  whose  hearts 
are  with  your  flocks  and  herds,  and  shops,  and  ships,  when  you 
are  in  your  churches  and  chapels.  Will  ye  longer  insult  the  Lord 
who  will  have  only  those  to  worship  him  who  worship  him  in 
spirit  and  in  truth  ?  A  mind  stuffed  with  vanity  and  unbehef 
must  be  worse  than  clothes  stuffed  with  straw.  Reader,  have 
you  never  set  up  this  abomination  before  the  very  eyes  of  the 
Eternal  ? 

9 


130  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

CLOWNS  AND  PKINCES. 

*'  It  is  not  a  wotider  for  a  clo7vn,  that  hath  not  been  acquainted 
with  dainties  J  to  love  garlic  a)id  oftions  j  but  for  a  prince  y  that 
hath  beeti  acguai^ited  with  better  diet,  to  leave  the  dai?ities  of  his 
father's  table  for  such  base  feeding,  that  were  strange.  I  do  not 
wonder  at  carnal  me7i,  that  they  are  delighted  with  carnal  objects  : 
they  never  knew  better;  but  for  a  child  of  God,  that  hath  tasted 
how  gracious  ajid  sweet  God  in  Christ  is,  tofijidsap  a7id  savotir 
in  coarser  fare,  this  is  wojiderful."  Yet  were  our  author  now 
alive  he  might  weep  his  eyes  out  as  he  saw  professing  Christians 
craving  for  the  ball-room  and  the  theatre.  The  carrion  which 
professors  can  now  feed  upon  is  disgusting  to  the  very  thought 
of  a  real  Christian.  Entertainments  are  got  up  among  religious 
people  which  are  unworthy  even  of  decent  worldlings.  Many 
true  hearts  are  deeply  wounded  by  this  terrible  degeneracy. 
Were  it  not  for  a  small  remnant  we  had  been  as  Sodom,  and 
been  made  like  unto  Gomorrah. 

PAINT  FOR  PAINT. 

"  A  ministry  that  stayeth  i7i  the  paijit  of  words  will  beget  but 
painted  graced  If  it  is  not  a  real,  hearty  ministry  of  grace, 
inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  end  in  nothing.  Fine  words 
neither  wound  nor  heal.  Oratory  may  amuse,  but  it  cannot 
convert;  and  rhetoric  may  astonish,  but  it  will  never  save.  We 
must  have  more  than  mere  words,  however  striking, — paint  will 
not  do ;  we  want  living  preaching,  by  men  in  downright  earnest, 
attended  by  the  living  Spirit,  or  else  life  will  never  be  created 
or  sustained  by  it.  What  is  the  use  of  colouring  the  cheek  of 
the  dead  ?  The  hue  of  life  is  a  mockery  while  death  reigns 
within.  That  is  evil  preaching  which  creates  the  semblance  of 
piety,  but  never  imparts  the  substance. 

Lord,  save  me  from  being  the  imitation  of  a  Christian,  the 
produce  of  a  mimic  gospel.  Give  me  thoroughness  and  since- 
rity, and  let  not  my  religion  be  a  painted  pageantry  for  me  to 
^0  to  hell  in.     Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God  ! 


r^{^ 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  131 

SLUGGARDS  HATE  LIGHT. 

"  The  lazy  world  would  fain  lie  tip  on  the  bed  of  ease,  draii, 
the  curtains  and  rest;  and  therefore  light  is  troublesome  to  it. 
In  these  days  7nen  begin  to  tire  of  gospel  music,  ajid  thirst  and 
pa?itfor  the  old  ujtsavojiry  moral  strains,  which  deal  with  sin 
171  general,  and  do  not  irritate  men  by  close  perso7tal  applica- 
tio7is"  Faithful  preachers  are  Hke  those  men  whose  business  it 
is  to  arouse  slumbering  workmen  and  call  them  to  their  labours. 
The  sound  is  not  welcome  to  those  who  desire  a  little  more 
slumber ;  they  wish  no  blessings  upon  the  head  of  the  noisy 
watchman.  Yet  if  they  be  aroused  and  reach  their  work  betimes 
they  have  a  good  word  in  the  end  for  him  who  caused  them  to 
be  up  and  doing.  The  watchman  should  not  take  notice  of  a 
hasty  word  from  one  half  awake  ;  he  may  rest  content  that  he 
will  have  their  good  word  by-and-by. 

Manton  was  right  in  his  suspicion  that  mere  moral  preaching 
would  continue  to  have  its  admirers.  Many  nowadays  reckon 
it  a  crime  for  the  preacher  to  be  rousing  and  personal ;  they 
prefer  a  good  sound  moralist  who  will  tell  servants  their 
duty,  and  let  their  masters  and  mistresses  sleep.  O  that  men 
were  wise,  for  then  they  would  count  him  to  be  the  best 
preacher  who  the  most  earnestly  calls  them  out  of  their  beds 
of  sinful  ease  to  seek  and  find  salvation.  None  do  this  but 
spiritual,  gospel  preachers.  Your  '^ moral"  teacher  pretends  to 
be  very  practical,  and  yet  if  you  watch  for  the  results  of  his 
efforts  what  will  you  see  ?  When  you  have  looked  through  a 
microscope  you  will  only  say,  "  there  is  nothing,"  for  truly  there 
are  no  results  worth  mentioning.  Sin  is  a  serpent  which  these 
moralists  cannot  tame,  charm  they  never  so  wisely. 

Lord,  help  us  to  cry  aloud,  and  spare  not  till  the  slumberers 
arise ;  and  let  us  use  thy  truth  as  the  best  awakener.  Let  thy 
light  shine  on  sluggards  and  awaken  them.  If  these  things  suffice 
not,  O  Lord,  thunder  at  them,  and  by  some  means  break  their 
death-sleep. 


132  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  LONG  GAKMENT. 

'^  A  garment  which  is  too  lo7ig  trails  i7i  the  mire  and  soon 
becomes  a  dirty  rag;  a?td  it  is  easy  for  large  estates  to  beco7ne 
much  the  same.  It  is  a  hard  lesson  to  '  lear7i  to  abou7id^ 
(Phil.  iv.  12).  We  say  such  a  07ie  would  do  well  to  be  a  lord  or 
a  lady;  but  it  is  a  harder  thi7ig  tha7i  we  thi7ik  it  to  be."  It  is 
hard  to  carry  a  full  cup  with  a  steady  hand.  High  places  are 
dizzy  places,  and  full  many  have  fallen  to  their  eternal  ruin 
through  climbing  aloft  without  having  grace  to  look  up.  The 
simile  of  the  trailing  garment  used  by  Manton  is  simple,  but 
instructive.  Such  robes  raise  a  dust,  and  gather  upon  themselves 
all  sorts  of  filthiness,  besides  being  subjected  to  needless  wear 
and  tear.  A  man  may  have  so  much  of  this  world  that  he  misses 
the  next.  His  long  robe  may  trip  him  up  in  the  race  for  the 
heavenly  prize,  and  he  may  fall  a  victim  to  the  wealth  he  idol- 
ized. Alas,  for  the  poor  rich  !  Faring  sumptuously  every  day, 
and  yet  full  often  strangers  to  that  deep  and  peerless  joy  which 
belongs  to  those  who,  in  the  deep  waters  of  poverty,  find  a 
boundless  bliss  in  trusting  God.  When  the  rich  are  saved  they 
should  count  it  a  miracle  of  grace,  and  feel  great  gratitude  to 
him  who  enables  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle, 
notwithstanding  his  hump. 

Lord,  give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches  ;  or,  rather,  be  thou 
my  riches,  and  give  thyself  to  me.  As  for  all  else,  I  would 
leave  myself  without  reserve  in  thy  hands. 

CRIPPLES  MOCKING. 

"  If  cripples  7nock  us  for  goi7dg  up7'ight,  we  pity  the7n^^  If 
Avorldlings  rail  at  us  for  endeavouring  to  lead  godly  and  sober 
lives,  we  should  not  be  angry,  but  rather  sorrow  over  their 
infatuation.  No  wise  man  will  swerve  an  inch  from  his  path  to 
please  those  who  are  mad  with  sin,  nor  will  he  break  his  heart 
because  idiotic  sinners  make  a  jest  of  his  uprightness. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  133 

BIRD-CATCHING  BY  NIGHT. 

"  This  is  the  DeviPs  device,  first  to  maze  people^  as  birds  are 
-with  a  light  and  a  bell  in  the  night,  ajtd  then  to  drive  them  itito 
the  net.  If  you  would  keep  to  wholesofne  doctrifte,  keep  to  a 
form  of  wholesome  words,  and  do  not  place  religion  in  conceited 
speaking'"*  Would  to  God  that  this  advice  would  be  heeded ! 
We  have  those  about  us  who  are  for  ever  inventing  some  new 
thing,  and  using  the  old  orthodox  terms  in  an  altogether  novel 
sense.  Their  hearers  are  first  dazzled  with  the  clever  candle 
light,  and  cannot  make  out  what  the  novel  brilliance  means  ; 
and  when  they  are  thoroughly  bewildered,  a  great  noise  and 
tinkling  is  made  of  pretended  wisdom  and  deep  thought,  so  that 
the  poor  souls  are  ready  to  fly  anywhere  and  anyhow.  Thus 
the  fowler's  business  is  effectually  done,  and  by  this  means,  if  it 
were  possible,  they  would  ensnare  the  very  elect.  The  safest 
way  for  simple  souls  is  to  keep  to  a  definite  and  decided  gospel 
ministry.  If  you  do  not  know  the  voice  of  the  shepherd,  do  not 
follow  him.  Of  course  you  will  avoid  a  wolf,  for  his  howl  is 
your  warning  ;  but  be  doubly  careful  to  keep  clear  of  the  false 
shepherd,  and,  to  make  quite  sure  of  your  man,  count  him  to  be 
false  who  is  not  evidently  true. 

Lord,  preserve  my  poor  silly  mind  from  being  dazed  and 
dazzled,  and  let  me  follow  thy  truth  step  by  step  even  to  the  end. 

DWELLERS  IN  MARSHES. 

"  In  marshy  countries  we  do  7tot  expect  a  clear  airj  so  sensual 
persons  have  seldojii  any  clear  and  elevated  thotights  of  God. 
Men  given  to  pleasures  can  taste  meats  and  drinks,  but  not 
doctrines^  Hence  the  folly  of  being  swayed  by  their  censures. 
Learned  men  are  to  be  respected  when  they  express  opinions 
upon  subjects  which  they  understand ;  but  when  they  are  known 
to  be  without  grace  and  spiritual  light  their  opinions  upon  divine 
truth  are  not  to  be  regarded.    They  have  not  the  capacity  to 


134  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND  MEDITATIONS. 

appreciate  such  things,  and  they  had  better  let  them  alone.  A 
bHnd  man  may  be  a  first-rate  musician,  and  in  his  own  depart- 
ment he  may  be  a  master,  but  if  he  ventures  to  dogmatize  upon 
colour  and  artistic  portraiture  he  is  more  worthy  of  ridicule  than 
of  reverence.  Carnal  men  have  not  the  needful  taste  by  which 
divine  doctrine  is  discerned.  Their  minds  are  as  to  religion  a 
mere  marsh  land,  breeding  fog  and  mist,  and  to  hope  for  clear 
and  expansive  views  of  the  gospel  from  them  is  in  vain.  May 
God  of  his  great  mercy  uplift  the  great,  sunken  intellects  of  our 
day,  and  give  a  holy  taste  and  discernment  to  those  who  now 
know  nothing  of  the  bread  of  heaven  or  the  new  wine  of  the 
gospel.  Meanwhile  it  will  be  as  well  to  take  as  little  notice  as 
possible  of  their  opinions  upon  religion,  which  must  of  necessity 
be  valueless. 

THE  UNFINISHED  HOUSE. 

"  We  shall  not  keep  what  we  have  receivcdif  we  do  not  labour 
to  increase  it,  as  a  house  begim  to  be  built  goeth  to  decay,  and 
droppeth  dow7i  more  and  more,  if  we  do  7iot  go  o?t  to  finish  it^^ 
Have  we  not  all  seen  what  are  commonly  called  house-carcases 
standing  in  desolation,  a  blot  upon  the  street,  and  a  dead  loss 
to  the  builder  ?  To-day  the  slates  are  falling,  to-morrow  the 
windows  are  broken,  and  anon  timber  after  timber  falls.  Just 
such  are  they  who  having  begun  to  build  in  the  matter  of  religion, 
have  failed  to  count  the  cost,  and  so  come  to  a  stand-still,  and 
speedily  arrive  at  a  ruin.  We  believe — 7iot  in  the  continuance 
of  unprogressive  grace,  but  in  the  perseverance  and  progress  of 
saints  even  to  the  end.  Blessed  are  they  who  have  this  perse- 
vering progress,  for  these  are  habitations  builded  of  God. 
Others,  who  abide  in  their  immovable  self-content,  are  ruined 
by  degrees,  and  prove  themselves  to  be  mere  carcases,  within 
which  the  living  graces  have  never  taken  up  their  residence. 

Remember  this,  O  my  soul,  and  pray  the  Lord  to  build  thee 
up  by  his  Spirit,  and  complete  in  thee  the  work  of  grace  with- 
power. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  135 

SOLDIERS  AND  SAILORS. 

*^  If  because  you  are  Christians  yon  promise  yourselves  a  long 
lease  of  temporal  happiness,  free  from  troubles  and  afflictio7is,  it 
is  as  if  a  soldier  going  to  the  wars  should  pro7nise  himself  peace 
and  continual  truce  with  the  ene7ny  j  or  as  if  a  marijier  coin- 
mittitig  himself  to  the  sea  for  a  long  voyage,  should  promise 
himself  nothing  but  fair  and  calm  weather,  without  waves  and 
storms; — so  irrational  it  is  for  a  Christia?i  to  promise  hi7nself 
rest  here  up07i  earth"  Experience  abundantly  confirms  this, 
and  yet  who  would  not  be  a  soldier  of  the  cross  ?  And,  being 
so,  who  would  wish  to  be  a  feather-bed  soldier,  never  flushing 
one's  sword,  or  smelling  powder.  If  there  be  no  war  there  can 
be  no  victory  ;  ease  is  therefore  our  loss  and  hindrance.  What 
we  need  is  not  freedom  from  conflict,  but  abundance  of  faith. 
Trials  would  little  try  us  if  we  had  more  confidence  in  God,  and 
afflictions  would  have  small  power  to  afllict  us  if  we  laid  up  our 
heart's  joy  and  confidence  in  the  Lord  alone.  Nearness  to  God 
is  the  one  desideratum. 

O  Lord,  draw  us  very  near  thee,  and  then  we  shall  dwell  in 
peace  though  the  whole  world  should  battle  with  us. 

BURNING  A  HOUSE  TO  KILL  MICE. 

"  If  a  man  should  fire  a  house  to  destroy  the  i7iice  in  it,  we 
should  thi7ik  hi77i  to  be  fairly  77iad"  Yet  those  who  consider 
themselves  to  be  reasonable  men  will  set  a  church  in  a  blaze 
about  the  merest  trifle.  Meeting  after  meeting  will  be  called, 
and  angry  discussions  provoked,  and  holy  work  overturned  about 
the  smallest  mistake  of  the  preacher,  or  the  minutest  fault  of 
a  deacon.  One  would  think  that  heaven  itself  was  endangered, 
and  yet  it  turns  out  to  be  a  question  of  infinitesimal  importance. 
Societies  which  were  doing  great  service  have  even  been  broken 
up  by  the  crazy  whimsies  of  good  brethren,  who  made  much  ado 
about  nothing,  and  did  great  harm  in  trying  to  do  a  little  good. 


136  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

But  the  mice  are  a  nuisance !  Of  course  they  are,  and  we 
must  buy  a  cat  or  set  a  trap,  but  we  certainly  shall  not  burn 
the  house  down  when  a  simple  means  will  accomplish  our 
purpose.  We  aim  at  reformation,  not  at  desolation.  We  see 
no  wisdom  in  so  perpetually  improving  a  church  or  a  good 
society  that  in  the  end  it  is  improved  from  off  the  face  of  the 
earth.  Religion  has  been  thought  to  be  sick,  and  fools  have 
doctored  it  till  they  brought  it  to  death's  door  by  their  poisons. 
Prudence  is  to  be  used,  even  when  our  object  is  worthiest  of 
zeal ;  and  never  ought  we  to  endanger  a  really  good  thing  for 
the  sake  of  making  it  a  httle  better. 

Lord,  make  me  wise  as  a  serpent  and  harmless  as  a  dove,  and 
if  I  am  called  to  protest  against  error  or  sin,  help  me  to  do  it  in 
the  spirit  of  my  Lord. 

CLOSING  THE  FLOOD-GATES. 

"  Any  fool  can  opejt  the  flood-gates,  but  ivheji  the  waters  have 
once  brokeft  out,  who  can  recall  them .?"  A  question  well  worthy 
to  be  weighed  by  those  who  create  strife.  They  can  with  a  few 
hasty  words  set  loose  a  torrent  of  anger  and  uncharitableness, 
and  cause  the  sweeping  away  of  much  good  service  and  sweet 
fellowship,  but  who  shall  rule,  restrain,  or  call  back  the  raging 
flood.  O  meddler,  pause  ere  thy  sad  work  be  actually  com- 
menced, for  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  offence  cometh ! 

So,  too,  a  stream  of  dangerous  doctrine  may  easily  enough  be 
set  flowing  among  a  people.  Doubtful  words  and  curious  ques- 
tions may  soon  let  out  a  ruinous  deluge  of  infidelity  and  false 
teaching,  and  he  who  at  the  first  drew  up  the  flood-gate  may 
never  have  dreamed  what  would  come  of  it;  he  may  even 
wring  his  hands  at  horror  of  his  own  deed,  and  yet  may  be 
utterly  powerless  to  stay  the  mischief.  Be  cautious,  therefore, 
O  speculating  teacher.  Carry  thine  inventive  faculties  into  a 
less  dangerous  region.  Let  the  old  barriers  stand,  and  be  not 
thou  Satan's  tool  to  do  a  mischief  which  an  age  may  rue. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  137 

THE  SPIDER. 

**  The  blind  hope  that  is  foimd  in  men  ignorant  and 
presumptuous  will  certainly  fail  thejjij  it  is  compared  to  *  a 
spider's  web^  Job  viii.  14.  The  spider  spitineth  a  web  out  of 
her  own  bowels,  which  is  swept  away  as  soofi  as  the  besom 
cometh;  so  do  carnal  men  conceive  a  few  rash  and  imgrounded 
hopes;  but  when  death  cometh;  or  a  little  trouble  of  conscience, 
these  vain  conceits  are  swept  away."  Let  us  not  spin  a  hope  of 
heaven  out  of  ourselves,  or  our  own  works,  feelings,  or  professions. 
Such  a  web  of  confidence  maybe  very  ingeniously  contrived,  but 
it  must  be  very  frail  and  will  inevitably  be  swept  away.  What 
is  a  man  full  of  self-righteousness  but  a  dark  room  full  of  cobwebs  ? 
Good  housekeepers  do  not  care  for  the  clever  works  of  this  poor 
insect,  but  are  eager  to  destroy  them,  for  they  are  a  detriment, 
and  not  an  ornament.  Neither  spiders  nor  their  webs  are  ac- 
ceptable to  us  ;  and  even  so  we  may  depend  upon  it  that  when 
we  have  finished  the  web  of  our  legal  hopes  and  worked  hard  at 
our  will  worship,  God  will  have  no  more  respect  to  us  and  our 
proud  doings  than  we  have  to  spiders  and  their  constructions. 
Let  proud  Pharisees  think  of  this  and  be  humbled.  The  bee 
is  our  example,  for  she  builds  a  house  but  fetches  all  the 
material  from  abroad,  and  it  is  from  the  flowers  of  the  garden, 
and  not  from  herself,  that  she  procures  the  honey  with  which 
she  stores  her  cells.  Spiders  suck  no  flowers  as  bees  do,  their 
productions  are  from  their  own  bowels.  True  believers  get  all 
the  substance  and  sweetness  of  their  hopes  from  the  flowers 
of  the  promises,  and  dare  not  live  upon  themselves,  or  anything 
that  they  can  do  or  be. 

BIRDS  ON  THE  WING. 

''^ Birds  are  seldom  taken  in  their  flight;  the  more  we  are 
upon  the  wing  of  heavetily  thoughts  the  more  we  escape  snares." 
O  that  we  would  remember  this,  and  never  tarry  long  on  the 
ground  lest  the  fowler  ensnare  us.    We  need  to  be  much  taken 


138  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

up  with  divine  things,  rising  in  thought  above  these  tempera"? 
matters,  or  else  the  world  will  entangle  us,  and  we  shall  be 
like  birds  held  with  limed  twigs,  or  encompassed  in  a  net. 
Holy  meditation  can  scarcely  be  overdone;  in  this  age  we 
fear  it  never  is.  We  are  too  worldly,  and  think  too  much  of 
the  fleeting  trifles  of  time,  and  so  the  enemy  gets  an  advantage 
of  us,  and  takes  a  shot  at  us.  O  for  more  wing  and  more  use  of 
the  flight  we  have !  Communion  with  Jesus  is  not  only  sweet  in 
itself,  but  it  has  a  preserving  power  by  bearing  us  aloft,  above 
gun-shot  of  the  enemy.  Thoughts  of  heaven  prevent  discontent 
with  our  present  lot,  delight  in  God  drives  away  love  to  the 
world,  and  joy  in  our  Lord  Jesus  expels  pride  and  carnal 
pleasure :  thus  we  escape  from  many  evils  by  rising  above  them. 
Up,  then,  my  heart.  Up  from  the  weedy  ditches  and  briery 
hedges  of  the  world  into  the  clear  atmosphere  of  heaven. 
There  where  the  dews  of  grace  are  born,  and  the  sun  of 
righteousness  is  Lord  paramount,  and  the  blessed  wind  of  the 
Spirit  blows  from  the  everlasting  hills,  thou  wilt  find  rest  on  the 
wing,  and  sing  for  joy  where  thine  enemies  cannot  even  see 
thee. 

VALENTINIAN  AND  THE  SPOTTED  GARMENT. 

"  There  is  a  story  of  Valentinian  in  Theodoret,  that  when  he 
acco7npanied  Julian  the  Apostate  to  the  te^nple  of  Fortimej 
those  that  had  charge  of  the  house  sprinkled  their  holy  water 
tipon  the  e7nperor,  a?id  a  drop  fell  upon  Vale?tti7iian^s  garme7it. 
He  beat  the  officer^  sayi7ig  that  he  was  polluted,  7iot  purged, 
a7td  tore  off  the  piece  of  his  gar77ie7it  up07i  which  the  drop  lighted , 
'  hati7igl  saith  the  historia7ii  ^  the  gar7ne7it  spotted  by  the  flesh!  " 
The  man  was  decided  and  outspoken,  and  this  may  well  make 
us  lenient  towards  his  rough  way  of  showing  it.  The  story  is 
narrated,  not  that  we  may  imitate  Valentinian  in  his  violence, 
but  that  we  may  regard  it  as  a  figure  of  the  holy  horror  which 
ought  to  inspire  us  when  so  much  as  a  spot  of  sin  defiles  us. 
We  are  to  keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world  ;  not  only 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  139 

free  from  great  smears  and  daubs,  but  even  from  spots.  O  for 
a  deep  hatred  of  sin,  and  a  determination  to  part  with  anything 
and  everything  which  bears  its  stain.  Let  us  rend  off  a  polluting 
habit  and  utterly  abstain  from  it,,  however  pleasing  it  may  have 
been.  Sins  of  the  flesh  especially  are  so  apt  to  grow  that  the 
least  approach  to  impurity  must  be  regarded  as  a  plague-spot ; 
here  there  must  be  no  dallying  with  evil,  or  winking  at  the  ap- 
pearance of  it.  The  same  is  true  of  all  other  forms  of  evil,  the 
smallest  seed  will  bring  forth  a  terrible  harvest.  From  the  least 
error,  the  least  wrong,  the  least  falsehood  we  must  be  purged  if 
we  would  walk  with  Christ  and  be  accepted  of  him  as  his  "  dis- 
ciples indeed." 

Lord,  cleanse  thou  me,  that  I  may  be  without  fault  before  thy 
throne. 

COITRTIER'S  COTTRTESY. 

Courtiers  are  7nore  ;poliie  i7i  their  manners  than  ordinary 
subjects,  because  they  are  more  in  their  princes  eye  and  compa7iy. 
The  oftener  we  are  in  Gods  court  the  more  holy  shall  we  become, ^^ 
The  company  of  the  Lord's  holy  servants  raises  the  tone  of  our 
thought  and  makes  us  aspire  after  a  sanctity  beyond  what  we 
possess,  and  therefore  we  maybe  sure  that  communion  with  their 
Lord  will  be  still  more  beneficial  to  us.  If  we  learn  good  man- 
ners from  the  man,  what  may  we  expect  from  being  with  the 
Master  !  From  Jesus  we  shall  learn  gentleness  and  love,  purity 
and  self-sacrifice,  and  so  acquire  the  courtly  manners  of  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  shaking  off  at  the  same  time  the  boorish  ways  which 
cling  to  us  from  having  dwelt  in  Mesech  and  tabernacled  in  the 
tents  of  Kedar.  There  is  no  preparation  for  heaven  like  abiding 
with  heaven's  Lord. 

Come,  my  heart,  art  thou  now  walking  with  God  ?  How  long 
since  thou  hast  spoken  with  thy  sovereign.?  Arise  and  get  thee 
to  his  royal  courts,  and,  once  there,  go  no  more  out  for  ever. 
Thy  heaven  and  thy  preparation  for  heaven  both  lie  in  thy  Lord. 


140  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

FINE  SPUN  THREAD. 

"  Whejt  the  thread  of  the  gospel  is  too  fijte  spun,  it  will  not 
clothe  a  naked  soul"  Nice  distinctions  and  technical  phrases 
may  hide  the  fulness  of  the  word  of  God,  and  the  simple  truth 
may  be  treated  in  such  a  philosophical  manner  that  its  strength 
and  substance  may  be  taken  away.  Some  men  preach  the  gospel, 
but  there  is  very  little  of  it.  It  is  the  right  wool,  but  it  is  spun 
too  fine.  They  give  milk,  it  is  true,  but  the  water  of  their  own 
notions  so  dilutes  it  that  a  man  might  sooner  be  drowned  in  it 
than  nourished  by  it.  O  to  preach  a  full  gospel  fully ! — to 
give  it  out  with  the  richness  and  freeness  which  poor  sinners 
need.  This  is  one  of  the  great  demands  of  the  day.  Men  are 
very  liberal  in  their  views,  but  they  are  not  liberal  in  dealing 
out  the  precious  things  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Cold  is  this 
world  and  bitter  are  the  blasts  of  conscience,  and  while  they  are 
shivering  in  their  sins,  poor  awakened  souls  need  all  the  gospel 
of  grace,  and  all  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  O  that  our  brethren 
would  give  up  their  fine  spinning  and  wire-drawing  of  the  doc- 
trines of  grace,  and  give  us  something  substantial  from  the 
storehouse  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  plenty  of  it.  Alas, 
too  many  despise  the  old-fashioned  word,  and  in  their  heart  of 
hearts  hate  the  very  doctrine  which  they  pretend  to  uphold.  We 
know  some  who  have  no  more  right  in  the  Christian  ministry 
than  Mahometans,  and  yet  they  say  they  are  followers  of  Jesus. 
We  have  not  so  learned  Christ. 

THE  FRIGHTENED  WOLF. 

"A  wolf  may  be  scared  fro7n  his  prey,  but  yet  he  keepeih  his 
preying  and  devouring  nature."  He  has  not  lost  his  taste  for 
lambs,  though  he  was  obliged  to  drop  the  one  which  he  had 
seized.  So  a  sinner  may  forego  his  beloved  lust,  and  yet  remain 
as  truly  a  sinner  as  before.  He  gives  up  the  drink  for  fear  of 
losing  his  situation,  or  dying  of  disease,  but  he  would  be  at 
his  liquor  again  if  he  dared.     The  fear  of  hell  whips  him  off 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  141 

some  favourite  vice,  and  yet  his  heart  pines  for  it,  and  in 
imagination  he  gloats  over  it.  While  this  is  the  case  the  man 
in  the  sight  of  God  is  as  his  heart  is:  the  muzzled  wolf  is 
still  a  wolf,  the  silenced  swearer  is  still  profane  in  heart,  the 
lewd  thinker  is  still  an  adulterer. 

Something  is  done  when  a  wolf  is  scared,  or  a  transgressor 
driven  out  of  his  evil  ways,  yet  nothing  is  done  which  will 
effectually  change  the  wolf  or  renew  the  ungodly  heart.  A 
frightened  sinner  is  a  sinner  still.  Like  the  frightened  dog,  he 
will  return  to  his  vomit ;  and  like  the  sow  that  was  washed,  he 
will  wallow  in  the  mire  again  as  soon  as  opportunity  offers.  "  Yc 
must  be  born  again  :" — this  is  the  only  effectual  cure  for  sin. 
While  the  nature  is  unchanged  it  is  but  the  outside  of  the  cup 
and  platter  which  is  washed.  ''  Truth  in  the  inward  parts  "  is 
that  which  God  dcsireth,  and  till  that  is  given  we  remain  under 
wrath.  Any  thief  will  turn  honest  under  the  gallows,  and  yet  if 
he  were  set  free  he  would  rob  the  first  house  he  came  to.  A 
scare  is  not  a  conversion.  A  sinner  may  be  frightened  into 
hypocrisy,  but  he  must  be  wooed  to  repentance  and  faith.  Love 
tames  and  grace  transforms  ;  may  the  God  of  all  grace  deal  thus 
with  each  of  us. 

THE  FALLEN  SOT. 

"  A  sottish  drunkard,  that  is  overpoised  with  his  own  excess, 
lieth  where  hefalleth,  a?td  except  some  friendly  ha?id  lift  him  tip, 
there  he  perisheth ;  ajidjust  so  it  is  with  sinners,  they  are  pleased 
with  their  condition,  and  if  they  be  7iot  sotmdly  roused  np  and 
awakejied,  they  lie  and  die,  and  fry  in  their  sins.  Oh!  theii, 
pluck  them  out  of  the  fire,  warn  theni  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come."  Be  in  earnest  with  them!  Exhort,  rebuke,  entreat. 
Do  not  leave  them  to  perish  in  their  sins.  Use  a  holy  violence 
with  them,  and  pull  them  out  of  the  mire.  Common  humanity 
would  lead  us  to  help  a  sheep  which  had  fallen  into  a  ditch, 
and  shall  we  not  come  to  the  rescue  of  an  immortal  soul .?  The 
sottishness  and  folly  of  the  ungodly  must  not  dispirit  us  ;  we 


142  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

must  take  that  into  the  account,  and  we  shall  not  wonder  at 
their  uncouth  and  ungrateful  treatment  of  us.  As  a  drunken 
man  does  not  want  to  be  helped,  and  curses  those  who  would 
serve  him,  so  is  it  often  with  those  ungodly  ones  who  most  of 
all  require  our  aid.  Let  us  not  be  put  off  by  them,  but  labour 
to  save  them  even  though  they  are  resolved  to  destroy  them- 
selves. Whatever  evil  expressions  they  use  towards  us  now, 
they  will  think  and  speak  very  differently  if  they  are  saved  by 
our  means.  We  will  appeal  from  the  verdict  of  their  present 
drunkenness  to  the  thankfulness  of  their  future  sobriety. 

Blessed  Master,  make  us  more  concerned  to  win  souls,  and 
let  us  never  give  over,  however  bad  men  may  be.  How  can  we 
let  them  perish  when  we  remember  that  thou  wouldst  not  leave 
US  to  die  in  our  sins,  though  we  were  as  far  gone  as  any  of  those 
around  us  ? 

THE  CLOCK  OF  PROVIDENCE. 

"  There  is  a  clock  with  which  Providence  keepeth  time  and 
pace,  and  God  himself  setteth  it.^'  So  that  everything  happens 
with  divine  punctuality.  Israel  came  out  of  Egypt  on  the  self- 
same night  in  which  the  redemption  was  appointed,  and  after- 
wards wandered  in  the  wilderness  till  the  hour  had  come  when 
the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  was  full.  Our  time  is  always  come, 
for  we  are  in  selfish  haste ;  but  our  Lord  when  on  earth  had  his 
set  times  and  knew  how  to  wait  for  them.  The  great  God  is 
never  before  his  time,  and  never  too  late.  We  may  well  admire 
the  punctuality  of  heaven. 

Our  trials  come  in  due  season,  and  go  at  the  appointed 
moment.  Our  fretfalness  will  neither  hasten  nor  delay  the  pur- 
pose of  our  God.  We  are  in  hot  haste  to  set  the  world  right,  and 
to  order  all  affairs :  the  Lord  hath  the  leisure  of  conscious  power 
and  unerring  wisdom,  and  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  learn  to  wait. 
The  clock  will  not  strike  till  the  hour;  but  when  the  instant 
Cometh  we  shall  hear  the  bell.  My  soul,  trust  thou  in  God,  and 
wait  patiently  when  he  says,  "  My  time  is  not  yet  come." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  143 

THE  HOUSE  ON  FIRE. 

"7/"^  man  set  Ms  hotise  07ijire,  he  is  liable  to  the  law;  if  it  be 
fired  by  others,  or  by  an  ill  accident,  he  is  pitied  a?id  relieved" 
We  are  to  take  up  our  cross  when  laid  upon  our  shoulders  by- 
God's  providence;  but  we  are  not  to  make  trouble  for  ourselves. 
We  are  not  to  fill  our  own  cup  with  gall  and  wormwood,  but  to 
drink  it  off  when  God  puts  a  bitter  draught  into  our  hand.  We 
are  to  meet  temptation  and  overcome  it ;  but  we  may  not  venture 
into  temptation  on  our  own  account,  or  we  may  have  to  rue  our 
foolhardiness. 

The  figure  of  the  burning  house  is  a  very  apt  one,  and  capable 
of  many  illustrations.  A  man  who  partakes  of  wine  or  strong 
liquors  wilfully  fires  his  own  house,  and,  whatever  may  be  the 
result  of  his  intemperance,  he  can  only  blame  himself.  He  who 
reads  sceptical  works,  or  frequents  infidel  society,  cannot  be 
pitied  if  he  loses  faith  and  comfort,  for  he  runs  a  wanton  and 
useless  risk. 

To  be  taken  at  unawares  by  a  fierce  temptation,  is  to  be  like  a 
building  fired  by  a  malicious  hand,  and  this  is  a  grievous  calamity ; 
but  to  go  wilfully  into  temptation  is  another  matter,  and  is  com- 
parable to  the  crime  of  arson,  in  which  a  man  collects  com- 
bustible materials  and  secretly  kindles  them,  that  his  house 
may  be  burned  down. 

Lord,  evermore  keep  me  from  being  my  own  destroyer.  Let 
me  not,  like  Absalom,  grow  my  hair  for  my  own  hanging.  "  Let 
not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over  me.'' 

A  KNOCK  BORNE  FOR  THE  SAKE  OF  A  CROWN. 

*'yi  ifiajt  will  venttcre  a  knock  that  is  in  reach  of  a  crown^ 
The  ambitious  will  run  all  risks  of  cruel  wounds,  and  death 
itself,  to  reach  a  throne ;  the  prize  hardens  them  against  all 
hazards.  Even  so  will  every  wise  man  encounter  all  difficulties 
for  the  crown  of  life  ;  and  when,  by  faith,  he  sees  it  within  reach, 
he  will  count  all  afflictions  light  through  which  he  wades  to 
glory.     "  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him." 


144  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

PROVISION  FOR  A  JOURNEY. 

^^He  that  is  in  ajour?tey  to  heave?t  77itist  be  provided  for  all 
weathers :  for  though  it  be  stmshine  when  he  first  sets  forth,  a 
stor7n  will  overtake  him  before  he  cometh  to  his  jotiriiefs  end."" 

Very  small  must  be  the  number  who  have  had  fair  weather 
all  the  way  to  glory :  it  is  questionable  if  ever  one  has  been  so 
favoured.  Hence  we  ought,  every  one  of  us,  to  be  prepared  for 
tempest  and  hurricane,  or  we  may  be  found  in  an  evil  plight 
in  the  day  of  our  calamity. 

The  presence  of  God  is  the  only  universal  preservative.  When 
he  is  with  us  the  sun  shall  not  hurt  us  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by 
night.  God,  all-sufficient,  meets  every  contingency,  seen  or  un- 
seen. Faith  must  take  her  God  to  herself,  and  then  prudently 
look  forward  to  occasions  for  making  test  and  proof  of  the  end- 
less uses  to  which  the  Divine  presence  can  be  turned.  A  man 
who  has  made  ample  provision  for  all  weathers  is  rather  glad 
than  sorry  to  be  driven  to  use  what  he  has  provided,  and,  even 
so,  trials  are  well-nigh  welcomed  by  the  man  who  is  fully  armed 
against  them.  He  feels  that  it  would  be  a  kind  of  waste  to  be 
well  stored  and  then  never  have  to  draw  upon  the  supply — 
a  sort  of  superfluity  to  be  fully  armed  and  yet  never  to  meet  an 
enemy. 

Have  faith  in  Christ  and  you  are  ready  for  anything,  thankful 
for  everything,  afraid  of  nothing.     "  Ye  are  complete  in  him." 

MAKING  A  NOISE  BY  CRYING  ''SILENCE." 

*'  A  crier  in  the  court,  that  is  often  cojnma7iding  silence,  dis- 
turbeth  the  court  more  than  they  that  make  the  noise;  so,  dispu- 
ting with  our  distractions  increaseth  theni.  They  are  better 
avoided  by  a  severe  contempt'^  That  is  to  say,  when  Satan 
would  disturb  us  at  our  devotions  by  injecting  blasphemous 
thoughts  or  trifling  ideas,  we  had  better  keep  right  on,  and  as 
much  as  possible  disregard  his  interruptions.  As  blind  Barti- 
maeus  cried  all  the  more  because  officious  persons  sought  to 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  145 

silence  him,  so  should  we  be  the  more  vehement  in  our  suppli- 
cations when  the  devil  seeks  to  take  us  off  from  them.  When 
he  knocks  let  us  fasten  another  bolt,  and  let  him  knock  till  he 
grows  weary.  Our  business  is  with  the  Lord,  and  let  us  give  our 
Avhole  heart  to  seeking  his  face,  for  if  we  turn  away  to  answer 
the  enemy  he  will  at  once  have  gained  his  point.  When  he 
paints  images  on  our  fancy,  if  we  steadfastly  refuse  to  look  at 
them  he  will  cease  from  the  unprofitable  work,  and  betake  him- 
self to  work  upon  some  more  foolish  folk,  who  will  turn  aside 
from  prayer  to  answer  his  vile  insinuations.  Let  him  howl  as  he 
pleases ;  if  we  do  not  regard  him  his  pride  will  be  hurt  more 
severely  than  by  any  blow  that  we  can  aim  at  him. 

"  Satan  trembles  when  he  sees 
The  weakest  saint  upon  his  knees." 

Therefore,  let  us  keep  to  our  praying,  and  let  him  keep  to  his 
tempting  till  he  has  had  enough  of  it.  "  Get  thee  behind  me, 
Satan  "  is  as  much  attention  as  he  deserves.  Herein  is  wisdom, 
and  he  that  hath  understanding  will  learn  from  it. 

RIPENING  CORN. 

''^Before  corn  be  ripened  it  jteedeth  all  Jd7ids  of  weather.  The 
husbandman  is  glad  of  showers  as  well  as  sunshine;  rainy 
weather  is  troublesome^  but  sometimes  the  season  requireth  it.'^ 
Even  so  the  various  conditions  of  man's  life  are  needful  to  ripen 
him  for  the  life  to  come.  Sorrows  and  joys,  depressions  and 
exhilarations,  have  all  their  part  to  play  in  the  completion 
of  Christian  character.  Were  one  grief  of  a  behever's  career 
omitted,  it  may  be  he  would  never  be  prepared  for  heaven :  the 
slightest  change  might  mar  the  ultimate  result.  God,  who 
knows  best  how  to  ripen  both  corn  and  men,  ordereth  all  things 
according  to  the  counsel  of  his  will,  and  it  is  our  wisdom  to  be- 
lieve in  the  infallible  prudence  which  arranges  all  the  details  of 
a  believing  life.     "  All  things  work  together  for  good." 

10 


143  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

LOOKING  FOR  AN  EXPECTED  GUEST. 

*'  When  lue  expect  any  one,  ive  hint  onr  eyes  that  way,  as  the 
wife  looks  towards  the  sea,  when  she  expects  her  husbancVs  i-e- 
iiirnr  Surely,  then,  if  we  look  for  Christ  to  coma  we  shall  keep 
our  eyes  heavenward,  and  our  minds  occupied  with  the  country 
from  which  he  cometh.  If  we  mind  earthly  things,  it  will  be 
evidence  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  has  no  power  over  us. 

Yet  a  good  wife  does  not  sit  idly  by  the  sea  watching  for  a 
sail,  but  she  sets  the  house  in  order  for  her  husband's  return. 
She  who  should  sit  looking  out  of  window,  or  studying  alma- 
nacks, and  have  no  provision  made  for  the  home-coming,  would 
show  but  scant  love  for  her  lord.  We  should  watch,  but  we 
should  also  stand  with  our  loins  girt,  and  do  the  duty  of  the 
hour,  that  when  our  Lord  comes  he  may  not  blame  our  negli- 
gence in  his  service.  If  we  know  little  of  the  prophecies,  v.-e 
can  show  our  expectancy  by  keeping  the  precepts. 

PAYMENT  IN  GOLD  INSTEAD  OF  COPPER. 

"  Though  Christ  paid  the  sai7te  debt  as  that  which  is  due  from 
lost  souls,  yet,  through  the  excellency  of  his  perso?i,  it  was  done 
in  a  shorter  time.  A  payment  in  gold  is  the  same  sum  as  a 
payment  in  silver  or  brass;  only,  through  the  excelleiicy  of  the 
7netal,  it  taketh  up  less  room.^''  Thus  do  we  clearly  see  how 
the  one  death  of  Jesus  was  a  fit  and  full  substitute  for  the  eter- 
nal woe  of  many.  How  precious  does  it  appear  in  that  light !  We 
are  redeemed  with  a  price  inconceivable !  Gold  and  silver  are 
corruptible  things  in  comparison  therewith.  How  we  ought  to 
prize  the  adorable  person  of  our  Lord !  What  high  thoughts  we 
ought  to  entertain  of  him,  seeing  that  it  is  "by  himself"  that  he 
purged  our  sins  !  His  own  intrinsic  excellence  was  the  essential 
value  of  the  great  price  which  he  paid.  Had  he  been  less 
illustrious  his  sufferings  had  been  insufficient.  Precious  blood  ! 
yea,  more  precious  Lord  Jesus,  from  whose  preciousness  the 
finished  work  derives  its  infinite  efficacy. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  147 

SLOW  SHOWERS  ARE  BEST. 

"  We  would  have  speedy  ridda7ice  of  trouble,  but  God  thinkcih 
not  fit  to  g7'ant  our  request.  Showers  that  come  by  drops  soak 
into  the  earth  better  than  those  that  come  in  a  tempest  and  hur- 
ricajieP  The  gradualness  and  long  continuance  of  a  trial,  which 
are  its  sharpness  and  bitterness,  are  also,  to  a  large  extent,  the 
causes  of  its  usefulness.  If  the  affliction  came  and  departed 
with  a  rush,  we  should  be  rather  swept  away  by  it  than  softened 
and  saturated  by  its  influence.  To  push  a  crucible  among  the 
glowing  coals  and  snatch  it  forth  again  would  answer  no  pur- 
pose in  refining :  the  metal  must  tarry  in  the  furnace  till  the 
fire  has  done  its  work. 

Perhaps  the  reader  has  long  lived  in  a  perpetual  drip  of 
trouble,  and  now  feels  himself  to  be  quite  weary  of  the  endless 
torture.  Let  him  not  faint  under  the  lengthened  process  :  the 
highest  degee  of  benefit  is  accruing  to  him  from  the  continuance 
of  his  adversity.  In  the  later  part  of  a  trial  every  stroke  tells 
with  tenfold  result,  and  operates  with  a  greatly  increased  effi- 
cacy. It  would  be  a  pity  for  the  Lord  to  stay  his  hand  when  it 
is  working  with  such  special  and  marked  result.  All  the  pre- 
ceding affliction  has  only  worked  the  heart  into  a  fit  condition 
to  receive  the  master-strokes  of  the  Divine  Artist.  The  ground 
colours  have  hitherto  been  laid  on,  but  the  second  and  finishing 
touch  is  now  being  given ;  therefore,  ask  not  the  hand  to  cease, 
but  rather  pray  that  its  work  may  be  carried  on  with  power,  and 
the  Lord's  glory  be  seen  in  it  all.  It  will  not  cease  raining  yet ; 
and  why  should  it  so  long  as  the  soil  is  being  softened,  saturated, 
and  fertilized  by  the  falling  drops  1  Let  patience  have  her 
perfect  work  ;  and  how  can  that  be  unless  the  tribulation  runs 
its  full  time  ? 

Lord,  make  me  ready  to  tarry  for  the  vision,  however  long  it 
may  be  delayed.  Thy  way  of  trying  me  is  the  best.  I  would 
not  hurry  thy  hand  if  I  could. 


148  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

GEEMAN  CHILDREN  BIPPED  IN  THE  RHINE. 

"God  seeth  it  fitting  sometiines,  at  our  first  setting  forth,  as 
the  old  Germans  were  wont  to  dip  their  children  in  the  Rhine  to 
harden  them,  so  to  seasoji  us  for  our  whole  course  by  'phmgitig 
7is  in  trouble.  Saints  must  bear  the  yoke  from  their  youth,  or 
first  acquai7itance  with  God  (Heb.  x.  yi).for  this  is  good  for 
themP  Some  of  us  can  endorse  this  opinion  from  our  own 
experience.  Sharp  trials  in  our  early  days  hardened  us  for  our 
life's  warfare.  Abused  and  misrepresented  both  by  good  and 
bad,  we  learned  to  set  small  store  by  the  judgment  of  men,  so 
that  when  praise  and  flattery  followed,  we  had  an  antidote  for 
the  poisons.  Pain  and  depression  of  spirit,  endured  in  early 
life,  have  prepared  many  to  sympathize  with  the  unhappy,  and 
to  live  a  life  of  benevolence.  A  baptism  into  fire  is,  for  young 
converts,  a  terrible  ordeal,  and  yet  an  incalculable  blessing. 
The  whole  Church  endured  this  baptism  for  ages,  and  thereby 
gathered  a  strength  much  needed  in  these  last  days. 

Let  us  never  despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord.  Should  he 
seem  to  dip  us  in  the  Styx  itself,  let  us  believe  that  it  is  for  our 
good,  and  stand  to  Job's  resolve,  "Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will 
I  trust  in  him." 

THE  TRADESMAN  MISSING  HIS  CUSTOMER. 

*'  YoiL  that  are  tradesmen  are  troubled  if  yoit  happen  to  be 
abroad  when  a  good  custofner  cometh  to  deal  with  you  :  the  ordi- 
nances of  God  are  the  market  for  yotir  souls  j  if  you  had  not  been 
abroad  with  Esau  yott  might  have  received  the  blessing,  and 
go?ie  away  richly  laden  from  a  prayer-7neeting,  from  the  word, 
and  the  Lord's  Stepper;  but  you  lose  yotir  advantages  for  want 
of  attention^  With  what  diligence  should  we  use  the  means  of 
grace,  "  not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together  as 
the  manner  of  some  is  ;''  and  when  we  are  there,  we  should  be 
like  the  shopkeeper — on  the  look-out  for  business ;  not  half 
asleep,  or  wandering  in  our  minds.     If  we  were  more  lively  at 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  149 

sermons,  we  should  find  them  more  lively.  Nothing  profits 
a  man  which  is  done  carelessly  ;  when  our  minds  are  not  in  our 
business  we  cannot  prosper  in  it,  and  we  may  be  even  more 
sure  that  we  cannot  profit  by  sacred  exercises  if  we  are  not 
intensely  earnest  in  them.  If  customers  call,  and  find  the 
tradesman  away,  he  loses  all  hope  of  gain ;  and  when  grace  and 
blessing  come,  and  our  hearts  are  not  on  the  watch,  we  miss 
heavenly  treasure,  and  remain  in  a  poor  and  miserable  condition. 
My  soul,  bestir  thyself.     Lord,  quicken  thou  me  in  thy  ways. 

EEADY  TO  SAIL. 

"  A  Christian  should  be  always  as  a  ship  that  hath  takeji  in 
its  lading^  and  is  prepa7'ed  and  furnished  with  all  ma7iner  of 
tackling,  ready  to  set  sail,  07ily  expecting  the  good  wind  to  carry 
him  out  of  the  havenP  Would  to  God  it  were  always  so  with 
us.  We  are  fully  stored  and  equipped  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  yet 
we  do  not  always  enjoy  the  holy  quiet  which  ought  to  spring 
out  of  so  divine  a  fact.  All  is  well.  Why  do  we  not  feel  that  it 
is  so  ?  Why  do  we  fear  to  depart?  There  remains  nothing  for 
us  but  to  obey  the  call,  let  loose  the  cable,  and  float  into  the 
heavenly  haven  ;  but  we  act  as  if  it  were  not  so,  and  often 
dread  the  time  for  commencing  the  last  voyage.  It  is  more 
important  to  be  prepared  to  live  aright  than  to  be  in  an  ecstasy 
at  the  thought  of  death  ;  but,  still,  while  we  are  ready  for 
service,  it  is  sweet  also  to  be  ready  for  glory.  The  thought  of 
death  should  never  put  us  in  a  flurry.  It  should  be  everyday 
work  to  die  :  indeed,  we  should  be  always  dead  with  Christ. 
Where  this  is  realized  death  is  dead,  and  as  children  are  not 
afraid  of  a  dead  lion,  so  we  also  are  not  disturbed  at  the  pro- 
spect of  departing  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father. 

"  All  that  remains  for  me 
Is  but  to  love  and  sing. 

And  wait  until  the  angels  come 
To  bear  me  to  my  king." 


150  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THAT  WHICH  WILL  FILL  A  SEA  WILL  FILL  A  BUCKET. 

"  God  is  satisfied  with  }iimselfj  and  sufficient  to  his  own  happi- 
ness. Therefore,  surely,  there  is  enough  in  him  to  fill  the  crea- 
ture. That  which  fills  an  ocean  will  fill  a  bucket;  that  which 
will  fill  a  gallon  will  fill  a  pint  j  those  revenices  which  will  defray 
an  emperor'' s  expeiises  ai'e  enough  for  a  beggar  or  poor  7na?i." 

Good  reasoning.    GOD  ALL  SUFFICIENT  is  assuredly  more  than 
sufficient  for  me.     What  said  Paul }  "  My  God  shall  fill  up  all 
your  needs,  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus." 
CONTRARY  TO  BIAS. 

"  A  ma7i  may  act  from  a  violent  iinpression  contra7y  to 
nature,  as  a  stone  moveth  upward,  or  a  bowl  thrown  with  great 
strength  will  so  rtin  that  it  is  clear  that  the  bias  is  ovej-ruled; 
so  a  wicked  man  may  do  a  good  actio?i  or  two,  as  Saitl  forced 
hijnselfj-  but  the  bent  and  natural  i7icli?iation  is  another  thing^^ 
A  fish  now  and  then  leaps  out  of  the  water,  but  it  is  not  a 
bird  ;  and  a  swallow  touches  the  brook  with  its  wing,  but  it  is 
not  a  fish.  Occasional  actions  and  deeds  done  under  pressure 
are  no  evidences  of  a  man's  condition  one  way  or  another. 
Even  a  life  of  pure  morality  may  not  be  a  sure  proof  of  a 
gracious  heart ;  for  circumstances  and  surroundings  may  have 
restrained  the  natural  tendency  of  the  mind,  and  it  may  be 
secretly  as  impure  as  that  of  the  man  who  riots  in  open  crime.  A 
young  leopard  seemed  to  be  perfectly  tame  for  years,  but  it 
once  had  an  opportunity  of  tasting  blood,  and  straightway  its 
innate  ferocity  was  aroused.  Some  men  only  need  to  be 
assailed  by  a  fitting  temptation,  and  we  should  soon  see  that 
Satan's  power  within  them  is  in  full  force.  The  ball  must  be 
cured  of  its  bias,  or  else  the  next  throw  may  reveal  its  inability 
to  move  in  a  straight  line  ;  and  so  we  must  be  renewed  in  heart, 
or  our  next  action  or  thought  may  manifest  our  depravity. 

Lord,  make  me  to  do  good  freely  and  naturally  because  I 
delight  to  do  it ;  for  nothing  less  than  this  will  prove  that  thou 
hast  renewed  me  by  thy  Spirit. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  lol 

THE  HOLDER  OF  THE  KEYS  KNOCKING  AT  THE  DOOR. 

"  IV/iai  stra7ige  co7idescensio7i,  that  he  who  hath  the  key  of 
David  should  knock  at  the  Father's  gate,  and  i-eceive  his  own 
heaven  by  gift  and  entreaty  1''^  These  are  M  anion's  words  of 
surprise  at  the  first  sentences  of  our  Lord's  prayer  in  John  xvii. : 
"Father,  glorify  thy  Son."  Even  to  Jesus  it  is  said,  "Ask  of 
me."  God  had  one  Son  without  sin,  but  never  a  son  who  did 
not  pray.  The  cry  of  "  Abba,  Father  ! "  is  the  mark  of  sonship. 
True  prayer  is  the  sign  of  a  true-born  child  of  God:  "Behold, he 
prayeth"  is  the  token  by  which  each  heir  of  glory  is  known. 

What,  then,  must  be  the  condition  of  such  as  never  pray? 
How  dwelleth  sonship  in  them  ?  All  who  call  upon  the  Lord  in 
spirit  and  in  truth  may  say,  "Our  Father":  it  is  as  "the  Father" 
that  God  seeketh  such  to  worship  him. 

O  my  heart,  dread  above  all  things  a  prayerless  spirit !  Thou 
hast  not  the  key  of  David ;  how,  then,  canst  thou  enter  into  glory 
without  knocking?  He  who  had  power  to  enter  of  himself  yet 
asked  that  he  might  receive.  Rouse  thee,  my  soul,  to  renewed 
supplication,  and  may  the  Father  hear  thee  at  this  hour,  for 
Jesus'  sake. 

CHILD'S-PLAY. 

"  To  ride  a  kingdo7Ji  is  a  7iobler  desig7i  tha7i  to  play  with 
childre7ifor  pi7is  or  7tiits."  What,  then,  is  the  folly  of  the  world- 
ling's choice  when  he  prefers  to  be  contending  among  men  for 
earthly  toys,  instead  of  seeking  those  things  which  are  above ! 
How  great  the  degradation  of  professing  Christians  when  their 
minds  are  taken  up  with  fashionable  trivialities  instead  of  living 
alone  to  glorify  their  God,  and  acting  as  those  whom  Jesus  has 
made  to  be  kings  and  priests  !  Who  cares  for  pebbles  when 
jewels  glitter  before  him  ?  Who  would  choose  toys  and  rattles 
when  the  wealth  of  the  Indies  is  offered  him  ?  Let  us  be  no 
longer  children  or  fools,  but  act  as  men  who  have  put  away 
childish  things. 


152  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  PRICELESS  PRICE. 

"  The  satisfaction  77iust  carry  proporiicni  with  the  merit  of  the 
offejice.  A  debt  of  a  thoiisaiid  pou?ids  is  not  discJiarged  by  two 
or  three  brass  farthings.  Creaticres  are  fitiite,  their  acts  of 
obedience  are  already  due  to  God,  and  their  sufferings  for  one 
another,  if  they  had  been  allowed,  would  have  beeti  of  li?nited 
i7tjlue?tce"  Jesus  alone,  as  the  Son  of  God,  could  present  a 
substitution  sufficient  to  meet  the  case  of  men  condemned  for 
their  iniquities.  The  majesty  of  his  nature,  his  freedom  from 
personal  obligation  to  the  law,  and  the  intensity  of  his  griefs, 
all  give  to  his  atonement  a  virtue  which  elsewhere  can  never  be 
discovered.  None  of  the  sons  of  men  "  can  by  any  means 
redeem  his  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him."  Jesus 
only  could  stand  in  our  soul's  stead,  and  pay  the  dreadful  price. 

What  sinners  we  are  !  What  a  sacrifice  has  been  presented 
for  us!  No  brass  farthings  were  our  price;  nay,  gold  and 
silver  are  called  "  corruptible  things  "  when  compared  with  the 
precious  blood  which  has  paid  our  ransom. 

PHIDIAS  AND  HIS  NAME. 

"  Like  Phidias,  who  in  his  image  carved  his  own  7iame,  there 
is  God  engraveji  npon  every  creatureP  Not  in  characters  of 
human  writing  is  it  written,  but  in  the  character  of  the  work. 
Phidias  needed  not  to  have  written  the  word  PHIDIAS  in  so 
many  letters,  for  the  master's  hand  had  a  cunning  of  its  own 
which  none  could  counterfeit.  An  instructed  person  had  only 
to  look  at  a  statue  and  say  at  once,  "  Phidias  did  this,  for  no 
other  hand  could  have  chiselled  such  a  countenance " ;  and 
believers  have  only  to  look  either  at  creation,  providence,  or  the 
divine  word,  and  they  will  cry  instinctively,  "  This  is  the  finger 
of  God."  Yet,  alas,  man  has  great  powers  of  wilful  blindness, 
and  these  are  aided  by  the  powers  of  darkness,  so  that,  being 
both  blind  and  in  the  dark,  man  is  unable  to  see  his  God,  though 
his  presence  is  as  clear  as  that  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  153 

EXPEDIENT  ABSENCE. 

"  It  is  better  for  us  that  Christ  should  be  in  heaven  Shan  with 
us  upon  earth.  A  luojnan  had  rather  have  her  husband  live  with 
her  than  go  to  the  Indies;  but  she  yieldeth  to  his  absence  when 
she  considereth  the  profit  of  his  trafiicP  The  figure  is  well 
selected.  Let  us  dwell  on  it  a  while,  and  think  of  the  amazing 
profit  which  this  journey  of  our  best  Beloved  is  bringing  in  to 
us.  He  is  pleading  in  the  place  of  authority  :  what  an  enrich- 
ment to  us  to  have  an  Intercessor  at  the  throne  of  grace,  through 
whom  every  true  prayer  is  accepted  !  He  is  ruling  on  the  seat 
of  empire,  arranging  all  providences  for  the  success  of  his 
church:  what  a  gain  to  have  our  Head  and  Leader  raised  above 
all  principalities  and  powers  !  He  is  preparing  a  place  for  his 
people :  what  a  boon  to  have  such  a  Forerunner,  Representative, 
and  Preparer !  Moreover,  by  his  departure  we  have  received 
the  Holy  Ghost,  of  whose  divine  value  what  pen  shall  write  ! 
He  is  with  us  and  in  us,  our  Instructor,  Ouickener,  Purifier,  and 
Comforter. 

Even  upon  these  few  points  we  are  great  gainers  by  his  bodily 
absence ;  but  there  is  much  more.  If  our  Lord  judged  it  to  be 
expedient  that  he  should  go,  then  expedient  it  is  in  the  highest 
sense,  and  therefore  let  us  solace  ourselves  in  his  present 
bodily  absence  from  us  "  till  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows 
flee  away." 

THE  EMPTY  HOPPER. 

"  The  inijid  is  like  a  mill :  when  it  wajiteth  corn  it  grindeth 
upon  itself. ^^  And  this  is  the  cause  of  much  of  the  mental  de- 
pression which  afflicts  mankind ;  many  people  have  nothing  to 
think  of  outside  of  themselves,  and  so  their  thoughts  prey  upon 
their  own  hearts.  Occupation  is  the  remedy  for  many  an  internal 
sorrow.  The  study  of  the  Scriptures  would  prevent  brooding 
over  imaginary  ills.  Try  it,  good  friend,  and  see  !  Fill  the 
hopper  of  thy  mind's  mill  with  holy  instruction,  and  thou  shalt 
get  for  thyself  good  corn  instead  of  wear  and  tear  and  grit. 


154  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  LOVING  WIDOW. 

"A  ivomajt,  that  07ily  bemoaiieth  the  loss  of  her  Imsband  Z7t 
co?npa?iy,  but  banishctJi  all  tJwiigJits  of  hivi  wJieii  alone,  viiglit 
pistly  be  suspected  to  act  a  tragedian^ s  part,  and  to  pretend 
sorrow  rather  thajt  feel  itT  The  moral  is,  that  one  who  only 
has  Christ  upon  his  tongue  in  public,  and  has  no  thought  of  him 
when  alone,  is  a  mere  actor  and  hypocrite.  Secret  religion  is 
the  very  soul  of  godliness.  What  we  are  alone,  that  alone  we 
are.  Private  communion  with  Jesus  is  a  better  sign  of  grace 
than  all  the  outward  sacraments  that  were  ever  attended.  It  is 
not  likely  that  a  hyprocrite  will  delight  in  solitary  devotion  ; 
there  is  nothing  in  it  to  pay  him  for  his  trouble  ;  for  his  reward 
is  the  praise  of  man.  Judgment  upon  ourselves  will  be  much 
more  likely  to  be  correct  if  we  examine  our  hidden'  life  than 
if  we  measure  ourselves  by  that  which  is  seen  of  men. 

THE  HUNTING  DOG. 

"y^  good  dog  hunts  by  sight  as  long  as  he  can  see  his  game ; 
but  wheji  that  is  lost  he  hunts  by  scent."  So  in  prayer  we  are  to 
pursue  the  blessing  while  we  are  encouraged  to  seek  it,  but  we 
are  not  to  cease  when  the  likelihood  of  success  is  gone.  We 
must  hunt  by  a  spiritual  scent  when  sight  quite  fails  us.  The 
odour  of  the  promise  must  direct  our  way  when  the  mercy  is 
numbered  with  the  "things  not  seen  as  yet."  It  would  be  a  sad 
degeneration  if  faith  became  nothing  better  than  a  conclusion 
drawn  from  preponderating  probabilities  :  we  must  hope  against 
hope,  and  believe  in  the  truth  of  the  promise  against  all  like- 
lihood of  its  performance,  or  we  know  nothing  of  the  crown  and 
glory  of  faith. 

O  for  a  quick  nostril,  that  we  may  follow  after  those  heavenly 
things  which  the  eye  seeth  not  and  the  ear  heareth  not.  These 
will  repay  the  chase  ;  whereas  the  things  seen  of  the  eye  turn 
out,  when  overtaken,  to  be  mere  gaudy  butterflies  which  are 
spoiled  in  the  act  of  grasping  them. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  15i> 

THE  DWARF. 

"  A  child,  if  he  should  co7itimie  a  child^  and  an  zn/anf 
still,  woidd  be  a  moiisterr  However  pleased  the  parents  had 
been  with  the  httle  one  when  it  was  a  babe,  they  would  soon  be 
deeply  distressed  if  year  after  year  it  still  remained  a  tiny  thing: 
indeed,  they  would  consider  it  a  great  calamity  to  be  the  parents 
of  a  dwarf.  What,  then,  shall  we  say  of  those  in  our  churches 
who  never  grow  ?  They  are  no  forwarder  after  fifty  years  ! 
Infants  at  sixty  years  of  age  ! 

I  have  in  my  house  a  singular  picture  which  is  made  up  of 
the  portraits  of  my  sons,  taken  on  their  birthdays  for  twenty- 
one  years.  They  begin  in  the  perambulator,  and  end  as  full- 
grown  young  men.  This  is  interesting  and  according  to 
nature  ;  but,  alas,  I  have  spiritual  children  whom  I  wheeled 
about  in  the  perambulator  of  tender  comfort  twenty  years  ago, 
and  they  are  babies  still,  needing  as  much  care  as  ever,  and  are 
as  little  able  to  run  alone.  Ah  me,  that  so  many  who  ought  to 
be  warriors  are  weaklings,  that  those  who  should  be  men  of  six 
feet  high  are  so  stunted  as  to  be  mere  Tom  Thumbs  in  grace. 

O  for  grace  to  grow  in  grace,  and  especially  in  the  knowledge 
of  my  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  God  save  us  from  a  life 
which  does  not  grow,  and  from  a  growth  which  is  not  healthy. 

WHETTING  THE  SCYTHE. 

"  Certainly  the  best  of  02tr  hours  should  be  taken  tip  about  the 
best  busifiess,  and  not  in  recreations.  Those  are  to  be  blamed 
who  as  soon  as  they  rise  thijik  about  amusements,  kfiit  pleasure 
lo  pleasure,  and  wear  away  the  scythe  in  whetting,  not  in 
working.^''  This  is  a  specially  wise  hint.  Doubtless  many 
occupy  the  chief  of  their  thoughts  upon  mere  sport  and  pastime, 
and  wear  out  their  minds  by  anxiously  considering  that  which 
can  only  be  allowable  as  a  relief  from  anxious  consideration. 
To  expend  more  pains  upon  their  pleasures  than  upon  their 
duties  is  the  mark  of  ungodly  men,  and  the  sign  of  folly.    That 


156  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

which  should  be  a  rest  from  thought  is  made  to  be  the  theme  of 
thought,  and  so  a  second  wear  and  tear  is  created  by  the  very 
process  which  ought  to  have  prevented  it :  the  scythe  is  not 
only  worn  away  by  its  cutting,  but  by  its  whetting. 

Christian  man,  remember  this.  Let  not  allowable  diversions 
become  occasions  for  transgression.  This  they  will  be  if  they 
cause  waste  of  time  ;  for  in  such  a  case  you  will  be  reported  to 
your  Master  as  a  steward  who  has  wasted  his  goods.  Nor  will 
you  be  blameless  if  your  recreations  weary  the  brain  and  heart, 
and  cause  a  new  and  unremunerative  expenditure  of  force. 
Above  all,  you  will  be  greatly  censurable  if  there  is  the  slightest 
tinge  of  sin  about  the  amusement  :  "  Abstain  from  all  ap- 
pearance of  evil."  "  Happy  is  he  that  condemneth  not  himself 
in  that  which  he  alloweth." 

SHIP  BUILDING. 

"  He  that  buildeth  a  ship  doth  not  make  his  work  of  such  a 
sort  that  it  may  avoid  all  waves  and  billows,  that  is  impossible  j 
but  he  so  builds  it  that  it  may  be  tight  and  staunch^  and  able  to  en- 
dure all  weathers^^  Even  so  the  very  frame  and  construction  of 
the  spiritual  life  were  formed  with  a  view  to  trials.  Jerusalem  was 
walled  because  enemies  were  expected  ;  David  built  towers  and 
armouries  because  he  looked  for  war;  and  what  mean  the  graces 
of  faith  and  patience  unless  affliction  is  to  be  reckoned  on  ? 
Our  glorious  Leader  would  never  have  armed  and  armoured  all 
his  followers  if  there  had  not  been  allotted  to  them  a  wrestling 
with  principalities  and  powers.  See  how  Paul,  in  the  same 
chapter  in  which  he  tells  us  of  the  panoply  of  God,  reminds  us 
of  the  adversaries  whom  we  shall  surely  encounter. 

Has  the  Lord  made  thee,  my  brother,  to  be  strong  in  faith  and 
brave  in  heart .?  Then  be  not  surprised  if  thy  stout  ship  is  sent 
to  traverse  stormy  seas.  God  doth  not  throw  away  strength  by 
putting  it  where  it  will  never  be  needed.  Storms  will  surely 
come  where  grace  is  given  to  bear  them,  and  through  these 
storms  grace  will  develop  into  glory. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  157 

ONE  BIED  SETTING  THE  OTHEES  CHIEPING. 

"  //  is  of  adva?itage  to  others  when  we  use  vocal  prayer,  for  it 
quickens  them  to  the  same  exercise^  as  one  bird  setteth  all  the  rest 
a  chirpi7ig.^^  Often  one  who  has  been  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  has 
stirred  his  friend  out  of  a  cold  and  Hfeless  frame,  and  set  him  all 
on  a  glow.  Yea,  and  a  whole  company  of  believers  have  been 
roused  to  hearty  devotion  by  the  fervour  of  one  man. 

The  simile  used  by  our  author  is  very  beautiful.  Ere  the  sun 
has  risen,  one  bird  awakes,  and,  with  a  clear  tuneful  note,  calls 
to  his  mate.  Whereupon  another  follows  in  the  same  manner, 
and  a  rivalry  begins  between  the  first  two  songsters.  These 
bestir  birds  of  every  wing,  and  in  a  few  niinutes  the  whole  grove 
is  vocal,  the  air  is  full  of  music,  and  the  sun  rejoices  to  arise 
amid  a  concert  of  happy  minstrels.  Earth  has  nothing  sweeter 
than  its  spring  sonnets,  which  make  that  season  of  the  year  like 
the  first  creation,  when  the  morning  stars  sang  together  and  the 
sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.  Blessed  is  the  bird  which  thus 
leads  the  choir,  and  happy  is  that  praying  or  praising  man 
whose  holy  expressions  awaken  his  fellows  to  the  like  sacred 
exercise.  It  is  well  worth  while  to  shake  off  natural  timidity, 
which  would  make  a  good  man  to  be  as  though  he  were  dumb, 
and  deprive  him  of  half  of  his  usefulness.  To  pray  in  private  is 
essential,  but  to  be  able  to  pray  in  public  is  profitable.  We  are 
not  to  live  unto  ourselves  in  anything,  and  certainly  not  in  those 
matters  which  are  the  crown  and  glory  of  our  highest  life :  there- 
in it  is  well  to  edify  saints  as  well  as  to  benefit  ourselves. 

Lord,  open  thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth  shall  show  forth  thy 
praise. 

THE  EOMAN  SENATE  AND  CHEIST. 

*'  The  story  goeth,  that  the  Roman  Senate,  hearing  of  the 
miracles  iii  Jndea,  decreed  divine  worship  to  Christ;  but 
Tiberius  the  emperor  crossed  it,  whe?i  he  heard  that  he  would  be 
worshipped  alone P    There  is  the  edge  of  the  controversy  between 


158  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

Christ  and  the  world.  The  Christian  rehgion  interferes  with  no 
man's  hberty,  but  leaves  every  conscience  free  and  accountable 
only  to  God  ;  and  yet  it  has  no  tolerance  for  false  doctrine,  and 
enters  upon  no  compact  or  truce  with  error.  .  It  does  not  claim 
to  be  one  form  of  truth  which  exists  side  by  side  with  a  dozen 
others,  but  it  reveals  Christ  as  "  the  truth."  We  do  not  believe 
in  many  ways  to  heaven,  for  we  know  that  there  is  only  one 
way,  and  we  do  not  acknowledge  two  foundations  for  faith,  for 
we  know  Christ  to  be  the  one  and  only  foundation,  and  we  dare 
not  say  otherwise.  Christ  is  not  one  among  many  Saviours,  he 
is  the  only  Redeemer  of  men.  The  popular  fiction  of  "  com- 
parative religions  "  is  a  delusion  ;  there  is  but  one  truth,  and 
that  which  does  not  agree  with  it  is  a  lie. 

In  my  heart,  great  Lord,  many  lords  have  had  dominion 
aforetime,  but  now  thy  name  alone  shall  bear  rule  over  my 
nature.  Let  me  never  insult  thee  by  enduring  a  rival ;  let  me 
never  ruin  myself  by  dividing  my  allegiance. 

LOOSE  STONES  IN  THE  FOUNDATION. 

"  //  is  dangero2is  when  foundation-stones  lie  loose?  Indeed 
it  is.  Never  was  this  danger  greater.  Men  are  denying  the 
full  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  frittering  away  the  atonement, 
carping  at  justification  by  faith,  and  questioning  the  proper 
deity  of  our  blessed  Lord,  It  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
establish,  ground,  and  settle  his  people  in  foundation  truths, 
and  there  is  reason  to  fear  from  the  dubious  preaching  of  certain 
"  intellectual "  persons  that  they  have  little  or  no  acquaintance 
with  his  inward  teachings.  ''  If  the  foundations  be  destroyed, 
what  can  the  righteous  do  ? "  The  ungodly  may  triumph,  but 
we  weep  and  lament  when  we  see  the  glorious  doctrines  of  truth 
assailed  by  those  who,  though  they  know  it  not,  are  the  enemies 
both  of  God  and  man.  O  Lord,  visit  thy  church,  and  restore  a 
martyr's  faith  among  us.  Meanwhile  we  rejoice  that  "the 
foundation  of  God  standeth  sure." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  159 

THE  QUEEN  CEOWNED  WITH  THE  KING. 

"  IVe  are  made  prophets,  priests^  and  kings :  prophets  meet  to 
declare  Gods  praises,  priests  fit  for  holy  ministering,  kings  to 
reign  over  our  corruptions  here,  and  with  Christ  for  ever  in  glo7y. 
As  the  gneen  is  crowned  with  the  king,  so  shall  the  church  reign 
with  Christr  What  a  joy  it  is  thus  to  receive  our  honours  in 
connection  with  our  Lord!  ''Crowned  with  the  King" — this 
is  a  vast  increase  of  joy  !  It  makes  our  seat  in  the  heavenlies 
the  more  glorious  when  we  remember  that  we  are  made  to  sit 
there  together  with  him.  To  rise  in  his  resurrection,  to  hve 
because  he  Hves,  to  be  crowned  in  his  coronation,  and  to  be 
glorified  with  his  glory,  this  is  a  double,  yea,  a  sevenfold  bliss. 
The  queen's  coronation  with  the  king  is  much  more  joyous  to 
her  than  if  she  were  crowned  alone;  for  all  her  husband's 
honours  are  her  delight,  and  give  her,  as  it  were,  another 
coronation  better  than  her  own. 

O  Lord,  it  seems  too  great  a  thing  that  such  a  worthless,  un- 
worthy creature  as  I  am  should  be  glorified  at  all ;  but  to  be 
with  thee  and  like  thee  is  a  greater  glory  than  even  heaven 
itself  would  have  been  if  it  could  have  been  enjoyed  apart  from 
thyself. 

THE  CIVET  BOX. 

"  After  the  worship  of  the  Lords  Day,  and  especially  after  the 
Lord's  Supper,  we  should  contiiitie  i7i  devotion,  and  make  the 
whole  day  a  post-com7mi7iio7i.  As  civet  boxes  retai7i  their  sce7it 
whe7i  the  civet  is  take7i  out,  so,  whe7i  the  act  of  visible  co77i- 
i7iu7iio7i  is  over,  our  thoughts  and  discourse  a7id  actio7is  should 
still  savour  of  the  sole77i7iity.  Certai7ily  it  is  an  a7gu77ie7it  of 
miich  weak7iess  to  be  all  for  flashes  a7td  sudde7i  starts.'^ 

This  retaining  of  their  perfume  by  boxes  and  drawers  in  which 
sweet  scents  have  been  placed  is  a  fragrant  figure  of  the  abiding 
nature  of  grace  in  a  heart  wherein  it  has  once  been  stored  up. 
If  ordinances  yield  the  influence  designed  by  them,  their  savour 


160  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

will  remain  in  our  lives,  and  if  our  conversion  be  indeed  a  pass- 
ing from  death  unto  life,  the  effect  of  it  v^^ill  be  seen  as  long  as 
we  dwell  among  men. 

We  cannot  come  away  from  real  communion  with  Christ  with- 
out carrying  some  of  the  delightful  odour  of  his  good  ointments. 
Grace  will  reveal  itself  by  its  fragrance  if  it  be  genuine,  and 
that  fragrance  will  be  a  perfunle  of  everlasting  continuance, 
a  sweetness  indestructible.  It  should  be  said  of  every  believer, 
in  his  measure,  even  as  it  is  written  of  his  Lord,  "All  thy 
garments  smell  of  myrrh,  and  aloes,  and  cassia,  out  of  the  ivory 
palaces,  whereby  they  have  made  thee  glad."  The  hypocrite 
has  a  temporary  perfume,  with  which  he  takes  care  to  odorize 
himself  when  he  goes  into  the  outward  sanctuary  ;  but  the  true 
believer  is,  by  grace,  made  inherently  fragrant,  and  the  heavenly 
spices  have  so  thoroughly  saturated  his  garments,  that  they 
shed  their  savour  abroad  even  when  he  is  engaged  in  his 
worldly  calling,  yea,  as  long  as  he  lives,  and  wherever  he  goes. 

Sweet  Lord  Jesus,  do  thou  so  anoint  me  that  I  may  always 
bear  about  with  me  the  fragrance  of  thine  infinite  perfections, 
and  be  a  savour  of  life  unto  life  among  my  neighbours. 

BEGGAR  WITH  TREMBLING  HAND. 

"  We  give  a  beggar  an  alms^  tJwicgh  he  receives  it  loith  a 
irembli7ig^  palsied  hand;  aiid  if  he  lets  it  fall,  ive  let  him  stoop 
for  it."  So  doth  the  Lord  give  even  to  our  weak  faith,  and  in 
his  great  tenderness  permits  us  afterwards  to  enjoy  what  at  first 
we  could  not  grasp.  The  trembling  hand  is  part  of  the  poor 
beggar's  distress,  and  the  weakness  of  our  faith  is  a  part  of  our 
spiritual  poverty  ;  therefore  it  moves  the  divine  compassion,  and 
is  an  argument  with  heavenly  pity.  As  a  sin,  unbelief  grieves 
the  Spirit,  but  as  a  weakness,  mourned  and  confessed,  it  secures 
his  help.  "  Lord,  I  believe,"  is  a  confession  of  faith  which 
loses  none  of  its  acceptableness  when  it  is  followed  by  the 
prayer,  "  help  thou  mine  unbelief." 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  Ifil 

CYETTS  AND  THE  RIVEE. 

"  Cyrus,  171  Herodotus,  going  to  fight  against  Scyihia,  coming 
to  a  broad  river,  and  not  being  able  to  pass  over  it,  cut  ajid 
divided  it  into  divers  arms  and  sltiices,  and  so  made  it  passable 
for  all  his  army.  This  is  the  devil's  policy;  he  laboureth  to 
divide  the  people  of  God,  and  separate  us  into  divers  sects  and 
factions,  that  so  he  7nay  easily  overcome  tis."  This  needs  no 
comment.  What  is  needed  is  that  by  a  spirit  of  brotherly  love 
we  promote  the  unity  of  all  the  churches,  and  the  peace  and 
concord  of  that  to  which  we  belong.  May  the  peace  of  the 
church  be  *^as  a  river."  Unity  is  strength.  "Divide  and 
conquer  "  is  Satan's  watchword  to  his  myrmidons  ;  but  Christ 
teaches  us  that  the  world  will  be  won  when  his  disciples 
are  one. 

WINDOWS  AND  TILES  WORTHY  OF  CARE. 

"  Soine  say, — ^ fimdamentals  are  few;  believe  them,  and  live 
Tjell,  and  you  are  saved!  This  is  as  if  a  ma7t  in  buildi7tg  should 
be  07ily  careful  to  lay  a  good  fou7idatio7t,  and  care  nothing  for 
roof,  'wi7idows,  or  walls.  If  a  77ian  should  tmtile  yo2ir  hotcse,  a7id 
iell  you  the  foii7idatio7i  and  the  7nai7t  buttresses  a7-e  safe,  yoic 
would  7iot  be  pleased.  Why  should  you  be  7nore  careless  in 
spiritual  thi7tgs  ?  "  This  is  well  spoken.  The  least  particle  of 
diamond  is  diamond,  and  the  least  grain  of  truth  is  truth,  and 
therefore  to  be  prized  above  the  rarest  gems.  That  which  is  not 
essential  to  salvation  may  yet  be  essential  to  comfort,  and 
necessary  to  our  complete  spiritual  manhood.  Our  Lord 
threatens  those  who  teach  men  to  disregard  the  least  of  his 
commandments  that  they  shall  be  called  the  least  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  It  becomes  not  servants  to  trifle  with  the 
smallest  commands  of  a  perfect  master.  How  can  the  church 
ever  be  a  perfect  house  of  God  if  one  of  the  parts,  which  are 
"fitly  framed  together,"  should  through  our  neglect  be  left  out? 

il 


1G2  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

No,  we  must  receive  all  the  truth,  that  we  may  be  built  up  "a 
holy  temple  in  the  Lord."  Grave  errors  have  been  suggested 
and  nurtured  by  what  at  first  appeared  to  be  trifling  departures 
from  scriptural  rule,  therefore  we  ought  to  give  earnest  heed 
even  to  minor  precepts.  Future  ages  may  have  to  mourn  over 
the  defalcations  of  to-day,  unless  we  are  careful  to  do  the  build- 
ing of  the  Lord's  house  with  faithfulness. 

Lord,  make  me  watchful  in  little  matters,  lest  I  grow  careless 
In  weightier  concerns.  Thou  didst  speak  concerning  the  pins 
and  cords  of  the  tabernacle,  and  ordain  that  all  should  be  made 
to  pattern,  and  by  this  I  perceive  that  thou  regardest  even  the 
small  things  of  thy  service;  I  pray  thee,  therefore,  give  me 
both  clear  light,  a  keen  eye,  and  a  tender  heart,  that  in  all  things 
I  may  please  thee. 

FLINT  AND  STEEL. 

"  God'^s  seasojis  are  not  at  your  beck.  If  the  first  stroke  of  the 
flint  doth  not  bring  forth  the  fire,  you  must  strike  again.^''  That 
is  to  say,  God  will  hear  prayer,  but  he  may  not  answer  it  at  the 
time  which  we  in  our  own  minds  have  appointed ;  he  will  reveal 
himself  to  our  seeking  hearts,  but  not  just  when  and  where  we 
have  settled  in  our  own  expectations.  Hence  the  need  of  per- 
severance and  importunity  in  supplication.  In  the  days  of  flint 
and  steel  and  brimstone  matches  we  had  to  strike  and  strike 
again,  dozens  of  times,  before  we  could  get  a  spark  to  live  in  the 
tinder ;  and  we  were  thankful  enough  if  we  succeeded  at  last. 
Shall  we  not  be  as  persevering  and  hopeful  as  to  heavenly 
things.''  We  have  more  certainty  of  success  in  this  business 
than  we  had  with  our  flint  and  steel,  for  we  have  God's  promise 
at  our  back.  Never  let  us  despair.  God's  time  for  mercy  will 
come  ;  yea,  it  has  come,  if  our  time  for  believing  has  arrived. 
Ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering  ;  but  never  cease  from  petitioning 
because  the  king  delays  to  reply.  Strike  the  steel  again.  Make 
the  sparks  fly  and  have  your  tinder  ready  :  you  will  get  a  light 
before  lone:. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  IC3 

CATCHING  AT  A  BOUGH. 

"  As  a  mail  falling  into  a  river  espieth  a  bough  of  a  tree,  and 
catches  at  it  luith  all  his  might,  and  as  soon  as  he  hath  fast  hold 
of  it  he  is  safe  though  troubles  ajid  fears  do  not  presently  vanish 
cut  of  his  mind;  so  the  soul,  espying  Christ  as  the  only  means 
to  save  hi?n,  and  reaching  out  the  hand  to  hitn,  is  safe,  though 
it  be  not  presently  quieted  a?id  pacified.^^  The  soul's  grasp  of 
Jesus  saves  even  when  it  does  not  comfort.  If  we  touch  the 
hem  of  his  garment  we  are  healed  of  our  deadly  disease,  though 
our  heart  may  still  be  full  of  trembling.  We  may  be  in  con- 
sternation, but  we  cannot  be  under  condemnation  if  we  have 
believed  in  Jesus  ;  even  as  the  man  who  has  grasped  the  branch 
may  be  wetted,  but  cannot  be  drowned.  Safety  is  one  thing, 
and  assurance  of  it  is  another.  Whether  the  believer  in  Christ 
Jesus  is  able  to  rejoice  in  his  safety,  or  is  still  under  bondage 
to  fear,  the  word  of  the  Lord  standeth  true  beyond  all  question 
— "  He  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life." 

THE  COIN  AND  THE  PEINCE. 

'*  l7t  the  Scriptures  there  is  a  draught  of  God,  but  ift  Christ 
there  is  God  himself  A  coin  bears  the  image  of  Ccesar,  but 
CcBsar's  son  is  his  lively  resemblance.  Christ  is  the  living 
Bible."  We  rightly  call  the  Scriptures  "  The  Word  of  God,"' 
and  yet  in  the  deepest  and  truest  sense  Christ  only  is  "  THE 
WORD."  What  reverence,  then,  is  due  to  him,  and  how  im- 
portant it  is  that  we  get  beyond  all  the  outward  signs  and 
symbols  of  religion,  and  even  beyond  the  letter  of  Scripture,  to 
the  person  of  the  Son  of  God  himself.  His  promise  of  rest  is 
to  those  who  come  to  himself, — "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden'';  for  it  is  in  himself  that  the 
divine  power  is  centred.  He  tells  us,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me 
hath  seen  the  Father";  but  the  eye  of  the  mind  has  never  yet 
beheld  the  glory  of  God,  or  known  him  in  any  true  sense  until  it 
has  gazed  upon  Immanuel,  God  with  us;  for  he  alone  is  "the 


164  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

brightness  of  his  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his 
person." 

God  is  in  every  covenant  blessing,  but  not  as  he  is  in  Christ, 
for  "  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 

A  man  had  better  have  the  prince  for  a  friend  than  possess  a 
thousand  images  of  the  king  his  father  upon  gold  and  silver ; 
and  so  it  is  a  happier  thing  for  us  to  know  that  Christ  is  ours 
than  to  possess  all  other  blessings,  however  much  of  God  there 
may  be  about  them.  "  Christ  is  all,"  and  he  is  more  than  all. 
To  his  people  he  is  all  in  all,  for  such  is  God. 

My  soul,  let  this  endear  Jesus  to  thee  beyond  all  else,  and  let 
it  make  thee  urgent  and  eager  to  draw  very  near  to  him.  Here 
lies  thy  way  to  God,  for  God  is  in  him,  and  nowhere  else  canst 
thou  ever  find  him.  What  a  happy  thing  for  thee  that  thy  God, 
thy  heaven,  thy  all,  are  treasured  up  in  one  so  accessible  to  thee 
as  thy  Mediator  and  Friend. 

THE  ANGLER  AND  THE  HUNTER. 

"  Till  we  sin  Satan  is  a  parasite;  but  when  07ice  we  are  in 
the  devil's  hands  he  tin-ns  tyrant.  As  an  angler^  when  the  fish 
hath  swallowed  the  bait,  discovers  himself;  or  as  a  himter  lies 
out  of  sight  till  the  beast  is  gotten  into  the  toils,  a?td  then  he 
shouts  and  tj^iumphs  over  his  prey,  so  the  evil  one  lets  not  his 
e7imity  be  seen  till  he  has  deceived  his  dupe.^'' 

How  often  have  I  seen  this.  A  soul  tempted  by  the  pleasures 
of  sin  one  day,  and  driven  to  despair  by  remorse  for  it  the 
next !  Satan  first  acts  as  deceiver  and  then  as  accuser.  While 
men  can  be  made  to  suck  down  sin  he  will  make  it  sweet  in 
their  mouths  ;  but  when  the  poison  is  down  he  makes  it  bitter 
in  their  bowels.  At  the  first  he  tells  them  that  there  is  no 
punishment,  and  by-and-by  that  there  is  no  mercy. 

Lord,  teach  us  how  to  baffle  Satan's  arts,  and  rescue  men  from 
his  wiles.  No  mere  human  wisdom  can  match  his  subtlety  ; 
instruct  us,  then,  by  thy  Spirit  that  we  may  be  as  wise  to  win 
souls  as  he  is  crafty  to  destroy  them. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  1G5 

WEDGES. 

"  When  a  man  cleaves  a  block  he  first  pierces  it  with  small 
luedges,  and  then  with  greater;  and  so  doth  the  devil  make 
entrance  into  the  soul  by  degrees.  Judas  first  purloineth  and 
stealeth  out  of  the  bag;  then  censtireth  Christ  as  profusely 
lavishing.  What  needs  this  waste  ?  This  was  not  only  a  check 
to  the  wo7nan,  but  to  Christ  himself  Lastly,  ztpon  Chris fs  rebuke 
he  hates  him,  and  theft  betrays  him  to  his  enemies^''  There  is  no 
dealing  with  the  devil  except  at  arm's  length.  Those  little 
wedges  of  his  are  terribly  insinuating  because  they  are  so  little. 
Keep  them  out,  or  worse  will  follow.  Occasional  glasses  lead 
on  to  drunken  orgies ;  occasional  theatre-going  grows  into 
wantonness  and  chambering ;  trifling  pilfering  soon  grows  to 
downright  theft ;  secret  backslidings  end  in  public  abominations. 
The  egg  of  all  mischief  is  as  small  as  a  mustard  seed.  It  is 
with  the  transgressor  as  with  the  falling  stone,  the  further  he 
falls  the  faster  he  falls.  Again  we  say — beware  of  the  little 
wedges,  for  they  are  in  crafty  hands,  and  our  utter  destruction 
may  be  compassed  by  them.  Even  iron  safes  have  been  forced 
when  litde  wedges  have  made  room  for  the  burglar's  lever. 
Take  heed  of  the  plea,  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?  " 

O  my  Saviour,  let  me  not  fall  by  little  and  little,  or  think 
myself  able  to  bear  the  indulgence  of  any  known  sin  because  it 
seems  so  insignificant.  Keep  me  from  sinful  beginnings,  lest 
they  lead  me  on  to  sorrowful  endings. 

THE  RIDEE  AND  THE  FOOTMAN. 

''^We  expect  he  should  come  sooner  that  rideth  on  horse- 
back than  he  that  travelleth  on  foot."  Privileges  have  their 
responsibilities.  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  much  shall  be 
required.  Five  talents  must  bring  in  more  interest  than  one, 
or  their  possessor  will  prove  to  be  a  slothful  servant. 

How  is  it  with  us  ?  Have  we  more  talents  than  others  1  Then 
our  Master  asks,  "  What  do  ye  more  than  others .? " 


166  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

LIGHT  CARRIED  BY  A  BLACK  MAN. 

"  A  torch  giveth  never  the  less  light  though  carried  by  a 
blackamoor;  nor  is  the  gospel  less  efficacious  because  managed 
by  car7ial  instru?nentsP  It  is  not  God's  will  that  anyone  who  is 
himself  living  in  sin  should  proclaim  the  gospel,  or  be  an  officer 
in  his  church,  and  yet  when  it  so  happens,  the  gospel  itself  is 
still  a  divine  light,  and  those  who  see  it  live  thereby.  The 
faults  of  the  preacher  are  very  grievous ;  but  if  the  truth  of  God 
be  delivered  by  him,  we  should  not  be  so  foolish  as  to  reject  the 
doctrine,  though  we  censure  the  man.  The  church  itself  may 
be,  like  Laodicea,  in  an  ill  state ;  but  it  is  not  for  us  to  quarrel 
with  the  Scriptures  on  that  account.  Young  persons  are  greatly 
stumbled  when  they  hear  of  the  fall  of  an  eminent  professor, 
and  yet  they  need  not  be  surprised,  for  there  have  been 
hypocrites  in  all  ages.  We  must  not  rest  our  faith  upon  men, 
nor  believe  in  God  because  we  have  confidence  in  a  minister  ; 
that  would  be  a  sorry  reason  for  faith,  and  would  vitiate  its 
nature.  No,  if  the  torch-bearer  turns  black  as  soot  we  will  still 
rejoice  in  the  light. 

Fit  is  it,  however,  that  none  but  gracious  men  should  touch 
the  work  of  the  Lord  ;  all  others  are  intruders.  "  Be  ye  clean 
that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."  "  To  the  wicked  God  saith, 
"What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes  ?" 

THE  RIVER  LOSING  DEPTH. 

"  Salvian  observeth  that  the  church,  like  a  river,  loscth  in 
depth  what  it  gaineth  in  breadth.'^  Yet  Salvian  could  not 
prove  that  it  needs  to  do  so.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  case  is 
occurring  even  now;  but  it  ought  not  so  to  be.  When  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover 
the  sea,  we  shall  look  for  depth  as  well  as  breadth,  or  the  figure 
will  not  be  complete.  The  New  Jerusalem  lieth  four  square, 
and  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth  ;  ''the  length  and  the 
breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  167 

THE  WOODEN  LEG. 

*'  Wicked  men  may  supply  the  7ieeds  of  an  office,  as  yudas  for 
a  while  did  duty  as  a7i  apostle.  A  wooden  leg  may  he  a  stay  to 
the  body,  though  it  be  not  a  true  inejnber.^^  Quaint,  but  true.  It 
is  to  be  feared  that  our  churches  have  many  wooden  legs,  in  the 
form  of  lifeless  ministers,  graceless  deacons,  and  unregenerate 
elders.  The  body  may  move  with  these,  but  her  walk  must  be 
limping,  painful,  slow,  and  ungainly.  As  for  the  wooden  limb 
itself,  its  end  is  to  be  burned.  It  will  be  a  fearful  thing  to  turn 
cut  to  be  a  dead  member  of  a  living  body — a  false  arm,  or  a 
glass  eye.  Such  shams  can  never  be  part  of  the  body  of  Christ. 
O  for  living,  loving,  lasting  union  with  the  living  Head  ! 

THE  MISFir. 

"  A  garjnent  too  short  will  not  cover  our  nakedness,  and  a 
garment  too  long  will  be  a  dirty  rag  to  trip  up  our  heels.  God 
is  bound  in  covenant  only  to  do  what  is  convejtient  for  us,  and 
that  we  jnust  leave  to  God  to  Judge.  The  sheep  must  not  choose 
the  pastures,  but  the  shepherdP  O  for  contentment !  "  Too 
much,"  we  see  by  the  figure  used  above,  has  its  inconveniences 
as  well  as  "  too  little."  Efiough  is  the  word,  and  God  knows 
best  when  we  are  at  that  point.  We  see  around  us  those  who 
are  much  hindered  in  holy  living  by  the  fact  of  their  being 
wealthy,  and  yet  perhaps  we  are  pining  to  run  in  their  silken 
sack.  Others  we  see  who  are  impeded  by  their  poverty, 
and  yet  this  need  not  be,  for  some  of  the  Lord's  poor  are  far 
ahead  of  other  runners,  and  keep  up  all  the  better  pace  because 
they  have  so  little  to  carry. 

Come,  my  heart,  be  satisfied.  It  should  be  no  hard  task  to 
thee  to  be  content,  seeing  all  things  are  thine,  and  thy  Father 
acts  as  thy  steward,  and  deals  out  daily  "  things  convenient " 
for  thee.  The  garment  which  he  puts  around  thee  fits  thee  in 
every  part  ;  blessed  art  thou  if  thou  canst  wear  it  becomingly 
and  praise  him  ior  it. 


168  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

TIMBER.     SHEEP.    WAX. 

**'  We  warp  in  the  sunshine,  a  shower  does  us  good.  The  dof^ 
is  let  loose  that  the  sheep  may  run  together.  A  piece  of  wax, 
when  it  is  broken,  put  it  together  7tever  so  often,  it  will  not 
dose  J  but  put  it  into  the  candle  and  the  ends  will  stick  close 
together."  Thus  by  three  figures  we  see  the  danger  of  pros- 
perity and  the  benefit  of  affliction. 

The  first  metaphor  is  impressive.  Timber  warps  if  it  be 
exposed  to  noontide  heat,  and  men  are  all  too  apt  to  be 
influenced  one  way  or  another  by  success.  Poor  fools  that  we 
are,  we  cannot,  while  on  earth,  bear  too  much  happiness.  It  is 
our  tendency  to  warping  which  often  necessitates  our  weeping. 
The  Lord  will  sooner  damp  us  with  showers  of  sorrow  than 
allow  us  to  be  spoiled. 

The  dog  to  fetch  back  the  wandering  sheep  is  a  well-known 
illustration.  Some  need  to  feel  the  dog's  teeth  before  they  will 
mind  him,  and  God  has  dogs  which  will  bite  if  barking  is  not 
enough.  Our  good  Shepherd  will  sooner  worry  us  with  the  dog 
of  affliction  than  leave  us  to  the  wolf  of  apostasy. 

The  broken  stick  of  wax  prettily  shows  how  we  need  suffering 
if  we  are  to  be  set  right  after  the  fractures  of  temptation.  How 
well  the  broken  heart  of  a  sinner  unites  with  the  heart  of  the 
suffering  Saviour !  There  must  be  melting,  or  there  v^^ill  not  be 
inion.  Blessed  be  God  for  any  experience  by  which  he  unites 
our  heart  to  fear  his  name. 

THE  TEAIL  OF  A  SNAIL. 

^^  As  a  snail  leavcih  a  frothy  slime  tipon  the  fairest  flowers^  so 
do  tmthankful  persons  leave  their  own  slime  upon  the  rich 
mercies  of  God  vouchsafed  to  thc?nJ''  Pining  for  things  denied 
them,  they  undervalue  favours  bestowed  upon  them.  Like  Israel 
in  the  wilderness,  if  they  cannot  have  flesh  to  feed  their  lusts 
they  call  even  angels'  food  "light  bread."  By  feasting  to  the 
full,  and  wasting  their  substance  in  luxury,  many  persons  do 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  169 

more  mischief  with  the  bounties  of  providence  than  slugs  and 
snails  can  do  among  the  plants  in  a  garden.  Yet,  when  their 
festivals  are  over,  or  even  while  their  wine  is  yet  on  the  board, 
they  grumble  and  murmur  as  if  they  were  more  hardly  done  by 
than  any  other  men  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  :  thus  a  second 
time  they  besmear  God's  goodness  by  their  thankless  conduct. 
They  abuse  the  gift  and  then  abuse  the  Giver.  They  climb  the 
\vall,  and  spurn  the  ladder  by  which  they  climbed  ;  they  drink, 
and  then  defile  the  spring ;  they  rise  upward  to  the  sky,  and 
then,  like  clouds,  obscure  the  heavens. 

My  God,  grant  that  I  may  never  abuse  thy  gifts,  nor  even 
dare  to  use  them  without  gratefully  praising  thee  for  them. 
Moses  warned  the  Jews  that  the  lizard,  the  snail,  and  the  mole 
are  unclean,  and  I  would  not  be  like  to  any  one  of  them.  David 
said  concerning  the  wicked,  "  As  a  snail  which  melteth,  let  every 
one  of  them  pass  away."  God  forbid  that  I  should  come  under 
that  curse,  and  so  pour  out  my  life  in  complaining,  leaving 
behind  me  a  trail  of  repining  wherever  I  may  move. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  PICTUEE  OF  A  SHEEP. 

"A  wolf  doth  not  worry  a  painted  sheep,  nor  does  the 
world  annoy  a  mere  professor.  But  when  any  are  holy 
indeed,  and  of  a  strict  innocency,  they  are  hated,  and  cojitra- 
dicted,  and  spoken  agai-nstP  No  one  fights  with  a  statue,  but 
living  soldiers  are  often  in  the  wars  :  living  Christians  are  sure 
to  be  assailed  in  one  way  or  another.  Let  us  therefore  for  once 
gather  figs  of  thistles,  and  find  comfortable  fruit  upon  the  thorns 
and  briars  of  persecution.  The  world  is  no  fool ;  it  would  not 
be  so  fierce  against  us  if  it  did  not  see  something  about  us 
contrary  to  itself;  its  enmity  therefore  is  part  evidence  that  we 
are  the  children  of  God.  When  we  see  wolves  worrying  the 
picture  of  a  sheep  we  shall  expect  to  see  the  ungodly  scoffing  at 
those  who  are  like  them.  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world 
would  love  his  own.'' 


170  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

SMALL  VESSELS  AND  A  GKEAT  FOUNTAIN. 

"  Our  co7mmmio7i  with  Christ  is  not  iiow  fiill.  There  is  a 
defect  both  in  the  pipe  and  in  the  vessel;  ive  caufiot  contain  all 
that  he  is  able  to  give  out,  Jtor  can  the  7neans  convey  it  all  to  7ts, 
The  77iea7is  are  as  7iarrow  conduits  fro77t  the  fou7itain,  or  as 
creeks  fro77i  the  sea.  The  foimtain  could  se7id forth  77iore  water ^ 
but  the  pipe  or  co7idiiit  ca7i  co7ivey  710  77wre.^''  Yet  the  means  of 
grace  could  convey  much  more  than  we  are  usually  ready  to 
receive,  and  Dr.  Manton  must  not  blame  the  pipe  so  much  as 
the  poor,  cracked  earthen  vessel,  so  narrow  at  the  mouth,  and 
so  stinted  in  every  direction.  Ministries  and  ordinances  would 
be  far  more  profitable  if  we  were  prepared  to  be  profited.  At 
the  same  time,  if  we  dwell  where  outward  privileges  are  scanty, 
we  need  not  therefore  be  famished.  Our  Lord  can  pour  his 
grace  into  us  altogether  apart  from  the  means  :  we  are  not 
straitened  in  him — the  straitness  is  in  ourselves  alone.  We  are 
shallow  and  narrow  creeks,  and  how  can  the  great  sea  of  divine 
love  pour  its  fulness  into  us  ?  O  Lord,  enlarge  our  hearts  till 
we  shall  be  "  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God." 

TRAVELLING  MUCH  MORE  DIFFICULT  THAN  LOOKING 
AT  MAPS. 

"  When  we  look  at  tow7is  071  a  77iap  we  thi7ik  the  way  to 
ihe7n  easy,  as  if  our  foot  were  as  7ii77ible  as  our  thoughts;  but  we 
are  soo?t  discouraged  a7id  tired,  whe7i  we  77ieet  with  dangerous 
a7id  craggy  passages,  a7td  co77ie  to  learn  the  differ e7tce  between 
gla7ici7ig  at  the  way  and  serious  e7tdeavours  to  traverse  it.  So 
i7i  77iatters  of  religion,  he  that  ejideavours  to  bri7ig  Christ  a7id 
his  soul  together,  befo7-e  he  hath  do7ie,  will  be  forced  to  sit  dow7i 
a7id  cry.  Lord,  help  77ie/"  He  means  that  faith  is  no  such 
child's  play  as  some  dream :  it  appears  easy  enough,  and  yet 
when  the  awakened  soul  comes  to  seek  the  Lord  in  earnest,  it 
finds  out  its  own  insufficiency.  It  is  well  when  this  discovery 
comes  speedily,  and  is  clearly  made,  so  that  the  heart  early  in  the 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  171 

morning-  casts  itself  on  God  for  everything,  and  docs  not  waste 
the  day  in  searching  for  water  in  its  own  broken  cisterns.  We 
need  as  much  to  look  to  Christ  for  faith  as  by  faith. 

Our  author  also  sets  forth  the  difference  between  theory  and 
experience.  Grace  in  the  book  is  one  thing,  and  grace  in  the 
heart  is  another.  To  build  on  paper  by  drawing  elaborate  plans 
has  been  the  amusement  of  many  a  fool  who  could  not  lay  one 
brick  upon  another.  We  must  beware  of  resting  in  mere  words 
and  confiding  in  head  knowledge,  and  we  must  come  to  soHd, 
substantial  facts.  A  man  may  dream  that  he  is  among  the 
stars,  and  may  suddenly  wake  to  find  that  he  has  battered  his 
face  against  the  post  of  his  bed  :  dreaming,  doting,  and  theori- 
zing are  poor  substitutes  for  "real"  experience  of  divine  things. 

KNOCKING  THE  BARREL. 

*'  By  knocking  upon  the  vessel  we  sec  luhether  it  be  full  o?' 
empty,  cracked  or  sound;  so  by  the  k7iocks  of  providence  given  7is 
in  afflictio7t  we  are  discovered"  The  figure  fnay  be  varied  by 
remembering  the  manner  in  which  wheels  are  tapped  with  a 
hammer  on  the  railway,  that  their  soundness  may  be  tested. 
Not  only  does  affliction  thus  try  our  characters,  but  prosperity 
does  the  same.  Approbation  is  a  testing  blow  to  many  a  man  ; 
for  he  who  could  have  borne  opposition  gallantly  too  often 
yields  at  the  touch  of  praise,  and  is  found  to  be  empty,  vain, 
and  devoid  of  stability. 

When  we  are  afflicted  it  is  wise  to  watch  the  result  upon 
ourselves.  Can  our  faith  bear  trial,  or  is  it  a  mere  counterfeit  ? 
Do  we  love  a  taking  as  well  as  a  giving  God  ?  Do  we  cleave  to 
Christ  when  under  a  cloud,  or  is  our  religion  only  a  fair-weather 
amusement  ?  Heart-searching  may  thus  be  greatly  helped,  and 
we  shall  run  less  danger  of  self-deception.  It  will  be  an  awful 
tiling  to  be  mere  empty  barrels,  and  never  know  it  till  death 
deals  a  blow  with  his  rod  of  iron,  and  we  answer  to  it  with 
hollow  sounds  of  despair. 


172  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  BROOK  AND  THE  RIVEE. 

'^  A  travelh}^  may  easily  pass  over  the  head  of  a  brook;  but 
when  he  goeth  down,  thinkitig  tofitid  it  narrower,  it  is  so  broad 
that  he  cannot  pass  at  all.  Every  delay  brings  on  a  jiew  degree 
of  hardness  of  heart  on  our  part,  and  a  new  desertion  on  God^s 
partP  Never  will  his  sin  be  less  powerful  than  at  this  moment, 
though  the  ungodly  man  should  wait  for  fifty  years.  The 
domination  of  evil  is  ever  growing,  never  waning.  Manton  well 
points  out  the  two  dangers  of  delay — our  own  hardening,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit's  withdrawal.  Either  of  these  may  well  cause 
fear  and  trembling  in  self-confident  hearts. 

To-day  let  the  anxious  soul  pass  the  brook  by  God's  gracious 
help  ;  to-morrow  the  stream  will  be  hard  to  ford,  and  anon  the 
torrent  will  sweep  all  before  it.  Tarry  not,  O  thou  who  wouldst 
be  saved. 

COMMERCE. 

"  Divers  countries  have  divers  conimodiiies,  a7id  one  needeth 
what  another  produceth  J  one  abotmdeth  with  wines,  some  have 
spices,  others  have  skins,  atid  co7mnodities  of  other  kinds j  and 
all  this  is  so  ordered  that  by  conunerce  a?id  traffic  there  miglit 
be  society  maintained  among  mankind.  So  God  in  his  church 
hath  given  to  07ie  gifts,  to  another  graces,  to  each  one  somewhat 
which  is  not  possessed  by  his  fellow,  to  inaintain  a  holy  society 
and  spiritual  co7nmerce  among  themselves.^'  Brethren  who  will 
not  commune  with  one  another  upon  spiritual  subjects  are  as 
traders  who  shut  up  their  shops  and  will  neither  buy  nor  sell. 
Too  wise  to  be  taught,  and  too  idle  to  teach,  they  live  isolated 
lives,  like  the  man  in  the  iron  mask,  without  joy  to  themselves 
or  benefit  to  others. 

We  shall  all  be  beggars  together  if  we  shut  ourselves  up  like 
hermits,  and  cry  "  every  man  for  himself."  We  have  seen  a 
little  of  this  "protection"  in  spiritual  goods,  and  we  witness 
that  it  tendeth  to  poverty.     Fellowship  is  pleasant,  mutual  help 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  173 

is  profitable  ;  let  us  not  look  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but 
every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others.  Time  was  when  they 
that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another,  and  that  was 
the  best  of  times.  Let  us  hold  mutual  discourse  upon  our  ex- 
periences, make  pleasant  exchange  of  our  knowledge,  and  aid 
each  other  by  our  gifts.  Among  idolaters  we  read  that  "  the 
carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsmith,  and  he  that  smoothed  with 
the  hammer  him  that  smote  the  anvil,"  and  surely  such  co- 
operation ought  to  be  even  more  evident  among  the  servants 
of  the  true  God.  We  wish  it  could  be  said  of  all  church  work, 
"  They  helped  every  one  his  neighbour,  and  every  one  said  to 
his  brother,  *  Be  of  good  courage.' "  When  shall  all  rivalry 
cease,  and  every  Christian  seek  to  advance  the  interests  of  his 
brethren  ?  We  want  no  more  "  exclusive  brethren,''  whoever 
they  may  be;  but  we  need  communicating  brethren,  whose 
fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  the  Son,  and  with  all 
the  saints. 

THE  BIRD  AFRAID  OF  THE  SCARECROW. 

"  If  a7t  tmregeneraie  man  should  leave  off  sin  under  fear  of 
death  or  hell,  it  wotild  not  be  out  of  hatred  to  sin,  but  out  of  the 
fear  of  the  piinishtnent,  as  the  bird  is  kept  fro7n  the  bait  by  the 
scarecrow^  Much  of  this  scarecrow  work  is  going  on  around 
us,  and  if  it  prevents  the  stealing  of  the  wheat  we  may  be  glad 
of  it.  Still,  it  is  a  poor  state  of  things  for  a  man  to  refrain 
from  sin  merely  and  only  because  he  is  afraid  of  smarting  for 
it.  If  the  heart  would,  but  the  hand  dares  not,  the  person  will 
be  judged  by  what  he  desires  rather  than  by  his  actions.  We 
are  before  God  what  in  our  hearts  we  wish  to  be.  The  raven  is 
not  a  dove  so  long  as  it  longs  for  carrion,  even  though  it  may 
sit  in  a  cage,  and  act  like  the  gentlest  of  birds.  Christ  did  not 
come  to  scare  us  from  sin,  but  to  save  us  from  it.  Even  if  there 
were  no  hell,  true  saints  would  hate  sin,  and  strive  after 
holiness. 


174  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

OIT  THE  TEEE  AND  IN  THE  STILL. 

''  The  rose  is  not  so  sweet  on  the  tree  as  in  the  stilU^  Yes,  Mr. 
Manton,  it  is  just  as  sweet,  but  it  does  not  so  fully  pour  forth  its 
perfume.  Thanks  to  the  fire,  the  fragrance  cannot  lie  latent 
when  the  leaves  are  distilled.  Thus  is  it  with  the  believini^ 
soul  under  adversity,  the  heart  then  yields  up  to  God  the  sweet- 
ness which  else  had  lain  dormant. 

Some  of  us  owe  more  than  we  can  tell  to  what  Manton  calls 
**  the  still."  The  furnace,  the  anvil,  and  the  hammer  have  been 
the  making  of  our  lives  under  the  guiding  wisdom  of  the  great 
Worker's  hand.  We  cannot  enjoy  the  process  while  we  undergo 
\\;  but  the  results  are  such  that  we  are  ready  to  fall  in  love  with 
suffering.  O  rose,  were  it  not  for  the  still,  thine  essence  had 
not  made  fragrant  the  robes  of  queens  ;  but  now  art  thou  in 
king's  palaces,  and  a  drop  of  thy  soul's  inmost  ichor  is  of  more 
worth  than  gold.  Even  so,  we  had  never  been  so  near  our  Lord, 
the  Prince  Immanuel,  had  we  not,  after  our  measure,  been  made 
to  drink  of  his  cup,  and  to  be  baptized  with  his  baptism. 

We  bless  thee,  O  Lord,  for  all  that  thou  doest,  whether  thou 
load  us  with  favour  till  we  are  as  flowers  gemmed  with  dew,  or 
pluck  away  our  beauty,  and  sever  us  from  our  delights  till  we 
are  as  roses  cut  off  and  cast  into  the  still.  All  that  thou  doest 
is  good,  and  for  all  thou  shalt  be  extolled. 

CALLING  OFF  THE  DOG. 

"  A  stranger  cajinot  call  oj^  a  dog  front  the  fiock^  but  the 
shepherd  can  do  so  with  a  word;  so  the  Lord  can  easily  rebuke 
Satan  when  he  finds  him  most  violent'^  O  Lord,  when  I  am 
worried  by  my  great  enemy,  call  him  off,  I  pray  thee.  Let  me 
hear  a  voice  saying,  "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan ;  even 
the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee."  By  thine 
election  of  me,  rebuke  him,  I  pray  thee,  and  deliver  me  from 
the  power  of  the  dog. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  175 

HEWING  STONES  AND  PRUNING  VINES. 

*'  There  is  more  squaring,  and  hewing^  a?id  hacking  used  about 
a  sto7ie  that  is  to  be  set  in  a  stately  palace  than  that  which  is 
placed  in  a?t  ordinary  btcildifigj  and  the  vine  is  primed  'whe7i 
the  bramble  is  not  looked  after,  but  let  alone  to  grow  to  its  full 
lengthy  This  should  reconcile  believers  to  their  chastisements. 
It  is  a  well-worn  figure  ;  but  it  is  well  put.  Brambles  certainly 
have  a  fine  time  of  it,  and  grow  after  their  own  pleasure.  We 
have  seen  their  long  shoots  reaching  far  and  wide,  and  no  knife 
has  threatened  them  as  they  luxuriated  upon  the  commons  and 
waste  lands.  The  poor  vine  is  cut  down  so  closely  that  little 
remains  of  it  but  bare  stems.  Yet,  when  clearing-time  comes, 
and  the  brambles  are  heaped  for  their  burning,  who  would  not 
rather  be  the  vine  ? 

Ah,  Lord !  Let  me  never  sigh  for  ease,  but  always  seek  for 
usefulness.  Square  me  till  I  am  fit  for  a  place  in  thy  temple  ; 
prune  me  till  I  yield  my  utmost  fruit.  I  know  not  what  this 
prayer  may  involve  ;  but  if  I  did,  I  would  pray  to  be  helped  to 
pray  it,  and  I  would  entreat  thee  to  fulfil  it  to  the  letter. 

THE  SINGER. 

"  l7i  a  choir  or  concert  of  voices  he  is  commended  that  sings 
luell.  Whether  he  sings  the  bass,  or  the  mean^  or  the  treble,  that 
is  nothiiig^  so  he  singeth  his  part  well ;  but  he  is  despised  and 
disallowed  that  sijigs  amiss,  whatever  voice  he  tiseth.  Even  thus 
doth  God  approve,  accept,  and  rezvard  his  people  that  serve  and 
glorify  hi7n  i7t  a7ty  state,  whether  it  be  high  or  loiu,  rich  or  poor ^ 
€nii7ie7it  or  obscure.^'  Yes,  it  is  not  our  rank  or  estate,  but  the 
right  using  of  our  position  which  is  the  point  to  be  thought  of — 
the  point  by  which  we  shall  be  judged  at  the  last.  If  called  in 
poverty  to  sing  bass,  blessed  is  he  who  sings  so  as  to  please  the 
ear  of  God ;  he  shall  be  fully  as  accepted  as  his  neighbour  who 
exalts  his  voice  upon  a  higher  key.  So  long  as  the  music  of 
his  life  was  true  to  the  score  of  duty  no  man  will  be  censured 


176  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

because  his  notes  were  not  so  strong,  or  high,  or  many  as  those 
of  another  in  the  company.  It  is  not  the  loftiness  of  our  place, 
but  the  worthy  occupying  of  it,  which  will  bring  acceptance  to 
our  work  before  the  Lord. 

O,  my  great  Master  and  Teacher,  help  me  to  remember  this, 
and  let  me  be  far  more  anxious  to  sing  my  part  correctly  than 
to  sit  in  this  seat  or  that,  among  the  rich  or  the  great. 

WAGGONS  NOT  MOVED  BY  WIND  NOR  SHIPS  DEAWN 
BY  HOESES. 

"  The  wise  use  right  means,  such  as  will  bring  them  io  their 
desired etid.  We  do  not  use  to  draw  ships  in  the  sea  with  horses, 
nor  draw  waggons  with  the  wind.  We  imist  7iot  use  cojttrary 
means^  nor  i7isuffi,cient  ?nea7zs.  We  cannot  go  to  the  bottom  of 
a  well  that  is  thirty  foot  deep  with  a  line  that  is  but  ten  foot." 
Why,  then,  do  men  try  to  win  heaven  by  their  own  merits? 
This  short  line  will  never  reach  so  far.  Why  do  they  endeavour 
to  save  souls  by  noise  and  carnal  excitement  instead  of  crying 
for  the  Spirit  of  God  }  What  is  this  but  refusing  to  spread  the 
sail  for  the  heavenly  breeze,  and  relying  upon  the  tramp  of 
horses,  and  the  strength  of  flesh  and  blood  ?  How  is  it  that  so 
many  look  to  obtain  blessing  through  ceremonies  of  man's 
invention?  This  is  an  endeavour  to  move  a  mountain  by 
dancing  before  it. 

If  the  means  must  be  adequate  to  the  end,  then  nothing  short 
of  the  merits  of  Jesus  can  cause  a  sinner  to  enter  heaven,  and 
nothing  but  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  can  make  men  new 
creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  If  the  means  must  be  adapted  to  the 
end,  then  we  must  have  mercy  to  comfort  misery,  love  to  rescue 
lost  sinners,  divine  goodness  for  despairing  hearts,  and  power 
from  on  high  for  souls  dead  in  trespasses  and  sin. 

Next  time  we  hear  a  man  try  to  convert  people  by  fine 
language,  we  shall  remember  Manton's  saying,  that  waggons 
are  not  moved  by  wind. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  177 

THE  PRICK  OF  A  PIN  AND  A  HEAVY  BLOW. 

"  The  prick  of  a  pin  maketh  a  man  start,  bnt  a  heavy  bloit 
stunneth  him.  David,  luhen  he  cut  off  the  lap  ofSanVs  garment, 
his  heaj't  smote  hijn;  but  when  he  fell  into  adultery  and  blood, 
he  was  like  one  in  a  sivoon."  Thus  it  is  that  a  sHo^ht  departure 
from  right  will  startle  the  unsophisticated  conscience,  while  a 
gross  sin  may  stun  it  into  a  horrible  insensibihty.  Much  serious 
thought  is  suggested  by  this  most  striking  simile.  Among 
other  things  it  teaches  us  to  dread  a  benumbed  or  swooning 
conscience,  for  it  may  have  been  brought  into  that  condition  by 
a  terrible  sin.  Better  far  to  be  morbidly  sensitive,  and  condemn 
one's  self  needlessly,  than  to  be  hardened  through  the  deceitful- 
ness  of  sin.  A  quick  and  tender  conscience  is  among  the  best 
gifts  of  grace  ;  let  those  who  have  it  guard  its  delicacy  with 
jealous  care. 

Lord,  let  my  conscience  be  as  tender  as  the  apple  of  my  eye. 
As  well-balanced  scales  are  tremulous  at  the  fall  of  a  single 
grain  of  dust,  so  let  the  minutest  sin  set  me  on  the  move. 
Never,  I  beseech  thee,  permit  mc  to  become  heavy  with  the 
intoxication  caused  by  a  deep  draught  of  evil  :  "  Keep  back  thy 
servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins  ;  let  them  not  have 
dominion  over  me.'' 

TO  DIE  FIGHTING. 

^^  Sometimes  God  letteth  his  people  alone  till  their  latter  days, 
and  their  season  of  fighti7tg  cometh  not  till  they  are  ready  to  go 
out  of  the  world,  that  they  may  die  fighting  and  be  crowjted  in 
the  field.  But  first  or  last  the  cross  cometh,  and  there  is  a  time 
to  exercise  our  faith  and  patience  before  we  inherit  the  promises. ^^ 

It  has  been  observed  that  many  of  those  who  begin  their  spi- 
ritual career  with  severe  mental  conflicts  are  afterwards  filled 
with  peace,  and  are  left  unmolested  for  years.  Others  have  their 
battle  in  middle-Ufe,  and  find  the  heat  of  their  noontide  sun  to 

12 


178  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

be  their  severest  trial ;  while  a  third  class  suffer,  as  our  author 
tells  us,  at  the  very  close  of  their  pilgrimage.  No  rule  can  be 
laid  down  as  to  the  varied  experiences  of  the  saints ;  but  we 
suspect  that  few  make  the  voyage  to  heaven  over  a  perpetually 
glassy  sea ;  the  vast  majority,  at  some  time  or  other,  are  ''tossed 
with  tempest  and  not  comforted." 

What  if  we  also  must  die  fighting  ?  We  shall  fall  amid  the 
shouts  of  victory.  How  surprising  will  heaven  be  to  us  !  One 
moment  almost  wrecked,  and  the  next  in  "the  Fair  Havens." 
Wrestling  one  moment,  and  resting  the  next  with  the  crown 
about  our  brows  !     "  At  eventide  it  shall  be  light." 

TRADING  ON  A  MAN'S  WORD. 

^^Ifa  man  promise,  they  reckon  much  of  that;  they  can  tarry 
upon  man's  security,  but  coimt  God's  word  nothing  worth.  They 
can  trade  with  a  factor  beyond  seas,  and  trust  all  their  estate  in  a 
man's  hands  whom  they  have  never  seen;  a7id  yet  the  word  oj 
the  i7ifallible  God  is  of  little  regard  and  respect  with  them,  even 
then  when  he  is  willing  to  give  an  earnest  of  the  promised good.'^ 
It  is  noteworthy  that  in  ordinary  life  small  matters  of  business 
are  transacted  by  sight,  and  articles  valued  by  pence  are  paid 
for  over  the  counter :  for  larger  things  we  give  cheques  which 
are  really  nothing  but  pieces  of  paper  made  valuable  by  a  man's 
name  ;  and  in  the  heaviest  transactions  of  all,  millions  change 
from  hand  to  hand  without  a  coin  being  seen,  the  whole  de- 
pending upon  the  honour  and  worth  of  those  who  sign  their 
hands.  What  then  ?  shall  not  the  Lord  be  trusted  ?  Ay,  with 
our  whole  being  and  destiny.  It  ought  to  be  the  most  natural 
thing  in  all  the  world  to  trust  God  ;  and  to  those  who  dwell  near 
him  it  is  so.  Where  should  we  trust  but  in  him  who  has  all 
power  and  truth  and  love  within  himself.^  We  commit  our- 
selves into  the  hands  of  our  faithful  Creator  and  feel  ourselves 
secure.  "Blessed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  and  whose 
hope  the  Lord  is." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  179 

THE  CHILD  AND  THE  FATHER. 

*'  A  yoimg  child  does  not  know  Ms  father's  strejtgth.  We  are 
poor,  weak  creatures^  and  canjiot  co7iceive  fully  of  the  perfectiotis 
of  God:  we  know  not  what  the  power  of  God  can  do  for  us. ^"^ 
It  would  be  the  height  of  absurdity  for  the  child  to  think  and 
speak  of  its  father  as  if  he  were  a  child  too,  and  could  do  no 
more  than  the  boy's  playmates.  Yet  this  is  the  common  error 
of  the  children  of  God.  We  do  not  raise  our  thoughts  to  a  god- 
like level.  We  think  our  own  thoughts  of  God,  and  straightway 
we  doubt.  Oh,  that  we  rose  to  God's  thoughts,  and  tried  to  con- 
ceive how  HE  looks  upon  matters  !  Surely  he  taketh  up  the 
isles  as  a  very  little  thing,  and  the  mountains  he  weighs  in 
scales.  If  our  troubles  were  set  in  the  light  of  God's  power, 
and  love,  and  faithfulness,  and  wisdom,  they  would  become  to  us 
small  burdens  :  why  should  we  not  so  regard  them  ?  Why  must 
we  reckon  as  children  ?  Why  not  compute  our  load  by  our 
Father's  measurement,  and  then  see  how  easily  it  will  be 
carried?  Estimating  divine  strength  by  human  standards  is 
one  of  the  childish  things  which  we  must  put  away. 

O  Lord,  forgive  me  for  having  often  limited  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel,  and  teach  me  never  again  to  judge  after  the  flesh. 

THE  GILDED  POTSHERD. 

*^A  glided  potsherd  may  shine  till  it  cometh  to  scouring,  then  the 
varnish  is  speedily  worn  offP  May  this  never  be  my  character, 
but  may  I  be  solid  gold,  which  will  bear  not  only  rubbing 
but  burning.  Alas,  when  I  am  impatient  under  affliction,  or 
cowardly  under  persecution,  or  weary  in  holy  service,  have  I 
not  good  reason  to  suspect  myself.?  It  may  be  that  my  religion 
is  only  a  mere  surface  film,  and  not  part  and  parcel  of  my  being ; 
and  if  so,  it  will  go  ill  with  me.  I  shall  ere  long  be  like  a  broken 
vessel,  cast  away  upon  the  dunghill  of  everlasting  contempt. 

O  Lord,  of  thy  mercy  save  me  from  being  a  mere  piece  of 
gilded  clay,  by  giving  me  truth  in  the  inward  parts. 


ISO  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

HOLDING  ON  WITH  THE  TEETH. 

''''He  who  is  spoken  of  in  the  story  first  holds  the  boat  with  his 
right  hand^  and  that  being  cut  off,  he  takes  hold  with  his  left  hand, 
mid  when  that  is  cut  off,  he  fastens  o?i  with  his  teeth.  So  when 
one  help  is  cut  off,  and  the7i  a7iother,  yet  faith  doth  fasten  upo7i 
God  as  lo7ig  as  it  hath  his  word  tofaste7i  07i.  When  God  makes 
b7-each  after  breach,  the7i  to  depe7id  up07i  him  is  faith  i7ideedy 
Well  may  we  maintain  our  hold  upon  our  God  come  what  may  ; 
for  who  else  is  fit  to  be  our  soul's  holdfast  ?  With  us  it  must 
be  Christ  or  nothing,  for  other  refuge  there  is  none.  Trying 
times  make  us  desperately  resolved  to  trust  in  the  Lord  at  all 
hazards.  A  sense  of  sin  snatches  away  one  promise,  and  another ; 
and  then  we  betake  ourselves  to  such  words  of  grace  as  were 
expressly  given  to  the  most  unworthy :  there  we  resolve  to  perish, 
if  perish  we  must.  Our  grasp  at  such  times  does  not  embrace 
much  of  the  truth,  but  it  is  intense,  and  takes  fast  hold  on  what 
it  has  reached.  We  cannot,  we  will  not,  let  go  the  Saviour. 
Like  Joab,  we  will  die  at  the  horns  of  the  altar,  if  we  must  die. 
He  who,  like  the  man  in  the  story,  has  lost  both  his  hands  and 
yet  holds  by  his  teeth,  is  safe  enough :  God  will  never  leave  such 
a  man  to  drown.  Let  us  refuse  to  despair,  or  even  to  despond  ; 
since  there  is  no  just  cause  for  distress  while  we  can  truly  say, 
"  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him." 

GONE  AT  THE  ROOT. 

*'  ^j  whe7t  the  root  of  a  tree  perisheth,  the  leaves  keep  green 
for  a  while,  but  within  a  while  they  wither  and  fall  off;  so  love 
is  the  root  and  heart  of  all  other  duties,  a7id  whe7i  that  decay  eth, 
other  thi7igs  decay  with  it'^  What  would  the  virtues  be  if  they 
could  remain  without  love  ?  A  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling 
cymbal.  But,  as  a  rule,  they  do  not  long  remain.  First  one 
drops  off  and  then  another,  like  falling  leaves  ;  and  by-and-by 
the  man  is  as  a  bare  branch,  only  fit  to  be  cut  down  and  cast 
into  the  fire.    Some,  who  once  professed  great  things,  have  now 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  181 

hardly  enough  rags  of  morahty  left  decently  to  go  to  hell  in,  and 
all  because  they  were  without  true  love,  and  therefore  were 
rotten  at  the  core. 

Evil  in  the  heart  is  a  deadly  wound,  but  it  is  usually  un- 
perceived  till  it  has  done  its  work.  No  axe  has  been  lifted 
against  the  man's  morals,  no  great  strokes  have  gashed  his 
visible  character,  and  yet  the  end  has  been  certain,  the 
ruin  has  been  complete:  the  spiritual  life-sap  ceased  to 
flow,  the  branch  of  usefulness  withered,  and  at  last  the  tree 
fell  over,  to  lie  prone  among  the  spoils  of  death.  We 
have  seen  it — seen  it  so  often,  that  our  most  solemn  warnings 
are  reserved  for  secret  declensions.  There  is  something  nobler 
in  falling  by  the  woodman's  strokes  than  in  perishing  by  a 
little  worm  at  the  root.  The  meanness  of  decaying  into  corrup- 
tion, while  standing  in  the  midst  of  a  church,  is  awful. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  keep  us  from  this  evil.    Amen. 

CHESSMEN  IN  THE  BAG. 

"  As  chessmen  are  all  thrown  mto  the  bag  together,  so  in  the 
grave  there  is  no  distinction;  skulls  wear  no  wreaths^  and  corpses 
carry  7io  tnarks  of  honour."  The  bishop  and  the  knight  tumble 
into  the  box  with  the  pawns,  and  the  king  and  the  queen  fare  no 
better.  Death  is  a  terrible  leveller.  It  is  a  pity  that  some  men 
carry  their  heads  so  high  above  their  fellows  all  the  day,  for 
they  will  have  to  sleep  at  night  in  the  same  bed  of  clay  with 
those  whom  they  despise.  With  uncouth  verse  the  poet  tells 
the  like  story  : — 

"Beauty,  and  strength,  and  wit,  and  wealth,  and  power. 
Have  their  short  flourishing  hour  ; 
And  love  to  see  themselves  and  smile, 
And  joy  in  their  pre-eminence  awhile. 
Ev'n  so  in  the  same  land, 
Poor  weeds,  rich  corn,  gay  flowers  together  stand  : 
Alas  !  death  mows  down  all  with  an  impartial  hand.' 


182  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  BITER  EITTEN. 

"  PerseaiHon  ajtd  oppression  are  like  an  iron  in  the  fire,  which, 
heated  too  hot,  burneth  their  fingers  that  hold  itP  The  nations 
on  the  continent  which  drove  out  the  Huguenots  were  ruined 
in  their  trade  by  the  loss  of  their  most  intelhgent  and  industrious 
artisans.  The  Romish  church  itself  became  the  object  of 
popular  hatred  by  its  burnings  of  godly  men  and  women.  As 
Pharaoh  was  glad  at  last  to  be  rid  of  the  Israelites  whom  he 
had  oppressed,  so  are  persecutors  frequently  pleased  if  they  can 
sneak  out  of  their  persecutions,  and  wash  their  hands  of  the 
business.  Playing  with  edged  tools  is  dangerous  work,  and  so 
is  slandering  the  saints  of  God.  Hammers  have  smitten  the 
patient  anvil  until  they  have  been  worn  out,  and  have  become 
more  weary  of  the  anvil's  endurance  than  it  was  of  their  blows. 

If  any  reader  is  opposing  the  church  of  God,  let  him  con- 
sider what  he  is  doing.  He  will  find  it  hard  to  kick  against  the 
pricks.  It  will  end  as  did  the  famous  battle  of  the  tow  with  the 
fire,  and  the  stubble  with  the  flame.  No  honour  is  to  be  gained 
by  the  conflict,  but  a  blot  will  fall  on  the  persecutor's  escutcheon, 
and  his  portion  shall  be  everlasting  contempt. 

THE  GIANT  AND  THE  STRAW. 

"y4  giant  striking  with  a  straw  cannot  put  forth  his  strength 
with  it.  So  ijt  blessing,  no  creature  nor  ordinance  can  co7ivey 
all  the  goodness  of  God  to  us."  The  best  preacher  is  no  better 
than  a  straw,  in  and  of  himself.  God  shows  his  omnipotence 
by  accomplishing  anything  with  such  poor  tools  as  we  are. 
Were  he  not  Almighty  the  infirmities  of  his  servants  would 
cause  him  to  fail  in  every  design  in  which  he  employs  them. 
As  it  is,  the  fact  of  our  unfitness  should  greatly  enhance  our 
sense  of  his  glory.  This  feebleness  on  the  part  of  the  fittest 
instrument  makes  it  imperative  that  the  Lord's  own  Spirit 
should  work  in  men's  hearts  over  and  above  his  working  through 
the  means.     New  hearts  cannot  be  created  by  mere  human 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  183 

voices  :  these  are  more  qualified  to  call  beasts  to  their  fodder 
than  dead  souls  out  of  their  spiritual  graves.  The  Holy  Ghost 
must  himself  breathe  life  and  infuse  strength  into  men  ;  for  his 
ministers  are  little  better  than  the  staff  of  Elijah,  which  was 
laid  upon  the  dead  child,  but  neither  hearing  nor  answering 
resulted  from  it. 

The  figure  of  a  giant  using  a  straw  as  a  cudgel  is  not, 
however,  perfect  unless  we  picture  him  as  able  to  strengthen 
the  straw,  till  he  strikes  with  it  as  with  a  hammer  and 
dashes  rocks  in  pieces  ;  for  even  thus  the  Lord  doth  by  his 
feeble  servants.  Hath  he  not  said,  '•'  Fear  not,  thou  worm 
Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Israel ;  I  will  help  thee,  saith  the  Lord, 
and  thy  RedeemxCr,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Behold,  I  will 
make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing  instrument  having  teeth  ; 
thou  shalt  thresh  the  mountains,  and  beat  them  small,  and  shalt 
make  the  hills  as  chaff.  Thou  shalt  fan  them,  and  the  wind 
shall  carry  them  away,  and  the  whirlwind  shall  scatter  them  : 
and  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  shalt  glory  in  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel"? 

O  thou  Almighty  One,  continue  to  display  thine  omnipotence 
by  using  me,  even  me,  the  least  and  feeblest  of  all  thine  instru- 
ments. 

EVERYTHING  ACCORDING  TO  ITS  NATURE. 

''  A  bowl  used  07i  the  greeti  must  be  utade  round  before  it  can 
run  round;  a  musical  instru?ne?it  must  be  framed  and  stning, 
and  put  in  tune  before  it  can  make  melody ;  a  t7'ee  must  first 
be  made  good  before  we  can  expect  atiy  good  fruit  from  it" 
Precisely  so  ;  and  yet  this  fact  is  seldom  considered.  Men  are 
loth  to  believe  that  their  errors  arise  out  of  themselves,  and 
that  they  must  themselves  be  improved  before  their  lives  will 
be  bettered.  Their  circumstances  and  associations  are  blamed, 
whereas  the  fault  lies  in  themselves,  only  they  will  not  believe 
it.    They  will  not  admit  that  there  is  a  bias  in  the  ball  itself, 


184  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

but  they  blame  the  hand  which  threw  it ;  the  harp-strings 
they  will  not  attend  to,  but  complain  of  the  musician's  touch  ; 
the  tree  they  will  not  chide  for  bearing  crabs,  it  is  the  soil, 
the  season,  or  the  gardener.  Most  guilty  men,  when  their 
crimes  are  exposed,  blame  their  ill-luck,  and  not  their  evil  hearts. 
The  world  has  come  to  call  an  unchaste  woman  "  unfortunate ;" 
and  this  is  but  one  open  expression  of  what  it  secretly  believes 
as  to  all  sin  :  it  reckons  our  transgression  to  be  our  misfor- 
tune rather  than  our  fault.  We  are  poor  erring  mortals,  and 
are  more  to  be  pitied  than  punished — this  is  the  secret  creed  of 
mankind,  and  there  is  a  floating  tradition  abroad  that  we  our- 
selves are  right  enough,  but  our  position  renders  error  unavoid- 
able. 

When  will  our  fellow-men  give  up  this  falsehood,  and  perceive 
that  if  the  vessel  leaks,  it  is  because  it  is  broken;  and  if  foul 
water  drips  from  it,  it  is  because  its  contents  are  unclean  ?  Oh, 
that  they  would  blame  themselves,  and  seek  a  change  of  heart ; 
for  nothing  short  of  this  can  set  the  matter  right. 

ALEXANDER  AND  APELLES. 

*^  Alexa7ider  wotdd  be  painted  by  none  but  Apelles,  and  carved 
by  none  but  Lysippus.  Domitiaii  would  not  have  his  statue 
made  btit  in  gold  or  silver.  God,  the  great  king,  will  be  served 
with  the  best  of  our  affections.  Whe?i  we  care  not  what  we  offer 
to  God,  how  will  he  accept  us  ?  "  It  is  but  ordinary  manners 
that,  when  we  entertain  a  friend  who  is  greatly  our  superior,  we 
should  at  least  do  our  best  and  set  before  him  all  that  our  house 
and  purse  can  afford,  with  many  an  apology  that  it  is  no  better. 
If  our  queen  came  to  sup  with  us,  we  should  do  our  very  best  to 
please  her  majesty  ;  how  much  more  ought  we  to  be  devoutly 
intent  to  offer  fit  homage  to  the  King  of  kings  ! 

O  my  Lord,  teach  me  to  give  thee  the  choicest  product  of  my 
being,  and  instruct  me  how  to  do  this  in  the  most  acceptable 
manner.      May  I   never  play  the  sloven  with   thee.     Angels 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  185 

cannot  serve  thee  as  thou  deservest  to  be  served,  and  shall  I 
think  to  please  thee  with  hap-hazard  offerings  ?  If  I  sing  to  thee, 
make  me  earnest  and  hearty  in  spirit,  and  as  musical  in  utterance 
as  my  harsh  voice  permits.  When  I  pray,  forbid  that  I  should 
even  seem  to  be  chill  and  dull.  If  I  am  honoured  to  preach  thy 
gospel,  may  I  plead  for  thee  with  my  whole  heart,  and  speak 
even  to  a  few  as  zealously  as  if  thousands  waited  for  my  words. 
It  is  meet  that  the  best  should  have  the  best  ;  that  thou,  the 
most  loving  of  Lords,  shouldst  have  my  most  loyal  services. 

TWO  WAYS  OF  PUTTING  OUT  FIEE. 

*^  Fire  is  quenched  by  pouring  on  water  or  by  witJidra'wijig 
fuel  J  so  the  Spirit  is  quenched  by  living  i?i  si7i,  which  is  like 
pouri7ig  water  on  a  fire;  or  by  not  iinproving  our  gifts  and 
graces,  which  is  like  withdrawing  fuel  from  the  hearth!^  Many 
are  found  carefully  avoiding  outward  sin,  and  yet  they  daily 
neglect  the  gifts  of  grace  !  What  folly  !  Will  it  not  come  to  the 
same  thing  in  the  end  with  the  fire  upon  my  hearth  whether  I 
pour  water  on  the  logs  or  refuse  to  place  fresh  brands  thereon  t 
It  will  die  out  with  equal  certainty,  whichever  is  my  mode  of 
procedure.  So  will  it  be  with  the  fire  in  my  heart.  To  be  careless 
is  as  dangerous  as  to  be  disobedient.  Not  to  do  good  is  to  do 
evil.  Sins  concerning  neglected  grace  and  omitted  duty  are  as 
mischievous  to  us  as  actual  wrong-doing. 

This  is  a  caution  to  thousands ;  possibly  to  the  reader ; 
certainly  to  the  writer.  Oh  for  grace  to  attend  to  the  state  of 
the  inward  fires,  lest  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  over  us  by 
our  neglect !  Though  he  may  have  been  foiled  in  every  attempt 
to  lead  us  into  active  rebellion  against  God,  the  enemy  may  yet 
prevail  by  bringing  us  into  a  negative  state  of  indifference  and 
apathy.  There  is  a  passive  disobedience,  which  is  exceedingly 
injurious  to  the  soul.  The  Lord  save  us  from  this  great  peril. 
Let  us  hear  him  say,  "  Quench  not  the  Spirit,"  and  yet  again, 
"  Stir  up  the  gift  which  is  in  thee." 


186  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

SETTLING  THE  EXPENDITUEE. 

"  When  a  man  hath  allotted  so  77iuch  for  bicildiitg  a  house,  so 
long  as  he  keeps  within  the  bounds  of  his  allotmeiit  he  parteth 
with  his  money  freely;  but  wheji  that  is  gone  he  parts  with 
evejy  penny  with  gricdging.  It  is  good  to  make  Christ  large 
allowance  at  the  first  so  that  we  do  not  afterwards  grttdge  our 
bargain  a7idcontractP  Good,  Dr.  Manton !  Very  good !  When 
some  of  us  began  with  the  Lord  Jesus  we  meant  to  place  all 
that  we  had  at  his  disposal,  and  ever  since  it  has  been  a  great 
joy  to  feel  that  everything  we  are  and  have  belongs  to  him. 
What  we  can  give  to  his  cause  we  regard  as  children  do  their 
spending  money  ;  we  lay  it  out  with  eagerness,  and  wish  it  were 
a  hundred  times  as  much.  No  silver  slips  from  our  hand  so 
joyfully  as  that  which  goes  to  God.  No  gold  is  so  readily 
parted  with  as  that  which  is  spent  upon  his  cause.  Grudging 
is  far  from  us,  when  God's  cause  is  near  to  us.  Surely,  some 
of  our  friends  started  with  other  notions,  and  put  the  Lord 
on  short  commons  at  the  first  estimate,  for  they  need  to  be 
hardly  pressed  ere  they  will  give  to  his  cause. 

Dear  reader,  is  this  so  with  you?  Do  you  look  a  score 
times  at  every  sixpence  you  spend  upon  the  Lord  1  If  so,  revise 
your  contract.  Make  your  Beloved  a  more  liberal  allowance. 
"  He  that  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly." 

THE  SHAKING  OF  THE  TREE. 

*'  When  the  tree  is  soundly  shaken,  7'otten  apples  fall  to  the 
ground;  so  in  great  trials  guile  of  spirit  will  fail P 

This,  then,  is  the  purpose  of  affliction  :  first,  to  test  me,  that  I 
may  see  how  far  my  supposed  graces  are  real  and  vital.  Those 
which  are  not  sound  will  soon  be  lost ;  only  the  living  and  grow- 
ing graces  will  remain.  Can  I  bear  the  test?  How  have  I 
borne  it  ? 

Secondly,  trials  relieve  me,  for  it  is  a  hurtful  thing  to  the  tree 
and  to  its  living  fruit  to  be  cumbered  with  rottenness,  in  which 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  187 

may  breed  noxious  worms,  which  when  they  multiply  may  come 
to  be  devourers  of  the  tree's  life.  We  are  enriched  when  we 
lose  fictitious  virtues.  Stripping  of  filthy  rags  is  an  advance 
towards  cleanliness,  and  what  are  counterfeit  graces  but  mere 
rags,  worthy  to  be  torn  off  and  cast  into  the  fire  ? 

In  the  end  such  a  result  of  affliction  also  beautifies  me;  for  as 
rotten  apples  disfigure  the  tree,  so  would  the  mere  pretence  of 
virtue  mar  my  character  in  the  sight  of  God  and  good  men.  It 
is  always  better  to  be  openly  without  an  attainment  than  to 
bear  the  form  of  it  without  in  reahty  possessing  it.  A  sham 
is  a  shame  :  an  unreal  virtue  is  an  undoubted  vice. 

Lord,  I  thank  thee  for  shaking  me,  since  I  now  perceive  that 
all  this  good  and  much  more  is  designed  by  the  process,  and 
is,  I  trust,  in  some  measure  accomplished  thereby.  Oh  that  thy 
Holy  Spirit  may  bless  my  adversities  to  this  end,  and  then 
they  will  not  be  adverse  to  me,  but  the  very  reverse  ! 

THIRSTY  MEN  DRINKING  WITHOUT  LOOKING. 

^^As  men  iji  a  deep  thirst  swallow  their  drink  before  they  know 
the  nature  of  it,  or  discern  the  taste  ofitj  so  when  we  a7'e  under 
a  great  thirst,  or  under g7-eat  famishment  as  to  spiritual  comfort, 
and  have  great  troubles  upon  ns,  we  take  up  with  comfortable 
notions  of  Christ  and  salvation  by  him<,  and  easily  drink  in  these 
and  other  truths,  catching  at  them  without  looking  ifito  the 
grounds  or  reasons  of  them.  Afterwards  we  see  the  need  of  care 
and  watchfuhiess  of  soul,  to  strengtheji  our  assent  and  fortify  our- 
selves against  those  doubts  of  mind  which  shake  us.  Then  we 
desire  to  settle  our  hearts  in  those  sicpreme  truths  which  in  our 
necessity  we  accepted  without  discussions^  This  is  a  very  natural 
figure.  See  how  the  thirsty  man  turns  up  the  cup  and  drinks  the 
contents  at  a  draught  ;  he  cares  little  what  it  is,  so  that  it  quenches 
his  raging  thirst.  "  Behold,  he  drinketh  up  a  river,  and  hasteth 
not  :  he  trusteth  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  into  his 
mouth."      But  now,  mark  him  in  cooler  moments !      He   is 


188  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

careful  of  his  drinking,  lest  he  be  made  top-heavy,  or  become 
nauseated.  A  simple,  receptive  faith  is  a  fine  thing  for  the 
speedy  removal  of  the  soul's  thirst ;  but  if  it  were  not  soon 
qualified  by  spiritual  discernment  it  would  lead  to  credulity,  and 
the  man  would  be  ready  to  take  in  anything  which  might  be  set 
before  him.  The  rapid  believer  would  soon  become  the  victim 
of  superstition.  The  more  study  of  the  Scriptures,  and  testing  of 
doctrines  thereby,  the  better.  Careful  investigation  may  save  the 
mind  from  being  injured  by  poisonous  teaching,  and  it  will  cer- 
tainly endear  the  truth  to  us,  and  strengthen  our  confidence  in  it. 
What  a  draught  was  that  which  some  of  us  had  at  the  first  ! 
Little  enough  we  knew;  but  our  enjoyment  of  what  we  did 
know  was  intense  !  Lord,  thou  hast  now  revealed  to  us  the 
ingredients  of  that  divine  cup  ;  grant  that  this  may  give  us  a 
new  and  deeper  joy  ;  but  do  not  allow  us  to  forget  the  bliss  of 
satisfied  thirst  because  we  are  gifted  with  fuller  knowledge. 
Such  a  gain  would  be  a  loss  most  serious. 

CHILDREN  CARRIED  BY  THEIR  FATHER. 

"  We  must  look  upon  Christ  as  a  father  carrying  all  his  chil- 
dren OH  his  back,  or  lapped  up  ijt  his  garment ^  through  a  deep 
river,  throii^h  which  they  must  needs  pass,  and,  as  it  were,  say- 
ing to  them,  Fear  not,  I  will  set  yott  safe  on  land.  Look  upon 
Christ  wadi7ig  with  all  his  childj-en  tJwough  the  floods  of  deatJi 
a7id  hell,  a?id  saying,  Fear  not,  worfn  Jacob;  fear  not, poor  souls, 
I  will  set  you  safe.^'  This  is  not  very  poetically  put.  It  is  the 
old  Christopher  story  in  a  more  common  dress.  The  good  Lord 
waits  at  the  river  to  bear  us  over,  lest  the  water-floods  prevail 
against  us.  He  hath  made,  and  he  will  bear,  even  he  will  carry. 
Here  is  our  safety  :  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and 
carry  them  in  his  bosom. 

O  my  gracious  Lord,  be  pleased  to  carry  me  among  thine  own 
in  life  and  in  death.  Yea,  set  me  safe  on  the  further  shore  to 
sing  for  ever  of  thy  saving  power. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  189 

GOING  TO  BED  TO  RISE  AGAIN. 

"A  mangoes  to  bed  willingly  and  cheerfully,  because  he  knows 
he  shall  rise  again  the  next  morning,  a?id  be  renewed  in  his 
strength.  Confidence  in  the  resurrection  would  make  us  go  to 
the  grave  as  cheerfully  as  we  go  to  our  beds;  it  would  make  us 
die  more  comfortably,  and  sleep  more  quietly,  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Lord  than  we  rest  in  our  own  bedsP  This  is  a  choice  word  ; 
a  flower  which  smells  sweet,  and  blossoms  in  the  dust.  It  needs 
not  a  line  from  us  ;  it  only  requires  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  us 
to  enjoy  its  fragrance. 

THE  KING'S  LODGING. 

"  If  an  earthly  king  lie  but  a  night  in  a  house,  what  care  is 
there  taken  that  nothing  be  offensive  to  him,  bid  that  all  thi?igs 
be  jieaf,  clean,  and  sweet  ?  How  much  more  ought  you  to  be 
careful  to  get  and  keep  your  hearts  clean,  to  perform  service 
acceptably  to  him;  to  be  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  love,  aiid  other 
graces,  that  you,  may  entertain,  as  you  ou^ht,  your  heavenly 
King,  who  comes  to  take  up  his  continual  abode  and  residence  in 
your  hearts  !  " 

We  know  a  house  in  which  an  empress  rested  for  a  very  short 
time,  and  the  owner  henceforth  refused  to  admit  other  inmates. 
Such  is  his  devotion  to  his  royal  guest  that  no  one  may  now  sit 
in  her  chair  or  dine  at  the  table  which  she  honoured.  Our 
verdict  is  that  he  makes  loyalty  into  absurdity  by  this  conduct ; 
but  if  we  imitate  him  in  this  procedure  in  reference  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  we  shall  be  wise.  Let  our  whole  being  be  set  apart  for 
Jesus,  and  for  Jesus  only.  We  shall  not  have  to  shut  up  the 
house ;  for  our  beloved  Lord  will  inhabit  every  chamber  of  it,  and 
make  it  a  permanent  palace.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  all  be  holy, 
all  pure,  all  devout. 

Help  us,  O  Purifier  of  the  temple,  to  drive  out  all  intruders, 
and  reserve  our  soul  in  all  the  beauty  of  holiness  for  the  Blessed 
and  Only  Potentate. 


190  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

BANKRUPTS. 

"  A  man  is  a  man,  though  he  be  a  bankrupt;  he  has  a  beings 
though  his  well-beitig  is  lost.^^  So  a  believer  may  be  truly  alive 
unto  God,  though  by  his  carelessness  he  has  lost  all  the  wealth 
of  the  spiritual  life,  and  has  fallen  into  soul  poverty.  Such  a 
man  should  not  despair,  but  with  deep  humiliation  he  should 
begin  again.  A  tradesman  who  has  failed  will  take  to  a  humble 
caUing  to  earn  his  bread,  and  so  should  a  Christian  who  has 
broken  down  in  his  spiritual  estate  take  a  lowly  position,  and 
with  all  diligence  labour  to  glorify  the  Lord  better  than  before. 

O  my  Lord,  give  me  good  speed  in  heavenly  business,  lest  I 
fail,  and  do  an  injury  to  thy  cause.  But  if  I  have  already  made 
a  miscarriage  of  my  life's  endeavours,  then  set  me  on  my  feet 
again,  for  I  am  still  thy  child.  "  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost 
sheep  ;  seek  thy  servant ;  for  I  do  not  forget  thy  command- 
ments." 

INFECTED  AIR. 

"  The  devil  is  called  '  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air^  In- 
fected air  is  drawn  into  the  lungs  without  pain,  and  we  get  a 
disease  before  we  feel  if,  and  so  die  of  a  pestilential  air.''' 

Thus  doth  Satan  injure  and  destroy  men's  souls  by  an  influ- 
ence so  subtle  and  painless  that  ere  a  man  is  aware  of  it  he  is 
inflicted  with  error  or  iniquity,  and  falls  a  victim  to  the  evil. 
Whole  cities  have  been  carried  off  by  pests  arising  from  causes 
which  the  sick  ones  never  suspected,  and  whole  classes  of  men 
perish  from  wild  passions  which  only  the  devil  could  have  ex- 
cited to  such  a  pitch.  No  gas  is  so  impalpable,  so  penetrating, 
so  all-pervading,  so  deadly,  as  the  influence  of  Satan.  In  these 
days  it  is  not  polite  to  speak  of  him  ;  it  would  seem  that  he  is 
so  much  respected  by  his  own  children  that  they  cannot  endure 
to  hear  a  word  against  him.  The  common  doubt  of  his  exist- 
ence is  a  proof  of  his  powerful  cunning  ;  nothing  will  serve  his 
turn  better  than  for  silly  men  to  dream  that  he  is  dead  or  in- 
capacitated.    He  laughs  in  his  sleeve,  for  he  is  surrounding  the 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  191 

very  men  who  deny  him,  and  for  him  they  live  and  move.  His 
subtlety  slays  without  leaving  the  stain  of  blood  to  alarm  other 
victims  :  who  knoweth  the  depth  of  his  cunning  ?  Alas,  that  so 
many  should  be  so  ignorant  of  his  devices  as  to  be  unsuspicious 
of  the  deadly  influence  which  he  breathes  into  the  moral  atmo- 
sphere ! 

May  the  health-giving  Spirit  of  the  Lord  preserve  all  new- 
born hearts,  so  that  they  may  pass  through  this  pestiferous 
world  unharmed.  Surely  we  may  give  a  spiritual  as  well  as  a 
natural  meaning  to  that  promise  in  the  psalm,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
be  afraid  for  the  pestilence  which  walketh  in  darkness.  A 
thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right 
hand;  but  it  shall  not  come  nigh  thee."  Doth  not  the  Scripture 
expressly  say,  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you ''  ?  Under 
the  protection  of  this  assurance  we  may  pursue  our  callings  in 
the  midst  of  this  evil  generation,  and  yet  remain  in  vigorous 
health  of  soul.     God  grant  it,  for  Jesu's  sake.     Amen. 

INFECTION  EASY., 

"  IVe  easily  catch  an  mfectious  disease  from  one  another,  but 
no  man  receiveth  health  from  another's  company ?  Too  true. 
Evil  communications  inevitably  corrupt  good  manners  ;  but 
good  communications  do  not  so  necessarily  improve  evil  man- 
ners. We  more  readily  learn  evil  than  good,  and  we  are  also 
more  forcible  in  communicating  sin  than  virtue.  Both  as  to  the 
giving  out  and  the  receiving,  the  aptness  lies  on  the  wrong  side. 
What  a  proof  of  our  natural  depravity !  What  a  change  must 
grace  work  in  us  before  we  shall  be  fully  like  our  Lord  Jesus, 
who  was  incapable  of  being  inoculated  by  sin,  but  abundantly 
able  to  communicate  goodness;  for  healing  virtue  proceeded 
from  him.  When  shall  we  become  disseminators  of  holiness 
by  our  very  presence  ?  When  shall  we  dwell  where  every  com- 
panion shall  minister  to  our  soul's  health  ?  Such  a  place  Jesus 
is  preparing  for  us,  and  thither  is  he  bringing  his  redeemed  ones. 


192  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  EVERYDAY   SUIT. 

"  Godliness  is  not  a  holiday  suit,  but  apparel  that  is  for  const  am 
lueary  This  illustrates  a  very  important  truth.  Some  people 
seem  to  fancy  that  they  can  put  their  religion  on  and  off  as  they 
do  their  Sunday  clothes.  Such  religion  is  better  put  off  once 
for  all.  He  who  is  not  godly  every  day  is  not  godly  any  day. 
We  should  aim  at  serving  God  with  all  our  hearts  on  the  Sabbath, 
in  songs,  and  prayers,  and  sermons  ;  but  if  these  are  to  be 
•acceptable,  we  must  also  serve  God  on  all  the  week-days  in  an 
Jlonest,  upright,  holy  conversation.  True  Christians  will  endea- 
vour to  make  their  houses  temples,  their  meals  sacraments,  their 
garments  vestments,  and  all  their  days  holy-days.  That  pro- 
fession which  is  merely  on  the  surface,  like  the  gilt  upon  the 
gingerbread  at  a  country  fair,  is  too  poor  a  thing  to  enter 
heaven. 

Lord,  make  me  to  wear  thy  righteousness  within  me,  and  then 
I  cannot  leave  it  off.  Make  me  like  the  king's  daughter,  "  all 
glorious  within."  Weave  thy  grace  into  the  warp  and  weft  of 
my  being.     Even  on  earth  let  me  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 

WORKING  BY  CONTRAKIES. 

**  God  ma7iy  times  workcth  cotitrary  to  oictward  likelihoods. 
IVheji  the  bricks  were  doubled,  who  would  look  for  deliverajice  ? 
As  the  Hebrew  totigite  must  be  read  backward,  or  as  the  sun 
f^oing  back  ten  degrees  in  Ahazs  dial  was  a  sign  of  Hezekiah's 
recovery,  so  is  providetice  to  be  read  backward.  Joseph  was 
made  a  slave  that  he  7night'be  made  a  favourite.  Who  would 
have  thought  that  the  dungeon  had  been  the  way  to  the  courts 
that  error  is  a  means  to  clear  truth,  and  bondage  niakcth  ^u  ay  for 
liberty  ?  "  Thus  have  we  found  sickness  work  for  our  health  and 
poverty  promote  our  wealth.  Our  worst  days  have  turned  out  to 
be  our  best  days,  and  our  low  estate  has  lifted  us  on  high.  When 
storms  come  we  may  welcome  them,  for  they  bring  blessing  on 
their  wings  ;  but  when  our  calm  is  long  and  deep  we  ought  to 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  193 

be  on  our  watch,  lest  stagnation  and  disease  should  come  of  it. 
Science  talks  of  curing  by  likes  ;  but  the  Heavenly  Physician 
heals  both  by  likes  and  by  contraries  ;  in  fact,  he  bends  all  things 
to  his  gracious  purpose.  To  judge  his  proceedings  is  folly  and 
ingratitude.  What  can  we  know?  Especially  what  can  we 
know  of  his  design  and  purpose  while  his  work  is  yet  on  the 
anvil  ?  Our  judgments  at  their  best  are  only  moderated  foolish- 
ness. We  are  neither  prophets  nor  sons  of  prophets,  and  it 
would  be  wise  if  we  would  no  more  speculate  upon  the  results 
of  divine  operations,  but  firmly  believe  and  patiently  wait  till 
the  providence  comes  to  the  flower  and  to  the  seed,  and  God 
becomes  his  own  interpreter. 

LIFE   IS  THE  MAIN  MATTER. 

"  A  corpse  may  be  laid  in  state,  and  sumpticously  adorned,  but 
there  is  no  life  within.^*  Adornments  are  out  of  place  in  the 
chamber  of  death ;  they  do  but  make  the  scene  the  more  ghastly. 
We  have  heard  of  a  dead  prince  who  was  placed  upon  a  throne, 
dressed  in  imperial  purple,  crowned,  and  sceptred !  How  pitiful 
the  spectacle  !  The  courtiers  mustered  to  so  wretched  a  travesty 
of  state  must  have  loathed  the  pageantry. 

So  is  it  when  a  man's  religion  is  a  dead  profession  ;  its 
ostentatious  zeal  and  ceremonious  display  are  the  grim  trappings 
which  make  the  death  appear  more  manifest.  When,  Hke  Jehu, 
a  man  cries,  "  Come  with  me,  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord,"  his 
false  heart  betrays  itself.  The  more  he  decorates  his  godliness  the 
more  does  the  hypocrite's  spiritual  death  appear.  It  is  not 
possible  to  supply  the  lack  of  the  divine  life.  There  is  an 
essential  difference  between  a  dead  child  at  its  best  and  a  living 
child  at  its  worst,  and  it  needs  no  Solomon  to  see  it.  Unless 
the  Spirit  of  God  shall  give  life,  sustain  life,  and  perfect  life, 
none  of  us  can  ever  dwell  with  the  living  God.  This  is  the 
point  to  look  to  :  the  vestments  and  trappings  are  a  secondary 
business. 

13 


194  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND  MEDITATIONS. 

WINDFALLS. 

"  Whe7t  the  tree  is  shaken  the  I'otten  apples  fall. ^"^  When  reli- 
gion is  at  a  discount,  and  godliness  is  derided,  then  hypocrites 
and  unsound  professors  desert  the  cause.  It  is  astonishing  what 
a  little  shake  will  get  rid  of  the  common-place  members  of  our 
churches.  Let  but  a  minister  die,  or  remove,  or  a  couple  of 
leading  men  fall  out — off  they  go.  A  warm  south  wind,  blowing 
from  the  cathedral,  or  the  manor-house,  or  the  public-house,  and 
dropping  a  gentle  shower  of  gifts,  will  cause  many  rotten  ones 
to  fall  into  the  lap  of  bribery.  Sound  believers,  who  are  full  of 
life,  and  untouched  by  the  worm  of  insincerity,  hold  to  the  church 
of  God  in  all  weathers.  May  more  of  these  be  produced  every 
year  to  God's  glory ! 

Rougher  winds  than  these  try  other  professors.  Stagnation 
in  business,  pressure  for  money,  and  the  temptation  to  speculate 
fetch  down  many  rotten  Christians.  The  fashion  of  the  worlds 
the  luxuries  of  life,  and  the  habits  of  wealthy  society  also  shake 
off  others  from  their  visible  profession.  When  they  fall,  the  loss 
is  all  their  own  :  the  church  may  apparently  lose  by  their 
apostasy,  but  it  is  not  a  real  injury ;  in  fact,  it  may  be  in  God's 
sight  a  gain  to  it.  God  thinks  no  better  of  a  tree  for  being 
burdened  with  rotten  fruit,  nor  of  a  church  for  being  swollen  in 
numbers  by  base  pretenders. 

Lord,  make  me  true  to  the  core,  and  keep  me  so. 

THE  BAKER  AND  HIS  OVEN. 

*'  The  baker  watcheth  ivhen  his  oven  is  hot,  and  then  pittieth 
in  his  breadP  Thus  should  we  seize  the  best  opportunity  for  a 
good  work.  Let  us  pray  most  when  we  feel  we  can  pray  best ; 
and  labour  most  in  our  holy  calling  when  God  is  giving  us 
precious  opportunities,  for  the  old  proverb  bids  us  make  hay 
while  the  sun  shines.  To  everything  there  is  a  season,  and  much 
depends  upon  seizing  that  season,  and  utilizing  it.  Oh,  worker 
for  God,  take  the  tide  at  its  flood,  and  the  occasion  at  its  full  I 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  195 

Preach  the  gospel  at  all  times,  but  specially  bring  it  in  when 
men  s  minds  are  tender  through  affliction  or  thoughtfulness.  If 
the  oven  be  cold,  heat  it ;  but  when  it  is  heated,  do  not  lose  your 
fuel.  Work  up  the  conversation  till  it  reaches  a  fit  stage  for 
bringing  in  the  Lord  Jesus  and  saving  truth  ;  but  be  sure  that  you 
never  get  men's  minds  ready,  and  then  fail  to  do  that  which  you 
are  aiming  at.  As  the  baker  would  not  forget  to  put  in  the  bread, 
so  never  forget  to  introduce  the  word  of  faith,  the  gospel  of  our 
salvation,  before  the  interview  is  over.  Have  we  not  already 
suffered  many  a  hot  oven  to  cool  ?  Let  us  mend  our  ways,  and 
be  more  diligent  in  our  Master's  business. 

THE  BENUMBED  SNAKE. 

*'  //  is  true  that  nattcral  corruption  doth  not  break  out  in  all 
luith  a  like  violence;  hit  a  benumbed  snake  is  a  snake;  a  sow 
washed  is  not  changed.  As  when  the  liver groweih^  other  parts 
languish^  so  great  lust  inter cepteth  the  noicrishment  of  other  cor- 
ruptions.'" It  seems,  then,  that  there  may  be  a  winter  to  our 
corruptions  as  well  as  to  animal  and  vegetable  life,  and  then 
the  sin  which  dwelleth  in  us  may  be  quiet,  as  though  frozen  into 
a  rigid  powerlessness  :  but  what  of  that  ?  The  weather  will 
change,  and  then  the  nest  of  vipers  will  be  all  astir  again, 
each  one  with  venomed  tooth  aiming  to  destroy.  Expe- 
rience has  also  taught  the  wise  observer  that  sin  may  be 
bound  by  sin,  and  one  ruhng  passion  may  hold  the  rest  in  check. 
One  man  is  kept  from  licentiousness  by  covetousness :  he 
would  be  glad  to  revel  in  vice  if  it  were  not  so  expensive  ;  another 
would  be  a  rake  and  a  spendthrift,  but  then  it  would  not  be  re- 
spectable, and  thus  his  pride  checks  his  passions.  This  restraint 
of  sin  by  sin  is  no  proof  that  the  nature  is  one  jot  the  better, 
but  that  it  puts  on  a  fairer  appearance,  and  is  more  likely  to 
deceive.  When  Satan  casts  out  Satan  it  is  a  deep  game ;  but 
we  must  not  be  deceived  by  the  diabolical  trick.  When  the 
devil's  work  seems  good  it  is  at  its  worst. 


196  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

Nothing  will  answer  with  inbred  sin  but  the  killing  of  it. 
When  Joshua  had  the  five  kings  in  the  cave  at  Makkedah,  he 
was  not  content  to  shut  them  in  with  great  stones.  No,  he 
took  special  pains  to  fetch  them  out,  and  hang  them  up.  The 
condemned  race  must  die,  and  then  Israel  can  breathe  freely. 
Sin  will  be  our  death  if  we  do  not  put  it  to  death.  Checks  and 
restraints  are  of  small  value ;  what  is  needed  is  the  root-and- 
branch  cure — crucifixion  with  Christ.  To  cure  sin  by  sin  is  a 
mere  piece  of  stage-playing,  which  will  never  answer  before 
God.  We  need  to  be  purged  of  the  cause  of  sin,  yea,  of  all  sin, 
or  we  can  never  enter  heaven. 

O  thou  destroyer  of  the  serpent  and  his  seed,  break  the  head 
of  sin  within  me,  so  that  it  may  never  lift  up  its  usurped  power 
within  my  soul.  Let  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  do  a  thorough  work 
within  my  nature,  till  not  a  single  rebel  lust  shall  remain  alive  in 
the  wide  domains  of  my  being.  Furbish  thy  sword,  O  Captain  of 
the  Host,  and  do  thine  office  within  me,  for  I  cannot  rest  till  sin 
is  slain. 

BUTTERFLIES. 

"^j  children  catch  at  biiite7'flics  the  gaudy  wings  melt  away 
in  their  fingers^  a?td  there  reniaineth  nothing  but  an  tigly  wornii'^ 
Such  is  the  end  of  all  earthly  ambitions  :  they  cost  us  a  weary 
pursuit,  and  if  we  gain  our  desire  it  is  destroyed  in  the  grasping 
of  it.  Alas,  poor  rich  man,  who  has  wealth  but  has  lost  the 
power  to  enjoy  it !  Alas,  poor  famous  man,  who  in  hunting  for 
honour  has  learned  its  emptiness  I  Alas,  poor  beautiful  woman, 
who  in  making  a  conquest  of  a  false  heart  has  pierced  her  own 
with  undying  sorrow !  A  butterfly-hunt  takes  a  child  into  danger, 
wearies  him,  throws  him  down,  and  often  ends  in  his  missing  the 
pretty  insect  :  if,  however,  the  boy  is  able  to  knock  down  his 
victim  with  his  hat,  he  has  crushed  the  beauty  for  which  he  under- 
took the  chase,  and  his  victory  defeats  him.  The  parallel  is  clear 
to  every  eye.     For  my  part,  let  me  sooner  be  the  schoolboy, 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  197 

dashing  after  the  painted  fly,  than  his   father  worrying  and 
wearying  to  snatch  at  something  more  deceptive  still. 

Lord,  it  is  time  I  had  done  with  all  butterfly-hunting,  for 
my  years  are  warning  me  that  I  may  hope  soon  to  be  among 
the  angels,  and  see  greater  beauties  than  this  whole  creation  can 
set  before  me.  I  am  now  bent  on  pursuing  nothing  but  that 
which  is  eternal  and  infinite.  Keep  me  to  this  resolve,  I  pray 
thee. 

SPECTACLES  USELESS  TO  THE  BLIND. 

*'  When  unrenewed  7iature  piitteth  07i  the  spectacles  of  art  she 
is  still  blindy  Nowadays  men  must  needs  be  philosophers, 
and  reason  and  argue ;  but  their  conclusions  as  to  spiritual 
things,  wherein  they  come  into  conflict  with  divine  revelation, 
are  not  one  whit  more  to  be  respected  than  the  conclusions  of 
utter  ignorance.  Blind  men  blunder  enough  in  the  dark  ;  add 
light,  and  they  see  no  better ;  add  spectacles,  and  the  case  is 
not  altered  ;  what  is  needed  is  the  seeing  eye.  Till  God  gives 
eyes  it  is  in  vain  for  opticians  to  lend  their  glasses.  So  unre- 
generate  men,  when  they  are  ignorant,  are  full  of  error ;  set 
them  in  the  Hght  of  the  gospel,  they  are  in  truth  no  wiser,  for 
they  have  no  spiritual  perception  of  it  ;  then  add  learning  and 
sharp  reasoning,  and  the  case  is  by  no  means  altered  ;  they 
see  no  more  than  before,  for  they  are  still  stone-blind.  We  have 
in  this  day  many  famous  learned  men,  whose  talk  about  the 
things  of  God  is  as  idle  as  that  of  illiterate  blasphemers.  What- 
ever they  know  as  to  other  matters,  they  can  know  nothing  of 
divine  truths,  for  they  have  no  faculty  with  which  to  perceive 
them.  Let  them  put  on  their  great  goggles  of  science,  they 
see  no  more  of  spirituals  with  them  than  without  them. 

Lord !  let  me  not  go  about  to  fit  spectacles  to  blind  eyes  ;  but 
whenever  I  meet  with  a  birth-blind  Bartimasus,  help  me  to  bring 
him  to  thee,  for  it  is  a  mark  of  thy  Mcssiahship  that  from  thee 
the  blind  receive  their  sight. 


198  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

AT  HOME,  YET  NOT  AT  HOME. 

"  yenisalem  from  above  is  the  mother  of  tis  all.  Heaven  is 
ilie  believer's  native  cotmtry^  and  therefore^  though  the  mail  be 
at  home,  yet  the  Christian  is  not;  he  is  out  of  his  proper  placed 

Hence  our  position  is  a  paradox.  We  were  in  literal  fact  born 
out  of  our  native  country,  and  whilst  we  are  at  home  we  are 
abroad.  We  can  say,  "  Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place 
in  all  generations,"  and  yet  we  often  cry,  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where 
I  might  find  him  ! "  We  are  exiles  in  spirit  while  we  are  at 
home  in  the  body  ;  and  we  shall  never  be  at  home  till  we  have 
left  our  native  land,  and  have  returned  to  the  country  which  we 
have  never  yet  seen.  We  are  living  paradoxes  and  contradic- 
tions, and  it  is  no  wonder  that  men  know  us  not,  for  we  scarcely 
know  ourselves. 

HORSE  WITH  HALTER. 

*'  A  beast  escaped  with  a  halter  is  easily  caught  again;  so  a 
lust  indulged  will  bring  us  into  our  old  bojidage."  Nothing  is 
harder  to  bury  than  the  tail  of  a  habit ;  but  unless  we  do  bury  it, 
tail  and  all,  the  viper  will  wriggle  out  of  its  grave.  A  clear,  clean, 
and  complete  escape  is  the  only  true  deliverance  from  an  evil 
practice  which  has  long  been  indulged.  A  drunkard  is  not  safe 
from  the  drink  while  he  takes  his  occasional  glass  with  a  friend. 
A  man  who  allows  himself  any  one  sin  will  be  sure  to  allow  an- 
other ;  where  one  dog  comes  into  the  room  another  may  follow. 
A  fish  is  not  free  for  his  life  while  a  hook  is  in  his  mouth,  and 
a  line  holds  him  to  the  rod.  However  thin  the  connecting 
medium,  it  will  be  the  death  of  the  fish,  if  it  holds  ;  and,  how- 
ever slight  the  bond  which  links  a  man  to  evil,  it  will  be  his  sure 
ruin. 

Oh  for  grace  to  war  with  eveiy  sin !  So  long  as  one  Amalekite 
remains,  Israel  is  not  free  from  peril  from  the  accursed  race. 
Let  us,  like  Samuel,  hew  the  delicate  Agag  in  pieces  before  the 
Lord.     He  may  have  a  gentle  speech  and  pleasing  manners,  but 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  199 

he  is  the  very  king  of  the  band,  and  must  not  be  spared.  We 
must  not  let  our  heart  go  after  one  of  its  idols,  or  it  will  be  in 
bondage  to  it,  and  afterwards  in  servitude  to  every  other  form 
of  sin. 

Lord,  set  me  free  from  the  last  link  of  my  chain.  Suffer  me 
not  to  drag  behind  me  even  a  fragment  of  my  fetters.  Free  to 
obey,  free  to  be  holy, — this  is  what  I  crave ! 

THE  SUNBEAM  ON  THE  DUNGHILL. 

"  God  can  by  no  means  be  looked  upon  as  the  direct  author  of 
sin,  or  the  proper  cause  of  that  obliquity  that  is  in  the  actiotis 
of  the  creatures;  for  his  providence  is  cofiversant  about  sin 
without  sin,  as  a  simbeani  lighteth  upojt  a  dunghill  without 
being  stained  by  itJ^  This  is  a  grand  truth  most  clearly  set 
forth.  It  will  help  us  to  answer  many  a  gainsayer.  Evil  is  in 
God's  world,  but  God  is  good,  and  only  good. 

IRON  IN  THE  FIRE  MADE  LIKE  FIRE. 

"  In  a  stamp  impressed,  the  wax  receiveth  only  the  form  a?id 
figure,  without  ajiy  real  quality;  as  a  golde?!  seal  leaveth  no 
tincture  of  gold,  nor  a  brazen  seal  the  property  of  brass.  In  a 
glass,  besides  figure  and  proportion,  there  is  a  representation  of 
motion,  but  no  other  real  qualities.  But  here,  as  iron  iii  the 
fire  seemeth  to  be  fire,  we  are  like  our  Lord  in  holiness  and 
JiappinessP  Thus,  O  my  soul,  be  thou  in  Christ  as  the  iron  in 
the  fire,  thyself  transformed  into  his  very  nature  and  spirit.  Is 
it  so  with  thee  now  1  Alas,  not  as  it  should  be.  Yet  he  that 
hath  wrought  us  to  the  self-same  thing  thus  far  is  the  Lord,  and 
he  will  not  cease  his  work  till  he  hath  perfected  it.  Refining 
fire  go  through  my  heart  until  I,  also,  burn  and  glow.  Lord,  I 
cry  to  thee  for  this,  and  surely  that  which  is  already  in  my  desire 
will  soon  be  in  my  possession.  I  leave  myself  in  thy  hands. 
Change  me  wholly  into  thine  image,  I  beseech  thee. 


200  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THORNS  AND  BURES. 

"  Ears  of  corn  do  7iot  catch  otir  clothes  and  hang  about  them, 
but  thorns  a7id  burrs  will  do  soP  In  passing  through  the  midst 
of  this  crooked  and  perverse  generation  we  are  far  more  likely 
to  learn  evil  than  good.  It  is  well  to  keep  our  clothes  well 
brushed  when  traversing  this  world's  dusty  roads,  for  it  is  not  a 
fragrant  spice,  but  a  defiling  dust,  which  we  gather  in  our  jour- 
neying. Often  have  we  gone  for  a  walk  and  brought  home  mire 
upon  our  shoes,  but  we  never  remember  to  have  come  home  with 
our  clothing  improved  by  our  perambulations.  The  tendency  of 
all  around  is  to  soil  us,  and  mar  the  beauty  of  our  holiness.  The 
Lord  help  us  to  be  very  careful  on  this  point.  May  we  be 
among  those  of  whom  there  were  a  few  even  in  Sardis,  "  who 
have  not  defiled  their  garments  ; "  for  the  Lord  Jesus  says  of 
them,  "  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy." 
What  a  walk  will  that  be  !  What  joy  had  Enoch  in  such  a  walk 
on  earth !  What  honour  will  be  given  us  by  such  a  walk  in 
heaven  ! 

SERVANTS  AND  HEIRS. 

"^  servaiit  niust  have  soi7iethi7ig  in  ha7id^  he  7>mst  have  his 
i)ay  fro77i  qua7'ter  to  qna7'ter,  or  from  week  to  week.  He  is  7iot 
cxpecti7is^  to  receive  his  77iaste7''s  possessio7is,  a7id,  thc)-efo7'e, 
seeks  a  prese7it  wage;  but  a7i  heir  waiteih  till  the  estate 
falls  in  to  hi7n,  and  looks  not  for  present  gai7is:'  Thus  may 
we  discern  between  the  mere  hireling  and  the  true-born 
child :  the  one  deserts  the  Lord's  service  when  it  does  not 
pay  down  on  the  nail  ;  the  other  never  expects  reward  till  glory 
shall  crown  his  labours.  It  is  a  sad  thing  for  any  sort  of  people 
when  Jesus  can  say  of  them,  "  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  they  have 
their  reward."  They  cannot  expect  to  be  paid  twice,  and  as 
their  account  is  discharged  in  full,  what  have  they  to  look  for .? 

Blessed  shall  we  be  if  we  are  enabled  to  imitate  the  example 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  served  the  Father  in  the  spirit  of  Son- 
ship.    Love  made  him  rise  above  all  idea  of  present  recompense : 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  201 

he  waited  the  Father's  time,  and  he  still  waits  for  his  complete 
reward  till  the  hour  of  his  Second  Advent  shall  arrive. 

"A  servant,"  according  to  Job,  *'  earnestly  desireth  the  shadow'* 
of  evening,  when  his  task  will  be  ended ;  "and  the  hireling  looketh 
for  the  reward  of  his  work":  this  is  nothing  more  than  natural, 
for  they  have  no  interest  in  the  work  beyond  their  pay.  But  the 
heir  loveth  his  father,  and  worketh  and  waiteth  patiently,  for 
the  father  saith  to  him,  "All  that  I  have  is  thine.''  In  serving 
the  cause  of  God  we  are  really  serving  ourselves,  for  we  are  par- 
takers in  this  great  cause,  even  as  the  interest  of  sons  is  one  with 
that  of  their  father.  Can  we  not,  therefore,  "  both  hope  and 
quietly  wait  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord"? 

HOUSES  AND  SHIPS  PEEPAEED  FOR  STOE!^. 

*•  He  that  buildeth  a  house,  doth  not  take  care  that  the  rain 
should  not  descend  upon  it,  or  the  storm  should  not  beat  upon  it: 
there  is  710  fencing  against  these  things,  they  cannot  be  prevented 
by  a7iy  care  of  ours;  but  he  takes  care  that  the  house  may  be  able 
io  endure  all  weathers  'without  damage,  A7id  he  that  btdldeth  a 
ship,  doth  7iot  make  this  his  wo7-k,  that  it  should  7icver  meet  with 
waves  a}id  billows;  that  is  i7npossible ;  but  that  it  7nay  be 
tight  a7id  staimch,  a7id  able  to  e7idure  all  tc77ipests.  A  77ia7t  that 
taketh  care  for  his  body,  doth  7iot  desire  that  he  7neet  with  710 
clia7ige  of  weather,  hot  or  cold;  but  he  p7'epa7'eth  his  dress  that 
his  body  7nay  bear  all  incle77te7icics.  Thus  should  Christians 
do  :  they  should  7iot  so  77iuch  take  care  how  to  avoia  afflictio7is 
as  to  be  ready  to  bear  them  with  an  even  and  qtiiet  mi7td.^' 

Let  me  then  seek  steadfastness  that  I  may  stand  in  every  storm, 
strength  that  I  may  brave  every  tempest,  and  all  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit  that  I  may  be  happy  in  every  condition.  I  may  not  pray 
to  be  kept  from  the  flood  and  the  wind,  but  that  my  house  may 
be  built  upon  a  rock.  I  may  not  ask  that  no  tempest  may  assault 
iny  barque,  but  that  Jesus  may  be  always  in  the  vessel.  I  may 
not  beg  the  Lord  to  change  the  arrangements  of  his  providence. 


202  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

and  neither  try  me  Avith  the  heat  of  prosperity  nor  the  cold  of 
adversity,  but  I  must  see  to  it  that  I  buy  of  him  raiment  that  I 
may  be  clothed  amid  all  the  changes  of  my  circumstances. 

Herein  is  wisdom.  Let  us  learn  it,  even  as  the  prudent  woman 
of  the  Proverbs  had  learned  it,  of  whom  we  read,  "  She  is  not 
afraid  of  the  snow  for  her  household,  for  all  her  household  are 
clothed  with  scarlet."  Better  to  be  prepared  for  trial  than  to  be 
flying  hither  and  thither  to  avoid  it.  Come,  my  soul,  thou  must 
make  a  passage  across  a  rough  sea,  nerve  thyself  to  it  by  grace 
divine,  and  the  Lord  shall  yet  be  glorified  in  thee.  A  battle 
awaits  thee.  Do  not  attempt  to  run  from  the  fight,  but  look  to 
thine  armour,  and  unsheathe  thy  sword. 

HEART-DISEASE  THE  WORST  DISEASE. 

"  What  wotdd  we  think  of  a  man  -who  complained  of  the  tooth- 
ache, or  of  a  att  finger,  luhen  all  the  while  he  was  wotcnded  at  the 
heart?  Would  it  not  seem  very  strange?^'  Yet  men  will  lament 
anything  sooner  than  the  depravity  of  their  hearts.  Many  will 
confess  their  wandering  thoughts  in  prayer,  but  will  not  acknow- 
ledge the  estrangement  of  their  hearts  from  God.  They  will  be 
sorry  for  having  spoken  angrily,  but  not  for  having  a  passionate 
heart.  They  will  own  to  Sabbath-breaking,  but  never  lament  their 
want  of  love  to  Jesus,  which  is  a  heart-matter.  The  evil  of  their 
hearts  seems  nothing  to  them  :  their  tongues,  hands,  feet  are  all 
that  they  notice.  What  !  will  they  cry  over  a  cut  finger,  and  feel 
no  fear  when  they  have  a  dagger  thrust  into  their  bowels  .?  Oh, 
madness  of  sinners,  that  they  trifle  most  with  that  disease  which 
is  the  most  dangerous,  and  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  other  ills. 
God's  great  complaint  of  men  is  that  they  set  up  in  their  hearts 
idols  which  they  themselves  think  nothing  of  Ezek.  xiv.  3,  5. 
Certain  in  our  day  are  so  far  gone  that  they  even  deny  that  the 
human  heart  is  diseased.  What  then  .^  It  does  but  prove  the 
intimate  connection  between  the  heart  and  the  eyes.  A  perverted 
heart  soon  creates  a  blinded  eye.  Of  course  a  depraved  heart  does 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  203 

not  see  its  own  depravity.  Oh,  that  we  could  lead  men  to  think 
and  feel  aright  about  their  hearts  ;  but  this  is  the  last  point  to 
which  we  can  bring  them  !  They  beat  about  the  bush,  and  mourn 
over  any  and  every  evil  except  the  source  and  fountain  of  it  all. 
Lord,  teach  me  to  look  within.  May  I  attend  even  more  to 
myself  than  to  my  acts.  Purge  thou  the  spring,  that  the  stream 
may  no  longer  be  defiled.  I  would  begin  where  thou  dost  begin, 
and  beseech  thee  to  give  me  a  new  heart.  Thou  sayest,  "  My 
son,  give  me  thine  heart."  Lord,  I  do  give  it  to  thee,  but  at  the 
same  time  I  pray,  "Lord,  give  me  a  new  heart";  for  without 
this  my  heart  is  not  worth  thy  having. 

THE  JUDGE'S  VERDICT  ALONE  TO  BE  REGARDED. 

"  //  is  no  matter  what  sianders-by  say  of  the  rimner^  so  the 
judge  of  the  race  doth  appi'ove  of  his  ru?mi?igy  Yet  we  all 
make  too  much  of  the  approval  or  disapproval  of  our  fellow- 
men,  who  are,  after  all,  only  the  spectators,  and  not  the  umpires, 
of  the  race.  What  folly  this  is  !  What  injuries  it  inflicts  !  We 
are  elevated  by  human  opinion  if  it  be  favourable  to  us,  and 
this  betrays  us  into  the  weakness  of  pride  ;  which  weakness 
soon  shows  itself  in  faint-heartedness,  when  that  unstable  opinion 
veers  round,  and  blows  a  cold  blast  of  fault-finding.  If  we  were 
steadily  "  looking  unto  Jesus,"  this  wculd  not  happen,  and  our 
running  would  be  more  regular  and  less  disturbed.  Be  it  our 
endeavour  to  live  above  men,  in  the  conscious  presence  of  God. 
Who  and  what  are  men  that  we  should  live  upon  the  breath  of 
their  nostrils  ?  Their  judgment  is  a  small  matter ;  the  judgment 
of  God  is  all  in  all. 

Lord,  thou  hast  said,  "  Walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect," 
and  from  this  I  learn  that  I  cannot  hope  for  perfection  unless 
I  set  thee  always  before  me,  and  rate  thine  approval  at  an  infi- 
nitely higher  price  than  the  judgment  of  those  about  me.  Enable 
me  to  say  with  thy  servant  David,  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always 
before  me :  because  he  is  at  my  right  hand,  I  shall  not  be  moved." 


201-  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS, 

PETJNING  UNPRUNED  TREES. 

"  Trees  long  unprtmed  have  the  more  cuts  of  the  knife  when 
the  gardener  begins  with  themP  The  ground  is  strewn  with  their 
offshoots,  and  they  present  a  sorry  figure :  one  might  even  think 
that  the  gardener  was  quite  destroying  them.  So  have  we  seen 
our  Father,  who  is  the  Husbandman,  cut  and  slash  terribly  with 
those  who  have  been  long  prosperous,  and  have,  therefore,  borne 
little  of  the  fruit  of  grace,  and  much  of  the  wood  of  worldhness. 
See  how  their  wealth  diminishes,  their  health  declines,  their  family 
sickens  !  Providence  multiplies  their  trials  till  they  feel  that  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone  out  against  them.  Does  the  gardener 
hate  the  apple-tree  when  he  prunes  so  remorselessly  ?  Far 
from  it :  he  knows  it  to  be  a  choice  tree,  and,  therefore,  he  would 
have  fruit  from  it  :  he  would  not  thus  wear  away  his  knife  upon 
a  crab.  Abounding  trials  prove  their  own  necessity  and  the 
Lord's  sagacity.  If  it  clearly  appears  that  we  have  not  been 
able  to  bear  seasons  of  worldly  ease,  it  is  the  stern  order  of 
heavenly  love  that  wc  mu5t  lose  the  unprofitable  luxuriance  of 
our  unregulated  joys.     Is  it  not  well  that  it  should  be  so  ? 

O  Lord,  I  thank  thee  for  all  the  wounds  thou  hast  hitherto 
seen  it  wise  to  inflict  upon  me.  If  I,  too,  have  enjoyed  too  much 
repose,  and  have  spent  my  strength  unprofitably  in  consequence 
thereof,  I  rejoice  to  think  that  I  am  in  good  hands.  Deal  with 
me  even  as  thou  wilt.  I  ask  not  for  affliction,  but  I  beg  thee  to 
make  me  fruitful  unto  thyself,  let  the  means  be  what  they  may. 

LIKE  WILL  TO  LIKE. 

"  Eve^ythinq'  tcndeth  to  the  place  of  its  original.  Meji  love 
their  native  soil;  tilings  bred  in  the  water  delight  in  that 
element ;  inaiiimate  thini^s  tend  to  their  centj'e ;  a  stone  will  fall 
to  the  grozind  though  b7-oke}i  in  pieces  by  the  fall. ^^ 

Thus  I  may  judge  of  my  nature  by  my  inclination.  What 
delights  me?  For  where  my  delight  is  my  heart  is.  If  I  take 
pleasure  in  the  ways  of  the  world,  then  I  am  of  the  world.     If 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  205 

1  find  myself  at  home  in  sin,  then  I  am  still  the  servant  of  sin. 
Doubtless  many  hasten  to  evil  with  such  desperate  speed  that 
they  will  be  broken  in  the  fall ;  yet  to  evil  they  must  needs  go, 
and  he  who  would  hinder  them  gets  a  wound  for  his  pains. 

Come,  my  heart,  what  sayest  thou  of  thyself?  Art  thou  in- 
dined  to  hohness  or  to  lewdness,  to  grace  or  to  covetousness  ? 
How  much  hangs  on  this  !  Yet  take  heart,  for  if  thou  hast  a 
nature  which  came  from  heaven  it  will  rise  to  heaven.  If  Jesus 
is  the  source  of  thy  life,  that  life  will  rise  as  high  as  the  place 
where  Jesus  dwells.     Is  not  this  a  rich  encouragement  ? 

SAILING  LONG,  BUT  NOT  FAR. 

"  A  man  may  abide  long  in  the  luorld  till  he  be  eaten  out  of 
life  by  his  owtt  rust,  or  droppeth  like  rotten  fruit;  but  he  ca7inot 
be  said  to  have  a  long  life;  as  a  matt  may  be  lo?tg  at  sea,  but  if 
he  is  driven  to  and  fro  by  the  waves  he  cannot  be  said  to  maize  a 
lo7ig  voyage  when  he  is  at  last  drive Ji  back  hito  the  port  out  of 
which  he  sailed  at  first P  Yes,  life  is  not  to  be  measured  by 
mere  lapse  of  time,  but  by  the  real  headway  which  a  man  makes. 
The  mass  of  mankind  voyage  to  no  known  port,  but  are  the 
sport  of  winds  and  waves.  Compass  or  chart  they  no  more 
consult  than  do  the  sea-birds  or  the  dolphins.  Thus  it  happens 
that  in  advanced  years  men  are  no  forwarder  than  in  youth,  for 
they  never  continue  in  one  line,  having  no  object  before  them  : 
they  have  not  lived,  but  existed.  Nothing  has  been  attempted, 
much  less  accomplished ;  their  years  have  rusted  them  into 
infirmity,  but  otherwise  they  are  unaltered.  Here's  the  respect 
which  makes  calamity  of  so  much  wasted  life. 

O  my  blessed  Lord,  preserve  thy  servant  from  spending  his 
•sojourn  here  after  the  manner  of  the  idler.  Let  mine  be  a  real 
life.  May  I  not  be  a  mere  strainer  of  meat  and  drink,  or  a 
walking  clothes-horse,  or  a  cypher  ;  but  may  I  so  live  on  earth 
that  it  may  seem  wise  to  thee  to  bid  me  continue  my  life  for 
-ever. 


206  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND  MEDITATIONS. 

DOUBLE  BENEFIT. 

"  A  77ialef actor  that  hath  a  leprosy  on  him  needs  not  only  a 
pardon,  but  a  medicine;  and  in  a  broken  leg,  not  only  ease  of  the 
fain  is  desirable,  but  that  the  bone  be  set  right.  So  we  need 
both  justification  and  sanctificationy  Justification  saves  the  male- 
factor, and  sanctification  cures  him  of  his  spiritual  disease : 
are  they  not  equally  desirable  ?  Who  would  wish  to  miss  the 
one  or  the  other  if  in  need  of  them  ?  Pardon  removes  the  pain 
of  our  broken  bones,  but  spiritual  renewal  reduces  the  fracture. 
Let  us  not  be  content  with  half  a  gospel,  but  obtain  a  whole 
Christ  for  our  broken  hearts.  Renewal  of  life  is  every  way  as 
desirable  as  forgiveness  of  sin.  As  well  be  full  of  guilt  as  full 
of  guile.  If  a  child  has  eaten  imhealthy  food  it  is  well  to  cure 
the  disease  which  is  occasioned  by  it,  but  it  is  equally  desirable 
to  break  him  of  the  habit  which  led  him  to  such  foul  feeding. 

Lord,  thy  poor  servant  is  by  nature  both  malefactor  and  leper  ; 
and  nothing  v/ill  serve  my  turn  but  a  double-handed  blessing. 
I  pray  thee  absolve  me,  and  cure  me  too.  Let  me  know  of  a 
surety  that  both  these  blessings  are  mine  beyond  all  question, 
mine  in  immediate  and  experienced  possession. 

GEAVEL  IN  THE  SHOE, 

"  Who  will  pity  the  man  who  cojnplai?zs  of  soreness  a7id  pai7i  in 
walJdng,  a?idyet  doth  not  take  the  gravel  out  of  his  shoe  ?  If  you 
woimd  and  gore  yourselves,  no  questio7i  but  yoicr  S77iart  a7id 
trouble  are  real,  you  do  7iot  co7nplai7i  i7i  hypocrisy;  but  who  is  to 
be  bla77ied?  Your  busi7iess  is  to  re77iove  the  causeP  Many  of  the 
trials  of  our  spiritual  life  are  preventible  :  if  we  indulge  a  sin  we 
invite  a  sorrow.  Others  are  curable  :  if  we  refuse  a  remedy  we 
rivet  a  disease.  All  that  we  can  do  for  ourselves  we  are  bound 
to  do.  We  must  put  away  evil  habits,  and  not  content  ourselves 
with  whining  out  our  regrets.  We  must  get  away  from  tempta- 
tion, and  not  sit  near  the  fire  and  complain  of  the  heat.  There 
is  too  much  of  this  insincerity  abroad.     What  should  we  have 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  207 

thought  of  the  prodigal  if  he  had  lamented  his  destitution,  but 
had  continued  in  the  far  country  ?  What  do  we  now  think  of 
the  drunkard  who  mourns  over  the  redness  of  his  eyes,  and  yet 
tarries  long  at  the  wine ;  or  of  the  lascivious  man  who  bemoans 
his  vice,  and  yet  frequents  the  house  of  the  strange  woman? 

By  gracious  instruction,  I  pray  thee,  O  Lord,  teach  me  to  be 
practical  in  going  to  the  bottom  of  things, — that  I  may  not  waste 
time  in  regretting  evils  which  it  is  my  duty  to  prevent.  Let  me 
not  mourn  my  doubt,  and  yet  refuse  to  believe  thy  faithful  word  ; 
neither  permit  me  to  cry  over  my  chastisement,  and  yet  continue 
in  my  folly.  Lord,  make  me  to  know  wisdom.  To  this  end, 
make  me  mindful  of  little  things.  Help  me  to  look  to  the  little 
stone,  or  tiny  dust  in  my  shoe,  for  this  may  cause  me  many  a 
blister,  and  even  lame  me,  so  that  I  cannot  hold  on  my  way. 

AN  UNUSITAL  COMPLAINT. 

*'  /  have  read  in  the  lives  of  the  fathers  of  a  devout  man  thaty 
being  one  year  without  any  trial^  cried  ozit,  *  Domine,  reliquisti 
me,  quia  non  me  visitasti,  hoc  anno,' — Lord  /  thou  hast  forgotten 
me,  and  for  a  whole  year  hast  not  appoijited  me  upon  ajiy  exercise 
of  patienceP  We  would  not  recommend  any  one  of  our  readers 
to  unite  with  this  devout  but  mistaken  expression.  We  should 
count  it  all  joy  when  we  fall  into  divers  trials,  but,  at  the  same 
time,  we  ought  to  be  thankful  if  we  do  not  fall  into  them.  If  a 
cross  be  laid  upon  us,  let  us  take  it  up  cheerfully  ;  but  it  would 
be  folly  to  make  a  cross  for  ourselves,  or  go  out  of  our  way  to 
look  for  one.  He  must  be  a  very  foolish  child  who  begs  to  be 
whipped.  "Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  is  a  prayer  of  our 
Lord's  own  teaching,  and  we  prefer  to  keep  to  it  rather  than 
follow  this  devout  man  in  what  reads  very  like  a  prayer  for 
temptation.  Those  who  cry  for  chastisement  will  have  enough 
of  it  before  all  is  over.  Be  it  ours  to  leave  our  correction  and 
probation  in  our  Lord's  hands,  and  never  let  us  be  so  unwise  as 
to  desire  more  trials  than  his  infinite  wisdom  appoints  us. 


208  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

THE  TAP  AND  THE  LIQUOR. 

"  The  tap  7'imneth  accordi7ig  to  the  liquor  with  luhich  the 
"Vessel  isfilledP  The  tongue  babbleth  out  that  which  occupies 
the  mind.  We  shall  never  hear  much  pious  conversation  till 
we  have  more  thorough  conversions.  Taps  will  never  run  with 
pure  water  while  the  barrels  are  bursting  with  fermented  liquors. 
Change  the  contents  of  the  heart,  and  you  alter  at  once  the 
droppings  of  the  mouth.  From  a  sweet  fountain  of  thought  we 
shall  have  sweet  waters  of  talk.  Even  the  involuntary  utter- 
ances of  gracious  men  are  gracious  :  the  mere  drippings  of 
common  speech  reveal  the  heart  of  the  man.  The  leakings  of  a 
tap  show  the  contents  quite  as  surely  as  the  proper  runnings 
of  it. 

Lord,  grant  that  even  my  dreams  may  be  pure,  that  my  playful 
thoughts  may  be  godly,  and  my  chance  words  acceptable  before 
thee.  Fill  me  with  thyself,  and  then  nothing  but  good  can  come 
from  me. 

BRASS  FARTHINGS  AND  GOLD  IN  THE  POCKET. 

"//ij  that  hath  in  his  pocket  more  store  of  gold  than  of  brass 
farthings  will  at  every  draught  brifig  out  more  gold  than 
farthings:''  Of  course  the  hand  fetches  out  the  various  kinds 
of  coins  in  proportion  as  they  exist  in  the  place  from  which  it 
takes  them.  Now,  our  works  are  our  hand,  and  this,  by  action, 
fetches  out  of  us  that  which  is  in  us.  In  a  child  of  God  there  is 
a  measure  of  natural  evil,  and  a  more  abounding  measure  of 
grace  ;  and  so  it  will  come  to  pass  that,  in  his  life,  holiness  will 
be  more  conspicuous  than  sin.  His  life  has  its  failings,  but 
much  more  its  virtues.  Peter  brought  out  brass  farthings  of 
boasting  and  impetuous  folly  at  times  ;  but  he  also  brought  forth 
so  much  true  gold  that  his  Lord  said,  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon 
Barjona."  When  he  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost  he  brought 
out  much  more  gold  ;  but  even  then  a  farthing  came  out  now 
and  then,  for  Paul  withstood  him  because  he  was  to  be  blamed. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  209 

When  the  behever's  tongue  also  makes  a  dip  into  the  pocket 
of  the  heart  there  may  come  forth  some  of  those  wretched  brass 
farthings  in  the  form  of  idle  words  ;  but  much  more  will  the  gold 
be  poured  forth  in  edifying  discourse.  Paul  saith  that  fooHsh 
talking  is  not  befitting,  but  he  commends  giving  of  thanks ;  now, 
if  somewhat  of  our  folly  has  come  forth  in  our  talk,  let  us  give 
heed  that  far  more  of  our  gratitude  shall  be  brought  out  also. 
We  ought  daily  to  grow  richer  in  grace,  and  so  have  more  gold, 
and  less  of  the  baser  sort. 

Lord,  help  me  to  get  rid  of  these  miserable  brass  counters, 
and  do  thou  fill  up  their  places  with  the  precious  metal  of  thine 
own  holiness  and  truth.  Am  I  not  thy  child  ?  Wilt  thou  not 
si^ly  me  within  with  that  which  will  be  fit  to  be  brought  out 
into  my  life  ?  Oh  that  I  might  be  "  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of 
God,"  that  my  poor  empty  things  may  no  more  appear  ! 

EAVENS  LOVING  THE  SCENT  OF  CARRION. 

"  1/  yoit  would  be  free  from  sm,  avoid  the  temptations  that 
lead  to  it.  If  ravens  or  crocus  be  driveii  away  from  carrion^ 
they  love  to  abide  within  scent  of  itJ^  This  last  sentence  is  a 
grim  parable,  but  all  too  true.  If  human  nature  cannot  yield  an 
ell  to  self-indulgence,  it  will  give  its  full  inch.  We  have  seen 
those  who  dared  not  enter  the  devil's  house  linger  long  and 
lovingly  around  the  doors.  The  old  woman  in  the  fable,  who 
could  find  no  wine  in  the  jar,  yet  loved  to  smell  at  it.  It  is  a 
clear  proof  of  the  love  of  human  nature  to  evil  that,  when 
restrained  from  actual  sin,  men  will  rehearse  their  former  exploits, 
and  dote  on  the  lusts  which  they  indulged  years  ago.  If  they 
cannot  have  a  fresh  dish  from  Satan's  garden  they  will  have 
"  the  cauld  kail  het  again  "  sooner  than  go  without. 

Our  author  gives  sage  advice  at  the  outset,  when  he  says, — to 
avoid  sin,  avoid  temptation.  He  who  would  not  be  wounded 
should  keep  out  of  battle  ;  he  who  would  not  be  tossed  about 
should  not  go  to  sea  ;  he  who  would  not  be  heated  should  keep 

14 


'210  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS. 

away  from  the  fire.  If  men  will  get  into  the  train  which  runs  to 
the  terminus  of  iniquity  they  must  expect  to  be  carried  to  their 
journey's  end.  He  who  desires  to  keep  awake  should  not  go  to 
bed.  If  I  stand  in  the  way  of  sinners  I  shall  soon  run  with  them. 
Oh,  to  possess  a  godly  fear,  which  shall  lead  me  rather  to  go  ten 
miles  round  about,  than  pass  by  the  place  of  temptation  !  It  is 
well  to  keep  out  of  the  smell  of  sin,  for  the  very  odour  of  it  is 
baneful. 

If  we  seek  a  temptation  we  shall  soon  find  it ;  and  within  it, 
like  a  kernel  in  a  nut,  we  shall  meet  with  sin.  Oh,  that  our 
young  people  had  the  wdt  to  see  this,  and  were  more  firmly 
resolved  not  to  stand  in  the  broad  road,  or  even  near  it,  lest 
they  should  become  regular  travellers  upon  it !  Lord,  give  them 
prudence.  Yea,  give  me  prudence,  and,  as  I  would  not  devour  the 
carrion  of  sin,  give  me  such  a  renewed  nature  that  the  most 
distant  scent  of  it  shall  at  once  sicken  me,  and  cause  me  to 
urge  my  steps  as  far  from  it  as  possible. 

TONGS  FOR  HANDLING  HOT  IRON. 

'"''Chrysostom  hath  the  following  comparison : — ^A  smith  that 
taketh  up  his  red-hot  i7'07i  with  his  hands^  and  not  with  his 
tongs ^  what  can  he  expect  but  to  bur?!  his  fiiigers?''  So  we  dest?'oy 
our  souls  whe?t  we  judge  of  the  myste?'ies  of  faith  by  the  laws  of 
common  reasonP  Common  enough  is  this  error.  Men  must 
needs  comprehend  when  their  main  business  is  to  apprehend. 
That  which  God  reveals  to  us  is,  to  a  large  extent,  beyond  the 
reach  of  understanding,  and,  therefore,  in  refusing  to  believe 
until  we  can  understand,  we  are  doing  ourselves  and  the  truth  a 
grievous  wrong.  Our  wisdom  lies  as  much  in  taking  heed  how 
we  receive  as  in  being  careful  what  we  receive.  Spiritual  truth 
must  be  received  by  a  spiritual  faculty ;  namely,  by  faith.  As 
well  hope  to  grasp  a  star  by  the  hand,  as  divine  truth  by  reason. 
Faith  is  well  likened  to  the  golden  tongs,  with  which  we 
may  carry  live  coals;  and  carnal  reason  is  the  burned  hand, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  211 

which  lets  fall  the  glowing  mass,  which  it  is  not  capable  of 
carrying. 

Let  it  not,  however,  be  thought  that  faith  is  contrary  to  reason. 
No :  it  is  not  unreasonable  for  a  little  child  to  believe  its  father's 
statements,  though  it  be  quite  incapable  of  perceiving  all  their 
bearings.  It  is  quite  reasonable  that  a  pupil  should  accept  his 
master's  principles  at  the  beginning  of  his  studies ;  he  will  get 
but  little  from  his  discipleship  if  he  begins  by  disputing  with  his 
teacher.  How  are  we  to  learn  anything  if  we  will  not  believe  ? 
In  the  gloriously  sublime  truths  of  Godhead,  Incarnation, 
Atonement,  Regeneration,  and  so  forth,  we  must  believe,  or  be 
for  ever  ignorant :  these  masses  of  the  molten  metal  of  eternal 
truth  must  be  handled  by  faith,  or  let  alone. 

All-gracious  Lord,  this  one  thing  thou  hast  done  for  me, — 
thou  hast  made  me  a  willing  believer.  Let  but  thine  authority 
be  at  the  back  of  a  statement,  and  it  stands  instead  of  reason : 
in  fact,  thy  word  is  to  me  the  surest  evidence,  and  to  believe  it 
is  my  soundest  common  sense.  O  Lord,  thy  LOGOS  is  my  logic; 
thy  Testament  is  my  argument;  thy  Word  is  my  warrant.  In 
the  day  which  shall  reveal  all  things  it  shall  be  seen  that  man's 
reasonings  are  but  childish  folly,  and  God's  revelation  is  wisdom 
at  its  height. 

GREEN  WOOD. 

"  Gree?i  wooa,  which  is  wet  and  full  of  sap^  cannot  be  kindled 
by  a  flash  or  a  sparky  but  needeth  much  care  and  blowing  ere  it 
will  burny  When  we  are  dealing  with  young  and  thoughtless 
minds,  we  must  remember  this,  and  be  patient  and  persevering. 
Such  will  not  readily  take  fire  when  we  apply  our  match  ;  we 
had  better  go  down  on  our  knees  while  we  are  trying  to  light  the 
fire  of  attention  in  them,  and  if  we  use  the  warm  breath  of  our 
anxious  love  we  shall  all  the  sooner  do  the  work. 

Lord,  as  I  have  seen  my  servant  thus  doing  my  work,  help  me 
as  thy  servant  to  copy  her,  and  succeed  in  thy  work. 


212  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

GAMBLING. 

"/;2  gaming  there  is  a  secret  witchery.  A  man  will  play  a 
little^  and  only  vejitiire  a  s7Jiall  sum;  but  soon  he  is  worined  iii^ 
ojzd  more  and  ?nore  e7ita7igled;  ajtd  so  men  think  it  is  no  great 
matter  to  siit  a  little^  and  yet  that  little  leadeth  07i  to  7norey  The 
illustration  is  most  forcible.  Many  persons  have  put  down  a 
piece  of  silver  on  the  gaming-table  when  passing  through  the 
room,  and  from  that  moment  their  ruin  has  been  sealed.  They 
will  be  seen  from  day  to  day  staking  their  hundreds,  till  the 
last  fatal  roll  of  the  ball  leaves  them  penniless.  For  the  while 
gamblers  live,  and  move,  and  have  their  being  in  the  game : 
their  eyes  are  quick,  and  their  brains  are  sharp,  to  see  each  turn 
of  the  play:  they  are  the  willing,  abject  slaves  of  what  is  called 
amusement.  Thus  doth  sin  begin  with  littles,  and  glide  into 
more  serious  faults  ;  till  the  sinner  is  spellbound,  and  finds  him- 
self engrossed  with  folly,  which  he  has  no  will  to  leave.  Be  it 
ours  to  give  no  place  to  the  devil.  Let  him  not  have  a  spot 
whereon  to  set  up  his  enchantment  and  work  his  diabolical  arts. 
If  we  never  venture  a  farthing  upon  Satan's  table,  we  shall 
never  be  made  beggars  by  his  devices.  If  he  is  not  allowed  to 
spin  a  spider's  web  about  us,  he  will  never  be  able  to  hold  us  with 
the  cords  of  iniquity.  If  we  never  wade  into  sin  we  shall  never 
drown  in  it.     Lord,  keep  us  from  the  appearance  of  evil. 

INWARD  BLEEDING. 

''''Ma7iy  die  ofi7iward  bleedi7ig  as  well  as  by  outward  woimdsi'^ 
Every  surgeon  can  give  instances  of  such  deaths.  Not  an  abra- 
sion of  the  skin  was  visible :  the  dying  man  had  neither  gash, 
nor  cut,  nor  even  a  pin's  prick,  and  yet  his  life  oozed  away  in 
secret.  Thus,  without  an  open  fault,  a  man's  soul  may  perish. 
If  wrath  rage  within,  it  is  fatal,  though  no  revengeful  act  has 
been  perpetrated ;  if  lust  be  burning  in  the  heart,  the  man  is  lost, 
though  he  has  never  advanced  to  a  lascivious  deed ;  if  unbelief 
proves  an  inward  enmity  against  God,  the  man  is  condemned 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  213 

already,  though  no  blasphemous  word  has  crossed  his  lip.  Sin 
is  a  bleeding  at  the  heart.  It  is  a  disease  which  destroys  the 
true  life  within,  as  well  as  the  fruit  of  it  without ;  therefore  let 
every  man  beware  of  flattering  himself  that  he  is  right  with  God 
because  no  glaring  vice  is  manifest  in  his  daily  conversation. 
The  worm  none  the  less  surely  destroys  the  apple  because  its 
first  operations  are  at  the  core,  and  quite  out  of  sight.  If  fire 
be  utterly  hidden  among  combustible  materials,  it  will  not  there- 
fore be  any  the  less  sure  and  rapid  in  its  devouring  work. 

"  Sin,  which  dwelleth  in  me,"  is  the  enemy  that  I  must  fight 
against,  as  well  as  sin  which  goeth  out  of  me.  O  Lord,  help 
me  to  be  healthy  in  the  fountain  of  my  being.  Heal  my  heart, 
and  so  I  shall  be  healed.  Heart-disease  baffles  all  physicians 
but  thyself.  This,  however,  is  thy  specialite.  Lord,  display  thy 
sovereign  power  and  skill  in  the  centre  of  my  being. 

A  CHILD  ASKING  AN  APPLE. 

^^Pf'oyers  to  God  for  spiritual  things  are  the  7nost  acceptable, 
but  prayers  for  te?ftp orals  are  not  despised.  A  child pleaseth  his 
father  7nore  when  he  desireth  him  to  teach  him  his  book  thaii 
when  he  begs  for  a?z  apple;  yet  this  request  is  not  refused  when  it 
will  do  him  no  ill  to  grant  itP  A  pretty,  simple  picture,  rightly 
drawn  upon  divine  authority ;  for  the  Lord  himself  teaches  us  to 
judge  what  our  heavenly  Father  will  do  for  us  by  that  which  we 
would  do  for  our  children.  If  I  go  to  God,  and  ask  for  spiritual 
blessings,  he  will  be  pleased  with  my  request,  and  most  surely 
grant  it,  even  as  a  father  will  readily  give  his  boy  a  lesson  in 
some  useful  work  or  book.  But  I  may  also  beg  for  temporal 
mercies,  as  a  child  asks  for  its  bread  and  butter.  More  than 
this,  as  a  child  may  ask  for  an  apple,  or  a  sweet,  so  may  I  make 
request  for  that  which  I  desire.  Only  in  this  latter  case  I  am 
bound  to  remember  that  a  child  is  not  bidden  to  ask  for  the 
apple,  though  he  is  allowed  to  do  so.  "  Give  me  this  day  my 
daily  bread,"  is  a  petition  prescribed :  if  I  ask  for  more  it  must 


211  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

be  as  a  petition  permitted.  Moreover,  the  child's  request  is  one 
which  must  be  left  entirely  to  the  Father's  own  discretion :  he  is 
bound  by  promise  to  give  his  offspring  necessaries,  but  he  is 
under  no  bonds  to  grant  them  luxuries.  Here  is  a  difference 
ever  to  be  noted  between  prayers  commanded  and  prayers  tole- 
rated. As  we  are  children  of  the  great  Father,  we  have  a  large 
liberty  of  request ;  if  we  delight  ourselves  in  the  Lord  he  will 
give  us  the  desires  of  our  hearts ;  but  still,  when  we  are  praying, 
it  is  well  for  us  to  press  our  suit  just  so  far  as  it  may  be  pressed, 
and  no  further.  A  child  asking  for  necessary  food  may  be 
vehement  even  unto  tears  ;  but  if  what  he  wishes  for  is  only  a 
sugar-stick,  he  will  be  a  naughty  child  if  he  be  passionately  im- 
portunate. Mind  this,  ye  babes  in  grace,  when  next  ye  pray. 
Ask,  seek,  knock,  according  as  the  promise  invites  ;  but  in  tem- 
poral matters  consider  the  way  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  submit 
your  will  unto  the  will  of  the  Father. 

THE  SHOWMAN'S  JEST. 

'■^Austin  s'beaketh  of  a  jester  who  boasted  that  at  the  7iextfair 
he  would  undertake  to  show  everyone  what  they  did  desire;  and 
when  there  was  a  great  concourse  aiid  expectation,  he  told  them, 
'  Hoc  omnes  vultis,  vili  emere,  et  caro  vendere,' —  You  all  desire 
to  buy  cheap  and  sell  dear.  Another  showman,  on  like  occasion, 
said,  '  Ye  all  desire  to  be  praised^  But  Austin  saith  rightly, 
these  were  but  foolish  answers,  because  many  good  men  desire 
neither,  the  one  being  agaiftst  justice,  and  the  other  agaist  since- 
rity; but,  saith  he,  '  Si  dixisset,  omnes  beati  esse  vultis,  If  he  had 
said,— ye  all  desire  to  be  happy,  he  had  said  right.  Every  one 
may  fnd  this  dispositio?t  in  his  ow7i  heart,  every  man  desireth 
happiness^  No  doubt  this  is  true,  and  it  is  equally  true  that 
the  notion  of  happiness  is  as  varied  as  the  wish  for  it  is  universal. 
What  is  my  view  of  happiness  ?  This  is  a  question  of  the 
highest  importance ;  for  as  I  am  sure  to  seek  after  that  which  I 
desire,  and  am  sure  to  desire  that  which   I   conceive   to  be 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  215 

happiness,  it  is  clear  that  my  conception  of  happiness  will  largely 
regulate  my  whole  course  of  life.  Remember  this,  O  my  soul, 
and  take  good  heed  that  thou  seek  not  happiness  apart  from 
holiness,  nor  rest  apart  from  Jesus,  nor  pleasure  apart  from 
pleasing  God. 

Lord,  teach  men  that  thou  art  their  bliss,  and  then  draw  them 
to  seek  after  thee  with  their  whole  hearts. 

CONSCIENCE  LIKE   THE  EYE   OR  THE   STOMACH. 

"  The  least  dust,  if  if  get  into  the  eye,  will  pai7i  it;  so  will 
conscience  at  first  smite  us  for  lesser  failings  and  excesses;  but 
afterwards  wheit  you  make  bold  with  it,  it  is  like  the  stomach  of 
the  ostrich,  which  digesteth  iron;  or  like  a  part  or  member  of 
the  body  which  is  seared  with  a  hot  iro?t,  it  hath  no  feeling, 
(i  Tim.  iv.  2);  or,  like  freezing  water,  which  at  fij-st  will  not 
bear  a  pin,  but  afterwards  it  freezeth,  and  freezeth,  till  it  bear 
a  caj^t-load.  Some  men  lose  their  tender  sense  of  si7i  by 
frequency  of  sin?ii?ig.^''  If  our  offending  against  right  did  us 
no  worse  turn  than  this  it  would  be  bad  enough,  for  to  lose 
sensitiveness  of  conscience  is  to  lose  the  excellence  of  our  being. 
What  is  the  eye  worth  when  it  can  no  longer  feel  pain,  or  the 
hand  when  its  touch  is  gone,  or  the  head  when  sensation  has 
departed  ?  As  well  take  away  from  the  goldsmith  all  his  tests 
as  from  man  his  conscience.  What  is  the  use  of  a  watchman 
who  is  in  a  dead  sleep  ?  How  far  any  one  of  us  may  be  pro- 
ceeding in  this  direction  it  will  be  prudent  for  us  to  know  at  once, 
that  by  repentance  we  may  arrest  the  process,  and  by  faith  may 
put  ourselves  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  he  may  give 
back  to  us  the  heart  of  flesh.  Let  us  entreat  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
continue  his  softening  operations  even  to  the  end. 
"  Sin  has  been  hammering  my  heart 
Unto  a  hardness  void  of  love  : 
Let  suppling  grace  to  cross  its  art 
Drop  from  above." 


216  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  EAK-EING. 

^''Reproof  is  an  ear-jewel :  now  an  ear-jewel  must  7zot  be  too 
weighty  ajid  heavy ^  lest  it  tear  and  i^end^  rather  tha?i  adorn  the 
cary  Rebuke  requires  delicacy.  It  is  never  wise  to  box  a  man 
on  the  ear  to  win  his  attention  to  a  whisper.  Too  much  zeal  in 
this  case  is  its  own  hindrance.  It  is  only  a  dainty  bit  of  pure 
gold,  garnished  with  a  rare  jewel,  that  a  lady  will  think  fit  for 
her  ear  :  it  would  be  idle  to  offer  her  a  quoit,  or  even  a  curtain- 
ring.  It  was  said  of  a  good  man  that  if  he  wished  to  brush  off 
a  fly  from  a  friend's  forehead  he  would  look  round  for  a  beetle 
and  wedges  ;  and  of  another  that  he  washed  off  spots  from  a 
brother's  face  with  scalding  water.  A  man  should  note  how 
reproofs  affect  himself,  and  he  may  from  this  observation 
discover  that  they  need  to  be  administered  very  tenderly.  The 
rebukes  of  the  righteous  should  always  be  as  a  precious  oint- 
ment, sweet  and  gentle  ;  never  should  they  break  the  head. 
Whenever  it  is  our  reader's  duty  to  attend  to  this  painful  business, 
let  him  remember  Manton's  figure  of  the  ear-ring,  and  act 
accordingly.  A  friend  who  wished  a  lady  to  wear  an  ear- 
ring would  go  down  to  the  jev/eller's,  and  with  dainty  fingers 
examine  various  jewels,  and  select  one  of  the  best,  suited 
for  that  exquisite  piece  of  living  coral  which  is  such  an 
adornment  to  a  fair  head.  This  he  would  not  fling  at  the  lady, 
nor  force  into  her  ear  with  violence,  but  he  would  proffer  it  with 
due  courtesy,  and  leave  her  to  fix  it  in  its  place  herself  If  a 
reproof  be  thus  selected,  and  be  really  precious,  it  should  be 
wisely  presented  to  the  person  for  whom  it  is  intended;  and 
much  of  the  application  must  be  adroitly  left  to  the  person's 
own  conscience.  Thus  will  the  gem  reach  the  ear,  and  the 
reproof  reach  the  heart. 

Lord,  make  us  wise  in  this  and  all  other  things  by  thy  Spirit. 
Let  us  not  shun  the  duty  of  reproof,  but  help  me  to  do  it  well, 
lest  I  do  harm  when  I  mean  to  do  good,  and  thus  myself  need 
to  be  rebuked. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  217 

THE  YOKE  LINED. 

"  The  yoke  of  Christ  will  be  more  easy  than  ive  think  of,  espe- 
cially whe?!  it  is  lined  with  graced  We  well  remember  an  old 
man  who  carried  pails  with  a  yoke,  and  as  he  was  infirm,  and 
tender  about  the  shoulders,  his  yoke  was  padded,  and  covered 
with  white  flannel  where  it  touched  him.  But  what  a  lining  is 
"love"  !  A  cross  of  iron,  lined  with  love,  would  never  gall  the 
neck,  much  less  will  Christ's  wooden  cross.  Lined  with  Christ's 
love  to  us  !  Covered  with  our  love  to  him  !  Truly  the  yoke  is 
easy,  and  the  burden  is  light. 

Whenever  the  shoulder  becomes  sore  let  us  look  to  the  lining. 
Keep  the  lining  right,  and  the  yoke  will  be  no  more  a  burden  to 
us  than  wings  are  to  a  bird,  or  her  wedding-ring  is  to  a  bride. 
O  love  divine,  line  my  whole  life,  my  cares,  my  griefs,  my  pains  ; 
and  what  more  can  I  ask  ? 

PEESCRIPTIONS  NOT  TO  BE  ALTERED. 

*^  The  prescriptions  of  a  physiciait  must  not  be  altered,  either  by 
the  apothecary  or  the  patient;  so  we,  the  preachers,  must  7iot  alter 
Cod^s  prescriptions,  neither  must  you,  the  hearers.  We  must  ?iot 
shim  to  declare,  nor  you  to  7'eceive,  ''The  whole  counsel  of  God  J" 
It  is  as  much  as  a  man's  soul  is  worth  to  alter  a  word  of  the 
Lord's  own  writing :  to  take  away  from  the  book,  or  to  add  to  it, 
is  forbidden  ;  and  threatened  with  the  heaviest  penalties.  It  is 
not  ours  to  improve  the  gospel,  but  to  repeat  it  when  we  preach, 
and  obey  it  when  we  hear.  The  gospel,  the  whole  gospel,  and 
nothing  but  the  gospel,  must  be  our  religion,  or  we  are  lost  men. 
Imagine  a  dispenser  altering  the  ingredients  of  a  medicine  to 
suit  his  own  notions !  We  should  soon  have  him  on  trial  for 
manslaughter  ;  and  surely  he  would  deserve  to  be  tried  on  a  still 
higher  charge  should  a  patient  die  through  his  folly.  The  gospel 
prescription  is  such  that  an  omission  or  an  addition  may  soon 
make  that  which  was  ordained  to  life  to  be  unto  death.  We 
may  not  attempt  to  be  wiser  than  God,  for  the  idea  involves 


218  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND  MEDITATIONS. 

constructive  blasphemy.     No,  it  is  ours  to  follow  our  copy  to 
the  letter,  come  what  may  of  it. 

Lord,  in  my  teaching  I  have  ever  kept  to  what  thou  hast  said ; 
and  therefore  men  think  me  old-fashioned,  and  behind  the  age. 
Give  me  grace  to  continue  so.  Never  may  I  aspire  to  practise 
a  new  pharmacy,  but  may  I  faithfully  dispense  thine  own  ancient 
and  unvarying  prescription  of  salvation  by  grace  through  faith. 

TRUSTING  AFTER  FAILURE. 

'-''  As  a  prodigal,  that  hath  07ice  broken  after  he  hath  been  set 
tfp,  is  7tot  trusted  with  a  like  stock  again;  so  Gods  children  may 
not  recover  that  largeness  of  spirit,  andfubiess  of  inward  strength 
and  comfort,  which  they  had  before.  Many  after  a  great 
disease  do  not  jrgain  that  pitch  of  health  which  fortnerly  they  had., 
but  they  carry  the  fruits  of  their  disease  with  them  to  their 
graves.^''  This  is  not  always  the  case,  for  it  may  happen,  as 
with  Peter,  that  the  bankrupt  believer  may  so  prosper  in  grace 
as  to  be  richer  than  before  his  failure  ;  but  we  fear  that  Manton 
here  mentions  the  general  rule.  Men  do  not  care  to  ride  a 
broken-kneed  horse  :  if  it  has  been  down  once,  it  may  be  down 
again.  A  wise  father  does  not  care  to  restore  a  son  to  a  position 
for  which  he  has  proved  himself  to  be  unfit.  Even  so  has  the 
Lord  dealt  with  many  backsliding  ones  :  like  David,  they  have 
been  restored,  but  never  to  their  former  peace,  prosperity,  and 
power.  Into  the  army  of  our  Lord  the  deserter  is  received  with 
gladness  ;  but  he  must  begin  in  the  ranks,  and  must  prove  his 
fidelity  before  he  is  again  entrusted  with  a  commission.  A 
fallen  one,  when  restored,  may  have  gained  in  self-knowledge, 
but  he  must  necessarily  be  a  loser  in  many  other  respects. 

A  little  boy,  who  had  fallen  into  the  habit  of  falsehood,  was 
made  by  his  father  to  drive  a  nail  into  a  post  every  time  he 
had  exaggerated,  or  told  a  lie.  At  last  the  habit  was  conquered, 
and  in  several  trials  the  boy  had  displayed  complete  truthful- 
ness.    Then  his  father  allowed  him  to  draw  out  some  of  the 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  219 

nails,  and  this  was  repeated  till  no  nail  was  left  in  the  post. 
The  little  fellow,  so  far  from  being  proud  when  every  nail  was 
gone,  exclaimed,  "  Alas,  father,  the  holes  are  there,  where  the 
nails  used  to  be!"  Just  so  does  evil  leave  its  marks.  However 
fully  restored,  the  fallen  professor  seldom  loses  the  memory  of 
impurity,  and  does  not  easily  regain  his  injured  influence.  He 
is  always  weak  in  those  points  which  led  to  his  former  fall,  and, 
for  the  most  part,  weaker  all  round. 

O  Lord  !  if  thou  hast  counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into  thy 
service,  I  pray  thee  keep  me  from  being  either  unfaithful  to  my 
charge,  or  negligent  in  my  life.  Let  me  be  so  upheld  that  I 
shall  not  have  need  to  be  picked  out  of  the  mire,  and  set  on  my 
feet  again. 

THE  DEN  OF  THE  COCKATRICE. 

"  If  lue  play  about  the  cockatrice^ s  hole^  no  wonder  we  are 
bitten^  An  old  proverb  advises  us  not  to  play  with  edged  tools 
lest  we  cut  our  fingers.  It  is  a  sin  to  trifle  with  sin.  If  we 
must  play,  we  had  better  find  harmless  toys  :  that  evil  which 
caused  Christ  a  bloody  sweat  is  no  fit  theme  for  any  man's  sport. 
Playing  with  wickedness  is  a  hazardous  game.  Sooner  or  later, 
if  we  pluck  the  lion  of  sin  by  the  beard,  it  will  arouse  itself,  and 
we  shall  be  torn  in  pieces.  This  is  true  of  indulgence  in  strong 
drink :  "  Look  not  thou  upon  the  wine  when  it  is  red,  when  it 
giveth  his  colour  in  the  cup,  when  it  moveth  itself  aright.  At 
the  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth  like  an  adder."  It 
is  equally  true  of  all  other  forms  of  evil,  especially  of  the  lusts  of 
the  flesh.  Lewd  words  soon  lead  to  foul  deeds.  Yet  such  is  the 
folly  of  men  that  they  run  dreadful  risks  in  sheer  wantonness,  as 
though  asps  and  cobras  were  fine  playmates,  and  devils  rare 
merry-makers. 

"  Lord,  keep  back  thy  servant  from  presumptuous  sins  ;  let 
them  not  have  dominion  over  me  ;  then  shall  I  be  upright,  and 
I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great  transgression." 


220  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

SUNSHINE  WITH  RAIN. 

"^j  ma7iy  times  the  su7i  sJtijicth  when  the  ramfalleth,  so  there 
may  be  in  the  soul  a  mixture  of  spiritual  rejoicing  a?id  holy 
moumingj  a  deep  sense  of  God^s  love,  and  yet  a  ?nourm?ig 
because  of  the  relics  of  corruption^  All  spiritual  persons  under- 
stand this.  The  inexperienced  ask  how  a  man  can  be  "sorrow- 
ful, yet  always  rejoicing. "  But  this  is  no  puzzle  to  a  Christian. 
Our  life  is  a  paradox.  Never  in  the  world  elsewhere  is  there 
such  sunshine  of  delight  as  we  enjoy,  and  never  such  rain  as 
that  which  damps  our  joys.  It  seems  at  times  as  if  heaven  and 
hell  met  in  our  experience.  Ours  is  a  joy  unspeakable,  and  yet 
an  agony  unutterable.  We  rise  to  the  heavenlies  in  Christ,  and 
sink  to  the  abyss  in  ourselves.  Those  who  have  seen  fire 
burning  on  the  sea,  trees  living  and  flourishing  upon  a  rock, 
feathers  flying  against  the  wind,  and  doves  vanquishing  eagles, 
have  begun  to  see  a  list  of  marvels,  all  of  which  are  to  be  found 
within  the  believer,  and  much  more  of  equal  or  greater 
singularity. 

Lord,  when  my  own  experience  puzzles  me,  let  me  be  com- 
forted by  the  thought  that  it  does  not  puzzle  thee.  What  I 
know  not  now  thou  hast  promised  to  make  me  know  hereafter ; 
and  there  I  leave  it. 

THE  SHIP  AND  ITS  PASSENGERS. 

'"''Look,  as  171  a  ship  so7ne  sleep,  a7id  so7ne  walk  co7itrary  to  the 
ships  77totion,  so  in  the  world;  so7ne  77ie7i  are  neglige7it,  others 
keep  bustling  a7td  stirri7ig,  a7id  seek  to  7'esist  the  desigjis  of  God; 
but  the  ship  goes  on,  a7id  the  world  goes  onP  Yes,  a  passenger 
may  walk  to  the  north  along  the  deck,  but  the  ship  keeps  on 
due  south  ;  he  may  sleep,  but  the  vessel  speeds  over  the  waves  ; 
he  may  denounce  its  motion,  but  it  holds  on  its  way.  So  the 
heathen  may  rage,  and  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing,  but  the 
counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  fast  for  ever.  Men  are  free  to  will 
and  to  act,  but  omnipotent  wisdom  rules  over  them  despite 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  221 

their  free  agency.  Not  as  if  they  were  logs  and  stones  does 
God  govern  men,  but  as  rational,  intelligent,  free  agents  he 
permits  them  to  do  their  own  will,  and  works  his  own  purposes 
notwithstanding.  This  is  a  great  marvel.  Men  are  as  free  as 
if  there  were  no  predestination,  and  predestination  is  accom- 
plished as  surely  as  if  there  were  no  free  agents  in  the  universe. 
We  are  full  of  wonder  at  this,  but  it  is  true. 

The  figure  before  us  is  not  perfect,  but  it  has  many  merits  ; 
and,  at  any  rate,  it  sets  out  the  one  idea  that  the  rebellions  and 
wilfulnesses  of  mankind  do  not  thwart  the  eternal  purposes  of 
the  Most  High.  The  royal  vessel  pursues  its  way  whether  men 
delight  in  its  glorious  progress,  or  rail  against  it.  "  The  Lord 
reigneth ;  let  the  earth  rejoice." 

THE  INSULTED  MERCHANT. 

"  A  merchajit  that  hath  a  precious  commodity^  and  ojie  bidddh 
a  mea7i  price^  he  foldeth  up  his  wares  with  i7idigjiatioiiP  We 
have  seen  the  exhibitor  turn  away  in  utter  disgust  when  some 
uninitiated  spectator  has  offered  pence  where  pounds  would  not 
have  been  accepted.  The  jeweller  or  artist  has  been  as  much 
offended  as  if  he  had  been  personally  insulted  by  such  a  depre- 
ciation of  his  valuables.  Do  you  wonder  that  the  Lord  God  is 
grieved  when  men  set  a  base  price  upon  his  priceless  grace,  and 
begin  to  bargain  and  chaffer  as  to  what  sins  they  will  give  up, 
and  what  duties  they  will  perform  ?  Do  you  wonder  that  he 
should  take  his  gospel  away  from  such  a  people,  and  turn  to 
others  who  will  set  more  store  by  his  goodness  .'*  Not  for  ever 
will  Jesus  cast  his  pearls  before  swine.  Woe  to  that  man  who  at 
last  angers  his  God  into  turning  from  him,  and  taking  the 
despised  gospel  elsewhere  I  He  well  deserves  to  perish  who 
counts  eternal  life  to  be  of  less  value  than  a  passing  pleasure,  or 
reckons  the  righteousness  of  God  to  be  no  better  than  his  own 
poor  works. 


222  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

PROVISIONED   FOR  A  SIEGE. 

'■''When  a  city  is  besieged^  the  prince  who  would  defend  it  doth 
not  leave  it  to  its  orditiary  strength  and  the  standi7tg  provisions 
which  it  had  before,  but  sendeth  in  fresh  supplies  of  soldiers, 
victuals,  and  annnunition,  and  such  things  as  the  prescjit 
exigetice  calleth  for.  So  doth  God  deal  with  his  people;  his 
Spirit  cometh  iti  with  a  new  supply,  that  they  may  better  repel 
sin,  and  stand  out  in  the  hoicr  of  trial P  What  supplies  of  food, 
medicine,  and  ammunition  are  poured  into  a  city  which  has  to  sus- 
tain a  siege  ;  and  seldom  do  they  prove  to  be  more  than  are 
required  !  Even  so,  in  our  time  of  temptation,  the  Lord  bestows 
vast  stores  of  grace,  strength,  comfort,  and  wisdom  ;  and  yet 
there  is  need  of  them  all  ere  the  assault  is  over.  It  were  well  if  we 
had  a  clearer  idea  of  the  needs  of  a  beleaguered  soul.  We  think 
far  too  lightly  of  the  necessities  which  arise  out  of  the  attacks  of 
Satan,  and  the  blockade  of  the  flesh.  The  City  of  Mansoul  has 
no  provision  within  itself,  and  if  its  commerce  with  heaven  be 
cut  off,  black  famine  stares  the  inhabitants  in  the  face.  While 
the  coast  is  clear  it  will  be  well  to  get  in  stores,  and  specially 
on  those  great  market-days,  the  Sabbaths.  None  can  fit  us  to 
stand  a  siege  but  that  Universal  Provider  who  daily  feeds  count- 
less myriads  of  needy  creatures. 

Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  knowest  when  next  my 
nature  shall  be  beleaguered  by  the  adversary.  Provision  me,  I 
pray  thee,  against  the  siege.  Give  me  to  rejoice  because  thou 
hast  prayed  for  me  that  my  faith  fail  not. 

BLOWN  INTO  HARBOUR. 

"  Me7t  171  a  tempest  are  so77ieti7nes  cast  up07t  a  place  of  safety 
which  th^y  had  7iot  77iade  for  by  inte7itio7i  a7td foresight P  Happ)^ 
mariner,  who  is  forced  into  port !  Blessed  is  that  wave  which 
throws  the  drowning  sailor  upon  the  rock  of  safety  !  Such  pro- 
pitious forces  are  abroad  at  times,  and  especially  in  the  spiritual 
world.     We  mean  not  to  exclude  the  agency  of  the  will  when 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  223 

we  speak  of  certain  compulsions  which  have  driven  men  into  a 
happiness  for  which  they  had  not  looked.  "  Had  I  not  lost  my 
eyes,"  said  one,  "  I  had  never  seen  my  Saviour,"  Another 
attributed  his  spiritual  riches  to  the  fact  that  he  lost  all  his 
property,  and  so  was  driven  to  his  God  for  consolation.  The 
utmost  faith  in  God  has  sometimes  been  created  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  by  means  of  the  utter  and  entire  failure  of  all  visible 
help.  Many  a  wayward  mind  has  been  set  free  from  the  bonds 
of  its  own  obstinate  will  by  being  yet  more  firmly  bound  by  a 
sacred  impulse  which  would  not  be  denied. 

When  we  reach  the  heights  of  glory  we  shall  ascribe  our 
felicity,  not  to  our  own  will  or  merit,  but  to  those  sweet  forces 
which  drew  us  to  heaven  with  cords  of  love  and  bands  of  a  man  ; 
and  perhaps  not  less  to  certain  ruder  agencies,  which  beat  like 
hurricanes  upon  our  pride,  and  sank  our  self-confidence  in  the 
floods,  wrecking  us  into  rest,  destroying  us  into  salvation. 

A  PEARL  OF  UNKNOWN  VALITE. 

*'7/"<2  man  find  a  pearl  of  great  price  ^  a?td  htoweth  not  what  if 
is,  he  maketh  no  more  esteeni  of  it  than  of  a  piece  of  glass  or  a 
common  bead,  and  is  ready  to  sell  it  for  a  few  pence.  But  ifnp07t 
the  offer  of  it  to  a  skilful  lapidary ,  the  jeweller  at  first  sight  biddeth 
two  or  three  thousand  crow7ts  for  it,  doth  he  not  change  his  mittd, 
aiid  think  this  jewel  is  of  greater  value  than  he  took  it  to  be  ?  So 
he?x  :  man  knows  not  the  value  of  his  soul,  and  does  not  greatly 
set  by  it.  Ada7n  lost  his  own  soul  and  the  souls  of  all  his 
posterity  for  a7i  apple,  and  we  sell  our  birthright  for  a  77iess  of 
"pottage.  But  whe7i  Christ,  who  77iade  souls,  a7id knoweth  the  value 
of  them,  ca77ie  to  recover  lost  souls,  he  gave  hi77iself  for  usj  did  he 
71  ot  hereby  teach  us  to  set  a  higher  price  up07i  the77ij  for  nothi7ig  but 
hispreciotcs  blood  could  redee77ithe77iV^  This  is  a  suggestive  simile, 
and  may  suggest  the  framework  of  a  sermon  on  "  the  estimate 
which  men  set  upon  their  souls,  and  the  hints  which  God  has 
given  them  as  to  their  real  value  by  what  he  has  done  in  reference 


224  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

thereto."  In  the  shop  of  a  diamond-merchant  at  Amsterdam  we 
saw  great  machinery  and  much  power  all  brought  to  bear  on  what 
seemed  to  be  a  small  piece  of  glass.  One  might  be  sure  of  the 
value  of  that  transparent  morsel  if  he  would  but  look  around 
and  see  what  skill  and  labour  were  being  expended  upon  it. 
God  has  laid  out  for  the  good  of  a  soul  the  watchfulness  of 
angels,  the  providence  of  this  world,  the  glory  of  the  next,  the 
councils  of  eternity,  himself  and  all  that  he  hath,  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  all  his  divine  influences, — yea,  he  spared  not  his  only 
Son.  Say,  soul,  what  must  thou  be  worth  thus  to  have  all 
heaven's  thought,  and  power,  and  love  laid  out  for  thee  ?  "  What 
shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul.?"  Let  not  a  man 
attempt  to  answer  the  question  till  he  hath  heard  the  Lord 
himself  say,  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia  and  Seba 
for  thee." 

A  POOR  MAN  ROBBED. 

'"''  If  a  poor  ina?i  be  robbed  oftiuenty  or  thirty  shillings^  no 
wojider  if  he  cry  ajid  take  on,  because  he  hath  no  more  to  help 
himself  with ;  but  now,  if  a  rich  man  be  robbed  of  such  a  sum^  he 
is  7iot  much  troubled,  because  he  hath  more  at  ho7ne.  So  a  man 
that  is  justified  by  faith,  and  hath  assurance  of  the  favour  of  God, 
he  can  comfortably  bear  up  against  all  the  troubles  and  crosses  he 
meets  with  in  his  way  to  heavenP  Remember  the  apostle's  reckon- 
ing in  Romans  viii.  i8  :  "For  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this 
present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed  in  us."  He  was  so  rich  in  grace  that  all  his 
losses  were  as  nothing  to  him.  One  of  old  got  his  living  by  his 
losses,  for  he  said,  "  By  these  things  men  live,  and  in  all  these 
things  is  the  life  of  my  spirit "  :  thus  spiritual  riches  enable  us 
to  bear  temporal  losses  with  great  patience.  It  is  far  otherwise 
with  the  worlding,  whose  goods  are  his  god  ;  for  when  these  are 
taken  he  cries  out  like  Micah,  "  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods 
which  I  made,  and  what  have  I  more  ?  "     He  to  whom  God  is 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  225 

all  things  cannot  be  robbed,  for  who  can  overcome  and  despoil 
the  Almighty  ? 

Lord,  lead  me  to  count  nothing  my  treasure  but  thyself,  and 
then  I  may  defy  the  thief  If  I  have  suffered  loss,  let  me  make 
a  gain  thereby  by  prizing  thee  the  more. 

A  TANNED  FACE. 

*^  As  a  man  that  walks  m  the  stpt,  tmawares,  before  he  thinks 
of  it,  his  cottntenance  is  ta7ined;  so  our  hearts  are  defiled  by  the 
slightest-  cojitact  with  sin^'^  We  have  seen  men  who  were  quite 
fair  where  their  hats  covered  their  foreheads,  and  thoroughly 
bronzed  where  the  sun  had  looked  upon  them.  A  man's  heart 
had  need  be  covered  with  a  veil  of  holy  carefulness  all  over,  or 
the  world  will  get  at  it,  and  brown  it  with  evil.  Some  trades  and 
callings  are  like  a  tropical  climate,  and  their  blackening  effect 
is  soon  visible  :  certain  companies  are  still  more  so  ;  they  make 
their  mark  upon  the  best  of  men,  and  that  mark  is  not  to  their 
improvement.  With  difSculty  can  a  man  prevent  the  world's 
influencing  him  for  evil  ;  evil  communications  will  corrupt  good 
manners  unless  a  sacred  remedy  is  heartily  used.  See  the 
efiect  of  evil  upon  professors  in  Jeremiah's  day  ;  he  says  :  "Her 
Nazarites  were  purer  than  snow,  they  were  whiter  than  milk, 
they  were  more  ruddy  in  body  than  rubies,  their  polishing  was 
of  sapphire  :  their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  coal ;  they  are  not 
known  in  the  streets  :  their  skin  cleaveth  to  their  bones  ;  it  is 
withered,  it  is  become  like  a  stick." 

Let  us,  as  much  as  we  can,  keep  ourselves  to  ourselves,  and 
go  quietly  through  life.  A  man  of  eminence,  who  outlived  the 
French  Revolution,  was  asked  how  he  escaped  the  guillotine, 
and  he  replied,  "  I  made  myself  of  no  reputation,  and  kept 
silence."  Let  us,  like  him,  stay  within  doors.  If  we  must  go 
forth  abroad,  it  is  well  to  walk  on  the  shady  side  of  the  street, 
by  keeping  as  much  out  of  the  world's  influence  as  we  can  ;  and 
it  is  also  wise  to  carry  with  us  such  holy  thoughts  and  feelings 

^5 


226  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

as  may  act  as  a  screen  to  ward  off  the  excessive  power  of  evil. 
We  have  no  wish  to  become  as  black  as  the  inhabitants  of  this 
sun-burnt  chme,  seeing  we  are  not  numbered  with  them,  but  are 
here  as  strangers  and  foreigners. 

Wash  me,  most  blessed  Jesus,  in  that  sacred  bath  which  thou 
hast  prepared  ;  for  it  will  make  me  fair  for  ever.  Black  as  I  now 
am  I  shall  then  be  whiter  than  snow.  Renew  me,  and  I  shall 
be  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing. 

THE  FOOT-RACE. 

"  A  true  racer  does  itot  use  to  stand  still,  or  look  beJmtd  liim, 
to  see  how  7nuch  of  the  way  is  already  past,  or  to  see  how  much 
the  other  j^imners  co7ne  short  of  hi?n,  but  he  sets  to  his  business  to 
^^et  through  the  reinainder  of  the  raceP  The  claim  to  perfection, 
which  some  have  started,  raises  a  serious  question  as  to  whether 
they  have  ever  entered  that  race,  of  which  the  apostle  Paul  said, 
"  Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended  :  but  this 
one  thing  I  do,  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind,  and 
reaching  forth  unto  those  things  which  are  before,  I  press 
toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus."  Surely  these  men  must  be  of  another  order  to 
St.  Paul,  or  must  be  upon  another  racecourse.  He  saw  much 
which  he  had  not  attained,  and  they  see  nothing  ;  he  was 
all  for  pressing  on,  and  they  are  at  the  mark  already.  They 
speak  fluently  of  their  perfection,  and  he  groaned  over  his  im- 
perfection. 

As  for  us,  we  have  no  belief  in  these  pretenders,  nor  do  we 
wish  to  think  about  them.  We  would  have  nothing  to  consider 
but  the  goal  and  the  prize.  We  may  not  rest  in  what  we  are, 
we  must  hasten  on  to  what  we  ought  to  be.  Attainments  and 
successes  will  breed  no  pride  if  we  treat  them  as  Paul  did,  when 
he  regarded  them  as  "  things  which  are  behind,"  and  therefore 
forgot  them.  "  Onward  "  be  our  watchword.  Satisfaction,  glory- 
ing, ease, — these  are  not  to  be  mentioned  among  us.     Swift 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  227 

as  arrows  from  the  bow  we  would  speed  towards  the  mark  of 
our  high  calHng.  The  last  thing  that  a  man  may  utter  is  that 
fatal  "  Rest  and  be  thankful "  ;  for  it  marks  the  end  of  a  progress 
which  ought  to  last  through  life. 

Lord,  if  I  am  ever  tempted  to  be  satisfied,  scourge  me  into  a 
holy  restlessness,  and  make  the  very  ground  beneath  me  burning 
to  my  feet.  With  my  Lord  before  me,  I  am  a  traitor  to  him  if 
I  chink  the  pieces  of  silver  in  my  hand,  and  accept  a  present 
satisfaction  in  barter  for  higher  things. 

THE  WARRIOR'S   THOUGHTS. 

"A  certaifi  Grecian  warrior^  wherever  he  walked,  was 
thinking  of  battles  J  he  asked  himself  continually,  if  he  should  be 
assaulted  07t  such  a  piece  of  groimd  how  he  would  model  aiid 
dispose  his  army  for  his  defeiice.  A  Christiajt  should  be  thinking 
ofheave?t,  how  he  may  get  thither,  and  what  he  shall  eiijoy  there.'" 
To  be  engrossed  in  a  pursuit  is  the  readiest  way  to  success  in  it. 
We  are  thorougWy  alive  unto  God  when  we  get  so  far  as  even  to 
eat,  and  drink,  and  sleep  eternal  life.  Where  our  treasure  is  there 
will  our  heart  be  also.  The  object  which  is  supreme  in  our  heart 
will  continually  make  itself  prominent  in  our  life.  When  Joshua 
saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  he  gave  him  a  military  challenge, 
for  his  whole  soul  was  in  the  war.  The  colour  of  our  chosen 
occupation  will  tinge  our  whole  existence.  "For to  me  to  live 
is  Christ,"  saith  the  apostle.  The  musician  will  be  moving  his 
fingers  upon  the  table  as  if  he  were  playing  a  tune  ;  the  sailor 
will  roll  about  in  his  walk  on  shore  as  if  he  were  still  on  board 
ship  ;  and  even  so  will  the  soul  that  communes  with  God 
rehearse  its  joys  when  it  is  busy  with  other  matters.  When  God 
and  heaven  bear  our  thoughts  away,  it  is  good  evidence  that  we 
are  preparing  for  eternal  felicity  ;  for  he  must  needs  be  soon  in 
heaven  who  already  hath  heaven  in  him.  When  heavenly 
things  take  up  our  souls,  our  souls  will  soon  be  taken  up  to 
heaven. 


228  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

Lord,  let  me  think  of  thee  and  thy  word  all  the  while  I  am 
awake  ;  and  when  I  sleep,  if  I  dream  at  all,  let  my  imagination 
still  tend  thy  way.  Oh,  that  I  were  fully  and  only  filled  with 
thee,  till  everywhere  and  at  all  times  my  every  thought  were 
thine !     With  all  thy  ransomed  ones  I  would  sing— 

*'  In  full  and  glad  surrender  we  give  ourselves  to  thee, 
Thine  utterly,  and  only,  and  evermore  to  be  ! 
O  Son  of  God,  who  lovest  us,  we  will  be  thine  alone, 
And  all  we  are,  and  all  we  have,  shall  henceforth  be  thine  own  ! " 

NATURE  TENDS  TO  ITS  AUTHOR. 

"  Trees,  that  receive  lifefroin  the  earth  a?id  the  sun,  send  forth 
their  bra?zches  to  receive  the  sun,  and  spread  their  roots  i?ito  the 
earth,  which  brought  thent  forth.  Fishes  will  7zot  live  out  of  the 
water  that  breedeth  them.  Chickens  are  7io  sooner  out  of  the  shell 
but  they  shroud  themselves  under  the  feathers  of  the  heji  by  whom, 
they  were  at  first  hatched.  The  little  lajnb  runneth  to  its  dam, 
though  there  be  a  thousa?id  sheep  of  the  same  wool  aiid  colour; 
as  if  it  said,  '  Here  I  received  that  which  I  have,  and  here  will  I 
seek  that  which  I  wa7it?  By  such  a  native  inbred  desire  do  the 
saints  run  to  God  to  seek  a  supply  of  strength  and  nourish- 
ment.^'^  This  is  an  excellent  lesson  for  every  believer.  All  our 
instincts  should  lead  us  to  our  God.  We  ought  not  to  need  so- 
much  as  directing,  much  less  impelling,  towards  the  great  source 
of  our  spiritual  life.  We  ought  as  naturally  to  seek  after  the 
Lord  from  day  to  day  as  the  spark  seeks  the  sun,  or  the  river 
the  ocean,  or  the  sheep  its  pasture,  or  the  bird  its  nest.  "  O 
God,  thou  art  my  God  ;  early  will  I  seek  thee,"  should  be  the 
perpetual  cry  of  our  heart.  Onward  and  upward  be  still  our 
movement,  a  secret  ardour  ever  burning  in  us  towards  the  Lord 
our  God. 

To  whom  else  should  we  go  ?  This  question  has  never  received 
an  answer,  and  never  will  receive  one.  We  are  bound  to  dwell 
in  God  or  perish.     As  we  find  all  in  God,  so  we  find  nothing  out 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  229 

of  him.  What  the  fish  would  be  without  water,  or  the  chick 
without  the  hen,  or  the  tree  without  the  earth, — that  we  should 
be  without  our  God.  It  is  the  height  of  folly  for  us  to  attempt 
a  thought  alone  ;  there  is  but  one  greater  absurdity,  and  that  is 
to  venture  upon  an  act  without  him.  "Abide  in  me"  is  the 
voice  of  him  in  whom  our  life  abides.  Let  us  not  be  deaf  to  his 
tender  warning. 

SUNSHINE. 

"  A  Utile  sujtsliine  enliveneth  the  poor  creatures^  the  birds  fall 
{t-singi7ig  that  were  melancholy  and  sad  before  in  cloudy  weather; 
all  thi?tgs  are  cheered  and  co7nforted  when  the  sun  shifies^^  Just 
so.  How  often  have  we  seen  the  change  which  is  wrought  by 
clear  shining  after  rain  !  It  has  seemed  as  though  heaven  had 
come  down  in  love  to  dry  earth's  tears  and  bedeck  her  with 
raiment  of  fair  colours.  Spiritually,  the  type  is  carried  out  in 
delightful  fashion.  The  Lord's  appearing  sheds  a  glory  upon 
our  infirmities,  and  transforms  our  trials  into  triumphs.  His 
presence  removes  the  dulness  which  else  hangs  like  a  cloud  on 
the  best  of  our  conditions,  and  in  this  way  lightens  all  our 
glooms.  His  countenance  is  to  his  saints  as  a  morning  with- 
out clouds,  it  brings  with  it  a  surprise  of  joy.  Till  Jesus 
communed  with  me  I  did  not  know  that  I  could  be  so  happy.  I 
heard  more  birds  singing  in  my  soul  than  I  had  ever  dreamed 
could  have  dwelt  within  me.  Never  had  my  sad  soul  imagined 
that  human  life  was  half  as  capable  of  divine  bliss,  or  earth 
within  a  thousand  leagues  so  near  to  heaven.  Truly  it  is  worth 
while  to  have  lived,  if  for  nothing  more  than  to  have  had  an 
hour's  fellowship  with  the  Well-beloved.  Earthly  joy  is  no  more 
to  be  compared  with  it  than  a  lamp  in  a  coal-mine  can  be 
likened  to  the  sun  in  the  heavens. 

Oh,  my  God,  I  thank  thee  for  having  made  me,  because  thou 
hast  made  me  able  to  walk  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance. 
Now  thou  dost  shine  upon  me  my  summer-tide  has  come. 


230  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

DOGS  AND  CATS  WHERE  THERE  ARE  NO  CHILDREN- 

"  They  that  lack  children  take  pleasure  in  little  dogs  a?idcats.^* 
We  have  known  houses  turned  into  stables  or  menageries  by 
those  whose  love,  which  should  have  gone  out  to  human  beings, 
went  out  to  dogs  and  cats.  People  must  have  objects  of  affection, 
and  if  they  have  not  the  better  they  choose  the  worse.  Those 
who  disdain  to  live  for  God  will  live  for  their  own  bellies. 
Those  who  do  not  care  for  the  great  doctrines  of  revelation  are 
usually  disputatious  over  trifling  opinions.  Those  who  do  not 
spend  their  time  and  strength  in  winning  souls  for  Jesus  often 
attach  an  inordinate  importance  to  a  national  habit  or  a  sanitary 
regulation.  If  we  do  not  live  in  all  seriousness  for  a  noble 
object,  the  probabihty  is  that  we  shall  industriously  trifle  our 
lives  away  in  doing  nothing.  Are  we  prepared  for  this  ?  Will 
we  be  numbered  with  cat-worshippers  and  dog-adorers  ? 

My  God,  grant  me  grace  to  love  thy  children,  and  make  much 
of  them.  Save  me  from  petty  and  paltry  objects.  May  the 
objects  of  my  life's  pursuit  be  worthy  of  an  immortal  spirit, 
worthy  of  an  heir  of  heaven.  Deliver  me  from  whims  and 
hobbies,  and  nerve  me  for  the  infinite  possibilities  which  are 
opening  up  before  me  ! 

THE  GARDENER  AND  THE  ROOTS. 

"  A  gardener  knoweth  what  roots  are  iji  the  groimd  long  before 
they  appear,  a?td  what  flowers  they  will  produced  Look  over 
the  garden  in  winter,  and  you  will  not  know  that  there  is  any 
preparation  for  spring ;  but  the  gardener  sees  in  his  mind's  eye, — 
here  a  circle  of  golden  cups,  as  if  set  out  for  a  royal  banquet, 
and  there  a  cluster  of  snow-white  beauties,  drooping  with  excess 
of  modest  purity.  His  eye  knows  where  the  daffodils  and  ane- 
mones lie  asleep,  waiting  to  rise  in  all  their  loveliness  ;  and  he 
has  learned  the  secret  of  the  primroses  and  the  violets,  who  wait 
in  ambush  till  the  first  warm  breath  of  spring  shall  bid  them 
reveal  themselves.     Even  thus  doth  the  Lord  know  his  hidden 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  231 

ones  long  before  the  day  of  their  manifestation  with  him.  He 
sees  his  church  before  his  ministers  see  it,  and  declares  con- 
cerning heathen  Corinth,  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city." 

The  figure  may  be  applied  to  the  garden  of  the  soul.  What 
graces  are  planted  in  the  renewed  heart,  waiting  their  season, 
the  Creator  of  those  graces  knows  right  well !  He  sees  our 
faith,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  patience,  long  before  we  can  see 
them  ;  yea,  and  he  discerns  them  when  we  ourselves  question 
their  existence.  He  not  only  knows  them  that  are  his,  but  all 
that  is  his  within  them.  Nothing  of  his  implanting  is  hidden 
from  his  inspection.  Bulbs  and  seeds  of  hohness  are  sown  in 
the  righteous,  and  therefore  are  out  of  their  sight  ;  but  he  that 
placed  them  where  they  are  has  marked  the  spot,  and  not  one 
of  them  shall  die.  Expectantly  he  waits  to  see  his  people's  lives 
become  "  as  beds  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers." 

Lord,  it  is  because  thou  knowest  all  things  that  thou  knowest 
that  I  love  thee.  Wert  thou  not  omniscient,  I  fear  thou  hadst 
not  discovered  my  sadly  feeble  love,  buried  as  it  is  beneath  so 
much  sin  and  carnality.  Lord,  cause  the  sacred  seed  to  grow, 
and  then  I  too  shall  be  assured  of  its  existence,  and  my  present 
questions  and  doubts  shall  flee  away ! 

RESPONSIBILITY  OF  SERVANTS. 

*^  If  a  rich  farmer  set  a  poor  man  to  work  to  dig  a  ditch,  or 
cast  up  a  bank;  if  he  be  afterward  trottbledfor  it^  his  master  is 
co7icernedto  bearhi?n  harmless.  David  saith, '  O  Lord,  truly  lam 
thy  servant;  lam  thy  serva7it,  and  the  son  of  thi?ie  handmaid : 
thou  hast  loosed  7?iy  bonds.'  Whilst  we  are  engaged  about  our 
Master's  biisiness,  and  in  his  work,  he  is  engaged  to  protect  us,ajid 
bear  us  out  in  it.''  If  what  we  do  is  done  under  the  command  of 
God,  the  responsibihty  of  its  result  does  not  lie  with  us.  He  who 
made  the  law  will  answer  for  those  who  keep  it.  If  a  man  should, 
through  obedience  to  the  law  of  the  Sabbath,  lose  his  situation,his 
poverty  would  be  no  fault  of  his.     If  through  strict  honesty  he 


232  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

should  be  despised  of  his  employer,  and  forfeit  his  place^  he  need 
not  blame  himself  for  his  dismission.  These  things  are  to  be 
taken  joyfully  as  a  part  of  our  living  sacrifice  to  God.  We  need 
not  fear  that  God  will  fail  to  justify  us  if  we  walk  in  the  way 
of  his  commandments.  Our  quarrel  is  his  quarrel  if  it  be 
occasioned  by  our  following  his  orders.  Jesus  asks  of  every 
persecutor,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  "  When  his  servants 
are  molested  he  is  wounded.  He  will  see  us  through  with  the 
business,  and  teach  our  opposers  that  in  us  they  oppose  him 
also. 

When  we  go  a  way  of  our  own  choosing,  we  must  bear  our  own 
hazard  ;  but  when  our  path  is  mapped  out  for  us,  we  have  the 
Lord  engaged  with  us,  and  his  name  and  honour  would  be  com- 
promised should  we  fail.  Oh,  happy  condition  !  We  are  in  the 
same  boat  with  Jesus.  He  bade  us  trust,  promising  us  salvation 
by  faith  and,  as  we  have  trusted,  he  must  and  will  save  us.  He 
bade  us  come  out  from  the  world,  and,  as  we  have  come  out,  he 
must  be  a  Father  unto  us.  He  bids  us  preach  the  gospel,  and, 
as  we  do  preach  it,  he  must  save  men  thereby.  Let  us  more  and 
more  pledge  the  honour  of  his  name,  resting  sure  that  he  will 
never  allow  his  orders  to  be  discredited. 

ASKING  IN  A  PERSON'S  NAME. 

*'  If  you  send  a  child  or  servant  to  a  friend  for  a  thing  in  your 
nai?ie,  the  request  is  yours j  and  he  that  denieth  the  child  or 
servant^  denieth  you.  fesus  Christ  hath  bidden  you  ask  i7t 
his  7ta7ne;  so  that  in  effect  your  request  becomes  Chrisfs  request. 
God  can  no  more  de7iy  your  request  in  Chrisfs  7ianie  tha/t 
he  ca7t  de7iy  Christ  hiinself^^  This  is  the  true  meaning  of 
asking  in  Christ's  name.  It  is  a  higher  plea  than — for  Jesu's 
sake.  The  one  pleads  the  Saviour's  merit  as  a  penitent  sinner  ; 
the  other  urges  his  authority  as  a  favoured  friend.  Jesus  permits 
his  disciple  to  make  request  in  his  Master's  stead,  using  the 
name  and    dignity  of  Christ  as  his   warrant.      Armed  wiih 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  233 

this  argument  our  prayers  become  akin  to  the  intercession  of  the 
Lord  himself.  Herein  hes  at  once  the  power  of  prayer  and  also 
its  limit.  For  who  will  dare  to  use  "the  name  which  is  above  every 
name  "  except  with  surest  right  to  do  so  ?  I  may  beg  for  Christ's 
sake  when  my  petition  is  somewhat  doubtful ;  but  the  royal  seal 
must  only  be  set  to  requests  which  the  most  searching  examina- 
tion commends  to  our  judgment  as  according  to  the  divine 
promise,  and  needful  for  God's  glory.  We  are  trusted  with  the 
Prince's  signet-ring,  but  gracious  discretion  must  be  used  in  its 
employment.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  prompts  the  desire,  and 
faith  sees  how  well  Jesus  deserves  the  blessing,  and  how  surely 
he  himself  would  have  sought  it  of  the  Father ;  then  prayer  is 
power  invincible,  for  it  is  the  pierced  hand  held  open  before  the 
Father's  approving  heart.  Cannon  have  been  called  "  the  last 
arguments  of  kings  "  ;  but  the  name  of  Jesus  is  the  master- 
argument  of  the  King's  children. 

Lord  Jesus,  cause  me  to  know  in  my  daily  experience  the  glory 
and  sweetness  of  thy  name,  and  then  teach  me  how  to  use  it  in 
my  prayer,  so  that  I  maybe  even  like  Israel,  a  prince  prevailing 
with  God.  Thy  name  is  my  passport,  and  secures  me  access  ; 
thy  name  is  my  plea,  and  secures  me  answer  ;  thy  name  is  my 
honour,  and  secures  me  glory.  Blessed  name,  thou  art  honey  in 
my  mouth,  music  in  my  ear,  heaven  in  my  heart,  and  all  in  all 
to  all  my  being  ! 

A  FATHER'S  LOVE  AND  A  CHILD'S  LOVE. 

"  A  father  cannot  forget  how  i7iany  childre?i  he  hath.  He  that 
leadeth  us  by  the  hand  wherever  we  go  hzoweth  where  and  how 
we  goP  This  is  a  very  simple  statement,  but  exceedingly  full  of 
consolation.  We,  being  evil,  do  not  forget  our  children  ;  we 
know  our  own,  and  do  not  omit  even  the  last  little  one  from  our 
tender  memory  ;  how  much  more  shall  our  heavenly  Father 
think  upon  all  his  own,  and  have  them  under  his  watchful  eye  ! 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  us  to  think  of  our  children,  for  they  are  parts 


234  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

of  ourselves.  We  could  almost  as  soon  cease  to  be  as  cease 
to  remember  them.  Our  Father  above  is  all  a  Father  can 
be  and  more  :  we  are  poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh 
upon  us. 

It  were  well  if  the  converse  of  all  this  were  tme.  We,  alas  !  as 
children,  too  often  forget  our  Father,  and  bear  ourselves  to- 
wards him  otherwise  than  is  meet.  If  we  treated  our  God  as 
good  children  do  a  loving  father,  our  conduct  towards  him 
would  lead  us  to  a  holy,  happy  life.  We  should  long  to  be  with 
him,  and  to  be  happy  in  his  company  ;  we  should  be  jealous  for 
the  honour  of  his  name,  and  feel  pleased  when  we  heard  others 
extol  him.  He  would  be  our  rest,  confidence,  pattern,  love,  and 
delight.  Miss  Havergal,  in  her  own  sweet  way,  has  worked  out 
the  ideal  treatment  of  a  father,  and  we  can  readily  spiritualize  it. 

*'  How  do  you  love  your  father? 
Oh,  in  a  thousand  ways  ! 
I  think  there's  no  one  like  him 

So  worthy  of  my  praise. 
I  tell  him  all  my  troubles, 

And  ask  him  what  to  do  ; 
I  know  that  he  will  give  to  me 
His  counsel  kind  and  true." 

Nor  does  the  relationship  merely  lead  us  to  expect  from 
him,  it  helps  us  to  yield  to  him  anything  which  he  desires 
from  us. 

"  Then  every  little  service 

Of  hand,  or  pen,  or  voice. 
Becomes,  if  he  has  asked  it, 

The  service  of  my  choice. 
And  from  my  own  desires 

'Tis  not  so  hard  to  part, 
If  once  I  know  I  follow  so 

His  wiser  will  and  heart." 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  235 

How  it  helps  us  in  the  hour  of  trial  to  find  a  father  near  in  all 
the  tenderness  of  his  love  !  The  same  charming  poetess  tells  us 
in  a  succeeding  verse, — 

*'  Once  I  was  ill  and  suffering 

Upon  a  foreign  shore, 
And  longed  to  see  my  father 

As  I  never  longed  before. 
He  came  :  his  arm  around  me  ; 

I  leant  upon  his  breast ; 
I  did  not  long  to  feel  more  strong, 

So  sweet  that  childlike  rest." 

Whatsoever  a  tender  daughter  would  be  to  a  kind,  considerate 
father,  that  we  should  spiritually  be  unto  our  Lord.  Let  us 
muse  over  the  model,  and  learn  from  it  what  our  highest 
relationship  deserves  at  our  hand. 

Lord,  I  would  reflect  thy  love  !  Help  me  to  remember  thee, 
because  thou  dost  without  fail  remember  me. 

LOOKERS  ON  AND  PLAYERS. 

**  They  that  stand  upon  tJie  skofc  may  easily  say  to  those  that 
are  in  the  midst  of  the  wares,  and  confiicting  for  life  or  death, 
Sail  thus  and  sail  th  us .'  But  what  of  that  ?  When  we  are  well 
we  give  counsel  to  the  sick;  but,  if  we  were  ill  ourselves,  how 
should  we  act  f"  Yes,  we  are  usually  ready  with  our  good 
advice  for  others  ;  but  what  are  we  willing  to  do  ourselves  ? 
Men  who  never  smelt  powder  know  exactly  how  a  commander 
should  have  acted  in  a  battle  ;  probably  they  would  themselves 
have  run  away  at  the  first  shot.  Safely  on  land,  the  wiseacre 
decides  most  positively  how  the  pilot  should  steer — which  sail 
should  be  hoisted,  and  which  should  be  put  away.  If  he  were 
on  board  the  labouring  barque,  he  would  be  lying  down  below, 
forgotten  as  a  dead  man  out  of  mind.  This  ought  to  render  us 
a  little  more  diffident  in  our  advising.  It  is  rather  awkward 
when,  after  having  prescribed  for  others,  we  fall  sick  ourselves, 


236  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

and  then  refuse  our  own  remedies  :  yet  many  have  done  so. 
It  is  sad  when  the  preacher  of  patience  is  himself  petulant,  and 
the  advocate  of  faith  is  himself  dubious.  No  :  we  must  teach 
more  by  our  example  than  by  our  advice,  or  else  we  shall  be 
poor  pleaders  for  the  right. 

Few  things  are  more  galling  than  to  be  at  our  wits'  end  in 
managing  a  difficult  matter,  and  then  to  be  charged  and  coun- 
selled by  some  intermeddling  novice  who  could  not  even  under- 
stand our  difficulty,  much  less  assist  us  out  of  it.  When  Balaam's 
ass  spoke,  it  uttered  sound  sense,  and  we  shall  never  welcome 
the  speech  of  another  such  animal  until  it  has  as  weighty  a 
message  to  deliver.  Alas  !  we  do  not  always  suffer  iaoXs gladly  : 
though  suffer  them  we  do.  We  have  wished  ourselves  deaf  at 
times  when  the  most  idle  nonsense  has  been  proffered  us  in  the 
moment  of  greatest  suspense. 

O  Lord  Jesus,  we  bless  thee  that  thy  counsel  comes  to  us  as 
that  of  experience  !  Thou  art  on  the  sea  with  us.  Thou  hast 
the  tone  and  manner  of  one  who  is  tried  in  us  and  with  us.  Our 
Counsellor  art  thou ;  and  thus  our  surest  helper,  because  thy 
counsel  is  infallible. 

THE  LUTE  UNTUNED. 

"  As  a  lute  that  is  not  played  up07t,  but  hangs  by  the  wally 
S0071  grows  out  of  order  for  wajit  of  use;  so,  if  we  do  not 
consta7itly  and  diligejttly  exercise  ourselves  in  godliitess,  our 
hearts  grow  dead  andvain'^  It  is  the  old  story  of  the  unused 
key.  It  would  seem  that  there  is  no  worse  abuse  of  a  good 
thing  than  to  abstain  from  its  use.  While  it  lies  idle  it  lies  ill. 
Grace  must  be  exercised  towards  God  in  devout  contemplation, 
wrestling  prayer,  or  adoring  praise  ;  and  it  must  be  exercised 
among  men  in  patience,  zeal,  charity,  and  holy  example  ;  or,  like 
an  arm  which  has  long  been  bound  by  a  man's  side,  it  will 
become  withered.  Some  enemies  were  left  in  Canaan  for  the 
sole  reason  that  the  armies  of  Israel  might  not  forget  the  art  of 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  237 

war  ;  and  we,  too,  may  expect  troubles  to  exercise  our  graces  in 
conflict,  if  we  do  not  ourselves  exercise  them  in  happier  service. 
The  Lord  will  not  allow  the  inner  life  of  his  people  to  degenerate 
because  of  inaction ;  nor  ought  we  to  allow  it.  Loud  calls  to 
energy  are  sounding  forth  on  every  hand.  A  curse  will  come 
upon  us,  like  that  invoked  upon  Meroz  of  old,  if  we  come  not  to 
the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty. 
To  return  to  our  author's  figure.  Are  we  like  a  lute  upon  the 
wall  ?  Are  the  strings  all  out  of  order  ?  Tune  us.  Lord,  and 
then  bring  music  out  of  us.  Why  should  a  single  instrument  in 
the  whole  concert  be  silent  when  the  Lord  is  to  be  praised.^ 
"  Awake  up,  my  glory  ;  awake,  psaltery  and  harp  :  I  myself  will 
awake  early." 

"  Be  near  me,  Lord,  and  tune  my  notes, 

And  make  them  sweet  and  strong, 
To  waft  thy  words  to  many  a  heart, 

Upon  the  wings  of  song. 
I  know  that  men  will  listen, 

For  my  very  heart  shall  sing, 
And  it  shall  be  thy  praise  alone, 

My  glorious  Lord  and  King." 

THE  FISH  IN  A  PAIL. 

"  W^  are  now  imperfect ,  and  straitened j  like  a  fish  in  a  pail, 
or  small  vessel  of  water,  which  canjiot  keep  it  alive  :  it  wotild 
fain  be  in  the  ocean,  or  swijnming  i?i  the  broad  and  large  rivers. 
So  we  are  pent  up,  and  cannot  do  what  we  woitldj  but  we 
long  for  a  larger  estate,  nainely,  to  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of 
God.  That  holiness  which  we  have  now,  ?naketh  us  look  and  long 
for  more  J  dftd,  surely,  this  desire  after  holiness  was  never  designed 
for  our  to7'mentj  there  ijiust  be  something  to  anszuer  to  the  desire 
excited.^''  It  is  even  so  ;  we  are  now  cribbed,  cabined,  and  con- 
fined, and  our  renewed  spirit  feels  itself  in  bondage.  The  fish 
cannot  half  so  much  desire  the  river  as  we  desire  a  nobler 


238  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

sphere  wherein  the  better  life  may  have  due  scope  and  range. 
As  a  Hon  goeth  to  and  fro  in  his  den,  impatient  of  restraint,  so 
doth  our  spirit  move  restlessly  after  better  things.  We  are  not 
content  with  the  measure  of  our  liberty,  the  tether  of  our  range. 
We  are  like  the  young  chick  which  is  pecking  at  the  shell  which 
shuts  it  in  ;  we  perceive  that  there  is  very  much  outside  of  our 
prison-wall,  and  we  are  anxious  to  break  forth.  Is  not  this  the 
testimony  of  all  saintly  men  ?  Are  not  the  bonds  felt  ?  Are  we 
not  groaning  under  them  ? 

The  argument  of  our  author  is  well  drawn,  and  incontro- 
vertible. God  does  not  create  desires  without  also  providing 
corresponding  objects :  for  thirst  there  is  drink,  for  hunger  there 
is  food,  for  the  eye  there  is  light.  So  also  for  the  soul  which 
hungers  and  thirsts  after  righteousness  there  is  a  filling.  The 
renewed  heart  shall  yet  see  the  perfection  for  which  it  pines, 
and  the  holy  mind  shall  enjoy  the  communion  with  God  for 
which  it  pants. 

Be  glad,  O  my  heart,  because  of  thine  own  pangs  !  If  thou 
wert  now  content,  there  would  be  in  thee  no  ensigns  and 
evidences  of  better  things  yet  to  be  revealed.  Thy  groanings 
and  yearnings  are  prophecies  of  guaranteed  perfection.  If 
thou  wert  of  the  earth,  thou  wouldst  be  satisfied  with  earth  ; 
but  because  thou  hast  a  higher  nature,  thou  art  not  at  home 
amid  these  lower  things.  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  for 
thee,  a  home  for  thee,  a  heaven  for  thee. 

THE  SENTINEL. 

*'  When  a  sentinel  is  set  upon  the  watch^  he  must  not  come  off 
without  the  commander^ s  leave^  and  till  he  is  discharged  by 
authority.  God  hath  set  us  in  a  watch,  and  we  must  not  leave 
our  ground  till  we  have  done  all  that  is  enjoined  upon  us,  and 
receive  a  fair  discharged  The  instance  of  the  sentinel  in 
Pompeii,  whose  skeleton  was  found  erect  at  the  city  gate,  when 
all  but  he  had  fled,  need  not  be  repeated  in  words  ;  but  it  should 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  239 

be  copied  by  each  one  of  us  in  his  hfe.  If  the  earth  should  reel, 
it  is  ours  to  keep  our  place.  If  set  to  preach  the  gospel,  let  us 
maintain  the  truth,  though  philosophy  should  thin  the  number 
of  our  comrades  till  we  remain  alone.  If  commanded  to  teach  a 
few  little  children,  let  us  be  as  faithful  to  our  trust  as  if  we  had  been 
set  to  lead  a  legion  of  angels.  Imagine  what  the  universe  would 
be  if  the  stars  forsook  their  marches,  and  the  sun  forbore  to 
shine  ;  yet  this  would  only  be  among  inanimate  objects  an 
imitation  of  the  conduct  of  men  who  quit  their  posts,  and  leave 
their  work  undone.  This  is  the  spirit  out  of  which  fiends  are 
made  :  first  neglect,  then  omission,  then  treachery  and  rebellion. 
It  is  such  an  honour  to  bear  his  Majesty's  commission  that 
King  Jesus  should  have  around  him  the  most  joyously  faithful 
band  of  servants.  "  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it  "  was 
Mary's  advice  in  her  day,  and  the  spirit  of  it  should  abide  with 
all  Christians  to  the  end  of  time.  Where  God's  command  has 
fixed  us,  there  let  us  abide  at  all  hazards.  Our  life,  our  honour, 
and  our  heaven  lie,  not  in  rising  out  of  the  place  which  our 
Master  has  allotted  to  us,  but  in  fulfilling  its  duties  to  the  utter- 
most. A  sentinel  must  not  leave  his  post  even  to  gather  pearls 
or  diamonds  ;  nor  must  we  forsake  our  duty  in  order  to 
acquire  the  highest  honours.  It  matters  nothing  how  well  we 
have  done  other  things  if  we  neglect  the  thing.  God  bids  us  do 
this^  and  if  we  fail  it  will  be  no  excuse  to  be  able  to  say — we 
have  done  that.  If  the  watcher  forsakes  his  post  it  will  not 
avail  that  he  climbed  a  mountain,  or  swam  a  river  :  he  was  not 
where  he  was  ordered  to  be. 

MAKTYKS  IN  BEARS'  SKINS. 

"  //  was  a  fashion^  in  the  primitive  persecutions,  to  invest 
Christians  with  bears'  shifts,  and  then  to  bait  them  as  bears ; 
and  it  is  a  usual  practice  of  Satan  and  his  itistruments^  first  to 
blast  the  reputation  of  religious  per so7ts^  and  then  to  persecute 
ihem  as  offetidersr     It  is  written  of  the  worthies  of  old  that 


240  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

"  they  had  trial  of  cruel  mockings."  TertulHan  says  that  in  the 
primitive  times  the  saints  were  called  herds  of  asses,  vile  fellows, 
the  disciples  of  a  man  crucified,  Galileans,  Nazarites,  eaters  of 
men's  flesh,  and  drinkers  of  men's  blood.  The  heathen  painted 
the  God  of  the  Christians  with  the  head  of  an  ass,  and  with  a 
book  in  his  hand,  to  signify  that,  though  Christians  pretended  to 
knowledge,  they  were  a  company  of  fools. 

The  like  custom  remains  still.  Good  men  are  first  slandered  and 
then  censured.  They  lay  to  our  charge  deeds  which  we  never 
dreamed  of,  and  then  they  pile  on  the  adjectives  of  denunciation, 
and  condemn  us  without  mercy.  Thanks  be  to  God,  a  saint  in  a 
bear's  skin  is  none  the  less  a  saint :  the  Lord  knows  the  wolf  in 
the  sheep's  skin,  and  the  sheep  in  the  bear's  skin  :  he  is  not 
deceived  by  falsehood  so  as  to  judge  his  children  unjustly.  Not 
even  for  the  present  are  the  reputations  of  the  godly  injured  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  as  for  the  future,  they  shall  suffer  no 
tarnishing.  Soon  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  good  names  as 
well  as  of  bodies  :  the  Lord  shall  restore  the  honour  and  renown 
of  each  slandered  believer. 

Meanwhile,  let  us  not  be  so  easily  led  into  harsh  judgments  as 
we  have  been.  Let  us  refuse  to  regard  our  own  brethren  as  wild 
beasts  because  wicked  men  thrust  the  bear's  skin  upon  them. 
From  us,  at  least,  let  them  receive  tokens  of  the  charity  which 
thinketh  no  evil.  Persistently  let  each  follower  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
say  of  reproach  cast  upon  a  brother,  "  I  will  not  believe  it."  A 
believer  in  Christ  should  be  an  unbeliever  in  the  world's  many- 
lies  :  this  rule  would  rob  slander  of  half  its  power.  By  holy 
confidence  in  our  fellow-Christians  we  should  snap  the  bow- 
string of  malice,  and  burn  its  arrows  in  the  fire. 

As  for  ourselves,  we  are  not  made  of  such  pliant  stuff  that  we 
would  alter  our  course  to  escape  the  calumny  of  men.  We  will 
not  move  a  hair's-breadth  because  of 

"  the  dread  of  tyrant  custom,  and  the  fear 
Lest  fops  should  censure  us,  and  fools  should  sneer." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  241 

PRIMING. 

"A  lower  degree  of  faith  viaketh  way  for  a  higher^  as  the 
Priming  of  the  wood  maketh  it  receptive  of  other  colours.^'* 
Painters  often  use  a  paint  at  the  first  which  is  to  be  the  pre- 
paration for  quite  another  colour  ;  red  is  commonly  thus 
employed.  So,  in  the  work  of  grace,  there  may  come  first  a 
dogmatical  faith  (as  Manton  calls  it),  which  receives  the  doc- 
trine of  the  word  of  God  as  truth.  This  does  not  save  the  soul, 
but  it  is  a  needful  preparative  for  that  receptive  and  trusting 
faith,  by  which  salvation  is  actually  received.  Dogmatic  faith 
is  the  priming  upon  which  faith  of  a  saving  colour  is  laid  by  the 
Master- workman. 

Much  the  same  is  true  of  those  gracious  influences  by  which 
a  man  is  made  a  willing  and  attentive  hearer,  and  a  respecter 
of  the  Sabbath  and  of  the  worship  of  God.  All  this  may  exist 
and  yet  there  may  be  no  saving  faith ;  still  it  is  the  "  priming  " 
for  the  higher  work.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing.  Hence  the 
value  of  all  healthy  moral  influence,  instruction,  and  example. 
None  of  these  can  save,  but  they  may  lead  up  to  salvation. 
The  paralyzed  man  was  not  cured  by  his  friends,  or  by  the  bed, 
or  by  the  ropes,  but  these  brought  him  where  Jesus  was,  and  so 
he  was  healed.  Make  a  man  sober,  and  he  is  all  the  more  likely 
to  mind  the  preacher's  admonitions:  give  him  the  power  to  read, 
and  he  may  study  the  Scriptures.  These  things  are  not  grace, 
but  they  may  be  stepping-stones  to  grace  :  they  are  not  the 
permanent  colour,  but  only  the  priming ;  yet  it  would  never  do 
to  neglect  them  for  that  reason.  He  would  be  an  unwise  painter 
who  put  on  the  woodwork  nothing  but  the  priming ;  and  he  would 
be  far  more  unwise  who  rested  content  with  mere  preparatory 
reforms.  Yet  in  order  to  avoid  this  evil  it  is  not  necessary 
to  forego  the  priming  altogether,  or  to  neglect  anything  by 
which  a  man  is  made  even  the  least  better. 

Oh,  that  I  may  be  willing  to  do  anything  by  which  souls  may  be 
helped  to  a  blessing !    If  I  cannot  actually  heal  the  man's  wounds, 

i6 


242  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

let  me  not  refuse  to  wash  them,  or  to  set  the  wounded  man  upon 
my  beast.  He  who  will  only  do  those  works  which  are  of  the 
highest  and  utmost  use  is  not  so  humble  as  he  should  be.  Lord, 
make  me  willing  to  wash  men's  feet,  if  for  the  present  I  cannot 
win  their  souls.  Incline  me,  my  Lord,  to  teach  a  child  his 
letters,  or  to  reason  with  a  drunkard,  or  to  instruct  a  peasant  in 
thrift,  since  any  one  of  these  may  help  to  something  better  ; 
for  I  know  that  everything  which  is  pure  and  honest  is  on  the 
side  of  Christ  and  his  salvation. 

MALICIOUS   WASTE. 

"  He  would  be  a  cruel  man  who  shoicld  cast  his  provisions 
and  superfluities  into  the  street^  a7id  deiiy  the?n  to  the  poor;  or 
should  allow  his  drink  to  run  ijito  the  kennel^  rather  than  that 
the  thirsty  should  taste  a  drop  of  it.  Such  are  we  to  God;  we 
know  not  what  to  employ  oicr  thoughts  upon,  and  yet  we  will 
not  thitik  of  his  name.  We  will  go  musing  tcpon  vanity  all  the 
day  lofig,  and  thus  grindijtg  chaff  rather  than  we  will  take  good 
cor7t  into  the  milW*  Well  put !  We  meet  with  persons  upon 
whose  hands  time  hangs  heavily  ;  they  have  nothing  to  do,  and 
are  dying  of  ennui.  Why  will  they  thus  spend  their  time  in 
waste  ?  Yet  all  the  while  they  give  not  God  a  thought,  nor 
spend  a  little  time  in  reading  his  word,  or  in  conversing  with 
him  in  prayer.  Have  they  all  their  days  on  hand,  and  yet  will 
they  not  afford  their  God  an  hour  ?  Are  they  full  of  time  even 
to  a  surfeit,  and  yet  cannot  they  give  ten  minutes'  space  to  their 
Maker  .^  Well  does  our  author  speak  of  cruelty.  Was  ever  such 
cruelty  on  earth  as  this  denial  of  an  hour  of  our  superfluous  time 
to  God .?  Will  we  rather  waste  it,  or  defile  it,  than  give  him  a 
portion  of  it  ?  Must  we  invent  pastimes  to  pass  time  away,  and 
yet  refuse  ten  minutes  for  meditation? 

Oh,  that  this  little  parable  might  meet  some  careless  eye,  and 
through  the  eye  pierce  the  heart !  What,  will  you  sooner  kill 
time  at  cards,  or  with  a  novel,  or  in  utter  idleness,  than  do  your 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  243 

greatest  Benefactor  the  honour  of  thinking  of  him  ?  Is  he  so 
distasteful  to  you  that  you  count  it  a  bore,  a  burden,  a  bugbear 
even  to  hear  his  sacred  name  ?  Come,  do  thyself  this  favour 
— to  give  the  next  hour  to  God  and  to  thine  own  soul.  Your 
cruelty  to  your  God  will  prove  to  be  cruelty  to  yourself.  Do  not 
persevere  in  it,  but  yield  to  your  heavenly  Friend  a  portion  of 
your  weary  time.  May  be  you  will  thus  find  out  a  way  of  never 
being  weary  again  in  this  fashion — find  out,  in-  fact,  the  way  to 
make  time  pass  like  a  river  which  flows  over  golden  sands, 
with  a  paradise  on  either  bank. 

SQUABBLING  WITH  A  SERVANT. 

"  Many  a  time  a  brabble  falleth  out  between  a  man  and  his 
hists  J  but  he  delayeth,  and  all  co7neth  to  7iothing.  In  a  heat  we 
bid  a  naughty  servant  begone  ;  but  he  lin^ereth,  and  before  the 
next  mor?ting  all  is  cool  and  quiet,  a?id  he  is  again  in  favour.^'' 
Ungodly  men  have  their  quarrels  with  their  favourite  sins  on 
various  accounts  ;  but  these  are  like  children's  pets  with  one 
another,  soon  over,  because  they  come  of  passion,  and  not  from 
principle.  An  unholy  person  will  fall  out  with  sin  because  it  has 
injured  his  health  or  his  credit,  or  has  brought  him  into  difficul- 
ties with  his  neighbours  ;  but  when  these  temporary  results  are 
ended  he  falls  in  love  again  with  the  same  iniquity.  Thus  we 
have  seen  the  drunkard  loathing  his  excess  when  his  eyes  were 
red,  and  his  head  was  aching  ;  but  ere  the  sun  went  down  the 
quarrel  was  ended,  and  he  and  Bacchus  were  rolling  in  the  gutter 
together.  Our  enmity  to  sin  should  be  based  upon  sound  know- 
ledge and  solid  reason,  and  be  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  then  it  will  lead  us  to  join  in  solemn  league  with  the 
Lord  who  hath  war  with  Amalek  throughout  all  generations.  We 
must  have  no  peace  with  sin  ;  nay,  not  with  the  least  sin.  Our 
hate  of  evil  must  be  as  everlasting  as  the  love  of  God. 

Of  old,  converted  Israelites  cast  their  idols  to  the  moles  and 
to  the  bats — away  from  sight  with  the  moles,  away  from  light 


214  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

with  the  bats.  Our  detestation  must  lead  us  to  put  sin  among 
the  dead  and  the  forgotten.  So  far  from  ever  entering  into  amity 
with  it,  we  must  regard  it  as  a  dead  and  corrupted  thing,  for  ever 
abandoned  to  silence  and  the  worm.  As  heaven  and  hell  will 
never  unite,  so  must  it  be  plain  that  a  saint  and  sin  will  never 
come  together  on  any  terms  whatever. 

Lord,  I  pray  thee  keep  me  ever  in  desperate  earnest  in  my  war 
with  sin.  Forbid  that  I  should  trifle  in  this  conflict,  or  grow  cold 
in  it.  Let  me  be  bound  to  never-ending  warfare  with  my  own 
sin,  and  never  may  I  be  pacified  till  Christ  has  utterly  crushed 
the  foe.     Like  thy  servant  David,  I  would  hate  every  false  way. 

THE  EIVER  SWOLLEN  BY  BEING  LAMMED. 

"  Corruption,  the  more  it  is  opposed  the  jnore  it  stormeih  and 
groweth  outrageous  ;  as  a  river  swelleth  by  reason  of  da?ns  and 
banks,  which  are  raised  against  it.  Cormptions  rage  against 
restraints  till  the  floods  break  loosed  This  figure  is  a  good  one. 
Corrupt  desires  will  often  lie  quiet  till  they  are  earnestly  opposed, 
and  then  they  swell  and  rage.  The  gracious  man  sets  himself 
with  resolution  to  overcome  a  habit,  and,  like  a  beast  at  bay,  it 
fights  tooth  and  nail  as  if  for  dear  life.  The  more  he  prays,  the 
more  he  mortifies  himself;  the  more  he  avoids  the  sin,  the  more 
does  it  appear  to  force  itself  upon  him.  The  water  flows  easily 
enough  down  the  unimpeded  bed  of  the  river,  and  it  will  readily 
enough  overflow  and  cover  the  meadows  ;  but  once  put  up  an 
embankment,  or  attempt  to  stem  the  torrent,  and  it  chafes  and 
rages,  and  displays  all  its  force.  So  sin  may  be  quiet  ;  but  when 
grace  enters  the  heart  it  revives,  resists,  and  raises  rebellion, 
setting  the  soul  into  a  horrible  tumult. 

We  must  not  think  that  the  work  of  sanctification  has  ceased 
because  impetuous  passions  are  more  clearly  perceived,  and  the 
power  of  the  flesh  is  more  deeply  deplored.  It  is  possible  that 
the  energy  of  inbred  sin  may  become  all  the  more  apparent 
because  through  divine  grace  it  is  more  strenuously  resisted. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  245 

When  the  vital  energy  is  great,  it  throws  out  upon  the  surface 
diseases  which,  with  a  feebler  vitality,  would  have  lain  smoulder- 
ing within  :  when  spiritual  life  is  forceful,  it  hunts  to  the  surface 
evils  which  else  would  have  festered  in  the  heart. 

There  are  times  with  the  ungodly  man  when  all  goes  smoothly, 
and  the  current  of  his  life  flows  placidly  ;  but,  nevertheless,  the 
whole  stream  is  polluted  from  the  fountain-head  to  the  outfall, 
though  he  knows  it  not.  With  the  godly  man  life's  inward 
stream  is  seldom  thus  deceitfully  smooth.  The  Christian's  old 
nature  is  opposed  at  every  turn  by  his  faith,  repentance, 
prayers,  and  other  dams  and  embankments  of  grace  ;  and  hence 
the  dashing  of  the  waves,  and  the  roaring  and  the  swelling  of 
the  evil  torrent.  Even  the  pure  stream  of  the  river  of  the  water 
of  life,  which  flows  into  him  from  the  throne  of  God,  for  a 
while  only  creates  a  greater  tumult.  The  waters  will  not 
blend,  and  hence  they  contend  one  with  another  till  the  man  is 
placed  in  the  position  of  Paul's  ship  when  it  fell  into  a  place 
where  two  seas  met.  Truly,  the  entrance  of  Christ  into  the 
heart,  though  it  ends  in  ultimate  rest,  yet  for  a  while  brings  not 
peace,  but  a  sword. 

When  a  man  dreams  that  he  is  perfect,  and  therefore  ceases 
to  fight  against  his  secret  sins,  all  seems  well ;  but  let  him  look 
into  the  depths  of  his  heart,  and  behold  the  corruptions  which 
slumber  there,  and  let  him  seek  to  expel  them  ;  and  a  battle 
will  begin,  compared  with  which  the  strife  of  the  warrior  and 
the  garments  rolled  in  blood  are  as  nothing.  The  heart  is  rent 
in  pieces  by  the  opposing  parties,  neither  does  it  seem  possible 
to  live  because  of  the  conflict.  Let  us  not  despair  while  this 
fierce  contest  is  going  on :  we  are  but  suffering  with  the  universe 
of  which  we  form  a  part,  for  "  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now."  These  groans  and  pangs 
are  bringing  on  that  glorious  birth  out  of  which  shall  come  the 
new  heavens  and  the  new  earth.  Even  so  it  is  with  us  :  our 
inward  travail   and  sore  conflict  will  work  out  an   immortal 


246  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

perfection,  which  is  the  consummation  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  soul.  When  the  waves  rage  terribly,  let  us  remember 
that  "  the  Lord  on  high  is  mightier  than  the  noise  of  many 
waters,  yea,  than  the  mighty  waves  of  the  sea."  He  will  quell 
the  opposition,  and  in  due  time  dry  up  the  rivers  of  inbred  sin, 
destroying  the  very  fountains  thereof,  and  giving  to  his  people 
ineffable  rest  and  unutterable  delight. 

O,  my  Lord,  give  me  grace  to  curb  every  evil  tendency 
within  myself,  and  the  more  I  perceive  that  these  evil  affections 
chafe  and  rebel,  the  more  determined  may  I  be  that  I  will  dam 
them  up,  and  that  they  shall  not  have  their  way.  Only  help 
thou  me,  and  as  the  struggle  grows  more  arduous,  let  thy  grace 
become  more  plenteous.  Surely  in  this  conflict  all  power  must 
come  from  thee,  for  thou  alone  canst  impart  the  strength  that  I 
need.  Hast  thou  not  said,  "  Behold,  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up 
the  sea,  I  make  the  rivers  a  wilderness  "  ?  Arise,  O  Lord,  let 
not  sin  prevail,  but  get  to  thyself  the  victory  in  me. 

EABBI  JOSEPH'S  LOVE  TO  THE  SYNAGOGUE. 

"  /  have  once  and  again  read  of  one  Rabbi  Joseph,  who,  being 
allured  by  the  hope  of  great  gain,  to  teach  Hebrew,  at  a  place 
where  there  was  7io  synagogue,  is  said  to  have  brought  forth  this 
Scripture  as  his  reason  for  rcfusitig  :  *  The  law  of  thy  7nouth 
is  better  unto  me  than  thousands  of  gold  a?td  silver.'' "  Well 
done.  Rabbi  Joseph  !  We  greatly  fear  that  there  are  few  of 
thy  kindred  who  are  of  thy  mind ;  for  the  heart  of  Israel  seems 
to  be  set  upon  the  precious  metals.  Nor  can  we  blame  Israel 
much,  for  the  same  is  all  too  true  concerning  those  who  call 
themselves  Christians.  The  chink  of  guineas  is  rare  music  even 
to  them. 

The  greatest  worldly  advantages  cannot  compensate  for  the 
loss  of  spiritual  privileges,  and  yet  we  know  many  who  scarcely 
take  this  matter  into  consideration  in  the  choice  of  their  pur- 
suits and  positions  in  life. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  247 

A  tradesman  is  earning  a  competence,  and  is  able  to  attend 
the  house  of  God,  and  to  give  part  of  his  time  and  talents 
to  the  service  of  the  church  ;  and  yet  he  thinks  it  to  be 
advisable  to  cumber  himself  with  extra  worldly  servitude, 
and  thereby  to  render  himself  unable  either  to  profit  the 
church  or  to  be  profited  himself  by  the  services  of  the  Lord's 
house.  Is  this  the  way  of  wisdom  ?  Can  this  man  say  that 
God's  words  are  more  desired  by  him  than  gold,  yea,  than  much 
fine  gold  ? 

A  young  man  is  in  a  fair  position,  where  he  has  godly 
surroundings,  and  every  opportunity  for  spiritual  progress  ;  and 
yet,  for  the  sake  of  a  few  pounds  more  he  puts  himself  into  an 
un- Christian  household,  and  loses  every  opportunity  of  uniting 
with  his  brethren  in  holy  work  and  worship.  Is  this  as  it  should 
be  ?  Does  not  Rabbi  Joseph  greatly  shame  such  a  backsliding 
Ephraim  ? 

If  I  were  to  choose  a  dwelling-house  I  would  wish  to  be 
known  as  Justus  was — for  he  was  "a  man  that  worshipped  God, 
whose  house  joined  hard  to  the  synagogue."  I  would  hope  to 
reverse  the  proverb,  and  prove  that  the  nearer  the  church  the 
nearer  to  God.  Of  course  one's  calling,  health,  or  circumstances 
might  compel  another  choice  ;  but  I  would  ever  give  preference 
to  a  habitation  near  to  a  gospel  ministry.  If  I  were  to  choose 
a  trade,  I  would  select  one  which  gave  me  leisure  for  .the 
service  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  I  had  the  option  of  my  condition 
in  life,  I  would  rather  have  less  earth  and  more  heaven  than 
more  earth  and  less  heaven.  It  argues  a  poor  state  of  spiritual 
health  when  the  mass  of  Christian  professors  estimate  their 
position  solely  and  entirely  by  the  money  which  it  yields  them. 
Surely  they  know,  unless  they  are  hypocrites  ingrain,  that  a 
man's  life  consists  far  more  in  the  devotion  which  he  enjoys 
than  in  the  treasure  which  he  accumulates. 

My  God,  grant  me  grace  ever  to  put  the  first  first,  and  the 
last  last.     Let  me  use  Paul's  scales,  which  were  the  balances  of 


248  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

the  sanctuary,  and  reckon  that  gain  to  be  loss  which  is  gained 
by  loss  of  communion  with  thee,  and  that  profit  to  be  unprofit- 
able which  renders  me  less  profitable  to  thee. 

A  lEAN-TO    SHED. 

^*  Many  men  owe  their  religion,  not  to  grace,  but  to  the  favour 
of  the  times;  they  follow  it  because  it  is  infashio7t,  and  they  can 
profess  it  at  a  cheap  rate,  because  no?ie  contradict  it.  They 
do  7iot  build  upon  the  rock,  but  set  up  a  shed  leaning  to  another 
man^s  house,  which  costs  them  nothing.^''  The  idea  of  a  lean-to> 
religion  is  somewhat  rough,  but  eminently  suggestive.  Weak 
characters  cannot  stand  alone,  like  mansions  ;  but  must  needs 
lean  on  others,  like  the  miserable  shops  which  nestle  under 
certain  Continental  cathedrals.  Under  the  eaves  of  old  customs 
many  build  their  plaster-nests,  like  swallows.  Such  are  good, 
if  good  at  all,  because  their  patrons  made  virtue  the  price  of 
their  patronage.  They  love  honesty  because  it  proves  to  be 
the  best  policy,  and  piety  because  it  serves  as  an  introduction 
to  trade  with  saints.  Their  religion  is  little  more  than 
courtesy  to  other  men's  opinions,  civility  to  godliness. 

Alas  for  an  age  when  this  sort  of  thing  abounds  !  It  is  an 
injury  to  the  architecture  of  godliness  to  be  encumbered  with 
these  pitiful  hovels.  As  parasites  suck  the  life  out  of  the  goodly 
tree,  so  do  these  pretenders  injure  those  to  whom  they  cling 
with  the  servile  homage  of  hireling  adulation.  To  themselves 
their  vain  profession  and  min-pleasing  are  a  presage  of  destruc- 
tion :  for  at  the  last  day  all  must  fall  into  eternal  ruin  which 
has  not  its  own  foundation  on  the  rock.  Our  lives  will  be 
weighed  one  by  one  in  personal  judgment,  and  no  other  man 
can  add  an  ounce  to  aid  us  if  we  are  found  wanting.  The 
well-founded  and  well-compacted  structure  of  the  sincerely 
gracious  will  survive  the  time  when  once  more  the  Lord  shall 
shake  not  only  earth  but  also  heaven  ;  but  that  frail  fabric 
which  leans  on  mortal  aid  will  perish  in  that  dread  convulsion. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  2i9 

Lord,  make  me  a  self-contained  man.  Supported  by  thee,  and 
by  thee  alone,  may  I  be  unmoved,  though  all  other  men  should 
leave  thee,  and  though  the  fashion  of  my  company  should  be 
opposed  to  all  godliness.     Then  shalt  thou  have  glory  through  me. 

RICHES  OF  CHILDREN  AND  MEN. 

*'  T/ie  more  abundance  of  b'lily  valuable  things  a  man  haihy 
the  more  he  hath  of  true  riches ;  a  child  counteth  himself  rich 
when  he  hath  a  great  7nany  pins,  and  poiftts,  and  cherry-stones^ 
for  these  suit  his  childish  age  andfaiicyj  a  worldly  7Jian  counteth 
himself  rich  when  he  hath  a  great  store  of  gold  and  silver, 
or  lands  ajid  heritages,  or  bills  and  bonds  j  but  a  child  of  God 
coimteth  hij7iself  rich  whc?t  he  hath  God  for  his  Portio7i,  Christ  to 
be  his  Redeemer,  and  the  Spirit  for  his  Guide,  Sa7ictifier,  and  C0771- 
forterj  which  is  as  much  above  a  car7tal  77ta7i^s  estate  i7i  the 
world,  as  a  carnal  ma7i^s  estate  is  above  a  child's  toys  a7td  trifles; 
yea,  infinitely  77ioreP  It  is  above  all  things  desirable  that  we 
adopt  a  correct  scale  of  estimates.  When  we  make  our  personal 
audit,  we  shall  fall  into  grievous  error  if  the  principles  of  our 
reckoning  are  not  thoroughly  accurate.  If  we  reckon  brass  as 
silver,  and  silver  as  gold,  we  shall  dream  that  we  are  rich  when 
we  are  in  penury.  In  taking  stock  of  our  own  condition,  let  us 
be  sure  only  to  reckon  that  for  riches  which  is  really  riches  to 
us.  Wealth  to  the  worldling  is  not  wealth  to  the  Christian. 
His  currency  is  different,  his  valuables  are  of  another  sort. 

Am  I  to-day  poorer  in  money  than  I  was  ten  years  ago  ;  and 
am  I  at  the  same  time  more  humble,  more  patient,  more 
earnest,  more  believing  ?  Then  set  me  down  as  a  richer  man. 
Have  my  worldly  goods  largely  increased  during  the  last  few 
years  ?  Am  I  some  thousands  of  pounds  in  advance  of  my 
former  position  ?  but  am  I  also  more  proud,  more  carnal-minded, 
more  lukewarm,  more  petulant?  Then  I  must  write  myself 
down  as  a  poorer  man,  whatever  men  may  think  of  my  estate. 
A  Christian's  riches  are  within  him.     External  belongings  are  by 


'/bO  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

no  means  a  sure  gain  to  a  man.  A  horse  is  none  the  better  oft' 
for  gilded  trappings  ;  and  a  man  is,  in  very  truth,  none  the 
richer  for  sumptuous  surroundings.  Paul  was  richer  than 
Croesus,  when  he  was  able  to  say,  "  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased, 
and  I  know  how  to  abound :  everywhere  and  in  all  things  I  am 
instructed  both  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,  both  to  abound  and 
to  suffer  need."  Such  contentment  surpasses  riches.  Outwardly 
Paul  was  "  poor,"  but  inasmuch  as  he  was  "  making  many  rich  " 
he  must  have  been  rich  himself ;  for  nothing  can  come  out  of 
a  man  which  is  not  in  him.  Solomon  was  a  very  Lazarus, 
when,  after  summing  up  all  his  possessions  and  delights,  he 
was  compelled  to  add,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity  1 " 

If  a  man  should  labour  to  be  rich  after  the  African 
fashion,  and  should  accumulate  a  large  store  of  shells  and 
beads  ;  yet  when  he  came  home  to  England  he  would  be  a 
beggar,  even  though  he  had  a  shipload  of  such  rubbish.  So  he 
who  gives  his  heart  and  soul  to  the  accumulation  of  gold  and  silver 
coin  is  a  beggar  when  he  comes  into  the  spiritual  realm,  where 
such  round  medals  are  reckoned  as  mere  forms  of  earth,  non- 
current  in  heaven,  and  of  less  value  than  the  least  of  spiritual 
blessings. 

We  -have  read  that  when  Bernard  visited  a  monastery  of 
ascetic  monks,  they  were  shocked  because  the  saddle  on  which 
he  rode  was  most  sumptuously  adorned.  They  thought  that 
this  ill  became  his  profession  as  a  meek  and  lowly  man.  Judge 
of  their  surprise  and  satisfaction  when  he  told  them  that  he  had 
never  so  much  as  noticed  what  it  was  whereon  he  sat.  The  fact 
was,  that  the  horse  and  saddle  were  not  his  own,  but  had  been 
lent  to  him  by  his  uncle,  and  their  nature  had  not  been  per- 
ceived by  him  during  the  whole  of  his  journey.  This  is  the  way 
to  use  all  earthly  treasure,  making  small  account  whether  we 
have  it  or  not ;  even  as  Paul  says,  "  It  remaineth,  that  both  they 
that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none  ;  and  they  that 
weep,  as  though  they  wept  not ;  and  they  that  rejoice,  as  though 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  251 

they  rejoiced  not  ;  and  they  that  buy,  as  though  they  possessed 
not ;  and  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing  it :  for  the 
fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."  Our  goods  are  good  if  we 
do  not  account  them  our  highest  good.  Even  Jonah's  gourd  did 
him  good  until  he  quarrelled  with  God  about  it. 

O,  my  Lord,  let  me  not  merely  talk  thus,  and  pretend  to  despise 
earthly  treasure,  when  all  the  while  I  am  hunting  after  it ; 
but  grant  me  grace  to  live  above  these  things,  never  setting  my 
heart  upon  them,  nor  caring  whether  I  have  them,  or  have  them 
not  ;  but  exercising  all  my  energy  in  pleasing  thee,  and  in  gain- 
ing those  things  which  thou  dost  hold  in  esteem.  Give  me,  I 
pray  thee,  the  riches  of  thy  grace  that  I  may  at  last  attain  to  the 
riches  of  thy  glory,  through  Christ  Jesus. 

A    PRINCELY    CARVER. 

"  To  be  carved  for  at  table  by  a  great  prince  would  be  counted 
as  great  a  favour  as  the  meal  itself  To  take  outward  blessmgs 
out  of  Gods  hand,  to  see  that  he  remembereth  us,  and  se7tdeth  in 
our  provision  at  every  turn;  this  endeareth  the  mercy,  and 
increaseth  our  delight  therein."  What,  indeed,  would  most  men 
give  if  they  could  say,  "  The  Queen  herself  carved  for  me,  and 
was  most  anxious  that  I  should  be  well  supplied "  .?  But  each 
believer  has  the  Lord  himself  for  his  Provider.  He  loads  our 
table,  and  fills  our  cup.  Providence  is  no  other  than  God  pro- 
viding. He  measures  out  our  joys,  weighs  our  sorrows,  appoints 
our  labours,  and  selects  our  trials.  There  is  no  morsel  on  the 
saint's  plate  which  is  not  of  the  Lord's  carving,  unless  he  has 
been  so  foolish  as  to  put  forth  his  hand  unto  iniquity. 

Is  it  not  delightful  to  know  that  our  Father's  hand  broke  for 
us  the  bread  which  we  have  eaten  this  day  ;  that  the  Saviour's 
own  fingers  mingled  our  cup,  and  that  every  blessing  has  come 
direct  from  God's  own  table  .?  Surely  we  are  as  dear  to  God  as 
the  little  ewe  lamb  in  Nathan's  parable  was  to  the  poor  man ;  for 
we  are  told  that  "  he  had  nourished  it  up,  and  it  grew  up  together 


252  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

with  him,  and  with  his  children ;  it  did  eat  of  his  own  meat,  and 
drank  of  his  own  cup,  and  lay  in  his  bosom."  Does  not  this 
make  our  meat,  and  drink,  and  lodging  more  than  royal  ?  Are 
we  not  more  than  content  with  such  fare  ? 

Yea,  Lord,  my  portion  tastes  of  love,  for  thy  hand  has 
sweetened  it.  A  sacred  perfume  is  on  my  raiment  and  in  my 
chamber,  for  thou  hast  prepared  both  for  me.  And  this  would 
be  true  if  I  wore  rags,  and  lay  in  a  dungeon,  in  sore  sickness. 
What  a  heritage  is  mine  !  One  said,  "  I  am  poor  and  needy, 
yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me." 

In  this  passage  the  second  sentence  underwrote  the  first,  and 
undermined  its  meaning  :  how  can  he  be  poor  and  needy  of 
whom  it  can  be  said  that  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  him  ?  O 
Lord,  thou  art  my  all,  and  my  all  in  all  :  my  all  is  more  than 
all  because  it  comes  of  thee,  and  is  dealt  out  to  me  by  thine 
own  self. 

SNOW  SOFT  BUT  SOAKING. 

"  Passionate  outcries  do  only  frighteti  easy  and  over-credulous 
souls,  and  that  only  for  the  prese?it :  proofs  ajid  argume7its  do  a 
great  deal  7Jiore  good.  Snow  thatfalleth  soft  soaketh  deep.  In  the 
tempest,  Christ  slept  :  whe?i  passion  is  up  true  zeal  is  usually 
asleep?^ 

How  gently  fall  the  snowflakes,  but  how  surely  they 
penetrate  into  the  ground  ;  a  driving  rain  hath  not  half  such 
efficacy  !  The  voice  of  the  snow-flakes  is  not  heard,  but  their 
influence  is  felt.  Proofs  from  Scripture,  winsomely  put,  carry 
all  before  them,  because  Jesus  loves  to  reach  men's  minds  by 
such  means,  and  not  by  wrath  and  fuiy. 

This  is  a  word  to  hasty  disputants.  Violent  words  appear  to 
them  to  be  forcible,  but  they  are  not.  Hard  arguments  are  best 
couched  in  soft  language  ;  the  force  of  the  lightning  is  not 
increased  by  the  thunder.  Wrath  weakens  reason,  but  gentle- 
ness gives  double  force  to  arguments.    Alas,  we  too  often  forget 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  253 

this,  and  call  in  our  evil  passions  to  aid  our  holy  principles. 
Then  the  Christ  within  us  sleeps,  and  the  devil  is  wide  awake. 
It  is  to  be  feared  that  Protestantismhas  been  rather  hindered  than 
furthered  by  the  ferocity  with  which  some  have  maintained  it. 

Our  present  controversies  are  some  of  them  essential  to 
fidelity  ;  but  it  will  be  well  if  we  all  remember  that  to  be  faithful 
to  truth  we  need  not  be  wrathful  towards  opponents.  Truth 
and  charity  are  of  the  same  heavenly  family,  and  are  loveliest 
when  they  walk  hand  in  hand.  It  has  happened  that  some  have 
been  so  charitable  that  they  would  not  lift  a  finger  to  save  truth's 
life  lest  they  should  wound  one  of  another  opinion.  This  is  a 
sad  practical  error.  But  we  shall  not  mend  matters  if  we  fight 
truth's  battles  so  savagely  that  we  hurl  shot  and  shell  upon  the 
abode  of  love. 

Lord,  teach  us,  for  we  are  fearfully  apt  to  err  in  this  matter. 
Give  us  bold  and  clear  words,  taken  from  thine  own  word  ;  and 
let  us  use  these  with  the  lowly  confidence  which  comes  of 
being  filled  with  thy  Spirit ;  but  never  allow  our  own  spirit  to 
get  the  upper  hand,  so  that  we  breathe  out  threatenings  and  utter 
bitter  expressions.  Let  our  sword  be  always  like  that  which 
Cometh  out  of  Christ's  mouth ;  sharp  but  salutary ;  flaming,  but 
only  with  the  fire  of  love. 

THE  MALICIOirS  GUEST. 

^'' Sin  is  an  ill  guest ^  for  it  always  sets  its  lodgi7ig  on  fireP 
Entertained  within  the  human  breast,  and  cherished  and  fondled, 
it  makes  its  host  no  return  but  an  evil  one.  It  places  the  burn- 
ing coals  of  evil  desire  within  the  soul  with  evident  intent  to 
fire  the  whole  man  with  fierce  passions.  Let  these  passions  be 
suffered  to  rage,  and  the  flame  will  burn  even  to  the  lowest  hell. 

Who  would  not  shut  his  door  on  such  a  guest  ?  Or  if  he  be 
known  to  be  lurking  within,  who  would  not  drag  him  out  ?  How 
foolish  are  those  who  find  delight  in  such  an  enemy,  and  treat 
him  with  more  care  than  their  best  friend  ! 


254  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

KEEPING  UP  A  SUIT. 

"  Keep  up  the  suit,  and  it  will  come  to  a  hearing-day  ere  it  be 
longP  In  a  suit  at  law  there  are  many  and  grievous  delays,  and 
yet  the  man  who  has  been  forced  into  the  court  does  not  dream 
of  relinquishing  his  case.  He  urges  on  his  solicitor,  and  entreats 
him  to  lose  no  opportunity  of  getting  the  business  settled  ;  but 
he  does  not  in  a  pet  take  the  case  oiit  of  his  hands,  for  he  ex- 
pects that  the  judge  will  sooner  or  later  decide  the  matter.  It 
would  be  a  pity  not  to  continue  steadfast  in  prayer,  for  it  is  cer- 
tain that  now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed. 
Every  hour  of  importunity  brings  us  nearer  to  the  time  when 
the  Judge  shall  avenge  his  own  elect.  To  waste  all  the  cost  of 
former  tears  and  entreaties,  and  to  let  months  of  praying  go  for 
nothing  would  be  a  sad  waste  of  effort.  Let  us  hope  in  the  Lord, 
and  wait  patiently  for  him,  abiding  still  at  the  mercy-seat.  Has 
he  not  himself  said,  "  Though  the  vision  tarry,  wait  for  it ;  be- 
cause it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry  " .? 

Sometimes,  before  we  call,  God  hears  us,  and  while  we  are  yet 
speaking  he  answers  us.  This  is  to  encourage  us  to  a  further 
trust  in  him  ;  perhaps  to  prepare  us  for  waiting  times.  Fre- 
quently the  richest  answers  are  not  the  speediest.  Ships  may 
return  all  the  more  quickly  because  they  have  a  slender  lading ; 
and  a  prayer  may  be  all  the  longer  on  its  voyage  because  it  is 
bringing  us  a  heavier  freight  of  blessing.  Delayed  answers  are 
not  only  trials  of  faith,  but  they  give  us  an  opportunity  of  honour- 
ing God  by  our  steadfast  confidence  in  him  under  apparent 
repulses. 

He  that  will  only  believe  because  he  sees  the  answer  to  his 
prayer  immediately  hath  but  little  faith.  He  is  the  man  after 
God's  own  heart  who  can  cry  day  and  night  unto  the  Lord  by 
the  month  together,  and  yet  never  swerve  from  the  full  convic- 
tion that  God  is  good  to  Israel,  and  that  in  waiting  upon  him 
there  is  great  reward.  David  says,  "  I  waited  patiently  for  the 
Lord,  and  he  inclined  unto  me,  and   heard  my  cry."     This 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  255 

patience  in  waiting  is  the  attribute  of  the  full-grown  saint,  and 
perhaps  it  gives  more  glory  to  God  than  the  songs  of  cherubim 
and  seraphim.  Jonah  says,  "  When  my  soul  fainted  within  me 
I  remembered  the  Lord :  and  my  prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  into 
thine  holy  temple." 

Desponding  brother,  keep  up  the  suit.  Perhaps  this  very  day 
may  be  the  hearing-day.  Go  again  seven  times.  The  little 
cloud,  like  a  man's  hand,  may  be  visible  on  that  last  time  of 
asking.  Knock,  and  knock  again,  till  the  gate  of  heaven  rever- 
berates your  blows.  The  door  must  open,  and  it  will  open  all 
the  wider  because  you  have  knocked  so  long.  "  Wait  on  the 
Lord  :  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart. 
Wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord." 

CLOSE  WRITING. 

*'  When  men  have  much  to  say  in  a  letter,  ajid  perceive  that 
they  have  little  paper  left,  they  write  closely.^''  Looking  at  the 
shortness  of  life,  and  the  much  that  has  to  be  written  upon  its 
tablets,  it  becomes  us  also  to  do  much  in  a  short  space,  and  so 
to  write  closely.  "  No  day  without  a  line,"  is  a  good  motto  for 
a  Christian.  A  thoroughly  useful  life  is  7nultu7n  in  parvo  :  it  is 
necessarily  little,  for  it  is  but  a  span  ;  but  how  much  may  be 
crowded  into  it  for  God,  our  souls,  the  Church,  our  families, 
and  our  fellows  !  We  cannot  afford  wide  blanks  of  idleness  ; 
we  should  not  only  live  by  the  day  but  by  the  twenty  minutes,  as 
Wesley  did.  He  did  not  keep  a  diary,  but  a  horary  ;  and  each 
hour  was  divided  into  three  parts.  So  scanty  is  our  space  that 
we  must  condense,  and  leave  out  superfluous  matter  ;  giving 
room  only  to  that  which  is  weighty,  and  of  the  first  importance. 

Lord,  whether  I  live  long  or  not,  I  leave  to  thee ;  but  help 
me  to  live  while  I  live,  that  I  may  live  much.  Thou  canst  give 
life  more  abundantly  ;  let  me  receive  it,  and  let  my  life  be  filled, 
yea,  packed  and  crammed,  with  all  manner  of  holy  thoughts  and 
words  and  deeds  to  thy  glory. 


256  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  MIRROR. 

"  Take  a  looking-glass  a7td put  it  toivards  Jieaveii;  there  yon 
shall  see  the  figure  of  heaven,  the  clouds  and  things  above.  Turn 
it  downward  towards  the  earth,  yoit  shall  see  the  figure  of  the 
earth,  trees,  meadows,  7ne7i.  So  doth  the  soul  receive  a  figiwe 
from  the  things  to  which  it  is  set.  If  the  heart  be  set  towards 
heaven,  that  puts  thee  into  a  heavenly  frame;  if  thou  appliest  it 
to  earthly  objects,  thou  art  a  man  of  the  earth  J^  Are  our  thoughts 
and  our  affections  full  of  worldliness  ?  Let  us  make  good  use 
of  Manton's  figure,  and  turn  the  looking-glass  the  other  way. 
Our  mind  will  readily  enough  reflect  divine  things  if  we  turn  it 
in  that  direction.  Let  us  see  if  it  be  not  so.  Reach  down  the 
Bible,  look  at  the  biography  of  a  holy  man,  or  some  lively  book 
of  devotion,  and  see  if  the  heart  be  not  straightway  filled  with 
holy  and  heavenly  images.  At  any  rate,  if  we  spend  our  time 
on  the  newspaper,  or  sit  hour  after  hour  reading  trashy  novels, 
we  have  no  reason  to  wonder  that  thought  and  heart  go  after 
vanity.  This  turning  of  the  mind  upward  is  half  the  battle. 
We  cannot  expect  it  to  reflect  that  towards  which  it  does  not 
turn.  Those  who  mind  earthly  things  are  earthly,  those  who  set 
their  affection  upon  things  above  are  heavenly.  Paul  shows  how 
practically  useful  it  is  to  turn  the  mind  God-ward  when  he  says 
that  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world,  "  looking 
for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great 
God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 

We  may  well  cry  concerning  this  matter,  "  Turn  us,  O  Lord, 
and  we  shall  be  turned."  If  we  cannot  see  divine  truth  to  our 
enjoyment,  let  us  nevertheless  look  that  way;  for  that  eye  is 
blessed  which  looks  in  the  direction  of  the  light.  It  is  well  to 
have  our  window  open  towards  Jerusalem.  He  who  would 
behold  the  sun  at  his  rising  must  not  look  to  the  west.  He 
that  would  see  God  to  his  delight  must  look  God-ward.  If  the 
mirror  of  the  soul  be  resolutely  set  towards  the  Lord,  we  shall 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  257 

all  with  open  face  behold,  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the  Lord, 
and  be  changed  into  the  same  image  from  gloiy  to  glory,  even 
as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 

O,  my  blessed  Master,  help  me  I  pray  thee  to  keep  the  mirror 
of  my  mind  in  the  right  position,  that  evermore  I  may  see  thee. 
True,  it  will  be  but  as  in  a  glass  darkly,  but  even  that  will  be  a 
marvellous  preparation  for  beholding  thee  face  to  face. 

THE  OLD  HOUSE  TAKEN  DOWN  TO  BE  REBTJILT. 

'*  If  we  lived  in  a  house  of  our  oum,  and  the  walls  became 
decayed,  a7id  the  roof  ready  to  drop  dowji  upon  otcr  heads,  we 
would  desire  to  remove  and  depart  for  a  while,  but  we  should  7iot 
therefore  give  up  the  ground,  ajid  the  materials  of  the  house.  No, 
we  would  have  it  built  up  in  a  better  manner.^''  Even  thus  the 
soul  desires  to  leave  the  poor  frail  tenement  of  the  body,  but 
not  that  the  body  may  be  utterly  destroyed :  it  quits  it  with  the 
hope  of  having  the  house  of  clay  rebuilt  in  more  glorious  form. 
"Not  that  we  would  be  unclothed,"  saith  the  apostle,  "but 
clothed  upon  with  our  house  which  is  from  heaven ;"  not  that 
we  would  be  turned  out  of  house  and  home  ;  but  that  we  would 
enter  upon  our  better  and  permanent  abode,  which  the  Lord  will 
surely  provide  for  us. 

The  Lord  doth  not  despise  this  house  of  clay  :  he  will  re- 
build it,  and  we  shall  inhabit  it  for  ever.  Wherefore  let  us  be 
comforted  when  the  wind  blows  through  the  chinks,  and  the  rain 
drips  through  the  roof ;  it  will  all  the  sooner  come  down,  and  all 
the  sooner  will  it  be  restored.  The  little  while  in  which  we  shall 
be  unhoused  will  cause  us  no  inconvenience,  for  even  then  we  shall 
be  with  the  Lord  ;  wherefore  let  us  in  all  things  be  of  good  cheer. 

O,  my  Lord,  thou  hast  made  me  to  know  that  this  body  will 
soon  cease  to  be  a  body  for  me,  therefore  I  will  not  pamper  it. 
But  thou  promisest  it  a  resurrection,  therefore  I  will  not  defile 
it.  Teach  me  how,  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body,  to  dwell  in 
thee,  and  honour  thy  holy  name. 

17 


25S  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

CHIIDHEN  THANKING  THE  TAILOK  FOS  THEIR  CLOTHES. 

"  As  cliildreti  will  thaiik  the  tailor ,  and  think  they  owe  their 
new  clothes  to  him  rather  than  to  their parenf  s  bounty^  so  we  look 
to  the  next  hand,  and  set  up  that  ijistead  of  Godr  Second 
causes  must  never  be  made  to  stand  before  the  first  cause. 
Friends  and  helpers  are  all  very  well  as  servants  of  our  Father, 
but  our  Father  must  have  all  our  praise. 

There  is  a  like  evil  in  the  matter  of  trouble.  We  are  apt  to 
be  angry  with  the  instrument  of  our  affliction,  instead  of  seeing 
the  hand  of  God  over  all,  and  meekly  bowing  before  it.  It  was 
a  great  help  to  David  in  bearing  with  railing  Shimei,  when  he 
saw  that  God  had  appointed  this  provocation  as  a  chastisement. 
He  would  not  suffer  his  hasty  captains  to  take  the  scoffer's  head, 
but  meekly  said,  "  Let  him  alone  and  let  him  curse,  for  the  Lord 
hath  bidden  him."  A  dog  when  he  is  struck  will  bite  the  stick  ; 
if  he  were  wise,  he  would  observe  that  the  stick  only  moves 
as  the  hand  directs  it.  When  we  discern  God  in  our  tribula- 
tions we  are  helped  to  be  quiet  and  endure  with  patience. 

Let  us  not  act  like  silly  children,  but  trace  matters  to  their 
fountain-head,  and  act  accordingly.  May  the  Spirit  of  wisdom 
make  us  men  in  understanding. 

PASSING  SHIPS  AT  SEA. 

''  When  we  are  on  board  ship,  if  another  vessel  passes  us  at 
sea,  we  think  that  it  is  sailing  more  swiftly  than  we  are.  Though 
both  ships  are  passing  alo?tg  at  the  same  rate,  we  do  not  so  cleai'ly 
discern  our  own  motion.  In  like  manjter  we  see  that  others  are 
mortal,  but  we  do  7iot  nujnber  our  own  daysP  This  is  an 
ordinary  observation  concerning  that  which  is  really  an  extra- 
ordinary piece  of  folly.  What  can  it  matter  to  us  how  other 
men's  lives  are  going  ?  Our  main  concern  is  our  ov/n  conduct, 
and  the  spending  of  our  own  days.  Come,  friend,  you  too  are 
getting  old  ;  snowflakes  here  and  there  upon  those  once  raven 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS.  259 

locks  are  prophetic  of  coming  winter.  Those  spectacles,  too  ! 
"  First  sight,"  you  say.  Just  so ;  but  you  were  not  once 
dependent  on  them.  Why,  you  will  never  see  fifty  again  ! 
Half  a  century  have  you  lived,  and  more  :  surely  it  is  time  to 
be  wise. 

Friend  Brown  is  getting  quite  the  old  man.  No  doubt ;  but 
you  are  moving  onward,  too.  Brown  does  not  get  a  year  older 
in  less  time  than  you  do.  We  are  all  sailing  at  the  same  rate. 
Is  it  not  time  that  we  took  observations,  and  found  out  our 
longitude  and  latitude  ?  At  any  rate,  it  were  well  to  know  what 
port  we  are  bound  for.  Some  have  not  even  so  much  knowledge 
as  this  implies. 

PLEASURE  FORGETS  LABOUR. 

"  In  hu7iti7ig^  fowlitig,  and  fisJiing^  though  there  be  as  much 
labour  as  in  our  ordinary  employments^  yet  we  count  the  toil 
nothing,  because  of  the  delight  we  have  in  themP  It  is  wonder- 
ful what  fatigue  men  will  bear  to  hunt  a  fox  or  shoot  a  partridge, 
and  yet  they  make  nothing  of  it,  but  call  it  sport.  In  like  manner 
many  a  zealous  worker  for  the  Lord  Jesus  will  preach,  and  teach, 
and  labour,  and  call  it  his  recreation,  with  which  he  fills  up  his 
leisure  hours.  We  know  many  such,  and  we  hope  we  shall  yet 
know  more.  Love  makes  labour  light.  Men  will  do  voluntarily 
that  which  they  would  never  undertake  for  pay,  and  they  will 
keep  up  freely  under  an  amount  of  pressure  which  would  crush 
the  hireling.  There  lies  the  grand  secret.  Make  holy  service 
a  delight,  and  you  can  do  any  amount  of  it. 

Lord,  thy  servant  has  no  need  to  reckon  thy  service  to  be  his 
pleasure,  for  it  is  indeed  so.  Could  he  but  serve  thee  perfectly, 
without  hindrance  and  without  mistake,  it  would  be  heaven  to 
him.  No  avocation  is  like  our  divine  vocation  for  pure  delight- 
fulness.  It  would  be  far  more  wearisome  not  to  serve  thee, 
O  my  God,  than  it  ever  can  be  to  perform  the  most  arduous 
labour  for  thy  love's  sake. 


260  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

IN   TRAINING. 

*■'  By  rimning  and  breathing  yourselves  every  day,  yott  are  flie 
Jitter  to  7-iin  i7i  a  race;  so  the  oftener yoic  come  i?ito  God''sp7'esence 
the  greater  C07ijidence,  aiid  freedom,  and  enla7gement  it  will 
bring."  No  doubt  by  praying  we  learn  to  pray,  and  the  more 
we  pray  the  oftener  we  can  pray,  and  the  better  we  can  pray. 
He  who  prays  by  fits  and  starts  is  never  hkely  to  attain  to  that 
effectual,  fervent  prayer  which  availeth  much.  Prayer  is  good, 
the  habit  of  prayer  is  better,  but  the  spirit  of  prayer  is  the  best 
of  all.  It  is  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  that  we  pray  without  ceasing, 
and  this  can  never  be  acquired  by  the  man  who  ceases  to 
pray. 

It  is  wonderful  what  distances  men  can  run  who  have  long 
practised  the  art,  and  it  is  equally  marvellous  for  what  a  length 
of  time  they  can  maintain  a  high  speed  after  they  have  once 
acquired  stamina,  and  skill  in  using  their  muscles.  Great  power 
in  prayer  is  within  our  reach,  but  we  must  go  to  work  to  obtain  it. 
Let  us  never  imagine  that  Abraham  could  have  interceded  so 
successfully  for  Sodom  if  he  had  not  been  all  his  lifetime  in  the 
practice  of  communion  with  God.  Jacob's  all-night  at  Peniel 
was  not  the  first  occasion  upon  which  he  had  met  his  God.  We 
may  even  look  upon  our  Lord's  most  choice  and  wonderful 
prayer  with  his  disciples  before  his  Passion  as  the  flower  and 
fruit  of  his  many  nights  of  devotion,  and  of  his  often  rising  up  a 
great  while  before  day  to  pray. 

A  man  who  becomes  a  great  runner  has  to  put  himself  in 
training,  and  to  keep  himself  in  it  ;  and  that  training  consists 
very  much  of  the  exercise  of  running.  Those  who  have  dis- 
tinguished themselves  for  speed  have  not  suddenly  leaped  into 
eminence,  but  have  long  been  runners.  If  a  man  dreams  that 
he  can  become  mighty  in  prayer  just  when  he  pleases,  he  labours 
under  a  great  mistake.  The  prayer  of  Elias,  which  shut  up  heaven 
and  afterwards  opened  its  floodgates,  was  one  of  a  long  series  of 
mighty  prevailings  with  God.     Oh,  that  Christian  men  would 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  2G1 

remember  this  !  Perseverance  in  prayer  is  necessary  to  preva- 
lence in  prayer.  Those  great  intercessors,  who  are  not  so  often 
mentioned  as  they  ought  to  be  in  connection  with  confessors  and 
martyrs,  were  nevertheless  the  grandest  benefactors  of  the 
church ;  but  it  was  only  by  abiding  at  the  mercy-seat  that  they 
attained  to  be  such  channels  of  mercy  to  men.  We  must  pray 
to  pray,  and  continue  in  prayer  that  our  prayers  may  continue. 

O  thou,  by  whom  we  come  to  God,  seeing  thou  hast  thyself 
trodden  the  way  of  prayer,  and  didst  never  turn  from  it,  teach 
me  to  remain  a  suppliant  as  long  as  I  remain  a  sinner,  and  to 
wrestle  in  prayer  so  long  as  I  have  to  wrestle  with  the  powers  of 
evil.  Whatever  else  I  may  outgrow,  may  I  never  dream  that  I 
may  relax  my  supplications  ;  for  well  I  know  that — 

*'  Long  as  they  live  should  Christians  pray, 
For  only  while  they  pray  they  live." 

TASTERS,  NOT  BUYERS. 

"  The  hearer's  life  is  the  pi-eacher'' s  best  conuncndation.  They 
that  praise  the  man  but  do  7iot  practise  the  matter  are  like  those 
that  taste  •wi7ies  that  they  may  commend  them,  not  buy  thej^t" 
What  a  worry  such  folk  are  to  dealers  who  are  in  earnest  to  do 
business  !  Time  is  wasted,  labour  lost,  hopes  disappointed.  Oh 
that  these  loafers  and  idlers  would  take  themselves  off  from  our 
market !  We  set  forth  the  precious  produce  of  heaven's  own 
vintage,  and  hope  that  they  will  buy  of  us  ;  but  no,  they  lift  the 
glass,  and  talk  like  thorough  connoisseurs,  and  then  go  off  with- 
out coming  to  a  bargain.  Sermons  which  we  have  studied  with 
care,  delivered  with  travail,  prayed  over,  and  wept  over,  are 
praised  for  such  minor  matters  as  taste,  accuracy,  and  diction, 
and  the  truth  they  contain  is  not  received.  We  cannot  bring 
our  hearers  to  a  decided  bargain,  though  our  wares  are  the  best 
that  heaven  can  supply.  Will  it  always  be  so  .^  Reader,  has  it 
been  so  with  you ?     Is  it  to  be  so  still.'* 


262  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  PLAISTEE. 

"A  p/az'sfer  may  be  of  sovefeign  efficacy^  but  wJicnyoti  are  still 
pidlmg  it  off  and  on  it  doth  you  no  good."  Faith  applies  Christ 
to  the  soul ;  but  what  if  unbelief  tears  him  away  ?  A  promise 
is  a  great  heal-all,  but  what  if  we  believe  and  disbelieve,  trust 
and  distrust  ?  How  can  the  surest  promise  comfort  us  ?  Men 
turn  to  God  in  their  fashion,  and  before  any  benefit  can  come 
of  it  they  turn  away  from  him.  What  do  they  expect  from  such 
folly  ?  Instability  in  saving  concerns  is  a  deadly  evil,  a  mockery 
of  God,  and  a  robbery  of  ourselves. 

Lord,  thy  Son's  atonement  is  the  blessed  plaister  which  has 
healed  my  soul's  sore.  Thou  hast  applied  it,  and  I  will  keep  it 
on  my  heart  for  ever,  whatever  may  happen,  and  whoever  may 
ridicule.  This  hope  I  have  by  thy  grace,  and  none  shall  take 
it  from  me. 

A  MEETING-HOTJSE  FOR  BEGGARS. 

^'■Ifa  clia7'itable  ina?i  should  see  a  coinpany  of  beggars  wander- 
ijig  in  the  street  durijig  the  ti7ne  of  worships  under  p?'ete7ice  that 
there  was  no  room  for  the7?i,  a7id  he  should  build  a  chapel  for 
the77i,  they  would  the7i  be  without  exxuse.  God  hath  bee7i  at  so 
great  a  cost  to  provide  a  thro7ie  of  grace,  that  we  77iust  7iot  7iow 
jieglect  prayer^  The  mercy-seat  under  the  law  was  overlaid 
with  pure  gold  to  foreshadow  the  costliness  of  its  antitype. 
It  cost  the  death  of  Christ  to  erect  a  mercy-seat  for  men.  To 
neglect  it  is  a  shameful  ingratitude  to  God,  and  a  wanton  rejec- 
tion of  one  of  his  costliest  blessings.  If  there  were  no  throne  of 
grace,  men  might  die  of  despair  because  they  could  not  approach 
to  God  ;  but  now  that  God  has  prepared  a  way  of  access  for  all 
who  desire  to  approach  him,  the  refusal  to  draw  near  must  rank 
among  the  grossest  and  most  wilful  of  rebellions.  There  is  no 
conceivable  excuse  for  the  prayerless.  A  man  who  dies  of 
starvation  with  bread  before  him,  and  perishes  with  disease 
when  the  remedy  is  in  his  hand,  deserves  no  pity  ;  and  he  who- 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  2G3 

sinks  down  to  hell  beneath  the  burden  of  his  sins  because  he 
will  not  pray,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  deserves  all 
that  damnation  means.  Pardon,  life,  salvation,  heaven,  are  all 
to  be  had  for  the  asking  ;  and  if  he  that  asketh  not  receiveth 
not,  who  shall  blame  either  the  justice  or  the  mercy  of  God  ? 

Reader,  has  this  day  passed  without  a  prayer  from  your  heart  ? 
Tremble  lest  ^  it  should  bring  wrath  upon  you.  One  said, 
"  Perhaps  the  day  in  which  the  world  shall  perish  will  be  the 
day  unsanctified  by  a  prayer."  What  if  the  day  of  your  death 
and  final  ruin  should  be  a  day  in  which  you  did  not  even  turn  a 
glance  towards  heaven  ? 

A  PIECE  OF  BARK,  NOT  THE  TREE. 

"^  man  that  keeps  the  law  only  outwardly^  ca7i  no  more  be 
said  to  keep  the  law,  thajt  he  that  hath  undertake7i  to  carry  a 
tree,  and  only  takes  tip  a  little  piece  of  the  bark."  The  essence 
of  the  law  lies  in  the  things  of  the  heart :  external  acts  are  as 
the  outward  bark.  The  Pharisees  were  great  bark-mongers, 
but  the  solid  timber  was  too  heavy  for  their  shoulders.  David 
was  the  man  to  carry  the  whole  of  the  blessed  load.  He  said, 
"  I  will  delight  myself  in  thy  commandments,  which  I  have 
loved.  My  hands  also  will  I  lift  up  unto  thy  commandments, 
which  I  have  loved  ;  and  I  will  meditate  in  thy  statutes." 

He  who  does  not  love  the  whole  law  is  not  holy.  He  who  does 
not  regard  the  law  in  his  heart  has  no  heart  to  the  law.  As  he 
is  not  a  Jew  who  is  only  one  outwardly,  so  he  is  not  a  doer  of 
the  law  who  only  attends  to  its  externals.  He  would  not  have 
sacrificed  a  bullock  unto  the  Lord,  who  should  only  have  brought 
its  horns  and  hoofs ;  and  he  has  not  yielded  himself  as  a  servant 
unto  the  Most  High,  who  only  brings  his  lips  and  hands. 

O  Lord,  I  would  love  all  thy  law,  but  especially  those  precepts 
of  it  which  concern  my  inward  parts.  'I  beseech  thee,  therefore, 
to  write  thy  law  upon  my  heart,  and  engrave  it  upon  my  mind. 
Let  its  spiritual  commands  have  full  command  of  my  spirit. 


264  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND  MEDITATIONS. 

THE  DOLE. 

"  Wlsdonis  dole  is  given  at  ivisdom^s  gates"  Those  who  wish 
for  it  must  go  there  for  it.  Go  to  the  gate  of  hearing  if  you 
would  obtain  the  gift  of  faith.  Resort  to  the  beautiful  porch  of 
the  temple  if  you  would  obtain  that  healing  which  is  given  by 
the  gospel.  Search  the  Scriptures  if  you  would  find  eternal  life. 
Hasten  humbly  to  the  gate  of  prayer  if  you  would  obtain  God's 
covenant  blessings.  Above  all,  wait  at  the  cross-foot  for  the 
purchased  boons  of  Jesu's  love.  The  dole  is  free  and  large,  but 
God  hath  his  place  appointed  for  its  distribution  :  be  often  there. 

Lord,  I  would  not  be  out  of  the  way  when  thine  alms  are  being 
distributed,  for  I  am  as  poor  as  poverty  itself.  See,  I  am  even 
now  waiting  at  the  portal  of  thy  grace.  Give  me,  I  pray  thee, 
my  daily  bread  from  heaven,  and  send  me  on  my  way  rejoicing. 

EEADY  FOE  THE  BREEZE. 

"By  tacking  about  men  get  the  wind,  7tot  by  lying  still;  many 
times  a  supply  of  grace  cometh  ere  we  are  aware.'^  "When  A\'e 
do  not  seem  to  have  the  favouring  gale  in  our  voyage  towards 
heaven,  let  us  not  therefore  cast  anchor,  and  idly  lie  still,  but  let 
us  use  what  wind  we  have,  employing  that  measure  of  grace 
which  is  vouchsafed  to  us.  Let  us  put  up  the  sail  to  catch  side- 
winds, that  we  may  be  aided  by  indirect  helps  till  we  get  where 
more  propitious  breezes  blow. 

If  I  cannot  pray,  let  me  read  a  chapter.  It  may  be  that  while 
I  hear  God  speak  to  me  I  shall  learn  how  to  speak  to  him.  If 
in  my  private  reading  I  feel  no  unction  upon  the  word,  let  me 
go  forth  and  attend  the  meeting  of  the  saints  ;  perhaps  God  in- 
tends to  bless  me  by  the  ear,  or  in  company  with  others.  If  this 
fails,  let  me  go  and  visit  the  sick,  or  perform  some  deed  of  cha- 
ri-ty.  Perhaps  in  helping  others  I  may  find  succour  for  my  own 
soul :  God  has  often  saved  a  man  from  freezing  by  setting  him 
to  rub  a  brother  into  warmth  and  life.  If  all  this  shall  not  have 
succeeded    let  me  hold  converse  with  some  choice  servant  of 


ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MEDITATIONS.  '2G5 

God ;  and  if  this  should  fail  me,  let  me  get  to  my  knees  again, 
or  begin  to  sing  a  psalm,  or  tell  to  others  what  I  have  expe- 
rienced of  God's  love  in  times  past. 

How  often  it  will  happen  that  or  ever  I  am  aware  my  soul  will 
make  me  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib.  "  While  I  was  mus- 
ing," said  one,  "  the  fire  burned."  "  The  wind  bloweth  where 
it  listeth,"  and  a  heavenly  gale  often  comes  upon  a  sudden ; 
but  it  seldom  or  never  comes  to  idle  souls,  or  to  those  who  are 
indifferent  about  it,  listless,  inactive,  dead,  careless  whether  it 
comes  or  not.  Come  then,  brother,  tack  about.  Complain  not 
of  the  want  of  heavenly  wind,  rather  complain  of  want  of  con- 
secrated energy.  Lord,  grant  that  what  I  preach  to  others  I 
may  always  practise  myself. 

MILK  FOR  BABES. 

*'  As  "iVarm  milk  is  fitter  to  nourish  a  babe  than  that  which  is 
cold,  so  the  word  of  God  delivered  by  a  lively  voice  hath  a  greater 
coiigruity  and  suitableness  to  the  wo7'k  of  grace?"*  Moreover, 
there  is  no  milk  for  a  babe  like  that  which  comes  warm  from 
the  mother's  breast.  Reading  the  word,  or  hearing  a  borrowed 
sermon,  is  like  a  child's  sucking  from  a  bottle ;  but  as  that  child 
grows  best  which  takes  its  nutriment  fresh  from  the  mother,  so 
hearing  warm-hearted  discourses,  fresh  from  the  preacher's  heart, 
is  the  most  nourishing  to  the  child  of  God.  There  is  no  warmth 
like  heart-warmth,  and  no  testimony  like  that  of  experience. 

This  is  the  grand  distinction  between  one  preaching  and 
another.  One  sermon  is  delivered  with  a  cold  propriety,  as  if 
the  preacher  had  no  concern  in  it,  nor  his  hearers  either,  and  as 
a  rule  it  fails  to  satisfy  the  soul.  Another  discourse  may  have 
less  food  in  it  than  the  first,  but  as  it  comes  from  the 
preacher's  inmost  soul,  and  he  speaks  it  with  warmth  of  zeal  and 
melting  affection,  it  enters  into  the  auditor,  is  assimilated  by 
him,  and  makes  him  grow  thereby.  Surely  there  can  be  no 
greater  farce  than  dull,  lifeless  preaching.     As  by  taking  the 


266  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

soul  out  of  a  man  we  cause  him  to  become  a  loathsome  and 
offensive  corpse,  so  has  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  when  it  has 
been  divorced  from  the  affection  of  th^  minister,  become  a 
heartless  creed,  bringing  more  of  bondage  to  men's  intellects 
than  of  sustenance  to  their  souls.  If  the  shepherd  is  not  alive, 
what  will  the  sheep  be?  If  men  are  compelled  to  feed  upon  ice, 
and  to  dwell  among  icebergs,  they  will  be  frozen ;  while  those 
who  are  warmed  by  an  ardent  ministry  are  likely  to  become 
fervent  Christians. 

Lord,  let  me  rather  be  dumb  than  so  preach  thy  word  as  to 
deprive  it  of  that  holy  warmth  which  makes  it  nourishing  food 
for  thy  children.  Let  me  not  set  thy  sick  ones  down  to  cold 
meats  for  which  they  will  have  no  stomach.  If  I  be  not 
eloquent,  yet  let  me  be  affectionate  ;  if  I  cannot  speak  with  the 
wisdom  of  a  father,  yet  let  me  speak  with  the  heart  of  a 
brother. 

COMPLEXION. 

"  We  do  not  judge  ofineii^s  complexions  by  the  colour  they  have 
ivhen  they  sit  befo7'e  the  fire.  We  cannot  judge  of  a  man  by  a  holy 
fit  which  he  hath  when  he  is  imder  the  infiue7ice  of  a  sermo?i^  or 
in  good  company;  but  when  at  all  times  he  labours  to  keep  up  a 
warjnth  of  heart  towards  GodP  If  all  were  truly  good  who  are 
occasionally  good,  good  men  would  not  be  scarce.  See  how 
people  weep  under  a  moving  sermon!  Think  not,  therefore, 
that  their  hearts  are  changed,  for  even  marble  drips  in  certain 
weathers.  A  man  fresh  from  a  revival-meeting  looks  like  a 
zealous  Christian ;  but  see  him  when  he  goes  to  market.  As  a 
face  rendered  red  by  the  fire  soon  loses  all  its  ruddiness,  so  do 
numbers  lose  all  their  godliness  when  they  quit  the  society  of 
the  godly. 

Lord,  let  me  never  be  what  I  cannot  be  for  ever.  Give  me  a 
complexion  which  I  shall  wear  all  my  lifetime,  and  when  time 
shall  be  no  more. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS.  '2u< 

THE  MASTER'S  EYE. 

"  As  soldiers  JigJit  best  in  their  generaVs  presence^  and  scholars 
'ply  their  books  ?nost  attentively  when  under  their  master'' s  eye,  so, 
by  living  always  in  the  si^ht  of  God,  we  are  the  more  studious 
to  please  him.  The  ofte7ier  we  cojisider  the  Lord,  the  more  we 
see  that  no  service  caji  be  holy  e7toitgh  or  good  enough  for  such  a 
God  as  he  isP  This  needs  no  comment,  but  it  needs  to  be 
realized.  See,  soldier  of  the  cross,  the  eye  of  the  Captain  of 
our  salvation  is  fixed  upon  thee  !  Jesus  cries,  "  I  know  thy 
works."  Will  not  this  incite  thee  to  valorous  deeds,  and  make 
a  hero  of  thee  ?     If  not,  what  will  t 

A  BLIND  EYE  AS  DANGEROUS  AS  A  LAME  FOOT. 

"  We  should  as  ca7'cfully  avoid  errors  as  vices;  a  blind  eye  is 
eve7i  wo7'se  than  a  lame  foot;  yea  a  blind  eye  77iay  cause  a  la7ne 
foot,  for  he  that  hath  7iot  light  is  apt  to  stu77ibleJ'^  Very  few 
seem  to  think  so,  but  there  is  solemn  truth  in  this  statement. 
Men  fancy  that  their  minds  are  their  own,  and  that  they  may  do 
what  they  will  with  them,  thinking  and  believing  just  as  their 
conceit  suggests.  But  who  gave  them  a  release  from  the 
authority  of  God  as  to  this  part  of  their  nature?  True,  they  are 
not  bound  by  the  opinions  of  their  fellow-men ;  but  does  this 
give  them  a  dispensation  from  the  supremacy  of  God.^  There 
are  revealed  truths  :  have  we  license  to  receive  or  reject  them  at 
our  pleasure?  If  we  set  up  our  own  conceptions  as  equal  or 
superior  to  the  teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  we  justified  in 
so  doing?  One  would  fancy  from  the  talk  of  the  wiseacres  of 
the  period  that  God  did  not  know  his  own  mind  when  he  wrote 
the  Scriptures,  or  that,  like  an  old  almanack,  divine  revelation 
is  out  of  date,  and  superseded  by  "  modern  thought." 

Doctrinal  laxity  has  led  to  moral  license:  professors  now 
wander  in  ways  which  their  sober  forefathers  would  have 
shuddered  at.  They  will  soon  be  given  over  to  return  to  the 
old  idolatries  of  Rome,  since  they  are  growing  weary  of  the 


268  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MEDITATIONS. 

grand  truths  of  Protestantism.  Falsehoods  of  belief  are  fitly 
followed  by  superstitions  in  ritual :  those  who  slay  the  doctrines 
are  not  ashamed  to  mangle  the  ordinances.  We  wonder  what 
next,  and  next ! 

O  Lord,  I  am  willing  to  be  thought  a  simpleton  for  believing 
as  reformers,  confessors,  and  martyrs  believed,  and  as  thy  word 
teaches.  Do  not  allow  me  to  be  blind  to  thy  truth,  lest  I  stumble 
in  my  daily  life,  and  become  scandalous  as  well  as  heretical. 

A  LONG  LEASE  ENHANCES  VALUE. 

'"''  If  a  man  might  have  a  cottage  on  a  hundred  years'  lease,  he 
would  prise  it  much  more  than  the  possession  of  a  palace  for  a 
dayP  Of  course  he  would  ;  and  this  it  is  which  adds  so  much 
preciousness  to  the  joys  of  heaven,  for  they  are  eternal.  The 
pleasures  of  this  world,  however  bright  they  seem,  are  but  for 
this  one  day  of  life,  which  is  already  half  over.  If  they  were  all 
they  profess  to  be,  and  a  thousand  times  more,  they  would  not 
be  worthy  to  be  mentioned  in  comparison  with  "  pleasures  for 
evermore  "  at  God's  right  hand. 

O  Thou  who  fillest  eternity,  impress  me  with  the  solemn 
import  of  that  word,  and  let  me  feel  that  all  time's  fleeting  cares 
and  caresses  are  as  dreams  ;  while  the  things  of  eternity  alone 
have  substance  in  them..  Give  me  thy  grace  that  I  may  "  lay 
hold  on  eternal  life." 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS 


PAGE 

Absence  of  Christ  expedient,  The. .   153 

Acorns,  Why  Men  ate       83 

Advice,  On  giving       235 

Affections,  the  Test  of  Character  . .  256 
Affliction,  The  Benefits  of  {see  also 

Trials)  66, 114, 145,  147,  148, 168, 

174,  175,  186,  222 
Alexander — Contempt  for  the  World, 

Illustrated 35 

and  Apelles      1S4 

Ambition       196 

Amusements,  {see  Recreation). 

Angler  and  the  Hunter,  The   . .      . .   164 

Ant-hill,  The       _ 122 

Apple,  Child  asking  for  an       . .      . .   213 

Apples  display  the  Sap      87 

Aqueduct  and  the  Sunflower,  The . .     89 

Arm,  The  Swollen      118 

Arrows  shot  at  random      93 

Artist  and  the  Paper-stainer,  The  . .  37 
Asking  in  a  Person's  Name      . .      . .   232 

Aspirations,  Spiritual 237 

Ass  wiser  than  the  Sinner,  The  . .  41 
Atonement,  The  {see  also  Christ)  . .  152 
Augustine's  Story  of  Alipius  . .  . .  55 
Axe,  Men  like  Trees  marked  for  the     61 

Backsliders,  How  to  Deal  with       . .   123 

likened  to  Bankrupts,  190, 218 

Balances,  Unjust 9 

Bankrupts,  Spiritual 190 

Bark  not  the  Tree,  A  Piece  of . .      . .   263 

Barrel,  Knocking  the 171 

Bed,  Going  to — a  Simile 189 

The  changed      126 

Beggar,  The  Dumb 115 

with  trembling  Hand,  The  160 

Beggars  and  the  Throne  of  Grace. .  ^6^ 
Begging,  The  Art  of  Spiritual  . .  26 
Beginnings,  The  Difficulty  of  . .  . .  33 
Believers  are  Heirs,  not  Hirelings  . .   200 

How  conformed  to  Christ..   199 

How  they  should  walk       . .     76 

Life — "SunshinewithRain"  220 

Pilgrims  and  Strangers  here  198 

Safe,  though  lacking  assur- 
ance         163 

Believers  should  "  set  their  affections 

on  things  above" 227,  228 

Support  under  Losses      . .  224 

Watchword  —  "  Onward  "  226 

Bernard's  Charity       74 


PAGE 

Best  of  Ways  to  the  Best  of  Posses- 
sions, The      8 

Bias,  Contrary  to        150 

Bird,  from  its  own  Egg,  Each       . .       7 

One,  setteth  another  chirping. .   157 

tied  by  a  String,  The        . .      . .       i 

catching  by  Night 133 

Birds  on  the  Wing      137 

Biter  Bitten,  The         182 

Blind  Eye  and  Lame  Foot.  The  . .  267 
Blossoms  do  not  become  Fruit,  All  100 

Blown  into  Harbour 222 

Boasters         44,118 

Bone  dislocated,  The 58 

Bones  stronger,  though  once  broken  104 
Brag,  The  Roman's  empty  . .  . .  44 
Brass  Farthings  and  Gold        . .      . .   208 

Briars,  Taken  in  the 114 

Bridles  for  old  Horses       77 

Broken  Bones  complaining  . .  . .  21 
Brook  and  the  River,  The        ..      .     172 

Bucket,  and  the  Sea,  The 150 

Empty,  The 15 

Buckets  in  a  Well — a  Simile  . .  . .  71 
Burning-glass,  The 94 

Caesar  killed  with  Bodkins       . .      . .     70 

Calvin  and  his  Lord 115 

Candle  is  lighted  for  a  Purpose,  A . .     35 

The  Thief  and  the         ..      ..     55 

Care,  a  Hindrance  to  Grace  . .  . .  xij 
Carpenter's  Line  and  Rule,  The  . .  85 
Carver,  The  (Two  Similes)      . .    38,  251 

Catching  at  a  Bough 163 

Cement  of  Heaven,  Love  is  the     . .   128*^ 
Chaff  and  Wheat  contrasted    ..      ..     62 
Changeability,  a  bad  Sign       . .      . .     6? 
"  Charity" — A  cry  to  be  suspected, 

119,  121 
Charity  that  thinketh  no  Evil  . .      . .     74 

Chastisement        175 

Chessboard,  The 114 

Chessmen  in  a  Bag 181 

Child  and  the  Father.  The        . .      . .  179-^ 

wanting  a  Knife,  The     . .      . .  67 

Child's-Play 151 

Children  and  the  Tailor 258  -^ 

carried  by  their  Father    . .  188 

Christ,  and  his  Truth,  The  Supre- 

macy  of /i5r> 

God  in      1^3 

our  Example 35 


270 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


PAGE 

Christ  Receiving        84 

The  Absence  of,  expedient  100, 153 

the  Centre  of  the  Soul         . .  78 

the  Magnet  of  the  Believer  12 

The  Riches  of,  a  Ground  of 

Confidence 83 

The  Sufferings  of,  their  value  41 

146,  152 

the  Sinner's  Substitute        ..   no 

The  Yoke  of,  lined 217 

— Union  of  Saints  with  ..    100,159 

Christ's  Name,  Asking  in  . .  . .  232 
Christian  Fellowship,  a  Necessity  27,  172 
Christians  should  be  Evangelists  . .  105 
Christians,  Some  are  like  Bankrupts  190 

Dwarfs  ..   155 

Church,  How  to  promote  the  Unity 

of  the     161 

Disturbers 135 

its  Defences 116 

Civet  Box,  The 159 

Clean  Vessels,  Choice  Liquors  require  19 
Clock  of  Providence,  The        . .      . .   142 

Clock,  Winding  up  the      14 

Clowns  and  Princes 130 

Coin  and  the  Prince,  The  . .  . .  163 
Cold,  How  to  keep  out  the      . .      . .     51 

Column,  The  Upright        71 

Comet  and  the  Sun,  The 117 

Comfort,  Christ  the  Giver  of   . .      . .    103 

Creatures  cannot  give       . .     39 

Commerce      172 

Communion  with  God       . .  106,  120,  137 

of  Saints      108 

Company,  Sinful  {see  Evil,  Sin)      . .   191 

Compasses,  The 78 

Complaint,  An  Unusual 207 

Complexion,  The        266 

Concentration  of  Purpose         . .      . .     94 

Conflict,  Spiritual        244 

Consecration  of  our  Substance  . .  186 
Conscience,  Sin  indulged  hardens  the    56 

Tenderness  of       . .      . .    177 

The  Folly  of  Stifling  . .     58 

■    What  it  is  like       14,  53,  215 

Contentment 124,  167 

Contraries,  God  working  by  seeming  192 
Controversy,  How  to  conduct  113,  252 
Conviction  is  not  Regeneration      42,  266 

Corn  Ripening 145 

Counterfeit,  The  Bright 4 

Courtiers'  Courtesy 139 

Privileges 106 

Covenant,  The  Better        104 

Covetousness         23,81 

Cripples  mocking        132 


PAGE 

Crown,  A  Knock  borne  for  a  . .  . .  143 
Cj^ress,  Some  Professors  like  the  . .  43 
Cyrus  and  the  River 161 

Dead  Fish 3 

Death  a  Final  Conflict      177 

a  terrible  Leveller 181 

Christ  with  Saints  in     ..      ..   188 

dissipates  Deceit 46 

How  Christiansshould  regard  149 

Spiritual   . .      . .   •  . .  180,  202,  212 

Declensions  in  Grace         . .     59,  70,  166 

Decoy,  The 57 

Den  of  the  Cockatrice,  The  ..  ..  219 
Desires  of  the  New  Creature,  The      237 

Devotion,  Undisturbed      23 

Diet,  Good,  In  unhealthy  places    . .   128 

Dirty  Corners       105 

Disappointment,  the  lot  of  mortals     100 

Dish  for  me,  The        97 

Distractions,  How  to  deal  with  . .  1-14 
Dog,  Calling  off  the 174 

The  Devil  compared  to  a       . .     80 

The  Hunting 154 

Dogs,  Barking,  catch  no  game        . .    113 

and  Cats  versus  Children    . .  230 

Doubts  and  Fears       99 

Dreams,  but  not  Dreams 92 

Drinking  to  drown  Care 58 

Drunkard,  The  Fallen      141 

Dry  Sticks  kindling  the  green. .  ..  124 
Dwarf,  The 155 

Eagles  and  Flies         76 

Ear-ring,  The       216 

Echo,  The 105 

Economy,  Expensive 81 

Egg,  Sin  like  to  a  Serpent's     . .      . .     46 

Earnestness 121 

Error,  The  Danger,  Sin  and  Punish- 
ment of  . .      ..   48,117,119,158,267 

The  Need  of  Protest  against  121 

Spiritual  Nutriment,  the  Pre- 
servative from      128 

Errorists,  The  Satanic  Devices  of  133 
Esther  going  in  unto  the  King  ..  n 
Eternal     Realities     and     Temporal 

Vanities 49,268 

Evidences  of  Grace 13 

Evil,  The   Infectious  Character  of  124, 

190,  191,  200,  225 

Exotics,  their  Need  of  Care    . .      . .     24 

Eye,  The  Master's 267 

Fading  Flowers 2 

Failing,  A  Child's       10 


INDEX  OF   SUBJECTS. 


271 


PAGE 

Faith  and  Spiritual  Discernment   . .    187 

Implicit _    ..      ..     13 

its  Sphere  in  Mysteries        . .     32 

The  least,  is  Saving      ..      ..   163 

to  be  exercised  when  Light  is 

absent 11,  154.  210 

Trial  of,  Precious  ..      ..  171,  254 

Weak,  and  Divine  Tenderness  160 

False  Doctrine  {sec  Error,  Errorists). 
False  Hopes,  Illustrated  . .      . .     87,  137 

Far-off  looks  small      49 

Fathers,  A  Saying  of  the         . .      . .   loi 

Fault-Finding      126 

Feelings,  Untrustworthiness  of       •  •     99 

Fellow-Countrj^-man,  The 108 

Fire  !  Fire  ! i2x 

Fire  from  Heaven,  The  Need  of     . .     52 

The  House  on      143 

Two  Ways  of  Putting  out       . .   185 

will  Spread 30 

Fish  in  a  Pail,  The 237 

Flint  and  Steel     162 

Flood-gates,  Closing  the 136 

Foot-Race,  The 226 

Formalists  and  Hypocrites  ..  15,  28 
Foundation,  Loose  Stones  in  the    ..    158 

Foundations,  Deep 127 

Free-Will  and  Effectual  Grace  . .  109 
Fruit  cannot  ripen  without  the  Sun  120 

Gambling      21a 

Gardener  and  the  Roots,  The         . .   230 

Garment,  The  long 132 

Ghost,  Guilt  of  Conscience  like  a  . .  39 
Giant  and  the  Straw,  The  . .  . .  182 
Gibeonites,  Worldly    things    to    be 

treated  as 80 

Giddy  think  the  Earth  moves,  The       99 

<jifts — their  Design 35,  172 

Gilded  Potsherd,  The        179 

Giving,  Christian         186 

Glass  without  a  foot,  The         ..      ..   121 

God  AU-Sufficient       15 

as  our  Judge,  to  be  regarded  . .   203 

• "by  whom  all  things  Consist"     95 

Faithfulness  of 102 

( jod  is  Engraven  on  every  Creature    152 

"  Jehovah  Rophi  " 96 

Man's  Disregard  of 122 

•  not  Second  Causes,  to  be  eyed  258 

Omniscience  of,  a  comfortable 

Reflection  from  the 230 

Our  Father 233 

Presence  of,  likened  to  Sunshine  229 

Pruning  the  Prosperous  . .      . .   204 

Sovereignty  of,  and  Free-agency  220 


PAGE 

God,  The  New  Nature  tends  to  89,  228, 
256 

to  be  served  with  our  best       . .   184 

— ' — Trust  in,  in  Extremity  ..  ..  180 
Ways  of,  not  to  be  measured  by 

Human  Standards      179 

Godliness       demands       care       and 

thought 37,  170 

God's  Appointments,    The    duty  of 

acquiescing  in       36 

Gold  instead  of  Copper  Payment  . .  146 
Gospel  Light,  Errorists  hate    . .      . .     55 

Unholy  Preachers  and  the  . .   166 

Grace,  Design  of  the  Means  of,  35,  65,  no 

Free,  and  Free-Will      . .      . .   109 

• Free,      the     Death-blow     of 

Popery 63 

Growth  in        111,155 

How  to  discover  evidencesof  13, 87 

is  for  use 18,236 

is  the  best  Plea      20 

its  abundance,  and  our  need  112, 

Preparatives  to       241 

Proportioned  to  Trials         . .     54 

The  Covenant  of 104 

—  The  Doom  of  Despisers  of . .   221 

The  Fragrance  of 159 

The  Sweet  Compulsions  of . .   222 

There  is  no  Old  Age  in        . .     31 

• Young    and    Old     need    the 

restraints  of 77 

Grapes,  Sour        26 

Gravel  in  the  Shoe      206 

Green  Wood 211 

Guest,  Looking  for  an  Expected    . .    146 

Sin,  a  Malicious 253 

Guilt  of  Conscience,  its  Terror        . .     39 

Handwriting,  We  should  plead  God's    50 

Happiness 214 

Hearers  of  the  Word  Disappointing 

the  Preacher         261,266 

should  be  like  Traders     . .       6 

• Need  Heart-preparation. .   122 

Heart,  Change  of,  needed        . .  126,  183 

Heart  Disease      180,  202,  212 

Heart- Fixedness,  The  Blessedness  of    23 

Purity,  An  Argument  for    . .   189 

Heaven,  Foretastes  of       91 

"  No  Cross,  No  Crown". .   143 

The  Saint's  Home  116,  198,  237 

The  Road  to.  Difficult    Si,  144 

Hedge  of  Thorns,  The  ungodly  a  . .  45 
Hen  and  her  Eggs,  The  . .  . .  54,  59 
The  Clucking     105 


INDEX  OF   SUBJECTS. 


PAGE 

Hewing  Stones  and  pruning  Vines. .   175 
Holder  of  the  Keys  knocking  at  the 

Door,  The 151 

Holding  on  by  the  Teeth 180 

Holiness,  how  promoted 139 

of  God,  The      85 

Homeward-bound       116 

Hooper  the  Martyr  at  the  Stake    . .     25 

Hopper,  The  Empty 153 

Horse  with  Halter,  The igS 

House  on  Fire,  The 143 

Taking  down  the  Old   . .      . .   257 

The  Unfinished       134 

Humility,  a  Mark  of  Grace     . .      . .     62 
Hypocrisy  ;  Hypocrites  .  .15,  28,  46,  179 

Ice,  half-melted,  Some  Souls  like  . .  42 

Image,  not  the  Man,  The 28 

Imperial  Revenues  and  small  Charges  83 

Inclinations  show  Character    . .      . .  204 

Industry',  An  Incentive  to  Holy     ..  115 

Infants  and  Sick  Folk,  How  to  treat  31 

Infection  of  Sin,  The 190,  191 

Instability  of  Earthly  Things.  The . .  100 
Instrumentality,_God's  Wisdom  dis- 
played in  using  human       . .      . .  57 
Invisible  Ink — Secret  Sin  illustrated  46 

Inward  Bleeding 212 

Ivy  in  the  Wall— a  Simile 8 

Jewels,  Save  the ..     37 

Joys  of  Earth  are  Fading  Flowers . .       2 
Judgment    of  the  Natural  Man  is 

False,  The     ..      ..      9 

Judgment-Day,    The,    Sins    unpar- 
doned will  appear  at 86 

"  The  Unfaithful  Steward  "    ..     88 

Justification     and     Sanctification — 

both  needed 206 

Key,  The  Unused 45 

of  the  House,  Waiting  for  the  109 

Keys,  Trying  the        no 

King's  Lodging,  The 189 

Knock  borne  for  a  Crown,  A   . .      . .   143 
Knowledge,  Speculative,  a  Snare  . .     78 

Lapwing,  The      126 

Lark  and  the  Fowler,  The        . .      . .     78 
Law  of  God,  On  Keeping  the. .      . .   263 

the  Rule  of  Life,  The      6 

Lay-Figures 129 

Lead,  Unrenewed  Nature  likened  to    34 

Lean-to  Shed,  The      248 

Leaven  in  the  Bread,  The        . .      . .   100 
Leaves,  New,  push  off  the  Old     . .     84 


PACK 

Light  carried  by  a  Black  Man       . .  166 
Life,  Christian  known  by  his  . .      . .   208 

God's  Judgment  of  our  . .      . .   175 

Picture  of  a  blighted       . .      . .     63 

proved  by  Growth     m 

■ to  be  measured  by  Results     . .   205 

The  Frailty  of 5 

The  true  Purpose  of . .      . .    60,     6r 

Like  will  to  Like 204,  208 

Link,  Only  a 119 

Long  Lease  enhances  Value,  A      . .   268 

Lookers-on  and  Players 235 

Losses,  Temporal,  How  Saints  bear  224 

Love,  a  Touchstone 72 

Brotherly         161 

illustrated         . .      . .  105,  107,  233 

its  Power  in  Service      . .      . .   259 

the  Root  Grace       . .    90,  128,  180 

to  God  expelling  Love  of  Sin    90 

Ludovicus  Marsacus,  The  story  of    73 

Lungs,  The 119 

Lute,  The  Untuned 236 

Madman  of  Athens.  The 87 

Man  unrenewed,  Spiritually  Blind  52,  83 

Marshes,  Dwellers  in         133 

Martha  complaining  of  Mary  . .  . .  117 
Martyr  and  the  Chain,  The      ..      ..     25 

Martyrs  in  Bears'  Skins 239 

Mattocks  of  Gold        60 

Meadows  and  Marshes      12 

Means  useless  without  Divine  Power  182 

of  Grace  to  be  prized,  148, 246,  264 

On  the  Choice  of  right         . .   176 

Meditation 18,  54,  93 

Merchant,  The  Insulted 221 

Mercy  Free,  but  Means  to  be  used     65 

Misery  the  best  Plea  with   . .   115 

Merit  and  Means        65 

The  Modesty  of  real      ..      ..118 

Meteors,  not  Stars      99 

Mice,  Burning  a  House  to  kill  the. .   135 

Milk  for  Babes 265 

Millstone,  The  Single        27 

Mind,  Occupation  a  necessity  for  the  153 
Ministers,  The  Example  of  . .  . .  125 
Ministry,  The  Need  of  a  living       . .    130 

Mirror,  The 256 

Miser  and  his  Bag  of  Money,  The . .     72 

Misfit,  The_ 167 

Moon  is  eclipsed  at  the  Full,  The  . .  75 
Mortality,  Delusive  Thoughts  on  . .  258 
MusteatzemofBabylon,  The  Ston'of    8r 

Nail,  One,  drives  out  another. .  . .  90 
The  All-supporting 95 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


273 


PAGE 

Nature,  Everything  acts  according 

to  its       I&3 

tends  to  its  Author    . .      . .   228 

Need,  the  best  Fitness  for  Grace    . .     15 

Needle  and  its  Pole,  The 12 

Nurse  and  the  Falling  Child,  The  . .     17 

Obedience,  Implicit 13 

Olivian's  Dying  Saying 102 

One  Rainj'  Day,  Trouble  but  as  . .  47 
Oven,  The  Baker  and  his 194 

Paint  for  Paint 130 

Palaelogus,  the  Emperor,  a  Beggar. .     8r 

Patience  under  Trials        142 

Pearl,  The  Soul  a  Priceless     . .      . .   223 

Pearls  and  Swine        64 

Perfectionism       226 

Perfumed  Gale,  The 91 

Persecution  for  Righteousness'  sake, 

73,  169,  182,  239 
Perseveranceof  the  Saints,  100 — 103, 134 
Peter  Martyr's  Illustration      . .      . .     52 

Phideas  and  his  Name      152 

Physician  in  the  Garden,  The  . .  112 
Pills,  Some  Truths  to  be  received  as  32 
Pin,  The  prick  of,  and  a  heavy  blow,  177 
Plaister  and  the  Hand,  The  103,  262 

Poisoned  Meat,  Error  dangerous  as,     48 

Poor  Man  Robbed,  A        224 

Popery,  The  Death-blow  of  . .  . .  63 
Position  no  Criterion  of  Worth       . .     75 

Pot,  The  Cracked       . .  _ 7 

Practical  Use  to  be  considered  ..  112 
Prayer,  Companionship  in         ..   82,  157 

Encouragement  for     . .    26,  262 

• for  Spirituals  and  Temporals  213 

How  to  attain  Power  in     . .   260 

Importunate  ..   29,  154,  162,  254 

■ in  Submission  to  the  Divine 

Will         67 

Neglect  of     45,  262 

of  the  Son  and  sons  of  God,    151 

Union  in,  its  Power    . .     82,  157 

Wordless,  yet  eloquent      ..   115 

Preachers  must    alarm    as    well  as 

comfort  (see  also  Sermons)  47,  131 
Preachers, need  Fire  from  Heaven,  52, 265 
Prescriptions  not  to  be  altered  . .  217 
Priming,  or,  Preparatives  to  Grace,  241 

Prince  in  a  Ditch,  The       97 

Printers' Proofs 125 

Procrastination 172 

Profession  and  Possession  contrasted,    4, 

99,  154,  i92>  193.  194,  248 

Professors,  Graceless  15,  28,  43,  134,  167 

Promises,  How  to  plead  the     . .     . .     50 


PAGE 

Promises  must  be  Divinely  applied  103 
Proportions  to  be  studied  . .      . .     54 

Prosperity,  a  Test  of  Character,  7, 132,  168 

The  Dangers  of     . .      . .     75 

Providence 142,  251 

Provision  for  a  Journey 144 

Provisioned  for  a  Siege     222 

Pump,  Water  poured  into  a    . .      ,.107 

Queen  crowned  with  the  King,  The  159 

Rabbi  Joseph  and  the  Synagogue . .  246 
Raiment,  Soul  and  Body  more  than  28 
Ravens  Loving  the  Scent  of  Carrion  209 

Ready  to  Sail 149,  264 

Reason,  its  Inability  to  solve  Divine 

Mysteries       210 

Records  of  Life 86 

Recreation 97,  130,  155 

Reformation  is  not  Regeneration,  34,  79, 
126,  140,  243,  266 
Registrar,  Conscience  the  inward  . .  53 
Religion,  "  A  Lean-to  Shed  ". .  . .  248 
^  Heartless 129 

Secret,  the  Soul  of  Godliness  154 

■ True,  is  Intolerant  of  Error  157 

Repentance,  Temporary  . .  . .  140,  243 
Reproof,  How  to  administer  . .  . .  216 
Responsibility,  how  measured. .  42,  165 

of  God's  Servants. .   2,31 

Resurrection  of  the  Body,  The  189,^5^ 
Rhine,  Children  dipped  in  the . .      . .   148 

Rhodians,  The 20 

Riches,  ensnaring  (see  Prosperity) . .   132 

■ of  Saints  and  Sinners,  The     249 

Rider  and  the  Footman,  The  . .  . .  165 
River  swollen  by  being  dammed,  The  244 

River  losing  Depth,  The 166 

Roman  Senate  and  Christ,  The  . .  157 
Root  and  the  Branches,  The  . .  . .  90 
Rose  on  the  Tree  and  in  the  Still,  A  174 

Runaway  Knocks       29 

Russet  Coat,  The       30 

Saints,  God  the  Carver  for  his         . .   251 

Hatred  of  the  World  to,  132,  169 

■ Honoured  with  Christ. .      ..   159 

Safety  of  the 100,  103 

Should  be  mutual  helpers  108, 172 

Soldiers  under  Christ's  Eye  267 

Sometimes  die  Fighting    ..   177 

Small  Vessels— God  a  great 

Fountain        1^0 

sufferings  for  Sin  corrective     17 

Salvation,  the  End  of  all  the  Means 

of  Grace 35 

"  Things  which  precede   . .   241: 

18 


274 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


PAGE 

Salvation,  Where  to  be  Obtained  . .   264 

Samson's  Locks 82 

Sanctification       . .      19,  84,  85,  206,  226 
:  Satan,  the  Lord  Rebuking       . .      . .   174 

Satan's  Devices,  79,80,  114, 161, 164,  166, 

190 

Scarecrow,  The  Bird  afraid  of  the..   173 

Scythe,  Whetting  the       ..      ....   155 

Scripture  Knowledge,  a  Preservative     21 

like  a  Sword 69 

"The  Chariot  of  the  Spirit"     22 

Seasons  of  Grace  to  be  utilized,  194, 264, 35 
Second  Coming  of  Christ,  The  . .  146 
Self-Denial,  Christ  the  Example  of  35 
Self-Reliance,  its  Danger  and  Folly  38 
Self-Righteousness  . .  . .  30,  44,  137 
Self-Sufficiency,  The  Danger  of     . .     16 

Sentinel,  The       238 

Sermons,  good  and  bad,  130, 131, 140,  265 

Servant,  The  Drunken  _ 42 

Squabbling  with  a     . .      . .  243 

Servants  and  Heirs 200 

Service,  A  Stimulus  to  H0I3'   . .      . .   267 

Settling  the  Expenditure 186 

Shaking  of  the  Tree,  The  . .  . .  186 
Shame  for  Christ's  sake  is  Honour. .  73 
Sheep  and  Sheep-dog,  The  . .  . .  168 
Sheep,  How  to  treat  wandering  . .  123 
Ship  and  its  Passengers,  The  . .      . .  220 

Building      156 

Ships  are  not  drawn  by  Horses  . .  176 
Ships,  Similes  from    5,  201, 205,  258,  264 

Showers,  Slow,  are  best 147 

Showman's  Jest,  The  ..  ••  _..  214 
"  Silence,"  Making  aNoise  by  crying,  144 
Sin,  "a  Malicious  Guest"        ..      ..   253 

Christ  in  the  Heart  expels      . .     51 

compared  to  a  benumbed  Snake,  195 

compared  to  Ivy 8 

Fear  of  Punishment  for  . .      . .   173 

Hardening  character  of,  55,  56,  172 

Indwelling,  mars  our  Service. .       4 

• our  worst  Enemy,  51,  244 

— though       pardoned, 

causes  pain       21 

Infectious  Character  of,  119, 200,  225 

is  seen  in  Little  Things    . .    10,  209 

Its  Effects  on  Conscience        . .   177 

must  be  mortified  in  its  Begin- 
nings   46,55,138,165 

must  be  slain,  or  it  will  slay  i,  71, 198, 

243 

■  Pleasures  of,  like  Sour  Grapes     26 

Presumptuous 219 

Secret,  Danger  of      ..      ..105,312 

The  Danger  of  One  . .     . .  165,  198 


PAGE 

Sin,  The  Restraint  of  Sin  by  . .  195,  243 
Sinner,  The,  less  wise  than  the  Ass  41 
Sinners,  The  Sad  Case  of  Unforgiven    40 

The  Throne  of  Grace  for    . .   262 

Singer,  The 175 

Sins  of  Infirmity  illustrated,  10,  208,  244 

seemingly  little,  are  deadly  . .     70 

of  the  Righteous       12 

Slander,  the  Persecutor's  Weapon. .  239 
Slandering  Holy  things,  The  Sin  of     6^ 

Sleeping  by  Waterfalls     56 

Sluggards  hate  Light        131 

Snail,  The  Trail  of  a 168 

Snake,  The  Benumbed     195 

Snow,  Soft  but  Soaking 252 

Soldiers  and  Sailors 135 

Sorrows  of  Saints  preferable  to  the 

Joys  of  Worldlings,  The  ..      ..     17 
Soul,  Preciousnessof  the  28,  37,  223,  246 

Trouble       127 

Spectacles  useless  to  the  Blind  . .  197 
Speech,  Fine,  not  Gospel-preaching  140 
Spices,  beaten.  Afflictions  likened  to     66 

Spider,  The 137 

Spire,  The — a  Simile 62 

Spirit,  The  Holy,  how  Quenched  . .   185 

helps   Saints     . .   222 

• Scripture  used  by    22 

Spiritual    and    Natural    Life,    and 

their  Fruits 7,  193 

Conflict        244 

Exercises     24,  25 

Life  is  aggressive      . .      . .     30 

progressive     . .      . .     30 

Maladies  require    prompt 

Attention       58 

• Maladies  need  the  help  of 

the  Means  of  Grace 25 

Spirituality,  Decline  of 166 

Stalk,  The  Stripped 68 

Stars  and  their  Strange  Names,  The    6j 

Steadfastness       238 

Steward,  The  Unfaithful 88 

Stitch  in  Time,  A        7a 

Stone  and  the  Chip,  The 122 

Storms,  Preparation  for 201 

Strife      136 

Study,  Meditation  must  follow       ..     18 

Substitute,  The  Princely no 

Suit,  Godliness  an  Every-day..      ..   192 

Keeping  up  a      254 

Sulphur  in  the  Incense      4 

Sun  alone  can  make  Day,  The       . .     39 

Dial,  The,  without  the  Sun    . .      13 

Eclipsed — Christ's  Sufferings..     40 

in  Winter 17 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


275 


rAGE 

Sunflower  and  the  Aqueduct,  The . .     89 

Sunshine        229 

Sunshine  with  Rain 220 

Sword  in  a  Child's  Hand,  The  . .  69 
not  to  be  judged  by  the  Belt    75 

Tailoring,  Man's 6 

Talent  and  Influence,  Small   . .      . .     60 

Tanned  Face,  A 225 

Tap  and  the  Liquor,  The 208 

Taste  the  best  Test 48 

Tasters,  not  Buyers 261 

Temptation      . .      . .     143,  209,  219,  225 

Communion   with    God 

baflles     137 

Testimony,  The  Power  of  Personal  64 
Thiefand  the  Candle,  The  ..  ..  55 
Thirsty  Men,  How  they  drink       . .   187 

Thorns  and  Burrs        200 

Thoughtless,  How  to  deal  with  the  211 

Thread,  Fine-spun      140 

Tight-rope  Dancer,  The 102 

Timber  in  Sun  and  Shower  . .  . .  168 
Time,  Preciousness  of  5,  155,  242,  255 
Tongs  for  Handling  Hot  Iron  . .  210 
Tongue,  the  Index  of  the  Mind,  208,  209 
Tradesman  losing  his  Customer,  The  148 
Trading  on  a  Man's  Word       . .      . .    178 

Training  for  Prayer 260 

Traitor  within.  Corruption  the  . .  51 
Traveller  and  the  Merchant,  The  . .  6 
Travelling,  Looking  at  Maps  is  not  170 
Treason  in  Coining  Farthings. .  . .  10 
Treasury  and  the  Bags,  The  Opened  112 

Tree,  The  Shaken       186 

Trees,  Pruning  Unpruned  . .  . .  204 
Trials,  Saints' need  of  135,  145,  148,  156 

Freedom  from         207 

Preventible      206 

—  Preparation  for       201 

Some  Uses  of  . .     . .  114,  186,  204 

Trouble  short-lived  to  a  Believer   . .     47 

Long-continued     147 

Trumpet  and  Pipe,  each  has  its  Use     47 

Trust  in  God,  Illustrated 178 

in  Trial 180 

Trusting  after  Failure       218 

Truth  must  be  loved  as  well  as  learned    48 

^^  spoken  in  Love,  113,  252 

■ is    precious    though    Sinners 

pervert  it        64 

;—  The  least,  to  be  prized  . .  119,  161 

Tuning  an  Instrument      124 

Unbelief,  The  Mischief  of  . .  . .  262 
Unconverted,  Care  for  the       . .      . .   141 


PAGE 

Unconverted,  Spiritually  Blind   83,   92, 

-— ^—  1  heir  love  of  Sin      . .   209 

Unthankfulness  for  Mercies  . .  . .  168 
Uprightness  alone  is  Safety     . .      . .     71 

Valentinian's  Polluted  Garment  ..  138 
V'anity  of  Earthly  Things,  The  . .  196 
Verities,  not  Vanities,  should  be  the 

Objects  of  Life 61 

Vessels,  Small,  and  a  great  Fountain  170 
Victims  led  to  the  Slaughter    . .      . .     98 

Vines,  Pruning 175 

Violet  and  Nettle        118 

Waggons  are  not  moved  bj'  Wind  . .    176 

Warrior's  Thoughts,  The 227 

Waste,  Malicious       242 

Watchmaker,  The      96 

Wax,  The  broken  Stick  of      . .      . .   168 

Way  to  Heaven,  The         8 

Weak,  strong;  and  the  Strong  weak     16 

— We  should  bear  with  the  31,  123 

Weapons,  Invention  of  fresh  . .  ..  116 
Weather  varied  to  suit  the  Soil,  The     36 

Wedges 165 

Weeds  must  be  choked 21 

Wicked,  The,  Prosperity  of    . .      . .     98 

why  preserved  . .      . .     45 

Widow,  The  loving 154 

Windfalls,  Professors  likened  to  . .  194 
Windows  and  Tiles  worthy  of  care  161 

Wisp,  The  little  ..     ..   _ 60 

Witness-Bearing  for  Christ      . .    64,  105 

Wolf,  The  frightened 146 

and  the  Picture  of  a  Sheep  169 

Wooden  Leg,  The      167 

Word  of  a  Man,  Trading  on  the  . .  178 
Word  of  God,  not  to  be   altered   ..   217 

Personal  Experience  of,     97 

Words,  Hasty,  The  Mischief  of     . .   136 

Works,  Good        87,  236 

World,  The,  not  the  Believer's  Rest  135 
Worldlings,  the  Pursuits  of  83,  151,  230 
Worldly  Conformity,  a  Mark  ofUn- 

regeneracy 3 

Things  should  be  made  to 

serve  Spiritual  Ends  . .      . .    80,  246 

Worship,  Public 246 

Worthless 129 

Writing  Close       255 

Yoke  Lined,  The       217 

of  Christ,  easy  by  use     . .      . .     33 

Young,  On  Training  the 21 

Zeal,  Intemperate       113,  135 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE   TEXTS. 


GENESIS. 
Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

xvlii.  26 — 30      ..      ..     45 

xix.  20        165 

xxxvii.  19 93 

EXODUS. 

viii.  17        152 

XV.  26 96 

xvii.  12       24 

xxxiv.  6      Ill 

LEVITICUS, 
xviii.  3        97 

NUMBERS. 

xxi.  5 168 

x.xxii.  23 86 

DEUTERONOMY, 
viii.  II— 14        ..      ..     75 

xxix.  19      245 

XXIX.  29      32 

xxxii.  6 — iS       ..      . .   168 
xxxii.  39 96 

JOSHUA. 

i.  5       loi 

i.  B       93 

ix.  21 8i 

JUDGES. 

xvi.  17         82 

xviii.  24      224 

I.  SAMUEL. 

ii.  9      102 

vii.  3 140,  150 

xvi.  7 17s 

xix.  13         28 

XX.  3 61 

xxiii.  16      108 

II.  SAMUEL. 

vi.  22 73 

xvi.  10        258 


I.  KINGS. 

Chap.  &  Verse  Pa^e 

x.x.  33 ..     80 

II.  KINGS, 
xvii.  33,  41         ..129,  130, 
154,  195 

I.  CHRONICLES. 

xvi.  II,  35 262 

xvii.  23       50 

IL  CHRONICLES, 
xxxiii.  II 114 

ESTHER. 
iv.  16 II,  13 

JOB. 
iv.  7 99 

iv.  19 — 21   . .        5,  61,  258 

V.  17 17 

vii 99 

ix.  25,  26    . .      ..      5,  258 

.xii.  4,5       . .    73,  169,  239 

xiii,  15..   II,  13,  148,  168, 

175,  180,  222 

xiii.  26        21 

xiv.  4 202,  209 

xiv.  7 — 9 90 

xvii.  9..  ..  33,  92,  199 
xix.  25 — 27  . .  . .  1B9 
xxviii.  28  . .  46,  55,  165, 
243 
x.xxvi.  18,  19     ..      ..   i8t 

PSALMS. 
Number  &  Verse       Page 
i.  2,  3  . .      45,  69,  93,  210 

ii.  I      220 

ii.  8      151 

v.  3      29,  254 

X;  3      23 

xi.  3 158 

xvi.  8 119,  203 


PSALMS.    (Con.) 
Number  &  Verse       Page 

xvii.  4 153 

.xvii.  14       98 

xviii.  32 — 35      . .      . .     33 

xix.  7 6 

xix.  12         212 

xi.x.  13         ..  143,  177   219 

xxii.  I,  2 40 

xxiii.  1,  5 251 

XXV.  21        72 

xxvii.  9       20 

xxvii.  14 255 

XXX.  6 75 

XXX.  7 120 

xxxi.  22       99 

xxxiv.  8      49 

.xxxvi.  2       245 

xxxvi.  9      170 

xx.xvii.  7 36 

xxxviii.  2,  6       . .      . .     14 

xxxviii.  3 190 

xxxviii.  22 58 

xxxix.  3      265 

xh  I      254 

xl.  17 252 

xiv.  8 160 

xlix.  8 223 

xlix.  13       92 

1.  16 140 

Ii.  6      141,  150 

Ii.  8      17 

Ii.  10 86,  212 

lv._i9 44 

Ivii.  7 23 

Ivii.  8 237 

Iviii.  8 169 

Ixiii.  1 22S 

Ixiii.  7 20 

Ixvi.  16       . .      . .    64,  105 

Ixvi.  18       15 

Ixxiii.  25 89 

Ixxvii.  2      103 

Ixxxi.  II,  12       . .      . .     56 
Ixxxiv.  1,2        . .     89,  246 

Ixxxiv.  7 31 

Ixxxiv.  II loi 

Ixxxvi.  14. 122 


INDEX  OF   SCRIPTURE  TEXTS. 


277 


PSALMS.    (Con.) 

Number  &  Verse       Page 

Ixxxvii.  7 io6 

Ixxxix.  30 — 33  . .      . .     10 
xc.  12  . .      . .      5,  255,  258 

xcv,  6 157 

xcv.  7,  8     . .      . .  172,  221 
xcvi.  10      . .      . .  220,  221 

cii.  17 262 

ciii.  3 58 

cvi.  15 67 

cvii.  6,  13,  19,  28     ..  114, 
167,  174,  175,  1B6 

cxvi.  16       231 

cxviii.  27 25 

cxix.  9,  II 153 

cxix.  10      23 

cxix.  47,  48        . .      . .   263 
cxix.  49      ..      ..    50,  154 

cxix.  50      154 

cxix.  59      206 

cxix.  63      . .      . .     27,  108 

cxix.  67      . .     17,  66,  no, 

168,  174,  178,  186,  222 

cxix.  71      . .     17,  66,  168, 

174, 175,  186,  222 

cxix.  72      247 

cxix.  97,  99        ..     18,54, 

72,  93 

cxix.  116    . .      ..    50,  154 

cxix,  130 55 

cxix.  T31 115 

c-4'^-  133 143 

cxix.  176 190 

cxxxii.  15,  16    ..      ..  128 

cxliii.  5       93 

cxlvii.  3      58 

cxlvii.  6      62 

PROVERBS. 
Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

i.  10 3,  no 

1-17 41 

1.  24—30 46 

ii-  1—5       21 

»"•  5 38 

111.  II,  12    ..147,174,175, 
186, 222 

iii.  17 8 

iv.  15 210 

iv.  18 31 

iv.  23 51,  77 

VI.  27,  28 143 

X...I7 58 

xii.  22 175 

XV.  lo,  31,  32     . .      . .     58 

XVI.  33         142 

xxii.  3 5S 


PROVERBS.     (C071.) 

Chap.  &  Verse.  Page 

xxiii.  4        38 

xxiii.  6        109 

xxiii.  17      119 

xxiii.  31      219 

XXV.  12       216 

xxviii.  13 105 

xxix.  I        56 

XXX.  8,  9     ..      7»  75.  124, 

132,  167,  171 

xx.x.  12,  13         . .      s .       4 

ECCLESIASTES. 

ii.  I— 12     ..     2,  151,  155, 
249 

ii.  14 181 

iii.  1 142 

V.  13 23 

xii.  14 88 

CANTICLES. 
Number  &  Verse      Page 

i- 4       72 

ii-  14 39 

ii.  15    . .      ..      46,  70,  165 
iii.  1—4      . .      . .       13,  39 

V.  I      112 

V.  2 — 6        148 

V.  6,  7 13,  72 

viii.  7 108 

ISAIAH. 

Chap.  &:  Verse  Page 

ii.  12 44 

V.  18 41 

V.  20 9,  267 

vi:.7 52 

viii.  20        267 

ix.  6 236 

xxvii.  3       24 

xxviii.  17 137 

xxix.  13      . .      ..  129,  195 

XXX.  10       131 

xxxv.  3       31 

xxxviii.  16 224 

xl.  6 68 

xl.  31 120 

xii.  6 173 

xii.  14 — 20  .  .160,  i6i,  183, 
188 

xliii.  3 224 

xliii,  27       . .      . .  166,  167 

xliv.  22       86 

xlv.  7,  12,  18     . .      . .     93 
1.  10 154 


ISAIAH.     (C^».) 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

lii_.  II  ..       19,  46,  55,  165 
liii.  I — 12   ..  no,  122,  261 

liii.  4 — 6     83 

liv.  10 102 

liv.  II ..      ..  129,  130,  178 
Iv.  I,  2        ..    97,  262,  264 

Iv.  8,  9        179 

Iviii.  I . .  47,  121,  131,  141, 
..  243 

Iix.  19 12,  150 


JEREMIAH 


LAMENTATIONS. 


in.  40 
iv.  7,  £ 


59.  70 
. .  225 


EZEKIEL. 

x:v.  3,5      202 

xvi.  49        88 

xviii.  20      42 

xxxiii.  I — 9  . .  . .  47 
xxxiii,  31  . .  129,  130,  195 
xxxiv.  2 — 4        . .  166,  167 

DANIEL. 

Xi.  32 T20 

HOSEA. 

vi.  3 . .  120 

vi.  4 173 

vii.  8 42 

AMOS, 

viii.  10        40 

OBADIAH. 

3  ..     ..  113,118,  252 

JONAH. 

jj;  7     255 

lii.  2 217 


278 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS. 


MICAH. 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

vi.  9 258 

vii.  9 127 

HABAKKUK. 
ii.  3      ..  29,  154,  162,  254 

HAGGAI. 
i.  6       60,  100 

ZECHARIAH. 

IV.  6 182 

xiv.  7 178 

MALACHI. 

iii.  6 102 

iii.  16 139 

MATTHEW. 

i.  23 163 

iii-  12 45 

V.  6      238 

V.  9      129 

V.  10 — 12    ..    73,  169,  239 

V.  II 132 

V.  14—16 35 

V.  19 10,  161 

vi.  5,  6        154 

vi.  13 205 

vi.  21 204 

vi.  25,  33 28 

vii.  7,  8  ..  29,  254,  262 
vii.  15  ..     ..  119,  121,  141 

vii.  16 — 20 87 

vii.  17,  18 86 

vii.  22 86 

vii.  24,  25 201 

ix.  20 163 

jc.  25 67 

JC;  29,  43—45     •  •     •  •     80 

xi.  12 170 

xi.  28 163 

xi.  29,  30    . .      ..  139,  217 

xii.  33—45 208 

xii.  43— 45 173 

xiii.  6 90 

xiii.  20,  21 . .      . .    42.  194 

xiv.  31 160,  163 

XV.  14 55.  267 

xvi.  23 80 

xvi;  26..      28,  37,  81,  224 

xvii.  14,  15 79 

•xviii.  2—4  ..  ..  118,  252 
xviii.  19,  20  . .  82,  157 
xix.  24        ..      ..  124,  132 


MATTHEW.    {Con.) 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

xxii.  II— 13       ..     ..     30 
xxiii.  5        ..  154,  166,  167 
xxiii.  5,  24 — 28  . .     28,  79, 
193 

xxiii.  14      79 

xxiv.  4        ..  119,  121,  141 

xxiv.  13      134 

XXV.  14 — 30       . .     . .     18 

xxv.  15       165 

xxvi.  41      70 

xxvi.  42       68 

xxvii.  46     40 


MARK. 


iv.  8  . . 
iv.  16,  17 
vii.  6 — 9 
viii.  33 
viii.  36 
ix.  24  .. 
X.  15    .. 


180 
15 


60,  81 

160,  163 

..  210 


LUKE. 


v.  27,  28     . 
vi.  12  . . 
vi.  24  . . 
vii.  42 . . 
ix.  23—25 
X.  40    .. 
xi.  13  ..     . 
xi.  42  . . 
xii.  15—30 


.  ..  117 
.   ..  213 

.  ..  15 
26,  40,  60, 
249 
255 
"5 
165 
65 
87 


146, 
49. 


xu.  37  •• 
xii.  40.. 

xii.  48 

xiii.  24        

xiii.  25 — 28 

XV.  5 

XV.  14  ..  ..114.  168, 
xvi.  10  . .  . .  70, 
xviii.  I — 8  ..  . .  162, 
xviii.  13,  14 

xix.  23        

xxii.  31,  32         ..  lor, 

xxli.  42        

xxiv.  32      . .    22,  119, 

JOHN. 


1.13  • 

11.  5  • 

ill-  3.  5- 

iii.  7  • 


7.  34. 
..    13. 

-•      34: 

126,  I4IJ 


222 
161 
260 
62 


163 
^50 
239 
150 
150 


JOHN.    {Coji.) 
Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

iii.  18 40 

iii.  19 209 

iii.  19 — 21 131 

iv.  23,  24 129 

iv.  29,  39,  42      . .    64,  105 

IV.  49 58 

V.  39 264 

vi.  47 92,  163 

vi.  68 78 

vii.  17 210 

X.  6      8 

x.  20 67 

X.  38 163 

xii.  35 242 

xiv.  2 153 

xiv.  8 158 

xiv.  9 163 

xiv.  13,  14 232 

xiv.  15,  21,  23  ..     13,  106 

xiv.  19         loi 

xiv.  30         80 

XV.  1—5      204 

XV.  2 175 

XV.  4 — 10    . .      . .     78,  260 

XV.  II 92 

XV.  15 106 

XV.  19  . .      . .    73.  169,  239 

xvi.  7 153 

xvi.  13         158 

xvi.  24        . .      . .    26,  260 
xvi.  33         . .      . .  135,  144 

xvii.  I 151 

xvii.  13       92 

xvii.  17        . .      .  •       21,  22 

xvii.  21        100 

xvii.  22,  23 161 

ACTS. 

iv.  22 147 

vi.  10 116 

viii.  4 30 

ix.  4 232 

ix.  II 151 

X.  26 57 

xii.  5 82 

xiii.  39        104 

xiii.  41        221 

xiii.  47        35 

xiv.  17        152 

xvii.  26       142 

XX.  24 143 

XX.  32 22 

ROMANS. 

i.  19 — 22 152 

i.  21     168 


INDEX  OF   SCRIPTURE  TEXTS. 


279 


ROMANS.     I^Con.) 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

ii.  12 42 

ii.  16 46 

iii.  24 63 

V.  10 20 

vi.  I,  2        64 

vi.  16 I 

vii.  7,  8       244 

vii.  9 71 

vii.  10 14 

vii.  12 6 

vii.  15— 25..  ..  5^.244 
vii.  18 — 21  . .     4,  8,  lo,  12 

vii.  24,  25 220 

viii.  5 — 8     . .      3,  150,  209 

viii.  13        71 

viii,  14—17        ..      ..233 

viii.  15        151 

viii.  17        200 

viii.  18  . .  ..47,  224 
viii.  28  . .  . .  36,  192 
viii.  30,  37—39  . .      . .     92 

viii.  32        20 

viii.  35        loi 

X.  3      30 

X.  17 264 

xi-  36 95 

xu.  3   ..     3,  113,  u8,  252 

x'n.  s 100 

xiii.  14        192 

xiv.  22        156 

XV.  2 172 

xvi.  18        75 

I.  CORINTHIANS. 

i.  17     ..112,  130,  133,  140 

i.  18—23  52,  93,  122,  130, 

133 

11- 4— 6       75 

":  14 9 

ill.  21,  22 112 

vi.  17 loi 

vi.  19 189 

vi.  19,  20 186 

vii.  31 62,  250 

ix.  24 65 

X.  31 192 

x>-.3i 105 

xiii.  I — 8 180 

xiii.  4,  13 74 

XV.  33..  ..124,191,225 
XV.  55-57  ..      ..39,  149 

II.  CORINTHIANS. 

i-3.  4 57 

1-5       17.54 


II.  CORINTH.    (C^«.) 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

ii.  II 144 

iii.  2 87 

iii.  18 199 

iv.  14 189 

iv-  17 47.  143 

IV.  18  ..   26,  I43,  257,  268 

V.  2—5        237 

V.  9      65 

V.   14 12,    107 

V.  17 84,  i6o 

vi.  10 220 

vi.  14—17 124 

VI.  17 76,  165 

vii.  6 17 

vii.  9- II   ..  127,  173,  245 

viu.  5 84 

yiii-  9 35 

IX.  6 i85 

ix.  8 128 

xi.  3 48 

xi.  3—15     . .      . .  130,  133 

XI.  14 164,  165 

xii.  9,  10 16 

xiii.  5  . .      . .      59,  70,  171 

GALATIANS. 

ii-  16 122 

ii.  20 91 

iii.  10 63 

V.  10,  12      136 

V-  17 SI 

V.  22,  23 84 

vi-  3 43.  44 

EPHESIANS. 

;•  3    159 

1. 18 170 

f:  23 150 

ii-  2     190 

li.  10 97 

ii-  14 92 

ii.  21    ..      ..  161,  164,  190 

iii.  8 iiS 

iii.  17.  18 48 

iii.  19 170 

jv-i,  17      97 

IV.  3,  13       ..  161,  164,  190 

iv.  4 — 16     . .    27,  62,  69, 

75,  108,  150,  155 

IV.  8 — 13     172 

iv.  15   ..     ..113,  118,  252 
iv.  18 133 

V.  2      107 

V.  4      209 

V.  16 242,  255 


EPHESIANS.  (Con.) 
Chap.  &  Verse  Page 
vi.  II— 18  ..156,  164,  165 
vi.  37 22 

PHILIPPIANS. 

i.  15,  16   ..  ..  166,  167 

1.  21  227 

i.  23  zi6,  149 

ii-3,  4 74 

H:  ^2 37 

]]]■  8 83,  143 

;H- 13 94 

iii.  13,  14  . .   . .  170,  226 

iv.  6 117 

iv.  12  . .  124,  132,  167,  250 
iv.  19  . .   . .  26,  150,  170 

COLOSSIANS. 

ii- 2  32 

ii-3  78 

11-  4,  8,  18  . .  . .  130,  133 

ii.  9   164 

iii.  2  ..119,137,151,155, 
256 

iii.  8 — 10 84 

iii.  II 164 

iii.  14 128 

I.  THESSALONIANS. 

i.  3   128 

ii.  7,  8    265 

ii.  12 76 

V.3   87 

v-S   55 

V-  14 31 

v.  17 119,  260 

V.  22  ..   46,  51,  55,  139, 

156,  165,  243 

V.  23 189 

II.THESSALONIANS. 
ii.  13 206 

I.  TIMOTHY. 

i-4      78 

1-4—6 136,  267 

1.6  ..      ...     ..      ..   135 

1.7  ..      ..130,133,140 

;•  16 57 

m- 9 19 

IV.  15..     ..       18,54,93 

V.  6      71 

vi.  6 — 8  ..  124,  132,  167 
vi.  ^,10  ..  ..  75,  8r 
vi.  17 249 


-280 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS. 


II.  TIMOTHY. 
Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

ii.  3     135,  144 

ii.  14 78. 

"•17 48 

ii.  19 158 

ii.  24 123 

iii.  16,  17 153 

iv.  I— 5       ..130,133,140, 

216,  265 

iv.  6 — 8       ..      ..116,  149 

TITUS. 

ii-  7  125 

ii.  13 146,  256 

ii-  14 76 

iii.  2 123 

iii.  5 no 

iii.  9 78 

HEBREWS. 

i.  3       163,  164 

1.7       52 

iii.  6,  14     ..     . .  134,  172 

iii.  7--15 221 

iii.  12 77 

iv.  1 1 65 

iv.  15 58 

iv.  16 262 

V-  12 155 

V;   13 69 

vi.  I Ill 

viii.  6,  13 104 

ix.  12 — 28  . .   83,  146,  152 

X.  13 182 

X,  25    ..148,  157,  246,  264 

X.  26,  27      10 

X.  32 148 

-"^l- 1 154 

-'^i- 6     ..      45 

xi.  10 — 16 198 

xi.  25,  26    ..    98,  151,  155 

xi.  34 16 

xi.  36 67 


HEBREWS.    iCon.) 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

xii.  5 148 

xii.  5 — 8     . .      . .  186,  207 

xii.  12—15 77 

xiii.  5 105 

xiii.  9 63,  150 

xiii.  20,  21 96 

JAMES. 

i.  5       , .      . .     . .      . .     26 

i.  6       162 

i.  18,  21      no 

i.  22 — 24     . .     . .        6,  54 

1:27 138 

ii.  10 10,  70 

iv.  6 i3 

iv.  6 18 

iv.  14 5,  258 

V.  I — 3        81 

I.  PETER, 
i.  6,  7  .  .145,  147)  ^68, 171, 
174.  175,  222 

i.  8      89,154 

i-  13 156 

i-  14 238 

i.  19     ..      ..  146,  152,  223 

i.  23—25     102 

i.  24 68 

iii.  15 69 

iii-  16 132 

iv.  3 130 

iv.  12 144,  156 

V.  3      128 

V.  5,  6 118 

V,  8,  9. .     ..  80,  114,  161, 
164,  165,  190 

II.  PETER. 

1:19 55 

ii.  I,  2 117 

ii.  20 — 22    . .  42,  141,  150, 

173 


II.  PETER.    (Con.) 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

iii.  8 — 12 49 

iii.  16 63,  69 

iii.  17  ..  62,  114,  150,  161, 

164,  165,  190 

iii.  18 Ill,  155 

I.  JOHN. 

i.  6—9.       ..     ..  105,  139 
ii.  15—17    -  •    60,  130,  204 

ii-  19 194 

ii.  28 146 

iii.  I     ..      .  •    52,  233,  251 

iii- 9 7.85 

iv.  10 no 

iv.  19  ..      ..     12,  105,  107 

V-  3— 5         91 

V.  4,  18       85 

V.  14 67 

V.  20 100 

II.  JOHN. 

7—10 48 

8 37 

JUDE. 

I,  24 100 

12 43>  44 

23    ..      ..  138,  165,  243 

REVELATION. 

i.  5       S6 

i-  6       76.  159 

11-4,5 90 

iii.  I 267 

Hi.  2,  3        ..      ,.       59.70 

iii.  20 109 

V.  8—12      158 

x.\-.  12 86 

xxi.  16        166 

xxii.  12       53 

xxii.  18       217 


Alabaster,  Passmore,  Ss"  Sons,  Printers,  London. 


WORKS  BY  C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AND  OTHER  AUTHORS, 

PUBLISHED  BY  PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER, 

4,    PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS,    E.G. 


lExpositorg. 
TREASURY    OF    DAVID:    Containing;   an    Original 

Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Psalms;   a  collection  of  illustrative 
Extracts  from  the   whole   range  of   Literature ;    a  series   of 
Homiletical  Hints  upon  almost  every  verse  ;  and  list  of  Writers 
upon  each  Psalm.     By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    Price  8s.  each  vol. 
Vol.     I.,  containing  Psalms 


II., 
III., 

IV., 

v., 

VI., 


I.  to        XXVI.— Twenty-first  Thousand. 
XXVII.  „  LII.— Eighteenth  Thousand. 

LIII.  „  LXXVIII.— Sixteenth  Thousand. 
LXXIX.  „  CIII.— Fifteenth  Thousand. 

CIV.  „      CXVIII.— Eleventh  Thousand. 
CXIX.  „       CXXIV.—Eifth  Thousand. 


"If  the  eloquent  Baptist  preacher  of  the  Metropolitan  Tahernacle  had 
produced  nothing  but  these  volumes  he  would  certainly  be   entitled  to   the 

thanks  of  aU  Bible  readers Mr.  Spurgeon  evidently  considers 

that  there  is  something  more  important  to  be  done  in  the  pulpit  than  discussing 
creeds,  and  as  the  expositions  of  the  Psalms  given  by  him  to  his  congregation 
on  Sunday  mornings  form  the  basis  of  the  present  work,  there  is  much  more  of 
experimental  than  of  doctrinal  teaching,  and  where  he  does  touch  upon  doc- 
trinal points  his  remarks  are,  in  the  main,  of  a  character  that  might  be  uttered 
by  any  Evangelical  clergyman  in  the  land.'' — The  Rock. 

THE  INTERPRETER;  or,  Scripture  for  Family  Wor- 
ship ;  being  selected  passages  of  the  "Word  of  God  for  every  morning  and 
evening  throughout  the  year,  accompanied  by  a  running  comment  and 
suitable  Hymns.  By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  Cloth  25s.,  Persian  Morocco  32s. 
Turkey  Morocco  42s.  Hymn  Book,  Is. 
"  Calculated  to  be  of  great  value  to  the  many  who  require  guidance  in 

conducting  family  worship." — The  Churchman's  Monthly  Penny  Magazine. 
"The  impress  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  genius  is  observable  in  the  very  felicitous 

arrangement  of  the  passages  of  Scripture  as  well  as  in  the  characteristic  running 

comments,  in  which  latter,  by  the  way,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  theological  views  come 

prominently  to  the  front."— The  Christian  FaniUy. 


^omilEtical 
THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE     PULPIT, 

Containing:  the  Sermons  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  preached  during  the  past 
twenty-eight  years.    Vols.  I.  and  II.,  6s.  6d.  each.    Vols.  III.  to  VI.,  7s. 
each.    Vol.  VII.,  8s.  6d.    Vols.  VIII.  to  XXVIII.,  7s.  each.    The  Ser- 
mons are  published  every  Thursday  at  Id. ;  and  will  be  sent  weekly  by 
the  Publishers,  post  free,  to  any  address  in  the  United  Kingdom  :— Three 
months,  Is.  lid. ;  Six  months,  3s.  9d. ;  Twelve  months,  7s.  6d. 
*^*  The  Publishers  call  attention  to  the  remarkable  fact  that  they  have  now 
issued  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Sermons  weekly  for  twenty-eight  years,  and  that  all  this 
time  the  circulation  has  not  only  been  very  large,  but  has  steadily  increased. 
This  unparalleled  fact,  unprecedented  in  the  pulpit  of  any  age  or  church,  speaks 
for  itself,  and  is  a  higher  eulogium  than  the  most  friendly  reviewer  could 
pronounce.    It  is  also  noteworthy  that  an  equally  warm  reception  has  been 
given  to  the  American  Edition,  and  that  the  Dutch,  German,  Swedish,  and 
French  translations  have  commanded  an  extensive  sale ;  and  the  Sermons  have 
been  acceptably  received  in  "Welsh,  Danish,  and  Italian. 

TWELVE     SERMONS     ON     VARIOUS     SUBJECTS. 

By  C.  H.  Spukgeon.  With  a  Portrait,  Views  of  Cottage  where  Mr. 
Spurgeon  first  preached,  and  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  Limp 
Cloth,  Is.    Post  free  II  stamps. 

TWELVE   SELECTED   SOUL-WINNING   SERMONS. 

Bound  in  Limp  Cloth,  Is.    Post  free  14  stamps. 

TWELVE  STRIKING   SERMONS.    Bound    in   Limp 

Cloth,  Is,    Post  free  14  stamps. 

TYPES  AND  EMBLEMS ;  Being  a  Collection  of  Sermons 

preached   on    Sunday  and  Thursday  Evenings    at    the    Metropolitan 

Tabernacle.  By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  3s. 
"This  volume  is  the  first  of  the  issue.  It  will  be  sure  to  be  a  favourite. 
'  Types  and  Emblems '  are  attractive  themes,  and  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  hands  they 
neither  lack  suggestiveness  nor  power.  All  his  well-known  qualities  as  a 
preacher  are  in  great  force  throughout  this  volume.'' — General  Baptist 
Magazine. 

TRUMPET  CALLS  TO  CHRISTIAN  ENERGY,  being  a 

Second  Series    of   Mr.    Spurgeon's    Sunday   and    Thursday   Evening 

Sermons.    Price  3s.  6d. 
*'  The  aim  in  each  of  these  addresses  is  the  simple  one  of  rousing  Christian 
men  and  women  to  renewed  activity  for  God.    Believing  them  to  be  eminently 
calculated  to  do  good,  we  wish  them  a  wide  circulation." — Rock. 

FARM  SERMONS.    By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    New  Illus- 
trated Volume.    Crown  8vo.    328  pp.    3s.  6d.  cloth  gilt. 
"  These  sermons  are  fresh  and  as  fragrant  as  the  newly-ploughed  soil,  or 
the  new-mown  hay,  and  ought  to  be  perused  with  pleasure  and  profit  by  many 
who  know  little  or  nothing  of  agricultural  pursuits."— TAe  Christian. 

THE  ROYAL  WEDDING.    The  Banquet  and  the  Guests. 

By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    Paper  Covers,  6d.     Cloth,  Is. 
"An  elegant  little  book  of  80  pages,  illustrating  the  parable  of  the  "Wedding 
Garment,  and   worthy   of  the   world-wide  fame   of  the   author."— .Bap</sf 
Messenger, 


HUustratibE. 
FEATHERS  FOR  ARROWS;    or,    Illustrations    for 

Preachers  and  Teachers,  from  my  Note  Book.    By  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Price  2s.  6d.     25th  Thousand. 

"  The  collection  is  very  varied,  but  all  bearing  on  the  highest  themes,  and  fitted 

to  help  the  highest  pui-pose  of  the  Christian  ministry.    There  is  an  admirable 

index  of  subjects,  and  another  of  texts,  which  greatly  add  to  the  practical 

usefulness  of  the  book  :  we  cordially  recommend  it." — Evangelical  Magazine. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MEDITATIONS  ;  or,  Flowers 

from  a  Puritan's  Garden.    Distilled  and  Dispensed  by  C.  II.  Spurgeon 
Price  2s.  6d. 

"  It  is  a  Garden  full  of  beautiful  and  useful  things,  which  will  yield  its 
delights  to  many  classes  of  readers."— CT/'J«im?i  World. 

iSitracts. 
FLASHES  OF  THOUGHT ;  being  one  Thousand  Choice 

Extracts  from  the  Works  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    Alphabetically  arranged, 

and  with  a  copious  Index.     Price  5s. 
"  A  thousand  extracts,  bright  with  the  light  of  heaven,  sparkling  with  wit, 
rich  in  imagery,  beautiful  in  their  setting,  forcible    in  style,  and   devoutly 
.stimulating  in  tone,  make  up  a  volume  of  unique  msvit."— General  Baptist 
Magazine. 

SPURGEON'S  GEMS :  being  Brilliant  Passages  Selected 

from  the  Discourses  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    Large  Type,  4s. 

GLEANINGS    AMONG  THE    SHEAVES.     By  C.  H. 

Spurgeon.    Cloth  Antique,  Price  Is.  6d. 
"These  extracts  are  quite  Spurgeonic— racy,  rich,  and  rare,  both  as  to 
style  and  matter — full  of  exquisite  consolation — faithful  advice — clear  analogies 
— poetic  touches — and  glorious  old  gospel. 

SPURGEON'S    BIRTHDAY    BOOK.      Cloth,  2s.  6d. ; 

Calf  or  Morocco,  5s ;  Russia,  with  Photograph,  10s.  6d. 
"A  metaphor,  simile,  allegory,  or  illusti'ation  for  every  day  in  the  year, 
compiled  from  the  works  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    For  thirty  pence  our  readers  may 
possess  a  book  which  is  as  useful  as  it  is  handsomely  got  xi^.^'— Christian  Age. 

IBebcttonal. 
MORNING  BY  MORNING;  or.  Daily  Readings  for  the 

Family  or  the  Closet.    By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    3s.  6d.    Morocco,  7s.  8d. 
"Those  who  have  learned  the  value  of  morning  devotion,  will  highly  prize 
these  helps.    All  who  love  a  full-orbed  gospel,  -sagorous,  varied  thought,  and 
a  racy  style,  will  appreciate  this  volimie." — Eev,  J.  Angus,  D.D. 

EVENING  BY  EVENING ;  or,  Readings  at  Eventide  for 

Family  or  the  Closet.     By  C.  II.  Spurgeon,      3s.  6d.     Morocco,  7s.  6d. 

•'  On  learning  that '  Evening  by  Evening'  was  published,  how  gladly  I  bade 

it  welcome  !  And  I  can  humbly  commend  it  in  no  higher  terms  than  by  simply 

saying  that  it  will  be  found  a  lit  companion,  every  way,  for  its  forerunnei  of 

the  morning."— C/t«r/cs  /.  Uruwu,  D.D.^  Edinburgh. 


Jor  .Stuticnts, 
LECTURES  TO   MY  STUDENTS;    A  Selection  from 

Addresses  delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  Metropolitan 

Tabernacle,    By  C.  H.  Spukgeon,  President.    First  and  Second  Series. 

Price  2s.  6d.  each. 

"  "We  have  read  this  work  -with  a  feeling  very  nearly  approaching  to  delight. 

Nothing  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  printed  has  so  thoroughly  pleased  us,  and  few 

of  his  works  are  calculated  to  be  of  greater  practical  service.      It  abounds  in 

words  of  Avisdom ;   it  is  rich  in  humour,  but  richer  in  human  and  spiritual 

experience." — Nonconfoi'inist, 

COMMENTING   AND    COMMENTARIES:   Two  Lee- 

tures  addressed  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  together  with 

a  Catalogue  of  Bible  Commentaries  and  Expositions.     Price  2s.  6d. 

"  Every  candid  reader  will  admit  that,  in  impartiality,  in  terse  and  telling 

brevity,  in  wisdom  shai-pened  into  wit,  in  unaffected  zeal  for  Christ's  cause, 

and,  above  all,  in  robust  common  sense,  this  volume  has  few  equals,  if  any." 

Literary  World. 

SPEECHES  by    C.   H.   SPURGEON  AT    HOME  and 

Abroad.  2s.  6d. 
The  work  is  printed  uniformly  with  the  series  of  Lectures,  and  contains 
eighteen  articles,  beginning  with  "  The  Bible,"  and  ending  with  "  Drive  On." 
The  pieces  are  in  the  main  given  as  they  originally  appeared  ;  in  the  majority 
of  instances  the  author  is  made  to  speak  in  the  first  person ;  but  this  is  not  the 
case  throughout.  The  reader  will  also  find  that  the  principal  subjects  are 
admirably  reported. 

Pettotiical. 
THE    SWORD   AND    THE   TROWEL:   .  A    Monthly 

Magazine,  Price  3d.  Yearly  vols.,  5s.  Cases  for  binding,  Is.  4d. 
It  commands  a  large  circulation  among  almost  all  classes  of  Christians,  and 
as  a  religious  periodical,  it  now  occupies  a  position  second  to  none.  It  records 
the  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love  which  are  the  honour  of  the  various 
sections  of  the  Church,  and  it  contends  most  unsparingly  against  the  errors  of 
the  times.  It  is  an  accurate  record  of  the  religious  movements  which  emanate 
from  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  but  its  advocacy  is  far  from  being  confined 
within  that  area.  No  pains  will  be  spared  to  render  the  Magazine  growingly 
worthy  of  the  widest  circulation.— Editor,  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

l^igtcticaL 
THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE:  its  History 

and  "Work.    "With  33  Illustrations.      By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.     Price,  in 

paper  covers.  Is.  Bound  in  cloth,  2s. 
"  Profusely  illustrated  with  portraits,  facsimiles  of  forgotten  caricatures, 
and  other  engravings,  quaint  and  otherwise,  is  likely  to  rival  'John  Plough- 
man '  in  popularity.  Containing  between  one  and  two  hundred  octavo  pages, 
the  matter  might  easily  have  been  spread  out  into  a  five  or  six  shilling  volume ; 
but,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  desires  to  write  for  the  people,  he  publishes  his  works  at 
prices  to  suit  the  pockets  even  of  the  poor." — Christian  World. 

MEMORIAL    VOLUME.       Containing    Sermons    and 

Addresses  delivered  on  the  completion  of  the  Twenty-fifth  year  of  the 
Pastorate  of  C.  H.  Spukgeon.    Price  Is.,  cloth. 


Popular. 


JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK ;    or,  Plain  Advice  for 

Plain  People.    Illustrated.     By  C,  H.  Spurgeon.    In  stiff  covers,  Is. 

Cloth,  gilt  edges,  2s.    320th  Thousand. 
*'  Racy  and  pungent ;   veiy  plain,  and  to   the  pui-pose.     No  fear  as  to 
whether  it  -will  be  read  or  not  by  those  into  whose  hands  it  may  fall.    If  Mr. 
Spurgeon  goes  on  at  this  rate  in  his  multiform  publications,  he  will  leave 
nothing  racy  unsaid.'' — Watchman. 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  PICTURES ;   or,  More  of  his 

Plain  Talk  for  Plain  People.      In  stiff  covers,  Is.;    cloth,  gilt  edges,  2s. 
90th  Thousand. 
"  Every  page  is  full  of  sayings  well  calculated  to  teach  people  the  charms 
f  religion,  and  the  happiness  attending  sober  industry." — Christian  World. 

SPURGEON'S   SHILLING  SERIES.    Bound  in  Cloth, 

No.  4.— The  Mourner's  Comforter. 
,,    5.— The  Bible  and  the  Newspaper. 
,,    6. — Eccentric  Preachers. 


No.  1.— Christ's  Glorious  Achievements 
,,    2.— Seven  Wonders  of  Grace. 
„    3.— The  Spare  Half  Hour, 


No.  7.— Good  Cheer. 
"  Promises  to  form  a  valuable  library  of  religious  litevatuxe.^'— Christian  Mag. 

One  Penny  Each.  In  neat  Wrapper.  ByC.H.  SPURGEON. 

Specially  adapted  for  gratuitous  disti'ibution. 


A  DOUBLE  IvNOCK  AT  THE  DOOR 
OF  THE  YOUNG. 

A  GOOD  SOLDIER  OF  JESUS 
CHRIST. 

AN  ANXIOUS  ENQUIRY  FOR  A 
BELOVED  SON. 

APOSTOLIC  EXHORTATION. 

A  SILLY  DOVE. 

A  WORD  FOR  THE  PERSECUTED. 

BAPTISMAL  REGENERATION. 

BEST  BURDEN  FOR  YOUNG 
SHOULDERS. 

CALL  TO  THE  UNCONVERTED. 

CONFESSION   OF  SIN. 

FAITH:  WHAT  IS  IT?  HOW 
CAN  IT  BE  OBTAINED  ? 

FEAR  NOT. 

"FEED  MY  LAMBS:"  A  SAB- 
BATH-SCHOOL SERMON. 

HOW  TO  OBTAIN  FAITH. 

HOW  TO  RAISE  THE  DEAD. 

INFANT  SALVATION. 

IS  CONVERSION  NECESSARY  ? 

IS  IT  NOTHING  TO  YOU  ? 

JESUS  AND  THE  LAMBS. 

LANDLORD  AND  TENANT. 

LET  US  PRAY. 

LITTLE    DOGS. 


LOVING  ADVICE  FOR  ANXIOUS 

SEEICERS. 
NONE  BUT  JESUS. 
NUMBER  1,500;  or,  LIFTING  UP 

l^HE  BRAZEN  SERPENT. 
ONLY  TRUST  HIM ! 
RECEIVING  THE  KINGDOM  OF 

GOD  AS  A  LITTLE  CHILD. 
SERMON  FOR  EVERYBODY. 
"SUPPOSING   HIM    TO    BE  THE 

GARDENER." 
THE  BRAZEN  SERPENT. 
THE    DROPPING    WELL    OF 

KNARESBOROUGH. 
THE  ESSENCE  OF  SIMPLICITY. 
THE  HOLD  FAST. 
THE  PEARL  OF  PATIENCE. 
THE  PERPETUITY  OF  THE  LAW 

OF  GOD. 
THE  PRIEST  DISPENSED  WITH. 
THE  SEA!  THE  SEA  !  THE  WIDE 

AND  OPEN  SEA. 
THE  SILVER  TRUMPET. 
THE  TURNING  POINT. 
THE  UPPER  HAND. 
THE  WAY  OF  SALVATIOxV. 
THERE  GO  THE  SHIPS. 
TOKEN  FOR  THE  BEREAVED, 


WORKS    BY    OTHER    AUTHORS. 
A  BODY  OF  DIVINITY,  contained  in  Sermons  upon  the 

Assembly's  Catechism.  By  the  Rev.  Thomas  Watson,  Rector  of  St. 
Stephen's,  "Walbrook.  A  new  and  complete  edition,  revised  and  adapted  to 
modern  readers,  by  the  Rev.  George  Rogers,  Camberwell.  With  a 
Preface  and  Appendix  by  Pastor  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  Price  6s. 
Every  divine  of  Calvinistic  views  should  read  it,  and  every  private  Christian 
also.  We  can  heartily  recommend  it  to  all  lovers  of  sound  doctrine,  among 
■whom  we  hope  for  a  large  sale.^-C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

ELISHA  COLES  ON  DIVINE  SOVEREIGNTY.    With 

Preface  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  2s.  6d. 
Romaine  says  of  this  book :  "The  doctrines  of  grace,  of  which  this  book 
treats,  are  the  truths  of  God :  our  author  has  defended  them  in  a  masterly 
manner.  He  has  not  only  proved  them  to  be  plainly  revealed  in  the  Scriptures, 
but  has  also  shown  that  they  are  of  such  constant  use  to  the  childi-en  of  God, 
that  without  the  steadfast  belief  of  them,  they  camiot  go  on  their  way  rejoicing. 
In  the  practical  view  of  these  points  Elisha  Coles  is  singularly  excellent. 

HENRY'S   OUTLINES   OF  CHURCH   HISTORY:    A 

Brief  Sketch  of  the  Christian  Church  from  the  First  Century.       By 

Joseph  Fernandez,  LL.D.  2s.  6d. 
"  The  Church  Histories  hitherto  in  vogue  are  too  cumbersome,  too  verbose, 
too  involved  to  be  used  in  schools  and  colleges,  and  we  entertain  the  hope  that 
the  pi'esent  work  will  remedy  that  evil,  and  supply  a  work  which  all  our  friends 
who  are  tutors  can  use  with  pleasure  and  safety.  Every  young  Christian  should 
be  acquainted  with  ecclesiastical  history  ;  it  should  be  taught  in  every  school  of 
a  high  grade,  to  young  ladies  as  well  as  to  their  brothers.'' — C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

GLIMPSES  OF  JESUS ;  or,  Christ  Exalted  in  the  AfFec- 

tions  of  bis  People.    By  W.  P.  Balfern.    Fifth  Thousand.    Fcp.  8vo. 

Cloth  3s. 
"  I  hailed  with  pleasure  the  advent  of  this  precious  volume.  I  sat  down  to 
road  it,  and  soon  discovered  its  beauty ;  it  was  a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  season 
long  to  be  remembered.  I  have  read  it  again  and  again,  and  would  desire  to 
adore  the  Holy  Spirit  for  that  gracious  unction  which  rested  on  me  in  its 
perusal."— C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

LESSONS  FROM  JESUS  ;  or,  the  Teachings  of  Divine 

Love.  By  W.  P.  Balfeen.  Second  Edition.  3s. 
"  This  is  a  worthy  seqviel  to  '  Glimpses  of  Jesus,'  by  the  same  author. 
Every  book  is  valuable  that  fixes  our  attention  upon  Jesus,  and  revives  our 
perception  of  his  beauty ;  and  especially  when  it  discovers  new  beauties,  and 
brings  his  whole  character  more  vividly  before  us.  Such  will  be  the  effect  of 
these  '  Lessons  from  the  life  of  Jesus.'  " — C.  H.  Spurgeon, 

THE   BEAUTY   OF  THE  GREAT  KING,  and  other 

Poems  for  the  Heart  and  Home.      By  W.   P.   Balfern,    Author    of 

"  Glimpses  of  Jesus."    Second  Edition.    2s.  Gd, 

We  strongly  recommend  this  book  to  the  attention  of  our  readers.  No 
child  of  God  can  read  it  without  pleasure  and  profit.  It  has  been  written  in  the 
furnace,  and  will  comfort  such  as  are  in  it.  The  Author  has  seen  some  of  '  The 
Beauty  of  the  Great  King,'  and  has  well  uttered  the  joy  of  that  great  sight. 
We  hope  that  many  will  have  equal  delight  with  ourselves  as  they  read  this 
book.''— C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Pastor  C.  H.  SPURGEON :   his  Life  and  Work  to  his 

Forty-tbird  Birthday ;  with  an  Account  of  his  Ancestors  lor  200  Years. 
By  George  J.  Stevenson,  M.A.    Paper  covers,  Is.,  cloth,  2s. 


THE  PATHOS  OF  LIFE;  or,  Touching  Incidents  Illus- 

trative  of  the  Truth  of  the  Gospel.  By  W.  Poole  Balfern.  Second  Edi- 
tion. 2s.  6d. 
"  Sensitive,  refined,  and  tender,  suited  to  contact  with  the  highest  class  of 
mind,  he  yet  seeks  to  reach  the  finer  feelings  of  those  who  externally  too  often 
exhibit  a  rough,  hard,  and  unimpressible  aspect.  The  young,  we  venture  to 
say,  will  be  charmed  by  the  fatherly  tendoTiess  characteristic  of  many  of  these 
poems.  The  book  will  be  highly  valued  by  the  Sunday-school  teacher,  by  the 
minister  of  the  gospel,  and  by  all  who  know  anything  of  Mr.  Balfern  and 
his  writings,  or  who  can  appreciate  earnest  and  deep-toned,  yet  cheerful 
spirituality." — Literary  World. 

BOOKSELLERS  AND  BOOKBUYERS  in  Byeways  and 

Highways.    By  C.   H.   Spurgeon,   Samuel  Manning,  LL.D.,  and  G. 

HoLDEN    Pike.    "With  a   Preface    by  the  Right   Hon.  the   Earl  of 

Shaftesbury,  K.G.  Cloth,  gilt  edges.  Is.  6d. 
Externally  this  is  an  attractive  book.  It  is  brought  out  with  the  view  of 
creating  and  increasing  public  interest  in  Colportage.  It  remains  a  mystery 
with  us  that  we  cannot  obtain  support  for  Colportage  in  as  liberal  a  measure  as 
so  good  a  work  demands.  It  does  not  say  much  for  the  wisdom  and  prudence 
of  Christian  people.  If  they  gave  most  where  the  best  return  might  legiti- 
mately be  expected,  we  may  say  of  our  religious  societies — these  are  last  which 
would  be  first.  If  these  addresses,  papers,  and  reports  should  bring  us  in  a 
revenue  of  sympathy,  it  will  soon  be  followed  by  substantial  help.  To  reach  the 
villages  and  hamlets  by  means  of  sound  litei'ature  taken  to  the  cottagers'  doors, 
is  a  most  worthy  work';  and  as  the  rural  population  becomes  smaller,  and  Non- 
conformist churches  become  feebler,  it  will  become  more  and  more  an  abso- 
lutely needful  work,  if  we  are  to  keep  alive  the  light  of  the  gospel  among  the 
poor  and  scattered.  Our  heart  sighs  and  groans  because  this  blessed  agency  is 
still  so  limited  when  every  day  the  needs  of  the  people  cry  for  an  increase. 
Scotland  is  supplied  with  colporteurs  from  sea  to  sea,  and  why  is  England  so 
far  behind  .'—C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

THE    PULPIT    BY    THE    HEARTH.      Being  Plain 

Chapters  for  Sabbath  Reading.    By  Arthur  Mursell.     Price  2s.  Cd. 

CONFERENCE  ADDRESSES,   being  a  Selection  from 

Addresses  delivered  at  the  Annual  Conferences  of  the  Pastors'  College,  by 

the  Rev.  George  Rogers.    "With  a  recommendation  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Cloth  2s.  6d. 

"Our  honoured  friend,  the  Rev.  George  Rogers,  has  given  an  address  at 
each  gathering  of  our  College  conference,  and  on  each  occasion  he  has  been 
singularly  happy  in  his  theme  and  in  his  mode  of  handling  it.  It  would  have 
been  a  pity  and  a  sin  to  allow  these  racy  addresses  to  be  forgotten :  and,  accor- 
dingly, we  are  glad  to  see  them  preserved  in  print.  Twelve  such  addresses  it 
would  be  very  hard  to  find  anywhere  else.  "We  firmly  believe  that  every  student 
and  minister  who  heard  them  will  be  anxious  at  once  to  possess  a  copy,  and  we 
shall  be  greatly  surprised  if  the  volume  does  not  command  a  host  of  readers. 
Mother  wit  is  blended  with  fatherly  wisdom,  and  the  whole  is  sanctified  by  zeal 
for  the  cause  of  God.  "We  cannot  too  heartily  commend  the  volume  to  our 
subscribers.  "—C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

A    COLLECTION    OF    RARE    JEWELS.      From  the 

Mines  of  "William   Gurnall.       (1680).    Dug  up  and  deposited  in  a 

Casket,  by  Arthur  Augustus  Rees  (1853).     Second  Edition.     Price  2s. 

"Of  all  the  Puritans,  Gurnall  is  the  best  adapted  for  quoting.      He  is 

sententious,  and  withal  pictorial,  and  both  in  a  high  degree.    Mr.  Rees  has 

made  his  selections  with  a  discerning  eye;    they  are  not  mere  clippings  at 

random,  but  extracts  chosen  with  judgment,"— C,  H.  Spurgeon. 


FOUR   LETTERS    TO  THE   CHRISTIANS    CALLED 

"BRETHREN"  on  the  subject  of  Ministry.  By  Arthur  Augustus 
Rees.    Price  Sixpence, 

WAYMARKS     FOR    WANDERERS.      Being     Five 

Addresses  delivered  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  By  W.  Y.  Fuller- 
ton,  Evangelist.  Price  Is. 
"  A  little  book  upon  the  prodigal  son.  The  theme  has  been  often  descanted 
on,  but  this  treatise  is  not  a  repetition;  it  is  full  of  freshness  and  originality. 
What  is  belter,  its  earnest  pleadings  and  plain  gospel  statements  are  sure  to  be 
useful  to  seeking  souls,  and  we  commend  it  for  wide  distribution  by  those  who 
wish  to  lead  others  to  the  home  above."— C.  B.  Spurgeon. 

BUNYAN'S   WATER   OF   LIFE.    Preface  By  C.  H. 

Spurgeon,  Is.  This  is  a  tasteful  little  book,  very  suitable  for  a  present,  and 
likely  to  be  made  useful  wherever  it  may  be  circulated.  It  is  written  in 
Bunyan'sbest  style ;  it  is  simple,  forcible,  pleasing  andfuU  of  illustration. 

BAPTIST     CONFESSION    OF     FAITH.      Thirty-two 

Articles  on  Christian  Paith  and  Practice,  with  Scripture  Proofs,  adopted  by 
the  Ministers  and  Messengers  of  the  General  Assembly,  which  met  in 
London  in  1689.  Preface  By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  Paper  covers,  4d.  Post 
free,  5  stamps. 

BAPTISM   DISCOVERED   PLAINLY  AND    FAITH- 

fully  according  to  the  Word  of  God.  Biy  John  Norcott.  A  New 
Edition,  corrected  and  somewhat  altered  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  Price, 
paper  covers,  6d. ;  cloth,  Is. 

FOR  EVER  AND  EVER.    A  College  Lecture  upon  the 

Duration  of  Euture  Punishment.    By  Rev.  George  Rogers.     Price  2d. 

FUTURE   PUNISHMENT.      A  Lecture  Delivered  to 

the  Students  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  College,  in  reply  to  a  series 
of  letters  in  "  The  Christian  World,''  from  the  Rev.  Edward  White.  By 
the  Rev.  George  Rogers.    Price  Id. 

MURSELL'S  LECTURES  TO  WORKING  MEN.     De- 

livered  at  the  Lambeth  Baths,  Westminster  Bridge  Road.  Price  One 
Penny  each ;  or  lOd.  the  series  in  wrapper.    Post  free. 


WHAT'S  YOUR  NAME  1 
TEMPLE  EAR. 
THE  CRYSTAL  PALACE. 
SUGAR-COATED  PILLS. 


COLOURS  OF  THE  RAINBOW. 
RIPPLES  ON  THE  RIVER. 
PACES  IN  THE  FIRE. 
CRIES  EROM  THE  CRADLE. 


WASHED  AWAY. 


PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  4,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS. 


Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01034  5413 


1 

DATE  DUE 

-^m,,: " 

^^^^^^. 

«W«<«S^:is^t!P^^ 

ir*"^'?^ 

ZOltt 

JWTF2 

\m 

GAYLORD 

#3523PI       Printed  in  USA 

