.Vl.Wfc-Ti 

F.  B.  MEYER 


GOULD  LIBRARY 
EASTERN  NAZARENE  COUErff! 


In  Defence  of  the  Faith 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/indefenceoffaithOOmeye 


Photo. 

J.  Russell  & Sous. 


'XoClco/viJI^ 

^ /3.  yyyju.ju>. 


In  Defence  of  the 
Faith 

The  Old  Better  than  the  Xew 


By  the 

Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A. 

Author  of  “ Steps  to  the  Blessed  Life,”  “ Some  Secrets 
of  Christian  Living,”  etc.,  etc. 


EATON  & MAINS : New  York. 
JENNINGS  & GRAHAM:  Cincinnati. 
1907 


1452 


Gtu-ftl 

6T 

3^^ 


Preface 


These  chapters  will  be  of  special  interest 
to  the  church  and  congregation  of  Christ 
Church,  to  which  they  were  addressed,  in 
another  form,  on  successive  Lord’s  Day 
evenings  at  the  close  of  my  ministry  there, 
of  fifteen  years. 

But  it  is  thought  that  they  will  influence 
and  help  a wider  circle ; and  they  are  sent 
forth  in  the  hope  that  they  may  admonish 
those  that  may  be  breaking  from  our  ranks, 
encourage  the  faint-hearted,  and  support 
the  weak. 

May  the  Good  Spirit  of  God  graciously 
make  use  of  them  for  the  Defence  of  the 
Faith  ! 

F.  B.  MEYER. 


The  Memorial  Hall, 
Farringdon  Street,  E.C. 


i 


4 


Contents 


PAGE 

THE  SUPERNATURAL  ELEMENT  IN  OUR 

lord's  birth II 

THE  DEATH  OF  THE  CROSS  . . *23 

SIN  MORE  THAN  SELFISHNESS  . . -39 

THE  NATURE  OF  OUR  LORD  . . -53 

LOSSES  AND  GAINS  IN  MODERN  RELIGIOUS 

THOUGHT 67 


OUR  LORD  S CREED 


83 


3T!te 

ttt  ffuv  JStrtft 


bill  put  enmite  tetbeen  tjee  antr 
boinan,  antr  tetbm  tftg  seetr  antr  Jer 


In  Defence  of  the  Faith 


Cite  ^ujietiratural  ^lewtettt 
(jt  rrttr  3$(vtit 

flp^HERE  seems  little  doubt  that  the 
Apostle  Paul  was  fully  cognisant  of 
the  mystery  which  attended  our  Lord's 
Birth.  In  a very  significant  phrase  he 
speaks  of  Him  as  '‘made  of  a woman” 
(Gal.  iv.  4).  We  must  surely  infer  that  he 
meant  something  more  than  to  refer  to  the 
ordinary  conditions  of  human  birth  when 
he  laid  stress  upon  this  phrase. 

This  inference  on  our  part  is  in  keeping 
with  the  old  Church  tradition  that  as  the 
Apostle  Peter  wrought  with  Mark  in  the 
preparation  of  the  second  Gospel,  so  Paul 


II 


IN  DEFEVjCE  OF  THE  FAITH 


collaborated  with  Luke  in  the  third  Gospel, 
which  is  especially  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord's 
humanity.  We  must  remember  the  cir- 
cumstances under  which  that  Gospel  was 
probably  written.  In  the  year  6o  A.D.  the 
air  was  full  of  enquiries  about  the  Christ. 
Who  is  this  Jesus  ? Who  were  His  parents  ? 
Where  was  He  born  and  reared?  In  what 
school  was  He  trained  ? All  these  enquiries 
were  passing  from  lip  to  lip ; and  as  they 
were  answered  at  third  or  fourth  hand, 
there  was  a danger  of  garbled  and  erroneous 
statements  becoming  current.  Under  these 
circumstances,  we  can  imagine  the  Apostle, 
who  was  set  for  the  defence  of  the  Gospel, 
urging  Luke  to  make  a thorough  investi- 
gation of  those  great  facts  which  lay  at 
the  root  of  Christianity.  ‘‘  Go,"  we  may 
imagine  his  saying,  “ and  investigate  from 
the  very  earliest  sources  the  story  of  our 
Lord's  Nativity." 


12 


OU^  LO^D^S 


Luke,  as  we  know,  was  one  of  the  most 
highly-trained  men  of  the  apostolic  group. 
The  Greek  of  the  first  four  verses  of  his 
Gospel  is  the  purest  Greek  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  bears  the  stamp  of  high 
culture.  He  was,  according  to  the  know- 
ledge of  that  day,  a scientific  man,  and 
versed  in  all  the  questions  of  birth  and  life, 
of  motherhood  and  paternity.  No  more 
accurate  or  suitable  investigator  could  have 
been  commissioned  to  make  the  necessary 
enquiry. 

In  the  prologue  of  his  Gospel  he  tells  us 
that  many  had  taken  in  hand  to  draw  up  a 
narrative  of  those  things  which  had  been 
fulfilled  in  their  midst.  He  admits  that  he 
had  not  been  himself  an  eye-witness  of  the 
original  facts,  but  tells  us  that  “ he  had 
traced  the  cause  of  all  things  accurately 
from  the  first.”  The  A.V.  obscures  his 
meaning  by  the  rendering,  ‘‘  It  seemed 

13 


IN  HEFEUI^E  OF  THE  FAITH 


good  to  me  also,  having  had  perfect  under- 
standing of  things  from  the  very  first’' ; but 
the  R.V.  very  appropriately  emphasises 
the  careful  investigation  which  had  traced 
back  the  wonderful  story  to  the  beginning. 
Those  words,  “to  the  very  first,"  clearly 
point  to  the  endeavour  that  he  had  made 
to  discover  the  earliest  traces  of  our  Lord’s 
advent  into  the  world. 

Students  have  remarked  on  the  great 
difference  between  the  pure  Greek  of  Luke’s 
opening  verses  and  the  simplicity  of  the 
remainder  of  the  first  two  chapters  of  his 
Gospel.  They  tell  us  that  these  seem  to 
be  a translation  of  the  Aramaic  patois 
which  was  spoken  by  the  peasants  of 
Galilee,  and  with  which  the  mother  of  Jesus 
was  certainly  familiar.  This  was  the  speech 
in  which  she  had  spoken  with  the  Boy 
Jesus.  It  was  the  homespun  talk  of  the 
carpenter’s  shop  as  it  was  the  medium  of 

14 


OUll  LO^D^S  ^ H 


His  dying  utterances.  We  can  imagine 
how  Luke  would  find  the  mother  of  Jesus, 
now  an  aged  woman,  verging  perhaps  on 
seventy  years,  residing,  it  may  be,  still  in 
the  village  of  Nazareth.  We  can  see  him 
gently  eliciting  the  things  which  she  had 
pondered  reverently  in  her  heart,  and 
taking  them  down  in  what  we  should  call 
shorthand.  We  can  understand  with  what 
careful  heed  he  would  catch  each  word  as 
it  fell  from  her  lips,  knowing  how  much 
depended  upon  his  literal  accuracy.  There 
is  an  artlessness,  a simplicity,  an  exquisite 
grace  in  the  story,  as  given  in  those  two 
memorable  chapters,  which  inevitably 
directs  our  minds  to  that  mother-heart 
which  lived  still  in  the  ever-memorable 
events  which  had  transpired  across  the  gulf 
of  years. 

With  these  notes  on  his  writing-tablets, 
Luke  found  his  way  back  to  the  great 

15 


IN  T>EFEDiCE  OF  FHE  FAITH 


Apostle  ; and  when,  finally,  the  whole  story 
was  set  out  as  the  portal  to  the  Gospel 
narrative  which  followed,  it  was  given  to 
the  world  with  the  double  endorsement  of 
Luke,  the  narrator,  and  of  Paul,  whose  life- 
course  had  been  so  marvellously  affected 
by  the  facts,  which  had  overborne  the 
opposition  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  argu- 
ments of  the  Sadducees,  and  of  which  he 
said : ‘‘  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness. 
He  who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  justi- 
fied in  the  spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached 
among  the  nations,  believed  on  in  the 
world,  received  up  to  glory.’’ 

After  all,  why  should  we  refuse  to  accept 
the  statement  of  the  Virgin  Birth  because 
of  its  mystery  ? Is  there  not  similar 
mystery  over  the  birth  of  every  individual  ? 
Even  if  we  are  more  familiar  with  the  con- 
ditions of  ordinary  birth,  are  they  not 
surrounded  by  the  veil  of  inscrutable 
l6 


0 L O S ^ I H 


mystery  ? If  there  were  not  mystery  in  the 
birth  of  our  Lord,  might  we  not  seriously 
question  whether  He  could  be  the  Word 
who  was  with  God,  and  who  was  God  ? 
When  God  becomes  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
surely  we  must  be  prepared  for  His  advent 
in  ways  that  we  had  not  known.  If  we 
were  to  obliterate  the  mystery  of  these 
' records,  and  reduce  them  to  the  ordinary 
light  of  every  day,  might  not  men  begin  to 
question  whether  the  Divine  Light  had 
really  tabernacled  in  curtains  of  mortality  ? 
Surely  there  are  processes  in  the  eternal 
world  which  are  hidden  from  mortal  ken, 
of  which  God  can  and  must  avail  Himself 
when  He  stoops  to  deliver  man.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  believe  that  He  acts  against 
law,  but  that  He  introduces  some  higher 
law  which  suspends  the  operation  of  a 
lower  one. 

At  this  juncture  we  may  also  call  in  the 
17  2 


IN  DEFED^CE  OF  FHE  FAITH 

testimony  of  men  of  science,  who  will  tell 
us  that  in  the  lower  orders  of  creation  there 
are  many  analogies  to  the  phenomenon  of 
Virgin  Birth  which  is  attested  both  by 
Matthew  and  Luke.  There  are  many 
species  of  beings  in  which  there  is  but  one 
parent,  and  if  this  is  possible  in  the  lower 
orders  of  being,  why  should  it  not  be  in  the 
higher  also  ? At  least  it  is  absurd  for  any 
of  us  to  say  that  the  fact  which  the  Bible 
records  is  impossible ; that  it  is  unusual  or 
rare,  we  may  say,  but  that  it  is  impossible 
no  thoughtful  man  can  say. 

But,  after  all,  the  question  is  not  one  of 
philosophy  or  speculation  or  human  reason ; 
it  is  as  to  the  historic  worth  and  accuracy 
of  the  Gospels  as  they  come  into  our  hand. 
They  have  been  subject  to  searching  in- 
vestigation ; they  have  passed  through  the 
crucible  of  criticism  ; the  keenest  intellects 
have  examined  them  with  the  microscope 
i8 


OUTl  LOTID^S  ^ I H 


under  the  fiercest  light,  and  the  opinion  of 
highly-trained  scholars  has  repeatedly 
ascribed  to  these  memoirs  the  attributes  of 
absolute  trustworthiness  and  authenticity. 

In  addition  to  this,  the  miraculous 
element  of  the  story  has  been  confirmed  by 
its  marvellous  effects  upon  the  world.  Far 
and  wide  it  has  proved  itself  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation.  The  home-life  has 
been  purified,  the  relation  between  parents 
and  children  ennobled,  the  sanctions  of  the 
marriage  life  have  become  enhanced,  and 
myriads  of  child-hearts  have  felt  the  thrill 
of  truth  as  they  have  heard  the  story  of 
Bethlehem.  Surely  these  fruits  prove  that 
the  tree  which  has  yielded  them  is  one  of 
God's  right-hand  planting.  A polluted 
fountain  could  not  flow  with  such  pure 
water,  and  a bundle  of  fiction  and  fables 
could  not  yield  so  fair  a harvest. 

It  may  be  frankly  acknowledged,  in  the 

19 


IN  T>EFEJ^CE  OF  THE  FAITH 


words  of  an  article  on  “Present-Day 
Theology/'  in  the  Homiletic  Review,  that, 
taking  this  item  of  the  Apostles'  Creed  as 
a test,  there  is  not  a church  in  Christendom 
(not  even  the  most  rationalistic  form  of  the 
Lutheran  Church)  that  would  eliminate  it 
from  the  Creed.  Here  it  may  be  stated 
the  Christian  Church,  as  a whole,  believes 
that,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  overshadowed 
the  Virgin  Mother,  He  counteracted  the 
natural  taint  of  fallen  humanity,  so  that 
only  a Holy  Thing  was  born  of  her. 


20 


“ (^otr  (oriitr  tfjat  I g^oultr  glorg,  sabe  m 
tfje  Cross  of  our  Hortr  Jfesus  Christ/' 


iBeatit  ot  tftt  Ci‘jcr^£? 


the  Apostle  Paul  Christ's  Death  was 
different  from  all  other  deaths,  and 
not  to  be  mentioned  in  the  same  category 
with  them.  A whole  heaven  of  difference 
intervened  between  the  Death  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  that,  for  instance,  of  Socrates, 
the  Athenian  Sage. 

So  far  as  we  know,  Socrates  lived  a pure 
and  beautiful  life.  He  was  sincere,  upright, 
disinterested,  and  singularly  pious,  accord- 
ing to  the  light  he  received.  His  disciple 
and  intimate  friend,  Xenophon,  declares 
that  he  never  undertook  any  work  without 
first  asking  counsel  of  the  gods.  A sense 
of  God,  a strong  faith  in  the  influence  and 
presence  of  God,  and  a deep  desire  to  be 

23 


IN  DEFEU\(CE  OF  THE  FAIFH 


governed  by  Him,  were  habitual  to  his  soul. 
He  devoted  his  life  to  the  diffusion  of  what 
he  believed  to  be  the  highest  truth  ; sought 
for  scholars  not  only  among  men  of  rank, 
but  among  labourers  and  mechanics ; and 
gathered  around  him  a body  of  devoted 
followers.  Finally,  he  was  condemned  to 
drink  the  cup  of  hemlock.  Why  is  it  that 
the  death  of  Socrates  is  viewed  as  the  death 
of  a martyr,  as  an  incident,  an  episode,  as  a 
tragic  termination  to  a useful  life,  whilst  in 
the  judgment  of  Paul  and  others,  who  knew 
the  circumstances  well,  the  Death  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  set  forth  as  the  main  end  and 
object  of  His  Incarnation?  The  life  and 
words  of  Socrates  are  his  main  contribution 
to  the  world ; but,  if  compelled  to  choose, 
who  would  not  be  willing  to  part  with  the 
records  of  our  Lord’s  life  and  teaching,  so 
long  as  the  record  of  His  Death  remained 
to  us?  Indeed,  though  the  Apostle  Paul 
24 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  CTjOSS 

must  have  been  familiar  with  ail  the 
things  that  Jesus  did  and  taught,  he  makes 
comparatively  small  reference  to  them, 
determined  to  know  nothing  save  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Him  crucified.  He  summed 
up  the  conclusion  to  which  he  had 
come,  after  a long  survey  of  the  possible 
objects  which  were  worth  living  for,  by 
saying : ‘‘  God  forbid  that  I should  glory, 
save  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.^’ 

It  may  be  said  that  the  peculiar  emphasis 
laid  by  the  Apostle  on  the  Death  of  Christ 
is  the  main  reason  of  the  special  significance 
with  which  Christendom  has  invested  it, 
but  it  must  be  remembered  that  Paul  reads 
into  the  tragedy  of  Calvary  nothing  more 
than  was  already  implied  by  the  words 
which  our  Lord  Himself  used  concerning 
it.  Just  as  the  plant  is  contained  in  the 
original  seed,  so  the  whole  doctrinal  position 
25 


IN  T>EFEU^E  OF  THE  FAIFH 


of  the  Pauline  Epistles  on  the  Lord's  death 
is  implied  in  two  statements  made  by  our 
Lord  Himself.  It  is  to  these  that  our 
attention  must  be  directed  if  we  would 
understand  the  Cross  aright. 

(i)  Six  months  before  our  Saviour  died, 
as  He  turned  His  back  upon  the  open  door 
of  Paradise,  and  took  the  cypress-lined  path 
which  led  to  the  Cross,  it  is  evident  that 
He  knew  precisely  all  things  which  awaited 
Him,  for  He  enumerated  them,  item  by 
item,  to  His  Apostles ; and  added,  “ The 
Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered 
unto  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a 
Ransom  for  rnany^'  (Mark  x.  45).  Notice 
that  remarkable  word.  It  implies  the 
ransom  price  of  a slave.  Socrates  could 
not  speak  thus  of  his  death ; no  one  could 
impute  to  that  cup  of  hemlock  the  power 
of  redeeming  others  from  the  consequences 
26 


THE  T)EArH  OF  THE  CT^OSS 


of  their  sin  ; but,  as  spoken  by  the  lips  of 
Jesus,  the  word  has  a priceless  value, 
suggesting  that  He  was  prepared  to  redeem 
us,  not  with  corruptible  things  as  silver  and 
gold,  but  with  His  own  precious  blood. 
We  must  view  the  Cross  through  the  lens 
of  His  own  consciousness. 

(2)  Once  again,  in  the  upper  room,  dark- 
ened by  the  sable  wings  of  approaching 
death,  when  His  followers  gathered  around 
Him  with  awe-struck  faces  and  hushed 
voices,  our  Lord  took  the  cup  and  said : 
This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  My 
Blood,  shed  for  you  and  for  many  /or  the 
remission  of  sins''  (Matt,  xxvi,  28).  These 
words  again  unfold  the  depths  of  our 
Saviour's  inner  consciousness,  as  He  drew 
near  the  hour  of  His  decease.  He  was 
conscious  that  He  was  about  to  bear  the 
sin  of  the  world,  and  that  by  His  stripes 
27 


IN  T>EFEUiCE  OF  rHE  FAIFH 

men  were  to  be  healed.  Did  Socrates  ever 
dream  of  suggesting  that  his  death  could 
remit  sin  ? and  does  not  this  reference  on 
the  part  of  our  Lord  give  new  meaning  to 
the  words  of  i Cor.  xv.  3 : “I  delivered  unto 
you  first  of  all  that  which  also  I received, 
how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins^  according 
to  the  Scriptures  ” ? 

These  two  passages  are  of  the  greatest 
importance  in  indicating  the  view  which 
our  Lord  had  of  His  death,  and  again  we 
ask  whether  there  is  anything  advanced  in 
the  Epistles  of  Paul  which  has  not  already 
been  implied  in  the  words  of  the  Master 
Himself? 

It  may  be  said  that  the  agony  in  the 
garden  was  inconsistent  with  the  exalted 
purpose  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Did 
He  not  seem  to  shrink,  as  any  man  might 
shrink,  from  the  anticipated  anguish  of 
Crucifixion  ? As  He  lay  on  the  crushed 
28 


THE  T>EArH  OF  THE  CES>SS 


grass  of  the  garden,  which  He  bedewed 
with  the  sweat  of  blood,  did  it  not  seem 
as  though  His  weak  human  nature  were 
strained  even  to  breaking-point,  revealing 
only  manhood  in  the  throes  of  mortal 
agony  ? But  remember  that  a nobler  ex- 
planation can  be  given,  which  effectually 
disposes  of  the  suggestion  that  Gethsemane 
is  inconsistent  with  the  conception  of  the 
Cross  as  the  supreme  sacrifice  for  sin.  Two 
contending  passions  met  in  the  bosom  of 
Christ.  On  the  one  hand  was  the  passion 
of  the  Redeemer  to  finish  the  v.-ork  that 
He  had  undertaken,  to  return  to  the 
Father’s  bosom,  to  accomplish  redemption. 
Did  He  not  say  that  He  was  straitened 
until  His  Baptism  was  accomplished  ? But, 
on  the  other  hand,  there  was  the  passion  of 
the  patriot.  Our  Lord  knew  well  that  His 
murder  would  bring  the  indelible  stain  of 
disgrace  upon  the  people  to  whom  He 
29 


IN  T>EFE3\(CE  OF  THE  FAITH 


belonged.  There  was,  above  all,  the  horror 
of  being  made  sin  for  us  all,  and  bearing 
away  the  guilt  of  the  world.  And  as  these 
two,  the  desire  to  depart  and  the  dread 
of  being  forsaken  by  God  for  our  sake, 
met  in  His  heart,  they  ruptured  its  slender 
walls,  and  pressed  the  blood  upon  His 
brow. 

We  therefore  must  believe  that  when  our 
Lord  died  He  took  upon  Himself  the  sin  of 
the  race,  its  shame,  its  curse,  and  the 
penalty  of  its  infraction  of  the  moral  law  of 
the  universe.  We  may  not  be  able  to  say 
exactly  how  our  Lord’s  sufferings  were  an 
equivalent  for  the  punishment  due  to  the 
race  for  sin,  but  we  must  believe  the  state- 
ments of  the  whole  New  Testament,  where 
inspired  men  one  after  another  assert  that 
He  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  Body  on  the 
tree,”  “that  He  suffered  the  Just  for  the 
unjust,”  and  that  “ He  was  made  a curse 
30 


rHE  T>EArH  OF  THE  C^OSS 


for  us.”  Nothing  can  be  clearer  than 
that  statement  in  Colossians  i.  20,  that 
‘'through  Him  God  made  peace  by  the 
Blood  of  His  Cross,  that  He  might 
reconcile  all  things  unto  Himself,  whether 
they  be  things  in  earth  or  things  in 
heaven.” 

The  work  of  our  Lord,  however,  has  been 
frequently  greatly  misrepresented.  Un- 
taught persons  have  put  it  thus — ^that  if 
there  were  in  the  same  school  two  boys,  one 
notoriously  bad,  and  the  other  quite  exem- 
plary for  his  goodness,  and  if  the  bad  boy 
deserved  punishment  but  the  teacher  chose 
to  call  up  the  good  one  and  make  him 
suffer,  the  bad  boy  might  be  let  off.  But 
it  must  not  be  supposed  for  a moment  that 
the  Infinite  God  imposed  suffering  upon 
the  holy  soul  of  Jesus  by  His  arbitrary, 
though  Divine  will.  Had  this  been  the 
case,  it  would  have  been  an  act  of  injustice, 

31 


IN  T>EFEDiCE  OF  THE  FAITH 


before  which  the  very  foundations  of  the 
Eternal  Throne  would  have  rocked.  God 
must  be  just,  when  He  becomes  the  Justifier. 
Let  me  give  an  illustration  which  seems  to 
me  to  offer  a truer  standpoint  from  which 
we  may  enter  into  the  meaning  of  “ that 
wondrous  Death/' 

Years  ago,  when  I was  working  in 
Leicester  amongst  discharged  prisoners,  I 
was  in  the  habit  of  taking  them  to  an 
institution  which  I founded.  One  rule  of 
the  establishment  was  that  no  one  should 
touch  intoxicating  liquor  as  long  as  he 
remained  there.  To  be  drunk  was  to 
involve  instant  expulsion.  One  morning, 
when  I reached  the  place,  my  manager  told 
me  that  four  men  had  become  drunk  on  the 
preceding  night,  and  as  I entered  the  break- 
fast-room  to  conduct  prayers,  the  four  men 
were  seated  together  on  a form,  whilst 
around  them  were  grouped  some  thirty 

32 


THE  T>EArH  OF  THE  CF^SS 


others,  all  interested  in  the  proceedings. 
For  a moment  I was  in  a dilemma.  If  I 
dismissed  the  men,  as  my  rules  demanded, 
I should  lose  the  results  of  all  my  trouble 
with  them,  besides  almost  certainly  landing 
them  in  prison  again ; but  if,  on  the  other 
hand,  I were  to  forgive  them  and  pass  over 
their  fault,  the  remainder  of  the  men  would 
say  that  what  I had  done  for  them  I would 
do  for  others,  and  I might  have  had  every 
one  of  them  drunk  by  nightfall.  I therefore 
bethought  me  of  the  following  expedient. 
I said : ‘‘  Men,  I am  a poor  man,  and  am 
keeping  up  this  place  at  a great  expenditure 
of  vital  energy.  I have  often  to  sit  up  late 
at  night  writing  in  order  to  earn  money  to 
maintain  it.  Every  sovereign  therefore 
which  I earn  stands  for  hard  work,  and  toil, 
and  forfeiture  of  sleep,  but  I am  prepared 
to  put  down  a piece  of  gold  as  a ransom 
for  each  of  you  four  men,  that,  by  suffering 
33  3 


IN  DEFEO^E  OF  THE  FAITH 


myself,  I may  be  able  to  save  you  from 
suffering,  or  being  sent  back  to  your  old 
ways/'  The  men  were  deeply  affected,  and 
the  shuttles  of  repentance  began  to  weave 
the  fabric  of  a new  life  within  them,  for  all 
the  men  in  the  place  felt  that  my  forgiveness 
had  cost  me  blood,  that  the  moral  govern- 
ment of  the  institution  had  been  maintained, 
and  that  sin  on  their  part  was  not  to  be 
thought  of,  in  view  of  the  inevitable  cost  to 
myself 

This,  in  poor  human  act,  seems  to  set 
forth  the  heart  of  the  Atonement,  in  which 
God  in  the  person  of  Christ  took  upon 
Himself  the  shame  and  sorrow  of  the  race, 
and  bore  it  for  us  all.  Of  course  it  is  always 
possible  for  any  of  us  to  contract  ourselves 
out  of  the  benefits  of  the  Atonement,  but 
we  do  so  to  our  own  infinite  loss,  for  ‘‘  God 
was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto 
Himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto 
34 


rHE  T^EATH  OF  THE  CEJ^SS 


them/^  and  hath  committed  unto  His 
servants  the  ministry  of  reconciliation,  so 
that  men  are  bidden  to  lay  down  their 
opposition,  ground  their  arms,  and  accept 
the  Atonement. 

But  there  is  more.  We  are  told  that  it 
was  by  “ the  Eternal  Spirit ''  that  our  Lord 
offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God.  There 
is  therefore  the  element  of  Eternity  in  the 
Cross.  It  does  not  belong  to  one  age,  nor 
to  the  past.  It  is  not  separated  from  us  by 
the  chasm  of  nineteen  centuries.  It  towers 
over  the  wrecks  of  time.  It  has,  therefore, 
perennial  potency  and  power,  as  we  may 
prove  for  ourselves.  In  the  first  chapter  of 
his  first  Epistle  to  Corinth,  the  Apostle 
says  that  ‘‘  the  word  of  the  Cross  is  to  them 
who  are  being  saved  the  Power  of  God.^’ 

We  can,  as  we  have  said,  prove  this  for 
ourselves.  If  the  virus  of  sin  is  poisoning 
the  fountain  of  our  blood,  if  we  are  being 
35 


IN  TiEFE!XCE  OF  THE  FAITH 


continually  overmastered  by  corrupt  and 
evil  passion,  let  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit  seek 
personal  and  conscious  union  with  Christ 
in  His  Cross  : so  shall  we  be  delivered  from 
the  bondage  of  corruption  and  share  the 
eternal  victory  of  His  Resurrection ; and 
this  will  prove  that  His  Death  was  no 
ordinary  martyrdom. 


36 


Mvt  i^0re  titan  ^eUi^itneiS© 


“^in  10  tje  Cransgression  of  if)t  Hato. 


endeavour  is  being  made  to  interpret 
the  Religion  of  Christ  in  terms  of  a 
philosophical  system,  and  the  amount  of 
cutting-off  and  paring-down  which  has  to 
be  done  to  get  Christ  into  the  small  con- 
taining space  is  prodigious.  Indeed,  there 
is  not  much  left,  certainly  nothing  worth 
dying  for,  hardly  enough  worth  living  for. 

Amongst  other  shrinkages,  we  find  that 
the  conception  of  sin,  which  is  now  being 
promulgated,  and  which  we  are  being  coaxed 
to  accept,  is  that  it  is  selfishness.  The 
sinful  life  is  the  life  which  is  lived  for  self 
alone'’  {The  New  Theology,  p.  52).  We 
are  prepared  to  admit  that  sin  is  the  asser- 
tion of  our  self-life,  of  the  “ I ” which  is 
39 


IN  TDEFEDiCE  OF  FHE  FAIFH 


always  striving  for  prominence  ; but  surely 
that  is  not  all  to  be  said  of  it.  This  defini- 
tion may  be  true  when  sin  is  viewed  simply 
from  the  standpoint  of  nature  and  phil- 
osophy ; but  there  are  other  aspects  from 
which  we  must  view  it.  There  are  other 
planes  of  being  and  thinking  into  which 
sin  has  intruded  and  which  it  has  dis- 
turbed ; and  from  these  we  must  obtain 
those  further  conceptions  of  the  nature  of 
sin,  which  must  be  considered  before  our 
analysis  can  be  complete  and  our  definition 
satisfactory. 

This  is  no  heresy-hunt,  no  theological 
hair-splitting.  Everything  in  religion  hinges 
on  the  conception  which  is  held  of  sin.  If 
sin  is  only  an  outburst  of  selfishness,  it  may 
be  cleansed  with  rose-water.  The  text  that 
reminds  us  that  our  Redeemer  came  not 
by  water  only,  but  by  water  and  blood,*' 
will  be  robbed  of  its  significant  emphasis ; 
40 


SIN  MOTjE  rUAN  SELFISHO^jESS 

and  we  shall  be  told  that  ‘‘the  blood  of 
Calvary  is  the  symbol  of  the  freely-offered 
love  of  Christ,”  that  “ the  spirit  of  self- 
sacrifice  and  love  was  and  is  the  real  blood 
of  Christ/’ 

What  is  to  save  Religion  from  dying  out  ? 
Certainly  not  Philosophy  nor  Institu- 
tionalism, not  the  Cinematograph  nor  the 
Social  element  in  the  Church-life ; but  the 
conviction  of  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of 
sin,  expressed  in  the  terms  of  the  present 
day,  and  driven  home  on  the  conscience 
and  heart,  with  the  fire  and  cogency  of 
John  Owen,  though  probably  not  with  his 
precise  terminology.  Does  not  our  nation 
and  our  age  need  awakening  to  the  claims 
of  God?  Is  it  not  necessary  to  show  how 
sin  affects  Him,  and  that  it  is  not  merely 
selfishness,  but  a crime  against  Him,  as  the 
Moral  Ruler  of  the  Worlds,  and  rebellion 
against  the  Father  of  our  spirits? 

41 


IN  T^EFEOjCE  OF  THE  FAITH 

Take  this  definition  of  sin,  that  it  is  only 
selfishness,  into  the  Court  of  Conscience,  Will 
it  stand  the  white  light  which  streams  from 
that  miniature  judgment-seat?  No,  for 
when  we  have  sinned,  the  inward  voice  of 
conscience  immediately  insists  that  we 
have  wrought  an  injury  against  God,  against 
His  moral  rule,  as  well  as  against  ourselves 
and  our  neighbours.  Even  if  we  ask  the 
pardon  of  some  fellow-sinner  whose  rights 
we  have  invaded,  we  can  never  really  rest 
until  we  have  sought  and  obtained  the 
forgiveness  of  the  Almighty. 

Take  this  definition  into  the  Court  of 
History,  Is  it  all  that  should  be  said, — said 
of  Nero  or  Borgia,  when  the  historian  de- 
scribes them  as  prostituting  every  interest 
committed  to  their  keeping, — that  it  was 
the  indulgenceof  selfishand  sensual  passion? 
Surely,  they  were  more  than  selfish  ! They 
must  be  brought  in  as  guilty  of  high  crimes 
42 


SIN  MOI{E  THAN  SELFISHV^ESS 


against  humanity,  whose  guise  they  wore, 
against  the  claims  of  the  Moral  Universe 
which  they  flouted,  and  against  the  God 
who  made  them  ! As  their  Maker,  He  had 
a right  to  claim  their  gratitude  for  His 
mercies,  and  their  recognition  of  His 
righteous  rule ! 

Take  the  definition  into  the  Court  of 
Autobiography.  Ask  David,  weeping  over 
the  fatal  sin  that  brought  so  dark  a stain 
on  his  fair  robe,  and  so  lasting  a slur  on  his 
good  name,  whether  he  is  not  too  profuse 
in  his  self-condemnation,  since  his  sin  was 
simply  an  excess  of  self-gratification,  and 
he  will  turn  away  as  from  a miserable 
comforter,  crying : “ Against  Thee,  Thee 
only,  have  I sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in 
Thy  sight,  that  Thou  may  be  justified 
when  Thou  speakest  and  be  clear  when 
Thou  judgest Open  The  Confessions  of 
Augustine,  and  notice  how,  in  every  para- 
43 


IN  DEFEDiCE  OF  FHE  FAIFH 


graph,  he  turns  from  the  sin  which  he 
recounts,  to  pour  out  his  entreaties  and 
cries  for  mercy  into  the  ear  of  Him  who 
fills  heaven  and  earth.  Turn  to  Shake- 
speare, than  whom  none  has  proved  him- 
self a greater  master  of  the  passages  of 
the  soul.  Is  there  not  something  more 
than  the  confession  of  selfishness  in  those 
words  of  Macbeth,  when  he  asks  Whether 
“all  great  Neptune’s  ocean”  can  wash 
the  blood  of  the  murdered  king  clean  from 
his  hand  ? 

What  would  Paul,  that  great  self-anato- 
mist, have  said,  when  he  was  lamenting  in 
his  later  life  over  the  persecution  of  the 
martyrs  of  the  early  Church,  if  he  had  been 
told  that,  after  all,  he  could  only  accuse 
himself  of  unbounded  selfishness  ? “ Nay,” 

he  would  reply,  “ say  not  so,  for  I was 
before  a blasphemer,  and  a persecutor,  and 
injurious,  and  I needed  to  obtain  mercy 
44 


SIN  MOI(E  THAN  SELFISH J\(ESS 


from  the  hands  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
which  abounded  toward  mel 

We  are  told  that  “sin  has  never  injured 
God  except  through  man'’  {The  New 
Theology,  p.  53),  and  that  there  is  no  Great 
White  Throne.  But  surely  God  must  have 
some  claims  on  His  creatures,  to  say  nothing 
about  His  children  ; and  where  those  claims 
are  resisted  or  ignored,  there  is  an  immediate 
rupture  of  the  happy  fellowship,  and  a sense 
of  the  grave  wrong  which  has  been  per- 
petrated. God  has  also  issued  explicit 
commandsand  injunctions, which  are  written 
alike  in  the  Nature  of  Things,  in  the  con- 
stitution of  Human  Nature,  and  in  Scripture. 
When  men  violate  and  condemn  these, 
surely  they  incur  penalty,  as  they  certainly 
inflict  an  injury  on  the  kingdom  of  His 
Grace.  “ A son  honoureth  his  father,  and 
a servant  his  master ; if  then  I be  a father, 
where  is  mine  honour  ? and  if  I be  a master, 
45 


IN  T>EFEJs(CE  OF  THE  FAITH 


where  is  my  fear  ? “ All  have  sinned,  and 

come  short  of  the  Glory  of  God/' 

We  have  been  told  of  late  that  we  are 
not  altogether  responsible  for  our  sin,  or  at 
least  we  are  to  regard  it  as  inevitable  in 
the  processes  of  the  Divine  self-realisation. 
The  man  who  got  drunk  last  night,  the 
roue  in  Piccadilly,  were  in  search  of  God. 
Sin  is  a quest  for  the  Infinite.  But  this 
seems  like  doing  evil  that  good  may  come. 
We  have  no  right  to  assume  that  we  must 
pass  through  the  commission  of  wrong 
things  in  order  to  know  right,  and  must  be 
very  jealous  of  any  teaching  which  lessens 
the  responsibility  of  the  soul.  The  words 
of  the  Book  of  Job  must  always  claim  our 
heed,  not  only  because  of  their  venerable 
age,  but  because  they  have  been  verified  by 
centuries  of  Christian  experience.  ‘‘  1 have 
sinned  and  perverted  that  which  was  right, 
and  it  profited  me  not."  Supposing  that  a 
46 


SIN  MOI{E  THAN  SELFISHN^ESS 


criminal,  brought  before  a judge  for  drunken 
and  disorderly  conduct,  were  to  plead  that 
he  was  not  responsible,  because  of  his 
heredity,  or  environment,  or  the  natural 
laws  of  moral  evolution,  he  would  not 
escape  the  penalty  of  fine  or  imprisonment, 
and  what  will  not  avail  in  the  lower  plane 
of  earthly  justice  will  be  found  wanting  in 
the  High  Plane  of  the  Eternal  Justice. 

It  has  often  been  affirmed  that  “every 
fall  is  a fall  upward.”  If  that  were  so,  the 
sin  of  an  Iscariot  was  a prodigious  advance 
towards  his  ultimate  salvation.  At  this 
rate,  the  more  men  sin  the  quicker  will  be 
their  complete  deliverance.  At  Meudon,  in 
the  French  Revolution,  says  Joseph  Cook, 
gloves  were  made  out  of  human  skins  ; but 
would  anyone  care  to  comfort  the  relatives 
of  the  flayed  Frenchmen,  that  sin  was  a 
necessary  step  in  the  process  of  virtue — 
development  ? On  that  hypothesis,  by  many 

47 


IN  T>EFEDiCE  OF  FHE  FAIFH 


a long,  winding  slope,  every  thief,  and  leper, 
and  perjurer,  and  murderer,  would  come  at 
last  to  a height  as  lofty  as  he  could  have 
reached  if  he  had  gone  up  without  sin. 
lago  falls;  but  he  falls  upward.  He  is 
getting  possession  of  his  faculties.  This 
kind  of  learning  does  not  tend  to  comfort 
you  if  some  miscreant  has  stolen  your 
watch ! 

f Sin  is  the  refusal  or  failure  to  realise 
God^s  ideal,  the  outlines  of  which  are  written 
on  the  soft  tablets  of  the  heart,  and  em- 
bodied in  the  perfect  man,  Christ  Jesus. 
When  a clock  is  in  order,  it  keeps  time  ; 
and  when  our  moral  nature  is  in  order, 
it  will  obey  the  promptings  of  conscience 
and  the  dictates  of  Scripture.  But  too 
often,  when  the  inner  voice  says,  You 
ought,’'  we  reply,  “ But  we  will  not  ” ; or 
when  it  says,  '‘You  ought  not,”  we  reply, 
“We  will.”  The  wheels  may  be  of  gold. 


SIN  MOI{E  THAN  SELFISH:J\(ESS 


silver,  or  precious  stones,  but  if  the  clock 
fails  to  keep  the  hour,  of  what  use  is  it? 
and  if  we  fail  of  God's  purpose,  we  are 
rejected  and  come  nigh  to  the  curse. 

Sin  is  negative  as  well  as  positive.  It  is 
a failure  to  realise  God's  standard,  equally 
as  it  is  a distinct  invasion  of  His  rights.  It 
may  be  forgiven,  when  we  forsake  it,  turn 
from  it,  and  confess  it.  But  the  secondary 
results  will  yet  accrue.  The  evil  entail  will 
refuse  to  be  cut  off.  The  limp  caused  by 
the  serpent's  sting  may  be  almost  obliter- 
ated, but  the  scar  must  remain.  God  can 
forgive,  and  He  can  forgive  fully,  because 
He  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the 
Tree  ; but  we  reap  as  we  have  sown.  Sin 
is  therefore  more  than  selfishness.  It  is  a 
crime  against  the  Holy  God,  and  its  for- 
giveness is  only  possible  because  God,  in 
the  Person  of  Christ,  bore  our  sins  in  His 
own  body  on  the  Tree.J 
49 


4 


IN  T>EFE3iCE  OF  THE  FAITH 


The  following  sane,  strong  words  by 
Professor  Orr  are  of  immense  weight  in 
this  connection.  He  says:  “The  ‘ FalH  is 
put  in  question  by  evolution ; but  unless 
sin  is  made  a necessity,  and  deprived  of  its 
heinousness  before  God,  which  made  re- 
demption needful,  its  origin  must  ever  be 
sought  in  the  voluntary  departure  from 
rectitude  of  a creature  who  had  the  power 
to  live  obediently.'’ 


Cite  i^atttre  af  #ttt  Earlf 


‘‘CJomas  anstomlr,  antr  saitr  nnto 
Horlr  antr  mg  0otr." 


iifftttte  at  <!5ur  Iturtr 

JVF  we  take  Scripture  for  our  Guide  and 
Authority,  we  cannot  doubt  Pre- 
existent Glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  Apostle  tells  us  that  He  was  “ in 
the  form  of  God”  (Phil.  ii.  S-8),  and  the 
Greek  word  translated  “form,”  means  a 
great  deal  more  than  the  external  appear- 
ance. It  stands  for  the  essence  of  God's 
nature,  so  that  there  is  an  exact  agreement 
between  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  and 
the  Prologue  to  the  Fourth  Gospel,  where 
we  are  taught  that  “the  Word  was  with 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God,  and  the 
same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God  ” 
(John  i.  1-4). 

These  deep  words  prove  that  whatever 

S3 


IN  DEFENSE  OF  FHE  FAIFH 


God  was  in  the  uncreated  eternity  of  the 
past — the  infinite,  the  incomprehensible, 
the  all-holy,  the  all-blessed,  that  the  Eternal 
Christ  was,  who  was  as  absolutely  one 
with  Him,  as  spirit  and  soul  are  one  in  the 
organisation  of  our  nature. 

When,  therefore,  we  are  told  on  the  first 
page  of  the  Bible  that  God  made  man  in 
His  own  image  and  after  His  likeness,  we 
are  intended  to  believe  that  the  Christ, 
who  from  all  Eternity  was  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father,'’  gave  the  type  after  which 
our  human  nature  was  modelled.  It  is 
just  what  we  might  have  expected,  then, 
that  those  who  put  on  " Christ  discover 
that  they  are  being  renewed  unto  know- 
ledge, after  (or  according  to)  the  image  of 
Him  who  originally  created  them  (Eph.  iv. 
24;  Col.  iii.  10). 

Christ  is  called  the  “ Word  of  God'C  be- 
cause through  Him  the  Abysmal  God  has 
54 


rHE  O^rURE  OF  OUR  LORTO 


uttered  Himself.  As  a man  utters  himself, 
and  makes  his  thoughts  and  feelings  known 
by  the  words  he  speaks,  so  God  has  made 
Himself  known  to  us  in  the  Son  of  His 
love,  who  in  another  place  is  said  to  be 
the  image  of  the  invisible  Godl'  Yet 
again.  He  is  described  as  “ the  effulgence  of 
His  glory  I'  i.e,^  the  outshining  ray  of  the 
Eternal  Sun,  and  the  very  image  of  His 
substance'^'  i,e.^  corresponding  to  the  Divine 
nature,  as  a seal  to  the  die  (Heb.  i.  3). 

Through  Christ  the  Material  Universe 
came  into  existence,  ''  All  things  were  made 
through  Him^  and  without  Him  was  nothing 
made  that  was  made''  (John  i.  2 ; see  also 
Col.  i.  15-17).  Notice  the  clear  distinction 
made  here.  The  Pantheist  says  that  God 
is  All,  and  that  All  is  God.  His  faith  is 
summed  up  in  the  aphorism  of  Hegel — 
All  that  is,  is  Divine.”  There  is  no  room 
for  Prayer,  for  sin,  for  the  Atonement,  in 
55 


T>EFEU\(^E  OF  THE  FAIFH 


that  dreary  system.  How  can  you  pray, 
there  is  None  to  address  except  the  God, 
who  is  in  each  one  of  us?  How  can  you 
sin,  when  all  you  do  is  due  to  the  effort  of 
the  God,  who  is  within  you,  towards  self- 
realisation  ? How  can  there  be  Atone- 
ment, when  there  is  no  Being  higher  and 
better  than  you  are  to  step  in  and  bear  the 
brunt  of  your  wrong-doing  ? 

Notice  how  carefully  accurate  the  in- 
spired writings  are  ! There  was  a time 
when  the  material  universe  did  not  exist — 
it  was  created.  But  the  world  is  not  God. 
Created  things  are  not  God.  They  are 
sustained  by  One  who  brought  them  into 
being,  and  pervades  them  in  all  their 
fulness,  but  is  apart  from  them,  God  over 
all,  blessed  for  ever.  Between  these  created 
things,  which  we  see,  touch,  and  handle,  and 
the  great  God  whom  no  man  can  see  and 
live,  there  is  the  Word,  who  has  ever  acted 
56 


THE  :HArURE  OF  OUR  LORJD 


as  the  medium  for  God’s  utterance,  and  for 
the  forth-putting  of  His  power.  Himself 
God,  He  uttered  God.  No  other  being 
could  have  done  so,  because  He  stood  in 
a unique  relation  to  God,  just  as  our  speech 
cannot  be  used  by  any  other  than  our- 
selves. Inspiration  therefore  writes  the 
name  of  Christ  on  stars  and  clouds,  on 
avalanches  and  snowflakes,  on  the  pillared 
forest,  and  the  blades  of  the  meadow. 
Everywhere  we  meet  the  touch  of  “ His 
unrivalled  finger.” 

Throughout  the  ages  the  progress  of  man- 
kind has  been  due  to  His  direction.  From 
Christ  those  quickening  impulses  have 
been  received,  which  have  kept  mankind 
from  being  overwhelmed  in  the  Stygian 
bog  of  self-indulgent  passion.  From  Him 
the  great  teachers  of  our  race  have  derived 
their  inspiration.  As  ‘‘  the  true  light,”  He 
has  lighted  every  man  coming  into  the 
57 


IN  defense  of  fhe  faith 


world  (John  i.  9).  The  regular  advance  of 
human  history,  in  spite  of  many  endeavours 
to  resist  it,  has  been  due  to  the  promptings 
and  ideals  which  He  has  communicated. 
His  delights  have  ever  been  with  the  sons 
of  men,  and  the  growth  of  civilisation  in 
science,  medicine,  art,  and  mechanical 
power  must  be  traced  to  Him,  as  its  Alpha 
and  Omega,  beginning  and  end,  first  and 
last.  He  spoke  in  the  eloquence  of  Isaiah 
and  the  tears  of  Jeremiah,  in  the  argument 
of  the  Book  of  Job  and  the  Psalm-lyrics 
of  David,  in  Moses  and  Malachi.  The 
portions  were  divers,  and  the  manners 
many,  but  the  Voice  was  One.  The  Rise 
of  Egypt,  the  Fall  of  Babylon,  the  con- 
quests of  Cyrus  and  Alexander,  the  imperial 
splendour  of  Rome,  the  invasion  of  the 
Northern  Peoples,  were  all  steps  in  that 
Plan,  which  He  is  leading  by  successive 
stages  to  one  final  and  glorious  goal. 

58 


THE  :JiArURE  OF  OUR  LORTD 


As  Jesus  Christ  God  became  Incarnate, 
God  was  manifest  in  Jesus  Christ  in  a 
manner  that  cannot  be  approached  by  any 
human  being  beside.  Think  for  a moment 
of  that  remarkable  scene,  six  months  before 
the  death  on  the  Cross,  and  on  the  eve  of 
the  Transfiguration,  when  Peter  acknow- 
ledged Him  to  be  ‘‘  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
the  living  God’^  (Matt.  xvi.  i6).  From  the 
manner  with  which  our  Lord  greeted  this 
appellation,  it  is  clear  that  Peter  meant, 
and  that  Jesus  knew  that  he  meant,  more 
than  could  be  said  of  any  ordinary  man. 
The  Socinian  holds  that  Jesus  Christ  was 
man,  only  of  such  remarkable  moral 
eminence  that  He  may  be  said  to  be 
Divine.  The  Arian  maintains  that  He 
existed  before  His  Incarnation,  but  that 
there  was  a time  when  He  did  not  exist. 
The  Pantheist  believes  Him  to  be  an 
exhibition  of  the  Divine  Immanence  on 
59 


IN  T>EFEU^CE  OF  THE  FAITH 


the  highest  plane,  and  counts  that  the 
same  energy  will  ultimately  realise  the 
same  result  in  all  men.  But  against  these 
we  oppose  the  ancient  creed  : I believe  in 

One  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Only-begotten 
Son  of  God.  Begotten  of  His  Father 
before  all  Worlds,  God  of  God,  Light  of 
Light,  Very  God  of  Very  God,  Begotten 
not  made.  Being  OF  One  Substance 
WITH  the  Father,  by  whom  all  things  were 
made,  who  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation 
came  down  from  Heaven,  and  was  incarnate 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary, 
and  was  made  Man.” 

We  must  guard  against  a conception  of 
Christ  which  says  that  He  is  the  perfect 
Revelation  of  God,  but  that  He  is  not 
personally  God.  We  must  also  beware  of 
the  idea  that  we  were  as  really  and  truly 
present  as  He  was  in  the  Divine  Nature 
from  all  eternity.  We  must  equally  take 
6o 


THE  ViATURE  OF  OUR  LORTO 


care  that  we  do  not  rob  our  Lord  of  a 
truly  human  body  and  soul.  Nothing  can 
be  more  absolute  than  the  teaching  of  the 
Fourth  Gospel,  that  the  Eternal  Word 
became  flesh.  “He  took,'’  says  Liddon,“a 
Body  of  Flesh,  and  His  whole  Humanity 
both  of  Soul  and  Body  shared  in  the  sinless 
infirmities  which  belong  to  our  common 
nature.  . . . The  place  ot  a created  in- 
dividual at  the  root  of  thought  and  feeling 
and  will  is  supplied  by  the  Eternal  Word, 
who  has  wrapped  around  His  Being  a 
created  Nature,  through  which,  in  its  un- 
mutilated perfection,  He  acts  upon  man- 
kind. 

When  we  speak  of  our  Lord  as  the 
Second  Person  of  the  Blessed  Trinity,  we 
must  not  suppose  that  we  are  called 
to  acknowledge  three  Gods.  The  word 
“ Person  ” means  primarily  the  mask  worn 
by  an  actor,  and  the  persons  of  the  God- 
61 


IN  T>EFEO\(CE  OF  FHE  FAIFH 

head  are  used  to  denote  three  distinct 
forms  of  Being,  which  are  eternal  and 
necessary  in  the  One  supreme  Essence, 
which  we  know  as  God. 

But  in  the  Incarnation  our  Lord  submitted 
to  certain  limitations^  which  the  Apostle 
refers  to  when  he  says^  “ He  emptied  Him- 
self (Phil.  ii.  7,  R.V.).  His  miracles,  for 
instance,  were  not  wrought  by  the  putting 
forth  of  His  intrinsic  and  original  power 
as  God,  but  by  the  power  which  He  received 
hour  by  hour  from  the  Father.  He  did 
nothing  from  Himself,  didn’t  speak  His  own 
words,  or  do  His  own  works.  The  Father 
that  indwelt  Him  was  the  source  of  all. 
‘‘God  was  in  Christ.”  Whatever  Christ 
did,  God  did  through  Him  ; so  that  the 
death  of  the  Cross  was  the  act  of  the 
entire  Deity,  “ through  the  Eternal  Spirit.” 
Let  us  love  Him  the  more,  because  ab- 
solutely and  voluntarily  He  forewent  the 
62 


THE  V^ArURE  OF  OUR  LORT> 


use  of  attributes  that  lay  all  around  Him, 
like  tools  within  the  reach  of  the  skilled 
mechanic,  that  He  might  live  a truly 
human  life,  weeping  our  tears  and  receiving 
from  the  Father  grace  upon  grace.” 

In  His  Resurrection  and  Ascension^  how- 
ever, our  Lord  resumed  the  use  of  those 
Attributes,  which  He  had  temporarily  laid 
aside.  Just  so,  a man  might  resume  the 
use  of  his  right  hand,  which  he  had 
temporarily  held  behind  his  back.  In  His 
exaltation  to  the  right  hand  of  power,  our 
Lord  now  therefore  combines  the  glory  of 
the  perfected  Manhood  and  the  glory  of 
the  Blessed  God,  which  He  had  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was  made.  His 
Name  (that  is,  His  Nature)  is  therefore 
above  every  name.  To  the  name  of  Jesus, 
the  perfected  servant,  is  added  the  incom- 
municable name  of  Jehovah.  In  that 
name  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every 

63 


IN  t>efe:i(ce  of  the  faith 


tongue  confess  that  He  is  Lord,  to  the 
Glory  of  God  the  Father  : and  He  is  with 
us  in  the  weary  march  of  the  generations, 
in  harmony  with  His  faithful  word,  “ Lo,  I 
am  with  you  always,  unto  the  consum- 
mation of  the  Age/* 

How  long  that  moment  may  be  distant 
we  know  not.  This  only  we  are  certain  of, 
that  He  will  ultimately  put  down  all  rule, 
and  authority,  and  power.  “ And  when 
all  things  have  been  subjected  unto  the 
Father,  then  shall  the  Son  (in  the  media- 
torial capacity)  also  Himself  be  subjected 
to  Him  that  did  subject  all  things  unto 
Him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all.** 


64 


ffirtf  in  iWnlfn*n 

l^eUaintt^  Citnuflitt 


s 


“13etoare  lest  ang  sjioil  ttiroug^ 
antr  bam  BtctiV 


ffjttr  (§mn^  in  iWntrn*n 

^Ip^HE  Religious  world  has  been  strangely 
moved  of  late  with  what  professes  to 
be  a fresh  statement  of  the  Christian  Faith. 
With  respect  to  this  we  enter  the  following 
cautions : — 

(i)  You  may  gain  a Philosophy  and  lose 
your  Religion,  The  Philosophic  system 
which  is  being  so  widely  discussed  at  the 
present  time  is  known  as  Monistic  Idealism. 
Monistic  is  of  course  derived  from  the  Greek 
word  Only  or  Alone,  Monistic  Idealism  is 
the  conception  of  the  Universe  as  being  the 
expression  of  one  indwelling  Omnipresent 
Power  which  enters  into  the  tiniest  atom 

67 


77V  T)EFEDiCE  OF  FHE  FAIFH 

of  the  whole.  In  order  to  understand  this 
system,  let  us  conceive  of  a tree  which  from 
its  root,  trunk,  bark,  branches,  twigs,  leaves, 
bloom,  fruit  is  all  permeated  and  penetrated 
by  one  life.  The  whole  of  this  great  universe, 
embracing  all  that  is  material,  intellectual, 
moral,  may  therefore  be  conceived  as  the 
expression  of  the  one  indwelling  and  im- 
manent spirit  which  pervades,  inspires,  and 
infills  all  things.  This,  speaking  generally, 
is  Monistic  Idealism.  It  is  an  ancient 
system  of  thought  which  dates  from  days 
far  away,  beyond  the  time  of  Christ ; and 
those  who  hold  it  come  very  near  Pantheism, 
which  teaches  that  ‘‘Pan,”  i,e.  The  All^  is 
God ; “ Theism  ” — All  is  God  and  God  is 
All.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  said — “ All  that 
is,  is  divine,”  and  the  contrary  of  that  is 
true — that  God  is  the  reality  of  which  the 
whole  universe  is  the  expression.  Conse- 
quently, according  to  this  teaching,  we 
68 


MOT>ERN  %ELIGIO  US  THO  UGHT 

must  believe  that  God  is  not  a Person  as 
distinct  from  other  persons.  T o use  the  words 
of  the  editor  of  the  British  Weekly — His 
goodness  is  the  goodness  of  His  creatures. 
His  knowledge  is  the  sum  of  their  know- 
ledge, that,  and  no  more.  God  has  no 
existence  out  of  the  world  any  more  than 
life  has  outside  of  things  living.’'  In  other 
words,  God  does  not  live  apart  from  the 
universe,  but  He  is  embodied  in  the  universe, 
and  it  is  the  expression  of  His  nature. 

The  logical  outcome  of  this  is  that  God 
becomes  indwelling  and  immanent,  but  not 
transcendent,  for  it  is  certain  that  there 
cannot  be  two  Infinities.  Supposing  this  is 
so,  and  we  go  along  this  path,  it  finally 
brings  us  to  the  brink  of  an  abyss.  God 
ceases  to  be  personal.  He  is  no  longer  the 
Father,  the  Creator,  the  Infinite  Lover  of 
man ; He  becomes  the  sum  of  all  Being. 
Surely  it  is  a perfect  Sahara  to  lose  the 
69 


IN  T^EFEOiCE  OF  FHE  FAITH 


Personal  God  ‘‘  by  Whom  all  things  were 
made,”  and  who  from  outside  the  universe 
redeems,  guides,  and  saves.  It  is  an  awful 
thing  to  lose  the  sense  of  a Personal  Deity. 
As  Tennyson  says,  you  become  '‘an  infant 
crying  in  the  night,  and  with  no  language 
but  a cry,”  and  you  cry  in  vain  ! By  crush- 
ing Christianity  into  this  philosophic  system, 
you  really  deprive  it  of  everything  that 
makes  it  worth  holding,  and  in  your  en- 
deavour to  be  philosophical  you  cease  to  be 
religious  in  the  sense  of  being  bound  to  God 
as  a child  to  its  parent.  Let  us  not  forget  that 
our  Lord  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven,  and 
said,  " Father”;  and  that  the  Apostle  Paul 
bowed  his  knee  to  the  " Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  from  Whom  the  whole  universe 
in  heaven  and  earth  is  named.” 

(2)  You  gain  a new  significance  for  a 
number  of  old  terms ^ but  you  lose  the  doctrines 
70 


J[IOT>ERN  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT 


which  underlie  those  terms  and  give  them 
their  living  power.  The  New  Theologian 
sings  our  hymns,  but  cannot  mean  what  we 
do  when  he  sings  them ; he  uses  our  litanies 
and  prayers,  but  they  do  not  mean  to  him 
what  they  do  to  us;  he  uses  the  old  Bible 
texts,  but  that  meaning  which  apostles, 
prophets,  and  martyrs  put  into  them,  he 
studiously  avoids.  It  is  as  though  he  bakes 
bread  in  the  same  sized  loaves  as  we  have 
been  accustomed  to  from  childhood,  and 
labels  them  by  the  same  names,  but  the  life- 
giving  elements  which  nourish  health  and 
strength  are  absolutely  wanting. 

We  will  take,  for  instance,  an  extract 
from  a recent  sermon.  The  text  was  that 
last  great  message  and  promise  of  Christ — 
“ I am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of 
the  age.''  The  preacher  said  that  the 
thought  he  wanted  them  to  take  away  with 
them  was  the  declaration  ‘‘  that  the  spirit 

71 


IN  T)EFE:}iCE  OF  THE  FAim 

of  Jesus  and  the  spirit  of  this  mysterious 
universe  of  ours  were  one  and  the  same ; 
seeing  Him  they  saw  all;  they  could  not 
escape  the  universe;  it  was  with  them  all 
the  days.”  According  to  this  interpretation, 
the  words  ‘‘  I am  with  you  always,”  which 
the  whole  Church  has  taken  to  indicate  the 
perpetual  presence  of  Christ  as  guiding  and 
leading  the  march  of  the  Church,  is  watered 
down  to  mean  only  this,  that  the  universe 
is  with  us  always.  But  surely  we  need 
something  more  than  the  universe  to  help 
us  in  times  of  temptation  and  sorrow ; we 
want  a hand,  a heart,  a Person. 

Or  take  another  word,  the  word  Atone- 
ment. We  are  taught  that  we  must  look 
for  the  key  to  its  significance  in  the  Semitic 
conception  rather  than  the  Hebrew,  in  the 
slaying  of  an  animal  and  eating  of  its  flesh 
that  the  worshipper  may  be  brought  into 
fellowship  with  his  fellow,  and  into  fellow- 
72 


MOT^ERN  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT 

ship  with  God.  In  this  there  was  no  thought 
of  a substitution,  no  thought  that  sin  was  to 
be  put  away,  it  was  just  a feast  of  fellowship 
or  self-sacrifice ; but  if  that  is  all,  the 
Atonement  is  robbed  of  the  peace-giving 
conception  that  God  in  the  Person  of  Christ 
bore  the  equivalent  of  the  curse  and  shame 
by  His  death  on  the  Cross.  This  teaching 
deprives  the  death  of  Christ  of  the  elements 
in  it  which  gave  peace  to  men  like  Augus- 
tine, Bunyan,  Wesley,  and  millions  more, 
and  the  Atonement  is  reduced  to  the  level 
of  Keir  Hardie  standing  in  the  House  of 
Commons  and  pleading  for  his  class,  of  a 
Salvation  Army  lass  helping  to  rescue  a 
woman  from  her  drunken  husband,  or  of  a 
band  of  fishermen  plunging  into  the  stormy 
waters  to  save  their  comrades.  That  is  all 
good  and  beautiful,  but  it  will  not  suffice 
for  consciences  which  are  deeply  convicted 
of  sin ; they  need  something  which  that 
73 


IN  T)EFEO^E  OF  THE  FAITH 


conception  of  the  Atonement  fails  to  impart, 
but  which  the  old  Hebrew  thinkers,  guided 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  saw  in  it,  who  believed 
that  on  the  Cross,  God  Himself,  in  the 
Person  of  Christ,  took  home  to  Himself  the 
equivalent  of  human  sin,  and  bore  it  “ in 
His  own  Body  on  the  tree/' 

(3)  You  gain  a new  conception  of  human 
nature^  but  in  doing  so  you  lose  the  Unique 
Nature  of  Christ,  Jesus  Christ  is  said  to 
represent  the  human  element  which  has 
been  in  the  Divine  nature  from  all  eternity. 
In  that  sense,  of  course,  He  was  pre-exist- 
ent, but  only  in  the  same  sense  in  which 
we  must  all  be  conceived  of  as  having  been 
equally  pre-existent.  He,  and  we,  and  all 
men  partake  of  the  same  nature,  and  are 
equally  divine;  but,  by  this  hypothesis. 
He  is  not  more  divine  than  we  are.  He 
was  born  as  we  are,  only  He  was  capable 
74 


MOT>ERN  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT 


of  receiving  to  a fuller  extent  God  into 
His  nature  than  the  rest  of  mankind.  A 
recent  writer  was  surely  perfectly  justified 
in  asking  how,  then,  it  could  be  accounted 
for  that  there  has  been  only  one  Christ? 
Why,  through  all  these  centuries  when  the 
character  of  Christ  has  been  so  prominently 
before  the  world,  have  not  others  received 
God  to  the  same  extent  into  their  nature  ? 
and  who  shall  say  that  in  ten  or  a hundred 
years  from  now  there  shall  not  arise  an- 
other being  who  shall  receive  God  into  his 
nature  more  absolutely  than  Christ  did? 
It  cannot  be  said  that  this  is  impossible. 
On  the  hypothesis  that  Christ  received 
God  into  His  being  as  we  do,  there  is  no 
essential  difference  between  Christ  and 
other  men ; and  there  is  therefore  nothing 
to  prevent  someone  else  with  a wider, 
greater,  fuller  capacity,  taking  in  still  more 
of  God. 


75 


IN  T>EFENiCE  OF  THE  FAITH 


On  this  showing,  Christ  ceases  to  be  our 
transcendent  King  because  of  the  unique 
glory  of  His  nature.  If  He  is  above  us,  it 
arises  not  from  a difference  in  nature,  but 
in  capacity.  He  was  born  of  human 
parents  by  the  natural  act  of  generation, 
and  there  must  have  been  in  Him,  there- 
fore, the  taint  which  attaches  to  all  man- 
kind. To  renounce  the  Virgin  Birth  is  to 
renounce  the  immaculate  purity  that  knew 
no  sin. 

(4)  You  get  a new  conception  of  Sin 
which  fails  to  satisfy  Conscience,  Sin  is 
defined  as  Selfishness.  Every  fall  is  a fall 
up.  Judas,  traitor  though  he  were,  will  at 
last  find  his  way  to  the  top.  Sin  becomes 
the  impulse  of  passion  rather  than  the 
choice  of  the  will.  The  roue  in  the  midst  of 
his  immoralities,  and  the  drunkard  swept 
before  the  strong  tide  of  inebriety,  are  in 
76 


MOT>ERN  RELIGIOUS  RHOUGHT 


the  process  of  evolution.  According  to  this 
philosophy,  young  men  are  justified  in 
saying,  when  you  remonstrate  with  them, 
We  shall  come  right  at  last.  It  will  be  a 
long  way  round,  but  we  like  the  primrose 
easy  path.'^  In  East  and  West  for  January, 
Canon  Brown  said  he  had  to  do  with  a 
Hindoo  in  Calcutta  who  came  to  him  to  be 
delivered  from  the  power  of  Drink.  The 
Canon  did  his  best,  but  one  day  the  man 
fell  worse  than  ever.  The  Canon  asked, 
‘‘  How  has  this  happened  ? and  the  man 
replied,  “ I have  been  to  a Pundit,  one  of 
our  holiest  teachers,  and  he  tells  me  that 
whatever  a man  does,  God  does  in  him. 
It  is  not  I that  did  it,  but  the  Divine 
nature.  I shall  come  right  at  last.” 

But  this  robs  Conscience  of  her  voice. 
We  know  that  Sin  is  more  than  Selfishness, 
and  that  even  though  we  have  confessed 
our  outburst  of  temper  or  unkindness  to 
77 


TN  T>EFE3^E  OF  THE  FAITH 


our  fellow-creature,  we  have  still  the  sense 
in  the  depth  of  our  heart  that  our  Sin 
cries  to  God,  and  that  we  never  can  be  at 
rest  until  He  has  spoken  the  Divine  word 
of  Pardon. 

(5)  You  lose  your  individual  existence  in 
the  great  Hereafter.  We  may  be  told  that 
the  spark  of  our  Consciousness  will  be  ful- 
filled in  eternal  being;  and  that,  as  the 
bubble  which  forms  on  the  ocean  surface 
sinks  back  into  it,  we  shall  exist  as  a film 
in  the  great  ocean  of  existence.  If  so,  all 
the  experience,  all  the  patience,  all  the 
discipline  of  this  mortal  life  will  fall  into 
the  universal  stock,  and  our  personalities 
will  be  eliminated. 

Do  not  let  us  forsake  the  Old  Book. 
There  is  nothing  better.  Let  us  bind  it 
again  to  our  heart.  It  made  martyrs,  con- 
fessors, and  saints,  but  we  may  gravely 

78 


MOT>ERN  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT 


question  whether  the  teaching  which  is 
now  in  vogue  is  capable  of  forming  char- 
acters that  will  stand  the  test  of  persecution 
and  death  in  the  same  way  that  the  New 
Testament  teaching  has  been  tested  by 
stake  and  sword.  ‘‘We  have  not  followed 
cunningly-devised  fables/’  says  the  Apostle, 
“ when  we  made  known  unto  you  the  power 
and  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
but  we  were  eye-witnesses  of  His  Majesty.” 
Dr  Foster,  of  the  Lebanon  Theological 
Seminary,  has  put  the  whole  issue  in  a nut- 
shell, when  he  says : “ If  there  is  anything 
new  in  substance,  as  well  as  in  form,  it  is 
not  to  be  relied  on  by  the  Church,  either 
for  its  own  needs,  or  the  needs  of  the  world. 
The  Gospel  which  is  to  keep  the  Church 
alive  in  the  twentieth  century  is  the  same 
Gospel  that  has  kept  the  world  from  putre- 
faction during  all  the  ages  past.  It  is  the 
same  Church,  the  same  world,  the  same 
79 


IN  T>EFEJ\(CE  OF  THE  FAITH 


disease,  the  same  crime,  the  same  curse,  the 
same  remedy,  endlessly.  The  Church 
received  what  have  been  called  its  marching 
orders  from  its  Lord,  but  it  received  no 
command  to  go  forth  and  discover  the 
truth.  Its  business  is  to  make  good  use  of 
what  long  ago  was  committed  to  it.” 


8o 


<0wv  Cveelr 


6 


ascenlr  unto  mg  jfatSer  antr  gour 
iPatSei:,  antr  mg  iiotr  antr  gout  iSolr/' 


#ttt’  Creelf 


Mt  is  neither  accurate  nor  fair  to  say  that 
we  owe  our  theology  to  the  Apostle 
Paul.  He  may  have  had  a large  share  in 
shaping  it,  but  there  is  nothing  in  his 
Epistles  of  which  we  may  not  easily  dis- 
cover the  primordial  germ  in  the  teaching 
of  our  Lord. 

Let  us  take  one  Gospel — that  according 
to  the  Evangelist  Matthew — the  historicity 
of  which  will  be  granted  by  our  critics,  and 
let  us  carefully  search  out  for  ourselves,  in 
these  venerable  paragraphs,  the  substance 
of  the  Creed  which  lay  at  the  foundation 
of  our  Saviour’s  words,  and  which,  speaking 
of  Him  from  the  human  standpoint,  we 
may  say  was  His  own. 

83 


IN  T>EFEJiCE  OF  THE  FAITH 


The  statement  of  Belief  which  is  gener- 
ally accepted  by  all  Christians  is  that 
known  as  the  Apostles’  Creed.  Its  origin  is 
by  no  means  clear.  Probably  it  emanated 
from  the  Sub- Apostolic  Age;  but  in  any 
case  it  comprehends  in  a succinct  and 
definite  form  the  faith,  “which  was  once 
for  all  delivered  to  the  saints.”  It  is  a 
noteworthy  fact  that  there  is  only  one 
clause  in  the  Apostles’  Creed  which,  for 
obvious  reasons,  cannot  be  substantiated 
from  the  lips  of  Christ;  and  it  may  be  a 
solid  ground  for  the  faith  of  some  to  re- 
member for  all  future  time  that  the  Apostles' 
Creed  was  also  Christ's  Creed, 

Before  we  substantiate  that  statement, 
let  us  remember  our  Lord's  veneration  for 
the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  If  there  is 
nothing  in  Paul,  which  was  not  first  in 
Christ ; so  there  is  nothing  in  the  New 
Testament,  which  was  not  first  in  the  Old  ; 

84 


OU^  LOAD'S  CT^EET> 


and  it  was  our  Lord’s  delight  to  correct  the 
false  exegesis  and  conclusions  of  His  age, 
and  to  prove  to  His  contemporaries  that 
they  erred,  because  they  knew  not  the 
Scriptures,  nor  the  Power  of  God.  As  a 
lad  His  memory  and  heart  were  filled  with 
the  Holy  Scriptures ; on  the  Mount  of 
Temptation,  He  parried  the  assaults  of  the 
Tempter  by  their  words;  and  throughout 
His  life  He  was  always  asking  His  critics. 
Have  ye  never  read  ? ” It  was  on  Scrip- 
ture that  He  pillowed  His  heart  in  its  last 
agony;  and  when  He  rose,  both  on  His 
way  to  Emmaus,  in  the  Upper  Room,  and 
for  the  following  Forty-days,  He  was  per- 
petually unfolding  to  His  disciples  all  the 
things  which  were  written  in  Moses,  the 
Prophets,  and  the  Psalms  concerning  Him- 
self (Luke  xxiv.  27,  44).  In  all.  He  quoted 
from  24  out  of  the  39  Old  Testament  Books, 
made  66  references  to  the  Pentateuch,  40 

85 


I 


IN  DEFENCE  OF  THE  FAITH 


to  Isaiah,  36  to  the  Psalms,  and  22  to  Daniel. 
It  is  not  a little  remarkable  to  find  that  the 
whole  of  our  Lord's  Theology  (speaking 
from  the  human  standpoint)  was  extracted 
from  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures;  and 
when,  therefore,  we  speak  of  His  Creed,  we 
are  also  dealing  with  that  venerable  Body 
of  Truth  which  has  descended  to  us  from 
ages  when  the  world  was  younger  by 
several  millenniums  than  it  is  to-day.  But 
truth  is  never  old. 

We  say,  I believe  in  God  the  Father 
Almighty,  Our  Lord  always  insisted  that 
God  was  His  Father  in  a unique  and 
special  sense.  It  was  for  this  that  the 
Jews,  on  two  occasions  at  least,  took  up 
stones  to  cast  at  Him  for  blasphemy  (John 
V.  18  ; X.  33).  His  whole  conflict  with  the 
Pharisaic  party  turned  upon  this  point. 
But  there  was  no  hesitancy  in  His  royal 
affirmation  of  this  position.  I thank  Thee, 
86 


OU^  LO^I{^T>^S  C^EET) 


O Father,”  He  said,  Lord  of  Heaven  and 
Earth”  (Matt.  xi.  25);  and  when  He  was 
on  the  threshold  of  death,  it  was  to  His 
Father  that  He  directed  His  cry : O My 

Father,  if  this  cannot  pass  away,  except  I 
drink  it.  Thy  will  be  done  ” (xxvi.  42). 

We  say,  Maker  of  Heaven  and  Earth^ 
The  Jew  viewed  God  as  his  special  Patron 
Deity.  Abraham  was  His  friend  ; the  land 
of  Palestine  His  peculiar  choice;  and  Jeru- 
salem the  Holy  City ; whilst  the  nations  of 
the  world  were  viewed  as  lying  outside 
His  care.  But  from  the  first  He  resented 
Satan's  claim  that  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world  or  their  glory  belonged  to  him.  In 
the  Parable  of  the  Tares,  He  asserted  God's 
claim  to  the  whole  round  world  as  His 
Field;  He  insisted  that  all  nations  would 
be  gathered  before  His  Judgment  Seat; 
and  as  He  ascended.  He  declared  that 
all  authority  was  now  His  in  Heaven 

87 


IN  IDEFEN^E  OF  FHE  FAITH 

and  on  Earth  (iv.  9;  xiii.  38;  xxv,  32; 
xxviii,  18). 

We  say,  And  in  Jesus  Christy  His  only 
Son^  our  Lord.  Six  months  before  He  died, 
before  He  climbed  the  Transfiguration 
Mount,  our  Lord  challenged  His  Disciples 
to  know  what  men  were  thinking  of  Him ; 
and  presently  Peter  stepped  out  of  the 
little  circle  to  attest  that  He  was  ‘‘  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  ” Did 
Peter  mean  by  that  statement  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  a man  like  himself,  only  with  a 
little  more  capacity  for  God?  If  so,  our 
Lord  could  not  have  greeted  his  words 
with  the  solemn  affirmation : ‘‘  Flesh  and 
Blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but 
My  Father  which  is  in  Heaven”  And 
afterwards  at  the  crisis  of  His  Trial,  when 
He  was  challenged  by  Caiaphas  to  say  who 
He  was,  and  whether  He  were  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,  ‘‘Jesus  saith  unto  him, 
88 


OU^  LO^/D^S  C^EET> 


Thou  hast  said  ; nevertheless,  I say  unto 
you,  Henceforth  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of 
Man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power.” 
At  once  they  rent  their  clothes  and  pro- 
nounced Him  to  be  guilty  of  the  death 
allotted  to  the  blasphemer  (xvi.  i6;  xxvi. 
63,  etc.). 

We  say.  He  was  conceived  of  the  Holy 
Ghosty  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  For  obvious 
reasons  that  cannot  be  substantiated  from 
our  Lord's  words,  though  Matthew  does 
not  hesitate  in  the  most  circumstantial 
manner  to  affirm  it  (i.  18,  etc.). 

We  say,  He  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate, 
was  Crucified,  Dead,  and  Buried,  But  this 
was  clearly  foreseen  by  the  Master,  when 
He  began  to  show  unto  His  disciples  how 
that  He  must  go  unto  Jerusalem  and  suffer 
many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests 
and  scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  the  third 
day  be  raised  up  (xvi.  21;  xx.  18).  We 

89 


IN  T^EFEOiCE  OF  FHE  FAITH 


have  already  seen  that  our  Lord  knew  well 
the  sacrificial  and  substitutionary  character 
of  His  death.  It  was  the  ransom  price  of 
our  Redemption  ; it  was  for  the  remission 
of  sin  (xx.  28  ; xxvi.  28). 

We  say,  He  descended  into  Hell,  i.e.  Hades. 
In  one  of  our  Lord's  discussions  with  the 
Scribes,  you  will  remember  that  He  said  : 
‘‘  As  Jonah  was  three  days  and  three  nights 
in  the  belly  of  the  whale  ; so  shall  the  Son 
of  Man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in 
the  heart  of  the  earth"  (xii.  40);  using,  in 
this  latter  phrase,  a well-known  expression 
among  the  Jews  of  His  time,  for  the  place 
of  the  departed  spirits  (xii.  40). 

We  say  also,  On  the  third  day  He  rose 
again  from  the  dead.  Our  Lord  knew 
perfectly  well  that  He  was  to  rise  again. 
He  said  : ‘‘  All  ye  shall  be  offended  in  Me 
this  night  . . . but  after  I am  raised  up,  I 
will  go  before  you  unto  Galilee"  (Matt. 
90 


OUTl  L0  71T>^S  CTjEET) 

XXVI.  32  ; xxviii.  16).  As  He  went  down 
into  the  grave,  He  stayed  Himself  on  the 
words  of  Psalm  xvi, : “ Thou  wilt  not  leave 
My  soul  in  Hades,  neither  wilt  Thou  give 
Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.’’ 

We  say,  He  ascended  into  Heave^t^  and 
sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  and  we 
are  reminded  of  our  Lord’s  words  : “ Hence- 
forth ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting 
at  the  right  hand  of  Power”  (xxvi.  64). 
And  if  we  continue  the  noble  words, 
From  thence  He  will  come  again  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead^  all  is  contained  in  those 
memorable  sentences,  which  have  filled  the 
heart  of  the  Church  with  Advent  anti- 
cipation— They  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  Heaven  with  power 
and  great  glory  ; ” and,  “ When  the  Son  of 
Man  shall  come  in  His  glory,  and  all  the 
Angels  with  Him,  then  shall  He  sit  on  the 
Throne  of  His  Glory”  (xxiv.  30 ; xxv.  31). 

91 


IN  T>EFEJ^CE  OF  THE  FAITH 


We  say,  / believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost ; and 
did  not  our  Lord  warn  against  the  sin  of 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Spirit  ? Did 
He  not  express  the  dependence  of  His  own 
Human  Nature  on  that  same  Spirit?  Did 
not  His  parting  words  place  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  formulary  for  Baptism,  with 
the  Father  and  the  Son?  (xii.  28,  32; 
xxviii.  19). 

We  say.  In  the  Holy  Catholic  Church. 
Amongst  our  Lord's  most  impressive  words 
is  His  avowal  of  the  intention  to  build  His 
Church  on  the  Rock  of  His  own  Divine 
Nature,  so  as  to  defy  the  whole  brunt  and 
power  of  the  unseen  world  (xvi,  18);  and 
He  made  still  further  subsequent  allusion 
to  its  binding  and  loosing  power  (xviii. 
17, 18). 

We  say.  In  the  Communion  of  Saints. 
Christ  has  wrapped  up  His  Saints  so  closely 
together  that  we  cannot  pray  for  ourselves 
92 


LO^D^S  C^EET> 


without  praying  for  them — our  Father,  our 
trespasses,  our  daily  bread. 

We  say.  In  the  Forgiveness  of  Sins, 
“ Son,”  said  He,  “ be  of  good  cheer,  thy 
sins  are  forgiven.  The  Son  of  Man  hath 
authority  on  earth  to  forgive  sins  ” (ix.  S ; 
xii.  31  ; xxvi.  28). 

We  say,  The  Resurrection  of  the  Body  and 
the  Life  Everlasting,  On  one  occasion  the 
Scribes  came  to  entangle  Jesus  in  His  talk, 
proposing  a question  about  the  Resur- 
rection, in  which  they  did  not  believe,  and 
the  Master  replied : “ As  touching  the 
Resurrection  of  the  dead,  have  ye  not  read 
that  which  was  spoken  unto  you  by  God, 
saying,  I AM  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob ; God  is  not  the  God  of  the 
dead,  but  of  the  living  ” (xxii.  32). 

The  Apostles*  Creed  was  our  Lord's,  and 
as  we  consider  His  words — the  words  of 
the  One  whom  all  recognise  as  the  supreme 
93 


IN  T^EFEOiCE  OF  THE  FAirH 

flower  on  the  root  of  our  human  race — we 
are  compelled  to  feel  that  He  could  not 
have  been  deceived ; we  build  on  His 
words  as  on  an  impregnable  Rock  (vii.  24), 
and  we  cry  with  one  heart  and  voice : — 

“ Thou  art  the  King  of  Glory,  O Christ. 

Thou  art  the  Everlasting  Son  of  the  Father. 
When  Thou  hadst  overcome  the  sharpness  of 
Death, 

Thou  didst  open  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  to  all 
believers.” 


PRINTED  BY  NEILL  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  EDINBURGH. 


:;t^ 


GOULD  UBRARY 

p 4prr'^N  NAZAPENE  COLLEGE 

NEASE  LIBRARY  EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 

BT382  .M42  GOULD 

Meyer  F.  B./ln  defence  of  the  faith;  th 


3 2999  00043  0111 


