SANNA gogo RO 


\ 


NI 


ORO ae LIP A 


RSS 


4 


an 
i 

ms 

= 

a 

*» 


m3 


bit 


I 
rile 
iY, 


M, 


_. IN THE BEGINNING, 


i ot 


AND 
+ - 


_» © THE ADAMIC EARTH 
a. 4 ( 
re 


‘ mn 


- 


: an 
Digitized by the Internet Archive 


in 2024 me : o ae 


e, 


/ 
4 


* He “tell t+ 


» 
7 

i e 

: od 1a 
” = . 
ye 3 .) 

. , we i i 

.. 


~ 
aT 


a 
=* 

a 

& 


ii eee 
> 
$ 


“i « + 


; _ https://archive.org/details/ir beginni 
ef nw ee * a ot 


ae Be eo hn 


- = 
—_ 


A) 


kd 


IN THE BEGINNING, 


AND 


THE ADAMIC EARTH: 


AN EXPOSITION OF 
GENESIS I.—Il. 3 


BY 


WILLIAM KELLY 
yy 


New Edition, Revised 


THE MASTER'S 
POWELL LIbhAR 
SANTA CLARITA, 


LONDON : 
T. WESTON, 53, PATERNOSTER Row 
1907 


b, 


COLLEGE 
021 


NORTHEASTER 
ESSEX FELLS, 


iy 


BRADBURY, AGNEW & CO. LD., PRINTERS, 
LONDON AND TONBRIDGE. 


PREFACE 


TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


Tis volume consists of papers which have 
already appeared in the Bible Treasury and thus 
secured a considerable circulation. But it has 
been strongly urged that even those who read these 
successive articles desire to have them as a consecu- 
tive whole, not only for their own reconsideration, 
but as much or more for the help of thousands 
unacquainted with that periodical, and more willing 
to examine the exposition of Gen. i.—ii. 3 in a 
convenient collective form. 

The writer has only to express his growing 
sense of the perfectness and inestimable value of 
this scripture as of all others. He prays that the 
work, notwithstanding all shortcomings, may be 
by grace helpful to all who (in a day of effort to 
resuscitate lifeless forms and of reactionary free- 


4 
680044 


vi PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 


thinking, both of which schools of unbelief struggle 
for the mastery) would keep Christ’s word and not 
deny His name. In faith and love they would also 
seek earnestly the winning of souls from the im- 
minent and increasing peril of going back, from 
the true light of Christ in all its fulness, to 
the darkness of a world now rapidly becoming 
apostate ; which, by wisdom even more dangerously 
than by folly, knew not God, and rejects as 
foolishness the wisdom of God in Christ and Him 


crucified. 


Lonpon, March, 1894, 


CONTENTS 


Genusis i. 1 
ie 43. 
he ME 8-6 
Se: 
ee 5-18. 
an trs14-19 
» i. 20-28 
ee i, 24, 25 
ise, eT 
ee i; 98 
Cet 99-81 
H. 1-8 °.« 


iy 


es 


102 
109 


IN THE BEGINNING 


GENESIS I. 1 


view of His earthly people Israel. It was of 

the highest moment that they should have 
the truth authoritatively announced that the one 
true God is the Creator of all. Darkness covered 
the earth, gross darkness the peoples. Israel, in 
Egypt, as later in the land of Canaan, was ever 
prone to forget this truth and lapse into the delusions 
of men. Fallen like others, they wished to be like 
all nations in their polity and their religion. Hence 
the importance of their knowing and acknowledging 
creation in any real sense ; it points to and is bound 
up with the unity of the living God. 

A difficulty has been raised, why, if God created, 
it was not always. The answer is as simple as 
complete. terval creation, eternal matter, is 
untrue and impossible, a contradiction for thought, 
even if we had not the word of God to enlighten us. 
God of all power, if He pleases, creates: there only 


is the truth of it. To say that the self-existing One 
B 


Se Old Testament is a revelation from God in 
ep) 


I.B. 


~ 


2, IN THE BEGINNING 


cannot create is to deny that He is the Absolute, 
that He is God. But that God, omnipotent, omni- 
scient, sovereign and good, cancreate when He chooses, 
flows necessarily from what He is. If He could not 
display Himself in this way, or even more gloriously, 
He is not God. If the display of creation or of 
anything else were always, He would not be free 
and absolute. His sovereignty is part of Himself 
(Eph. i. 11). Suppose any display necessary, and 
you destroy in thought His divine essence and will. 
Necessity is at bottom an atheistic device to get 
rid of the true God. Creation, therefore, was 
perfectly free to God, but not necessary ; it was when 
and as He pleased. And He was pleased to create. 
Creation exists. 

Nor can there be conceived a more simple, sublime, 
and comprehensive opening of divine revelation than 
these few words :—‘‘In the beginning God created 
the heavens and the earth.” It is the absolute 
commencement of creation, and in the most pointed 
contradistinction from the seven days. The question 
is solely about the true unforced meaning of the 
written word of God, not about Rabbis any more 
than the chosen people. What does the inspired 
record contain and convey? It may be of interest 
to examine what Philo or Josephus understood, as 
well as how the Seventy translated it into Greek 
long before Christ. One may weigh either the — 
Massorah or the Jerusalem Targum, and the 
comments of Jarchi, Aben Ezra, both Kimchis, Levi 


GENESIS I. 1 3 


Ben Gerson, Saadias Haggaon, Abarbanel, or any 

other learned Jew, to say nothing of others. 

But without them there is God’s word given to be 
read and understood, though not without the faith 
of Christ, not without His guidance Who communi- 
cated it originally. It was not given to teach 
science, and it is wholly independent of philosophy 
for its intelligence. Geologists, Botanists, Zoologists, 
Astronomers, Historians, etc., have His brief and 
clear account before them. Man’s comprehension 
of what is communicated may be affected by the 
amount of his knowledge, and far more by his faith. 
This, however, is a question of our understanding 
and expounding it ; but we must never forget that 
God is the Author, and the writers only the 
instruments. The Bible is a moral book, only the 
more striking in its unity because it consists of so 

- many compositions of so many writers, stretching 
over a thousand years of the most varied circum- 
stances if we limit ourselves to the O.T. The reader 
may be right or wrong at any given time in the 
idea he attaches to what we call “firmament,” “plant,” 
or the like; but the truth remains unadulterated 
and unchanging in scripture, for us to read again 
and again, and to learn more perfectly. 

This indeed constitutes its characteristic and 
permanent value. It is not only a full and sure 
~ gource of instruction in consonance with its moral 
and yet higher designs to God’s glory; it is the 
sole standard of the truth, by which we are bound 

B2 


4 IN THE BEGINNING 


to test all else which professes to be divine. Let 
us ever search afresh in faith, and ever grow into 
a deepening knowledge of the revealed mind of God. 

The philosophies, as well as the religions, of 
antiquity were wholly ignorant of creation. Of 
God, of the “beginning,” they knew nothing. 
Dreams of evolution were the earliest folly, and, 
among the Ionic school, Anaximander and Anaxi- 
menes followed Thales, each differing, all blind. 
Anaxagoras let in with mere matter the idea of 
mind, but no creator. It is useless to name others ; 
even Plato and Aristotle, rivals too, had no real 
light. They, more or less openly, all held eternal 
matter at bottom; and though the philosophers 
boasted, as they still do, of their knowledge and 
logic, they failed to see that they could not prove it, 
or even that it is to mere mind unthinkable. To 
the believer it is the simple yet deep truth, that a 
beginning was given to everything that exists; if 
God says it, he perceives that nothing else can be 
true. For it is impossible to admit an effect without 
a cause ; but reasoning can never rise at best beyond, 
There must be a First Cause; it can never say, 
There vs. This God alone can and does affirm: “In 
the beginning God created the heavens and the 
earth.” God brought the whole ordered system into 
being. The form, nature, and aim, are not here 
explained: such a detail had no proper place here. 


That He created all is a primary and momentous 
truth. 


GENESIS 1. 1 5 


But there is not a word in scripture to warrant 
the strange and hasty assumption that the universe 
was brought into being in the six days of Gen. i. 
3-31, so often referred to throughout the Bible. 
Construe the six days as men will, it is out of the 
power of any on just principles of interpretation to 
deny that the first day begins with light, and that 
the first two verses are marked off in their nature, 
as well as by their expression, from the work of 
the six days. Nothing indeed but prepossession 
can account for the mistake, which the record itself 
corrects. ‘In the beginning” has its own proper 
significance, and is in no way connected with ‘ the 
days,”’ save as the revealed start of divine creation, 
and in due time (however probably immense the 
interval) leading to that measure of time only when 
the constitution of things was made for Adam, for 
the race. 

The antiquity of the earth may be as great as the 
shifting schemes of the most enthusiastic geologist 
ever conceived: there is absolutely neither here nor 
in any other part of scripture the least intima- 
tion that opposes vast ages before man was created, 
or that affirms man to be nearly contemporary with 
the original creation. It is ignorance of scripture to 
say that Moses assigns an epoch to the earth’s first 
formation, such as fathers or commentators (not 
without worthier remarks) have imagined and made 
current in christendom., The philosophers who have 
spent their time in the study of geology and kindred 


6 IN THE BEGINNING 


sciences will act wisely in reading with unwonted 
care the beginning of Gen. i. They will thence 
learn that they have been precipitate in the con- 
clusion that the inspired writing is at all committed 
to the blunders of its interpreters, theological or 
scientific. However vast the periods they claim, 
even for the strata nearest the surface, scripture is 
the sole record which, while revealing God as the 
Creator of all things, leaves room for all that has 
been wrought before the Adamic earth. “The ever- 
lasting God, Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the 
earth, fainteth not, neither is weary: there is no 
searching of his understanding” (Isa. xl. 28). 
While geology waits for its Newton, subjection to 
scripture meanwhile would be untold gain to its 
devotees as to all other men. 

There was an epoch then in the infinite course of 
eternity when God created the universe. This is 
here stated with the utmost accuracy—“in the 
beginning.” It is in view of man, primarily indeed 
of Israel, that the Pentateuch was written, the 
Second man and Last Adam being the, as yet, 
hidden object (and the church one with Him) of 
God’s counsels, Angels are not spoken of, though 
we know from another ancient book of inspiration 
that they expressed their joy when earth’s founda- 
tions were made to sink (Job xxxvili. 6, 7). “In 
the beginning,” accordingly, is severed from all the 
measures of time with which a man’s existence is 
conversant. How admirably previous duration, 


GENESIS I. 1 Vf 


unlimited by ordinary notation, suits the immense 
changes of which geology takes cognizance, needs no 
further remark here. 

“God” in our version answers to the Hebrew 
Elohim, which, however, has the peculiarity of a 
plural substantive with a singular verb. Christianity 
alone in its own time cleared up the enigma, which 
still remains impenetrably dark to the Jews, as well 
to other men, who know not in Christ “the true 
Light.” 

Again, there ought to be no doubt among scholars 
that the word “created” in our tongue corresponds 
better than any other with the original. With us, 
as with Israel, the word admits of application to 
signal callings into existence out of actual material, 
as in Gen. i. 21, 27, but only with a special ground 
and emphasis. And never is it used of any other 
maker than God. But if the aim were to speak of 
creation in the ultimate, highest, and strictest sense, 
the Hebrews, like ourselves, had no other word so 
appropriated. Here the context is decisive. “God 
created the heavens and the earth,’ where nothing 
of the kind existed previously. They were created 
out of nothing as men speak, perhaps loosely, but 
not unintelligibly. The heathen might worship, as 
all did, the heavens, or even the earth; the Jew 
sinned against the written word if he was ensnared 
of Satan after their dark example. The first words 
of God’s law told him that those were but creatures ; 
Israel was to hear if others were deaf, and bound to 


8 IN THE BEGINNING 


own, serve, and worship the one God, the Creator. 
The chosen people was quite as ready as any other 
to worship the creature, as all their history to the 
Babylonish captivity proves; but there can be no 
doubt what the Bible supposed, declared, and claimed 
from its very first verse—God created the universe. 
Further, it is not matter created, crude matter 
to be afterwards fashioned into the shapely and 
beautiful universe of the heavens and the earth. 
It is not chaos first, as Greek and Latin poets 
feigned, in accordance with heathen tradition never 
wholly right, though often mixing up what was not 
wrong. It is not a nebula, as La Place conceived, 
a mere modification of the same rationalism, how- 
ever refined it be. Lord Rosse, by his observations 
with his great reflector, has fairly disposed of this 
unbelieving hypothesis. For he has proved that 
many nebule, considered even by the Herschels 
irresolvable objects, actually consist of agglomera- 
tions of stars. Surely, therefore, the only just pre- 
sumption is that all nebule are nothing more, and 
only need more powerful means to make manifest 
their true nature. God only has given the truth 
plainly, briefly, and after a way transparently divine 
in its simple and unparalleled majesty. ‘In the 
beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” 
How is it, ye savants, that this great truth is found 
here only in its pristine splendour, towering above 
your Hesiods and Homers, your Ovids and Virgils, 
your Egyptian and Mexican remains, your Hindoo 


GENESIS I. l 9 


and Chinese fables? How is it that to our day the 
Lyells and Darwins, to say nothing of profaner men, 
are stumbling in the dark over a morass of hypo- 
theses (to say the least), unproved and dubious? It 
is because God’s word is not believed as He wrote 
it; and this, because men like not the true God Who 
judges sin and saves only through His Son the Lord 
Jesus. So of old when men knew God, they glorified 
Him not as God, neither gave thanks, but became 
vain in their reasonings, and their senseless heart 
was darkened. It is the more guilty now, because, 
the Son of God being come and having accomplished 
redemption, the darkness quite passes away and the 
true light already shines. Alas! anything is welcome 
but a living God, and least of all the whole universe 
created by and through and for His Son Who is 
before all things and by Whom all things consist. 
‘By faith we understand (or apprehend) that the 
worlds have been framed by God’s word, so that 
what is seen hath not been made out of things which 
appear” (Heb. xi. 8). 


GENESIS I. 2 


|REATION then in ver. 1 is the great primary 
© fact of revelation. It is all the stronger, 
because the Hebrew text (‘In [the] be- 
ginning ”) has no article, any more than the Greek 
in John i. 1. It is therefore undefined. Compare 
Proy. viii. 28. From the context, however, it is 
plain that the fourth Gospel rises beyond the first 
book of Moses ; for it goes back to divine and eternal 
being (not éyévero, but jv), and not merely divine 
origination, which in fact appears later (in Johni. 3), 
and this in a form all-embracing and exclusive. 
“All things were made (came into being) through 
him, and without him was not anything made 
which hath been made.” 

“Tn the beginning” is not a known fixed point of 
time, but indefinite according to the subject-matter ; 
it here intimates that “Of old,’ or “In former 
duration” (expressly undefined), God created the 
universe. Undoubtedly there is no disclosure of the 
immense sons of which geologists speak so freely ; 
but the language of ver. 1 leaves the door open for 
all that can be proved by research, or even for the 


longest demand of the most extravagant Uniformi- 
tarlan. 


GENESIS I. 2 11 


But the words do affirm a “beginning” of the 
universe, and by God’s word, as in both O. and N.T. 
(see Ps. xxxiii. 6-9, and Heb. xi. 8). ‘This was 
everything to accomplish His design, and His design 
was to create the heavens and the earth, where 
there had been nothing. Whatever Atheists or 
Pantheists feign, science at length confesses there 
was a “beginning ;” so that “created” stands here 
in its proper and fullest sense, as the context requires. 

“There was a beginning, says geology, to man; 
and farther back, to mammals, to birds, and to 
reptiles, to fishes, and all the lower animals, and to 
plants ; a beginning to life: a beginning, it says 
also, to mountain ranges and valleys, to lands and 
seas, to rocks. Hence science takes another step 
back, and admits or claims a beginning to the earth, 
a beginning to all planets and suns, and a beginning 
to the universe. Science and the record in Genesis 
are thus one. This is not reconciliation; it is 
accordance.” So writes Dr. J. D. Dana, the eminent 
American Professor, in the ‘“O. and N. Test. 
Student” of July, 1890. 

The record declares that God created not a 
‘formless earth,’ but “the heavens” (where at no 
time do we hear of disorder) “and the earth.” But 
even as to “the earth,” which was to be a scene of 
change, we are expressly told by an authority no 
less inspired, and therefore of equal authority with 
Moses, that such disorder was not the original state. 
“ For thus saith Jehovah that created the heavens; 


12 IN THE BEGINNING 


he is God; that formed the earth and made it; he 
established it, he created it not a waste, he formed 
it to be inhabited” (Isa. xlv. 18). The Revised V. 
is purposely cited, as confessedly the more correct 
reflection of the prophet. Here is therefore the 
surest warrant to separate ver. 2 from ver. 1 (save, 
of course, that it is a subsequent fact), severed, it 
may be, by a succession of geologic ages, and 
characterised by a catastrophe, at least as far as 
regards the earth. Indeed it would be strange to 
hear of an ordered heavens along with a “ formless 
earth ” as the firstfruits of God’s creative activity. 

But we are not told of any such anomaly. The 
universe, fresh from God’s will and power, consisted 
of ‘‘ the heavens and the earth.” Silence is kept as 
to its condition then, and up to the cataclysm of 
ver. 2; and most suitably, unless God’s purpose in 
the Bible were altogether different from that moral 
end which pervades it from first to last. What had 
the history of those preliminary physical changes to 
do with His people and their relations to Himself ? 
But it ought not to be doubted that each state 
which God made was a system perfect for its aim. 
Yet 1t was not formless materials only, but heaven 
and earth. 


“And the earth was (or became) waste* and 


* «Without form” is hardly exact, for all matter must 
have form, but desolate or disordered it may be made subse- 
quently. ‘To become” (not ‘‘be’’) is the force of the verb 
in some twenty places in this chapter. 


GENESIS I. 2 13 


empty, and darkness [was] upon the face of the deep; 
and the Spirit of God [was] brooding upon the face of 
the waters” (ver. 2). 

The well-known and flexible particle of connection 
in the Hebrew text introduces the verse. Its mean- 
ing, usually and simply copulative, is often modified, 
as almost all words in every language must be, by 
contextual considerations. Hence the learned 
Dathe, in 1781, renders it here “ posthaec vero,” 
expressly to distinguish the state of things in ver. 2 
from that referred to in ver. 1, and sends us to such 
instances as Num. v. 28, Deut. i. 19. Now there is 
no doubt that the Hebrew conjunction admits of an 
interval as often as facts demand it; but there 
is no need of departing from its primary force, 
‘‘and” (though our conjunction is not so pliant) ; 
or it may readily have a somewhat adversative force 
as we see in the LXX. The true determination lies 
in what follows. For the usage of the past verb 
when thus employed is to express a state subsequent 
to, and not connected with, what goes before, but 
previous to what follows. Hebrew idiom does not 
use that verb simply as a copula, as may be seen 
twice in this verse, and almost everywhere; or it 
puts the verb before the noun. The right conclusion 
therefore is that Moses was led to indicate the 
desolation into which the earth was thrown at some 
epoch not made known, after creation, but prior to 
the “days” in which it was made the habitation for 
Adam and the race. 


14 IN THE BEGINNING 


With this agrees the occurrence of the remark- 
able phraseology ‘‘waste and empty” elsewhere. 
There are but two other occasions :—Isa. xxxiv. 11, 
“the line of confusion [or waste] and the stones of 
emptiness ;” and Jer. iv. 28, “I beheld the earth; 
and lo! it was waste and emptiness.” In both it is 
a desolation inflicted, not the primary condition. So 
it is in Genesis i.2. It is the more to be noted, as 
in Jeremiah it is said of the heavens at this time, 
that “they had no light.’’ Thus is confirmed, by 
each of the other occurrences, the conviction that our 
text describes a state which befel the earth, possibly 
long after its original creation as in the verse before. 
It is to this interval that the successive ages of 
geology apply. Here are undeniable facts, full of 
interest, and implying creation made existent and 
extinguished. One’s confidence in the hypotheses 
reared on all this may be otiose or enthusiastic; but 
the exact meaning of Moses’ words in this verse 
leaves all the room that could be desired for those 
vast processes which may be gathered from the 
observed phenomena of the earth’s crust. There is 
nothing in scripture to exclude a succession of 
creatures rising to higher organization from lower as 
the rule, with a striking exception here and there, from 
the Eozoon in the Laurentian rocks of Canada to the 
Mammalia, which most nearly resemble those of 
the earth as it is. But all the brilliant ingenuity 
of Sir C. Lyell, with others of kindred view, fails 
to explain or evade the proofs of change at this 


GENESIS I. 2 15 


very period, immense as it may have been, incom- 
parably vaster and more rapid than since man 
appeared. No doubt the deluge had the deepest 
moral significance, and is thus unique, because 
the human race, save those in the ark, was then 
swept away. But physically its traces were super- 
ficial compared with those far more ancient con- 
vulsions so apparent except to those who worship 
Time and Uniformitarianism. 

“We simply assert” (says the cautious Sir R. L. 
Murchison), “on the countless evidences of fracture, 
dislocation, metamorphism, and inversion of the 
strata, and also on that of vast and clean-swept 
denudations, that these agencies were from time to 
time infinitely more energetic than in existing nature 
—in other words, that the metamorphisms and 
oscillations of the terrestrial crust, including the 
uprise of sea-bottoms, and the sweeping out of 
débris, were paroxysmal in comparison with the 
movements of our own era. We further maintain 
that no amount of time (of which no true geologist 
was ever parsimonious when recording the history 
of bygone accumulations of sediment, or of the 
different races of animals they contain) will enable 
us to account for the signs of many great breaks and 
convulsions which are visible in every mountain 
chain, and which the miner encounters in all under- 
ground workings... . The case therefore stands 
thus. The shelly and pebbly terraces which exist 
are signs of sudden elevations at different periods ; 


16 IN THE BEGINNING 


whilst the theory of modern gradual elevation and 
depression is still wanting in any valid proof that 
such operations have taken place except within very 
limited areas. Much longer and more persistent 
observations must indeed be made before any definite 
conclusion can be reached respecting the rate of 
gradual elevation or depression which has been going 
on in the last thousand years, though we may con- 
fidently assert that such changes in the relations 
of land to water in the historical period have been 
infinitesimally small when compared with the many 
antecedent geological operations” (Siluria, 490-1, 
fifth ed., 1872). 

On the one hand the facts point to changes in 
earth and sea, and these repeatedly varied too with 
fresh water; to rocks igneous and stratified and 
metamorphised, and (during the periods thus implied, 
and with a corresponding environment of tempera- 
ture and constitution) to organised natures, vegetable 
and animal, from lower orders to high, short of man 
and those animals which accompany his appearance 
on the earth ; to whole groups of these organisms in 
vast abundance coming to an end, and others quite 
distinct succeeding and extinguished in their turn. 
Would it not be a harsh supposition that God, in the 
fossils of the rocks, made a mere appearance of what 
once lived? that these petrified creatures never had 
animate existence here below? On the other hand, 
the principle and the fact of creation we see not 
more plainly revealed in ver. 1 than of disruption in 


GENESIS 1. 2 uve 


ver. 2; and both before the actual preparation of the 
earth for Adam as described in the six days. 

As the creation, announced in a few words of noble 
simplicity, is the first and most momentous of God’s 
productive interventions, so the catastrophe here 
briefly described seems to be the last and greatest 
disturbance of the globe, the twenty-seventh or sub- 
Apennine stage, if we accept the elaborate conclu- 
sions of M. Alcide D’Orbigny (Paléontologie Stratigr., 
Tome ii. 800—824), a most competent naturalist. 
Then the Alps and Chilian Andes received their 
actual elevation, of itself (though with many other 
changes of enormous consequence) quite sufficient 
to account for universal confusion, with destruction 
of life on the earth, the deep supervening everywhere, 
and utter darkness pervading all. However vast, 
this state may have been for but a little while. The 
animals imbedded ages before in the rocks had eyes ; 
presumably therefore light then prevailed. Indeed 
some of the earliest organic remains had vision with 
the most striking adaptation to their circumstances, 
as the Trilobites of the Silurian and other beds, with 
their compound structure, each eye in one computed 
to have 6,000 facets (Owen’s Pal. 48, 49, 2nd ed.). 
The language of ver. 2 is perfectly consistent with 
this, when compared with ver. 1, and in fact natur- 
ally supposes the darkness to be the effect of the 
disorder. 

To confound the two verses is as contrary to the 
only sound interpretation of the record, as it is to 


I.B. Cc 


18 IN THE BEGINNING 


the facts which science undertakes to arrange and 
expound. Nor can anything be more certain than 
the manner in which scripture steers clear of all 
error and consistently with all that is irrefragably 
ascertained, whilst never quitting its own spiritual 
ground to occupy the reader with physics. To reduce 
these gigantic operations of the geologic ages, in 
destruction and reconstruction with new living genera 
and species, to the slow course of nature and provi- 
dence in the Adamiec earth, the fashionable craze of 
the modern school, is “making a world after a 
pattern of our own,” quite as really as uninformed 
prejudice used to do. It was absurd to deny that 
the petrifactions of the strata were once real animals 
and plants, and to attribute them to a plastic force 
in the earth, or to the influence of the heavens: 
but so it is to overlook the evidence of extremely 
violent and rapid convulsions before man was made, 
closing one geological period and inaugurating 
another with its flora and fauna successively suited 
to each in the wisdom and power and goodness of 
God. 

Neither ver. 1 nor ver. 2 is a summary of the 
Adamic earth, which only begins to be got ready 
from ver. 8. There are, accordingly, three states with 
the most marked distinction : original creation of the 
universe ; the earth passed into a state of waste and 
emptiness ; and the renovation of the earth, etc., for 
man its new inhabitant and ruler. Science is dumb, 
because wholly ignorant, how each of these three 


GENESIS I. 2 19 


events, stupendous even the least of them, came to 
pass ; it can only speak, often hesitatingly, about the 
effects of each, and, with least boldness, about 
creation in the genuine sense, though some, I cheer- 
fully acknowledge, with outspoken and ungrudging 
cordiality. How different and surpassing is the 
language of scripture, which has revealed all these 
things to babes, if they are hid from or dubious to 
the wise and the prudent! From the Bible they are, 
or ought to be, known on infallible authority, and 
this in the first written words God gave to man, 
when Rome and Athens had not emerged from 
barbarism if they existed as such at all. 

Our ver. 2 then brings to view a confused state of 
the earth, as different from the order of primary 
creation as from the earth of Adam and his sons, in 
regard to which state the Spirit of God is said to 
have been “brooding upon the face of the waters.” 
By His Spirit the heavens are beautified ; and as to 
creatures generally it is written, “Thou sendest forth 
thy Spirit, they are created, and thou renewest the 
face of the ground.” Here it was to be for man’s 
earth. This is the link of transition. All was to 
be made by God’s word. Wisdom rejoices in the 
“habitable” earth, and has delights with the sons 
of men. A mighty wind might rage over the abyss. 
The Spirit of God, not the wind, could be said with 
propriety to “brood.” What new wonders were at 
hand! 


02 


GENESIS I. 3-5 


OW comes the first point of direct contact 
aN with the habitable earth and its sur- 
roundings. We have had (ver. 1) the 
creation of the heavens and the earth, apart from 
date or definite time; we have had also (ver. 2) a 
superinduced condition of confusion, but the Spirit 
of God brooding upon the face of the waters. 
Neither one nor other has to do with man’s earth, 
though earth there had been under both those 
differing and successive conditions. Nor can it be 
doubtful to him who knows God, that even the latter 
had its worthy and wise aim as well as more 
obviously the former. But neither phase is con- 
nected immediately with man, though all was done 
to God’s glory with man in prospect, and above all 
the Second man, as we can add unhesitatingly from 
the N. T. It is to the facts stated in these pre- 
liminary verses that geological observations and 
inferences would mainly refer. As the words are 
few and general, there is ample space for research. 
The believer knows beforehand that theoretic con- 
clusions wherever sound must fall in with the 
sentence of inspiration, The work of the six days 
has little if anything to do with geology. There may 


GENBHSIS 1. 8-5 21 


be a measure of analogy between the work of the 
third, fifth, and sixth days, and certain of the alleged 
antecedent geologic periods which the Bible passes 
over silently as being outside its range and object, 
while room is left for them all in vers.1 and 2. But 
the effort to force the days, whether those three or all 
six, into a scriptural authority for the successive ages 
of geology is mere illusion, If it bea harmless use of 
geology, it is anything but reverence for God’s word 
or intelligence in it. That there are discrepancies 
between the record and any facts certainly ascer- 
tained, neither geology proves, nor any of the sciences 
still more sure and mature. But he who is assured 
of revealed truth can afford to hear all that experts 
assert, even when based on a partial induction of facts, 
as is not seldom the case. If, outside scripture, there 
is nothing a believer has to contend for ; if scripture 
speaks, he believes, no matter what science declares 
to the contrary ; if science confirms it, so much the 
better for science. Assuredly God’s word needs no 
amprvmatur from men. 

If one appealed to any branch of physical science 
as to the first day, he could get no clear answer. 
Geology has confessedly, nothing to say. What 
can astronomy or optics do more? Science, as such, 
leaves out God—science, not scientific men, many 
of the greatest of whom have been true-hearted 
believers. Science, in itself, knows nothing of the 
power that originated, ignores the First Cause, 
and shirks ordinarily even the final causes which 


29. IN THE BEGINNING 


might summon heed to a first cause. It occupies 
itself with an established order in the world and 
with secondary causes, especially those at work 
before men’s eyes or probably deducible from ex- 
perience. The peril for the unwary is obvious, and 
real, and notorious. It would be much less if 
science were honest enough to acknowledge its 
ignorance of what is beyond its sphere. But often 
its interpreter says ‘‘ There is not,” where logically 
and morally he is entitled only to say, “I know not.” 
This is not merely audacity without warrant, but 
sin of the worst kind. The fool hath said in his 
heart, “There is no God.’ It is exactly where 
science finds itself confessedly stopped by a blind 
wall that scripture proclaims the truth from God. 
As He knows, so He revealed as far as in His wisdom 
and goodness He saw fit. ‘* And God said, Light be : 
and light was. And God saw the light that [it was] 
good ; and God divided between the light and the 
darkness. And God called the light Day, and the 
darkness He called Night. And there was evening, 
and there was morning, one (or, first) day” (vers. 8-5). 

Now who but an inspired man would have so 
written? The more you depreciate Israel as an 
unlettered, if not rude and barbarous, people, the 
greater the wonder. Did Egypt so teach, or Babylon ? 
did Greece or Rome? How came Moses to declare 
that the fact was as he writes? I do not speak of 
the sublime which Longinus so justly extolled, but 
of that which human experience never could have 


GENESIS I. 3-5 23 


suggested; for living man, had he judged from 
universally known phenomena, had ever regarded 
the sun as the great source of light; so that if the 
writing had been his, he must naturally have spoken 
first of that bright orb. In other words, the work 
of the fourth day would more reasonably have taken 
the place of the first. That the philosophers taught 
for ages afterwards. But not so the truth; and, 
whatever the seeming and striking difficulty, 
especially then, Moses was given to write the truth. 
As the apostle says some fifteen centuries after, God 
spoke light to shine out of darkness (2 Cor. iv. 6). 
The darkness is not said to have been everywhere, 
but “on the face of the deep,’’ and now that an 
earth for the human race was in question, there it 
was that God commanded light to shine. That it 
was “created ” now is not said; that it had existed 
before during the geologic ages for varying phases of 
the earth and for a very long while for the vegetable 
and animal kingdoms, there is abundant reason to 
conclude, But this is science, not faith, though the 
scriptural account is the sole cosmogony that leaves 
room for it. 

But what is affirmed is that (after utter confusion 
reigned over the earth and darkness on the face of 
the deep, yet the Spirit of God brooding on the face 
of the waters) God interposed and said, Light be ; 
and light was. As far as the Adamic earth was 
concerned, the light-bearers were not yet set in their 
functions as now: this was the fourth-day work. 


24 IN THE BEGINNING 


The word was, “ Light be ;”’ and light was: language 
evidently consistent with that view of light which 
prevails in comparatively modern times against 
Sir I. Newton’s theory of emanation from the sun. 
If the phenomena of light are allowed in general to 
be a result of molecular action, and dependent on 
fundamental qualities of matter as it is now consti- 
tuted, so that it was not the creation of an element 
admitting of independent existence, as science now 
owns, is it not remarkable that the words of Moses 
avoid all error, without forestalling scientific dis- 
covery, and express nothing but truth in the clearest 
terms? Atthe word of God appeared instant activity 
of light, just before that time inert. 

But science easily over-shoots itself in hasty 
generalisation. For it contradicts the inspired record 
when it ventures to say that the fiat as to light on the 
first day must have preceded the existence of water 
and of earth, of solid or liquid or gaseous compounds 
of every kind. Granted that light is manifested in 
the making of such compounds. But vers. 1 and 2 
give the surest testimony that “ earth ”’ and “ water” 
did exist, not indeed before light, but before that 
particular fiat of God which called it into action for 
the earth that now is, after the confusion and 
darkness which had just before prevailed. 

It is all a mistake then, and distinctly at issue 
with the context, to assume that there was no 
“light ” in the state of things intimated by ver. 1. 
And it is allowed that even the “ earth ” and “ water”’ 


GENESIS I. 8-5 25 


of ver. 2, whatever the then state of ruin and dark- 
ness, could not have been without “ light ” previously, 
if but to form them. Verse 8 was not therefore 
really the signal of creation begun, but of God acting 
afresh and in detail, ages after the universe was 
created, with its systems, and within them its suns, 
planets, and satellites. On the plain face of the 
record, after the mighty work of the universe, and 
after a disruption that befell the earth with most 
marked consequences, God puts forth His word to 
form the Adamic earth with its due accompaniments. 
Hence we may notice anticipatively that on the 
fourth day not a hint is given of creating the 
physical masses of the sun, moon, and stars. It is 
there and then no more than setting them in their 
declared and existing relations to the earth. Their 
creation belongs in time to Gen. i.1; but of the rest 
more fully in its place. That on the first day light 
dissipated the then prevailing darkness is true, and 
of deep interest as God’s first word and act for the 
earth of man. But this says nothing about the 
original creation of the heavens and earth. Nor is 
it quite comprehensible why “the waters” of ver. 2 
should not be literal waters, because utter darkness 
veiled the deep or abyss. These are the inconsist- 
encies that necessarily flow from the false start 
which confounds “in the beginning” of ver. 1 with 
the “first day” of vers. 3-5 and those that follow; 
as this again involves the extraordinary error of 
taking ver. 2 to be the original state of the earth 
HE MASTER'S ( me 
POWELL LIBRARY 


SANTA, CLARITA, CA 93321 


26 IN THE BEGINNING 


in ver. 1, when it immediately came into being 
from God. 

The hypothesis that the earth whencreation began 
was a frigid chaos or frozen globe, strange as it seems, 
is hard to escape for such as deny successive states 
since creation according to God’s will, or, which goes 
along with it, for such as affirm the “creation” of 
the sun, etc., only on the fourth day. The argu- 
ment is that, if so, it must have been almost cloud- 
less, well lighted, and well warmed—in short, an 
impossibility. But reasoning from things as they 
are to a condition so contrasted in the record itself 
with what God formed for man subsequently is 
fallacious. It is simply a question of what God 
tells us of the abnormal state supposed in ver, 2. 
Not a word implies frigidity, save that darkness was 
on the face of the deep, which may rather have been 
the effect of heat acting on the earth and the waters, 
a transient state after previous order, and before it 
was made for Adam.* The record in no way iden- 


* Without any pretension to dogmatise on science, it is 
curious to find how these oracles disagree. For the nebular 
theory in La Place’s ‘‘ Exposition du Systéme du Monde,” 
the boast of modern science so vaunted against Genesis i., 
supposes all the planets existing before the sun reached its 
actual condition. And Arago, Humboldt, ete., contend that 
the sun not only was but is a dark globe, with a luminous 
atmosphere simply. Dr. A. M‘Oaul also refers to the dis- 
coveries of Kirchhoff in proof that the earth was before the 
sun and had a light of its own. Why attach weight to any 
speculation about the solar system before the preparation of 


GENESIS 1. 8-5 27 


tifies the disorder with the earth when its creation 
was effected in ver. 1; but it assuredly distin- 
guishes the dark dislocation of ver. 2 from the work 
of the fourth day when the earth and sun and stars 
became one in system as in their present constitution. 
In short, the dilemma appears to be quite baseless. 
The true scope of ver. 2 is not at all that the original 
creation was a scene of darkness, even for the earth, 
but that when the earth, not the heavens, was thrown 
into confusion ever so long after, darkness was on the 
face of the deep. Light is not an element calling for 
annihilation (which would indeed be absurd), but a 
state flowing from molecular activity which God 
could and did here arrest, as far as “ the deep” was 
concerned. It acted all the same elsewhere; as it 
had over the earth till then during the formation of 
what some geologists call the Tertiary, Secondary, 
and Primary beds, to say nothing of what preceded: 
details for men to discover and interpret as they 
can scientifically, but as foreign to scripture as 
the detailed wonders and movements of the starry 
heavens. 

Hence “creation ” of light, first or second, in the 
universe is only the slip of philosophers. Scripture 
is more accurate than its most modern expounder, 
even when striving to show the accordance of 


the earth for the race? The proper domain of science les 
not in what has long passed away, but in the accurate classi- 
fication of facts grouped under general laws that stand the 
test. 


28 IN THE BEGINNING 


science with the Bible. In the gloom that over- 
hung the earth thrown into desolation God caused 
light to act, as the characteristic act of the “ first 
day” of the week, the brief cycle that was to close 
with man its new master and representative of God 
here below. ‘And God saw the light that [it was] 
good ; and God divided the light from the darkness; 
and God called the light Day, and the darkness he 
called Night.” It presents to us God pondering 
and speaking in gracious consideration of the race 
He was about to create thereon, with a mind 
dwelling on realities about to open out for man far 
more solemn than the light or the darkness, day or 
night, literally. Yet the light of the eyes rejoiceth 
the heart, says the Preacher (Prov. xv. 30), and truly 
is sweet (Eccl. xi. 7), as God pronounced it “ good.” 
“ And it was evening, and it was morning, first (or, 
one) day.” Only we must guard against taking the 
previous darkness as the evening. It would appear 
rather that light shone; and then its waning into 
night, and brightening into day, constituted the 
first day. That the earth would revolve on its axis, 
before the light-bearing of the sun afterwards, and 
so have the phenomena of evening and morning, is 
easy to apprehend. The fact is certain; the “how” 
was no difficulty to Him Who spoke and it was 
done. Our place is to honour Him in believing 
His word, without which faith nothing is as it 
should be. Another first day was to behold a better 
light ; there, too, still more conspicuously, if that 


GENESIS I. 8-5 29 


True Light shone when all was profounder darkness, 
He too had been before the darkness. 

If the preceding exposition be just, the day of the 
first week is plainly one of twenty-four hours. No 
one can fairly deny that scripture, like other speech, 
uses “day’’ where required in a general or figurative 
sense, which may cover a period of considerable 
length. But this need never produce embarrassment 
to a careful reader: as ever, the context gives the 
clue. In this chapter and the next we have the 
word variously applied according to the exigency of 
the case; in none ought it to be doubtful. Here 
“the evening” and “the morning ’”’ should exclude 
just question. It can only mean, thus defined, a day 
of twenty-four hours. Before (not “there was a 
sun,” but before) the sun was set to rule the day 
(of twelve hours) as now makes no difference as to 
the length meant, The same phrase is carefully 
used before and after. Nor would any prolonged 
sense have been tolerated for this carefully specified 
week but for the error which muddles “the be- 
ginning” with the first and following days, makes 
the heavens and the earth at first to be a chaos, and 
in so doing effaces in fact the creation of both the 
one and the other. For where is either really 
“created” on such a scheme ? 

This will appear still more convincingly when we 
come to close quarters with the six days viewed as 
embracing the immense ages of geology. It might 
not be so glaring when taken in a dreamy poetic 


30 IN THE BEGINNING 


way as a vision in the hands of the late Hugh 
Miller. But when the simple dignity of the true 
father of history is vindicated for the matchless 
prose of Moses, the effort to make the days, or some 
of them, answer to the ages of geologic formation in 
building up the crust of the globe proves itself in so 
much more glaring and violent failure. Take the 
first day as our first test: are we told to imagine 
such a notion as that the outshining of the light in 
dispelling the immediately antecedent darkness 
occupied an age? And if not for the first day, or 
the second, or the fourth, how harshly inconsistent 
to claim it for the third, fifth, and sixth? Especially 
as the seventh day, or sabbath, should honestly put 
to the rout any such application. In every case the 
figurative sense is here irrelevant and unsuitable. 
We shall see in due time from scripture that the 
stretching out of the sabbath into an eon is altogether 
unfounded. 

An ingenious attempt is made in “Sermons in 
Stones’ to show that the brooding of the spirit in 
ver. 2 means the creation of submarine animals 
(Zoophytes and Bivalve Mollusks without visual 
organs) before light ; then of a higher class furnished 
with organs of sight after light on the second day; 
and lastly of Vertebrate Fishes on the third. All 
this is error opposed by the record, which admits of 
animated nature for man’s world only after the 
fourth day. For this confusion we are indebted to 
the misinterpreting “days” here into ages. The 


GENESIS 1. 3-5 ii) 


truth is, according to the record, that the Spirit’s 
brooding upon the face of the waters is quite general 
and admits of no such precision, as it was also before 
the first day. And if the days were simply days of 
the week in which Adam was created, geology can 
neither affirm nor contradict. Its main office is to 
investigate the evidence of the successive ages of the 
earth’s crust before the human race. It is freely 
granted that the language employed by inspiration 
is that of phenomena; but this does not warrant the 
hypothesis of the medium of a vision. It was a 
divine communication to and by Moses; but how 
given we know not and should not speculate, lest 
we err. A vision in fact might have shown him the 
submarine animals, being beyond natural conditions; 
but the hypothesis is invented to foist in the creation 
of animals, not seen or specified in the record. 
Further, we must banish the notion that the black 
pall of an unbroken night was the original condition 
—a heathen, not a biblical, idea. It was not so 
before ver. 2, which describes a subsequent and 
transient state. The first verse supposes an order 
of the universe; the second, an interruption of no 
small moment for man; then in ver. 3 the week 
begins in which the earth was prepared for his abode 
who was made before that week ended. The geologic 
ages had passed before the human measures of time 
commenced. If the record had been duly read, the 
Inquisition might have avoided its unwise and 
suicidal judgment of Gal. Galiléi; for the first day, 


82, IN THE BEGINNING 


compared with the fourth, favours the Copernican 
theory as decidedly as it condemns the old philosophy 
of Ptolemy. It exactly agrees with the revolution 
of the earth round its axis for evening and morning, 
independently of the function of the sun soon after 
formed. Only we must take note that the profound 
darkness dispelled was neither primeval nor universal, 
as many men of science have hastily assumed. It 
had nothing to do with the heavens, any more than 
had the disorder which befell the earth, after ever so 
long lapse of time. 


GENESIS I. 6-8 


APPILY the second day’s work admits of a 
Ne notice so much the more brief because of 
~ the rather full remarks on the preceding 
verses. In these were discussed the original creation 
“in the beginning” ; then the superinduced state of 
confusion; lastly the work of the “first day” that 
commences the week of the earth’s preparation for 
the human race. 

The evident immediateness of the first day’s work 
applies throughout the other days. Whatever 
grounds there may be for scientific men to infer 
processes occupying vast tracts of time before the 
“days,” there is no real reason to doubt, but plain 
and positive scripture to believe, that the work done 
on the several six days was not of long ages, but 
really within the compass of the literal evening and 
morning. How unnatural to suppose an age for 
light to act on the first day! And why suppose 
otherwise on the second day or any other? A long 
succession of ages may be true after ‘‘the beginning” 
and before “the days,” which taken in their natural 
import have a striking moral harmony with man, 
the last work of God’s creation-week. 

In this way there is no contest between long 


I.B. D 
* 


34 IN THE BEGINNING 


periods of progressive character and successive acts 
of marked brevity. On the one hand, the record is 
so written as to leave ample space for the researches 
of scientific discovery over the evidence of successive 
states of the earth before man existed ; on the other, 
details under the shape of divine fiats in the six days 
appear only when man is about to becreated. There 
is thus truth in both views. The mistake is in setting 
them in opposition. One can understand, if God so 
willed it, immense times of physical action, with 
secondary causes in operation before man, not with- 
out the evidence of convulsion far beyond volcanoes 
or the deluge within the human period, which great 
geologists at home and abroad admit, contrary to the 
recent speculations of others. But there are those 
that feel the gracious (not belittling) condescension 
of God in deigning to work for six days and rest on 
the seventh, only when getting ready that earth 
where was, not only the first man to come under His 
moral government, but the Second man later to 
glorify God to the uttermost, give to such as believe 
eternal life, and prove the worthlessness of all who 
reject His grace and repent not of their sins; the 
true and intelligible and blessed reason why this 
earth, so insignificant in bulk when compared with 
the vast universe of God, has a position in His 
favour so transcending all other planets, suns, or 
systems, put together. If man was much to differen- 
tiate the earth, Christ is infinitely more: and He 
has yet to show what the earth and man on it are to 


GENESIS I. 6-8 85 


be under His glorious kingdom, to say nothing of the 
heavens according to His grace and the counsels of 
God. 

But alittle must be said of the second day. These 
are the terms :—“ And God said, Let an expanse be 
in the midst of the waters, and dividing be between 
waters and waters. And God made the expanse, and 
divided between the waters that [are] under the 
expanse and the waters that [are] above the expanse: 
and it was so. And God called the expanse Heavens. 
And there was evening and there was morning, a 
second day” (vers. 6-8). 

There is no more ground for conceiving this to be 
the first creation of atmospheric heavens than we 
saw in the case of light on the first day. The 
absolute language of creating is avoided in both 
cases, As there had been light in the long ages of 
geology when not only plants but animals marine 
and terrestrial abounded, suited to the systems that 
contained them, so an atmosphere was requisite and, 
no doubt, was furnished of God with every provision 
for their sustenance till a new condition succeeded 
by God’s power. That which now girdles the earth 
may not have been altogether alike for the varying 
states of vegetable and animated being long before 
man existed, to say nothing of the azoic periods before 
either. They had each an environment adapted by 
the Creator of all. The remains in successive strata 
indicate an admirable suitability for the then flora 
and fauna, quite different from the Adamic earth 

D2 


86 IN THE BEGINNING 


and its inhabitants, in some of which it may be 
doubted if man could have lived, as he did not in 
fact. 

The great difficulty for geologists, especially of 
late from the growth of infidel thought, is to 
allow such a revolution as ver. 2 intimates. Even 
Christians among them are afraid to be governed 
by its express declarations, and shrink from the 
ignorant mockery of those who boldly deny there 
ever was a breach of continuity between the original 
creation and the days of man on the earth. But on 
the one hand it is certain that the record maintains 
such a breach to have occurred (and this not on a 
circumscribed part of the earth, which some lke 
Dr. Pye Smith have imagined in a spirit of com- 
promise,* but for the earth wholly) as to require an 
entire re-ordering of it as well as man’s creation, 
God’s vicegerent then first made to have dominion 
over all here below. On the other hand, it is 


* Sir J. W. Dawson, in his “‘ Archaia,” rejects the views 
represented by both Chalmers and Smith, but seems himself 
obscure as to the bearing of ver. 2. Heisa believer; where, 
and when, does he then assign the occurrence of that un- 
paralleled disorder? That scripture places it before the 
Adamic earth, and after the original creation, is an undeniable 
fact. It is easy to object if influenced by some loud-voiced 
materialists ; but what is the truth? What saith the serip- 
ture? Geology has much to learn. Our call is to believe 
God, not to humour the lispings of an infant science. That 
mmense and violent upturning was itself absolutely 
requisite for man about to be created subsequently. 


GENESIS I. 6-8 37 


intolerable to assume that no convulsions could have 
effected such changes as the non-action of light, or 
the destruction of atmospheric conditions, etc. This 
is mere and narrow unbelief. “Ye do err, knowing 
not the scriptures nor the power of God.” How 
little science can explain even of existing life 
and of its surroundings! How unbecoming of 
geology to dogmatise! Is it not one of the 
youngest of sciences, with much to explore and 
adequately weigh, and very far from the precision 
of chemistry for instance, though there too how 
much is unknown ? 

At a fit moment the question of the mammoth, 
etc., co-existing with the musk-ox and other surviving 
quadrupeds may be briefly examined. But on the 
face of the argument it is plain that there is no more 
difficulty in conceiving God might renew some pre- 
viously existing plants and animals for Adam’s earth, 
than in causing light again to act on the first day 
and the atmosphere on the second. The work of the 
first day, perfectly if not exclusively consistent with 
an instantaneous exertion of the divine will, illus- 
trates and confirms that of the second day. Scrip- 
ture places the description of ver. 2 at some 
time before these days commence. Light acted 
first after that disorder, and according to the 
earth’s revolution on its axis. Next day the 
atmospheric heavens, so essential to light, sound, 
and electricity, to vegetation and animal life, were 
called (or rather recalled) to their functions after 


38 IN THE BEGINNING 


that confusion which destroyed them in ways beyond 
our ken. 

Assuredly this renewal was no matter of a long 
age of gradual process, but a work to which God 
assigned a separate day, though to Him abstractedly 
a moment had sufficed. As it is, man’s attention 
was impressively drawn to His considerate and 
almighty goodness Who then separated “waters 
from waters,” which otherwise had filled space above 
the earth with continual vapour and without that 
due mixture of gases which constitutes the air 
essential to all life on the globe. To its machinery 
with other causes by divine constitution we owe the 
formation of clouds and the fall of rain as well as 
evaporation ; to its refractive and reflective powers, 
that modification of light which adds incalculably to 
beauty no less than to the utility of the creation: a 
black sky had otherwise cast its constant pall over 
the earth. Even had dry land by another fiat been 
disengaged from the waters, without this encom- 
passing elastic fluid, vapours would not have been 
absorbed nor have fallen as now; dew had ceased; 
fountains and rivers if formed had wasted away ; 
water had enormously prevailed; and if dry land 
had survived anywhere, it must have been a dry 
arid mass with neither animal life nor a blade of 
grass. But enough; these are not the pages in 
which to seek the physical methods of creative 
beneficence. 


It is now generally known, as it had long been 


GENESIS I. 6-8 39 


laid down by the most competent Hebraists before 
modern science existed, that “expanse” is the real 
force of the original word, instead of “ firmament” 
which came to us through the Latin Vulgate, as it 
seems due to the Greek Septuagint. Possibly these 
Jewish translators in the days of Ptolemy Phila- 
delphus may have succumbed here as elsewhere to 
Gentile ideas or at least phrases. And a great 
Rabbinical scholar, a Christian teacher, has given 
his opinion that the Greek version employs the word 
(orepéwua) in the sense of an ethereal or fine subtle 
orb, and in no way of a solid permanent vault as 
rationalists love to assume, basing it on etymology 
and figurative usage. The aim is obvious, the wish 
father to the thought. Excluding God from the 
written word as from creation, deifying nature and 
exalting fallen man (more especially of the nineteenth 
century), they gladly depreciate the text by citing 
“windows”’ and “doors,” “pillars” and “ founda- 
tions ” as if meant literally. Now the usage of the 
word even in the chapter itself (vers. 15, 17, 20, 28) 
sufficiently proves that the word conveys the idea 
of the open transparent sky, whatever may have 
been the misunderstanding of the reader at any 
given time. 

Hence it may be noted that the Authorised and 
Revised English Versions give “the air” as the — 
equivalent of “the heavens” in ver. 28 as elsewhere. 
It is really the expanse, including the atmospheric 
heavens in the lower part of which birds fly. A 


40 IN THE BEGINNING 


solid vault is out of the question. The true deriva- 
tion seems rather from a word expressing elevation, 
like the source of our own “heaven”; but even if 
drawn from the idea of beating or hammering out, 
who knows not that words may and do acquire a 
force etherealised according to the object designated, 
wholly above their material origin? The scriptures 
really present the heavens as spread out, and the 
earth hung upon nothing, nowhere giving coun- 
tenance to the grossness of the stars fastened like 
brass nails on a metallic vault. Sceptical ill-will 
likes that it should seem so; but it is unworthy 
slander. Even Dathe who was free enough gives 
“ spatium eatensum,” as did learned Jews generally 
long before and since. 

“The waters above” consist of that enormous 
supply of vapour which fills the clouds and falls as 
rain, hail, or snow. “The waters below” covered 
the earth as yet, but were shortly to form seas, when 
the dry land appeared next day. It is ignorance 
therefore to say, in the face of a crowd of scriptures, 
that the waters above imply a permanent solid vault 
like a shower bath. The Hebrews could see the 
movements of many heavenly bodies instead of 
regarding all as fixtures. But even had they been 
as dull as rationalism is invidious, our concern is 
with the divine record, the accuracy of which irritates 
hostile minds who would hail the least flaw with 
satisfaction. Scripture abides; science changes and 
corrects itself from age to age. As to figures, 


GENESIS I. 6-8 Al 


“bottles”? are used no less than “pillars,” and a 
“tent” or “curtain” as well as “ windows” and 
“doors.” They are all strikingly expressive. Only 
the stupid or malicious could take any of them in 
the letter, to dishonour the scriptures. 


GENESIS I. 9-13 


|HIS publication is scarcely the suited place, 
ee nor does the writer pretend, to draw out 
adequately the wondrous and _ beneficent 
functions of the separated waters or seas and of the 
dry land, any more than of the light and of the 
atmospheric heavens, on which a little has been 
said. But afew words here may confirm, what was 
remarked as to the first and the second days, that 
the record speaks with immediate propriety of God’s 
constituting the earth for the human race. By no 
means does it intimate particulars of the long 
periods before man when those successive changes 
are observable, which laid down vast stores for his 
future use and fitted the earth’s progressively built- 
up crust, the rich field of geological research. One 
can admire the wisdom which did not encumber the 
Bible with the details of natural science. Rocks 
crystalline and stratified are before men’s eyes, who 
can reason on the fossils they embalm. Scripture 
alone avoids the universal heathen idea of a 
primitive chaos, and the philosophic error of an 
eternal universe or even eternal matter. Scripture, 
on the contrary, has carefully enunciated God’s 
creation at an undefined moment, “in the beginning,” 


GENESIS I. 9-18 43 


not merely of crude materials, but of the heavens and 
the earth, without a word about their denizens. It 
also makes known the fact that the earth was 
subjected to revolution so complete that before the 
Adamic state of things divine power was needed to 
cause light to act in a diurnal way, as well as to 
order the atmosphere, and from a previous and 
universal overspread of waters the appearance of dry 
land, on which God began the plants or vegetable 
kingdom for man. 

Thus the work of these days wholly leaves out, 
because chronologically it follows, the vast operations 
both of slow construction and of destruction which 
give special interest to the geologist. Original 
creation and subsequent dislocation (which swept 
away in due time whole species and genera of 
organised beings, followed by fresh and different 
ones, and this repeatedly) it asserts distinctly; and 
both, before the days which prepared all for his life 
and probation under divine government who was 
created ere the week closed. The document itself 
furnishes the warrant to the believer for taking the 
first verse indefinitely before the six days, and also 
for affirming the state, possibly final state, of confusion 
into which the earth passed before it became the 
world as it now is. 

There may indeed be some analogy between the 
days that concern the earth of the human race and 
those immense ages of ripening advance which pre- 
ceded, so as to furnish a slight ground of resemblance 


44 IN THE BEGINNING 


on which not a few men of ingenuity and the 
best intentions have reared their various schemes 
for accommodating the days to the geological ages. 
Yet this hypothesis, even when guarded by the 
most cautious and competent aid of science, does 
not square with scripture. It is unjustifiable in 
every point of view to confound the disturbed state 
of ver. 2 with the creation of the earth described 
in ver. 1, which it really follows, disorder after 
order; is it not even absurd to identify ver. 3 
with either? Each follows consecutively; and the 
long tracts of time, if filled up in a way that scrip- 
ture does not essay, would come in after ver. 1, 
and before ver. 3, which wholly differing from what 
precedes, introduces a new condition where alone 
details are given to mark God’s direct dealings with 
man. 

Hence the days, from ver. 8 and onward, are 
wholly misapplied to the geologic ages. Where for 
this scheme have we the formation of the plutonic, 
volcanic, and metamorphic rocks? Where the 
upheaval of the mountain ranges and the tracing of 
the river systems? Where the succession of organic 
remains, marine and terrestrial, vegetable and 
animal, new ones following those extinguished, and 
mutually distinct, from the Laurentian beds to the 
Post-Pleiocene or Quaternary? The six days set 
forth the peculiar constitution God was pleased to 
establish for the existing or human world. What the 
geologic periods embrace is successive remodellings 


GENESIS 1. 9-18 45 


of the earth where sea and land have changed 
place, mountains were raised and valleys scooped, 
perhaps again and again, not only a sweeping away 
of old organic creation, but an introduction of 
new plants and animals, each assemblage confessed 
even by Lyell to admirably fit the new states of the 
globe; with singular varieties all pointing by 
harmony of parts and beauty of contrivance to One 
Divine Maker. These days only begin, when God, 
having closed the long undefined periods of pro- 
gressive character, with repeated extermination of 
their correspondingly changed flora and fauna, 
forms, within the brief span of human labour, that 
system, inorganic and organic of which man is the 
appointed head, but enriched by all He had slowly 
deposited and rendered available to man’s industry 
and profit by that dislocation which laid bare 
treasures so remote and manifold, so interesting and 
important. 

The divine operations of the third day call for 
more detail than that which was last before us. 
They form a double class, as does the work of the 
sixth day. 

“And God said, Let the waters under the 
heavens be gathered together to one place, and let 
the dry [land] appear. And it was so. And God 
called the dry [land] Earth, and the gathering 
together of the waters he called Seas. And. God 
saw that [it was] good. And God said, Let the 
earth sprout grass, herb producing seed, fruit-trees 


46 IN THE BEGINNING 


yielding fruit after their kind, the seed of which [is] 
in them, on the earth. And it was so. And the 
earth sprouted grass, herb producing seed after its 
kind, and trees yielding fruit, the seed of which [is] 
in them after their kind. And God saw that [it 
was] good. And there was evening, and there was 
morning, a third day” (vers. 9-18). 

We have seen light (involving heat) caused to act 
for the Adamic earth, and that atmosphere which 
sustains an enormous body of waters above those 
that lie below: both of them results of essential 
importance for what was coming, and of course 
adapted by divine power and wisdom to the system 
in which the human race were to exist. It was 
needless and foreign for a divine revelation to 
explain how these and other works of God were 
effected. The important truth for His people, and 
for every soul of man, to know, is that He is both 
the Originator and the Maker of all. No student of 
geology doubts mechanical any more than chemical 
agency on the largest scale in forming the crust of 
the earth. Heat, water, and air have played their 
part under His hand in change, and waste, and 
progressive formation. But it is only the petty and 
pedantic unbelief of some who cry up such gradual 
secondary causes as are now seen, shutting out the 
evidence (which geology itself affords to candid 
minds) of repeated and enormous transformations, 
and all but entire revolution of organic life, in both 
extinction and new creation, with the corresponding 


GENESIS I. 9-18 47 


change of the globe and its temperature which this 
implies, and each of these not for a brief space but 
for ages before the earth of man. Facts plamly 
enough point to these conclusions for those who 
occupy themselves with the natural antiquities of 
the earth. Nor can it be doubted that each suc- 
cessive tale inscribed on the fossiliferous rocky 
tablets of the earth shows on the whole distinct 
progress, in no way as mere development of the 
antecedent condition, but the fresh fruit of creative 
acts, even if some species seem renewed for the 
subsequent phase, and all with evident relation to 
the earth as it was to be for Adam, and as it will be 
when the Second man takes it with the universe 
itself for His inheritance. Unity of plan marks all 
from first to last. 

But all this bygone succession of physical change 
is only left room for in the revealed word which 
dwells on man and Immanuel. Geological detail in 
scripture would have been as much out of place as 
any other science; but how can the room left for 
all, in what is said, be accounted for save as implying 
the knowledge of all by Him Who revealed His 
word? An original creation of the heavens and the 
earth without details, and unlimited even by myriads 
of years, “in the beginning,” perfectly falls in with 
every ascertained fact; and a violent dislocation of 
the earth, of the highest importance for the race 
in its disarrangements, altogether different from 
and more thorough than any diluvial or merely 


48 IN THE BEGINNING 


superficial action, is also made known ; followed 
by that “making” of heaven and earth which is 
historically described in Gen. i. 3-81 and referred to 
solemnly in Exod. xx. 11. 

It is pertinent to observe that the effort to interpret 
the days of the immense ages before man, separates 
Adam from his historie time as well as the creation 
placed under him as its head. For according to the 
long periods of geology what would the fossil-plants 
of the third day have to do with those that grew on 
the Adamic tarth ? And so with the animals on the 
fifth day, if not the sixth. On the contrary “the 
six days” were plainly meant to convey a realm of 
creation immediately connected with Adam, the 
various forms of organic nature being subjected and 
given to him. ‘The sixth day is thus made geologic 
as well as historical. Surely this does not hang 
together; any more than our having a detailed 
account of fossil creation, and none at all of that 
which seems the express object of the several days 
—the creation in view of the incoming race. Now in 
a divine revelation it is easy to understand passing 
over all particulars of the fossilised stages of the 
earth ; but inconceivable that there should be no 
account of heaven and earth and sea and all that in 
them is, in connected relation to Adam and his sons: 
especially as out of the thousands of organised species 
in the Secondary rocks, not a single species, says 
Professor Hitchcock, corresponds with any now 
living; and even out of the thousands in the 


GENESIS I. 9-13 49 


Tertiary, but few seem identical with living species 
The natural and only reasonable conclusion is that, 
whatever the analogy with the divine action in past 
geologic time, the “days”’ speak solely of what God 
made in immediate view of Adam; not of fossils, 
animal or vegetable, but of the organic beings placed 
under Adam and his race, with their surroundings 
and suited system. To suppose both is nothing but 
confusion. 

Returning to the day before us we see a fresh 
operation of God for man’s world, the waters under 
the heavens collected to one place, and dry land 
consequently appearing. Not that such a separation 
had not existed before; but that the disruption, 
wise and benevolent for the earth of man, made it 
a necessary act now, as indeed in a general way 
everything had to be made afresh for Adam: a dis- 
ruption wholly distinct from the vague and useless 
chaos which the heathen imagined. 

Now God formed the earth and seas in the con- 
dition which substantially abides to our days. How 
momentous an act for the race needs few words to 
explain. That both earth and seas had existed 
previously no geologist disputes, any more than 
the various phases of both according to the plants 
and animals that prevailed from one geologic age 
to another. Doubtless also, save for dead-level 
Uniformitarians if there be such, the epochs of 
change that destroyed the older creatures and 


beheld new races modified greatly both the earth 


I.B. H 


50 IN THE BEGINNING 


and the seas; for each period had its own proper 
system, with changes in inorganic matter, water, 
atmosphere, temperature, and the like, corresponding 
to each new set of organised beings. 

The earth then was to have that form for the most 
part which God saw best fitted for His new purpose : 
vast continents and vaster oceans, islands large and 
small, lakes salt and fresh, swamps and torrents, 
mountains and rivers, plains greater or less, and 
valleys not merely effected by gradual erosion but 
often by deep and sudden dislocation. It iscommon 
knowledge what a part is played in the physical 
economy of the world by the “seas,’’ (which in 
Hebrew idiom embrace all large collections of waters, 
oceans, seas, lakes, and even rivers,) as well as by 
the varied disposition of the land, high or low. To 
this the disarrangement of Gen. i. 2 had directly 
contributed ; as now in the separation of earth and 
seas after having been commingled for a time. 
Rapid extraordinary operations wrought, and of 
course slow and existing causes, in bringing about 
what was then done for man; but here we learn that 
God laid down the great landmarks which abide to 
this day. Gen. ii. 11-14 is enough to indicate that 
men attribute to the deluge or other changes more 
than can be proved. 

God gave names too, as to the objects of His work 
on the previous days, 

But there is a second part of His work to notice: 
vegetable nature for the earth that now is, that 


GENESIS I. 9-18 51 


kingdom which mediates between minerals and 
animals. God commanded the earth to bring forth 
grass (or, sprout sprouts*), herb seeding seed, fruit- 
trees yielding fruit after its kind, which has its seed 
in itself after its kind, as is said here most emphati- 
cally. This is the true origin of vegetable species 
for the Adamic earth. And as God pronounced good 
the dry land and the seas, so now the beautiful 
clothing of the dry land, and the abundant supplies 
for man and beast—at first indeed the exclusive food 
even for man. 

How does the protracted scheme of the days as 
geologic periods agree with the vegetable kingdom 
on the third day, and the animal even in its lowest 
forms on the fifth? Is it really so with the evidence 
of fossils? The coal measures indicate vast brackens, 
ferns, etc.; but what of fruit-trees bearing fruit 
according to each several kind? Certainly it would 
seem that Zoophytes are as early as any vegetable 
remains, long before the Carboniferous era so 
paraded as the fulfilment of the third day, after a 
great abundance of marine animals far beyond 
plants, of which direct evidence appears in the rocks. 


* There may be a question whether the peculiar phrase 
here does not mean the general term “sprouts” expanded 
into herbs and fruit-trees, as some learned men have inferred. 
The substantive has a wider meaning than “ grass” which it 
frequently signifies ; but I am not aware of any other appli- 
cation so extensive as to justify that generic force. If meant 
here it is peculiar. 


E 2 


52 IN THE BEGINNING 


If the days are taken simply in reference to Adam, 
there is no difficulty on any such score, as the provi- 
sion for the world that now is appeared with no 
interval such as geology can appreciate. 

How absurd, taking the third day before us as 
our example, for us to identify it with the Carboni- 
ferous age, or that which laid the basis for the 
coal measures! What real analogy between coal- 
plants, chiefly Acrogens, and the grass, herb, tree, so 
manifestly for the food of animals, above all of 
man? What with herb in general producing seed, 
and what with fruit-trees yielding fruit after their 
kind, the seed ofwhichisinthem? This is evidently 
not provision for coal, but for the food and refresh- 
ment of man and cattle, of bird and beast. The 
analogy vanishes when looked into. For geologic 
eras it is a failure; for man’s world it is the simple 
and suited truth. It was plant-life for Adam’s 
earth. The Carboniferous era, when people have 
been content with facts, was the age, botanically 
of Cryptogams and Gymnosperms, in the animal 
realm of the earlier reptiles, Batrachian or Amphi- 
bian. Now does this truly correspond with the 
third day? With the formation of seas and the 
emergence of dry land? And this clothed with ver- 
dure, herbs, and fruit-trees, each propagating after its 
kind? Beyond just doubt Moses meant herbs, not of 
the Carboniferous age, but solely of the earth for 
man, animal lite for 2¢ not existing till the fifth day. 
Compare ver. 29. 


GENESIS I. 9-13 538 


But the geologic evidence points to plants and 
animals even in Archean time; for as the simplest 
animal forms (Rhizopods) have been detected in the 
Laurentian rocks, so the enormous quantity of 
graphite, being carbon, implies abundant vegetation, 
sea-weeds, and lichens. The metamorphism of the 
rocks may account for the rare indications of organic 
life even in the Huronian beds which were subse- 
quent ; but according to what is generally averred, 
Palzozoic time goes farther back than even the 
Silurian age, Upper and Lower, the era of fucoids on 
the one hand and of marine invertebrate animals on 
the other (Protozoans, Radiates, Mollusks, and 
Articulates). Then comes the Devonian, or age of 
fishes (chiefly Selachian and Ganoid), and some 
insects, in addition to previous invertebrates and, 
besides sea-weeds, Calamites, Conifers, Ferns, and 
Lycopods. Surely long ages with organic life, not 
only vegetable but animal, before the Carboniferous 
period, as all geologists accept, disprove beyond con- 
troversy the effort to make out the third day therein 
fulfilled. Hence Principal Dawson (Arch. 168) is 
obliged to own that the coal flora (consisting mainly 
of Cryptogams allied to ferns and clubmosses, and of 
Gymnosperms allied to the pines and cycads) cannot 
‘coalesce with the higher orders of plants called into 
being in our verses 11, 12. ‘For these reasons,” 
says he, ‘‘ we are shut up to the conclusion that this 
flora of the third day must have its place before the 
Paleozoic period of geology,” z.e., when vegetation 


54 IN THE BEGINNING 


was incomparably lower than that of the coal 
measures! The true conclusion on the contrary is 
that the third day’s work implies a flora for man 
and the creatures under him, long after the coal 
measures. 

By the way, Dawson remarks that “the sacred 
writer specifies three descriptions of plants as 
included in it”: the first he will have to be not 
“orass,” but the Cryptogamia, as fungi, mosses, 
lichens, ferns, etc.; then seed-bearing herbs, and 
fruit-bearing trees. The Cryptogams may well be 
doubted: if tenable, it might be pleaded even more 
fairly that the Phznogams, endogenous and exo- 
genous, follow. However, it would seem that no 
scientific classification is intended, but a general 
division which all could observe into grass, herbs, 
and fruit-trees, each species none the less expressly 
and permanently reproductive. In point of fact 
it is not till the Cretaceous period of Mesozoic 
time that we find the first traces of Angiosperms 
(Oak, Plane, Fig, etc.); so that the reference to an 
age before the Palaeozoic time is still less reasonable 
than the hypothesis of the Carboniferous era. 

Doubtless geologists would, if they could, make 
verses 11, 12 subsequent to the great operations of 
the fourth day ; for who can question the all-impor- 
tance not of light only but of the sunbeam for herb- — 
age of all kinds, for fruit-bearing, and for timber ? 
This is no difficulty for one who takes the days as 
“the evening and the morning”; but is it not 


GENESIS I. 9-13 55 


insuperable for all who regard them as representing 
ages of untold duration? The Archean rocks, we 
must bear in mind, are believed to be near five miles 
thick; the Silurian system considerably thicker, 
especially if we add the Devonian. Then come the 
Carboniferous and Permian formations of not far 
from four miles; and after the Triassic and Jurassic 
the Cretaceous, when it would seem that Angio- 
sperms or Dicotyledons began to appear (Rose, 
Apple, Elm, etc.). In fact it was only just before 
the Tertiary or Cainozoic, if we include in it, as most 
do, the Nummulitic beds. Who can reckon the 
times of these formations ? 

There is another observation of importance to 
make. What scripture reveals of the third day’s 
work points in no way to Archean or Palzozoic 
times, but simply and naturally to the formation of 
the Adamic earth. Geology tells us that the conti- 
nents while still beneath the waters began to take 
shape ; then, as the seas deepened, that the first dry 
land appeared, low, barren, and lifeless; next that, 
under intestine and external action, the dry land 
expanded, strata formed, and mountains rose, each 
in its appointed place, till finally heights and conti- 
nents reached their fullest development. Now the 
flora described by the inspired writer does not fit 
the geologic first appearance of dry land, when of 
the character above described, till the mountains 
rose ages afterwards and river-systems followed. To 
say the least, marked advance of state is involved in 


56 IN THE BEGINNING 


the flora described by Moses. How then identify it 
with the earliest geologic time when sea-weeds alone 
existed in the waters, along with lichens on the land, 
and even then the Eozoon Rhizopod ? 

Moses describes just such a vegetable kingdom in 
its main features as Adam had, and we have now. 
It was vegetation as he knew it; and God led him 
so to describe it, being the truth. Is there then 
contradiction between the more or less satisfactory 
conclusions of geology and unerring scripture? In 
no way. Distinguish the times, and clashing dis- 
appears. The third day speaks solely of the earth’s 
last emergence from the waters by which it was 
submerged long ages after the original “ outlining of 
the land and water determining the earth’s general 
configuration.” Dr. Dana on reconsideration should 
acknowledge that the idea of life expressed in the 
lowest plants and afterward, if not contempora- 
neously, in the lowest or systemless animals, the 
Protozoans, is doubly and hopelessly incongruous with 
the Mosaic record. Take it as of the Adamic week, 
and all is plain to the believer, if a few difficulties 
remain for the geologist. Why should any wonder, 
since it is confessed by the same competent authority 
that “a broken record the geological undoubtedly: is, 
especially for terrestrial life” (Dana’s ‘“‘ Manual of 
Geology,” 601, third edition, 1875) ? Not so with 
the Bible, which, being divine, is and must be true: 
plain for the wayfaring man, profound for the most 
informed and best cultured. 


GENESIS I. 14-19 


the third day is express. It is dry lands and 

seas in view of man: in no way the varying 
phases of either in the geologic ages, but solely the 
result, after the last disturbance when the waters 
prevailed everywhere. Indeed a good deal of un- 
founded hypothesis is now exploded (especially since 
the recent deep-sea soundings) as to the alternation 
of the ocean beds and the vast mountain ranges 
east or west. For though the strata and fossils, 
marine, lacustrine or fluviatile, and terrestrial, point 
to repeated submergence and emergence of consider- 
able regions, the continents have abode from 
Archean time, the Atlantic flowing on one side, the 
Pacific on another. During the ages that followed, 
allow all that can be proved of change by upheaval, 
oscillation, dislocation, and rock formation, frag- 
mental, or crystalline, eruptive or stratified, by 
means organic, mechanical, or chemical, by 
atmosphere, water, fire or aught else, there 
were elements of life vegetable and animal brought 
into being in the waters and on the land, 
but successively extinguished, and new ones 
created with the changed state of the globe, each 


Se evidence which the record furnishes of 


— 


58 IN THE BEGINNING 


period having its appropriate species in the new 
environment. 

But none of these alternations, vast and impor- 
tant as they were physically, enters the scope of the 
six days. No geologist denies that the mountains, 
to take this one sample, were elevated substantially 
as they are, long before the human race; and on 
mountains depend the springs and rivers and even 
the due fall of rains, and striking equalisation of 
temperature between the extremest climes, so neces- 
sary to man and beast and herb. Very much more 
indeed had been done by God in that immense 
preparation, not only in the partially hidden supplies 
(coal, marble, lime, precious stones, metals, etc.) for 
man’s use, but in enriching the soil and beautifying 
the surface of the earth in countless ways, working, 
as He still does, now for instance by sudden volcanic 
action, and again for example by the slow process of 
innumerable polyps, yea, and mysteriously by their 
combined action (though the one be organic and the 
other not) in the accomplishment of His creative 
designs, from a time when there was no life here 
below, till every organised form was there short of 
man. Now it is exclusively of the human era and 
its belongings that the six days speak; and none 
more clearly than the third day, when the vegetable 
kingdom began, but solely in reference to Adam and 
those subject to him. The application to geologic 
time is impossible as proved by the record itself, and 
the mutual contradictions of all who essay it, 


GENESIS I. 14-19 59 


The evidence is no less plain and conclusive as 
to the fourth day, of which the more prudent advo- 
cates for the long-period days say little. But even 
here, though it be a question of the heavenly orbs, 
the record looks at them simply in view of man and 
this earth. “And God said, Let there be light- 
bearers in [the] expanse of the heavens to divide 
between the day and between the night; and let 
them be for signs and for seasons and for days and 
years; and let them be for light-bearers in [the] 
expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth. 
And it was so. And God made the two great lights, 
the greater light for ruling the day, and the lesser 
- light for ruling the night (the stars also). And God 
set them in the firmament of the heavens to give 
light on the earth and to rule over the day and over 
the night, and to divide between the light and the 
darkness. And God saw that [it was] good. And 
there was evening, and there was morning, a fourth 
day ” (verses 14-19). 

It is a mistake to suppose that during the long 
ages of vegetable and animal life up to the highest 
forms, one excepted, there had not been the shining 
of sun, moon and stars, as well as sea and land and 
atmosphere, though not always quite the same as 
ours, If geology can trace the proofs of life, and its 
progress in a typical system, which reveals unity of 
plan as distinctly as deep and comprehensive wisdom, 
be it so; yet they enjoyed sunlight, heat, air, and 
water throughout. But here we have everything 


60 IN THE BEGINNING 


successively ordered for man, after those immense 
eras of change were closed, when the last disturbance 
needed God’s interference for a new system. Light 
was caused to act. The atmosphere as it is followed. 
Next, the seas were gathered to their own place, 
and dry land appeared, and the vegetable realm; 
the work of mountain-making and valley-scooping, 
shaping as well as storing, having been already, and 
it may be in long successive ages, effected. In each 
case of these “days” the result seems instantaneous. 
“He spoke, and it was done.” The work stated here 
is quite distinct. “The evening and the morning” 
are the expression of God’s considerate goodness to 
man, responsible to learn of Him and to do His will 
on the earth, as Christ did perfectly. 

It is assuredly not the creation of the sun, etc. 
This the inspired historian does not say, but only 
that God now constituted the heavenly luminaries, 
after the plants and before the animals for the 
Adamic earth. Light had shone otherwise since 
the first day of the great week. Now He set the 
light-bearers of the heavens to do their assigned 
work, but it is for the earth, and indeed for man. 
Their creation was implied in ver.1; for God did 
not create either empty ; and what would heaven 
be without its host? And we saw that ver. 2 
implies that the earth even had not been so, though 
so it became with other marks of disorder. What 
then hindered the functions of sun and moon was 
now rectified. Light independently had been proved 


GENESIS I. 14-19 61 


to be under God’s control. On the fourth day He 
gave the luminaries of heaven their unhindered 
relation to divide the day from the night. Now we 
can readily understand the plants (and these were 
for the use of man and his congeners) caused to 
spring forth on the day before without the sunbeam; 
but assuredly not so of a geological age of grass, 
corn, and fruit. Yet we see the fitness of the due 
ordering of light and heat, as we have it, the next 
day, if the plants were to flourish, as well as for the 
animal life that begins after that according to His 
word. 

This is entirely confirmed if we inspect the con- 
text more closely. For where would be the sense of 
the light-bearers “for signs and for seasons, and for 
days and years,” if it had been an age (thousands, 
myriads, millions of years) before Adam? If, on the 
contrary, God was not creating them, but, after that 
which had intercepted, only “setting” them to 
their ordained task in immediate view of man, all 
is clear and consistent. And to whom could this be 
of such interest as to Israel, the people of His choice, 
in whose history we have them acting as “signs” 
on critical occasions for His sovereign will? With- 
out dwelling on His wonders in Egypt where light 
was in Israel’s dwellings, darkness thick in all the 
rest of the land, or Jater at Sinai, we see what a 
sign it was to Israel when Joshua said in their sight, 
“ Sun, stand still upon Gibeon, and thou, Moon, in the 
valley of Ajalon”’; or in far other days when Jehovah 


62 IN THE BEGINNING 


spoke to sick Hezekiah, and gave him a sign in the 
shadow that went back ten steps on the dial of 
Ahaz. And what a sign again where all was lost, as 
far as man is concerned, in the Cross of Messiah 
when darkness for three hours covered all the land! 
A mere eclipse was then impossible. Nor will whole 
clusters of signs be wanting when He comes in 
power and glory on the clouds of heaven. For 
“seasons” is needed no comment: man alone on 
earth understands and appreciates these fit and 
recurring times. As the same Hebrew word means 
“the congregation ” and “ the solemn feast,” as well 
as the season or appointed time at which they kept 
it, “seasons” may have a sacred aspect; but the 
more ordinary sense seems confirmed by what 
follows. Very little astronomy is requisite to know 
how ‘‘days and years’’ are defined by them, but 
only for man. In the ages before him this were all 
irrelevant. In view of man, and Israel especially, it 
is as affecting as full of interest. The constant 
design is reiterated in “Let them be for light-bearers 
in the expanse of the heavens.” It was their effect, 
not their structure, that is intimated. “And it was 
80.” 

Then we are told that “God made,” not created, 
“the two great lights.” The language is never 
varied without purpose. Rosenmiiller the younger 
was anadmirable Hebraist, and certainly free enough 
in his handling of scripture: yet he has no hesita- 
tion in his discussion of this question formally, but 


GENESIS I. 14-19 68 


insists that the genuine force of the construction is 
not “fiant luminaria” (z.e., let lights be made), but 
“jinserviant in expanso coelorum”’ (2.e., serve in the 
expanse of the heavens). He compares the singular 
with the plural of the Hebrew verb for being, and 
deduces the inference that the language can only 
express the determination of the luminaries to some 
fixed uses for the world, and not to their production. 
Further, it is solely relation to man on earth that 
demonstrates the strict phraseological propriety of 
“the two great lights.” He Who created all and 
inspired Moses knew better than Newton or La Place 
the sizes of every orb in heaven ; but for man’s and 
for Israel’s help on earth, to say nothing of every 
subject creature, what were all the rest, for light- 
giving by day and night, compared to the sun and 
moon ? 

This, again, as definitely excludes scientific pre- 
occupation as it confirms the reference throughout. 
The stars only come in parenthetically. God made 
them too, if blind man deified them. But God gave 
sun and moon to rule over the day and over the 
night. They were His creatures and gifts for man’s 
use dividing between the light and the darkness. 
“And God saw that [it was] good,’ not as if they 
were just created, but in the assigned work He gave 
to be done by them. “And there was evening and 
there was morning, a fourth day.” Here it cannot 
be fairly denied by any, that from the necessary 
effect of that day’s work we have the ordinary 


64 IN THE BEGINNING 


vicissitude of night and day; and that a similar 
diurnal revolution followed for the fifth and sixth 
days, as for every day since, including the seventh. 
But this being so, surely consistency requires it for 
the three previous days. That light was supplied 
otherwise before the fourth day is no impediment. 
The daily course of the earth on its axis depends on 
gravitation, not on illumination, and would have 
gone on equally, had the sun been only and always 
opaque, or had its previous and its present action in 
light-bearing never existed. 

And here it may be noticed that those who con- 
tend for nothing but the same agencies at work from 
the first as act now before our eyes, and who go so 
far as to swell the time into incalculable ages by 
embracing the fond hypothesis of evolution, so that 
300,000,000 years span an inconsiderable period of 
geological imagination, have now to confront an 
unexpected and veritable cowp de grace from Lord 
Kelvin. For he has proved that 7f the earth existed 
at all only 100,000,000 years ago, it must have been 
on scientific grounds a red-hot molten globe altogether 
incompatible with life, animal or vegetable. The 
geologists in their loose and one-sided way reasoned 
from the deposition of the enormously deep strata at 
the present rate of formation, But Lord Kelvin 
founded his far more rigorous calculations on the 
acknowledged facts of the earth’s tidal retardation, 
as well as of its gradually cooling state. Hence the 
recent disposition among the less prejudiced men to 


GENESIS 1. 14-19. 65 


re-arrange the order and time of formations by the 
probable contemporaneity of unlike strata. They 
essay thus to reduce their egregious demands by the 
supposition that the Cambrian, for instance, may 
coalesce chronologically with the Silurian, the former 
lacustrine, the latter marine ; and similarly the Per- 
mian with the Jurassic, etc. The groups thus 
associated would each owe their different phenomena 
to their respective conditions of deposit. 

But those who accept the plain and simple 
interpretation of the record here offered will observe 
that, if all these shifting and precarious hypotheses 
are due to the dim twilight of the science, scripture 
is responsible for no error. What it asserts remains 
not only unshaken but indisputably true. 


I.B. ay 


GENESIS I. 20-23 


aN are now come to a fresh activity of divine 


power, when the Holy Spirit employs 

again the term “created” (ver. 21): not 
merely organisms,’ for these we have seen for the 
new vegetable kingdom on day third, but the first 
animal life for the Adamic world, to people the 
waters below and the heavens above. They are 
familiarly known to be the opposed but mutually 
dependent realms of life, far above inorganic nature, 
not only in growth and structural development, but 
in germs for the continuance of the species, both of 
which materialism vainly strives to explain or evade. 
For plants take in nourishment without an interior 
cavity or sac, and without digestive fluid, which 
animals have; and as plants imbibe carbon and 
give out oxygen, animals exhale carbon and use up 
oxygen: a provision worthy of divine wisdom for 
the well-being of the earth, Nor is this hard to 
appreciate ; for plants are nourished by inorganic 
food which they convert into organic for animals, as 
they store up for their use condensed force from the 
sun’s influence, starch, glutine, etc, for animal 
development with increasing power, and locomotive 
faculty, as well as a will. That their germs are 


GENESIS I. 20-23 67 


chemically like, not only in elements but in their 
proportions, only brings out the total difference 
which results from their respective character of life. 
To originate animal life especially, even in its least 
form, justly calls for the term “created.” 

Thus God is not content with employing chemical 
powers to disintegrate and to reconstruct, as well as 
mechanical means chiefly by water, frost, and gravi- 
tation not only to enlarge the surface but to increase 
its fertility. The provision and satisfying of life is 
a part of His admirable plan even for a fallen world, 
the very volcano playing no small part, whatever its 
temporary terrors, in His beneficent hand. But all 
else would have been ineffectual without that great 
reality, of which science is as ignorant as those 
whom it most despises in its unbecoming scorn— 
that reality which would bring God face to face 
with every rational being, were men not hard in 
conscience and blinded by sin—that reality which 
meets every soul as the surest fact, yet the most 
inscrutable for any man; life, not vegetable only 
but animal, even if we regard it in its simplest 
range. It is life that directs the chemistry of plants 
or animals ; it is life which produces the organisation 
appropriate according to its kind. Men may speak 
of protoplasm, and analyse into carbon, hydrogen, 
nitrogen, and oxygen; but these are the mere 
materials which God employs according to the 
limits He has imposed on species under the agency 
of life. When life is given, the activity of change 

F 2 


68 IN THE BEGINNING 


goes on in the creature and its reproduction; when 
life is withdrawn there is a dissolution into the 
common stock for the fresh replenishment of the 
earth and its organized beings. Men may shrink 
from the Causa causans, and take refuge in “the 
laws of nature”; but after all they only succeed, if 
they do succeed, in retreating a step back from the 
Giver of life, and the Sovereign sustainer of nature. 
But this retreat is to lose God altogether. 

Genesis i. knows nothing of a primordial gas, or 
the nebula hypothesis, of an original spore, or of a 
monad. That God created the universe is its 
proclamation, with details of Adam’s world. A 
nisus formativus is here unheard, and left only to 
the unbelieving fanatics of science. Men would 
have had ere this wings better than those of 
Deedalus if desires and efforts availed; nor would 
the peacock be left alone to expand his feathered 
glories in the golden light of the sun. The power 
and wisdom of God has made these countless 
creatures, plants or animals, out of a few elements ; 
and these, as geology is compelled to own, repeatedly 
exterminated on the earth, and as often renewed, 
in systems ever perfectly suited to each, and as 
uniformly rising on the whole, when He was pleased 
to form a higher one, till He created man. Yea, at 
last He deigned to send His Son, the Eternal Word, 
to be made flesh, accomplish redemption, and unite 
to Himself those that are His for heavenly glory; 
as God will send Him again to bless Israel and all 


GENESIS 1. 20-28 69 


nations, to reign from heaven over a reconciled 
creation (for He is Heir of all things), but none 
the less to judge those who reject Him the Lord and 
Saviour to their own everlasting ruin, and manifestly 
so in “ that day.” 

Further, as God created, so He perpetuates life 
within variations brought about by circumstances 
and especially by man’s will, which, ceasing to act, 
leave plant or animal to revert to primitive type; 
when hybrids are forced, sterility also ensues. His 
will gave birth to the creatures that people the 
waters and the sky; and He abides to give constant 
effect to His will. We can see therefore the wisdom 
of His revelation of the day before us; for how 
many sages have dreamt and thought that the sun 
was the prolific source of life! The vegetable king- 
dom was formed when the sun was not yet set to 
do its all-important office for the earth of man. 
The humbler departments of the animal kingdom 
were called into being by God the day after. And 
how manifestly is contingency excluded no less than 
necessity ? It is all the result of the Creator’s will, 
Who upholds all that He has called into being. 
“ For thou didst create all things, and because of thy 
will they were and they were created” (Rev. iv. 11). 
Dualism, pantheism, eternal matter, and evolution 
are mere but wicked delusions. 

“And God said, Let the waters swarm a swarm 
of living creatures (lit. souls), and let birds fly above 
the earth on the face of the expanse of the heavens. 


70 IN THE BEGINNING 


And God created the great whales (or, sea monsters) 
and every living creature that moveth with which 
the waters swarmed after their kind, and every 
winged bird after its kind. And God saw that 
[it was] good. And God blessed them, saying, Be 
fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas, 
and let birds multiply on the earth. And there 
was evening and there was morning, a fifth day” 
(vers. 20-28). 

Here it is to be observed that “sea-monsters ” * 
is given by many modern translators, the Revisers 
among them; so as to include the huge creatures 
of large rivers, crocodiles, ete., as well as marine. 
Indeed “whales” may be here in view specifically 
by the accompanying epithet “great”; seeing that 
they exceed in size all other animals, not only of 
the Adamic period, but even of previous ages when 
characterised by creatures of enormous magnitude 
as compared with analogous ones in man’s day. If 
the whale be here singled out, the description is 
justified beyond dispute; and all the more because 
the fossils, as the rule, disclose specimens larger of 
their kind than any now living, whether Protozoans, 
Crustaceans, or the Vertebrates in general. Even 
the birds then must have been gigantic, if we accept 
their supposed footmarks on the new red sandstone 
of Connecticut. Their fossils were much later. 


* This must not be confounded with a shorter word, which 
would seem to mean jackals. When a land monster is ex- 
pressed by the word in the text, it means a dragon or serpent. 


GENESIS 1. 20-23 y Re 


In ver. 20 then God spoke into being the creatures 
that people the waters and those that people the air in 
terms the most general. In ver.21 the result is stated 
with more precision, the great whales or sea-monsters 
being distinguished from every living creature that 
moveth (whether Protozoans, Radiates, Mollusks, 
Articulates, or Vertebrates), with which the waters 
swarmed, after their kind. Again we hear of “ every 
bird of wing” after its kind. A correct version here, 
as the reader may see, explodes the error which 
commentators, Jewish and Christian, have tried to 
explain; for the sense is not that the waters pro- 
duced the birds, but that God made them fly in the 
open expanse of the heavens. Compare Gen. ii. 19, 
which distinctly teaches that they were formed out 
of the ground no less than was the beast of the 
field. 

But the important fact announced is that for 
Adam’s world the waters were now peopled and the 
air likewise. It is in no true sense the Reptilian 
age, though no doubt such reptiles as belonged to 
the waters then were included ; for land reptiles are 
distinctively of the sixth day, as is certain from vers. 
24,25,26,28. Hence the effort to make the fifth day’s 
work correspond with the Mesozoic time of geology 
is an utter fallacy. During it, especially in the 
Cretaceous period, reptiles abounded, and many 
were enormous, Dinosaurs, Enaliosaurs, Ichthyosaurs, 
Mosasaurs, Plesiosaurs, or Pterosaurs ; for in contrast 
with the fifth day the earth had then its species, as 


72, IN THE BEGINNING 


well as the seaandtheair. Jurassic Britain had its vast 
and numerous varieties, as their absence is the more 
conspicuous since Adam’s day. But all that the 
cautious Dr. Dana says as to birds is, that they 
probably began in the Triassic, especially as the 
inferior tribe of Marsupials were then found; that in 
the Jurassic some if not all birds exhibited the long 
vertebrated tail which with other peculiarities allied 
them to reptiles; but that in the Cretaceous they 
were numerous, and most of modern type, though 
some were of the older form. ‘To suppose all that 
now people the waters and air existed then is as 
baseless as that these verses really describe the Rep- 
tilian age. For ‘“ the great” sea-monsters and many 
birds had yet to be. 

Now it is on the face of the record that the entire 
population of the waters and of the air, as Adam 
knew both, is meant; not that extraordinary era of 
the Secondary formation, with its prodigious denizens 
of earth and sea and air. Indeed it is notorious 
geologically that Protozoans, Radiates, Mollusks, and 
Articulates had been even in the Lower Silurian ; 
and in the Upper S. fishes appear if only Sharks and 
Ganoids. Again, who does not know that the 
Devonian is habitually designated the age of Fishes 2 
How then can it be fairly alleged that the day-period 
interpretation holds good? If the third day means 
the Carboniferous age, though this has been proved 
erroneous, how comes the age of Fishes to be before it 2 
The record declares that the fish and the fowl of 


GENESIS I. 20-238 ve 


Adam’s world were only and alike on the fifth 
day. 

Is it not then extreme prejudice that has beguiled 
able and excellent persons into the thought that the 
record here speaks of the Reptilian age of geology ? 
Hence one zealous advocate limits the swarm of the 
waters in ver. 28 to “the reptile,” and for the same 
reason changes “that moveth ” into “that creepeth” 
in ver. 21. The fact is that, though the former word 
often means “reptile,” the context here proves it to 
be of far larger bearing, and in fact of cognate sig- 
nification with the verb; so that to “swarm swarms” 
seems the literal force, and to “bring forth abun- 
dantly the moving’’ thing is a fair representation as 
in the A. and R. Versions. Again, in ver. 21 the 
right way is to interpret the Hebrew as “moving” 
in water and “creeping” on land; so any one may 
see who can intelligently use a Hebrew Concordance. 
In both respects Sir J. W. Dawson is more correct 
than the late Mr. D. M‘Causland: but he errs in 
making ver. 21 say ‘great reptiles.” It is either all 
the large creatures of the deep, or not improbably 
“the whales,” for the reason already and appro- 
priately implied in “ the great.” Perhaps we may 
fairly add that the Cetacea call for a special place as 
being the representative of Mammals, and hence are 
made to stand apart from the general population of 
the deep. Certainly they were of the waters. 

The effect too of the periodic construction of the 
days is here quite plainly as unfounded as elsewhere. 


74 IN THE BEGINNING 


The fishes with which Adam and his race were 
familiar are thereby almost wholly left out of God’s 
account of His creation. All we are told, on that 
hypothesis, is of fossil Saurians, the most anomalous 
in appearance of all the creatures whose remains 
have come to view, of which Moses knew as little as the 
children of Israel, however interesting to geologists 
in our day. Is it credible that the Holy Spirit 
inspired the law-giver to speak of wonders only 
intelligible in the nineteenth century, and to pass by 
without a word what they needed to know of the 
teeming creatures in the watery world ? 

As usual the hypothesis when considered seriously 
betrays its inherent unreality. The huge Saurians 
of the Mesozoic were not marine only, as they ought 
to be if the record spoke of them; many of them 
were Pterosaurs of the land, some species even 
winged, though we cannot count Pterodactyls as 
birds. The inspired text therefore conclusively puts 
them all out of consideration. Here we read solely 
of the creatures with which the waters swarmed, of 
every living creature that moved there, each accord- 
ing to its species, as well as of those justly designated 
“the great”? among the multitudes of smaller 
sea-creatures ; as also of “every winged bird”’ after 
its kind. The natural force and true aim of the 
revelation was to make known God’s work in that 
lower part of the animal kingdom, which is none the 
less the object of His care; and if one portion be of 
vast bulk, none the less was it His creature. The 


GENESIS 1. 20-23 75 


Adam family were called to own His hand and 
goodness in the whole. 

The evident intention was to impress, on all that 
heed the written word, that the fifth day’s work 
embraced the entire circle of aquatic animals as well 
as all bird life known to mankind; not at all to 
acquaint them with a bygone system of animated 
nature, which sustained at the close of the Cretaceous 
period one of the most complete exterminations of 
species confessed by geologists. In fact too it is 
only in the Quaternary that Teliost Fishes as well as 
Birds find their culmination; of all allusion to 
which, though nearly affecting man, the mis-inter- 
pretation entirely deprives us. If on the contrary 
the inspired writer speak of what concerns man 
practically, with this agrees the expressed blessing of 
God, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters 
in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.” 
It also derives impressive confirmation from vers. 26, 
28, where dominion over the fish of the sea is given 
to man, no less than over birds of the air, and beast 
and cattle and all that creep on the earth. The only 
detail in fact is in setting forth the origin of what 
was actually put under man’s rule; which certainly 
does not apply to Paleozoic, or Mesozoic, or Tertiary 
times. 


GENESIS I. 24, 25 


T needs few words to prove that in the fifth 
day’s work we vainly look for an exact cor- 
respondence with the Secondary or Mesozoic 
period. Fishes, even vertebrated fishes, had been 
created in abundance in Paleozoic time, and so 


before the Carboniferous age ; also the earlier reptiles, 
chiefly Amphibian, preceded the age when they 
arrived at gigantic proportions and in every sphere, 
earth having its species no less than sea and air. 
Does this agree with the record which distinguishes 
its denizens, as of sea and air, from those that were 
only called into being on the following day,—which 
declares that every reptile of the earth belongs to 
the sixth, and not the fifth? Dinosaurs (including 
Megalosaurs, Iguanodons, Hyleosaurs) being land 
reptiles stand opposed. Nor is this all. The 
absurdity of the periodic interpretation is that we 
are compelled to leave out the fishes proper, such as 
Adam knew and we, in order to make it fulfilled in 
Labyrinthodonts, Ichthyosaurs, Pterodactyls, &c. 
Birds had in no way their culmination, any more 
than Teliost Fishes, or even the higher insects, and 
Mammals, till the Quaternary of man. The Cetacea 
(“the great whales”) again resist this expository 


GENESIS 1. 24, 25 at 


violence. Expressly specified in the text as created 
on the fifth day, being water-creatures, they according 
to geology ought to belong to a far later epoch, as 
being of a high mammalian rank, and in no way to 
be classed with even the small marsupials, &c., of an 
earlier day, though this again is not according to the 
record. The truth we have seen, in accordance with 
that of the four previous days, is that the fifth day’s 
work contemplates the entire population of sea and 
air for man’s world, and nothing else. Here as in 
every other case the ages of geology prove untenable 
when fairly examined. Apply the six days to Adam’s 
time, and the balance is restored. 

Exactly analogous for the land’s inhabitants is 
the work of the sixth day. Does it really corre- 
spond with Cainozoic time before man, or the 
Tertiary age? The scripture gives manifestly and 
solely the land-creatures made for man and on the 
same day as man; geology is obliged to confess that 
“ all the Fishes, Reptiles, Birds, and Mammals of the 
Tertiary are extinct species ” (Dana, 518). Take 
the equine tribe alone : there was the Orohippus of 
the Eocene, the Anchitherium of the Meiocene, and 
the Hipparion of the Pleiocene. All passed away 
before the Quaternary, when the Equus Caballus 
exists for man’s service. Even those who contend 
most keenly for nothing but secondary causes 
operating all through cannot deny the general exter- 
mination of species that closed Mesozoic time any 
more than the great disturbances that wrought 


78 IN THE BEGINNING 


repeatedly and similarly in the Tertiary age. Indeed 
geologists of eminence, who had nothing to do with 
theology and alleged prejudice, are constrained to 
allow that the elevation of the great mountain chains 
of Europe and Asia, as well as of America, only attained 
its full height about the close of that period, as 
well as the larger part of igneous eruption, with the 
usual destruction of systems of life in being previous 
to God’s introducing a new one adapted to the fresh 
conditions. “Chaos” is not a word any Christian 
need favour; but there was assuredly a fearful state 
of disorder that intervened, however brief the interval 
might have been. Do not geologists seem rash to 
deny that of which they are and must be ignorant ¢ 
But all this was antecedent to the six days. The 
believer absolutely subject to God’s word can calmly 
accept every ascertained fact, assured that every 
work of God agrees with His word. But hypotheses 
are another thing and open to criticism, especially 
where we see plain symptoms of infidelity open or 
underlying. 

“And God said, Let the earth bring forth living 
creature (lit. soul) after its kind, cattle, and creeping 
thing, and beast of the field after its kind. And it 
was so. And God made beast of the earth after its 
kind, and the cattle after its kind, and every creeping 
thing of the ground after its kind. And God saw 
that [it was] good” (vers. 24, 25). 

Where is the analogy even here with the age of 
Mammals, as the Tertiary has been well designated 2 


GENESIS I. 24, 25 "9 


If we add according to scripture the creation of man 
on} that same day, the system is not only different 
but even in contrast. The simple truth intended is 
that we have in these verses the land population of 
all kinds for the period of the human race; as 
before we had that of the waters and of the alr, 
after the vegetable provision, with the due establish- 
ment not of light only but of the heavenly 
phenomena. 

To introduce the herbivores, the reptiles, and 
the carnivores into the text is to strain after a 
scientific gloss, besides failing to represent the sense 
in some respects if not in all. Compare Deut. xxviii. 
26 for the very first class. Reptiles again are too 
narrow, and so are the “carnivora,” where “ferae” 
would express the truth more exactly. Nor is there 
real anachronism in giving “cattle” as the first 
named in verse 24, the domesticable if not yet 
domesticated animals, appropriate to the use of man. 
“Creeping thing” follows in its more literal appli- 
cation, whereas ‘‘ moving” expressed more fully the 
action of the creatures that peopled the waters, so as 
to embrace not only serpents, &., but insect life. 
“ Animal of earth ” designates the wild beast. 

All of them are terms in constant usage where 
man lives and reigns ; they do not distinctively define 
the age of Mammals where he was not, such as 
Anoplotheres, Chzropotami, Dinotheres, Palzo- 
theres, Lophiodons, Xiphodons, &c. Pachyderms are 
no doubt included, but by no means so determined 


80 IN THE BEGINNING 


as to warrant a reference to the age in which 
they abounded. Indeed, at that time confessedly 
there was the almost total absence of the tribe of 
ruminants, which rose to prominence when man was 
made. 

The language of the text does not really call up 
the period “ when the brute species existed in their 
greatest magnificence, and brutal ferocity had full 
play,” but the day crowned by the creation of man 
where material force fell into the shade before higher 
powers. In man’s presence the greater birds and 
beasts that co-existed even become extinct; as 
notably the Moa of New Zealand, the Dodo of the 
Mauritius, and the Aepyornis of Madagascar; and 
again the Urus (or Bos primigenius) described in 
Cesar’s Comm. de Bello Gall. vi. 26, the great Irish 
Elk (or Megaceros), the Megatherium, the Mastodon, 
and the Mammoth. For the evidence points to their 
co-existence with man, some for but a little while, 
others till recent time. The tendency has been to push 
man’s age back on the assumption that only so could 
he have been coeval with them. But the facts are 
plain and sure enough, not only as to the first but 
even the last named also, that they existed with man 
for no inconsiderable time, and this if we accept 
the lowest reckoning of Biblical chronology. It 
seems the fashion just now to exaggerate as to time, 
placing the glacial season or seasons at an incredibly 
remote distance, and thus the gigantic creatures that 
perished then, and man also, judging from remains 


GENESIS I. 24, 25 81 


which indicate his hand. There is on the contrary 
strong and varied evidence, in the estimate of sober 
geologists, not committed to hypothesis, to show the 
recent date of the glacial period both in Europe and 
in America, and the sudden close of what is called 
“the drift,” and the extinction of mammoths, etc. 
The second part of the sixth day’s work is too 
momentous to be touched here. This only may be 
remarked, how fitting it is that for Adam’s time all 
animal and vegetable creation should arrive at the 
highest organisation, that the heavenly luminaries 
should do their regulative work in view of the race, 
that the seas and the land should be as a whole 
adequately settled, that the atmospheric conditions 
in supplies of water, vapour, dew, etc., should stand 
most favourably, with the bountiful and regular 
vicissitudes of night and day, for life more varied 
than ever before here below. Thus, if the geologic 
ages brought in by divine power and wisdom a con- 
stantly rising state of the earth and of creatures 
suited to each new state, so the six days connected 
with Adam and his world express rapidly succeeding 
divine fiats culminating in him, and in their com- 
bination of respective goodness characterising that 
period in which the human race was called not only 
into being, but into responsibility before God. Other 
ages might be distinctively azoic; or the system of 
life might be ushered in with sea-plants, then with 
marine life of low type, then with fishes when the 


Vertebrates were made, Next, when dry land was 


I.B, G 


82, IN THE BEGINNING 


fitted, such plants grew as would flourish and adapt 
it for higher ones, and, again, for living creatures 
that live on herbage, as well as prey one on another. 
So in geologic ages we can talk of the age of 
Acrogens, of Invertebrates, of Fishes, of Reptiles, 
and of Mammals. But the human period is charac- 
teristically that of all, not in their utmost profusion 
or in their greatest physical magnitude, but as the 
rule in their highest forms and also together in their 
respective places under their appointed ruler, God’s 
vicegerent here below. For example, the Cereals 
attach to the human period, and depend pre- 
eminently on cultivation. Compare Is. xxviii. 23-29. 

In each case we have God’s word, the immediate 
and manifest result, and its excellence in His sight 
declared. Thus if the six days gave an immediate 
relation to Adam, the immense ages antecedent were 
on a vast scale preparatory; and geology, as one of 
its ablest exponents owns, “leaves wholly unexplained 
the creation of matter, life, and spirit, and that 
spiritual element which pervades the whole history 
like a prophecy, becoming more and more clearly 
pronounced with the progressing ages, and having 
its culmination and fulfilment in man.” 


GENESIS I. 26, 27. 


ee day third we saw the distinct two-fold energy 
of the Creator; not only the waters gathered 

into seas, and the dry land appearing, and 

this seen to be good ; but the earth caused by His 
word to put forth grass, herb seeding seed after its 
kind, and tree yielding fruit, with its seed in itself 
after its kind, upon the earth, and this seen to be 
good. On the sixth day there is also a double 
action, and the second still more strikingly distin- 
guished, as human life is brought into being, the 
highest of earthly natures (not as before vegetable 
life, the lowest of organised creatures) here below. 
The spheres had been fitted in divine wisdom and 
in the unfolding ways of God for the living beings 
that were to clothe and fill them with beauty, 
food, and fruit, to be followed duly by higher 
beings to profit by all that His provident goodness 
had prepared, all endowed with powers of constant 
reproduction, whether vegetable or animal. In a 
general way God had in the vast ages of which 
geology takes cognisance so wrought in creative 
energy, but without man as the centre of systems 
which successively appeared and fell. The days we 


have seen have special reference to man, who, on the 
a2 


84 IN THE BEGINNING 


sixth, follows and crowns the highest animals set 
under his rule. 

“ And God said, Let us make men in our image, 
after our likeness; and let them have dominion over 
fish of the sea, and over bird of the heavens, and 
over cattle, and over all the earth, and over every 
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. And 
God created Man* in his image, in God’s image 
created he him; male and female created he them” 
(vers. 26, 27). 

Not only is man introduced with marked separate- 
ness from the previous creation of animals, even 
from those of the earth made on the same day, each 
“after its kind,” and all seen as “ good,” but for the 
first time God enters into counsel with Himself for 
this great and absolutely new work. It is no longer 
“Let there be,” or ‘ Let the earth (or “the waters”) 
bring forth,” though man’s body is in its due place 
expressly said to have been formed of the dust of 
the ground. Here the language rises into appro- 
priate grandeur and solemnity, ‘‘ Let us make men.” 
Not a word about kinds of men, for there was 
but one; whatever people may have subequently 
dreamt in their pride or in the selfish advantage 
they desired to take of their degraded fellows. Not 
a little was suffered afterwards in view of their 


* The race, Man, which as it has the article in Hebrew, is 
thus distinguished from the anarthrous noun, has a name 
derived from the ground out of which man was taken. The 
context confirms the plural sense also. 


= 


GENESIS I. 26, 27 85 


hard-heartedness ; but from the beginning it had 
not been so, 

We shall hear yet more when we come to a fresh 
revelation, not of man’s creation as its head simply, 
but of the moral relations in which he is shown to 
have been set; but here there is ample evidence of 
the dignity conferred on the race. “Let us make 
men in our image, after our likeness.” Nothing 
is more opposed to the Bible than the anthropo- 
morphism of Greek and Roman mythology, which 
degraded their deities to fallen males and females 
with like passions and lusts, and gave the sanction 
of religion to the basest immorality. And what 
philosophers of Greece or Rome ever ventured to 
claim so noble a prototype? Here Moses was 
inspired to give it as the holy declaration of the 
Creator. How far from the brute at length evolving 
man, a theory suggested by Satan to brutalise the 
race! It is the simple yet wondrous truth: not 
God brought down to the human level, but men 
alone created after a divine pattern. 

A frequent question is raised as to the force of 
the terms and their precise shade of difference ; for _ 
those are not to be heard who hide their ignorance 
under the assumption that both mean the same 
thing. The usage throughout the O. and N. 
Testaments seems to indicate that “image” repre- 
sents, and “ likeness” resembles. Thus the “image” 
of the world-power in Nebuchadnezzar’s dream 
- represented the succession of Gentile empires from 


86 IN THE BEGINNING 


first to last: likeness could not be the point. So 
it is “image”? in the plain of Dura (Dan. iii.), the 
proportions of which exclude a human figure, or the 
resemblance of any living creature. Whatever it 
might not be like, it definitely represented what 
the monarch commanded to be an object of worship. 
Again, in the N. T. the denarius our Lord asked 
for had on its face the image and superscription of 
Cesar. It might nave been a faulty likeness, but 
was an indisputable image of the Roman imperator. 
It expressed his authority and represented his claim 
over the Jews because of their departure from God, 
ill as they liked to own either. 

So men (ver. 26) are said to have been made in 
God’s image, after His likeness, as the former is 
emphatically repeated in ver. 27: not in His like- 
ness, after His image. Jn God’s image is the truth 
insisted on, though here also man is declared to 
be made after or according to His likeness. To 
man only was it given to represent God here below. 
Angels are never called to such a place. They 
excel in might. They fulfil God’s word, they hearken 
unto the voice of His word. Yet no angel rules in 
His name, nor does he represent Him, as a centre 
of a system subjected to Him, and looking up to Him. 
But man was made to represent God in the midst 
of a lower creation dependent on him; though in 
order to be created in God’s image, he was also 
made “after His likeness,” without evil and upright. 
But even when through sin the likeness existed no 


GENESIS I. 26, 27 87 


more, he abode His image; however inadequate to 
represent God aright, he was still responsible to 
represent Him. Hence in chap. v. 1, 2, we read 
that God made man in His likeness; male and 
female created He them, and blessed them, and 
called their name Adam in the day of their creation. 
But it is significantly added in ver. 3 that Adam 
begat in his likeness, Seth resembled his father, 
now fallen, as well as represented him, Again, 
when after the deluge animals were given for the 
food of man, blood was interdicted, and the most 
jealous care of human life insisted on ; for in the 
image of God made He man. To kill him was 
rebellion against God’s image, though a man was 
now anything but like God. 

The N. T. fully sustains the same distinction far 
beyond Ozsar’s case already referred to. Thus the 
man in 1 Cor. xi. is distinctively called God’s image 
and glory, as publicly representing Him ; and Christ, 
the incarnate Son, is styled “image of the invisible 
God.” His not being called “likeness” only con- 
firms the truth. If so entitled, it would deny His 
deity. For He is God, instead of being only like 
God. Compare for the Christian now, Col. ii. 10, as 
well as 2 Cor. iii. 18; and for the glorious result, 
Rom. viii. 29, and 1 Cor. xv. 49. 

On the other hand we must not confound the 
state of Adam unfallen with the mew man which 
“after God hath been created in righteousness and 
holiness cf the truth.” This is descriptive of the 


88 IN THE BEGINNING 


new creation, not of the first Adam state where all 
was mere innocence, but the knowledge of good and 
evil along with the power by grace which abhors 
evil and clings to good that is implied in righteous- 
ness and holiness of the truth. This is not nature, 
but supernatural in believers, who become partakers 
of a divine nature (2 Peter i. 4). 

Nevertheless, though Adam’s state was far from 
that of which Christ is the risen Head, he evidently 
was made to have a portion, though a creature, above 
all the creation that surrounded him, “in Qod’s 
image, after His likeness.” How utterly false in 
presence of the Bible are the speculations of evolu- 
tion, an hypothesis logically at issue with those 
fixed laws of nature which the same philosophers cry 
up to the exclusion of God! For how reconcile 
invariable law with change of species? The truth 
is that real science depends upon the uniformity of 
results, and consists in discovering and classifying 
them. This does not hinder variation through cir- 
cumstances, failing which the original type returns. 

Again, as natural science is essentially based on 
the reality and continuance of species, so it can give 
no account of origins. If honest, it admits there 
must be a cause, and an adequate one; but here, as 
science, it is and must be wholly ignorant. God’s 
word alone reveals the truth; and of all reveries 
none viler than the ignorance which refuses to learn 
and dares to defy divine revelation, by conceiving 
man a developed ape, fish, seaweed, or aught else. 


GENESIS I. 26, 27 89 


The truth is that primordial causes are beyond 
science ; which, instead of honestly owning its ignor- 
ance, pretends to deny the creation which scripture 
clearly reveals. God alone could create; and He 
declares that He has done so, and in what order. 
Science would gladly learn if not sceptical; for its 
province lies in investigating effects, and cannot 
reach up to primordial causes, which it is of all 
moment to know if revealed. But we can only know 
them from God’s testimony, which is simple if we 
were. 

How worthy of God and cheering to man, turning 
from these freaks of spurious science, to weigh once 
more His words! “Let us make men in our image 
after our likeness ; and let them have dominion over 
fish of the sea and over bird of the heavens [the 
work of the day fifth] and over cattle, and over all 
the earth, and over every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth [sixth day’s work]. And 
God created Man in his image, in God’s image 
created he him; male and female created he them.” 
How emphatically, it will be noticed, Moses says 
that God created the race. It was enough to say so 
once of the vast universe in ver. 1, when it was 
' brought originally into being. Again, it was said to 
mark the introduction of animated nature, or at 
least of the aquatic Mammals, into the Adamic 
world in ver. 21. But here of Man it is repeated 
again and again to enforce the attention of all who 
tremble at God’s word. Not only was Man an 


90 IN THE BEGINNING 


unprecedented creature, but he had a place in God’s 
mind altogether peculiar, not merely in time on 
earth, but for all eternity. For the unfolding of this 
we must await other declarations of God’s mind. 
What is said here points to his creature place as 
originally set on earth by God. Even for the details 
of this we need chap. i. with its all-important supple- 
ment on the relations of Adam, where we have the 
key to the fact that Man was created “male and 
female,” as we are told here: a single pair, and even 
so, formed as none other ever was, that Man might 
be differentiated from every creature in earth or 
heaven. For immense consequences turn on that 
fact, which God took care to make good, and only 
He in the nature of things could reveal. 

What can science as such say on a matter go 
profoundly interesting, and morally so important ? 
Is it logical to deny whatever it does not know? 
For science to confess ignorance is no doubt 
humiliating. But is it reverent to despise what God 
does know and has revealed? Alas! science knows 
nothing of faith any more than of piety or rever- 
ence. Were it content to assert only what it knows, 
and confess its ignorance of all beyond its own limits, 
it would do less mischief and speak more becomingly. 
Hewers of wood and drawers of water have a place 
useful if not dignified. Boasting is not seemly, save 
only in the Lord for all who trust Him. 


GENESIS I. 28 


MAGQMHUS we have seen Man, the race, created in 
Oe God’s image. No doubt, that this should be 

true, it was and must be after God’s likeness 
in the absence of all moral evil. But it was 
emphatically a creation in God’s image. Man was 
the last-and chief creature here below, the only 
one in the heavens or the earth, whom scripture 
designates as made in God’s image: a wondrously 
high distinction, with the grave responsibility of 
representing Him aright before others, as His 
delegated ruler. Not even the highest angel 
possesses such a place before the universe. Angels 
serve on account of those that shall inherit 
salvation. 

But here, as we may easily stray, we need simple 
and entire subjection to the written word ; and this 
we are most unlikely to have or court unless we 
have unwavering faith in it, as we certainly ought 
if we believe it inspired of God. This the apostle 
predicates, not merely of scripture generally as a 
known body of holy writings, but of everything 
coming under that designation, some of which had 
yet to be written. What can be conceived more 
precious and withal comprehensive, than raoo 


92, IN THE BEGINNING 


yeapy, “every scripture,” in 2 Tim. iii. 162 He 
declares it to be, not only useful for the various 
purposes of divine blessing to man, but before all 
God-inspired. All admit the human instruments; 
but if scripture be God-inspired in every part, it is 
certain that God is not a man that He should lie. 
And He has magnified His word above all His 
name. 

Now there is a two-fold danger of misapprehend- 
ing Adam’s state and place while unfallen. We 
may exalt it beyond the truth by confounding it 
with what grace gives in Christ; or we may lower 
it by making it a question of such reasoning and 
conscience as man acquired by the fall. In his 
original state Adam stood in relationship with God 
in thankful use of all He gave, but liable to death 
on disobedience. It was in no way heaven held 
out if he obeyed, as will appear more fully by-and-by. 
The danger was of losing his first estate by trans- 
gression. But God imposed no such moral govern- 
ment as the law; nor had Adam the knowledge of 
good and evil till the fall. Man was not holy but 
innocent, and tested solely by prohibition as the 
simple test of obedience on God’s part. It was a 
blessed creature’s responsibility to obey with the 
threat of death on transgression. 

By the fall man got the knowledge of good and 
evil, that is, the intrinsic perception of right and 
Wrong apart from prescription; or as Jehovah 
Elohim said (Gen. iii. 22), “Behold, the man is 


GENESIS I. 28 93 


become as one of us to know good and evil!” In 
Adam fresh from God’s hand the knowledge of good 
and evil would have been a defect, a moral incon- 
sistency, and therefore an impossibility. Before 
the fall he had conscience solely in the sense of 
responsibility to obey, not at all in the way of 
accusing or else excusing self. Only when he sinned, 
and thus lost his innocence, did he gain the moral 
power of knowing good and evil of himself, hence- 
forth his sad, painful, but most useful monitor. 
Before that, he was naturally enjoying divine 
goodness in its creative effects, under the test, not 
of resisting things intrinsically evil, but of a single 
restriction from God which made eating the for- 
bidden fruit wrong: a state wholly different from 
ours. The fall changed for evil the whole ground 
of standing. Propitiation with life in Christ is a 
still deeper and higher change for good, even though 
in fact the old man yet abides and is altogether evil 
in itself. Christianity is no mere restoration of man, 
but eternal life in Christ and eternal redemption. 
But unfallen Adam was in no way free in the 
sense of independence of God. He had indisputable 
title to act in what God subjected to him, but in 
nothing else. Obedience and dependence were due 
to God. All was good around him to enjoy: one 
thing was forbidden, and wrong because God forbade 
it, as a test of subjection to Himself. To act 
independently was to set self up as God, and thus 
in effect to set aside the true God. But this is sin, 


94 IN THE BEGINNING 


yea, apostasy from God, instead of walking as created 
in His image, after His likeness, the total opposite 
of Him, Who being God, became man, the image of 
the invisible God, come to do His will on earth 
where all else had failed. 

And here it is that science, however interesting in 
its sphere and useful also, comes in so mischievously. 
At best it ignores man as God created him, because 
it only knows man as he is, fallen from his original 
relationship with God in nature; as it equally 
ignores man born anew, born of water and of the 
Spirit, because the new birth is supernatural. This 
ignorance falsifies scientific ideas and reasonings. 
For instance, that knowledge of good and evil of 
which scripture speaks as a consequence of the fall, 
or a moral sense as men call it, is assumed to be the 
highest ethical constitution that has survived the 
fall! But there was this immense difference that, 
while of course God knew good and evil, it was as 
One unassailable by evil and supremely above it in 
His own nature: man only acquired it by sin and 
in subjection to the power of evil, and thus having 
it now in himself. The Lord Jesus on the contrary 
was the Word made flesh, born not innocent only 
but holy, rejecting evil always even when tempted 
as Adam and his sons never were, and at the end as 
a sacrifice dying for sins and to sin, that we who 
believe might live in Him risen, the life-giving Spirit, 
the Second man and Last Adam. 

Now faith only, not science, recognises either the 


GENESIS 1. 28 95 


fall of the first man as affecting all mankind and 
the entire scene put under him, or the victory which 
God gives all who believe in Christ risen from the 
dead. Science accepts fallen man’s estate as the 
only one, because it alone is the subject-matter of 
ordinary experience. It is therefore involved in 
difficulties necessarily insoluble, because it knows 
neither the sinless and happy state in which God 
originally set man, nor the righteous deliverance 
which the Lord Jesus gives to faith in God’s love ; 
still less the glory, power, and incorruption to be 
made good even for the dead, and for the mortal 
body, when He comes. Philosophy is either openly 
infidel or vainly essays to conciliate, with a God of 
power and goodness, a world of sin, suffering, misery, 
and death. Were creation truly believed and the 
fall honestly confessed, the main difficulty vanishes ; 
absolutely so, when God’s love is read in the gift of 
His Son incarnate an¢ suffering for the sinful world 
which crucified Him in its unbelief of His glory and 
rejection of His grace and truth. But science as 
such starts with the world and man as they are, 
ignoring his moral disorder and the effect of this on 
what was subjected to him; and cannot rise above 
the facts it discovers in the perceived course of 
nature, but may deduce its laws so called. God 
only could reveal creation. His word alone tells 
how man fell from innocence in first estate into sin 
and death, and dragged down with him all the 
inferior creation. 


96 IN THE BEGINNING 


Science in its very nature is incapable of rising 
to this knowledge infinitely more important as it 
is than all it can make known or even discover, 
however ample the field in nature may be. For 
revelation speaks of three broadly distinct con- 
ditions : creation unfallen ; creation as it is in guilt, 
and misery, whatever the resources of sovereign 
grace held out to faith; creation as it will be when 
all things are made new. Science occupying itself 
solely with the intermediate is in great danger of 
denying in dishonest pride what it cannot know 
scientifically, to the destruction of all who trust 7, 
instead of the God Who gave His Son in love to 
save sinners who repent and believe the gospel. 

But to return, we read, “And God blessed them ; 
and God said to them, Be fruitful, and multiply, 
and fill the earth, and subdue it; and have dominion 
over fish of the sea and bird of the heavens, and 
over every living thing that creepeth on the earth” 
(ver. 28). Man, as Prof. Owen said, is the sole 
species of his genus, and the sole representative of 
his species. 

This is the second benediction of creation. The 
first was when God made the creatures that peopled 
the waters and the air of Adam’s world, the earliest 
to enjoy animal life in that state of things. God 
has pleasure in blessing His creatures that have a 
life even of a lowly kind to appreciate the fruits of 
His goodness, and especially in view of their repro- 
duction and multiplying within their sphere. Here, 


GENESIS 1. 28 97 


a second time, He blessed mankind, male and 
female, of whom alone it is said, though the detailed 
difference is reserved for a subsequent and more 
fitting occasion. In verse 22 we have only “ saying,” 
but here “God said to them, Be fruitful,” etc. Man 
was the depositary of God’s revelation, as he ought 
to be His priest, and, as we have seen, His viceroy. 
This is more than the interpreter of nature, as one 
of our sages styled him. He had intercourse with 
God at once. 

Language thus was in no way the slow invention 
of man’s wit, but an immediate endowment of our 
first parents by God from creation. Here His word 
assures us of its reality from the first day of man’s 
creation; and everything confirms in the chapters 
that follow. To imagine otherwise is to disbelieve 
the Bible and prefer one’s own thoughts or the 
dreams of other men, as if we or they could know 
anything about the matter. He Who alone knows 
all has been pleased to tell us the truth through 
Moses. His word was valid for the unintelligent 
creation: how comforting for the human pair to 
hear Him say, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill 
the earth and subdue it! Even though man comes 
in as a creature with the rest, still he is intro- 
duced exceptionally as the crown of creation; and 
the higher creatures are pronounced good sepa- 
rately from man, who is blessed, male and female, 
in an address to them as at the head of all 


the rest. 


I.B. H 


98 IN THE BEGINNING 


Then comes the proclamation of the rule assigned 
them by God. Not only were they, like others, to 
multiply and fill the earth, they were to subdue, or 
bring it into subjection. Next He adds as before, 
“and have dominion over fish of the sea and over 
bird of the heavens, and over every living thing that 
creepeth on the earth.” Thus from the outset was 
man, even when enumerated as a being fresh from 
God, set apart essentially. None other was to 
subdue the earth. He alone had the God-given 
capacity. He alone was called to have dominion. 
Development in the Darwinian sense is not only an 
illusion, but at plain issue with the word of God. A 
striking and practical proof of the reality of this 
dominion as far as every beast and every bird was 
given to Adam (chap. 11. 19) when Jehovah Elohim 
brought them to see what their lord would call 
them; and whatever he called each living soul (or, 
creature), that was its name: a fact full of interest 
otherwise on which some remark will fall in its 
season. He was owned by God in that place of 
authority which entitled him to give each subject 
creature its name. 

For the present, however, we do not notice more 
than the singular evidence here afforded of real 
intelligible language communicated from the very 
first to the head of the race. Adam had it in per- 
fection, like the other properties of full growth, the 
day he was created. Doubtless in this he differed 
from all that sprang from him in due time and to 


GENESIS I. 28 99 


this day who have to learn. But here God created 
worthily of Himself; and even infidels own that 
there must have been primeval causes for all that 
exists, of which science can give no account. It 
can at most only say “must be,” not “is.” For its 
fixed laws are only gathered from the constant 
course of things; and such a course supposes the 
“things that appear” to have gone on long enough 
for men to observe the order of nature which they 
thus designate. An originating first cause is no 
less certain ; also the phenomena need time for that 
regular course which they describe by “laws of 
nature.” Eternal self-existence belongs only to 
God, not to the creature; and none so negligent 
or perhaps rebellious as geologists, if they forget 
how often God intervened to create as well as to 
destroy in a way irreconcilable either with chance 
or with fate. But these are the characteristic main- 
springs of Epicureanism on the one hand and of 
Stoicism on the other, the two chief opposing 
systems of ancient philosophy (Acts xvii. 18) as of 
modern under new names. Without creation and 
the fall, man can account for nothing aright; but 
for knowing either we need faith, as well as their 
revelation, which some in their infatuation pro- 
nounce impossible. These men confessedly can 
make known their evil ideas to their fellows ; but 
God, they argue, cannot communicate His good 
word! What is possible with men seems to their 
unbelief impossible with God! Could folly sink 
H 2 


100 IN THE BEGINNING 


lower? Creation must be a miracle; but miracles 
must not be. Has not the nineteenth century settled 
it for ever. 

Here also natural religion betrays its inherent 
insufficiency and falseness. For it never truly feels 
or acknowledges the fall, even if it borrow creation 
as a tradition from the Bible. If it estimated the 
ruin aright, it would own the necessity of divine 
revelation and of salvation by grace, yea of a Saviour 
able to meet God in righteousness, no less than man 
in grace. But it takes the ground of making out a 
righteousness of its own, supplemented by God’s 
mercy to cover all faults and deficiencies. Impossible 
for any soul to find satisfaction thus. For on one 
side he acknowledges a Creator God of power and 
goodness infinite : on the other he faces a world and 
race of sin, evil, wretchedness, and death, to say 
nothing of a judgment he could not but dread. The 
strongest and clearest mind is lost in this labyrinth ; 
and human efforts on the religious side of supersti- 
tion are as vain to clear it up and present the truth 
and purge the conscience as the profane speculations 
and self-contradictory antinomies of philosophy. 
Human religion only hardens men in their naturally 
false thoughts of God as either austere or easy-going. 
Philosophy (in its struggles to escape the incon- 
sistencies inevitable to a fallen estate, which is not 
confessed to God with a broken heart) only darkens 
more deeply what is already dark, and ends too 
often by the mental endeavour to deny the God 


GENESIS 1. 28 101 


Whom sin and unbelief have made unknown, save 
in the qualms of conscience. 

No! man was made to look up, not physically 
alone but morally, in dependence on God the source 
and giver of all goodness. He sought independence 
by sin, and gained a conscience already bad, which 
made him look down, while his pride still pretended 
to everything. He had lost God and departed from 
Him, and (being wholly insufficient to abide self- 
sustained) set his mind on the creature below himself 
so as at length even to deify it. The Son of God 
emptied Himself by taking the form of a bondman, 
being made in the likeness of men, and humbled 
Himself, becoming obedient even unto the death of 
the cross; where God was glorified as to sin by 
propitiation for it, and the ground laid for the 
righteous salvation of all who believe. A man-god 
was Satan’s bait and man’s ruin. The God-man 
dying in obedience and for redemption is the triumph 
of truth and grace, 


GENESIS I. 29-31. 


FAHE closing notice remains, the economy of 
/ the primeval creation, and the divine 
"estimate of it all. 

«And God said, Behold, I have given you every 
herb producing seed that [is] upon the face of all 
the earth, and every tree in which [is] the fruit of 
a tree producing seed: to you it shall be for food ; 
and to every animal of the earth, and to every bird 
of the heavens, and to every thing that creepeth 
upon the earth, in which [is] a living soul, every 
green herb for food. And it was so, And God saw 
everything that he had made, and, behold [it was] very 
good. And there was evening and there was morn- 
ing, the sixth day ” (vers. 29-31). Man has still 
his distinctive place in God’s commission and plan ; 
but it is in the state of innocence. After the fall 
came in corruption and violence. Animal life was 
not permitted to man till after the deluge. Herbs 
and fruit were given at first to man, and to the 
subject creation every green herb. Death was not 
in the Adamic earth till sin. Granted that Rom. v. 
12-21 does not go beyond the human race as fallen 
under death through sin; but Rom. viii. 19-22 looks 
at “all the creation” as ruined through the fall of 


GENESIS I. 29-81 1038 


its head. Neither scripture raises any question about 
states of the earth anterior to Adam. We have seen 
in Gen. i. 1, 2, the general principle of a previous 
condition called into being and destroyed ; which, as 
far as it goes, leaves room for death by one means or 
another among the then animals. In no previous 
conditions was there man existing, still less the great 
moral trial of Adam the first head, and the varied 
dispensations of God, till through the last, the risen 
Adam, God gives those who believe the victory. 
Whatever gradual approach may have been made 
before, the six days describe the formation of that 
platform where man would be tested in every way 
according to divine wisdom, and God was in due 
time to bring in Christ, His Son, become man to 
glorify Him, not only in obedience but in redemp- 
tion, and a wholly new and everlasting creation only 
as yet come in the person of its glorious Head on 
high, The words of God here spoken are in view of 
man and earth yet unfallen. 

Here experience is necessarily at fault. For only 
the Bible could give us the truth as to the primitive 
phase of man and the creatures around him. But it 
at once approves itself, when revealed, as being the 
sole conceivable state in which the Creator could 
have placed creation and its head suitably to His 
own goodness. Hence the force and moral beauty 
of His final survey in the last verse. ‘And God saw 
everything that he had made (i.e., in the Adamic 
earth), and behold, it was very good.” So with the 


104 IN THE BEGINNING 


one exception of day second had He called each 
thing “ good”; now as a whole it was superlatively 
so in His eyes. 

Yet the unbeliever, scientific or not, is misled by 
his abuse of experience about a time where he can- 
not have a tittle of evidence to contradict scripture, 
and imputes to God, if he allow there is One, such 
a world as would be the production of a fiend, not of 
the Only True God. Even on his own ground it is 
the grossest assumption to assume that at the begin- 
ning (and science is now compelled to own there 
must have been a beginning) things were as they 
now are. It is illogical, as well as infidel, to take 
for granted that the present state is a normal one, 
or that God made men sinful, vain, proud, selfish, to 
say nothing of more abominable outbreaks; that He 
left men indifferent, so as to become heathen or 
Jews, Mahometans or Christians, of any religion or 
of none, without guidance or proof. It is evident 
that the state of the world is offensive to God; and 
that it has been so since man left records more 
or less credible. This is a fact, Bible or no Bible. 

But the Bible alone, unlike every other testimony, 
gives us the simplest, clearest, and fullest explana- 
tion, in a few words, how all came to pass. God 
made man upright, surrounded by every thing “ very 
good” yet under trial of obedience, as we shall soon 
hear definitely ; but he departed from God through 
the wiles of the enemy in the face of solemn warning, 
He sinned and thus introduced death for himself and 


GENESIS I. 29-81 105 


his posterity, and “‘ subjected to vanity ” the creation 
put under him. But God, when tracing the evil to 
its source, has proved His goodness by holding out 
the assurance of a Conqueror over the enemy, even 
while suffering Himself, to be born of woman too. 
And to this word all believers from the fall clung till 
He came Who made it good in His death on the 
cross and in His resurrection. 

Thus does God from the first proclaim mercy 
rejoicing over judgment, though sin bore its sorrow- 
ful fruits in an outcast race and a blighted world, 
where no creature is as God made it. It is science, 
not scripture, which here as elsewhere, brings in 
difficulties even for believers. 

But Sir J. W. Dawson in his Archaia, 217-222, 
raises questions which are certainly not solved, 
though brought by himself, a very competent geolo- 
gist, “ into the light of our modern knowledge of 
nature.” He pictures Eden either cleared of its 
previous inhabitants or not yet invaded by animals 
from other centres! He supposes man created then 
with a group adapted to his happiness (Gen. u. 19, 
etc., treating of them only), and these latest species 
of animals and plants extending themselves within 
the spheres of older districts, so as to replace the 
ferocious beasts of older epochs and other regions! 
He fancies that on the fall the curse that befell the 
earth would thus consist in the predaceous animals 
with thorns and briars invading his Eden. Most of 
my veaders will have heard more than they wish of 


106 IN THE BEGINNING 


notions as irreconcileable with scripture as dero- 
gatory to it. How can the excellent Principal of 
M‘Gill College have indulged in such speculations? 
Evidently because being sure, too sure, of his geolo- 
gical scheme, he accommodates scripture to it: a 
position not very wise scientifically where so much 
is continually shifting and so little is absolutely 
ascertained—a position most antagonistic to a 
Christian’s faith in God’s word. He is not entitled 
geologically to assume a mixture of the conditions of 
the Tertiary with those of the human period in the 
Quaternary. His theory of day-ages exposes him to 
these consequences, along with the recently adopted 
fashion of opposition to A. D’Orbigny’s careful and 
exhaustive proof in his “ Prodrome de Stratigraphique 
Palezontologie,”’* that not a species of plants or 
animals survived the Tertiary, and that a distinct 
break preceded man’s time as often before. 

And what is the alleged ground in scripture ? 
“Man was to rule over the fish of the sea, the birds 
of the air, and the b’hemah or herbivorous animals. 
The carnivorous creatures are not mentioned, and 
possibly were not included in man’s dominion” ! 
But this is distinctly refuted by ver. 30, which 
expressly assigns every green herb to “ every beast” 
_* Trois Volumes, Victor Masson, Paris; also his “ Cours 
élém. de pal. et de Géol. strat.” 2 vols. Perhaps no recent 
author has combined to the same degree mastery over both 


zoology and geology with the fullest scope of practical cbser- 


vation. Such a man’s positive testimony is entitled to 
unusual respect, 


GENESIS I. 29-81 107 


or animal of the earth. The same text proves that 
at this time “ every animal in the earth was herb- 
ivorous,” though it is boldly laid down that this 
cannot be meant. Nor should any believer question 
the past fact, if assured by inspired prophecy that 
the day is coming, when the wolf shall dwell with 
the lamb and the leopard lie down with the kid, 
when the cow and the bear shall feed, their young 
lying down together, and the lion shall eat straw 
like the ox. Here undoubtedly science will decry 
and scoff; but he who believes (as Dawson does) the 
unfallen state of Adam and his Eden, if not his 
earth, is inconsistent in curtailing his rule to a petty 
domain. The apostle, we have seen, interprets his 
headship of creation in general, whatever modern 
geology may pronounce to the contrary. 

Philologically too, it is quite an error that b’hemah, 
though expressing “cattle,” is limited as is here 
imagined. Any good Hebrew Concordance will 
show the most unlearned that it is frequently 
employed in the largest sense and rightly rendered 
“beast” in both the Auth. and the Rev. Versions. 
Compare Gen. vi. 7, vii. 2 twice, 8, vill. 20, xxxiv. 
23, xxxvi. 6: Ex. viii. 17, 18, ix. 9, 10, 19, 22, 25, 
xi. 5, 7, xiii. 2, 12, 15, xix. 13, xx. 10, xxii. 10, 19. 
It occurs at least 25 times in this sense in Leviticus, 
8 times in Numbers, and 7 times in Deuteronomy ; 
go often in the historical books, in the Psalms and in 
the Prophets, where the sense of “ cattle ” is in fact 
rare. 


108 IN THE BEGINNING 


This then is God’s account of His creation, and 
in detail of the Adamic earth. No wise man will 
wonder that we are conducted silently over the vast 
and successive platforms of dead plants and animals, 
to say nothing of the débris of rocks, under water 
and heat. Here we have a system of life rising up, 
not by any necessity, but by divine power, wisdom, 
and goodness, to beings constituted chief of creation 
and made in His image after His likeness, before sin 
brought in death and every woe on the guilty and 
all subject to them: a system where our feeble eyes 
cannot fail, save blinded by wilful evil, to see it 
everywhere, above, around, below, filled with con- 
trivances that disclose the omniscient designs and 
the inexhaustible benevolence of the omnipotent 
Designer, yet in no case absolutely, but with a view 
to moral government, the effects of which afford a 
handle of objection to those who refuse that divine 
word which reveals good then and still higher pur- 
poses of grace in Christ for all who believe. Even 
in the lowest point of view, well may we at this 
place exclaim with the psalmist, “These wait all 
upon thee, that thou mayest give [them] their meat 
in due season : [that] thou givest them, they gather. 
Thou openest thine hand; they are filled with 
good ” (civ. 27, 28). 


GENESIS II. 1-3. 


FENHESE verses are really the necessary supple- 
x (he ment and close of chap. i., if we divide into 

chapters on a sound principle. It is well 
known that such a division, save in the Psalms, etc., 
has no authority and is not seldom erroneous. The 
new title given to God, Jehovah Elohim, indicates 
consistently a new subject, as will be shown in its 
place. Hitherto it is simply Elohim, the abstract 
name of the Creator. Here as everywhere the name 
has nothing whatever to do with the question of 
authorship, as ignorant unbelief has suggested with 
misplaced confidence, but springs exclusively from 
internal reasons, as may be seen throughout scripture 
to much interest and instruction. 

“ And the heavens and the earth and all their host 
were finished. And God had finished on the seventh 
day his work which he had made; and he rested 
on the seventh day from all his work which he had 
made. And God blessed the seventh day and sancti- 
fied it; because that on it he had rested from all 
his work which God had created in making ” (or, 
and made, lit. to make) (vers. 1-8). 

The last is without doubt a remarkable phrase, 
falling in naturally with what we have seen in the 


110 IN THE BEGINNING 


opening verses, an original creation where man was 
not, succeeded by catastrophe, and by fresh creative 
energy, the details of which refer to the scene 
where and when man was to be brought into being. 
Here the work and the rest of God are in clear view 
of the race; and the seventh day or sabbath has 
immense importance. On its first mention it was 
unmistakably the witness of God’s rest: His rest, 
not from weariness of course, but from the work of 
creation and making. This work was now ended for 
the life that now is. And as the six preceding days 
were literal, so is the seventh the closing day of the 
week. 

This is amply and strictly confirmed by Exod. xx. 
1-11. The sabbath is not a but the seventh day, 
the memorial of creation finished—of the Adamic 
world. “For in six days Jehovah made the heavens 
and the earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and 
rested the seventh day; therefore Jehovah blessed 
the sabbath day and sanctified it.” The language is 
precise. It is not said “created” but “made.” 
This was the right phrase as a whole for the work of 
the six days, however well creating is said of parts 
within that work. It was not the original produc- 
tion but a special construction of divine will and 
power with man in view. That the seventh day is 
the sabbath is with equal care impressed in Deut. v. 
12-15, though the connexion of heart here is with 
the deliverance from bondage in the land of Egypt 
rather than with creation. 


GENESIS 11. 1-3 Va! 


Nor is there a commandment on which scripture 
laid greater stress, when the law was bound on the 
sons of Israel, than that of the sabbath. All the 
others were moral in a sense which this was not; for 
of their own selves they could not but feel and own 
the duty. But the hallowing of the sabbath was of 
God’s initiation exclusively, and singularly marked 
out for His people that they should not even look to 
gather the manna on that day. His honour was 
pre-eminently identified with its observance ; and 
so was His blessing. 

For us, Christians, the first day of the week, and 
not the sabbath, is characteristic. That only is to 
us the Lord’s day, as the day of His resurrection, and 
the witness of our accomplished redemption and of 
the power of His life as risen from the dead, and our 
life. It is accordingly as much marked by the new 
creation and grace as the sabbath day was by the 
six-days’ creation and the Jaw. Yet, though we have 
to do with the Lord on the first day, as the N. T. 
makes plain in manifold ways, the sabbath is not 
done with but will assuredly re-appear, when Zion 
arises from her long slumber in the dust, and the 
light of Jehovah shines in Israel for the universal 
blessing of the earth and the nations, as it never did 
even in the days of David and Solomon; so the 
prophets proclaim, and scripture cannot be broken. 

Ours meanwhile is a higher call and a brighter 
hope ; for we are by the Holy Spirit united to Him 
Whom Jew and Gentile crucified, Whom God not 


112 IN THE BEGINNING 


only raised but set at His own right hand in the 
heavenlies, far above all principality and power and 
might and dominion, and every name that is named 
not only in this age but also in that which is to 
come ; we are the body of the glorified Head. Those 
who had the sabbath, as a sign between them and 
Jehovah, rejected their own Messiah, Who, slain by 
the bands of lawless men, lay in the grave that 
sabbath, “high” or great day as it emphatically was. 
It was the sin and the death of Israel, the ground of 
a still more terrible scattering than that of Assyria 
or of Babylon; yet in God’s grace the divine and 
only efficacious means to faith of blotting out that 
sin and every other; as we prove who believe the 
gospel, while hardening in part has befallen Israel. 
But all Israel shall be saved by-and-by; and when 
they are, from one moon to another, and from one 
sabbath to another, all flesh shall come to worship 
before Jehovah. We now by the Spirit sent down 
from heaven draw near by faith within the holiest, 
and this with boldness by the blood of Jesus. Of 
our peculiar blessing the first day, not the seventh, 
is the witness. Nor can lack of Christian intelli- 
gence be more decided than confounding the Lord’s- 
day with the sabbath. 

But the seventh day is also decisively against the 
day periods. For what can be conceived more 
unnatural, save when we let a system of private 
interpretation carry us away alike from simplicity 


and from spiritual understanding? Till the six — 


yt 
y 


GENESIS 11. 1-3 1138 


days introduced Adam and his world, it could not 
be said that the heavens and the earth, still less 
“all their host,’ were finished. Previous states of 
the creation had their importance; but till man and 
his congeners, animal and vegetable, there was a 
great lack. Neither on earth nor even in the 
heavens was there a creature made in God’s image 
or after His likeness. This was not a little in itself 
as bringing in moral ways of and with man, and 
room for God’s manifestation in promise and govern- 
ment, till the infinite fact of Immanuel, the Word 
made flesh, the Son of God a man, and His work 
no less infinite of redemption, yet to be the basis not 
only of the church’s blessedness, as also of all saints 
and of Israel to come, but of the new heavens and 
new earth through all eternity. 

What possible evidence from scripture that “the 
seventh day is the modern or human era in geology” 
(Archaia, 235)? or as the author of “ Footprints of 
the Creator” puts it, ‘“‘God’s sabbath of rest 
may still exist; the work of redemption may 
be the work of His sabbath day!” Does it need 
the words of any one to refute such a reverie of 
self-destroying fancy? The scripture before us 
points out His rest as cessation from work, not 
merely from creation, but from “creating to make.” 
No doubt, if six immensely protracted periods of 
several thousand years each were certainly meant by 
the six days, analogy would claim a proportionately 
lengthened term for the seventh. But the doctrine 


I.B. I 


114 IN THE BEGINNING 


of God’s word even then would be thrown into 
confusion. For sin violated the rest of creation ; 
and as God could not rest in sin, so He would 
not in misery, its effect. This is not our rest: it 
is polluted. 

The argument of Heb. iii, iv. is that, even 
though Messiah is come and the work of propitiation 
wrought, and we that believe do enter into the rest 
of God, we are only as yet in the day of temptation 
in the wilderness. Hence we are exhorted to fear 
lest any might seem to have failed, and to use 
diligence to enter in. A sabbatism, then, remains 
to the people of God. It is not yet come. It is the 
day of glory and not before, when God has no more 
work to do, all being done so perfectly that He can 
rest for ever. So our Lord pleaded to those who 
indulged in somewhat similar imagination in His 
day, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” 
But work and rest are in contrast. Hence our 
Lord did on the sabbath what roused the enmity 
of the Jews implacably. God’s rest was in no true 
sense come. He must work in grace, yea, the 
Father and the Son; and this has been done beyond 
all thought of the creature, and God is glorified 
thereby ; yet the rest remains for another day. 

But that work, infinitely acceptable and efficacious, 
is the very opposite of His rest, though the founda- 
tion of it. Meanwhile the heirs of God and joint- 
heirs with Christ are being called; the delay, the 
long-suffering of God, is salvation; and the people of 


GENESIS 11. 1-8 115 


God must be by faith fitted to enjoy His rest. In 
due time they will enter in, in heaven and on earth, 
But it still remains; it is not yet come. The idea 
of a sabbath from Adam till now is a dream wholly 
antagonistic to all revealed truth. It will be at the 
end when God makes all things new, and the first 
things have passed away. This is in the fullest 
sense the rest of God, not the morning cloud that 
enveloped the entrance into Canaan, nor the dew that 
passed so early away in Eden. They were but 
shadows. The reality is to come, the true rest of 
God. There cannot be rest and work at the same 
time in the same sense. To view the sabbath or 
rest of God as contemporaneous with His work is to 
be in a mist and to lose completely the truth of both 
in strange fancifulness. 

The absurdity which thus inevitably attaches to 
the age-day theory is proved by no consideration 
more clearly than by the seventh day or sabbath. 
That the natural day is meant is only the more 
evident from the fact that scripture leaves no room 
for a symbolic or age-lasting sabbath, after the 
Adamic world was made, but casts us only on its 
sure but still future dawn. It is “a promise left 
us” which the day of glory alone fulfils. Of this 
the sabbath, the natural day at the beginning, was 
the pledge, the blessed antitype, when God and the 
creature shall (by redemption and resurrection 
power) enjoy the communion of His own rest, sin, 
sorrow, and death completely effaced, and love, 


116 IN THE BEGINNING 


righteousness, and glory, triumphant for ever 
through our Lord Jesus. This the scriptures hold 
out abundantly and unambiguously; but an allegoric 
sabbath stretching over the fall and the deluge, the 
kingdom of Israel and the Gentile world-powers (to 
say nothing of the law, the gospel, and the church), 
is a mere fiction of some few geologists speculative 
beyond the rest, for which not a word of revelation 
has ever been truly advanced. 


Reviewing these papers attentively for reproduction 
in a small volume, I do not feel the need of adding 
many words. Scripture is to the believer absolutely 
reliable ; and, in my judgment, it refuses to bend to 
philosophic speculation which is not true science, 
but the guesswork of some scientists assuming to 
theorise on what is unknown to science and there- 
fore illegitimate. In such schemes generally proper 
creation is denied, and evolution of matter (perhaps 
eternal matter) takes the place of God calling the 
universe into being as in Gen. i. 1. Next, the state 
of disorder, so necessary in its results for man when 
brought into existence, is shown in ver. 2 and 
connected with the statement of original creation, 
because both preceded man’s world, and cover the 
enormous periods of geologic time, not only when 
fossil remains make their records recognisable in 
themselves and distinguishable one from another, 
but the more vague Azoic age which preceded. 


a 


«} 
«4 


Hence the least offensive of these schemes, as Prof. — = 


GENESIS I. 1-3 LAN y 


Dana’s, is not only without, but opposed to, scripture 
in assuming an original nebula. For this disagrees 
with both the first verse and the second of Gen. i., 
and conceives the third to mean the earth as aglobe 
of molten rock, like the sun in brightness and nature, 
enveloped in an atmosphere containing the dis- 
sociated elements of the future waters and whatever 
else the heat at the surface could evaporate. Such 
is the first era of philosophic conjecture. A second 
went forward until first the earth became centrally 
solid. Long after, a crust was formed outside; and 
the vapours of the atmosphere were condensed, and 
a watery envelope made. A third age, or continua- 
tion, followed, so as to admit of the simplest forms 
of vegetable life, and of the crust increasing by con- 
traction, aided by disintegration of the rock, by 
exposure to the ocean; and so began the earth’s 
supercrust—the only part of the earth’s structure 
within the reach of direct investigation. As the 
first introduction of vegetable life is the fourth age, 
the display of the systems followed in the four 
grand types of the animal kingdom in the fifth ; and 
in the siath, Mammals, and Man. 

Analogy, with the chief periods of geological time, 
is admitted. But it is only a measure of analogy as 
a whole. We have seen on conclusive evidence that 
the inspired record will not bend to the assumption, 
either that the first verse of Gen. i. is a summary of 
the chapter, or that ver. 2 contains the original 

order of creation, instead of being a state of con- 


118 IN THE BEGINNING 


fusion into which, for the wisest purposes to come, 
the earth was thrown. He created it not a waste 
(compare Isa, xlv. 18). Both verses are incompatible 
with the hypothesis, fashionable for the moment, 
that man’s world like himself goes forward with a 
progress steady in the main and slowly advancing to 
comparative perfection. Nor is the periodistic 
reading of the days due to the text itself or any 
light of the Holy Spirit afforded by other scriptures, 
but to the overbearing influence of unbelieving geolo- 
gists who take almost equal pleasure in parading 
the prevalent scheme of their science as absolutely 
settled among all the intelligent, and in per- 
plexing Christians too easily allured or alarmed, 
who forthwith set about to adjust the language of 
Holy Writ to the alleged exigence of modern 
scientific results. Yet the enormous changes, not 
merely through the better ascertainment of impor- 
tant facts, but in the abandonment of fundamental 
principles by one so influential as the late Sir C. 
Lyell, ought assuredly to impress the need and the 
value of creation; especially as the change was a 
yielding to the sceptical spirit of the day, betraying 
animus against scripture, not to say contempt for all 
it teaches of man’s comparatively recent origin, as 
well as the utmost self-confidence in that uniformi- 
tarianism which logically shuts out God and denies 
creation in any real sense. yo 
Now, speculate as people may on Gen. i-ii. 8, it 


will scarcely be contested that God in the words of me 


GENESIS I. 1-3 119 


Exod, xx. did not adopt the language of poetry or 
“philosophy but laid down moral principles in the 
most liberal and unambiguous terms. What then 
means His fourth commandment to Israel? “Re- 
member the sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days 
shalt thou labour and do all thy work; but the 
seventh day is a sabbath unto Jehovah thy God. 
For in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the 
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the 
seventh day,” etc. (vers. 8-11). The accuracy of the 
inspired word is so much the more to be noticed, as 
so many commentators wrongly refer to it as 
“created” instead of “made:” exactly agreeing 
with the remarkable phrase that closes the account 
in Gen, ii. 3, which combines, yet distinguishes, “all 
his work which Elohim created to make.’ What- 
ever particulars might properly be called creating 
within the six days, the comprehensive term which 
embraced the whole is expressly “made” in contra- 
distinction to the equally proper term “ created ” in 
chap. i.1. Can any nicety of speech more mani- 
festly confirm the interpretation of the days in 
Genesis as meant exclusively in their ordinary and 
historical sense? The six days are God’s work in 
view of man; on the seventh is His rest, the pledge 
of a better and enduring one, based on the redemp- 
tion of the Second man, and issuing in glory for 
heavens and earth, and above all for those who by 
er believe. Need one say more ? 


} 
——————— 

» 
- - BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO, LD., PRINTERS, LONDON AND TONBRIDGE. 


WORKS BY W. KELLY. 


LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE STUDY OF THE PENTATEUCH. Witha 
~~ valuable Introduction. Crown 8vo, cloth boards, 5s. Ge. 


LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE STUDY OF THE EARLIER HISTORICAL 
BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. Joshua to 2 Samuel. Uniform with 
Lectures on the ‘‘Pentateuch.” Cloth, 3s. 6d. 


LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE STUDY OF THE MINOR PROPHETS. 
Uniform with the above, 4s. 6d. 

EXPOSITION OF ISAIAH. Demy 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. Witha New Version. Cloth boards, 1s. 6d, 

NOTES ON THE PSALMS. With a New Version. Cloth boards, 2s. 6d. 

NOTES ON EZEKIEL. Consisting of Notes on each Chapter of Ezekiel. 273 pages, 
Bound in cloth boards, 2s, 

NOTES ON THE BOOK OF DANIEL. Bound in cloth boards, 2s. 

NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. WithaNewTranslation. Fscp. 8vo. 
284 pages. Bound in cloth boards, 2s. 6d. 

NOTES ON THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. With a New Transla- 
tion. Fscp. 8vo, 299 pages. Bound in cloth boards, 2s. 6d. 

NOTES ON THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, With a New 
Translation. Fscp. 8vo, 299 pages. Bound in cloth boards, 2s. 

LECTURES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. With a New Translation. 
198 pages. Bound in cloth boards, 1s. 6d. 


LECTURES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, With a New Translation. 
Bound in cloth boards, 2s. 


LECTURES ON THE EPISTLES TO THE PHILIPPIANS AND COLOSSIANS. 
With a New Translation of the Two Epistles. Bound in cloth boards, 2s, 

THE TWO EPISTLES OF PETER. Two Vols., cloth, 4s. 6d. 

EXPOSITION OF HEBREWS. With a New Translation. Demy 8vo, cloth, 6s, 

EXPOSITION OF EPISTLES OF JOHN. Demy 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

LECTURES ON THE BOOK OF REVELATION. With New Translation. New 
Large Type Edition, revised and corrected, with many additions. Demy 8vo, 
cloth, 6s. 6d, 

THE DAY OF ATONEMENT. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 

SIX LECTURES ON THE CHURCH OF GOD, Tenth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s, 

LECTURES ON THE SECOND COMING AND KINGDOM OF THE LORD AND 


SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST. Hight Lectures with Appendix. Third Hdition. 
Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 


LECTURES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 
Ten Lectures, with Appendix. Crown 8vo, Third Edition, revised, 2s. 6d. 

SECOND ADVENT PRE-MILLENNIAL. 6d. O.P. 

CHRIST PREAOHING TO THE SPIRITS IN PRISON. Is. 6d, and 2s, 


The Day of Atonement compared with | The Heavenly Witnesses. 1d. 

Christ’s Work, Lecture 1. Price 2d. Gospel Words, Series i. ii., iii, 1s. per 
The Day of Atonement—Jehovah’s Lot 100. 

and the People’s, Lecture 2. Price 2d, | Feasts of Jehovah. 6d. 
On the Epistle to the Galatians. | Christ Tempted and Sympathising. 4d. 


Price 2d. The Lord’s Supper. A New Edition. 84d. 
Thoughts on Presbyterianism. One Body aad Ons Spirit. 2d. 

Price ld. O.P. Peter's Denial. 1d. 
Three Lectures on the Book of Job. On Drummond's Natural Law. 1d. 

Price 6d. O.P. Born of Water and Spirit. 1d. ; 
Daniel’s Seventy Weeks. 4d, Letter toa Hindoo Friend. 4d. :- 
On the Lord’s Prayer. 38d. The Bible Treasury. Monthly, 14d. 


The Doctrine of Ohrist. 1d. Some early and later volumes still on sale. 


Laven bo VV ORS 


Published or sold by 


eS ON 


1907 


53 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON 
E.C. 


ze T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


Works by J. N. DARBY. 


Collected ye a 34 vols. She ».. each 
Index oe re at 

Letters 3 vols. ... each 

Synopsis of Books of the Bible 5 ‘vols. ... . 


Cheap edition ... each net 2/6; per set, net 
Brief outline of Books of the Bible ase Lads 
Psalms, Exposition of & 

Practical reflections on 1 The ... 
_ Luke, Notes on ne 
John ‘ ie Fr 
Acts of the Apostles, Meditations on 2vols. each 
Romans, Notes on 2. Ses fe hee 
Meditations on.. 
-—— Exposition of . 
1 & 2 Corinthians, Notes of a a Reading on 
Galatians, Notes on. Sos 
Hebrews be 
—— Brief analysis of 
James, Exposition of 
1 John, Lectures on 
Apocalypse, Notes on the 


Accepted Man, The... 

Apocalypse, Notes on the 

Apostasy, On the 

As is the Heavenly 

Assembly of God. its present state and the duties 
that result Ree 

Atonement, ... 

Balaam, Hired of Balak 

Believer’s place in Christ ... 

Binding and loosing by the Assembly : 

Brief analysis of the Epistle to the Hebrews 

—— Outline of the Books of the Bible ... 

—— Remarks on Rev. D. Brown’s “Christ’s Second 
Coming” 

Cain, his world and his worship 

Canaan, and the armour of God. ... 

“i Catholic Apostolic” teachers, are they sent of 

od?... ae re bse es 


ee 


DWHOOKP HEN RP RRR WHWHONARNa % 


js) “efete, (exer =) (S(eleoke sh fete i k=) 


— 
SCARARAROMROOOCO A, 


e 
COOCOAaCOoAoC°oo 


oo enwmor- 
tol 


wir tole 


— 
wo FRO ONMrH 
th 


T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


3 


By J. N. Darsy, continued— 
Christ’s desires for the Christian ... 
Christian not of this world.. ee 
Christian Perfection 
Church in the Wilderness, The .. 
Claims of the Church of England considered 
Collected Writings 34 vols. 3 ... each 
Index ... 
Discipline and Unity ‘of the Assembly (abridged) 
Dispensation of the Kingdom of Heaven . : 
Divine mercy in the Church and towards Israel _ 
Either in Adam or in Christ (new edition) 
Elements of Prophecy awe 
Eternal Punishment for plain people 
Father and the pre sf 
Freewill - 
God dwelling ix in us and we in God 
in His Essence and Attributes ae 
the Father Manifested and Glorified 
God’s Rest the Saints’ Rest x i 
Gospel of the Glory ... : 
—— Sermons me 
Greek Article, Particles and Prepositions 
Growth through the truth . ce e 
Have we a revelation from God? . ae, (she 
Hints on the Tabernacle, &c. of ase 
Hope of the Christian aS 
Hopes of the Church of God 
How to get peace . 
Immortality of the Soul 
Intercession of Christ 
Lay Preaching 
Lectures on i First Epistle of John 
Second Coming of Christ es Si 
Letters of J.N.D. 3 vols. ... Ro ... each 
—— on Romanism .. ot ate ae te 
Life in Resurrection _ 
Lord Jesus in Humiliation and Service 
Man’s hatred and Christ’s love. ey 
Meditations on the Acts of the Apostles, 2vols.) 
Melchisedec Priesthood of Christ . ie 
Names of the Lord Jesus in the Epistles... 
Newman Street teachers (Catholic Apostolic), are 

they sent of God ? 

Notes and Comments on Scripture, vols. i—v. each 


MO KHON SOCCORFHOCOCODNWOOFPOCNWHOODCOOOOCOOOCOCODCONRMOOCOCOSCSO & 


ow SNOHMEEHODONHEOHPOHOCOHOORH EEE RHEHENONMHOCOrPHHEE & 


4 ihe Wee, 53, ocala Row, London, E.C. 


By J. N. Darsy, continued—- 


Notes and Comments on pata vol. vi. : 

—— of Addresses, vols. i. and ii. a Oacly 

—— on the Offerings ae 

—— on Luke 

—— on John 

— on Romans. 

—— ofa Reading on 11&2 Corinthians ... 

on Galatians ... ee 

Notes on Hebrews ... 

—— on the Apocalypse 

Offerings, Notes on the nie we x 

Only Fellowship. Openness in Spee! &e. 
JENGD ands We hemes. re 

—— Ground of Practical Holiness 

Outline of the Books of the Bible .. 

Part with Christ Be 

Pleasant land despised - : 

Practical reflections on the Psalms. 

Promise of Life 

Propitiation & Substitution... aa 

Remarks on the Church and the World ... 

Rejected Man, The ... S. 

Responsibility of Disciples .. 

Resurrection, the fundamental truth of the Gospel 

Romapism, Letters on 

Sanctification, or setting apart to God 

Sealing with the Holy Spirit 

Second Coming of Christ, Lectures on the 

Select Papers 

Separation from evil, ‘God’s ‘principle of unity 

Seven Lectures on the Addresses to the Seven 
Churches : 

Standing and State of the Believer 

Substance of a Lecture on ei 

Sufferings of Christ . 

Superstition i is not Faith a ane 

Synopsis of the Books of the Bible. 5 vols. each 

-—— Cheap Edition ie a each net 

Tabernacle, Hints on the _.. 

The Lord Jesus Christ in Humiliation and ‘Service 

Thoughtfulness of Divine Love 

Two Resurrections.. : 

Watching Servant ... me 

What do I learn from Seri pture ? Pare 


SOD CNH HHH WHOHD % 


— 


SOOCOONRDOHPOOF DOHOOCOCOOCHOOWOO 


WOODOROMAINDOA | 
} 


OHH 
WF 


wie 


SHOSHaASH 
iF tee 


DO G2 > 2 U2 Ft vO 


ORDER ORDORONN® 


wir 


T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, H.C. 5 
By J. N. Darsy, continued— 
What is a Christian, now and hereafter ? 0 14 
is the world? and what is its end ? fe OT AL 
— the world is, and howaChristiancanliveinit 0O 1 
is Succession a succession of ? 53 sean Oe A 
—— Saints will be in the Tribulation ? Ont 
Who is a Priest ? and what is a Priest? ... 0 04 
Why do I groan? a 0 14 
Wilderness Grace ... 0 14 
Wish of Paul in chains : te nit ee eet 
Work for the Lord ... - A perdoz. O 4 
Works by W. KELLY. 
(Marked thus * are out of print) 
iy otal 
* Lectures introductory to the Pentateuch cr.8vo 5 0 
Earlier Historical Books ah ps Be ial 
-—— Minor Sc eanele oe (new edition) ,, 4 6 
—— Gospels ae A be Sool 5 0 
5) -(@) 
= Rue Catholic Epistles and the Revelation 
r. 8vo i : a Asan ee) 
Job, olen on Book of 546 6 
- Three Lectures on Book of 
Psalms, 'The, a new Version with Short notes me 
Song of Songs ee ee i: EONS 
Isaiah, Exposition of a oat demy 8 hie) Hh (a) 
The known oo 46 0 6 
Ezekiel, Notes on .. 2 0 
Daniel, ‘Notes on, with reply t to Dean Farrar 1/6& 2 0 
#Matthew, Lectures on F x (shortly) 5 O 
Mark . ie a a ye a NE Dee: 0) 
*Luke | u Ce Nee (shortly) 
*John, Exposition of sae nae (shortly) 7. 6 
*Acts of the Apostles ce ... (shortly) net 5 O 
Romans, Notes on we ion a age: 0 
1 Corinthians 2 6 
2 Corinthians 2 0 
Galatians 1 6 
Ephesians .. oo 2,0 
Philippians and Colossians ... 2 0 


*] & 2 Thessalonians 


6 T. Weston, 58, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


By W. Ke tty, continued— 
* 1 & 2 Timothy 
Titus and Philemon .. ah ae ay ae 
Hebrews, eae ue ah Som demy 8yvo 
1 Peter aoc 
2 Peter sete a0 5 
John’s Epistles, Exposition ht See demy 8vo 
Revelation, Lectures on The wah demy 8yvo 
Expounded 
= Abram 
Action of Holy Spirit i in the ‘Assembly 
Active Neology : 
Administration or Fulness of the Seasons. 
Advoeacy of Christ ... 
Apostle Paul and Athens 
Apostle Peter on Baptism ... 
Apostolic Fathers on the Lord’s Coming .. 
Babylon and the Beast 
Baptism, Apostle Peter on ... 
Behold my Servant 
Born of Water and Spirit ... a6 
Brethren, Rev. A. Moody Stuart, on vhs ee 
Bride, the Lamb’s Wife, The me 
Brief Hints on Psalms 
Tsaiah ... 
-—— Minor Prophets 
— Romans : 
—— 1 & 2 Corinthians 
—— Galatians 
—— Ephesians 
—— Philippians 
Colossians... Pa 
—— 1 & 2 Thessalonians ... 
— 1&2 eeear 
—— Titus : 
—— Philemon 
Hebrews 
—— James ... 
——1&2Peter ... 
—— 1, 2&3 John ... 
—— Jude Bae 
Revelation ‘ies on es 
Broken state of Christendom. a per doz. 
By whom sent? : Ae 
Christ not Christendom, nor Judaism 


DODD OCOD OCOOC OO DO OC OOO OS OS OOS OOOO OS OOCOP NAAN NAO % 


tol 


FHP ORCOAROEROOD DS 


» 
4 


to 


bre a el Ae ae eae 


Ree DO bo 
ers, pie Aan At 


earerue 


DRM rRONrO 
vi 


T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


x 


By W. KEtty, continwed— 
Christ Preaching to the Spirits in Prison ... 1/6 & 
Tempted and Sympathizing ... (new edition) 
Christ washing the Feet... per doz. 
*Christ’s Coming again, chiefly on its Tatyanig side 
Christian Science, a delusion of the day ... es 


The 
Church of God, Lectures on, » (tenth edition) 
—— The 7 
Closing types of Leviticus ... paper 8d., ; cloth 


Coming and Day of the Lord paper 1/-, cloth 
of the Lord, etc., Lectures at Montrose on . 

Creation é a 1 

Daniel the Prophet wd *s = ae 

-— Notes on ; ie Hs 55 6 & & 

Daniel’s Seventy Weeks a eee 

Day Star, The 

Doctrine of Christ and Bethesdaism (new edition) 

Drummond’s Natural Law, Reply to 


Kpistles of Paul, Short Introduction to ... 1 j- & 

Exodus i.—iii. : 

Exposition of Isaiah Ere “demy 8vo cloth 
of Hebrews... ue 3 ata 


John’s Epistles r 

—— the Epistles to Titus and Philemon... - 

First Epistle of Peter... \ sae 

—— Second Epistle of Peter = 

—— The Revelation (third edition) 

F. E. R. Heterodox on Christ’s Person... 

—— on Life Eternal, other divine truths and 
above all Christ’s person ass ... cloth 

Feasts of Jehovah, The _..... mm oo Sar 

Feasts in Deuteronomy xvi... 

Four Lectures at Montrose ... 

Fulness of Christ (John i.) ... 

Future Tribulation ... iF 

Gathered unto His Name 


God’s Inspiration of the Seriptures i NER 
Gospel of God ‘ per 100 
Heavenly Hope, The “paper 9d., cloth Mo 


Witnesses, The, (1 John v. ie 


Higher Criticism. 
Hope of Christ, compatible with Prophecy ts 
In the Beginning and the Adamic Earth . NET 


Tnnovation 


OCOroococrrrROOCOOCCOrF 


SNNNNWADNOHOCOCOCONWOCCOHHONDCOWOODN a 


2 -eeorre® 


SPRONHERASCDO 


vi 


SE PRBS. Re 


ODAPRHOARHENMERRO 


er 


8 T. Weston, 58, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


. W. KELLY, continued— 


Tsaa a ... Cloth 
Teel Holy to Jehovah... “paper 8d., ae 
Jacob .. ... Cloth 


Jesus forsaken of God and the Gaccquenceel “ 
Jewish and Christian ug ene of Christ con- 
trasted : i 
Joseph -. cloth 

Judgment, not Re-union, of ‘Christendom .. 

Known Isaiah, The ... 

Later Epistles and Rev elation, Short Introduction to 
Lectures Introductory to the Earlier Historical 


Books 
Lectures on the Day of Atonement, (new edition) 
— I. and IU ..- each 


—— Church of God (tenth edition) 

— Doctrine of the Holy Spirit ... 

—— on Second Coming and Kingdom of our Lord 
——— Epistle to the Galatians ae ao 
—-———- Ephesians 

Philippians and Colossians 

— Book of the Revelation ae wits sles 
Letter on Recent Po: oo a 100 
Life Eternal . 

Life Eternal denied by F. E. R. as a . present 
possession. Parts i., ii., iii. andiv. each 
“~~ Notes on a Lecture 

Lord’s Prayer, On the so-called... a de 
Lights in the world, &c., On e 4 copies 
Lord’s Supper, On the ; oy ast ae 
Mystery and the Covenants... 

of Godliness... 

New Development 1890 

New Organ of Neology sah se aes 
No more conscience of sins... oes per 100 
Not Sinai but Zion ... 

Notes on Job 

—-— Ezekiel sa ae fe 
— Daniel (new edition) .. ae Ban Lug ees 
—— Romans a So sc Ba Ba 
— aes eRe 

Offerings of Leviticus a limp 1/-, cloth 
Olivet, The Lord’s Prophecy on... ae a8 
One Body and One Spirit ... 


SUPE MmuMecEooScOcCoSOSO SOF one mrmmwomy SOORS Orr s 


‘ DOOAMRONOD BABOMW HAHOD 
DW ODOMBOOAH ODM ho wo tl rs oo wo wone ic Q 


T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


(’o) 


By W. KE tty, continued— 
Oneness and Union . 
Only F eke Openness i in Receivi ving, ete. JN.D. 

an 

Partakers of a Divine Nature Ei ate 
Paul’s Epistles, Short Introduction Sok im ceehd a & 
Peter, First Epistle of Bie a 
—— Second Epistle 
on Baptism 
Peter’s Denial of the Lord . as ae 
Pope’s Encyclical Letters, Nos. 1—8 ... each 
Powers that Be, The , ot ie 
Preaching to the Spirits in Prison... cee gee 
Priesthood of Christ + nes ane i 


—— The , ET 

Prize of our High Calling ae 

Promise of the Father, ee Body, the Church 
Providence and Faith 

Psalms, The, A new Version with Short Notes 
Purpose of God for His Sons and Heirs 

Rapture of the Saints i x ee 
Recent Heterodoxy . $8 per 100 
Recent Parties versus ; Scripture og per 100 
Red Sea and Jordan, Salvation as typified in 
Restraint put on Speaking in the Assem ak oe 100 
Righteousness of God, What is it? 

Salvation by Grace (Luke xxiii.) 


Salvation of God as typified in the Red Sea and Jordan 


Scripture Proofs of the Lord’s Second oriacie 100 

Separate State and the Resurrection 

Self-abnegation ae =f 

Sinai and it terrors ... 

Sinner Saved, The stale vii.) 

Song of Songs 

Soul neither Mortal nor to- Sleep (new edition) 

Stephen the Christian proto-martyr 

The Higher Criticism 

The Vision, and the Just shall live by faith 

Unity of the Church in coapinnl an sul 

Unto My Name < 

We must all be manifested... 

Why many Saints were outside Park ‘Street in 1881 
(new edition) Ge i ee 

Worship, Three Lectures on 


Memories fas the Life and Last pays of W. KELLY, 


y Dr. Wreford . 1/6 net. 


CO CODCOD COOCOCCOORPOOCOCOHPSHHOONCOCONONOOOCONNHOO Cf 


Sh 


[Se 


rey 


tole 


oH to] 


SCWWOWODTDCKHOOADOH 


tol 


Ri) NP wl 


FPONWH ADH WHER OCAONNPANAONFD 
pH iH wis 


to) 


RO 


10 T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


By Various Authors 


A Help or a Hindrance, which? C.H.M. 

A Meditation on the Lord Jesus Christ in His 
varied characters in the four Gospels. J.G.B. 

Aids to Believers. J.C.D. ... ; 2 

All for Christ. J.B. i: eae 

All-sufficiency of Christ. C.H.M. tt te 

Ark, The, and its Contents. G.S.B. ... (shortly) 

Atonement and the way to God. G. Ge ade it 

its nature and extent. E 

—— money, The J.G.B. she 

atoning death of the Son of God . Ao 

Awake! awake! Behold the Bridegroom. CS. 

Baptismal Regeneration. C.S. ... 

Behold He cometh ... 

Believer’s Monthly Magazine, vols. ii. —v. cloth, e ea. 

Belshazzar’s Feast. J.G.B. 

Belshazzar’s Feast and the Day of the Lord. G.G. 

Brotherly Care and Personal Trespass 

Canticles, The J.G.B. ; 

Caught up by the Bridegroom, Coming ‘with the 
King . 

Changed in a moment oe 

Character of Office in the present dispensation de 

Christ and the Scriptures. H.P. (2d. per doz.) 100 

Christ our Life, our Pattern, our Object ... 

the Centre. C.S. 

Measure of blessing and Standard of walk. J.B. 

Christ’s coming and a Lest J.S.F.C. (8 copies 
1d.) per 100 


Christian perfection, What is it? CHM. 
Church and the Kingdom Q. de M. 
of God. G.R. 
Coming events as revealed in n Seripture 
—— Kingdom, The G.V.W. 

of the Lord, The With diagram. OS. 
Communion with God : oe re 
Conversation on Dress. W.J.H. ... 
Conversion of J. R. ... ane 40h _ Per 100 
Conversion ; what is it ? 5c 
C.8. Tracts, vols. ivi... : ... each 
Dates and chronology of Scripture 
Death is ours 
Deity of the Holy Spirit. JOB: ... 


OSS OonMmocooooooow oooF-coo eoocooonwocoooodo soHsS SS 


ONWrFNORO 


wi 


IK 


VIF 


Se oe Ae wo © 
wl 


IR eI 


KHNMOADPONWOORrHFrrwhwc 


T. Weston, 58, Paternoster Row, London, H.C. 


By Various Authors, continued— 
Earthly relations of the Heavenly Family. J.L.H. 
Eight lectures on Prophecy. Ie Dest ae 
Election. C.S. o3 ot ee a 
Evangelists, The J.G.B. ... i ie. Ae 
Exodus, Notes on O.H.M. ee 1j- 2/- & 
Ezekiel’s last parable. Mrs. Bevan ... nett 
Fallen from Grace, or castaway ... ¥ ia 
Five letters on Worship and Ministry. W.T. 
Forgiveness in its three aspects a 
Freedom from sin et 
Genesis, Notes on C.H.M. : 
Gideon and his companions. C.H.M. 
Gift as well as Office oe, 
Gilgal = oe we a Bs wis 
Gleanings from teaching of G.V.W. 3 vols. each 
Glory of the Lord revealed, and Israel restored 
God for us ee os 
God’s salvation Sc Pa aS Br Se 
Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh. G.S.M. per doz. 
Gospel and the Church according to Scripture ... 
of our Salvation. H.F.W. ... oh he 
of the grace of God ... 
Papers . se ths 
Gospels ? Why four, &c. ... ie we iat 
Green pastures and still waters. J. A. von P. 
Handfuls of pasture. C.H.M. Vol. i. 
” ” ” Vol ii. 
Help or a hindrance, which? C.H.M. 
History of the tribe of Levi. C.H.M. _ .. 
How can I be saved. Heyman Wreford ... 
— reasonings of an anxious soul were ended... 
Hymns of Ter Steegen, Suso and others. 2 vols. each 
Imputed Righteousness __ ... a he by 
Is Prayer compatible with General Laws. E.J.T. 
Jehoshaphat, a word on World-bordering. O.H.M. 
Jericho and Achor ... nse ee Ade it 
Jewish and Christian Dispensations contrasted ... 
Bondage and Christian Freedom 
Remnant in the latter days ... 
Job and his Friends. C.H.M 
Job’s conversion. CS. ... a, fi 
Joseph a Type of the Risen Christ. C8. 
Jottings on the Railway we a 


i 2 8 


CSCOCOODCOHCOCOOCOROCOCOOOCOFRONOrOrFRCOrFrOSO 


KODOWOOSTONMWWOrHD 


H 
tr 


RH DDR S00 09 19. C2 DY ARE BD OO AAA OD HW ALO OR PPROHPRPNNUADOWANA 


12 T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


By Various Authors, continued— 
Kingdom of Heaven. With diagram 
Letter to Young Believernot Breaking Bread. E.J.T. 
Letters from an Old Disciple to a ee Sister in 
the Lord. A.M. °.. 
Letters and Papers of Lady Powerscourt .. 
Liberty : Who gets it? and How ? s 
Life and Times of David. C.H.M. 


of Hezekiah. C.H.M. ... 

of William Farel. Mrs. Bevan 

Light amid the Darkness ai 

Lights and Shadows of the Reformation. ... 

Lord’s Coming, Israel and the Church. T.B.B. ... 

—_—— Testimony to the Mosaic perk re of the 
Pentateuch. W.J.H. 

Love even to death. W.G. : ee 

Man ready to Perish, God ready to save ... es 

Manner of Some sae Bec per doz. 

Meditations on the Beatitudes. A.M. 

Meditations on the Book of Joshua ey 

Christian Standing and State. A.M. 

Gospel of John. J.GB. .. 

— Moral Glory of the Lord Jesus. J.G.B. Ye & 

—- Psalms. J.G.B. ‘ 

——— 28rd and 84th Psalms. A.M. 

Song of Solomon. A.M. 

Memories of the Life and Last Days of W. Kelly 
by Heyman Wreford ... ... net 

Midnight Cry. AH.B.... ci ae 

Morning of Life aes Pa 

Musings on Hebrews. J.G.B. 

The Apocalypse. J.G.B. % 

Nehemiah, or the Building of the Wall. GS. 

Neutrality as to Christ. J.G.B. .. 


5 PRAL EST Se 


Notes on Genesis. ©.H.M.. ox aay lis 
——- Exodus. C.H.M. nt ot bon MANE 
——— (Leviticus?) O.H.M: |... ee sob WE 
—— Numbers CHM. ... ea 1/- 
—— Deuteronomy. C.H.M. 2 vols. each 1/- 
—— Luke. J.G.B. 

Now and then, or Time and Eternity, C.HLM. 
Old Nature and New Birth 


On Building Houses. J.JJ. 
— Fire, or from Loneliness to Relationship. AHA tes 
— God’s Wonderful Trees. JJJ, satt Lex: 


MNWNNMOrHOCONWO CO” 


BRB RB RRR ROCCO 


PRE RHOCOFRNNNNNOCOOFOrF 


eetes aber) 


WF Wo) 


SNWOOF® DARARDORDOMRBDWOCONW AGAADDWArA 


oF 


AMM WOCCOOCS 


T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


13. 


By Various Authors, continued— 
On Light. JJ.J... oe: 
—- The Voyage and its Perils. J.JJ. 
Ordination, The Lord’s Supper, etc. 
Our Pilgrimage and His Rest 
Pages for the anxious. C.H.M. .. 
Papers on the Lord’s Coming. C. HM. 
Patriarchs, The J.G.B.... 
Paul a Servant. J.L.H. 
Peace and Deliverance 
Philemon. J.L.H. .. 
Plain Papers on Prophetic & other Subj ects. Ww: mT. 
—--— Thoughts on Philippians 
Present Priesthood of Christ ae 
Psalms, The, A New Version with Short Notes ... 
Revealed Course of Events from the Rapture to 

the Restitution of all See J.S.F.C. 
Revelation of Jesus Christ. C.S. 
School of God. J.L.H. ... 
Scriptural Enquiry as to the True Nature of the Sab- 
bath, the Law and Christian Ministry. C.H.M. 

Short Meditations. J.G.B 
—— Papers on Church History. AM. 3 vols. each 
Showers Upon the Grass. J.Q.B.... 
Sins and Sin.. : er ah per 100 
Son of God.» J.G. Bs 
Story of John Wesley. Mrs. Bevan wa aa 
— — the Good Shepherd. H.F.W. we AE & 
Streams of Refreshing. H.H.S. ... he oa 
Talkings in the Twilight. JJJ. 
The Call of God. C.H.M. 
Things which must Shortly ec come to Pass... 
Thou and Thy House. C.H.M 4 
To Depart and be with Christ. G.G. 
True Peace and Power Booklets. W.B. Nos. 1-6 each 
— bound together in cloth.. 
Truths Important to every Believer. (. si 
Unequal Yoke. C.H.M.... 


Unity of the Spirit .. y per 100 
Victoria Hall Gospel Addresses. Heyman Wreford 
31 kinds ... each 


What was the Sabbath? and What is the First 
Day of the Week ? ae 

Who are We?  W.N.T. = “per doz. 

Woollen and Linen. J.G. a & a i 

Young Gunner, The.. ae oe per 100 


wmooo°oo So NWOCDCTOCTDCCOFRNNNEHNFE PIO ooo WOOCRODORFOWFOQDOFF & 


DOW RPNWONW OSU FPO Quy 


vie 


Hae 


wie 


OWNWOMOPNWPAAMOADOMD® Glo 


ay 


Op tore 


14 T. Weston, 58, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


GOD’S INSPIRATION OF THE SCRIPTURES 
By William Kelly. 
Outline of Contents:— 600 pp. Price 4/6 ner 
Chap. i. Divine Authority. 
,, i. Apostolic Doctrine. 
» il. Its Uniformity. 
» iv. The Human Element. 
» v. Divine Design. 
5 vi. Conclusion. 


CHRIST’S COMING AGAIN 


Chiefly on its Heavenly side. 
By W. K. Cloth 3/- 


Being :—“ The Lord’s Prophecy on Olivet,” 
““The Coming and Day of the Lord,” 
and ‘“‘The Heavenly Hope.” 


Bound together in cloth boards, wniform with “ Lectures on the 
Second Coming,” “The First Epistle of Peter,” &c. 


BIBLES AND TESTAMENTS. 

THE OXFORD, BAGSTER’S, and other Publishers’, in 
a great variety of sizes, prices, and styles. 

J.N.D.’s TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 
Cloth, tos. 6d. Morocco, 15s, Ditto limp, rounded 
corners, 16s. Ditto flaps, 17s. 6d. Ditto best, 30s. 

J.N.D.’s TRANSLATION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 
Cloth, 3s. 6d. | French Morocco, 5s. Morocco, 6s. 6d. 
Limp, round corners, 7s. 6d. Morocco flaps, 8s. Ditto 
Kid lined, &c., 20s. 

OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT COMPLETE. Cloth, 
15s. Morocco, 21s. Ditto, levant, 35s. 

J.N.D.’s TRANSLATION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 
PocKET EDITION. Cloth, 2s. Leather, 3s. Morocco 


limp, thin paper, 4s. 6d. Morocco yapp, ditto, 5s. 6d 
Best Morocco Yapp, Kid lined, ditto, 10s. 6d. 


T. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 15 


Magazines. 


“THE BIBLE TREASURY.” A monthly magazine of 
Papers on Scriptural Subjects. Price 144d., by post 2d. 
Year 1906: in paper covers, 1/6 net. Vol. v. new 
series (1904 & 1905), 4/6. 

STILL ON SALE.—The following half vols. in paper covers, 
1888—189g0 at 3/- each; 1892—1896 at 1/- each net; 
1897—1906 at 1/6 each net. 

Cloth vols, each containing 2 years: vols, iii—v., 
xi,—xiii., xvii., at 7/6 each: xviii., 5/6; xix. and xx. 3/6 
each; vol. i. new series, 4/-; ii—v, new series, 4/6 ea. 

“(GOSPEL GLEANINGS.” A monthly Gospel magazine. 
Price reduced to 14d.from January 1904. Vols. 1.—iii., 
in paper, 1/-; vols. iv.—vi., cloth 1/-. 

“A MESSAGE FROM GOD.” An illustrated monthly 
Gospel paper. Edited by Heyman Wreford. gd. 
Vol. xxiii. (1906). cl. 1/6 

“(GLAD TIDINGS FOR THE YOUNG,” An illustrated 

monthly for the children. %4d. Vol. i., cloth gilt, &c., 1/6 
Vol. ii. cl. 1/6. 


Flymns Revised tn 18094. 


SMALL SIZE.—Cloth od. Paste grain, gilt edges, 1/6. 
Morocco limp, 2/-; paste grain, yapped, 2/6 ; Morocco 
circuit, 3/6; Morocco roll, 3/6; Morocco yapped, 4/- ; 
Morocco yapped, leather lined, 6/- 

LARGE SIZE.—Cloth, 1/6; paste grain, gilt edges, 2/6; 
Morocco limp, 4/6; Morocco circuit, 6/- 


Good Tidings’ Hymn Book. 


210 Hymns. Cloth limp, 3d.; cloth boards, 5d; ditto, gilt 


edged 6d. 
The above two Hymn Books bound together, Cloth, 1/- 


Lymn Sheets. 


Gospel Hymns. Nos,1 and 2. Each 1/6 per 100; post 
free, 1/9. 
Hymns for special meetings of Christians, 2/- per 100 ; post 2/3 
Ditto Teachers’ meetings, 1/6 per 100; by post 1/9. 


16 =. Weston, 53, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


Gospel Tracts for General Distribution. 


NO. FOUR-PAGE, I/- per Loo, 
2 Grace for the persecutor- 
6 The ground of peace 

to “Under conviction” 

12 “I have been brought up init” 

14 “I am all wrong” 

16 The destruction of Pompeii 

24 I've insured my life for £500 

32 Peace with God 

38 “I hope He'll overlook the past’ 

48 “He's got'em both.” Part I 

5° Ditto ditto Part II 

55 Superabounding grace 

56 Howa Jewand his wife found 
the Messiah 

590 Is the world improving ? 

6c The Substitute 

61 Saved for nothing 

62 Searching for the Messiah 

73 The old lady's conversion 

78 Telegraph messenger's con- 
version 

81 Salvation 

83 Saved at sea 


84 A brand plucked from the 


burning 


NO. FOUR-PAGE I/- per loo 


106 The Ground for Assurance 
108 The Commodore's Death 
142 Procrastination 

144 Are you willingly ignorant? 
146 The clergyman’s discovery 
148 Man's heart, and God's 

150 Every nation from one source 
151 To seek God 

152 In Him we live 

153 I'm too bad for Jesus 

154 The Divine 

156 The risen Judge 

157 The result 

158 Hoping or knowing—which 
159 An hour of quickening 

160 Rebellious 

161 Are your eyes open? 

162 Life and Judgement 

163 If I thought about it 


a 


NO TWo-PAGK, 6d, per 100 

3 Arsenio’s conversion 

5 Does your conscience con- 
demn vou? 

tr Saved at the last 

13 Learning to float 

15 Too cheap 

25 One thing thou lackest 

39 Songs of heaven 


NO. TWO-PAGE, 6d. per 100 
43 All this through Jesus’ blood 
45 The stonebreaker & the blood 
49 The counsel of peace 

to1 Conversion of a Trinity Hall 

doctor 

103 Some ene belonging to her 
105 What is your destination ? 


EIGHT-PAGE BOOKLETS, 2/- per 100, Sins and sin. Conversion of 
John R——, The Young Gunner. 


Broapoast Leariets, 


Nos. 1—16, 4d. 100 assorted. 


500, 1/3 net., 1000, 2/3 net., 3000, 6/- net., 
5000, 9/6 net. With full page notice of Gospel 
Meeting on back, 500 6/-, 1000 8/-, 3000 15/-, 


5000, 20/- net. 


LOVE EVEN TO DEATH. 4d. each; 3/6 per 100 


Many other series of reli 


able Gospel Tracts, Book- 


lets, Leaflets and Handbills, &c., kept in stock, or can 


be obtained to order. 


Special Prices for Large Quantities. 


PRIESTLEY BROS., 189 GT. DOVER STREET, BORO’, S.E. 


K29+- Kelly, William 
v4qq; In the beginning _~ 


eee 
DATE DUE | 
KB2991 
Kelly, William 


In the beginning La 


THE MASTER'S GUL! 
POWELL LIBRA’ 
SANTA CLARITA, CA 2). 2) 


