TORONTO 


NO. 


REGISTER   No  .......  /./ 


^  19/CT 


pirns 

HONORABLE    S.  H.  BLAKE,   K.C. 


ENTERED    AT    STATIONERS'    HALL. 


ml:  alrhwte  with  dial 


THE    STORY    OF   JACOB    RE-TOLD. 


REV.    F.     B.     MEYER,     B.A, 

Author  of 
"ELIJAH:  AND  THE  SECRET  OF  His  POWER." 


# 

A. 

w 


"Thy  name  shall  be  called  no  more  Jacob,  but   Israel:   for  as  I   f'/J  ^     I 
a  prince  hast  thou  power  with  God   and   with   men,   and   hist  /    r"  / 


prevailed."— GEN.  xxxii.  28. 


' 


LONDON:     MORGAN    AND    SCOTT, 

(OFFICE  OF  "  3Tlje  C^rtsttan,") 
12,    PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS,    E.G. 

And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 
ALL    RIGHTS    RESERVED. 


By    REV.    F.    B.    MEYER,    B.A. 

:  and  ttje  £>ecret  of  ^t'0 

With  Nine  Original  Illustrations. 
Cloth  plain,  2s.  6d. ;  cloth,  bevelled  boards,  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d. 


CONTENTS. 


THI  SOURCE  OF  ELIJAH'S  STRENGTH. 

B«3iDE  THE  DRYING  BROOK. 

ORDERED  TO  ZAREPHATH, 

"THE  SPIRIT  AND  POWER  OP  ELIAS." 

THB  T«ST  OF  THB  HOME-LIFE. 

OBADIAH— A  CONTRAST. 

THE  PiAj;  or  CAMPAIGN. 

THB  CONFLICT  os  THE  HEIGHTS  OF  CARMEL. 

RAIS  AT  LAST. 

Ilow  THE  MIGHTY  FELL. 


LOVINGKINDSESS  BETTER  THAN  LIFE. 

THE  "STILL,  SMALL  VOICE." 

"Go,  RETURN  !" 

NABOTH'S  VINEYARD. 

THE  OLD  COCRAOE  AGAIN. 

EVENSONG. 

THE  TRANSLATION. 

A  DOUBLE  PORTION  OF  ELIJAH'S  SPIRIT. 

THB  TRANSFIGURATION. 

"  FILLED  WITH  THE  HOLY  GHOST." 


"The  twenty  chapters  of  which  this  handsome  volume  consists  are  fresh,  suggestive,  and 
practical.  They  are  the  outcome  of  wide  reading,  earnest  study,  and  keen  observation ;  and  combine 
simplicity  and  culture,  careful  exegesis  and  impressive  appeals,  useful  instruction  and  hearty 
exhortation.  The  author  has  a  word  in  season  for  all  his  hearers,  and  none  of  his  readers  can  be  sent 
empty  away."— Oldhani  Chranidc. 


LONDON  :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


HESE 


PREFACE. 


pages,     in     response     to     many 


HE 

requests,  preserve  in  a  permanent  form 
a  series  of  articles,  originally  contributed  to 
The  Christian. 

Produced  amid  the  pressure  of  a  very 
active  life,  these  chapters  may,  perhaps,  help 
some  who  shrink  from  profounder  and  more 
elaborate  treatises.  They  will  at  least  remind 
my  own  people  of  many  happy  hours  which 
we  have  spent  together  in  our  beloved 
"  Melbourne  Hall."  And  they  may  serve  to 
show  some  of  my  fellow-workers,  weary  with 
the  incessant  demands  of  their  congregations, 


PREFACE. 

how  they  may  find  a  constant  well-spring  of 
freshness,  variety,  and  interest  in  the  glorious 
biographies  of  Scripture. 

To  recruit  a  dwindling  congregation ;  to 
sustain  interest  in  a  crowded  one ;  to  awaken 
new  devotion  to  the  Bible ;  and  to  touch 
the  many  chords  of  human  life — there  is 
nothing  to  be  compared  with  a  reverent  re 
telling  of  the  Stones  of  Bible  Heroes  and 
Saints. 


F.  B.  MEYER. 


Leicester. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


FIRST  IMPRESSIONS 


CHAPTER  II. 
THE  SALE  OF  THE  BIRTHRIGHT 


CHAPTER  III. 


THE  STOLEN  BLESSING 


THE  ANGEL-LADDER 


CHAPTER  IV. 


CHAPTER    V. 


THE  NOBLE  RESOLVE       •        -  '      . 

CHAPTER    VI. 
THE  EDUCATION  OF  HOME 

CHAPTER    VIT. 
THE  MID-PASSAGE  OF  LIFE 

CHAPTER    VIII. 
THE  STIRRING-UP  OF  THE  NEST     - 

CHAPTER  IX. 
THE  MIDNIGHT  WRESTLE 


PAGE 
9 


20 
32 

44 
55 

65 
75 


vii 


FAILURE 


CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER   X. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


BACK  TO  BETHEL 


CHAPTER  XII. 
THE  SCHOOL  OF  SORROW 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
GLIMPSES  OF  THE  ISRAEL-NATURE  - 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
REST,  AND  THE  REST-GIVER  - 


HOME  :  AT  LAST  ! 


THE  GOD  OF  JACOB - 


CHAPTER  XV. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


PAGE 

105 

117 
126 
138 


160 


170 


I. 

jftcgt 

GKNESIS    XXV. 

"  One  adequate  support 
For  the  calamities  of  mortal  life 
Exists — one  only  :  an  assured  belief 
That  the  procession  of  our  fate,  howe'er 
Sad  or  disturbed,  is  ordered  by  a  Being 
Of  Infinite  benevolence  and  power  ; 
Whose  everlasting  purposes  embrace 
All  accidents,  converting  them  to  good." 

WORDSWORTH, 

N  old-world  story  this  !  In  its  strange  Eastern 
dress,  it  appears  to  be  as  remote  from  us  as  the 
garb  of  an  Arab,  or  the  barter  of  an  Oriental  bazaar. 
And  yet  human  life  is  much  the  same,  whether  lived 
eighteen  hundred  years  on  this  side  or  eighteen  hundred 
years  on  that  side  of  the  Cross  ;  whether  hidden  beneath 
our  broadcloth,  or  the  flowing  robes  of  an  Arab  Sheikh; 
whether  spent  in  modern  towns,  or  on  the  Iree,  open 
pasture-lands  of  Southern  Palestine. 

Our  critics  complain  of  our  poring  over  these  time-worn 
pages  of  ancient  biography ;  but,  with  all  deference  to 
them,  we  feel  bound  to  say  that  we  learn  better  how 
to  live,  we  inhale  more  spiritual  ozone,  we  see  further 
into  the  reasons  of  God's  dealings  with  men,  when  doing 


10  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

so,  than  when  scanning  the  pages  of  yesterday's  news 
paper,  or  of  a  society  journal. 

With  human  life  and  discipline,  one  day  is  as  a  thousand 
years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day.  Souls  grasp  hands 
across  the  intervening  centuries.  Thousands  of  miles  can 
not  part  us  from  our  kin  across  the  seas ;  and  thousands  of 
years  cannot  part  us  from  our  kin  across  the  ages,  or  sever 
the  readers  of  these  words — who  daily  weep  over  an  often- 
dropt  ideal — from  that  son  of  Isaac,  who,  nearly  drowned  in 
the  seas  of  his  own  craft  and  cunning,  at  length  emerged  a 
new  man,  and  a  prince  with  God. 

There  are  many  reasons  which  invest  this  story  with 
absorbing  interest : — 

I.  JACOB  WAS  THE  FATHER  OF  THE  JEWISH  RACE,  AND 
A  TYPICAL  JEW. 

The  Jews  called  themselves  by  the  name  of  Jacob ;  and 
surnamed  themselves  by  the  name  of  Israel  (Isa.  xliv.  5). 
God  calls  them  children  of  Israel.  We  call  them 
Israelites.  We  speak  of  Jacob,  rather  than  Abraham,  as 
the  founder  of  the  people  to  which  he  gave  his  name; 
because,  though  Abraham  was  their  ancestor,  yet  he  was 
not  so  exclusively.  He  is  the  founder  of  a  yet  richer, 
mightier  line.  The  wild  son  of  the  desert  claims  him  as 
father  equally  with  the  bargain-loving  Jew.  Nor  is  that  all. 
We  Gentiles  have  reason  to  be  proud  to  trace  back  our 
lineage  to  the  first  great  Hebrew,  the  man  who  crossed  over* 
and  whom  God  designated  as  His  friend.  He  is  the  father 

*  The  word  "Hebrew,"  according  to  the  generally-accepted  inter- 
pretation,  signifies  the  man  -who  had  crossed  the  river-flood- -the  man 
who  c?me  from  beyond  the  Euphrates.  (See  Stanley's/™™*  Church,  \. 


JACOB,    THE    TYPICAL  JEW.  11 

of  all  who  believe  :  not  of  the  circumcision  only;  but  of  those 
who  walk  in  the  steps  of  the  faith  which  he  had,  even 
before  he  was  circumcised  (Rom.  iv.  12).  We  go  to  make' 
up  the  sands  on  the  shore  and  the  stars  of  the  heavens, 
which  he  saw  in  the  visions  of  God  (Gen.  xxii.  17). 

But  Jacob  is  the  typical  Jew.  His  life  is  the  epitome  of 
that  wonderful  people,  who  are  found  in  every  country  and 
belong  to  none ;  who  supply  us  with  our  loftiest  religious 
literature,  and  are  yet  a  by-word  for  their  craft,  their  sche 
ming,  and  their  love  of  money  ;  who  have  supplied  us  with 
our  highest  ideals  of  nobility,  and  our  lowest  types  of 
villainy ;  who  have  played  so  great  a  part  in  the  history  of 
the  past,  and  are  only  waiting  now  for  the  final  catastrophe 
which  is  to  replace  them  in  the  van  of  the  world's  progress. 

No  thoughtful  man  can  ignore  this  wonderful  people. 
Their  history  is,  without  doubt,  the  key  to  the  complica 
tions  of  modern  politics ;  and  it  may  be  that  their  redemp 
tion  is  to  be  the  fruit  of  that  mighty  travail,  which  is 
beginning  to  convulse  all  peoples,  announced  as  it  is,  by 
throes  of  earthquake  and  the  rumours  of  war. 

If  we  can  understand  the  life  of  Jacob,  we  can  under 
stand  the  history  of  his  people.  The  extremes  which 
startle  us  in  them  are  all  in  him.  Like  them,  he  is  the 
most  successful  schemer  of  his  times  ;  and,  like  them,  he 
has  that  deep  spirituality,  that  far-seeing  faith,  which  are  the 
grandest  of  all  qualities,  and  make  a  man  capable  of  the 
highest  culture  that  a  human  spirit  can  receive.  Like  them, 
he  spends  the  greatest  part  of  his  life  in  exile,  and  amid 
trying  conditions  of  toil  and  sorrow ;  and,  like  them,  he  is 
inalienably  attached  to  that  dear  land,  his  only  hold  on 
which  was  by  the  promise  of  God  and  the  graves  of  the 
heroic  dead. 


12  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

But  Jacob's  character  was  purified  by  tremendous  dis 
cipline.  The  furnace  into  which  he  was  cast  was  heated 
one  seven  times  more  than  it  is  wont  to  be  heated  for 
ordinary  men.  He  stands  among  the  peers  in  the  kingdom 
of  sorrow ;  and  through  it  all  he  passed  into  a  peerage  of 
moral  and  spiritual  power,  which  made  the  mightiest 
monarch  of  his  times  bend  eagerly  for  a  blessing  from 
his  trembling  hand.  Through  such  discipline  his  people 
have  been  passing  for  centuries ;  and  surely,  before  its 
searching  fires,  the  baser  elements  of  their  natures  will 
be  expelled,  until  they  recognize  the  true  Joseph  of  their 
seed — who  has  sent  them  many  generous  gifts ;  whom  yet 
they  have  not  known ;  but  towards  whom  they  are  certainly 
being  brought.  Then  shall  they  share  His  glory  (Gen.  xlv. 
13,  1 8);  and  they  shall  be  amongst  many  people,  "as  a 
dew  from  the  Lord  "  (Micah  v.  7) ;  yea,  in  them  shall  be 
fulfilled  the  ancient  promise,  "  I  will  bless  thee  ;  and  thou 
shalt  be  a  blessing  "  (Gen.  xii.  2). 

II.  JACOB  ALSO  HAS  so  MANY  POINTS  OF  CONTACT 
WITH  OURSELVES. 

Newman  has  said  truly,  "Abraham  was  a  hero;  Jacob 
was  a  plain  man  dwelling  in  tents.  Abraham  we  feel  to  be 
above  ourselves  ;  Jacob  like  ourselves.  \Ve  no  longer  stand 
in  the  unclouded  golden  dawn  of  the  patriarchal  age  ;  it  is 
overcast  with  clouds,  and  is  more  like  our  own  chequered 
life." 

His  failings  speak  to  us.  He  takes  advantage  of  his 
brother  when  hard  pressed  with  hunger.  He  deceives  his 
father.  He  meets  Laban's  guile  with  guile.  He  thinks  to 
buy  himself  out  of  his  trouble  with  Esau.  He  mixes,  in 
a  terrible  mingle-mangle,  religion  and  worldly  policy.  His 


HIS  EXPERIENCE,    AND   OURS.  13 

children  grow  up  to  hatred,  violence,  and  murder.  He 
cringes  before  the  distant  Egyptian  governor,  and  sends  him 
a  present.  Mean,  crafty  and  weak,  are  the  least  terms  we 
can  apply  to  him.  But,  alas !  who  is  there  that  does  not 
feel  the  germs  of  this  harvest  to  be  within  his  own  breast, 
hidden  there  as  seed-germs  in  a  mummy-case,  and  only 
waiting  for  favourable  conditions  to  ripen  them  to  the  same 
disastrous  growth.  "  There  goes  myself,  but  for  the  grace 
of  God." 

His  aspirations  speak  to  us.  We  too,  have  our  angel- 
haunted  dreams,  and  make  our  vows,  when  we  leave  home.  ' 
We,  too,  count  hard  work  a  trifle,  when  inspired  by  all- 
mastering  love.  We,  too,  cling  in  a  paroxysm  of  yearning 
to  the  departing  angels,  that  they  should  bless  us  ere  they 
go.  We,  too,  get  back  to  our  Bethels,  and  bury  our  idols 
We,  too,  confess  ourselves  pilgrims  and  strangers  on  the 
earth.  We,  too,  recognize  the  shepherd  care  of  God 
(Gen.  xlviii.  15).  We,  too,  wait  for  God's  salvation  (Gen. 
xlix.  18). 

His  sorrows  speak  to  us.  In  every  life  there  is  a 
leaving  home  to  go  forth  alone  ;  and  a  weary  struggle  for 
existence ;  and  a  limp  which  reminds  us  of  some  awful 
crisis ;  and  an  Allon-bachuth  (an  oak  of  weeping,  Gen. 
xxxv.  8)  ;  and  a  lonely  grave  on  the  way  to  Ephrath,  which 
holds  some  priceless  jewel-case  ;  and  a  lost  Joseph  ;  and 
the  grey  hairs  of  sorrow.  And  we  have  mourned  over 
hopes,  which  have  mocked  us  with  their  non-fulfilment ; 
"I  have  not  attained"  (Gen.  xlvii.  9). 

What  a  comfort  it  is  to  find  that  the  Bible  saints,  who 
now  shine  as  stars  in  the  firmament  of  heaven,  were  men  of 
like  passions  with  ourselves  !  They  were  not  always  saints  : 
they  sinned,  and  murmured,  and  rebelled — as  we  do. 


14  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

Heaven's  rarest  blades  were  not  wrought  of  finer  metal  than 
that  which  is  within  our  constitution.  God's  choicest 
vessels  were  not  turned  from  superior  earth  to  that  of  which 
we  are  made.  The  jewels  which  now  lie  at  the  foundation 
of  the'  new  Jerusalem  were  once  obscure,  un-named  men  of 
no  finer  texture  than  ourselves.  Look  to  the  quarry  whence 
they  were  hewn,  and  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  they  were 
digged  ;  and  say  if  there  was  much  to  choose  between  their 
origin  and  your  own.  And  then,  take  heart;  for  if  God  were 
able  to  take  up  such  men  as  Jacob,  and  Simon  Bar-Jona, 
and  make  of  them  princes  and  kings,  surely  He  can  do  as 
much  for  you.  The  discipline  may  be  keen  as  fire ;  but 
the  result  shall  be  glorious :  and  all  eternity  shall  ring  with 
the  praises  of  Him  who  raises  up  the  poor  out  of  the 
dust,  and  lifts  up  the  beggar  from  the  dunghill,  and  makes 
them  kings  and  priests  unto  God. 

III.  IN  JACOB  WE  CAN  TRACE  THE  WORKINGS  OF  DIVINE 
LOVE. 

"  Jacob  have  I  loved  "  (Mai.  i.  2).  It  was  pre-natal  love. 
Before  the  child  was  born,  it  was  the  object  of  God's  love 
(Rom.  ix.  u).  In  God's  heart  all  his  members  were 
written,  when  as  yet  there  was  none  of  them.  Though  God 
forecasted  his  disposition  and  habits,  yet  He  loved  him.  It 
is  ever  sweet  to  rest  on  a  love  which  is  dated  not  in  time 
but  eternity ;  because  one  feels  that  as  God's  love  did  not 
originate  in  any  unforeseen  flash  of  excellence  in  us,  so  it  will 
not  be  turned  away  by  any  unexpected  outbreak  of  depravity. 
It  did  not  begin  because  of  what  we  were ;  and  it  will  con 
tinue  in  spite  of  whatVe  are. 

It  was  fervent  love.  \  So  strong  that,  in  comparison,  the 
love  which  shone  around>Esau  might  be  almost  termed  hatred 


DISCIPLINARY  LOVE.  I  5 

(Rom.  ix.  13).  For  God  loved  Esau  as  he  loves  all  men. 
He  hates  nothing  that  He  has  made.  But  there  were  as 
many  degrees  of  temperature  between  His  love  to  Jacob 
and  that  to  Esau,  as  there  are  in  human  hearts  between  love 
and  hate.  Sometimes  in  an  early  morning  the  moon  shines 
in  the  same  sky  as  the  sun — her  beams  still  fall  on  all  things ; 
but  one  might  almost  assert  that  she  did  not  shine,  by  reason 
of  the  brilliance  of  his  beams.  So  was  it  with  these  two 
men.  And  who  shall  find  fault  ?  There  must  be  degrees 
in  the  love  of  God.  Was  there  not  one  disciple  "whom 
Jesus  loved"?  (See  also  Matt.  x.  37  and  Luke  xiv.  26.) 

It  was  a  disciplinary  love.  We  have  low  thoughts  of  love. 
We  can  only  count  that  as  love  which  caresses,  and  soothes, 
and  says  sweet  things,  and  makes  of  itself  a  shield  so  that 
no  rough  wind  may  breathe  on  us.  We  have  no  notion  of 
a  love  that  can  say,  "  No " ;  that  can  use  the  rod,  and 
scourge,  and  fire ;  that  can  sustain  the  long  discipline  by 
which  the  mean  and  false  and  evil  elements  are  driven  out 
of  the  beloved  soul.  But  such  is  the  love  of  God.  "  The 
grace  of  God  hath  appeared,  bringing  salvation  to  all  men, 
instructing  us"  (disciplining  us,  Titus  li.  12,  R.V.).  So  it 
came  to  Jacob. 

If  we  had  been  asked  to  tell  which  of  these  two  men  was 
Heaven's  favourite,  we  should,  in  all  likelihood,  have  selected 
the  wrong  one. 

Here  stands  Esau,  the  shaggy,  broad-shouldered,  red- 
haired  huntsman,  equipped  with  bow  and  arrows,  full  of 
generous  impulse,  affectionate  to  his  aged  father,  forgiving 
to  the  brother  who  had  done  him  such  grievous  wrong.  He 
became  a  chieftain  of  renown,  and  the  ancestor  of  a  princely 
line  (Gen.  xxxvi.).  He  was  happy  in  his  wives  and  children  ; 
we  read  of  no  such  outbreaks  as  embittered  Jacob's  lot.  He 


1 6  ISRAEL:  A    PRINCE    WITH   GOD. 

was  so  rich  that  he  could  make  light  of  Jacob's  presents ; 
and  so  powerful  that  Jacob's  company  was  helpless  in  his 
hand.  His  people  were  happily  settled  in  their  rich 
territories;  whilst  the  children  of  Jacob  were  groaning  in 
Egyptian  bondage.  And,  as  we  consider  him,  we  are  inclined 
to  imitate  the  words  of  Samuel,  when  Jesse's  eldest  son 
entered  his  presence,  and  say  :  "  Surely,  the  Lord's  anointed 
is  before  Him  ! " 

There,  on  the  other  hand,  is  Jacob.  In  his  young  man 
hood,  an  exile  from  his  father's  house.  In  his  mature 
manhood,  a  hireling,  in  the  employ  of  a  kinsman.  In  his 
declining  years,  worn  by  anxiety  and  trouble.  In  his  old 
age,  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land.  Few  and  evil  were  the 
days  of  the  years  of  his  pilgrimage.  Yet  he  was  the  beloved 
of  God ;  and  it  was  because  of  that  especial  love  that  he 
was  exposed  to  such  searching  discipline.  "Whom  the 
Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom 
He  receiveth  "  (Heb.  xii.  6). 

Earthly  prosperity  is  no  sign  of  the  special  love  of 
Heaven;  nor  are  sorrow  and  care  any  mark  of  God's 
disfavour,  but  the  reverse.  "Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her 
sister,  and  Lazarus.  When  He  had  heard,  therefore,  that  he 
was  sick,  He  abode  where  He  was,"  and  let  Lazarus  die. 
God's  love  is  robust,  and  true,  and  eager— not  for  our 
comfort,  but  for  our  lasting  blessedness;  it  is  bent  on 
achieving  this,  and  it  is  strong  enough  to  bear  misrepre 
sentation  and  rebuke  in  its  attempts  to  attune  our  spirits 
to  higher  music.  It  therefore  comes  instructing  us. 

Let  us  enter  ourselves  as  pupils  in  the  school  of  God's 
love.  Let  us  lay  aside  our  own  notions  of  the  course  of 
study;  let  us  submit  ourselves  to  be  led  and  taught;  let  us 
be  prepared  for  any  lessons  that  may  be  given  from  the 


"ELECTION."  17 

black-board  of  sorrow ;  let  us  be  so  assured  of  the  inexhaust 
ible  tenacity  of  His  love,  as  to  dare  to  trust  Him,  though  He 
slay  us.  And  let  us  look  forward  to  that  august  moment 
when  He  will  give  us  a  reason  for  all  life's  discipline,  with  a 
smile  that  shall  thrill  our  souls  with  ecstasy,  and  constrain 
sorrow  and  sighing  to  flee  away  for  ever. 

IV.  JACOB'S  LIFE  GIVES  A  CLUE  TO  THE  DOCTRINE  OF 
ELECTION. 

There  was  election  here.  The  Apostle  Paul  uses  it  to 
illustrate  that  mysterious  truth  (Rom.  ix.  n).  And  it  is 
obviously  so.  Jacob  was  the  younger  son ;  and  his  life  is  as 
much  a  Gospel  for  younger  sons  as  is  that  matchless  parable 
of  the  prodigal.  The  children  were  not  born  when  God 
foretold  and  fixed  their  destiny. 

It  is  impossible  to  ignore  election ;  it  has  been  truly  said 
to  be  the  key  to  the  order  of  all  nature  and  history.  "  There 
are  elect  angels ;  elect  stars ;  elect  races  of  animals ;  elect 
flowers  and  fruits ;  elect  human  souls.  Nowhere  do  we 
meet  with  equality,  uniformity,  the  monotony  of  a  dull  level. 
Everywhere  things  and  beings,  with  superior  endowment  to 
other  things  and  beings,  seem  made  to  head  them,  and  sweep 
them  along  in  the  orbit  of  their  motion  by  the  attraction  of 
the  superior  on  the  inferior  spheres.  One  star  differeth 
from  another  star  in  glory;  some  flash  forth  resplendent, 
regal  gems  in  the  diadem  of  night,  while  others  are  scattered 
faint  and  dim  like  seed-pearls  on  her  dusky  robe." 

So  is  it  with  races.  Some,  like  the  Anglo-Saxon,  stand 
forth  in  the  foremost  rank,  the  pioneers  in  civilization,  the 
easy  masters  of  the  world.  Others,  like  the  Hottentot,  drag 
on  a  dull  existence,  which,  when  at  high-water  mark,  is  little 
removed  above  the  brutes  that  share  with  them  the  forest 
glades, 


1 8  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

So  is  it  with  souls.  Some  men  are  evidently  born  to  be 
the  leaders,  teachers,  masters  of  mankind.  Thus  it  was 
with  Jeremiah  the  prophet  (Jer.  i.  5) ;  with  Cyrus  the  con 
queror  (Isa.  xlv.  i,  4) ;  and  John  the  Baptist  (Luke  i.  1 7)— and 
these  are  types  of  myriads  more. 

But  to  what  are  these  elect?  To  comfort,  ease,  success  ? 
Nay,  for  these  things  fall  to  the  lot  rather  of  the  Esaus  than 
the  Jacobs.  The  elect  of  God  seem  chosen  to  stand  in  the 
front  rank,  and  bear  the  brunt  of  the  storms  of  sorrow,  pain, 
and  care. 

Are  they,  then,  elect  to  personal  salvation  ?  Many  of  the 
cases  in  which  the  words  occur  do  not  demand  this  as  their 
exclusive  meaning.  Indeed,  Scripture  does  not  certainly 
exclude  Esau  himself  from  a  share  in  Abraham's  bosom.  He 
lost  his  birthright,  truly,  and  he  could  not  recover  it  by 
strong  cryings  and  tears ;  but  the  loss  of  his  birthright  did 
not  necessarily  entail  the  loss  of  his  soul. 

But  may  we  not  hold  that  election  refers  largely,  if  not 
primarily,  to  the  service  which  the  elect  are  qualified  to 
render  to  their  fellows  throughout  all  coming  time? 
They  are  elect,  not  for  themselves,  or  for  the  sake  of 
their  own  future;  but  rather  for  the  sake  of  the  work 
which  their  position  of  privilege  may  enable  them  to  do  for 
mankind. 

This,  certainly,  has  been  one  result  of  the  election  of 
Jacob  and  his  people.  They  were  elect  to  be  the  spiritual 
leaders  and  teachers  of  mankind ;  to  furnish  us  with  a 
matchless  religious  literature ;  to  provide  a  suitable  platform 
on  which  the  Saviour  of  the  world  should  appear,  and  from 
which  He  might  influence  the  world.  Not  for  the  sake  of 
their  own  comfort,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  dark  and  dying 
world,  God  gave  them  light  and  life,  and  sustained  them  in 


"  WHOSOEVER."  19 

existence  against  overwhelming  odds,  and  stored  in  them 
streams  of  electric  force,  as  in  some  mighty  battery. 

This,  then,  will  explain  also  the  terrific  discipline  through 
which  they  passed.  It  was  needed,  not  for  their  sakes 
alone,  but  for  the  race  they  were  destined  to  serve ;  that  they 
might  be  set  free  from  deteriorating  influences,  and  stand 
forth  as  God's  chosen  vessels,  brimming  with  blessing  for 
the  world. 

Seeking  souls  need  not  then  concern  themselves  with 
this  mysterious  subject.  Outside  the  house  of  salvation, 
there  is  no  word  but  this — "  whosoever."  When  once  we 
have  crossed  the  threshold  and  looked  around,  we  may  find 
some  such  text  as  that  with  which  Peter  begins  his  first 
epistle ;  and  we  may  find  that  God  had  some  purpose  of 
mercy  to  others,  when  He  first  drew  us  to  Himself. 

But  this  and  many  other  similar  questions  will  receive 
new  and  beautiful  illustrations,  as  we  pursue  our  studies 
of  Jacob's  life. 


B  2 


II. 
t  tlje 

GENESIS   XXV. 


"  We  shape  ourselves  the  joy  or  fear 

Of  which  the  coming  life  is  made  ; 
And  fill  our  future's  atmosphere 
With  sunshine  or  with  shade. 
The  tissue  of  the  life  to  be 

We  weave  with  colours  all  our  own  ; 
And  in  the  fields  of  Destiny 
We  reap  as  we  have  sown.  " 

WHITTIER. 

IROTHERS  were  these  two  men,  yes,  twin  brothers; 
but  brothers  could  not  differ  more  widely.  Before 
their  birth  their  difference  was  foretold.  At  their  birth  it 
was  evident.  From  their  birth  it  began  to  broaden  and 
increase.  The  linked  hands  of  the  brothers,  reaching 
across  the  tiny  rill  of  their  earliest  infancy,  were  soon 
parted,  as  the  stream  of  life  widened  between  them,  and 
they  passed  to  their  destiny  along  the  opposite  banks. 

They  differed  in  appearance.  Esau  was  rough,  ruddy, 
and  hairy.  He  would  give  the  impression  of  great  bodily 
strength  ;  capacity  for  vast  physical  fatigue  ;  and  a  tempera 
ment  which  would  incline  him  to  exciting  and  hazardous 
pursuits.  Jacob  was  the  reverse  :  smooth  in  skin  ;  dark  in 


THE   TWO  BROTHERS.  21 

feature ;  slight  in  build ;  no  match  for  his  burly  brother  in 
physical  force,  but  more  than  his  match  in  guile. 

They  differed  in  pursuits.  Esau  was  a  cunning  hunter, 
a  man  of  the  field  and  chase.  Had  he  been  living  now, 
he  would  have  been  foremost  in  all  manly,  daring,  out-door 
sports.  Nor  would  it  be  difficult  to  find  his  duplicate 
to-day  amongst  our  high-born  youth  :  with  handsome  face, 
generous  disposition,  and  open  hand ;  quick  to  resent,  and 
quick  to  forgive ;  perfect  in  dress ;  polished  in  manner ; 
a  rare  shot,  a  splendid  rider,  an  expert  in  all  manly  exercise; 
and  certain  to  marry  well — as  Esau  did — and  found  a  strong 
and  noble  house.  Jacob,  on  the  other  hand,  loved  the 
home  life.  The  violent  exercise  and.  hazards  for  which 
Esau  pined,  as  an  imprisoned  eagle  for  its  rocky,  storm- 
beaten  crags,  had  no  fascination  for  him.  And  while  Esau 
was  away,  he  was  content  to  dwell  among  the  flocks  and 
herds  of  the  camp ;  content  with  the  peaceful  occupations 
of  an  uneventful  pastoral  life.  Each  man  to  his  taste  ! 

They  differed  most  in  character.  There  is  much  in  Esau 
which  makes  us  like  him  ;  and  we  should  have  been  certainly 
more  quickly  attracted  to  him  than  to  his  brother.  If  he 
was  impetuous,  he  was  generous.  If  he  was  rash,  he  was 
frank.  If  he  was  singularly  wanting  in  religious  fervour,  he 
was  a  good  son.  If  his  heart  doted  on  the  pleasures  of  the 
chase,  he  was  splendid  company,  and  every  inch  a  man. 
But,  for  all  this,  he  was  decidedly  sensual — Scripture  calls 
him  profane — i.e.,  he  was  a  slave  to  his  senses  ;  he  hailed 
anything  that  would  thrill  him  with  pleasant  though  transient 
excitement;  he  was  willing  to  purchase  pleasure  at  any 
price,  though  he  had  to  pawn  the  most  priceless  jewels  of 
his  spirit ;  he  was,  indeed,  too  enamoured  with  the  claims 
of  the  passing  hour  to  care  for  unseen  realities;  or  to  seek 


22  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  COD. 

the  eternal  harvest  which  lies  beyond  the  bitter  sowing 
times  of  patience,  and  waiting,  and  pain.  Alas,  that  he 
should  have  had  such  a  host  of  imitators  ! 

Jacob  was  a  "  plain"  man  (a  "  quiet"  man,  R.V.  marg.}; 
but  under  that  calm  exterior  there  were  depths  and  depths. 
Amid  all  the  craft  and  duplicity  of  his  nature,  there  was 
immense  capacity  for  religious  fervour  and  religious  faith. 
He  could  understand,  as  Esau  never  could,  the  meaning  of 
the  birthright,  with  all  its  spiritual  glow  and  glory.  He 
could  draw  aside  the  veil  of  the  unseen,  and  weigh  its 
promises,  and  compare  its  treasures  with  the  shows  of  earth. 
He  could  dream  angel-haunted  dreams,  that  threw  a  mystic 
ladder  over  the  abyss  of  space,  linking  all  worlds.  And 
while  Esau  was  occupied  with  pleasure,  Jacob  would  feel 
within  him  the  strange  stirrings  of  a  nature  which  could  not 
be  satisfied  with  anything  within  the  narrow  limits  of  his 
tents ;  but  which  yearned  for  that  spiritual  heritage  which 
was  summed  up  in  the  word  "  birthright." 

Let  us  consider — the  Birthright ;  the  Barter ;  and  the 
Bitter  Cry. 

I.  THE  BIRTHRIGHT. 

What  was  it  ?  It  was  not  worldly  prosperity  ;  for  though 
Esau  lost  it,  he  had  an  abundant  fortune :  four  hundred  armed 
retainers  followed  at  his  heel ;  the  great  country  of  Edom 
owned  his  sway  ;  till,  after  a  life  of  splendid  and  unbroken 
prosperity,  he  went  down  to  the  grave  in  peace  and  a  good 
old  age.  There  is  nothing  in  the  brief  record  which  we 
have  of  him  to  make  us  think  that  he  lived  a  broken  or 
disappointed  life.  All  that  this  world  could  give  was  his. 
The  sunshine  of  worldly  prosperity  touched  with  golden 
light  all  the  wavelets  that  broke  upon  the  beach  of  his  life. 


WHAT  WAS   THE  BIRTHRIGHT?  2$ 

The  exceeding  bitter  wail  of  momentary  disappointment 
was  soon  forgotten  in  his  satisfaction  at  having  lost  nothing 
which  he  really  cared  for,  while  so  much  was  still  left  to  him 
that  his  soul  loved.  Whatever  the  birthright  was,  it 
evidently  was  not  worldly  prosperity ;  for  of  this,  Esau,  who 
lost  it,  probably  had  more  than  Jacob,  who  won  it. 

It  was  not  immunity  from  sorrow.  When  Jacob  had 
secured  it,  it  seemed  as  if  the  mystic  box  of  Pandora  had 
been  opened  in  his  home ;  for  every  human  ill  was  let  free 
into  his  life.  Staff  in  hand,  he  tears  himself  from  home, 
and  seeks  a  distant  country.  A  hireling  in  a  kinsman's 
house,  he  spends  the  best  years  of  manhood's  prime.  Halt 
ing  on  his  thigh,  he  bows  before  Esau ;  buries  his  favourite 
Rachel;  chafes  over  the  open  sores  of  his  home  life;  is 
bereaved  of  his  children ;  and  moans  that  the  days  of  the 
years  of  his  pilgrimage  have  been  evil  and  few.  Few  have 
trodden  a  more  rugged  path,  or  bound  about  their  brows  a 
crown  more  set  with  thorns.  It  was  a  sad  and  weary  life 
that  breathed  itself  out  in  that  hieroglyphed  chamber  in  the 
land  of  the  Pharaohs,  when  for  the  last  time  he  gathered  his 
feet  into  his  bed,  and  was  gathered  unto  his  people.  What 
ever  the  birthright  was,  it  evidently  was  not  freedom  from 
pain  and  grief;  for  of  these,  Jacob,  who  won  it,  had  infinitely 
more  than  Esau,  who  lost  it. 

The  birthright  was  a  spiritual  heritage.  It  gave  the  right 
— which  ever  belonged  to  its  possessor — of  being  the  priest  of 
the  family  or  clan.  It  carried  the  privilege  of  being  the 
depositary  and  communicator  of  the  Divine  secrets.  It 
constituted  a  link  in  the  line  of  descent  by  which  the  Messiah 
was  to  be  born  into  the  world.  The  right  of  wielding  power 
with  God  and  men ;  the  right  of  catching  up  and  handing 
on — as  in  the  old  Greek  race — the  torch  of  Messianic  hope; 


24  ISRAEL:   A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

the  right  of  heirship  to  the  promises  of  the  covenant  made 
to  Abraham ;  the  right  of  standing  among  the  spiritual 
aristocracy  of  mankind ;  the  right  of  being  a  pilgrim  of 
eternity,  owning  no  foot  of  earth,  because  all  heaven  was 
held  in  fee — this,  and  more  than  this,  was  summed  up  in 
the  possession  of  the  birthright. 

It  was  a  fair  heritage  ;  but  a  fairer  one  is  the  birthright  of 
every  reader  of  these  lines.  You  have  been  born  into  a 
world  which  has  been  trodden  by  the  feet  and  wet  by  the 
tears  of  the  Son  of  God.  You  have  been  born  of  a  race 
whose  redemption  has  been  purchased  at  the  exceeding 
great  price  of  His  precious  blood.  You  have  been  born  of 
a  nature  which  has  been  taken  up  by  Him,  who  passed  by 
that  of  angels.  And  such  a  birth  carries  with  it  rights, 
given  by  the  matchless  grace  of  God,  which  as  much  out 
shine  the  birthrights  of  the  old  world,  as  the  regalia  of 
England  does  the  crown  of  Alfred. 

Your  birth  gives  you  the  right  to  be  translated  from  the 
kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son  ; 
the  right  to  claim  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  second  birth  ;  the 
right  to  be  forgiven  and  saved ;  the  right  to  become  the 
sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty ;  the  right  to 
stand  side  by  side  with  the  Son  in  His  glory,  joint-heirs 
with  Him  of  all  that  is  His  ;  the  right  to  be  more  than 
conquerors  over  all  the  power  of  your  foes  ;  the  right  to  be 
delivered  from  sin,  and  to  join  the  jubilant  throng  that 
stands  on  the  shores  of  the  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire. 

This  may  be  your  glorious  heritage.  It  cannot  be  pur 
chased,  or  won  by  might  of  arm.  It  is  reserved  for  those  only 
who,  having  been  born  of  woman,  have  also  been  born  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  It  may  be  amid  tears  and  storm  that  the 
heart  will  first  realize  its  right  to  participate  in  this 


THE   BIRTHRIGHT  SOLD.  2$ 

inheritance ;  yet,  even  then,  the  thought  and  hope  of  its 
future  heritage  will  cheer  the  spirit  when  passing  through  the 
stern  discipline  of  life,  on  its  way  to  the  promised  rest.  That 
hope  shall  not  be  ashamed.  And  surely  it  will  he  the  stand 
ing  marvel  of  eternity  that  a  destiny  so  bright  was  ever  put 
within  the  reach  of  the  fallen  children  of  this  sin-cursed 
earth. 

II.   THE  BARTER. 

One  day  Jacob  was  standing  over  a  caldron  ot  savoury 
pottage,  made  of  those  red  lentiles  which  to  the  present  day 
form  a  dish  highly  relished  in  Syria  and  in  Egypt.  The 
appetising  odour  soon  filled  the  air,  enticing  enough  for  a 
full,  to  say  nothing  of  a  hungry  man.  At  that  moment,  who 
should  come  in  but  Esau,  faint  with  hunger.  He  did  not 
know  the  name  :  his  active  life  left  him  little  time  for  such 
trifles  as  domestic  cookery ;  but  the  sight  and  smell  were 
quite  enough  to  convince  him  that  Jacob's  preparations 
would  be  marvellously  suitable  to  stay  the  cravings  of  his 
hunter's  hunger.  "  Give  me  some  of  that  red — that  red," 
he  cried  impatiently. 

Now  Jacob  was  not  wholly  a  selfish  man;  but  it  suddenly 
occurred  to  him  that  this  would  be  a  good  opportunity  of 
winning  the  right  to  be  the  spiritual  leader  of  the  clan.  So, 
knowing  well  how  little  his  brother  counted  on  his  rights,  he 
made  the  extraordinary  proposal  to  exchange  the  mess  of 
pottage  for  the  birthright. 

Esau  closed  with  the  proposal.  "  Behold,"  said  the  bluff 
hunter,  "I  am  on  the  point  to  die;  and  what  profit  shall  this 
birthright  do  to  me  ?  "  On  the  one  hand  was  the  birthright 
— a  myth,  so  far  as  he  could  see,  a  vision  of  the  far  future, 
wholly  unseen  and  spiritual.  On  the  other  hand  was  this 


26  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

pottage,  right  before  him,  and  very  tempting  to  his  hunger. 
So  he  made  over  his  birthright  to  Jacob.  And  Jacob  gave 
him  bread  and  pottage  of  lentiles;  and  he  did  eat  and  drink, 
and  went  his  way — not,  I  think,  without  some  qualms  of 
conscience  :  and  thus  Esau  despised  his  birthright. 

We  cannot  exonerate  either  of  these  men  from  blame. 
Jacob  was  not  only  a  traitor  to  his  brother,  but  he  was 
faithless  towards  his  God.  Had  it  not  been  distinctly 
whispered  in  his  mother's  ear  that  the  elder  of  the  brothers 
should  serve  the  younger  ?  Had  not  the  realization  of  his 
loftiest  ambition  been  pledged  by  One  whose  faithfulness 
had  been  the  theme  of  repeated  talks  with  Abraham,  who 
had  survived  during  the  first  eighteen  years  of  his  young 
life  ?  He  might  have  been  well  assured  that  what  the  God 
of  Abraham  had  promised  He  was  able  also  to  perform ; 
and  would  perform,  without  the  aid  of  his  own  miserable 
schemes.  But  how  hard  is  it  for  us  to  quietly  wait  for  God  ! 
We  are  too  apt  to  outrun  Him ;  to  forestall  the  quiet  unfold 
ing  of  His  purposes ;  and  to  snatch  at  promised  blessings 
before  they  are  ripe. 

And  as  for  Esau,  we  can  never  forget  the  beacon  words  of 
Scripture :  "  Look  diligently,  lest  there  be  any  profane 
person,  as  Esau,  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birth 
right  "  (Heb.  xii.  16).  Yet  let  us,  in  condemning  him  across 
the  ages,  look  close  at  home.  How  many  are  there  amongst 
ourselves,  born  into  the  world  with  splendid  talents ;  dowried 
with  unusual  powers  ;  inheritors  of  noble  names ;  heirs  to  vast 
estates ;  gifted  with  keys  to  unlock  any  of  the  many  doors  to 
name,  and  fame,  and  usefulness — who  yet  fling  away  all  these 
possibilities  of  blessing  and  blessedness,  for  one  brief  plunge 
into  the  Stygian  pool  of  selfish  and  sensual  indulgence ! 

The  strongest  and  bravest  men  in  build  and  muscle  are 


1 '  WA  TCH  AND   PR  A  Y  !  "  27 

often  the  weakest  in  resisting  the  appeals  of  momentary 
passion.  Esau  is  mastered  by  the  fragrance  of  a  mess  of 
pottage ;  Samson  by  the  charms  of  a  Philistine  girl ;  Peter 
by  the  question  of  a  servant.  There  is  no  strength  apart 
from  the  strong  Son  of  God. 

And  the  appeals  to  sense  come  oftenest  when  we  are 
least  expecting  them.  When  we  say,  Peace  and  safety, 
then  sudden  destruction  comes.  The  foe  creeps  through 
the  postern  gate.  The  arrow  penetrates  the  joints  of  the 
harness.  The  moment  of  crisis  is  the  moment  when  we 
come  in  from  the  dangers  of  the  chase  to  the  home  which 
promised  us  immunity  from  the  attack.  "  Watch  ye,  there 
fore,  and  pray  always ;  that  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to 
escape  all  these  things." 

These  appeals,  moreover,  come  in  the  most  trivial  things. 
One  mess  of  pottage ;  one  glass  of  drink ;  one  moment's 
unbridled  passion ;  one  afternoon's  saunter ;  a  question  and 
an  answer ;  a  movement  or  a  look.  It  is  in  such  small 
things — small  as  the  angle  at  which  railway  lines  diverge 
from  each  other  to  east  and  west — that  great  alternatives  are 
offered  and  great  decisions  made.  When  we  fail  in  some 
such  thing,  we  often  comfort  ourselves  with  the  reflection 
that  we  could  and  would  do  right  in  some  all-important 
crisis.  We  cannot  pray  in  a  bedroom  ;  but  we  could  burn 
at  a  stake.  We  cannot  speak  to  an  individual ;  but  we 
could  preach  at  a  Pentecost.  We  little  understand  ourselves. 
V/e  do  not  see  that  trifles  are  the  truest  test  of  character; 
and  that  if  we  cannot  run  with  footmen,  we  certainly  could 
not  contend  with  horses ;  and  if  we  have  been  wearied  in 
the  land  of  peace,  we  certainly  shall  stand  no  chance  when 
we  are  called  to  battle  with  the  swellings  of  Jordan.  There 
are  no  trifles  in  Christian  living.  Everything  is  great; 


28  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

because  the  mightiest  events  revolve  on  the  smallest  pivots ; 
and  the  greatest  harvests  for  good  and  ill  spring  from  the 
tiniest  seeds. 

Had  we  been  at  Esau's  side,  how  eagerly  should  we  have 
laid  our  hand  upon  his  shoulder,  entreating  him  to  pause 
and  consider,  before  he  bartered  the  spiritual  for  the  physi 
cal  ;  the  eternal  for  the  temporal ;  the  unseen  for  the  seen. 
"  AVill  it  pay  ?"  "  Is  it  wise  ?"  "  Will  you  get  an  equivalent 
for  that  which  you  forfeit  now  for  ever?"  And  such  questions 
are  asked  still  of  all  Esaus  who  are  tempted  to  barter  their 
peace,  their  manhood,  their  heaven,  for  one  mess  of  the 
devil's  pottage.  It  steams.  It  smells  savoury.  It  promises 
to  do  more  good  to  you  than  all  the  Bible  put  together. 
The  tempter  whispers,  "  Thou  shalt  not  surely  die.  Bow 
down  and  worship  me,  and  all  shall  be  thine.  Give  me  that 
which  thou  hast;  and  I  will  give  thee  this  and  much  more." 
Then  it  is  that  a  still  small  voice  asks,  "  What  shall  it  profit 
a  man  if  he  gain  the  world  and  lose  himself?  How  much 
less  will  it  profit  him  to  lose  his  all  for  one  small  mess  of 
pottage,  which  will  only  secure  a  brief  respite  from  the  cra 
vings  of  appetite."  Learn  to  master  appetite  in  Christ's 
strength  ;  this  will  serve  thee  better  far  than  warding  off  its 
urgency  for  a  time,  leaving  it  to  return  with  whetted  hunger, 
like  a  pack  of  wolves  which  have  tasted  blood.  "  Hold  that 
fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown." 

III.   THE  BITTER  CRY. 

When  Esau  saw  that  God  had  taken  him  at  his  word,  and 
had  taken  away  from  him  the  birthright  of  spiritual  primacy, 
"  he  cried  with  an  exceeding  great  and  bitter  cry "  (Gen. 
xxviii.  34,  R.V.)  But  that  cry  came  too  late  to  alter  the 
consequences  of  his  rash  act.  "  He  found  no  place  of 


"NO   PLACE    OF  REPENTANCE."  29 

repentance"  (no  way  to  change  his  father's  decision), 
"  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears." 

"  No  place  of  repentance  !"  On  many  hearts  those  words 
have  rung  the  knell  of  hope.  As  the  heart-broken  sinner 
has  reviewed  a  blighted  past  with  bitter  tears  and  cries,  the 
adversary  of  souls  has  whispered  that  he  has  sinned  too 
deeply  for  repentance,  and  wandered  too  far  to  return ;  and 
he  has  backed  the  insinuation  with  these  terrible  words — 
"  no  place  of  repentance." 

And  is  it  so  ?  Is  it  possible  for  a  soul,  on  this  side  of 
death,  to  reach  a  position  where  tears  and  prayers  will  strike 
against  the  brazen  heavens,  and  rebound,  only  an  echo  ?  It 
cannot  be.  It  is  possible  that  a  man  should  become  too 
callous  and  hard  to  desire  salvation  :  this  is  the  sin  unto 
death ;  this  is  the  sin  that  hath  never  forgiveness ;  and  it  has 
no  forgiveness  because  the  sinner  does  not  desire  or  seek  it. 
But  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  desire  to  repent  and  not 
find  a  ready  help  in  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  im 
possible  for  a  man  to  seek  forgiveness  with  bitter  tears,  and 
not  obtain  it.  It  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  knock  at  the 
door  of  mercy,  and  not  find  it  open  at  last,  though  after  long 
delay  :  "  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven 
unto  men."  In  point  of  fact,  these  desires  and  tears  and 
prayers  are  blessed  symptoms  that  the  work  of  grace  and  for 
giveness  has  begun  within  the  soul.  They  are  not  of  man ; 
or  of  the  will  of  the  flesh  :  but  of  God.  And  when  God  puts 
His  hand  to  the  plough  in  a  human  spirit,  He  never  looks 
back. 

But  the  "repentance"  mentioned  here  is  not  repentance  to 
salvation ;  but  the  power  of  reversing  the  past.  Esau  could 
not  undo  what  he  had  done.  He  had  long  despised 
his  birthright.  That  act  of  surrender  was  not  a  solitary 


30  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

one,  but  the  outcome  of  a  state  of  heart.  It  simply  revealed 
thoughts  that  had  been  long  admitted  guests  in  the  inner 
chamber  of  his  being.  But  when  once  this  temper  had 
taken  effect  in  a  definite  promise,  asseverated  by  an  oath, 
God  held  him  to  it — yea,  nature  and  righteousness  and 
conscience  held  him  to  it  too ;  and  he  could  not  alter  it  by 
his  tears  or  bitter  cries. 

The  sinful  past  is  irrevocable.  Eve  might  bitterly  regret 
her  choice  ;  but  as  she  stood  with  Adam  outside  the  cherub- 
guarded  gate,  with  the  faded  rose  in  her  hand — of  which 
Rabbis  tell  us — her  bitter  regrets  could  not  replace  the  apple 
on  the  tree,  or  reinstate  her  within  the  golden  bowers  of 
Paradise.  Peter  went  out  and  wept  bitterly ;  but  those  tears 
of  uncontrollable  anguish  could  not  recal  the  words  of  de 
nial,  or  blot  from  his  memory  that  look  of  pain.  The  Virgins 
might  beat  their  breasts  in  bitter  self-reproach ;  but  no  com 
plaints,  however  pitiable,  could  reverse  the  decision  of  the 
Bridegroom's  lips. 

We  all  know  this.  We  remember  bursts  of  passion  which 
have  broken  hearts ;  sundered  ties  of  love ;  clouded  sunny 
skies;  withered  hopes;  and  shattered  promising  prospects. 
We  would  give  worlds  to  blot  out  the  record,  and  to 
make  them  as  if  they  had  never  been.  But  it  is  impossible. 
We  cannot  bring  back  the  shadow  on  the  dial.  We  cannot 
reverse  the  writing  of  the  faithful  chronicler.  We  cannot 
find  a  chance  for  altering  the  decisions,  which  had  been 
long  floating  in  solution  in  our  minds,  but  which  have 
had  one  fatal  and  irrevocable  crystallisation  in  word  or  act. 
There  is  no  place  of  repentance,  though  we  seek  it  carefully 
and  with  tears.  You  cannot  undo. 

But  though  the  past  is  irrevocable,  it  is  not  irreparable. 
In  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  our  Lord  said  mournfully  to 


"HE  RESTORETH  MY  SOUL."  31 

the  chosen  three,  "Sleep  on  now,  and  take  your  rest;"  but 
He  instantly  added,  "  Arise  :  let  us  be  going."  In  the  first 
sentence,  He  taught  the  irrevocableness  of  the  past;  they 
might  as  well  sleep,  for  any  good  that  watching  could  now 
do.  But  in  the  second  sentence,  He  taught  that  there  was 
still  a  future  before  them,  with  new  chances,  and  oppor 
tunities,  and  hopes. 

So  shall  it  ever  be.  God  Himself  cannot  undo  the  past. 
But  He  can  and  will  forgive.  He  will  not  mention  the  past ; 
but  give  us  a  fair  fresh  start.  He  will  even  "  restore  the 
years  that  the  canker-worm  has  eaten."  He  will  give  us  new 
opportunities  of  showing  how  truly  we  repent  the  decisions 
of  the  past ;  and  how  loyally  we  desire  to  serve  Him  in  the 
decisions  of  the  future.  He  will  not  even  mention  the  thrice 
denial ;  but  He  will  give  us  three  opportunities  of  saying  how 
much  we  love  Him,  as  He  thrice  bids  us  tend  His  flock. 
"  The  King  is  dead  !" — that  is  the  proclamation  of  the  irre 
vocable  past.  "  Long  live  the  King !" — that  is  the  announce 
ment  of  an  available  future. 


III. 
Stolen 


GENESIS    XXVII. 

"  No  action,  whether  foul  or  fair, 
Is  ever  done,  but  it  leaves  somewhere 
A  record,  written  by  fingers  ghostly 
As  a  blessing,  or  a  curse  ;  and  mostly 
In  the  greater  weakness  or  greater  strength 
Of  the  acts  which  follow  it :  till  at  length 
The  wrongs  of  ages  are  redressed, 
And  the  justice  of  God  made  manifest." 

ANON. 

tN  many  a  picturesque  English  village  there  lies  a  pond 
of  stagnant  water,  which  has  been  there  as  long  as  the 
oldest  inhabitant  can  remember.  It  looks  innocent  enough 
when  the  winds  of  March  sweep  it,  or  the  leaves  of  October 
bestrew  it ;  but  when  it  is  exposed  to  the  scorching  rays  of 
a  summer  sun,  it  pours  forth  volumes  of  poisonous  gases, 
which  had  lurked  unnoticed  in  its  depths,  and  typhoid  fever 
is  sown  in  the  homes  that  cluster  round.  Such  is  the  heart 
of  man.  We  do  not  think,  we  do  not  care  to  know,  how 
much  evil  lies  within.  We  read  with  listless  interest  the 
terrible  photograph  given  by  One  who  could  not  exaggerate 
(Mark  vii.  21) ;  and  attach  a  vague  meaning  to  other  words 
which  characterize  the  human  heart  as  "  desperately  wicked." 
And  yet  we  do  not  feel  so  bad ;  nor  shall  we  truly  verify 


ENDURING   TEMPTATION.  33 

those  words ;  nor  realize  how  evil  our  nature  is  ;  or  what  a 
dying  need  we  have  for  God — until  we  have  been  exposed 
to  some  searching  test,  which  shall  reveal  us  to  ourselves. 

Temptation  is  such  a  test.  There  is  no  sin  in  being 
tempted.  Our  great  High  Priest  was  "  tempted  in  all  points 
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  And  temptation  need  not 
necessarily  lead  to  sin ;  so  long  as  the  steadfast  will,  inspired 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  keeps  the  door  of  the  nature  shut  and 
locked.  Nay,  temptation  is  even  a  blessing  :  "  Blessed  is 
the  man  that  endureth  temptation,"  when  it  leads  a  man  to 
discover  tendencies,  movements,  appetites  within  him — 
unknown  before,  but  against  which  he  must  henceforth  be 
on  his  guard. 

God  our  Father  permits  us  to  be  tempted,  to  lead  us  to 
see  the  hidden  evils  of  our  heart — to  hold  up  a  looking-glass 
before  us,  in  which  we  may  behold  what  manner  of  people 
we  are ;  and  to  make  us  so  sensible  of  our  own  worthlessness 
and  deformity  as  to  drive  us  to  hand  ourselves  over  to  Him, 
to  do  anything  He  may  please,  if  only  we  may  be  delivered 
out  of  this  body  of  death.  To  know  oneself,  and  to  despair 
of  oneself,  is  to  come  within  the  sweep  of  that  gracious 
power,  which  can  fashion  a  temple-column  out  of  a  bruised 
reed ;  and  a  noble  vessel  out  of  a  lump  of  clay ;  and  an 
Israel  out  of  a  Jacob. 

We  need  not  be  at  all  astonished,  then,  to  learn  that 
temptation  was  allowed  to  come  to  Jacob  from  an  unex 
pected  source,  taking  him  unawares.  And  if  you  are  truly 
desirous  of  ascending  the  higher  reaches  of  Christian 
thought  and  life,  you  must  not  be  astonished  if,  in  answer 
to  your  prayer  for  more  grace  and  life,  your  heavenly  Lover 
should  take  some  unexpected  means  of  showing  you  what 

you  are.     So  Newton  found — 

c 


34  ISRAEL;  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

"  I  asked  the  Lord  that  I  might  grow 

In  faith,  and  love,  and  every  grace  ; 
Might  more  of  His  salvation  know, 
And  see  the  glory  of  His  face. 

"  Instead  of  this,  He  made  me  feel 
The  hidden  evils  of  my  heart ; 
And  let  the  angry  powers  of  hell 
Assault  my  soul  in  every  part." 

I.  THE  TEMPTATION  ORIGINATED  IN  A  SENSUOUS 
REQUEST  OF  ISAAC. 

We  sometimes  find  it  hard  to  think  that  the  Isaac  of  this 
chapter  is  the  same  person  as  the  submissive  boy  who  carried 
the  altar-wood  on  his  stalwart  young  shoulders,  and  wondered 
about  the  lamb,  and  meekly  submitted  to  be  bound  as  a 
sacrifice.  That  was  a  radiant  dawn  for  a  human  life,  which 
for  some  reason  became  quickly  overcast. 

What  was  that  reason  ?  Was  it  the  prosperity  of  which 
we  read  in  the  previous  chapter?  "The  man  waxed  great, 
and  went  forward,  and  grew  until  he  became  very  great." 
It  would  not  be  the  last  time  that  prosperity  has  choked  off 
spiritual  growth.  Was  it  a  too-easy  disposition,  of  which  we 
catch  a  glimpse  in  his  readiness  to  abandon  well  after  well, 
if  only  he  might  be  left  in  peace  ?  It  would  not  be  the  only 
time  that  a  molluscous  lack  of  backbone  has  barred  the 
path  of  a  noble  career.  Was  it  an  inordinate  love  for  the 
pleasures  of  the  table  ?  There  seems  to  have  been  too 
much  of  this  in  his  constitution.  He  said  to  Esau,  "  Make 
me  savoury  meat,  such  as  I  love."  Rebekah  was  keenly 
aware  of  her  husband's  weakness  in  this  respect :  "  I  will 
make  for  thy  father  savoury  meat  such  as  he  loveth."  There 
is  a  sad  suggestiveness  in  all  this,  and  enough  to  account 
for  all.  The  man  who,  on  the  supposed  point  of  death, 
thinks  most  of  all  of  a  good  dish  of  delicious  venison,  is  not 


A    THREEFOLD  PREPARATION.  35 

likely  to  shine  as  a  specially  brilliant  star  in  the  heavenly 
firmament. 

We  need  to  take  warning  against  the  twin  sins  of  gluttony 
and  drunkenness.  Intemperance  in  eating  may  not  result  in 
the  same  outward  degradation  as  in  drinking ;  but  it  is  as 
harmful  to  the  spirit.  The  question  is,  whether  average 
Christian  people  do  not  eat  much  more  than  is  good  for  the 
health  of  either  body  or  spirit.  Certainly  the  world  and  the 
Church  are  filled  with  numberless  cases  of  men,  the  brilliance 
of  whose  minds  has  been  obscured,  and  the  edge  of  their 
spiritual  life  blunted,  by  their  habitual  and  greedy  indulgence 
in  superfluous  and  luxurious  food.  With  every  grace  we  say 
at  our  meals,  we  need  to  ask  that  we  may  eat  and  drink,  not 
merely  at  our  own  caprice,  but  to  the  glory  of  God.  "Take 
heed  to  yourselves,  lest  at  any  time  your  hearts  be  over 
charged  with  surfeiting,  and  drunkenness,  and  cares." 

Many  years  had  passed  since  that  memorable  day  on 
Mount  Moriah ;  and  many  signs  told  Isaac  that  his  sun  was 
setting.  Chief  among  these  was  dimming  sight.  God  has 
mercifully  arranged  that  such  reminders,  like  warning  bells, 
should  ring  out  to  show  us  how  far  we  have  travelled,  and 
how  near  we  are  to  the  terminus  of  life.  Many  a  man,  who 
otherwise  had  dropped  carelessly  into  the  grave,  has  been 
awakened  by  such  things  to  say  to  himself,  "  Behold,  now  I 
am  old  ;  I  know  not  the  day  of  my  death.  I  must  begin  to 
prepare  for  the  final  act." 

There  are  glimpses  of  the  better  things  in  Isaac's  char 
acter  in  the  threefold  preparation  he  made  for  his  end. 

He  made  his  last  testamentary  disposition.  If  you  have 
not  done  this,  do  it  at  once — no  time  so  good  as  this. 
Leave  nothing  uncertain;  nothing  to  chance;  no  loophole  for 

heartburning  or  heartbreak  amongst  your  heirs.      He  laid 

c  2 


3  6  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

aside  his  earthly  cares.  He  lived  for  several  years  after  this; 
but  he  was  a  man  set  apart.  It  was  the  gloaming  of  his  life; 
not  quite  dark,  yet  not  light  enough  to  work — the  fittest  time 
for  meditation  and  prayer.  It  was  ever  the  ambition  of  Dr. 
Chalmers  to  have  such  a  time  of  Sabbath  calm  after  the  busy 
rush  of  his  life  of  working  days,  and  before  the  final  act. 
He  handed  on  the  blessing.  Even  though  he  proposed  to 
counterwork  the  purposes  of  God,  yet  there  is  a  significant 
beauty  in  the  desire  of  the  old  man  to  bless  before  he  died. 
Aged  people,  we  younger  ones  have  surely  a  right  to 
expect  some  blessing,  ere  you  leave  us,  of  ripe  counsel ;  of 
matured  wisdom  ;  of  prophetic  experience. 

II.    THIS    TEMPTATION    WAS    PRESENTED    TO    JACOB 

THROUGH  THE  UNSCRUPULOUS  LOVE  OF  REBEKAH. 

Jacob  was  her  favourite  son.  There  was  a  closer  relation 
ship  between  them,  than  there  could  be  between  her  and 
the  more  random  Esau.  As  soon  as  she  overheard  Isaac's 
request  to  Esau,  she  resolved  at  once  to  win  his  blessing  for 
her  younger  boy.  And  if  a  momentary  qualm  suggested 
itself,  she,  doubtless,  quieted  it  by  the  reflection  that  she 
was  simply  trying  to  ratify  the  bargain  which  he  had  made 
for  himself. 

We  cannot  but  admire  her  love.  She  threw  herself  away 
on  this  lad,  whom  she  was  never  to  see  again.  She  was 
reckless  of  personal  consequences.  She  cared  not  what 
might  come  to  herself,  so  that  he  might  win.  "  Upon  me 
be  thy  curse,  my  son."  For  him  she  sacrificed  husband, 
elder  son,  principle — all.  It  is  with  such  prodigality  of 
affection  that  women  constantly  give  themselves  for  their 
beloved.  Their  love  is  often  worthy  of  a  better  object;  and 
yet  it  is  beautiful.  Oh  that  all  such  knew  of  Him  on  whom 


A   MOTHER'S  LOVE.  37 

the  saint  of  the  home  at  Bethany,  and  the  sinner  in  the 
house  of  Simon,  broke  their  alabaster  boxes  in  a  very  prodi 
gality  of  love,  and  yet  there  was  no  waste  ! 

But  Rebekah's  love  was  not  based  on  principle.  And  such 
love  is  as  terrible  as  the  fire  which  has  burst  from  the  restraints 
of  iron  bars,  and  leaves  behind  it  a  scorched  and  blackened 
trail.  Love  is  either  the  bliss  or  bane  of  life :  its  bliss,  if 
rooted  and  grounded  in  an  all-mastering  and  all-penetrating 
devotion  to  purity,  truth,  principle — or  in  a  word,  to  God ; 
but  its  curse,  if,  like  some  pirate  crew,  it  steers  the  ship  of 
life  according  to  its  own  wild  whim.  Let  us  keep  our 
hearts  above  all  that  we  guard,  since  out  of  them  are  the 
issues  of  life.  And  if  we  are  ever  prompted  to  act  according 
to  the  strong  solicitation  of  mere  natural  affection,  let  us 
remember  the  havoc  which  such  a  course  produced  in  that 
far-off  Eastern  home,  under  the  black  tents  of  the  patriarch 
Isaac:  how  it  deceived  the  husband;  wronged  the  elder  son; 
drove  the  younger  to  an  enforced  exile;  and  blasted  the 
reputation  of  this  woman,  who  otherwise  had  been  honoured 
and  beloved. 

But  Rebekah  is  not  the  only  mother  who  has  acted  thus. 
As  we  review  her  life,  we  find  its  counterpart  in  many :  who 
will  scheme,  manreuvre,  palter  with  truth  and  righteousness, 
and  cast  even  conjugal  love  into  the  scale,  if  only,  at  all 
hazards,  they  can  advance  the  interests  of  their  child.  How 
little  do  they  realize  the  harvest  of  which  these  are  the  seeds  ! 
— a  harvest  of  misery  for  the  home ;  of  heart-burning  and 
hatred;  of  sorrow  for  those  whom  they  would  benefit;  and  of 
heart-breaking  anguish  for  themselves. 

In  another  sense  than  our  Saviour  meant,  a  man's  foes 
may  be  they  of  his  own  household.  We  exert  a  vast  influ 
ence — not  only  by  what  we  say,  but  by  the  spirit  of  our  lives 


38  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

— on  those  who  dwell  under  the  same  roof,  and  address  us  by 
the  tenderest  names.  And,  alas !  this  influence  is  often 
sadly  averse  to  their  nobler  life,  withering  it,  as  gas  does 
flowers.  They  see  us  in  our  most  careless  moments,  when 
we  have  ungirded  ourselves,  and  lie  at  ease  on  the  grass. 
They  catch  up  our  least  guarded  words.  They  take  us  at  a 
disadvantage,  when,  biassed  by  love,  we  try  to  solve  their 
problems  and  answer  their  questions  so  as  to  make  life's 
pathway  as  easy  as  possible  for  their  feet.  And  one  drop  of 
poison  instilled  into  the  heart  by  a  loved  and  trusted  friend 
is  enough  to  spoil  a  life.  We  drink  more  unquestioningly 
of  the  poisoned  chalice,  when  put  to  our  lips  by  one  we 
love.  We  enter  more  unsuspectingly  the  pathway  to  ruin, 
when  the  hand  of  parent  or  friend  points  the  way.  The 
course  of  deceit  is  less  forbidding,  when  urged  on  us  by 
those  who,  like  Rebekah,  can  gain  nothing  if  we  succeed ; 
who  are  willing  to  assume  all  responsibility  if  we  fail ;  and 
who  profess  that  they  are  inspired  by  no  other  motive  than 
the  most  unselfish  devotion  to  our  interests. 

How  careful  should  we  be,  then,  of  all  suggestions  and 
advice  we  give  to  those  accustomed  to  look  up  to  us;  lest, 
wittingly  or  not,  we  should  place  a  stumbling-block  and 
occasion  to  fall  in  another's  way.  In  such  matters  affection 
is  no  true  guide,  unless  regulated,  as  God's  is,  by  the  dictates 
of  righteousness  and  truth;  if  these  be  absent,  there  is 
terrible  danger  lest  we  should  make  again  the  mistake  of 
Rebekah,  and  follow  again  in  the  footsteps  of  her  sin,  against 
her  sons,  herself,  and  her  God. 

III.  THIS  TEMPTATION  WAS  GREEDILY  RESPONDED  TO  BY 
THE  WEAK  AND  CRAFTY  NATURE  OF  JACOB. 

Jacob  was   not  a  thoroughly  vicious  man;  but  he  was 


AFRAID    TO  SAY"NO!n  39 

deplorably  weak  :  and  weakness  is  close  akin  to  the  sin  to 
which  it  inevitably  leads.  He  would  not  have  concocted 
this  plot  or  laid  the  train  himself.  He  would  have  preferred 
not  to  act  the  liar.  He  was  really  afraid  of  the  result.  But 
he  had  not  the  courage  to  say  "  No  "  to  the  strong  will  and 
wish  of  his  mother,  especially  when  she  was  ready  to  take 
all  risks.  He  tried  to  quiet  his  conscience  by  the  considera 
tion  that  he  was  only  trying  to  get  his  own ;  and  that  Esau 
had  no  right  to  think  of  getting  back  from  their  father  the 
birthright  which  he  had  certainly  sold.  And  so,  when  his 
mother  put  strong  pressure  on  him,  summoning  him  by  the 
obedience  he  owed  her  as  her  son  (ver.  8),  he  weakly  did 
not  refuse  on  the  ground  that  it  was  unlawful ;  but  suggested 
it  was  inexpedient,  lest  they  should  be  found  out.  "  Behold, 
Esau  my  brother  is  a  hairy  man,  and  I  am  a  smooth  man ; 
my  father  peradventure  will  feel  me,  and  I  shall  seem  to 
him  as  a  deceiver,  and  I  shall  bring  a  curse  upon  me,  and 
not  a  blessing."  When  a  man  retreats  from  the  position  of 
what  is  right,  to  the  urging  of  what  is  likely  to  be  expedient 
and  to  pay — that  man  is  near  a  fall,  swift  as  the  archangel's 
from  heaven  to  hell. 

Such  a  fall  was  Jacob's.  It  is  impossible  to  emphasize  this 
point  too  earnestly,  especially  for  the  young.  So  long  as  we 
take  our  stand  on  what  is  lawful — as  John  the  Baptist  did, 
when  he  strode  into  the  royal  presence  and  told  Herod  that 
he  had  no  right  to  take  his  brother's  wife — we  are  impreg 
nable.  But  when  once  we  retreat  from  this,  and  argue  with 
the  tempter  on  the  lower  grounds  of  possible  discovery  and 
failure,  we  shall  find  ourselves  outmatched  by  his  arithmetic, 
and  led  as  garlanded  oxen  to  the  slaughter-house.  Into  this 
fault,  to  which  all  weak  men  are  so  liable,  Jacob  fell ;  and 
so,  when,  a  second  time,  his  mother  commanded  him  to 


40  ISRAEL:   A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

obey  her  voice  (ver.  13),  and  go  to  the  flock  for  two  good 
kids  of  the  goats,  "he  went,  and  fetched,  and  brought  them 
to  his  mother.'' 

When  once  the  first  step  had  been  taken,  it  was  quickly 
followed  by  others  which  it  seemed  to  render  needful.  Sin 
never  comes  alone.  The  first  act  of  sin  is  like  the  boy  put 
through  a  narrow  window  into  a  burglar-beset  house,  who 
creeps  round  to  open  the  door  for  the  entire  gang  ;  or  it  is 
like  the  first  link  of  the  rusty  chain,  which  draws  all  the  rest 
into  the  hold  of  the  ship.  If  the  graces  come  with  linked 
hands,  so  do  the  vices.  They  are  sporadic.  That  first  sin 
of  Jacob  led  to  many  others. 

He  simulated  his  brother's  dress  and  skin.  While  the 
meat  was  cooking,  Rebekah  was  engaged  in  turning  over 
Esau's  wardrobe,  to  find  some  suitable  garments,  highly  per 
fumed,  as  is  the  custom  with  the  Easterns  to  this  day.  This 
done,  she  prepared  the  delicate  skins  of  the  kids  for  his 
hands  and  neck.  All  was  done  with  haste ;  lest  Esau  might 
come  in.  And  when  all  was  ready,  Jacob  arrayed  himself  to 
play  his  part. 

He  deceived  his  father  with  a  direct  falsehood.  "  I  am 
Esau,  thy  firstborn ;  I  have  done  according  as  thou  badest 
me ;  eat  of  my  venison,  that  thy  soul  may  bless  me." 

He  made  an  impious  use  of  the  name  of  God.  In  answer 
to  Isaac's  question  as  to  how  he  had  found  it  so  quickly,  he 
dared  to  say,  "The  Lord  thy  God  brought  it  to  me." 

Yet  what  horror  must  have  thrilled  him  as  he  found  him 
self  forced  to  take  step  after  step,  aware  that  he  was  being 
carried  out  by  a  rushing  stream  towards  an  ocean  of  ink ;  yet 
not  daring  to  stop — nay,  compelled  to  press  still  further  out 
to  sea.  How  his  heart  must  have  stood  still  when  the  old 
man  became  suspicious,  and  doubted  his  voice,  and  insisted 


FASHIONED  BY  GOD.  4! 

on  feeling,  smelling,  and  having  him  near !  What  if  God 
should  strike  him  dead  !  What  a  relief  when  he  came  out 
again  into  the  fresh  air ! — though  the  words  of  the  coveted 
blessing  hardly  repaid  him  for  the  agony  he  had  passed 
through.  How  he  must  have  loathed  himself,  and  longed 
to  change  places  with  the  lizards  that  crept  about  the  tents, 
or  the  little  naked  slave  children  that  laughed  so  merrily  at 
play !  The  sun  itself  seemed  shorn  of  half  its  light. 

Yet  this  is  the  man  who  became  the  Prince  of  God.  And 
if  he  became  so,  is  there  not  hope  for  us,  who  can  trace  in 
him  many  resemblances  to  ourselves  ?  "  Though  we  have 
lien  among  the  pots,  yet  may  we  be  as  the  wings  of  a  dove, 
covered  with  yellow  gold."  If  the  Almighty  Workman 
could  fashion  such  clay  into  so  fair  a  vessel,  what  may  He 
not  do  for  us  ?  Our  only  hope  is  to  hand  ourselves  over  to 
Him,  in  an  act  of  entire  self-surrender ;  conscious  that  we 
are  useless  and  worthless,  deserving  rather  to  be  trampled 
under  foot  than  fashioned  by  his  hand  ;  conscious,  too, 
that  if  He  do  not  work  for  us,  we  are  undone ;  willing  to  be 
and  do  anything  He  may  direct ;  careful  to  work  out  all 
that  He  may  work  in.  If  only  we  will  to  do  this,  and  yield 
ourselves  to  God,  and  be  willing  to  be  made  willing  to  have 
his  will  done  in  us,  by  us,  and  about  us,  then  God  will  be 
able  to  work  in  us  also  some  fair  design  of  beauty  and  use. 
Oh,  do  not  mar  His  work ;  or  lead  Him  to  make  of  thee 
some  inferior  vessel  to  that  which  thou  mayest  become ! 
(Jer.  xviii.  4). 

But,  remember,  God  must  implant  the  nature  which  He 
educates  into  Israel  the  Prince.  When  we  speak  of  God's 
education,  we  must  be  very  careful  what  we  mean,  and  how 
we  express  it ;  lest  we  should  countenance  error.  Amidst  all 
his  sin,  there  must  have  been  in  Jacob  a  better  self,  which 


42  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

was  capable  of  receiving  the  education  of  God,  and  of  being 
developed  into  Israel.  You  may  call  ihisfaM,  or  what  you 
will;  but  it  was  there.  And  it  was  the  possession  of  this 
better  nature  that  made  Jacob  stand  in  a  different  relation 
towards  God  than  Esau  did ;  and  made  him  capable  of  rising 
to  a  spiritual  level,  for  which  Esau  had  neither  the  aptitude 
nor  the  taste. 

No  doubt  the  God  of  love  had  thoughts  of  love  towards 
Esau  ;  but  there  was  not,  in  his  worldly  nature,  the  faith,  or 
the  elements  of  nobility,  which,  through  faith,  had  been 
implanted  in  his  brother's  heart.  Put  a  stone  into  a  flower 
pot  ;  cover  it  with  mould ;  give  it  water  and  sunshine,  and 
light  and  air — it  will  always  be  a  stone  :  so  if  Esau  had  passed 
through  the  discipline  of  Jacob,  he  would  always  have  been 
an  Esau — he  never  could  have  been  an  Israel ;  unless  there 
had  been  also  in  him  the  better  nature  which  is  associated 
with  faith.  You  may  develop  intelligence,  by  education 
and  mind-culture ;  but  the  faculty  must  be  already  present, 
otherwise  your  best  methods  will  be  abortive.  You  can 
develop  the  rudimentary  germ ;  but  when  it  is  absent,  you 
cannot  create  it.  So  the  discipline  of  God's  grace  in  a 
human  life  can  do  nothing,  unless  there  be  the  germ  of 
that  new  and  divine  nature  of  which  our  Lord  spoke  to 
Nicodemus:  "That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh; 
that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit.  Ye  must  be  born 
again." 

If,  then,  you  are  conscious  of  a  depraved  nature,  capable  of 
the  faults  which  disfigure  the  character  of  Jacob,  be  anxious 
to  enquire  if,  besides  this,  there  is  the  new  nature,  born  of 
God,  and  capable  of  being  educated  into  His  image.  If  it 
be  there,  be  thankful ;  and  ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  lust 
against  and  repress  the  Jacob-nature,  so  that  you  may  not 


"LOOK,   AND  LIVE!" 


43 


do  the  things  that  you  would  (Gal.  v.  17,  R.V.),  and  to 
hasten  your  Israel-beauty.  If  it  be  not  there,  your  duty  is 
to  look  at  once  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  was  delivered  for 
your  sins,  and  was  raised  again  for  your  justification ;  and 
the  imparting,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the  germ  of  the  new 
and  better  nature  will  be  simultaneous  with  the  first  real, 
longing,  transforming  look  of  faith  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 


IV. 


GENESIS   XXVIII. 

"Though  like  the  wanderer, 

Daylight  all  gone, 

Darkness  be  over  me, 

My  rest  a  stone  : 

Yet,  in  my  dreams,  I  'd  be 

Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee, 

Nearer  to  Thee." 

S.  F.  ADAMS. 

i\A(7«  HEN  Esau  found  that  Jacob  had  stolen  his  bles 
sing,  he  hated  him,  and  vowed  to  kill  him.  This 
was  nothing  less  than  might  have  been  expected  from  his 
headstrong  and  impetuous  nature.  These  threats  came  to 
Rebekah's  ears,  and  filled  her  with  fear,  lest  she  should 
be  deprived  of  them  both  in  one  day — Jacob,  the  jewel  of 
her  eye,  by  the  hand  of  his  brother ;  and  Esau,  by  being 
compelled,  like  a  second  Cain,  to  become  an  outlaw  for  his 
brother's  murder. 

But  there  was  one  source  of  relief  which  presented  itself 
to  her  mother's  love  and  woman's  wit.  She  understood 
Esau's  temperament  perfectly.  She  knew  that  a  passionate, 
hasty  man  is  less  to  be  feared  than  a  man  who  gives  no 
sign  of  the  tumult  raging  within.  Rage  like  Esau's  would 
soon  expend  itself  in  words  and  threats ;  and  burn  itself  out, 


GOING   TOWARDS  HARAN.  45 

like  a  quick  and  furious  fire,  for  want  of  fuel.  If  only  Jacob 
absented  himself  for  a  short  time,  all  would  be  forgotten. 
So  Rebekah  made  up  her  mind  that  he  should  go  across 
the  desert  to  Haran ;  to  abide  for  a  time  with  her  brother 
Laban,  from  whom  she  had  been  parted  since  that  memor 
able  day,  when,  with  many  a  girlish  dream  floating  before 
her  dark  eyes,  she  had  started  with  Abraham's  servant  for 
her  new  home.  She  did  not  tell  her  husband  all  her 
reasons— it  would  have  done  more  harm  than  good ;  but 
she  adduced  very  good  and  obvious  ones,  in  the  necessity 
of  preserving  from  defilement  the  holy  seed,  and  of  procur 
ing  for  Jacob  a  suitable  wife. 

Isaac  fell  in  with  the  proposal ;  and  "  called  Jacob,  and 
blessed  him,  and  charged  him,  and  said  unto  him,  Thou 
shalt  not  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan.  Arise,  go 
to  Padan-aram ;  and  take  thee  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of 
Laban,  thy  mother's  brother.  And  God  Almighty  bless 
thee  !  "  And  Jacob,  not  without  many  a  tear,  went  out  from 
Beersheba,  and  went  toward  Haran.  And  it  was  on  his 
way  that  this  revelation  of  the  Angel-Ladder  was  made  to 
him. 

I.  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES   IN   WHICH   THIS   REVELATION 

WAS    MADE   TO    HIM. 

Jacob  was  lonely.  He  was  not  what  we  should  call  a  young 
man  ;  he  had  reached  mature  years  :  but  it  is  almost  certain 
that  this  was  the  first  time  of  his  leaving  the  shelter  of  his 
home.  Led  afar  from  home  in  pursuit  of  the  fleet  deer, 
his  hunter  brother  may  often  have  passed  the  night  amid 
the  wilds,  comfortable  and  content.  But  Jacob  had  no  taste 
for  such  experiences.  For  him  solitude  had  no  charms  ;  he 
loved  to  hear  the  sounds  of  human  voices,  and  the  stir  of 


46  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

the  camp.  In  the  early  morning  light,  as  he  started  forth 
there  may  have  been  an  exhilarating  sense  of  independence, 
freshness,  and  novelty  ;  but  as  night  drew  its  curtains  over 
the  world,  and  the  stars  glimmered  out  of  the  depths,  and 
the  solemn  boulders  lay  so  still  on  the  moorland  around 
him — with  no  tent  for  shelter,  no  fire  for  warmth,  no  pillow 
for  rest,  there  stole  over  his  mind  a  sense  of  loneliness  and 
melancholy.  This  was  God's  chosen  time,  when  He  drew 
near  to  his  spirit,  and  said,  "  Behold,  I  am  with  thee ;  and 
will  keep  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest ;  and  will 
bring  thee  again  into  this  land :  for  I  will  not  leave  thee, 
until  I  have  done  that  which  I  have  spoken  to  thee  of." 
And  so  it  has  often  been  with  men.  We  must  be  withdrawn 
from  the  rush  and  hum  of  the  busy  market-place,  if  in  the 
old  minster  we  would  see  the  calm  angel-faces  carved  in 
stone,  or  hear  the  thrilling  notes  of  the  chorister  boys. 
Recal,  for  a  moment,  your  first  night  away  from  home — as  a 
schoolboy ;  or  apprentice ;  or  servant ;  or  student :  and 
answer,  if  that  were  not  a  sacred  epoch  in  your  history, 
when  God  took  up  the  trailing  tendrils  of  your  love,  and 
twined  them  around  Himself,  and  you  realized  His  presence, 
and  clung  to  Him  as  never  before. 

Jacob  was  also  standing  on  the  threshold  of  independence. 
It  is  a  solemn  moment  when  a  man  enters  on  independence 
— fairly  afloat  like  a  swimmer  without  corks  ;  adrift  like  a 
boat's  crew  who  have  seen  the  waves  close  over  their  ship. 
Childhood  sleeps  peacefully,  because  it  has  no  responsi 
bilities  ;  the  flower  is  sheathed  in  its  green  case ;  the 
nestling  is  fed  and  shielded  by  the  untiring  care  of  the 
parent  bird.  But  this  does  not  last  long ;  and  none  need 
wish  prematurely  to  exchange  such  dependence  for  the 
independence  that  must  needs  care  for  itself.  The  child 


ABIDING   UNION  WITH  CHRIST.  47 

must  go  forth  at  last  to  earn  his  own  living;  to  win  his  spurs; 
to  stand  alone;  to  choose  and  act  for  himself.  It  is  a 
solemn  crisis. 

But  it  is  at  such  a  moment  that  the  Almighty,  as  a 
wayfaring  man,  offers  His  company  for  the  untrodden  path. 
Happy  is  he  who  accepts  the  proffered  help ;  and  transfers 
the  feeling  of  dependence  from  the  earthly  to  the  heavenly 
Friend.  It  is  almost  worth  while  being  cast  off  by  father 
and  mother,  if  one  may  be  taken  up  by  the  Lord.  And 
when  one  is  willing  to  be  taken  up  by  Him,  there  need  be 
no  further  anxiety  or  care ;  for  directly  a  human  spirit 
yields  itself  to  its  Almighty  Lover,  that  moment  He 
takes  it,  and  assumes  all  responsibility,  and  makes  Himself 
answerable  for  all  its  needs.  There  is  but  one  condition  : 
"  Seek  ye  first  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  His  righteousness ; 
and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  As  Queen 
Elizabeth  said  once  to  one  of  her  Court :  "  Sir,  if  you  will 
look  after  my  business,  I  will  make  yours  my  care." 
Would  that  all  the  children  of  God  might  know  what  it  is 
to  hand  over,  moment  by  moment,  as  they  occur,  all 
worries,  anxieties,  and  cares,  to  the  compassionate  Lord, 
sure  that  He  takes  them  straight  from  their  hands  !  We 
need  never  feel,  then,  as  if  all  depended  on  our  tired  brain 
or  failing  strength ;  because  the  Lord  Himself  would  supply 
all  our  need,  according  to  his  riches  in  glory.  There  is, 
indeed,  no  real  independence  for  the  believer.  To  be 
independent  of  Christ  is  to  be  cast  forth  as  a  branch  to 
wither.  The  secret  of  rest,  and  fruit,  and  power,  is  an 
abiding  union  with  Him — which  time  cannot  impair,  and 
death  cannot  dissolve. 

Jacob  was  also  in  fear.  What  should  hinder  Esau,  when 
he  heard  of  his  flight,  from  pursuing  him  ?  He  was  well 


48  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

acquainted  with  those  parts ;  was  fleet  of  foot ;  or  might  use 
dogs,  so  as  to  track  him  and  run  him  down.  Besides,  the 
country  was  full  of  robbers  and  wild  beasts.  And  it  was 
then  that  God  calmed  his  fears,  by  showing  him  that  that 
lone  spot  was  teeming  with  angel-hosts,  willing  and  eager  to 
encamp  about  him,  with  celestial  watch  and  ward.  The 
most  lonely  spot  is  as  safe  for  us  as  the  most  crowded,  since 
God  is  there.  It  is  His  presence  that  keeps  us  safe  amid 
the  crowded  city  ;  and  it  is  not  in  the  smallest  degree  with 
drawn  when,  benighted  on  some  desolate  moorland,  we  lay 
ourselves  down  to  sleep.  Into  the  low  dungeon,  where  the 
true-hearted  prophet  lies  (Lam.  iii.  55);  into  the  prison  cell, 
where  the  heroic  apostle  awaits  his  doom  (Acts  xxiii.  n); 
into  the  cabin  of  the  creaking,  labouring  vessel,  threatened 
each  moment  with  destruction  (Acts  xxvii.  24) — there  comes 
this  assurance  of  One  who  cannot  lie  :  "  Fear  not !  "  so  that 
we  may  boldly  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  helper  :  and  I  will 
not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto  me  "  (Heb.  xiii.  6). 

II.     THE     ELEMENTS    OF    WHICH     THIS     REVELATION 
CONSISTED. 

The  Spirit  of  God  always  conveyed  His  teachings  to  His 
servants  in  language  borrowed  from  their  surroundings.  . 
John's  records  of  heaven  are  full  of  reminiscences  of  the 
^gean  ;  which  sometimes  murmured  around  the  cliffs  of  his 
prison-isle  as  a  sea  of  glass  bathed  in  fire,  and  at  other 
times  broke  on  them  in  yeasty  foam.  David's  Psalms  make 
constant  reference  to  the  wild  hill-country  of  Judasa,  in 
which  so  many  of  them  were  composed  ;  Daniel's  visions 
commemorate  the  giant  forms  familiar  to  him  in  Babylon  \ 
and  Amos  casts  his  prophecies  in  moulds  borrowed  from  a 
herdsman's  life.  So  was  it  here. 


JACOB  AT  BETHEL.  49 

Bethel  was  a  bleak  moorland  that  lay  in  the  heart  of 
Palestine.  There  was  nothing  remarkable  about  it ;  it  was 
"  a  certain  place."  The  hill-sides  and  upland  slopes  were 
strewn  with  large  sheets  of  bare  rock  :  most  of  which  lay  flat 
upon  their  faces,  like  huge  fallen  gravestones ;  whilst  some 
few  were  standing  erect,  like  the  cromlechs  of  our  Druid 
circles. 

Fleeing  northwards,  the  wanderer  suddenly  found  himself 
overtaken  by  the  swift  Eastern  night,  whilst  on  this  desolate 
and  unpeopled  waste.  There  was  no  help  for  it  but  to  lie 
down  on  the  hard  ground,  taking  the  stones  thereof  as  a 
pillow  for  his  head.  And  thus  he  slept ;  and  as  he  slept  he 
dreamed  :  and  in  his  dream  his  mind  wove  together  many  of 
his  waking  thoughts  in  fantastic  medley.  The  striking 
appearance  of  those  huge  boulders ;  the  memory  that 
Abraham  had  built  one  of  his  earliest  altars  there,  remnants 
of  which  may  have  been  still  standing  ;  his  last  look  upwards 
at  that  wondrous  heaven,  studded  with  the  brilliant  con 
stellations  of  an  Eastern  night — all  these  wove  themselves 
into  his  dreams.  It  seemed  as  if  the  huge  slabs  of  limestone 
came  near  together,  and  built  themselves  up  into  a  gigantic 
staircase,  reaching  from  the  spot  where  he  lay  to  the  starry 
depths  above  him ;  and  on  that  staircase  angels  came  and 
went,  peopling  by  their  multitudes  that  most  desolate  region, 
and  evidently  deeply  concerned  with  the  sleeper  that  lay 
beneath.  Nor  was  this  all ;  for,  from  the  summit,  the  voice 
of  God  fell  like  music. 

There  are  here  three  points  of  interest. 

(i)  The  Ladder.  Jacob  may  have  been  oppressed  by  a 
sense  of  his  insignificance,  and  sin,  and  distance  from  home. 
And  it  was  very  pleasant  to  know  that  there  was  a  link 
between  him  and  God,  Earth  is  not  a  wandering  star  :  it 

D 


50  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE   WITH  GOD. 

is  bound  to  heaven,  not  by  the  golden  chains  of  which  our 
Laureate  sings;  not  by  the  iron  fetters  of  necessity,  as  a 
slave-ship  to  its  captor ;  not  by  the  silken  ties  of  gravitation 
which  thread  the  worlds — but  by  a  ladder,  denoting  com 
munion,  fellowship,  passage  to  and  fro. 

That  ladder  is  Jesus  Christ  Himself  (John  i.  51).  He 
took  upon  Himself  our  nature,  built  up  from  the  dust ;  and 
in  that  nature  passed  upwards  from  the  brow  of  Olivet, 
beyond  principalities  and  powers,  thrones  and  dominions,  to 
the  very  throne  of  God  :  and  in  doing  so,  He  has  left  a  trail 
of  light  behind ;  and  become  "  the  way  "  by  which  we  may 
approach  the  High  and  Lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity, 
whose  name  is  Holy.  There  is  no  other  way ;  "  no  man 
cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Him."  To  neglect  Him  is 
to  drift  past  the  only  medium  by  which  a  sinner  may  come 
into  the  Light  and  Love  and  Life  of  God.  And  yet  the 
weakest  and  most  sinful  may  climb  through  Jesus  from  the 
verge  of  the  pit  of  hell  to  the  foot  of  the  eternal  throne. 

"  The  sons  of  Ignorance  and  Night 

May  dwell  in  the  Eternal  Light, 

Through  the  Eternal  Love." 

Milton,  in  his  sublime  poem,  tells  how  Sin  and  Death 
followed  the  track  of  Satan,  and  paved  after  him  a  broad 
and  beaten  way  over  the  dark  abyss,  whose  boiling  gulf 
tamely  endured  a  bridge  of  wondrous  length  from  hell,  con 
tinued  to  the  utmost  orb  of  this  frail  world ;  so  that  the 
wicked  spirits  of  his  court  might  easily  pass  to  and  fro  to 
tempt  us  mortals.  That  is  imagination  :  this  is  fact,  that 
there  is  a  "Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus,  (i  Tim.  ii.  5.) 

Sometimes,  when  the  sky  is  beclouded,  we  do  not  see 
that  across  the  garden  path  there  sways  a  ladder  of  gossamer, 


MINISTERING  ANGELS.  5 1 

linking  tree  with  tree ;  but  when  the  sun  shines,  it  is  revealed 
by  its  silver  sheen.  So,  as  the  infidel  looks  upward,  he 
can  see  no  bond  of  union  between  this  atom  of  star-dust 
and  the  metropolis  of  the  universe,  until  his  eyes  are  opened, 
and  he  sees  the  ladder  left  by  the  trail  of  the  departing 
Saviour.  Thank  God,  we  are  not  cut  adrift  to  the  mercy  of 
every  current ;  this  dark  coal-ship  is  moored  alongside  the 
bright  ship  of  heavenly  grace ;  yes,  and  there  is  a  plank 
from  the  one  to  the  other. 

(2)  The  Angels.  The  angels  ascended  :  there  is  the 
ascent  of  our  prayers.  The  angels  descended  :  there  is  the 
descent  of  God's  answers.  We  are  reminded  of  the  afferent 
and  efferent  nerves  of  the  body — up  which  flash  the  sharp 
stings  of  pain  from  the  extremities  to  the  head ;  and  down 
which  come  the  directions  how  to  act.  It  would  be  well  to 
ponder  more  frequently  the  ministering  care  of  the  angels. 
They  keep  pace  with  every  railway  train,  at  whatever  speed 
it  travels,  which  bears  some  child  of  God  to  his  appointed 
destination.  They  convoy  every  ship  ploughing  its  way 
through  the  troubled  sea,  which  carries  an  heir  of  salvation 
to  the  haven  where  he  would  be.  They  encamp  with  horses 
and  chariots  of  fire  about  every  city,  however  beleaguered, 
in  which  God's  servants  are  found.  They  minister  to  our 
needs.  They  prepare  for  us  strengthening  meals  when  we 
sink  exhausted  on  the  desert  sands  and  wish  to  die.  They 
whisper  comfort  into  our  troubled  hearts.  They  carry  our 
departing  spirits  upwards  in  the  hour  of  death.  "  And  all 
for  love,  and  nothing  for  reward."  God  gives  His  angels 
charge  concerning  us,  to  keep  us  in  all  our  ways ;  they  bear 
us  up  in  their  hands.  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth 
round  about  them  that  fear  Him,  and  delivereth  them." 
They  are  "sent  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation." 

D    2 


52  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

What  comfort  Jacob  must  have  realized!  He  found,  to  his 
great  surprise,  that  that  lone  spot  was  as  thickly  populated 
as  the  gate  of  some  Eastern  town,  which  is  the  place  of  con 
course  and  barter.  But  it  was  the  gate  of  heaven  ;  for  it 
seemed  as  if  the  populations  of  heaven  were  teeming  around 
him,  thronging  to  and  fro;  and  all  engaged  in  the  beneficent 
work  of  bringing  in  the  needs  of  men,  and  carrying  out  the 
blessings  of  God  heaped  up,  after  the  overflowing  measure 
with  which  He  is  wont  to  give.  We  need  never  yield  to 
feelings  of  loneliness  again,  if  we  remember  that,  in  our 
most  retired  hours,  we  are  living  in  the  very  heart  of  a  vast 
throng  of  angels ;  and  we  should  hear  their  songs,  and  see 
their  forms,  if  only  our  senses  were  not  clogged  with  sin. 

(3)  The  Voice  of  God.  God  answered  his  thoughts.  He 
felt  lonesome ;  but  God  said,  "  I  will  be  with  thee."  He 
feared  Esau ;  but  God  said,  "  I  will  keep  thee."  He  knew 
not  what  hardships  he  might  meet  with ;  and  God  promised 
to  bring  him  safely  back  again.  He  seemed  forsaken  of 
friends ;  but  God  gave  him  the  assurance,  "  I  will  not  leave 
thee."  Appearances  seemed  to  contradict  the  Divine 
promise ;  but  God  said,  "  I  will  do  that  which  I  have  spoken 
to  thee  of."  These  are  precious  words ;  but  they  only 
belong  to  those  who  lie  at  the  foot  of  that  wondrous 
Cross  which  unites  earth  with  heaven.  If  your  place  is 
there,  you  may  freely  claim  all  the  comfort  that  they 
contain. 

Is  it  not  remarkable  that  Jacob  did  not  see  these  glorious 
realities  until  he  slept  ?  God  was  as  much  brooding  in  the 
wilderness  before  he  slept  as  afterwards  ;  only  he  knew  it  not. 
It  was  only  when  he  slept  that  he  came  to  know  it.  "  Gradu 
ally  slumber  stole  upon  him,  and  folded  him  in  her  arms ; 
gradually  the  fever  cooled,  the  excitement  subsided,  the 


WALKING    WITH  GOD.  53 

anxiety  ceased.  He  grew  tranquil  and  still ;  he  lost  him 
self — the  flurried,  heated,  uneasy  self  that  he  had  brought 
with  him  from  Beersheba :  and,  while  he  slept,  the  hitherto 
unperceived  Eternal  Presence  came  out  softly,  largely,  above 
and  around  him.  He  saw  His  glory,  and  heard  His  voice  ; 
the  solitary  waste  trembled,  flushed,  and  overflowed  with 
God."* 

There  is  a  lesson  for  us  in  this  old  story  of  how  the  Lord 
waited  until  His  servant  slept  ere  He  revealed  to  him  the 
secret  of  His  presence.  Is  it  not  true  that  we  sometimes 
need  to  sleep  in  order  to  see  ?  May  we  not  be  rather  too 
wide-awake — too  wakeful  to  the  passing  things  of  earth? 
And  would  it  not  be  well  if  we  were  more  oblivious  to  these 
things,  that  our  spiritual  vision  might  behold  the  things 
which  are  unseen  and  eternal  ? 

When  the  groups  of  children  are  playing  in  the  forest 
glades,  and  their  voices  ring  out  in  laughter,  all  the  life  of 
animals  and  the  song  of  birds  is  hushed  :  but  when  they 
have  gone  their  way,  the  squirrel  springs  up  the  bark ;  the 
birds  call  to  each  other;  and  many  a  beautiful  thing 
glides  into  the  open  from  behind  the  trees.  "  Enter  into 
thy  closet,  and  shut  thy  door."  "  My  soul,  be  thou  silent 
unto  God." 

It  is  impossible  to  walk  with  God,  unless  we  have  these 
seasons  of  quiet  vision.  Some  are  ever  dwarfed,  and  driven 
to  and  fro  by  every  wind,  because  they  do  not  make  times 
of  respite  from  the  whirl  of  occupation,  and  the  fret  of  daily 
work  and  care.  We  need  to  escape  from  ourselves,  our  cares 
and  gains,  our  personal  individualities,  in  order  that  we  may 
be  at  leisure  to  receive  the  revelations  of  God.  And  if  we 


*  Rev.  S.  A.  TIPPLE. 


54  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE   WITH  GOD. 

are  to  have  this  blessed  sleep,  it  must  be  the  gift  of  God  in 
answer  to  our  childlike  trust. 

In  our  next  paper,  we  shall  detail  the  effect  which  this 
marvellous  vision  produced  on  the  awe-struck  fugitive  ;  but 
ere  we  close,  we  ask  you  to  think  of  that  mystic  ladder, 
which  descends  from  the  throne  of  God  to  the  spot, 
however  lowly,  where  you  may  be,  as  you  read  these  lines. 
It  may  be  a  moorland  waste  ;  a  humble  cottage ;  a  ship's 
cabin;  a  settler's  hut;  a  bed  of  pain  :  but  Jesus  Christ  finds 
you  out,  and  comes  just  where  you  are.  The  one  pole  of 
this  ladder  is  the  gold  of  His  Deity  ;  the  other  is  the  silver 
of  His  Manhood ;  the  rungs  are  the  series  of  events  from 
the  cradle  of  Bethlehem  to  the  right  hand  of  power,  where 
He  sits.  That  ladder  sways  beneath  a  weight  of  blessing 
for  you.  Oh  that  you  would  send  away  your  burdens  of 
sin  and  care  and  fear,  by  the  hands  of  the  ascending  angels 
of  prayer  and  faith  ! — so  as  to  be  able  to  receive  into  your 
heart  the  trooping  angels  of  peace,  and  joy,  and  love,  and 
glory. 


V. 


GENESIS   XXVIII. 

"  I  slept  and  dreamt  that  life  was  beauty  ; 
I  waked  and  found  that  life  was  duty. 
Was  thy  dream,  then,  a  shadowy  lie  ? 
Toil  on,  sad  heart,  courageously, 
And  thou  shalt  find  thy  dream  to  be 
A  noon-day  light  and  truth  to  thee. 

Dreams  grow  holy  put  in  action, 
Work  grows  fair  through  starry  dreaming; 
But  where  each  flows  on  unmingling, 
Both  are  fruitless  and  in  vain.  " 

A.  A.  PROCTER. 

WE  are  studying  the  education  of  a  human  spirit  in 
r<LJ  the  story  of  Jacob,  who  became  Israel  the  Prince. 
But  before  you  can  benefit  by  it,  you  must  be  quite  sure 
that  there  is  something  in  you  capable  of  being  educated. 
Education  means  draining  out  ;  as  culture  will  draw 
fragrance,  colour,  and  graceful  beauty,  out  of  the  bulb 
which  looks  uninteresting  and  dead.  No  amount  of  educa 
tion  could  draw  such  products  from  a  stone.  Education 
only  avails  when  there  is  some  latent  germ  containing  the 
promise  and  potency  of  life.  So  the  discipline  of  God  will 
be  a  failure,  so  far  as  you  are  concerned,  unless  you  have 
got  within  you,  as  Jacob  certainly  had,  the  principle  of  a 


56  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

nobler  life  than  that  which  comes  by  nature.  In  a  word — 
Have  you  been  born  again  ?  Has  there  been  placed  within 
you,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  principle  of  a  new  and  better 
life?  Is  there  within  you  a  something  which  is  not  of  self, 
or  of  man,  or  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of  God?  If  so, 
you  are  welcome  to  acquire  any  help  that  may  be  afforded 
by  a  study  of  God's  dealings  with  Jacob,  in  whose  original 
constitution  there  was  little  to  admire.  There  were  three 
steps  in  God's  dealings  with  this  mean  and  crafty  spirit ;  and, 
in  one  form  or  another,  they  have  a  universal  application. 

To  begin  with,  God  revealed  Jacob  to  himself.  He  might 
have  gone  on  for  years  in  dreamy  self-content,  ignorant  of 
the  evils  that  lurked  within  his  breast.  So  a  strong  tempta 
tion  was  permitted  to  cross  his  pathway.  There  was  no 
necessity  for  him  to  yield ;  but  he  did  yield.  And  in  yield 
ing,  he  stood  face  to  face  with  the  unutterable  baseness  of 
his  own  heart.  A  rock,  jutting  up  in  the  midst  of  a  stream, 
often  reveals  the  set  of  the  languid  current.  Fling  a  strong 
light  into  a  cave :  and  the  wretched  tenants  will  hurry  out 
screaming,  as  they  behold  the  loathsome  creatures  that  had 
crept  around  them.  This  is  the  first  step  towards  soul- 
health.  A  Nathan  must  be  sent  to  unveil  the  evils  that 
fester  within,  and  to  accost  us  with  the  terrible  apostrophe, 
"  Thou  art  the  man  !"  If,  of  late,  you  have  begun  to  see 
the  hidden  evils  of  your  heart ;  and  to  discover  the  workings 
of  things  of  which  you  could  not  have  supposed  yourself 
capable ;  and  to  loathe  yourself,  as  Job  did  :  then  take 
heart.  God  is  dealing  with  you;  and  is  commencing  a  work 
which  He  will  never  abandon,  till  you  are  presented  faultless 
in  His  presence,  with  exceeding  joy.  The  first  and  indis 
pensable  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  human  spirit,  is  to 
convict  of  sin. 


THE   "STILL  SMALL    VOICE."  S7 

In  the  next  place,  God  permitted  Jacob  to  suffer  the  loss 
of  all  earthly  friends  and  goods.  The  prodigal,  in  the  far 
country,  was  reduced  to  heart-rending  straits.  "When  he  had 
spent  all,  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land :  and  he 
began  to  be  in  want.  And  he  was  sent  into  the  fields  to  feed 
swine ;  and  no  man  gave  unto  him."  And  yet  he  was  not 
much  worse  off  than  Jacob  was  at  this  moment.  We  saw 
in  our  last  chapter  that  he  was  lonely,  destitute,  and  in  fear. 
He  had  little  or  no  property,  but  a  cruse  of  oil  (v.  1 8)  and 
his  staff  (xxxii.  10).  He  dreaded  his  brother's  wrath.  He  was 
compelled  to  content  himself  with  a  stone  for  his  pillow  on 
the  moorland  waste.  But  he  was  not  the  last  man  who  has 
had  reason  to  bless  God,  to  all  eternity,  for  having  swept  his 
life  clear  of  much  which  he  had  accounted  absolutely  needful 
to  his  existence.  The  "  still  small  voice  "  can  only  be  heard 
when  all  other  voices  are  hushed.  The  silver  stars  can  only 
be  seen  in  the  dark.  It  is  when  the  weary  fishers  have  toiled 
all  the  night,  without  taking  a  solitary  fish,  that  they  are 
prepared  to  see,  in  the  morning  haze,  the  form  of  One  who 
loves  them  standing  on  the  shore.  Do  not  be  surprised  if 
to  soul-trial  there  have  been  added  other  bitter  trials 
beside. 

Finally,  God  thrust  into  Jacob's  life  a  revelation  of  His 
love.  "  Behold,  a  ladder  set  up  on  the  earth,  and  the  top 
of  it  reached  to  heaven."  That  ladder  symbolized  the 
love  of  God.  All  through  his  life,  that  love  had  surrounded 
Jacob  with  its  balmy  atmosphere ;  but  he  had  never  realized, 
or  returned,  or  yielded  to  it.  But  now  it  was  gathered  up 
and  crystallized  into  one  definite  appeal,  and  thrust  upon 
him ;  so  that  he  could  do  no  other  than  behold  it.  And  in 
that  hour  of  conviction  and  need,  it  was  as  welcome  as  a 
ladder  put  down  into  a  dark  and  noisome  pit,  where  a  man 


58  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH   GOD. 

is  sinking  fast  into  despair ;  he  quickly  hails  its  seasonable 
aid,  and  begins  to  climb  back  to  daylight. 

Can  you  not  remember  the  moment  when  the  love  of  God 
in  Jesus  Christ  first  broke  on  you  ?  You  were  deeply  con 
vinced  of  sin ;  you  dreaded  lest  at  any  moment  the  sword  of 
the  Avenger  should  smite  you  down;  you  would  have  gladly 
exchanged  places  with  the  dumb  animals  around  you ;  you 
were  broken  by  trouble,  anxiety,  and  care.  And  just  then 
you  were  arrested  by  the  cross  of  Jesus.  At  first  you  only 
looked  on  it  with  the  casual  gaze  of  curiosity ;  but  as  you 
looked,  your  attention  became  so  fixed  that  you  were  spell 
bound.  You  saw  it  transfigured  beneath  the  light  of 
heaven ;  you  felt  that  Divine  love  shone  in  those  dying  eyes ; 
and  streamed  in  tides  of  blessing  from  every  open  wound ; 
and  spoke  in  every  accent  of  that  faltering  voice.  And  as 
you  lingered  still,  there  stole  into  your  heart  the  conviction 
that  it  was  all  for  you — a  conviction  which  forced  tears  to 
your  eyes,  and  these  words  from  your  lips  :  "  He  loved  me, 
and  gave  Himself  for  me.  My  sins  nailed  Him  there ;  my 
curse  poured  its  vials  upon  that  drooping  head ;  my  stripes 
broke  that  royal  heart." 

"  So  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  just  as  Christian  came  up 
with  the  cross,  his  burden  loosed  from  off  his  shoulders,  and 
fell  from  off  his  back,  and  began  to  tumble ;  and  so  con 
tinued  to  do  till  it  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre, 
where  it  fell  in,  and  I  saw  it  no  more.  Then  was  Christian 
glad  and  lightsome  ;  and  said,  with  a  merry  heart, 

'  He  hath  given  me  rest  by  His  sorrow, 
And  life  by  His  death." 

Then  he  stood  still  awhile  to  look  and  wonder;  even  till  the 
springs  that  were  in  his  head  sent  the  waters  down  his 
cheeks." 


"GOD  IS  EVERYWHERE."  '   59 

Has  this  been  your  experience  ?  If  not,  seek  it ;  ask 
that  your  eyes  may  be  opened  to  see  the  love  of  God  to 
you,  revealed  in  the  cross  of  Jesus,  and  let  down  into  your 
life.  Then  \\ill  you  also  give  three  leaps  for  joy,  and  go  on 
your  way  singing. 

The  revelation  of  God's  love  will  have  five  resuHs  on  the 
receptive  spirit. 

I.    IT  WILL   MAKE   US   QUICK   TO   DISCOVER   GOD. 

Jacob  had  been  inclined  to  localize  God  in  his  father's 
tents  :  as  many  localize  Him  now  in  chapel,  church,  or 
minster ;  supposing  that  prayer  and  worship  are  more  accept 
able  there  than  anywhere  beside.  Now  he  learned  that 
God  was  equally  in  every  place — on  the  moorland  waste  as 
well  as  by  Isaac's  altar,  though  his  eye  had  been  too  blind 
to  perceive  Him.  In  point  of  fact,  the  difference  lay  not  in 
God,  but  in  himself;  the  human  spirit  carries  with  it  every 
where  its  own  atmosphere,  through  which  it  may  see,  or  not 
see,  the  presence  of  the  Omnipresent.  If  your  spirit  is 
reverent,  it  will  discern  God  on  a  moorland  waste.  If  your 
spirit  is  thoughtless  and  careless,  it  will  fail  to  find  Him 
even  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  many  men, 
who  might  have  kept  as  close  to  the  Apostle  Paul  as  his 
shadow,  who  would  not  have  seen  one  angel  vision  or  heard 
one  heavenly  word.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  Apostle 
were  to  spend  a  day  with  us,  he  would  see  traces  of  the 
glorious  presence  of  God  in  our  busy  streets  and  wrangling 
marts.  The  difference  is  not  in  the  place,  or  in  the  degrees 
of  God's  presence ;  but  in  the  keenness  of  the  spiritual  eye, 
since  all  places  are  equally  hallowed,  and  God  is  every 
where. 

When  we  have  been  touched  and  solemnized  by  some 


60  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

stately  service  or  stirring  discourse,  we  are  disposed  to  say, 
"  This  is  none  other  but  the  house  of  God ;  and  this  is  the 
gate  of  heaven."  But  we  are  not  disposed  to  say  as  much 
of  the  shop  or  counting-house  in  which  we  spend  the  greater 
part  of  our  time.  The  reason  for  this  is  to  be  found  in  the 
materialism  of  our  spirit.  If  only  we  were  full  of  God,  we 
should  find  that  every  spot  was  sacred,  every  moment 
hallowed,  every  act  a  sacrament ;  from  every  incident  we 
should  see  a  ladder  stretching  up  to  heaven  :  and  our  happy 
spirits  would  be  constantly  availing  themselves  of  the  oppor 
tunity  to  run  up  the  shining  way  and  embrace  their  dearest 
Lord. 

Similarly,  when  we  have  met  with  a  great  deliverance — as 
Abraham  on  Mount  Moriah — we  are  led  to  exclaim,  "  This 
is  the  finger  of  God."  But  we  are  not  apt  to  say  as  much  of 
every  trivial  incident  in  daily  life.  The  reason,  again,  is  in 
ourselves.  We  need  the  quick  insight  which  only  love  can 
give.  It  was  the  disciple  to  whom  Jesus  had  revealed  His 
special  love  that  discerned  Him  on  the  lake-shore,  and  cried, 
"  It  is  the  Lord."  And  if  we  were  as  willing  as  he  was  to 
drink  in  the  love  of  Jesus,  we  should  be  as  quick  as  he  was 
in  discerning  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

Up  to  this  moment  the  Lord  has  been  in  many  of  the 
moorland  wastes  of  your  lives  ;  but  you  have  not  known  it. 
He  has  been  beside  you  in  that  lonely  chamber  of  pain  ;  in 
that  irksome  situation ;  on  that  rugged  pathway  ;  by  that 
bitter  cross  ;  amid  those  godless  companions  ;  during  those 
hours  which  you  have  counted  secular  and  profane — but 
your  eyes  have  been  holden.  What  wonder  that  your  path 
has  been  so  drear!  But  if  you  will  only  take  home  to 
yourself  the  message  of  the  cross  of  Jesus,  "  God  loves  me ; " 
and  if  you  will  let  it  shed  its  perfume  through  your  secret 


''THIS  IS   THE   GATE   OF  HEAVEN."  6 1 

heart — then  you  will  never  feel  lonely  or  outcast  again.  You 
will  be  able  to  see  Him  where  no  other  eye  can  discern 
Him.  You  will  feel  the  ruddy  glow  of  His  love  when  others 
carry  chilled  and  torpid  hearts.  You  will  discover  that  a 
desolate  moor  is  one  of  the  mansions  of  your  Father's  house. 
You  will  detect  your  Father's  handwriting  in  every  letter ; 
your  Father's  seal  on  every  parcel ;  your  Father's  will  in 
every  event.  You  will  be  able  to  commune  with  Him  equally 
on  the  hill-side  as  amid  the  congregation.  And  you  will  be 
often  compelled  to  exclaim,  as  you  meet  with  fresh  revela 
tions  of  Himself,  in  the  most  unlikely  places,  "  This  is  none 
other  but  the  house  of  God ;  and  this  is  the  gate  of  heaven." 

II.    IT   WILL    INSPIRE   US    WITH    GODLY    FEAR. 

"  He  was  afraid,  and  said,  How  dreadful  is  this  place ! " 
"  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear  " — the  fear  that  hath  torment ; 
but  it  begets  in  us  another  fear,  which  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom  and  the  foundation  of  all  noble  lives ;  the  fear 
that  reveres  God,  and  shudders  to  grieve  Him ;  and  dreads 
to  lose  the  tiniest  chance  of  doing  His  holy  will.  True 
love  is  always  fearless  and  fearful.  It  is  fearless  with  the 
freedom  of  undoubting  trust ;  but  it  is  fearful  lest  it  should 
miss  a  single  grain  of  tender  affection,  or  should  bring 
a  moment's  shadow  over  the  face  of  the  beloved.  Those 
who  look  from  without  sometimes  rebuke  us  for  dwelling  so 
constantly  on  the  infinite  love  of  God,  surrounding  us,  as 
the  warm  Southern  seas  lap  around  shores  enamelled  with 
shells.  Some  say,  "  You  will  lead  people  to  live  loosely,  if 
you  tell  them  that  there  is  no  sin  which  may  not  be 
instantly  forgiven."  Ah  !  they  do  not  know  that  there  are 
none  who  fear  sin  so  much  as  those  who  know  that  they  are 
greatly  loved.  For  them  every  spot  is  full  of  the  presence 


62  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

of  the  Beloved.  Heaven  itself  does  not  more  evidently 
glow  with  it  than  each  spot  of  earth.  And  thus,  though  all 
other  fear  has  fled  before  all-mastering  love,  there  will  have 
come  into  the  spirit  another  fear,  which  distrusts  self  and 
clings  to  Christ,  and  works  out  its  salvation  \vith  fear  and 
trembling. 

III.    IT  WILL  CONSTRAIN  US  TO  GIVE  OURSELVES  TO  GOD. 

The  ordinary  reading  might  lead  us  to  suppose  that,  true 
to  his  worse  self,  Jacob  tried  to  make  a  bargain  with  God ; 
and  promised  to  take  Him  as  his,  on  certain  conditions. 
"  If  God  will  be  with  me,  and  keep  me  in  my  way,  and  give 

me  bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put  on  :  then ."  But  a 

better  reading  relieves  him  of  this  sad  imputation  ;  and 
tones  the  words  down  to  mean  that  if  the  Lord  would  be 
his  God,  then  the  stone  should  be  God's  house.  But,  how 
ever  the  words  may  run,  this  was  evidently  the  moment  of 
his  consecration.  He  was  constrained  by  love  of  God,  "no 
longer  to  live  to  himself,  but  to  Him." 

Have  you  done  thus,  dear  reader  ?  It  is  the  sole  condi 
tion  of  soul-health,  and  peace,  and  power.  You  are 
Christ's  by  right ;  but  you  have  been  living  as  if  you  were 
your  own,  and  had  never  been  bought  by  His  precious  blood. 
Is  it  then  to  be  wondered  at,  that  your  life  has  been  such 
a  miserable  failure  ?  You  are  robbing  Jesus  of  His  own 
purchased  possession ;  and  you  cannot  expect  to  enjoy  the 
fulness  of  His  salvation.  Give  yourself  to  Him  now. 
And,  as  soon  as  you  will  to  do  so,  He  takes  that  which  you 
give.  Or,  if  you  cannot  give  yourself,  then  lie  low  at  His 
feet,  and  ask  Him  to  take  all  you  are  and  have.  And  so 
soon  as  the  words  have  passed  your  lips,  He  will  answer  your 
prayer,  and  make  you  His  for  ever. 


ONE-TENTH  FOR   GOD.  63 

IV.  IT  WILL  PROMPT  US  TO  DEVOTE  OUR  PROPERTY 
TO  HlM. 

"  Of  all  that  Thou  shalt  give  me,  I  will  surely  give  the 
tenth  unto  Thee."  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  this 
became  the  principle  of  Jacob's  life :  and  if  so,  he  shames 
the  majority  of  Christian  people — most  of  whom  do  not  give 
on  principle ;  and  give  a  very  uncertain  and  meagre  per 
centage  of  their  income.  The  Church  would  have  no  lack 
if  every  one  of  its  members  acted  upon  this  principle.  Let 
the  proportion  be  diminished,  if  you  will;  though  that  were 
surely  unworthy  of  us,  who  sing, 

"  Were  the  whole  realm  of  nature  mine, 
That  were  an  offering  far  too  small ; 
Love  so  amazing,  so  divine, 
Demands  my  life,  my  soul,  my  all. " 

But  whether  the  proportion  be  diminished  or  not,  let 
each  Christian  person  resolve  to  give  systematically  to  the 
Lord's  cause ;  and  to  put  aside,  as  first-fruits  from  all  profits 
and  receipts,  a  certain  part,  which  shall  be  considered  as  dis 
tinctly  and  exclusively  the  Lord's,  to  be  applied  as  He  may 
direct. 

There  is  something  better  than  this — viz.,  to  consider 
oneself,  one's  earnings,  one's  strength,  one's  all,  as  belonging 
to  the  dear  Master ;  as  the  rags,  and  earnings,  and  jewels,  of 
slaves  belonged  absolutely  to  their  owners,  who  had  bought 
them  off  the  block.  But  many,  admitting  this  theoretically, 
do  nothing  practically ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  better  to  give  a 
regular  proportion  certainly,  and  as  much  more  as  you 
choose,  as  a  perpetual  reminder  that  all  you  have  and  are  is 
not  your  own,  but  Jesus  Christ's. 

It  is  failure  in  this  which  so  often  brings  barrenness  and 
joylessness  into  Christian  lives.  This  is  the  reason  that  so 


64  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

many  of  the  ascending  angels  never  come  down  again,  or 
return  with  empty  hands.  This  is  why  we  sow  much,  and 
bring  in  little ;  eat,  and  have  not  enough ;  drink,  and  are  not 
satisfied ;  and  put  our  wages  into  a  bag  with  holes.  We 
have  robbed  God  in  tithes  and  offerings.  But  if  we  would 
resolve  to  give  Him  tithes  of  all,  and  to  bring  them  into 
His  storehouse,  we  should  find  that  He  would  open  the 
windows  of  heaven,  and  pour  us  out  such  a  blessing  that 
there  would  not  be  room  to  receive  it. 

V.  IT  WILL  FILL  us  WITH  JOY. 

"Then  Jacob  lifted  up  his  feet"  (xxix.  i,  marg.}.  Does 
not  that  denote  the  light-hearted  alacrity  with  which  he 
sped  upon  his  way  ?  His  feet  were  winged  with  joy,  and 
seemed  scarcely  to  tread  the  earth.  All  sorrow  had  gone 
from  his  heart ;  for  he  had  handed  his  burdens  over  to  those 
ascending  angels.  And  this  will  be  our  happy  lot,  if  only 
we  will  believe  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us.  We,  too, 
shall  lose  our  burdens  at  the  foot  of  the  cross ;  and  we  shall 
learn  the  blessed  secret  of  handing  over,  as  soon  as  they 
arise,  all  worries  and  fears  to  our  pitiful  High  Priest.  Then 
shall  our  mouth  be  "  filled  with  laughter,  and  our  tongue  with 
singing."  Our  heart  shall  "  bubble  over  with  good  matter." 
"  Our  soul  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord;  the  humble 
shall  hear  thereof,  and  be  glad." 


VI. 

Ctmcatt'on  of 

GENESIS   XXIX. 

"  Life  is  only  bright  when  it  proceedeth 

Towards  a  truer,  deeper  Life  above  ; 

Human  Love  is  sweetest  when  it  leadeth 

To  a  more  Divine  and  perfect  Love." 

A.  A.  PROCTER. 

to  the  love  of  God  comes  the  love  of  man  or 
woman,  as  a  factor  in  the  education  of  a  human 
spirit.  Each  one  of  us  is  capable  of  giving  out  a  vast 
wealth  of  love ;  we  must  love  and  be  loved  :  and  almost 
everything  depends  on  the  twin-spirit  whom  we  choose — 
as  the  object  of  our  affection ;  and  as  the  hearth  at 
whose  fires  we  may  warm  ourselves,  when  chilled  and 
repelled  by  an  unfriendly  world.  That  love  may  make  or 
mar  us ;  may  transfigure  or  degrade  us — and  which  it  shall 
be  is  settled  by  the  objects  whom  we  choose,  and  the  way 
in  which  we  treat  them. 

Jacob's  encounter  with  Rachel  at  the  first  well  he  came 
to,  reminds  us  that  though  there  is  nothing  more  important 
than  the  union  of  heart  with  heart,  there  is  nothing  into 
which  people  drift  more  heedlessly.  A  fancy,  a  look,  a 
smile,  a  touch,  a  moment's  talk  in  a  crowded  room,  amid 
the  excitement  of  an  evening's  gaiety — any  of  these  is 


66  ISRAEL:  A    PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

deemed  sufficient  to  justify  a  choice,  which  may  affect  the 
destiny  of  the  spirit  for  evermore. 

Of  course  we  do  not  deny  that  Jacob  may  find  his  other 
self  in  the  beautiful  girl  at  the  well,  under  the  Eastern  noon ; 
and  that  she  may  prove  to  be  the  one  without  whom  his  life 
would  be  incomplete.  It  may  so  happen,  through  the  kind 
providence  of  God,  which  shields  us  from  dangers  we  do 
not  perceive,  and  loads  us  with  benefits  we  do  not  deserve. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  the  highest  folly  to  leave  so  momentous  a 
matter  to  be  decided  by  a  transient  passion,  or  by  the 
charms  of  a  fascinating  manner  and  a  pretty  face.  Do  not 
carry  your  heart  on  your  sleeve.  Do  not  let  your  affections 
trail  loosely  on  the  ground,  to  catch  in  every  thorn-brake. 
Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind ;  test  the  spirits  whether 
they  be  of  God.  Do  not  take  an  irrevocable  step  without 
earnest  prayer  that  He  would  still  the  voices  of  self-choice  ; 
keep  you  from  making  a  mistake ;  and  reveal  to  you  His 
will. 

It  is  not  enough  to  think  and  pray  thus  when  a  new 
affection  has  already  flung  its  spell  over  you.  At  such  a 
time,  the  soul  is  thrilling  beneath  its  new-found  rapture ;  and 
it  is  much  harder  for  the  judgment  to  discover  the  voice  of 
God,  because  the  heart  deflects  it — as  the  mass  of  iron  in  a 
modern  steamboat  deflects  the  needle  from  the  pole.  And 
therefore,  it  is  of  the  highest  importance  that  these  subjects 
be  made  a  matter  of  prayer  and  thought  in  the  earlier  stages 
of  life,  when  a  supreme  affection  is,  as  yet,  an  ideal  and  a 
dream.  Let  mothers  speak  of  them  to  their  daughters  ;  and 
fathers  to  their  sons — as  Isaac  did  to  Jacob  (ch.  xxviii.  i,  2). 
Let  young  men,  whenever  they  think  of  these  matters,  turn 
their  thoughts  into  prayers  that  God  would  guide  them — as 
He  did  Abraham's  servant — to  the  woman  whom  He  has 


CONDITIONS   OF  A    TRUE  HOME.  6/ 

chosen  to  be  their  helpmeet.  And  let  Christian  women  lay 
aside  all  idea  of  attracting  men  to  themselves.  Let  them 
quiet  their  hearts  as  weaned  babes.  Let  them  constitute 
themselves  the  wards  of  God  :  leaving  Him  to  choose  for 
them  the  one  who  shall  give  them  strength  for  sweetness  ; 
defence  for  weakness ;  protection  for  helplessness ;  and  love 
for  love. 

There  is  no  training  of  such  value  to  man  or  woman  as 
the  training  of  the  home — to  which  the  deep  instincts  of  our 
nature,  and  the  most  solemn  sanctions  of  the  Bible,  point  us. 
Jacob  found  it  so.  Rachel  and  Leah  had  a  very  powerful 
influence  upon  his  character  and  life ;  and  we  need  to  take 
warning  by  his  mistakes,  and  reap  his  rewards. 

I.     THE  FOUR  CONDITIONS  OF  A  TRUE  HOME. 

(i)  There  must  be  a  supreme  affection.  This  was  clearly 
a  love-match.  "Jacob  loved  Rachel"  (verse  18),  is  a 
sufficient  explanation.  And  no  marriage  is  heaven-made, 
heaven-sent,  or  heaven-sanctioned,  which  does  not  spring 
from  a  supreme  love.  Alas,  how  many  marry  from  some 
less  worthy  motive  !  Some  for  a  home ;  others  to  escape 
from  uncongenial  surroundings  ;  others  for  position ;  others 
for  baser  reasons  still.  All  these  sin  against  God's  purpose  ; 
they  sin  against  one  another ;  and,  not  least,  they  sin 
against  themselves.  No  two  should  marry  unless  each  feels 
that  life  without  the  other  would  be  incomplete.  Less 
than  this  will  never  suffice.  If  one  loves,  and  not  the  other, 
there  cannot  be  true  happiness  for  there  is  no  reciprocity ; 
no  mutual  satisfaction.  To  give  without  receiving  is  to  run 
to  waste;  to  take  without  giving  is  to  harden  the  heart, 
till  it  becomes  ice.  If  neither  loves,  what  is  it  less  than  the 

crime  which  cries  myriad-tongued  to  heaven  on  every  night 

E  2 


68  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

breeze  ?  But  if  there  be  true  love,  then,  though  one  has 
been  taken  from  the  other  by  death  before  they  stand  to 
gether  at  the  marriage  altar,  yet  in  the  sight  of  God's  high 
angels  those  twain  are  one  for  ever. 

It  is  needless  to  show  how  the  necessity  of  the  presence 
of  a  supreme  love  is  the  ground  and  justification  of  mono 
gamy,  the  union  of  two.  This  has  been  the  pride  and  glory 
of  the  German  peoples,  as  even  Tacitus  discerned ;  and 
this  has  been  the  cradle  of  all  those  higher  ministries  which 
distinguish  our  people,  and  assign  us  the  leading  position 
among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  "  Therefore  take  heed  to 
your  spirit,  and  let  none  deal  treacherously  against  the  wife 
of  his  youth." 

You  have  no  right  to  excite  that  love,  or  play  with  it, 
unless  you  are  prepared  to  satisfy  it,  as  far  as  you  may.  You 
have  no  right  to  give  that  love  away,  till  you  discover  that 
all  other  conditions  are  assured.  You  have  no  right  to 
marry  if  this  love  be  absent.  You  have  no  right  to  treat 
either  man  or  woman  as  you  would  not  like  your  brother  or 
sister  to  be  treated,  or  as  you  would  not  like  to  be  treated 
yourself. 

(2)  Marriage  must  be  "  only  in  the  Lord."  Jacob's  was 
so.  He  might  have  taken  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Heth, 
as  Esau  did,  steeped  in  the  idolatries  and  impurities  which 
cursed  the  land.  But,  guided  by  his  parents'  counsels,  he 
crossed  the  desert  to  obtain  a  wife  who  had  been  reared 
in  a  home  in  which  there  lingered  still  the  memory  of  the 
worship  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Nahor,  and  of  their 
father  Terah  (xxxi.  53). 

The  Bible  rings  from  end  to  end  with  warnings  against 
mixed  marriages.  "  Thou  shalt  not  give  thy  daughter  unto 
his  son ;  nor  take  his  daughter  unto  thy  son :  for  they  will 


"ONLY  IN  THE  LORD."  69 

turn  away  thy  son  from  following  Me,  to  serve  other  gods " 
(Deut.  vii.  3).  "  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with 
unbelievers ;  for  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with 
unrighteousness  ;  light  with  darkness  ;  Christ  with  Belial  ?  " 
(2  Cor.  vi.  14,  15).  "She  is  at  liberty  to  be  married  to 
whom  she  will ;  only  in  the  Lord  "  (i  Cor.  vii.  39). 

We  need  not  be  surprised  at  these  strong  and  repeated 
prohibitions.  A  mixed  marriage  is  a  prolific  source  of 
misery.  In  the  course  of  a  considerable  pastoral  experi 
ence,  I  have  never  known  one  to  result  in  perfect  happiness. 
Believers,  in  such  unions,  do  not  level  their  unbelieving 
partners  up  to  Christ ;  but  are  themselves  dragged  down  to 
infinite  misery  and  self-reproach.  "  Did  not  Solomon,  king 
of  Israel,  sin  by  these  things  ?  Yet  among  many  nations 
was  there  no  king  like  unto  him,  who  was  beloved  of  his 
God :  and  God  made  him  king  over  all  Israel.  Never 
theless,  even  him  did  outlandish  women  cause  to  sin " 
(Neh.  xiii.  26).  How  can  there  be  sympathy  in  the 
deepest  matters  ?  Each  feels  that  there  is  one  subject 
on  which  they  are  not  agreed ;  and  this  is  a  fatal  barrier 
to  perfect  union.  The  ungodly  partner  despises  the 
Christian  for  marrying  in  the  teeth  of  principle.  The 
Christian  is  disappointed  because  the  apparent  influence 
gained  before  marriage  is  dissipated  soon  after  the  knot 
is  irrevocably  tied.  Well  might  Rebekah  be  weary  of 
her  life  through  those  daughters  of  Heth !  Many  a 
Christian  girl  has  married  an  unbeliever,  in  the  hope  of 
saving  him,  and  has  bitterly  rued  her  choice  :  she  has  seen 
her  influence  wane ;  and  has  learnt,  though  too  late,  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  will  not  co-operate  with  our  efforts,  if  they 
are  based  on  distinct  disobedience  to  one  of  the  clearest 
commands  of  the  Bible.  If  a  man  threatens  that  if  you 


7O  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

deny  yourself  to  him,  he  will  take  violent  or  fatal  steps,  let 
him  \  He  has  no  right  to  put  you  in  that  position ;  he 
simply  wants  to  get  you  into  his  power :  and  he  will  be  much 
too  great  a  coward  to  carry  out  his  threats.  Do  right  in  the 
sight  of  God ;  and  leave  him  to  settle  the  matter  with  his 
Maker. 

(3)  A  true  home  should  be  based  on  the  good-will  of  parents 
and  friends.     This  is  not  necessary  where  sanction  is  with 
held  from  caprice.     But  where  it  can  possibly  be  obtained, 
there   is   the   halo   of   a   brighter   promise   encircling    the 
union  of  two  young  hearts,  when  it  is  ratified  amid  the 
congratulations    of    rejoicing    friends.       So    it    was    with 
Jacob  :    "  Isaac  called   Jacob,  and   blessed  him,  and  sent 
him    away "    (Gen.    xxviii.    1-5).      It   is   wise   and    right, 
where  practicable,  for  children  to  consult,  in  such  matters, 
those   whose    love    has    made   them   the   eager   guardians 
of  their   opening   life;   and   to   do   so   by  courtesy,  even 
when  mature  years  have  given  them  the  right  to  choose 
and    act   for    themselves.      But    if    parents    would    have 
such   confidences  when  their  children  are  old,  they  must 
make  themselves  their  confidants  whilst  they  are  young : 
they  must  give  as  well  as  receive ;  they  must  exercise  their 
authority  by  love  and  reasoning,  rather  than  by  constraint ; 
and  they  have  no  right  to  let  their  decision  be   warped, 
through  any  personal  whim,  from  the  straight  line  of  what 
would  best  serve  the  highest  interest  of  a  beloved  child. 

(4)  There  should  be  some  prospect  of  statable  livelihood. 
In  the  broad  wealthy  land  where  Jacob  found  himself,  there 
was  not  much  difficulty  about  that.     It  is  a  much  more  com 
plicated  matter  amid  the  conditions  of  our  crowded  modern 
life,     Yet  there  ought  to  be  some  security  of  a  competence. 


SUPREME  AFFECTION.  "Jl 

Young  people  have  no  need  to  begin  where  their  parents 
are  leaving  off;  to  do  so  would  avoid  much  wholesome 
difficulty  and  the  opportunities  for  mutual  help  :  but  it  is 
equally  absurd  to  run  the  risk  of  a  late  repentance  for  a 
rash  marriage.  Young  man,  select  as  your  partner  one 
who,  with  refinement  and  culture,  is  not  above  turning  her 
hands  to  the  practical  details  of  household  management, 
and  who  knows  what  to  do  and  how  to  do  it.  Young 
women,  give  your  hearts  to  men  who  love  you  well  enough 
to  earn  you  through  years  of  faithful  and  steadfast  courtship, 
if  so  it  must  be.  Any  one  could  do  one  deed  of  gallantry ; 
it  took  a  true  man  to  serve  for  seven  long  years. 

If  these  four  conditions  are  fulfilled,  there  will  be  the 
strongest  reasons  for  anticipating  a  union  which  shall  be  a 
miniature  picture  of  that  sublime  event  for  which  the  whole 
creation  groans  :  when  the  midnight  air  shall  be  startled  by 
the  tidings  of  the  Bridegroom's  advent ;  and  the  Church 
shall  pass  as  the  Bride  into  the  wedding  feast. 

II.  THE  EXPULSIVE  POWER  OF  SUPREME  AFFECTION. 

"  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  Rachel ;  and  they  seemed 
unto  him  but  a  few  days,  for  the  love  he  had  to  her  "  (ver. 
20).  That  sentence  always  charms  us  for  its  beauty  and  its 
truth.  Love  has  the  power  of  making  a  rough  road  easy, 
and  a  weary  waiting  time  short.  It  makes  us  oblivious  to 
many  things,  which,  for  lack  of  it,  would  be  insupportable. 
The  three  mighty  men  break  through  the  armed  host  of  the 
Philistines,  to  get  one  draught  of  water  from  the  well  for  their 
beloved  chieftain,  oblivious  of  personal  risk— -for  the  love  they 
bare  to  him.  The  trembling  women,  on  the  resurrection 
morning,  ventured  out  into  the  perils  of  the  crowded  city, 


72  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

whilst  it  was  yet  dark,  that  they  might  embalm  the  body  of 
their  Lord ;  nor  do  they  appear  to  have  considered  the 
perils  amid  which  they  threaded  their  way  to  His  grave— for 
the  love  they  bare  to  Him,  The  martyrs  died  amid  bitter 
torture,  with  a  smile  on  their  faces  and  a  song  on  their  lips, 
not  counting  their  lives  dear;  but  reckoning  it  an  honour  to 
spill  their  heart's  blood— -for  the  love  they  bare  to  Him. 
Many  a  woman  has  nursed  her  children  through  loathsome 
disorders,  doing  for  them  what  no  money  would  hire  a 
servant  to  do ;  but  she  has  not  considered  the  cost— -for  the 
love  she  bare  to  them.  Yea,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  endured 
the  cross,  and  despised  the  shame  ;  stooped  to  a  felon's 
death;  bore  the  base  treatment  of  coarse  and  brutal  soldiery; 
and  rejoiced  to  lay  down  His  \\fe-for  the  love  He  bare  to  us. 
Do  you  find  it  hard  to  deny  yourself,  to  make  the  required 
sacrifices  for  doing  His  will,  and  to  confess  Him  ?  There  is 
one  cure,  a  short  and  easy  one.  Go  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
ask  Him  to  shed  the  love  of  Christ  abroad  in  your  heart, 
and  so  teach  you  to  love  Him  who  first  loved  you.  Then, 
as  the  tides  of  that  love  rise  within  your  heart,  they  will  con 
strain  you  to  live,  not  for  yourself,  but  for  Him;  then  burdens 
will  be  light  that  once  crushed  ;  roads  will  be  pleasant  that 
once  strained  and  tired  ;  hours  will  fly  that  were  once  leaden- 
footed  ;  years  will  seem  as  a  day.  Love's  labour  is  always 
light. 

III.  SOME  CLOSING  WORDS. 

Are  you  unmarried  ?  Do  not  bewail  yourself,  as  if  your 
life  must  be  incomplete.  Yours  is  not  a  higher  state,  as 
the  priest  has  falsely  taught ;  but  it  is  neither  a  failure  nor 
a  shame.  It  will  attain  to  finished  beauty,  if  only  you 
walk  in  the  path  which  your  Heavenly  Father  has  prepared 


THE   OBJECT  OF  LOVE.  73 

for  you.  Cease  to  measure  yourself  by  human  standards. 
Find  rest  in  being  just  what  your  Heavenly  Father  wills  you 
to  be.  Break  the  alabaster  box  of  your  affection  on  Him, 
and  His,  for  His  sake.  It  may  be  that  you  have  been  kept 
free  from  the  limited  circle  of  a  home,  in  order  to  pour  your 
love  on  those  who  have  no  one  else  to  love  them.  But 
remember,  it  is  possible  for  all  such  to  live  in  perfect  self- 
restraint  and  purity,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
"  which  is  in  us." 

Are  you  disappointed  ?  Jacob  was  disappointed  in  poor 
Leah  ;  and  she  spent  many  a  bitter  hour  of  anguish.  Her 
father  had  forced  her  on  a  man  who  did  not  love  her,  and 
who  wanted  to  be  rid  of  her.  She  had  a  woman's  heart, 
and  pined  for  love  that  never  came.  There  are  few  stories 
more  touching  than  the  secret  history  of  Leah,  as  revealed 
in  the  names  she  gave  her  boys,  and  her  reasons  in  giving 
them.  Yet  remember,  she  had  her  compensations  in  the 
love  of  those  strong,  healthy  lads,  who  greeted  her  with  the 
title,  "  Mother,"  so  dear  to  a  woman's  heart.  And  there  are, 
doubtless,  compensations  in  your  lot,  if  you  are  not  too 
bitter  to  see  them.  And  this  is  the  best  of  all :  "  The  Lord 
will  look  upon  your  affliction  "  (ver.  32).  Meanwhile,  do 
not  flinch  from  doing  your  duty  as  in  His  sight. 

Are  you  happily  married  ?  Then  beware  lest  you  make 
an  idol  of  your  happiness ;  or  suppose  that  there  is  no 
further  need  to  watch.  Is  it  not  remarkable  that  Jacob's 
dearest  wife  was  the  source  of  his  defeat  and  disgrace,  in 
after  years,  because  she  hid  in  her  baggage  the  household 
idols  of  her  father  ?  That  was  a  remarkable  command  that 
Moses  gave  to  Israel :  "  If  the  wife  of  thy  bosom  entice 
thee  secretly,  saying,  Let  us  go  and  serve  other  gods,  thou 
shalt  not  consent  unto  her ;  neither  shalt  thou  spare,  but 


74  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

thine  hand  shalt  be  first  upon  her  to  put  her  to  death." 
Does  it  not  teach  us  that  we  are  not  to  receive,  without 
question,  the  suggestions  of  even  our  dearest  ?  We  must 
ever  put  God  first.  "  If  any  come  to  Me,  and  hate  not  his 
father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  children,  and  brethren, 
and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  My 
disciple." 

Have  you  become  a  Christian  since  you  were  married  to 
an  unbeliever  ?  Then  do  not  seek,  in  any  wise,  to  alter  your 
relations  (i  Cor.  vii.  13,  14) ;  but  expect,  in  all  assurance, 
that  you  will  be  the  happy  means  of  winning  that  beloved 
one  to  Christ.  And  seek  this,  not  so  much  by  frequent 
speech — there  is  a  time  to  speak,  but  also  a  time  to  be 
silent ; — but  rather  seek  it  by  the  admirable  beauty  and 
consistency  of  your  life  :  "  That  if  any  obey  not  the  word, 
they  may  without  the  word  be  gained  by  your  manner  of 
life,  beholding  your  behaviour"  (i  Peter  iii.  i). 

Above  all,  withhold  not  your  love  from  the  dear  Master, 
Christ.  Hold  all  human  love  in  Him.  You  may  love  to 
the  uttermost  of  your  power,  if  only  you  make  Him  first ; 
and  take  your  love  as  His  gift ;  and  enjoy  it  in  Him  ;  and 
thank  Him  for  it.  So  human  love  will  teach  you  to  under 
stand  Divine  love ;  and  from  your  thoughts  you  may  under 
stand  His  thoughts  :  "  Every  one  that  loveth  .  .  .  knoweth 
God."  "  That  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  we  may 
be  able  to  comprehend  .  .  .  the  love  of  Christ." 


VII. 


of  2Ufe, 


GENESIS  XXX. 


"  Let  us,  then,  be  what  we  are  ;  and  speak  what  we  think  ;  and  in 

all  things 

Keep  ourselves  loyal  to  truth,  and  the  sacred  professions  of  friend 
ship. 

Of  all  that  is  unsound,  beware  !  "  LONGFELLOW 

Sii 

fN  our  last  chapter,  we  saw  how  Jacob  built  for  himself  a 
home.  But  ah  —  what  a  home  !  The  presence  of  the 
two  sisters  there  was  fatal  to  its  peace.  They  who  had 
been  happy  enough  as  sisters  before  he  came,  could  not 
now  live  in  such  close  quarters,  as  wives  of  the  same 
husband,  without  incessant  jealousy  and  heart-burning. 
Each  had  her  own  grievance.  Poor  Leah  knew  that  Jacob 
had  never  loved  her  ;  and  that  she  was  not  the  wife  of  his 
choice  :  and  though  God  compensated  her  by  giving  her 
that  pride  of  Oriental  women,  a  family  of  sons,  yet  even 
this  was  a  new  source  of  anguish  to  her  ;  for  Rachel  envied 
her.  Frightfully  desolate  was  she  in  that  home  ;  and  the 
names  of  her  sons  are  like  so  many  landmarks  of  her 
misery.  But  Rachel  must  have  been  equally  miserable  : 
true,  she  had  her  husband's  love,  but  she  could  not  be  sure 
of  keeping  it  ;  and  she  had  the  mortification  of  seeing  her 


?  ISRAEL:   A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

sister's  children  growing  up  as  her  husband's  heirs.  How 
eagerly  she  prayed,  and  fretted,  and  proudly  chafed  ! 

What  wonder,  then,  that  the  children  grew  up  wild  and 
bad  ?  Reuben,  unstable  as  water,  excitable  and  passionate  ; 
Simeon,  quick  to  obey,  but  quick  to  desperate  cruelty  ;  and 
Levi,  a  willing  accomplice  in  his  crime.  When  children 
turn  out  badly,  and  the  beautiful  gate  of  childhood  does  not 
lead  to  the  fair  temple  of  mature  life,  it  is  generally  the  fault 
of  the  home-training ;  and  it  is  more  often  the  result  of  what 
they  see  than  of  what  they  are  taught.  Whatever  Jacob 
may  have  been — and  I  fear  that  his  example  was  none  of  the 
best, — yet  the  impressions  received  in  the  women's  tents,  of 
high  words  and  evil  passion,  would  be  enough  to  ruin  any 
child.  Beware  how  you  act  at  home.  Remember  what 
keen  little  eyes  are  watching  you ;  and  with  what  absolute 
mimicry  they  will  repeat  what  they  see. 

But  it  is  not  so  much  Jacob's  home  life,  as  his  business 
dealings,  that  we  have  now  to  consider. 

He  served  fourteen  years,  as  a  dowry  for  his  two  wives  ; 
and  at  the  time  when  Rachel  gave  birth  to  her  first-born 
Joseph,  that  period  had  elapsed.  So  soon  as  mother  and 
child  were  able  to  undertake  so  long  and  fatiguing  a  journey, 
Jacob  declared  his  intention  of  returning  to  Canaan ;  and 
this  resolve  was  perhaps  precipitated  by  a  message  from 
Rebekah,  to  say  that  there  was  now  no  further  reason  for 
his  absence. 

This  proposal  alarmed  Laban,  who  had  learnt  to  value  his 
services ;  and  was  much  too  astute  to  let  him  go,  without 
making  an  effort  to  retain  so  valuable  a  servant.  "  Tarry," 
said  he,  "I  pray  thee,  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes ; 
for  I  have  learned  by  experience  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed 
me  for  thy  sake.'"  Jacob  at  once  caught  at  the  opportunity 


JACOB'S   GUILT.  77 

of  making  an  independent  provision  for  his  large  and  in 
creasing  family  ;  and  the  bargain  was  struck. 

Eastern  sheep  are  almost  wholly  white  ;  the  goats  black  ; 
the  parti-coloured  rare.  Jacob  proposed,  therefore,  that  all 
the  brown  and  speckled  should  be  at  once  removed ;  and 
that  all  of  that  colour,  which  the  flock  produced  afterwards, 
should  be  his  wage.  There  was  no  harm  in  this ;  unless  he 
had  already  made  up  his  mind  to  take  the  unfair  advantage 
of  Laban,  which  is  a  dark  blot  on  his  name.  Supposing 
that  this  were  the  case,  we  have  here  a  humiliating  picture 
of  two  unprincipled  men,  each  trying  to  outwit  the  other : 
Laban  chuckling  over  his  bargain,  and  taking  care  to 
remove,  not  only  the  young,  but  the  old,  and  sending  them 
off  under  the  care  of  his  sons ;  Jacob,  laughing  in  his  sleeve, 
because  he  knew,  or  thought  he  knew,  a  plan  of  winning  to 
himself  a  great  advantage.  But  whether  this  were  premedi 
tated  in  the  first  instance  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  Jacob 
acted  as  a  cheat  and  a  rogue.  Laban  entrusted  his  flocks 
to  his  care  without  supposing  for  a  moment  that  he  would 
tamper  with  the  usual  course  of  nature.  Jacob,  oa»the 
other  hand,  did  not  scruple  to  use  every  art  to  secure  his 
own  advantage  at  Laban's  cost ;  taking  means  to  procure  for 
himself  the  produce  of  the  strongest  of  the  flock,  and  to 
leave  to  Laban  the  enfeebled  and  the  weak. 

It  is  very  surprising  to  find  how  eagerly  some  of  the  older 
commentators  try  to  vindicate  Jacob  in  this.  They  might 
almost  as  soon  sprinkle  rose-water  on  a  sewer.  And  it 
certainly  lowers  the  standard  of  morality  to  attempt  to 
prove  that  there  was  not  very  much  harm  after  all  in  what 
Jacob  did.  I  feel  no  temptation  to  do  this. 

The  Bible  does  not  hesitate  to  tell  us  the  very  worst  about 
its  heroes ;  that  we  may  better  magnify  the  grace  of  God, 


7  ISRAEL:  A   PPINCE    WITH  GOD. 

which,  out  of  such  materials,  could  create  trophies  of  mercy. 
Let  Jacob  be  painted  in  colours  borrowed  from  Rembrandt's 
brush ;  and  there  is  all  the  more  wonder  that  the  grace  of 
God  could  overcome  his  duplicity  and  cunning,  and  make 
of  him  a  diamond  of  the  very  first  water. 

Let  us  draw  near,  and  remonstrate  with  Jacob,  as  he  sits 
beside  his  flocks,  in  the  scorching  Eastern  sun ;  and  let  us 
carefully  notice  his  excuses  and  pleas. 

He  might  urge,  first,  the  necessity  of  self-protection. 
"  My  uncle  is  bent  on  defrauding  me,  and  keeping  me 
down ;  and,  if  I  did  not  do  this,  he  would  succeed.  You 
must  meet  a  man  on  his  own  ground  ;  and,  as  he  has  chosen 
to  play  the  rogue  with  me,  I  cannot  see  the  harm  of  turning 
his  own  weapons  on  himself."  This  reasoning  did  not  die 
with  Jacob :  it  is  still  passed  round  the  world  in  act  and 
word ;  and  good  men  are  sometimes  sorely  tempted  to  make 
use  of  it.  It  is  undoubtedly  hard  to  find  that  another  man 
is  taking  an  unfair  advantage  of  you  by  manoeuvres  which, 
from  your  soul,  you  loathe.  But  is  that  a  justification  for 
you  to  resort  to  them  ?  This  has  come  into  your  life  as  a 
test ;  to  prove  whether  you  believe  that  the  world  is  ordered 
by  God  or  the  devil.  If  you  believe  it  is  the  devil's  world, 
it  is  quite  likely  that  you  will  try  to  hold  your  ground,  or 
gain  an  advantage  by  arts,  which  he  alone  would  approve. 
But  if  you  really  believe  in  the  Almighty  God,  you  will  be 
sure  that  falsehood  must  ultimately  fail,  and  righteousness 
finally  win  :  and  you  will  meet  fraud  by  faith ;  cunning  by 
conscience ;  and  violence  by  a  Divine  virtue.  Goliath  may 
wear  armour ;  but  that  is  no  reason  why  David  should. 
Remember  how  the  Lord  hath  said  :  "  I  will  keep  thee." 
Your  competitors  may  do  mean  and  dirty  tricks ;  but  you 
will  live  to  see  them  trapped  in  their  own  pits,  and  pierced 


"BUSINESS  IS  BUSINESS"  79 

by  their  own  swords  :  whilst  if  you  continue  to  do  right, 
you  will  go  steadily  forward  to  success ;  as  the  sun  at  noon 
rids  himself  of  the  clouds  that  obscured  his  early  rays. 
"  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good ;  so  shalt  thou  dwell  in 
the  land,  and  verily  thou  shalt  be  fed.  Fret  not  thyself  in 
any  wise  to  do  evil ;  for  evildoers  shall  be  cut  off."  "The 
Lord  shall  be  thy  confidence,  and  shall  keep  thy  foot  from 
being  taken." 

He  might  urge,  as  a  second  plea,  the  familiar  formula, 
Business  is  business.  "  It  is  quite  right  to  speak  of  Bethel 
when  that  sacred  anniversary  comes  round ;  but  it  is 
out  of  the  question  to  suppose  that  I  can  act  and  speak  in 
my  daily  business,  as  I  did  when  that  angel-ladder  glistened 
before  my  view.  Easiness  must  be  regulated  on  its  own 
distinct  laws ;  and  they  are  quite  different  to  those  which 
obtain  at  Bethel.3'  It  is  strange  to  hear  professing  Christians 
speak  thus.  They  have  one  standard  of  morality  for  the 
Lord's  day ;  and  another  for  the  other  six.  They  permit 
things  in  business  which  are  contrary  to  the  spirit  and  letter 
of  the  Word  of  God;  and  which  they  would  not  sanction  for 
a  moment  in  the  ordinary  dealings  of  daily  life :  and  they 
quiet  their  conscience  by  the  easy  motto,  Business  is  busi 
ness.  I  never  can  understand  what  difference  there  is  in  the 
morality  of  an  act,  because  it  has  to  do  with  buying  and 
selling ;  or  why  we  should  not  apply  to  such  an  act  the  same 
principles  by  which  we  judge  other  actions.  According  to 
the  practice  of  some,  we  should  read  the  golden  rule  thus  : 
"  Do  as  you  would  be  done  by — except  in  business."  "  Do 
not  steal  "  applies  everywhere — except  in  shops  and  factories. 
"Lying  lips  are  always  an  abomination  to  the  Lord"-except 
when  a  salesman  wants  to  dispose  of  some  soiled  goods. 
If  this  were  the  case,  the  larger  part  of  the  life  of  most  men 


SO  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

would  be  outside  the  circumference  of  God's  commands. 
But  it  cannot  be.  The  moralities  of  the  Gospel  resemble 
the  law  of  gravitation  :  to  which  nothing  is  secular  ;  nothing 
common ;  but  which  determines  the  pathway  of  a  grain  of 
dust  on  the  autumn  breeze,  as  well  as  the  march  of 
worlds. 

But  Jacob  might  urge,  as  his  third  plea,  that  this  was  the 
general  practice.  "Other  shepherds  practise  it.  Laban 
must  know  all  about  it ;  or  he  might  know.  When  you  are 
with  Chaldeans,  you  must  do  as  Chaldeans  do.  I  am  not 
worse  than  others."  But  a  universal  practice  does  not  con 
done  sin ;  this  is  the  difference  between  God's  laws  and 
man's.  Let  all  men  break  a  human  law :  it  stands  abrogated 
on  the  statute  book  ;  it  cannot  be  enforced.  But  though  all 
men  break  a  Divine  law,  it  will  exact  its  penalty  from  all. 
Multitudes  may  have  sinned  together ;  but  they  will  not  be 
able  to  screen  each  other,  or  to  escape.  And  if  you  do  a 
mean  thing,  it  will  come  back  to  roost  in  your  heart ;  and 
will  find  you  out  with  its  curse,  though  you  may  be  one  of  a 
crowd. 

But  he  might  urge,  as  his  fourth  plea,  that  chicanery  was 
necessary  to  obtain  bread.  "A  man  must  live,  you  know." 
But  the  plea  cannot  stand.  There  is  no  must  about  it. 
Where  should  we  have  been  to-day  if  all  the  martyrs  had 
argued  that  it  was  more  important  to  live  than  to  do  right  ? 
Every  man  has  to  choose  between  these  two.  Many  men 
deem  life  more  important  than  righteousness ;  and,  like  the 
nautilus,  they  drop  out  of  sight  when  storms  sweep  the  sea  : 
they  are  fair-weather  Christians,  and  are  of  too  soft  a  stuff 
to  make  martyrs.  Others  reckon  that  it  is  not  necessary  for 
them  to  live ;  but  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  do  right.  They 
say — what  Pompey  said  when  his  friends  besought  him  not 


JACOB'S  DOUBLE-DEALING.  8 1 

to  risk  his  life  upon  a  tempestuous  sea — "  It  is  necessary  for 
me  to  go  ;  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  live."  This  surely 
is  the  logic  of  faith.  A  man  may  be  well  content  to  suffer 
the  loss  of  all  things,  and  to  die,  if  he  may  keep  inviolate 
the  priceless  jewels  which  God  has  entrusted  to  his  care. 

Jacob's  double-dealing  appeared  to  be  a  success.  "  The 
man  increased  exceedingly;  and  had  much  cattle,  and 
maidservants,  and  menservants,  and  camels,  and  asses." 
But  that  which  men  call  success,  and  which  is  sometimes  a 
very  superficial  and  temporary  thing,  proves  nothing  as  to 
the  Tightness  or  wrongness  of  a  life.  It  is  not  by  the  glitter 
of  gold  that  God  rewards  His  faithful  servants.  Many  a 
noble  life  in  the  sight  of  God  has  been  a  sad  failure,  when 
judged  by  human  standards.  And  many  a  failure  in  the 
judgment  of  man  has  been  a  royal  success  in  the  estimation 
of  the  angels.  When  a  tide  of  gold  has  been  setting  in 
towards  some  men,  it  has  been  allowed  to  come  as  a  judg 
ment  and  a  curse,  that  they  might  be  blinded  to  destruction. 
And  in  many  cases,  the  tide  has  been  restrained,  that  it 
might  be  more  possible  for  the  soul  to  attain  to  perfect 
health. 

I  demur  to  the  common  use  of  the  phrase,  "  Honesty  is 
the  best  policy  "  ;  no  doubt,  it  is  so  in  reality  and  at  the  end, 
though  not  always  in  appearance  and  at  the  beginning.  But 
if  we  are  simply  going  to  be  honest  because  it  pays,  we  are 
basing  the  fabric  of  our  lives  on  too  low  a  level;  and  our 
foundation  may  give  way  in  days  of  storm.  We  must  be 
honest — not  because  of  good  policy,  but  because  of  good 
principle ;  because  it  is  right,  and  noble,  and  God-like ;  yea, 
because  it  pleases  God.  Let  us  do  right ;  and  we  shall  be 
happier  with  scanty  means  and  a  good  conscience,  than  those 
who  have  all  that  heart  could  wish,  but  are  haunted  by 


82  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

memories  of  the  means  by  which  their  fortunes  were  ac 
quired — memories  which,  like  the  ghost  of  the  murdered 
king,  in  the  immortal  drama,  arise  to  mar  the  merriment  of 
the  splendid  feast.  "  A  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is 
better  than  the  riches  of  many  wicked." 

Do  not  draw  a  line  of  separation  between  the  house  of 
God  and  the  house  of  business.  The  counting-house  and 
the  shop  may  be  as  much  the  house  of  God  as  the  holiest 
shrine,  where  generations  have  knelt  in  prayer.  A  devout 
soul  will  find  God  everywhere ;  and  will  abide  with  God  in 
every  calling  in  which  it  is  called.  If  you  cannot  have  the 
companionship  of  Jesus  in  the  paths  of  daily  business,  by 
all  means  abandon  them.  But  if  they  are  at  all  legitimate, 
you  will  find  Him  at  your  side,  though  His  presence  is 
veiled  from  all  other  eyes. 

Do  what  you  have  to  do  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
In  that  name  you  are  wont  to  pray.  In  that  name  learn  to 
do  your  work.  Speak  that  name  over  the  most  menial 
tasks ;  and  they  will  glisten  with  heavenly  beauty.  Speak  it 
over  doubtful  things ;  and  their  true  character  will  be 
revealed — as  the  tempter  sprang  from  the  toad,  when  touched 
by  the  spear  of  Ithuriel.  Speak  it  over  difficulties ;  and  the 
iron  gates  will  own  the  spell,  and  open  to  you  of  their  own 
accord. 

Take  the  Lord  Jesus  into  your  partnership.  Consult  Him 
before  branching  out  into  new  directions ;  or  consigning 
goods  to  fresh  customers  ;  or  making  large  purchases.  Let 
every  transaction  and  every  entry  be  freely  open  to  His  eye 
Let  every  transaction  be  laid  before  Him,  for  Him  to  close 
or  open  as  He  will.  And  be  sure  to  divide  with  Him  the 
profits,  which  are  His  due.  A  business  life,  with  such 
sanctions,  could  never  strand  on  the  shoals  of  bankruptcy. 


"BOUGHT   WITH  A   PRICE."  83 

Above  all,  realize  that  you  are  the  slaves  of  Jesus  Christ. 
In  the  olden  days  of  slavery,  a  master  would  sometimes  put 
a  trusted  slave  into  a  position  of  great  responsibility,  where 
he  wras  permitted  even  to  trade  for  his  owner.  But  his 
brains,  his  muscles,  and  his  gains  were  all  another's.  Every 
thing  had  to  be  used  and  accounted  for  on  that  one  condi 
tion.  And  what  are  we  but  the  purchased  possession  of  the 
Son  of  God  ?  What  is  our  business,  but  a  branch  of  our 
stewardship  for  Him,  as  it  is  also  a  training  school  for  us  ? 
What  is  there  we  can  call  our  own  ?  It  is  He  that  giveth 
us  power  to  get  wealth ;  and  His  image  and  superscription 
are  evident  on  every  coin.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own  ;  ye  are 
bought  with  a  price :  wherefore  glorify  God  in  your  body  and 
in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's." 


VIII, 
Stirring; --up  of  ttje 

GENESIS    XXXI. 

O  Father  !  the  untrodden  path  how  shall  we  dare  to  tread  ? 
We  see  not  what  is  in  the  clouds  now  hanging  o'er  our  head. 
Thou  hid'st  the  future  from  our  ken.     Oh,  be  Thy  children's  light  ! 
Guide  Thou  our  halting  footsteps  in  the  day  or  in  the  night." 

MARIANNE  FARNINGHAM. 

(Jo 

tN  that  sublime  song  with  which  the  great  Law-giver 
closed  his  words  to  Israel,  we  are  carried  through  the 
steeps  of  air,  to  stand  beside  an  eagle's  eyrie,  perched  amid 
the  inaccessible  cliffs.  Here  we  may  find  a  clue  to  explain 
the  ways  of  God  to  man.  The  young  eaglets  arc  old  and 
strong  enough  to  fly  ;  but  they  cling  to  the  familiar  nest,  with 
its  scant  shelter.  They  dare  not  venture  forth  upon  the  un 
tried  air,  or  trust  their  fluttering  wings.  But  they  must 
learn  to  fly.  There  are  joys  awaiting  them  in  the  wide 
oceans  of  space,  which  far  outvie  those  of  the  rude  nest  in 
which  they  have  been  nurtured.  And  so  the  eagle  stirs  up 
the  nest,  and  drives  them  forth.  What  anguish  the  young 
birds  feel,  as  they  see  that  nest  destroyed  ;  and  themselves 
thrust  forth,  as  it  might  seem,  to  certain  destruction  !  But 
when  once  they  are  launched  upon  the  upbearing  air,  and 

learn  by  glad  experience  the  freedom,  the  ecstasy  of  flight — - 

\ 

\ 


A   PARABLE   OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  85 

how  grateful  should  they  be  to  the  parent  bird,  who  flinched 
not  from  the  unwelcome  task  ;  and  who  still  swoops  and 
flies  beneath  them,  ready  to  catch  them  up  if  their  powers 
should  flag,  and  to  bear  them  sunwards.  There,  in  mid- 
heaven,  she  lets  them  fall  again;  and  again  she  catches 
them  :  and  thus,  each  moment  they  increase  in  confidence 
and  strength;  and  develop  powers  of  sustained  flight,  of 
which  they  were  unconscious  when  they  lingered  by  the  nest. 

It  is  a  beautiful  parable  of  human  life.  We  all  cling  to 
the  old  nest — the  old  home  where  we  were  born  ;  the  dear 
protection  of  strong,  true  hearts,  that  screen  us  from  every 
breath  ;  the  place  where  we  are  known ;  the  faces  with  which 
we  are  familiar ;  the  competence  which  we  have  won.  We 
say,  with  eager  petulance,  "  Let  us  stay  here  for  ever. 
Do  not  speak  to  us  of  that  great  outer  world ;  or  of 
the  opportunities  which  lie  hidden  there  ;  and  which,  you 
say,  might  bring  out  powers  of  muscle,  and  brain,  and 
heart,  of  which  we  now  know  nothing.  We  would  rather 
that  they  should  remain  hidden,  than  that  we  should 
have  to  suffer  the  anguish  of  their  development  amid  the 
strain  and  trial  of  that  rude,  strange  world  of  which  we  now 
catch  but  distant  rumours.  We  are  content ;  let  us  stay." 
But  the  great  love  of  God  has  provided  some  better  thing 
for  us.  He  knows  that  there  are  heights  and  depths  of  life 
hidden  from  us  till  we  go  forth.  Keen  may  be  the  agony  of 
the  moment  in  which  we  see  the  nest  stirred  up,  and  find 
ourselves  flung  forth  into  a  strange  element.  But  it  is  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  instantly  revealed ;  for 
that  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  out 
for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory :  the 
glory  of  a  faith  that  poises  itself  on  the  unseen  ;  the  glory  of 
a  hope  that  breasts  the  thundercloud ;  the  glory  of  a  love 


86  ISRAEL  :  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

that  soars  ever  upward  to  the   sun.     "  They  change  their 
strength,  and  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles." 

These  thoughts  give  the  key  to  the  next  experience  in 
Jacob's  troubled  life.  There  is  a  reason  for  every  step  in 
our  education,  whether  we  see  it  or  not :  and,  though 
Jacob  could  not  have  guessed  it  at  the  time,  yet,  as  we 
look  back,  we  can  easily  understand  why  his  residence 
at  Haran  was  suddenly  closed  ;  and  his  home  broken  up  ; 
and  he  driven  across  the  desert,  as  a  fugitive,  hotly  pursued 
— much  as  he  had  been  years  before,  only  in  the  reverse 
direction. 

In  point  of  fact,  Jacob  was  becoming  too  contented  in 
that  strange  land.  Like  Ulysses  and  his  crews,  he  was  in 
danger  of  forgetting  the  land  of  his  birth ;  the  tents  of  his 
father ;  and  the  promises  of  which  he  was  the  heir.  He  was 
fast  losing  the  pilgrim  spirit,  and  settled  into  a  citizen  of 
that  far  country.  His  mean  and  crafty  arts  to  increase  his 
wealth  were  honeycombing  his  spirit,  and  eating  out  his 
nobler  nature,  prostituting  it  to  the  meanest  ends.  His 
wives,  infected  with  the  idolatry  of  their  father's  house,  were 
in  danger  of  corrupting  the  minds  of  his  children  ;  and  how 
then  would  fare  the  holy  seed,  destined  to  give  the  world 
the  messages  of  God  ?  It  was  evident  that  his  nest  must  be 
broken  up  in  Haran  ;  that  he  must  be  driven  back  into  the 
pilgrim-life — to  become  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner,  as  his 
fathers  were.  And  this  was  another  step  nearer  the  moment 
when  he  became  an  Israel,  a  prince  with  God.  This  may 
be  your  destiny,  my  reader ;  and,  if  it  be,  accept  meekly  the 
discipline  which  forces  you  towards  it.  It  is  the  hand  that 
was  pierced  with  nails  that  breaks  up  the  nest  of  the  past, 
and  beckons  you  to  the  untried  but  blessed  realities  in 
front. 


"  THIS  IS  NOT   YOUR  REST."  87 

I.  THE  SUMMONS  TO  DEPART. 

"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Jacob,  Return  unto  the  land  of 
thy  fathers,  and  to  thy  kindred ;  and  I  will  be  with  thee." 
Whether  there  was  voice  audible  to  the  outward  ear  I 
cannot  tell ;  but  there  was  certainly  the  uprising  of  a  strong 
impulse  within  his  heart.  Sometimes  on  a  sultry  summer 
day  we  suddenly  feel  the  breeze  fanning  our  faces,  and  we 
say  that  the  wind  is  rising ;  but  we  know  not  whence  it 
comes,  or  whither  it  goes :  so  does  the  Spirit  of  God 
frequently  visit  us  with  strong  and  holy  impulses.  There  is 
a  divine  restlessness ;  a  noble  discontent ;  a  hunger  created 
in  the  heart,  which  will  not  be  satisfied  with  the  husks  on 
which  the  swine  feed.  We  cannot  always  understand 
ourselves ;  but  it  is  the  Lord  saying  to  us,  Arise  and  depart ; 
for  this  is  not  your  rest. 

There  are  many  kinds  of  voices  in  the  world,  and  none  of 
them  is  without  signification  ;  and  sometimes  it  is  difficult  to 
know  the  voice  of  the  Lord.  But  the  more  truly  we  partake 
of  the  nature  of  "  His  own  sheep,"  the  more  unerringly  shall 
we  detect  the  voice  of  the  Good  Shepherd.  If  you  are  not 
quite  sure,  wait  till  you  are.  It  is  the  Shepherd's  business 
to  make  His  presence  and  wish  understood  by  the  timid  and 
perplexed  in  His  flock.  The  only  necessity  is  to  be  willing  to 
do  His  will  so  soon  as  it  is  clearly  seen.  If  you  are  in  doubt, 
wait  in  faith  till  every  other  door  is  shut,  and  one  path  only 
lies  open  before  you,  and  you  are  able  to  say :  "  He  leadeth 
me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  for  His  name's  sake." 

God's  voice  to  the  heart  is  generally  corroborated  by  the 
drift  of  outward  circumstances.  "Jacob  beheld  the  counte 
nance  of  Laban,  and.  behold,  it  was  not  towards  him  as 
before."  For  some  time  their  relations  had  been  strained. 
Ten  times  in  six  years  had  Laban  altered  the  method  of 


88  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

computing  his  wages  ;  and  now  there  were  symptoms  of  open 
rupture.  It  is  always  wise  to  be  on  the  outlook  for  any 
evident  symptoms  of  God's  will ;  and  here  was  one. 

It  is  very  bitter  to  behold  a  change  passing  over  men  and 
women  in  their  behaviour  towards  us ;  a  change  which  we 
cannot  avert.  We  dread  it  as  the  timid  passenger  by  the 
night  mail  dreads  the  roar  of  the  waves,  as  they  seethe, 
white  with  rage,  outside  the  harbour  bar.  And  yet  God  is 
undoubtedly  in  all  this.  It  is  the  way  which  He  is  taking 
through  the  deep.  Listen  to  the  Divine  assurance,  "  I  am 
with  thee."  The  Good  Shepherd  Himself  is  putting  you 
forth  from  the  warm  fold,  now  almost  bare,  that  He  may 
conduct  you  to  green  pastures  and  living  waters.  The 
Master  Himself  is  emptying  you  from  vessel  to  vessel ;  lest 
you  should  settle  on  your  lees.  The  Husbandman  Himself 
is  exposing  you  to  that  painful  process  of  transplanting, 
which  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  surest  methods  of  luxuriant 
growth.  Take  heart :  it  is  only  part  of  the  process  of 
making  you  a  prince ;  you  need  it  badly  enough — in  no 
other  way  can  your  mean  Jacob-nature  be  re-placed  by 
something  better. 

\ 
II.     THE  TENACITY  OF  CIRCUMSTANCES. 

When  the  pilgrim-spirit  essays  to  obey  the  voice  of  God, 
the  house  is  always  filled  with  neighbours  to  dissuade  from 
the  rash  resolve.  "As  Christian  ran,  some  mocked  ;  others 
threatened;  and  some  cried  after  him  to  return."  There 
was  something  of  this  in  Jacob's  case.  The  bird-lime  clung 
closely  to  him,  as  he  began  to  plume  his  wings  for  his  home 
ward  flight. 

He  was  evidently  afraid  that  his  wives  would  hinder  his 
return.  It  would  have  been  natural  if  they  had.  Was  it 


THE    CHURCH  AND    THE    WORLD.  89 

likely  that  they  would  at  once  consent  to  his  proposal  to 
tear  them  from  their  kindred  and  land?  This  fear  may 
have  greatly  hindered  Jacob.  He  at  least  thought  it  neces 
sary  to  fortify  himself  with  a  quiverful  of  arguments,  in  order 
to  carry  his  point.  In  those  arguments  we  catch  another 
glimpse  of  his  cowardly  and  crafty  nature.  They  are  a 
strange  medley  of  lies,  and  cant,  and  truth.  He  might  have 
saved  himself  from  all  this,  if  he  had  only  trusted  God  to 
roll  away  the  stones  from  the  path  of  obedience.  For  God 
had  been  at  work  before  him ;  and  had  prepared  their  hearts, 
so  that  they  at  once  assented  to  his  plan,  saying :  "  We  have 
no  further  ties  to  home ;  now  then,  whatsoever  God  hath 
said  unto  thee,  do."  If  we  would  only  go  forward  in  simple 
obedience,  we  should  find  that  there  would  be  no  need  for 
our  diplomacy ;  He  would  go  before  us,  making  the  crooked 
straight,  and  the  rough  smooth. 

In  the  endeavours  of  Laban  to  retain  Jacob,  we  have  a 
vivid  picture  of  the  eager  energy  with  which  the  world 
would  retain  us,  when  we  are  about  to  turn  away  from  it  for 
ever.  It  pursues  us,  with  all  its  allies,  for  seven  days  and 
more  (ver.  23).  It  asks  us  why  we  are  not  content  to  abide 
with  it  (ver.  27).  It  professes  its  willingness  to  make  our 
religion  palatable,  by  mingling  with  it  its  own  tabret  and 
dance  (ver.  27).  It  appeals  to  our  feelings,  and  asks  us  not 
to  be  too  cruel  (ver.  28).  It  threatens  us  (ver.  29).  It  jeers 
us  with  our  sudden  compunction,  after  so  many  years  of  con 
tentment  with  its  company  (ver.  30).  It  reproaches  us  with 
our  inconsistency  in  making  so  much  of  our  God,  and  yet 
harbouring  some  cunning  sin.  "  Wherefore  hast  thou  stolen 
my  gods  ?  "  (ver.  30).  Ah,  friends,  how  sad  it  is,  when  we, 
who  profess  so  much,  give  occasion  to  our  foes  to  sneer,  be 
cause  of  the  secret  idols  which  they  know  we  carry  with  us  ! 


90  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

Sometimes  it  is  not  we  who  are  to  blame,  so  much  as  our 
Rachels — our  wives,  or  children,  or  friends.  But  we  should 
never  rest  till,  so  far  as  we  know,  our  camp  is  clear  of  the 
accursed  thing. 

At  last,  our  Labans,  who  would  hold  us  fast,  having  tried 
every  expedient,  content  themselves  with  groaning,  "  What 
can  I  do  this  day  ?"  Blustering  often  ends  in  bewailing 
over  an  unalterable  destiny. 

Thus  the  heap  of  witness  is  raised  at  length.  Oh  that 
you  might  break  away  from  that  life  of  worldliness  in  which 
you  have  tarried  too  long  !  Make  a  clean  break  with  it ! 
Only  do  not  do  it  secretly,  as  Jacob  did.  Better  so,  than 
not  at  all :  but  it  is  mean-spirited  and  cowardly  ;  it  always 
arouses  intenser  opposition ;  and  it  is  not  worthy  of  one 
whose  escort  is  God  Himself.  The  straightforward  and 
outspoken  course — which  nails  its  colours  to  the  mast — is 
always  the  easiest,  and  safest,  and  best. 

A  midshipman,  who  was  about  to  leave  the  sailor's  home, 
where  he  had  been  converted,  came  to  the  superintendent  on 
the  day  of  going  on  board,  and  asked  him  to  write  on  a  card, 
in  plain  bold  characters,  the  words,  "  I  am  a  Christian." 
When  he  was  asked  his  object,  he  said,  "  As  soon  as  I  get 
on  board,  I  shall  go  to  my  hammock,  and  put  this  card 
where  everybody  can  see  it :  it  will  save  a  lot  of  trouble  ;  for 
every  one  will  know  at  once  which  side  I  am  on,  and  will 
expect  me  to  keep  true  to  it"  This  is  raising  the  heap  of 
witness. 

Let  us  raise  that  heap  :  let  me  help  you  rear  it ;  gather 
stones,  and  pile  them  into  the  form  of  that  cross  by  which 
the  world  was  crucified  to  St.  Paul,  and  he  to  the  world. 
Eat  there  the  feast  that  speaks  of  life  through  death.  Call 
your  friends  to  witness  your  solemn  act;  above  all,  call  God 


"MORE    THAN  CONQUERORS."  9 1 

to  witness  your  resolve — that  never  again  shall  the  world,  the 
flesh,  or  the  devil,  come  over  to  you,  or  you  pass  over  to 
them.  This  is  the  true  Mizpah,  of  the  Lord's  watch. 

III.  THE  DIVINE  CARE. 

Well  might  Jacob  have  thrilled  with  joy,  as  he  said  to  his 
wives,  "  The  God  of  my  father  has  been  with  me."  When 
God  is  for  us.  and  with  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  Blessed 
is  he  who  is  environed  by  God,  and  for  whom  God  fights. 
He  must  be  more  than  a  conqueror.  So  Jacob  found  it ; 
and,  at  the  end  of  his  encounter  with  Laban,  he  was  able  to 
repeat  his  assurance,  that  the  God  of  his  father  had  been 
with  him  (ver.  42). 

At  the  head  of  his  flocks  and  herds,  with  wives  and  chil 
dren  and  slaves,  he  struck  across  the  Euphrates  and  the 
desert,  at  the  utmost  speed  possible  to  his  encumbered 
march  ;  but  God's  angels  accompanied  him.  He  met  their 
radiant  hosts  afterwards  (xxxii.  i).  His  flight  remained 
unsuspected  for  three  days ;  then  Laban  set  off  with  swift 
camels  in  pursuit,  and  overtook  them,  when  still  threading 
their  way  among  the  richly  wooded  and  watered  hills  of 
Gilead.  It  was  a  moment  of  real  danger  ;  and  it  was  then 
that  God  interposed.  "  God  came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  by 
night."  That  dream  laid  an  irresistible  spell  on  Laban, 
which  prevented  him  from  carrying  out  his  design  to  do 
Jacob  hurt. 

Jacob  was  an  erring  and  unworthy  child ;  but  God  did  not 
leave  or  forsake  him.  He  does  not  love  us  (as  we  so  often 
falsely  tell  little  children)  because  we  are  good  ;  but  to  make 
us  so.  As  He  does  not  set  His  love  on  us  because  of  our 
deserts,  so  He  does  not  turn  it  away  from  us  because  of  our 
sins.  He  hates  our  sins;  but  He  loves  ourselves  with  a 


92  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

love  that  sin  can  neither  wear  out,  nor  turn  away.  Thus 
He  was  able  to  throw  His  protection  round  His  erring  child ; 
and  this  was  part  of  the  loving  discipline  which  was  leading 
Jacob  to  a  goal  of  which  he  never  dreamed. 

Jacob  conceived  that  he  was  a  model  shepherd  (ver.  38) ; 
but  he  little  realized  how  lovingly  he  was  being  protected 
by  the  shepherd-care  of  Him  who  keepeth  Israel,  and  who 
neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  That  protection  may  be  ours. 

O  Thou,  who  art  the  Good  Shepherd  ;  who  dost  guard  Thy 
flock,  in  drought  and  frost,  with  untired  and  unabated 
tenderness ;  who  dost  go  after  that  which  is  gone  astray, 
until  Thou  dost  find  it,  bringing  it  back  uponThy  shoulders — 
we,  too,  have  gone  astray  like  lost  sheep.  Seek  Thy  servants  ; 
at  whatever  cost,  disentangle  us  from  the  meshes  of  the 
world  ;  and  take  care  of  us  until  Thine  own  ideal  is  realized 
in  our  lives. 


IX. 

9pftnfg$t 

GENESIS    XXXII. 

"  The  Sun  of  Righteousness  on  me 
Hath  rose,  with  healing  in  His  wings. 
Withered  my  nature's  strength  ;  from  Thee 
My  soul  its  life  and  succour  brings  ; 
My  help  is  all  laid  up  above  ; 
Thy  nature  and  Thy  name  is  Love  ! 

"  Contented  now,  upon  my  thigh 
I  halt,  till  life's  short  journey  end ; 
All  helplessness,  all  weakness,  I 
On  Thee  alone  for  strength  depend  ; 
Nor  have  I  power  from  Thee  to  move : 
Thy  nature  and  Thy  name  is  Love  !  " 

WESLEY. 

the  morning  after  his  interview  with  Laban,  Jacob 
broke  up  his  camp  on  the  heights  of  Gilead,  and 
slowly  took  his  journey  southwards.  He  little  knew  that 
that  day  was  to  be  the  crisis  of  his  life.  "  Thou  knowest 
not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth,"  not  of  evil  only,  but  of 
blessing.  It  may  be  that  this  day  has  been  predestined  from 
all  eternity  to  be  that  of  thy  transformation  from  the  craft 
and  cunning  of  years,  to  a  life  of  subjection  to  the  will  of 
God,  and  of  power  over  men. 

This  wondrous  scene  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  corres 
pond  to  that  change  which  we  call  conversion.     That  was 


94  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

determined,  surely,  by  the  angel  vision  at  Bethel.  But  it 
may  rather  be  compared  with  that  further  blessing,  which 
sometimes  comes  to  a  Christian  after  some  years  of  religious 
experience  and  profession.  There  is  no  reason,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  why  it  should  be  so.  There  is  no  reason 
why,  at  the  moment  of  conversion,  we  should  not  at  once 
step  into  the  realization  and  enjoyment  of  all  the  possibilities 
of  Christian  living.  But  still,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  very 
often  happens  that  some  years  of  wilderness  wandering  do 
intervene  between  the  deliverance  of  the  Passover  and  the 
passage  across  the  Jordan  into  the  land  of  promise,  and 
rest,  and  victory.  Many  a  child  of  God  who  has  no  doubt 
of  acceptance  and  forgiveness,  is  conscious  of  a  broken  and 
fitful  experience  :  often  foiled  and  overthrown ;  wishing  to  do 
good,  but  unable  to  do  it ;  full  of  self-reproach  and  bitterness 
of  soul.  Then  there  comes  a  time  when  he  is  almost 
forced  into  a  new  experience.  He  passes  into  a  climate 
that  brings  into  glorious  fruitage  the  seed-germs  which  were 
lying  in  his  nature  undeveloped.  He  receives  an  abounding 
freshet  of  grace,  that  lifts  him  sheer  above  all  the  former 
levels  of  his  existence,  and  launches  him  on  the  flood-tide 
of  blessedness.  If  you  have  never  known  this  in  happy 
experience,  you  can  hardly  understand  what  an  extraordinary 
change  comes  over  all  things  ;  or  how  great  a  contrast  severs 
the  new  from  the  old.  Such  an  experience  fell  to  Jacob's 
lot  after  that  memorable  night. 

Three  events  are  narrated  in  this  chapter,  correspond 
ing  to  morning,  afternoon,  and  night  of  that  memorable 
day. 

(i)  IN  THE  MORNING,  we  are  told  that  the  angels  of  God 
met  him.  Those  words  tremble  with  mystic  and  in- 


"MAHANAIM."  95 

describable  beauty.  How  did  it  befal  ?  Did  they  come  in 
twos  or  threes  ?  or,  as  he  turned  some  corner  in  the  moun 
tain  pass,  did  he  see  a  long  procession  of  bright  harnessed 
angels,  marching  four  abreast,  with  golden  bands  girding 
about  them  their  lustrous  robes,  whilst  the  music  of  heaven 
beat  time  ?  Would  it  not  remind  him  of  Bethel,  that  lay 
across  the  chasm  of  five-and-twenty  years  ?  Would  it  not 
nerve  and  prepare  him  for  coming  danger  ? 

Doubtless  these  angel-bands  are  always  passing  by  us  ; 
only  our  eyes  are  holden  so  that  we  do  not  see  them.  But 
whether  we  see  them  or  not,  we  may  always  reckon  on  their 
being  at  hand — especially  when  some  heavy  trial  is  near. 
"  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  about  them  that 
fear  Him,  and  delivereth  them."  This  is  Mahanaim.  Here 
two  hosts  are  meeting ;  the  mountain  is  full  of  horses  and 
chariots  of  fire  around  us ;  more  are  they  that  are  with  us 
than  all  they  which  are  against  us. 

(2)  As  the  day  wore  on  to  AFTERNOON,  Jacob's  spirit  was 
shaken  to  the  centre  by  ominous  tidings.  He  had  sent 
messengers,  as  Arab  chiefs  would  do  still,  to  announce  to 
Esau  his  return,  and  to  ascertain  his  mind.  They  now 
returned  in  breathless  haste  to  say  that  Esau  was  coming  to 
meet  him,  with  four  hundred  men  at  his  back.  Jacob  was 
panic-stricken  ;  and  well  he  might  be.  His  all  was  at  stake 
— wives  and  children  ;  herds  and  cattle ;  the  careful  gains 
of  six  laborious  years.  The  Mizpah-tower  barred  the  way 
back;  his  bridge  was,  so  to  speak,  burnt  behind  him.  Around 
him  were  robber  tribes,  eager  to  seize  on  the  rich  booty,  if  he 
showed  the  least  sign  of  vacillation  or  fear.  But  to  go  on 
seemed  to  involve  a  risk  of  inevitable  ruin.  There  was  just 
one  alternative — which  most  men  will  only  turn  to  when  all 
other  expedients  have  failed  :  he  could  at  least  pray ;  and  to 


96  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

prayer  he  betook  himself.  It  may  have  been  a  long  time 
since  he  prayed  like  this. 

For  years  his  nobler  self  had  been  overgrown  by  a  noxious 
growth  of  weeds,  and  drugged  to  unconsciousness  by  the 
cares  of  this  life ;  the  deceitfulness  of  riches  ;  and  the  lusts 
of  many  things.  The  evil  conscience  cannot  pray.  Prayer 
cannot  live  in  the  heart  with  deceit,  and  craft,  and  villainy ; 
but  passes  out  unnoticed  and  unmissed.  But  now,  under 
the  shock  of  this  terrible  danger,  the  olden  spirit  revived  in 
him ;  and  the  hair  of  consecration  began  to  grow  again. 
(See  Num.  vi.)  Is  not  this  the  key  to  God's  dealings  with 
us  all  ?  He  brings  us  into  sore  straits ;  He  shuts  us  up  in  a 
corner ;  He  causes  the  walls  and  ceiling  and  floor  of  our 
room  to  draw  together,  as  if  to  crush  us.  At  such  moments 
there  is  only  one  resource  left.  It  is  Himself.  We  must  fly 
to  God,  to  escape  from  God.  We  are  driven  to  our  knees, 
with  no  language  but  a  cry.  And  though  that  cry  consists 
mostly  of  a  confession  of  unworthiness,  yet  it  is  enough  : 
the  silence  is  broken ;  the  avenues  are  cleared  of  their 
choking  undergrowth ;  the  child  has  already  left  the  far 
country,  and  is  on  his  way  home.  Was  not  this  the  experience 
of  the  Syro-phenician  woman  ?  Her  utter  misery  made  her 
seek  Christ ;  she  found  Him  out  in  a  retirement  which  would 
have  concealed  Him  from  all  save  one  in  her  dire  need ;  and 
His  apparent  denial  drove  her  to  climb  an  altitude  of  faith,  and 
to  utter  words  of  desperate  boldness,  from  which  she  would 
have  shrunk  except  under  the  pressure  of  that  terrible  agony 
of  soul.  The  love  of  God  is  great  enough  to  cause  us  pain 
— if  only  it  can  force  us  to  positions  from  which  we  had 
heretofore  shrunk,  but  from  which  we  shall  never  again 
recede. 

There  are  many  healthy  symptoms  in  that  prayer.     In 


THE  PROMISES  OF  GOD.  97 

some  respects  it  may  serve  as  a  mould  into  which  our  own 
spirits  may  pour  themselves,  when  melted  in  the  fiery 
furnace  of  sorrow. 

He  began  by  quoting  God's  promise  :  "  Thou  saidst." 
He  did  so  twice  (9  and  12).  Ah,  he  had  got  God  in  his 
power  then  !  God  puts  Himself  within  our  reach  in  His 
promises ;  and  when  we  can  say  to  Him,  "  Thou  saidst,"  He 
cannot  say  nay — He  must  do  as  He  has  said.  If  Herod 
was  so  particular  for  his  oath's  sake,  what  will  not  our  God 
be  ?  Be  sure,  in  prayer,  to  get  your  feet  well  on  a  promise ; 
it  will  give  you  purchase  enough  to  force  open  the  gates  of 
heaven,  and  to  take  it  by  force. 

He  next  went  to  confession  :  "  I  am  not  worthy."  There 
passed  before  his  mind  his  deceit  to  his  aged  father;  his 
behaviour  to  Esau  ;  his  years  of  trickery  to  Laban.  All  the 
meanness  of  his  heart  and  life  stood  revealed,  as  a  landscape 
is  revealed  when  the  midnight  sky  is  riven  by  the  lightning- 
flash.  Conscience  came  forth  from  its  retreat  in  the 
dungeons  of  his  nature,  and  climbed  the  stairs,  and  stood 
in  the  throne-room  of  his  spirit :  as  Nathan  before  David ; 
or  John  the  Baptist  before  Herod ;  or  Paul  before  Felix, 
the  Roman  governor,  who  trembled  as  he  spake  of  righteous 
ness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come.  And  as  the  sea 
of  memory  gave  up  the  dead  past  to  a  terrible  resurrection, 
and  as  it  all  stood  in  vivid  minuteness  before  him,  was 
there  not  plenty  to  justify  his  penitent  confession  ? — "  I  am 
not  worthy."  Great  soul-anguish  will  generally  wring  some 
such  cry  from  our  startled  and  stricken  hearts.  If  there 
is  one  position  that  better  becomes  us  than  another,  it  is 
that  of  the  publican  with  downcast  eyes  ;  nor  can  we  improve 
on  his  prayer,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  the  sinner." 

Then  he  passed  on  to  plead  for  deliverance  :  "  Deliver  me, 


9$  ISRAEL:   A    PRINCE    WITH  COD. 

I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of  my  brother,  from  the  hand  of 
Esau."  It  was,  of  course,  quite  right  to  pray  thus ;  but  I  can 
not  feel  that  it  was  a  whole-hearted  prayer  :  for  he  had  hardly 
finished  it,  when  he  reverted  to  the  plan  on  which  he  had 
been  busy  before  he  turned  aside  to  pray.  Jacob's  first 
thought  was  always  a  plan.  He  had  a  plan  for  Isaac's  blessing; 
and  another  for  his  property ;  and  now  another  to  appease 
Esau.  Of  course,  I  have  no  word  to  say  against  planning, 
when  that  is  evidently  God's  method  of  delivering  us  ;  but 
I  am  desperately  afraid  lest  our  planning  should  take  the 
place  of  simple  waiting  on  God,  till  the  cloud  rises,  and 
moves  forward,  and  shows  us  our  path  across  the  trackless 
sands.  We  are  all  so  apt  to  pray,  and  then  to  try  and  concoct 
a  plan  for  our  own  deliverance.  Surely  the  nobler  attitude 
is,  after  prayer,  to  stand  still  for  God  to  develop  His  plan, 
leading  us  in  ways  that  we  had  never  guessed.  The  blessed 
life  of  our  Lord  was  absolutely  planless. 

There  was  too  much  self-hood  in  Jacob ;  as  there  is  also 
in  us.  This  must  be  broken  down,  and  put  in  the  place  of 
death.  The  I-life  must  be  crucified  before  the  Christ-life 
can  take  its  place.  The  sinews  of  the  old  nature  must  be 
utterly  shrivelled ;  that  the  new  nature,  whose  only  strength 
is  to  cling,  may  be  manifested  in  power.  This  was  the 
object  of  that  mysterious  conflict,  which  left  so  deep  an  im 
pression  on  Jacob's  life.  . 

(3)  IT  WAS  MIDNIGHT.  Jacob  had  already  sent  across  the 
Jabbok  his  property,  his  children,  even  the  beloved  Rachel. 
It  seemed  as  if,  amid  the  awful  pressure  of  that  anxiety,  he 
could  not  bear  the  noise  of  the  camp ;  the  prattlings  of  the 
children  ;  or  even  the  presence  of  the  only  woman  he  ever 
really  loved.  "He  caused  them  to  pass  over  the  brook ;  and 
sent  over  that  he  had.  And  Jacob  was  left  alone."  When 


THE    WRESTLE.  99 

the  soul  enters  its  Gethsemane,  it  withdraws  a  stone's  cast 
from  its  most  trusted  friends.  Around  him  was  the  profound 
stillness  of  those  most  desolate  regions  ;  beside  him  the 
murmur  of  the  rapid  brook  over  the  stones ;  above  him  the 
infinite  depths  of  heaven,  bejewelled  with  stars.  There, 
alone,  he  considered  the  past ;  and  anticipated  the  future  ; 
and  felt  the  meanness  of  the  aims  for  which  he  had  sold  his 
soul ;  and  saw  the  wretched  failure  of  his  life  :  and  so, 
suddenly,  he  became  aware  that  a  mysterious  combatant  was 
at  his  side,  drawing  him  into  a  conflict,  half  literal  and  half 
spiritual,  which  lasted  till  break  of  day. 

Was  this  a  literal  contest  ?  There  is  no  reason  to  deny 
it.  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  sometimes  anticipated 
His  incarnation  by  assuming  literal  physical  shapes.  "  His 
delights  were  of  old  amongst  the  sons  of  men."  And  it 
would  have  been  as  possible  for  Him  to  wrestle  literally 
with  Jacob,  as  for  Him  to  offer  His  hands  to  the  touch  of 
Thomas  after  His  resurrection.  The  physical  must  have 
been  largely  present ;  because,  when  he  resumed  his  journey, 
Jacob  halted  upon  his  thigh  :  it  was  a  physical  fact ;  physi 
cally  commemorated  by  the  Israelites  to  this  day,  who 
abstain  from  eating  of  that  part  in  animals  which  corre 
sponds  to  the  sinew  that  shrank  in  Jacob's  thigh.  Men  do 
not  become  lame  in  imaginary  conflicts.  But,  in  any  case, 
the  outward  wrestling  was  only  a  poor  symbol  of  the 
spiritual  struggle  which  convulsed  the  patriarch's  soul ;  and 
is  as  real  in  the  experience  of  earnest  men  to-day  as  when 
the  world  was  young. 

Remember  that  the  conflict  originated  not  with  Jacob,  but 
with  the  angel :  "  There  wrestled  a  Man  with  him."  This 
passage  is  often  quoted  as  an  instance  of  Jacob's  earnestness 
in  prayer.  It  is  nothing  of  the  sort.  It  is  an  instance  of 

G    2 


IOO  ISRAEL:  A    PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

God's  earnestness  to  take  from  us  all  that  hinders  our  truest 
life;  whilst  we  resist  Him  with  all  ou*  might  and  main.  It 
was  not  that  Jacob  wished  to  obtain  aught  from  God  ;  but  it 
was  that  He — the  angel  Jehovah — had  a  controversy  with 
this  double-dealing  and  crafty  child  of  His :  desirous  to  break 
up  his  self-sufficiency  for  ever  ;  and  to  give  scope  for  the 
development  of  the  Israel  that  lay  cramped  and  coffined 
within. 

There  is  an  illustration  of  this  in  the  life  of  Moses.  For 
forty  years  he  lived  in  the  retirement  of  the  desert.  At  last 
he  set  out  for  Egypt,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  children. 
Concerning  those  children,  in  deference  to  their  mother's 
wish,  he  seems  to  have  neglected  a  rite,  binding,  by  Divine 
command,  on  every  son  of  Abraham.  And  it  came  to  pass 
in  the  way,  that  the  Lord  barred  his  journey,  and  even 
threatened  him  with  death,  until  he  had  obeyed  the  injunc 
tion  he  had  ignored ;  then  He  let  him  go.  So  it  was  with 
Jacob.  There  was  much  in  him  that  needed  to  be  laid 
aside ;  much  self-sufficiency  requiring  to  be  broken  down  ; 
much  dross  that  had  to  be  burnt  out  by  a  consuming  fire  ; 
and  so  the  Love  of  God  drew  near  to  him  on  that  solemn 
night,  to  wrest  these  things  from  him  at  whatever  cost. 

Has  not  "  this  Man  "  that  wrestled  with  Jacob  found  you 
out  ?  Have  you  not  felt  a  holy  discontent  with  yourself? 
Have  you  not  felt  that  certain  things,  long  cherished  and 
loved,  should  be  given  up,  though  it  should  cost  you  blood  ? 
Have  you  not  felt  that  you  should  yield  your  whole  being  to 
God,  but  there  has  been  a  rebellious  uprising  of  self-will 
within  you,  as  if  it  were  impossible  for  you  to  make  the 
surrender  ?  Have  you  not  felt  in  an  agony,  between  the 
stirrings  of  God's  good  Spirit  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  pre 
ferences  of  your  own  choice  on  the  other  ?  Have  you  not 


"RESIST  NOT  THE  SPIRIT."  10 1 

felt  as  if  some  mighty  power  were  wrestling  with  you,  against 
you,  and  for  your  good  ?  Surely  these  convulsive  throes  ; 
these  heaven-born  strivings  ;  these  mysterious  workings — are 
not  of  man,  or  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of  God.  It  is 
God  that  worketh  in  you,  and  wrestleth  with  you.  Glory  be 
to  Him  for  His  tender  patience,  interest,  and  love  ! 

At  first  Jacob  held  his  own.  "  He  saw  that  He  prevailed 
not  against  him."  The  strength  that,  years  before,  had 
rolled  the  stone  from  the  well  for  Rachel's  sheep,  was  vigo 
rous  yet ;  and  he  was  in  no  humour  to  submit.  And  thus 
we  do  all  resist  the  love  of  God.  We  carry  out  our  own 
plans ;  we  follow  our  own  will ;  we  are  strong  in  our  own 
self-sufficiency.  "When  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdedst 
thyself,  and  walkedst  whither  thou  wouldest."  Each  one  of 
us  is  dowered  with  that  wonderful  power  of  holding  our  own 
against  God;  and  He  knows,  sorrowfully,  that  He  cannot 
prevail  against  us,  without  taking  some  severe  measures 
which  will  give  us  no  alternative  but  to  yield. 

Then  the  angel  touched  the  hollow  of  his  thigh.  What 
ever  it  is  that  enables  a  soul,  whom  God  designs  to  bless, 
to  stand  out  against  Him,  God  will  touch.  It  may  be  the 
pride  of  wealth  ;  or  of  influence ;  or  of  affection :  but  it  will 
not  be  spared — God  will  touch  it.  It  may  be  something  as 
natural  as  a  sinew ;  but  if  it  robs  a  man  of  spiritual  blessing, 
God  will  touch  it.  It  may  be  as  small  a  thing  as  a  sinew ; 
but  its  influence  in  making  a  man  strong  in  his  resistance  of 
blessing  will  be  enough  to  condemn  it — and  God  will  touch 
it.  And  beneath  that  touch  it  will  shrink  and  shrivel ;  and 
you  will  limp  to  the  end  of  life.  Remember  that  the  sinew 
never  shrinks  save  beneath  the  touch  of  the  Angel-hand — the 
touch  of  tender  love.  This  is  why  your  schemes  have  mis 
carried  ;  and  your  children  have  faded  in  untimely  decay ; 


IO2  ISRAEL:  A    PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

and  your  life  has  been  haunted  by  disappointment.  God 
has  touched  the  sinew  of  your  strength ;  and  it  has  dried  up. 
Oh,  you  who  are  still  holding  out  against  Him,  make  haste 
to  yield,  lest  some  worse  thing  come  upon  you ! 

Then  Jacob  went  from  resisting  to  clinging.  As  the  day 
broke,  the  Angel  would  be  gone  ;  but  He  could  not,  because 
Jacob  clung  to  Him  with  a  death  grip.  The  request  to  be  let 
go  indicates  how  tenaciously  the  limping  patriarch  clung  to 
Him  for  support.  He  had  abandoned  the  posture  of  defence 
and  resistance ;  and  had  fastened  himself  on  to  the  Angel — as 
a  terrified  child  clasps  its  arms  tightly  around  its  father's 
neck.  That  is  a  glad  moment  in  the  history  of  the  human 
spirit,  when  it  throws  both  arms  around  the  risen  Saviour ; 
and  hangs  on  Him,  and  will  not  let  Him  go.  It  is  the 
attitude  of  blessing.  It  is  the  posture  of  power.  It  is  the 
sublime  condition  in  which  Christ  will  whisper  His  own  new 
name,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth  it. 
Have  you  ever  come  to  this  ?  Have  you  abandoned  the  art 
of  self-defence  for  the  artlessness  of  clinging  trust  ?  Have 
you  felt  able  to  rejoice  in  your  inability  to  stand  alone, 
because  it  has  made  the  Lord  Jesus  so  real  ?  Have  you 
reached  the  point  of  self-surrender  ?  If  not,  ask  God  to 
show  you  what  sinew  it  is  that  makes  you  too  strong  for  Him 
to  bless  you ;  ask  Him  to  touch  it,  so  that  you  shall  be  able 
to  hold  out  no  more.  And  then  you  will  discover  the  three 
fold  blessing  which  is  yours. 

(i)  The  changed  name.  In  olden  days,  names  were  given 
not  for  euphony,  or  by  caprice,  but  for  character.  A  man's 
character  was  in  his  name.  Now,  when  Jacob  came  into 
the  attitude  of  blessing — an  attitude  which  has  two  parts :  viz., 
absolute  abandonment  of  self,  and  a  trust  which  clings  to 
Christ — then  immediately  the  Angel  said,  "What  is  thy 


THE  NAME    CHANGED.  1 03 

name?"  And  he  said,  "Jacob.  By  nature  lam  a  sup- 
planter,  a  rogue,  and  a  cheat."  Never  shrink  from  declaring 
your  true  character  :  "  My  name  is  Sinner."  "  And  he  said, 
thy  name  shall  be  no  more  Jacob ;  but  Israel :  a  prince  with 
God."  The  changed  name  indicated  a  changed  character. 
Jacob  was  swallowed  up  of  light.  He  was  clothed  upon 
with  the  name  and  nature  of  a  prince.  There  is  only  one 
way  to  princeliness — it  is  the  thorn-set  path  of  self-surrender 
and  of  faith.  Why  should  you  not  now  yield  yourself 
entirely  to  God,  and  give  Him  your  whole  being  ?  It  is 
only  a  reasonable  service  :  and  out  of  it  will  spring  a  tenacity 
of  faith ;  and  a  power  for  service ;  and  a  royalty  of  character 
—  enough  to  make  you  willing  to  bear  the  limp,  which  proves 
that  your  own  strength  has  passed  away  for  ever. 

(2)  Power.     The  better  rendering  of  these  words  would 
be  :  "  As  a  prince  hast  thou  power  with  God ;  and  with  man 
thou  shalt  prevail."    We  sigh  for  power — power  over  our 
selves  ;  power  for  service ;  power  over  the  principalities  of 
wicked  spirits.     But  before  we  can  receive  power  with  the 
creature,  we  must  obtain  it  from  the  Creator.     The  man 
who  would  have  power  with  men  must  first  have  it  with 
God ;  and  we  can  only  get  power  with  God  when  our  own 
strength  has  failed,   and  we  limp.     "  I  glory  in  infirmity, 
that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  me ;  for  when  I  am 
weak,  then  am  I  strong."     Oh  for  the  withered  sinew  of 
our  own  strength,  that  we  may  lay  hold  on  the  strength  of 
God: 

(3)  The  beatific  vision.     "  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face." 
Our  moments  of  vision  come  at  daybreak  :  but  they  are 
ushered  in  by  the  agony  of  dread;  the  long  midnight  vigil;  the 
extreme  agony  of  conflict ;  the  shrinking  of  the  sinew.    Yet, 


104 


ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 


when  they  come,  they  are  so  glorious,  that  the  frame  is 
almost  overpowered  with  the  brightness  of  that  light,  and 
the  exceeding  weight  of  glory.  The  price  is  dear ;  but  the; 
vision  is  more  than  worth  it  all.  The  sufferings  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  revealed. 

This  is  life ;  a  long  wrestle  against  the  love  of  God,  which 
longs  to  make  us  royal.  As  the  years  go  on,  we  begin  to 
cling  where  once  we  struggled  ;  and  as  the  morn  of  heaven 
breaks,  we  catch  glimpses  of  the  Angel-face  of  love,  and 
hear  His  whispered  name :  and  as  He  blesses  us,  we  awake  to 
find  ourselves  living,  and  face  to  face  with  God — and  that  is 
heaven  itself. 


X. 

failure* 

GENESIS    XXXIII.    AND    XXXIV. 

"  Or  sometimes  strangely  I  forget ; 

And,  learning  o'er  and  o'er 
A  lesson  all  with  tear-drops  wet, 

Which  I  had  learnt  before. 
lie  chides  me  not,  but  waits  awhile  ; 

Then  wipes  my  heavy  eyes  : 
Oh,  what  a  Teacher  is  our  God, — 
So  patient  and  so  wise  !  " 

F.  R.  HAVERGAL. 

HAT  midnight  wrestle,  which  last  engaged  our  thoughts, 
made  an  epoch  in  Jacob's  life.  It  was  the  moment 
in  which  he  stepped  up  to  a  new  level  in  his  experience — the 
level  of  Israel  the  prince.  But,  let  us  remember,  it  is  one 
thing  to  step  up  to  a  level  like  that ;  it  is  quite  another  to 
keep  it.  Some,  when  they  touch  a  new  attainment,  keep  to 
it,  and  are  blessed  for  evermore ;  others,  when  they  have 
stood  there  for  a  moment,  recede  from  it.  Yet  it  is  well 
for  them  to  have  stood  for  even  a  moment  on  the  shining 
table-lands,  where  God  Himself  is  sun  :  for,  when  once  they 
have  caught  sight  of  a  new  ideal,  they  will  never  be  satisfied 
to  live  as  they  have  lived  ;  and,  even  if  they  do  not  win  it  at 
once  as  an  abiding  experience,  they  will  come  to  it  after 
wards.  Jacob,  alas  !  soon  stepped  down  from  that  glorious 
level  to  which  the  Angel  had  lifted  him. 


IO6  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

This  descent  is  indicated  by  the  retention,  in  the  sacred 
record,  of  the  name  Jacob.  We  should  have  expected  that 
it  would  have  been  replaced  by  the  new  title,  Israel — as 
Abram  was  by  Abraham  ;  but  it  is  not  so.  How  could  he 
be  called  Israel,  when  he  had  so  soon  reverted  to  the  life  of 
Jacob  ;  and  had  gone  back  from  the  life  of  clinging,  to  the 
cringing,  crafty,  scheming  life  which  he  had  been  leading  all 
too  long?  The  time  will  come  when  Israel  shall  become  his 
habitual  designation  ;  but  not  yet — not  yet.  Our  Heavenly 
Father  is  very  tender  with  us ;  and  if  we  do  not  learn  His 
lessons  at  once,  He  will  present  them  to  us  again  and 
again — now  in  one  form,  then  in  another — until  at  last  His 
ideal  is  accomplished  in  our  characters  and  lives. 

We  have  to  consider  now  the  three  evidences  of  failure, 
which  are  recounted  in  these  chapters. 

I.  THE  FIRST  FAILURE  WAS  IN  HIS  MANNER  OF  MEET 
ING  ESAU. 

As  the  morning  broke,  "  Jacob  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and 
looked  ;  and,  behold,  Esau  came,  and  with  him  four  hundred 
men."  Such  is  life.  It  is  filled  with  sharply  varied  ex 
periences.  Now  the  Angel ;  then  the  coming  of  Esau.  Now 
forty  days  on  the  brow  of  Sinai  with  God  ;  then  the  golden 
calf.  Now  the  Mountain  of  Transfiguration  ;  then  the  bitter 
cross.  Now  Patmos,  with  its  visions ;  then  the  cold  grey 
rock,  and  the  commonplaces  of  captivity  and  loneliness. 

Yet,  how  grateful  should  we  be  that  it  is  so  !  Life  might 
have  been  full  of  Esaus,  and  no  Jacobs  ;  full  of  Gethsemanes, 
and  no  glimpses  into  heaven  ;  full  of  grey  commonplaces, 
and  no  rapturous  visions.  The  bright  days  of  our  lives  out 
number  the  dark  ones.  There  are  more  sweets  than  bitters ; 
more  smiles  than  tears  ;  more  mercies  than  miseries. 


TWO    WAYS  OF  MEETING    TROUBLE.  IO? 

How  often  do  we  find  that  a  great  blessing — like  that 
which  came  to  Jacob  by  the  fords  of  the  Jabbok — is  sent  to 
prepare  us  for  a  great  trial.  God  prevents  us,  and  prepares 
us,  with  the  blessings  of  His  goodness.  He  takes  us  up  the 
Hill  Difficulty ;  into  the  House  Beautiful :  where  we  sleep  in 
the  Chamber  of  Peace,  which  looks  toward  the  sunrising. 
Not  that  we  should  stay  there  :  but  that  we  should  be  rested, 
and  accoutred,  and  prepared  to  meet  Apollyon  in  the  Valley  ; 
and  to  pass  unscathed  through  the  Shadow  of  Death  and 
Vanity  Fair.  Do  not  be  surprised  or  discouraged  if  a  time 
of  fiery  trial  should  follow  a  season  of  unusual  blessing ; 
indeed,  you  may  be  rather  surprised  if  it  does  not.  But  when 
it  comes,  be  sure  to  do  as  Jacob  did  not  do, — and  draw 
heavily  upon  all  those  resources  of  strength  and  comfort 
which  have  been  stored  up  during  the  previous  days  of  clear 
shining  and  peace. 

There  are  two  ways  of  meeting  troubles  :  the  one  is  the 
way  of  the  flesh  ;  the  other,  of  the  Spirit.  The  flesh  antici 
pates  them  with  terror ;  prepares  against  them  with  trembling 
hands ;  prays  in  a  panic,  and  then  cringes  before  them — as 
Jacob,  who  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven  times,  until 
he  came  near  his  brother.  The  way  of  faith  is  better  far. 
She  clings  to  God  ;  she  hears  God  say,  "  I  am  with  thee,  and 
will  keep  thee ; "  she  believes  that  He  will  keep  His  word  ; 
she  reviews  the  past,  when  the  hands  of  Laban  were  tied, 
and  argues  that  God  can  do  as  much  again  ;  she  goes  to 
meet  trouble,  not  cringing  but  erect,  sure  that  God  has 
already  been  at  work  in  the  heart  of  difficulty  :  and  that, 
however  grim  they  may  seem  in  the  distance,  yet  the  lions 
are  chained ,  the  wolf-claws  are  extracted  ;  and  the  arrows 
have  been  deprived  of  their  barbed  tips. 

I  have  always  admired  the  refusal  of    the  members  of 


IO8  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

Lord  Elgin's  suite  to  crawl  on  the  ground  into  the  presence 
of  the  Emperor  of  China.  When  they  learnt  that  that  was 
the  posture  which  all  foreigners  were  expected  to  assume, 
they  indignantly  replied  that  they  certainly  would  not  give 
to  the  Emperor  of  China  a  homage  which  their  own  Most 
Gracious  Sovereign  did  not  require;  and,  in  the  end,  they 
were  permitted  to  enter  his  presence  erect.  This  is  the 
natural  posture  of  an  Englishman ;  but  it  is  more  surely  the 
native  posture  of  faith. 

Some  who  read  this  may  be  dreading  a  meeting  with 
their  Esaus.  to-morrow  :  some  creditor  ; .  some  demand  for 
payment;  some  awkward  problem;  some  difficulty.  And  you 
are  to-day  worrying,  planning,  scheming,  and  contriving,  as 
Jacob  did,  in  arranging  his  wives,  and  children,  and  ser 
vants,  whilst  to-morrow  you  will  go  cringing  and  creeping 
towards  it. 

Listen  to  a  more  excellent  way.  Do  not  lift  up  your  eyes 
and  look  for  Esaus.  Those  who  look  for  troubles  will  not  be 
long  without  finding  trouble  to  look  at.  But  lift  them 
higher — to  Him  from  whom  our  help  cometh.  Then  you 
will  be  able  to  meet  your  troubles  with  an  unperturbed 
spirit.  Those  who  have  seen  the  face  of  God  need  not  fear 
the  face  of  a  man  that  shall  die.  To  have  •  power,  with  God 
is  to  have  power  over  all  the  evils  that  threaten  us. 

Besides  all  this,  when  prayer  has  preceded  trial,  the  trial 
turns  out  to  be  much  less  than  we  anticipated.  The  women 
found,  when  they  reached  the  sepulchre,  that  the  dreaded 
stone  had  been  rolled  away.  When  Peter  reached  the  outer 
gate,  that  threatened  to  be  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to 
liberty,  it  opened  to  him  of  its  own  accord.  So  Jacob 
dreaded  that  meeting  with  Esau ;  but  when  Esau  came  up 
with  him,  he  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him,  and  fell 

\ 


PREVAILING  PRAYER.  1 09 

on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him  :  and  they  wept.  The  heroic 
Gordon  used  to  say  that,  in  his  lonely  camel  rides,  he  often 
in  prayer  encountered  and  disarmed  hostile  chiefs,  before  he 
rode,  unaccompanied,  into  their  presence.  None  can  guess, 
if  they  have  not  tried  it  for  themselves,  what  a  solvent 
prayer  is  for  the  difficulties  and  agonies  of  life. 

It  is  very  beautiful  to  see  that,  in  this,  God  was  better  to 
Jacob  than  his  fears,  or  his  faith.  Whilst  he  was  foreboding 
the  worst,  his  heavenly  Friend  was  preparing  deliverance ; 
as,  years  after,  the  Lord  stretched  out  His  hand  and  saved 
from  the  yeasty  waves  the  faithless  Apostle,  who  had  looked 
away  from  Himself  to  the  terrors  of  the  storm. 

II.  THE  SECOND  FAILURE  WAS  IN  THE  SUBTERFUGE 
TO  WHICH  JACOB  RESORTED,  TO  FREE  HIMSELF  FROM 
ESAU'S  COMPANY. 

When  Esau  offered  him  the  protection  of  his  armed  men, 
he  was  at  once  in  a  panic  ;  for  he  dreaded  them  even  more 
than  the  Bedouins  of  the  wilds.  He  tried  to  evade  the 
proposal  by  many  excuses  ;  especially  explaining  that  his 
flocks  and  his  children  could  not  keep  up  with  their  more 
rapid  pace.  And  finally,  still  further  to  reconcile  Esau  to 
the  separation,  he  promised  to  come  at  last  to  Seir,  where 
Esau  had  fixed  his  abode. 

Now  I  do  not,  for  a  single  moment,  believe  that  Jacob 
really  meant  to  go  to  Seir ;  for  as  soon  as  he  had  seen  the 
rear  of  Esau's  retiring  forces,  he  journeyed  in  the  contrary 
direction  to  Succoth.  All  such  subterfuge  and  lying  were 
utterly  unworthy  of  the  man  who  had  seen  God's  angels  face 
to  face. 

What  wretched  failure  was  here  !  The  bright  dawn  was  all 
too  speedily  overcast  and  clouded  ;  and  if  it  had  not  been  for 


IIO  ISRAEL:  A    PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

the  marvellous  tenderness  of  God,  there  is  no  telling  how 
much  further  Jacob  would  have  drifted,  or  how  indefinitely 
distant  the  day  would  have  been  in  which  he  should  be 
worthy  to  bear  the  name  of  Israel. 

III.  THE  THIRD  FAILURE  WAS  IN  SETTLING  AT  SHECHEM. 

God  had  not  said,  Go  to  Shechem ;  but,  "  I  am  the  God  of 
Bethel."  Bethel,  rather  than  Shechem,  was  his  appointed 
goal.  But  alas  !  we  are  all  too  ready  to  fall  short  of  God's 
schemes  for  our  elevation  and  blessedness.  And  so  Jacob 
came  to  Shalem,  a  city  of  Shechem. 

But  he  did  worse ;  he  pitched  his  tent  before  the  city — as 
Lot  did,  when  he  pitched  his  tent  before  Sodom.  What 
took  him  there?  Was  it  that  Rachel  persuaded  him  that  a 
little  society  would  be  a  pleasant  relief  to  the  monotony  and 
seclusion  of  the  camp  life  ?  Was  it  that  his  children  urged 
him  to  it  against  his  better  mind  ?  Was  it  some  idea  of 
obtaining  eligible  alliances  for  his  children  among  the 
children  of  the  land  ?  Whatever  may  have  been  his  reason, 
there  stands  the  sad  and  solemn  fact  that  Jacob  pitched  his 
tent  before  the  city. 

Are  not  many  Christians  doing  so  still  ?  They  live  on 
the  edge  of  the  world,  just  on  the  borderland  ;  far  enough 
away  to  justify  a  religious  profession,  yet  near  enough  to  run 
into  it  for  sweets.  They  send  their  children  to  fashionable 
schools,  that  they  may  acquire  the  false  veneer  of  the  world, 
and  pass  muster  in  its  drawing-rooms.  They  remove  into 
the  fashionable  quarters  of  a  town  ;  and  adopt  a  certain  style ; 
and  throw  themselves  into  the  swim  of  all  manner  of  worldly 
engagements — that  they  may  get  in  with  "society."  They 
choose  their  Church,  their  pastimes,  their  friendships,  on 
the  sole  principle  of  doing  as  others  do ;  and  of  forming  good 


AMUSEMENTS.  1 1  I 

alliances  for  their  children.      What  is  all  this  but  pitching 
the  tent  towards  Shechem  ? 

"  But  what  are  we  to  do  ?  "  say  they  ;  "  our  children  must 
have  society ;  they  cannot  be  recluses,  or  be  for  ever  shut  up 
in  our  homes."  But  why  need  we  cater  for  them  by  rushing 
into  the  world  ?  Are  there  not  plenty  of  innocent  pastimes, 
on  which  worldliness  has  never  breathed  its  withering  breath? 
Are  there  not  enough  elements  in  the  bright  social  inter 
course  of  the  family  circle ;  in  the  play  of  imagination  and 
wholesome  merriment;  in  games  of  skill;  in  the  charms  of 
books ;  in  the  recital  of  travel  and  adventure ;  in  the  witchery 
of  wholesome  songs  and  music ;  and  even  in  the  revelations 
of  modern  popular  science — to  beguile  the  hours  of  long 
winter  evenings,  without  calling  in  the  aid  of  worldly  society, 
whose  brightest  hours  leave  a  sense  of  vacuity  and  thirst,  to 
say  nothing  of  a  positive  sting  ?  The  most  earnest  religion 
does  not  debar  us  from  manly  sports  :  the  swift  movement  of 
the  skater  over  the  frozen  lake ;  the  evening  row ;  the  ex 
hilarating  climb  :  or  from  the  culture  of  the  faculties  of  art ; 
and  music;  and  imagination;  of  science  and  poesy.  Surely, 
in  all  these  there  is  enough  to  brighten  Christian  homes, 
without  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  lowering  their  tone. 
But  if  parents  and  guardians  will  insist  on  something  more 
exciting  and  stimulating  than  these,  they  must  reckon  on 
being  called  upon  to  pay  the  price.  They  may  have  the  dice- 
box,  the  theatre,  the  dance,  if  they  will;  but  they  must  learn, 
by  sad  experience,  the  bitter  cost.  He  needs  a  long  spoon 
who  sups  with  the  devil.  The  fact  is,  it  is  much  easier  to 
give  these  things  than  to  arouse  oneself  to  provide  something 
better.  The  something  better  needs  time  and  thought ;  and 
staying  at  home  from  religious  meetings,  to  give  it  effect :  but 
the  ultimate  benefit  will  more  than  repay  the  self-denial. 


U2  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

We  cannot  put  old  heads  on  young  shoulders ;  or  our 
experience  into  young  hearts.  We  must  let  our  children 
see  a  brightness  in  our  behaviour  which  shall  not  repel  them 
from  us,  but  win  them  to  our  Saviour.  But  in  doing  this,  it 
is  quite  unnecessary  to  go  to  those  empty  cisterns  which  the 
children  of  the  world  have  hewn  for  themselves,  and  which 
yield  no  water.  We  may  find,  with  a  little  trouble,  other 
wells,  through  which  the  living  water  rises  with  a  sparkle  and 
a  beauty  that  cannot  fail  to  attract  young  hearts  not  yet 
spoilt  by  the  world's  glamour  and  show. 

But  Jacob  did  still  worse.  Not  content  with  pitching  his 
tent  before  the  city,  he  bought  the  parcel  of  ground  "  where 
he  had  pitched  his  tent."  Abraham  bought  a  parcel  of 
ground  in  which  to  bury  his  dead ;  and  this  was  no  declen 
sion  from  the  pilgrim  spirit— it  rather  placed  it  in  clearer 
relief.  But  as  Jacob  paid  down  his  hundred  pieces  of 
money,  each  of  which  bore  the  rude  imprint  of  a  lamb,  he 
was  abandoning  the  pilgrim  spirit  and  the  pilgrim  attitude, 
and  was  buying  \hat  which  God  had  promised  to  give  to  him 
and  to  his  seed.  The  true  spirit  of  faith  would  have  waited 
quietly,  until  God  had  made  good  His  repeated  promise. 

It  may  be  that  Jacob  sought  to  conciliate  his  conscience 
by  building  the  altar,  and  dedicating  it  to  the  God  of  Israel. 
Or  perhaps  he  thought  to  counteract  the  effect  of  the 
idolatrous  city,  by  this  means.  In  some  such  way  professing 
Christians  sometimes  try  to  find  an  antidote  for  a  week  of 
worldliness  in  the  religious  observances  of  the  Lord's  day. 
They  allow  their  children  to  go  into  the  world ;  but  they 
insist  on  their  attending  family-worship  before  they  retire  to 
rest.  Where  the  altar  and  the  world  are  put  in  rivalry,  there 
is  no  doubt  as  to  which  will  win  the  day  :  the  Shechem  gate 
will  appeal  too  strongly  to  our  natural  tendencies ;  and  we 


A  STARTLING  ANNOUNCEMENT.  113 

shall  find  ourselves  and  our  children  drifting  into  Shechem — 
whilst  the  grass  of  neglect  grows  up  around  the  altar,  or  it 
becomes  broken  down  and  disused. 

"  And  Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Leah,  which  she  bare  unto 
Jacob,  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land."  It  is  a 
startling  announcement ;  but  it  contains  nothing  more  than 
might  have  been  expected.  Poor  girl !  A  moth  fluttering 
about  a  flame !  A  foolish  fish  nibbling  at  the  bait !  Was 
she  lonely,  being  the  only  girl  ?  Did  she  want  to  show  off 
some  piece  of  jewelry  or  dress  ?  Did  she  long  for  more 
admiration,  or  fascinating  society,  than  she  could  find  at 
home  ?  Was  there  a  secret  drawing  to  the  young  men  of  the 
place  ?  She  went  along  a  path,  that  seemed  to  her  girlish 
fancy  ever  so  much  more  attractive  than  the  dull  routine 
of  home.  She  took  no  heed  to  the  warnings  that  may  have 
been  addressed  to  her.  And  it  all  ended — as  it  has  ended 
in  thousands  of  cases  since — in  misery,  ruin,  and  unutterable 
disgrace. 

She  was  kindly  received.  The  world  will  always  give  a 
hearty  welcome  to  those  who  bear  a  Christian  name. 
Perhaps  there  is  a  sense  of  relief  in  feeling  that  it  cannot  be 
so  bad  after  all,  since  Christians  do  not  hesitate  to  take  part 
with  it.  The  welcome  and  "  well-done  "  of  worldly  men 
should  always  put  us  on  our  guard.  "  What  evil  thing  have 
I  done,"  said  a  shrewd  observer,  "  that  yonder  worldling 
speaks  so  well  of  me  ?  " 

She  fascinated  the  young  prince,  and  fell.  It  is  the  old, 
old  story,  which  is  ever  new.  On  the  one  hand — rank,  and 
wealth,  and  unbridled  appetite ;  on  the  other — beauty,  weak 
ness,  and  dallying  with  temptation.  But  to  whom  was  her 
fall  due?  To  Shechem?  Yes.  To  herself?  Yes.  But 
also  to  Jacob.  He  must  for  ever  reproach  himself  for  his 


114  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

daughter's  murdered  innocence.  But  of  what  use  were  his 
reproaches,  when  the  deed  was  done  ;  and  the  honour  of  his 
house  was  gone  ;  and  his  name  stank  among  the  inhabitants 
of  the  land  ?  Would  that  some  Christian  parents,  reading 
these  words,  might  take  warning  as  to  the  end  of  a  pathway 
on  which  they  are  encouraging  their  children  to  tread  !  To 
stay  now  may  save  them  tears  of  blood,  and  years  of  fruitless 
agony.  In  the  strongest  terms,  let  me  entreat  them  not  to 
play  on  the  rim  of  the  whirlpool :  lest  its  hurrying  waters 
catch  the  too-hazardous  craft  before  they  are  aware ;  and 
whirl  them  round  in  an  ever  giddier  dance;  and  finally  engulf 
them  in  its  eddying  vortex. 

And  all  this  came  because  Jacob  stepped  down  from  the 
Israel  level,  back  to  his  old  unlovely  self.  Have  you  done 
the  same  ?  If  so,  learn  what  the  results  may  be  of  the  fatal 
lapse ;  and  ere  it  be  too  late,  seek  the  forgiveness  of  God ; 
ask  the  Good  Shepherd  to  restore  your  soul :  and  never  rest 
till  you  sit  again  together  with  Christ  in  those  heavenly 
places  where  failure  does  not  dim  the  light  of  God's  face  ;  or 
lower  the  tone  of  your  confession ;  or  involve  your  dear  ones 
in  irretrievable  loss.  And,  when  once  restored,  trust  Christ 
to  keep  you  on  His  own  glorious  level — making  you  walk, 
with  hind's  feet,  on  your  high  places. 


XI. 

Bacfc  to  BetljeU 

GENESIS   XXXV. 

"  O  God,  man's  heart  is  darkened, 

He  will  not  understand  ! 
Show  him  Thy  cloud  and  fire  ; 

And,  with  Thine  own  right  hand 
Then  lead  him  through  his  desert, 
Back  to  Thy  Holy  Land  ! " 

E.  A.  PROCTER. 

Gti 

JJLN  itself,  Bethel  was  not  much.  Imagine  a  long 
^  range  of  broken  hills  running  north  and  south. 
The  eastern  slopes,  bleak  and  tempest-riven,  descend  to 
the  Jordan.  The  western  slopes  lie  towards  the  more 
thickly-peopled  parts  of  Palestine.  In  the  valley  at  their 
foot  runs  the  main  thoroughfare  of  Palestine,  which  has 
been  trodden  by  centuries  of  travellers — a  rough,  broken 
mountain  roadway,  following  the  uneven  course  of  the 
valley,  and  intersected  by  innumerable  watercourses.  From 
this  track  and  upwards  the  mountain  slopes  are  strewn  with 
large  sheets  of  bare  rocks — most  prone  as  gravestones,  some 
erect  as  Druid  cromlechs.  No  house  is  within  sight;  no 
cultivated  lands  break  the  stretch  of  mountain  pasture ;  no 
domestic  animals  share  the  rule  of  the  eagle,  the  wild  goat, 
and  the  rabbit. 

But  to  Jacob,  Bethel  was  the  most  memorable  and  sacred 


Il8  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

spot  in  all  the  earth.  It  was  there,  on  the  first  night  of  his 
flight  from  home,  that  the  mystic  ladder  had  seemed  to  link 
earth  to  heaven,  thronged  by  angels  engaged  in  holy 
ministry. 

Many  years  had  passed  since  then — years  of  searching 
discipline,  which  had  revealed  the  meanness,  the  craft,  the 
weakness  of  his  nature.  He  had  fallen  far  below  the  pro 
mise  of  his  early  vows ;  his  better  nature  had  held  but  a 
spasmodic  supremacy  over  his  worse ;  even  the  angel-wrestle 
had  only  momentarily  lifted  him  to  the  level  of  Israel,  the 
Prince.  And  of  late  it  would  seem  that  even  worse 
symptoms  had  begun  to  show  themselves.  His  life  at  the 
gate  of  Shechem  had  done  much  to  lower  his  standard  and 
aims ;  and  to  assimilate  them  to  those  of  the  people  with 
whom  he  had  been  associated.  He  seems  even  to  have 
winked  at  the  idols  which  were  in  common  request  among 
his  people,  and  of  the  presence  of  which  he  was  perfectly 
well  aware.  There  had  been  a  time  when,  if  his  dearest 
wife  wished  for  graven  images,  she  must  have  them  surrepti 
tiously  ;  but  now  he  had  become  so  lax  himself,  that  there 
was  no  need  for  concealment  on  the  part  of  any  (ver.  2). 
Alas  !  what  a  fall  was  this  for  the  man  who  had  built  so 
many  altars  to  Jehovah;  and  was  the  chosen  depositary  of 
those  truths  for  which  the  world  was  waiting  !  For  the  world's 
sake,  and  for  his  own,  it  was  essential  that  he  should  be 
compelled  to  regain  the  ground  which  he  had  so  grievously 
lost.  It  was  then  that  he  said  to  his  household,  "  Let  us 
arise,  and  go  up  to  Bethel." 

This  impulse  was  natural.  The  emigrant  who  lives  in  the 
soft  Bermudas,  or  in  a  Canadian  log-house,  as  he  reaches 
mature  life,  will  find  a  strange  yearning  rising  within  him  for 
the  Highland  glen  in  which  he  was  born.  He  sends  many 


IN  TERRIBLE    TROUBLE.  lip 

a  longing  look  towards  the  Northern  stars;  and  at  last  starts 
on  pilgrimage.  He  may  find  the  scene  desolate  and 
deserted ;  yet  he  is  not  wholly  disappointed  :  he  needed  the 
glut  of  reality  to  satisfy  the  long  fever  of  his  soul.  It  was 
something  like  this  that  came  to  Jacob.  A  voice  (shall  I 
not  call  it  an  instinct,  within  him  ?)  cried  :  Go  and  dwell  for 
a  season  at  Bethel ;  gaze  once  more  on  the  familiar  scene  ; 
put  your  head  down  again  upon  that  stone  which  you  set  up 
for  a  pillar ;  and  review  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
hath  led  thee. 

But  his  untoward  circumstances  gave  a  yet  further  reason. 
He  was  in  terrible  trouble.  He  had  settled  himself  down, 
and  sunk  a  well  for  his  supply,  which  became  so  famous 
as  to  be  known  through  all  succeeding  time  as  Jacob's  Well ; 
he  was  intimately  identified  for  several  uneventful  years  with 
the  life  of  the  locality ;  and  then  his  sons  had  made  his 
name  stink  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  by  the  frenzied 
passion  with  which  they  had  revenged  their  sister's  dishonour. 
He  was  in  imminent  danger  of  destruction  from  the  infuriated 
tribes  around  him.  He  must  go  somewhere ;  and  it  was  at 
this  moment  that  the  impulse  came  to  him  to  go  up  to 
Bethel.  He  might  not  have  heeded  it,  if  the  waters  of  earthly 
comfort  had  sufficed  for  his  urgent  need.  But  now  that  they 
threatened  to  fail,  and  even  to  turn  to  poison,  he  was  the 
more  ready  to  try  what  Bethel  might  afford  of  comfort  and 
safety,  of  satisfaction  and  restoration.  A  drying  well  will 
often  lead  the  spirit  to  the  river  that  flows  from  the  throne 
of  the  Lamb. 

But,  above  all,  that  impulse  originated  in  God  Himself. 
"  God  said  unto  Jacob,  Arise,  go  up  to  Bethel,  and  dwell 
there."  No  human  ear  now  catches  the  tones  of  that 
majestic  voice.  Yet,  God  often  speaks  to  us  also— through 


120  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

our  own  consciousness,  and  within  our  own  souls.  Yes,  and 
He  speaks  oftener  than  most  of  us  are  aware.  We  do  not 
always  distinguish  the  voice  within  us  to  be  the  voice  of 
God.  We  act  on  an  impulse,  we  know  not  why.  But  as 
we  review  our  path  from  the  sweet  summit  of  religious 
revival  to  which  we  have  been  led,  we  recognize,  with  thank 
ful  awe,  that  the  voice  to  which  we  listened  was  none  other 
than  that  voice  which  Jacob  first  heard  speaking  to  him  in 
his  angel-haunted  sleep.  Has  it  not  been  so  with  you  ? 
You  have  followed  an  inward  impulse,  not  knowing  whence 
it  came,  or  whither  it  led ;  you  have  wandered  blindly  on, 
reaching  positions  of  which  you  had  never  dreamed,  but 
which  are  evidently  your  special  sphere :  and  it  is  only  on 
looking  backwards  that  you  realize  how  every  step  of  your 
way  has  been  ordered  by  a  wisdom  not  your  own ;  how  the 
impulse  originated  in  Him  who  prompts  the  swallows  to 
follow  the  sun  to  wanner  climes ;  and  how  the  voice  that 
called  you  was  the  voice  of  God. 

But  there  is  something  better  than  this  blind  obedience ; 
and  it  would  be  a  happy  thing  if  every  child  of  God  had 
reached  it.  God  is  always  speaking  to  us  in  the  incidents 
of  daily  life ;  He  has  a  meaning,  and  transmits  to  us  a 
message,  in  everything  which  He  permits  to  happen.  We 
are  wise,  therefore,  when  we  set  ourselves  to  decipher  the 
hieroglyphics  in  which  His  meaning  is  enwrapped ;  and  to 
question  each  event  as  to  the  tidings  which  He  has  entrusted 
it  to  bring.  We  are  wiser  still,  when  we  lovingly,  yea  joy 
fully,  accept,  and  unquestioningly  obey. 

And  why  did  God  wish  Jacob  to  go  back  to  Bethel? 
Because  Bethel  was  associated  with  one  of  the  most  blessed 
spiritual  experiences  of  his  life.  And  the  summons  to  go 
back  to  Bethel  was  equivalent  to  an  invitation  to  return  to 


SPIRITUAL   DECLENSION.  121 

that  fervour,  that  devotion,  and  those  holy  vows,  which  had 
made  that  bare  mountain-pass  the  very  house  of  God  and 
the  gate  of  heaven.  "  Come  back ;  and  be  as  near  to  Me 
as  you  were  when  you  first  set  up  that  stone,  and  anointed 
it  with  oil." 

There  are  some  words  which  cannot  be  spoken  in  our 
ears  without  arousing  in  us  an  immediate  and  touching 
response.  They  come  on  us  as  a  strain  of  music ;  or  a  whiff 
of  perfume  on  the  summer  breeze — awakening  far-off  memo 
ries,  and  exciting  emotions  long  gone  by.  So  must  the 
word  Bethel  have  sounded  in  the  ear  of  Jacob :  stirring  all 
his  better  nature — bidding  it  arise,  and  come  forth  from  its 
long  death-sleep ;  and  lighting  up  the  nobler  spirit  of  his 
life.  It  met  with  an  instant  response  :  "  Then  Jacob  said 
unto  his  household,  and  to  all  that  were  with  him,  Put  away 
the  strange  gods  that  are  among  you ;  and  be  clean,  and 
change  your  garments.  And  let  us  arise,  and  go  up  to 
Bethel." 

And  so  he  came  to  Bethel,  protected  by  God's  watchful 
care  ;  and  he  built  there  an  altar,  and  God  appeared  unto 
him  again. 

I.  MANY  CHRISTIANS  ARE  SUFFERING  FROM  SPIRITUAL 
DECLENSION. 

They  hardly  realize  it,  it  has  crept  on  them  so  quietly ;  but 
they  have  drifted  far  away  from  their  Bethel  and  Peniel.  Grey 
hairs  are  on  a  man  before  he  knows.  Summer  fruit  is  be 
ginning  to  rot  within,  long  before  its  surface  is  pitted  with 
specks.  The  leafs  connection  with  the  branch  is  severed, 
even  when  it  looks  green.  The  devil  is  too  shrewd  to  make 
Judases  at  a  stroke  ;  he  wins  us  from  the  side  of  Christ  by 
hair-breadths.  We  would  never  think  of  letting  in  the  lion; 


122  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

but  we  spare  the  little  foxes,  which  break  down  the  hedge — 
through  which  the  lion  comes  presently.  We  would  never 
think  of  letting  Delilah  cut  off  our  seven  locks  of  hair;  but  we 
do  not  so  much  object  to  her  binding  it  with  her  green  withes, 
though  she  will  creep  on  to  the  other.  So  insensibly  have 
you  been  slipping  back ;  until  you  are  infinitely  farther  from 
God  than  you  were  in  the  sacred,  happy  days  that  are 
past. 

II.  IDOLS  ARE  THE  INEVITABLE  SYMPTOM  OF  INCIPIENT 
DECAY. 

Go  at  autumn  into  the  woods,  and  see  how  the  members 
of  the  fungus  tribes  are  scattered  plentifully  throughout  the 
unfrequented  glades.  All  through  the  long  scorching  sum 
mer  days  their  germs  were  present  in  the  soil;  but  they  were 
kept  from  germinating  by  the  dryness  of  the  air,  and  the 
heat  of  the  sun.  However,  there  is  now  nothing  to  prevent 
it ;  nay,  the  dank  damp  of  decay  is  the  very  food  of  their 
life.  Where  the  shade  is  deepest,  and  the  soil  most  im 
pregnated  with  the  products  of  corruption,  they  love  to 
pitch  their  tents.  Wherever,  therefore,  you  find  these  fungus 
growths,  you  may  be  sure  that  there  is  corruption  and 
decay.  Similarly,  whenever  there  has  set  in  upon  the 
spiritual  life  the  autumn  of  decay,  you  will  be  sure  to  find  a 
fungus  growth  of  idols — the  sorrowful  symptoms  that  the 
bright  summer  time  has  passed,  or  is  passing  away  from  the 
soul. 

You  may  hide  your  idols,  like  Rachel ;  but  they  will  not 
remain  hidden  :  they  will  work  their  way  forward,  until 
what  was  hidden  as  a  sin  becomes  paraded  as  a  boast.  It 
may  be  that  some  backslider  shall  read  these  lines,  conscious 
that  things  are  not  now  what  they  were  between  him  and 


IDOL    WORSHIP.  123 

God.  Such  an  one  will  bear  witness  from  his  own  bitter 
experience,  that  in  proportion  to  the  decay  of  the  inner  life 
there  has  been  the  growth  of  some  idol-love.  You  have  set 
your  heart  on  making  a  reputation,  or  a  fortune ;  you  have 
loved  some  worthless  friend  with  an  inordinate  affection; 
you  have  lavished  yourself  on  something  or  some  one  out 
side  01  God — and  as  your  energies  have  waxed  in  this 
direction,  they  have  waned  in  the  other.  "  No  man  can 
serve  two  masters  :  either  he  will  love  the  one,  and  hate  the 
other ;  or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the 
other." 

III.  THESE     IDOLS    MUST    BE    SURRENDERED    BEFORE 

THERE    CAN    BE   VICTORY    OR    PEACE. 

The  reason  for  Jacob's  flight  before  those  alien  tribes 
was,  of  course,  the  censurable  and  merciless  action  of  his 
sons  ;  but  above  and  beyond  this,  lay  the  fact  that  Jacob 
had  been  giving  some  measure  of  countenance  to  the 
existence  of  idolatry  in  the  camp.  I  always  find,  in 
Christian  experience,  that  failure  and  defeat  indicate  the 
presence  of  some  idol  somewhere,  and  the  need  of  more 
complete  consecration  to  God.  It  may  be  a  hidden  idol ; 
and  it  may  be  hidden  by  the  Rachel  of  your  heart,  lovely 
and  beloved  :  but  if  it  be  there,  it  will  be  the  certain  cause  of 
disappointment.  You  say  that  you  do  not  find  yourself  able 
to  overcome  besetting  sin ;  that  you  are  tripped  up  before 
you  look  to  Christ ;  that  you  are  sometimes  hot  as  juniper- 
coals,  and  then  cold  as  ice  ;  you  talk  about  your  experi 
ence  as  if  Christ  had  failed — no  such  thing !  Get  down  on 
your  knees  ;  search  out  the  idols  ;  ransack  all  the  camel- 
baggage,  in  spite  of  all  that  Rachel  may  say ;  bring  out  the 
accursed  things,  and  bury  them.  Put  away  the  garments 


124  ISRAEL:   A   PRINCE    WITH  G0£>. 

spotted  with  the  flesh  ;  only  thus  will  you  enter  upon  the 
life  of  victory,  or  will  God  appear  unto  you  again. 

How  wise  it  was  for  Jacob  to  bury  those  idols  right  away ! 
If  he  had  kept  or  carried  them  with  him,  he  might  have 
been  tempted  to  bring  them  out  again.  It  was  so  much 
better  to  leave  them  right  there,  under  the  oak  in  Shechem, 
before  he  started  for  Bethel.  I  do  not  think  he  could  have 
counted  on  God's  delivering  care,  if  he  had  not  acted  with 
such  promptness  and  decision.  God  would  not  have  been 
the  escort  of  a  pack  of  idols  !  Burn  the  books  that 
have  polluted  your  mind.  Cut  off  the  hand  that  has  made 
you  offend.  Renounce  the  drink  that  has  obtained  such  a 
power  over  you  ;  and  pour  the  contents  of  your  cellars  down 
the  gutter,  lest  you  be  tempted  to  return  to  them  again. 
Burn  your  bridge  behind  you.  Hide  the  idols  under  the 
oak.  "  Mother,"  said  a  betting  man,  "  I  have  taken  the 
first  step  to  Christianity  ;  I  have  burnt  my  betting-books." 
We  cannot  be  surprised  at  the  mighty  work  of  God  in 
Ephesus  after  the  splendid  auto-da-fe  that  took  place  in  the 
market-place  (Acts  xix.  19). 

What  a  man  is,  that  in  most  cases  his  family  will  also  be. 
When  Jacob's  camp  saw  that  he  was  himself  in  earnest,  they 
gave  him  all  the  strange  gods  that  were  in  their  hand,  and  all 
the  earrings  that  were  in  their  ears.  What  a  solemn  responsi 
bility  rests  on  us  all  in  our  family  life,  that  we  should  not,  by 
our  silence,  connive  at  either  follies  or  sins.  If  those  around 
us  see  that  we  are  consistent  and  determined,  they  will  not  let 
us  go  to  heaven  alone.  Christiana  and  her  children  will 
sooner  or  later  follow  Christian.  "Jacob  came  to  Luz,  that 
is,  Bethel,  he  and  all  the  people  that  were  with  him." 

This,  then,  is  our  closing  message  :  put  away  your  idols, 
and  get  back  to  Bethel.  Repent,  and  do  the  first  works. 


RETURN   TO    THE  LORD! 


125 


Pray  as  you  used  to  pray.  Study  the  Bible  as  you  used  to 
study  it.  Spend  the  Lord's  day  as  you  used  to  spend  it. 
Build  an  altar  now  on  the  same  site  on  which  you  built  it 
years  ago.  Give  yourself  again  to  God.  True,  a  sad  life  of 
wasted  opportunities  lies  behind  you ;  but  do  not  waste  more 
time  in  fruitless  regrets.  Forget  the  things  that  are  behind; 
stretch  forward  to  those  that  are  before.  And  God  will 
appear  to  you  again;  and  will  renew  the  Princely  Name  and 
the  Princely  Blessing  to  which  you  might  have  thought  that 
you  had  forfeited  all  right ;  moreover.  He  will  promise  you 
marvellous  fruitfulness  in  service,  and  far-reaching  posses 
sions  in  the  Land  of  Promise  (verses  n,  12).  All  these 
things  are  in  store  for  you — if  only  you  will  bury  your  idols, 
and  go  up  to  Bethel,  and  dwell  there.  "  Goodness  and 
mercy  shall  follow  you  all  the  days  of  your  life ;  and  you 
shall  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  "  Return, 
ye  backsliding  children  ;  and  I  will  heal  your  backslidings. 
Behold,  we  come  unto  Thee ;  for  Thou  art  the  Lord  our 
God." 


XII. 

of 

GENESIS   XXXV. — XLII. 

"  The  ills  we  see — 

The  mysteries  of  sorrow  deep  and  long, 
The  dark  enigmas  of  permitted  wrong, — 

Have  all  one  key  : 

This  strange,  sad  world  is  but  our  Father's  school  ; 
All  chance  and  change  His  love  shall  grandly  overrule. 

F.  R.  HAVERGAL. 
cv. 

tN  manufactories  of  china-ware  there  are  processes  which 
illustrate  our  lives  with  startling  force  and  beauty. 
Amongst  others  which  read  us  deep  and  helpful  lessons, 
is  the  burning-in  of  the  colours,  which  had  been  pre 
viously  painted  on  the  ware.  It  is  only  the  skilled  hand 
that  can  delineate  those  designs  which  delight  our  fancy; 
but  no  skill  of  the  painter  could  make  them  other  than 
evanescent,  unless  there  were  some  other  method  of  render 
ing  them  permanent.  This  is  accomplished  by  placing  the 
newly-painted  ware  in  a  kiln  or  furnace,  where  it  is  exposed 
to  very  intense  heat;  and  the  colours  are  burnt  in  and 
fixed. 

It  is  very  often  thus  that  God  makes  permanent  some 
great  blessing  which  we  have  received.  He  burns  it  in  by 
placing  us  amid  the  fires  of  keen  suffering  and  sorrow.  So 
often  have  I  noticed  this,  that  I  am  never  surprised  to  hear 


JACOB'S  EXPERIENCE,   AND   OURS.  127 

men  date  an  unusual  amount  of  trial  from  the  moment  in 
which  heaven  seemed  nearer,  and  Christ  dearer,  than  ever 
before.  It  must  be  so :  or  the  blessing  which  they  had 
obtained  would  fade  from  their  soul— as  the  tints  of  sunset 
fade  off  earth  and  sky ;  or  as  the  photograph  fades  from  the 
plate,  unless  it  has  been  "  fixed  "  in  the  dark  chamber.  In 
this  respect,  there  is  a  precise  analogy  between  the  experience 
of  Jacob  and  ourselves  :  teaching  us  again  that  spiritual  life 
is  one,  though  severed  by  the  centuries ;  and  that  the  Bible 
is  evidently  the  Word  of  God,  because  it  is  so  certainly  the 
book  of  man. 

When,  having  left  his  idols  behind,  Jacob  had  got  back 
to  Bethel,  and  had  built  again  the  altar  of  renewed  conse 
cration,  we  are  told  significantly  that  "God  appeared  unto 
him  again,  and  blessed  him."  Are  all  the  readers  of  these 
lines  conscious  that  the  blessing  of  the  Almighty  is  resting 
upon  them  ? — as  the  light  of  the  transfigured  body  of  our 
Lord  fell  upon  the  virgin  snows  of  Hermon,  and  made  the 
darkness  light  ?  Has  God  revealed  Himself  to  you  again, 
after  the  long,  sad  lapse  of  fellowship  and  communion  ?  Is 
the  backslider  back  again  in  the  house  of  God,  and  at  the 
gate  of  heaven?  If  not,  would  it  not  be  wise  to  do  as 
Jacob  did  ?  Ask  God  to  show  you  what  your  idols  are. 
Tell  Him  that  you  want  to  be  only,  always,  all  for  Him. 
Put  away  not  only  your  sins,  but  your  weights — i.e.,  aught 
that  hinders  you  in  the  Christian  race.  If  you  cannot  do 
this  yourself,  tell  Him  that  you  are  willing  for  Him  to  take 
them  from  you.  If  you  cannot  say  that  you  are  willing,  tell 
Him  that  you  are  willing  to  be  made  willing.  And  when 
you  have  thus  surrendered  your  will,  give  yourself  again 
to  Him  ;  entreat  Him  to  take  full  possession  of  your 
entire  being ;  lay  yourself  as  an  Isaac  upon  the  altar  of  self- 


128  ISRAEL:   A   PRTNCE    WITH  GOD. 

dedication;  and  remember  that  He  takes  all  we  give,  and 
at  the  moment  of  our  giving  it.  It  may  be  that  He  will 
appear  to  us  at  once,  flooding  our  spirits  with  the  old  un 
speakable  joy ;  or  He  may  keep  us  waiting  for  a  little.  But 
it  matters  comparatively  little,  if  only  we  can  say,  with  the 
assurance  of  an  unwavering  faith,  "  We  are  His ;  nothing 
shall  henceforth  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God." 

It  was  a  great  blessing,  indeed,  that  God  vouchsafed  to 
Jacob.  "  God  said  unto  him,  Thy  name  is  Jacob  :  thy 
name  shall  not  be  called  any  more  Jacob  ;  but  Israel  shall 
be  thy  name."  The  angel  had  said  as  much  as  this  at 
Peniel;  and,  for  a  brief  moment,  he  had  shone  in  the  trans 
figuring  gleam  of  royalty.  But  the  gleam  was  transient 
enough ;  like  that  which  sometimes  breaks  for  a  moment  far 
out  upon  a  stormy  sea,  and  is  instantly  veiled  again.  But 
there  had  been  wrought  on  him  a  deep  spiritual  change 
since  then ;  and  his  experience  had  been  brought  into 
more  constant  conformity  with  the  level  of  Israel,  the 
Prince — which  was  now  re-affirmed  as  his  perpetual 
designation.  And  forthwith  he  was  plunged  into  a  fiery 
furnace  of  trial,  which  made  both  name  and  character 
permanent. 

But  this  was  not  all :  God  constituted  him  father  of 
nations  and  kings  ;  and  promised  to  give  to  him  the  land  in 
which  he  was  a  wanderer,  as  his  fathers  before  him.  Now 
these  two  items  of  fruitfulness  and  possession  are  only  possible 
to  those  who  have  passed  through  the  school  of  suffering.  It 
is  in  soul-travail  that  our  children  are  born  ;  and  it  is  through 
much  tribulation  that  we  enter  into  the  Kingdom.  Let  no 
man  think  that  he  can  win  the  highest  spiritual  attainments 
without  paying  the  price  for  them.  Our  Lord  could  only  be 
perfected  as  our  Captain  and  High  Priest  by  the  things  that 


THE  DEATH  OF  DEBORAH.  I2p 

He  suffered ;  through  His  sufferings  He  became  the  Author 
of  eternal  salvation  to  all  who  believe. 

We  need  not  dwell  further,  then,  on  the  probable  reasons 
why,  from  this  moment,  Jacob's  path  was  draped  in  the 
gathering  shadows  of  outward  sorrow.  But  we  may  notice 
what  those  shadows  were.  And  we  may  interest  ourselves 
in  remarking  how,  as  the  sorrows  gathered,  there  was  a  fuller 
life,  and  fruitfulness,  and  royalty.  Jacob  is  increasingly 
replaced  by  Israel,  the  Prince.  Does  it  not  remind  us 
forcibly  of  another,  who  said,  "  Though  our  outward  man 
perish,  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day  ?  "  (2  Cor.  iv. 
1 6).  Our  affliction  is  light,  and  for  a  moment,  compared 
with  the  weight  of  glory  which  it  is  working  out. 

There  are  four  burials  in  one  chapter  (Gen.  xxxv.),  in 
cluding  that  of  the  idols  in  Shechem.  These  were  the 
beginning  of  sorrows. 

First,  Deborah  died ;  the  old  favourite  nurse,  who  had  ac 
companied  her  young  mistress,  when,  long  years  before,  she 
had  left  her  home  across  the  Euphrates  to  become  Isaac's 
bride.  What  a  link  she  must  have  been  with  that  sacred 
past !  What  stories  she  could  tell  of  the  glory  of  that  camp 
presided  over  by  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God  !  And  often 
she  would  live  again  in  the  past,  and  tell  how  bitterly 
Rebekah  rued  the  fatal  advice  she  gave  to  her  favourite  son — 
whom  she  was  never  to  see  again ;  and  for  lack  of  whom  she 
pined,  until  she  drooped  in  death,  whilst  he  still  tarried 
across  the  distant  Euphrates'  flood.  Rebekah 's  death  may 
have  made  the  camp  of  Isaac  distasteful  to  the  faithful  old 
servant ;  and  she  took  the  first  opportunity  of  coming  to 
spend  her  remaining  days  with  him  whom,  in  memory  of  the 
long  past,  she  too  loved  with  the  tenacious  affection  of  her 


130  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

race.  It  must  have  been  a  sad  wrench  to  Jacob  to  lay  the 
remains  of  his  mother's  closest  friend  beneath  that  oak  in 
Bethel.  The  grief  occasioned  by  her  death  was  evidently 
quite  unusual ;  since  even  the  oak  became  known,  in  after 
years,  as  "  the  oak  of  tears." 

But  a  worse  sorrow  was  in  store.  They  journeyed  from 
Bethel,  and  there  was  but  a  little  way  to  come  to  Ephrath. 
The  foremost  ranks  of  the  march  were  already  in  sight  of 
the  hostelry,  and  were  eagerly  pressing  on  for  the  camping 
ground.  But  suddenly  a  summons  from  the  rear  bade  them 
halt.  The  beloved  Rachel  cannot  go  another  step.  The 
tidings  of  her  extreme  agony  and  peril  silence  the  motley 
groups  of  drovers  and  slaves,  and  servants  and  sons. 
Gathered  in  confusion  upon  the  road,  they  await  the  issue 
with  the  dread  suspense  which  breathlessly  marks  each 
flicker  of  life's  taper.  That  scene  would  never  be  forgotten 
by  any  of  them,  least  of  all  by  Jacob.  When  he,  too,  lay 
upon  his  dying  bed,  in  that  hieroglyphed  Egyptian  chamber, 
it  came  back  to  him,  with  touching  force  and  pathos,  such 
as  told  the  freshness  of  the  wound,  and  the  anguish  of  the 
grief,  which  thirty  years  could  not  dull.  Ah,  sorrow ! 
nature  may  cast  its  mantle  of  greenery  over  her  scars,  and 
golden  grain  may  stand  in  serried  ranks  upon  the  field  of 
Waterloo ;  but  thou  canst  inflict  wounds  which  never  seam 
together,  but  gape,  and  gape. 

But  all  the  agony  of  those  devoted  hearts  could  not  stay 
that  departing  spirit :  the  mother  only  lived  long  enough  to 
see  her  second  babe,  and  to  enshrine  her  sorrow  in  its  name ; 
and  then  she  died,  and  was  buried  there  in  the  way  to 
Ephrath,  which  is  Bethlehem.  It  was  a  matter  of  evident 
regret  to  Jacob,  in  after  years,  that  she  did  not  lie,  with  the 
rest  of  her  kin,  in  Machpelah's  ancient  cave ;  but  he  could 


JOSEPH  SOLD.  131 

never  forget  that  lone  spot  on  the  way  to  Ephrath  (xlviii.  7). 
And  when  the  wheel  of  time  had  brought  many  changes,  and 
that  spot  had  become  famous  as  the  birthplace  of  the  great 
Son  of  Jesse,  still  it  seemed  to  the  anointed  ear  of  the 
prophet  as  if  Rachel's  spirit  haunted  the  spot,  wailing  for 
her  children.  And  even  to  this  day  travellers  turn  aside  to 
visit  Rachel's  tomb. 

Yet  another  heart-pang  was  measured  out  to  that  much- 
tried  man.  We  suffer  keenly  through  the  sins  of  those 
we  love ;  and  when  the  father  saw  his  Reuben  and 
his  Judah  stained  with  the  soil  of  nameless  impurity,  he 
drank  perhaps  the  bitterest  cup  of  his  life. 

Nor  was  this  all.  He  lived  to  see  dissension  and  hatred 
rend  his  home.  The  elder  brethren  envied  and  hated  their 
younger  brother,  Joseph ;  the  son  of  the  beloved  Rachel, 
and  the  child  of  his  old  age.  His  partiality  most  certainly 
added  fuel  to  the  flame.  It  was  a  great  mistake  to  confer 
the  costly  coat  that  indicated  the  heir  and  prince  of  an 
Eastern  clan.  But  we  can  easily  understand  how  naturally 
the  old  man  would  turn  to  the  promising  lad,  whose  dreams 
bespoke  his  regal  future,  and  reminded  him  of  his  own. 
"  His  brethren  envied  him ;  but  his  father  observed  the 
saying." 

But  there  was  worse  to  follow.  One  day  the  sons  brought 
home  the  coat  he  knew  so  well ;  but  it  was  bedaubed  with 
blood,  and  stained.  "  This  have  we  found ;  know  now 
whether  it  be  thy  son's  coat  or  no."  It  may  be  that  a 
suspicion  even  then  crossed  his  mind  that  there  had  been 
foul  play.  But  if  it  did,  he  kept  it  to  himself,  and  only  let 
it  slip  afterwards  in  the  bitterness  of  his  grief  (xlii.  36).  He 
at  least  professed  to  believe  that  an  evil  beast  had  devoured 
the  beloved  body,  and  that  Joseph  had  been  rent  in  pieces. 

I   2 


132       ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE  WITH  GOD. 

How  he  mourned  only  those  know  who  have  passed  through 
similar  anguish.  The  father's  grief  touched  unwonted 
chords  in  the  hearts  of  his  children.  They  rose  up  to 
comfort  him.  "  But  he  refused  to  be  comforted ;  and  said, 
I  will  go  down  to  the  grave  unto  my  son  mourning.  Thus 
his  father  wept  for  him." 

But  another  sorrow  was  in  store.  Jacob  was  next 
called  upon  to  see  his  aged  father  breathe  his  last ;  and 
perhaps  once  more  to  hear  those  trembling  lips  pronounce 
the  blessing  which  had  cost  so  much.  "  Isaac  gave  up 
the  ghost  and  died,  and  was  gathered  unto  his  people." 
He  joined  the  great  gathering  of  his  clan,  in  the  ranks  of 
which  are  numbered  all  meek  and  true-hearted  souls.  Who 
are  our  people,  to  whom  we  shall  be  one  day  gathered  ? 
And  the  two  sons  buried  him.  Esau  came  from  Edom — 
the  successful  man  of  the  world,  who  had  anticipated  this 
moment  years  before,  as  likely  to  suit  his  purpose  for  slaying 
Jacob ;  but  who  was  sweetened  and  softened  by  the  mellow 
ing  influence  of  time.  And  Jacob — limping  in  his  step ; 
broken  by  hard  toils  ;  stricken  by  his  recent  losses — came  to 
help  him.  There  they  stood  for  a  moment :  the  twins  whose 
lives  had  been  such  a  struggle  and  such  a  contrast,  recon 
ciled  in  the  presence  of  the  great  silence  of  the  grave ;  and 
soon  to  take  their  several  ways,  never  again  to  meet,  but  to 
tread  ever  diverging  paths,  both  they  and  their  children,  and 
their  children's  children.  We  link  hands  with  the  playmates 
and  companions  of  early  life  across  the  tiny  stream,  and  for 
some  distance  we  can  keep  them  linked,  albeit  that  the 
streamlet  widens  between  us ;  then  loosing  hands,  we  walk 
side  by  side,  keeping  each  other  well  in  view,  and  talking 
merrily  :  but,  at  last,  the  mighty  river  spreads  its  volume 
between  us ;  and  we  can  neither  see  nor  hear  anything,  save 


THE  FAMINE.  133 

the  break  of  the  sea  upon  the  shore.  It  is  all  important 
that  those  who  love  should  be  on  the  same  right  side  of  the 
stream,  if  they  would  escape  an  eternal  separation. 

On  the  heels  of  bereavement  came  one  of  those  terrific 
famines  to  which  Eastern  countries  are  subject,  and  which 
sweep  them  bare  of  people.  The  family  of  Jacob  was  not 
exempt.  The  sons  seem  to  have  sat  down  in  the  stolid 
indifference  born  of  long  privation  ;  and  were  only  aroused 
by  their  father's  appeal,  "  Why  do  ye  look  one  upon 
another  ?  "  They  went  down  into  Egypt — in  all  ages  the 
granary  of  the  world ;  and  after  an  agonizing  interval  of  sus 
pense  returned.  But  Simeon  was  not  with  them ;  and  to  get 
him,  and  more  corn,  Jacob  must  risk  the  son  of  his  right 
hand — the  lad  who  had  cost  him  so  much  in  Rachel's  death. 
Who  does  not  sympathize  with  the  cry  of  agony  wrung  from 
that  quivering  heart,  a  cry  that  revealed  that  depth  of 
love  of  which  it  was  capable  ? — "  Me  have  ye  bereaved 
of  my  children:  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon  is  not;  and 
ye  will  take  Benjamin  away  :  all  these  things  are  against 
me.  Ye  shall  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the 
grave." 

In  addition  to  all  this,  there  was  growing  upon  him  a 
sense  that  his  life  was  closing  ;  that  his  strength  was  failing  ; 
and  that  he  must  prepare  to  follow  his  father  into  the  unseen. 
His  years  had  been  few  in  comparison  with  those  of  his 
forefathers ;  and  he  had  the  weary  sense  of  failure,  in  that 
he  had  "  not  attained  "  (xlvii.  9).  It  is  a  pitiful  thing,  when 
an  old  man  finds  life  ebbing  fast  away  from  him ;  whilst  all 
his  regrets  cannot  recal  one  single  mistake,  or  give  him  the 
consciousness  of  having  done  all  he  could.  Such  sorrows 
fell  to  Jacob's  lot :  they  fall  to  our  lot  still ;  and  when  they 
do,  let  us  learn  how  to  behave  ourselves. 


134  ISRAEL:   A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

I,       DO   NOT   JUDGE   BY   APPEARANCES. 

Jacob  said,  "  All  these  things  are  against  me."  It  was  a 
great  mistake.  Joseph  was  alive — the  governor  of  Egypt ; 
sent  there  to  preserve  their  lives,  and  to  be  the  stay  of  his 
closing  years.  Simeon  was  also  alive — the  blessed  link  which 
was  drawing  and  compelling  his  brothers  to  return  into  the 
presence  of  the  strange  Egyptian  governor.  Benjamin  would 
come  safely  back  again.  All  things,  so  far  from  being  against 
him,  were  working  together  for  good  to  him ;  and  if  only 
he  would  trust  God,  he  would  live  to  see  it  so.  All  things 
are  yours,  if  you  are  Christ's.  All  things  serve  you.  Even 
those  that  seem  most  awry  and  trying  are  really  promoting 
your  best  interests.  If  you  knew  as  much  about  them  as 
God  does,  you  would  go  down  on  your  bended  knees  and 
thank  Him,  with  streaming  eyes,  for  the  most  untoward  of 
your  circumstances.  The  seed  buried  in  the  ground  may 
rejoice  in  the  frost  as  much  as  in  the  genial  sunshine.  And 
even  though  some  events  cut  us  to  the  quick,  if  we  believe 
that  the  infinite  love  of  God  is  working  in  and  through  them, 
we  may  sing  as  Paul  and  Silas  did,  albeit  that  our  feet  are  fast 
in  the  stocks.  Let  us  cultivate  the  habit  of  looking  at  the 
bright  side  of  things.  If  there  are  only  a  few  clouds  float 
ing  in  your  sky,  do  not  say  that  the  whole  is  overcast ;  and 
if  all  the  heaven  is  covered,  save  one  small  chink  of  blue, 
make  much  of  that ;  and  by  all  means  do  not  exaggerate  the 
darkness. 

II.  BE  SURE  THAT  GOD  HAS  A  PURPOSE  IN  ALL  YOUR 
SORROW. 

The  apparent  aimlessness  of  some  kinds  of  pain  is  some 
times  their  sorest  ingredient.  We  can  suffer  more  cheerfully 


"NOTHING  COMES  BY  CHANCE."  135 

if  we  can  clearly  see  the  end  which  is  being  slowly  reached. 
But  if  we  cannot,  it  is  hard  to  lie  still  and  be  at  rest.  But 
the  believer  knows  that  nothing  can  come  to  him,  save  by 
the  permission  of  God's  love.  Every  trial  must  reach  him 
through  the  mystic  barriers  that  engird  him  ;  and  must  show 
a  permit  signed  by  the  hand  of  God  Himself.  Nothing 
comes  by  chance,  or  by  the  will  of  friend  or  foe ;  but  all  is 
under  law.  And  each  several  calamity  has  a  specific 
purpose.  "  Fitches  are  not  threshed  with  a  sharp  threshing 
instrument,  neither  is  a  cart  wheel  turned  about  upon  the 
cummin ;  but  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with  a  staff,  and 
the  cummin  with  a  rod." 

And  as  the  farmer  carefully  adjusts  his  method  to  various 
kinds  of  grain,  and  to  accomplish  the  object  he  has  at  heart, 
so  the  Almighty  varies  his  method  of  dealing  with  us :  He 
ever  selects  the  precise  trial  that  will  soonest  and  best 
accomplish  His  purposes ;  and  He  only  continues  it  long 
enough  to  do  all"  that  needs  to  be  done.  "  Bread  corn  is 
bruised  :  but  He  will  not  ever  be  threshing  it ;  nor  break  it 
with  the  wheel  of  his  cart ;  nor  bruise  it  with  his  horsemen." 
I  commend  that  precious  promise  to  those  who  think  their 
sorrows  past  endurance.  They  will  not  last  for  ever ;  they 
will  be  suited  to  our  peculiar  needs  and  strength.  They 
will  accomplish  that  on  which  the  great  Husbandman  has 
set  His  heart. 

III.   REMEMBER    THAT   NOTHING   CAN    SEPARATE    YOU 

FROM   THE   LOVE   OF   GOD. 

When  Jacob  reviewed  these  dark  passages  of  his  life  from 
the  serene  heights  of  his  dying  bed,  he  saw — as  he  had  never 
seen  it  before — that  God  had  shepherded  him  all  his  life 


136  ISRAEL:  A    PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

long;  and  His  Angel  had  redeemed  him  from  all  evil  (xlviii. 
15,  16).  We  do  not  realize  this  at  the  time:  but  there  is 
never  an  experience  in  life  without  the  watch  of  that  un 
sleeping  Shepherd-eye;  never  a  peril  without  the  interposition 
of  that  untiring  Shepherd-hand.  The  hand  of  the  Good 
Physician  is  ever  on  the  pulse,  as  we  pass  through  the 
operation.  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ? 
Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  famine,  or 
nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  Nay."  These  things  may 
sever  God  from  our  eyes,  and  shut  away  the  realization  of 
His  love  :  but  they  cannot  make  Him  cease  to  love  us ;  or 
hide  us  from  Him  ;  or  separate  us  from  Him.  Take  heart, 
you  who  are  descending  into  the  dark  valley  of  shadow ;  the 
Good  Shepherd  is  going  at  your  side,  though  you  see  Him 
not.  His  rod  and  staff  shall  comfort  you  :  yea,  His  own 
voice  shall  speak  comfortably  to  you.  Fear  not ! 

IV.  ANTICIPATE  THE  "AFTERWARD." 

Look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen ;  but  at  those  which 
are  not  seen.  Cast  into  the  one  scale  your  sorrows,  if  you 
will ;  but  put  into  the  other  the  glory  which  shall  presently 
be  the  outcome  of  the  pain.  Consider  how  splendid  it  will 
be,  when  the  discipline  is  over ;  and  the  lovely  shape  is 
acquired ;  and  the  lesson  learnt ;  and  the  pattern  fixed 
for  ever.  Anticipate  the  time  when  every  vestige  of  Jacob 
shall  have  been  laid  aside,  and  Israel  is  become  the  befitting 
title  for  your  soul.  Will  not  that  repay  you — because  you 
will  have  been  brought  into  a  oneness  with  Christ  which 
shall  be  heaven  in  miniature  ? 

Take  heart,  thou  bit  of  heaven's  porcelain  :  thou  must  be 
shaped  and  fashioned  on  the  rapid  wheel ;  thy  fairest  hues 
must  be  burnt  in  amid  the  most  fiery  trials — but  thou  shalt 


ONENESS   WITH  CHRIST. 


137 


yet  grace  the  table  of  thy  King ;  and  shalt  be  used  of  Him 
for  His  choicest  purposes. 

"  Wherefore,  let  them  that  suffer  according  to  the  will  of 
God,  commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to  Him,  as  unto 
a  faithful  Creator  "  (i  Peter  iv.  19). 


RACHEL'S  TOMB. 


XIII. 


CElimptfeg  of  tlje 


GENESIS   XLVII. 

"  I  held  it  truth  with  him  who  sings 
To  one  clear  harp  in  divers  tones, 
That  men  may  rise  on  stepping-stones 
Of  their  dead  selves  to  higher  things." 

TENNYSON. 

S  a  brook  runs,  it  clears  itself.  It  was  so  with  Jacob's 
life.  The  discipline  of  life,  like  a  refining  fire,  did 
not  fail  in  its  purpose.  The  dross  of  his  nature  was 
at  last  well-nigh  worked  out  ;  and  the  nobler  Israel-nature 
became  more  and  more  apparent.  This  change  is  marked 
by  the  change  in  the  name  by  which  he  is  designated  on 
the  inspired  page.  The  old  term,  Jacob,  is  used  but 
sparingly  ;  and  for  the  most  part  Israel  is  the  title  of  his 
nobility. 

Before  we  can  study  the  traces  of  his  increasing  princeli- 
ness  of  character,  we  should  do  well  to  notice  that  the  name 
Jacob,  though  used  sparingly,  is  not  wholly  dropped.  We 
can  never  forget  what  we  were.  We  can  never  forget  what 
we  might  be,  were  it  not  for  the  restraining  grace  of  God.  I 
cannot  agree  with  those  who  think  that  the  Jacob-nature 
may  be  expunged,  wiped  out  from  our  being.  In  my  judg 
ment,  both  Scripture  and  experience  are  dead  against  them 


"  WALK  IN  THE  SPIRIT."  139 

"The  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit";  and  will  lust,  though 
with  ever-decreasing  force,  unto  the  end.  But  it  is  my 
joyful  belief,  also,  that  "the  Spirit  lusteth  against  the  flesh"; 
and  represses  it  with  such  growing  power  that  it  is  reduced 
to  the  last  extremity  :  and  we  are  kept  from  doing  the  things 
that  we  otherwise  would.  Indeed,  the  self-life  can  scarcely 
be  said  to  live,  since  it  makes  but  the  faintest  response  to 
temptation.  If  only  we  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  live  in  the 
Spirit,  and  are  led  by  the  Spirit,  we  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts 
of  the  flesh :  we  shall  hardly  be  aware  of  their  presence  in 
our  being;  we  shall  be  as  good  as  dead  to  them.  But,  in  the 
moment  that  we  cease  to  abide  in  living  union  with  the 
Blessed  Spirit,  we  shall  find  that  the  old  nature  will  revive 
again,  in  horrid  resurrection ;  and  will  sweep  us  down  to  a 
sin  like  that  which  blackened  and  saddened  all  David's 
later  years. 

Germs  of  disease  may  be  constantly  breeding  in  an  in 
fected  house ;  but,  so  long  as  the  disinfecting  fluid  is  well 
sprinkled  on  the  floors  and  pendant  sheets,  they  are  killed 
off  as  soon  as  they  are  formed.  So  sin,  though  present  in 
the  heart,  may  be  choked  off,  so  as  to  be  almost  unperceived ; 
because  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ever  at  work  acting  as  a  disinfec 
tant  :  but,  so  soon  as  His  grace  is  withdrawn,  sin  regains  its 
old  deadly  sway,  and  breathes  forth  its  pestilential  poison. 
It  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  then,  to  keep  in  with  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

One  more  illustration,  though  some  may  deem  it  far 
fetched,  will  clench  and  illustrate  my  meaning.  A 
mesmerist  may  weave  a  spell,  by  passing  hands  over  a  man 
of  weaker  mind,  so  as  to  cast  him  into  all  the  appearances 
of  death.  But  he  is  not  dead;  and  when  the  charm  is 
broken,  the  processes  of  life  resume  their  course.  So, 


140  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

beneath  the  spell  of  the  grace  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  our  evil 
self-life  may  lie  as  dead,  only  giving  faint  signs  of  life ;  and 
yet,  if  that  spell  be  spoken,  it  will  spring  up  with  robust 
and  deadly  vigour.  It  becomes  us  then  to  watch  and  pray, 
lest  we  enter  into  temptation. 

There  is  a  beautiful  experiment,  which  the  readers  of  these 
lines  may  try  for  themselves  ;  and  which  will  give  them  a 
vivid  idea  of  how  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus  can  make  them  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  If 
you  take  a  heavy  book  and  hold  it  at  arm's  length,  the  pull 
of  the  law  of  gravitation  will  soon  draw  it  downwards ;  but 
if  some  friend  will  pour  down  that  arm  a  constant  stream  of 
electricity,  the  flow  of  the  electric  current  will  set  you  free 
from  the  effect  of  the  downward  pull.  It  will  still  be  there, 
though  you  will  have  become  almost  unconscious  of  it. 
Thus  it  will  be  when  we  are  filled  by  the  Spirit  of  God :  the 
downward  tendency  may  be  in  us  yet ;  but  it  will  be  more 
than  counteracted  by  the  habit  of  that  new  life,  in  which  the 
power  of  the  living  Saviour  is  ever  at  work,  through  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

In  the  earlier  stages 'of  the  Christian  life,  the  habit  of 
abiding  ever  in  communion  with  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
difficult  to  form  and  maintain.  Some  seem  to  acquire  it 
more  habitually  and  unbrokenly  than  others.  Where  this  is 
the  case,  the  Jacob-nature  begins  to  disappear  with  a  sud 
denness  that  reminds  us  of  a  rapid  thaw,  which,  in  a  single 
night,  may  rid  the  streets  of  tons  of  snow.  In  the  case  of 
those  who  learn  the  sweet  lesson  of  unbroken  fellowship 
more  slowly,  the  Jacob-nature  keeps  breaking  in  upon  the 
Israel-life,  as  the  underlying  rock-strata  will  break  up  through 
the  green  sward  of  a  highland  valley.  Yet,  as  the  years 
pass  on,  and  the  habit  of  fellowship  becomes  a  permanent 


"JOY  COMETH  IN   THE  MORNING."  141 

possession,  these  irruptions  become  less  and  less  frequent ; 
so  that  at  last  the  Israel-nature  has  the  almost  undisputed 
sway  in  the  life. 

We  have  to  notice  some  manifestations  of  this  Israel- 
nature  in  Jacob,  like  the  out-shinings  of  the  sun :  which,  in 
the  early  morning,  has  fought  with  heavy  mists  for  his 
supremacy ;  but  at  last  shines  out  in  a  cloudless  sky,  and 
sets  in  radiant  glory. 

For  more  than  twenty  years  Jacob  mourned  for  Joseph  as 
dead.  The  monotony  of  those  years  was  only  broken  by 
new  misfortunes,  which  came  upon  each  other's  heels,  as  the 
messengers  of  calamity  to  Job.  We  only  catch  some  few 
sobs  from  that  stricken  heart ;  like  the  cries  of  the  Crucified 
from  amid  the  dense  gloom  of  the  cross.  On  first  seeing 
the  bloodstained  coat,  "  I  will  go  down  into  the  grave 
mourning  " ;  on  learning  the  first  tidings  about  the  rough 
governor,  the  lord  of  the  land,  "  Me  have  ye  bereaved  of  my 
children ; "  on  the  appeal  of  his  sons  to  spare  Benjamin, 
"  My  son  shall  not  go  down  with  you,  lest  ye  bring  down 
my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave  ; "  on  their  renewed 
appeal,  "Wherefore  dealt  ye  so  ill  with  me  as  to  tell  the  man 
ye  had  a  brother  ?  "  on  giving  his  final  consent,  in  addition 
to  his  direction  that  they  should  take  some  few  delicacies 
from  their  almost  emptied  stores,  he  said  sadly  and  almost 
despairingly,  "  God  Almighty  give  you  mercy  before  the 
man,  that  he  may  send  away  your  other  brother,  and 
Benjamin.  If  I  be  bereaved  of  my  children,  I  am  bereaved." 

But  the  night  of  weeping  was  followed  by  the  morning  of 
joy.  Joy  looked  in  at  the  old  man's  window ;  and  sorrow 
and  sighing  fled  away.  What  a  confusion  of  emotion  must 
have  filled  his  heart  when  the  completed  band  of  his  sons 
stood  once  again  before  him  with  such  amazing  tidings ! 


142  ISRAEL:   A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

Benjamin  was  there,  and  Simeon.  Love  had  welded  them 
together  in  the  furnace  of  sorrow,  like  a  twelve-linked  chain, 
no  link  of  which  would  ever  again  be  missing.  The  God 
of  their  fathers  had  met  with  them;  and  henceforward 
would  supply  their  needs  so  fully,  that  they  could  have 
no  further  lack,  though  the  famine  should  last  thrice  seven 
years.  And,  above  all,  Joseph  was  yet  alive ;  and  he  was 
governor  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  What  wonder  that 
the  aged  heart  stood  still,  and  its  machinery  almost 
threatened  to  break  down,  beneath  the  pressure  of  sudden 
rapture.  At  first  he  could  not  believe  it  all.  But  the  sight 
of  the  waggons  convinced  him.  Then  there  came  forth  a 
gleam  of  the  royal  spirit  of  faith — the  spirit  of  Jacob 
revived,  and  Israel  said,  "It  is  enough  :  Joseph  my  son  is 
yet  alive  ;  I  will  go  and  see  him  before  I  die." 

Before  he  left  Canaan,  he  had  one  final  interview  with  his 
Almighty  Friend.  It  happened  at  Beersheba — the  last  halting- 
place  amid  the  green  pasture  lands  of  the  Land  of  Promise, 
and  before  they  struck  into  the  sand-waste  that  lay  between 
them  and  Egypt.  Everything  there  reminded  him  of  his 
own  early  life  which  was  spent  there.  He  could  find  the 
ruins  of  his  father's  altar ;  and  the  well  which  his  father  had 
sunk;  and  "  he  offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  his  father 
Isaac."  At  that  time  his  mind  was  engaged  in  eager  debate 
as  to  the  path  of  duty.  On  the  one  hand,  love  to  Joseph 
and  his  necessities  drew  him  to  Egypt ;  on  the  other,  the 
memory  of  how  much  evil  had  befallen  his  ancestors  when 
ever  they  went  down  to  Egypt,  made  him  eagerly  question 
whether  he  was  justified  in  going.  It  was  at  that  time  that 
God  made  his  path  clear,  by  saying,  "Fear  not  to  go 
down  into  Egypt;  for  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great 
nation :  I  will  go  down  with  thee  into  Egypt ;  and  Joseph 


IJIS  MEETING    WITH  JOSEPH.  143 

shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eyes."  How  comfortably  our 
God  speaks  to  us  when  we  are  sore  perplexed.  If  we  will 
only  wait,  we  shall  hear  a  voice  behind  us  saying,  "  This  is 
the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  But,  since  the  voice  speaks  from 
behind,  we  must  not  run  on  too  far  or  fast  in  front. 

(1)  There  is  a  glimpse  of  the  Israel-nature  in  his  meeting 
with  Joseph.     How  feverishly  the  old  man  anticipated  it ! — 
and  when,  on  the  confines  of  Egypt,  he  learnt  that  the 
second  chariot  in  the  land  was  bringing  his  long-lost  son  to 
his  embrace,  he  roused  himself  to  meet  him ;   not  as  the 
Jacob  of  olden  days,  but  as  Israel  the  Prince.     "  And  Israel 
said  unto  Joseph,  Now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy 
face,  because  thou  art  yet  alive." 

(2)  There  is  yet  another  glimpse  of  the  Israel-nature  in 
his  blessing  of  Pharaoh.     Joseph  might  almost  have  been 
ashamed  of  his  aged  father,  and  left  him  in  the  background. 
He  was  old,  and  decrepit,  and  lame.     He  had  spent  all  his 
life  in  tents  and  sheep-farms,  and  was  totally  ignorant  of  the 
manners  of  a  court.     He  was  an  exile,  an  emigrant,  a  man 
who  had  failed.     His  very  presence  there  was  due  to  his 
ruinous   losses.      What  a  contrast  between  him  and   the 
glorious  Pharaoh,   whose  court   teemed  with   science   and 
wit ;  with  soldiers  and  priests  ;  with  wealth  and  splendour ! 
And  yet,  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh,  there  was  so  much 
moral  grandeur  about  him  that  the  greatest  monarch  in  the 
world  bent  eagerly  beneath  his  blessing.     "  How  old   art 
thou  ? "  was  the  kind  inquiry  of  the  mighty  monarch,   to 
commemorate  whom  a  massive  pyramid,  destined  to  outlast 
his   race,  was  in  course  ot    erection.      The   question  was 
perhaps  suggested  by  his  bent  form  and  withered  look.    The 
reply  was  sad  enough;   and  it  was  the  Jacob-nature  that 


144  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

uttered  it.  It  seemed  like  an  anticipation  of  the  cry  of 
Ecclesiastes,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  It  was  lit 
up  by  no  single  ray  ot  thankfulness,  or  faith,  or  hope  :  "  My 
life  has  been  a  pilgrimage ;  its  days  have  been  few  and  evil." 
few,  in  comparison  with  those  of  Terah,  Abraham,  and 
Isaac.  Evil,  in  comparison  with  that  of  Esau,  who  stood 
at  the  head  of  a  great  kingdom,  the  progenitor  of  a  line  of 
kings.  And  yet,  with  this  confession  ringing  in  his  ears, 
Pharaoh  was  blessed  by  those  outstretched  trembling  hands, 
and  by  that  quavering  voice.  Esau  never  could  have  done 
that. 

"Without  all  contradiction  the  less  is  blessed  of  the 
better."  Jacob  must  have  had  something  about  him  that 
rendered  him  superior  to  the  greatest  monarch  of  his  time. 
There  were  two  kings  in  that  royal  chamber  decorated  by 
weird  hieroglyphs  and  long  lines  of  fantastic  figures  :  the  one, 
royal  with  the  adventitious  distinction  of  birth  and  rr.nk ;  the 
other,  a  way-worn  pilgrim,  royal  with  the  divine  patent  of 
royalty — a  noble  character.  And,  as  they  stood  together,  it 
was  shown  to  all  the  world  that  the  spiritual  is  greater  than 
the  material ;  and  that  God  can  endow  a  human  spirit  with 
such  moral  splendour  as  to  compel  the  world's  conquerors 
to  confess  themselves  conquered  before  its  power.  You 
may  be  crafty,  mean,  and  bargain-loving;  yet  if  you  will  but 
yield  yourself  to  God,  and  submit  to  his  loving  discipline, 
He  will  make  you  truly  royal,  and  give  you  the  moral  power, 
which  masters  all  other  power  beside. 

(3)  There  is  yet  another  glimpse  of  the  Israel-nature  in 
his  solemn  injunctions  to  Joseph  about  his  burial.  "  The 
time  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  die  :  and  he  called  his  son 
Joseph,  and  said  unto  him  .  .  .  (xlvii.  29).  And  Israel 
bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  head."  It  is  the  death-scene 


"BURY  ME  NOT  IN  EGYPT."  145 

which  shows  the  true  nature  of  a  man ;  and  its  darkness  set 
Jacob's  better  nature  in  full  relief. 

He  was  evidently  a  man  of  faith.  He  knew  the  ancient 
promise  made  by  God,  of  which  Abraham  may  have  often 
spoken  to  him  in  his  early  life — that  their  seed  should  inherit 
Canaan.  He  was  sure,  therefore,  that  his  people  would  not 
always  abide  in  Egypt — however  fertile  its  Goshens,  or 
friendly  its  peoples.  The  trumpet  would  sound  the 
summons  for  their  departure.  If  then  he  were  buried  in 
Egypt,  he  would  be  left  behind,  a  stranger  among  strangers ; 
and  this  could  not  be.  He  must  be  where  his  people  were. 
To  him,  therefore,  burial  in  the  most  splendid  mausoleum 
that  was  ever  constructed  in  that  land  of  silent  tombs  was 
not  for  one  moment  to  be  compared  with  burial  in 
Machpelah's  solitary  and  humble  cave ;  which  at  that  time 
was  a  mere  outpost  in  a  distant  and  hostile  land.  And  he 
desired  it,  not  only  because  the  mortal  remains  of  Abraham 
and  Sarah,  of  Isaac  and  Rebekah,  and  of  Leah  lay  there ; 
but  because  he  foresaw  the  time  when  it  would  be  sur 
rounded  by  the  teeming  myriads  of  his  children. 

He  could  only  see  this  by  faith.  He  "had  not  received 
the  promises ;  but,  by  faith,  he  had  seen  them  afar  off,  and 
was  persuaded  of  them,  and  embraced  them."  It  was  by 
faith  that  he  was  able  to  say,  "  Behold  I  die :  but  God 
shall  be  with  you,  and  bring  you  again  unto  the  land  of 
your  fathers.  . . .  Bury  me  not  in  Egypt ;  but  I  will  lie  with 
my  fathers,  and  thou  shalt  carry  me  out  of  Egypt,  and  bury 
me  in  their  burying-place."  Was  it  not  Israel  that  spake 
thus?  Faith  made  him  royal;  as  it  will  ennoble  the 
coarsest  and  commonest  nature,  lifting  the  beggar  from  the 
dunghill,  and  making  him  sit  among  princes.  And  these 
noble  utterances  prove  how  truly  God  had  done  his  work  of 


146  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE   WITH  GOD. 

ennoblement ;   and  how  royal  was  the  spirit  of  the  dying 
patriarch. 

(4)  There  is  yet  another  glimpse  of  the  Israel-nature  in  his 
dealings  with  Joseph's  sons.  In  the  chapter  that  records 
that  solemn  scene,  it  is  almost  entirely  on  Israel  that  our 
attention  is  fixed.  "  Israel  strengthened  himself  on  his  bed.". 
"Israel  beheld  Joseph's  sons."  "Israel  stretched  out  his 
right  hand."  "  Israel  said  unto  Joseph." 

The  sands  of  time  had  nearly  run  out  in  that  aged  and 
battered  body;  and  when  Joseph  arrived  at  his  dwelling, 
the  gift  of  his  own  munificence,  the  dying  man  seems  to 
have  been  lying  in  the  extreme  of  physical  exhaustion.  But 
the  sound  of  the  beloved  name  of  "  Joseph "  rallied  him ; 
and,  propped  by  pillows,  he  sat  up  upon  his  bed. 

Then,  with  that  wonderful  accuracy  of  memory  which  is  so 
remarkable  in  the  dying,  he  reviewed  the  past.  The  vision 
of  the  wondrous  ladder,  with  its  troops  of  angels ;  the 
precious  words  of  promise,  which  one  hundred  years  could 
not  obliterate  from  the  tablets  of  memory ;  the  scene  on  the 
hilly  road  to  Bethlehem,  where  he  buried  Rachel ;  the 
successive  instances  of  the  guardian  care  of  the  Angel  who 
had  tended  him,  as  a  shepherd  does  his  flock,  all  his  life  long 
until  that  day — all  passed  before  his  eye,  dim  with  age,  but 
bright  with  memory  and  hope. 

Amid  this  reverie,  the  old  man  became  aware  of  the  pre 
sence  of  Joseph's  two  sons,  and  inquired  who  they  were ;  and 
when  he  knew,  he  asked  that  they  might  be  brought  near 
enough  for  him  to  give  them  an  old  man's  blessing.  He  did 
this  with  great  affection  and  solemnity.  He  kissed  and  em 
braced  them ;  and  asked  that  his  good  Angel  might  bless  the 
lads.  He  ranked  them  among  his  own  sons  :  and  was  led  by 
prophetic  insight  to  distinguish  between  them,  crossing  his 


HIS  ROYALTY.  147 

hands,  and  laying  his  right  on  the  head  of  the  younger, 
whom  Joseph  had  placed  before  his  left ;  and  his  left  on  the 
head  of  the  elder,  whom  the  father  had  placed  before  his 
right.  When  Joseph  remonstrated  with  him,  thinking  it  was 
a  mistake  due  to  his  age  and  blindness,  the  old  man  still 
held  to  his  choice,  as  one  conscious  of  a  prerogative  in 
which  not  even  Joseph  must  interfere. 

This  touching  interview  ended  by  the  gift  to  Joseph  of 
the  parcel  of  ground  which  he  had  wrested  from  the  Amorites 
in  Shechem.  It  had  long  ago  returned  to  its  original  owners ; 
but  he  saw,  down  the  vista  of  the  future,  that  there  would  be 
a  reversion  of  the  whole  to  him  and  his — and  it  was  of  that 
future  that  he  spoke  in  faith. 

The  whole  of  this  scene  is  replete  with  a  dignity,  born  of 
moral  greatness,  and  worthy  of  Israel,  the  Prince. 

Time  fails  to  bring  out  the  traits  of  royalty  in  the  closing 
scene  of  all,  which  must  yield  us  material  for  our  next  chapter. 
It  is  enough  to  remind  you  of  them,  ere  we  close.  They  are 
evident  enough.  Twelve  strong,  bearded  men  stand  around 
him.  He  is  in  the  last  extreme  of  physical  decrepitude; 
but  he  does  not  cower  or  shrink  before  them,  as  in  other 
days.  His  face  may  be  shadowed  with  death ;  but  his  eye 
gleams  with  the  light  of  prophecy.  He  calls  out  their  names 
one  by  one.  He  arraigns  them  at  the  bar  of  judgment.  He 
reviews  their  past.  He  apportions  them  their  praise  or 
blame.  He  allots  their  future.  "These  are  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel ;  and  this  is  it  that  their  father  spake  unto 
them." 

We  need  not  go  into  further  particulars ;  because  enough 
has  been  said  to  convince  the  most  careless  reader  of  the 
royalty  that  shone  forth  from  this  aged  man,  as  the  gleaming 
torch-lights  flashed  from  the  breaking  pitchers  of  Gideon's 

K    2 


148 


ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 


host.  And  there  is  enkindled  in  our  hearts  the  hope  that 
God  will  do  as  much  for  us,  through  Him  who  loveth  us, 
and  by  His  death  hath  made  us  kings  unto  God,  with  whom 
we  shall  one  day  reign  on  the  earth, 


XIV. 

Kegt,  anti  tfje 

GENESIS    XLIX. 

"  Oh,  the  little  birds  sang  east,  the  little  birds  sang  west  ! 
And  I  said,  in  underbreath,  all  our  life  is  mixed  with  death  : 

And  who  knoweth  which  is  best  ? 

Oh,  the  little  birds  sang  east,  the  little  birds  sang  west  ! 
And  I  smiled  to  think  God's  goodness  flows  around  our  incompleteness; 

Round  our  restlessness  He 's  rest ! " 

MRS.  E.  B.  BROWNING. 

tHERE  is  much  of  interest  in  these  dying  words  of 
Jacob,  through  which  Israel  the  Prince  shines  so  con 
spicuously.      We  can  but  touch  them  as  we  pass,  as  the 
sea-bird  touches  the  wave;  for  higher  themes  allure  us. 

It  would,  for  instance,  be  interesting  to  mark  their 
accuracy.  Reuben,  though  the  firstborn,  never  excelled ;  no 
judge,  prophet,  or  ruler,  sprang  from  his  tribe.  Simeon  was 
almost  absorbed  in  the  nomad  tribes,  of  Southern  Palestine. 
The  cities  in  which  the  sons  of  Levi  dwelt  were  scattered 
throughout  all  the  tribes.  Vestiges  of  terraced  vineyards 
still  attest  how  well  the  hilly  province  assigned  to  Judah 
suited  the  culture  of  the  vine.  Zebulun  embosomed  the 
lake  of  Galilee,  and  stretched  away  toward  the  coast  of  the 
blue  Mediterranean.  Esdraelon,  the  battle-field  of  Palestine, 
where  Assyria  from  the  North  and  Egypt  from  the  South  often 
met  in  deadly  feud,  lay  within  the  limits  of  Issachar.  Dan 


150  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

was  small  as  an  adder ;  but,  like  it,  could  inflict  dangerous 
wounds  on  any  invader  who  had  to  pass  by  it  towards  the 
heart  of  the  country.  Gad,  much  pressed  by  border  war ; 
Asher,  notable  for  fertility ;  Naphtali,  famous  for  eloquence ; 
Benjamin,  cruel  as  a  wolf.  All  these  justified  the  prophecy 
of  their  dying  ancestor ;  whilst  the  mighty  tribes  of  Ephraim 
and  Manasseh,  sprung  from  the  sons  of  Joseph,  inherited  to 
the  full  "  the  blessings  of  heaven  above ;  blessings  of  the  deep 
that  lieth  under ;  blessings  of  the  breasts  and  of  the  womb  ; 
blessings  to  the  utmost  bound  of  the  everlasting  hills." 

It  would  be  interesting,  also,  to  mark  the  beauty  of  these 
dying  words.  They  abound  in  observation  and  description 
of  animal  nature ;  indicating  the  habits  of  the  shepherd's  life, 
with  which,  from  his  earliest  days  Jacob  must  have  been 
familiar.  The  lion's  whelp,  couching  in  his  lair,  refusing  to  be 
roused  up,  because  satisfied  with  a  sufficient  meal.  The  ass, 
and  her  colt  browsing  on  the  young  grapes  of  the  vine.  The 
serpent  lurking  in  the  sand ;  and  springing  out  as  the  horse 
passes  him,  with  venomous  sting.  The  wolf,  with  stealthy 
tread,  seeking  his  prey  at  night.  The  slender,  gentle  hind. 
Then,  too,  the  vineyards,  rich  with  grapes ;  that  stain  the 
garments  of  the  peasants  with  blood-red  juice,  as  they 
stamp  them  in  the  vats.  The  boughs  running  over  the 
vineyard  walls,  in  rich  bounty,  and  giving  refreshment 
to  weary  passers  by.  The  bubbling  waters  of  the  spring. 
The  beach  of  the  distant  sea.  The  blue  outline  of  the 
everlasting  hills  in  the  far  distance.  All  these  bespeak  a 
mind  that  loved  natural  beauty. 

It  would  be  interesting,  also,  to  mark  the  close  connec 
tion  between  the  awards  and  the  character  of  the  bearded 
sons  who  stood  around  the  withered,  propped-up  body  of 
that  dying  man ;  whilst  his  spirit  was  flaming  out  in  one  last 


11  UNTIL  SHILOH  COME*  151 

splendid  outburst  of  prophetic  and  princelike  glory,  too  much 
for  the  frail  tenement  to  endure.  Take,  for  example,  the 
case  of  Reuben :  he  had  committed  a  nameless  sin  years 
before ;  he  might  have  hoped  that  it  was  all  long  since 
forgotten  ;  but  no,  here  it  re-appears,  dragged  into  inevitable 
light — as  ours  must  be,  unless  hidden  beneath  the  Blood  of 
Jesus.  That  sin  deprived  him  of  the  primacy — that  one  sin. 
Was  not  this  arbitrary  ?  Not  so  :  since  it  was  the  index  of 
his  character,  and  was  the  unerring  evidence  of  an  unstable 
nature ;  for  sensuality  and  instability  are  one.  As  sensual 
indulgence  palsies  the  nerves  of  the  body,  so  it  paralyses  the 
strength  and  decision  of  the  spirit.  And  there  was  this 
further  dread  effect  of  Reuben's  sin  :  he  not  only  entailed 
a  loss  of  position  and  prestige  on  his  descendants,  but  he 
transmitted  to  them  his  own  character.  On  the  threshold 
of  Canaan  they  asked  for  land  east  of  Jordan  ;  they  could 
not  wait :  they  showed  all  the  characteristics  of  the  man  of 
appetite,  who  places  the  present  above  the  future,  and  seen 
above  the  unseen.  And  Deborah,  in  her  war  song,  chanted 
the  requiem  of  the  martial  valour  of  the  tribe. 

But  amidst  all  this  change  of  character,  condition,  and 
estate,  there'  comes,  in  these  dying  words,  the  announce 
ment  of  a  personality,  mysterious,  ineffable,  sublime,  which 
dwarfs  all  others — as  Mont  Blanc  the  lesser  elevations  of  his 
mountain  realm  ;  and  before  which  that  aged  spirit  bows  in 
worship,  illumining  the  withered  face  with  a  light  not  born 
of  earth.  What  does  he  mean  by  those  mystic  words, 
describing  the  Shiloh;  and  His  coming;  and  the  gathering  of 
the  peoples  to  Him?  There  is  a  power  in  them  that 
strangely  stirs  our  spirits.  We  feel  instinctively  that  we  are 
face  to  face  with  Him  before  whom  angels  bow,  veiling 
their  faces  with  their  wings.  Again  the  words  ring  in  our 


1 52  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE   WITH  GOD. 

hearts :  "  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a 
lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come  ;  and 
unto  Him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  peoples  be." 

I.    LET   US   TRY   TO    UNDERSTAND   THEM. 

The  primacy  of  Israel,  forfeited  by  Reuben,  was  transferred 
to  Judah.  The  sceptre,  or  staff,  surely  indicates  legislative 
authority ;  the  lawgiver,  some  kind  of  legislator :  and  the 
drift  of  meaning  in  the  verse  is  that  Judah  should  retain  the 
primacy  of  the  tribes ;  and  should  not  fail  to  have  some  kind 
of  government,  and  some  kind  of  governor,  until  One  came, 
of  whom  Jacob  spoke  as  Shiloh. 

And  who  is  this  Shiloh  ?  The  greatest  modern  Hebrew 
critics  tell  us  that  it  is  like  the  German  Frederick — Rich  in 
Peace ;  the  Rest- Giver ;  the  Man  of  Rest.  And  of  whom  can 
this  be  true,  but  of  One?  Amid  the  vice  and  crimes  of  their 
times,  an  aged  pair  gave  to  their  new-born  son  the  name  of 
Noah — Rest;  and  hoped  that  he  would  live  to  comfort  them. 
It  was,  alas  !  a  vain  hope ;  the  waters  of  the  deluge  were 
destined  to  sweep  over  their  home  and  world.  No  man  can 
give  us  rest.  He  who  shall  give  rest  to  the  toiling  popula 
tions  of  earth,  must  be  more  than  man ;  and  must  be  superior 
to  those  changes  that  toss  us  on  their  tumultuous  billows. 
The  true  Shiloh  can  be  none  other  than  the  Son  of  God;  who, 
standing  amongst  earth's  toiling  millions,  said,  "  Come  unto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest." 

I  have  sometimes  wondered  where  Jacob  learnt  this  most 
sweet  and  true  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  Was  it  flashed 
into  his  heart,  at  that  moment,  for  the  first  time  ?  It  may 
have  been.  But  there  is  another  supposition,  which  has 
often  pleased  me.  You  will  remember  that  at  Peniel, 


"  THE  REST-GIVER."  153 

Jacob  asked  the  mysterious  combatant  His  name.  What 
answer  did  he  receive?  When  Manoah  asked  a  similar 
question,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  told  him  it  was  secret.  But 
no  such  negative  was  spoken  to  Jacob.  The  angel  simply 
said  :  "  Wherefore  is  it  that  thou  dost  ask  after  My  name  ? 
And  He  blessed  him  there."  I  have  sometimes  thought 
that,  as  He  blessed  him,  He  whispered  in  his  ear  this 
lovely  title ;  which  lingered  in  the  old  man's  mind,  as  the 
years  went  on,  and  became  invested  with  ever  fuller  and 
richer  meaning,  as  he  felt  to  need  more  urgently  the  balm 
and  strength  which  it  contained.  To  him  that  overcometh 
Christ  promises  to  give  a  white  stone ;  and  in  that  stone 
a  new  name  written,  which  is  only  known  to  him  that 
receiveth  it.  Why  should  He  not  have  done  as  much  for 
that  old-world  patriarch,  who  had  overcome  in  his  defeat ; 
and  had  gone  from  wrestling  in  full  strength  to  halting  on 
shrunken  thigh  ?  And  it  would  be  only  natural  that,  at  the 
moment  of  full  surrender,  He  should  teach  him  the  secret 
of  rest.  This  is  the  universal  order  of  Christian  living  :  first 
the  resistance  ;  then  the  shrunken  sinew  ;  then  the  yielding 
and  clinging  ;  and  finally  rest. 

Jacob,  then,  believed  that  the  Rest-giver  would  come  at 
length  ;  and  that,  when  He  came,  people  would  be  gathered 
to  Him — not  driven,  as  he  had  seen  long  strings  of  Nubian 
slaves  driven  through  the  streets  of  Egyptian  towns :  but 
gathered  as  a  hen  gathers  her  chickens  beneath  her  wing ;  or 
as  the  magnet  attracts  steel-filings  to  itself. 

II.    LET  US    NOTE,  ALSO,   THEIR   LITERAL  FULFILMENT. 

For  long  centuries,  Judah  held  the  proud  position  assigned 
by  the  dying  chieftain.  The  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 
brooked  no  rival.  Jerusalem  lay  in  his  territory.  David 


154  ISRAEL.   A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

sprang  from  his  sons.  Throughout  the  long  captivity,  princes 
still  claimed  and  held  their  right ;  for  we  are  told,  when  Cyrus 
issued  the  proclamation  that  gave  them  liberty,  "  there  arose 
up  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Judah,  and  numbered  unto 
them  Sheshbazzar,  the  prince  of  Judah."  It  was  Judah  that 
returned  from  the  captivity  and  gave  the  title  Jeiv  to  every 
member  of  the  race ;  and  even  up  to  the  times  of  our  Lord, 
there  were  vestiges  of  the  ancient  government  in  the  council 
before  which  He  was  arraigned. 

But  the  system  had  become  decrepit,  and  showed  signs  of 
passing  away.  We  are  told,  for  instance,  when  the  Idumsean 
Herod  was  placed  upon  the  throne,  all  Jewish  patriots  were 
in  deep  consternation.  Men  with  wild  and  haggard  looks, 
their  garments  rent,  and  ashes  on  their  heads,  went  about 
the  streets  crying,  "  Woe  unto  us !  woe  unto  us  !  for  the 
sceptre  is  departed  from  Judah ;  and  a  lawgiver  from  between 
his  feet."  Still  the  complex  machinery  of  inferior  and 
superior  courts  lingered  on,  until  that  mighty  explosion 
burst  beneath  the  Jewish  State — leaving  not  a  single  Jew 
within  fifty  miles  of  Bethlehem ;  and  making  it  utterly  im 
possible  for  Shiloh  to  come  out  of  Judah. 

Before  this  entire  break-up  of  the  Jewish  system,  the  Shiloh 
came.  When  they  were  expecting  Him  at  the  front  door,  He 
stole  in  at  the  back.  Whilst  they  were  expecting  Him  with 
outward  show,  He  came  as  the  spring  comes,  and  as  day 
breaks.  He  had  rest  in  Himself.  What  else  could  have  kept 
Him  so  calm — amid  the  tumult  at  Nazareth  ;  and  the  raging 
of  the  storm  on  the  Lake  of  Galilee  ;  and  the  mob  in  Geth- 
semane  ?  And  He  gave  rest :  rest  from  weary  years  of 
pain ;  rest  from  tears  and  heartache ;  rest  from  sin. 

And  as  He  has  spoken  through  the  centuries,  His  still 
small  voice  has  been  heard  above  the  fevered  throb  and 


"COME    UNTO  ME!"  155 

pulse  of  human  life,  saying,  "  Come  unto  Me,  come  unto 
Me  !  "  and  spirits  have  arisen  and  gone  forth  to  Him  :  drawn 
to  Him  as  the  publicans  and  sinners  were  of  old ;  gathering 
to  Him  as  the  oppressed  in  the  old  kingdom  of  Saul 
gathered  to  David  in  Adullam's  cave,  furnishing  material  for 
a  host  which  was  to  carry  everything  before  its  victorious 
arms.  "  Thy  people  shall  be  free-will  offerings  in  the  day  of 
thy  power." 

III.      LET   US   REALIZE   THEIR   TRUTH. 

What  a  variety  of  weary  eyes  will  read  these  words ! — 
weary  eyes,  aching  heads,  tired  bodies,  breaking  hearts. 
Tired  of  sitting  at  the  task  which  barely  suffices  to  get  bread 
for  hungry  little  ones ;  tired  of  waiting  for  one  who  never 
comes ;  tired  of  bearing  the  slow  torture  of  never-ceasing 
pain  ;  tired  of  the  strain  of  competition,  ever  waxing  keener 
and  more  merciless;  tired  of  the  conflict  against  the  evil 
around ;  tired  of  the  war  with  self  and  sin  within ;  tired  of 

life— 

"  Lord,  oftentimes  I  am  a-weary  quite 
Of  my  own  self,  my  sin,  my  vanity  ; 
Yet  be  not  Thou  (or  I  am  lost  outright) 
Weary  of  me." 

Would  to  God  that  each  of  these  could  understand  that 
Jesus  Christ,  the  true  Shiloh,  is  able  to  give  them,  now  and 
for  evermore — rest !  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  REST." 

It  is  a  royal  word.  If  this  were  the  only  scrap  of  His 
words,  we  should  feel  Him  to  have  been  the  most  royal  man 
that  ever  trod  our  world.  He  knows  exactly  what  men 
want ;  and  He  feels  that  He  has  the  secret,  and  is  Himself  the 
universal  and  unfailing  reservoir  of  rest.  What  must  not  be 
the  ocean-fulness  of  His  heart !— which  can  fill  up  every  void 


I5<  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

and  vacancy  in  all  human  spirits  :  as  the  tides  of  the  Pacific, 
the  stormless,  restful  ocean,  fill  up  all  the  myriad  indentations 
of  every  continent,  and  coral  reef,  and  emerald  isle,  washed 
by  their  waves  !  What  certainty  is  here ! — no  doubt,  or 
question,  or  fear  of  failure  ;  no  faltering  in  that  clear  voice ; 
no  hesitancy  in  that  decisive  accent.  We  may  trust  Him, 
brothers  and  sisters.  He  at  least  has  learnt  the  law  of 
equilibrium.  He  speaks  that  which  He  knows.  He  has 
Himself  the  rest  He  promises.  Put  yourselves  into  His 
hand.  It  will  not  take  Him  longer  to  give  you  rest,  than 
it  took  Him  to  still  the  waves ;  they  did  not  even  need  to 
rock  themselves  to  rest :  "  immediately  there  was  a  great 
calm." 

The  Shiloh-rest  is  not  for  heaven.  We  need  not  ask  for 
the  wings  of  a  dove  to  fly  away  to  it.  We  should  not  find 
it  hereafter,  if  we  did  not  first  find  it  here.  "  We  which 
believe  DO  enter  into  rest."  The  rest  remaineth,  only  in  the 
sense  of  being  unexhausted  by  all  who  have  gone  before. 
It  awaits  us  in  unstinted  abundance. 

The  Shiloh-rest  is  not  in  Circumstances.  That  thought 
lies  at  the  root  of  the  teaching  of  the  Epicurean,  the  Stoic, 
the  worldly  philosopher.  But  circumstances  will  never 
bring  it ;  any  more  than  change  of  posture  will  bring  per 
manent  relief  to  the  pain-racked  body.  Here  is  a  truer 
science :  rest  within — rest  within  the  heart,  while  storms,  and 
perplexities,  and  trials  are  swirling  through  the  world ;  as  the 
ocean  depths  are  still  enough  to  permit  of  perpetual  deposits 
while  hurricanes  sweep  the  surface  ;  and  as  there  is  a  point 
of  calm  in  the  midst  of  the  fiercest  whirlwind  that  ever 
marched  across  the  desert  sands. 

The  Shiloh-rest  is  not  in  Inaction.  He  invites  us  to  no 
bank  of  roses ;  to  no  Elysian  plain ;  to  no  parade-ground. 


THE  "BURDEN"  AND  THE  "  YOKE."  Itf 

In  heaven,  though  they  rest,  yet  they  rest  not.  They  rest  in 
their  blessed  service.  They  serve  without  breaking  their 
rest.  There  is  the  strenuous  putting  forth  of  energy ;  but  no 
strain,  no  effort,  no  sense  of  fatigue.  And  such  is  the  rest 
He  gives.  Does  He  not  speak  of  a  "burden"  and  a  "yoke" 
in  the  same  breath  as  He  speaks  of  Rest  ? 

And  it  is  not  hard  to  get  it.  See  !  He  gives  it ;  and  it 
does  not  need  much  effort  to  take  a  gift.  He  shows  just 
where  to  look  for  it ;  and  it  is  easy  enough  to  find  a  thing  if 
we  know  just  where  it  lies.  There  seems  to  me  but  three 
conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  us. 

(1)  Surrender  all  to  Him.      As  long  as  you  try  to  wield 
that  sceptre,  or  permit  your  will  to  be  the  lawgiver  of  your 
life,  the  Shiloh  cannot  come  to  you.     You  must  give  up 
your  own  efforts  to  save  yourself — your  own  ideas  of  getting 
right  with  God;  your  own  choice;  your  own  way;  your  own 
will.     You  must  as  absolutely  cease  from  your  own  works  as 
God  did  from  His  on  the  Sabbath  of  His  rest.     You  must 
hand  over  your  sinful  spirit  to  be  saved  by  Him ;  you  must 
surrender  the  keys  of  every  room  in  your  heart ;  you  must  be 
willing  for  Him  to  be  supreme  monarch  of  every  province  of 
your  being ;  you  must  lie  naked  and  open  to  Him  as  the 
victim  before  the  priest.    So  only  can  you  expect  rest.    And 
if  you  cannot  bring  your  nature  into  this  posture,  ask  Him 
to  do  it  for  you.     Let  your  will  crown  Him — as  our  own 
Alfred  was  crowned,  when  the  most  of  England  was  still 
ravaged  by  the  Danes.    He  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged, 
till  He  have  put  down  all  rule  and  authority  and  power,  and 
made  Himself  supreme  throughout  heart  and  life. 

(2)  Trust  Him,  by  handing  over  all  to  Him.     Hand  over 
to  Him  all  your  sins  and  all  your  sorrows.     He  taketh  away 


158  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE   WITH  GOD. 

the  sin  of  the  world.  Do  not  wait  till  sins  have  accumulated 
into  a  cloud  or  a  mountain.  Do  not  tarry  till  the  time  has 
come  for  evening  prayer.  Do  not  delay  till  you  are  alone. 
But  as  swiftly  as  you  are  conscious  of  any  burden,  pass  it  on 
to  Jesus ;  cast  all  your  care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  you. 
His  eye  is  quick  to  see  each  effort  to  believe ;  and  His  heart 
is  large  enough  to  hold  the  troubles  of  the  world.  So  soon 
as  you  give,  He  takes  ;  and  what  He  takes  He  also  under 
takes  ;  and  will  see  it  made  right  for  you,  to  your  rejoicing 
and  to  His  glory.  This  is  the  Blessed  Rest  of  Faith ;  the 
Land  of  Promise  into  which  our  Joshua  waits  to  lead  all 
who  trust  Him. 

(3)  Take  His  yoke,  and  learn  of  Him — i.e.,  do  as  He  did. 
What  did  He  do  ?  What  was  His  yoke  ?  A  yoke  means 
submission.  To  whom  did  He  submit  ?  Not  to  man ;  not 
even  to  His  mother ;  not  to  the  suggestions  of  Satan  :  but  to 
the  Father's  will.  Whenever  He  saw  the  handwriting  of 
that  will,  He  meekly  yielded  submission.  This  was  the 
secret  of  His  rest.  To  live  in  the  will  of  God — this  is  rest. 
Be  ever  on  the  outlook  for  it:  in  every  event;  in  every  kind 
ness  or  insult ;  in  every  letter  ;  in  every  new  friendship  ;  in 
every  discipline  of  Providence ;  and  in  every  text  of  Scrip 
ture.  And  whenever  you  see  it,  take  it.  Do  not  wait  for  it 
to  be  forced  on  you ;  as  a  yoke  on  a  heifer  unaccustomed  to 
it,  which  struggles  till  a  deep  wound  is  cut  in  its  flesh.  But 
take  the  yoke  ;  be  meek  and  lowly ;  imitate  Him  who  said, 
"  The  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not 
drink  it  ?  "  The  language  which  best  befits  such  an  one  is 
that  wonderful  sentence,  in  which  simplicity  and  sublimity 
struggle  for  mastery :  "  Even  so,  Father ;  for  so  it  seemed 
good  in  Thy  sight." 

A  gentleman  once  visited  a  school  of  deaf  and  dumb 


THE  SECRET  OF  REST. 


159 


children,  and  was  asked  to  write  them  a  question  on  the 
black-board  ;  and  he  wrote,  "Why  did  God  make  you  deaf 
and  dumb,  while  I  can  hear  and  speak  ?  "  Tears  filled  their 
eyes  ;  and  after  a  slight  pause,  a  little  boy  stepped  forward, 
and  took  the  chalk  and  wrote  beneath,  "  Even  so,  Father ; 
for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight."  If  you  can  say  that, 
you  have  learnt  the  secret  of  rest ;  and  Shiloh  has  already 
come  to  you ;  and  you  are  one  of  those  that  are  being 
gathered  to  Him  through  the  long  weary  ages  to  share  His 
ultimate  triumph  and  reign. 


XV. 
Sit  Ia0t! 

GENESIS    L. 

"What  is  death  ?  oh,  what  is  death  ? 
'Tis  slumber  to  the  weary  ; 
"Pis  rest  to  the  forlorn  ; 
'Tis  shelter  to  the  dreary; 
'Tis  peace  amid  the  storm  ; 
'Tis  the  entrance  to  our  home  ; 
'Tis  the  passage  to  that  God 
Who  bids  His  children  come, 
When  their  weary  course  is  trod." 

ANON. 

HE  end  is  come  at  last  !  And  we  stand  with  those 
ycx-7,  stalwart  men  in  that  hieroglyph-covered  chamber, 
silent  with  the  hush  of  death,  to  see  the  way-worn  pilgrim 
breathe  his  last.  His  life  has  been  a  stern  fight ;  his  path 
way  not  strewn  with  roses,  but  set  with  flints ;  few  and  evil 
the  days  of  the  years  of  his  pilgrimage.  Compared  with  the 
brilliant  career  of  Esau,  his  life  might  be  almost  considered 
a  failure — estimating  it  by  all  human  standards  of  failure  and 
success.  But  as  the  scaffold  is  taken  down  piece  by  piece, 
we  catch  glimpses  of  the  real  manhood  which  God  has  been 
so  carefully  building  up,  through  long  years  of  pain  and 
sorrow ;  and  as  it  comes  into  view,  we  feel  that  it  is  more 
than  enough  to  justify  all.  Better  a  hundredfold  to  be 
Israel  the  Prince,  though  an  exile ;  than  Esau,  the  founder 


THE   CITY  OF  GOD.  l6l 

of  a  line  of  dukes.  The  glory  of  moral  and  spiritual  rank 
will  glisten  when  the  crowns  of  earthly  splendour  shall  have 
mouldered  into  dust ;  and  the  name  of  Israel  will  be  an 
unfailing  inspiration  to  those  who,  conscious  of  untold 
weakness  and  unloveableness,  shall  yet  strive  to  apprehend 
that  for  which  they  were  originally  apprehended  by  Christ 
Jesus. 

We,  too,  if  the  Lord  tarry,  shall  lie  some  day  in  a  chamber 
of  death,  surrounded  by  our  dear  ones.  Our  spirits  must 
poise  themselves  for  their  final  flight,  and  stand  waiting  at 
the  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  temple  of  life.  And  as  Jacob  has 
taught  us  how  to  live,  so  let  him  teach  us  how  to  die. 
"  Come,"  said  the  dying  Havelock  to  his  son,  "  and  see  how 
a  Christian  can  die."  Some  such  summons  calls  us  now  : 
for  even  we,  living  in  the  noon-tide  of  the  Gospel,  may 
obtain  salutary  hints  for  our  own  death-hour  from  one  who 
once  seemed  too  mean  to  teach  us  anything ;  but  who  now, 
through  the  stern  discipline  of  the  Angel  of  Love,  stands 
forth  to  lead  faithful  souls  through  the  dark  gorge  of  death 
into  the  land  of  the  eternal  morning. 

Before  the  mind  of  the  dying  patriarch  three  visions 
seemed  to  float  in  that  solemn  hour.  He  was  thinking  of 
the  City  of  God ;  and  of  the  gathering  of  his  clan  ;  and  of 
that  lone  and  distant  cave  in  Canaan  where  his  fathers  lay, 
and  which  he  had  so  often  visited. 

I.  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

We  are  expressly  told  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  that 
Jacob  was  one  of  those  "who  died  in  faith."  He  was  the 
heir  of  Promise.  The  land  promised  to  Abraham  and  Isaac 
had  not  as  yet  passed  into  his  possession ;  it  was  still  held 
by  the  wandering  and  settled  tribes,  who  had  eyed  his 


1 62  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

journeyings  with  such  evident  suspicion.  All  he  had  was 
the  assured  promise  that  in  the  coming  days  it  should  be 
his  through  his  seed.  Perhaps,  in  the  dawn  of  early  vigour, 
he  may  have  hoped  to  live  until  those  fair  pasture  lands  and 
terraced  hills  had  literally  passed  into  his  possession.  This 
yearning  comes  out  in  the  deep-drawn  ejaculation,  flashing 
through  his  dying  charge  to  his  sons,  "  I  have  waited  for 
Thy  salvation,  O  Lord  !  " 

But  as  the  years  passed  on,  and  clouds  closed  over  this 
azure  aperture  of  earthly  hope,  he  was  compelled  to  realize 
that  he  would  never  live  to  be  lord  of  Canaan.  Neverthe 
less,  he  clung  tenaciously  to  the  blessed  promise,  so  often 
reiterated  to  Abraham,  that  the  land  should  become  his 
people's  ;  and  his  assurance  that  God  would  keep  His  word 
flung  a  radiance,  which  neither  sorrow  nor  adversity  could 
dim,  over  his  dying  moments.  Oh,  glorious  faith  ! — which 
carries  a  torch  through  the  long  catacombs  of  sorrow,  keep 
ing  the  heart  from,  fainting,  until  the  welcome  dawn  of 
accomplishment  grows  upon  the  sight.  What  cannot  faith 
do  for  those  whom  God  has  taught  to  trust !  "  My  soul,  wait 
thou  only  upon  God;  for  my  expectation  is  from  Him." 

As  it  became  clear  to  Jacob  that  he  was  not  to  inherit 
Canaan,  he  seems  to  have  fixed  his  mind  with  increasing 
eagerness  on  heaven.  He  felt  that  if  God  had  not  destined 
for  him  an  earthly  resting-place,  yet  He  had  prepared  for 
him  a  City.  Its  foundations  had  not  been  laid  by  man  ;  its 
walls  bore  no  mark  of  human  workmanship  ;  its  atmosphere 
could  not  be  stained  with  the  smoke  or  dust  of  earth. 
And  it  was  for  that  glorious  city,  the  city  of  the  saints,  that 
his  pilgrim-spirit  now  yearned.  It  was  the  vision  of  that 
city  which  had  enabled  him  to  confess  to  the  mighty 
Pharaoh  that  he  was  a  pilgrim  and  a  stranger  on  the  earth. 


THE  ATTITUDE   OF  FAITH.  163 

And  now  it  was  his  close  proximity  to  it  that  stirred  his 
aged  spirit,  and  drew  it  on  with  breathless  eagerness  and 
rapid  steps. 

The  sacred  writer  employs  a  beautiful  similitude  when  he 
says  of  Jacob  and  the  rest  of  the  patriarchs,  that  they 
greeted  the  promises  from  afar  (Heb.  xi.  13).  When  the 
traveller  returns  from  distant  lands,  and  from  the  summit  of 
some  neighbouring  hill  catches  the  first  glimpse  of  his  still 
distant  home,  with  its  spiral  column  of  blue  smoke  curling 
up  amid  the  trees,  he  is  disposed  to  fall  upon  the  green 
sward,  and  with  outstretched  hands  thank  God  and  greet 
his  home.  "  Hail !  happy  scenes  of  childhood  ;  and  blest 
abode  of  manhood's  prime."  So  Jacob,  as  he  neared  the 
City  of  God,  so  dear  to  faithful  hearts,  approved  his  kins- 
manship  with  the  elect  spirits  of  all  ages,  by  reaching  forth 
towards  it  his  aged,  trembling  hands.  And  as  God  looked 
down  upon  that  eager  attitude  of  faith,  and  hope,  and  desire, 
He  was  not  ashamed  to  be  called  his  God. 

Modern  commentators  have  wrangled  fiercely  as  to  how 
much  or  how  little  of  the  future  life  was  realized  by  these 
ancient  saints.  Into  that  controversy  I  have  no  desire  to 
enter.  But  I  find  a  large  answer  to  their  questions  in  the 
assurance  of  Scripture,  that  Jacob  and  the  men  of  his  type 
desired  "  the  better  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly."  The 
future  was  less  indistinct  to  them  than  we  sometimes 
suppose.  They,  too,  stood  on  Pisgah-heights  and  beheld  a 
Land  of  Promise  :  not  that  on  which  the  veteran  law-giver 
gazed,  bounded  by  the  blue  waters  of  the  Mediterranean  ; 
but  that  which  is  never  shadowed  by  night,  or  swept  by  wild 
tempests  of  wind  and  rain — the  true  Home  of  the  saints. 
On  such  a  Pisgah-height  Jacob  was  standing;  and  as  all 
earthly  objects,  even  the  face  of  Joseph,  grew  indistinct  to 

L    2 


1 64  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

his  dimming  eyes,  those  rapturous  and  celestial  scenes  grew 
upon  his  spiritual  vision,  and  beckoned  to  him. 

In  what  relation  do  you,  my  readers,  stand  to  that  City  of 
God  ?  Do  not  imagine  that  it  will  gladden  your  dying  gaze, 
unless  it  has  often  been  the  object  of  your  loving  thought  in 
the  days  of  health  and  vigour.  Your  citizenship  must  be  in 
heaven  now,  if  you  would  feel  attracted  to  it  as  your  true 
home  at  last.  Is  it  so  ?  Do  you  feel  content  to  live  in  tents, 
having  no  fixed  hold  upon  this  fleeting  scene  ;  and  confess 
ing  yourselves  pilgrims  and  strangers  on  the  earth — because 
you  are  looking  for  the  City  ?  Do  you  feel  the  pull  of  that 
city,  as  the  sailor  does  of  the  anchor,  which  keeps  him  from 
drifting  with  the  tide  ?  Do  you  anticipate  it,  like  the 
children  in  the  Children's  Crusade,  who  asked  of  every  city 
they  entered,  "  Is  this  Jerusalem  ?  "  If  so,  it  shall  gladden 
your  dying  moments.  You  shall  see  the  holy  city  descend 
ing  out  of  heaven  from  God,  as  a  bank  seems  to  approach 
the  nearing  vessel.  And  you  shall  have  the  blessedness, 
assured  by  the  living  Saviour  to  those  who  wash  their  robes, 
of  the  right  to  enter  in,  through  the  gates,  into  the  City. 
(Rev.  xxii.  14,  R.V.) 

II.     THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  CLAN. 

"  I  am  to  be  gathered  unto  my  people."  When  the 
dying  Patriarch  spoke  thus,  he  meant  something  more 
than  that  his  dust  should  mingle  with  all  that  was  mortal  of 
his  forefathers.  He  expresses  that  thought  in  the  following 
sentence  :  "  Bury  me  with  my  fathers."  No ;  he  meant 
something  more  than  this.  He  surely  looked  upon  the 
City  as  the  gathering-place  of  his  clan  ;  the  metropolis  of 
true  and  godly  hearts ;  the  rendezvous  of  all  who  were  his 
people,  because  they  were  the  people  of  God. 


"TO  DIE  IS   GAIN."  165 

How  much  truer  is  this  thought  of  heaven  than  that  which 
is  entertained  by  many  Christian  people !  "  What  do  you 
think  of  the  intermediate  state?"  "  Shall  we  be  consciously 
happy  from  the  very  moment  of  death  ?  "  "  Shall  we  know 
one  another  on  the  other  side?"  These  are  the  doleful 
questions  asked  on  many  sides  ;  and  they  present  a  melan 
choly  contrast  to  the  words  of  the  dying  Jacob,  "  I  am  to  be 
gathered  unto  my  people." 

What  as  to  the  intermediate  state  ?  At  the  best  "  we 
know  not  what  we  shall  be."  We  cannot  penetrate  the 
veil  that  only  opens  wide  enough  to  admit  the  entering 
spirit.  It  is  clear  that  our  spirits  will  not  reach  their  full 
consummation  and  bliss  till  the  morning  ot  the  resurrection, 
when  body  and  spirit  will  be  reunited ;  but  it  is  equally 
clear  that  they  will  not  be  unconscious,  but  will  enter  into 
the  blessed  presence  of  our  Lord. 

This  was  taught  by  Christ  Himself,  when  He  quoted  the 
words,  "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  : "  and 
added  the  comment,  "  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead;  but 
of  the  living."  That  grand  formula  was  spoken  years  after 
Jacob  had  fallen  asleep;  and  yet  God  speaks  of  Himself  as 
his  God  :  and  since  He  could  not  be  the  God  of  dead 
mummies  only,  or  of  unconscious  spirits,  Jacob  and  all  the 
rest  must  have  been  living.  Yes,  they  were  living  then,  and 
are  living  now,  possessed  of  all  the  vivid  life  that  made 
them  wh?.'.  they  were. 

There  is  no  accent  of  uncertainty  in  the  New  Testament. 
As  soon  as  the  tent  is  taken  down,  the  mansion  is  entered 
(2  Cor.  v.  2).  Absent  from  the  body,  the  believer  is 
present  with  the  Lord.  "To  die  is  gain";  which  were  an  im 
possibility  if  the  spirit  did  not  have  more  of  Christ  than  is 
possible  on  this  side  of  the  Golden  City  (Phil.  i.  21).  The 


1 66  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

dying  Stephen  went  direct  into  the  hands  of  his  Lord  (Acts 
vii.  59).  Do  not  puzzle  over  useless  questionings  :  be  con 
tent  to  know  that  death  is  not  a  state,  but  an  act ;  not  a 
resting-place,  but  a  transition  ;  a  passage,  a  birth,  a  crossing 
the  Bridge  of  Sighs  from  the  prison  to  the  palace. 

"  Death  is  another  life.     We  bow  our  heads 
At  going  out,  we  think  ;   and  enter  straight 
Another  golden  chamber  of  the  King's, 
Larger  than  this  we  leave,  and  lovelier." 

What  as  to  the  recognition  of  the  departed  ?  It  would 
not  have  been  an  object  of  anticipation  to  Jacob  to  be 
gathered  to  his  people,  if  he  would  not  know  them  when  he 
reached  their  blest  society.  When  the  Jew  thought  of  the 
unseen  world,  he  expected  to  meet  the  saints,  of  whom 
he  had  been  wont  to  hear  from  childhood,  and  especially 
Abraham.  Was  not  the  Jew  wiser  than  most  Christians  ? 
What !  has  the  body  pou  ers  of  recognition,  and  the  spirit 
none  ?  Shall  love,  which  has  moulded  the  life,  range  through 
eternity  unable  to  find  the  twin-spirit  with  which  it  had 
become  entwined  ?  Can  that  be  a  Father's  home,  where  the 
brothers  and  sisters  do  not  know  each  other  ? 

But  these  questions  have  always  been  solved,  to  me 
at  least,  by  a  careful  study  of  the  facts  of  our  Lord's 
resurrection-body — the  model  to  the  likeness  of  which  we  are 
to  be  conformed  (Phil.  iii.  21).  Those  who  knew  Him  be 
fore  His  death,  recognized  Him  after.  His  very  voice  had 
in  it  intonations  familiar  to  those  who  loved  Him  (John  xx. 
1 6).  His  mannerisms  were  identical;  and  sufficient  to 
identify  Him  to  the  two  disciples  with  whom  He  sat  (Luke 
xxiv.  31).  And  as  it  was  with  Him,  so  shall  it  be  with  us 
and  our  beloved. 

We  shall  be  gathered  to  our  people.     Death  will   not 


"BURY  ME    WITH  MY  FA  THERS. "  1 67 

usher  us  into  a  chill,  unfriendly  circle;  but  into  a  great 
gathering  of  loving  and  sympathizing  friends,  who  shall  give 
us  a  choral  welcome  as  we  enter  into  the  eternal  kingdom 
of  our  Lord  (2  Pet.  i.  n  ;  see  the  Greek). 

Throughout  the  ages  the  elect  souls  of  our  race  have  been 
gathering  there.  Are  they  our  people?  Can  we  claim 
kinship  with  them?  There  is  but  one  bond,  as  we  are 
taught  in  Heb.  xi.  That  bond,  is  not  of  dispensation ;  or  of 
knowledge ;  or  of  exploits :  but  of  faith — such  faith  as  may 
exist  in  a  beggar  or  a  king,  in  a  child  or  a  philosopher.  It 
is  independent  of  age,  or  sect,  or  knowledge,  or  work.  But, 
wherever  it  is  found,  it  designates  the  owner  to  be  one  of 
those  who  can  claim  kinship  with  the  saintly  inhabitants  of 
the  City  of  God.  The  test-question  of  qualification  for  the 
franchise  of  the  New  Jerusalem  is  :  "  Dost  thou  believe  in 
the  name  of  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God  ?  " 

III.     THE  CAVE  OF  MACHPELAH. 

"  Bury  me  with  my  fathers  in  the  cave  that  is  in  the  field 
of  Ephron  the  Hittite."  For  seventeen  years  he  had  lived 
in  Egypt,  surrounded  by  all  the  comforts  that  Joseph's  filial 
love  could  devise,  and  his  munificence  execute.  He  must 
have  become  familiar  with  Egypt's  splendid  temples  and 
obelisks  and  pyramids,  with  which  that  cave  could  not  for 
one  moment  be  compared.  But  he  would  not  rest  in  any 
of  them.  He  must  be  laid  where  Abraham  and  Sarah,  Isaac 
and  Rebekah,  and  the  faithful  Leah  awaited  resurrection. 

This  was  something  more  than  the  natural  sentiment 
which  impels  us  to  request  burial  in  some  quiet  spot  in 
God's  acre,  where  our  family  name  is  inscribed  on  many  of 
the  gravestones  around.  He  felt  that  Machpelah's  cave 
was  the  first  outpost  in  the  land  which  was  one  day  to 


1 68  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

belong  to  his  people ;  and  he  wanted,  so  far  as  he  might,  to 
be  there  with  them,  and  to  share  in  the  land  of  promise. 

The  last  word  was  spoken,  the  last  commission  given,  and 
he  knew  the  end  was  come.  "  He  gathered  up  his  feet  into 
the  bed  ;  "  i.e.,  he  met  death  quietly,  calmly,  manfully.  He 
was  not  dragged  away  as  a  criminal ;  he  went  to  meet  it  with 
complacency  and  with  joy.  The  servant  might  have  a  grim 
face  and  a  sable  suit ;  but  he  had  come  to  take  him  home. 
He  quietly  breathed  out  his  spirit,  and  was  gathered  unto 
his  people.  And  at  that  moment  sorrow  and  sighing, 
which  had  been  his  close  companions  in  life,  fled  away 
for  ever. 

How  calm  and  noble  that  face  looked,  fixed  in  the  marble 
of  death  !  The  Jacob-look  had  vanished  from  it ;  and  it  was 
stamped  with  the  smile  with  which  the  royal  Israel-spirit 
had  moulded  it  in  its  outward  passage. 

"  So,  pilgrim,  now  thy  brows  are  cold, 
We  see  thee  what  thou  art ;  and  know 
Thy  likeness  to  the  wise  below, 
Thy  kindred  to  the  great  of  old." 

What  wonder,  then,  that  Joseph  fell  upon  his  father's 
face,  and  wept  upon  him,  and  kissed  him  !  He  had  borne 
the  strain  as  long  as  he  could ;  and  now  nature  must  vent 
herself  in  manly,  filial  grier. 

The  body  was  carefully  embalmed.  No  time,  or  pains, 
or  cost,  were  spared.  Egypt  herself  mourned  for  him  for 
seventy  days.  And  then  one  of  the  most  splendid  funeral 
processions  that  ever  gathered  to  lay  saint,  or  sage,  or  hero 
to  his  rest,  carried  that  precious  casket  in  solemn  pomp 
from  Egypt  up  to  Canaan.  The  chivalry  of  Egypt,  its 
statesmen  and  counsellors,  its  princes  and  priests,  joined 
with  the  shepherds  of  Goshen  in  accompanying  the  cortege. 


THE  DAYS  OF  MOURNING. 


169 


And  the  signs  of  mourning  were  so  great  as  to  impress  the 
inhabitants  of  the  land,  the  Canaanites. 

The  stone  was  rolled  away,  and  the  remains  laid  on  their 
appointed  niche ;  and  in  all  probability  they  are  there,  in  a 
state  of  perfect  preservation,  unto  this  day.  Many  a  storm 
has  swept  over  them — Assyrian,  Egyptian,  Babylonian, 
Grecian,  Roman,  Saracenic,  and  Mohammedan.  But  nought 
has  disturbed  their  quiet  rest ;  and  they  hold  the  land  in 
fee,  till  God  shall  fulfil,  in  all  its  magnificence,  the  promise 
which  He  made  and  has  never  recalled — that  He  would  give 
the  land  to  Jacob's  seed  for  an  everlasting  inheritance.  So 
rest  thee,  ISRAEL  THE  PRINCE  1 


XVI. 

d5oti  of 

PSALM    XLVI. 

"  With  all  thy  heart,  with  all  thy  soule  and  mind, 
Thou  must  Him  love,  and  His  behests  embrace ; 
All  other  loves — with  which  the  world  doth  blind 
Weake  fancies,  and  stirre  up  affections  base — 
Thou  must  renounce,  and  utterly  displace  ; 
And  give  thyself  unto  Him  full  and  free, 
That  full  and  freely  gave  Himselfe  to  thee." 

SPENSER. 

tT  is  very  comforting  to  discover  in  how  many  parts  of 
Scripture  God  calls  Himself  the  God  of  Jacob.  He 
seems  to  take  special  delight  in  the  title  which  links 
His  holy  nature  with  one  who,  so  far  from  giving  promise  of 
saintship,  was  naturally  one  of  the  meanest  of  men.  We 
should  not  have  been  surprised  to  find  Him  speaking  of 
Himself  as  the  God  of  Israel,  the  Prince ;  but  it  is  as 
startling  as  it  is  reassuring  to  find  Him  speaking  of  Himself 
still  more  often  as  the  God  of  Jacob. 

But  as  we  notice  the  careful  reiteration  of  the  designa 
tion — especially  in  the  Psalms  of  David  and  the  prophecies 
of  Isaiah — we  learn  this  priceless  lesson  :  that  He  has  not 
changed  since  He  took  Jacob  in  hand;  that  He  feels 
towards  such  characters  now  as  He  did  when  He  began  his 
gracious  work  of  renewal  in  that  poor  cramped  heart ;  and 
that  He  is  ready  to  do  as  much  for  all  who  are  conscious  of 


A    CLOSING  APPEAL.  I? I 

being  equally  worthless  by  nature,  and  who  are  willing  to 
put  themselves  into  His  gracious  hands — which  reach  down 
from  heaven  to  earth,  "  moulding  men." 

There  is  little  doubt  that  God  would  do  as  much  for  all 
the  readers  of  these  lines,  if  only  they  were  willing.  And  it 
is  the  object  of  this  closing  appeal  to  urge  my  readers  to  let 
Him  have  His  gracious  way  with  them.  As  we  have  studied 
together  Jacob's  life  and  character,  have  you  not  been  keenly 
conscious  of  similarities  between  him  and  yourself?  You  too 
may  be  cunning,  crafty,  and  deceitful ;  or  you  may  be  prone 
to  outbursts  of  ungovernable  temper ;  or  you  may  be  cursed 
by  unholy  desires  that  honeycomb  your  better  nature;  or 
you  may  be  constantly  brought  into  captivity  to  some  tyran 
nous  sin.  Now  there  is  no  need  for  this  to  be  your  hapless 
lot  for  one  mcment  longer,  if  only  you  will  hand  yourself 
over  to  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob. 

At  the  door  of  a  mission  hall  in  a  low  and  degraded 
neighbourhood,  a  Christian  man,  one  evening,  was  inviting 
the  passers-by  to  go  in  to  the  service,  which  was  about  to 
commence.  "  But  my  coat  is  in  rags,"  replied  a  wretched- 
looking  man.  "That  is  no  matter,"  was  the  answer; 
"there's  a  man  inside  without  a  coat  at  all"  It  was  quite 
enough  to  remove  all  further  hesitation ;  and  he  entered. 
Forgive  the  simple  illustration,  by  which  I  wish  to  press 
home  my  meaning  on  those  who  may  question  if  their 
nature  is  not  too  ignoble,  and  their  evil  habits  too  con 
firmed,  for  them  to  entertain  the  hope  of  saintliness.  Your 
case  is  not  hopeless.  If  God  could  make  a  prince  of  Jacob, 
He  can  do  as  much  for  any  one.  It  is  hardly  possible  for 
one  of  us  to  be  more  hopeless  than  Jacob  was  to  begin  with ; 
and  the  same  Lord  who  was  so  rich  in  mercy  to  him,  will 
be  as  rich  to  all  them  that  call  upon  Him  in  truth. 


I/2  ISRAEL:  A   1RINCE    WITH  GOD. 

I.  CULTIVATE  A  HOLY  AMBITION. 

There  is  no  tendency  of  the  unrenewed  heart  more  subtle 
or  dangerous  than  ambition.  "  By  this  sin  fell  the  angels." 
And  yet,  if  it  is  properly  curbed  and  kept,  ambition  plays  a 
useful  part  among  the  motive-forces  of  human  life.  It  is  a 
bad  sign  when  a  lad,  or  a  man,  has  no  desire  to  improve 
his  position  and  get  on.  In  all  likelihood  he  will  always 
lie  with  the  rest  of  the  rabble  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill, 
without  the  desire  or  power  to  stir.  And  it  is  well  to  culti 
vate  a  holy  ambition  to  be  all  that  God  can  make  us ;  to 
grasp  all  the  possibilities  that  lie  within  the  reach  of  faith ; 
and  to  apprehend  that  for  which  we  have  been  apprehended 
of  Christ  Jesus. 

Such  an  ambition  fired  the  heart  of  the  Apostle  when  he 
said  :  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either  were 
already  perfect ;  but  I  follow  after :  .  .  .  forgetting  those 
things  which  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those  things 
which  are  before,  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the 
high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iii.  12-14).  Does 
not  this  stir  you  ?  Do  not  be  content  to  be  always  a  Jacob. 
Do  not  settle  down  to  life-long  slavery  beneath  your  merciless 
oppressors.  Do  not  suppose  that  you  must  always  be  what 
you  have  been.  "  The  arrows  are  beyond  thee  : "  make  for 
them  ! 

This  holy  ambition  may  be  aroused  by  the  study  of 
Christian  biography.  Every  time  you  read  or  hear  of  God's 
grace  being  magnified  in  some  beautiful  and  noble  life, 
thank  Him ;  let  your  own  ideal  be  raised,  and  ask  Him  to 
do  as  much  for  you.  But  there  is  nothing  which  will 
quicken  this  sacred  spark  into  a  flame  so  soon  as  the  devout 
study  of  the  Bible.  There  are  such  wonderful  openings-up 
of  the  possibilities  of  Christian  living  and  being  in  almost 


MAKE  A    COMPLETE  SURRENDER!  173 

every  paragraph.  Constant  familiarity  may  have  rubbed 
them  bright  and  smooth,  like  some  well-worn  coin  ;  but  if 
only  we  will  let  the  Holy  Ghost  re-cut  them  for  us,  we  shall 
be  perfectly  astonished.  And  as,  one  after  another,  these 
ideals  of  God's  own  heart  open  to  our  gaze,  let  us  entreat 
Him  "to  fulfil  in  us  the  good  pleasure  of  His  goodness,  and 
the  work  of  faith  with  power." 

Let  this  be  deeply  engraven  on  your  heart,  as  the  sacred 
page  is  turned — that  every  promise  is  for  you  ;  and  that  God 
is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  you  can  ask  or 
think  ;  and  then  look  up  to  Him,  and  claim  that  He  should 
do  as  He  has  said. 

II.     MAKE  A  COMPLETE  SURRENDER  TO  GOD. 

Before  God  will  commence  His  gracious  work  on  a  human 
spirit,  it  must  be  entirely  surrendered  to  Him.  The  key  of 
every  room,  and  closet,  and  cupboard,  in  the  being  must  be 
put  into  His  hands.  Every  province  of  the  life  must  be 
placed  under  His  government.  There  must  be  no  keeping 
back,  no  reserve  :  to  withhold  one  thing,  even  the  least,  will 
vitiate  the  whole  transaction ;  and  leave  a  foothold  for  the 
self-life,  from  which  it  will  speedily  spread  back  throughout 
the  whole  nature. 

Who  would  take  a  house  recently  infected  by  small-pox, 
unless  the  whole  of  it  were  thrown  freely  open  to  the  officers 
of  health  ?  Who  would  pretend  to  advise  a  friend  involved 
in  financial  difficulties,  unless  the  whole  of  his  liabilities 
were  freely  disclosed  ?  Who  would  prescribe  for  a  disease, 
unless  the  patient  told  all  the  symptoms  and  entirely  gave 
up  all  other  means  of  cure  ?  And  so  God  will  not  under 
take  the  case  of  any  poor  child  of  His  unless  there  be  first 


174  ISRAEL:  A    PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

a  complete  and  entire  surrender  of  the  whole  being  to  His 
gentle  healing  work. 

Some  time  ago,  as  I  was  passing  down  one  of  the  poorei 
streets  in  Leicester,  I  remarked  a  notice  in  the  window  of  a 
most  dilapidated  shop,  the  trade  of  which  had  for  some 
time  past  been  ebbing  away.  The  notice  was  to  the  follow 
ing  effect :  "  This  shop  will  shortly  be  opened  under  entirely 
new  management."  And  as  I  stood  for  a  moment  there,  it 
seemed  as  if  the  whole  building  put  on  a  kind  of  hopeful 
smile,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  am  so  glad  that  I  am  to  be  put 
under  an  entirely  fresh  management."  Several  days  after 
wards,  as  I  passed  that  way  again,  I  found  a  small  army  of 
whitewashers  and  paper-hangers  at  work ;  and  on  the  next 
occasion,  the  change  in  management  was  evident  to  the 
most  casual  eye,  for  the  whole  place  had  a  clean,  sweet  look 
about  it  which  was  quite  attractive. 

Now  this  is  just  what  you  require — you  with  the  Jacob 
nature.  You  have  been  trying  to  manage  yourself  all  too 
long.  A  change  is  evidently  needed ;  but  it  must  be  com 
plete.  There  must  be  nothing  left  of  yourself  at  all. 
Everything  must  be  absolutely  surrendered  to  that  mighty 
God  of  Jacob  whom  the  Psalmist  made  his  refuge ;  and  who 
is  able  to  take  bankrupt  souls,  and  make  them  heirs  of  God, 
and  joint-heirs  with  Christ.  Why  should  you  not  make 
that  surrender  now  ? 

Instances  crowd  upon  my  pen,  eagerly  asking  mention,  of 
those  who  have  entered  into  experiences  of  undreamt-of 
blessing  through  the  strait  gate  of  entire  surrender.  But  I 
forbear  to  give  them  here.  It  is  enough  to  point  the  way ; 
and  leave  all  to  enter  the  golden  land  who  will. 

When  you  come  to  the  point  of  self-surrender,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  some  one  thing  will  suggest  itself  to  your  mind 


ARE    YOU   WILLING?  175 

which  it  is  very  difficult  to  transfer  from  your  control  to  that 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  You  would  so  much  prefer  to  retain  it 
under  your  own  management.  You  are  not  quite  sure 
whether  He  may  not  introduce  some  sweeping  and  painful 
changes.  You  stand  in  dread,  as  the  lad  before  he  throws 
himself  into  the  buoyant  waves.  But  such  fears  are  most 
unworthy  of  our  loving  Master.  He  will  take  away  nothing 
which  it  will  do  us  no  harm  to  keep.  He  never  amputates 
a  limb  without  using  some  anodyne  to  lessen  the  pain  with 
out  injuring  the  health.  He  will  never  give  us  one  thrill  of 
anguish  from  which  it  would  be  possible  to  save  us. 

Do  not  be  afraid  of  giving  all  up  to  the  lovely  will  of  Him 
who  is  love ;  and  who  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed  or 
quench  the  smoking  flax.  If  your  child  were  to  say,  "  I  am 
going  to  give  my  life  over  to  your  ordering  ;  do  all  you  will," 
would  you  begin  to  make  him  miserable  ?  Would  you  not 
rejoice  in  the  opportunity  of  arresting  him  in  courses  which 
were  harming  him  ?  Would  you  not  gladly  embrace  the 
opportunity  of  filling  him  with  joys  that  he  could  never  have 
realized  for  himself?  And  your  heavenly  Father  will  not  do 
less  for  you ;  only  trust  Him  with  all. 

And  should  there  be  things  in  your  life  which  you  find  it 
hard  to  abandon — dear  as  right  eye,  or  hand,  or  foot; 
involving  the  happiness  of  others  as  well  as  your  own — tell 
God  that  you  give  them  over  to  Him  ;  and  that  you  are 
willing  to  have  His  will  done,  if  He  only  will  bring  it  to  pass 
in  His  own  good  time  and  way.  And  if  you  cannot  say  as 
much  as  that,  tell  Him  that  you  are  willing  to  be  made 
willing:  hand  over  your  will  to  Him,  though  it  seem 
to  be  as  a  piece  of  cold,  hard  iron;  sure  that  He  can 
soften  and  weld  it  into  the  pattern  on  which  He  has  set 
His  heart. 


I  ?  ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

"  Renew  my  will  from  day  to  day  ; 
Blend  it  with  Thine,  and  take  away 
All  that  now  makes  it  hard  to  say, 
Thy  will  be  done," 

There  is  even  a  more  excellent  way  than  any,  which  is 
within  the  reach  of  the  feeblest  hand ;  and  that  is,  to  ask  the 
Lord  to  come  into  your  life  to  take  that  which  you  do  not 
feel  able  to  give.  The  only  matter  of  which  you  need  be 
careful,  is  your  willingness  that  He  should  have  all ;  if  that 
is  assured,  the  rest  may  be  safely  left  to  His  gracious  arrange 
ment.  Directly  you  are  willing,  the  door  is  opened  to  Him ; 
and  He  instantly  takes  full  possession. 

III.  BE  CAREFUL  NOT  TO  THWART  GOD'S  GOOD 
WORKMANSHIP. 

Of  course,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  we  cannot  resist  or 
impede  the  execution  of  His  sovereign  will.  "  He  doeth  as 
He  will  amongst  the  armies  of  heaven  and  the  inhabitants 
of  earth."  And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  we  may  hinder  and 
counterwork  His  loving  purposes.  "  How  often  would  I  .  .  .  ; 
but  ye  would  not ! "  Let  us  be  on  the  guard  against  this 
disastrous  resistance ;  and  be  ever  on  the  alert  to  work  out 
that  which  God  is  working  in  us,  "both  to  will  and  to  do." 

Once,  the  prophet  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xviii.)  was  led  to  go 
down  into  the  valley,  where  the  potter  was  at  work,  moulding 
clay  on  a  wheel.  And  as  he  stood  by  to  watch  the  skilful 
manipulation  of  the  clay,  the  prophet  had,  of  course,  no  idea 
what  pattern  was  in  the  designer's  mind  ;  though,  probably, 
it  was  one  of  the  noblest  conception,  and  destined  for  some 
royal  or  special  purpose.  And  so,  beneath  those  rapid 
revolutions  of  the  wheel,  the  ideal  began  to  take  shape. 
Then  suddenly  the  clay  was  taken  from  the  wheel  with  an 
exclamation  of  disappointment,  and  the  design  was  foiled 


A   NOBLE   IDEAL.  177 

and  spoilt.  Why?  Because  the  potter  was  wanting  in 
skill  ?  No,  but  because  the  clay  refused  to  take  on  the 
shape  which  he  had  designed.  His  work  was,  therefore, 
marred  on  the  wheel ;  and  he  was  compelled  to  make  of 
that  clay  some  inferior  vessel  from  that  which  he  had 
intended.  It  might  have  served  a  noble  purpose  in  the 
royal  household,  or  even  in  the  Temple  service ;  but  it  was 
now  fashioned  into  a  coarser  form,  for  some  mean  purpose 
in  a  peasant's  home.  The  lesson  was  meant  for  Israel ;  but 
it  will  serve  for  us. 

Speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  may  we  not  say  that 
when  God  created  us  anew  in  Christ  Jesus  He  conceived  a 
noble  ideal,  after  the  pattern  of  which  we  might  have  been 
conformed  ?  And  if  we  had  only  yielded  to  Him  more 
completely,  that  ideal  would  long  ago  have  revealed  itself  in 
our  experience  ;  but,  alas  !  we  have  not  always  been  plastic 
in  His  hands ;  we  have  not  obeyed  the  promptings  of  His 
Spirit ;  we  have  quenched  and  grieved  Him  ;  and  we  are  far 
different  to-day  from  what  we  might  have  been,  and  from 
what  God  intended  us  to  become.  Shall  we  not  confess 
this  with  tears  and  shame  ?  Shall  we  not  take  unto  us 
words,  and  turn  to  Him,  saying,  "  Now,  O  Lord,  we  are  the 
clay,  and  Thou  our  potter ;  we  are  all  the  work  of  Thy 
hands.  Be  not  wroth  very  sore."  And  if  a  man  purify 
himself  from  the  sins  which  have  hindered  the  Divine 
Workman,  he  shall  yet  become  "a  vessel  unto  honour, 
sanctified,  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use,  and  prepared  unto 
every  good  work." 

I  do  not  deny  that  God  will  fulfil  His  purpose  in  us,  even 
though  we  hinder  Him  ;  but  it  will  be  carried  through,  as  it 
was  in  the  case  of  Jacob,  at  a  terrible  expenditure  of  r.gony, 
and  the  shrivelling  of  the  sinew  of  our  strength.  The 

M 


I/8  ISRAEL:  A  PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 

yoke  will  have  to  be  borne,  and  the  long  furiows  cut;  and 
if  the  unaccustomed  heifer  prove  restive,  its  struggles  will 
only  chafe  sores  about  its  neck — but  it  will  ultimately  be 
broken  in,  On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  always  better  to 
take  the  yoke  of  Divine  purpose,  offered  by  our  Lord  as 
His  :  "  Take  My  yoke."  And  remember,  a  yoke  is  for  two. 
Our  Lord  yokes  Himself  at  our  side ;  and  paces  by  us,  step 
by  step,  doing  for  us  what  Simon  the  Cyrenian  once  did  for 
Him,  on  the  way  to  Golgotha. 

IV.     SEEK  THE  FULNESS  OF  THE  SPIRIT. 

That  Spirit  dwelt  in  Israel ;  as  the  sun  flushes  the  topmost 
summits  of  the  Alps  with  a  roseate  glow,  long  before  it 
bathes  the  valleys  in  its  meridian  light.  But  in  this  blessed 
dispensation,  He  is  given — not  to  saints  and  prophets  only ; 
but  to  all :  to  sons  and  daughters ;  to  old  men  and  children  ; 
to  servants  and  handmaidens.  "  The  promise  is  to  you  and 
to  your  children ;  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many 
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call "  (Acts  ii.  39).  And  it  is 
only  as  we  receive  this  sacred  gift,  in  all  its  fulness,  that  we 
can  hope  to  attain  to  the  royal  standard  of  the  Israel-life. 
That  blessed  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Son — the  Spirit  of  the 
one  royal  Man  that  ever  walked  the  world ;  and  if  we  would 
have  His  nature,  we  must  have  His  Spirit :  not  in  drops,  but 
in  rivers ;  not  as  a  zephyr  breath,  but  as  "  a  rushing  mighty 
wind." 

.  This  is  the  dying  need  of  the  Christian  Church  in  this 
country.  We  have  learning,  rhetoric,  fashion,  wealth,  splen 
did  buildings,  and  superb  machinery ;  but  we  are  powerless, 
for  lack  of  the  power  which  can  only  be  obtained  through 
the  fulness  of  the  Spirit.  Of  what  use  is  a  train  of  sumptuous 
Pulman  cars  without  an  engine  throbbing  with  the  power  of 


"BE  FILLED    WITH  THE  SPIRIT."  1 79 

steam?  We  have  too  largely  forgotten  the  exhortation: 
"  Be  filled  with  the  Spirit."  We  have  thought  that  the  ful 
ness  of  the  Spirit  was  a  speciality  for  the  apostolic  age, 
instead  of  being  for  all  time.  And  thus  the  majority  of 
Christians  are  living  on  the  other  side  of  Pentecost.  We 
can  never  be  what  we  might  be  until  we  have  got  back  to 
apostolic  theory  and  practice  in  respect  to  this  all-essential 
matter.  Oh  that  God,  in  these  last  days,  would  raise  uj> 
some  fire-touched  tongue  to  do  for  this  neglected  doc 
trine  what  Luther  did  for  justification  by  faith  ! 

In  the  meanwhile  seek  this  blessed  filling.  It  is  only 
possible  to  emptied  hearts ;  but  just  so  soon  as  a  vacuum 
has  been  created  by  the  act  of  entire  surrender,  there  will 
be  an  instantaneous  filling  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  answer  to 
expectant  desire  and  eager  faith.  For  the  Holy  Ghost  longs 
to  enter  the  human  heart ;  resembling  in  this  the  air,  which 
is  ever  seeking  to  enter  our  homes  by  every  keyhole,  crack, 
and  aperture.  Do  not  wait  to  feel  that  you  have  Him.  Be 
sure  that  you  do  possess  His  fulness,  if  only  you  have  made 
room  for  Him  ;  and  go  on  acting  in  the  strength  of  His 
mighty  power.  So  shall  you  be  an  Israel,  and  have  power 
with  God  and  man. 

The  words,  of  course,  apply  only  to  those  who  by  faith 
have  become  the  justified  children  of  God.  If  any  who  are 
not  assured  of  this  should  have  read  thus  far,  let  them  now 
make  a  complete  abandonment  of  themselves  to  the  Son  of 
God,  to  be  saved  by  His  death  and  life,  just  as  He  will. 
This  is  the  first  essential  step  towards  royalty.  To  £s  many 
as  receive  Him,  to  them  He  gives  the  right  to  become 
children  of  God,  even  to  as  many  as  believe  on  His  name. 
(John  i.  12.) 

Life  is  no  child's   play  to  those  who  enter  into   God's 

M  2 


i8o 


ISRAEL:  A   PRINCE    WITH  GOD. 


purposes,  and  in  whom  He  is  fulfilling  His  sublime  ideals. 
But,  with  the  dying  Kingsley,  we  are  sure  that  all  is  right 
and  well  since  "  all  is  under  law."  When  the  discipline  is 
over,  we  shall  be  more  than  satisfied  with  the  result ;  and, 
taking  our  stand  amongst  the  princes  of  the  royal  blood,  we 
shall  ascribe  eternal  glory  to  Him  who  loved  us  in  spite  of 
all,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood,  and  out 
of  Jacobs  made  us  KINGS  UNTO  GOD. 


LONDON  :    MORGAN   .AND   SCOTT,    12,    PATERNOSTER   BUILDINGS. 


IMst  of  Morks 


BIBLE  STUDENTS  ^  CHRISTIAN  WORKERS. 


PUBLISHED    BY 


MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  Paternoster  Buildings. 

And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookselltr. 


CRUDEN'S    CONCORDANCE. 


Respecting  Morgan  &  Scott's 

Cheap   Portable   Edition, 
Rev.  C.   H.  SPURGEON  says : 

"Messrs.  Morgan  and  Scott  are  resolved  not 
to  be  beaten ;  and  so  they  have  produced  a 
portable  edition  of  'Cruden's  Concordance' 
for  3s.  6d.  It  is  the  same  as  usual,  with  the 
Apocrypha  left  out.  This  omission  we  look 
upon  as  a  gain  rather  than  a  loss.  Nobody 
should  now  be  without  a  Concordance:  which 
is  to  the  Bible-reader  what  a  foot-rule  is  to  a 
carpenter,  or  a  chain  to  a  land-surveyor.  For 
the  sake  of  all  the  poor  parsons  in  the  three 
kingdoms,  we  feel  grateful  to  Messrs.  Morgan 
and  Scott.  How  they  can  issue  such  a  book 
at  such  a  price  we  cannot  tell." 


MORGAN    &    SCOTT'S     UNABRIDGED    EDITIONS    OF 


Crutmi's 


A1 


ILL  the  Editions  described  below  contain  757  pages,  2270  closely  printed  columns,  and 
about  250.000  references.  A  special  feature  is  The  List  Of  Proper  Names,  newly 
translated  by  Rev.  ALFRED  JONES,  M.A.  This  portion  of  the  work  is  strictly  copyright, 
and  can  only  appear  in  Morgan  fs3  Scott's  Eiiitions.  ___  _____ 


CRUDEN'S  CONCORDANCE. 

PORTABLE    EDITION. 

STRONGLY  BOUND  IN  CLOTH 

BOARDS. 
HALF  CALF,  MARBLED  EDGES. 


I       "  This  Edition  is,  to  our  mind,  the  most  mar- 
j  vellous  production  of  cheapness  and  good  value 
l~.\  that  has  ever  emanated  from  any  publishing  office. 
/  M     ^'  's  a  most  va'uable  work,  well  bound,  and  most 
/  ^    perfect  and  complete  in  every  particular." 


76 


nplete  in  every  pa 

The  Protestant  Standard, 


iCRUDEN'S  CONCORDANCE. 

POPULAR    EDITION.  j~  j 

PRINTED  ON  SUPERIOR  PAPER.        0/"~ 
STRONGLY  BOUND  IN  CLOTH  BOARDS. 


"What  a  boon  to  poor  preachers  of  the 
Gospel  !  We  need  not  say  a  word  to  commend 
'  CRUDEN'S  '  priceless  work." 

The  Sword  and  Trowel. 


CRUDEN'S  CONCORDANCE. 

PRESENTATION    EDITION,     rj  if\ 
HANDSOMELY  BOUND  IN  1  /  0 

CLOTH  BEVELLED  BOARDS,  GILT  TOP. 

LIBRARY    EDITION. 
STRONGLY  HALF-BOUND  IN 

LEATHER.    10  6 


"  We  should  suppose  that  no  minister  is  with 
out  a  copy  of  '  CRUDEN'S  CONCORDANCE  ' ;  but 
it  is  just  as  useful  to  the  local  preacher,  Sabbath- 
school  teacher,  and  intelligent  Christian.  Every 
Christian  home  ought  to  have  a  copy." 

Oldham  Chronicle. 


CRUDEN'S  CONCORDANCE. in   R 

ILLUSTRATED    EDITION^  1 U, 
With  U  Exquisite  Sttil-platr.  Engravings, 

and  6  Btautifnl  Coloured  Maps. 
CLOTH  BEVELLED  BOARDS,  GILT  TOP. 


Rev.  Dr.  J.  L.  PORTER,  Professor  of  Biblical 
Criticism,  Belfast,  speaking  of  the  Engravings, 
says  : 

"/  have  examined  with  care  the  views  for 
Biblical  illustration.  The  Engravings  are  very 
beautiful.  In  clearness,  accuracy,  and  general 
effect  they  surpass,  I  think,  any  I  have  seen." 


LONDON  :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  -PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.C. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


PRAYER. 

_  understand  what  is  meant  by  Prayer.  Some 
think  it  is  a  repeating,  perhaps  a  thousand  times, 
of  the  name  of  God,  or  of  His  various  perfections  ;  or  they 
believe  it  to  be  a  prostrating  of  the  body  on  the  ground,  or 
striking  of  the  earth  with  their  forehead.  No,  not  by  such 
means  as  these  will  the  Tree  of  Blessing  shed  on  you  its 
golden  fruit.  Let  me  explain  to  you  my  meaning. 

"And  first,  that  Tree  of 
Blessing  is  fenced  round;  and 
we  must  reach  it,  as  it  were,  by 
a  gate.  We  are  not  worthy  in 
ourselves  to  ask  anything  of 
God ;  but  we  find  the  key  of 
the  gate  in  the  name  of  the 
Saviour.  Christ  spake  thus, 
'Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the 
Father  in  My  Name,  He  will 
give  it  you.'  And  then  the 
fruit-laden  Tree  of  Blessing 
being  within  your  reach,  think 
it  not  enough  to  stand  with 
folded  hands  before  it,  repeating  some  form  of  prayer, 
however  good.  Think  it  not  enough  to  go  close  to  the 
Tree,  and,  as  it  were,  lay  your  hands  upon  it,  by  long  lifeless 
repetitions.  If  you  want  the  fruit  of  the  Tree  you  must  shake 
it ;  shake  it  heartily  ;  shake  it  perseveringly  ;  and  then  down 
comes  the  golden  shower." — Extract  from  page  32. 


^PEARLS   OF   WISDOM   FROM  THE  PARABLES  OF 

CHRIST.     By   A.  L.  O.  E.     With  Twenty-four  full-page  Original 

Drawings.   CROWN  8vo,  256  pages:  Cloth  boards,  3s.  6d. ;  with  gilt  edges,  4s. 

CROWN   i6MO   EDITION  :    Complete,  with  reduced  facsimiles  of  all  the 

Drawings ;  Tinted  cover,  6d.  ;  cloth  boards,  Is.  ;  cloth  bevelled  boards,  gilt 

edges,  Is.  6d. 


LONDON  :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


THE  SPARROWS. 

words  of  Jesus  —  'Ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows' 
—  whisper  to  me  the  comforting  assurance  that  my  falling 
asleep  and  my  awaking  are  matters  of  interest  to  God,  because 
everything  which  concerns  me  and  my  well-being  is  of  moment  to  my 
Heavenly  Father  ;  and  with  all  my  experience  of  His  wondrous  love, 
the  thought  fills  me  with  peaceful  trust  and  the  thankfulness  of  an 
overflowing  heart,  a  thankfulness  that  ought  to  break  forth  into  singing. 

"  There  are  times  in  the  life  of 
the  sparrow  when   his  usual  little 
chirp  is  quite  insufficient  for  him, 
and  he  must  needs  sing  a  low  and 
sweet  song.     I  do  not  suppose  you 
ever  heard  him  —  for  the  chirp  is 
for   the  crowd,    and   the  song  is 
sung  before  only  very  few  ;   and 
not  many  hear  it  :  perhaps  because 
only  few  people  take  any  notice 
of  wild  birds.     But  sing  he  does  ; 
simply  because  he  is  so  happy,  he 
cannot    help    singing—  just    as    a 


"  I  wish  we  all  did  likewise. 
What  a  cheery  world  it  would  be, 
if,  instead  of  the  almost  mechanical 
chirp  of  contentment  most  of  us 
give  over  our  daily  mercies  and 
blessings,  we  were  to  burst  out 
now  and  again  into  songs  of  thanks 
giving  and  grateful  praise  !  Most  of  us  have  the  gratitude  in  our 
hearts  ;  but  we  do  not  allow  it  to  swell  up  in  music  to  our  lips.  Day 
by  day  our  songs  ought  to  rise  to  heaven,  as  we  think  of  all  that  God 
gives  us  —  Life,  health,  food,  raiment,  loving  relatives  and  friends, 
sweet  sunshine,  and  numberless  enjoyments  and  blessings.  Let  us  not 
forget  the  duty  of  delight."  —  Extract  from  pages  55  and  56. 


DIRDS  OF  THE   BIBLE.     Chats  with  the  Children  about 
BIBLE  BIRDS.      By  JAMES    BOWKER,    F.R. G.S.I.      With    Coloured 
Frontispiece  and  Twenty-nine  other  Illustrations.     Cloth  bevelled  boards, 
gilt  edges,  2s. 


V 


LONDON  :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.C. 
And  mai>  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


THE    BURNT    OFFERINGS. 

with  me  through  the  gate  of  the  Court  of  the 
Tabernacle,  that  we  may  look  at  the  Altar  of  Burnt 
Offering,  which  stood  between  the  gate  of  the  court 
and  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle.  This  Altar  was  made  of  wood, 
and  covered  with  brass.  It  was  in  height  about  five  feet ;  and 
in  length  and  width  about  nine  feet.  It  is  sometimes  called 
the  Table  of  the  Lord  ;  and  that  which  was  put  upon  it  is 
sometimes  called  the  food  of  the  Altar  (see  Mai.  i.  12  ; 
Lev.  xxi.  6,  8,  17,  21,  22).  The  Burnt  Offering  was  offered  on 
this  altar  ;  the  fat  of  the  sin-offering  and  memorials  of  both 
the  peace-offering  and  the  meat-offering  were  burnt  on  the 
same  altar  :  but  the  flesh,  and  the  bones,  and  the  skin,  of  the 
Sin-Offering — were  burnt  to  ashes  on  the  earth  outside  the 
camp,  several  miles  away  from  the  Tabernacle.  The  Altar 
was  four-square ;  and  it  had  four  horns.  The  animals  offered 
in  sacrifice  were  horned  animals,  and  were  doubtless  bound 
by  their  horns  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and  then  slain." 

Extract  from  pages  21  and  22. 


-THE    GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO    MOSES:  as  seen 

'       in   the   TABERNACLE  and  its  Various  Services.     By  Rev.   GEORGE 

RODGERS.      With    numerous     Illustrations.  Tinted    covers,    Is.;    cloth 
boards,  Is.  6d.  ;  with  gilt  edges,  2s. 


LONDON  :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G 
And  mav  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


DR.    TAYLOR,    THE    MARTYR. 

HE  sheriff  of  London  with  his 
officers  came  by  two  o'clock  A.M., 
and  brought  Dr.  Taylor  forth  ; 
and  without  any  light  led  him  to  the 
Woolpack,  an  Inn  without  Aldgate. 
Mrs.  Taylor,  suspecting  that  her  hus 
band  would  that  night  be  carried  away, 
watched  all  night  in  St.  Botolph's  Church 
porch,  without  Aldgate,  having  with  her 
two  children,  the  one  named  Elizabeth, 
an  orphan,  whom  the  Doctor  had  a- 
d  opted  at  three  years  old  ;  the  other 
named  Mary,  his  own  daughter. 

"When  the  sheriff  and  his  company  came 
against  St.  Botolph's  Church,  the  grateful 
little  Elizabeth  cried,  'Oh,  my  dear  father  ! 
Mother,  mother,  here  is  my  father  led 
away  !  '  '  Rowland/  said  his  wife,  '  where 
art  thou  ?  '  P^or  it  was  so  dark  a  morn 
ing  that  the  one  could  not  see  the  other. 
'Dear  wife,  I  am  here,'  said  the  Doctor, 
and  stopped.  The  sheriff's  men  would 
have  forced  him  on  ;  but  the  sheriff  said 
-'  Stay  a  little,  I  pray  you  ;  and 
let  him  speak  to  his  wife.'  She 

then  came  to  him,  when  he  took 
his  daughter   Mary  jn   hj 


while  he,  his  wife,  and  Elizabeth,  kneeled  down  and  said  the 
Lord's  Prayer.  At  which  sight  the  sheriff  wept  much,  as  did 
several  others  of  the  company.  The  prayer  finished,  Taylor 
rose  up  and  kissed  his  wife,  and  pressing  her  hand,  he  said, 
"  Farewell,  my  dear  wife  ;  be  of  good  cheer,  for  I  am  quiet  in 
my  conscience.  God  shall  stir  up  a  father  for  my  children." 

Extract  from  page  638. 


COXE'S  BOOK  OF  MARTYRS.     With  Twelve  full-page 

•        Illustrations.     Complete  in  one  handsome  volume,  1083  pages  :  cloth, 
bevelled  boards,  10s.  6d.  ;  with  gilt  edges,  12s.  6d. 

"A  wonderful  compilation."  —  Protestant  Standard. 


"" 


LONDON  :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E  C 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


THE   PRIESTS. 

th?u  unto    thee   Aaron  thy  brother,  and  his  sons  with 
him,    from     among     the    children    of    Israel,    that   he    may 
minister  unto  Me  in  the  Priest's  office."— EXOD.  xxviii.  i. 
"  In  this  direction  to  Moses,  we  may  observe  how  the  priestly  family 
is  kept  distinct  from  Moses  and  his  descendants;  so  that  neither  he 
himself,  nor  his  sons,  have  any  office  of  priesthood.     This  points  out  a 
contrast  between  the  priesthood  under  the  law,  and  that  of  which  Christ 

Whereas, 


is  the  head. 
The  leadership 
or  kingship  of 
Moses,  as  well 
as  the  office  of 
mediator,  were 
in  him  kept 
apart  from  the 
pries  t  hood, 
which  was  con 
fined  to  Aaron 
and  his  sons : 
and  these  dig 
nities  were  thus 
lodged  in  dif 
ferent  persons. 


one 

object  of  the 
Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  is  to 
point  out  the 
Lord  Jesus  in 
resurrection, 
combining  in 
Himself  the 
various  offices 
and  dignities  of 
King,  Media 
tor,  Apostle, 
Surety,  Cap 
tain,  and  Shep 
herd. 


"  The  names  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  are  significant.  Aaron  means 
'very  high.'  He  stood  supreme,  as  the  High  Priest;  very  high  above 
his  own  house,  as  well  as  exalted  above  the  people :  a  type  thus  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  whom  God  has  exalted  with  His  right  hand,  to  be  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour  (Acts  v.  31).  And  as  if  still  further  to  exalt  the  high 
priesthood  of  Jesus  above  that  of  Aaron,  we  have  the  word  '  great ' 
added ;  so  that  the  Lord  is  called  a  Great  High  Priest  (Heb.  iv.  14). 
Aaron's  sons  have  each  appropriate  names  :  Nadab,  'willing  ' ;  Abihu, 
'  my  Father  is  He  '  (that  is,  God) ;  Eleazar,  '  help  of  God  ' ;  Ithamar, 
'  land  of  palm.'  These  four  words  afford  a  little  prophetic  intimation 
of  characteristics  attaching  to  the  house  of  which  the  Son  of  God  is 
the  Head  ;  deriving  its  life  from  God  the  Father,  and  all  its  power 
and  help  from  Him  ;  following  in  the  footsteps,  also,  of  its  blessed 
Master,  in  yielding  willing  and  not  constrained  service  to  God  ;  and 
like  the  palm  trees,  lofty  in  righteousness,  and  ever  bringing  forth  fruit 
(Psalm  xcii.  12-14)."  Extract  from  pa^es  189,  190. 


y-THE  TABERNACLE,  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  AND  TH£V 

'       OFFERINGS:  WITH  THE  SPIRITUAL  LESSOXS  DERIVED  FROM  THE 
RITUAL  AXD  CEREMONIES   OF  THE   OLD   DISPENSATION.     By  HENRY 
W.    SOLTAU.     Profusely  Illustrated.     Cloth,  5s. ;  cloth,  gilt  edges,  6s. 
CHEAP  EDITION  :  without  the  coloured  Illustrations  :  Tinted  covers.  3s. 


LONDON :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


JOHN    B.   GOUGH. 

this  has  been  a  sad  and  awful  revelation ;  my  cheeks 
have  burned  with  shame,  as  I  have  written  ;  and  I  have  been 
strongly  tempted  to  tone  down,  or  draw  a  veil  over,  portions  of 
this  narrative  :  but  I  have  told  the  truth,  plain  and  unvarnished.  As  I 
look  back  to  1842,  it  seems  almost  a  hideous  dream.  I  can  hardly  realize 
my  identity  with  the  staggering,  hopeless,  victim  of  the  terrible  vice  of 
intemperance  ;  but  the  scars  remain  to  testify  the  reality  ;  yes,  scars  and 
marks  never  to  be  eradicated,  never  to  be  removed  in  this  life.  Saved  I 
may  be,  so  as  by  fire  ;  yet  the  scar  of  fire  is  on  me  :  the  nails  may  be  drawn  ; 


seven  years  of 
my  life,  from 
eighteen  to 
twenty-five.  I 
am  intensely 
social  in  my 
nature,  and 
enjoy  the  so 
ciety  of  friends 
keenly  ;  yet 
often,  in  the 
midst  of  the 
pleasant  social 
circle,  the 
ghost  of  the 
past  comes 
gliding  before 
me,  and  words 
seem  to  be 
hissed  into 
my  ear:  'What 
is  your  record?' 
.  .  .  Young 

men,  I  say  to  you,  looking  back  at  the  fire  where  I  lay  scorching — at  the 
bed  of  torture,  where  the  iron  entered  my  soul — yes,  looking  back  at  the 
past  ;  standing,  as  I  trust  I  do,  under  the  arc  of  the  bow,  one  base  of 
which  rests  on  the  dark  days,  and  the  other,  I  hope,  on  the  sunny  slopes 
of  paradise — I  say  to  you,  in  view  of  the  awful  evil  spreading  around 
you,  '  Beware  !  tamper  not  with  the  accursed  thing  ! '  And  may  God 
forbid  that  you  should  ever  suffer  as  I  have  suffered,  or  be  called  to 
fight  such  a  battle  as  I  fought  for  body  and  soul." — Extract  from  page  51. 


but  the  marks 
are  there.  Do 
I  not  bear 
about  with  me 
the  remem 
brance  of  those 
days?  Yes,  al 
ways.  I  never 
rise  to  speak, 
but  I  think 
of  them  ;  the 
more  I  mingle 
with  the  wise, 
the  pure,  the 
true  —  the 
higher  my  as 
pirations — the 
more  intense 
is  my  disgust 
and  abhor 
rence  of  the 
hateful  degra 
dation  of  those 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY   OF  JOHN    B.    GOUGH. 

Revised  by  Himself.       Brought  down  to  the  time  of  his  decease. 
With  Portrait  :   Tinted  covers,   Is. ;  cloth  limp,  Is.  6d. 

SUPERIOR  EDITION,   with  Portrait  and  Three  other  full-page 
•^Illustrations  :  Cloth  gilt,  bevelled  boards,  3s.  6d. 


LONDON  :    MORGAN  AND  SCOTT,   12,   PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


APOSTROPHE   TO   WATER. 

BAKING  in  his  hand  a  glass  of  water,  Mr;  Gough  exclaimed  : — 
gp$     "  Did  you  ever  feel  the  tongue  dry,  the  lips  parched,  and  the  I 

throat  feverish  ?  and  then,  bringing  a  goblet  filled  with  pure 
water  to  your  lips,  do  you  remember  the  sensation  as  the  water 
trickled  over  your  tongue  and  gurgled  down  your  throat  ?  Was  it 
not  a  luxury  ?  Surely,  it  is  a  luxury  to  quench  the  thirst  in  pure 
spring  water.  Here  is  a  beverage  brewed  for  us  by  our  Heavenly 
Father — brewed  too  in  beautiful  places  ;  and  not  amid  the  smoky 
fires,  the  horrid  stench,  and  rank  corruption,  that  fester  around  the 
brew-house  or  distillery.  Our  Father  brews  a  drink  for  His  own 
children  in  lovely  places  :  down  in  yon  grassy  dell,  where  the  red 
deer  wanders  and  the  child  loves  to  play  ;  down  there,  where  the 
brooks  murmur  and  the  rills  give  out  their  music — there  He  brews 
pure  water  :  again  far  away  on  the  mountain  top,  whose  granite 
peaks  glitter  like  gold  in  the  sunlight,  and  whose  shady  places  are 
moist  with  the  dew  of  heaven ;  and  whence  come  forth  the  tiny 
rivulets  which  swell  out  into  mighty  streams. 

There  brews  He  beautiful  water  !  and  beautiful  it  always  is  ! 
You  see  it  glistening  in  the  dewdrop  ;  you  hear  it  singing  in  the 
summer  rain  ;  you  see  it  glittering  in  the  ice  gems  when  the  trees 
seem  loaded  with  sparkling  jewels  !  Look  at  it  as  it  shimmers  in 
the  hoar  frost  on  which  the  sun  is  shining  !  Beautiful  water  ! — 
dancing  in  the  hail-storm  ;  leaping,  foaming,  dashing  in  the 
cataract ;  sparkling  in  the  fountain  ;  and  grand  and  glorious  in 
the  wide  wild  sea,  where  the  hurricane  howls  its  mournful  melody, 
and  the  storm  sends  back  the  chorus,  echoing  the  march  of  God  ! 
Extract  from  "  Orations  by  J.  B.  Gough." 


QRATIONS    BY  JOHN    B.    GOUGH. 

^*^  Containing  Eleven  of  his  stirring  Orations  delivered  in  London 
and  the  Provinces.  Tinted  covers,  Is.  ;  cloth  limp,  Is.  6d  ;  cloth 
boards,  2s.  6d. 


LONDON  :    MORGAN  AND  SCOTT,   12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


WORKS  by  Rev.  J.  CULROSS,  D.D.,  M.A. 

Principal   of    Bristol    Baptist  College  and    President  of   the 
Baptist   Union. 


John,  whom  Jesus  Loved. 

A  Sketch  of  the  Character,  Writings,  Theology,  and  Influence  of  the 
Beloved  Disciple.  With  Two  Chromo- Lithographic  Vinvs.  Cloth, 
bevelled  boards,  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d. 


SPECIAL  CHEAP  EDITION— Tinted  covers,  2s.;  cloth  boards,  2s.  6d. 


"In  DR.  CULROSS' new  work,  entitled,  '  JOHN,  WHOM  JESUS  LOVED,' we  have  found 
a.  book.  It  is  part  of  our  appointed  suffering  in  this  present  life  to  be  compelled  to  winnow 
heaps  of  literature,  with  great  result  in  chaff  and  dust,  and  small  gain  in  bread  corn  ; 
and  therefore  our  rejoicing  is  the  greater  when  grain  comes  to  our  garner  as  clean  prov- 
enderingood  weight  and  measure." — Rev.  C.  H.  SPURGEON,  in  The  Sword  and  Trowel. 

11  Thy  First  Love." 

CHRIST'S    MESSAGE    TO    EPHESUS.     Crown  Svo.     Cloth,   bevelled 
boards,   2s.  6d.      With  Chromo- Lithographic  Frontispiece. 


SPECIAL  CHEAP  EDITION— Tinted  covers,  Is.  6d. 


"  Its  language  is  chaste  and  clear  ;  its  thoughts  are  fresh  and  invigorating  ;  its  tone  is 
evangelical,  without  being  sentimental.  While  there  is  a  genial  warmth  of  devout 
feeling,  there  runs  through  its  pages  a  healthy  breeze  of  robustness." — Literary  World. 

"  Full  of  choice  thoughts,  beautifully  expressed,  this  work  breathes  a  truly  Christ-like 
spirit,  which  will  render  it  dear  to  all  spiritually-minded  readers."—  Word  and  Work. 

"Behold,  I  Stand  at  the  Door  and  Knock." 

CHRIST'S  MESSAGE  TO  LAODICEA.      Crown  Svo.      Cloth,  bevelled 
boards,  2s.  6d.      With  Chromo-Lithographic  Frontispiece. 


SPECIAL  CHEAP  EDITION— Tinted  covers,  Is.;  cloth,  Is.  6d. 

"  The  exposition  is  fresh  and  original,  displaying  great  critical  skill  and  discrimination, 
together  with  happy  quotations  of  Scripture.  The  style  is  all  that  could  be  desired- 
chaste  and  polished,  yet  full  of  force  :  here  and  there,  as  in  the  author's  other  works,  we 
meet  with  passages  of  great  poetic  beauty."— Aberdeen  Daily  Press. 

LONDON  :    MORGAN  AND   SCOTT,   12,   PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,   E.G. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


B  x  o  a- :R  .A.  IP  IH:  i  c  .^  x,    WOIR,:K:S_ 
Nineteen  Beautiful  Years. 

THE  RECORD  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  A  BELOVED  SISTER.  By  FRANCES 
ii.  WILI.ARD,  President  of  the  Women's  National  Christian  Tem 
perance  Union  of  America.  With  Introduction  by  BISHOP  FOSTER- 
and  a  Prefatory  Note  by  the  Poet,  JOHN  G.  WHITTIER.  Cloth 
boards,  2s.  6d. ;  with  gilt  edges,  3s. 


A  book  we  most  cordially  commend  to  the  notice  of  readers,  young  and  old. 
™  w°uld  S'adly  linger  over  these  records  of  a  beautiful  life;   but  we  hope  we  have  said 

for^m    l'nCI^  T  r"dersl°  Procure  and  Peruse  these  bright,  touching  memorials 
sr  themselves.  — Our  Oum  Gazette. 

Duncan  Matheson.  THE  SCOTTISH  EVANGELIST:  His  Life 
and  Labours.  By  Rev.  J.  MACPHERSON,  Author  of  "  The  Christian 
ffero,"  etc.  With  life-like  Portrait.  Tinted  covers,  Is.  6d. ;  cloth 
boards,  2s.  6d.  Thirtieth  Thousand. 

"  The  life  of  a  real  man,  consecrated  in  life  and  full  of  zeal  for  the  Lord.    This  biography 
ot  only  interest,  but  benefit  a  wide  circle  of  readers.     We  had  the  happiness  of 
trequent  correspondence  with  Duncan  Matheson.     We  valued  him  as  a  successful  soul- 
winner,  and  especially  for  his  soundness  of  doctrine  and  innocence  of  cant.     We  are  right 
glad  to  see  so  worthy  a  memorial  of  so  worthy  a  man."—  The  Sword  and  Trowel. 

Robert  Annan.     THE  CHRISTIAN  HERO. 

By  Rev.  J.  MACPHERSON,  Author  of  "Duncan  Matheson,"  etc.  With 
Frontispiece.  Tinted  covers,  6d. ;  cloth  boards,  Is.;  LARGE  TYPE 
EDITION,  tinted  covers,  Is.;  cloth  boards,  Is.  6d. 

"The  memory  of  ROBERT  ANNAN  was  worthy  to  be  had  in  remembrance;  and 
Mr.  Macpherson  has  told  the  story  well,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  move  the  feelings  of 
the  reader,  and,  we  hope,  to  stimulate  others  to  follow  the  noble  example  of  this 
CHRISTIAN  HERO  in  humble  life."— Christian  Work. 


James  Scott.     A  LABOURER  FOR  GOD. 

By  Rev.  ANDREW  A.  BONAR,  D.D.,  Author  of  "Memoir  of  Rev.  R.  M. 
McCheyne"  etc.,  etc.  Tinted  covers,  Is. ;  cloth  limp,  Is.  6d.  ; 
cloth  boards,  2s.  6d.  With  Portrait  and  two  other  Illustrations. 

"  There  is  something  reassuring  to  read  of  this  young  man  fighting  in  the  fore  front 
of  the  battle  against  sin,  and  vice,  and  intemperance.  It  makes  one  hopeful  for  the 
future  that,  amid  all  the  selfish  indifference  around,  there  are  such  spirits  .  .  .  who, 
in  the  strength  of  the  Christianity  they  profess,  wage  war  against  ungodliness;  and, 
in  the  noblest  spirit  of  self-sacrifice,  fight  it  out  to  the  very  death." — Christian  Leader. 

LONDON  :    MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.C. 
And  may  be  ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 


EVERY  FRIDAY. 


PRICE   ONE  PENNY. 


A  WEEKLY   NEWSPAPER. 

Containing  Accounts  of  Christian  Work  and  Missionary  Enterprise  In 
all  Parts  of  the  World. 

ORIGINAL    ARTICLES,    NARRATIVES, 

POETRY,    NOTES   ON    PASSING    EVENTS, 

And   GENERAL   EVANGELISTIC   INTELLIGENCE. 

of  Eminent 


portraits!  anB  TBtograjrfucal 

Christian  S!9en  anu  Cdomen. 

"  It  is  eminently  stimulative  of  Christian  zeal,  and  is  unrivalled  as  a  medium  for  the 
benevolent,  to  distribute  amongst  the  deserving."  —  Christian  Age. 

"The  contents  are  varied,  interesting,  and  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of  true  religious  zeal. 
It  is  most  gratifying  to  read  in  its  pages  how  blessedly,  and  by  what  various  instrumen 
talities,  God  is  carrying  on  His  great  work.  "—  King's  High-way. 


On  receipt  of  Is.  9d.  in  P.O.O.,  or  Stamps,  "&$e  Christian" 
will  be  forwarded  to  any  Address  direct  from  the 
Publishers,  post  free,  for  13  weeks. 


EIGHT  PAGES  MONTHLY. 


ONE   HALFPENNY. 


AN     ILLUSTRATED     MONTHLY    MESSENGER. 

Each  Number  consists  of  Eight  Quarto  Pages,  with  Full-page 
Illustration  and  several  Smaller  Engravings. 

Containing 
STIRRING    APPEALS,    NARRATIVES, 

PAGES    FOR    THE    YOUNG, 

CHOICE    EXTRACTS,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Full  of  short,  telling  anecdotes;  rich  in  encouragement,  comfort,  and  solemn  warning. 
They  point  to  Christ  and  His  unsearchable  riches.  The  Illustrations  are  good  and 
suggestive."  —  Tht  Friend. 


Eight  copies  of  "  The  Herald  of  Mercy "  will  be  sent  post 
free  to  any  Address  direct  from  the  Publishers  for  12 
months  on  receipt  of  P.0.0.  or  stamps  for  4s. 


LONDON 


MORGAN  AND  SCOTT,   12,   PATERNOSTER   BUILDINGS,   E.G. 
And  way  be  ordered  of  any  Bockselltr. 


DATE   DUE 


