


Simplicity 
in Preaching 





J. C. RYLE 


Dorothea Press 


Simplicity in Preaching 
a few short hints on a great subject 


J. C. RYLE 


Dorothea Press 
2022 


Simplicity in Preaching 


Originally published as Simplicity in Preaching. A few short hints on a great 
subject by John Charles Ryle, London: William Hunt, 1882. 


Text now in the public domain. This work is licensed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. 





Cover image: Photograph of J C Ryle in his study from Wikimedia Commons. 
The image was converted to greyscale, and is licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license. 


Design and composition: Peter F. Whyte. 


First published, 1882 
E-book first produced February 2022 


Published by 
Dorothea Press 
Belfast, N Ireland 


Text proofed and corrected by Peter F. Whyte. The text is unaltered but reset, 
and the orthography has been modernised. 


Contents 


Title page 

Preface 

Simplicity in Preaching 
About Dorothea Press 


Preface 


The substance of this paper was originally addressed, as a 
lecture, to a clerical audience, at St. Paul’s Cathedral, on 
behalf of the Homiletical Society. 

For a certain roughness and abruptness of style I must 
apologize. But my readers must kindly remember that the 
lecture was spoken and not written, and is prepared for the 
press from the notes of a shorthand writer. 

In the hope that it may prove useful to some of my 
younger brethren in the Ministry, it is now published in its 
present form. 


J. C. LIVERPOOL 


October ist, 1882 


Simplicity in Preaching 
ee 


KiNG SOLOMON says, in the book of Ecclesiastes, “Of 
making many books there is no end” (Eccles. 12:12). There 
are few subjects about which that saying is more true than 
that of preaching. The volumes which have been written in 
order to show ministers how to preach are enough to make 
a small library. In sending forth one more little treatise, I 
only propose to touch one branch of the subject. I do not 
pretend to consider what should be the substance and 
matter of a sermon. I purposely leave alone such points as 
“gravity, unction, liveliness, warmth,” and the like, or the 
comparative merits of written or extempore sermons. I 
wish to confine myself to one point, which receives far less 
attention than it deserves. That point is simplicity in 
language and style. 

I ought to be able to tell my readers something about 
“simplicity,” if experience will give any help. I began 
preaching forty years ago, when I first took orders, in a 
poor rural parish, and a great portion of my ministerial life 
has been spent in preaching to labourers and farmers. I 
know the enormous difficulty of preaching to such hearers, 
of making them understand one’s meaning, and securing 
their attention. So far as concerns language and 


composition, I deliberately say that I would rather preach 
before the University at Oxford or Cambridge, or the 
Temple, or Lincoln’s Inn, or the Houses of Parliament, than 
I would address an agricultural congregation on a fine hot 
afternoon in the month of August. I have heard of a 
labourer who enjoyed Sunday more than any other day in 
the week,—“Because,” he said, “I sit comfortably in church, 
put up my legs, have nothing to think about, and just go to 
sleep.” Some of my younger friends in the ministry may 
some day be called to preach to such congregations as I 
have had, and I shall be glad if they can profit by my 
experience. 

Before entering on the subject, I wish to clear the way 
by making four prefatory remarks. 

(a) For one thing, I ask all my readers to remember that 
to attain simplicity in preaching is of the utmost 
importance to every minister who wishes to be useful to 
souls. Unless you are simple in your sermons you will never 
be understood, and unless you are understood you cannot 
do good to those who hear you. It was a true saying of 
Quintilian, “If you do not wish to be understood, you 
deserve to be neglected.” The first object of a minister 
should be to preach the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but “the truth as it is in Jesus.” But the next thing he ought 
to aim at is that his sermon may be understood; and it will 
not be understood by most of his hearers if it is not simple. 

(b) The next thing I will say, by way of prefatory 
remark, is, that to attain simplicity in preaching is by no 


means an easy matter. No greater mistake can be made 
than to suppose this. “To make hard things seem hard,” to 
use the substance of a saying of Archbishop Usher’s, “is 
within the reach of all, but to make hard things seem easy 
and intelligible is a height attained by very few speakers.” 
One of the wisest and best of the Puritans said two hundred 
years ago, “that the greater part of preachers shoot over 
the heads of the people.” This is true also in 1882! I feara 
vast proportion of what we preach is not understood by our 
hearers any more than if it were Greek. When people hear 
a simple sermon, or read a simple tract, they are apt to Say, 
“How true! how plain! how easy to understand,” and to 
suppose that any one can write in that style. Allow me to 
say it is an extremely difficult thing to write simple, clear, 
perspicuous, and forcible English. Look at the sermons of 
Charles Bradley, of Clapham. A sermon of his reads most 
beautifully. It is so simple and natural, that any one feels at 
once that the meaning is as clear as the sun at noonday. 
Every word is the right word, and every word is in its right 
place. Yet the labour those sermons cost Mr. Bradley was 
very great indeed. Those who have read Goldsmith’s Vicar 
of Wakefield attentively, can hardly fail to have noticed the 
exquisite naturalness, ease, and simplicity of its language. 
And yet it is known that the pains and trouble and time 
bestowed upon that work were immense. Let the Vicar of 
Wakefield be compared with Johnson’s Rasselas,—which 
was written off in a few days, it is said, under high 
pressure, —and the difference is at once apparent. In fact, 


to use very long words, to seem very learned, to make 
people go away after a sermon, saying, “How fine! how 
clever! how grand!” all this is very easy work. But to write 
what will strike and stick, to speak or to write that which at 
once pleases and is understood, and becomes assimilated 
with a hearer’s mind and a thing never forgotten—that, we 
may depend upon it, is a very difficult thing and a very rare 
attainment. 

(c) Let me observe, in the next place, that when I talk 
of simplicity in preaching, I would not have my readers 
suppose I mean childish preaching. If we suppose the poor 
like that sort of sermon, we are greatly mistaken. If our 
hearers once imagine we consider them a parcel of 
ignorant folks for whom any kind of “infant’s food” is good 
enough, our chance of doing good is lost altogether. People 
do not like even the appearance of condescending 
preaching. They feel we are not treating them as equals, 
but inferiors. Human nature always dislikes that. They will 
at once put up their backs, stop their ears, and take 
offence, and then we might as well preach to the winds. 

(d) Finally, let me observe that it is not coarse or vulgar 
preaching that is needed. It is quite possible to be simple, 
and yet to speak like a gentleman, and with the demeanour 
of a courteous and refined person. It is an utter mistake to 
imagine that uneducated and illiterate men and women 
prefer to be spoken to in an illiterate way, and by an 
uneducated person. To suppose that a lay-evangelist or 
Scripture-reader, who knows nothing of Latin or Greek, and 


is only familiar with his Bible, is more acceptable than an 
Oxford first-class man, or a Cambridge wrangler (if that 
first-class man knows how to preach), is a complete error. 
People only tolerate vulgarity and coarseness, as a rule, 
when they can get nothing else. 

Having made these prefatory remarks in order to clear 
the way, I will now proceed to give my readers five brief 
hints as to what seems to me the best method of attaining 
simplicity in preaching. 


I. My first hint is this: If you want to attain simplicity in 
preaching, take care that you have a clear view of the 
subject upon which you are going to preach. I ask your 
special attention to this. Of all the five hints I am about to 
give, this is the most important. Mind, then, when your text 
is chosen, that you understand it and see right through it; 
that you know precisely what you want to prove, what you 
want to teach, what you want to establish, and what you 
want people’s minds to carry away. If you yourself begin in 
a fog, you may depend upon it you will leave your people in 
darkness. Cicero, one of the greatest ancient orators, said 
long ago,—“No one can possibly speak clearly and 
eloquently about a subject which he _  does_ not 
understand,”—and I am satisfied that he spoke the truth. 
Archbishop Whateley was a very shrewd observer of human 
nature, and he said rightly of a vast number of preachers, 
that “they aimed at nothing, and they hit nothing. Like men 
landing on an unknown island, and setting out on a journey 


of exploration, they set out in ignorance, and travelled on 
in ignorance all the day long.” 

I ask all young ministers especially, to remember this 
first hint. I repeat most emphatically, “Take care you 
thoroughly understand your subject. Never choose a text of 
which you do not quite know what it means.” Beware of 
taking obscure passages such as those which are to be 
found in unfulfilled and emblematic prophecies. If a man 
will continually preach to an ordinary congregation about 
the seals and vials and trumpets in Revelation, or about 
Ezekiel’s temple, or about predestination, free will, and the 
eternal purposes of God, it will not be at all surprising to 
any reasonable mind if he fails to attain simplicity. I do not 
mean that these subjects ought not to be handled 
occasionally, at fit times, and before a suitable audience. All 
I say is, that they are very deep subjects, about which wise 
Christians often disagree, and it is almost impossible to 
make them very simple. We ought to see our subjects 
plainly, if we wish to make them simple, and there are 
hundreds of plain subjects to be found in God’s Word. 

Beware, for the same reason, of taking up what I call 
fanciful subjects and accommodated texts, and then 
dragging out of them meanings which the Holy Ghost never 
intended to put into them. There is no subject needful for 
the soul’s health which is not to be found plainly taught and 
set forth in Scripture. This being the case, I think a 
preacher should never take a text and extract from it, as a 
dentist would a tooth from the jaw, something which, 


however true in itself, is not the plain literal meaning of the 
inspired words. The sermon may seem very glittering and 
ingenious, and his people may go away saying, “What a 
clever parson we have got!” But if, on examination, they 
can neither find the sermon in the text, nor the text in the 
sermon, their minds are perplexed, and they begin to think 
the Bible is a deep book which cannot be understood. If you 
want to attain simplicity, beware of accommodated texts. 
When I speak of accommodated texts, let me explain 
what I mean. I remember hearing of a minister in a 
northern town, who was famous for preaching in this style. 
Once he gave out for his text, “He that is so impoverished 
that he hath no oblation, chooseth unto him a tree that will 
not rot (Isa. 40:20). “Here,” said he, “is man by nature 
impoverished and undone. He has nothing to offer, in order 
to make satisfaction for his soul. And what ought he to do? 
He ought to choose a tree which cannot rot, even the cross 
of our Lord Jesus Christ.”—On another occasion, being 
anxious to preach on the doctrine of indwelling sin, he 
chose his text out of the history of Joseph and his brethren, 
and gave out the words, “The old man of whom ye spake, is 
he yet alive?” (Gen. 43:7). Out of this question he 
ingeniously twisted a discourse about the infection of 
nature remaining in the believer,—a grand truth, no doubt, 
but certainly not the truth of the passage. Such instances 
will, I trust, be a warning to all my younger brethren. If you 
want to preach about the indwelling corruption of human 
nature, or about Christ crucified, you need not seek for 


such far-fetched texts as those I have named. If you want to 
be simple, mind you choose plain simple texts. 
Furthermore, if you wish to see through your subjects 
thoroughly, and so to attain the foundation of simplicity, do 
not be ashamed of dividing your sermons and stating your 
divisions. I need hardly say this is a very vexed question. 
There is a morbid dread of “firstly, secondly, and thirdly” in 
many quarters. The stream of fashion runs strongly against 
divisions, and I must frankly confess that a lively undivided 
sermon is much better than one divided in a dull, stupid, 
illogical way. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own 
mind. He that can preach sermons which strike and stick 
without divisions, by all means let him hold on his way and 
persevere. But let him not despise his neighbour who 
divides. All I say is, if we would be simple, there must be 
order in a sermon as there is in an army. What wise general 
would mix up artillery, infantry, and cavalry in one confused 
mass in the day of battle? What giver of a banquet or 
dinner would dream of putting on the table the whole of the 
viands at once, the soup, the fish, the entries, the joints, the 
salads, the game, the sweets, the dessert, in one huge dish? 
Such a host would hardly be thought to serve his dinner 
well. Just so I say it is with sermons. By all means let there 
be order—order, whether you bring out your “firstly, 
secondly, or thirdly,” or not—order, whether your divisions 
are concealed or expressed—order so carefully arranged 
that your points and ideas shall follow one another in 


beautiful regularity, like regiments marching past before 
The Queen on a review day in Windsor Park. 

For my own part, I honestly confess that I do not think I 
have preached two sermons in my life without divisions. I 
find it of the utmost importance to make _ people 
understand, remember, and carry away what I say, and I am 
certain that divisions help me to do so. They are, in fact, 
like hooks and pegs and shelves in the mind. If you study 
the sermons of men who have been and are successful 
preachers, you will always find order, and often divisions, in 
their sermons. I am not a bit ashamed to say that I often 
read the sermons of Mr. Spurgeon. I like to gather hints 
about preaching from all quarters. David did not ask about 
the sword of Goliath, Who made it? who polished it? what 
blacksmith forged it? He said, “There is nothing like it;” for 
he had once used it to cut off its owner’s head. Mr. 
Spurgeon can preach most ably, and he proves it by 
keeping his enormous congregation together. We ought 
always to examine and analyze sermons which draw people 
together. Now when you read Mr. Spurgeon’s sermons, 
note how clearly and perspicuously he divides a sermon, 
and fills each division with beautiful and simple ideas. How 
easily you grasp his meaning! How thoroughly he brings 
before you certain great truths that hang to you like hooks 
of steel, and which, once planted in your memory, you 
never forget! My first point, then, if you would be simple in 
your preaching, is, that you must thoroughly understand 
your subject, and if you want to know whether you 


understand it, try to divide and arrange it I can only say for 
myself that I have done this ever since I have been a 
minister. For forty years I have kept blank ms. books in 
which I put down texts and heads of sermons for use when 
required. Whenever I get hold of a text, and see my way 
through it, I put it down and make a note of it. If I do not 
see my way through a text, I cannot preach on it, because I 
know I cannot be simple, and if I cannot be simple, I know I 
had better not preach at all. 


II. The second hint I would give is this: Try to use in all 
your sermons, as far as you can, simple words. In saying 
this, however, I must explain myself When I talk of simple 
words, I do not mean words of only one syllable, or words 
which are purely Saxon. I cannot in this matter agree with 
Archbishop Whateley. I think he goes too far in his 
recommendation of Saxon, though there is much truth in 
what he says about it. I rather prefer the saying of that 
wise old heathen Cicero, when he said that orators should 
try to use words which are “in daily common use” amongst 
the people. Whether the words are Saxon or not, or of two 
or three syllables, it does not matter so long as they are 
words commonly used and understood by the people. Only, 
whatever you do, beware of what the poor shrewdly call 
“dictionary” words, that is, of words which are abstract, or 
scientific, or pedantic, or complicated, or indefinite, or very 
long. They may seem very fine and sound very grand, but 


they are rarely of any use. The most powerful and forcible 
words, as a rule, are very short. 

Let me say one word more to confirm what I have 
stated about that common fallacy of the desirableness of 
always using Saxon English. I would remind you that a vast 
number of words of other than Saxon origin are used by 
writers of notorious simplicity. Take for instance the famous 
work of John Bunyan, and look at the very title of it, The 
Pilgrim’s Progress. Neither of the leading words in that 
title is Saxon. Would he have improved matters if he had 
called it “The Wayfarer’s Walk”? In saying this I admit 
freely that words of French and Latin origin are generally 
inferior to Saxon, and, as a rule, I should say, use strong 
pure Saxon words if you can. All I mean to say is, that you 
must not think it a matter of course that words cannot be 
good and simple if they are not of Saxon origin. In any case, 
beware of long words. Dr. Gee, in his excellent book, Our 
Sermons (Longman), very ably points out the uselessness of 
using long words and expressions not in common use. For 
example, be says, “Talk of happiness rather than of felicity, 
talk of almighty rather than omnipotent, lessen rather than 
diminish, forbidden rather than proscribed, hateful rather 
than noxious, seeming rather than apparent, afterwards 
rather than subsequently, call out and draw forth instead of 
evoke and educe.” We all need to be pulled up sharply on 
these points. It is very well to use fine words at Oxford and 
Cambridge, before classical hearers, and in preaching 
before educated audiences. But depend upon it, when you 


preach to ordinary congregations, the sooner you throw 
overboard this sort of English, and use plain common 
words, the better. One thing, at all events, is quite certain, 
without simple words you will never attain simplicity in 
preaching. 


II. The third hint I would offer, if you wish to attain 
simplicity in preaching, is this: take care to aim at a simple 
style of composition. I will try to illustrate what I mean. If 
you take up the sermons preached by that great and 
wonderful man Dr. Chalmers, you can hardly fail to see 
what an enormous number of lines you meet with without 
coming to a full stop. This I cannot but regard as a great 
mistake. It may suit Scotland, but it will never do for 
England. If you would attain a simple style of composition, 
beware of writing many lines without coming to a pause, 
and so allowing the minds of your hearers to take breath. 
Beware of colons and semicolons. Stick to commas and full 
stops, and take care to write as if you were asthmatical or 
short of breath. Never write or speak very long sentences 
or long paragraphs. Use stops frequently, and start again, 
and the oftener you do this the more likely you are to attain 
a simple style of composition. Enormous sentences full of 
colons, semi-colons, and parentheses, with paragraphs of 
two or three pages’ length, are utterly fatal to simplicity. 
We should bear in mind that preachers have to do with 
hearers and not readers, and that what will “read” well will 
not always “speak” well. A reader of English can always 


help himself by looking back a few lines and refreshing his 
mind. A hearer of English hears once for all, and if he loses 
the thread of your sermon in a long involved sentence, he 
very likely never finds it again. 

Again, simplicity in your style of composition depends 
very much upon the proper use of proverbs and 
epigrammatic sentences. This is of vast importance. Here, I 
think, is the value of much that you find in Matthew 
Henry’s commentary, and Bishop Hall’s Contemplations. 
There are some good sayings of this sort in a book not 
known so well as it should be, called Papers on Preaching 
by a Wykehamist. Take a few examples of what I mean: 
“What we weave in time we wear in eternity.” “Hell is 
paved with good intentions.” “Sin forsaken is one of the 
best evidences of sin forgiven.” “It matters little how we 
die, but it matters much how we live.” “Meddle with no 
man’s person, but spare no man’s sin.” “The street is soon 
clean when every one sweeps before his own door.” “Lying 
rides on debt’s back: it is hard for an empty bag to stand 
upright.” “He that begins with prayer will end with praise.” 
“All is not gold that glitters.” “In religion, as in business, 
there are no gains without pains.” “In the Bible there are 
Shallows where a lamb can wade, and depths where an 
elephant must swim.” “One thief on the cross was saved, 
that none should despair, and only one, that none should 
presume.” 

Proverbial, epigrammatic, and antithetical sayings of 
this kind give wonderful per-spicuousness and force to a 


sermon. Labour to store your minds with them. Use them 
judiciously, and especially at the end of paragraphs, and 
you will find them an immense help to the attainment of a 
simple style of composition. But of long, involved, 
complicated sentences always beware. 


IV. The fourth hint I will give is this: if you wish to 
preach simply, use a direct style. What do I mean by this? I 
mean the practice and custom of saying “I” and “you.” 
When a man takes up this style of preaching, he is often 
told that he is conceited and egotistical The result is that 
many preachers are never direct, and always think it very 
humble and modest, and becoming, to say “we.” But I 
remember good Bishop Villiers saying that “we” was a 
word Kings and Corporations should use, and they alone, 
but that parish clergymen should always talk of “I” and 
you.” I endorse that saying with all my heart I declare I 
never can understand what the famous pulpit “we” means. 


a 


Does the preacher who all through his sermon keeps saying 
“we” mean himself and the bishop? or himself and the 
Church? or himself and the congregation? or himself and 
the Early Fathers? or himself and the Reformers? or himself 
and all the wise men in the world? or, after all, does he only 
mean myself, plain “John Smith” or “Thomas Jones”? If he 
only means himself, what earthly reason can he give for 
using the plural number, and not saying simply and plainly 
“1”? When he visits his parishioners, or sits by a sick bed, 
or catechises his school, or orders bread at the baker’s, or 


meat at the butcher’s, he does not say “we,” but “I.” Why, 
then, I should like to know, can he not say “I” in the pulpit? 
What right has he, as a modest man, to speak for any one 
but himself? Why not stand up on Sunday and say, “Reading 
in the Word of God, I have found a text containing such 
things as these, and I come to set them before you”? 

Many people, I am sure, do not understand what the 
preacher’s “we” means. The expression leaves them in a 
kind of fog. If you say, “I, your rector; I, your vicar; I, the 
curate of the parish,” come here to talk of something that 
concerns your soul, something you should believe, 
something you should do—you are at any rate understood. 
But if you begin to talk in the vague plural number of what 
“we” ought to do, many of your hearers do not know what 
you are driving at, and whether you are speaking to 
yourself or them. I charge and entreat my younger 
brethren in the ministry not to forget this point. Do try to 
be as direct as possible. Never mind what people say of 
you. In this particular do not imitate Chalmers, or Melville, 
or certain other living pulpit celebrities. Never say “we” 
when you mean “I.” The more you get into the habit of 
talking plainly to the people, in the first person singular, as 
old Bishop Latimer did, the simpler will your sermon be, 
and the more easily understood. The glory of Whitefield’s 
sermons is their directness. But unhappily they were so 
badly reported that we cannot now appreciate them. 


V. The fifth and last hint I wish to give you is this. If you 
would attain simplicity in preaching, you must use plenty of 
anecdotes and illustrations. You must regard illustrations 
as windows through which light is let in upon your subject 
Upon this point a great deal might be said, but the limits of 
a small treatise oblige me to touch it very briefly. I need 
hardly remind you of the example of Him who “spake as 
never man spake,” our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
Study the four Gospels attentively, and mark what a wealth 
of illustration His sermons generally contain. How often 
you find figure upon figure, parable upon parable, in His 
discourses. There was nothing under His eyes apparently 
from which He did not draw lessons. The birds of the air, 
and the fish in the sea, the sheep, the goats, the cornfield, 
the vineyard, the ploughman, the sower, the reaper, the 
fisherman, the shepherd, the vinedresser, the woman 
kneading meal, the flowers, the grass, the bank, the 
wedding feast, the sepulchre,—all were made vehicles for 
conveying thoughts to minds of hearers. What are such 
parables as the prodigal son, the good Samaritan, the ten 
virgins, the king who made a marriage for his son, the rich 
man and Lazarus, the labourers of the vineyard, and others, 
—what are all these but stirring stories that our Lord tells 
in order to convey some great truth to the souls of His 
hearers? Try to walk in His footsteps and follow His 
example. 

If you pause in your sermon, and say, “Now I will tell 
you a story,” I engage that all who are not too fast asleep 


will prick up their ears and listen. People like similes, 
illustrations, and well-told stories, and will listen to them 
when they will attend to nothing else. And from what 
countless sources we can get illustrations! Take all the 
book of nature around us. Look at the sky above and the 
world beneath. Look at history. Look at all the branches of 
science, at geology, at botany, at chemistry, at astronomy. 
What is there in heaven above or earth below from which 
you may not bring illustrations to throw light on the 
message of the Gospel? Read Bishop Latimer’s sermons, 
the most popular, perhaps, that were ever preached. Read 
the works of Brooks and Watson and Swinnock, the 
Puritans. How full they are of illustrations, figures, 
metaphors, and stories! Look at Mr. Moody’s sermons. 
What is one secret of his popularity? He fills his sermons 
with pleasing stories. He is the best speaker, says an 
Arabian proverb, who can turn the ear into an eye. 

For my part, I not only try to tell stories, but in country 
parishes I have sometimes put before people familiar 
illustrations which they can see. For instance—Do I want to 
show them that there must have been a first great cause or 
Being who made this world? I have sometimes taken out my 
watch, and have said, “Look at this watch. How well it is 
made! Do any of you suppose for a moment that all the 
screws, all the wheels, all the pins of that watch came 
together by accident? Would not any one say there must 
have been a watchmaker? And if so, it follows most surely 
that there must have been a Maker of the world, whose 


handiwork we see graven on the face of every one of those 
glorious planets going their yearly rounds and keeping time 
to a single second. Look at the world in which you live, and 
the wonderful things which it contains. Will you tell me that 
there is no God, and that creation is the result of chance?” 
Or, sometimes I have taken out a bunch of keys and shaken 
them. The whole congregation, when they hear the keys, 
look up. Then I say, “Would there be need of any keys if all 
men were perfect and honest? What does this bunch of 
keys show? Why, they show that the heart of man is 
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.” 
Illustration, I confidently assert, is one of the best receipts 
for making a sermon simple, clear, perspicuous, and easily 
understood. Lay yourselves out for it. Pick up illustrations 
wherever you can. Keep your eyes open, and use them well. 
Happy is that preacher who has an eye for similitudes, and 
a memory stored with well-chosen stories and illustrations. 
If he is a real man of God, and knows how to deliver a 
sermon, he will never preach to bare walls and empty 
benches. 

But I must add a word of caution. There is a way of 
telling stories. If a man cannot tell stories naturally, he had 
better not tell them at all. Illustration, again, after all I 
have said in its favour, may be carried too far. I remember a 
notable instance of this in the case of the great Welch 
preacher, Christmas Evans. There is in print a sermon of 
his about the wonderful miracle that took place in Gadara, 
when devils took possession of the swine, and the whole 


herd ran down violently into the sea. He paints it so 
minutely that it really becomes ludicrous by reason of the 
words put in the mouth of the swineherds who told their 
master of the loss he had sustained. “Oh! sir,” says one, 
“the pigs have all gone!” “But,” says the master, “where 
have they gone?” “They have run down into the sea.” “But 
who drove them down?” “Oh! sir, that wonderful man.” 
“Well, what sort of a man was he? What did he do?” “Why, 
sir, he came and talked such strange things, and the whole 
herd ran suddenly down the steep place into the sea.” 
“What, the old black boar and all?” “Yes, sir, the old black 
boar has gone too; for as we looked round we just saw the 
end of his tail going over the cliff.” Now that is going to an 
extreme. So again Dr. Guthrie’s admirable sermons are 
occasionally so overladen with illustrations as to remind 
one of cake made almost entirely of plums and containing 
hardly any flour. Put plenty of colour and picture into your 
sermon by all means. Draw sweetness and light from all 
sources and from all creatures, from the heavens and the 
earth, from history, from science. But after all there is a 
limit. You must be careful how you use colour, lest you do 
as much harm as good. Do not put on colour by spoonfuls, 
but with a brush. This caution remembered, you will find 
colour an immense aid in the attainment of simplicity and 
perspicuousness in preaching. 

And now bear in mind that my five points are these: 

First: If you want to attain simplicity in preaching, you 
must have a clear knowledge of what you are going to 


preach. 

Secondly: If you would attain simplicity in preaching, 
you must use simple words. 

Thirdly: If you would attain simplicity in preaching, you 
must seek to acquire a simple style of composition, with 
short sentences and as few colons and semi-colons as 
possible. 

Fourthly: If you would attain simplicity in preaching, 
aim at directness. 

Lastly: If you would attain simplicity in preaching, 
make abundant use of illustration and anecdote. 

Let me add to all this one plain word of application. You 
will never attain simplicity in preaching without plenty of 
trouble. Pains and trouble, I say emphatically, pains and 
trouble. When Turner, the great painter, was asked by some 
one how it was he mixed his colours so well, and what it 
was that made them so different from those of other artists; 
“Mix them? mix them? mix them? Why, with brains, sir.” I 
am persuaded that, in preaching, little can be done except 
by trouble and by pains. 

I have heard that a young and careless clergyman once 
said to Richard Cecil, “I think I want more faith.” “No,” said 
the wise old man: “you want more works. You want more 
pains. You must not think that God will do work For you, 
though He is ready to do it By you.” I entreat my younger 
brethren to remember this. I beg them to make time for 
their composition of sermons, to take trouble and to 


exercise their brains by reading. Only mind that you read 
what is useful. 

I would not have you spend your time in reading the 
Fathers in order to help your preaching. They are very 
useful in their way, but there are many things more useful 
in modern writers, if you choose them discreetly. Read good 
models, and become familiar with good specimens of 
simplicity in preaching. As your best model, take the 
English Bible. If you speak the language in which that is 
written, you will speak well. Read John Bunyan’s immortal 
work, the Pilgrim’s Progress. Read it again and again, if 
you wish to attain simplicity in preaching. Do not be above 
reading the Puritans. Some of them no doubt are heavy. 
Goodwin and Owen are very heavy, though excellent 
artillery in position. Read such books as Baxter, and 
Watson, and Traill, and Flavel, and Charnock, and Hall, and 
Henry. They are, to my mind, models of the best simple 
English spoken in old times. Remember, however, that 
language alters with years. They spoke English, and so do 
we, but their style was different from ours. Read beside 
them the best models of modern English that you can get at 
I believe the best English writer for the last hundred years 
was William Cobbett, the political radical I think he wrote 
the finest simple Saxon-English the world has ever seen. In 
the present day I do not know a greater master of tersely 
spoken Saxon-English than John Bright. Among old political 
orators, the speeches of Lord Chatham and Patrick Henry, 
the American, are models of good English. Last, but not 


least, never forget that, next to the Bible, there is nothing 
in the English language which, for combined simplicity, 
perspicuousness, eloguence, and power, can be compared 
with some of the great speeches in Shakespeare. Models of 
this sort must really be studied, and studied “with brains,” 
too, if you wish to attain a good style of composition in 
preaching. On the other hand, do not be above talking to 
the poor, and visiting your people from house to house. Sit 
down with your people by the fireside, and exchange 
thoughts with them on all subjects. Find out how they think 
and how they express themselves, if you want them to 
understand your sermons. By so doing you will insensibly 
learn much. You will be continually picking up modes of 
thought, and get notions as to what you should say in your 
pulpit. 

A humble country clergyman was once asked “whether 
he studied the fathers.” The worthy man replied that he 
had little opportunity of studying the fathers, as they were 
generally out in the fields when he called. But he studied 
the mothers more, because he often found them at home, 
and he could talk to them. Wittingly or unwittingly, the 
good man hit a nail right on the head. We must talk to our 
people, if we would understand how to preach to them. 

(a) I will only say, in conclusion, that whatever we 
preach, or whatever pulpit we occupy, whether we preach 
simply or not, whether we preach written or extempore, we 
ought to aim not merely at letting off fireworks, but at 
preaching that which will do lasting good to souls. Let us 


beware of fireworks in our preaching. “Beautiful” sermons, 
“brilliant” sermons, “clever” sermons, “popular” sermons, 
are often sermons which have no effect on _ the 
congregation, and do not draw men to Jesus Christ. Let us 
aim so to preach that what we say may really come home to 
men’s minds and consciences and hearts, and make them 
think and consider. 

(b) All the simplicity in the world can do no good, 
unless you preach the simple Gospel of Jesus Christ so fully 
and clearly that everybody can understand it. If Christ 
crucified has not His rightful place in your sermons, and sin 
is not exposed as it should be, and your people are not 
plainly told what they ought to be and do, youUR PREACHING 
IS OF NO USE. 

(c) All the simplicity in the world, again, is useless 
without a good lively delivery. If you bury your head in your 
bosom, and mumble over your manuscript in a dull, 
monotonous, droning way, like a bee in a bottle, so that 
people cannot understand what you are speaking about, 
your preaching will be in vain. Depend upon it, delivery is 
not sufficiently attended to in our Church. In this, as in 
everything else connected with the science of preaching, I 
consider the Church of England is sadly deficient. I know 
that I began preaching alone in the New Forest, and 
nobody ever told me what was right or wrong in the pulpit. 
The result was that the first year of my preaching was a 
series of experiments. We get no help in these matters at 
Oxford and Cambridge. The utter want of any proper 


training for the pulpit is one great blot and defect in the 
system of the Church of England. 

(d) Above all, let us never forget that all the simplicity 
in the world is useless without prayer for God’s blessing, 
and without a life corresponding in some measure to what 
we preach. Be it ours to have an earnest desire for the 
souls of men, while we seek for simplicity in preaching the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and let us never forget to 
accompany our sermons by holy living and fervent prayer. 


About Dorothea Press 


DoOROTHEA Press seeks to make high quality e-books of 
public domain text available. Many freely available EPUB 
and Kindle versions of public domain texts are uncorrected 
scans with poor navigation. Dorothea Press versions meet 
the latest EPUB standards and have been _ proofed, 
corrected, and typeset to modern standards. Some archaic 
words have been modernized, or have meanings supplied in 
editorial footnotes. References to biblical and classical 
texts are standardized according to SBL or similar 
guidelines. 

The books are largely of Christian theology and biblical 
studies, ranging from the Early Church Fathers through 
Reformation writers to late-nineteenth to early-twentieth 
century authors and preachers, or Latin and Greek readers. 
Where the books include notes and indexes these have 
been fully hyperlinked to permit easy navigation. 


