

















JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


Rey. Frederick B. Meyer, B. A. 
COD 


“Few books of recent years are better adapted to instruct and 
help Christians than those of this author. He is a man ‘ mighty 
in the Scriptures.’’’—D. L. Moopy. 





The Bells of Is; or, Voicesof Human Need and Sorrow, Echoes 

from my early pastorates. With portrait. x2mo, cloth... -$ .75 
Prayers for Heart and Home. Morning and Evening Devotions 

fora Month. 8vo, flexible cloth................. weseleinsistaets “75 
Old Testament Heroes. 12mo, cloth, each....... aiaistauieletslvieieh XeOU 

Jeremiah: Priest and Prophet. (/x preparation.) 

Joshua and the Land of Promise, (Wew.) 

Moses, the Servant of God. 

Joseph: Beloved—Hated—Exalted, 

Israel: A Prince with God. 

Abraham ; or, The Obedience of Faith 

Elijah and the Secret of His Power. 

“* Such studies as these may serve as models to those who are 
grappling with the problem of a Sunday-night preaching ser- 
vice. These sermons are of exceptional excellence.”—7Zhe 
Golden Rule. 


The ae Life Series. 18mo, cloth, each 50c.; white rh 
CACH  Aianirecesu alrite stele iereatareirts 
Calvary to Pentecost. (Mew.) 
Key Words to the Inner Life. 
The Future Tenses of the Blessed Life 
The Present Tenses of the Blessed Life. 
The Shepherd Psalm. 
Christian Living. 

“The Christian Life series of books by F. B. Meyer are well 
adapted to inspire the purpose of holy living.”— The Central 
Presbyterian. 

The Present Tenses and The Future Tenses. r6mo, white vellum 
cloth, silk inlaid, gold and ink stamping, per set, boxed..... x. 50 


The Expository Series. £20, Cloth, each. »....< ss eeeeancn 1.00 


The Way into the Holiest. An Exposition of the Epistle to 
the Hebrews. 


The Life and Light of Men. Expositions in John’s Gospel. 
Tried by Fire. Expositions of First Epistle of Peter, 


“These expositions have the character ‘of all Mr. Meyer’s 
writings. They combine devout insight into the rich resources 
of the Word of God, with skill in adapting it to the scriptural 
needs of his readers.” — The Sunday School Times. 


Envelope Series of Booklets. Packets Nos, 1 and 2, each con- 


i kd 


taining 12 Tracts, assorted..... sraeretaieiniers eek emis Seeieees net, .20 
Choice Extracts from the Works of Rev. F. B. Meyer. By Rev. 
B, Fay Mills. 24mo, Paper, each 5c.; per doz........... net, 35 


Larger edition, TOMO; Papenneawencneeeec ne Cont eAsban vie aks 


sf JEREMIAH 


PRIEST AND PROPHET 


BY 
F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
AUTHOR OF ‘ELIJAH, AND THE SECRET OF HIS POWER,” ‘‘ MOSES, THE 
SERVANT OF GOD,” ‘‘ TRIED BY FIRE,” ‘‘ THE SHEPHERD PSALM,” ETC. 


FLEMING H. REVELL CO. 


New-York CHICAGO TorRONTO 


Publishers of Evangelical Literature 


Copyright, 1894, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY. 


~PREPACE. 


EREMIAH has always a fascination to Christian hearts, 
because of the close similarity that exists between his 
life and that of Jesus Christ. Each of them was “a man 
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief”; each came to his 
own, and his own received him not; each passed through 
hours of rejection, desolation, and forsakenness. And in 
Jeremiah we may see, beaten out into detail, experiences 
which, in our Lord, are but lightly touched on by the evan- 
gelists. 

It is by no means an easy task to discern the true order of 
Jeremiah’s prophecies. The clew to their present arrange- 
ment seems lost. Probably the chapters are grouped more 
according to subject than to chronology, those touching 
on the same topic being grouped together. In this book I 
have endeavored, as far as possible, to follow the chrono- 
logical sequence. 

If I had been writing a history of the last days of the 
monarchy of Judah, these pages would have been much 
extended; but I have refrained from this, wishing only to 
tell so much of the general story as was needful to eluci- 
date the part Jeremiah was called to play. 

It will more than serve my purpose if I shall be able to 
make the personality of this great man more familiar to the 
general Christian public. For some reason there is a great ~ 
amount of ignorance of the life and times of Jeremiah, 
which contrasts remarkably with the veneration with which 
the Jews have always regarded him.. But amid the names 


333092 


6 PREFACE 


that shine as stars in the hemisphere of Old Testament 
Scripture, there is not one more brilliant than his. 

There is an especial message in the ministry of Jeremiah 
for those who are compelled to stand alone, who fall into 
the ground to die, who fill up what is behind of the suffer- 
ings of Christ, and through death arise to bear fruit in the 
great world of men, which they passionately love. 

F, B. MEYER. 


IT. 
III. 
IV. 


VI. 
VII. 
VIII. 
IX. 


XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 
XVII. 
XVIII. 
XIX. 
XX. 


CONTENTS. 


““THE WoRD OF THE LORD CAME UNTO ME”... 9 


Sole ORMED . UAE M pent ce huis sivtaw.eia eaten eee ty) 
(CISTERINSMAING | oiicce Shona seats eer iia: y oicvanse el serie laets 25 
Lin SECOND DISCOURSE tam seracietntea ste mien Beyer: 34 
CATO THE  LEMPLE GATES o..iaclity coed ole anomun cues ayer) 42 
PRET ESOL Sr 6 VA MIN agaxe)ave'e: seas @Yovra, clare eee RN 52 
i SWELEING OF JORDAN’: «5 crc. sic sial,-s/eebelaeielers 62 
PUES OROU GIT sign citer ones toa a greetaiaia ete .ace sets 71 
‘ON THE, POTTER'S” WHEEL’. G<)ncvasataco senessoe 80 
TAP MRIRE OF SELOLY UMPUESE cy! cle ietoreie snoterniaietel ota 8 
AFFLICTIONS, DISTRESSES, TUMULTS .............. 99 
THE AINDESTRUCTIBLE, WORD! J.-sinfe acrsiele = ose) seeds 108 
THERE CHABITES ys cyclers. 0s) selene ta shetoleteretanyetmet at ste hit 
EID DEN, BUT. INADLAN DT overs cae oo ollopsiclerereiaisimteneler eke 126 
THE MINISTRY OF DESTRUCTION..........--++00: 135 
JEREMIAH’S GRANDEST ODE .........-seeeesveees 146 
How A-REED STOOD.AS A PILLAR. «20.62 nca0-3.: 157 
INTO THE GROUND; TO DES Fees «sie csi «vie 1cloiel 168 
THE. FALL OF JERUSALEM ........¢+cceecssesees Li 
AS CLOUDED) SUNSEP aces as ce mac oro u 189 





JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 





lf 


“ he Word of the Lord Came unto Me.” 
(JEREMIAH i. 4, II, 13-) 


«‘ We know—things that we cannot say ; 
We soar—where we could never map our flight ; 
We see—flashes and colorings too quick and bright 
For any hand to paint. We hear— 
Strange, far-off mental music, all too sweet, 
Too great for any earthly instrument; 
Gone, if we strive to bring it near.” 
F. R. HAVERGAL, 


F the days of David and Solomon may be compared to 
spring and summer in the history of the kingdom of 
Israel, it was late autumn when our story opens. The in- 
fluence of the spiritual revival under Hezekiah and Isaiah, 
which had for a brief interval arrested the process of de- 
cline, had spent itself; and not even the reforms of the 
good King Josiah, which affected rather the surface than 
the heart of the people, could avail to avert inevitable 

judgment. 
The northern tribes were captive on the plains of Meso- 

9 


10 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


potamia, whence, in the dawn of history, their race had 
sprung. And Judah, unwarned by the fate of her sister 
Israel, was rapidly pursuing the same path, to be presently 
involved in a similar catastrophe. King and court, princes 
and people, prophets and priests, were infected with the 
abominable vices for committing which the Canaanites had 
been expelled from the Promised Land centuries before. 

- Every high hill had its thick grove of green trees, within 
whose shadow the idolatrous rites and abominable license 
of nature-worship were freely practiced. The face of the 
country was thickly covered with temples erected for the 
worship of Baal and Astarte, and all the host of heaven, 
and with lewd idols. In the cities, the black-robed chema- 
rim, the priests of these unhallowed practices, flitted to 
and fro in strange contrast to the white-stoled priests of 
Jehovah. The people were taught to consider vice as part 
of their religion, and to frequent houses dedicated to im- 
purity. All kinds of evil throve unchecked. The poor 
were plundered, the innocent falsely accused; wicked men 
lay in wait to catch men; theft and murder, adultery and 
idolatry, like spores of corruption, filled the fetid air and 
flourished on the tainted soil (ii. 20, 27, 34; v. 7, 8, 26; 
ix-:2), 

But it was in Jerusalem that these evils came to a head. 
In the streets of the Holy City the children were taught to 
gather wood, while the fathers kindled the fire, and the 
women kneaded dough to make cakes for Astarte, “ the 
queen of heaven,” and to pour out drink-offerings unto 
other gods. The Temple, with so many sacred associa- 
tions, was the headquarters of Baal-worship; its courts 
were desecrated by monstrous images and symbols, and 
its precincts were the abode of infamous men and women. 
It seemed as though the king of Sodom had dispossessed 
Melchizedek in his ancient home. Below the Temple bat- 


“THE WORD OF THE LORD CAME UNTO ME” 11 


tlements, deep down in the Valley of Hinnom, scenes were 
constantly witnessed that recalled the darkest cruelties of 
heathendom. There was the high place of Tophet, which 
derived its name from the clamor of the drums that drowned 
the cries of the babes flung into the fires. It was an awful 
combination. ‘The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of 
the Lord!” was the cry of. the heartless formalist, while 
below the sacred shrine such scenes of devilry were rife. 
Ah me! would that it had been the last time in the world’s 
history when the profession of true religion had been ac- 
companied by the license of vice and the service of the 
devil! 

In such a Sodom God’s voice must be heard. The 
Judge of all the earth must warn the ungodly of a certain 
retribution, only to be averted by swift repentance. The 
Good Shepherd must seek his wayward sheep. Better be- 
lieve that there is no God than think that he could be speech- 
less in the presence of sins that frustrated his election and 
long education of Israel and threatened to terminate its 
very existence as a people. 

Yet if God speak, it must be through the yielded lips of 
man. For if his voice struck the ear of sinful man directly, 
it would either paralyze him with dread, or seem indistinct, 
like the mutterings of thunder. Therefore in every age the 
Divine Spirit has gone through the world seeking for the 
prepared lip of elect souls through which to utter himself. 
He seeks such to-day. Men are still the vehicles of his 
communications to men. To us, as to Ezekiel, the Divine 
Spirit says, “Son of man, thou shalt hear the word at my 
mouth, and give them warning from me.” 

In the call of Jeremiah we may discover the sort of man 
whom God chooses as the medium for his speech. And 
our discovery will greatly startle us. We shall find the 
heavenly treasure in a simple earthen vessel: not in the 


12 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


metropolis, but in the poor village of Anathoth, three miles 
to the north; not in an elder, but in a youth; not among 
the high and noble, but in the family of an undistinguished 
priest ; not in a man mighty as Elijah, eloquent as Isaiah, or 
seraphic as Ezekiel; but in one who was timid and shrink- 
ing, conscious of his helplessness, yearning for a sympathy 
and love he was never to know. Such was the chosen organ 
through which the word of the Lord came to that corrupt 
and degenerate age. 

It is not to be expected that a superficial gaze will dis- 
cern the special qualifications that attracted the divine 
choice to Jeremiah. But that is no wonder. The instru- 
ments of the divine purpose in all ages have not been such 
as man would have selected. God has always chosen “ the 
foolish things of the world, that he might put to shame 
them that are wise; and the weak things of the world, that 
he might put to shame the things that are strong; and the 
base things of the world, and the things that are despised, 
yea, and the things that are not, that he might bring to 
naught the things that are: that no flesh should glory be- 
fore God.” Your family may be poor in Manasseh, and 
yourself the least in your father’s house—nothing more 
than a cake of barley-bread; yet if God lay hold of you 
he will work a wonderful deliverance. But there were 
several reasons why Jeremiah might have been passed over: 

He was young. How young we do not know; but young 
enough for him to start back at the divine proposal, with 
the cry, “Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak: for I 
am a child.” Without doubt, as a boy he had enjoyed 
peculiar advantages. He came of a priestly family; his 
father, Hilkiah, may have been the high priest who, in the 
discharge of his sacred office in the Temple, discovered the 
manuscript roll which proved to be a copy of the Book 
of the Law and led to the reformation under Josiah. His 


“THE WORD OF THE LORD CAME UNTO ME” 13 


uncle, Shallum, was the husband of Huldah, the prophet- 
ess, in whom the fire of the old Hebrew faith was burning 
brightly, even in those days of almost universal degeneracy. 
Shaphan, Baruch, and Hanameel were probably the com- 
panions of his youth, and afterward formed a little band 
who nourished the noblest traditions of the national life. 
Still, Jeremiah was but as a child. 

God has often selected the young for posts of eminent 
service: Samuel and Timothy, Joseph and David, Daniel 
and Jeremiah; Calvin, who wrote his “ Institutes” before he 
was twenty-four; and Wesley, who was only twenty-five 
when he inaugurated the great system of Methodism. In 
every age of the Church young eyes have eagerly scanned 
this paragraph, and have dared to cherish the hope that 
since youth did not disqualify Jeremiah, so it would not 
render them unfit for the special service of God. The 
only thing to be sure of is that God has really called you; 
and this can only be ascertained after very careful con- 
sideration. There is, first, the consciousness of a strong in- 
ward impulse, which is most present in the holiest hours, 
but which is never far away, and often surges up pure and 
strong in the soul. There is, next, a certain concurrence 
of Providence, by which other doors seem closed, and that 
opened which conducts to the desired goal. Besides these 
there is a natural adaptation, a consensus of opinion among 
friends and advisers, and the constant voice of the Spirit 
through the Word. 

He was naturally timid and sensitive. By nature he 
seemed cast in too delicate a mold to be able to combat 
the dangers and difficulties of his time. He reminds us of 
a denizen of the sea, accustomed to live within its shell, 
but suddenly deprived of its strong incasement, and thrown 
without covering on the sharp edges of the rocks. The 
bitter complaint of his after-life was that his mother had 


14 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


brought him into a world of strife and contention. And 
it was in allusion to the natural shrinking of his disposition 
that Jehovah promised to make him a “ defenced city, and 
an iron pillar, and brazen walls against the whole land.” 

Many are molded upon this type. They have the sensi- 
tiveness of a girl, and the nervous organism of a gazelle. 
They love the shallows, with their carpet of silver sand, 
rather than the strong billows that test a man’s endurance. 
For them it is enough to run with footmen; they have no 
desire to contend with horses. They love the land of peace 
in which they are secure, and have no heart for the swell- 
ing of Jordan. Yet such, like Jeremiah, may play an heroic 
part on the world’s stage, if only they will let God lay 
down the iron of his might along the lines of their natural 
weakness. His strength is only made perfect in weakness. 
It is to those who have no might that he increaseth strength. 
Happy is the soul that can look up from its utter helpless- 
ness and say with Jeremiah, “O Lord, my strength in the 
day of affliction;” or with Micah, in yet earlier times, 
“Truly I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and 
of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his trans- 
gression, and to Israel his sin.” 

fle specially shrank from the burden he was summoned to 
bear, His chosen theme would have been God's mercy— 
the boundlessness of his compassion, the tenderness of his 
pity. In the earlier chapters, when pleading with the peo- 
ple to return to God, there is a tenderness in his voice and a 
pathos in his speech, which prove how thoroughly his heart 
was in this part of his work. Some of his choicest allu- 
sions to natural scenes are intended to set forth the love 
of God to backsliding and penitent souls. God’s mercy 
is like ‘‘a fountain of living waters,” as contrasted to the 
brackish contents of the rock-hewn cisterns; or like the 
ocean waves lapping on the bank of soft sand they may 


“THE WORD OF THE LORD CAME UNTO ME” 15 


not pass; or like a husband’s great love, which cannot for- 
get the day of espousal amid the unfaithfulness which has 
ruined the peace of his home. 

But to be charged with a message of judgment; to an- 
nounce the woful day; to oppose every suggestion of 
heroic resistance; to charge home on the prophetic and 
the priestly orders, to each of which he belonged, and the 
anger of each of which he incurred, the crimes by which 
they were disgraced—this was the commission that was 
furthest from his choice. “As for me,” he cried, “I have 
not hastened from being a shepherd after thee: neither 
have I desired the woful day ; thou knowest”’ (xvii. 16). 

He was conscious of his deficiency in speech. Like Moses 
he could say, ‘““O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither 
heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant; 
but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.” Like 
Isaiah he might cry, “Woe is me! for I am undone; be- 
cause I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst 
of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the 
King, the Lord of hosts.” Like the Apostle Paul he could 
affirm, “ My speech and my preaching were not in persua- 
sive words of wisdom.” “Then said I, Ah, Lord God! 
behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child.” 

The best speakers for God are frequently they who are 
least gifted with human eloquence; for if that be richly 
present—the mighty power of moving men—there is an 
imminent peril of relying on it and attributing the results to 
its magnetic spell. God cannot give his glory to another. 
He may not share his praise with man. He dare not ex- 
pose his servants to the temptation of sacrificing to their 
own net or trusting their own ability. And so he often 
chooses uneloquent lips, and touches them with his finger, 
and leaves his words trembling there, the meet vehicles of 
his thoughts that burn on the altar of the soul. Of him, 


16 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


and through him, and to him must be all things, that the 
glory may be his forever. 

Do not then despair because of these apparent disqualifi- 
cations. None of them will shut out from thee the accents 
of the voice of God. Notwithstanding all, the word of 
the Lord shall come to thee; not for thy sake alone, but 
for those to whom thou shalt be sent. The one thing that 
God demands of thee is absolute consecration to his pur- 
pose, and willingness to go on any errand on which he 
may send thee. If these are thine all else will be given 
thee. He will hush thine alarm—“ Be not afraid!” He 
will assure thee of his presence—‘I am with thee to de- 
liver thee.” He will equip thee—“ Then the Lord put forth 
his hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord said unto 
me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.” How 
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah we cannot tell; 
whether audibly as to Samuel, or in the deep chambers of 
his soul. But when it came he knew it. And we shall 
know it. Oh for the circumcised ear and the loyal, obedi- 
ent heart ! 


it, 


“3 Formed Thee.” 
(JEREMIAH i. 5.) 


‘¢T was not born 
Informed and fearless from the first, but shrank 
From aught which marked me out apart from men: 
I would have lived their life, and died their death, 
Lost in their ranks, eluding destiny.” 
BROWNING. 


OD has a plan for each of his children. From the 

foot of the cross, where we are cradled in our second 
birth, to the brink of the river, where we lay down our 
armor, there is a path which he has prepared for us to 
walk in. Its roughness and steeps, its velvet grass and 
quiet glades, its climb up the mountain side and descent 
into the valley of dark shadow, have all been planned and 
laid out by his matchless wisdom, his unerring love. The 
path has been prepared ; it is for us to walk in it. 

On the other hand, God prepares us for the path he 
has chosen. We are his workmanship, created unto the 
good works which he has before prepared. There is no 
emergency in the path for which there has not been provis- 
ion made in our nature; and there is no faculty stored in 
our nature which, sooner or later, shall not have its proper 
exercise and use. From the earliest inception of being 
God had a plan for Jeremiah’s career, for which he pre- 
pared him. Before the dawn of consciousness, in the very 

17 


18 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


origin of his being, the hands of the great Master Work- 
man reached down out of heaven to shape the plastic clay 
for the high purpose which he had in view. Note the 
conjunction of those two expressions: “I appointed and 
sanctified thee a prophet to the nations; ” and again, “I 
formed thee.” God always forms those whom he has ap- 
pointed and sanctified for any great work. 

Ask what thy work in the world is—that for which 
thou wast born, to which thou wast appointed, on account 
of which thou wast conceived in the creative thought of 
God. That there is a divine purpose in thy being is in- 
dubitable. Seek that thou mayest be permitted to realize 
it. And never doubt that thou hast been endowed with 
all the special aptitudes which that purpose may demand. 
God has formed thee for it, storing thy mind with all that 
he knew to be requisite for thy life-work. It is thy part 
to elaborate and improve to the utmost the two talents 
which thou hast. Do not envy another his five. Those 
three additional ones were not needed for the special pur- 
pose that thou wast designed to fulfill. And it is enough 
to answer the divine intention in thy creation, redemption, 
or call to service, whatever it may have been. Do not be 
jealous or covetous; it is enough for thee to be what God 
made thee to be, and to be always at thy best. 


I. THe Divine Purpose.—‘/ knew thee, ... [sanctified 
thee,... I have appointed thee a prophet.” In that degen- 
erate age the great Lover of souls needed a spokesman ; 
and the divine decree determined the conditions of Jere- 
miah’s birth and character and life. How this could be 
consistent with the exercise of personal volition and choice 
on the part of the youthful prophet, we cannot say. We 
can only see the two piers of the mighty arch, but not the 
arch itself, since the mists of time veil it, and we are dim 


DIFORMED THEE” 19 


of sight. Some try to explain it by introducing the thought 
of foreknowledge; they quote the words, “ Whom he did 
foreknow he also did predestinate.” But, after all, this 
only carries the difficulty one step farther back into mys- 
tery. 

It is wise to ascertain, if possible, while life is yet young, 
the direction of the divine purpose. There are four con- 
siderations that will help us: First, the indication of our 
natural aptitudes; for these, when touched by the Divine 
Spirit, become talents or gifts. Secondly, the inward im- 
pulse or energy of the Divine Spirit, working in us both to 
will and to do of his good pleasure. Thirdly, the teaching 
of the Word of God. Fourthly, the evidence of the cir- 
cumstances and demands of life. When these concur, and 
focus in one point, there need be no doubt as to the divine 
purpose and plan. It was thus that God disclosed to 
Samuel and Jeremiah and Saul of Tarsus the future for 
which they were destined. And it is extremely delightful 
when, from the first bud of youth to the flower and fruit 
of maturity, the heavenly vision has molded the entire 
tenor and development of the life. 

But in cases where the divine purpose is not so clearly 
disclosed, in which life is necessarily lived piecemeal, and 
the bits of marble for the tessellated floor are heaped to- 
gether with no apparent plan, we must dare to believe that 
God has an intention for each of us, and that if we are 
true to our noblest ideals we shall certainly work out the 
divine pattern and be permitted some day to see it in its 
unveiled symmetery and beauty. Perhaps the noblest aim 
for any of us is to realize that word which, according to 
the margin of the Revised Version, was addressed by God 
to Jeremiah, when he said to him, “On whatsoever errand 
I shall send thee, thou shalt go; and whatsoever I shall 
command thee, thou shalt speak.” 


20 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


To run errands for God! To be like the angels that 
excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening to 
the voice of his word! ‘To resemble the boy messengers in 
some of our large cities, that wait in readiness to discharge 
any commission that may be intrusted to them! To know 
that your message is as certainly given you as the letter 
which is placed under the wing of the carrier-pigeon! 
To go on occupying the position in which we have been 
placed by the providence of God, but to hold it for God 
till he bids us do something else! Such are golden secrets 
of blessedness and usefulness. 


II. ForMATIVE INFLUENCES.—/¢ is very interesting to 
study the formative influences that were brought to bear on 
the character of Jeremiah. There were the character and 
disposition of his mother, and the priestly office of his 
father. ‘There was the picturesque beauty of his birth- 
place, the village of Anathoth, lying on the highroad three 
miles north of Jerusalem, encircled by the famous hills of 
Benjamin, and looking down the ravine on the blue waters 
of the Dead Sea, gleaming at the foot of the purple hills 
of Moab. There was the near proximity of the Holy City, 
rendering it possible for the boy to be present at all the 
holy festivals, and to receive such instruction as the best 
seminaries of instruction could provide. There was the 
companionship and association of godly families, which still 
preserved the religion of their forefathers, and treasured as 
sacred relics the literature, psalms, and history of our purer 
and better days. There were also the prophets Nahum and 
Zephaniah, who were burning as bright constellations in 
that dark sky, to be soon joined by himself. 

His mind was evidently very sensitive to all the influ- 
ences of his early life. His speech is saturated with refer- 
ences to natural emblems .and national customs, to the life 


“©T FORMED THEE” 21 


of men, and the older literature of the Bible. Take, for 
instance, his earliest sermon, in which he refers to the story 

» of the Exodus, and the pleadings of Deuteronomy ; to the 
roar of the young lion, and the habits of the wild ass; to 
the young camel traversing her ways, and the Arabian of 
the wilderness; to the murmur of the brook, and the hew- 
ing of the cistern. His quick and sensitive soul eagerly 
incorporated the influences of the varied life around him, 
and reproduced them. Many fabrics were woven into the 
texture of his mind. Many flowers mingled their perfume 
in the inclosure of his heart. Many chords made up the 
music of his speech. 

It is thus that God is ever at work, forming and molding 
us. (Whenever you are called to pass through an experi- 
ence which is unusually trying and difficult, comfort your- 
self by the thought that you are being fitted for some high 
purpose that has not yet been made known, but which will 
lay its demand on that very experience which has been per- 
mitted for that end. }And as you look back on your hte; 
you will see how all has been ordered to fit you to fulfill a 
ministry to others that would have been less worthily ful- 
filled had you been excused from the tears, the hardships, 
the privations of a single day. The plan of God threads 
the maze of life. The purpose of God gives meaning to 
many of its strange experiences. Be brave and trustful! 
If he serves himself of thee, he will recompense thee. 
He is not unfaithful to forget. 

There is a striking illustration of this in one of the clos- 
ing scenes of Joseph’s life. Speaking to his brethren of © 
the pit and the afflictions to which it led, he said, ve 
meant it for evil; but God meant it for good” (Gen. 1. 20). 
Standing on the eminence of the years, he was able to read 
God’s meaning in that dark and mysterious providence. 


And if he had been asked to state his view of the divine 


22 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


reason in the trials and hardships of those early days, fast 
fading behind the mist of years, he would probably have 
answered, “God was forming me for my future; prepar- 
ing me for what he had prepared for me; disciplining and 
equipping me for the position that awaited me; and there 
is no single incident in all those weary years through which 
I passed that I could have dispensed with, except at a seri- 
ous disadvantage to my present standing.” 


III. THERE WAS ALSO A SPECIAL PREPARATION AND As- 
SURANCE FOR HIS LIFE-woRk.—“ The Lord put forth his 
hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord said unto me, 
Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.” In a similar 
manner had the seraph touched the lips of Isaiah years be- 
fore. And we are reminded that the Lord Jesus promised 
that the Spirit of the Father should put appropriate words 
into the lips of his disciples when summoned before the 
tribunals of their foes. Words are the special gift of God. 
They were the endowment of the Church at Pentecost. 
And it is always an evidence of a Spirit-filled man when 
he begins to speak as the Spirit gives him utterance. 

God never asks us to go on his errands (i. 7) without 
telling us what to say. If we are living in fellowship with 
him, he will impress his messages on our minds, and en- 
rich our life with the appropriate utterances by which those 
messages shall be conveyed to our fellows. Do any read 
these words who, like Moses, lack this royal endowment— 
their words fall pointless and dead? _Let them offer their 
lips to speak, not with the wisdom of human words, or with 
the grace of human eloquence, but with the power and 
demonstration of the Holy Ghost; and their appeal will 
not be denied. If only God’s glory be our object, God’s 
hand will be put forth to touch our mouth, and he will 
leave his words there. 


“T FORMED THEE” 23 


Two other assurances were also given: First, “Thou 
shalt go to whomsoever I shall send thee.” ‘This gave a 
definiteness and directness to the prophet’s speech. Sec- 
ondly, “ Be not afraid because of them, for I am with thee 
to deliver thee, saith the Lord ”—an assurance which was 
remarkably fulfilled, as we shall see in the unfolding of 
this narrative. 

These are marvelous words, spoken to us all, as God 
sends us on a mission or errand into the world. It may 
be of greater or less consequence—to rule an empire or 
nurse a single babe; to be an apostle or to care for a few 
sheep in the wilderness. But we are no less sent than Jesus 
was from the bosom of the Father—sent to learn, sent to 
suffer, sent to achieve; sent on an errand as Joseph was 
from the patriarchal tent. 

And just as long as we are on the prepared path, per- 
forming the appointed mission, he is with us. We may 
defy death. We bear a charmed life. We are more than 
conquerors. The music of his voice sounds in our heart, 
though defaming and terror are on every side (xx. 10). 
Men may fight against us, but they cannot prevail, for the 
Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge 


fist): 


IV. Lastty, Gop VouCcHSAFED A TWOFOLD VISION TO 
us CHILD.—On the one hand, the swift-blossoming almond- 
tree assured him that God would watch over him and see 
to the swift performance of his predictions; on the other, 
the seething caldron, turned toward the north, indicated 
the breaking out of evil. So the pendulum of life swings 
to and fro, now to light and then to dark. But happy is 
the man whose heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. He 
is hidden in the secret of God’s pavilion from the strife of 
tongues, and abides in the secret place of the tabernacle 


24 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


of the Most High. Men may fight against him, but shall 
not prevail against him; for he is encircled in the environ- 
ing care of Jehovah. As he spake to Jeremiah, so he ad- 
dresses us: “ They shall fight against thee; but they shall 
not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the 
Lord, to deliver thee” (i. 19). “ Man is immortal till his 
work is done.” 

There was a period in Jeremiah’s life when he seems to 
have swerved from the pathway of complete obedience 
(xv. 19), and to have gone back from following the God- 
given plan. Surrounded by contention and strife, cursed 
as though he were a usurer, reproached and threatened 
with death, he lost heart and fainted in the precipitous 
path. And immediately he had good reason to fear that 
the divine protection had been withdrawn. We are safe 
only when we are on God’s plan. But as he returned again 
to his allegiance, these precious promises were renewed, and 
again sounded in his ears: “I will make thee unto this 
people a fenced brazen wall: and they shall fight against 
thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with 
thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the Lord. And I 
will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will 
redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.” 


ITI. 


Cistern-making. 
(JEREMIAH ii. 13.) 


“* Attempt, how vain— 
With things of earthly sort, with aught but God, 
With aught but moral excellence, truth, and love— 
To satisfy and fill the immortal soul! 
To satisfy the ocean with a drop; 
To marry immortality to death ; 
And with the unsubstantial slave of time 
To fill the embrace of all eternity.” 

PoLLok’s ‘‘ COURSE OF TIME.” 


i. was probably but little interval between Jere- 
miah’s call and his entrance upon his sacred work. 
When once the Spirit of God has established a code of 
communications between himself and the soul whom he 
has selected to be his mouthpiece, he is likely to avail 
himself of it constantly. The difficulty is to lay down the 
wire through the ocean depths ; but when it is there, the 
messages flash to and fro repeatedly. So we are told that 
to this young ardent soul “the word of the Lord came” 
(ii, 1). Coming, it thrilled him. 

He dwelt but lightly on the ominous mention of the in- 
evitable conflict which the divine voice prognosticated. 
He did not stay to gauge the full pressure of opposition 
indicated in the celestial storm-signal. He had been told 
that kings and princes, priests and people, would fight 
- 


26 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


against him; but in the first blush of his young faith he 
thought more of the presence of Jehovah, who had prom- 
ised to make him “a defensed city, and an iron pillar, and 
brazen walls against the whole land.” How tenderly God 
veils our future, and leads us forward step by step! But 
there is a difference between the elastic hopefulness of 
youth and the experience of manhood. The earlier chap- 
ters of Jeremiah differ from his Lamentations, as the first 
green of spring from the sere foliage of autumn. 

As we study the words and deeds of this most human of 
prophets, let us pass through his plaintive cries and tears 
and prayers, to that Divine Man, whose gentle spirit was 
so closely anticipated and reflected in that of his servant. 
In every age he is at work through his servants, striving 
against sin in every form, and seeking to set up his reign 
of righteousness, peace, and joy. In Jeremiah’s words we 
have his vehement beseechings and remonstrances; in 
Jeremiah’s prayers we have echoes of the unutterable in- 
tercessions of the Holy Spirit; in Jeremiah’s conflicts we 
have the divine antagonism against flesh and blood and 
the rulers of the darkness of this world; in Jeremiah’s 
Lamentations we have the divine grief over human willful- 
ness. This priest and prophet of the Jerusalem of David 
and Solomon had a remarkable course to pursue, in pre- 
senting in the obscure mirror of his life the cross and sor- 
row of the true Priest and Prophet of the restored Jeru- 
salem. 


I, THE PROPHET’S TWOFOLD BuRDEN.—When Jeremiah 
began his ministry, going from Anathoth to Jerusalem for 
that purpose (il. 2), Josiah, though only twenty-one years 
of age, had been for thirteen years on the throne. He 
was commencing those measures of reform which availed 
to postpone, though not to avert, the doom of city and 


CISTERN-MAKING 27 


nation. His measures were as drastic as those of Crom- 
well and his soldiers in their determined effort to remove 
every vestige of popery from churches and public build- 
ings. “ They brake down the altars of the Baalim in his pres- 
ence; and the sun-images, that were on high above them, 
he hewed down; and the Asherim, and the graven images, 
and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made dust 
of them, and strewed it upon the graves of them that had 
sacrificed unto them. And he burned the bones of the 
priests upon their altars, and purged Judah and Jerusalem” 
(2 Chron. xxxiv. 4, 5, R.V.). 

There must have been a great cawing among the rooks 
when the trees in which they had so long nested were felled. 
For seventy years the grossest forms of idolatry had held 
almost undisputed sway. The impious orgies and degrad- 
ing rites which licensed vice as a part of religion were in 
harmony with the depraved tastes of the people. What, 
therefore, ecclesiastics and their flocks felt toward Henry 
VIII. when he demolished the monasteries, and toward the 
Protector when his officers pursued their work of devasta- 
tion, must have found ready place in those early years of 
Josiah’s reign. 

The result was, first, that the work of reform was largely 
superficial. It did not strike beneath the surface, or change 
the trend of national choice. And secondly, this policy 
compacted together a strong political party determined to 
promote a closer alliance with Egypt, which, under Psam- 
metichus, had just asserted her independence against the 
king of Assyria. In these two directions the young prophet 
was called to make his influence felt. 

First, he protested against the prevalent sin around him. 
The one thought of the people was to preserve the out- 
ward acknowledgment of Jehovah by the maintenance of 
the Temple services and rites. If these were rigorously 


28 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


observed they considered that there was no sufficient cause 
for charging them with the sin of apostasy. They insisted 
that they were not polluted (ii. 23), and reiterated with 
wearisome monotony, “ The Temple of the Lord, The Tem- 
ple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, are these” (vii. 4). 

It was Jeremiah’s mission to show that mere outward 
observance was worse than useless, and was compatible 
with a real forsaking of God. Like the hectic flush, it 
only concealed the corruption eating its way into the heart. 
Like the flowers on the edge of the precipice, it hid the 
fatal brink. . Nominal profession is compatible with utter 
atheism, and with the worst form of atheism, because the 
heart parries every attack with the foil of apparent and 
avowed belief. 

This will account for the plain denunciations of sin that 
came burning-hot from the lips of the young prophet. 
He includes the priests and expounders of the law, pastors 
and prophets, in his scathing words (i. 8). The Valley of 
Hinnom, with its obscene and cruel rites, is quoted in evi- 
dence against them (23); the blood of children flung into 
the fires is detected on their robes (34); the trees of the 
groves whisper what they have witnessed beneath their 
shadow; and the jagged rocks tell stories they dare not 
conceal (20; iii. 6), Every metaphor is adopted that human 
art can suggest to bring home to the people their infidelity 
to their great Lover and Redeemer, God (iii. 20). 

Fle also protested against the proposal to form an Egyptian 
alliance. The little land of Canaan lay between the vast 
rival empires founded on the Nile and the Euphrates, 
‘much as Switzerland between France and Austria. It 
was therefore constantly exposed to the transit of im- 
mense armies, like locusts destroying everything, or to the 
hostile incursions of one or other of its belligerent neigh- 
bors. It had always been the policy of a considerable 


—_ 


CISTERN-MAKING 29 


party at the court of Jerusalem to cultivate alliance with 
Egypt or Assyria. In Hezekiah’s and Manasseh’s time 
the tendency had been toward Assyria ; now it was toward 
Egypt, which had in a remarkable way thrown off the yoke 
which the great king Esarhaddon in three terrible campaigns 
had sought to rivet on its neck. The prophet strenuously 
opposed these overtures. Why should his people bind 
themselves to the fortunes of any heathen nation whatso- 
ever? Was not God their King? Would not he succor 
them in times of overflowing calamity ? Surely their true 
policy was to stand alone, untrammeled by foreign alli- 
ances, resting only on the mighty power of Jehovah, serv- 
ing his purposes, true to his law, devoted to his will. 
“What hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the 
waters of Sihor [z.c., the black Nile] ? or what hast thou to 
do in the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river ? 
. . . Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy 
way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast 
ashamed of Assyria. Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, 
and thine hands upon thine head: for the Lord hath re- 
jected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them” 


(ii. 18, 36, 37). 


This, then, was Jeremiah’s mission—to stand almost 
alone; to protest against the sins of the people, which were 
covered by their boasted reverence to Jehovah, whom they 
worshiped as the tutelary deity of their land, besides many 
false gods; and to oppose the policy of the court, which 
sought to cultivate friendly relations with the one power 
that seemed able to render aid to his fatherland in the 
awful struggle with the northern kingdom which he saw to 
be imminent (i. 15). And this ministry was exercised in 
the teeth of the most virulent opposition. Here was a 
priest denouncing the practices of priests, a prophet the 
lies of prophets. It was no light thing to expose the false- 


30 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


hoods alike of priest and prophet, and accuse them of 
healing the hurt of the daughter of his people slightly, say- 
ing, “‘ Peace, peace,” when there was no peace. Small won- 
der, therefore, that the most powerful parties in the state 
conspired against him, as in after-days Pilate and Herod 
joined hands against Christ. 


II. Toe Imacery He Empioyep.—It is a scene among 
the mountains. In that green glade a fountain rises icy- 
cold from the depths, and pours its silver stream downward 
through the valley. You can hear the music of its ripple, 
and trace its course by the vegetation that follows it. It 
is always flowing in abundance for young and old, for the 
villagers in the hamlets, and when it has grown fuller and 
broader for the inhabitants of large towns along its course. 
But its banks are unvisited, neither cup nor bucket descends 
into its crystal depths; for all practical purposes it might 
as well cease to flow. 

Far away from that verdant valley you hear the clink 
of the chisel, and presently-discover people of every age 
and rank engaged in making cisterns to supply their homes. 
The bead-drops stand thick upon their brow, as from early 
dawn to far on into the night they pursue their arduous toil, 
wrestling with the stubborn granite. They will not avail 
themselves of the materials of former times, nor utilize the 
half-hewn cisterns deserted by their ancestors. Each man 
has his own scheme, his own design. He toils at it when 
spring casts her green mantle over the pasture-lands that 
come to the edge of the quarry, and when the summer heat 
makes the quarry like a kiln. While others are gathering in 
the ruddy grape or golden corn, he remains constant to his 
toil, and he is there amid the biting cold of winter. After 
years of work he may achieve his purpose and complete 
the cistern on which he has spent his years. He calls on 


CISTERN-MAKING 31 


his neighbors to view his accomplished purpose, and waits 
expectant of the shower. Presently it descends, and he is 
filled with pride and pleasure to think of the store of water 
which he has been able to secure. But lo! it does not 
stay. As soon as it enters it passes out. There is a fatal 
crack or flaw, or the stone is too porous. He finds what 
every one of his neighbors has found, or will find, that with 
the utmost care the cisterns wrought in the quarry can hold 
no water. 

What an infinite mistake to miss the fountain freely flow- 
ing to quench the thirst, and hew out the broken cistern in 
which is disappointment and despair! Yet this, said the 
prophet, was the precise position of Israel. They had done 
as no nation else, though search were made from the far 
west of Chittim to the far east of Kedar. The heathen, 
at least, were constant to their gods. False religions were 
indigenous to the lands where they had originated—the 
same idols worshiped, the same rites performed, the same 
temples filled with succeeding generations. But the peo- 
ple of Jehovah had forsaken him as a maid might lay 
aside her ornaments, or a bride her attire ; and in resorting 
to false religions and heathen alliances they were hewing 
out for themselves broken cisterns which would fail them 
in their hour of need. 

Very pathetically the prophet reminds them of the past. 
The kindness of their youth, the love of their espousals, 
their holiness to the Lord, and the song with which they 
celebrated their deliverance on the shores of the Red Sea, 
suggested a sad contrast to the evils that cursed the land. 
Through him the voice of God is heard inquiring the rea- 
son of this lamentable apostasy. The chapter is full of 
questions, as though God would elicit the charge upon 
which they had deserted him. “What unrighteousness 
have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from 


32 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? 
‘ Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of 
darkness? wherefore say my people, We are broken loose ; 
we will come no more unto thee?” 

There is nothing sadder than the ebb of love, when we 
are compelled to sit on the beach and watch the slowly re- 
ceding waters as they drop down from the high-water mark 
which they had reached with the dancing wavelets. This 
takes the light from the eye, and the spring from the foot. 
Life can never again be quite as it was. The tide may 
come up again ; but it will never efface the recollection of the 
ebb, and the fear of its return. This in human experience 
is something like the pain felt by the Eternal, as he saw 
Israel, for whom he had done so much, turn from him 
to strangers. Bitter, indeed, to hear them say to a stock, 
“Thou art my father ; ” and to a stone, “ Thou hast brought 
me forth.” Their apostasy was to God as though a wife 
should go from the husband that doted upon her, and be- 
come another man’s (iii. 1).) 

III. Irs ApPPLicaTION TO OURSELVES.—Many cistern- 
makers may read these words—each with soul-thirst crav- 
ing satisfaction; each within easy reach of God, whose 
nature is as rock-water for those that are athirst; but all 
attempting the impossible task of satisfying the thirst for 
the infinite and divine with men and things. 

There is the cistern of Pleasure, embroidered with fruits 
and flowers and bacchanalian figures, wrought at the cost 
of health and rest; the cistern of Wealth, gilded and inlaid 
with pearls, like the mangers of the stud of Eastern kings 
the cistern of Fame, hewn by the youth who tore himself 
from the welcome of home and the embrace of human 
love, to climb with his banner of strange device the unfre- 
quented solitudes of the mountain summit, far above all 


CISTERN-MAKING 33 


rivalry, and even companionship; the cistern of Human 
Love, which, however beautiful as a revelation of the Divine 
Love, can never satisfy the soul that rests in it alone—all 
these, made at infinite cost of time and pains, deceive and 
disappoint. In the expressive words of Jeremiah, they are 
“broken cisterns, that can hold no water.” And in the time 
of trouble they will not be able to save those that have 
constructed and trusted them. 

At your feet, O weary cistern-hewer, the fountain of 
God’s love is flowing through the channel of the Divine 
Man! Stoop to drink it. We must descend to the level 
of the stream, if its waters are to flow over our parched lips 
to slake our thirst. You have already dropped your tools, 
and are weary of your toil. List to the music that fills 
the air and floats around, like the chime of angel voices: 
“Come back to God. Do the first works. Forsake the 
alliances and idolatries which have alienated you from your 
best Friend. Open your heart, that he may create in you 
the fountain of living water, leaping up to eternal life. 
. . . The Spirit and the bride say, Come ! And he that 
heareth, let him say, Come! And he that is athirst, let him 
come: he that will, let him take the water of life freely.” 


IN; 


The Second Misconrse. 
(JEREMIAH iii.—vi.) f 


‘¢ Surely the time is short, 
Endless the task and art, 
To brighten for the ethereal court 
A soil’d, earth-drudging heart: 
But He, the dread Proclaimer of that hour, 
Is pledged to thee in Love, as to thy foes in Power.” 
KEBLE. 


E do not know how Jeremiah’s first address was re- 

ceived. It was impossible for Jerusalem to have 
heard the eager pleadings of the young preacher, protesting 
so earnestly against the policy of its leaders and the prac- 
tices of its priests, without becoming aware that a new 
force had entered the arena of its public life. And from 
that moment, through the forty-four years that followed, 
the influence of his holy example and fervent words was 
destined to make itself mightily felt. One star of hope 
more shone over that hotbed of corruption, the very atmos- 
phere of which was charged with symptoms of impending 
dissolution. Another voice was audible through which 
God could utter his pleadings and remonstrances. 

In his second discourse, lasting from the third to the 
sixth chapters inclusive—and which perhaps is preserved 
as a specimen of Jeremiah’s words at this period—there is 
an added power and pathos. The flame burns higher; the 

34 


THE SECOND DISCOURSE 35 


sword has a keener edge; yet the tone is more tremulous 
and tender. There is more than ever of the spirit of Jesus, 
bewailing the blindness and obstinacy of men, as the vision 
of impending judgment looms clearer before the soul, and 
the violence done to the redeeming love of God is more 
clearly apprehended. In his own touching words, Jeremiah 
was as a gentle lamb led to the slaughter (xi. 19); but he 
was also strong as a lion, in the vehemence with which he 
strove to avert the doom, already gathering on the hori- 
zon, and threatening to devastate his beloved fatherland. 
If any pure and holy soul could have saved Judah by 
its pleadings, tears, and warnings, Jeremiah would have 
done it. 

But it was not to be. The upas had struck its roots 
too deeply. The ulcer was too inveterate. The evil that 
Manasseh had sown had too thickly impregnated the soil. 
This, however, did not appear in those early days of Jere- 
miah’s ministry, and with all the hopefulness of youth he 
thought that he might yet avert the disaster. Surely a voice 
warning of the rocks that lay direct in the vessel’s course, 
and a firm hand on the tiller, might yet steer the good ship 
into calm, deep water. 

This discourse is occupied with a clear prevision of the 
Chaldean invasion; with plaintive expressions of pity and 
pain, and eloquent assertions of the redeeming grace of 
God. 


I. Tue Propuet’s PREVISION OF APPROACHING JUDG- 
MENT.—At the opening of Jeremiah’s ministry, as we have 
seen, the land was rejoicing in a brief parenthesis of peace, 
like a glint of light ona mountain side in a cloudy and 
dark day. It was a welcome contrast to the experience 
of the previous centuries. And it appeared probable that 
it might last. The mighty empire of Assyria was weak- 


36 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


ened by internal dissension ; Babylon was becoming a for- 
midable rival of Nineveh; the Medes, under Cyaxares, were 
beginning to descend the western slopes of the Taurus ; 
while in Egypt Psammetichus was too deeply engaged in 
expelling the Assyrian garrisons, consolidating his king- 
dom, and founding his dynasty, to have leisure or desire 
to interfere with the tiny neighboring kingdom. 

Thus Josiah was able to pursue his reforms in peace, and 
there was no war-cloud on the horizon. It was on one of 
these days of Josiah the king (iii. 6) that the newly ap- 
pointed prophet startled the men of Jerusalem and Judah 
as he made known what he had seen on his watch-tower. 

He had heard the trumpet summoning the peasantry from 
the open country to the fenced cities, leaving their crops 
at the mercy of the invader, to save their lives. He had 
descried the lion stealing up from his lair in the thicket to 
destroy the nations. He had caught the cries of the watch- 
ers from the northern heights of Dan to Ephraim, and so 
to Jerusalem, as they announced the advent of the invader. 
He had beheld the desolation of the land, the hurried re- 
treat of the defenders of the Holy City herself, some to 
thickets, and others to holes in the ragged rocks. Yes, and 
he had seen the daughter of Zion gasping in the extreme 
of her anguish, and crying, “ Woe is me now !” 

So real was the whole scene to him that we find him 
turning to his brother Benjamites, who had fled for shelter 
to the metropolis, bidding them flee still farther south. He 
beholds the preparations for the siege, and the chagrin of 
her assailants that the evening shadows of declining day 
interpose between them and her inevitable capture. He 
describes the invader as a mighty and ancient nation, glean- 
ing Israel as men gather the last grapes into their basket ; 
cruel and merciless as ravening wolves: their quiver a 
sepulcher ; their sword a terror; their charging cry hoarse 


THE SECOND DISCOURSE 37 


and deafening as the roar of the sea; their chariots and 
cavalry irresistible. The mere report of their deeds was 
sufficient to induce in each hearer, as it were, the pangs of 
travail (i. 15 ; iv. 6, 7, 16, 19; Vi.g, 19, 21). And the words 
of the young prophet were as fire to wood (v. 14). 

It has been supposed that these words referred to the 
invasion of the Scythians, who about this time poured in 
countless hordes over western Asia. The cities of Nin- 
eveh and Babylon alone, because of their great strength, 
escaped; the open country was swept utterly bare; all who 
could not escape were barbarously massacred or carried 
off as slaves; villages and towns were turned into charred 
and smoking ruins, But these barbarian hordes do not ful- 
fill the entire scope of the prophet’s words. They do not 
appear to have entered Palestine, but to have passed down 
on the eastern or western frontier, skirting the territory of 
Josiah, and driving the panic-stricken people to the shelter 
of the larger cities, whence they traced the path of the in- 
vaders, lit by conflagrations kindled on their ruthless march. 
It is better, therefore, to refer these ominous words to the 
invasion of Judah by Babylon, which was to take place in 
thirty years, but of which the people were amply warned, 
that they might put away their abominations and return to 
the Fountain of Living Waters. 


Il. His PLaintIve EXPRESSION OF Pity AND PaiNn.— 
The tender heart of Jeremiah was filled with the utmost 
sorrow at the heavy tidings he was called to announce. 
Throughout the book we constantly encounter the expres- 
sions of his anguish. ‘True patriot as he was, it was hard 
for him to contemplate the impending destruction of the 
Holy City. The noblest traditions of his people were rep- 
resented in those cries which for a little demand our con- 
sideration. 


38 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


“The sword,” he says, “reaches to the soul.” And again, 
“My heart! my heart! I writhe in pain! the walls of 
my heart will break! my heart groans within me; I can- 
not keep it still” (iv. 19, free translation). He identifies 
himself with his land, and it seems as though the curtains 
of his own tents are being spoiled, as in a moment. He 
struggles against uttering his message of judgment till he 
can no longer contain himself and becomes weary with 
holding in (vi. 11). He addresses Jerusalem as the daugh- 
ter of his people, and bids her gird herself with sackcloth 
and sit in ashes, mourning as for an only son (vi. 23). He 
asks how he may comfort himself against sorrow, because 
his heart faints within him (vill. 18). He wishes that his 
head were waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he 
might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of 
his people (ix. 1). He wanders alone over the mountains, 
weeping and wailing because the pasture-lands are dry, be- 
cause the lowing of the cattle and the song of the bird are 
hushed (ix. 10). ‘“‘ Woe is me!” he exclaims; ‘my wound 
is grievous.” 

He had no alternative than to announce the judgments 
which he saw upon their way; but there was a sob in the 
voice that predicted them. So far from desiring the evil 
day, very gladly would he have laid down his life to avert 
it. The chalice of his life was full of that spirit which led 
the Master in after-years to weep as he beheld the guilty 
and doomed city. Many a great preacher of repentance, 
in all the centuries of church history, has known something 
of this bewailing. Side by side with vehement denuncia- 
tions of coming judgment there has been the pitiful yearn- 
ing over lost men. 

We need more of this. Nothing is so terrible as to utter 
God’s threatenings against sin, which are predictions of its 
natural and inevitable outworking, with no sign of anguish 


THE SECOND DISCOURSE 39 


or regret. If we are called to speak of judgment to come, 
it should be after hours of solitary prayer, weeping, and 
soul travail. It is only in proportion as we have felt for 
sinners that we can warn them. It is only in so far as we 
have known the Saviour's pity that we can dare to take up 
the woes he pronounced against Pharisee and Sadducee, or 
threaten the fate which he so clearly and awfully denounced. 

Our mistake is in dealing with generals and not with 
particulars ; or in using terms which have passed from hand 
to hand, until their inscription is worn away. We have 
not realized the loss of one soul, or the unutterable woe of 
hell for one apostate, or the meaning of the undying worm 
and the unquenched flame. And probably the best way 
of entering into the meaning of any of these terrible con- 
ceptions is to try and realize what they would mean for 
any one soul who was dear to us as life. Then from the 
one we may pass to the many; from the one lost soul we 
may understand the meaning of a lost world. Let us look 
at these things from the standpoint of the Saviour, or of a 
parent’s love, or of the soul itself; and when thoughts have 
saturated our hearts of the dishonor done to God, the loss 
sustained by Christ, the anguish wrought into the texture 
of one disobedient life, we shall be able to speak to men 
of the judgment to come, with streaming tears, tremulous 
voice, and breaking heart. Such preaching will always be 
a convincing and irresistible argument to turn sinners from 
the error of their ways. Nothing is more awful than to 
speak of the great mysteries of life and death, of heaven 
and hell, of the right and left of the Throne, without that 
compassion of heart which is borrowed from close com- 
munion with the Saviour of the world. 


III. His ASSERTION OF REDEEMING Grace.—Few of 
the sacred writers have had truer or deeper views of the 


40 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


love of God. It is to the earlier chapters of Jeremiah that 
backsliders must always turn for comfort and assurance of 
abundant pardon. The word dacks/ide is characteristic of 
this prophet. 

Lo Jeremiah’s thought sin could not quench God's love. It 
may come in between man and wife, severing the marriage 
tie and leaving the husband to divorce her whom he had 
taken to be his other self; but though our sin be more in- 
veterate and repeated than woman ever perpetrated against 
man, Or man against woman, it cannot cut off that love 
which is from everlasting to everlasting. The clouds may 
dim, but they cannot extinguish, the sun. Sin may hide 
the manifestation of the love of God, but can never make 
God abandon his love to us (Jer. iii. 1). 

The love of God goes forth in forgiving mercy. He only 
asks that the people should acknowledge their iniquity and 
confess to having perverted their way and forgotten their 
God. It were enough that they should accept the terms 
of the confession which he himself suggested : “ Behold, we 
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God; ” and he 
assures them that though their sin and iniquity were sought 
for there should be none found (iii. 22). 

The love of God does not deal with us after our sins. He 
gives showers immediately on repentance. He does not 
keep his anger forever. He intervenes between us and 
trouble, as the soft sand between the homes of men and 
the yeasty, foaming ocean. He waits to receive us back, 
saying, “If thou wilt return, O Israel, unto me, thou shalt 
return.” Ours may be the pleasant land; ours the goodly 
heritage ; ours the rest for the soul—all of which we have 
forfeited, but all of which are restored to us when we 
return. 

What true and delightful conceptions of the love of God 
were vouchsafed to the young prophet ! Many similarities 


THE SECOND DISCOURSE 41 


between his expressions and those of Deuteronomy suggest 
that it was his favorite book, as, if we may venture to say 
so, it was our Lord’s; and perhaps it was from that ancient 
writing, then newly discovered, that he derived his inspira- 
tion. But, in any case, his living spirit had drunk deep 
drafts of the everlasting, forgiving, pitiful love of God, 
revealed and given to men in Jesus Christ our Lord. Oh, 
blessed love !—through which backsliding hearts may be 
admitted again to the inner circle, and have restored the 
years that the canker-worm has eaten. 


V. 


At the Gemple Gates. 
(JEREMIAH vii.—x.) 


‘« Bewildered in its search, bewildered with the cry, 
‘Lo here, lo there, the Church!’ poor sad humanity 
Through all the dust and heat turns back, with bleeding feet, 
By the weary road it came, 
Unto the simple thought, by the Great Master taught, 
And that remaineth still: 
Not he that repeateth the Name, 


But he that doeth the will.” 
LONGFELLOW. 


E must read the records given in the Books of the 
Kings and Chronicles to understand the remark- 
able movement which was on foot during the time covered 
by the first twelve chapters of the Book of Jeremiah. In 
his collected words he scarcely refers to the great reforms 
being introduced by his friend the King Josiah; and he is 
scarcely mentioned in the historical records. But there is 
no doubt that he was in constant and close communication 
with the king and the little group of earnest reformers that 
clustered round his person, and which included Shaphan, 
Hilkiah, the prophet Zephaniah, the prophetess Huldah, 
and his own friend Baruch. 

Josiah promoted measures of reform from the earliest 
years of his reign; but at first he was opposed by the dead- 
weight of national apathy to the cause he espoused. ‘The 

42 


AT THE TEMPLE GATES 43 


worship of idols—for which there are twenty different 
terms in the Hebrew language—had so many fascinations 
from the use of the peoples around, and from its appeals to 
sensual passion, that the mass of the people had no desire 
to revert to the more austere and purer worship of their 
forefathers. Besides, had not Solomon the magnificent, 
four hundred years before, erected on the southern slopes 
of Olivet shrines to Ashtoreth, the goddess of Sidon, to 
Chemosh and Milcom, the national gods of Moab and 
Ammon? The rites of heathen superstition were also 
maintained by a vast herd of false prophets and priests, 
who, like parasites, throve in the corruption of their time. 
There was a fatal compact and collusion between the two 
bodies which boded no good for the efforts of the zealous 
band of reformers who gathered round the king, because 
they appeared to give a divine sanction to the abomina- 
tions that were being perpetrated. A wonderful and hor- 
rible thing had come to pass in the land: the prophets 
prophesied falsely, and the priests bare rule by their means, 
and the people loved to have it so. 

The codperation of Zephaniah and Jeremiah was, there- 
fore, exceedingly valuable. While Josiah wrought from 
without, pursuing a career of uncompromising iconoclasm, 
they wrought from within, appealing to the conscience and 
heart—here pleading the claims of Jehovah on the thought- 
less crowds; there taunting the idol-worshipers with the 
futility of their reliance on the creations of their fancy; 
and again announcing the swift descent of national judg- 
ment on the national sins which were desolating the 
country. 

But, notwithstanding their united efforts, the cause of 
reform moved slowly, or might even have come to a stand- 
still—as an express-train when buried in an avalanche of 
soft snow—had not the discovery made in the eighteenth 


44 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


year of Josiah’s reign given a new and unexpected im- 
petus to the ancient religion of Israel. And though it is 
not exactly an incident in the life of Jeremiah, he was so 
closely associated with the men who were principally con- 
cerned, and his third discourse is so evidently suggested 
by the reforms to which it led, that we must briefly touch 
on it. 


I. THE FINDING OF THE Law.—At the time to which 
this incident must be referred, the Temple was under re- 
pair. It sadly needed it, for the lewd emblems of idolatry 
had been erected within its sacred precincts, and beside 
them the dwellings of the wretched men and women asso- 
ciated with the impious rites permitted on the site where 
David worshiped and Solomon spread his hands in sol- 
emn dedicatory prayer. Probably, also, the fabric was 
showing signs of dilapidation and age, for two and a half 
centuries had elapsed since it had been completely restored 
by Joash. 

The work was intrusted to the superintendence of Hil- 
kiah, the high priest, who was assisted by a little group of 
Levites, and the cost was contributed by the people who 
passed through the Temple gates. On one occasion the 
king sent Shaphan, his secretary and chancellor, who was 
the father of Gemariah and a good man—who afterward 
defended Jeremiah (Jer. xxxvi. ro—1 9, 25)—to take an ac- 
count with Hilkiah of the money which had been gathered 
by the doorkeepers. When they had attended to this im- 
portant business, and delivered the money into the hands 
of the workmen that had the oversight of the work, Hil- 
kiah, the high priest, said unto Shaphan, the scribe, “I 
have found the Book of the Law in the house of the Lord.” 

It was a very startling discovery. The rabbinical tradi- 
tion states that it was discovered inside a heap of stones, 


AT THE TEMPLE GATES 45 


where it was hidden when Ahaz destroyed all the other 
copies of the holy books. Or it may have been hidden 
away in the ark, which Ahaz may have removed to one 
of the rooms of the Temple, where dust and lumber con- 
cealed it. There has been much discussion as to what 
that roll of ancient MSS. contained, some holding that it 
was the entire Pentateuch, others that it was the Book of 
Deuteronomy. It has even been asserted by some that a 
pious fraud was perpetrated on Josiah and his times by 
some well-meaning individual, who had just written the 
Book of Deuteronomy with his own hand, and now foisted 
it on Hilkiah and the rest as a venerable production dat- 
ing from the days of Moses! To what miserable straits 
they are reduced who would have us accept such wanton 
speculations! Let the critics betake themselves to the 
examination of the ancient MSS., if they will. We thank 
them for the facts they bring to light; in their own prov- 
ince we give them credit for painstaking and erudition, but 
we refuse to accept their theories. Let them give us the 
facts, and we can formulate the theories for ourselves. 
Even if it could be shown—which we hold it cannot—that 
Moses was not the author of the Book of Deuteronomy, it 
is surely utterly inconceivable that the mind through which 
that sublime treatise was given to the world could have 
been a party to a fraud so unblushing and scandalous as 
to palm off its own offspring under the august sanction of 
the name of Moses ! 

After careful thought, we are disposed to think that the 
Book of Deuteronomy is specially referred to here, though 
not to the exclusion of the other books of Moses. It seems 
unquestionable that this portion alone of the Pentateuch 
was ordained to be written out by each king on his acces- 
sion, and was read before the assembled congregation once 
in each seven years. The terms of the covenant made 


46 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


afterward by Josiah and his people are precisely those with 
which the Book of Deuteronomy abounds; and the phrases 
which characterize it are perpetually recurring in the ad- 
dresses and appeals of Jeremiah. This book dyed his 
speech, as it had done that of Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, and 
Micah. 

Its discovery by Hilkiah made as great a sensation as 
that of the Latin Bible by Luther in the library of the old 
Augustinian monastery at Erfurt. Shaphan read parts of 
it before the king, among them probably chapter xxviii. 
“And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words 
of the Book of the Law, that he rent his clothes.” In hot 
haste he sent a deputation of his most trusty friends to one 
of the suburbs of the city, where the prophetess Huldah 
dwelt. Jeremiah may have been at this time at Anathoth, 
or he may have been too young in his work to be recog- 
nized as an authority in so grave a crisis. The question 
to be asked was, whether the nation must expect to suffer 
all the awful curses which those words predicted, and the 
answer was an uncompromising “ Yes,” though their inflic- 
tion might be for a brief space postponed. 

Forthwith the king summoned a mighty convocation of 
all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 
and the priests and the prophets, and all the people, both 
small and great, and, from a platform erected in the en- 
trance of the inner court, he read aloud all the words of 
the book of the covenant which had been found in the 
house of the Lord. And further, he solemnly renewed the 
covenant between Jehovah and the people, that they would 
walk after the Lord, and keep his commandments, his tes- 
timonies, and his statutes. Perhaps, as one commentator 
suggests, an ox was slain, and the king and people passed 
between the severed halves in witness of their solemn resolve. 

Then the work of reform broke out afresh. The tide of 


AT THE TEMPLE GATES 47 


popular feeling rose high, and the reformers took it at its 
flow. The black-robed priests were suppressed ; the em- 
blems of idolatry were cast out of the Temple, and burned 
without the city; the dwellings of the miserable votaries 
of lust were destroyed, Tophet was defiled, and the high 
places leveled to the ground. Thus, outwardly at least, 
Israel became again true to its allegiance to the God of 
its fathers, and free from the taint of idolatry. 


II. Tue DivoRcE BETWEEN RELIGION AND MORALITY. 
—The influence of the court, the finding and reading of 
the law, the splendid success of the great Passover which 
Josiah instituted, the glow of the crusade against the old 
idolatries, sufficed for a time to effect widespread reform, 
and the fickle populace gave an outward adhesion at least 
to the service of Jehovah. The Temple courts were 
thronged; the rites and forms of the Levitical code were 
rigorously maintained ; every point of ceremonial allegiance 
to the institutions of Moses was punctiliously observed. 
But there was no real change in disposition. The refor- 
mation was entirely superficial. Beneath the fair exterior 
the grossest forms of evil were seething in hideous cor- 
ruption, now and again breaking forth into the light of 
day, but awaiting the death of Josiah, when they once 
more asserted themselves. 

Jeremiah was profoundly disappointed at the result of a 
movement which had promised so well. He detected its 
true character, and sought an opportunity of showing its 
insufficiency to avert the wrath of God, which was gather- 
ing like a thunder-cloud upon the horizon. Taking up his 
position in the gate of the Temple, on the occasion of some 
great festival when the people of Judah were gathered with 
the citizens of Jerusalem to worship Jehovah, he poured 
forth a torrent of remonstrance and appeal. 


48 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


He was not unaware of the attention paid by the nation 
to outward ritual, which they mistook for religion. The 
incense of Sheba, and the costly, fine-scented cane fetched 
from Arabia or India, burned for the sake of their rich per- 
fume, stole through the Temple precincts (vi. 20). They 
took care to speak of the Temple as the house of God, 
and to stand before him as his people (vii. 10). The burnt- 
offering and other sacrifices were rigorously distinguished 
from one another, the priests and people feeding on those 
parts alone permitted by the Mosaic ritual (vii. 21). It 
was the boast of the people that the law of the Lord had 
been committed to their charge, and that they had therefore 
special claim upon his forbearance (viii. 8). And against 
every accusation which the prophet laid at the nation’s 
door, they pointed to the order and beauty of the restored 
ritual, of their splendid Temple, of their privileged condi- 
tion as the chosen people of God, and cried, “ The Tem- 
ple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of 
the Lord, are these.” 

But alongside of this outward decorum the grossest sins 
were permitted with unblushing shame. One of the charges 
which Jeremiah brings against his people is, that they had 
lost the power of blushing (viii. 12). The shamefulness of 
their sin was apparent in their shamelessness. They op- 
pressed the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow. Theft, 
murder, and adultery showed themselves in open day. So 
frequent and atrocious were their crimes of violence, that 
they seemed transformed into a horde of robbers—the 
Temple their den; lies flew from their tongues like arrows 
_ from a bow; and while men spake peaceably to their 
neighbors in their ears, they were lying in wait to betray 
them. Though idolatry had been overthrown in the high 
places of the land, it lingered in the houses of the great, 
who squandered their silver and their gold, their blue and 


AT THE TEMPLE GATES 49 


their purple, on the wood which they had shaped into the 
fashion of a god. 

There was an evident divorce between religion and 
morals; and whenever that comes into the life of a nation 
or an individual, it is fatal. Satan himself has no objec- 
tion to a religion which consists in postures and cere- 
monies and rites. Indeed, he fosters it, for the soul of 
man demands God and craves religion; and it is the art 
of the great enemy of souls to substitute the counterfeit for 
the reality, to quiet the religious appetite with the shows 
and effigies of the eternal and divine—much as a man 
might satisfy his hunger with food that lacked the elements 
of nutrition, while his strength and vigor were slowly ebb- 
ing away. It can never be too strongly emphasized that 
the soul of man cannot rest or be content without God ; 
but it is too apt to be cajoled with that which is not bread, 
and which satisfieth not. 


III. THe Excuses BENEATH WHICH THE SOUL OF MAN 
Suetters ITsELF.—(1) Ritualism.—It was the old belief 
that God was bound to help a nation or person that stead- 
fastly complied with the outward forms of religion, as if 
he had no other alternative than to help-his devoted wor- 
shiper. In one form or another this conception has ap- 
peared in every nation and age. “ What more can God 
want,” the heathen cries, “than that I should give burnt- 
offerings, and calves of a year old; thousands of rams, and 
ten thousands of rivers of oil; my first-born for my trans- 
gression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?” 
“What more can God want?” cries the formalist of our 
time. ‘I was received into the visible church as soon as 
I was born; I have complied with all her regulations; I 
do my best to maintain her institutions and services ; in all 
weathers I am present when her doors are open; and there 


50 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


is no demand made by her representatives to which I do not 
comply to the best of my ability. What lack I yet?” 

The incessant remonstrance of the Bible is against such 
protestations— whether expressed or understood—as these. 
“What doth the Lord require of thee,” says Micah, “ but 
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with 
thy God?” (Micah vi. 8). “To what purpose is the multi- 
tude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord,” is one 
of Isaiah’s earliest sentences, and he added, still speaking 
in the name of God, “‘ Incense is an abomination to me.” 
And here Jeremiah takes up the same strain. He says in 
effect: “ Put all your offerings together; abolish the sacer- 
dotal distinctions which Moses bade you observe; relin- 
quish all ritual; end festival and fast alike.” These things 
are comparatively indifferent to God, when substituted for 
obedience and a holy walk (vii. 22). 

Where the heart is right with God it will find fit and 
proper expression in the well-ordered worship of the sanc- 
tuary. It will find the outward ordinance a means of 
quickening the soul by the laws of association and expres- 
sion; but the outward can never be a substitute for the in- 
ward. The soul must know God, and worship him as a 
spirit. There must be faith, repentance, inward grace. 
“God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must wor- 
ship him in spirit and in truth.” Throughout the ages 
he has been seeking such to worship him. 

(2) Destiny.—Men often say, as the Jews did, “ We are 
delivered to do all these abominations; we were made so; 
we are swept forward by an irresistible current which we 
cannot control” (vii. 10). How many a man lays the 
blame of his sin upon his Creator, alleging that it is only the 
outworking of the natural tendencies with which he was 
endowed! How many a woman has laid the blame of 
her unutterable fall upon the force of circumstances, which 


AT THE TEMPLE GATES 51 


held her in their grip! And there are some religious fatal- 
ists who have gone so far as to trace their sins to the elec- 
tive decrees of the Almighty! Whatever truth there may 
be in the doctrine of predestination, it will not absolve 
you from sin in the sight of God and his angels. There 
is more than enough grace in God to counteract the drift 
of the current and the strength of passion. 

(3) Special Privilege-—Many a soul has presumed on 
being a favorite of Heaven. “I am wise; the law of the 
Lord is with me. He needs me for the preservation of 
his truth, the elaboration of his scheme. His cause is too 
deeply involved with me for him to allow me to be a cast- 
away. I may do as I will, he will deliver.” Ah, soul, be- 
ware ! thou art not indispensable to God. Before thou 
wert he was well served; and if thou fail him he will 
call others to minister to him. See what he did to Shiloh 
(vii. 14) and to Jerusalem. How bare the site; how woful 
the overthrow! ‘If God spared not the natural branches, 
take heed lest he also spare not thee!” Take heed lest 
the kingdom of God be taken from you, and be given to 
a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. 


VI. 


Che Soul's ‘‘ Amen.” 
(JEREMIAH xi. 5.) 


** Whatso it be, howso it be, Amen! 

Blessed it is, believing, not to see. 

Now God knows all that is, and we shall then, 
Whatso it be. 

God’s will is best for man, whose will is free; 

God’s will is better for us, yea, than ten 

Desires whereof he holds and weighs the key.” 

CHRISTINA ROSSETTI. 


HE words of the prophet in chapter xi., verse 5 are full 

of deep significance to every holy soul summoned to 
stand between God and other men. They have also far- 
reaching meaning for all who are passing through the divine 
discipline in this strange and difficult life. Jeremiah was 
conscious of the special current of divine energy which 
was passing into and through his soul. The word had 
come to him “from the Lord.” This is one of three forms 
of expression that he employs. Sometimes, “the word of 
the Lord that came to Jeremiah; ” sometimes, “thus saith 
the Lord; ” sometimes, as here, “the word that came to 
Jeremiah from the Lord.” Probably he felt that word as 
a burning fire shut up in his bones, which he could not con- 
tain. He must needs give vent to it; but when it has 
passed his lips, and he has time carefully to consider it, he 
answers the divine message by saying, “Amen, O Lord !” 

52 


THE SOUL’S* “AMEN” 53 


There is something very sublime in this attitude. Jere- 
miah, as we have seen, was naturally gentle, yielding, and 
pitiful for the sins and sorrows of his people. Nothing was 
further from his heart than to “desire the evil day.” In 
these earlier stages of his ministry especially, it must have 
been one long effort to stand by himself against the strong 
current of popular feeling and patriotism which colored the 
visions of the false prophets. And yet, as he utters the 
terrible curses and threatenings of divine justice, and pre- 
dicts the inevitable fate of his people, he is so possessed 
with the sense of the divine rectitude, so sure that God 
could not do differently, so convinced that, judged by the 
loftiest moral standards, the sins of Israel could not be 
otherwise dealt with, that his soul rises up, and though he 
must pronounce the doom of Israel, he is forced to answer 
and say, “Amen, O Lord !” 

There is something like this in the history of the re- 
deemed Church. When God has judged her that did cor- 
rupt the world with her fornication, and has avenged the 
blood of his servants at her hand, as the smoke of her de- 
struction arises, the blessed spirits who had been learning 
the deepest lessons of divine love, at the very source and 
fount of love, are heard crying, ‘Amen; Halleluiah !” 

In each of these cases it is extremely interesting to see 
how the sense of justly deserved and righteously incurred » 
judgment corrects the verdict of mere compassionateness, 
and enables the most sensitive and gentle souls to acqui- 
esce in what otherwise had been resisted to the uttermost. 

Beside these two instances we may place a third, in 
which our Lord, in the same breath as he appealed to the 
weary and heavy-laden to come to him, spoke of the mys- 
teries which were hidden from the wise and prudent, but 
revealed to babes, and said, “‘ Yea, Father, for so it was well- 
pleasing in thy sight.” ‘‘ Yea” is close akin to ‘“ Amen.” 


54 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


“How many soever be the promises of God, in him is the 
Yea: wherefore also through him is the Amen, unto the 
glory of God through us ” (Matt. xi. 26; 2 Cor. 1/ 26,.B. Na). 


I. Tue Sout’s AFFIRMATION.—(1) Jz Providence—We 
often seem to be traveling through a difficult piece of moun- 
tainous country in company with a strong, wise, and gentle 
companion, who has undertaken to guide us to our des- 
tination. There are foaming torrents, black and hurrying, 
which we have to ford at the imminent risk of being carried 
off our feet; there are darksome woods and forests, where 
suns have seldom penetrated, and where wild beasts have 
their lair; there are paths paved with flints so sharp, and 
slabs of rock so slippery, that progress seems impossible, 
except at too great a cost; there are long stretches of 
dreary desert, where the glare blinds, the sunbeams cut like 
swords, and the shadow of a tiny retem-bush provides a 
grateful relief; there are steep hills and paths so narrow 
that there is hardly room to pass along the ledge of rock, 
while the dark precipice waits to engulf. In earlier days 
the soul started back horror-stricken; in later ones we 
pleaded for an easier, pleasanter path, and envied the lot 
of others; but now our life has become one long and deep 
and constantly repeated “Amen” to the choice of Him 
who goes beside us, and in whose mind each step has been 
previously conceived. 

Let us guard against mistake. It is not possible at 
first to say “Amen” in tones of triumph and ecstasy. 
Nay, the word is often choked with sobs that cannot be 
stifled, and soaked with tears that cannot be repressed. So 
it was with Abraham, when he tore himself from Ur of the 
Chaldees, and waited weary years for his son, and climbed 
with aching heart the steep of Moriah. And as these 
words are read by those who lie year after year on beds of 


THE SOUL’S “AMEN” 55 


constant pain; or by those who have lost the enjoyment of 
the presence of their twin soul ; or by those whose earthly life 
is tossed upon the sea of anxiety, over which billows of care 
and turmoil perpetually roll, it is not improbable that they 
will protest as to the possibility of saying “ Amen” to God’s 
providential dealings, or they will ask, Of what avail is it 
to utter with the lip a word against which the whole heart 
stands up in revolt? Is it not, it may be asked, an im- 
piety, a hypocrisy, to say with the mouth a word that is so 
alien to the sentiments of the heart ? 

In reply, let all such remember that in the garden our 
blessed Lord was content to put his will upon the side of 
God. What though his body were covered with the dew 
of anguish, pressed out from it as the juice of the grape 
by the tread of the husbandman! He did not chide him- 
self. He knew it was enough if, in the lower parts of the 
earth to which his human nature had descended, he was 
able unflinchingly to affirm, “I delight to do thy will, O 
my God; ” “Not as I will, but as thou wilt.” 

Dare to say “Amen” to God’s providential dealings. 
Say it though heart and flesh fail; say it amid a storm of 
tumultuous feeling and a rain of tears; say it though it 
shall seem to be the last word that shall be spoken because 
life is ebbing so fast: and you will find that if the will 
doth acquiesce, the heart comes ultimately to choose; and 
as days pass, some incident, some turn in the road, some 
concurrence of unforeseen circumstances, will suddenly flash 
the conviction on the mind and reason that God’s way was 
right, the wisest and the best. “What thou knowest not 
now, thou shalt know hereafter,” is the perpetual assurance 
of the Guide; and this is realized not in the world of the 
hereafter only, but here and now, on the hither side of the 
Gate of Pearl. 

(2) Zn Revelation there are mysteries which baffle the 


56 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


clearest thinkers, the most profound theologians, the Johns 
and Pauls of the Church; paths that lose themselves in 
mere tracks on the moor; snatches of music and color 
which no mortal genius can work out; suggestions of 
movements in the spiritual world which defy the appre. 
hension of the subtlest and greatest of the sons of men to 
follow. The man that tracks God’s footsteps loses them 
in the depths; and the eye that pursues his workings is 
dazzled by a light above the brightness of the sun; and 
the argument breaks off with the cry, “O the depth of 
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! 
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past 
finding out!” It must be so while God is God. We are 
partakers of his nature, as a child is of his father’s; but 
the distance between our capacity of intelligence and the 
thoughts of God is not measured even by that between the 
dawn of a child’s mind and the full splendor of his father’s 
power, because this moves in the region of the finite, while 
that is a difference between the finite and infinite. We 
cannot by searching find out God, or know the Almighty. 
There is no fathoming-line long enough, no parallax fine 
enough, no standard of mensuration, though the universe 
itself be taken as our unit, by which to measure God. 
High as heaven, what canst thou do? Deep as hell, what 
canst thou know ? 

But though we cannot comprehend, we may affirm, the 
thoughts of God. That we cannot understand is due to 
the immaturity of our faculties. We are in our nursery 
stage: our words are the babblings of infancy; our ideas 
the thoughts of a child. But we can accept, and admit, 
and acquiesce in, and affirm the things which eye could 
not see, nor the heart conceive, but which are revealed on 
the page of Scripture. 

There is no doubt that the death of Jesus Christ has 


THE SOUL’S “AMEN” 57 


fully met the demands of divine law; and though some 
phases of his Atonement may at times perplex us, yet our 
soul confidently-exclaims, ‘Amen, Lord!” We are igno- 
rant why God chose us; how Christ could combine in him- 
self the natures of God and man; or in what manner the 
Holy Spirit regenerates the soul. ‘‘ How can these things 
be?” is the question which often occurs to the devout stu- 
dent of revelation. But when He who has come straight 
from the realms of eternal day steadfastly affirms that 
which he knows, and bears witness to what he has seen, 
we receive his witness and say reverently, “Amen, Lord!” 

(3) Zn Judgment.—God's judgments on the wicked are 
a great deep. The problems that encircle the question of 
present or future punishment are among the deepest and 
most awful that the mind of man can approach. Like 
Moses, we fear and quake when we climb the storm-girt 
sides of Sinai, and hear the pealing, thunderous curse, to 
be followed by the lightning flash of fiery indignation de- 
vouring the adversary. We may well turn aside from such 
considerations, and ask if the time can ever come when we 
shall be able to consider with equanimity the awful suffer- 
ing which they must incur who have rejected the love of 
God in Christ. Will heaven have any bliss to us so long 
as there is a hell? Will there be any possibility of happi- 
ness while one sheep is lost, one link absent in the bridal 
necklet, one stone deficient from the regalia, one voice 
missing in the chorus? A partial answer at least is given 
to these inquiries when we hear from the lips of the most 
gentle of the prophets, anticipating the destruction of his 
people, for which his eye was to trickle down with tears, 
“Amen, Lord !” 

At present we cannot expect to attain to much of this 
condition of mind and heart, because our views of the 
divine rectitude are so imperfect, our estimate of sin is so 


58 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


slight, our knowledge of the conditions of the universe so 
inadequate. Did we know more of sin, of holiness, of the 
love of God, of the yearning pleadings of his Spirit with 
men, of the all-sufficiency of the measure he has taken for 
their arrest and salvation, of the barriers erected to stay 
the precipitate downward course of the wicked, we should 
probably understand better how Jeremiah was able to say, 
“ Amen, Lord !” 

There is a striking thought in Ezekiel xiv. 22, 23, in 
which God says that when we see the way and the doings 
of sinners in the light that shall be flung upon their entire 
life-course from the great white throne, we shall be com- 
forted concerning the evil that he shall have brought upon 
them. And the prophet goes on to show that God will 
make us know that he has not done in vain anything that 
he shall have done. That era has not yet broken, but it 
is a wonderful conception of the comfort and resignation 
which the added light of eternity shall bring into hearts 
perplexed and anxious as they consider the fate of the un- 
godly. Abraham shall be comforted over the destruction 
of the cities of the plain; Jeremiah shall be comforted as 
he reviews the fate of Jerusalem; and Paul shall be com- 
forted as he considers the long alienation of the seed of 
Abraham from their land, and their exile with wandering 
foot and terror-stricken heart in all the countries of the 
world. And we shall be comforted as we behold the de- 
struction of the wicked. 


II. THe GRrounD OF THE SouL’s PEAcE.—“ Yea, 
Father!” It may seem at first sight as though it were 
impossible that the heart of man could ever be induced to 
acquiesce in the terrible and difficult matters touched upon 
in the previous paragraphs. As long as mothers love the 
sucking child, and have compassion on their sons; as long 


THE SOUL’S “AMEN” 59 


as soul is wedded to soul by the strongest and most tena- 
cious bonds of human love; as long as we can suffer, 
yearn, fear, hope, pity; while memory keeps the records 
of the past, and love reigns, and the mind holds her seat, 
it might seem the impossible dream of the imagination that 
what appears incompatible with the tender human feeling 
can be consistent with the love of God. “Surely,” you 
cry, ‘‘there are things to which I can never assent, decis- 
ions I can never reaffirm, sentences I can never counter- 
sign, possibilities to which I can never say, ‘ Amen, Lord!’” 

But does not this protest of the soul arise from the fact 
that you have judged such things from the standpoint of 
pure emotion, or human reasoning, or perverted principles 
of human action, and that you need to stand in the sanc- 
tuary of God, which is the focus and metropolis to which 
the loftiest intelligences converge, in order to come in con- 
tact with the lofty morality and legislation of eternity ? 
And do we not wrongly think that our love is more tender, 
our sympathy more delicate, our compassions deeper, than 
those of the Father ? 

When tried and perplexed with the troubles of life, turn 
from these, which will make the brain dizzy and the heart 
sick, and consider the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
from whom every ray of love in the universe has emanated, 
and remember that nothing can be permitted or devised 
by him which is not consistent with the gentlest and truest 
dealings that an earthly father could mete out to the child 
of his right hand, his Benjamin, the darling of his old age. 
So shall you be able to say, “ Amen, Lord)” 

When face to face with the mysteries of the Atonement, 
of Substitution and Sacrifice, of Predestination and Elec- 
tion, of the unequal distribution of gospel light, be sure to 
turn to God as the Father of light, in whom is no dark- 
ness, no shadow of unkindness, no note inconsistent with 
















60 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


the music of perfect benevolence. He is your Fat 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father from > 
every home life receives its tenderest touches. 
trust him, and in the strength of that trust to say, “ Amen 
Lord !” 

When peering over the strong barrier of redemptiot 
intervenes between you and the dark fate of the ungod! 
when thoughts will force themselves upon the spirit 
cry of the insurgent mob might penetrate the sacre 
sion of a temple, look away from this and ga 
face of the Father, which is turned in the sam 
and dare to believe that nothing can happen in heave 
earth or hell which is out of harmony with the love that 
has inspired parents toward their children, that breathed 
the love into Mary’s heart as she clasped her Babe to her 
bosom, or that yielded the Only-begotten to the horror of 
the cross for man’s redemption: so there shall be a new 
tone in the voice of the soul that says, “‘ Amen, Lord !” 

In other words, we must not look into the dark and per- 
plexing questions that seethe and boil like wreaths of vapor 
around us. We must look up to the blue sky of undimmed 
sunshine, our Father’s heart. He must be love, beyond 
our tenderest, deepest, richest conceptions of what love is. 
In his dealings with us, with all men, and especially with 
the lost ones, love is the very essence and law of his nature. 
Somehow, we repeat it, everything must be consistent with 
this all-persuasive nature and temper of the Divine Being ; 
and in proportion as you dare to believe in the Father, 
you will be able to say “ Yes,” which is a true rendering of 
the Greek word in our version translated “ Even so” (Matt. 
xi. 26), 


III, THE TRIUMPH OF THE AFFIRMING SOUL.—“ Amen; 
Halleluiah!” Jesus as he rested in his Father was able to 


THE SOUL’S “AMEN” 61 















ot only “Even so, Father,” but “I thank thee, 
”; and so there shall come a day when the four 
enty elders, representing the redeemed Church, shall 
e judgment of the great opponent of the Lamb’s 
ad say, “ Amen; Halleluiah !” 
tk the addition of “ Halleluiah” to the “Amen.” 
ie Amen, and not often the Halleluiah; there the 
he assent and the consent; the acquiescence and the 
the submission to the will of God, and the triumph- 
burst of praise and adoration. Let us anticipate 
age when we shall know as we are known, and when 
shall be perfectly satisfied, perfectly jubilant, perfectly 
blessed: when every shadow of misunderstanding and mis- 
apprehension shall be dispelled, and we shall join in the 
hymn of the redeemed Church: “ Great and marvelous are 
thy works, O Lord God, the Almighty ; righteous and true 
are thy ways, thou King of the ages” (Rev. xv. 3, R.V.). 


VII. 


Che Swelling of Jordan. 
(JEREMIAH xii. 5.) 


‘‘ But I, amid the torture and the taunting, 
I have had THEE! 
Thy hand was holding my hand fast and faster, 
Thy voice was close to me: 
And glorious eyes said, ‘ Follow me, thy Master, 
Smile as I smile thy faithfulness to see.’” 
Mrs. HAMILTON-KING. 


ETWEEN the incidents referred to in our last chapter 
and the subject of the present one, a most terrible 
calamity had befallen the kingdom of Judah. In the face 
of urgent remonstrances, addressed to him from all sides, 
King Josiah led his little army down from the mountain 
fastnesses, where he dwelt safely, to attack Pharaoh Necho, 
who was marching up by the coast route to participate in 
the scramble for the spoils of Nineveh, then in her death- 
throes. The two armies met at Megiddo, at the foot of 
Carmel, on the extreme border of the plain of Esdraelon, 
which has so often been a decisive battle-field. The issue 
was not long in suspense. Josiah’s army was routed and 
himself mortally wounded. 

“ Have me away ; for I am sore wounded,” said the dying 
monarch, and his servants bore him from his war-chariot 
to another in reserve; but he died, after a few miles’ drive, 
at Hadadrimmon. His death was the signal for such an 

62 


THE SWELLING OF JORDAN 63 


outburst of grief throughout the land that it became in 
after-years the emblem of excessive sorrow. Zechariah 
could find no adequate expression for the anguish of Jeru- 
salem when the people shall look on Him whom they pierced, 
and mourn, than that it should be like ‘‘ the mourning of 
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo,” when the land 
mourned, every family apart. It has been compared to 
the grief of Athens when tidings came that Lysander had 
destroyed her fleet, and to that of Edinburgh on the even- 
ing of Flodden. Jeremiah composed an elegy on the death 
of his king and friend, which has not been preserved ; and 
at once the fortunes of Judah were overcast with darkest 
gloom (2 Chron. xxxv. 20-27; Zech. xii. 11). 

The next king, Josiah’s son Jehoahaz, reigned but three 
_ months, and then was led off with a ring in his nose, like 
some wild beast, to Egypt, where he died. Necho insti- 
tuted his brother Jehoiakim in his stead, as his nominee 
and tributary. But the four last kings of Judah reversed 
the policy of Josiah. They did evil in the sight of the 
Lord, and of Jehoiakim it is recorded that he wrought 
abomination (2 Chron. xxxvi. 1-8). 

At the death of Josiah the large party that favored idol- 
atry again asserted itself. The reformation promoted by the 
good king had never struck its roots deeply in the land, 
and the vigor with which he had carried out his reforms now 
led to a corresponding reaction. The reformers fell under 
the popular hate, much as the Puritans did in the days of the 
Restoration, and Jeremiah especially came in for a large 
share of it. He had been the friend and adviser of the late 
king, and had not scrupled to denounce in the most scathing 
terms the idolatry and licentiousness of his age. He had 
uttered terrible predictions of coming disaster, which were 
beginning to be fulfilled. There were the mutterings of a 
coming storm of hatred and murder. Unbeknown to him, 


64 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


his countrymen were devising devices against him, saying, 
“Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us 
cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may 
be no more remembered.” 

The symptoms of this rising storm were less likely to 
reach him, because he had been commanded to itinerate 
among the cities of Judah, as well as the streets of Jeru- 
salem, and had probably started on a prolonged tour 
throughout the land, standing up in the principal market- 
places, and announcing everywhere the inevitable retribu- 
tion that must follow on the breach of the divine covenant 
(xi. 8). The issue of that tour was profoundly disappoint- 
ing. A conspiracy was found among the men of Judah 
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. They turned back to 
the iniquities of their forefathers ; each city had its tutelary 
deity, each street its altar to Baal. And the conviction 
was wrought into the prophet’s heart that intercession itself 
was useless for a people so deeply and resolutely set on 
sin. They had sinned the sin unto death, for which prayer 
is in vain (xi. 14; 1 John v. 16). 

Disappointed and heart-sick, Jeremiah retired to his native 
place Anathoth. He was unsuspicious of danger, as a gen- 
tle lamb led to the slaughter. Surely among his brethren, 
in the house of his father, he would be safe, and able to 
find the sympathy and affection for which his sensitive 
heart hungered, but which evaded him everywhere else. 
But it was not to be. In this also he was to be like the 
Lord Jesus, who came unto his own, but his own received 
him not, and led him to the brow of the hill on which their 
city was built, that they might cast him down headlong. 
There was treachery in the little village. The sacred tie 
of kindred was too weak to restrain the outbreak of fanatic 
hate. The priestly houses had winced beneath the vehe- 
ment denunciations of their young relative, and could bear 


THE SWELLING OF JORDAN 65 


it no longer. A plot was therefore set on foot, and under 
the show of fair words they conspired to take the prophet’s 
life. He had not known of his danger but for divine illu- 
mination: ‘The Lord hath given me knowledge of it, and I 
know it: then thou showedst me their doings” (xi. 18). 

Stunned with the sudden discovery, Jeremiah turned to 
God with remonstrance and appeal. Conscious of his own 
rectitude and the rectitude of God, he was for a moment 
caught in the outer circles of the whirlpool of questioning 
which has ever agitated the minds of God’s oppressed ones 
concerning the unequal distribution of earthly lots. “ Right- 
eous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet 
would I reason the cause with thee: Wherefore doth the 
way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they at ease 
that deal very treacherously?” (xi. 20; xii. 1, R.V.). 


I. THe APPEAL OF THE MALIGNED AND PERSECUTED 
Sou,.—(1) He was Conscious of his own Integrity.—With- 
out doubt Jeremiah was profoundly conscious of his un- 
worthiness. He must have had as deep a conviction of 
sinfulness as any of the great prophets and psalmists of 
Israel. None could have lived as close to God as he did 
without an overwhelming sense of uncleanness. What Job 
felt, and Moses and David and Isaiah, must have been 
constantly present to his consciousness also. But in re- 
spect to this special outburst of hatred he knew of nothing 
for which to blame himself. He had not hastened from 
being a shepherd, nor desired the woful day, nor taken 
pleasure in the disasters he announced, nor spoken in the 
heat of personal passion. The sins of the people had pro- 
cured the evils he predicted, and he had only sought to 
warn the reckless mariners of the rocks that lay straight in 
their course. 

When we are reviled and hated, we should carefully 


66 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


search our hearts to see if we have given any just cause to 
those that hate and persecute us. The only suffering which 
comes within the circle of Christ’s beatitude is that which 
is inflicted falsely, wrongfully, and for his sake. The man 
who endures griefs, suffering wrongfully, alone can claim 
to be following in the steps of the Master, and to be offer- 
ing a sacrifice which is acceptable to God. He only can 
count on God’s delivering aid. 

The bursting storm should lead the captain to see that 
there is peace among his crew, and amity with the other 
ships of the fleet. We have no right to complain of the 
wrong-doing of others unless we are sure that, so far as 
we are concerned, we have given no just cause. But if 
we have done so there is no option but to agree with our 
adversary quickly, though it involve leaving our gift at the 
altar. Every moment of delay aggravates the case and in- 
creases the difficulty of reconciliation. The course of jus- 
tice is so rapid, from the adversary to the judge, the judge 
to the officer, and the officer to prison (Matt. v. 22-25). 

(2) He was Perplexed at the Inequality of Human Lot.— 
Every word of good Asaph’s complaint in Psalm Ixxiii. 
might have been appropriated by Jeremiah. He had never 
swerved from the narrow path of obedience; at all hazards 
he had dared to stand alone, bereft of the comforts and 
alleviations that come in the lot of men; he did not scruple 
to bare his heart toward God, knowing that to the limit of 
his light he had done his bidding. But he was hated, per- 
secuted, threatened with death, while the way of the wicked 
prospered, and they were at ease who dealt very treacher- 
‘ously. Surely it was in vain that he had cleansed his heart 
and washed his hands in innocency. It was too painful for 
him, His feet were almost gone, his steps had well-nigh 
slipped. 

It is the question of all ages, to be answered only by re- 


THE SWELLING OF JORDAN 67 


membering that this world is upside-down; that the course 
of nature has been disturbed by sin; that the prince of the 
power of the air is god of this world; and that the servants 
of righteousness fight, not against flesh and blood, but 
against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world, the wicked spirits in heavenly 
places. 

(3) He was Anxious for God's Character—There is a 
touch of apparent vindictiveness in his cry. “Let me see 
thy vengeance on them. . . . Pull them out like sheep for the 
slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.” We 
are disposed to contrast these words with those that Jesus 
breathed for his murderers from the cross, and that Stephen 
uttered as the stones crashed in upon him; and we think 
that there is an alloy in the fine gold, a trace of dross in 
the saint. 

It is possible to adopt the suggestion that the prophet 
was predicting the fate of these wicked men, or that he 
was the divine mouthpiece in this solemn pronouncement 
of coming doom. But a deeper and more correct concep- 
tion of his words appears to be that he was concerned with 
the effect that would be produced on his people if Jehovah 
passed by the sin of his persecutors and intending murder- 
ers. It was as though the prophet feared lest his own 
undeserved sufferings might lead men to reason that 
wrong-doing was more likely to promote their prosperity 
than integrity and holiness. Josiah was the one God-fear- 
ing monarch of his time, but he was slain in battle; re 
was the devoted servant of God, and his life was one long 
agony. Was it the best policy, then, to fear God ? Might 
it not be wiser, safer, better, to worship the gods of the 
surrounding peoples, who seemed well able to defend their 
votaries, and to promote the prosperity of the great king- 
doms that maintained their temples? As Jeremiah beheld 


68 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


the blasting influence of sin, how the land mourned and the 
herbs were withered and the beasts and birds consumed, 
his heart misgave him. He saw no limit to the awful evil 
of his times so long as God seemed indifferent to its preva- 
lence. Therefore he cried for vengeance—not for the grati- 
fication of his own feeling, but for the sake of Israel. 

(4) He also Rolled his Cause on God.—So might chapter 
xi, verse 20 be rendered: “On thee have I rolled my 
cause.” Ah! this was wise. And it is our only safety in 
times of great soul anguish. The Divine Sufferer did this on 
the cross. ‘“‘ Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again ; 

. but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously.” 
In his steps we must plant our feet. When men malign 
and plot against us, when friends forsake, when difficulties 
like Atlantic breakers threaten to engulf us, we must roll 
our anxieties from ourselves upon the blessed Lord, our 
burden-bearer, and leave them with him. The care ceases 
to be ours when it has been committed to him. He will 
see to all for us with a love so strong and tender and true 
that we need have no further cause for fear. Roll thyself, 
thy burden, and thy way on the Lord. 


II. Tue Divine Repty.—“ If thou hast run with the 
footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou 
contend with horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein 
thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do 
in the swelling of Jordan?” God stooped over his life 
and said: “Do you not remember when I first called you 
to be my prophet that I foreshadowed the loneliness and 
isolation, the difficulty and persecution, which were in store? 
Do you not remember that I told you that you would have 
to be a brazen wall against the whole people? Have you 
already lost heart? Are you so soon discouraged? Has 
the first brush of opposition mastered your heroic courage? 


THE SWELLING OF JORDAN 69 


You have as yet run with footmen, presently you will en- 
counter horses; you are now in the land of comparative 
peace, your native village, where those surround you who 
have known you from your childhood, and yet you are dis- 
mayed; but how will you do when a tide of sorrow comes 
upon this land, as when the Jordan leaps its banks, and 
swells over the low-lying land around, and drives the wild 
beasts from their lair—how then?” 

Does not God ever deal with us thus? He does not 
put us at once to contend with horses, but tests us first 
with footmen. He does not allow any one of us with frail 
and fainting courage to meet the overflowing floods of Jor- 
dan; but he causes us first to be tested in our homestead— 
the land of peace, where we are comparatively secure amid 
those who know and love us. God graduates the trials of 
our life; he allows the lesser to precede the greater. He 
gives us the opportunity of learning to trust him in slighter 
difficulties, that faith may become muscular and strong, 
and that we may be able to walk to him amid the surge 
of the ocean. Be sure that whatever your sorrows and 
troubles are at this hour, God has allowed them to come 
to afford you an opportunity of preparation for future days. 
Do not be discouraged or give up the fight, or be unfaith- 
ful in the very little. Do not say you cannot bear it. You 
can! 

There is sufficient grace in him; appropriate it, use it; 
rest upon him. Be very thankful that he has given you 
this time of discipline and of searching, and now, taking to 
yourself all that he waits to give—the grace and comfort 
and assurance—go forward! He cannot fail you. What 
he is in the lesser he will be much more in the greater. 
The grace he gives to-day is but as a silver thread com- 
pared to the river of grace he will give to you to-morrow. 
If you start back now you will miss the greater discipline 


70 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


that will surely come, but in missing it you will also miss 
the greater revelation of himself that will accompany the 
discipline. Be true to God! Trust in God, and remem- 
ber that when he brings you to the swelling of Jordan— 
not necessarily death, but some awful flood of sorrow— 
that then, for the first time perhaps, you will meet the ark 
and the Priest whose feet, when they dip in the margin of 
the river, will cause it to part, and you will go over dry- 
shod. When Jordan overflows its banks God brings his 
chosen people to the brink, and it is then that he cleaves 
the path through the heart of the river, so that they are 
not touched by its descending torrent. 

It is a solemn question. You have failed in the quiet, 
sequestered home life: how will you do in the turmoil of 
the city, with its terrific temptations? You have suc- 
cumbed when there was everything to help you: how will 
you do when all is against you? You cannot bear the 
transient troubles of an hour with patience: how will you 
do in those that wear the life out with ceaseless pain? 
You cannot live well: how will you do when the moment 
arrives for you to die? “If the righteous scarcely be saved, 
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear ? ” 


VIII. 


Che Dronght. 


(JEREMIAH xiv., xv.) 


*sTf, in the paths of the world, 
Stones might have wounded thy feet, 
Toil or dejection have tried 
Thy spirit—of that we saw 
Nothing; to us thou wast still 
Cheerful, and helpful, and firm ; 
Therefore to thee it was given 
Many to save with thyself; 
And at the end of thy day, 
O faithful shepherd! to come, 
Bringing thy sheep in thy hand.” 

ARNOLD. 


HE reign of Jehoiakim was still young. Necho was 
back in Egypt, Nineveh was tottering to her fall, 
Babylon was slowly growing upon the horizon as the rival 
of each great empire and as the future desolater of Judah. 
Meanwhile the chosen people, like a tree whose heart is 
eaten away with insects, were corrupted by innumerable 
evils. As a premonition of coming destruction, and as 
though the Almighty would make one last effort to arouse 
them to the awfulness and imminence of their peril, a ter- 
rible drought cast its sere mantle over the land. It had 
often been predicted among the other results of disobedi- 
ence, but probably never before had it fallen with such 
desolating effect (Lev. xxvi. 20; Deut. xi. 17; XXvili. 23). 
The whole land was filled with mourning. In the places 
71 


72 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


of public concourse, where the people gathered in the 
burning sunshine, they sat in black garments upon the hard 
ground. Accustomed to rely upon the natural resources 
of the country, nourished by the rivers and streams that 
gushed from valley and hill, they were reduced to the 
dire extremities of famine. The vines on the terraced 
hills were withered, the cornfields were covered with stub- 
ble, and the pasture on the wolds was yellow and scorched. 
The very dew seemed to have forsaken the land; where 
the river had poured its full tide there were only a few 
trickling drops. The beds uf the watercourses were filled 
with stones. And the bitter cry of Jerusalem ascended, 
made up of the mingled anguish of men and women and 
children, whose parched lips might not be moistened. 

The description given by the prophet is very striking. 
Want is felt in the great houses of the nobles, who send 
their servants for water without avail. The plowmen sit 
in their barns with covered heads; it is useless to think of 
driving their plows through the chapped soil. The hind, 
whose maternal love has passed into a proverb, is repre- 
sented as forsaking her young, that she may seek for grass. 
The wild asses stand on the bare heights and eagerly snuff 
up what breeze may pass over the land in the evening, to 
relieve the agony of the fever of their thirst. All the land 
bakes like an oven, and the sun, as he passes daily through a 
leaden sky, looks down on scenes of unutterable horror. 

What a picture is this of the desolation that sometimes 
overtakes a Christian community! Every faithful worker 
could tell of periods when it has seemed as though the 
cloud and dew of divine blessing had forsaken the plot on 
which he was engaged. ‘There are no tears of penitence, 
no sighs of contrition, no blessed visitations of the dew of 
the Holy Ghost, no fresh young shoots of piety, no joy in 
the Lord, no fruits of the Spirit. Ah! then work is hard © 


THE DROUGHT 13 


and difficult, and the soul of the worker faints and is dis- 
couraged. Blessed is that church which has not known 
this time of drought, and which has not experienced in 
the spiritual sphere the counterpart of the utter failure of 
moisture in the natural. 

It is at such times that the lover of his fellows gathers 
himself together to deal with the Almighty. You can see 
him entering the secret place of the Most High, prepared 
to speak with God, and, if possible, secure a mitigation of 
the reign of the brazen sky and a return of those times of 
blessing that can only come from the presence of the Lord. 
His face is set with a resolute purpose. Through the weary 
eyes the fire of a mighty resolution is burning. With his 
two hands he is prepared to come to close dealings with 
God, as Jacob when he made supplication with the angel. © 
Let us draw near and overhear the colloquy between Jere- 
miah and the Almighty. It may be that we shall discover 
arguments that we may take upon our own lips when days 
of drought are visiting the Church at large, or that sphere 
of work in which we are called specially to labor. It is 
thus that the soul discourses with God. 


I. THE PLEADINGS OF THE INTERCEDING SouL.— My 
God, I come into thy presence to acknowledge my own 
sin, and especially the sins of my people. I stand before 
thee as their priest. to confess the sins which have separated 
between thee and them, incurring thy divine displeasure, 
and closing the avenues of communion. Our iniquities 
testify against us, and our backslidings are many. Once 
thou seemedst to abide in our midst: thy smile a per- 
petual summer; thy presence one long stream of benedic- 
tion; thy grace like a river making glad thy city. But of 
late thy visits have been few and far between. Thou hast 
tarried for a night, and been away again at dawn, and we 


74 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


sorely miss thee. Once thou wert as a mighty man, our 
Samson, whose arm sufficed to keep our enemies at bay; 
but for long thou hast seemed overcome by an unnatural 
stupor, by a paralysis that holds thee like a vise. And 
yet thou hast not really changed. Thou art our Saviour ; 
thou art in the midst of us. We bear thy name. Thine 
honor is implicated in our lot. What thou couldst not do 
for any merit of ours do for the credit of thy name; do 
for the sake of thy Son; do for the maintenance of thy 
cause upon earth. Leave us not, nor let that foreboding 
prediction of Ezekiel be realized, when he saw the glory 
of the Lord recede by stages from the holy place, until it 
stood outside the city walls” (Jer. xiv. 7-9). 

The Answer of the Divine Spirit—There are times when 
“ God seems to speak thus to the soul—if we may dare put 
our impression of his words in our own phrase: “ It is use- 
less, my servant, to pray. My grace is infinite; my mercy 
endureth forever; my fullness waits to pour forth its tides, 
to make the wilderness rejoice and blossom as the rose. I 
have no pleasure in the parched wilderness; I would that 
it were springs of water. I have no liking for the glowing 
sand; I would that it might become a pool. But so long 
as men cling to their sins, so long as they perpetrate 
abominations like those which Ezekiel saw when in the 
chambers of imagery he beheld the elders of Israel offer- 
ing incense to creeping things and abominable beasts, it is 
impossible for me to cause rain or give showers. Beneath 
the appearance of religious worship and decorum, evils are 
breeding that separate between my people and myself, and 
hide my face from them. These must be dealt with. You 
must begin to search the chambers of their hearts with 
candles, to show my people their transgressions, and the 
house of Israel their sins. Your work just now is not that 
of the intercessor, but of the reformer; not yet to plead 


THE DROUGHT 15 


with Elijah upon the brow of Carmel, but, like Elijah, to 
extirpate the lurking evil of the people as when he dyed 
the waters of Kishon with the blood of Ahab’s priests” 
(xiv. 10-12). 


II, Tue LAMENT OF THE TRUE SHEPHERD.—“ Ah, Lord 
God! True, too true, sadly too true, are thy words. Thy 
people deserve all that thou hast said. Their iniquities are 
alone accountable for their sorrows. But remember how 
falsely they have been taught. The land is full of those 
who hide thy truth under a cloud of words. They say that 
the outward ritual sufficeth, howsoever far the heart is from 
thee. There is grievous fault; but surely it lieth at the 
door of those who mislead the fickle, changeful crowd. 
Their mouths are lined with wool; they cry ‘ Peace, Peace !’ 
when there isnone. The very remonstrances of conscience 
are drowned by their delusive assurances. Spare thy peo- 
ple! they are scattered because the shepherds have failed 
in their high commission” (xiv. 13). 

The Answer of the Divine Spirit—There are days in the 
history of the Christian when he is called to walk upon the 
mountains of vision, and overhears the attendant shepherds, 
of whom Bunyan speaks, talking to each other and saying, 
“ Shall we show these pilgrims some wonders ?” Beneath 
their guidance he climbs to the top of the hill called Error, 
which is very steep on the farther side. At the bottom lie 
several men all dashed to pieces by a fall from the top. 
“What meaneth this?” is the obvious inquiry. ‘“ Have 
you not heard of Hymenzus and Philetus,” is the reply, 
“who erred concerning the faith of the resurrection of the 
body ? These are they.” So in our pleadings for men 
we sometimes obtain a glimpse of the inevitableness of the 
divine judgments and the irreparableness of the injury that 
false teachers may do to their fellows. There is no fate 


76 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


so terrible as of those who have not only erred themselves, 
but have caused men to err; who have been a stumbling- 
block in the way of one of God’s little ones. Better be 
dumb and not able to speak than say words that may de- 
stroy the faith of childhood, or start questionings that may 
shatter by one fell blow the construction of years. It was 
in this strain that God replied to the prophet: 

“The doom of the false prophets will be terrible. Their 
fate will be the more awful because they have run without 
being sent, and prophesied without having seen a vision. 
There has been no divine impulse energizing their words. 
Position, bread, power, have been the incentives of their 
office ; but the people have loved to have it so. Their cor- 
rupt morals have produced a corrupt priesthood and a crop 
of false prophets. The men of whom you complain are the 
product of their times, My people, enervated with sloth, 
luxury, and conceit, would not endure the simple truth of 
the divine Word; and this evil band have been bred and 
nurtured in the stifling corruption of the age. Until, there- 
fore, the people themselves have put away their sin, and 
returned to me in penitence and consecration, they must 
be held guilty before my sight, and suffer the outworking 
of their sin. ‘I will pour their wickedness upon them’”’ 
(xiv. 14-16). 


III. THe InTeRcEpING Sout.— Granted, great God, 
that thou art just and right, yet thou canst not utterly re- 
ject. Thy smiting cannot be unto death. Thou must 
heal. Thou mayest cast away those with whom thou hast 
not entered into covenant relationship, or on whom thy 
name has not been named, or among whom the throne 
of thy glory has not been set up, but thou canst not 
deal with us as with them. There is a tie between thee 
and us which our sin cannot break. There are claims which 


THE DROUGHT 77 


we have on thee as our Father, which the far-country wan- 
derings of the prodigal cannot annul. There are interweav- 
ings of thy character and prestige with our history which no 
stroke of thy pen can dissolve. | Remember the covenant; 
remember thy promise to thy Son; remember thy bride 
whom thou canst not put away; remember that we have 
no help but in thee; remember the word on which thou 
hast caused us to hope—therefore we will still wait upon 
thee. We are not worthy to be called thine; but we claim 
the kiss, the robe, the fatted calf” (xiv. 17-22). 

The Answer of the Divine Spirit—It is as though the 
Lord said: “I am wearied with repenting. I have tried 
every means of restraining them and turning them to bet- 
ter things—now by winnowing out the chaff, and again 
by bereavement and sorrow, and again by the swift destruc- 
tion of the sword. They have appeared to amend, but the 
improvement was only superficial. Now my mind is thor- 
oughly made up. My methods must be more drastic, my 
discipline more searching and thorough. I will turn my 
hand upon my people, and thoroughly purge away their 
dross, and take away all their tin, and I will restore their 
judges as at the first and their counselors as at the begin- 
ning. Thus I will answer thy pleadings on their behalf. 
The destruction of the city, the decimation of the people 
by sword and famine, the awful sorrows of captivity, shall 
act as purging fires, through which they shall pass to a 
new and blessed life. Nothing else can now avail. For 
my love of them I cannot spare them. The prayers of my 
holiest cannot alter my determination, since only thus can 
my eternal purpose of redemption be realized ” (xv. 1-9). 


IV. Tue Cry or THE INTERCESSOR.—Here the prophet 
falls into a muse, and as he foresees the misrepresentation 
of his motives, and the certain hate which his unfaltering 


78 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


prediction of coming doom must excite, he wishes that he 
had never been born. So does the heart of the man of God 
fail, and if, like Jeremiah’s, it is highly strung and keenly 
sensitive, it becomes the prey of the deepest anguish. “ Why, 
O God, didst thou make me so gentle and sympathetic, so 
naturally weak and yielding, so incapable of looking calmly 
on pain? Would not some stronger, rougher nature have 
done thy bidding better? Even now hast thou not some 
man of ruder make to whom thou canst intrust this mis- 
sion? There are skins more impervious to the scorching 
heat than mine: may they not go into these flames? Why 
this stammering lip, this faltering heart, this thorn in my 
flesh ?” (xv. 10). 

The Answer of the Divine Spirit—T1 will strengthen 
thee for good.” It is as if God said: “ My grace is suffi- 
cient for thee. I have summoned thee, with all thy weak- 
nesses, to perform my will, because my strength is only 
perfected thus. I need a low platform for the exhibition 
of my great power. To those that have no might I impart 
strength ; in those that have no wisdom I unfold my deep- 
est thoughts. The broken reed furnishes the pillar of my 
Temple ; smoking flax gives light to my beacon-fires. Be 
content to be a threshold over which the river passes; be 
satisfied to be a rod in my hand which shall achieve the 
deliverance of my people. O frail, weak soul, thou art like- 
liest to be the channel and organ for the forthputting of 
my energy. Only yield thyself to me, and let me have my 
way through thee, with thee, in thee; then thou shalt be 
as the northern iron and brass, which man cannot break” 
(xv. 11-14). 


V. THE RESPONSE OF THE SouL.—“O Lord, thou know- 
est.” “ Things that my dearest cannot guess, which I can- 
not utter, which I am slow to admit even to myself; the 


THE DROUGHT 79 


hope that trembles like the first flush of dawn, and the fear 
that paralyzes; the conflict, the broken ideals, the unfin- 
ished sentences, the songs without words: thou knowest. 
Thou art my all. Thy smile strengthens me against re- 
proach. Thy words bring rifts of joy and rejoicing in my 
saddest hours. Thy presence banishes loneliness when I 
sit alone. And yet sometimes a dark foreboding comes that 
thou wilt be to me as a deceitful brook, whose intermit- 
tent waters fail, which is dry when most its flow is needed. 
I know it cannot be, since thou art faithful; and yet what 
could I do if, after having made me what I am, thou should- 
est leave me to myself ?” (xv. 15-18). 

The Answer of the Divine Spirit“ Renounce thy fore- 
bodings.” God seems to say: “Come back from the far 
country of thy despondency. I would have thee stand face 
to face with me without a shadow of a cloud. Wait before 
me. Consider not thy frailty, but my might; not thy foes, 
but my deliverances. Put from thee that which is vile; ex- 
pose thyself to my refining fires, that all thy dross may be 
expurgated. Divest thyself of all that is inconsistent with 
thy high calling. Then thou shalt be as my mouth; thou 
shalt stand amid the surging crowd as a fenced brazen 
wall; thou shalt be impregnable against the assault of fear ; 
in the darkest hours, when floods of ungodliness might 
make thee afraid, and the fury of hell be hurled against 
thee, I will be with thee to save and deliver. Thou may- 
est have neither wife nor child; but I will be to thee more 
than they. And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the 
wicked, and redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.” 
“This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their 
righteousness is of me, saith the Lord” (xv. 19-21). 


iS 
“On the Potter’s Wheel.” 
(JEREMIAH xviii. 4.) 


“* He fixed thee ’mid this dance 
Of plastic circumstance, 
This present thou, forsooth, wouldst fain arrest: 
Machinery just meant 
To give thy soul its bent, 
Try thee, and turn thee forth, sufficiently impressed.” 
R. BROWNING, 


NE day, beneath the impulse of the Divine Spirit, 
Jeremiah went beyond the city precincts to the Val- 
ley of Hinnom, on the outskirts of Jerusalem, where, in a 
little hut, he found a potter busily engaged at his handi- 
craft. “Behold, he wrought a work on the wheels.” 
Amid the many improvements of the present day, the art 
of pottery remains almost as it was as many centuries be- 
fore Christ as we live after. 

As the prophet stood quietly beside the potter, he saw 
him take a piece of clay from the mass that lay beside his 
hand, and, having kneaded it to rid it of the bubbles, place 
it on the wheel, rapidly revolving horizontally at the motion 
of his foot driving the treadle. From that moment his 
hands were at work, within and without, shaping the vessel 
with his deft touch, here widening, there leading it up into 
a more slender form, and, again, opening out the lip. So 
that from the shapeless clay there emerged a fair and beau- 

80 


“ON THE POTTER’S WHEEL” 81 


tiful vessel, fit for the Temple court or the royal palace. 

When it was nearly complete, and the next step would 

have been to remove it, to await the kiln, through a flaw 
in the material it fell a shapeless ruin—some broken pieces 

upon the wheel, and others upon the floor of the house. 

The prophet naturally expected that the potter would 
immediately take another piece of clay, and produce in its 
yielding substance the ideal which had been so hopelessly 
marred under his hand. Instead of this, however, to his 
astonishment and keenly excited interest, the potter with 
scrupulous care gathered up the broken pieces of the clay 
and pressed them together as at the first, and placed the 
clay again where it had lain before, and made it again into 
another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it. 
Perhaps this second vessel was not quite so fair as the first 
might have been; still it was beautiful and useful. It was 
a memorial of the potter’s patience and long-suffering, of 
his careful use of material, and of his power of repairing loss 
and making something out of failure and disappointment. 

O vision of the long-suffering patience of God! O 
bright anticipation of God’s redemptive work! O parable 
of remade characters and lives and hopes! To us, as to 
Jeremiah, the divine thought is flashed: ‘Cannot I do 
with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the 
clay is in the potter’s hand, so are ye in mine hand, O 
house of Israel.” 

The purport of this vision seems to have been to give 
his people hope that even though they had marred God's 
fair ideal, yet a glorious and blessed future was within 
reach; and that if only they would yield themselves to the 
touch of the Great Potter, he would undo the results of 
years of disobedience which had marred and spoiled his 
fair purpose, and would make the chosen people a vessel 
unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Master’s use. 


82 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


The same thought may apply to us all. Who is there 
that is not conscious of having marred and resisted the 
touch of God’s molding hands? Who is there that does 
not lament opportunities of saintliness which were lost 
through the obdurateness of the will and the hardness 
of the heart? Who is there that would not like to be 
made again as seems good to the Potter? “But now, 
O Lord, thou art our Father; we are the clay, and thou 
our Potter; and we all are the work of thy hand. Be not 
wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for- 
ever.” 


I. Tue Divine Maxine or Men.—(1) Zhe Potter has an 
Tdeal.—Floating through his fancy there is the vessel that 
is to be. He already sees it hidden in the shapeless clay, 
waiting for his call to evoke. His hands achieve so far as 
they may the embodiment of the fair conception of his 
thought. Before the woman applies scissors to the silk she 
has conceived the pattern of her dress; before the spade 
cleaves the sod the architect has conceived the plan of the 
building to be erected there. 

So of God in nature. The pattern of this round world 
and of her sister-spheres lay in his creative thought before 
the first beam of light streamed across the abyss. All that 
exists embodies with more or less exactness the divine ideal 
—sin alone excepted. So of the mystical body of Christ, 
the Church, his bride. In his Book all his “ members were 
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet 
there was none of them.” So also of the possibilities of each 
human life. I know not if we shall ever be permitted, 
amid the archives of heaven, to see the transcript of God’s 
original thought of what our life might have been had we 
only yielded ourselves to the hands that reach down from 


ON MES POTLER?S: WHEEL 83 


heaven molding men; but sure it is that God foreordained 
and predestinated us, each in his own measure and degree, 
to be conformed to the image of his Son. 

See that mother bending over the cradle where her first- 
born baby son lies sleeping. Mark that smile which goes 
and comes over her face, like a breath of wind on a calm 
summer’s day! Why does she smile? Ah! she is dream- 
ing, and in her dreams is building castles of the future 
eminence of this child—in the pulpit or the Senate, in war 
or art. If only she might have her way he should be fore- 
most in happiness, renowned in the service of men. But 
no mother ever wished so much for her child as God for 
us, when first cradled at the foot of the cross. 

To be like Christ, the type of perfect manhood; to be 
as much to Christ as he was to his Father; to reflect the 
face of Christ on men as he the face of God; to fulfill the 
commission of redemption; to take up the cross; to be 
crucified with Christ; to rise and reign with him—all this 
is God’s ideal. 

(2) The Potter Achieves his Purpose by Means of the Wheel. 
—In the discipline of human life this surely represents the 
revolution of daily circumstance; often monotonous, com- 
monplace, trivial enough, and yet intended to effect, if it 
may, ends on which God has set his heart. 

Many, on entering the life of full consecration and devo- 
tion, are eager to change the circumstances of their lives 
for those in which they suppose that they will more readily 
attain a fully developed character. Hence much of the 
restlessness and fever, the disappointment, and willfulness, 
of the early days of Christian experience. Such have yet to 
learn that out of myriads of circumstances God has chosen 
the lot of each as being specially adapted to develop the 
hidden qualities and idiosyncrasies of the soul he loves. 


84 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


Anything else than the life which you are called to live 
would fail in giving scope for the evolution of properties 
of your nature which are known only to God, as the colors 
and fragrance which lie enfolded in some tropic seed. Be- 
lieve that all has been ordered or permitted, because of 
that which lay entombed within you waiting for his call, 
“Come forth !” 

Do not, therefore, seek to change, by some rash and 
willful act, the setting and environment of your life. Stay 
where you are till God as-evidently calls you elsewhere as. 
he has put you where you are. Abide for the present in 
the calling wherein you were called. Throw upon him the 
responsibility of indicating to you a change when it is nec- 
essary for your further development. In the meanwhile 
look deep into the heart of every circumstance for its spe- 
cial message, lesson, or discipline. Upon the way in which 
you accept or reject these will depend the achievement or 
marring of the divine purpose. 

You complain of the monotony of your life. Day in, 
day out, the same round. Year after year the same path 
trodden to and fro; no horizon; no space or width; only 
the same lane of sky between the high houses on either 
side. What scope is there here for the evolution of noble 
character ? What opportunity to meditate and achieve 
great deeds? Yet remember that the passive virtues are 
even dearer to God than the active ones. They take the 
longest learning and are the last learned. They consist in 
patience, submission, endurance, long-suffering, persistence 
in well-doing.» They need more courage and evince greater 
heroism than those qualities which the world admires most. 
But they can only be acquired in just that monotonous 
and narrow round of which many complain as offering so 
scant a chance of acquiring saintliness. 

(3) Zhe Bulk of the Work is Done by the Potter's Fingers. 


‘“ON THE POTTER’S WHEEL” 85 


—How delicate their touch! How fine their sensibility ! 
It would almost seem as though they were endued with intel- 
lect, instead of being the instruments by which the brain is 
executing its purpose. And in the nurture of the soul these 
represent the touch of the Spirit of God working in us to 
will and to do of his good pleasure. He is in us all, his 
one purpose being to infill us with himself, and to fulfill 
through us “all the good pleasure of his goodness, and 
every work of faith, with power; that the name of our Lord 
Jesus may be glorified in us, and we in him.” 

But we are too busy, too absorbed in many things, to 
heed the gentle touch. Sometimes, when we are aware of 
it, we resent it, or stubbornly refuse to yield to it. Hence 
the necessity of setting apart a portion of every day, or a 
season in the course of the week, in which to seclude our- 
selves from every other influence, and expose the entire 
range of our being to divine influences only. 

The wheel and the hand worked together; often their 
motion was in opposite directions, but their object was 
one. So all things work together for good to them that 
love God. God’s touch and voice give the meaning of 
his providences, and his providences enforce the lesson that 
his tender monitions might not be strong enough to teach. 
Whenever, therefore, you are in doubt as to the meaning 
of certain circumstances through which you are called to 
pass, and which are strange and inexplicable, be still; re- 
frain from murmuring or repining; hush the many voices 
that would speak within, and listen until there is borne in 
on your soul a persuasion of God’s purpose, and let his 
Spirit within codperate with the circumstance without. It 
is in the equal working of these two—the circumstance sup- 
plying the occasion for manifesting a certain grace, and the 
Holy Ghost supplying the grace to be manifested—that the 
spirit soars, as the bird by the even motion of its two wings. 


86 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


II. Gon’s Remakinc or Men.—“ He made it again.” 
The potter could not make what he might have wished, 
but he did his best with his materials. So God is ever try- 
ing to do his best for us. If we refuse the best he gives 
the next best. If we will not be gold we may be silver, 
and if not silver there are still the earthen and the wood. 
How often he has to make us again ! 

He made Jacob again when he met him at the Jabbok 
ford, finding him a supplanter and a cheat, but after a long 
wrestle leaving him a prince with God. He made Simon 
again, on the resurrection morning, when he found him 
somewhere near the open grave, the son of a dove—for 
so his old name Bar-jona signifies—and left him Peter, 
the man of the rock, the apostle of Pentecost. He made 
Mark again, between his impulsive leaving of Paul and 
Barnabas, as though frightened by the first touch of sea- 
sickness, and the times when Peter spake of him as his 
son, and Paul from the Mamertine prison described him 
as being profitable. 

I have been told of a gifted son who, when night has 
fallen, and his aged father has gone to the early couch of 
age, comes into the studio where the old man’s hands had 
been busily engaged all day modeling clay, not without 
some fear that they are losing their skill, and removes all 
trace of senility or decay. So does God come to our work 
when we have done our best and failed, and when men 
have turned from us with disappointment. He perfects 
that which concerns us, because his mercy endures for- 
ever, and he cannot forsake the work of his own hands. 

Are you conscious of having marred God’s early plan 
for yourself? His ideal of a life of earnest devotion to 
his cause has been so miserably lost sight of. Your career 
as parent or child, as friend or Christian worker, has been 
such a failure. The grand chord struck in your early vows 


“ONSEHE, POTTER?S WHEEL” 87 


at the marriage altar, or on the day of ordination, has been 
lost beyond recall; and the whole music has been so halt- 
ing and feeble. For such science and the competition of 
modern life have little encouragement. There seems no 
alternative but to go off into the rear, and let others carry 
away the prizes that come so easily to them; while into 
the soul the conviction is burned: “I had my chance and 
missed it; it will never come to me again. The survival 
of the fittest leaves no place for the unfit. They must be 
flung amid the waste which is ever accumulating around 
the furnaces of human life.” It is here that the gospel 
comes in with its gentle words for the outcast and lost. 
The bruised reed is made again into a pillar for the temple 
of God. The feebly smoking flax is kindled to a flame. 
The waste products are shown to be of extraordinary value, 
yielding the fairest colors, or providing the elementary 
principles of life. 


III. Our ATTITUDE TOWARD THE GREAT POTTER.— 
Yield to him! Each particle in the clay seems to say 
“Ves” to wheel and hand. And in proportion as this is 
the case the work goes merrily on. If there be rebellion 
and resistance, the work of the potter is marred. Let God 
have his way with you. Let his will be done in you as in 
heaven. Bear it even when you cannot do it. Be sure and 
say “Yes.” There are times when we are not conscious 
that he is doing right. Life is often like the gray aspect 
of nature in February, when spring waits just outside the 
portal longing to touch all things with her magic wand. 
It seems as if no one is concerned about “all the miles of 
unsprung wheat,” or responsible for leaf or bud. Yet in 
myriads upon myriads of graves where seeds lie buried, 
God’s angels are busily at work, rolling away stones and 
ushering in the new heaven and the new earth of spring. 


88 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


So when we have once committed ourselves to God, we 
.must believe that he does not lose a single moment, but is 
ever hurrying forward the consummation of his ideal. 

We cannot always understand his dealings, because we 
do not know what his purpose is. We fail to recognize 
the design, the position which we are being trained to fill, 
the ministry we are to exercise. What wonder then that 
we get puzzled and perplexed ! We strive with our Maker, 
saying, “ What makest thou?” or, “He hathno hands.” Yet 
surely it is enough to know our Guide, if we do not know 
which point he is aiming for in the long chain of hills. He 
knows all the mountain passes, and will take the easiest. 

There is special comfort in these thoughts for the middle- 
aged and old. Do not look regretfully back on the wasted 
springtime and summer, gone beyond recall; though it be 
autumn there is yet chance for thee to bear some fruit, 
under the care of the great Husbandman. In all he in- 
spires hope. He can turn the battle from the gate, and 
make the lost iron swim, and replenish the empty pitchers 
with new good wine, and restore the years the canker-worm 
has eaten, and make failures into victories. He who was able 
to transform the cross from a badge of shame into the sign 
of victory and glory must surely be able to take the most 
hopeless, disreputable, and abandoned lives, and make them 
bloom with flowers heavy with fragrance and full of blessed 
promise. Only let him have a free hand. Whatsoever he. 
says, do it, or suffer it to be done. Seek forgiveness for the 
past, then restoration and remaking at his hand. Reckon 
on God, and according to your faith it shall be done unto 
you. 


X. 


The Fire of Holp Impulse. 
(JEREMIAH Xxx. 9.) 


‘* There is a stay, and we are strong! 

Our Master is at hand 

To cheer our solitary song 
And guide us to the strand! 

Or if, for our unworthiness, 
Toil, prayer, and watching fail, 

In disappointment thou canst bless, 
So love at heart prevail!” 

KEBLE. 


EREMIAH'’S nature reminds us of the A#olian harp, 
which is so sensitive to the passing breeze, now wailing 
with sorrow, now jubilant with song: so delicately strung, 
so sympathetic, so easily affected by every passing circum- 
stance, was the soul of the prophet. The whole book mir- 
rors the changefulness of his mood, as the ocean the per- 
petual heavens outspread above it—now blue as the azure 
sky, and again dark with the brooding storm. 

There are many indications of this in the chapters before 
us. For instance there is the exclamation, “Cursed be the 
day wherein I was born. . . - Cursed be the man who brought 
tidings to my father, saying, A man-child is born unto 
thee. . . . Wherefore was I born to see labor and sorrow?” 
(xx. 14-18). But in the same breath there is the heroic 


. 


outburst, “The Lord is with me as a mighty one and ter- 
89 


go FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


rible ; therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall 
not prevail” (xx. 11). How great the contrast between 
these moods! In the first he is traversing the valley of 
the shadow, where the dark trees shut out the sky, and the 
swollen torrent rushes turbidly through the gorge; in the 
second he stands upon the heights where the sun shines, 
and to the far horizon the landscape lies outspread, its corn- 
fields goldening in the summer sun. 

The same contrast appears in this verse. There we find 
the half-formed resolution to make no further mention of 
God, and to speak no more in his name. Then he is in- 
stantly aware of his inability to control the passionate out- 
burst of the Spirit within. ‘‘ There is in mine heart as it 
were a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I am weary 
with forbearing, and I cannot contain” (r.v.). Oh, won- 
derful heart of man! who can understand thee, who can 
estimate the heights to which thou canst rise, or the depths 
to which thou canst sink ? What an infinitude of bliss 
and of sorrow is within thy compass! How radiant thy 
heavens, how dark thine abyss! It is well for us when we 
learn to distinguish between the life of our emotions and 
that of our will, and resolve to live no more in mood or 
emotion, but to build the edifice of our life upon the gran- 
ite of the obedient will. 


I. THE CIRCUMSTANCES OUT OF WHICH THESE WoRDS 
SPRANG.—Jeremiah’s Half-formed Resolution.— 1 will not 
make mention of Him, nor speak any more in His name.” 
Not improbably by this time Nineveh had fallen. For six 
hundred years she had ruled surrounding nations with a rod 
of iron tyranny, exerting an imperial sway with merciless 
cruelty. At last her time had come. A vast host-gath- 
ered from Asia Minor as far as the shores of the Black 
Sea, from the entire valley of the Tigris, from Armenia, 


THE FIRE OF HOLY IMPULSE gt 


Assyria, and the wandering tribes of the desert, and set- 
tled down on her as swarms of hornets on a putrid carcass. 
For two years the siege had lasted under the direction of 
the trusted general of the last king of Nineveh, Nabopo- 
lassar, whose son, Nebuchadnezzar, was destined to be the 
“hammer of God.”. Rumors of this catastrophe were 
spreading through the world, carrying everywhere a sense 
of relief and foreboding—relief that the tyrant was down, 
foreboding as to who should take his place. 

At this time Egypt was in the zenith of her power. 
Amid the decrepitude of Nineveh, Pharaoh had seized the 
opportunity of extending his empire to the banks of the 
Tigris. The kingdom of Judah, like all neighboring nations, 
owned, at least nominally, the king of Egypt as suzerain. 
Confidence in the proximity and prowess of his great ally 
encouraged Jehoiakim in his career of shameless idolatry 
and sin. The whole land, as we have seen, was corrupt. 

Jeremiah, the foremost of the little band that remained 
true to the best traditions of the past, never lost an oppor- 
tunity of lodging his complaint or striving to resist the down- 
ward progress of his people. In doing this he aroused an 
ever-growing weight of opposition. The plot of his native 
town of Anathoth was the first volcanic outburst, to be fol- 
lowed by a long series of plots and snares and manifesta- 
tions of hatred on the part of those for whom he would 
have gladly given his life as he daily gave his prayers. 
He sat alone, cast out by prophet and priest, by court and 
people. 

“ Come,” they said on one occasion, “and let us devise 
devices against Jeremiah ; for the law shall not perish from 
the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from 
the prophet.” He was a laughing-stock all the day. Every 
one mocked him. The word of the Lord was made a re- 
proach to him and a derision continually. | His associates 


92 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


and those with whom he came in contact watched for his 
halting, and whispered that peradventure he would be en- 
ticed so that they should prevail against him and take their 
revenge on him. 

Matters culminated finally in the episode of chapters xix. 
and xx. Beneath a divine impulse he procured a com- 
mon earthen bottle, and gathering a number of the elders, 
led them forth into the Valley of Hinnom, beside the gate 
of the potsherds. On this spot the refuse of the city was 
perpetually exposed to the foul birds and the wild dogs. 
It was a place of abhorring and loathsomeness. There 
he uttered a long and terrible indictment of the sins of his 
people, accompanying it with predictions of the certain 
and irrevocable doom to which they were hurrying. The 
men of Jerusalem would fall there by the sword before 
their enemies; in the straitness of the siege they would eat 
the flesh of their sons and their daughters. The city itself 
would fall into ruins of blackened stones, and the surround- 
ing valley be filled with the carcasses of the slain making 
banquet for the fowls of the heaven and the beasts of the 
earth. To emphasize his words he broke the potter’s ves- 
sel, pouring forth its contents in token that the blood of his 
countrymen would be shed to bedew and saturate the soil. 

Not satisfied with this, he returned from Tophet and 
stood in the court of the Temple, perhaps on the steps that 
led up to the court of the priests. Crowds of people were 
probably at the time engaged in some sacred rite; it may 
have been the time of one of the great feasts. When his 
voice was heard, a vast concourse must have gathered, 
whose angry faces and vehement gestures indicated the in- 
tensity of their dislike to the man who cast the shadow of 
impending destruction over their gayest hours. The en- 
durance of one of them at least had at last reached its 
limit. Pashur, the chief governor of the Temple, to whose 


THE FIRE OF HOLY IMPULSE 93 


jurisdiction its order was intrusted, gathering a band of 
Levites or Temple servants, seized the prophet, threw him 
on the pavement, scourged him after the Eastern fashion, 
and finally thrust him into the stocks, leaving him there 
the whole night, to the ridicule and hatred of the populace, 
to the cold night and the prowling dogs. 

In the morning Pashur appears to have repented of his 
harsh treatment, and to have released the prophet, whose 
strong spirit was not for a moment cowed by the indignity 
and torture to which he had been exposed. Turning on 
his persecutor, he told him that he would live to be a ter- 
ror to himself and all his friends; that all Judah would be 
given into the hand of the king of Babylon, now men- 
tioned for the first time; that the people would be carried 
captives to Babylon, and slain there with the sword; and 
that all the riches and gains of the city, and all the pre- 
cious things thereof, and all the treasures of the king of 
Judah, should be given into the hand of their enemies to 
carry to Babylon. It is this fourfold mention of Babylon 
that gives color to the suggestion that Nineveh had fallen, 
and that the strong hand of Nabopolassar and his son was 
beginning to show itself, and to wield the scepter which 
was falling from the faltering grasp of one of the oldest 
and greatest empires of antiquity. 

Set free, Jeremiah went to his home, and there poured 
forth that marvelous combination of heroic faith and wail- 
ing grief which is recorded for us that we may know the 
weakness of his nature and learn how earthen was the ves- 
sel in which God had placed his heavenly treasure. No 
brazen wall was he, but a reed shaken by the wind; no 
wise, strong hero, but a child. What he did and said when 
face to face with his age was due to no native strength or 
heroism; as he says himself, his was ‘the soul of the 
needy ” (verse 13, R.V.). 


94 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


What a tale could be told by the walls of the secret 
chambers of God’s greatest saints! What litanies of tears 
and sighs and broken sentences have beaten against them 
in successive billows of heart-rending sorrow! ‘Take, for 
instance, that outburst of Luther on the eve of his appear- 
ance before the Diet of Worms. Those who have seemed 
strongest and most rock-like in the presence of their fellows 
have sunk most helplessly on the ground in solitude, con- 
fessing that none were so weak and helpless as they. 

Our prophet seems to have gone even farther. Then 
came a suggestion to his heart that he should relinquish his 
labors and renounce public for private life. Why struggle 
any more against the inevitable? Why set himself to con- 
vince those who would not be convinced, and who repaid 
his love with hate? Why surrender name and comfort 
and human love for the thankless task of endeavoring to 
stem his people’s career? He came to the point of say- 
ing, “Send whom thou wilt send; intrust thy commission 
to some stronger soul, cast in a more heroic mold; let me 
go back to the seclusion and humble toils of my village 
home.” 

Not dissimilar have been the appeals of God’s servants 
in every age, when they have measured their weakness 
against the strength of the evils they have combated, and 
have marked their limited success: the handfuls of seed 
wasted upon barren soil; the word spoken in the ear of 
the wind; the futility of opposing an Ahab or a Jezebel; 
the ingratitude of those whom they would have gladly 
saved. They have been disposed to cry with the greatest 
of the prophets, ‘It is enough; let me die!” 


II. THe IRReEsIsSTIBLE IMpULSE.—‘ There is in mine 
heart as it were a burning fire shut up in my bones, and 
I am weary with forbearing, and I cannot contain.” ‘“O 


THE FIRE OF HOLY IMPULSE 95 


Lord, . . . thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed.” 
Three things arrest us here. 

(1) Zhe Prophet’s Habit of Turning from Man to God.— 
Throughout the book there are so many indications of the 
close fellowship in which he lived with Jehovah. God 
seemed always nigh at hand. His ear always bent down 
to the least whisper of his servant’s need. Compelled to 
live much alone, this much-suffering man acquired the 
habit of counting on the companionship of God as one of 
the undoubted facts of his life. He poured into the ear 
of God every thought as it passed through his soul. He 
spread forth his roots by the river of God, which is full of 
water. There was no fear, therefore, that his leaf would 
become sere in the summer heat, or that he would cease 
from yielding fruit in the year of drought. The Lord was 
his strength, his stronghold, and his refuge in the day of 
affliction, and to him he opened his cause. “Heal me, O 
Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be 
saved: for thou art my praise. . . . Let me not be dis- 
mayed or ashamed” (xvii. 14—18). 

Let us seek this attitude of soul, which easily turns 
from man to God; not foregoing the hours of prolonged 

fellowship, but, in addition, acquiring the habit of talking 

over our life with One who does not need to be informed 
of what transpires, but awaits with infinite desire to receive 
the confidence of his children. Talk over each detail of 
your life with God, telling him all things, and finding the 
myriad needs of the soul satisfied in him. 

(2) The Burning Fire—We have sometimes seen a little 
steamer, like “The Maid of the Mist” at the foot of the 
Falls of Niagara, resisting and gaining upon a stormy tor- 
rent madly rushing past her. Slowly she has worked her 
way through the mad rush of waters, defying their attempt 
to bear her back, calmly and serenely pursuing her onward 


g6 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


course, without being turned aside, driven back, or dis- 
mayed. And why? Because a burning fire is shut up in 
her heart, and her engines cannot stay, because impelled 
in their strong and regular motion. Similarly, within Jere- 
miah’s heart a fire had been lit from the heart of God, and 
was kept aflame by the continual fuel heaped on it. The 
difficulty, therefore, with him was, not in speaking, but in 
keeping silent—not in acting, but in refraining. 

This sheds some light upon the prophetic impulse, and 
helps us to understand what the Apostle Peter meant when 
he said, “Holy men of God spake as they were borne 
along by the Holy Ghost.” It was as though the cur- 
rent of thought and feeling came mightily from without, 
and, passing through them, swept them forward irresistibly. 
In this way it often happened that the prophets did not 
understand words which were put into their hearts by the 
Spirit of God, and of whose full meaning they were ignorant. 

But, after all, our main desire is to know how we may 
have this heart on fire. We are tired of a cold heart to- 
ward God. We complain because of our sense of effort 
in Christian life and duty; we would fain learn the secret 
of being so possessed by the Spirit and thought of God 
that we might be daunted by no opposition, abashed by 
no fear. The source of the inward fire is the love of God, 
shed abroad by the Holy Ghost; not primarily our love to 
God, but our sense of his love to us. The coals of juniper 
that gave so fierce a heat to the heart of a Rutherford were 
brought from the altar of the heart of God. If we set 
ourselves with open face toward the cross, which, like a 
burning lens, focuses the love of God, and if, at the same 
time, we reckon upon the Holy Spirit—well called the 
Spirit of Burning—to do his wonted office, we shall find 
the ice that cakes the surface of our heart dissolving in 
tears of penitence, and presently the sacred fire will begin 


THE FIRE OF HOLY IMPULSE 97 


to glow. Then the love of Christ will constrain us. Whether 
we be beside ourselves or be sober will not be the subject 
of our consideration; but his Spirit, the thought of what 
he desires, the passion of fulfilling his will, will destroy the 
fire of self-esteem, and replace it with the sacred fire of 
passionate devotion. 

When that love has once begun to burn within the soul, 
when once the baptism of fire has set us aglow, the sins 
and sorrows of men—their impieties and blasphemies, their 
disregard of God, of his service and of his day, their blind 
courting of danger, their dalliance with evil—will only incite 
in us a more ardent spirit. To see the multitudes rushing 
to destruction, to hear the boast of the blasphemer, the 
taunt of the infidel, the cry of the oppressed, the ribald 
mirth of the profane, the desecration of all that is holiest 
and best in man; to think of the grief caused to the Spirit 
of God, the dishonor done to him; to anticipate the outer 
darkness, the undying worm, the bottomless pit—surely 
these will be enough to fan the smoldering embers till they 
break out in the least emotional; as when Jeremiah said 
that he felt an inner impulse, to restrain which was a weari- 
ness, to stay from obeying which was a sin. 

(3) Zhe Prophet's Safety —“ The Lord is with me as a 
mighty one and terrible; therefore my persecutors shall 
stumble, and they shall not prevail.” The presence of God 
ss salvation. When Ezekiel describes the plot of Edom to 
possess herself of the land of the chosen people, he indi- 
cates bya single phrase the futility of the attempt, saying sig- 
nificantly, “Whereas the Lord was there” (Ezek. xxxv. 10). 
It was enough, though Israel was in exile, that God’s Spirit 
was brooding over their desolate land. He guarded its 
frontiers and filled its vacant spaces, and could not be dis- 
possessed. His presence made every attempt to capture 
it abortive. 


98 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


Thus Jeremiah felt. He might be the weakest of the 
weak, having neither might, nor wisdom, nor power of 
speech, apparently the easy prey of Pashur and Jehoiakim ; 
but since God was with him, casting the mantle of his pro- 
tection around his servant, and pledging himself to be his 
stronghold and house of defence, he was invulnerable. 

O weak and trembling soul, if thou art true to God, God 
is with thee, besetting thee behind and before, and cover- 
ing thee with the hollow of his hand. Thou shalt be like 
the city of the great King—the kings may assemble, but 
so soon as they see thee they shall be stricken with terror 
and pass away, while thou shalt be a quiet habitation, a 
tent that shall not be removed, the stakes whereof shall 
never be plucked, neither shall any of the cords thereof be 
broken. ‘This God is our God forever and ever: he will 
be our guide even forevermore” (Ps, xlviii. 14, R.V., marg.). 


XI. 


Afflictions, Distresses, Cumults. 
(JEREMIAH xxvi.) 


‘«T see the wrong that round me lies, 
I feel the guilt within ; 
I hear, with groan and travail-cries, 
The world confess its sin. 


‘* Vet in the maddening maze of things, 
And tossed by storm and flood, 
To one fixed stake my spirit clings— 
I know that God is good.” 
WHITTIER. 


kings of Judah. Josephus says that he was unjust in 
disposition, an evil-doer, neither pious toward God nor 
just toward men. Something of this may have been due 
to the influence of his wife Nehushta, whose father, Elna- 
than, was an accomplice in the royal murder of Urijah. 
“Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to 
reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he 
did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God.” 
Such is the inspired epitaph by the chronicler. 

Jeremiah appears to have been constantly in conflict with 
this king, and probably the earliest manifestation of conflict 
that could not but subsist between two such men occurred 

99 


H eeces cei was, perhaps, the most despicable of the 


100 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


in connection with the building of Jehoiakim’s palace. 
Though his kingdom was greatly impoverished with the 
heavy fine of between forty and fifty thousand pounds im- 
posed by Pharaoh Necho after the defeat and death of 
Josiah, and though the times were dark with portents of 
approaching disaster, yet he began to rear a splendid pal- 
ace for himself, with spacious chambers and large windows, 
floors of cedar and decorations of vermilion. As Elijah 
confronted Ahab, so did Jeremiah confront the young king 
with his terrible woes: “ Woe unto him that buildeth his 
house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by injustice ; 
that useth his neighbor’s service without wages, and giveth 
him not his hire. . . . Thine eyes and thine heart are not 
but for thy dishonest gain, and for oppression, and for v10- 
lence.” He further reminded him that the stability of 
Josiah’s throne depended not on the splendor of his pal- 
ace, but upon the justice with which he judged the cause 
of the poor and needy (Jer. xxii. 13, etc.). 

Clearly such a monarch must have entertained a mortal 
hatred toward the man who dared to raise his voice in 
denunciation of his crimes; and, like Herod with John the 
Baptist, he would not have scrupled to quench in blood 
the light that cast such strong condemnation upon his 
oppressive and cruel actions. An example of this had been 
recently afforded in the death of Urijah, who had uttered 
solemn words against Jerusalem and its inhabitants in the 
same way that Jeremiah had done. Such fury had been 
excited by his words that he had been obliged to flee to 
Egypt, from whence the king had secured his extradition, 
that he might avenge his bold denunciation by the sword 
and fling his body into the graves of the common people. 
Small shrift, then, could be expected by Jeremiah, if the 
king dared to take measures against him. But it would 
appear that this time at least his safety was secured by the 


AFFLICTIONS, DISTRESSES, TUMULTS 101 


interposition of influential friends among the aristocracy, 
one of whom was Ahikam, the son of Shaphan (Jer. xxvi. 
20-24). 


I. THe DivinzE Commission.—Beneath the divine im- 
pulse Jeremiah went up to the court of the Lord’s house, 
and took his place on some great occasion when all the 
cities of Judah had poured their populations to worship 
there. Not one word was to be kept back. We are all 
more or less conscious of these inward impulses; and it 
often becomes a matter of considerable difficulty to distin- 
guish whether they originate in the energy of our own 
nature or are the genuine outcome of the Spirit of Christ. 
It is only in the latter case that such service can be fruit- 
ful. And here for a moment we will turn aside to see how 
the heart of man may become the medium through which 
God can pour his thoughts on men, and the way by which 
we may recognize his inward prompting. 

There is no greater enemy of the highest usefulness than 
the presence of the flesh in our activities. There is no 
department of life or service into which its subtle, deadly 
influence does not penetrate. We have to encounter it in 
our unregenerate life, when its passions reveal themselves, 
brooking no restraint. We meet it after we have entered 
upon the new life, striving against the Spirit, and restrain- 
ing his gracious energy. We are most baffled when we 
find it prompting to holy resolutions, and efforts after a 
consecrated life. The Apostle Paul calls this the unequal 
marriage of the flesh, or self-life, with the holy law of God 
—a union which brings forth fruit unto death. And, lastly, 
it confronts us in Christian work, because there is so much 
of it that in our quiet moments we are bound to trace to a 
desire for notoriety, to a passion to excel, and to the rest- 
lessness of a nature which evades questions in the deeper 


102 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


life by flinging itself into every avenue through which it 
may exert its activities. 

There is only one solution to these difficulties. By the 
way of the cross and the grave we can alone become dis- 
entangled and discharged from the insidious domination of 
this evil principle, which is accursed by God, and hurtful 
to holy living, as blight to the tender fruit. In the cross 
of Jesus, when he died in the likeness of sinful flesh, God 
wrote his curse upon every manifestation of selfish and 
fleshly energy ; and now it remains for each of us to appro- 
priate that cross, to accept the divine sentence, to lie in 
the grave where the voices of human ambition and adula- 
tion cannot follow us, to oppose the silence of death to the 
workings of our evil self. Not, however, to stay there; 
but to pass up by the grace of the Holy Ghost into the 
pure resurrection air and light, where no face is visible 
but that of the risen Saviour, where no voice is audible 
save his, and where in the hush of perfect fellowship the 
spirit becomes able to discern the wish of its Lord. 


II. THe MEssAGE AND ITS RECEPTION.—There was a 
twofold appeal in the words Jeremiah was commissioned 
to deliver on this great occasion, when the whole land 
stood intent to hear. On the one side, by his lips, God 
entreated his people to repent and turn from their evil 
ways; on the other, he bade them know that their obdu- 
racy would compel him to make their great national shrine 
as complete a desolation as the site of Shiloh, which for 
five hundred years had been in ruins. It is impossible to 
realize the intensity of passion which such words evoked. 
They seemed to insinuate that Jehovah could not defend 
his own, or that their religion had become so heartless that 
he would not. Prophets and priests had assured the peo- 
ple that the very presence among them of Jehovah’s Tem- 


AFFLICTIONS, DISTRESSES, TUMULTS 103 


ple was a guaranty of their safety, and to suggest that a 
fate might overtake them like that which in the days of 
Samuel made the ears of every listener to tingle seemed the 
height of impertinence. “ Now it came to pass, when Jere- 
miah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had 
commanded him to speak unto all the people,” that he found 
himself suddenly in the vortex of a whirlpool of popular 
excitement. Thus it befell Paul in after-days, when the 
presumption that he had defiled the holy place produced 
so intense a paroxysm of popular feeling that all the city 
was moved, and the people ran together and laid hold on 
him, and dragged him out of the Temple, so that he was 
with difficulty rescued by a regiment of Roman soldiers, 
who bore him by main force from the violence of the 
crowd, the multitude following and crying out, “ Away 
with him !” (Acts xxi. 27-36). There is little doubt that 
Jeremiah would have met his death in a similar émeute, had 
it not been for the prompt interposition of the princes. 

Such is always the reception given on the part of man to 
the words of God. We may gravely question how far our 
words are God’s, when people accept them quietly and as 
a matter of course. The Word of God to those that hug 
their sin can only be as fire, a hammer, and a sharp, two- 
edged sword. And here again is a certain test whether 
our message is the product of our own fancy, or the burden 
of the Lord. That which men approve and applaud may 
lack the King’s seal and be the substitution on the part of 
the messenger of tidings which he deems more palatable, 
and therefore more likely to secure for himself a larger 
welcome. 


III. Wetcome INTERPOSITION.—The princés were 
seated in the palace, and instantly on receiving tidings of 
the outbreak came up to the Temple. Their presence 


104 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


stilled the excitement, and prevented the infuriated people 
from carrying out their design upon the life of the defence- 
less prophet. They hastily constituted themselves into a 
court of appeal, before which prophet and people were 
summoned.- The priests and prophets acted as the ex- 
ponents of the people’s wish, and demanded sentence of 
death, turning from the court to the people to ask their 
concurrence. Then Jeremiah stood on his defence. His 
plea was that he could not but utter the words with which 
the Lord had sent him. Again he called upon the people 
to amend their ways. He acknowledged that he was in 
their hands, but he warned them that innocent blood would 
bring its own Nemesis upon them all, and at the close 
of his address he reaffirmed his certain embassage from 
Jehovah, 

This bold and ingenuous defence seems to have turned 
the scale in his favor. The princes gave their verdict: 
“This man is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to 
us in the name of the Lord our God.” And the fickle 
populace, swept hither and thither by the wind, appear to 
have passed over e7 masse to the same conclusion ; so that 
princes and people stood confederate against the false 
prophets and priests. The conclusion thus gained was 
further confirmed by the voice of certain of the elders of 
the land, who had come from all the cities of Judah, and 
who reminded the people that the good King Hezekiah 
had acted very differently to the prophet Micah in listen- 
ing to his remonstrances, entreating the favor of the Lord, 
and securing the reversal of the divine sentence. 

Thus does God hide his faithful servants in the hollow 
of his hand. No weapon that is formed against them pros- 
pers. They are hidden in the secret of his pavilion from 
the strife of tongues. 


- 


AFFLICTIONS, DISTRESSES, TUMULTS 105 


HISTORICAL CONNECTION, 


In a previous chapter we saw that Egypt was mistress 
of all lands from the Nile to the Euphrates. But as soon 
as the Chaldeans had established their kingdom upon the 
ruins of Nineveh, they turned their attention to wrest from 
Pharaoh Necho some portion of his vast empire. Jeremiah 
had long before seen that this would be the case, and had 
depicted in graphic imagery the scene and issue of the 
awful battle at Carchemish, by the Euphrates, where the 
two mighty peoples wrestled for the supreme power of the 
world. 

He heard the call to arms. He beheld the horses heav- 
ily armed, and the horsemen with flashing spears and coats 
of mail, The Egyptian hosts, like the Nile at flood, pour 
themselves against the solid ranks of their foes; her tribu- 
taries from Cush and Put, together with the Ludim, famous 
at handling the bow, strive in vain to check the flight of 
Egypt’s mighty men. They flee apace, and look not back ; 
the sword devours and drinks its fill of blood; the cry of 
the fugitive hosts fills the earth with clamor ; and the mighty 
stumble, never to rise (Jer. xlvi. 1-12). Egypt never rallied 
again, nor dared to do more than strive against the yoke 
that Nebuchadnezzar, with imperial might, fastened upon 
her. 

After this there was nothing to stay the onset of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, who probably had been associated in the king- 
dom with his aged father, and the first year of whose reign 
would therefore coincide with the fourth year of Jehoiakim 
(Jer. xxv. 1). Like a leopard, to use the expression of 
Habakkuk, who at this time was beginning to exercise his 
ministry, the young king leaped upon the peoples that had 
been subject to Egypt and had aided in her expedition. 


106 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


And, as the tidings of his prowess spread through the 
world, Jeremiah foretold that he would be the scourge of 
God to punish the abounding wickedness of the peoples: 
‘“‘T will send unto Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, 
my servant, and will bring him against this land, and against 
the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round 
about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an 
astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual desolations. .. . 
And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonish- 
ment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon 
seventy years.” 

In his first invasion of Judah the king of Babylon con- 
tented himself with binding Jehoiakim in fetters to carry 
him to Babylon, though he seems afterward to have changed 
his intention, and to have restored him.to his throne as his 
vassal, taking an oath of allegiance (Ezek. xvii. 12, 13). 
He stripped the Temple of its precious vessels to enrich 
the house of his god at Babylon, and carried into captivity 
several of the mighty of the land, among them Daniel and 
his three friends (Dan. i. 1, 2). He then hastened back to 
Babylon, summoned thither by the tidings of the death of 
his father, Nabopolassar. 

For three years Jehoiakim remained faithful to his oath 
(2 Kings xxiv. 1); then he was deluded by the hope of 
independence, based on the hope of forming a confedera- 
tion of neighboring peoples. Messengers went to and fro 
between himself and Pharaoh, negotiating for horses and 
much people; though all the while Ezekiel and Jeremiah 
protested that Jehovah would certainly punish him for vio- 
lating his pledge to the king of Babylon. This was a time 
of unusual activity for the prophets of Jehovah, who strove 
their utmost to avert a political mistake, founded wpon a 
moral obliquity, and sure to incur terrible vengeance 
(Ezek. xvii. 15-21). 


AFFLICTIONS, DISTRESSES, TUMULTS 107 


It befell as they feared. Nebuchadnezzar, who was not 
prepared to brook such infidelity on the part of a sub- 
ject king, soon put his forces in motion, and prepared to 
advance across the desert to punish the weak and faithless 
Jehoiakim. It was during his march on Jerusalem that the 
incidents narrated in: the two following chapters took place 
—the one the proclamation of a fast, the other the gathering 
of the Rechabites, with other fugitives, into the shelter of 
the city. 

We have no certain clew to the prophet’s history during 
these three or four years. His heart must have been filled 
with the patriot’s anguish as he saw the coils of invasion 
drawn closer around the devoted city. To him, indeed, it 
was the year of drought, and there was no hope save in 
God: and often upon his lips must have been words like 
those which the great Florentine addressed to the city 
which he loved with the passionate affection which the 
Jews always cherished toward Jerusalem: “Thy sins, O 
Florence, are the cause of these stripes. But now repent, 
offer prayers, become united. I have wearied myself all 
the days of my life to make known to thee the truths of 
the faith and of holy living, and I have had nothing but 
tribulations, derision, and reproach.” 


XII. 
he Indestructible Word. 


(JEREMIAH xxxvi. 23.) 


‘Truth, crushed to earth, shall rise again: 
The eternal years of God are hers ; 
But error, vanquished, writhes in pain, 
And dies amid her worshipers,” 


E are admitted to the prophet’s private chamber, 
where he is keeping close that he may not excite 
the acute animosity and hatred of the people. Baruch, his 
trusted friend, a man of rank and learning, sits writing with 
laborious care at the dictation of the prophet, whose soul 
is borne along by the impulse of the Divine Spirit. “Tell us 
now,” the princes said afterward to Baruch, “ Howdidst thou 
write all these words at his mouth?” ‘Then Baruch answered 
them, “ He pronounced all these words unto me with his 
mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.” 

When the roll was filled, Jeremiah, not venturing to go 
into places of public concourse, intrusted it to Baruch, and 
bade him read it to the assembled crowds, Jerusalem just 
then was unusually full. From all parts of Judah people 
had come to observe the great fast which had been pro- 
claimed in view of the approach of the Babylonian army. 
Adopting the cry which Jeremiah had so fervently depre- 
cated, ‘‘ The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, 


are these,” and imagining that there was a special virtue in 
108 


THE INDESTRUCTIBLE WORD ¥OQ 


the Temple precincts, the multitudes had crowded thither 
in an agony of fear, hoping by their black veils and covered 
lips and heart-rending cries to propitiate the Almighty and 
avert the fate that seemed imminent. 

Choosing a position in the upper court at the entry of 
the new gate to the Lord’s house, Baruch commenced to 
read, while the people stood densely massed around him. 
Amid the awestruck crowd was a young man, Michaiah, the 
grandson of Shaphan, who was so impressed and startled 
by what he heard that he hastened to acquaint the 
princes, then sitting in council in the chamber of the chief 
secretary of state, in the royal palace. They in turn were 
so aroused by what he told them that they sent him back 
to the Temple, and asked Baruch to come without delay 
and read the prophet’s words to them. He came at their 
request, and sitting among them commenced to read. 

In the group of princes were several notable men: Elish- 
ama, the secretary of state; Elnathan, the father-in-law of 
the king, who had brought the prophet Urijah back from 
Egypt to die; and others. A great fear fell upon them 
as they heard those ominous words, which were probably 
closely similar to those recorded in the twenty-fifth chap- 
ter of this book. Though they had joined in the general 
hatred of the prophet, they were deeply sensible that there 
was everything to justify him in his prognostications of 
coming trouble; and it seemed their plain duty to acquaint 
the king with the contents of the roll. 

Before doing so, however, they counseled Baruch and 
Jeremiah to conceal themselves, for they well knew the 
despotic and passionate temper of Jehoiakim ; and the roll 
was left in the chamber of Elishama. It would appear 
that in the first instance they thought a verbal statement 
of the words they had heard would suffice. This, however, 
would not satisfy the king, who bade Jehudi fetch the roll 


110 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


itself. It was winter, the month of December; the king 
was occupying the winter-quarters of his palace, and a fire 
was burning brightly in the brazier. It is a vivid picture— 
the king sitting before the fire ; the princes standing around 
him ; Jehudi reading the contents of the roll; consternation 
and panic reigning throughout the city and darkening the 
faces of the prostrate crowds in the Temple courts. As 
Jehudi began to read, the royal brow knit, and symptoms 
of a tempest of anger showed themselves. After the scribe 
had read three or four columns, Jehoiakim snatched the 
roll from his hand, and, demanding the penknife which he 
carried as symbol and implement of his calling, began to 
cut the manuscript in pieces, which he flung contemptu- 
ously into the fire. The worst have some compunctions, 
and for the most passionate there are warning voices that 
remonstrate and plead. So was it with King Jehoiakim. 
Delaiah, Gemariah, and even Elnathan tried to dissuade 
him from his purpose, but in vain. Nothing could stop 
him until the whole roll was cut to pieces, and every frag- 
ment consumed. Not content with this flagrant act of de- 
fiance, he gave orders for the immediate arrest of Jeremiah 
and Baruch—an order which his emissaries attempted to 
execute, but in vain. 

The destruction of the roll did not, however, cancel the 
terrible doom to which the ship of state was hurrying, 
under the orders of its passionate and wicked captain. 
On another roll all the words of the book which he had 
burned were written again, and others were added, foretell- 
ing the indignity and insult to which the dead body of the 
king would be exposed. “His dead body shall be cast 
out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.” 


I. Eves OPENED TO SEE.—There was a vast difference 
between Baruch, whose heart was in perfect sympathy with 


THE INDESTRUCTIBLE WORD Iil 


Jeremiah, and Jehudi or the princes. But there was al- 
most as much between the faithful scribe and the Heaven- 
illumined prophet.. The one could only write as the words 
streamed from those burning lips; he saw nothing, he real- 
ized nothing; to him the walls of the chamber were the 
utmost bound of vision: while the other beheld the whole 
landscape of truth outspread before him, the rocks and 
shoals on the margin of the ocean, the inrolling storm-bil- 
lows tipped with angry foam, the gathering clouds, the 
ship straining in every timber and driving sheer on the 
shore. For Jeremiah the walls of the chamber where they 
sat together were as though they had become transparent ; 
he looked through and beyond them, and read off his mes- 
sage from what he saw, as a man might read from a book. 

This was the work of the Spirit who inspired him, and 
whose special function it was to open the eye of the seers 
of the old time to the great facts of the unseen and eternal 
world, which were shortly to be reduplicated in the world 
of the temporal and visible. They beheld visions of God: 
the sapphire throne upborne by the strong cherubim; the 
terrible wheels of providence; the rise and fall of mighty 
empires ; the subdual of sin and pain by the mighty sway 
of the coming One. To speak what he knew, and to tes- 
tify what he had seen—such was the mission of the prophet. 

In our case there is no likelihood of this. Yet men 
may be seers still. Two men may sit together side by 
side. The veil of sense may hang darkly before the one, 
while for the other it is rent in twain from the top to the 
bottom. Zhere no thought, no ambition, no desire for 
aught beyond the temporal and seen; but Aere the vision 
of the presence and care of God, of the principalities and 
powers in the heavenlies, of the ministry of angels and the 
opposition of fiends, of the chariots and horses of salvation, 
of the prize and crown, of the awards of Christ’s judgment- 


112 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


seat, and the home beyond the river. Flesh and blood do 
not reveal such things, but the Spirit of God. They are 
hidden from the wise and prudent, but revealed to babes 
who love God. Happy are they the eyes of whose heart 
are opened to know what is the hope of his calling, what 
the riches of his inheritance in the saints, and what the 



















or eeu but of fachieiores it cannot be acquired in 
school of earthly science, but is the gift of Him who alo: 
can open the eyes of the blind, and remove the films Yi 
earthliness that shut out the eternal and unseen. If you 
lack it, reader, seek it at the hands of Jesus; be willing 
do his will, and you shall know. It is a thousand pr 
to be blind, and not able to see afar off, when all ar 
stand the mountains of God in solemn majesty, as the 
around the Swiss hostelry, where the traveler arrives 
nightfall, to eat and drink and sleep, unconscious of 
proximity of so much loveliness. It is related of Ampére, 
electrician, who was short-sighted without being aware 
it, that when he became conscious of his defective vis 
through the casual use of the eye-glasses of a friend, 
burst into tears as he realized how much he had mis 
throughout his life of the wonderful beauty and interest 
of the world around him. With more reason will many 
of us have to lament our untold loss through that spiritual 
near-sightedness of which the Holy Ghost speaks (2 Pet. 
io, RW): 

If, on the other hand, you have the opened eye, you 
will not need books of evidences to establish to your satis- 
faction the truth of our holy religion, the glory of the risen 
Lord, the world of the unseen. With the woman of Samaria 


THE INDESTRUCTIBLE WORD 113 


you will say, ““We have seen it for ourselves.” No further 
proof will be needed than your own spiritual senses afford. 
And though a series of well-ordered arguments should be 
brought into array to assail your position as a believer, you 
would be bold to reply, ‘‘ Whereas I was blind, now I see.” 
_ The patriarchs of old who reached forth their hands to 
greet the vision of the city that hath foundations, the New 
_ Jerusalem—which all holy souls behold descending out of 


kaa 
heaven from God—furnish the model for spiritual men of 


















Bible in varied ways. Among these are Systems of 
tcraft and Error. They have done it. They will do 
ain. They are wise to do it—I mean wise in their own 
ests. For when once the Bible is in the hands of the 
people, the false teacher who has deluded them for selfish 
purposes must pack. The long reign of the Roman Catho- 
: Church was broken as soon as Tyndale, Erasmus, and 
ther opened the Word of God, and the printing-press 
ered it over the world. It is not to be wondered at, 
-efore, that as long as possible fires were lit for Bible 
ing in every chief city of Europe, and the knife was 
_ freely used to cut out whatever condemned the office of the 
pope, or the system to which he belonged. The Vulgate, 
with its mutilations and excisions, is a standing evidence 
that Jehudi’s penknife survived his age. 

The next that follows Jehoiakim’s practice is the Jnfidel, 
who uses the keen blade of bitter sarcasm and miscalled 
reason to destroy the Scriptures. The hostility that mani- 
fested itself in the winter palace among the princes of this 
world has wrought in the halls of earthly learning and sci- 


114 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


ence, instigating similar acts to theirs. The laboratory of 
the chemist, the hammer of the mineralogist, the pry of the 
geologist, the telescope of the astronomer, the calculations 
of the arithmetician, and the explorations of the discoverer, 
have all been used in turn as the penknife of destruction. 
The Bible is cut up regularly once in each generation by 
men like these. 

The next are the Higher Critics of our time, who surely 
have gone beyond the necessities of the case in their ruth- 
less use of the knife. Some of them seem to delight in 
making havoc of the sacred writings, hacking at the Old 
Testament specially, and whittling away from the reputed 
work of a Moses, an Isaiah, or a Daniel. There is room 
for the honest examination of the fabric of Sacred Script- 
ure, its language, the evidence furnished in its texture of 
the successive hands which have reédited its most ancient 
documents; but this is altogether different to the ruthless 
vandalism that wantonly assigns large portions of the Pen- 
tateuch to the age of Ezra, and the Book of Daniel to the 
times of the Maccabees. 

We are all tempted to use Jehudi’s penknife. It is proba- 
ble that no one is free from the almost unconscious habit 
of evading or toning down certain passages which conflict 
with the doctrinal or ecclesiastical position in which we 
were reared or which we have assumed. 

In our private reading of the Scripture we must beware 
of using the penknife. Whole books and tracts of truth 
are practically cut out of the Bible of some earnest Chris- 
tians—passages referring to the Second Advent, with their 
summons to awake and gird on the armor of light; those 
that deal with the undying worm, the unquenched fire, and 
the inevitable doom of the ungodly; those that describe 
the types and shadows of the ancient law; or those that 
build up massive systems of truth and doctrine, as in the 


THE INDESTRUCTIBLE WORD 115, 


epistles. But we can only eliminate these things at our 
peril. The Bible is like good wheaten bread, which con- 
tains all the properties necessary to support life. And we 
cannot eliminate its starch or sugar, its nitrates or phos- 
phates, without becoming enfeebled and unhealthy. It is 
a golden rule to read the Bible as a whole. Of course 
each will have his favorite passages, dark with tears and 
use: Psalm xxiii., Isaiah liii., John xiv.; but besides these 
there should be the loving and devout study of all Script- 
ure, which is given by inspiration of God, and is therefore 
profitable, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly 
furnished to every good work. 


III. THe INDESTRUCTIBLE Worp.—Men may destroy 
the words and the fabric on which they are written, but 
not the Word itself. It is the incorruptible Word of God, 
which liveth and abideth, though all flesh wither as grass 
and the glory of man as the flower of the field. It must 
be sometimes an uncomfortable reflection to those who re- 
fuse the testimony of the Word of God, who to all intents 
and purposes destroy it and despise its remonstrances and 
warnings, that their attitude toward the message cannot 
affect the reality to which it bears witness. 

Jeremiah wrote another roll. The money spent in buy- 
ing up copies of the Bible to burn at St. Paul’s enabled 
Tyndale to reissue the Scriptures in a cheaper form and a 
better type. And perhaps the most remarkable fact in this 
connection is that, in spite of all that has been done to 
stamp out the Bible, it exists in millions of copies, and is 
circulated among all the nations of the world—not a chap- 
ter effaced, not a parable dropped out, not a miracle injured, 
not a promise scarred. It has been declared over and over 
again to be a careless, unauthenticated collection of works 
of different periods, having no unity save that given by 


116 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


the bookbinder; yet it is with us to-day in unimpaired 
authority. 

And the facts to which Jeremiah bore witness all came 
to pass. Neither knife nor fire could arrest the inevitable 
doom of king, city, and people. The drunken captain may 
cut in pieces the chart that tells of the rocks in the vessel’s 
course, and put in irons the sailor who calls his attention 
to it; but neither will avert the crash that must ensue un- 
less the helm is turned. Let those beware who deny the 
testimony of Scripture to the retribution of sin and the 
wrath of God: these things are as true as the throne of 
God and the reward of the redeemed. You may tamper 
with and destroy the record, but the stubborn facts remain. 


XIII. 


The Rechabites. 
(JEREMIAH xxxv. 6-10.) 


‘* Happy if full of days—but happier far 
If, ere we yet discern life’s evening star, 
Sick of the service of a world that feeds 
Its patient drudges with dry chaff and weeds, 
We can escape from custom’s idiot sway, 
To serve the Sovereign we were born to obey.” 
COWPER. 


HE march of Nebuchadnezzar on Jerusalem was an- 
ticipated by incursions of Syrians, Moabites, and the 
children of Ammon. These may be compared to the squad- 
rons of light cavalry used in modern warfare to harass the 
enemy and prepare the way for heavier armaments. They 
swept up the valleys, massacred the peasantry, devoured the 
crops, and spread terror on every hand. The inhabitants, 
therefore, of the neighboring country, eager to save their 
lives and some relics of their property, left their houses 
and lands to the mercy of the invader, and fled for protec- 
tion to the metropolis, accounting that within the massive 
walls of Zion they would find safeguard. What a stir there 
must have been as day by day the motley groups pressed 
in under the old gateways, gray with age, and sought ac- 
commodation and food in the already overcrowded tene- 
ments of the city! 
Among the rest came a tribe that excited much curiosity 
117 


118 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


by reason of its strange and antique manners. It came in 
full force—of men at least. The sheik’s name was Jaazaniah 
—‘‘he whom Jehovah hears”; and his brethren and sons 
and the heads of other households were with him. They 
refused to shelter in the houses or permanent buildings of 
the city, but pitched their dusky tents in some open space 
within the walls, and there awaited the turn of events. 

Their record was an honorable one, and reached far back 
into the early days of Hebrew history. When Israel was 
passing through the wilderness of Sinai, the tribe of the 
Kenites showed them kindness, and this laid the founda- 
tion of perpetual friendliness between the two peoples. 
They seem to have adopted the religious convictions of 
Israel, and to have accompanied them into the Land of 
Promise. Retaining their integrity as a pastoral people, 
the Kenites maintained these friendly relations with Israel 
during the intervening centuries; and it was of this tribe 
that the Rechabites, for such was the name of this strange, 
tent-loving people, had sprung (Judges iv. 17, 24; 1 Sam. 
xv. 65) 8 Chron. ii. 5c). 

About the time of Elijah, and perhaps largely influenced 
by him, the sheik or leader of one branch of the Kenites 
was Jonadab, the son of Rechab. He was dismayed at the 
abounding corruption and iniquity of the time, and espe- 
cially of the northern kingdom, then under the fatal spell 
of Jezebel’s and Ahab’s influence, and resembling some rank 
jungle in whose steamy air, heavy with fever and poison, 
noisome creatures swarm and foul pestilences breed. In 
his endeavor to save his people from such a fate, this noble 
man, who afterward became Jehu’s confederate in extirpat- 
ing idolatry, bound his people under a solemn pledge to 
drink no wine forever; neither to build houses, nor sow 
seed, nor plant vineyards, but to dwell in tents. Two hun- 
dred and fifty years had passed since then, but when they 


THE RECHABITES wa) 


arrived in Jerusalem they were still true to the traditions 
of their race, and with sturdy strength stood out among 
the effeminate and idol-loving people of Jerusalem, living 
representatives of the noblest and purest days of Hebrew 


story. 


I, JEREMIAH’s TEST OF THE RECHABITES.—SO soon as 
their arrival was noised abroad and had come to the ears 
of Jeremiah, he was seized by a divine impulse to derive 
from them a striking object-lesson for his own people. 
With an inventiveness which only passionate love could 
have suggested, the prophet caught at every incident and 
used every method to awaken his people to realize their 
true position in the sight of God. Taking the leaders of 
the Rechabites with him, he went into the Temple, to a 
room belonging to the sons of Hanan, known as a man of 
God, immediately adjacent to the room occupied by the 
princes, and above that occupied by the gatekeeper. 

Probably a little group of Jews, arrested by the prophet’s 
association with these strange-looking men, followed them 
in to watch the proceedings. They were curious witnesses 
of the prophet’s action, as he caused bowls of wine to be 
set before the tribesmen, and cups to be offered them, 
that they might dip them in and drink. They also heard 
the blunt, unqualified refusal of these quaint, old-fashioned 
Puritans, “We will drink no wine,” followed by an ex- 
planation of the solemn obligation laid on them centuries 
before. 

The moral was obvious. Here were men loyal to the 
wish of their ancestor, though he was little more than a 
name to them, and refusing the offered sweets in which so 
many freely indulged. How great a contrast to the peo- 
ple of Jerusalem, who persistently disregarded the words 
of the living God perpetually remonstrating against their 


120 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


sins! The prohibitions of Jonadab were largely arbitrary 
and external, while those of Jehovah were corroborated by 
the convictions of conscience, and consonant with the 
deepest foundations of religion and morality. The voice 
of Jonadab was a cry coming faintly from far down the 
ages, while Jehovah was ever speaking with each new 
dawn, and in the voice of each fresh messenger whom he 
rose early to send. 

There could be but one result. Judah, eaten through 
with the crimes and corruption against which God had 
protested in vain, must reap the whirlwind, as she had sown 
the wind. There could be no escape from the judgment 
which was drawing nearer with every daybreak. If the 
people could not heed words of expostulation, of entreaty 
and warning, accounting them exaggerated and vain, they 
should at least be compelled to admit that not one of God’s 
threats of vengeance fell impotent on the air or missed its 
aim. 

On the other hand, such devotion to principle, such per- 
sistent culture of simplicity, frugality, and abstinence, such 
literal adherence to the will of the father of their house, 
not only carried within them the assurance of perpetuity to 
the people who practiced them, but must receive the sig- 
nature and countersign of the Almighty. “Therefore thus 
saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab the 
son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me 
forever.” 

This phrase had a very profound significance. It sug- 
gested, of course, obviously, that the tribe should not cease 
to exist. And it is to be noted that Dr. Wolff, the mis- 
sionary traveler, met a tribe in Arabia who claimed-to be 
Rechabites and read to him these words of Jeremiah from 
an Arabic Bible; and that Signor Pierotti, near the south- 
east end of the Dead Sea, met a tribe who also called them. 


THE RECHABITES 121 


selves Rechabites and quoted these words. But there was 
a yet deeper thought. The phrase is often used in Scripture 
of priestly service. And may we not infer that where we 
meet that devotion to principle and that detachment from 
the world which characterized these men, there will always 
be a strong religious tone, a knowledge of God, a power 
in prayer and intercession, which are the essential charac- 
teristics of the priest? This will lead us to thoughts which 
are alike suggestive and salutary. 


II. THE ELEMENTS oF A STRONGLY Re icious LIFE.— 
The phrase “to stand before God” designates a high-toned 
religious life, and includes the knowledge of God, the fac- 
ulty of executing his commands, and the power of interced- 
ing for others. The phrase was a favorite one with Elijah, 
as expressing the spirit of his great career, and was chosen 
by the angel Gabriel as conveying to the maiden of Naza- 
reth the most certain guaranty of his authority and verac- 
ity. Surely every reader of these words must desire that 
the spirit and attitude of all coming days may be desig- 
nated thus! Oh, to stand always before Him, on whose 
face the glory of God shines as the sun in his strength ! 
But if this is to be something more than a vague wish, an . 
idle dream, three things should be remembered, suggested 
by the words of the Rechabites: 

(1) There must be Close Adhesion to Great Principles.— 
Many superficial reasons might have suggested to the 
Rechabites compliance with the prophet’s tempting sug- 
gestion. The wine was before them; there was no sin 
against God in taking it; the people around had no scru- 
ples about it; and the prophet himself invited them. But 
against all they stood on the principles which Jonadab 
had laid down to guide them, and they did not hesitate 
to avow them, let those ridicule who would. 


122 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


In contrast to this, it is the general tendency é a 
men to ask what is the practice of the majority; w 
done by those in their rank and station; and what vill 
expected of them. We drift with the current. We allow 
our lives to be settled by our companions or our whims, _ 
our fancies or our tastes; and if ever we have a momentary 
qualm in contrasting our lives with the standards of primi- 
tive simplicity, of which Scripture and old biographies are 
full, we excuse ourselves by saying that so long as the main _ 
purpose is right the details are unimportant. This reason ¥! 
ing is wrong. We make a grave mistake in supposing that — 
the main purpose of our life is something different from 
that which reveals itself in details. What we are in the 
details of our life that we are really and essentially. The 
truest photographs are taken when we are unprepared for 
the operation. The true man, therefore, is always settling 
his life in its details, as well as in its main direction, accord- 
ing to great principles. Before we go another step let me 
entreat my readers not to allow themselves to do or permit 
things simply because custom or taste or public opinion 
advocates them, but to bring their entire life to the touch- 
stone of some elementary law of the kingdom of heaven, 
which shall do in the moral what gravitation does in the 
physical sphere, ordaining the course of worlds and of 
molecules of dust. 

And if it be asked, What principle is far-reaching enough 
in its scope and powerful enough in its force for so great 
a work? let us ponder what William Law so perpetually 
insists upon in his ‘Serious Call”: “The first and most 
fundamental principle of Christianity is an intention to 
please God in all our actions. It is because the generality 
of Christians have no such intention that they so fall short 
of true devotion.” And, indeed, when we consider the 
characters of the early disciples of Jesus, or those of saints, 














THE RECHABITES 123 














and confessors, must we not admit that they were 
lous in seeking the will of God about the trifles 
life as the Rechabites were in consulting the will 
id pleasure of the dead Jonadab? The thought of God 
was as present with the one as of Jonadab with the other. 
And was not this the secret of their strong and noble lives ? 

What a revolution would come to us all if it became the 
one fixed aim and ambition of our lives to do always those 
things that are pleasing in His sight! It would not make 
less tender in our friendships, or less active in our ser- 
vice. It would not take the sparkle from the eye, the nerve 
from the grasp, or the warm glow from the heart. But it 
would check many a vain word, arrest many a silly jest, 
stop much selfish and vainglorious expenditure, and bring 
us back to whatsoever things are true, honorable, just, pure, 
lovely, and of good report. 

(2) Abstinence from the Spirit of the Age-—It was an im- 
mense gain in every way for the Rechabites to abstain from 
wine. Wine was closely associated with the luxury, corrup- 
tion, and abominable revelries of the time (Isa. xxviii. 1-8). 
Their abstinence was not only a protest against the evils 
which were honeycombing their age, but was a sure safe- 
guard against participation in them. 

In these days the same principles apply. Whatever may 
be said about the use of alcohol in certain forms of sickness 
and debilitated health, it is incontrovertible that it is un- 
necessary as an article of ordinary diet. It is very closely 
identified with the vilest practices of impure passion, the 
obscenities of the music-hall, the license of the stage, and 
the coarse revelry of the race-course. Its fumes fill the card- 
room, the billiard-room, and the scene of abandoned vice. 
The votaries of sin confess that they could not do as they 
do apart from its excitement. Add to all this the incon- 
testable direct results of the drink traffic in crime, poverty, 


124 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


misery, suicide, and death—results which Mr. Gladstone 
once declared to be more deplorable than those that flow 
from famine, pestilence, and war combined. Surely, then, 
we shall do well to say with the Rechabites, whoever may 
ask us to drink, “ We will drink no wine.” 

But wine may stand for the spirit of the age, its restless- 
ness, its constant thirst for novelty, for amusement, for fas- 
cination, its feverish demand for the fresh play, the excit- 
ing novel, the rush of the season, the magnificent pageant. 
It is easier to abstain from alcohol than from this insidious 
spirit of our time, which is poured so freely into the air, as 
from the vial of some demon sorceress. We might well 
refer to this the wise words of the Apostle: ‘‘ Be not drunk 
with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit.” 
You cannot exorcise Satan by a negation. You must be 
preoccupied, prepossessed. And it is only they that are 
filled by the Holy Spirit, in his blessed energy, who are 
proof against the intoxicating cup of this Circe world. 

(3) We must Hold Lightly to the Things around —The 
Rechabites dwelt in tents. They drove their vast flocks 
from place to place, and were content with the simple life 
of the wandering shepherd. It was thus that the great 
patriarchs had lived before them (Heb. xi. 9, 13). And 
ever since their days the tent life has been the chosen 
emblem of the life that is so strongly attracted to the other 
world as to be lightly attached to this. 

It is difficult to say what worldliness consists in. What 
would be worldly to some people is an ordinary part of 
life’s circumstances to others. But all of us are sensible 
of ties that hold us to the earth. We may discover what 
they are by considering what we cling to; what we find it 
hard to let go, even into the hands of Christ; what we are 
always striving to augment; what we pride ourselves in. 
It may be name, fame, notoriety, pride of fashion, rank, 


THE RECHABITES 125 


money. But whatever it is, if it hinders us from living on 
the highest level, if it is a weight that impedes our speed 
heavenward, it should be laid deliberately on God’s altar, 
that he may do with it as he will, and that we may be able, 
without let or hindrance, to be wholly for God. 


XIV. 


Hidden, but Radiant. 
(JEREMIAH xxxvi. 26.) 


“ Be still and strong, 
O Man, my Brother! hold thy sobbing breath, 
And keep thy soul’s large window pure from wrong! 
That so, as life’s appointment issueth, 
Thy vision may be clear to watch along 
The sunset consummation-lights of death!” 
E. B. BROWNING. 


FTER Jehoiakim had deliberately cut in pieces the 
prophet’s roll, and so rejected his warnings and ex- 
postulations, and when in addition to this he had threat- 
ened the lives of God’s faithful servants, it became clear 
that no further good could be gained by reiterating his 
messages. Thus the prophet’s voice was hushed, appar- 
ently for the remainder of the reign of this bad and infatu- 
ated king. This is one of those principles of the divine 
government, which is as certain in its operation to-day as 
ever, that after a certain time the divine voice, being un- 
heeded, ceases to speak, and those who will not retain God 
in their knowledge are given up to the workings of their 
corrupt minds, to work all uncleanness with greediness. 
We recall those ominous words, written as an epitaph on 
the grave of the first king of Israel: “Samuel came no 


more to see Saul until the day of his death,” and the no 
126 


HIDDEN, BUT RADIANT Lady 


less awful words of the apostle of love: “There is a sin 
unto death: not concerning this do I say that he should 
make request” (1 John v. 16, R.v.). 

Into that new and splendid palace of Jehoiakim, whose 
spacious halls were ceiled with cedar from Lebanon, lighted 
by wide windows, and painted with bright colors, the one 
presence never entered which at that time would have 
saved the ship of state—as the timely arrival of a pilot 
may save an ocean steamer from the fatal ignorance of an 
incompetent captain. The false prophets might beguile 
the ears of king and people with predictions bred in the 
falsehood of their own nature. The strong Egyptian par- 
tisans might urge on the king alliance with Pharaoh as the 
certain cure for the difficulties of their position. But Jere- 
miah’s voice, during the dark and troublous days that suc- 
ceeded that scene in the palace, and until Jehoiakim’s body 
was cast forth, unburied and unwept, was still. How did 
it fare with the prophet, and what engaged him during 
those eventful years ? 


I. THE Lorp H1p H1m.—What that precisely means it 
is impossible to say. Was there a John of Gaunt for this 
Wycliffe, an elector of Saxony for this Luther? Did Ahi- 
kam, who had before interposed on his behalf, or his sons 
—Gemariah, who lent Jeremiah his room in the Temple for 
the reading of his roll, and Gedaliah, who became governor 
of Judah after Zedekiah’s deportation—take the prophet 
under their care? Or was this hiding something more 
divine and blessed still? In any case, whether through 
the intervention of second causes or directly, Jeremiah was 
hidden in the covert of the divine presence from the plot- 
tings of man, and was kept secretly in a pavilion from the 
strife of tongues. In his first alarm he had said, “I am 
cut off from before thine eyes.” Nevertheless, God had 


128 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


heard the voice of his supplication and had preserved his 
faithful servant. 

These divine hidings are needed by us all. We must 
obey the voice that cries to us, as it did to Elijah, “ Get 
, thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself.” 
We are too prominent, too self-important, too conscious of 
ourselves. Our shadows fall too much in front of us, and 
we see them on the sand, clear-cut and defined. We need 
to keep our faces sunward, that our shadow may be well 
out of sight. And God must sometimes hide us in the sick- 
chamber, the valley of shadow, the cleft of the rock. He 
calls us to Zarephath or Carmel, to the privacy of obscu- 
rity or of solitude. It is only when self is hidden in the 
darkness of the grave that the true light shines upon our 
hearts, or the power of the true life emanates from our acts. 

How often has some timid nature sheltered and hidden 
itself in a stronger personality to which it was devotedly 
attached, so that it could bear unmoved the stare of indif- 
ference, the affectation of superiority, the sarcastic taunt, 
the injurious act! So when the one passion of our nature 
is Godward, when his smile is our sufficient reward, when 
we have no aim than to be well-pleasing in his sight, we 
are hidden; and from our retreat in the burning glory of 
his light we can look out with equanimity on the forms 
of dreaded evils as they pass us by. 

There is a literal sense also, O tried and tempted be- 
liever, in which God willhide you. It is stated that on one 
occasion when the dragoons of Claverhouse were scouring 
the mountains of Scotland in search of the Covenanters, a 
little party of these godly folk, gathered on the hillside for 
prayer, must have fallen into their hands, had not a cloud 
suddenly settled down, effectually concealing them. from 
their pursuers. Thus the Son of God still interposes for 
his own. Live to him alone. Be a polished shaft hidden 


HIDDEN, BUT RADIANT 129 


in the hollow of his hand. Abide in him. Hark! he says 
to thee as David to Abiathar, ‘‘ Abide thou with me, fear 
not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life: but with 
me thou shalt be in safeguard.” 


Il. He REEDITED HIS PROPHECIES.—To this period we 
may refer the divine injunction: ‘‘ Thus speaketh the Lord 
God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I 
have spoken unto thee in a book” (xxx. 2). It may be 
that throughout this period Baruch continued to act as 
his faithful amanuensis and scribe. He, at least, was cer- 
tainly included in the divine hidings (xxxvi. 26-32). It 
was at great cost to his earthly prospects. He came of 
a good family, his brother being Seraiah, who held high 
office under King Zedekiah, and he cherished the ambi- 
tion of distinguishing himself among his compeers. “ He 
sought great things for himself.” But he was reconciled 
to the lot of suffering and sorrow to which his close identi- 
fication with Jeremiah led him by a special revelation as- 
suring him of the speedy overthrow of the state, and that 
in the general chaos he would escape with his life (xlv.). 

By the aid of this faithful friend Jeremiah gathered to- 
gether the prophecies which he had uttered on various 
occasions, and put them in order, specially elaborating the 
predictions given in the fourth year of Jehoiakim against 
the surrounding nations. The word of the Lord came to 
him concerning the Philistines and Moab, and the children 
of Ammon and Edom, Damascus and Kedar. And the 
devout student may well pause to read again the marvelous 
paragraphs which foretell the fate of these nations, beneath 
the all-desolating incursions of Nebuchadnezzar and his 
ruthless soldiers. “Thou art my battle-ax and weapons 
of war,” said the prophet, addressing the great king in Je- 
hovah’s name: “for with thee will I break in pieces the na- 


130 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


tions, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms ” (see chapters 
xlvii. to xlix. 33). 

This time of Jeremiah’s seclusion was therefore not lost 
to the world. It was fruitful as Bunyan’s in Bedford Jail, 
Luther’s.in the Wartburg, Madame Guyon’s in the Bastille. 
Unseen, the prophet busied himself, as the night settled 
_ down on his country, in kindling the sure light of prophecy 
that should cast its radiant beams over the dark waters of 
time until the day should dawn and the day-star glimmer 
out in the Eastern sky. Yield your whole nature to God, 
and be sure that he will bring all of it, and every moment, 
under his productive cultivation, so that it shall become 
like one of the old-fashioned wall-inclosed country gar- 
dens, every square inch of which yields some produce to 
the skillful hand of its owner. 


III. He Mave A DousLE JouRNEY TO BaByLon.—To 
this period we must also refer the incident of the linen 
girdle, because the discourse founded on it was delivered 
during the three months’ reign of Jehoiachin, which was alto- 
gether too brief to admit of so long a journey as was nec- 
essary for the purposes on which the prophet was sent (xiil., 
notably verse 18). 

The Israelite was extremely particular as to cleanliness, 
and especially of linen. -It therefore attracted universal 
notice that Jeremiah at a certain period wore a newly pur- 
chased linen girdle without washing it. When it was soiled 
and filthy he took it, under divine direction, to the river 
Euphrates, and there buried it in a hole of the rock. Some 
have thought that this is the description of a vision, or that 
some place nearer than the Euphrates, which was two hun- 
dred and fifty miles distant, is intended. But there seems 
no good reason for questioning the literal interpretation of 
the narrative as given by the prophet. There was no spe- 


HIDDEN, BUT RADIANT US) 


cial demand for his presence in Jerusalem, but the reverse. 
Time was no object in comparison with the vividness of 
the impression that would be produced. Besides, large 
purposes were served by his becoming familiarized with 
the condition of the exiles in Babylon, and with the drift 
of events there. In the prophecies which he delivered 
afterward on the fall of Babylon, there are touches of de- 
scription so minute and accurate as could hardly have been 
given by one who was not familiar with the city from per- 
sonal observation. 

After his return from Babylon “many days” passed. 
Indeed, his second journey to recover his marred girdle 
may have been so timed by Almighty Providence as to 
secure his absence from the city during the last scene of 
Jehoiakim’s sad and tragic history, and to bring him thither 
again as Jehoiachin began his brief reign. But that rotted 
piece of linen, held up before the eyes of his people, told 
its own sad story. Judah and Jerusalem might have been 
to Jehovah for a name, a praise, and a glory, and he would 
have caused them to cleave unto him, but they would not 
hear ; they went after other gods to serve and worship them. 
Therefore they were destined to be cast aside as worthless 
and unprofitable. 

The lesson of this double journey, which must have 
meant about a thousand miles on foot, teaches us that no 
exertion on our part should be considered excessive if we 
can execute the commissions of our King. Long before, 
when a comparative child, Jeremiah had been summoned 
to perform God’s errands for him (i. 7), and it was not for 
him to complain if any special errand took him far afield, 
or involved journeying under scorching suns and sleeping 
in the night-dews. When Jesus bids us go into all the 
world, he means it, and we may not plead before him the 
distance and hardships of the way. It is enough if he has 


132 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


said, “Go to Euphrates.” When once we are sure of this 
we must imitate the prophet, who says, with charming sim- 
plicity, ‘So I went to Euphrates.” 


IV. He wap VISIONS OF THE NEw CoveNnant.—There 
is much reason for supposing that it was in this time of 
seclusion that Jeremiah’s eyes were opened to see a spiritual 
truth which was far in advance of any contemporary reve- 
lation, and was destined to become the mold into which 
some of the richest ore of gospel truth should be poured. 
It was not the last time when mortal eyes were closed in 
order to see—shielded from the glare of this world that they 
might behold the light that never shone on sea or shore. 
The d4nd Milton sang of Paradise lost and regained. 

The exquisite poem to which we must now turn is con- 
tained in chapters thirty and thirty-one, and consists of 
some seven stanzas. The prophet is no longer concerned 
with Judah alone; his thought embraces the ten tribes also 
—Israel he calls them, or Ephraim, which one hundred 
and seventy years before had been carried away captive to 
Nineveh. But his heart exults as he anticipates the return 
of the entire people from the land of the north, baptized 
through suffering into a purer, nobler life. 

On many of the exquisite thoughts and phrases of this 
joyful outburst we might long and profitably dwell. We 
can only cull a few flowerets, and leave them to tell the 
wealth of the garden from which they come: 

“Fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the Lord; 
neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will save thee from 
afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity.” 

“T will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of 
thy wounds, saith the Lord.” 

“Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: there- 
fore with loving-kindness have I drawn thee. Again I will 


HIDDEN, BUT RADIANT 133 


build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel: 
thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go 
forth in the dances of them that make merry.” 

“My people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith 
the Lord.” 

Transported by words like these, as he lay in prophetic 
trance, it is not wonderful that Jeremiah experienced, after 
a spiritual sort, the ecstatic joy which visits the soul when 
between sleeping and waking it realizes that its dearest 
hopes are being fulfilled. ‘Upon this I awaked, and be- 
held; and my sleep was sweet unto me” (xxxi. 26). 

But the more stupendous revelation was to follow. The 
dread commands of Moses, the elaborate forms of Temple 
ritual, the pleadings of Deuteronomy, enforced as they 
had been by the words of contemporary prophets, had all 
failed to withhold the people from backsliding. What hope 
was there that the distant future would not repeat the bitter 
story of the past? But God, who commanded the light to 
shine out of darkness, shined into his servant’s heart, and 
unveiled the glory of the New Covenant, which was to be 
sealed by the blood of the cross—“ the New Testament in 
my blood,” as Jesus called it: a covenant which would 
no longer depend on man’s obedience to “Thou shalt” and 
“Thou shalt not,” but would glisten with the seven-times 
repeated I witu of God (xxxi. 31-34; Luke xxii, 20; Heb. 
viii. 8-12). 

That the law of God should not be without as a precept, 
but within, as though inwrought into the very structure of 
the heart and will; that religion should consist primarily in 
what God was to his child, rather than in what the child said 
or did toward him; that neither priest nor Levite should be 
needed any more, since each soul would possess the right 
of direct intercourse with its Lord; that sin should be 
completely forgiven, as if it had never been—this was the 


134 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


vision which shone in on the prophet’s heart, and is realized 
in Christ for all who belong to him by faith. This blessed 
covenant shall yet gather Israel within its provisions. 

It is a serious question how far that covenant has been 
fulfilled in our experience. We are enamored with the life 
it foreshadows, and sometimes we think that our inward 
parts and hearts do bear its sacred inscriptions, as did the 
stone slabs of Sinai the writing of the decalogue. But we 
become suddenly conscious of some overwhelming irrup- 
tion of covetousness, envy, pride, and wrath, as though a 
sewer were to pour forth its filth over the mosaic-work of 
some splendid pavement. 

Such experiences stagger, but they should not discour- 
age us. They probably show, not that God has not com- 
menced his divine work, but that we have momentarily 
turned aside from him to make some effort of our own, or 
to pride ourselves on what has been accomplished. Let 
us turn back to him. Let us open our hearts and inward 
parts to his finger. Let us in meek humility wait for him 
to grave even more deeply and legibly his secret thoughts 
upon us. Let us believe that he is doing it. Let us reckon 
on him to perfect the legend, and to keep it clear and clean. 

Thus we shall know God. The dead past will bury its 
dead. The sins and iniquities of former days will be strewn 
on the shore, like the corpses of the Egyptians from whom 
Israel had got free. And then our hearts shall go out in 
the dance; our mourning will be turned into joy; our soul 
shall be as a watered garden; and God will comfort us, 
making us rejoice from our sorrow, and enabling us to reap 
in joy what we sowed in tears (xxxi. 10-14). 


XV. 


Che Ministry of Destruction. 
(JEREMIAH xxvii.—xxix.) 


‘* Ours the shame to understand 

That the world prefers the lie; 

That, with medicine in her hand, 
She wz// sink and choose to die ! 

Ours the agonizing sense 
Of the heaven this earth might be, 

If, from their blank indifference, 
Men woke one hour and felt as we!” 

HOUGHTON. 


HEN Jeremiah was first summoned to the work of 
prophet, it was summarized under six distinct divis- 

ions. He was set over nations and kingdoms to pluck 
up, and to break down, and to destroy, and to overthrow, 
to build, and to plant (i. 10). Two thirds of his work was 
therefore in the direction of destruction. It is not pleas- 
ant or easy work. No one would choose to stand amid 
the choking dust of the crumbling brickwork, which is 
being destroyed to make way for some palatial structure to 
be erected on the site. Vested interests, long-established 
abuses, lucrative wrongs, cry out loudly against any attempt 
to interfere with their existence. But Elijah must precede 
Elisha, and John the Baptist must prepare the way for 
Christ. Before the seed-sowing, the plow; before the out- 
burst of the spring, the stern disintegration of winter, rub- 

: 135 


136 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


bing the soil to powder in its mighty hands. Such was 
the work that fell to the lot of Jeremiah. 


I. THE Work or DEmo.Lition.—(1) Jehoiakim.—When 
Josiah died the whole land mourned. Each citizen felt 
personally bereaved, and appropriated the plaintive cries 
of professional mourners, saying, “ Ah, my brother !” and 
“Ah, sister!” The air was full of the words, ‘Ah, lord!” 
“Ah, the glory of Israel!’? But Jeremiah foretold that at 
the death of Jehoiakim there should be no such expression : 
“ He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and 
cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.” And again, 
somewhat later, when the king in impious defiance had 
burned the roll, the prophet said: “He shall have none to 
sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shall be 
cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the 
frost ” (xxil. 13-19; XXXVi. 29-31). 

The words of the prophet carried with them the impri- 
matur of Jehovah. They pronounced the inevitable sen- 
tence which he executed. And therefore, though we have 
no certain record of the manner of it, it is more than prob- 
able that on his return from his second journey to Babylon 
Jeremiah received the tidings of the death of his inveterate 
foe. There are several traditions as to his death—one that 
he was assassinated in the streets of Jerusalem; another 
that he fell in a skirmish with raiders, who had been in- 
cited by Nebuchadnezzar to desolate the neighborhood of 
Jerusalem ; another that he was enticed to the camp of the 
king of Babylon, and there treacherously murdered—but 
he died as he lived, dishonorably and miserably. 

(2) Jecontah.—His was a reign like Napoleon’s after his 
return from Elba—of one hundred days. He was eighteen 
when he was called to the throne, and he occupied it for 
three months and ten days (2 Chron. xxxvi. 9); but in that 


THE MINISTRY OF DESTRUCTION ES 


brief time he was able to show the drift of his character. 
“He did evil in the sight of the Lord.” His mother, 
Nehushta, daughter of Elnathan, whose hands had been 
imbrued in the murder of Urijah, and the strong heathen 
party who dominated the policy of the court, between them 
molded the young monarch to their will. 

Jeremiah uttered words of awful significance. Passing 
through the streets he showed the marred linen girdle, and 
foretold the doom of the king and queen-mother. “Sit 
down,” he cried, “in the dust; for the crown of royalty 
shall be rolled from your brow to the ground. The cities 
in the south country, the beautiful flock of towns and vil- 
lages, are already in the hands of the invader, and the 
whole land shall shortly be carried into captivity, because 
of the abominations, the pollution, the idolatries that have 
been perpetrated on the hills of the field.” Then, coming 
to closer dealings with the royal pair, he said that Coniah 
should be given into the hands of them that sought his life, 
and of those of whom he was afraid; that Jehovah would 
cast his mother and himself, like a despised, broken vessel, 
into another country, where they were not born; that there 
they should die; and that there should be no return to the 
land they loved (xiii. 18-21; xxii. 28-30). 

Thus, too, it befell. Such was the bitter fierceness of 
the Chaldeans, who were again besieging the city to punish 
Jehoiakim’s perfidy, that nothing would appease them but 
the surrender of the persons of the king and his mother. 
There was no alternative; and so, Josephus tells us, a sad 
procession was formed, and through a gateway, which 
afterward bore the king’s name, but was bricked up so 
that none might pass by a path which had been the scene 
of such a disaster, the king, his mother, the nobles and offi- 
cials, went forth to the Chaldean camp, and sat down on 
the ground, their persons robed in black and their faces 


138 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


veiled. By this time Nebuchadnezzar had returned from 
fighting against Pharaoh Necho, who had marched to the 
relief of his ally, but had been finally quelled; and he re- 
ceived in person the submission of the royal fugitives 
(2 Kings xxiv. 7). 

The spoliation of the city followed. The Temple was 
stripped of its gold and treasures. All the princes and the 
mighty men of valor, the craftsmen and the smiths, the 
king’s harem and court officials, were manacled in long 
lines, and torn from their beloved country, which the 
majority of them were never again to behold. Ezekiel 
was one of that sad procession, and it seemed as though a 
pitiful wail arose from the whole country—from Lebanon 
and Bashan and Abarim—as the exiles wended their way 
to their distant destination. And the prophet wept sore, 
his eye ran down with tears, because the Lord’s flock was 
taken captive. 

(3) Zhe Prophets—The prophets were a large and influ- 
ential class. Dating from the days of Samuel, their schools 
had poured forth a succession of men who occupied a 
unique position in the land as the representatives of God. 
But in the degenerate days of which we are now writing, 
when the kingdom of Judah was rapidly tottering to its 
fall, they seem to have been deeply infected by the prevail- 
ing vices of their time. They were, as Isaiah says, “dumb 
dogs which could not bark.” Greedy and drunken, lazy 
and dissolute, dreaming, lying down, and loving to slum- 
ber, they denied the Lord, and said, when Jeremiah spoke, 
“Tt is not he.” They had become wind, and the word of 
God was not in them (Isa. lvi. g-12; Jer. v. 12, 13). 

It must have been very painful for Jeremiah to oppose 
them and counteract their influence on the people; but he 
had no alternative. His heart was broken and his bones 
shook ; he was in a stupor like a drunken man, and like a 


THE MINISTRY OF DESTRUCTION £39 


man whom wine had overcome, for both prophet and priest 
were profane, and in God’s own house wickedness was 
rife. Listen to these terrible words, spoken in the name 
of Jehovah: “T have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem 
a horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: 
they strengthen also the hands of evil-doers, that none 
doth return from his wickedness: they are all of them unto 
me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah” 
(xxiii. g—14). 

Jeremiah entreated his people not to hearken to these 
men, who spoke the vision of their own heart, and not out 
of the mouth of the Lord. Their fatal crime was to live 
on the traditions of the past and to encourage even those 
who walked in the stubbornness of their hearts, by assuring 
them that no evil should come on them. ‘They deliberately 
set themselves to lessen the power of Jeremiah’s appeals 
and protestations by the promulgation of their own lying 
dreams, as though they, and not he, were in Jehovah’s 
secrets. 

Matters came to a pass shortly after the deportation of 
Jeconiah: Hananiah, of Gibeon, which was one of the 
priestly settlements, rose up and publicly contradicted Jere- 
miah when he was speaking in the Temple in the presence 
of the priests and of all the people. Using the holy name 
of Jehovah, he declared it had been divinely revealed to 
him that in two years Jeconiah and all the captives, and 
all the sacred vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had taken 
away, would come again. Instantly Jeremiah spoke up 
from amid the crowd. ‘ Amen,” he cried: ‘ would that it 
might be so; would that Jehovah might bring again the 
captivity; but it shall not be; nay, it cannot be, without 
canceling words that have been uttered by him through 
the prophets before me, and of old.” 

Not content, however, with his words, the false prophet 


140 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


snatched from Jeremiah’s shoulders the wooden yoke which 
he carried for the purpose of perpetually reminding his peo- 
ple and the neighboring nations that they must serve the 
king of Babylon until the appointed time had gone. He 
broke it in twain, saying that similarly God within two 
years would break Nebuchadnezzar’s yoke. Jeremiah did 
not prolong the altercation, but privately told Hananiah 
that the yoke of wood would be replaced by one of iron, 
and that he was causing the people to trust a lie. “This 
year thou shalt die,” he said, as he turned away, and two 
months after the false prophet was a corpse. 

(4) Zhe Surrounding Nations——On two occasions Jere- 
miah protested against a combination of the surrounding 
nations to resist the growing power of Babylon, which 
without doubt was fostered by the neighboring power of 
Egypt. On the first occasion he said that they would have 
to drink the cup of the Lord’s fury; and on the second, 
that they must bear the yoke of Babylon. ‘‘ Now have I 
given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar 
the king of Babylon, my servant. . . . And all nations shall 
serve him, and his son, and his son’s son, until the very time 
of his land come” (Jer. xxv. and xxvii.). 

All this must have laid the prophet open to the charge 
of the want of patriotism: his words weakened the people 
of the land; his influence withheld them from joining a 
great league of emancipation. But he had no alternative. 
He had no alternative than to be spokesman of that great 
word of Jehovah, “TI will overturn, overturn, overturn.” 

(5) Zhe Exiles —The false prophets had suffered the fate 
of their nation, and were with the rest in captivity; they at 
once endeavored to raise the hopes of the exiles by prophe- 
sying a speedy return. “It is of no use,” they said in 
effect, ‘‘to build houses, or plant gardens, or enter into 
marriage relations. Ina short time we shall be back again 


THE MINISTRY OF DESTRUCTION 141 


in Jerusalem.” The ringleaders were Zedekiah and Ahab, 
men of grossly immoral life, who were made an example 
of by being roasted alive (xxix. 21-23). Still the ferment 
continued, and the people refused to settle down in content- 
ment with the conditions of their captivity. 

Jeremiah, therefore, wrote a letter, which was intrusted 
to two men of high rank, friendly to himself, whom Zede- 
kiah, the uncle and successor of Jeconiah, sent to Babylon 
with assurances of his fidelity. ‘Yield to the will of God,” 
was the burden of the letter. “Build, plant, settle.” ‘Seek 
the peace of the city whither God has caused you to be 
carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it: for 
in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.” When Shemaiah, 
one of these false prophets, heard this letter, he wrote off 
in hot haste to Zephaniah, who was now high priest, and 
demanded that the prophet should be put into stocks, and 
his head into a collar, as a madman. The high priest, 
however, contented himself with reading the letter to Jere- 
miah, who replied by sending a second letter to the exiles, 
assuring them that God would punish Shemaiah and his 
seed, so that he should not have a son to perpetuate his 
name, and should not see the good which would come at 
the end of the predestined time (xxix.). 

These denunciations were fraught with terror, and equally 
terrible was the fate which befell these men. It may be 
said, “Surely they were patriots, eager for the deliverance 
of their people. They were fanatical enthusiasts, not in- 
tentional criminals. They mistook their hopes for revela- 
tions.” But it should be remembered that they were also 
convicted of immoral and evil lives. Their sins had blunted 
their perceptions of the divine voice, while their words 
pandered to their people’s sins and encouraged them in 
their lewd idolatries. It was as vicious and fallen men, as 
well as false prophets, that they incurred the awful woes 


142 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


which befell them, both from the lip of the prophet and 
the hand of the Almighty. 


II. His CoapsuTor.—While Jeremiah was exercising 
this ministry of destruction in utter loneliness and isola- 
tion, his heart must have often misgiven him. Remember 
that he loved his country with all the passionate patriotism 
of which the Jewish nature was capable, and which ex- 
presses itself so plaintively in the Book of Lamentations. 
Matthew Henry says, “It is not easy to preach Christ 
crucified in a crucified spirit.” But Jeremiah did a harder 
thing. Though for forty years he was constantly in antago- 
nism with the sins and vices of the people, the fountain of 
tears within his soul seems never to have dried up or be- 
come frozen over. He preached the terrors of Sinai with 
the pathos of Calvary. 

It was just because he loved so much that he suffered so 
keenly. And this may comfort others in their dark sorrow 
and despair for their fellows. They say that their natures 
are too tender and affectionate, and that they feel every_ 
thing too keenly, as though to infer that they would wish 
to have been clothed in tougher skin and cast in a rougher 
mold. But surely it would be a fatal mistake to barter a 
tender heart, with its faculty of suffering, for a callous one 
without that liability. ‘Our sorrow,” says Carlyle, “is the 
inverted image of our nobleness. The depth of our despair 
measures what capability and height of claim we have to 
hope. Black smoke, as of Tophet, filling all your universe, 
it can yet by true heart-energy become flame and brilliancy 
of heaven. Courage !” 

You fear to love lest you may have to suffer; but, ah, 
how infinitely you lose! You may have an immunity 
from one sort of pain, but you certainly incur the pain of 
a selfish, mean, and miserly soul. You miss the valleys 


THE MINISTRY OF DESTRUCTION 143 


of shadow, but you also miss the heights of transfiguration. 
You save your life, but you lose it. Suppose that Jere- 
miah had put away the heavenly summons, and had lived 
in the sequestered ease of Anathoth: he might have secured 
a respectable and peaceable life, but Jehovah would never 
have spoken to him; the unseen and eternal would never 
have unfolded to his vision; he would never have felt the 
supreme satisfaction of knowing that he had done his best ; 
he would never have shone like a star amid the darkening 
clouds of Jerusalem’s fall; he would have missed the hero’s 
crown, the Master’s “‘ Well done,” and the exceeding great 
reward. 

And God sent him an ally and comrade. In the heart 
of the exiles Ezekiel arose, uttering the same messages, 
though clothed in the superb imagery of his gorgeous im- 
agination. He, too, denounced his people’s sins, advised 
them to settle in the land of exile, and spoke of the cer- 
tain doom of the people and city. In the mouth of these 
two witnesses every word was established. Like well-at- 
tuned instruments, they symphonized, as our Lord said kin- 
dred souls must, when they ask concerning some heavenly 
gift. They were like the two olive-trees and the two can- 
dlesticks, standing before the Lord of the earth. They had 
power with God and man; shutting the heaven, turning 
the waters into blood, and smiting the earth with a curse. 
So the beast made war with them, as he always will. Theirs 
was no easy task, for they were hated by those whom their 
words tormented. But God has long since called them to 
his throne, where they stand in the foremost rank of those 
who, having fulfilled the will of God, have received his 
welcome and reward. 


Ill. THe NEED oF THIS Ministry.—/¢ must be fulfilled 
with the unconverted. For lack of it much gospel effort 


144 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


fails. Of what use are appeals to come to Jesus until the 
sinner has been led to see the awful peril which he has in- 
curred? Of what avail to extol the balm of Gilead until 
the soul has heard and accepted the diagnosis of its fatal 
condition? Of what advantage to offer a seat in the life- 
boat, so long as the sailor is full of confidence in his ship, — 
and is unaware of its crazy and unseaworthy condition ? 
One of the most important ministries of the servant of God 
is to destroy false confidence, to pull down refuges of lies, 
and to show the utter futility of venturing on the sea of 
eternity in any other craft than that which Christ launched 
from the cross of Calvary. 

It is a great mistake to heal the wound of the heart too 
lightly. The consolations of the gospel are very well; but 
they must be withheld until men have seen their state be- 
fore God, and have been held over the mouth of the 
bottomless pit of their own sin. The greatest revivals 
always begin in a thorough preaching of the law, press- 
ing home its demands upon the consciences of the un- 
godly. Nor is it enough to dwell in general denuncia- 
tion; we must particularize till conscience cries, “Thou 
art the man !” 

Tt must be fulfilled with those who lack assurance. When 
‘men say that they cannot believe, it is probably because 
they are harboring some evil thing in their hearts, or are 
conscious of some unrepaired wrong in their lives. ‘These 
must be dealt with. There must be the righting, so far 
as possible, of ancient injuries; the restitution of ill-gotten 
gains; the seeking of forgiveness ; the adjustment of wrong. 
The fixed purpose to do this, when an opportunity presents 
itself, will be sufficient to remove the stumbling-block to 
faith, which will gush out with the sparkle and song of an 
imprisoned brook. The inability to realize acceptance with 
God very often points to something that is grieving the 


THE MINISTRY OF DESTRUCTION 145 


Spirit, and at such times the searching ministry of probing 
and testing and demolition is invaluable. 

It must be fulfilled in the higher attainments of the divine 
life. As our obedience grows our light will grow. And in 
the growing dawn we shall become aware of evils that had 
passed without our notice. The Holy Spirit will lead us 
to discriminate between the wrong and the right, and re- 
veal what may be hindering us. Then as he destroys one 
subterfuge after another, plows up the fallow ground, dis- 
inters the buried secrets, reveals us to ourselves, we may 
gratefully accept his ministry, which destroys to build, which 
overthrows to plant, which leads us through the grave that 
he may minister eternal life. Nor must we overlook the 
responsibility of exhorting one another, of urging to re- 
pentance, and so much the more as we see the day ap- 
proaching, 


XVI. 


Beremiah’s Grandest Ode. 
(JEREMIAH li.) 


“God spake, and gave us the word to keep; 
Bade never fold the hands, nor sleep 
’Mid a faithless world—at watch and ward, 
Till Christ at the end relieve our guard. 
By his servant Moses the watch was set : 
Though near upon cock-crow, we keep it yet.” 
BROWNING. 


T was a very deserted Jerusalem in which Jeremiah 
dwelt, after King Jehoiachin, his household and court, 
princes and mighty men of valor, had been carried off to 
Babylon. It was impossible to take ten thousand of those 
that constituted the bone and muscle of the state without 
leaving an attenuated and weakened residuum. Still the 
fertility and natural resources of the land were so consid- 
erable as to give hope of its comparative prosperity, as a 
trailing vine dependent on Babylon (Ezek. xvii.). 
Mattaniah, the third son of Josiah—who was a boy of 
ten years of age when tidings came of the awful catas- 
trophe at Megiddo, but who was now in his twenty-first 
year—was called to the throne by the conqueror, and re- 
quired to hold it under a solemn oath of allegiance, which 
was asseverated and sanctioned by an appeal to Jehovah 
himself. It was as though the heathen monarch thought 
to make insubordination impossible on the part of the 
146 


FEREMIAH’S GRANDEST ODE 147 


young monarch, since his word of honor was ratified under 
such solemn and august conditions—conditions which under 
similar circumstances the heathen king would probably 

have felt binding and final. Alas! how often heathen men 
have attached an importance to religious appeals which has 
shamed religious professors! And how often they must” 
have marveled that we could so lightly disregard them ! 

(2 Chron. xxxvi. 13; Ezek. xvii. 13). 

At the instance of his conqueror the young king took 
the name Zedekiah, “the righteousness of Jehovah.” It 
was an auspicious sign; every encouragement was given 
him to follow in the footsteps of his illustrious father. 
And throughout his reign he gave evident tokens of desir- 
ing better things; but he was weak and irresolute, lacking 
the strength of purpose necessary to assert himself for good 
amid the confused counsels that agitated his court. He 
respected Jeremiah, but did not dare publicly to espouse 
his cause, showing him his royal favor by stealth. 

Meanwhile the kingdom was violently agitated by rumors 
from every side, which encouraged the hope that ere long 
the power of Babylon would be broken and the exiles re- 
turn. These thoughts were rife among the exiles them- 
selves, as we have seen; they were diligently fostered by 
the false prophets, who gladly fell in with the current of 
the popular wish; and there seem to have been various 
political considerations which favored the expectation of a 
speedy reversal of conditions that chafed the proud Jewish 
heart beyond endurance. 

About this time there was a revolt in Elam against Baby- 
lon. What if this should spread until the empire itself be- 
came disintegrated! But Jeremiah, by the voice of God, 
said, “It shall not be: the bow of Elam shall be broken, 
her king and princes destroyed, her people scattered toward 
the four winds of heaven” (xlix. 34-39). 


148 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


Then there was the seething discontent of the neighbor- 
ing peoples, who, though they had accompanied the in- 
vader as allies, were eager to regain their independence, 
and desired to draw Judah into one vast confederacy, with 
Egypt as its base. ‘ No,” said Jeremiah, “ it must not be: 
Nebuchadnezzar is doing the behest of Jehovah; all the 
nations are to serve him, and his son, and his son’s son” 
(xxvii. 6, 7). Perhaps it was at Jeremiah’s suggestion that 
Zedekiah at this time made a journey to Babylon to pay 
homage to his suzerain and assure him of his fidelity. 

All through the troubles that followed Jeremiah pursued 
the same policy. He asserted that the state of the cap- 
tives in Babylon, as compared with that of the remnant 
at Jerusalem, was as good figs to bad (xxiv.); when Pha- 
raoh’s army produced a temporary diversion and compelled 
the Chaldeans to draw off, he said that they would cer- 
tainly return, set fire to palace and Temple, and burn the 
city (xxxvii.), and his policy was so well known among the 
Chaldeans that in the final overthrow they gave him his 
life and allowed him to choose where he would dwell (xl.). 

Often it must have seemed to his choicest friends as 
though his advice were pusillanimous and wanting in the 
courage of faith. Did he really favor Babylon above Jeru- 
salem? Was he traitorous to the best interests of his peo- 
ple? But if ever they entertained such questionings they 
must have been suddenly and completely disillusionized 
when he summoned them to hear the tremendous indict- 
ment he had composed against Babylon in the early months 
of Zedekiah’s reign, together with the graphic description 
of its fall. A copy of this prophecy was intrusted to 
Seraiah, the chief chamberlain, who went in the train of 
Zedekiah to Babylon, with instructions that he should read 
it privately to the exiles, and then, weighting it with a 
stone, cast it into the midst of the Euphrates with the sol- 


FEREMIAH’S GRANDEST ODE 149 


emn words, that must have thrilled the bystanders: “ Thus 
shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise again, because of the 
evil which God will bring upon her: and her might shall 
wax faint” (li. 59-64). 


I. THE PROPHECY OF THE FaLL or BasyLon.— Zhe 
Glory of Babylon—In glowing imagery Jeremiah depicts 
her glory and beauty. She had been a golden cup in the 
hand of Jehovah, his battle-ax and weapons of war. Her 
influence was carried far and wide. She dwelt by many 
waters, rich in treasure, and the wonder of the earth. Like 
a mighty tree, she stretched her branches over the sur- 
rounding lands. Queen of the nations, she was at ease 
and thought to see trouble no more. “Is not this great 
Babylon,” her greatest monarch cried, “ which I have built 
for the royal dwelling-place by the might of my power, 
and for the glory of my majesty ?” 

The Divine Controversy.—The Almighty had used her for 
great purposes of disintegration, doing among the nations 
much the same sort of work that the icebergs did among 
the rocks of the primitive world, or that the frosts do each 
winter in pulverizing the dust of the earth. But she had 
abused for unrighteous and selfish ends the power which 
God had intrusted to her. Her execution of the divine 
purpose, her administration of the divine decrees, had been 
cruel in the extreme. The track of her armies had been 
marked with ruthless and wanton bloodshed. She had 
floated to the eminence of another Ararat, on the waters 
of another flood, an ocean of human suffering. And 
therefore Jehovah set nets for her, and caught her as a 
wild beast. He opened his armory and brought out the 
weapons of his wrath. 

But God was especially against Babylon for her treat- 
ment of his people. The inhabitants of Zion are intro- 


150 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


duced, crying, “ The king of Babylon has devoured us, he 
hath crushed us, and he hath filled himself with our delica- 
cies. The violence done to me and mine be upon Babylon.” 
Therefore the Most High would take up their cause and 
take vengeance on their behalf. “ As Babylon caused the 
slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of 
all the earth: for the Lord is a God of recompenses ; he 
shall surely requite.” 

The Summons to her Foes.—The standard is reared, and 
around it, at the sounding of the trumpet, the nations 
gather. The wild tribes of Ararat and Armenia are there, 
the kings of the Medes, the governors thereof, and all the 
lands of her empire. The sure-footed shaggy horses of 
the mountaineers are like the rough locusts that fill the 
land with their countless multitudes. Sacrifices are offered 
to propitiate the gods of battle, and the tide of invasion 
begins to flow against and around the massive walls of the 
city. The very earth trembles beneath the weight of the 
armaments and the tread of the troops. “ Behold,” the 
prophet cries, “a people cometh from the north, and a great 
nation, and many kings shall be stirred up from the utter- 
most parts of the earth. They lay hold on bow and spear: 
they are cruel, and have no mercy: their voice roareth like 
the sea, and they ride upon horses, every one set in array, 
as a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Baby- 
lon” (1. 41, 42, R.V.). 

The Attack.—The archers invest the city on every side 
so that none may escape. ‘They are bidden to shoot at 
her and not spare their arrows. Now the battle-shout is 
raised, and an assault is made against her walls. See! she 
submits; she gives her hand in token; her bulwarks are 
fallen ; the bars of her gates are broken through; her walls 
are thrown down; the mighty men of Babylon have for- 
borne to fight ; their might has failed ; they have become as 


FEREMIAH’S GRANDEST ODE 151 


women. Lo! the fire breaks out amid her dwelling-places. 
The messengers, running with similar tidings from different 
quarters of the city, come to show the king of Babylon 
that the fords are in the hand of the foe and that the city 
is taken. 

The Overthrow of the City—Then the captured city is 
given up to the savage soldiery. Nameless wrongs are 
inflicted on the defenceless and weak. There is plunder 
enough to satisfy the most rapacious. Her granaries are 
despoiled, her treasuries ransacked, her stores winnowed. 
All the captive peoples who had been held by her in cruel 
bondage go free, and especially the Jews. “Let us for- 
sake her,” they cry, “ and let us go every one into his own 
country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is 
lifted up even to the skies.” 

“ And now her cities are become a desolation, a dry land, 
and a desert, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth 
any son of man pass through ; but the jackals dwell there, 
and it lies waste from generation to generation, as when God 
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities 
thereof.” 

Such were the predictions of Jeremiah concerning the 
greatest city which perhaps the world has ever seen, and 
which was then rising to the zenith of her power and glory. 

- Seventy years were to pass before his words would be ful- 
filled ; but history itself could hardly be more definite and 
precise. ‘Those who can compare this prophecy with the 
story of the fall of Babylon, and with the researches of 
Layard, will find how exactly every detail was repeated, 
even to the burning of the reeds in the river-bed, the meet- 
ing of post with post on the night of its fall, the deep 
stupor with which the fumes of wine had dazed the brave 
men of Babylon, and the utter desolation which for cen- 
turies has reigned over her site. 


152 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


“They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of 
silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone. In the 
same hour came forth fingers of a man’s hand, and wrote 
over against the candlestick upon the plaster of the wall 
of the king’s palace. . . . In that night was Belshazzar the 
king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took 
the kingdom.” 


II. BABYLON THE GREAT.—In every age of the world 
Babylon has had its counterpart. Over against the line of 
Seth, with its reverence for God, was that of Cain, where 
arts and science were cradled and nurtured. Babel’s tower 
cast its shadow over the primitive races of mankind. Over 
against Shem was Ham; over against Abraham, Chedor- 
laomer; over against Israel, Nineveh; over against Jeru- 
salem, Babylon; over against the Church, Rome; over 
against the New Jerusalem, Babylon the Great; over 
against the bride of the Lamb, the scarlet woman riding 
upon the beast. Where God has built up his kingdom, the 
devil has always counterfeited it by some travesty of his own. 

Jeremiah comforted his heart amid the desolations which 
fell thick and heavily on his beloved fatherland, by antici- 
pating the inevitable doom of the oppressor. And his 
words, read amid the exiles of Babylon, as they sat beside 
the rivers, and wept, and hanged their harps upon the wil- 
lows, may have inspired that marvelous outburst of faith 
and patriotism and undying hatred— 


“O daughter of Babylon, thou art to be destroyed ; 
Happy shall he be that rewardeth thee.as thou hast served us. 
Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones 
Against the rock.” 


In the same way, throughout the persecutions of the 
empire, when paganism made her awful attempts to stamp 


pnb 


FEREMIAH’S GRANDEST ODE 153 


out Christianity ; and afterward amid the horrors of inqui- 
sition, when the Roman Catholic Church sought to extin- 
guish the true light of the gospel, which in no age has 
been without witnesses, the suffering children of God have 
turned to the Book of Revelation to read the doom of that 
antichristian power which, under the guise of paganism or 
of papalism, always sets itself against God, and is set on 
by the undying hatred of the devil. Her fate is described 
in words that strongly recall those of Jeremiah. She, too, 
had the golden cup, and was drunk with blood, and reigned 
over the kings of the earth. She, too, is destroyed by a 
combination of those that had owned her sway. A voice 
is heard bidding God’s people come out from her, lest they 
be involved in her overthrow. It is rendered unto her 
as she rendered, and double is mingled into her cup. As 
Seraiah cast a stone into the Euphrates, so a strong angel 
casts a great millstone into the sea, saying, “Thus with a 
mighty fall is Babylon, the great city, cast down, and shall 
be found no more.” And her site becomes the haunt of 
demons, and a hold of every unclean and hateful bird; the 
voice of harpers and minstrels forever silenced; the light 
of the household lamp forever quenched ; the voice of the 
millstone forever still. 

Prophetic students have always identified this great per-- 
secuting power with Rome, the city of the seven hills; and 
if this interpretation be correct, without doubt in the mil- 
lennial age her site will be as desolate as that of Babylon 
has been for more than two thousand years. But one is 
disposed to enlarge the scope of the prophecy, and to be- 
lieve that every form of anti-Christian power, whether sys- 
tems of false philosophy or structures of ancient supersti- 
tion, or gigantic wrongs like the drink traffic and the opium 
trade, shall wither and die before the all-conquering might 
of Immanuel, who was manifested to destroy the works of 


154 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


the devil. He must reign till all enemies are put beneath 
his feet. Then shall be heard in heaven the voice of a 
great multitude, as the voice of many waters and as the 
voice of mighty thunders, saying, “Halleluiah: for the 
Lord our God, the Almighty, reigneth.” 

Let us strengthen our confidence in the certain preva- 
lence of good over evil, of the Church over the world, and 
of Christ over Satan, as we consider the precise fulfillment 
of Jeremiah’s predictions concerning the fall of Babylon. 
“So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that 
love thee be. as the sun when he goeth forth in his might.” 


III. Our own BazsyLon.—Each heart has its special 
form of sin to which it is liable, and by yielding to which 
it has been perpetually overthrown. How bitter have been 
your tears and self-reproach! How you have chafed and 
foamed beneath the strong iron bit of your tyrant! How 
hopeless your struggles to escape from the tormenting net, 
whose meshes refused to break, while every plunge only en- 
tangled you more tightly in its folds ! 

But there is a deliverance for you, as for those weak and 
misguided but suffering Jews. How exactly your life-his- 
tory is delineated in theirs! They were the children of 
God; so are you. They might have lived in an impreg- 
nable fortress of God’s covenant protection; so might you. 
They forfeited this by their disobedience and unbelief; so 
have you. They tried to compensate for the loss of God’s 
keeping power by heroic resolutions and efforts, and by 
alliance with neighboring peoples; so have you. They 
utterly failed, and were crushed as a moth in a child’s © 
hand; so has it been with you. They almost renounced 
hope; this, too, is your case—you hardly dare hope for 
deliverance. But as God saved them by his own right 
hand, so will he save you. And as Babylon was so utterly 


FEREMIAH’S GRANDEST ODE 155 


quelled that it ceased to be an object of alarm, so God is 
able so entirely to deliver you that you shall no more fear 
or be afraid; you shall see the bodies of your taskmasters 
dead upon the sea-shore. 

Accept these rules if you would have this blessed deliver- 
ance: 

(1) Put out of your life all known sin. Are there vows 
that ought never to have been made? Recall them! Are 
there wrongs that lie back in the past, which can be 
righted? Right them! Are there secret habits and prac- 
tices which eat out your heart? Be willing to be set free, 
and deliberately tell God so. So far as you are concerned, 
put away the idols that have provoked God to jealousy. 

(2) Intrust the keeping of your soul to God. You can- 
not control it, but he can. He made you, and must be 
able to keep you. One of his angels has power enough 
to bind the devil; surely then the Lord of all angels can 
deliver you from the accursed demons that make sport of 
you. If Christ in his human weakness cleared the Temple, 
he must be able to drive the foul things from your heart, 
and when once they are out it will be easy for him to keep 
them out. In his ascension he was raised above all the 
principalities and powers of darkness, and you were raised 
with him, too, if you only knew it; certainly the living 
Christ can tread your lion and dragon beneath his feet. 
You cannot, buthe can. Put the case deliberately, thought- 
fully, calmly into his hand. Do not say, “I will try,” but, 
“J will trust.” Do not look at your faith, but at him. Do 
not cry, “ Help me!” for that implies that you are going to 
do some and he some, and your part will inevitably vitiate 
all; but cry, “Keep me !” thus throwing the entire responsi- 
bility on him. 

(3) Reckon that the Almighty Saviour accepts your de- 
posit at the moment of your making it. As it leaves your 


156 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


hand it passes into his. Be sure that he has undertaken it 
all for you. Do not try to /ee/ that he has, but reckon that 
he has. Do not go over and over the act of committal to 
see whether it was rightly done. Make it as well as you 
can, or ask him to take what you but ineffectively transfer. 
Never doubt that he reads your motive and desire, even 
though you fail to do as you would, and that he accepts 
the eager willing for the perfect doing. Then steadfastly 
resist every suggestion to doubt him. Dare to say a hun- 
dred times a day, “ Jesus is able to keep that which I have 
committed to him: I am a worm, weak, witless, worthless ; 
but the Son of God has me in his safe-keeping; he hath 
delivered, he doth deliver, and I am persuaded that he will 
yet deliver.” You may have no glad emotion, no pzxan of 
victory, no share of ecstasy: never mind; lie still and trust 
him. The lion may roar all around, but the weary, tired 
sheep will lie within the fold absolutely safe, because the 
Shepherd interposes his mighty keeping between it and 
every dreaded ill. 


XVII. 
fjow a Reed Stood as a Pillar. 


(JEREMIAH xxiv., xxxiv., xxxvii.) 


«‘Thou wast alone through thy redemption vigil, 
Thy friends had fled; 
The Angel at the garden from thee parted; 
And solitude instead, 
More than the scourge or cross, -O Tender-hearted! 
Under the crown of thorns, bowed down thy head. 


«¢ But I, amid the torture and the taunting, 
I have had thee! é 
Thy hand was holding my hand fast and faster, 
Thy voice was close to me: 
And glorious eyes said, ‘ Follow me, thy Master, 
Smile as I smile thy faithfulness to see.’” 
Mrs. HamiLtTon Kine. 


O a sensitive nature it is an agony to stand alone. By 

a swift and unerring instinct such a soul can detect 
what is in men’s hearts; and when it knows intuitively that 
the sympathy for which it yearns is dried up like a sum- 
mer brook; that interest has changed to indifference, and 
warmth of friendship to the coldness of disdain—whether 
in society or in the great world of human life—its energy 
ebbs, and its native power of influence is frozen at its 
spring. To many, the sense of being esteemed and loved 
is the very breath of life. They would scorn flattery and 
the adulation of wealth or fashion; they are quite content 
to dwell among their own people; but they are so consti- 

157 


% 


158 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


tuted as to require an atmosphere of sympathy for the full 
forthputting of their powers. 

Many strong and stalwart souls, cast in an heroic mold, 
have no experience of this sensitive and tender disposition. 
It is well that they have not. They were born to be the 
discoverers, the pioneers, the soldiers of the race; theirs 
the ribs of iron and the nerves of steel; theirs the courage 
which mounts higher on opposition and ill-will. They will 
never realize the cost at which those do their work and 
bear their testimony who have much of the woman in 
their nature, with its faculty of insight, its warmth of emo- 
tion, its keen sensitiveness to praise or hate, its yearning 
for sympathy, the smile of approbation, the kind word of 
cheer. 

Jeremiah was one of the latter class: tender, shrink- 
ing, sensitive, with a vast capacity for emotion, strong to 
hate, and therefore to love, not constituted by nature to 
stand alone. But herein let us adore that grace which 
stepped into his life and for forty years made him “a de- 
fenced city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls against the 
whole land ”—against princes, priests, and people. They 
indeed fought against him, but could not prevail, because 
God was with him. He outlasted all his foes, and main- 
tained the standard. to life’s end. ‘And this marvelous 
endurance and steadfastness of spirit was nowhere so con- 
spicuous as during the last months of his nation’s independ- 
ence. We must tell part of this story in this chapter, that 
none may miss its helpful inspiration, because, if the pres- 
ence of God could do so much for him, and for so long, it 
is sufficient for the weakest child of his that may read these 
words. 


I, JEREMIAH’S ATTITUDE TOWARD THE Kinc.—We gain 
much information concerning the situation at Jerusalem, 


HOW A REED STOOD AS A PILLAR 159 


during the reign of Zedekiah, from the pages of Ezekiel, 
who, though resident in the land of the exile, faithfully re- 
flected, and in prophetic vision anticipated, what was trans- 
piring in the beloved city, to which his thoughts were in- 
cessantly directed. His prophecies are most valuable and 
interesting when read in this light. 

Zedekiah, as we have seen, on ascending the throne, 
bound himself under the most solemn sanctions to be loyal 
to the supremacy of Babylon; and there is no doubt that 
at the time he fully intended to be faithful, the more espe- 
cially as, at Nebuchadnezzar’s command, he took the oath 
of allegiance in the sacred name of Jehovah. But he was 
weak and young, and wholly in the hands of the strong 
court party that favored an alliance with Egypt and the 
casting off of the Chaldean yoke. 

Two years before the catastrophe befell, Ezekiel clearly 
fotetold what was about to happen. He foresaw the 
embassy sent to Pharaoh requesting horses and people, 
and asked indignantly, ‘“ Shall he prosper ? shall he escape 
that doeth such things? or shall he break the covenant, and 
be delivered?” And he followed up his bitter remonstrances 
by the awful words, “ As I live, saith the Lord God, surely 
in the place where the king dwelleth that made him. king, 
whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even 
with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die. Neither 
shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company 
make for him in the war” (Ezek. xvii. 11-21). 

Jeremiah, as we know, earnestly dissuaded both king 
and princes from entering into the alliance which was being 
advocated between Judah and the neighboring states, and 
insisted, in the face of the false prophets, that the residue 
of the vessels left by Nebuchadnezzar in the Temple would 
certainly be transported, as the rest had been, to Babylon, 
if the mad project were persisted in (xxvii.). Notwithstand- 


160 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


ing all these remonstrances, however, the confederacy was 
formed, and in a fatal moment Zedekiah renounced his 
allegiance to the king of Babylon. 

Then it befell precisely as Ezekiel had foreseen. * Stung 
to the quick by the perfidy and ingratitude of the Jews, 
who had so persistently and obstinately outraged him, 
Nebuchadnezzar gathered a vast army, resolved to make 
a public example of them to surrounding peoples by the 
swiftness and mercilessness of his vengeance. ‘“‘ A sword, 
a sword, it is sharpened, and also furbished : it is sharpened 
that it may make a slaughter; it is furbished that it may 
be as lightning. . . . Cry and howl, son of man: for it is 
upon my people, it is upon all the princes of Israel. They 
are delivered over to the sword with my people: smite 
therefore upon thy thigh” (Ezek. xxi. 8-17, R.v.). 

The king of Babylon comes to the junction of the ways 
—this to Jerusalem, that to Rabbah, the chief city ‘of 
Ammon. He consults the usual signs of divination, which 
point him to the assault of Jerusalem with battering-rams 
and mounts and forts. And as he takes the road to the 
devoted city, the voice of Jehovah is heard bidding the 
prince of Israel, whose day is come, to remove the miter 
and take off the crown, because Jehovah was resolved to 
“overturn, overturn, and overturn.” And then, as though 
to justify the awful sentence, there is given an enumeration 
of the crimes which were making the streets of Jerusalem 
red with blood and foul with impurity. It is altogether 
a terrible description of the state of things in the city dur- 
ing those last years of Zedekiah’s reign. A bitter experi- 
ence for Jeremiah, whose soul must have been sore vexed 
from day to day in seeing and hearing their lawless deeds 
(Ezek. xxi. 18-27; xxii, 1-16). 

At last, in December, 591 8.c., the siege began. On the 
approach of Nebuchadnezzar the confederacy had melted 


HOW A REED STOOD AS A PILLAR 161 


away, and Jerusalem was left alone, an islet amid the roar- 
ing waves of Chaldean armies. But the citizens had laid 
in a good store of provisions, and were expecting daily the 
advance of Pharaoh Hophra, with the cavalry of Egypt, 
to raise the siege. 

At this juncture Zedekiah sent two well-known men to 
Jeremiah to ask whether Jehovah would not interpose for 
his people, as he had done in the great days of the past, 
as, for instance, when he destroyed the host of Sennacherib 
in a single night. It must have been a trying ordeal to the 
prophet. One conciliatory word might have averted the 
dislike of princes and people, given a bright glint of popu- 
larity and hero-worship, and obliterated the charges of 
mean-spiritedness and lack of patriotism that were freely 
leveled at him. Why should he not be the Isaiah of this 
new siege? Why not arouse and encourage his people to 
indomitable resistance and heroic faith? Why not blend 
his voice with those of the prophets that foretold a certain 
deliverance, and so acquire an influence over them, which 
might be used ultimately for their highest good ? 

It is not impossible that such considerations passed be- 
fore his mind. But if so they were immediately dismissed. 
“Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zede- 
kiah: Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel; Behold, I 
will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, 
wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against 
the Chaldeans, which besiege you without the walls, and I 
will gather them into the midst of this city. And I myself 
will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a 
strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath. 
And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and 
beast : they shall die of a great pestilence. And afterward, 
saith the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, 
and his servants, and the people, even such as are left in 


162 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the 
famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon: 

. and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; 
he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy.” 

He followed up these terrible words by saying that the 
only way of safety was to go forth to the Chaldeans, who 
were now investing the city on every side. All who stopped 
in the city would die of sword, pestilence, or famine. They 
would be accounted as figs not fit to be eaten and des- 
tined to be cast away as refuse. But those who went forth 
and surrendered themselves to the king of Babylon would 
save their lives (xxi.; xxii. 1-9; Xxiv.). 

Yet once again, when the siege of Jerusalem was in prog- 
ress, and every day the air was full of the cries of the com- 
batants, the heavy thud of the battering-rams against the 
walls, and the cries of wounded men borne from the ram- 
parts to the tendance of women, Jeremiah went fearlessly 
to Zedekiah with the heavy tidings that nothing could stay 
the sack and burning of the city, since God had given it 
into the hands of the king of Babylon; and that he would 
surely be taken, and behold him face to face. “‘ He shall 
speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to 
Babylon ” (xxxiv. 1-7). 

At the same time, rolling across the desert waste and 
reverberating like a funeral knell, came the terrible voice 
of Ezekiel : ‘‘ Woe to the bloody city! Heap on the wood; 
make the fire hot; then set it empty upon the coals thereof, 
that the rust of it may be consumed. I the Lord have 
spoken it. I will not go back, neither will I repent” 
(Ezek. xxiv. 1-14). 


II. His ATTITUDE TOWARD THE SLAVE-OWNING JEWS. 
—It is not impossible that Jeremiah’s vehement words of 
reproof aroused the deeply drugged conscience of his peo- 


HOW A REED STOOD AS A PILLAR 163 


ple, and they resolved, at the suggestion of Zedekiah, to 
make some reparation for their sins, and at the same time 
strengthen their garrison by setting free their slaves. This 
was done at a solemn convocation specially summoned in 
the Temple, and the national resolve was ratified before 
God with the most sacred rites. A calf was cut in twain, 
and the princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the 
eunuchs and the priests, and all the principal people, passed 
between the parts of the calf, as much as to say, “ May 
God part us in twain, as this beast is, if we turn back from 
our vow to emancipate our brethren and sisters, Hebrews 
and Hebrewesses, who are enslaved.” 

Great joy spread through hundreds of hearts—a body of 
stalwart defenders was raised for the beleaguered city. Best 
of all, the nation had done right in the eyes of the Lord. 
Two months or so passed, when, to the unbounded joy of 
the citizens, the attacks of Nebuchadnezzar became less 
frequent; the lines of the besieging army thinned; and 
presently the tents were struck, and the whole host moved 
off. How immense the relief when the crash of catapult 
and ram ceased, and the population pent up so long within 
their walls could go freely forth! This diversion was caused 
by the approach of Pharaoh’s army. The Jews thought 
that they would never see their foes again, and must have 
derided Jeremiah mercilessly. They also repealed the edict 
of emancipation, and caused the servants and handmaidens 
whom they had let go to return to their former condition. 

In that tumult of national rejoicing, when the prophet’s 
words seemed falsified, and when the fear they had inspired 
turned to increased hatred against the man who had spoken 
them; when he seemed cast off and disowned by Jehovah 
himself, it must have needed uncommon faith and cour- 
age to raise a bold and uncompromising protest. But he 
did not swerve by a hair’s-breadth from the path of duty. 


164 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


The infatuation of his people, their treachery to their 
plighted oath, the disappointment and sufferings of the en- 
slaved, and the honor of Jehovah so ruthlessly contemned 
—all compelled him to speak out. “ Behold, saith the 
Lord, I proclaim liberty to the sword, to the pestilence, 
and to the famine. And I will give the men that have 
transgressed my covenant into the hand of their enemies : 
and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the 
heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. And Zedekiah king 
of Judah and his princes will I give into the hand of the 
king of Babylon’s army, which are gone up from you. 
Behold, I will command, saith the Lord, and cause them 
to return to this city; and they shall fight against it, and 
take it, and burn it with fire: and I will make the cities of 
Judah a desolation without inhabitant ” (xxxiv.). 

It needed no common moral courage and sense of the ~ 
presence of God to dare to speak such words, and they 
must have brought down on the devoted head of the lonely 
prophet storms of abuse. How easy to ridicule him when 
it seemed so sure that the false prophets were right and 
he wrong! His opponents would be proportionately in- 
dignant, as the voice of conscience, not yet quite silenced, 
protested that he was speaking the very word of Jehovah. 


III. His ATTITUDE DURING THE INTERVAL OF RESPITE. 
—The city was delirious with joy. The Chaldeans had 
withdrawn, Pharaoh would prove more than a match for 
them, they would not return. The thunder-cloud had 
broken—there was nothing to fear. But Jeremiah never 
changed his note. It seemed like a raven’s croak amid 
the songs of spring birds. Very depressing! Very unpopu- 
lar! Very likely to spread suspicion and panic! Only too 
gladly would he have yielded to the current flowing around 
him. But he dared not; and when the king sent another 


HOW A REED STOOD AS A PILLAR 165 


\ 


deputation to inquire through him of Jehovah he returned 
this terrible reply: “ Deceive not yourselves, saying, ‘The 
Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for they shall not 
depart. For though ye had smitten the whole army of the 
Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but 
wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every 
man in his tent, and burn this city with fire” (xxxvii. 1-10). 

God’s prophets had too clear a vision of the issue of the 
duel between Chaldea and Egypt to be able to buoy up 
their people with hopes of deliverance. Jeremiah had al- 
ready foreseen that the daughter of Egypt should be put 
to shame and delivered into the hand of the people of the 
north; he had even asked that the tidings of invasion might 
be published in her principal cities (xlvi. 13-28). Ezekiel 
was not less decisive: “Thus saith the Lord God; I will 
strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my 
sword in his hand: but I will break the arms of Pharaoh, 
and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a 
deadly wounded man” (Ezek. xxx.). 

Shortly after this the prophet resolved to take the oppor- 
tunity offered by the withdrawal of the Chaldeans to visit 
his inheritance at Anathoth, for the purpose of receiving his 
portion there, perhaps of rent or of some division of tithes 
among the priestly families, of which he was a member. 
As he was passing out through the gate of Benjamin, he 
was recognized by a captain, whose family had long been 
in antagonism with him; and he was not slow to turn the 
occasion to advantage by repaying a long-standing grudge 
(xxxvii. 13). He therefore laid hold on the prophet, say- 
ing, “Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.” It was an 
absurd charge; for the Chaldeans had raised the siege, and 
it was supposed they would not return. The pretext, how- 
ever, was sufficient to serve Irijah’s purpose, and though 
it was indignantly repudiated by Jeremiah, he was dragged 


166 JEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


with violence into the presence of the princes, who were 
as glad to have their intractable foe at their mercy as the 
priests to whom Judas offered to betray his Master. 

When he had been ina similar plight in the previous 
reign, Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, had rescued him, like 
another John of Gaunt; but he was now dead or in exile. 
Zedekiah was too weak to interpose to rescue the prophet 
from the fury of his lords, even if he were acquainted with 
his peril. And so they adjudged him to the bastinado ; 
forty stripes save one fell from the scourge on his bare 
back; and he was then thrust into a dark, underground, 
unhealthy dungeon, where he remained many days at the 
peril of his life. 

After a while Zedekiah, perhaps pricked by remorse, or 
alarmed at the tidings which came from the frontier, sent 
for him, much as Herod was wont to summon John the 
Baptist from his dungeon to converse with him in his pal- 
ace halls above. ‘Is there any word from the Lord ?”’ the 
king asked, anxiously. 

What an opportunity was here for Jeremiah to trim his 
speech, to put velvet on his lips, and to mitigate the un- 
welcome truth! Thus he might curry the king’s favor, 
and secure for himself deliverance from his intolerable suf- 
ferings. But again there was no compromise. “And Jere- 
miah said, There is. He said also, Thou shalt be delivered 
into the hand of the king of Babylon.” 

He then pleaded with the royal clemency for a mitiga- 
tion of the severity of his sentence, with such good success 
that he was committed, at the king’s command, to the 
court of the guard, in the immediate vicinity of the palace, 
and fed daily with a loaf of bread out of the bakers’ street, 
until all the bread in the city was spent. In the meanwhile 
the army of the Chaldeans, having defeated Pharaoh, re- 
turned, and again formed their thick-set lines around the 


HOW A REED STOOD AS A PILLAR 167 


city, like a fence of iron, to be drawn closer and closer 
until Jerusalem fell, like a snared bird, into their grasp. 

It is impossible to recite or read this story without ad- 
miration for the man who dared to stand alone with God 
against a nation in arms. It makes us think of Ziegenbalg, 
the first missionary to the East Indies, standing alone there 
against the whole force of the authorities, determined to 
crush his mission in the bud; of Judson, pursuing his work 
for the salvation of Burmah amid the treachery and hos- 
tility of the king; of Moffat, going alone and unarmed into 
the territory of the terrible Africander ; of John Hunt amid 
the ferocious cannibals of Fiji; of John G. Paton, who was 
preserved amid fifty attempts to take his life. Surely the 
angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear 
him, and delivereth them. Our duty is to see to it that we 
are on God’s plan and doing his work ; to wrap around our 
souls the sense of his presence; to keep our ears open to 
the perpetual assurance, ‘‘I am with thee to deliver thee,” 
Then we shall find that by our God we can leap barrier- 
walls, pass unscathed through troops of foes, and stand as 
- pillars in his temple that shall never be removed. 


XVIII. 


Into the Ground, to Die. 
(JEREMIAH xxxii.) 


« All we have willed or hoped or dreamed of good shall exist ; 

Not its semblance, but itself; no beauty, nor good, nor power, 

Whose voice has gone forth, but each survives for the melodist 
When eternity affirms the conception of an hour ; 

The light that proved too high, the heroic for earth too hard, 
The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky, 

The music sent up to God by the lover and the bard; 
Enough that he heard it once; we shall hear it by and by.” 

BROWNING. 


HILE shut up in the court of the guard, perhaps 

fastened by a chain that restrained his liberty, Jere- . 
miah received a divine intimation that his uncle would 
shortly come to him with a request for him to purchase 
the family property at Anathoth. This greatly startled him, 
because he had so clear a conviction, which he cherished 
as divinely given, of the approaching overthrow of the 
kingdom, and the consequent desolation of the land. It 
had been his one incessant message to his people for nearly 
forty years that the land must keep her sabbaths as a judg- 
ment for the sins of the people; and now it seemed con- 
flicting and inconsistent to be told to purchase the field at 
Anathoth, as though it were needed for cultivation. The 
divine command quite staggered him, and may have made 
him for a moment question whether there had not been 

168 


INTO THE GROUND, TO DIE 169 


some mistake in the message he had so constantly reiter- 
ated in the ears of his people. 

He gave, however, no outward sign of his perplexities ; 
but when his uncle’s son entered the courtyard with his 
request, the prophet at once assented to the proposal, and 
purchased the property for seventeen shekels (about ten 
dollars). A similar incident is recorded in Roman history. 
When Rome was being besieged by Hannibal, the very 
ground on which he was encamped was put up for auction, 
and purchased—a proof of the calm confidence that the 
Romans possessed of the ultimate issue of the conflict. 

In addition to this, Jeremiah took care to have the pur- 
chase recorded and witnessed with the same elaborate pains 
as if he were at once to be entering on occupation. Not 
a single form was omitted or slurred over; and ultimately 
the two deeds of contract—the one sealed with the more 
private details of price, the other open and bearing the signa- 
tures of witnesses—were deposited in the charge of Baruch, 
with the injunction to put them in an earthen vessel and 
preserve them, They were probably not opened again 
until the return from the captivity; but we can well im- 
agine how strong a rush of emotion and confidence must 
have been inspired as the men of that day perused the 
documents. 

But Jeremiah was not a sharer in that glad scene. He 
did as God bade him, though the shadow of a great dark- 
ness lay upon his soul, from which he could only find 
relief, as the Lord on the cross, in recourse to the Father. 
Indeed, at this point of his life he resembles the hidden 
vessel, which contained within it the charter of the nation’s 
deliverance. He was an earthen vessel indeed, but he con- 
tained heavenly treasure. He fell into the ground to die, 
as the seed does, which holds at its heart a principle of life 
that can only express itself through death, and can only 


170 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


bless men when its sowing, amid the depression and decay 
of autumn, has been complete. 


I. Hours or Mipnicut DarkNEss.—It is only in service 
that anything reaches its fullest life. A bit of iron is con- 
demned to solitude and uselessness till it becomes part of a 
great machine. A seed of corn, hidden for three thousand 
years in a mummy-case, abides alone, and only learns the 
motive and glory of existence when, through death, it learns 
to weave the chemical juices of the earth, and dews, sun- 
beams, and air, into the fabric of the golden corn. A man 
who lives a self-contained life, of which the gratification of 
his own ambition and selfhood is the supreme aim, never 
drinks the sweets of existence or attains his full develop- 
ment. It is only when we live for God, and, in doing so, 
for man, that we are able to appropriate the rarest blessed- 
ness of which our nature is capable, or to unfold into all 
the proportions of full growth in Christ. In the deepest 
sense, therefore, Jeremiah could never regret that he had 
given the strength and measure of his days to the service 
of others. If he had not done so, but had shrunk back 
from the high calling of his early life, his misery would 
have been in proportion to the royal quality of his nature, 
and his power to enrich the life of man. 

But none can give themselves to the service of others 
except at bitter cost of much that this world holds dear. 
In the words of Christ, the corn of wheat must fall into 
the ground and die if it is to bear much fruit. In the case 
of the wheat-corn, death is necessary to break up the case 
in which the principle of life lies imprisoned. It has fed 
on the choice farina, the fine flour, stored in its sac.or shell, 
and having consumed it all, it must be let forth; and there 
is no way of emancipation except through the death that 
tears down the prison-walls of its cell, and allows it to strike 


INTO THE GROUND, TO DIE 171 


its radicle downward, and its blade upward to the air. And 
in the case of every true life there must be death to the 
attractions and indulgences of the self-life, that the soul, 
being at leisure from itself, may go forth to seek its sup- 
plies from God, and to weave them into nourishing food 
for the lives of those around. ‘This will explain the priva- 
tions and sorrows to which Jeremiah was subjected. Death 
wrought in him that life might work in Israel, and in all 
who should read the book of his prophecy. 

He died to the dear ties of human love. “Thou shalt not 
take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons nor daughters 
in this place,” was early said to him. The men of Anathoth, 
of the house of his father, conspired against him. The 
friends with whom he took sweet counsel, and in whose 
company he walked to the house of God, betrayed him. 
What he held in his heart belonged to the race, and might 
not be poured forth within the narrower circle of the home, 
of priestly Temple duty, or of the little village of Anathoth. 

He died to the good-will of his fellows. None can be in- 
different to this. It is easy to do or suffer when the bark 
of life is wafted on its way by favoring breezes, or the air 
thrills with expressions of love and adulation. Then aman 
is nerved to dare to do his best. And a nature as sensitive 
as Jeremiah’s is peculiarly susceptible to such impressions. 
But it was his bitter lot to encounter from the first an in- 
cessant stream of vituperation and dislike. We have no 
record of one voice being raised to thank or encourage him. 
“Woe is me, my mother,” he cried, sadly, “that thou hast 
borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the 
whole earth! I have neither lent on usury, nor men have 
lent to me on usury; yet every one of them doth curse 
me,” 

He died to the pride of national patriotism. No patriot 
allows himself to despair of his country. However dark 


172 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


the lowering storm-clouds and strong the adverse current, 
he believes that the ship of state will weather the storm. 
He chokes back words of despondency and depression lest 
they should breed dismay. He does not allow his heart to 
harbor the thoughts of despair that flit across it and knock 
for entrance; he drives them away, and treats them as 
traitors guilty of high treason. But Jeremiah was driven 
along an opposite course. A truer heart than his never 
beat in human breast. A loftier patriotism than his never 
hazarded itself in the last breach. His belief in Israel was 
part of his belief in God. But he found himself compelled 
to speak in such a fashion that the princes proposed, not 
without show of reason, to put him to death, because he 
weakened the hands of the men of war. 

fle died to the sweets of personal liberty. A \arge portion 
of his ministry was exerted from the precincts of a prison. 
Repeatedly we read of his being shut up and not able to 
go forth. His friend Baruch had constantly to act as his 
intermediary and interpreter. This, too, must have been 
bitter to him. His writings abound with references to 
nature and to natural processes; and the iron fetters of 
restraint must have eaten deeply into the tender flesh of 
his gentle heart. 

Fle died, also, to the meaning he had been wont to place on 
his own prophecies. Upto the moment when Jehovah bade 
him purchase the property of Hanameel, he had never 
questioned the impending fate of Jerusalem. It was cer- 
tainly and inevitably to be destroyed by sword, famine, 
pestilence, and fire. All that he had ever said in private 
or public was but the fresh assertion of this bitter fate, with 
some new touch of pathos or turn of emphasis. ~But now 
the word of God, demanding an act of obedience, seemed 
to indicate that the land was to remain under the cultiva- 
tion of the families that owned it. 


“INTO THE GROUND, TO DIE 173 


IJ. JEREMIAH’s BEHAVIOR.—To very few men has it 
been given so closely to walk along the path which the 
Redeemer trod during his earthly life. He was stripped 
of almost everything that men prize most. But amid it all 
he derived solace and support in three main directions: 

(1) He prayed. ‘Take this extract from his own diary: 
“Now after I had delivered the deed of the purchase unto 
Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the Lord, say- 
ing, Ah, Lord God!” Yea, and he was encouraged in this 
holy exercise, for shortly after this incident, when tidings 
came to him that the houses of the kings of Judah were 
being broken down to provide materials for the building 
of an inner line of defence behind the shell of wall which 
was nearly demolished by the terrible battering-rams, and 
when his heart was more than ever dismayed, the word of 
the Lord came to him, saying, “Call unto me, and I will 
answer thee, and will show thee great and secret [or inac- 
cessible] things, which thou knowest not” (xxxiil. 1-5). 

There is no help to the troubled soul like that which 
comes through prayer. You may have no clear vision of 
God. You may be only able to grope your way in the 
direction where he sits enshrouded from your view in the 
thick darkness. You may be able to do little more than re- 
cite things which God and you know perfectly well, ending 
your prayer as Jeremiah did, with the words, “ and, behold, 
thou seest it” (24). Nevertheless pray ; pray on your knees ; 
“in everything by prayer and supplication . . . let your 
requests be made known unto God ;” and the peace of God 
will settle down on and enwrap your weary, troubled soul. 

(2) He rested on the Word of God. The soul of the proph- 
et was nourished and fed by the divine Word. “Thy words 
were found,” he cries, “and I did eat them: and thy words 
were unto me the joy and the rejoicing of my heart.” It 
sounds but hard and cold advice to bid a man in sorrow 


174 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND ‘PROPHET 


to read his Bible; but it were impossible to give better. 
Because behind the words is the Word; in this garden the 
Son of Man walks; in this tabernacle the Sun shines in 
whose beams are health and comfort. How often have 
God’s people turned to the Bible, as the Saviour did in 
the darkest hours that swept over his soul, and found in a 
psalm or a chapter the balm of Gilead, the tree of life with 
healing leaves ! 

(3) He faithfully kept to the path of duty. “And I bought 
the field.” It does not always happen that our service to 
men will be met by rebuff, ill-will, and hard treatment; 
but when it does there should be no swerving or flinching 
or drawing back. God’s sun shines on the evil as well as 
the good, and his rain descends on the fields of the thank- 
less churl equally as on those of his children. The fierce 
snow-laden blast, driving straight in your teeth, is not so 
pleasant as the breath of summer, laden with the scent of 
the heather; but if you can see the track you must follow 
it. To be anywhere off it, either right or left, would be 
dangerous in the extreme. And often when the lonely 
soul has reaped nothing but obloquy and opposition, has 
been borne to a cross, and crucified as a malefactor, it has 
comforted itself with the prospect of the harvests of blessing 
which were to accrue to those who had rejected its appeals, 
just as Pentecost came to those who had been the murder- 
ers of Christ. 

Such are the resorts of the soul in its seasons of anguish. 
It casts itself on the ground, crying, “ Father, Abba, Father ;” 
it stays itself on the word of promise that comes to it in 
angel garb; it goes forth to yield itself to death, assured 
that life awaits it and the objects of its choice. 


III. Compensations.—To all valleys there are mount- 
ains, to all depths heights ; for all midnight hours there are 


INTO THE GROUND, TO DIE 175 


hours of sunrise ; for Gethsemane an Olivet. We can never 
give up aught for God or man without discovering that at 
the moment of surrender he begins to repay, as he foretold 
to the prophet: “ For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I 
will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron.” 
We do not make the surrender with any thought of profit- 
ing by it; but when we make it with a single purpose and 
aim, we learn that when Christ lays a requisition on boat 
or sailor’s time, he returns the boat laden with fish to the 
water’s edge. 

Nor does God keep these compensations for that new 
world, “ where light and darkness fuse.” It were long to 
-wait if that wereso. But here and now we learn that there 
are compensations. It may seem a hardship to the man 
to leave his cell, where he has been immured so long that 
he dreads the light, the stare of strange eyes, the call for 
exertion; but when the first stiffness of the joints and the 
novelty of his surroundings have passed off, will he not be 
compensated? The first movement from the selfish life may 
strain and try us, the indifference of our fellows be hard to 
bear; but God has such things to reveal and give as pass 
the wildest imaginings of the self-centered soul. 

So Jeremiah found it. His compensations came. God 
became his Comforter, and wiped away his tears, and 
opened to him the vista of the future, down whose long 
aisles he beheld his people planted again in their own land. 
He saw men buying fields for money, and subscribing deeds 
and sealing them, as he had done; he heard the voice of 
joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom 
and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that bring the 
sacrifices of joy into the Lord’s house; he was assured of 
the advent of the Man, the Branch from the root of David, 
who should sit upon his throne (xxxii., xxxiii.). There was 
compensation also in the confidence with which N ebuchad- 


176 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


nezzar treated him, and in the evident reliance which his 
decimated people placed on his intercessions, as we shall 
see. And if he could only know of the myriads who had 
been comforted by the story of his griefs, and by the assur- 
ances of his prophecies—ruddy juice pressed into the golden 
chalice of Scripture by the sorrows that crushed his heart 
—surely he would feel that his affliction was light and not 
worthy to be compared with the far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory which it was working out. 

So will it be with all who fall into the ground to die. 
God will not forget or forsake them. The grave may be 
dark and deep, the winter long, the frost keen and pene- 
trating ; but spring will come, and the stone be rolled away, 
and the golden stalk shall wave in the sunshine, bearing its 
crown of fruit, and men shall thrive on the bread of our 
experience, the product of our tears and sufferings and 
prayers. 


XIX. 


Che Fall of Terusalem. 


(JEREMIAH xxxviii., xxxix.) 


“« Among the faithless faithful only he; 
Among innumerable false, unmoved, 
Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified, 
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal ; 
Nor number, nor example with him wrought 
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind 
Though single. From amidst them forth he pass’d, 
Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustain’d 
Superior, nor of violence fear’d aught ; 
And with retorted scorn his back he turn’d 
On those proud tow’rs to swift destruction doom’d.” 
MILTON. 


URING those long, dark months of siege probably the 
only soul in all that crowded city which was in per- 

fect peace, and free in its unrestrained liberty, was Jere- 
miah’s. ‘Tethered as he was by an iron chain to the wall 
of the court of the guard, he passed beyond the narrow 
confines of the inclosure to the great age that was to be, 
when Judah should be saved and Jerusalem should dwell 
safely, known by the name THE LorD OUR RIGHTEOUS- 
ness. And amid the cries of assailants and defenders, un- 
broken by the thud of the battering-rams, deep as the blue 
Syrian sky that looked down upon him, was the peace of 
God, that passed the understanding of those that thronged 

177 


178 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


in and out, to and fro, between the city and the royal 
palace. 


I. THE Horrors oF THE SiecGE.—It lasted in all for 
about eighteen months, with the one brief respite caused 
by the approach of Pharaoh’s army, and it is impossible 
for us to estimate the amount of human anguish which 
was crowded into that fateful space. Some conception of 
it may be gathered from the words with which Ezekiel an- 
ticipated it. As in a mirror coming events were forecast. 
The caldron full of the choicest flesh hanging over the 
swift fire until it was consumed; the vision of the iron pan 
encircling the sun-burnt brick, as the iron legions of Chaldea 
would engirdle the beleaguered city ; the meager measure of 
wheat and barley and beans and lentils and millet and 
spelt, dealt out by measure day by day, but barely sufficient 
for the prophet’s sustenance ; the barley-cakes mingled with 
cow’s dung, abhorrent to the taste, yet greedily devoured ; 
the stealthy preparation of his household stuff for removal ; 
and the stealing out at night from his house by a hole in 
the wall, with covered face and laden shoulder—all these 
spoke with a vividness which no words could equal of the 
horrors of that siege (Ezek. iv.). 

Imagine for a moment the overcrowded city, into which 
had gathered from all the country round the peasantry and 
villagers, who, with such of their valuables as they had 
been able hastily to collect and transport, had sought ref- 
uge within the gray old walls of Zion from the violence 
and outrage of the merciless troops. If wandering tribes 
like the sons of Rechab were induced for once to break the 
tradition of their nomad life to shelter themselves within 
the city inclosure, how much more would the terrified 
populations scattered in slight habitations over the hill 
country count it politic to do the same? This mass of 


THE FALL OF FERUSALEM 179 


fugitives would greatly add to the difficulties of the defence 
by their demands upon the provisions which were laid up 
in anticipation of the siege, by overcrowding the thorough- 
fares and impeding the movements of the soldiery. 

The incident referred to in our last chapter, of the demo- 
lition of a portion of the royal palace to provide materials 
for an inner line of defence, is a specimen of many another 
episode in that intense effort of Zedekiah and his people 
to hurl back the tide of merciless hate and thirst for blood 
that broke day after day around the battlements; much as 
the long ocean wave sends its surges up against a reef of 
rock, and casts its splintered forces highin air. Here there 
was a scaling party which must be flung back on their lad- 
ders; there an attempt to run a mine which must be inter- 
cepted; and now tidings came that a portion of the wall, 
which had been long exposed to the battering-rams, showed 
signs of weakness and must be built up from within; and 
yet again precautions must be taken against fire flung in 
missiles, or flights of arrows, or stones cast by catapults. 
For no single hour could the defenders relax their vigi- 
lance. A council of princes must have been in perpetual 
session, fertile in resource, swift to meet the craft or the 
courage of the foe. And all the time the stock of provis- 
ions was becoming less, and the store of water drying, as 
in the case of Malchiah’s dungeon, into wet mud. 

So much for the earlier months of the siege; but as the 
days passed on darker shadows gathered. It was as though 
the very pit of hell added in human passion the last dread 
horrors of the scene. The precious sons of Zion, compa- 
rable to fine gold, lay by scores in the recesses of the houses, 
broken like earthen pitchers, the work of the hand of the 
potter. The women became cruel, and refused to spare 
from their breast for their young the nutriment they needed 
for themselves. The tongues of the sucking babes be- 


180 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


came so dry and parched that they could no longer cry. 
Young children, whose weakness constituted a first claim, 
asked for bread, and asked in vain. Highly nurtured 
maidens searched over the dung-heaps in hope of finding 
something to stay the craving of hunger. The nobles lost 
their portly mien, and walked the streets like animated 
mummies. The sword of the invader without had fewer 
victims than that which hunger wielded within, and, as the 
climax of all, pitiful women murdered their own little babes 
and soddened them to make a meal. Finally, pestilence 
began its ravages, and the foul stench of bodies that men 
had no time to bury, and that fell thick and fast each day 
in the streets of the city, like autumn leaves, caused death, 
which mowed down those that had escaped the foe and 
privation. Ah, Jerusalem! who stonedst the prophets, and 
sheddest the blood of the just, this was the day of the over- 
flowing wrath and fury of Jehovah! No human hand lit 
the flame, no mere human hate was accountable for suffer- 
ings so complex and so terrible. “Thou, O God, hast slain 
priest and prophet in thy sanctuary; youth and age in the 
streets. ‘Thou hast slain them in the day of thine anger; 
thou hast slaughtered, and not pitied.” 

And as Jeremiah waited day after day, unable to do 
other than listen to tidings of woe that converged to him 
from every side, he resembled the physician who, unable 
to stay the slow progress of some terrible form of paralysis 
in one he loves better than life, is compelled to listen to 
the tidings of its conquests, knowing surely that these are 
only stages in an assault which ultimately must capture the 
citadel of life—an assault which he can do nothing to stay. 


Il. Tue PropuHet’s ADDED SorRows.—In addition to 
the discomfort which he shared in common with the rest 
of the crowded populace, Jeremiah was exposed to aggra- 


THE FALL OF FERUSALEM 181 


vated sorrows. It would appear that he was constantly 
reiterating in the ears of all who passed through the court- 
house the message which he had previously delivered to the 
king, that to stay in the city was to incur death by sword, 
famine, or pestilence, while to go forth to the lines of the 
Chaldeans was the one condition of life. He lost no op- 
portunity of asserting that Jerusalem should surely be given 
into the hands of the king of Babylon, and that he would 
take it. As these words passed from lip to lip, they carried 
dismay throughout the city. Men repeated them as they 
did duty on the walls, or met around the bivouac fires, or 
discussed the probable issues of the siege; and the fact 
that Jeremiah had so often spoken as the mouthpiece of 
Jehovah gave an added weight to his words. 

It was quite natural, therefore, that the princes, who 
knew well enough the importance of keeping up the cour- 
age of the people, should demand the death of one who 
was not only weakening the hands of the people generally, 
but especially of the men of war. In some such way the 
drowsy sleeper, unwilling to be aroused by the barking of 
the watch-dog, catches up his revolver to shoot him; or 
the crew, eager for carouse, murders the watchman who 
warns them of the white surf breaking along a ragged, 
rock-bound shore. The young king was weak rather than 
wicked, a puppet and toy in the hands of his princes and 
court. He therefore yielded to their demand, saying, “ Be- 
hold, he is in your hand: for the king is not he that can 
do anything against you.” 

Without delay Jeremiah was flung into one of those 
rock-hewn cisterns that abound in Jerusalem, and the bot- 
tom of which, the water having been exhausted during the 
extremities of the siege, consisted of a deep sediment of 
mud, into which he sank. There was not a moment to be 
lost. The life of the faithful servant of God was not to 


182 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


end amid the damp darkness of that hideous sepulcher, 
from which no cry could reach the upper air; and help 
was sent through a very unexpected channel. An Ethi- 
opian eunuch—who is probably anonymous, since the name 
Ebed-melech simply means “the king’s servant ”—with a 
love to God’s cause which was sweetly prophetic of the 
way in which Gentile hearts would be opened to welcome 
and forward it throughout the world, hastened to the king, 
then sitting to administer justice at one of the gates of the 
city, remonstrated with him, and urged him to take im- 
mediate steps to save the prophet from imminent death. 
Always swayed by the last strong influence brought to 
bear on him, the king yielded as easily to his faithful serv- 
ant, who was probably the custodian of his harem, as he 
had done to his lords, and bade him take a sufficient num- 
ber of men to secure him from interference, and at once 
extricate the prophet. There was great gentleness in the 
way this noble Ethiopian executed his purpose. He was 
not content with merely dragging him from the pit’s bot- 
tom, but lined the ropes with old cast clouts and rotten 
rags, fetched hurriedly from the house of the king; thus 
the tender flesh of the prophet was neither cut nor chafed. 
It was an act of womanly tenderness, which makes it as 
fragrant as the breaking of the box over the person of the 
Lord. It is not enough to serve and help those who need 
assistance; we should do it with the sweetness and gentle- 
ness of Christ. It is not only what we do, but the way in 
which we do it which most quickly indicates our real selves. 
Many a man might have hurried to the pit’s mouth with 
ropes; only one of God’s own gentlemen would have 
thought of the rags and clouts. It is very quaint and 
beautiful, when so much is left untold, that a dozen lines 
in the Word of God should be given to this simple inci- 
dent and the hurried advice thrown into the darkness of 


THE FALL OF JERUSALEM 183 


the lonely prophet by his kind-hearted deliverer. “Then 
they drew up Jeremiah with the cords, and took him up 
out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court 
of the guard.” 

From that moment till the city fell the prophet remained 
in safe custody, and on one memorable occasion the king 
sought his counsel, though in strict secrecy. Once more, 
and for the last time, those two men stood face to face— 
king and prophet—weakness and strength—representatives, 
the one of the fading glories of David’s race, and the other 
of the imperishable splendor of truth and righteousness. 
Once more Zedekiah asked what the issue would be, and 
once more received the alternatives that appeared so fool- 
ish to the eye of sense—Defeat and Death by remaining 
in the city; Liberty and Life by going forth. 

“Go forth ?” said Zedekiah, in effect, ‘never! It would 
be unworthy of one in whose veins flows the blood of kings. 
I shall expose myself to the ridicule of all that have fled 
across the Chaldean lines, and the Chaldeans themselves 
would deliver me into their hands.” 

“They shal] not deliver thee,” said Jeremiah, and then 
began to plead with him as a man might plead for himself. 
“Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of the Lord, in that which 
I speak unto thee: so it shall be well with thee, and thy 
soul shall live.” Then in graphic words he painted the pict- 
ure of the certain doom the king would incur if he tarried 
until the city fell into the captor’s hands. For the derision 
of the few Jews that had fallen away, he would then be 
exposed to the taunts of his wives and children, who would 
by that time have become allotted to their captors, and 
would seek to win the smiles of their new lords by taunt- 
ing the fallen monarch in whose smiles they had been wont 
to bask. 

In this advice of Jeremiah we are reminded of words 


184 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


repeated by our Lord on five different occasions, and in 
which he tells us that those who keep their lives lose them, 
and that those who lose their lives find and keep them. 
Not in husbanding our strength, but in yielding it in serv- 
ice; not in burying our talents, but in administering them ; 
not in hoarding our seed in the barn, but in scattering it ; 
not in following an earthly human policy, but in surrender- 
ing ourselves to the will of God—do we find the safe and — 
blessed path. The man of faith judges not after the sight 
of his eyes or the judgment of sense; he strikes currents 
flowing unseen by the world, and acts on suggestions re 
ceived by direct communication from the Spirit of God, 
though always through the Word of God, and consistent 
with the loftiest dictates of sanctified common sense. 

The weakness which was the ruin of Zedekiah came o 
in his request that Jeremiah would not inform the princes 
of the nature of their communications, and would hide the 
truth beneath the semblance of truth. It is difficult to pro- 
nounce a judgment on the way in which the prophet veiled 
the purport of his conversation with Zedekiah from the in- 
quisitive questions of the princes. There is an appearance 
of evasion in his reply, which seems a little inconsistent with 
the character of the prophet of Jehovah. At the same time, 
the princes had no right to catechize him, and he was not 
obliged by his duty to them to tell the entire truth. We 
are under no obligation to gratify an impertinent curiosity ; 
but we must be very careful to be transparent in speech 
and in act, and to be utterly true when we profess to be 
telling the whole truth to those that have a right to know. 
In the present case the prophet shielded the king with a 
touch of chivalrous devotion and loyalty which was prob- 
ably the last act of devotion to the royal house, to save 
which he had poured out his heart’s blood in tears and en- 
treaties and sacrifices for nearly forty years. 







THE FALL OF FERUSALEM 185 


III. THe Fate or THE City.—At last a breach was 

made in the old fortifications, and the troops began to rush 
in, like an angry sea which after long chafing has made 
for itself an entrance in the sea-wall, and pours in turbu- 
lent fury to carry desolation in its course. The kings of 
the earth and all the inhabitants of the world could never 
have believed that the adversary and the enemy should 
enter into the gates of Jerusalem; yet so it befell. Then 
the terrified people fled from the lower into the upper city, 
and L as they did so their homes were filled with the desolat- 
ing terror of the merciless soldiery. 
A hundred different forms of anguish gathered in that 
Jevoted city, like vultures to the dead camel of the desert. 
e then to the men who had fought for their very life ! 
but woe more utter and agonizing to the women and maid- 
ens, to the children and little babes! War is always ter- 
rible; but no hand of historian dare lift the veil, and tell 
in unvarnished words all the horror of the sack of a city 
by such soldiery as Nebuchadnezzar and his generals led to 
war. The wolves of the Siberian forest are more merciful 
than they. “All the princes of the king of Babylon came 
in, and sat in the middle gate,” from which they gave direc- 
tions for the immediate prosecution of their success upon 
the terrified people, who now crowded the upper city, pre- 
pared to make the last desperate stand. 

Late that afternoon the old palace of David was filled 
with eager consultation. Everything must be done to pre- 
serve the royal house, “the breath of our nostrils, the 
anointed of the Lord.” It was therefore arranged that 
as soon as night fell Zedekiah and his harem should go 
forth under the protection of all the men of war, through 
a breach to be made in the walls of the city to the south; 
and exactly as Ezekiel had foretold, so it came to pass. 
“The prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoul- 








186 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND. PROPHET 


der in the dark, and shall go forth: they shall dig through 
the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face” 
(Ezek, xii 12). 

A long line of fugitives, each carrying property or neces- 
saries, stole silently through the king’s private garden, and 
so toward the breach, and like shadows of the night passed 
forth into the darkness between long lines of armed men, 
who held their breath. If only by the dawn they could 
gain the plains of Jericho they might hope to elude the 
fury of their pursuers. But all night Zedekiah must have 
remembered those last words of Jeremiah, “Thou shalt not 
escape, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Baby- 
lon.” “Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let 
the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth.” This 
was not the first time or the last that man has thought to 
elude the close meshes of the Word of God. 

Somehow the tidings of the flight reached the Chaldeans. 
The whole army arose to pursue. “Our pursuers were 
swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they chased us upon 
the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness. . . . 
The anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits.” That is 
the lament of Jeremiah; but Ezekiel gives an even deeper 
insight into the events of that memorable and terrible night : 
“My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken 
in my snare. . . . And I will scatter toward every wind all 
that are about him to help him, and all his bands” (Lam. 
iV. 19, 205 Ezek, Xi, 13,14), . 

What happened the next morning in Jerusalem and what 
befell her in after-months is told in the Book of Lamenta- 
tions. Her streets and houses were filled with the bodies 
of the slain, after having been outraged with.nameless 
atrocities ; but happier these perchance than the thousands 
who were led off into exile or sold into slavery, to suffer 
the horrors of death in life. Then the wild fury of fire 


THE FALL OF FERUSALEM 187 


engulfed temple and palace, public building and dwelling- 
house, and blackened ruins covered the site of the holy and 
beautiful city which had been the joy of the whole earth; 
and the ear of the prophet heard the spirit of the fallen 


city crying: 


“Ts it nothing to you, all ye that pass by ? 
Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is 
done unto me, 
Wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger!” 


All that passed by clapped their hands at her; they hissed 
and wagged their heads at the daughter of Jerusalem, say- 
ing, “Is this the city that men call The perfection of beauty, 
The joy of the whole earth?” All her enemies opened their 
mouths wide against her: they hissed and gnashed their 
teeth: they said, “ We have swallowed her up: certainly 
this is the day that we looked for; we have found it, we 
have seenit.” The Lord did that which he devised: he ful- 
filled his word: he threw down, and did not pity: he caused 
the enemy to rejoice. Foxes walked upon the desolate 
mountain of Zion (Lam. ii. v.). 

As for Zedekiah, he was taken to Riblah, where Nebu- 
chadnezzar was at this time, perhaps not expecting so 
speedy a downfall of the city. With barbarous cruelty he 
slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, that the last 
sight he beheld might be of their dying agony. He was 
also compelled to witness the slaughter of all his nobles. 
Then, as a coup de grace, with his own hand probably, 
Nebuchadnezzar struck out Zedekiah’s two eyes with his 
spear. 

Thus God brought upon his people the king of the Chal- 
deans, who slew their young men with the sword in the 
house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon 
young man or maiden, old man or ancient, but gave them 


188 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


all into his hand. And all the vessels of the house of God, 
great and small, and the treasures of the house of the Lord, 
and the treasures of the king and his princes, all these he 
brought to Babylon. And they burned the house of God, 
and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burned all the 
palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly ves- 
sels thereof. And them that had escaped from the sword 
carried he away to Babylon, and they were servants to him 
and his sons, 


XX. 


A Clonded Sunset. 


(JEREMIAH xl.—xliv.) 


‘¢ Therefore to whom turn I but to thee, the ineffable Name? 
Builder and maker thou of houses not made with hands! 
What! have fear of change from thee who art ever the same? 
Doubt that thy power can fill the heart that thy power expands? 
There never shall be one lost Good! What was, shall live as before; 
The Evil is null, is naught, is silence implying sound; 
What was good, shall be good, with for evil so much good more; 
On the earth the broken arcs—in the heaven a perfect round!” 
BROWNING. 


F the closing verses of the Book of Jeremiah were writ- 
ten by his own hand, he must have lived for twenty 
years after the fall of Jerusalem; but they partook of the 
same infinite sadness as the forty years of his public minis- 
try. It would appear that so far as his outward lot was con- 
cerned the prophet Jeremiah spent a life of more unrelieved 
sadness than has perhaps fallen to the lot of any other, with 
the exception of the Divine Lord. This was so apparent 
to the Jewish commentators on the prophecies of Isaiah 
that they applied to him the words of the fifty-third chap- 
ter, which tell the story of the man of sorrows, who was 
acquainted with grief, and stood as a sheep dumb before 
her shearers. Of course in the light of Calvary we see 
the depths of substitutionary suffering in those inimitable 
words which no mortal could ever realize; but it is never- 
189 


190 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


theless significant that in any sense they were deemed ap- 
plicable to Jeremiah. 

His sufferings may be classed under three divisions: 
those recited in the Book of Lamentations, and connected 
with the fall of Jerusalem; those connected with the mur- 
der of Gedaliah and the flight into Egypt; and those of 
the exile there. But amid the salt brine of these bitter ex- 
periences there was always welling up a spring of hope and 
peace. Oppressed on every side, but not straitened ; per- 
plexed, yet not unto despair; pursued, yet not forsaken; 
smitten down, yet not destroyed; always delivered unto 
death, yet passing through death into the true life, sure that 
the Lord would not cast off forever, but, though he caused 
grief, he would have compassion, according to the multitude 
of his mercies. 


I. THE DeEso.atTe City.—It is only latterly that any 
question has been raised as to the authorship of the Book 
of Lamentations. In the text no author is named, and 
these exquisite elegiacs have descended to us anonymously. 
But a very old tradition ascribes them to our prophet. In 
the Septuagint translation, made in the year 280 B.c., the 
following introduction is prefixed to the book: “It came 
to pass, after Israel was taken captive, and Jerusalem made 
desolate, Jeremiah sat weeping, and lamented this lamenta- 
tion over Jerusalem.” -To this the Vulgate adds, “in bit- 
terness of heart-sighing and crying.” The cave in which 
Jeremiah is said to have written them is still shown on the 
western-side of the city; and every Friday the Jews assem- 
ble to recite as his these plaintive words, at their wailing- 
place in Jerusalem, where a few of the old stones still remain. 
There is no good reason, therefore, for disassociating the 
Book of Lamentations from the authorship of Jeremiah. 

This being so, what a flood of light is cast upon the 


A CLOUDED SUNSET IgI 


desolate scene when Nebuzar-adan had completed his work 
of destruction, and the long lines of captives were already 
far on their way to Babylon! How many went into exile 
we have no means of knowing; the number would probably 
amount to several thousands, principally of the wealthier 
classes. Only the poor of the people were left to cultivate 
the land, that it might not revert to an absolute desert. 
But the population would probably be very sparse—a few 
peasants scattered over the sites which had teemed with 
crowds. 

The city sat solitary which had been full of people. She 
had become as a widow. Night and day it seemed to the 
eye of her patriot lovers as though she were weeping sore 
and her tears were upon her cheeks; the holy fire was ex- 
tinct upon her altars ; pilgrims no longer traversed the ways 
of Zion to attend the appointed feasts; her gates had sunk 
into the ground, and her habitations were pitilessly de- 
stroyed by fire. How often would Jeremiah pass mourn- 
fully amid the blackened ruins! Here was the site of the 
altar; there of the most holy place. That was the palace 
of David; this the new palace that Jehoiakim had made 
for himself, with its wide windows and heavy coatings of 
vermilion. Yonder was the court of the guard, where he 
had suffered so many months of confinement; and there, 
again, was the place where he had so often stood to warn 
his people of their sins. 

Above and around, nature preserved the unbroken round 
of her seasons and months, of day and night. The old 
mountains which had stood around the city in the days of 
David and Hezekiah glowed with the morning light and 
softened in the darkening shadows of the night. The sun 
arose over Olivet and set in the western sea. The pano- 
rama of hill and valley, which lay around like the undu- 
lations of a sea of rock, spread itself in its accustomed 


192 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


strength and beauty, for Zion had always been beautiful in 
her situation. But upon the site of the virgin daughter of 
Zion the stillness of death had fallen, broken only by the 
cry of jackal and wild dog. 

What all this meant to Jeremiah words fail to say. No 
truer heart ever beat in patriot’s bosom. What Phocion 
felt for Athens, what Savonarola for Florence, what the 
elder Pitt for England, amid the catastrophes that darkened 
his latter days—that in a concentrated form must Jere- 
miah, whose love for country was so intimately bound up 
with his religious life, have felt and suffered. Anticipating 
the words of One who in after-days was to sit on the same 
mountain and look across the valley, he might have said, 
“© Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killeth the prophets, and 
stoneth them that are sent unto her! how often would I 
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gather- 
eth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Be- 
hold, your house is left unto you desolate !” 


II. GepaLiaH’s Murprr.—Nebuchadnezzar and _ his 
chiefs had evidently been kept closely informed of the 
state of parties during the siege of Jerusalem, and the king 
gave definite instructions to his chief officers to take special 
precautions for the safety of Jeremiah. When the upper 
city fell into their hands, they sent and took him out of the 
court of the guard, and he was brought in chains among 
the other captives to Ramah, about five miles north of 
Jerusalem. 

In a remarkable address which the captain of the guard, 
made to Jeremiah, he acknowledged the retributive justice 
of Jehovah—one of the many traces of the real religious- 
ness that gave a tone and bearing to these men by which 
they are altogether removed from the category of ordinary 
heathen. “The Lord thy God pronounced this evil upon 


A CLOUDED SUNSET 193 


this place, and the Lord hath brought it, and done accord- 
ing as he spake: because ye have sinned against the Lord, 
and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come 
upon you.” 

The chains were then struck from off his fettered hands, 
and liberty was given him either to accompany the rest of 
the people to Babylon, or to go where he chose through- 
out the land. Ultimately, as he seemed to hesitate as to 
which direction to take, the Chaldean general urged him 
to make his home with Gedaliah, to strengthen his hands, 
and give him the benefit of his counsel in the difficult task 
to which he had been appointed. Thus again he turned 
from rest and ease to take the rough path of duty. 

Gedaliah was the grandson of Shaphan, King Josiah’s 
secretary, and son of Ahikam, who had been sent to in- 
quire of the prophetess Huldah concerning the newly 
found Book of the Law. On a former occasion the hand 
of Ahikam had rescued Jeremiah from the nobles. Evi- 
dently the whole family was bound by the strongest, ten- 
derest ties to the servant of God, imbued with the spirit 
and governed by the policy which he enunciated. These 
principles Gedaliah had consistently followed, and they 
marked him out, in the judgment of Nebuchadnezzar, as 
the fittest to be intrusted with the reins of government 
and to exert some kind of authority over the scattered rem- 
nant. To him, therefore, Jeremiah came with an allow- 
ance of victuals and other marks of the esteem in which 
the conquerors regarded him. 

For a brief interval all went well. The new governor 
took up his residence at Mizpah, an old fort which Asa 
had erected three hundred years before to check the inva- 
son of Baasha. The town stood on a rocky eminence, but 
the castle was supplied with water from a deep well. Chal- 
dean soldiers gave the show of authority and stability to 


194 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


Gedaliah’s rule. To Mizpah the scattered remnant of the 
Jews began to look with hope. The captains of the forces 
which were in the fields, still holding out, as roving bands, 
against. the conqueror, hastened to swear allegiance to the 
representative of the Jewish state ; and the Jews who had 
fled to Moab, Edom, and other surrounding peoples re- 
turned out of all places whither they had been driven, and 
they came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah. 
How glad must Jeremiah have been to see this nucleus 
of order spreading its influence through the surrounding 
chaos and confusion, and with what eagerness he must have 
used all the influence he possessed to aid in the establish- 
ment of Gedaliah’s authority! The fair dream, however, 
was rudely dissipated by the treacherous murder of Geda- 
liah, who seems to have been eminently fitted for his post, 
- by Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah. In the midst of a feast 
given by the unsuspecting governor, he was slain with the 
sword, together with all the Jews that were with him and 
the Chaldean garrison. On the second day after, the red- 
handed murderers, still thirsting for blood, slew seventy 
pilgrims who were on their way to weep amid the ruins of 
Jerusalem and lay offerings on the site of the ruined altar. 
The deep well of the keep was choked with bodies, and 
shortly afterward Ishmael carried off the king’s daughters 
and all the people that had gathered around Gedaliah, and 
started with them for the court of Baalis, the king of the 
children of Ammon, who was an accomplice in the plot. 
It was a bitter disappointment, and to none would the 
grief of it have been more poignant than to Jeremiah, who, 
in the demolition of this last attempt to effect the peace- 
able settlement of his country, saw the irreconcilable an- 
tagonism of his people against the reign of the king of Baby- 
lon. This he knew must last for at least seventy years. 


A CLOUDED SUNSET 195 


The people themselves appear to have lost heart; for 
though Johanan and other of the captains of roving bands 
pursued Ishmael and delivered from his hand all the cap- 
tives he had taken, and recovered the women and the chil- 
dren, yet none of them dared to return to Mizpah; but, 
like shepherdless sheep, harried by hogs, driven, draggled, 
panting, and terrified, they resolved to quit their land and 
retire southward, with the intention of fleeing into the land 
of Egypt, with which during the later days of their national 
history they had maintained close relations. 

They carried Jeremiah with them. They had confidence 
in his prayers and in his veracity, since his predictions had 
been verified so often by the event. They knew he stood 
high in the favor of the court of Babylon. They believed 
that his prayers prevailed with God. And therefore they 
regarded him as a shield and defence; a noble representa- 
tive of the highest hopes and tradition of their people; one 
in whom the statesman, sage, and prophet mingled in equal 
proportion. 

Halting at the caravansary of Chimham, whose name 
recalls David’s flight from and return to Jerusalem, the spot 
where travelers left the frontiers of Palestine for Egypt, the 
people earnestly debated whether they should go forward 
or return. They came also to Jeremiah, and asked him to 
give himself to prayer, that the Lord his God should show 
them the way wherein they should walk, and the thing they 
should do. They professed their willingness to be guided 
entirely by the voice of God, though in this they were 
probably not sincere. They dealt deceitfully against their 
own souls by appearing to desire only God’s ways, while 
in point of fact they were determined to enter into Egypt. 

For ten days Jeremiah gave himself to prayer. Then 
the word of the Lord came unto him, and he summoned 


196 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


the people around him to declare it. Speaking in the name 
of the Most High, he said: “If ye will still abide in this 
land, then will I build you, and not pull you down; and I 
will plant you, and not pluck you up. . . . Be not afraid of 
the king of Babylon: . . . for I am with you to save you, 
and to deliver you from his hand.” If, on the other hand, 
they persisted in going into the land of Egypt, in the hope 
that they would see no more war, nor hear the sound of 
the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread, then they would be 
overtaken there by the sword, the famine, and the pesti- 
lence; they would be an execration, an astonishment, a 
curse, and a reproach, and they should never again see 
their native land. As he spoke he seems to have been 
sadly aware that during the ten days devoted to interces- 
sion on their behalf the prepossession in favor of Egypt 
had been growing, and that his words would not avail to 
stay the strong current which was bearing them thither. 

So it befell. When he had made an end of speaking all 
the words wherewith the Lord had sent him to them, the 
chiefs accused him of speaking falsely, and of misrepresent- 
ing the divine word. Not willing to accuse him flatly of 
treachery, they suggested that Baruch, who was still accom- 
panying him as his faithful friend, had incited him to urge 
the return to Canaan with the view of betraying them into 
the hand of the Chaldeans for death or exile. So the ter- 
" rified people pursued their way to Egypt, and settled at 
Tahpanhes, which was ten miles across the frontier. 

Almost the last ingredient of bitterness in Jeremiah’s cup 
must have been furnished by this pertinacious obstinacy, 
which would not be controlled by his word, which resisted 
his entreaties, and suggested that his advice was _tinctured 
by treachery in their best interests. How terrible that they 
should malign and misunderstand the man who had spent 
forty years of consistent public ministry in efforts to save 


A CLOUDED SUNSET 197 


them from the effects of evil counsel, and to recall them to 
a simple and absolute faith in the God of their fathers ! 


III. Ecypr.—His life of protest was not yet complete. 
No sooner had the people settled in their new home than 
he was led to take great stones in his hand and lay them 
beneath the mortar in some brickwork which was being 
laid down at the entry of Pharaoh’s palace in Tahpanhes. 
“On these stones,” he said, “the king of Babylon shall set 
his throne, and spread out his royal pavilion upon them. 
He shall smite the land of Egypt, and kindle a fire in the 
houses of its gods, and array himself in her spoils as easily 
as a shepherd throws his outer garment around his shoul- 
ders. The obelisks of Heliopolis will be also burned with 
fire. To have come here, therefore, is not to escape the 
dreaded foe, but to throw yourselves into his arms.” 

Some years must have followed of which we have no 
record, and during which the great king was engaged in 
the siege of Tyre, and therefore unable to pursue his plans 
against Pharaoh. During this time the Jews scattered over 
a wide extent of territory, so that colonies were formed in 
Upper as well as Lower Egypt, all of which became deeply 
infected with the prevailing idolatries and customs around 
them. Notwithstanding all the bitter experiences which 
had befallen them in consequence of their idolatries, they 
burned incense unto the gods of Egypt, and repeated the 
abominations which had brought such disaster and suffer- 
ing upon their nation. 

Taking. advantage, therefore, of a great convocation at 
some idolatrous festival, Jeremiah warned them of the in- 
evitable fate which must overtake them in Egypt, as it 
had befallen them in Jerusalem. “ Behold,” said the faith- 
ful prophet, “God will punish you who dwell in the land 
of Egypt, as he punished Jerusalem, by sword, by famine, 


198 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


and by pestilence: so that none of the remnant of Judah, 
which are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, 
shall escape or remain, or return to the land of Judah to 
dwell there.” 

A severe altercation then ensued. » The men indignantly 
protested that they would still burn incense unto the queen 
of heaven, as they had done in the streets of Jerusalem, and 
they even ascribed the evils that had befallen them to their 
discontinuance of this custom. Jeremiah, on the other 
hand, gray with age, his face marred with suffering, an old 
man now, did not hesitate to insist, in the name of the God 
he served so faithfully, that the sufferings of the people were 
due, not to their discontinuance of idolatry, but to their 
persistence in its unholy rites. “ Because ye have burned 
incense and sinned against the Lord, and have not walked 
in his law, his statutes, or his testimonies; therefore is this 
evil happened unto you, as it is this day.” He went on 
to predict the invasion of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, which 
took place in the year 568 B.c., and which resulted, as 
Josephus tells us, in the carrying off to Babylon of the 
remnant of Jews who had, against Jeremiah’s advice, fled 
there for refuge. So it was proved whose word should 
stand, God’s or theirs. 

Through all these dark and painful experiences the soul 
of Jeremiah quieted itself as a weaned babe. When he 
said his strength was perished, still his expectation was 
from the Lord. When his soul remembered its wormwood 
and gall, he recalled to mind the covenant, ordered in all 
things, and sure; therefore he had hope. The Lord was 
his portion, and he hoped and quietly waited for the salva- 
tion of God. He knew that God would not cast off for- 
ever, but though he caused grief, yet he would have com- 
passion, according to the multitude of his mercies. He knew 
that his Redeemer lived, who would arise for his cause, 
and render a recompense to his foes. He looked far away 


A CLOUDED SUNSET 199 


beyond the mist of years, and saw the expiry of the sen- 
tence of captivity, the return of his people, the rebuilding 
of the city, the holy and blessed condition of its inhabitants, 
the glorious reign of the Branch, the Scion of David’s stock, 
the New Covenant before which the old should vanish away. 
Probably, therefore, his days were not all dark, but aglow 
with the first rays of the Sun of Righteousness, smiting the 
Alpine peaks of his holy and loyal spirit. The Comforter 
must have come to him. God, who comforteth those that 
are cast down, must have spoken words of balm and ten- 
der peace. Never yet in the history of the world has he 
permitted his servants to sink in unrelieved and hopeless 
midnight. Unto the upright there always arises light in 
the darkness. The gloomiest hours that ever brooded over 
the Son of Man broke up with the cry, “ Father, into thy 
hands I commend my spirit.” 

If these words should be read by some whose life, like 
Jeremiah’s, has been draped with curtains of somber hue, 
shutting out the glad light of day—who have trodden the 
path of sorrow and the valley of shadow—let them know 
that nothing brings men into such intimate relationship 
with the spirit of God, and that to none does the Infinite 
One stoop so closely as to those that are sore broken on 
the wheel of affliction. It is only when we fall into the 
ground and die that we cease to abide alone and begin to 
bear much fruit. Do not try to feel resigned. Wid/ resig- 
nation. Submit yourself under the mighty hand of God. 
If you can say nothing else, fill your nights and days with 
the cry or sob of “ Father, not my will, but thine, be done.” 
Never doubt the love of God. Never suppose for a moment 
that he has forgotten or forsaken. Never yield to the sug- 
gestion of the adversary that the harvests which you are 
to garner could have been procured at any less cost. As for 
God, his way is perfect, and he makes our way perfect. 

Scripture says nothing about the death of Jeremiah. 


200 FEREMIAH, PRIEST AND PROPHET 


Whether it took place, as Christian tradition affirms, by 
stoning in Egypt, or whether he breathed out his soul be- 
neath the faithful tendance of Baruch, in some quiet cham- 
ber of death, we cannot tell. The Bible makes compara- 
tively little of death-scenes, that it may throw into greater 
prominence the prolonged narrative of the One Death, 
which has abolished death. God’s chief interest is focused 
on the life and work of his servants. What they did, said, 
and suffered is more to him than how they surrendered 
their lives at his bidding. Indeed, to know how a man 
has lived is to make us largely indifferent of information 
regarding his last hours. The sculptured column projects 
its shaft in perfect symmetry upward from the earth, 
though we may not be able to follow it because the mass 
of waving verdure veils it from our gaze. But we know 
it is beautiful, and in perfect harmony with all we behold. 

But how gladly did the prophet close his eyes upon the 
wreck that sin had wrought on the chosen people, and open 
them on the land where neither sin, nor death, nor the sight 
and sound of war break the perfect rest! What a look of 
surprise and rapture must have settled upon the worn face, 
the expression of the last glad vision of the soul as it passed 
out from the body of corruption, worn and weary with the 
long conflict, to hear the “Well done” and welcome of 
God! His memory was cherished with exceptional rever- 
ence. It seemed to the restored people as if his tender 
spirit were watching over their interests. The struggles of 
Judas Maccabzeus were cheered by the thought that he 
had. come to succor him. It was believed that he con- 
tinued in heaven the intercessions for which he had been 
so famous on earth, and in the days that preceded the 
second siege of Jerusalem it was supposed that he had re- 
appeared in the person of the Son of Man. 


A SELECTION FROM 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY’S 


CATALOGUE 


New YORK, 112 FiFTH AVENUE 
CHICAGO, 148 & 150 MADISON STREET 
TORONTO, 140 & 142 YONGE STREET 


Christian Evidences, etc. 
AOD 


Many Infallible Proofs. The Evidences of Christianity. By 

Rev. A. T. Pierson, D.D. 12mo, paper, net 35c.; cloth..... 1.00 

“Only a man of wide and of broad cba “soo and one who 

had himself come up out of a conflict with doubts, could have so 

completely covered the whole battlefield of unbelief, meeting 

the doubter at every point with a candor that captivates, and a 
logic that conquers.”— The Morning Star. 


None Like It. A Plea for the Old Sword. By Rev. Joseph 
Parker, D.D., author of ‘‘ The People’s Bible.” r2mo, cloth 1.25 
A defense of the inspiration and authority of the Bible. 
“The spirit of the work is as sweet as its blows are sturdy. 
This volume is one of the ablest on its side and is sound in its 
principles,’”— The Congregationalist. 


I Believe in God the Father Almighty. By Rev. John Henry 
Barrows. D.D _ 16mo, cloth, gilt top...... eerste clas 1,00 


“This is a bright and strong series of four addresses by a 


bright and strong man. They are rich in illustration, full of 
pith, and right to the point.” —Tke Independent. 


A Lawyer’s Examination of the Bible. By H. H. Russell. 
TAM CLO (c:0.010 «12101010 Ai cig ore wr alee aie ces ade ete rasa eke loiaarerviwtatoeta earers 1.00 
“The case of the Bible is presented in such a way as to 
satisfy the demands of the intellect as well as the heart.” —The 
N.Y. Observer. 


Atonement: The Fundamental Fact of Christianity. By Rev. 
Newman Hall, D.D. r12amo. cloth...........e eee eee ee eens 7 
“This valuable little volume will do much to assist in their 
study of this important subject those who may not have access 
to more elaborate works or leisure for the study of them. Itisa 
Book Swick cannot have too large a circulation.”’—Christian 
Orr, , 


Unsettled Questions Touching the Foundations of Christianity. 
By JoM. P. Otts, D.D. zamo, Cloth, o6-onee ew cecestowns ae nea 1200) 
“The author recognizes the fact that young men are some- 
times harassed with doubts and questions, and he does his best 
to dispel the first and to answer the last. The simplicity and 
force of his reasoning will do all this for many inquiring minds.” 
—The N. Y. Observer. 


The Highest Critics vs. The Higher Critics. By Rev. L. W. 
Munhall, M.A. remo, cloth..... noo OMe eseic Sounocod) +++ 1,00 
““The appearance of this volume is timely. The style is 
pe and pointed, and the argument critical and cumulative. 

e commend it to all.” — The Religious Telescope. 


The Evidences of Christianity. ee William Paley, D.D. Edited 
to) 


by Canon Birks. Introduction, Notes,and Supplement, :s2mo, 
clothyn cc. se eeseeces Seeie viele vieseeeece 1.20 


Ten Reasons Why I Believe the Bible is the Word of God. By 
Rev. R. A. Torrey. 16mo, paper.......... -s..00. - Gsanc0e 15 


*,% See also Brookes, By-Paths, and Living Papers. 


Introductory Studies. 


CISD 
Outline Studies in the Books of the Old Testament. By Prof. 
W. G. Moorehead. remo, cloth........-.+sseeeees Pp Ser} Hie) 


“This volume of outline study forms an admirable help to 
the Bible reader. The leading topics, books and personages of 
the Old Testament are presented in order, and brief, clear and 
satisfactory explanations are given.” —Zion’s Herald. 


An Introduction to the Study of the New Testament. By Rev. 
John H. Kerr, A.M. With Introduction by Prof. Warfield. 
T2MO, ClOth......2sseccreceecrerscssensesereterccess dane cees 1.50 


‘‘We take particular pleasure in commending this volume to 
students of divinity, who will find in ita convenient summary 
of the facts and arguments relating to an important subject ; 
and take still greater pleasure in commending it to laymen who 
have no time for laborious researches, but who desire to know 
the grounds on which the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament 
ought to be faithfully received and devoutly believed.”—7ke 
Church Standard. 


An Introduction to the Book of Acts. By Prof. J. M. Stifler, 
D.D. Second Edition, Revised. 12mo, Clothiancs cemeoete Dene 525 


“For general readers we cannot speak too highly of this 
book. It marks the great events of this first period subsequent 
to the death and resurrection of Christ with masterly simplicity 
and good sense, and performs the work of such an introduction 
by leaving the outlines and great features of the history strongly 
impressed on the student’s mind.” — The Independent. 


The Cartoons of St. Mark. By Rev. R. F. Horton, D.D. 12mo, 
buckram. .....--- «+ ccrcceeer ere eeteces & AG SGOCONOS BADD 1.50 


Vivid pen-pictures of salient features of Mark’s Gospel. 


Alone With the Word. Devotional Notes on the New Testa- 

ment. By G.S. Rowe. 8vo, cloth, gilt top.......- Seeniene (2025, 

“So carefully condensed that every word is weighty. Itis 

a great joy to come to such fresh and helpful pages as these.” — 
The Christian. 


The Bible Remembrancer. A Handbook of the Old and New 
Testament. New Edition, With maps and illustrations. 8vo, 
cloth. ....+-.sseees aeisisiers sisiniivisie potent sters riee/eleherin<in@laieis sisibisteiahe25 

“Good maps; good lists of priests, kings, prophets, judges ; 
especially helpful lists of contemporary monarchs ; profane his- 
tory and extra-Biblical events: with weights. money. the Jewish 
calendar, and other helpful information.”—T7he New York 
Evangelist. 


The Bible Handbook. An Introduction to the Study of Sacred 
Scripture. By Joseph Angus, M.A., B.D, With map. 12mo, 


cloth .....---20 ADDONS bila otareielaiete/etuce!siole.0:<)sisre}ar= soreisietaies +++ 2,00 
A New Companion to the Bible. For Bible Classes, Sunday 
Schools and Families. With maps. 12mo, cloth,.... paisereiss X.O0) 


*,% See also By-Paths, Text Books, Commentaries, Bible Readings, 
Edersheim, Meyer, and Weidner. 


Bible Readings. 
ASD 


Notes and Suggestions for Bible Readings. - By S. R. Brig; 
and J. H. Elliott. g5¢2 thousand. 8vo, paper, soc.; flexible cloth, 
EC rs CIOLM s 5 steitaieiersine HAmeee bo baie athe cee a on eee $1.00 


Acknowledged to be the very best help for Bible readings 
in print. Over six hundred outlines of Bible readings by many 
of the most eminent Bible students of the day. 


New Notes for Bible Readings. By S.R. Briggs. With memoir 
by Rev. J. H. Brookes, D.D. 8vo, flexible cloth, 75c.; cloth, 1.00 


“The readings are practical helpful, full. of suggestiveness, 
and bring out the most important points and truths in the 
subjects on which they are based. It is, in fact, the best thing 
of the kind we have seen,”’"— The Christian at Work. 


Scriptural Outlines by Books and Themes. By William G. 
Carr. 12mo,cloth..... ...... aia oiefatainine a nrastela Sera sisreiparshash ote 75 


‘* They are adapted to the Student of the Sacred Scriptures, 
in his private work at home, or in his public work as ‘a Bible 
Reader. They will inevitably stimulate devotion and a know- 
ledge of the Word.” —Tke Golden Rule. 


Flashes from the Lighthouse of Truth; or, Bible Readings 
on the First Three Chapters of the First Epistle to the Church at 
Thessalonica. By Rev. F, E. Marsh. remo, cloth..... ... 1.00 


“Has a distinct mission and deserves wide popularity.”— 
Ram's Horn. 


The Open Secret; or, The Bible Explaining Itself. A Series of 
Practical Bible Readings. By Hannah Whitall Smith, author of 
“The Christian’s Secret of a Happy Life.’’ 12mo, cloth... 1.00 


Bible Briefs; or, Outline Themes for Scripture Students. By 
Geo. C. and E. A. Needham, 12mo, cloth..«.........: cle.siete) HLOO) 


Broken Bread for Serving Disciples. _A Companion to ‘ Bible 
Briefs.” By Geo. C.and E. A. Needham, 12mo, cloth.... 1.00 


““We have looked through this book with pleasure and com- 
mend it heartily. It is a good sign that such works are in 
demand.”— The NV. Y. Evangelist. 


Gold from Ophir. Bible Readings, Original and Selected. By 


J. E, Wolfe. Introduction by Rev. J. H. Brookes, D.D. 
BIO, ClO cosas sence sy eee OAydwotie aoaoce Me boa 1.25 


““A warehouse cf pulpit and platform furniture ready for 
use. Everything is condensed and analyzed, so that there is 
not a line to spare.’—C. H. Spurgeon. 


Ruth, the Moabitess.- Gleanings in the Book of Ruth, By 
Henry Mocrhouse. 12mo, paper, 20c.; cloth .  .......54. .40 


*4% See also Introductory Studies, Works of Reference, 
and Commentaries, 


Bible Readers Hints. 
OD 


Hints on Bible Study. A Symposium. By Dr. Cifford, Pro- 
fessors Drummond and Elmslie, Revs. Moule, Horton, Meyer, 


Waller, Berry, and Dawson. r2mo, cloth.............+.-0e $ .50 
Bible Difficulties and How to Meet Them. A Symposium. 
Fourth Thousand. 12M0, Cloth...........050. seceeessvess 50 


ContTents—Inspiration. by Dr. Clifford—The Bible and 
Science, by Rev. F. Ballard—The Incarnation, by Rev. Pre- 
bendary Gordon Calthrop—Miracles, by Rev. R. F. Horton — 
The Atonement, by the Rev. J. Reid Howatt—The Reliability of 
the Gospels, by Rev. A. R. Buckland—The Resurrection, by 
Rey F, B. Meyer—The Trinity in Unity, by Rev. Dr. Hiles 

itchens, 


Among Matty Witnesses. A Book for Bible Students. By M.B. 
Williams. 12mo, cloth...........+-+--+ RENCRA ose OO I.00 


Bible Helps for Busy Men. By A.C. P. Coote. 12mo, paper, 
30C.; COLD... 2. cere cece cece ener e eee ete eee te ne eene er eneesees 60 


Red Letter Readings. By Miss Bessie B. Tyson. 12mo, paper, 


25C.; ClOth.... +500 cee eees wee e eee crete ee ceeeeee teeter ee ees +50 
Pegs of Preachers—Points for Workers. By Charles Inglis. 
T2MO, CLOED:< Hees o ee ae ae es eiecine ne eieee do acwenedenss SO mS 


“Calculated to be helpful guides to any who may wish to 
avail themselves of them.” — 7he Christian Intelligencer. 


Supplementai Bible Studies. By Rev. H. T. Sell. 8vo, paper, 
Net, 25C.; Cloth........ cere ees eceeserevereees Senaoraines net, .50 
This book meets the demand for a short and comprehensive 
course of study upon the Structure, Geography, History, and 
Institutions of the Bible. - There are three outline maps and a 
blackboard outline for every lesson. 
“* Mr, Sell has had the rare good fortune to hit upon the doing 
of exactly the kind of thing sorely needed to be done, and he 
has done it well.” — The Advance. 


A Pocket Concordance to the Scriptures. By Rev. John Brown. 

gemo, cloth.... .-..-.-. «+++++. sees cee ceesee oe MEL, 225 

Printed on good paper and substantially bound. A ready 
companion for the traveler. 


bse! Scripture Questions with Answers. 16mo, paper. 25C.; 
cloth 


Bbieis ate ainiviwlo\in(ecni06\a(ea Raise viatersbolnieclovsouiisinie’s e} sisisie'eisioisiaveatsrerel” 1¢ 50. 
Symbols and System in Bible Readings. By Rev. W. F. Crafts. 
TOMO, PAPEL. ...seseesereeeee ecloeisiee Meeeielaiiste elie sisiesieiec'sisjea. 625) 


How to Mark your Bible. By Mrs. Stephen Menzies. With 
prefatory note by D. L. Moody. 8vo, paper, 35c.; cloth....  .75 
‘An almost inexhaustibie number of cl pao for mar- 
ginal notes and markings. It is a book every Christian 
worker will do well to have among his Bible helps.” —7he Young 
Men's Era. 


How to Study the Bible. By D. L. Moody. Revised. 16m0, 
paper, 10C.; flexible cloth .. ...s.eeee sere BR re ic] oe 15 


*,* See also Introductory Studies, Works of Reference, 
and Commentaries. 


For Evangelistic Work. 
COD 


The Ivory Palaces of the King. By Rev. J. Wilbur Chapman, 
D.D. r16m0, Cloth. ......0.cceccecneceececcererceccresees enaeSO 


‘Brief, impressive observations about spiritual duty and 
character, intended to lead the unbelieving to Christ, and to 
stimulate Christians.” — The Congregationalzst. 


Victory Through Surrender. By Rev. B. Fay Mills. 16mo, cloth, 
Silver StAMPING.....scecceeeecsecrenesererersereseecesesese 250 


Wanted—Antiseptic Christians. A Plea for Purity of Life and 
Walk. By Mrs. Maud Ballington Booth. 12mo, paper, roc.; 
per dozen........+.+++ Piaroatersie wala sivievejeisiers cleealeinioe) te nsisisinie net, 1.00 


“In this booklet one whose frequent dealings with moral and 
spiritual impurity has taught her how to value its counterpart. 
has written wisely, and womanly, and well. It is a tract that 
should be circulated widely.” — The Christian Intelligencer. 


The Curse of Septic Soul Treatment. By Mrs. Maud Balling- 
ton Booth. x2mo, paper, 25c.; half-cloth....... ..+++. Sorta) his 


The Blessed Life: How to Find and Live It. By Prof. Nis 
Hofmeyr, of the Theological College of the Dutch Church, 
Stellenbosch, Cape Colony. 12mo, cloth....... secnnacs Ape es) 


‘““The volume is pervaded by a devout and earnest spirit, 
and the style is such as to give a distinct feeling in the reading.” 
—The Watchman. : 


Life, Warfare, and Victory. By Major D. W, Whittle. r2mo, 
paper, 30c.; cloth..........+- avaicietoeiajete eters atarond views) Sele prelate eee O0 
“The writer has written a book which will be found of im- 
mense service to those who are either inquiring after truth or 
have just embraced the Gospel of Christ.” —Batzst Messenger. 


According to Promise; or, The Lord’s Method of Dealing with 
His Chosen People. By C.H.Spurgeon. 16mo, cloth.... .50 


The Sure Foundation; or, Thoughts on the Believer’s Safety. 
By Rev. E. Boys. 18m0, Cloth......ssseesseeereeserererees 040 


Bunyan’s Pilgrims Progress. : 


The Barnard-Linton Edition. With 55 full-page illustrations 
Py Frederick Barnard, J. D. Linton and others. 4to, elegant 
cloth, boxed.............+.- ia StsTe nie Mosel Mibgniby ase tele aynis ae Seeniekeso 

The Lat is gone Edition. Pica type. Unabridged, fully illus- 
trated, colored frontispiece. 8vo, cloth, $1.50; beveled cloth, 
full gilt edges, and five extra colored plates.......... ++» 2.00 

The Library Edition. Illustrated by Barnard, and others, 
z2amo, Cloth, gilt top....... 00d ive ve cde csc eveceecssens see ks5O 

The Crown Edition. Illustrated. 12mo, cloth.........6.+. 1625 

The Dear Edition. Wlustrated by Barnard and others, 12mo, 
Sela Wy agoomonsouay CE EOL EID Se oerioton tice Laat ea eae EOD 

The Children’s Edition. Withillustrations. remo, cloth, .50 

The Half-Dime Edition. 199 pages. 48M0, Papef....eere 05 


Devotional. 


COOSD 


‘Prayers for Heart and Home. Morning and Evening Devotions 
for a Month. By Rev. F. B. Meyer, B.A. 8vo, flexible 


(AGT sc ea aropmoneucurce Prete aleve, Scelaceinie eit ace erels Slaaisiaiiolancas tess $ .75 
Daily Family Prayers fora Year. By Rev. J. R. Macduff, D.D. 
At, ClOLD cs ces cwele scien preloiajetain sleiatbleceriecaleia"s\m GOTC ODI NICOR Ge 1,50 


A Guide to Family Devotion. Prayers, Scripture Readings, and 
Hymns, Morning and Evening, fora Year. By Rev, Alexander 
Fletcher, D.D. 4to, cloth........... Soqcidunrocogansodup pecs 3.00 


A Gift of Love, and Loving patecHine® for 365 Days. By Rose 
Porter. Long x18mo, cloth, $1.00; white cloth, silver top, boxed, 
$1.25; decorated silk, gilt edges, boxed........ ssseesereee 1.75 


A Gift of Peace, and Loving Greetings for 365 Days. By Rose 
Porter. Long 18mo, cloth, $1.00; white cloth, silver top, boxed, 
$1.25 ; decorated silk, gilt edges, boxed..........++ jononn dan 1.75 


Daily Food for Daily Life. With border. Cloth, red edges, 
1sc.; white enamel covers, gilt edges.......... aereelatsiais sovne 40 


pay Loud Complete Poems. 8vo, boxed. 
Me LOE eer eeisiereciciaininisiolble ss aie teiwlaele ss oswiece seevsceceeceees 2400 
2. Cloth, full gilt......... cece sete seer ecee ese eecnerereeees 2.50 
4. French morocco. padded, gilt roll. red under gold edges, 4.00 
5. Persian calf, padded and embossed, gilt roll and red 
CAZES oo ccc e cece cece eer ee rence te seseeneeseeesesneass 5.00 
6. Three-quarter calf, gilt top, trimmed edges, gilt marbled 
paper sides.......... FABRA ORO AOCDEO Stott aielayalsloralste forever 4.50 


Prayers from the Poets. A compilation. By Martha Harger. 
16mo, cloth, gilt top .......seseeesereeevece PP armente adex tid: 1,00 


The Gates of Praise, and ‘other Original Poems. By Rev. J. R. 
Macduff, D.D. 18mo, cloth...........sseeeeeerreereeesees -60 


The Gates of Prayer. Private Devotion for Morning and Even- 
ing. By Rev. J. R. Macduff, D.D. 18mo, cloth..........+. -60 


“«My Guest Chamber;’’ or, For the Master’s Use. By Sophia M. 
Nugent. x8mo, cloth, soc.; white vellum CIOEB so cciss eee 75 


Jesus Himself. By Rev. Andrew Murray. With portrait of the 
author. 18mo0, Cloth........eceeeeeseeeseecenves aieisieicie vieipie's +50 


Love Made Perfect. By Rev. Andrew Murray. With portrait of 
the author. 18mo0, Cloth.......cseeececsceces Jasipesaiedsaisices | 950: 


COMFORT AND CONSOLATION. 
The Trausfigured Valley. By Rev. William Miller. 16mo, 


CIOEN sco ccace cons ccvccvceccceccscgcvosscvcesvens Delsiteresieey aS 
Wells of Baca; or, Solaces of the Christian Mourner. By Rev. 
J, R. Macduff, D.D. 24mo, cloth, gilt top..... Maspassemetty +50 


‘The Life Beyond. An Allegory. By Mrs. A. Gatty. Adapted 
M. A. T. 32mo. white vellum cCloth....ccseccceccerenennnes +40 


Wall Rolls. 


CEOS 


Unless otherwise specified each Roll contains 32 leaves, ts about 
14%21 inches, and is mounted on handsome hardwood roller with 
cord attachment. Very large and clear type. 


Daily Comfort, in Four Fold Links: Prayer—Promise—Precept 
—Praise. Compiled by Mrs. Ella J. Mahoney. Sixteenth 
TROWSERE Bis cas visa visie neds aierWelarett side cis. sie uinioe wipe einielamioherst eee: ter 14 


The most popular Wall Roll published, and deservedly so. 
It is a constant monitor in a Christian household, a silent teacher 
for the school, a comforting messenger for the sick-room, as well 
as being suitable for the office, the store or the shop. Every 
page is an effective sermon. 


Y¥. P. S. C. E. Wall Roll. pe 3 People’s Precepts and 
Promises for Spiritual Service, Comfort, Consolation, Exhorta- 
tion and Enlightenment. Scripture Texts arranged by Mrs. 
Ella J. Mahoney..... mace SEDO ode earaicuG, & ocue “abar oe ery 5S 


A new wall roll for the Christian Endeavorers. Contains 
the Pledge of the Society. 


Words of Life. Carefully Selected Bible texts. Compiled by 
Mrs. M. E. Bell... ....08555 Stbidis «Baia ibiois sce meee paces 


Strength and Sunshine for Every-Day Life. Compiled by May 
G. Holmes. Selections from great Authors, Secular and 
ACESS cree oe vie eles mavleiseeiereseuioe Seeman So eure 75 


“This wall roll embraces, as its name imports, rays of sun- 
shine for the mind and heart. It is pleasing in execution, and 
elevating to one’s thought, as the eye catches the sentiment 
which, in its various and rich text, it both breathes and reflects.” 
—The Watchman. 


Seed for Spring-time Sowing. A Wall Roll for the use of Primary, 
Sabbath School and Kindergarten Teachers. Compiled by Mrs. 
Robert Pra tteisay cis awisistsia ds oc tae sie sleteio note SC a mers 


Sunny Teachings. A colored Bible Picture Roll, containing 12 
handsome lithographic prints from Scripture History, with 
verses of Scripture. specially adapted for children and 
mission work..........+++ piotals\efeis ciara siete clare etaisiosiete azaie avensys: Savers 75 


The Bible Picture Roll. A series of 31 beautiful wood cuts with 
Text in large type, to aid in teaching the Scriptures to the 
SVlOUMU BY ces ayeseiavars atone aloyets lo Qcwre}oteCbroparesersjeiontinies stele /eimjavereiniene alayeee ove reat +75 


Bible Pictures. _Twelve excellent lithographic reproductions, 
reduced from Scripture Cartoons, by W. J. Morgan and W. “. 
eet illustrative of the New Testament. Appropriate 

OXES). ames euies aka casbumsee cence neers Senecio aS 


Silent Comforter. Compiled by Rev. T. B. Harpur......... ~.80 


Green Pastures. Compiled by Rev. T. B. Harpur........2.. -.80 














BS580.J4 
Meyer, F 7 


~B. (Frederick Brothe 
€remiah : priest and mae 





Meyer, Frederick Brotherton, 1847-192! 
Jeremiah, priest and prophet. New 
York, Toronto Cetc.J Fleming H. Revel 

[c1894) 
200p. 19cm. (Lettered on cover: 
Testament heroes) 


1. Jeremiah, the prophet. di ed 


CCSC/mm 








