^00 


ICO 
ICO 


■{O 


=co 


Hluiiiiii 

¥ 

■It': 

1 1 ' 

THIS  BOOK 

IS  FROM 

THE  LIBRARY  OF 

Rev.  James  Leach 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2010  witii  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/jeremialipriestprOOmeye 


JEREMIAH 

PRIEST    AND    PROPHET 


Morgan    &    Scott's    "  GoMen    Treasury  **    Series. 


Without  taking  into  account  the  enormous  unrecorded  circulation 
of  Bogatzsky's  "Golden  Treasury,"  the  volumes  comprised  in  this 
Series  are  now  in  their 

One  millioa  seven  hundred  and  twenty-slztli  thousand 
(l,726tli  thousand). 

A  OOLDEN  TBEASIT&7  for  the  CMldren  of  Qod.     Based  upoa  the  weU-lcnown  work 

of  C.  H.  V.  BOGATZSKY. 
CaaiST  AND  THE  SCaiPXTTRES.     By  Rev.  ADOLPH  SAPHIR.  D.D. 
DAVID:   Shepherd,  Psalmiit,  King.    By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A. 
ELUAH:    And  the  Secret  of  his  Power.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  Mhyer.  B.A. 
ISaAEL:    A  Prince  with  God.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  MHVER,  E.A. 
JOHN,  WHOM  JE8US  LOVED.     By  Rev.  James  Culross,  D.D 
JOSEPH  :  Beloved— Hated— Exalted.    By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.  B.A. 
MOSES:  The  Serrant  of  (Jod.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  MHYER.  B.A. 
PAUL:    A  Servant  of  Jeiua  Ohrlst.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  MtYER.  B.A. 

THE  CATACOMBS  AT  SOME.    A  Vindication  of  P«re  and  Primitive  Ohriatianlt; 

By  Benjamin  Scott,  F.R,A.S. 

JOSHUA :  And  the  Land  of  Promise.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A. 

TELL  JESUS  :    And  Poemi.    By  Anna  Shipton. 

JEEBMLAH :    Priest  and  Prophet.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  MRVER,  B.A. 

ABRAHAM:  Or,  The  Obedience  of  Faith.     By  Riv.  F.  B.  Mbyhr.  B.A. 

JOHIt  THE  BAPTIST.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  MEYER.  B.A. 

CHKIST  IN  ISAIAH.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  MEYER,.  B.A. 

FINDERS  OP  THE  WAY.     By  Rev.  JAMES  STIRLING. 

j  PLEASURE  AND  PEOFIT  IN  BIBLE  STUDY,  and 

t  ANECDOTES,  INCIDENTS,   &.ND  ILLU8TBATI0NS.     By  D.  L.  MOODY. 

riVO   VOLUMES  BOUND  IN  ONB 
I  THE   WAV  TO  QOD,  and 

I  HEAVEN  :  OK  THE  LIFE  BEYOND.     By  D.  L.  MOODY. 

TWO  VOLUMES  BOUND  IN  ONB 
THE  ORATIONS  OF  JOHN  B.  G0U6H. 


MORGAN      AND     SCOTT     LTD.,     LONDON, 


JEREMIAH 

PRIEST    AND    PROPHET 


BY 

F.    B.    MEYER,  D.D. 

Author  of 

ELIJAH:  and  the  Secret  of  his  Power 

TRIED  BY  Fire 

SAVED  AND  Kept 

etc.,  etc 


MORGAN    AND    SCOTT    Ltd. 

(Office  of  %\\t  (Kljnstian) 
12,  Paternoster  Buildings 
LONDON  E.G.  4 


Sixth    Impression 
Completing  i6,ooOb 


^r^fari^. 


^9^ 

i^(}  EREMIAH  has  always  a  fascination  to 
^  Christian  hearts,  because  of  the  close 
'K  sirrjiilarity  that  exists  between  his  life  and 
^^(y'  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  Each  of  them  was 
j^  "  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with 
grief" ;  each  came  to  his  own,  and  his  own  re- 
ceived him  not  ;  each  passed  through  hours  of 
rejection,  desolation,  and  forsakenness.  And  in 
Jeremiah  we  may  see  beaten  out  into  detail, 
experiences  which,  in  our  Lord,  are  but  lightly 
touched  on  by  the  evangelists. 

It  is  by  no  means  an  easy  task  to  discern  the 
true  order  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies.  The  clue  to 
their  present  arrangement  seems  lost.  Probably 
the  chapters  are  grouped  more  according  to  subject 
than  to  chronology,  those  touching  on  the  same 
topic  being  grouped  together.  In  this  book  I 
have  endeavoured,  as  far  as  possible,  to  follow 
the  chronological  sequence. 


vi  preface. 

If  I  had  been  writing  a  history  of  the  last 
days  of  the  monarchy  of  Judah,  these  pages 
would  have  been  much  extended  ;  but  I  have 
refrained  from  this,  wishing  cnly  to  tell  so  much 
of  the  general  story  as  was  needful  to  elucidate 
the  part  Jeremiah  v/as  called  to  play 

It  will  more  than  serve  my  purpose  if  I  shall 
be  able  to  make  the  personality  of  this  great 
man  more  familiar  to  the  general  Christian  public. 
For  some  reason  there  is  a  great  amount  of 
ignorance  of  the  life  and  times  of  Jeremiah  which 
contrasts  remarkably  with  the  veneration  with 
which  the  Jews  have  always  regarded  him.  But 
amid  the  names  that  shine  as  stars  in  the  hemi- 
sphere of  Old  Testament  Scripture,  there  is  not 
one  more  brilliant  than  his. 

There  is  an  especial  message  in  the  ministry  of 
Jeremiah  for  those  who  are  compelled  to  stand 
alone,  who  fall  into  the  ground  to  die,  who  till  up 
what  is  behind  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and 
through  death  arise  to  bear  fruit  in  the  great  world 
of  men,  which  they  passionately  love. 


^  /I  ymju^jLA. 


nntrnts. 


I.  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  Came  unto 

II.  "I  Formed  Thee"    ... 

III.  Cistern  Making 

IV.  The  Second  Discourse 
V.  At  the  Temple  Gates 

VI.  The  Soul's  "Amen"... 

VII.  The  Swelling  of  Jordan 

VIII.  The  Drought 

IX.  On  the  Potter's  Wheel 

X.  The  Fire  of  Holy  Impulse 

XI.  Afflictions,  Distresses,  Tumults 

XII.  The  Indestructible  Word 

XIII.  The  Rechabites        

XIV,  Hidden,  but  Radiant  ! 
XV.  The  Ministry  of  Destruction 

XVI.  Jeremiah's  Grandest  Ode 

XVII.  How  A  Reed  Stood  as  a  Pillar 

XVIII.  Into  the  Ground,  to  Die 

XIX.  The  Fall  of  Jerusalem 

XX.  A  Clouded  Sunset 


ME 


0itmavabh  ©at^a* 


-^ 


B.C. 

640 — The  Call  of  Jeremiah. 

638 — The  Accession  op  Josiah. 

6c8 — The  Accession  of  Jehoahaz. 

607— The  Accession  of  Jehoiakim. 

606— First  Siege  of  Jerusalem 
BY  Nebuchadnezzar. 

599--zedekiah. 

589— Fall  of  Jerusalem. 

588 — Murder  of  Gedaliah. 


JEREMIAH:  Priest  and  Prophet. 


— '^0^^3^B%^0' 


**  ®ij^  Morb  0f  i\it  %tsxh  ratnu  untn  m^/' 

(Jeremiah  i.  4,  11,  13.) 

"  We  know  things  that  we  cannot  say  ; 

We  soar  where  we  could  never  map  our  flight ; 
We  see  flashes  and  colourings  too  quick  and  bright 
For  any  hand  to  paint.     We  hear 
Strange  far-off  mental  music,  all  too  sweet, 
Too  great  for  any  earthly  instrument ; 
Gone,  if  we  strive  to  bring  it  near." 

F.  R.  Havergal. 

jto^'^F  the  days  of  David  and  Solomon  may  be  compared 
"^i|ipt  to  spring  and  summer  in  the  history  of  the  King- 
*)^^  dom  of  Israel,  it  was  late  autumn  when  our  story 
^f^  S"'  opens.  The  influence  of  the  spiritual  revival 
^^^  under  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah,  which  had  for  a  brief 
interval  arrested  the  process  of  decline,  had  spent 
itself;  and  not  even  the  reforms  of  the  good  king  Josiah, 
which  affected  rather  the  surface  than  the  heart  of  the 
people,  would  avail  to  avert  inevitable  judgment. 

The  northern  tribes  were  captive  on  the  plains  of 
Mesopotamia,  whence,  in  the  dawn  of  histor}',  their  race 
had  sprung.  And  Judah,  unwarned  by  the  fate  of  her 
sister  Israel,  was  rapidly  pursuing  the  same  path,  to  be 
presently  involved  in  a  similar  catastrophe.  King  and 
court,  princes  and  people,  prophets  and  priests,  were 
infected  with  the  abominable  vices,  for  committing  which 
the  Canaanites  had  been  expelled  from  the  Promised  Land 
centuries  before. 


lo        **tllje  Wiovh  of  tljE  ^ortr  ratne  unto  me." 

Every  high  hill  had  its  thick  grove  of  green  trees,  within 
whose  shadow  the  idolatrous  rites  and  abominable  licence 
of  nature  worship  were  freely  practised.  The  face  of  the 
country  was  thickly  covered  with  temples  erected  for  the 
worship  of  Baal  and  Astarte,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven,  and 
with  lewd  idols.  In  the  cities,  the  black-robed  chemarim, 
the  priests  of  these  unhallowed  practices,  flitted  to  and  fro  in 
strange  contrast  to  the  white-stoled  priests  of  Jehovah.  The 
people  were  taught  to  consider  vice  as  part  of  their  rehgion, 
and  to  frequent  houses  dedicated  to  impurity.  All  kinds 
of  evil  throve  unchecked.  The  poor  were  plundered,  the 
innocent  falsely  accused ;  wicked  men  lay  in  wait  to 
catch  men;  theft  and  murder,  adultery  and  idolatry, 
like  spores  of  corruption,  filled  the  foetid  air  and  flourished 
on  the  tainted  soil  (ii.  20,  27,  34;  v.  7,  8,  26;  ix.  2). 

But  it  was  in  Jerusalem  that  these  evils  came  to  a  head. 
In  the  streets  of  the  holy  city,  the  children  were  taught  to 
gather  wood,  whilst  the  fathers  kindled  the  fire,  and  the 
women  kneaded  dough  to  make  cakes  for  Astarte,  "the 
queen  of  heaven,"  and  to  pour  out  drink-offerings  unto 
other  gods.  The  Temple,  w4th  so  many  sacred  associa- 
tions, was  the  head-quarters  of  Baal  worship  ;  its  courts  were 
desecrated  by  monstrous  images  and  symbols,  and  its 
precincts  were  the  abode  of  infamous  men  and  women.  It 
seemed  as  though  the  king  of  Sodom  had  dispossessed 
Melchizedek  in  his  ancient  home.  Below  the  Temple 
battlements,  deep  down  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  scenes 
were  constantly  witnessed  that  recalled  the  darkest  cruelties 
of  heathendom.  There  was  the  high  place  of  Tophet, 
which  derived  its  name  from  the  clamour  of  the  drums  that 
drowned  the  cries  of  the  babes  flung  into  the  fires.  It  was 
an  awful  combination.  "The  Temple  of  the  Lord,  the 
Temple  of  the  Lord ! "  was  the  cry  of  the  heartless 
formalist ;  whilst  below  the  sacred  shrine  such  scenes 
of  devilry  were  rife.  Ah  me  !  would  that  it  had  been  the 
last  time  in  the  world's  history  when  the  profession  of  true 


W\jt  Call  of  leremialj.  u 

religion  had  been  accompanied  by  the  hcence  of  vice  and 
the  service  of  the  devil ! 

In  such  a  Sodom  God's  voice  must  be  heard.  The 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  warn  the  ungodly  of  a  certain 
retribution,  only  to  be  averted  by  swift  repentance.  The 
Good  Shepherd  must  seek  his  wayward  sheep.  Better 
believe  that  there  is  no  God,  than  think  that  He  could  be 
speechless  in  the  presence  of  sins  that  frustrated  his  election 
and  long  education  of  Israel,  and  threatened  to  terminate 
its  very  existence  as  a  people. 

Yet  if  God  speak,  it  must  be  through  the  yielded  lips  of 
man.  For  if  his  voice  struck  the  ear  of  sinful  man  directly, 
it  would  either  paralyze  him  with  dread,  or  seem  indistinct, 
like  the  mutterings  of  thunder.  Therefore  in  every  age  the 
Divine  Spirit  has  gone  through  the  world,  seeking  for  the 
prepared  lip  of  elect  souls  through  which  to  utter  Himself. 
He  seeks  such  to-day.  Men  are  still  the  vehicles  of  his 
communications  to  men.  To  us,  as  to  Ezekiel,  the  Divine 
Spirit  says,  "  Son  of  man,  thou  shalt  hear  the  word  at  my 
mouth,  and  give  them  warning  from  Me." 

In  the  call  of  Jeremiah  we  may  discover  the  sort  of  man 
whom  God  chooses  as  the  medium  for  his  speech.  And 
our  discovery  will  greatly  startle  us.  ^Ve  shall  find  the 
heavenly  treasure  in  a  simple  earthen  vessel.  Not  in  the 
metropolis,  but  in  the  poor  village  of  Anathoth,  three  miles 
to  the  north  ;  not  in  an  elder,  but  in  a  youth  ;  not  among 
the  high  and  noble,  but  in  the  family  of  an  undistinguished 
priest ;  not  in  a  man  mighty  as  Elijah,  eloquent  as  Isaiah, 
or  seraphic  as  Ezekiel ;  but  in  one  who  was  timid  and 
shrinking,  conscious  of  his  helplessness,  yearning  for  a 
sympathy  and  love  he  was  never  to  know — such  was  the 
chosen  organ  through  which  the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  to 
that  corrupt  and  degenerate  age. 

It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  a  superficial  gaze  will  discern 
the  special  qualifications  that  attracted  the  Divine  choice  to 
Jeremiah.     But  that  is  no  wonder.     The  instruments  of  the 


12        *' QTIje  Wiatti  of  tijc  l^orit  camt  nnta  mt/' 

Divine  purpose  in  all  ages  have  not  been  such  as  man 
would  have  selected.  God  has  always  chosen  "  the  foolish 
things  of  the  world,  that  He  might  put  to  shame  them 
that  are  wise ;  and  the  weak  things  of  the  world,  that 
He  might  put  to  shame  the  things  that  are  strong; 
and  the  base  things  of  the  world,  and  the  things  that 
are  despised,  yea,  and  the  things  that  are  not,  that 
He  might  bring  to  nought  the  things  that  are  ;  that  no 
flesh  should  glory  before  God."  Your  family  may  be  poor  in 
Manasseh,  and  yourself  the  least  in  your  father's  house — 
nothing  more  than  a  cake  of  barley  bread ;  yet  if  God  lay 
hold  of  you.  He  will  work  a  wonderful  deliverance. 

But  there  were  several  reasons  why  Jeremiah  might  have 
been  passed  over. 

Ife  was  young. — How  young  we  do  not  know  ;  but  young 
enough  for  him  to  start  back  at  the  Divine  proposal,  with 
the  cry,  "  Ah,  Lord  God  !  behold,  I  cannot  speak  ;  for  I  am 
a  child."  Without  doubt,  as  a  boy  he  had  enjoyed  pecuhar 
advantages.  He  came  of  a  priestly  family ;  his  father, 
Hilkiah,  may  have  been  the  high-priest  who,  in  the  discharge 
of  his  sacred  office  in  the  Temple,  discovered  the  manu- 
script roll,  which  proved  to  be  a  copy  of  the  Book  of  the 
Law,  and  led  to  the  reformation  under  Josiah.  His  uncle, 
Shallum,  was  the  husband  of  Huldah,  the  prophetess,  in 
whom  the  fire  of  the  old  Hebrew  faith  was  burning  brightly, 
even  in  those  days  of  almost  universal  degeneracy. 
Shaphan,  Baruch,  and  Hanameel  were  probably  the 
companions  of  his  youth,  and  afterwards  formed  a  little 
band,  who  nourished  the  noblest  traditions  of  the  national 
life.     Still,  Jeremiah  was  but  as  a  child. 

God  has  often  selected  the  young  for  posts  of  eminent 
service  :  Samuel  and  Timothy  ;  Joseph  and  David ;  Daniel 
and  John  the  Baptist ;  Calvin,  who  wrote  his  Institutes 
before  he  was  twenty-four ;  and  Wesley,  who  was  only 
twenty- five  when  he  inaugurated  the  great  system  of 
Methodism.      In   every   age   of    the   Church    young   eyes 


Jeremiab'a  llatural  disposition.  13 

have  eagerly  scanned  this  paragraph  ;  and  have  dared  to 
cherish  the  hope  that  since  youth  did  not  disqualify 
Jeremiah,  so  it  would  not  render  them  unfit  for  the  special 
service  of  God.  The  only  thing  to  be  sure  of  is  that 
God  has  really  called  you  ;  and  this  can  only  be  ascertained 
after  very  careful  consideration.  There  is  first  the  con- 
sciousness of  a  strong  inward  impulse,  which  is  most 
present  in  the  holiest  hours,  but  which  is  never  far  away, 
and  often  surges  up  pure  and  strong  in  the  soul.  There  is 
next  a  certain  concurrence  of  Providence,  by  which  other 
doors  seem  closed,  and  that  opened  which  conducts  to  the 
desired  goal.  Besides  these,  there  is  a  natural  adaptation, 
a  consensus  of  opinion  amongst  friends  and  advisers,  and 
the  constant  voice  of  the  Spirit  through  the  Word. 

He  was  naturally  timid  and  sensitive. — By  nature  he 
seemed  cast  in  too  delicate  a  mould  to  be  able  to  combat 
the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  his  time.  He  reminds  us  01 
a  denizen  of  the  sea,  accustomed  to  live  within  its  shell,  but 
suddenly  deprived  of  its  strong  encasement,  and  thrown 
without  covering  on  the  sharp  edges  of  the  rocks.  The 
bitter  complaint  of  his  after-Hfe  was  that  his  mother  had 
brought  him  into  a  world  of  strife  and  contention.  And 
it  was  in  allusion  to  the  natural  shrinking  of  his  disposition 
that  Jehovah  promised  to  make  him  a  "  defenced  city,  an 
iron  pillar,  and  a  brazen  wall  against  the  whole  land." 

Many  are  moulded  upon  this  type.  They  have  the 
sensitiveness  of  a  girl,  and  the  nervous  organism  of  a 
gazelle.  They  love  the  shallows,  with  their  carpet  of  silver 
sand,  rather  than  the  strong  billows  that  test  a  man's 
endurance.  For  them,  it  is  enough  to  run  with  footmen  ; 
they  have  no  desire  to  contend  with  horses.  They  love  the 
land  of  peace  in  which  they  are  secure,  and  have  no  heart 
for  the  swelling  of  Jordan.  Yet  such,  like  Jeremiah,  may 
play  an  heroic  part  on  the  world's  stage,  if  only  they  will 
let  God  lay  down  the  iron  of  his  might  along  the  lines  of 
their  natural  weakness.     His  strength  is  only  made  perfect 


14        "  ^ht  Morii  of  t|j£  ^oxh  cExnt  nnta  mt/* 

in  weakness.  It  is  to  those  who  have  no  might  that  He 
increaseth  strength.  Happy  is  the  soul  that  can  look  up 
from  its  utter  helplessness,  and  say  with  Jeremiah,  "  0 
Lord,  my  strength  in  the  day  of  affliction  "  ;  or  with  Micah, 
in  yet  earlier  times,  "  Truly  I  am  full  of  power,  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  of  judgment,  and  of  might,  to  de- 
clare unto  Jacob  his  transgression,  and  to  Israel  his  sin." 

He  specially  shrank  from  the  burden  he  was  summoned  to 
hear. — His  chosen  theme  would  have  been  God's  mercy — 
the  boundlessness  of  his  compassion,  the  tenderness  of  his 
pity.  In  the  earlier  chapters,  when  pleading  with  the  people 
to  return  to  God,  there  is  a  tenderness  in  his  voice,  and 
pathos  in  his  speech,  which  proves  how  thoroughly  his 
heart  was  in  this  part  of  his  work.  Some  of  his  choicest 
allusions  to  natural  scenes  are  intended  to  set  forth  the  love 
of  God  to  backsliding  and  penitent  souls.  God's  mercy  is 
hke  "  a  fountain  of  living  n-aters,"  as  contrasted  to  the 
brackish  contents  of  the  rock-hewn  cisterns  ;  or  like  the 
ocean  waves  lapping  on  the  bank  of  soft  sand  they  may  not 
pass  ;  or  like  a  husband's  great  love,  which  cannot  forget 
the  day  of  espousals  amid  the  unfaithfulness  which  has 
ruined  the  peace  of  his  home. 

But  to  be  charged  with  a  message  of  judgment  ;  to 
announce  the  woeful  day  ;  to  oppose  every  suggestion  of 
heroic  resistance  \  to  charge  home  on  the  prophetic  and  the 
priestly  orders,  to  each  of  which  he  belonged,  and  the  anger 
of  each  of  which  he  incurred,  the  crimes  by  which  they 
were  disgraced — this  was  the  commission  that  was  furthest 
from  his  choice.  "  As  for  me,"  he  cried,  "  I  have  not 
hastened  from  being  a  shepherd  after  Thee  ;  neither  have  I 
desired  the  woeful  day  ;  Thou  knowest  "  (xvii.  i6). 

He  was  conscious  of  his  deficiency  in  speech, — Like  Moses, 
he  could  say,  "O  my  Lord,  I  am  not  eloquent,  neither 
heretofore,  nor  since  Thou  hast  spoken  unto  thy  servant : 
but  I  am  slow  of  speech,  and  of  a  slow  tongue."  Like 
Isaiah,   he    might  cry,    "  Woe  is  me !    for   I   am   undone  : 


W)jz  f8est  speakers  for  (Boti.  15 

because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  I  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips  :  for  mine  eyes  have  seen 
the  King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts.''  Like  the  apostle  Paul, 
he  would  affirm,  "  My  speech  and  my  preaching  were  not  in 
persuasive  words  of  wisdom."  "Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord 
God  !  behold,  I  cannot  speak  ;  for  I  am  a  child." 

The  best  speakers  for  God  are  frequently  they  who 
are  least  gifted  with  human  eloquence  ;  for  if  that  be  richly 
present — the  mighty  power  of  moving  men — there  is  an 
imminent  peril  of  relying  on  it,  and  attributing  the  results  to 
its  magnetic  spell.  God  cannot  give  his  glory  to  another. 
He  may  not  share  his  praise  with  man.  He  dare  not 
expose  his  servants  to  the  temptation  of  sacrificing  to  their 
own  net  or  trusting  their  own  ability.  Of  Him,  and 
through  Him,  and  to  Him,  must  be  all  things,  that  the 
glory  may  be  his  for  ever. 

Do  not  then  despair  because  of  these  apparent  dis- 
qualifications. None  of  them  will  shut  out  from  thee 
the  accents  of  the  voice  of  God.  Notwithstanding  all, 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  shall  come  to  thee ;  not  for  thy  sake 
alone,  but  for  those  to  whom  thou  shalt  be  sent.  The 
one  thing  that  God  demands  of  thee  is  absolute  consecration 
to  his  purpose,,  and  willingness  to  go  on  any  errand  on 
which  He  may  send  thee.  If  these  are  thine,  all  else  will 
be  given  thee.  He  will  hush  thine  alarm — "Be  not  afraid!" 
He  will  assure  thee  of  his  presence — "I  am  with  thee, 
to  deliver  thee."  He  will  equip  thee — "Then  the  Lord  put 
forth  his  hand,  and  touched  my  mouth  ;  and  the  Lord  said 
unto  me.  Behold,  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth." 
How  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah  we  cannot 
tell;  whether  audibly  as  to  Samuel,  or  in  the  deep  chambers 
of  his  soul.  But  when  it  came,  he  knew  it.  And  we 
shall  know  it.  Oh  for  the  circumcised  ear,  and  the 
loyal,  obedient  heart ! 


II. 

"I  fatmtii  met." 

(Jeremiah  i.  5.) 

' '  I  was  not  bom 
Informed  and  fearless  from  the  first,  but  shrank 
From  aught  which  marked  me  out  apart  from  men : 
1  would  have  lived  their  life,  and  died  their  death, 
Lost  in  their  ranks,  eluding  destiny." 

Browning. 

^:^^N^(OD  has  a  plan  for  each   of   his  children.      From 

the  foot    of   the   cross,   where   we   are    cradled 

in  our  second  birth,  to  the  brink  of  the  river, 

'Im'S^V*      where    we    lay   down    our    armour,    there   is   a 

Jilx^^        path   which   He   has   prepared   for   us    to   walk 

in.      Its  roughness  and  steeps,  its  velvet  grass 

and   quiet   glades,    its    climb   up    the    mountain    side   and 

descent  into  the  valley    of    dark    shadow — have   all    been 

planned    and    laid    out    by    his    matchless    wisdom,    his 

unerring  love.     The  path  has  been  prepared,  it  is  for  us 

to  walk  in  it. 

On  the  other  hand,  God  prepares  us  for  the  path  He  has 
chosen.  We  are  his  workmanship,  created  unto  the 
good  works  which  He  has  before  prepared.  There  is 
no  emergency  in  the  path  for  which  there  has  not  been 
provision  made  in  our  nature;  and  there  is  no  faculty  stored 
in  our  nature  which,  sooner  or  later,  shall  not  have  its 
proper  exercise  and  use.  From  the  earliest  inception 
of  being,  God  had  a  plan  for  Jeremiah's  career,  for  which  He 
prepared  him.  Before  the  dawn  of  consciousness,  in 
the  very  origin  of  his  nature,  the  hands  of  the  great  Master 
Workman  reached  down  out  of  heaven  to  shape  the  plastic 
clay  for  the  high  purpose  which  He  had  in  view.     Note  the 


®IjB  gibtttE  purpose.  17 

conjunction  of  those  two  expressions :  I  appointed  a?id 
sanctified  thee  a  prophet  to  the  nations  ;  and  again,  I  formed 
thee.  God  always  forms  those  whom  He  has  appointed  and 
sanctified  for  any  great  work. 

Ask  what  thy  work  in  the  world  is.  That  for  which  thou 
wast  born,  to  which  thou  wast  appointed,  on  account  of 
which  thou  wast  conceived  in  the  creative  thought  of  God. 
That  there  is  a  Divine  purpose  in  thy  being  is  indubitable. 
Seek  that  thou  mayest  be  permitted  to  realize  it.  And 
never  doubt  that  thou  hast  been  endowed  with  all  the 
special  aptitudes  which  that  purpose  may  demand.  God 
has  formed  thee  for  it,  storing  thy  mind  with  all  that  He 
knew  to  be  requisite  for  thy  life-work.  It  is  thy  part  to 
elaborate  and  improve  to  the  utmost  the  two  talents  which 
thou  hast.  Do  not  envy  another  his  five.  Those  three 
additional  ones  were  not  needed  for  the  special  purpose 
that  thou  wast  designed  to  fulfil.  And  it  is  enough  to 
answer  the  Divine  intention  in  thy  creation,  redemption,  or 
call  to  service,  whatever  it  may  have  been.  Do  not  be 
jealous  or  covetous ;  it  is  enough  for  thee  to  be  what  God 
made  thee  to  be,  and  to  be  always  at  thy  best. 

I.  The  Divine  Purpose. — ^^  I  knew  thee.  .  .  I  sanc- 
tified thee.  .  .  I  have  appointed  thee  a  prophet.''— \n  that 
degenerate  age  the  great  Lover  of  souls  needed  a  spokes- 
man ;  and  the  Divine  decree  determined  the  conditions  of 
Jeremiah's  birth,  and  character,  and  life.  How  this  could 
be  consistent  with  the  exercise  of  personal  volition  and 
choice  on  the  part  of  the  youthful  prophet,  we  cannot  say. 
We  can  only  see  the  two  piers  of  the  mighty  arch,  but  not 
the  arch  itself,  since  the  mists  of  time  veil  it,  and  we  are 
dim  of  sight.  Some  try  to  explain  it  by  introducing  the 
thought  of  foreknowledge ;  they  quote  the  words,  "  Whom 
He  did  foreknow^  He  also  did  predestinate."  But,  after  all, 
this  only  carries  the  difficulty  one  step  further  back  into 
mystery. 

B 


i8  **|  Javmzh  fljec." 

It  is  wise  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  while  life  is  yet  young, 
the  direction  of  the  Divine  purpose.  There  are  four  con- 
siderations that  will  help  us.  First,  the  indication  of  our 
natural  aptitudes ;  for  these,  when  touched  by  the  Divine 
Spirit,  become  talents  or  gifts.  Secondly,  the  inward 
impulse  or  energy  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  working  in  us  both 
to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure.  Thirdly,  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Word  of  God.  Fourthly,  the  evidence  of  the 
circumstances  and  demands  of  life.  When  these  concur, 
and  focus  in  one  point,  there  need  be  no  doubt  as  to  the 
Divine  purpose  and  plan.  It  was  thus  that  God  disclosed 
to  Samuel,  and  Jeremiah,  and  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  future  for 
which  they  were  destined.  And  it  is  extremely  delightful 
when,  from  the  first  bud  of  youth  to  the  flower  and  fruit  of 
maturity,  the  heavenly  vision  has  moulded  the  entire  tenor 
and  development  of  the  life. 

But  in  cases  where  the  Divine  purpose  is  not  so  clearly 
disclosed,  in  which  life  is  necessarily  lived  piecemeal,  and 
the  bits  of  marble  for  the  tesselated  floor  are  heaped 
together  with  no  apparent  plan,  we  must  dare  to  beheve 
that  God  has  an  intention  for  each  of  us ;  and  that  if  we  are 
true  to  our  noblest  ideals,  we  shall  certainly  work  out  the 
Divine  pattern,  and  be  permitted  some  day  to  see  it  in  its 
unveiled  symmetry  and  beauty.  Perhaps  the  noblest  aim 
for  any  of  us  is  to  realize  that  word  which,  according  to  the 
margin  of  the  Revised  Version,  was  addressed  by  God  to 
Jeremiah,  when  He  said  to  him,  "  On  whatsoever  errand  I 
shall  send  thee,  thou  shalt  go ;  and  whatsoever  I  shall 
command  thee,  thou  shalt  speak." 

To  run  errands  for  God  I  To  be  like  the  angels  that 
excel  in  strength,  and  do  his  commandment,  hearkening  to 
the  voice  of  his  Word  !  To  resemble  the  boy  messengers 
in  some  of  our  large  cities,  that  wait  in  readiness  to  dis- 
charge any  commission  that  may  be  entrusted  to  them  ' 
To  know  that  your  message  is  as  certainly  given  you  as  the 
letter  which  is  placed  under  the  wing  of  the  carrier-pigeon  ! 


CItc  ^ta^ljtVs  C^arlg  fife.  19 

To  go  on  occupying  the  position  in  which  we  have  been 
placed  by  the  Providence  of  God,  but  to  hold  it  for  God 
till  He  bids  us  do  something  else !  Such  are  golden  secrets 
of  blessedness  and  usefulness. 

II.  Formative  Influences. — //  is  very  interestiiig  to 
study  the  formative  influences  that  were  brought  to  bear  on  the 
character  of  Jeremiah. — There  v^^ere  the  character  and  dis- 
position of  his  mother,  and  the  priestly  office  of  his  father. 
There  was  the  picturesque  beauty  of  his  birthplace,  the 
village  of  Anathoth,  lying  on  the  high  road  three  miles  north 
of  Jerusalem,  encircled  by  the  famous  hills  of  Benjamin, 
and  looking  down  the  ravine  on  the  blue  waters  of  the 
Dead  Sea,  gleaming  at  the  foot  of  the  purple  hills  of  Moab. 
There  was  the  near  proximity  of  the  holy  city,  rendering  it 
possible  for  the  boy  to  be  present  at  all  the  holy  festivals, 
and  to  receive  such  instruction  as  the  best  seminaries  could 
provide.  There  was  the  companionship  and  association 
of  Godly  families,  like  those  of  Shaphan  and  Maaseiah, 
who  themselves  had  passed  away,  but  whose  children 
preserved  the  religion  of  their  forefathers,  and  treasured 
as  sacred  relics  the  literature,  psalms,  and  history  of  purer 
and  better  days.  His  uncle,  Shallum,  was  the  husband  of 
the  illustrious  and  devoted  prophetess,  Huldah ;  and  their 
son  Hanameel  shared  with  Baruch,  the  grandson  of 
Maaseiah,  the  close  friendship  of  the  prophet,  probably 
from  the  days  that  they  were  boys  together.  There  were 
also  the  prophets  Nahum  and  Zephaniah,  who  were  burning 
as  bright  constellations  in  that  dark  sky,  to  be  soon  joined 
by  himself. 

His  mind  was  evidently  very  sensitive  to  all  the  influences 
of  his  early  life.  His  speech  is  saturated  with  references  to 
natural  emblems  and  national  customs,  to  the  life  of  men, 
and  the  older  literature  of  the  Bible.  Take,  for  instance, 
his  earliest  sermon  in  which  he  refers  to  the  story  of  the 
Exodus,  and  the  pleadings  of  Deuteronomy ;  to  the  roar  of 


20  *'i  formetr  mtt:' 

the  young  lion,  and  the  habits  of  the  wild  ass ;  to  the  young 
camel  traversing  her  ways,  and  the  Arabian  of  the  wilder- 
ness ;  to  the  murmur  of  the  brook,  and  the  hewing  of  the 
cistern.  His  quick  and  sensitive  soul  eagerly  incorporated 
the  influences  of  the  varied  life  around  him,  and  reproduced 
them.  Many  fabrics  were  woven  into  the  texture  of  his  mind. 
Many  flowers  mingled  their  perfume  in  the  enclosure  of 
his  heart.    Many  chords  made  up  the  music  of  his  speech. 

It  is  thus  that  God  is  ever  at  work,  forming  and  moulding 
us.  Whenever  you  are  called  to  pass  through  an  experience 
which  is  unusually  trying  and  difficult,  comfort  yourself  by 
the  thought  that  you  are  being  fitted  for  some  high  purpose 
that  has  not  yet  been  made  known,  but  which  will  lay  its 
demand  on  that  very  experience  which  has  been  permitted 
for  that  end.  And  as  you  look  back  on  your  life,  you  will 
see  how  all  has  been  ordered  to  fit  you  to  fulfil  a  ministry 
to  others  that  would  have  been  less  worthily  fulfilled  had  you 
been  excused  from  the  tears,  the  hardships,  the  privations 
of  a  single  day.  The  plan  of  God  threads  the  maze  of  life. 
The  purpose  of  God  gives  meaning  to  many  of  its  strange 
experiences.  Be  brave,  strong,  and  trustful !  If  He  serves 
Himself  of  thee,  He  will  recompense  thee.  He  is  not  un- 
faithful to  forget. 

There  is  a  striking  illustration  of  this  in  one  of  the  closing 
scenes  of  Joseph's  life.  Speaking  to  his  brethren  of  the  pit, 
and  the  afflictions  to  which  it  led,  he  said,  "Ye  meant  it  for 
evil;  but  God  meant  it  for  good"  (Gen.  1.  20).  Standing  on 
the  eminence  of  the  years,  he  was  able  to  read  God's 
meaning  in  that  dark  and  mysterious  providence.  And  if 
he  had  been  asked  to  state  his  view  of  the  Divine  reason  in 
the  trials  and  hardships  of  those  early  days,  fast  fading 
behind  the  mist  of  years,  he  would  probably  have  answered, 
"  God  was  forming  me  for  my  future ;  preparing  me  for 
what  He  had  prepared  for  me ;  disciplining  and  equipping 
me  for  the  position  that  awaited  me ;  and  there  is  no  single 
incident  in  all  those  weary  years  through  which  I  passed, 


^  1:10531  (Bntrottimettt.  21 

that  I  could  have  dispensed  with,  except  at  a  serious  disad- 
vantage to  my  present  standing." 

III.  There  was  also  a  Special  Preparation  and 
Assurance  for  his  Life-work. — "The  Lord  put  forth 
his  hand,  and  touched  my  mouth.  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
me,  Behold,  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth."  In  a 
similar  manner  had  the  seraph  touched  the  lips  of  Isaiah 
years  before.  And  we  are  reminded  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
promised  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  should  put  appro- 
priate words  into  the  hps  of  his  disciples  when  summoned 
before  the  tribunals  of  their  foes.  Words  are  the  special 
gift  of  God.  They  were  the  endowment  of  the  Church  at 
Pentecost.  And  it  is  always  an  evidence  of  a  Spirit -filled 
man,  when  he  begins  to  speak  as  the  Spirit  gives  him 
utterance. 

God  never  asks  us  to  go  on  his  errands  (i.  7)  without 
telling  us  what  to  say.  If  we  are  living  in  fellowship  with 
Him,  He  will  impress  his  messages  on  our  minds,  and 
enrich  our  life  with  the  appropriate  utterances  by  which 
those  messages  shall  be  conveyed  to  our  fellows.  Do  any 
read  these  words,  who,  like  Moses,  lack  this  royal  endow 
ment — their  words  fall  pointless  and  dead  ?  let  them  offer 
their  lips  to  speak,  not  with  the  wisdom  of  human  words, 
nor  with  the  grace  of  human  eloquence,  but  with  the  power 
and  demonstration  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  their  appeal  will 
not  be  denied.  If  only  God's  glory  be  our  object,  God's 
hand  will  be  put  forth  to  touch  our  mouth,  and  He  will 
leave  his  words  there. 

Two  other  assurances  were  also  given.  First,  "Thou 
shalt  go  to  whomsoever  I  shall  send  thee."  This  gave 
a  definiteness  and  directness  to  the  prophet's  speech. 
Secondly,  "  Be  not  afraid  because  of  them ;  for  I  am  with 
thee  to  deliver  thee,  saith  the  Lord."  An  assurance  which 
was  remarkably  fulfilled,  as  we  shall  see,  in  the  unfoldmg  of 
this  narrative. 


22  **%  yotmtb  W>hnr 

These  are  marvellous  words,  spoken  to  us  all,  as  God 
sends  us  on  a  mission,  or  errand,  into  the  world.  It  may 
be  of  greater  or  less  consequence — to  rule  an  empire  or 
nurse  a  single  babe  ;  to  be  an  apostle  or  to  care  for  a  few 
sheep  in  the  wilderness.  But  we  are  no  less  sent  than 
Jesus  was  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father — sent  to  learn, 
sent  to  suffer,  sent  to  achieve.  Sent  on  an  errand,  as 
Joseph  was  from  the  patriarchal  tent. 

And,  just  as  long  as  we  are  on  the  prepared  path,  per- 
forming the  appointed  mission,  He  is  with  us.  We  may 
defy  death.  We  bear  a  charmed  life.  We  are  more  than 
conquerors.  The  music  of  his  voice  sounds  in  our  heart, 
though  defaming  and  terror  are  on  every  side  (xx.  lo). 
Men  may  fight  against  us,  but  they  cannot  prevail;  for 
the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  with  us,  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our 
refuge  (i.  19). 

IV.  Lastly,  God  Vouchsafed  a  Twofold  Vision  to 
HIS  Child. —  On  the  one  hand,  the  swift-blossoming 
almond-tree  assured  him  that  God  would  watch  over  him, 
and  see  to  the  swift  performance  of  his  predictions  ;  on  the 
other,  the  seething  cauldron,  turned  towards  the  north, 
indicated  the  breaking  out  of  evil.  So  the  pendulum  of 
life  swings  to  and  fro  ;  now  to  light,  and  then  to  dark.  But 
happy  is  the  man  whose  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord. 
He  is  hidden  in  the  secret  of  God's  pavilion  from  the  strife 
of  tongues  ;  and  abides  in  the  secret  place  of  the  taber- 
nacles of  the  Most  High.  Men  may  fight  against  him, 
but  they  shall  not  prevail  ;  he  is  encircled  in  the  environing 
care  of  Jehovah ;  he  is  as  safe  as  the  Israelites  when  the 
cloud  lay  between  them  and  Pharaoh.  As  God  spake  to 
Jeremiah,  so  He  addresses  us  :  "  They  shall  fight  against 
thee,  but  they  shall  not  prevail  against  thee  ;  for  I  am 
with  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  to  deliver  thee"  (i.  19).  "We 
are  immortal  till  our  work  is  done." 

There  was  a  period  in  Jeremiah's  fife  when  he  seems  to 


i^ljE  ^atlr  of  J^afet^.  23 

have  swerved  from  the  pathway  of  complete  obedience 
(xv.  19),  and  to  have  gone  back  from  following  the  God- 
given  plan.  Surrounded  by  contention  and  strife ;  cursed 
as  though  he  were  a  usurer ;  reproached  and  threatened 
with  death — he  lost  heart,  and  fainted  in  the  precipitous 
path.  Immediately  he  had  good  reason  to  fear  that  the 
Divine  protection  had  been  withdrawn.  We  are  only  safe 
when  we  are  on  God's  plan.  But  as  he  returned  again  to 
his  allegiance,  these  precious  promises  were  renewed,  and 
again  sounded  in  his  ears  :  "  I  will  make  thee  unto  this 
people  a  fenced  brazen  wall ;  and  they  shall  fight  against 
thee,  but  they  shall  not  prevail  against  thee ;  for  I  am  with 
thee  to  save  thee  and  to  deliver  thee,  saith  the  Lord.  And 
I  will  deliver  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  wicked,  and  I  will 
redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  terrible." 

It  may  be  that  you  have  stepped  back  before  some 
fearful  storm  of  opposition,  as  a  fireman  before  the  belching 
flames.  Thus  Cranmer  signed  his  recantation.  Yet  return 
again  to  your  post ;  renew  your  protest ;  take  forth  the 
precious  from  the  vile.  The  old  blessing  will  flood  your 
soul ;  God  will  bring  you  again  that  you  may  stand  before 
Him,  and  you  shall  be  as  his  mouth.  Thus  it  was  with 
Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost. 


III. 

Cistern  faking, 

(Jeremiah  ii.  13.) 

"  Attempt,  how  vain — 
With  things  of  earthly  sort,  with  aught  but  God, 
With  aught  but  moral  excellence,  truth  and  love — 
To  satisfy  and  fill  the  immortal  soul ! 
To  satisfy  the  ocean  with  a  drop ; 
To  marry  immortality  to  death  ; 
And  with  the  unsubstantial  slave  of  time 
To  fill  the  embrace  of  all  eternity." 
^  Pollok's  "Course  of  Time." 

'HERE  was  probably  but  little  interval  between 
Jeremiah's  call  and  his  entrance  upon  his 
sacred  work.  When  once  the  Spirit  of  God 
has  established  a  code  of  communications 
between  Himself  and  the  soul  whom  He  has 
selected  to  be  his  mouthpiece,  He  is  likely  to 
avail  Himself  of  it  constantly.  The  difficulty  is  to  lay 
down  the  wire  through  the  ocean  depths  ;  but  when  it  is 
there,  the  messages  flash  to  and  fro  repeatedly.  So  we  are 
told  that  to  this  young  ardent  soul  "  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came"  (ii.  i).     Coming,  it  thrilled  him. 

He  dwelt  but  lightly  on  the  ominous  mention  of  the 
inevitable  conflict  which  the  Divine  voice  prognosticated. 
He  did  not  stay  to  gauge  the  full  pressure  of  opposition 
indicated  in  the  celestial  storm-signal.  He  had  been  told 
that  kings  and  princes,  priests  and  people,  would  fight 
against  him  ;  but  in  the  first  blush  of  his  young  faith  he 
thought  more  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  who  had  pro- 
mised to  make  him  "  a  defenced  city,  an  iron  pillar,  and 
brazen  walls  against  the  whole  land."     How  tenderly  God 


Icrcmiab's  ^inaioib  gurden.  25 

veils  our  future,  and  leads  us  forward  step  by  step  !  But 
there  is  a  difference  between  the  elastic  hopefulness  of 
youth  and  the  experience  of  manhood.  The  earlier  chapters 
of  Jeremiah  differ  from  his  Lamentations,  as  the  first  green 
of  spring  from  the  sere  foliage  of  autumn. 

As  we  study  the  words  and  deeds  of  this  most  human  of 
prophets,  let  us  pass  through  his  plaintive  cries  and  tears 
and  prayers,  to  that  Divine  Man,  whose  gentle  spirit  was  so 
closely  anticipated  and  reflected  in  that  of  his  servant.  In 
every  age  He  is  at  work  through  his  servants,  striving 
against  sin  in  every  form,  and  seeking  to  set  up  his  reign  of 
righteousness,  peace,  and  joy.  In  Jeremiah's  words,  we 
have  His  vehement  beseechings  and  remonstrances  ;  in 
Jeremiah's  prayers,  we  have  echoes  of  the  unutterable 
intercessions  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  in  Jeremiah's  conflicts, 
we  have  the  Divine  antagonism  against  flesh  and  blood, 
and  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world  ;  in  Jeremiah's 
Lamentations,  we  have  the  Divine  grief  over  human  wilful- 
ness. This  priest  and  prophet  of  the  Jerusalem  of  David 
and  vSolomon  had  a  remarkable  course  to  pursue,  in  pre- 
senting in  the  obscure  mirror  of  his  life  the  cross  and 
sorrow  of  the  true  Priest  and  Prophet  of  the  restored 
Jerusalem. 

I.  The  Prophet's  Twofold  Burden. — When  Jeremiah 
began  his  ministry,  going  from  Anathoth  to  Jerusalem  for 
that  purpose  (ii.  2),  Josiah,  though  only  twenty-one  years  of 
age,  had  been  for  thirteen  years  on  the  throne.  He  was 
commencing  those  measures  of  reform  which  availed  to 
postpone,  though  not  to  avert,  the  doom  of  city  and  nation. 
His  measures  were  as  drastic  as  those  of  Cromwell  and  his 
soldiers,  in  their  determined  effort  to  remove  every  vestige 
of  popery  from  churches  and  public  buildings.  "  They 
brake  down  the  altars  of  the  BaaHm  in  his  presence  ;  and 
the  sun-images,  that  were  on  high  above  them,  he  hewed 
down  ;  and  the  Asherim,  and  the  graven  images,  and  the 


26  (Ktatern  iKfiktng. 

molten  images,  he  brake  in  pieces,  and  made  dust  of  them, 
and  strewed  it  upon  the  graves  of  them  that  had  sacrificed 
unto  them.  And  he  burnt  the  bones  of  the  priests 
upon  their  altars,  and  purged  Judah  and  Jerusalem  " 
(2  Chron.  xxxiv.  4,  5,  r.v.). 

There  must  have  been  a  great  cawing  among  the  rooks 
when  the  trees  in  which  they  had  so  long  nested  were  felled. 
For  seventy  years  the  grossest  forms  of  idolatry  had  held 
almost  undisputed  sway.  The  impious  orgies  and  degrading 
rites,  which  licensed  vice  as  a  part  of  religion,  were  in 
harmony  with  the  depraved  tastes  of  the  people.  What,  there- 
fore, ecclesiastics  and  their  flocks  felt  towards  Henry  VIII. 
when  he  demoHshed  the  monasteries,  and  to  the  Protector, 
when  his  officers  pursued  their  work  of  devastation,  must 
have  found  ready  place  in  those  early  years  of  Josiah's 
reign. 

The  result  was — first,  that  the  work  of  reform  was  largely 
superficial ;  it  did  not  strike  beneath  the  surface,  nor  change 
the  trend  of  national  choice.  And  secondly,  this  policy 
compacted  together  a  strong  political  party,  determined  to 
promote  a  closer  alliance  with  Egypt,  which,  under  Psam- 
metichus,  had  just  asserted  her  independence  against  the 
king  of  Assyria.  In  these  two  directions  the  young  prophet 
was  called  to  make  his  influence  felt. 

Firsts  he  protested  against  the  prevalent  sin  around  hifn. — 
The  one  thought  of  the  people  was  to  preserve  the  outward 
acknowledgment  of  Jehovah  by  the  maintenance  of  the 
Temple  services  and  rites.  If  these  were  rigorously 
observed,  they  considered  that  there  was  no  sufficient  cause 
for  charging  them  with  the  sin  of  apostasy.  They  insisted 
that  they  were  not  polluted  (ii.  23] ;  and  reiterated  with  weari- 
some monotony,  "The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  are  these  "  (vii.  4). 

It  was  Jeremiah's  mission  to  show  that  mere  outward 
observance  was  worse  than  useless,  and  was  compatible  with 
a  real  forsaking  of  God.      Like  the   hectic   flush,  it  only 


concealed  the  corruption  eating  its  way  into  the  heart.  Like 
the  flowers  on  the  edge  of  the  precipice,  it  hid  the  fatal 
brink.  Nominal  profession  is  compatible  with  utter  atheism , 
and  with  the  worst  form  of  atheism,  because  the  heart 
parries  every  attack  with  the  foil  of  apparent  and  avowed 
belief. 

This  will  account  for  the  plain  denunciations  of  sin,  that 
came  burning  hot  from  the  hps  of  the  young  prophet.  He 
includes  the  priests  and  expounders  of  the  law,  pastors  and 
prophets,  in  his  scathing  words  (ii.  8).  The  valley  of 
Hinnom,  with  its  obscene  and  cruel  rites,  is  quoted  in 
evidence  against  them  (23).  The  blood  of  children 
flung  into  the  fires  is  detected  on  their  robes  (34) ;  the  trees 
of  the  groves  whisper  what  they  have  witnessed  beneath 
their  shadow ;  and  the  jagged  rocks  tell  stories  they  dare  not 
conceal  (20;  iii.  6).  Every  metaphor  is  adopted  that  human 
art  can  suggest  to  bring  home  to  the  people  their  infidelity 
to  their  great  Lover  and  Redeemer,  God  (iii.  20). 

He  also  protested  against  the  proposal  to  form  an  Egyptian 
alliance. — The  little  land  of  Canaan  lay  between  the  vast 
rival  empires  founded  on  the  Nile  and  the  Euphrates,  much 
as  Switzerland  between  France  and  Austria.  It  was,  there- 
fore, constantly  exposed  to  the  transit  of  immense  armies, 
like  locusts,  destroying  everything,  or  to  the  hostile  incursions 
of  one  or  other  of  its  belligerent  neighbours.  It  had  always 
been  the  policy  of  a  considerable  party  at  the  court  of 
Jerusalem  to  cultivate  alliance  with  Egypt  or  Assyria.  In 
Hezekiah's  and  Manasseh's  time  the  tendency  had  been 
towards  Assyria ;  now  it  was  towards  Egypt,  which  had  in  a 
remarkable  way  thrown  off  the  yoke  which  the  great  king 
Esarhaddon  in  three  terrible  campaigns  had  sought  to 
rivet  on  its  neck.  The  prophet  strenuously  opposed  these 
overtures.  Why  should  his  people  bind  themselves  to 
the  fortunes  of  any  heathen  nation  whatsoever  ?  Was 
not  God  their  King  ?  Would  not  He  succour  them  in 
times  of  overflowing  calamity  ?     Surely  their  true  policy  was 


28  (Kialertt  iHaktnj. 

to  stand  alone,  untrammelled  by  foreign  alliances,  resting 
only  on  the  mighty  power  of  Jehovah,  serving  his  purposes, 
true  to  his  law,  devoted  to  his  will.  "  What  hast  thou  to  do 
in  the  way  of  Egypt,  to  drink  the  waters  of  Sihor  (/.^., 
the  black  Nile) ;  or  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of 
Assyria,  to  drink  the  waters  of  the  river  ?  "  (ii.  i8,  36,  37). 

This,  then,  was  Jeremiah's  mission — to  stand  almost 
alone ;  to  protest  against  the  sins  of  the  people,  which  were 
covered  by  their  boasted  reverence  to  Jehovah,  whom  they 
worshipped  as  the  tutelary  deity  of  their  land,  beside  many 
false  gods  ;  and  to  oppose  the  policy  of  the  court,  which 
sought  to  cultivate  friendly  relations  with  the  one  power 
that  seemed  able  to  render  aid  to  his  fatherland  in  the  awful 
struggle  with  the  northern  kingdom  which  he  saw  to  be 
imminent  (i.  15).  And  this  ministry  was  exercised  in 
the  teeth  of  the  most  virulent  opposition.  Here  was  a 
priest  denouncing  the  practices  of  priests,  a  prophet  the  hes 
of  prophets.  It  was  no  light  thing  to  expose  the  falsehoods 
alike  of  priest  and  prophet,  and  accuse  them  of  healing  the 
hurt  of  the  daughter  of  his  people  slightly,  saying,  "  Peace, 
peace,"  when  there  was  no  peace.  Small  wonder,  therefore, 
that  the  most  powerful  parties  in  the  state  conspired  against 
him  ;  as  in  after  days  Pilate  and  Herod  joined  hands  against 
Christ. 

n  The  Imagery  he  Employed. — It  is  a  scene  amongst 
the  mountains.  In  that  green  glade  a  fountain  rises  icy 
cold  from  the  depths,  and  pours  its  silver  stream  down- 
ward through  the  valley  You  can  hear  the  music  of  its 
ripple,  and  trace  its  course  by  the  vegetation  that  follows  it. 
It  is  always  flowing  in  abundance  for  young  and  old, 
for  the  villagers  in  the  hamlets,  and,  when  it  has  grown 
fuller  and  broader,  for  the  inhabitants  of  large  towns  along 
its  course.  But  its  banks  are  unvisited,  neither  cup  nor 
bucket  descends  into  its  crystal  depths  ;  for  all  practical 
purposes  it  might  as  well  cease  to  flow. 


5 15 appointment  an5  geapair.  29 

Far  away  from  that  verdant  valley  you  hear  the  clink  of 
the  chisel,  and  presently  discover  people  of  every  age  and 
rank  engaged  in  making  cisterns  to  supply  their  homes. 
The  bead-drops  stand  thick  upon  their  brow,  as  from  early 
dawn  to  far  on  into  the  night  they  pursue  their  arduous 
toil,  wrestling  with  the  stubborn  granite.  They  will  not 
avail  themselves  of  the  materials  of  former  times,  nor  utihze 
the  half-hewn  cisterns  deserted  by  their  ancestors.  Each 
man  has  his  own  scheme,  his  own  design.  He  toils  at  it 
when  spring  casts  her  green  mantle  over  the  pasture  lands 
that  come  to  the  edge  of  the  quarry,  and  when  the  summer 
heat  makes  the  quarry  like  a  kiln.  Whilst  others  are 
gathering  in  the  ruddy  grape  or  golden  corn,  he  remains 
constant  to  his  toil,  and  he  is  there  amid  the  biting  cold  of 
winter  After  years  of  work  he  may  achieve  his  purpose, 
and  complete  the  cistern  on  which  he  has  spent  his  years. 
He  calls  on  his  neighbours  to  view  his  accompHshed 
purpose,  and  waits  expectant  of  the  shower.  Presently  it 
descends,  and  he  is  filled  with  pride  and  pleasure  to  think 
of  the  store  of  water  which  he  has  been  able  to  secure. 
But  lo  !  it  does  not  stay.  As  soon  as  it  enters,  it  passes  out. 
There  is  a  fatal  crack  or  flaw;  perhaps  the  stone  is  too 
porous.  He  finds,  what  every  one  of  his  neighbours  has 
found,  or  will  find,  that  with  the  utmost  care  the  cisterns 
wrought  in  the  quarry  can  hold  no  water. 

What  an  infinite  mistake  to  miss  the  fountain  freely 
flowing  to  quench  the  thirst,  and  hew  out  the  broken 
cistern  in  which  is  disappointment  and  despair  !  Yet  this, 
said  the  prophet,  was  the  precise  position  of  Israel.  They 
had  done  as  no  nation  else,  though  search  were  made  from 
the  far  west  of  Chittim  to  the  far  east  of  Kedar.  The 
heathen  at  least  were  constant  to  their  gods.  False 
religions  were  indigenous  to  the  lands  where  they  had 
originated — the  same  idols  worshipped,  the  same  rites 
performed,  the  same  temples  filled  with  succeeding  gener- 
ations.     But  the  people  of  Jehovah  had  forsaken  Him,  as  a 


30  Cistern  iltaking. 

maid  might  lay  aside  her  ornaments,  or  a  bride  her  attire  ; 
and  in  resorting  to  false  religions  and  heathen  alhances, 
they  were  hewing  out  for  themselves  broken  cisterns  which 
would  fail  them  in  their  hour  of  need. 

Very  pathetically  the  prophet  reminds  them  of  the  past. 
The  kindness  of  their  youth,  the  love  of  their  espousals, 
their  holiness  to  the  Lord,  and  the  song  with  which  they 
celebrated  their  deliverance  on  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea, 
suggested  a  sad  contrast  to  the  evils  that  cursed  the  land. 
Through  him  the  voice  of  God  is  heard  inquiring  the  reason 
of  this  lamentable  apostasy.  The  chapter  is  full  of  questions, 
as  though  God  would  elicit  the  charge  upon  which  they  had 
deserted  Him.  "What  unrighteousness  have  your  fathers 
found  in  Me,  that  they  are  gone  far  from.  Me,  and  have 
walked  after  vanity  and  are  become  vain  ?  Have  I  been  a 
wilderness  unto  Israel  ?  or  a  land  of  thick  darkness  ? 
Wherefore  say  my  people.  We  are  broken  loose,  we  will 
come  no  more  unto  Thee  ?  " 

There  is  nothing  sadder  than  the  ebb  of  love,  when  we 
are  compelled  to  sit  on  the  beach  and  watch  the  slowly 
receding  waters  as  they  drop  down  from  the  high-water 
mark  which  they  had  reached  with  the  dancing  wavelets. 
This  takes  the  light  from  the  eye,  and  the  spring  from  the 
foot.  Life  can  never  again  be  quite  as  it  was.  The  tide 
may  come  up  again ;  but  it  will  never  efface  the  recollection 
of  the  ebb,  and  the  fear  of  its  return.  This  in  human 
experience  is  something  like  the  pain  felt  by  the  Eternal,  as 
He  saw  Israel,  for  whom  He  had  done  so  much,  turn  from 
Him  to  strangers.  Bitter,  indeed,  to  hear  them  say  to  a 
stock,  "  Thou  art  my  father ; "  and  to  a  stone,  "  Thou  hast 
brought  me  forth."  Their  apostasy  was  to  Crod  as  though  a 
wife  should  go  from  the  husband  that  doted  upon  her,  and 
become  another  man's  (iii.  i). 

III.  Its  Application  to  Ourselves. — Many  cistern- 
makers  may  read  these  words — each  with  soul-thirst  craving 


€\jz  fountain  of  Cloii's  f  nhe  3^ 

satisfaction ;  each  within  easy  reach  of  God,  whose  nature 
is  as  rock-water  for  those  that  are  athirst.  But  all 
attempting  the  impossible  task  of  satisfying  the  thirst  for  the 
Infinite  and  Divine,  with  men  and  things. 

There  is  the  cistern  of  Pleasure^  embroidered  with  fruits 
and  flowers,  and  bacchanalian  figures,  wrought  at  the  cost  of 
health  and  rest ;  the  cistern  of  Wealthy  gilded  and  inlaid 
with  pearls,  like  the  mangers  of  the  stud  oi  eastern  kings ; 
the  cistern  of  Fame,  hewn  by  the  youth  who  tore  himself 
from  the  welcome  of  home,  and  the  embrace  of  human  love, 
to  climb,  with  his  banner  of  strange  device,  the  unfrequented 
solitudes  of  the  mountain  summit,  far  above  all  rivalry,  and 
even  companionship ;  the  cistern  of  Hujfian  Love,  which, 
however  beautiful  as  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  Love,  can 
never  satisfy  the  soul  that  rests  in  it  alone — all  these,  made 
at  infinite  cost  of  time  and  pains,  deceive  and  disappoint. 
In  the  expressive  words  of  Jeremiah,  they  are  "broken 
cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water."  And  in  the  time  of 
trouble  they  will  not  be  able  to  save  those  that  have  con 
structed  and  trusted  them. 

At  your  feet,  O  weary  cistern-hewer,  the  fountain  of  God's 
love  is  flowing  through  the  channel  of  the  Divine  Man  ! 
Stoop  to  drink  it.  We  must  descend  to  the  level  of  the 
stream,  if  its  waters  are  to  flow  over  our  parched  lips  to 
slake  our  thirst.  You  have  already  dropped  your  tools,  and 
are  weary  of  your  toil.  List  to  the  music  that  fills  the  air 
and  floats  around,  like  the  chime  of  angel  voices  :  "  Come 
back  to  God.  Do  the  first  works.  Forsake  the  alliances 
and  idolatries  which  have  alienated  you  from  your  best 
Friend.  Open  your  heart,  that  He  may  create  in  you  the 
fountain  of  living  water,  leaping  up  to  eternal  life.  .  .  . 
The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come  !  And  he  that  heareth, 
let  him  say,  Come !  And  he  that  is  athirst,  let  him  come . 
he  that  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely." 


IV. 

(Jeremiah  iii. — vi. ) 

"  Surely  the  time  is  short, 
Endless  the  task  and  art, 
To  brighten  for  the  ethereal  court 
A  soiled  earth-drudging  heart : 
But  He,  the  dread  Proclaimer  of  that  hour, 
Is  pledged  to  thee  in  Love,  as  to  thy  foes  in  Power. 

Keble. 

E  do  not  know  how  Jeremiah's  first  address 
was  received.     It  was  impossible  for  Jeru- 
salem  to   have   heard   the   eager  pleadings 
'^^^'^^f^.         of  the  young  preacher,  protesting  so  earn- 
C^^'^-.w         estly  against  the  policy  of  its  leaders,  and 
^  the  practices  of  its  priests,  without  becom- 

ing aware  that  a  new  force  had  entered  the  arena  of  its 
public  life.  And  from  that  moment,  through  the  forty-four 
years  that  followed,  the  influence  of  his  holy  example  and 
fervent  words  was  destined  to  make  itself  mightily  felt. 
One  more  star  of  hope  shone  over  that  hotbed  of  corruption, 
the  very  atmosphere  of  which  was  charged  with  symptoms 
of  impending  dissolution.  Another  voice  was  audible 
through  which  God  could  utter  his  pleadings  and  remon- 
strances. 

In  his  second  discourse,  lasting  from  the  third  to  the 
sixth  chapters  inclusive — and  which  perhaps  is  preserved  as 
a  specimen  of  Jeremiah's  words  at  this  period — there  is  an 
added  power  and  pathos.  The  flame  burns  higher  ;  the 
sword  has  a  keener  edge ;  yet  the  tone  is  more  tremulous 
and  tender.     There  is  more  than  ever  of  the  spirit  of  Jesus, 


^  |§mf  Reason  of  ^tacz.  33 

bewailing  the  blindness  and  obstinacy  of  men,  as  the  vision 
of  impending  judgment  looms  clearer  before  the  soul,  and 
the  violence  done  to  the  redeeming  love  of  God  is  m.ore 
clearly  apprehended.  In  his  own  touching  words,  Jeremiah 
was  as  a  gentle  lamb  led  to  the  slaughter  (xi.  19)  :  but  he 
was  also  strong  as  a  lion,  in  the  vehemence  with  which  he 
strove  to  avert  the  doom,  already  gathering  on  the  horizon, 
and  threatening  to  devastate  his  beloved  fatherland.  If  any 
pure  and  holy  soul  could  have  saved  Judah  by  its  pleadings, 
tears,  and  warnings,  Jeremiah  would  have  done  it. 

But  it  was  not  to  be.  The  upas  had  struck  its  roots 
too  deeply  ;  the  ulcer  was  too  inveterate.  The  evil  that 
Manasseh  had  sown  had  too  thickly  impregnated  the  soil. 
This,  however,  did  not  appear  in  those  early  days  of 
Jeremiah's  ministry  ;  and  with  all  the  hopefulness  of  youth, 
he  thought  that  he  might  yet  avert  the  disaster.  Surely  a 
voice  warning  of  the  rocks  that  lay  direct  in  the  vessel's 
course,  and  a  firm  hand  on  the  tiller,  might  yet  steer  the 
good  ship  into  calm,  deep  water  ! 

This  discourse  is  occupied  with  a  clear  prevision  of  the 
Chaldean  invasion  ;  with  plaintive  expressions  of  pity  and 
pain  ;  and  with  eloquent  assertions  of  the  redeeming  grace 
of  God. 

I.  The  Prophet's  Prevision  of  Approaching  Judg- 
ment.— At  the  opening  of  Jeremiah's  ministry,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  land  was  rejoicing  in  a  brief  parenthesis  of  peace ; 
like  a  glint  of  light  on  a  mountain  side,  in  a  cloudy  and 
dark  day.  It  was  a  welcome  contrast  to  the  experience  of 
the  previous  centuries.  And  it  appeared  probable  that  it 
might  last.  The  mighty  empire  of  Assyria  was  weakened 
by  internal  dissension  ;  Babylon  was  becoming  a  formidable 
rival  of  Nineveh  ;  the  Medes,  under  Cyaxares,  were  be- 
ginning to  descend  the  western  slopes  of  the  Taurus  ; 
whilst  in  Egypt  Psammetichus  was  too  deeply  engaged  in 
expelling  the  Assyrian  garrisons,  consolidating  his  kingdom, 
c 


34  ^Ijc  ^etontr  gisrourse, 

and  founding  his  dynasty,  to  have  leisure  or  desire  to  inter- 
fere with  the  tiny  neighbouring  kingdom. 

Thus  Josiah  was  able  to  pursue  his  reforms  in  peace,  and 
there  was  no  war-cloud  on  the  horizon.  It  was  on  one  of 
these  days  of  Josiah  the  king  (iii.  6)  that  the  newly- 
appointed  prophet  startled  the  men  of  Jerusalem  and 
Judah,  as  he  made  known  what  he  had  seen  on  his 
watch-tower. 

He  had  heard  the  trumpet  summoning  the  peasantry 
from  the  open  country  to  the  fenced  cities,  leaving  their 
crops  at  the  mercy  of  the  invader,  to  save  their  lives.  He 
had  descried  the  lion  stealing  up  from  his  lair  in  the  thicket, 
to  destroy  the  nations.  He  had  caught  the  cries  of  the 
watchers  from  the  northern  heights  of  Dan  to  Ephraim,  and 
so  to  Jerusalem,  as  they  announced  the  advent  of  the 
invader.  He  had  beheld  the  desolation  of  the  land,  the 
hurried  retreat  of  the  defenders  of  the  holy  city  herself, 
some  to  thickets,  and  others  to  holes  in  the  jagged  rocks. 
Yes,  and  he  had  seen  the  daughter  of  Zion  gasping  in  the 
extreme  of  her  anguish,  and  crying,  "  Woe  is  me  now !  " 

So  real  was  the  whole  scene  to  him  that  we  find  him 
turning  to  his  brother  Benjamites,  who  had  fled  for  shelter 
to  the  metropolis,  bidding  them  flee  still  further  south.  He 
beholds  the  preparations  for  the  siege,  and  the  chagrin  of 
her  assailants  that  the  evening  shadows  of  declining  day 
interpose  between  them  and  her  inevitable  capture.  He 
describes  the  invader  as  a  mighty  and  ancient  nation,  glean- 
ing Israel  as  men  gather  the  last  grapes  into  their  basket ; 
cruel  and  merciless  as  evening  wolves.  Their  quiver  a 
sepulchre ;  their  sword  a  terror ;  their  charging  cry  hoarse 
and  deafening  as  the  roar  of  the  sea ;  their  chariots  and 
cavalry  irresistible.  The  mere  reports  of  their  deeds  were 
sufficient  to  induce  in  each  hearer,  as  it  were,  the  pangs  of 
travail  (i.  15;  iv.  6,  7,  16,  19;  vi.  9,  19,  21).  And  the 
words  of  the  young  prophet  were  as  fire  to  wood  (v.  14). 

It  has  been  supposed  that  these  words  referred  to  the 


dijTrcsBions  of  J^-itnttisIr.  35 

invasion  of  the  Scythians,  who  about  this  time  poured  in 
countless  hordes  over  Western  Asia.  The  cities  of  Nineveh 
and  Babylon  alone,  because  of  their  great  strength,  escaped ; 
the  open  country  was  swept  utterly  bare ;  all  who  could  not 
escape  were  barbarously  massacred  or  carried  off  as  slaves ; 
villages  and  towns  were  turned  into  charred  and  smoking 
ruins.  But  these  barbarian  hordes  do  not  fulfil  the  entire 
scope  of  the  prophet's  words.  They  do  not  appear  to  have 
entered  Palestine ;  but  to  have  passed  down  on  the  eastern 
or  western  frontier,  skirting  the  territory  of  Josiah,  and 
driving  the  panic-stricken  people  to  the  shelter  of  the  larger 
cities,  whence  they  traced  the  path  of  the  invader,  lit  by 
conflagrations  kindled  on  their  ruthless  march.  It  is  better, 
therefore,  to  refer  these  ominous  words  to  the  invasion 
of  Judah  by  Babylon,  which  was  to  take  place  in  thirty 
years,  but  of  which  the  people  were  amply  warned,  that 
they  might  put  away  their  abominations  and  return  to  the 
Fountain  of  Living  Waters. 

II.  His  Plaintive  Expression  of  Pity  and  Pain. — The 
tender  heart  of  Jeremiah  was  filled  with  the  utmost  sorrow 
at  the  heavy  tidings  he  was  called  to  announce.  Throughout 
the  book  we  constantly  encounter  the  expressions  of  his 
anguish.  True  patriot  as  he  was,  it  was  hard  for  him  to 
contemplate  the  impending  destruction  of  the  holy  city. 
The  noblest  traditions  of  his  people  were  represented  in 
those  cries,  which  for  a  little  demand  our  consideration. 

"The  sword,"  he  says,  "reaches  to  the  soul."  And 
again,  "  My  heart !  my  heart !  I  writhe  in  pain  !  the  walls  of 
my  heart  will  break  !  my  heart  groans  within  me ;  I  cannot 
keep  it  still"  (iv.  19,  free  translation).  He  identifies 
himself  with  his  land,  and  it  seems  as  though  the  curtains 
of  his  own  tents  are  being  spoiled,  as  in  a  moment.  He 
struggles  against  uttering  his  message  of  judgment  till  he 
can  no  longer  contain  himself,  and  becomes  weary  with 
holding    in    (vi.     11).     He   addresses    Jerusalem    as    the 


36  tibe  .^ecotttr  discourse. 

daughter  of  his  people,  and  bids  her  gird  herself  with 
sackcloth  and  sit  in  ashes,  mourning  as  for  an  only  son 
(vi.  23).  He  asks  how  he  may  comfort  himself  against 
sorrow,  because  his  heart  faints  within  him  (viii.  18).  He 
wishes  that  his  head  were  waters,  and  his  eyes  a  fountain  of 
tears,  that  he  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the  slain  of  the 
daughter  of  his  people  (ix.  i).  He  wanders  alone  over  the 
mountains,  weeping  and  wailing  because  the  pasture  lands 
are  dry,  because  the  lowing  of  the  cattle  and  the  song  of  the 
bird  are  hushed  (ix.  10).  "Woe  is  me!"  he  exclaims; 
"  my  wound  is  grievous." 

He  had  no  alternative  but  to  announce  the  judgments 
which  he  saw  upon  their  way ;  but  there  was  a  sob  in  the 
voice  that  predicted  them.  So  far  from  desiring  the  evil 
day,  very  gladly  would  he  have  laid  down  his  life  to  avert  it. 
The  chalice  of  his  life  was  full  of  that  spirit  which  led  the 
Master  in  after  years  to  weep  as  he  beheld  the  guilty  and 
doomed  city.  Many  a  great  preacher  of  repentance  in  all 
the  centuries  of  Church  history  has  known  something  of  this 
bewailing.  Side  by  side  with  vehement  denunciations  of 
coming  judgment,  there  has  been  the  pitiful  yearning  over 
lost  men. 

We  need  more  of  this.  Nothing  is  so  terrible  as  to  utter 
God's  threatenings  against  sin,  which  are  predictions  of  its 
natural  and  inevitable  outworking,  with  no  sign  of  anguish 
or  regret.  If  we  are  called  to  speak  of  judgment  to  come, 
it  should  be  after  hours  of  solitary  prayer,  weeping,  and 
soul  travail.  It  is  only  in  proportion  as  we  have  felt  for 
sinners,  that  we  can  warn  them.  It  is  only  in  so  far  as  we 
have  known  the  Saviour's  pity,  that  we  can  dare  to  take  up 
the  woes  He  pronounced  against  Pharisee  and  Sadducee,  or 
threaten  the  fate  which  He  so  clearly  and  awfully  de- 
nounced. 

Our  mistake  is  in  dealing  with  generals  and  not  with 
particulars  ;  or  in  using  terms  which  have  passed  from  hand 
to  hand,  until  their  inscription  is  worn  away.     We  have 


**  (Bbtvi&stiuQ  fotre."  37 

not  realized  the  loss  of  one  soul  ;  nor  the  unutterable  woe  of 
hell  for  one  apostate  ;  nor  the  meaning  of  the  undying  worm 
and  the  unquenched  flame.  And  probably  the  best  way 
of  entering  into  the  meaning  of  any  of  these  terrible  con- 
ceptions is  to  try  and  realize  what  they  would  mean  for 
any  one  soul  who  was  dear  to  us  as  Hfe.  Then  from  the  one 
we  may  pass  to  the  many ;  from  the  one  lost  soul  we 
may  understand  the  meaning  of  a  lost  world.  Let  us 
look  at  these  things  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Saviour, 
or  of  a  parent's  love,  or  of  the  soul  itself^  and  when  thoughts 
have  saturated  our  hearts  of  the  dishonour  done  to  God, 
the  loss  sustained  by  Christ,  the  anguish  wrought  into 
the  texture  of  one  disobedient  life — we  shall  be  able  to 
speak  to  men  of  the  judgment  to  come,  with  streaming 
tears,  tremulous  voice,  and  breaking  heart.  Such  preaching 
will  always  be  a  convincing  and  irresistible  argument  to  turn 
sinners  from  the  error  of  their  ways.  Nothing  is  more 
awful  than  to  speak  of  the  great  mysteries  of  life  and  death, 
of  heaven  and  hell,  of  the  right  and  left  of  the  Throne, 
without  that  compassion  of  heart  which  is  borrowed 
from  close  communion  with  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 

III.  His  Assertion  of  Redeeming  Grace. — Few  of 
the  sacred  writers  have  had  truer  or  deeper  views  of  the 
love  of  God.  It  is  to  the  earlier  chapters  of  Jeremiah  that 
backsliders  must  always  turn  for  comfort  and  assurance 
of  abundant  pardon.  The  word  backslide  is  characteristic 
of  this  prophet. 

To  Jeremiah' s  thought^  sin  could  not  quench  God^s  love. — It 
may  come  in  between  man  and  wife,  severing  the  marriage 
tie,  and  leading  the  husband  to  divorce  her  whom  he 
had  taken  to  be  his  other  self ;  but  though  our  sin  be  more 
inveterate  and  repeated  than  woman  ever  perpetrated  against 
man,  or  man  against  woman,  it  cannot  cut  off  that  love 
which  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  The  clouds  may 
dim,  but  they  cannot  extinguish  the  sun.     Sin  may  hide  the 


38  Wht  ^tconii  gisrourae. 

manifestation  of  the  love  of  God,  but  can  never  make 
God  abandon  his  love  to  us  (Jer.  iii.  i). 

TAe  love  of  God  goes  forth  in  forgiving  mercy. — He 
only  asks  that  the  people  should  acknowledge  their  iniquity, 
and  confess  to  having  perverted  their  way,  and  forgotten 
their  God.  It  were  enough  that  they  should  accept  the 
terms  of  the  confession  which  he  himself  suggested : 
"  Behold  we  come  unto  Thee,  for  thou  art  the  Lord  our 
God  " ;  and  he  assures  them  that  though  their  sin  and  in- 
iquity were  sought  for,  there  should  be  none  (iv.  i;  v.  20). 

The  love  of  God  does  not  deal  with  us  after  our  sins. — He 
gives  showers  immediately  on  repentance.  He  does 
not  keep  his  anger  for  ever.  He  intervenes  between  us  and 
trouble,  as  the  soft  sand  between  the  homes  of  men  and 
the  yeasty  foaming  ocean.  He  waits  to  receive  us  back, 
saying,  "  If  thou  wilt  return,  O  Israel,  unto  Me,  thou 
shalt  return."  Ours  may  be  the  pleasant  land;  ours  the 
goodly  heritage  ;  ours  the  rest  for  the  soul — all  of  which  we 
had  forfeited,  but  all  of  which  are  restored  to  us  when 
we  return. 

What  true  and  delightful  conceptions  of  the  love  of  God 
were  vouchsafed  to  the  young  prophet !  Many  similarities 
between  his  expressions  and  those  of  Deuteronomy  suggest 
that  it  was  his  favourite  book — as,  if  we  may  venture  to 
say  so,  it  was  our  Lord's  ;  and  perhaps  it  was  from  that 
ancient  writing,  then  newly  discovered,  that  he  derived 
his  inspiration.  But,  in  any  case,  his  living  spirit  had  drunk 
deep  draughts  of  the  everlasting,  forgiving,  pitiful  love  of  God, 
revealed  and  given  to  men  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Oh,  blessed  love  .'—through  which  backsliding  hearts  may  be 
admitted  again  to  the  inner  circle,  and  have  restored  the 
years  that  the  cankervvorm  has  eaten 


V. 

(Jeremiah  vii.— x.) 

"  Bewildered  in  its  search,  bewildered  with  the  cry, 
'  Lo  here  !  lo  there,  the  Church  ! '  poor  sad  humanity 
Through  all  the  dust  and  heat  turns  back,  with  bleeding  feet, 

By  the  weary  road  it  came 
Unto  the  simple  thought,  by  the  Great  Master  taught, 
And  that  remaineth  still : 

Noi  he  that  repeateth  the  Name, 
But  he  that  doeth  the  will." 
.    /*_.  J  Longfellow. 

w&WivWiE  must  read  the  records  given  in  the  Books 
^^mmm  -^  °^  ^^^  Kings  and  Chronicles,  to  understand 
^SjfiS  ^^^  remarkable  movement  which  was  on 
'^^(.^^Jx       ^^^^   during   the   time   covered    by  the   first 

^^3  ,.-•-  twelve  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah. 
^  In  his  collected  words  he  scarcely  refers  to 

the  great  reforms  being  introduced  by  his  friend,  the  king 
Josiah ;  and  he  is  scarcely  mentioned  in  the  historical 
records.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  in  constant 
and  close  communication  with  the  king  and  the  little 
group  of  earnest  reformers  that  clustered  round  his  person, 
and  which  included  Shaphan,  Hilkiah,  the  prophet  Zeph- 
aniah,  the  prophetess  Huldah,  and  his  own  friend,  Baruch. 

Josiah  promoted  measures  of  reform  from  the  earliest 
years  of  his  reign  ;  but  at  first  he  was  opposed  by  the  dead 
weight  of  national  apathy  to  the  cause  he  espoused.  The 
worship  of  idols — for  which  there  are  twenty  different  terms 
in  the  Hebrew  language — had  so  many  fascinations  from  the 
use  of  the  peoples  around,  and  from  its  appeals  to  sensual 
passion,  that  the  mass  of  the  people  had  no  desire  to  revert 


40  ^t  tije  S^entpk  Olatcs. 

\o  the  more  austere  and  purer  worship  of  their  forefathers. 
Besides,  had  not  Solomon  the  magnificent,  four  hundred 
years  before,  erected  on  the  southern  slopes  of  Olivet 
shrines  to  Ashtoreth,  the  goddess  of  Sidon  ;  to  Chemosh 
and  Milcom,  the  national  gods  of  Moab  and  Ammon  ? 
The  rites  of  heathen  superstition  were  also  maintained  by  a 
vast  herd  of  false  prophets  and  priests,  who,  like  parasites, 
throve  in  the  corruption  of  their  time.  There  was  a  fatal 
compact  and  collusion  between  the  two  bodies  which  boded 
no  good  for  the  efforts  of  the  zealous  band  of  reformers  who 
gathered  round  the  king,  because  they  appeared  to  give  a 
Divine  sanction  to  the  abominations  that  were  being  per- 
petrated. A  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  had  come  to 
pass  in  the  land :  the  prophets  prophesied  falsely,  and  the 
priests  bare  rule  by  their  means  ;  and  the  people  loved  to 
have  it  so. 

The  co-operation  of  Zephaniah  and  Jeremiah  was  there- 
fore exceedingly  valuable.  Whilst  Josiah  wrought  from 
without,  pursuing  a  career  of  uncompromising  iconoclasm, 
they  wrought  from  within,  appealing  to  the  conscience  and 
heart — here  pleading  the  claims  of  Jehovah  on  the  thought- 
less crowds  ;  there  taunting  the  idol-worshippers  with  the 
futility  of  their  reliance  on  the  creations  of  their  fancy  ;  and 
again  announcing  the  swift  descent  of  national  judgments 
on  the  national  sins  which  were  desolating  the  country. 

But,  notwithstanding  their  united  efforts,  the  cause  of 
reform  moved  slowly,  or  might  even  have  come  to  a 
standstill — as  an  express  train  when  buried  in  an  avalanche 
of  soft  snow — had  not  the  discovery,  made  in  the  eighteenth 
year  of  Josiah's  reign,  given  a  new  and  unexpected  impetus 
to  the  ancient  religion  of  Israel.  And  though  it  is  not 
exactly  an  incident  in  the  life  of  Jeremiah,  he  was  so 
closely  associated  with  the  men  who  were  principally 
concerned,  and  his  third  discourse  is  so  evidently  suggested 
by  the  reforms  to  which  it  led,  that  we  must  briefly  touch 
on  it. 


^IjE  flcformation  unhtv  |o5ia^.  4^ 

I.  The  Finding  of  the  Law.— At  the  time  to  which 
this  incident  must  be  referred,  the  Temple  was  under 
repair.  It  sadly  needed  it;  for  the  lewd  emblems  of 
idolatry  had  been  erected  within  its  sacred  precincts,  and 
beside  them  the  dweUings  of  the  wretched  men  and  women 
associated  with  the  impious  rites  permitted  on  the  site 
where  David  worshipped,  and  Solomon  spread  his  hands 
in  solemn  dedicatory  prayer.  Probably  also  the  fabric  was 
showing  signs  of  dilapidation  and  age,  for  two  and  a  half 
centuries  had  elapsed  since  it  had  been  completely  restored 

by  Joash. 

The  work  was  entrusted  to  the  superintendence  of 
Hilkiah,  the  high  priest,  who  was  assisted  by  a  little  group 
of  Levites ;  and  the  cost  was  contributed  by  the  people 
who  passed  through  the  Temple  gates.  On  one  occasion, 
the  king  sent  Shaphan,  his  secretary  and  chancellor,  who 
was  the  father  of  Gemariah  and  a  good  man— who  after 
wards  defended  Jeremiah  (xxxvi.  10-19,  25)— to  take 
an  account  with  Hilkiah  of  the  money  which  had  been 
gathered  by  the  doorkeepers.  When  they  had  attended  to 
this  important  business,  and  delivered  the  money  into  the 
hands  of  the  workmen  that  had  the  oversight  of  the  work, 
Hilkiah,  the  high  priest,  said  unto  Shaphan,  the  scribe,  ||  I 
have  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the  house  of  the  Lord." 

It  was  a  very  startling  discovery.  The  Rabbmical 
tradition  states  that  it  was  discovered  inside  a  heap  of 
stones,  where  it  was  hidden  when  Ahaz  destroyed  all  the 
other  copies  of  the  holy  books.  Or  it  may  have  been 
hidden  away  in  the  Ark,  which  Ahaz  may  have  removed  to 
one  of  the  rooms  of  the  Temple,  where  dust  and  lumber 
concealed  it.  There  has  been  much  discussion  as  to  what 
that  roll  of  ancient  MSS.  contained ;  some  holding  that  it 
was  the  entire  Pentateuch,  others  that  it  was  the  Book  of 
Deuteronomy.  It  has  even  been  asserted  by  some  that  a 
pious  fraud  was  perpetrated  on  Josiah  and  his  times  by 
some  well-meaning   individual,   who  had  just   written   the 


42  Jit  tlje  i^cmpk  (^atts. 

Book  of  Deuteronomy  with  his  own  hand,  and  now  foisted 
it  on  Hilkiah  and  the  rest,  as  a  venerable  production, 
dating  from  the  days  of  Moses  !  To  what  miserable  straits 
they  are  reduced  who  would  have  us  accept  such  wanton 
speculations !  Let  the  critics  betake  themselves  to  the  exam- 
ination of  the  ancient  MSS.,  if  they  will.  We  thank  them  for 
the  facts  they  bring  to  light ;  in  their  own  province  we  give 
them  credit  for  painstaking  and  erudition,  but  we  refuse  to 
accept  their  theories.  Let  them  give  us  the  facts,  and  we  can 
formulate  the  theories  for  ourselves.  Even  if  it  could  be 
shown — which  we  hold  it  cannot — that  Moses  was  not  the 
author  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  it  is  surely  utterly 
inconceivable  that  the  mind  through  which  that  sublime 
treatise  was  given  to  the  world  could  have  been  a  party  to  a 
fraud  so  unblushing  and  scandalous  as  to  palm  off  its  own 
offspring  under  the  august  sanction  of  the  name  of  Moses  ! 

After  careful  thought,  we  are  disposed  to  think  that  the 
Book  of  Deuteronomy  is  specially  referred  to  here,  though 
not  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other  books  of  Moses.  It  seems 
unquestionable  that  this  portion  alone  of  the  Pentateuch 
was  ordained  to  be  written  out  by  each  king  on  his  acces- 
sion, and  was  read  before  the  assembled  congregation  once 
in  each  seven  years.  The  terms  of  the  covenant  made 
afterwards  by  Josiah  and  his  people  are  precisely  those 
with  which  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  abounds ;  and  the 
phrases  which  characterize  it  are  perpetually  recurring  in 
the  addresses  and  appeals  of  Jeremiah.  This  book  dyed 
his  speech,  as  it  had  done  that  of  Amos,  Hosea,  Isaiah, 
and  Micah. 

Its  discovery  by  Hilkiah  made  as  great  a  sensation  as 
that  of  the  Latin  Bible  by  Luther  in  the  library  of  the  old 
Augustinian  monastery  at  Erfurt.  Shaphan  read  parts  of  it 
before  the  king,  amongst  them  probably  chapter  xxviii. 
"  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  had  heard  the  words 
of  the  book  of  the  law,  that  he  rent  his  clothes."  In  hot 
haste  he  sent  a  deputation  of  his  moit  trusty  friends  to  one 


Jintrin^  tlje  gook  of  t^e  f  »to.  43 

of  the  suburbs  of  the  city,  \Yhere  the  prophetess  Huldah 
dwelt.  Jeremiah  may  have  been  at  this  time  at  Anathoth ; 
or  he  may  have  been  too  young  in  his  work  to  be  recognised 
as  an  authority  in  so  grave  a  crisis.  The  question  to  be 
asked  was,  whether  the  nation  must  expect  to  suffer  all  the 
awful  curses  which  those  words  predicted ;  and  the  answer 
was  an  uncompromising  "Yes,"  though  their  infliction 
might  be  for  a  brief  space  postponed. 

Forthwith  the  king  summoned  a  mighty  convocation  of 
all  the  men  of  Judah  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
and  the  priests  and  the  prophets,  and  the  people,  both 
small  and  great ;  and  from  a  platform  erected  in  the 
entrance  of  the  inner  court,  he  read  aloud  all  the  words  of 
the  book  of  the  covenant,  which  had  been  found  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  And  further,  he  solemnly  renewed  the 
covenant  between  Jehovah  and  the  people,  that  they  ^vould 
walk  after  the  Lord,  and  keep  his  commandments,  testimo- 
nies, and  statutes.  Perhaps,  as  one  commentator  suggests, 
an  ox  was  slain,  and  the  king  and  people  passed  between 
the  severed  halves  in  witness  of  their  solemn  resolve. 

Then  the  work  of  reform  broke  out  afresh.  The  tide  of 
popular  feeling  rose  high,  and  the  reformers  took  it  at  its 
flow.  The  black-robed  priests  were  suppressed;  the  emblems 
of  idolatry  were  cast  out  of  the  Temple,  and  burnt  without 
the  city;  the  dwellings  of  the  miserable  votaries  of  lust 
were  destroyed,  Tophet  was  defiled,  and  the  high  places 
levelled  to  the  ground.  Thus,  outwardly  at  least,  Israel 
became  again  true  to  its  allegiance  to  the  God  of  their 
fathers,  and  free  from  the  taint  of  idolatry. 

IL  The  Divorce  between  Religion  and  Morality. — 
The  influence  of  the  court ;  the  finding  and  reading  of  the 
law ;  the  splendid  success  of  the  great  Passover  which 
Josiah  instituted ;  the  glow  of  the  crusade  against  the  old 
idolatries — sufficed  for  a  time  to  effect  widespread  reform, 
and  the  fickle  populace  gave  an  outward  adhesion  at  least  to 


44  ^t  t)jt  WzmipU  (Sates. 

the  service  of  Jehovah.  The  Temple  courts  were  thronged  ; 
the  rites  and  forms  of  the  Levitical  code  were  rigorously 
maintained ;  every  point  of  ceremonial  allegiance  to  the 
institutions  of  Moses  was  punctiliously  obsei-ved.  But  there 
was  no  real  change  in  disposition.  The  reformation  was 
entirely  superficial.  Beneath  the  fair  exterior  the  grossest 
forms  of  evil  were  seething  in  hideous  corruption  ;  now  and 
again  breaking  forth  into  the  light  of  day,  but  awaiting  the 
death  of  Josiah,  when  they  once  more  asserted  themselves. 

Jeremiah  was  profoundly  disappointed  at  the  result  of  a 
movement  which  had  promised  so  well.  He  detected  its 
true  character,  and  sought  an  opportunity  of  showing  its 
insufficiency  to  avert  the  wrath  of  God,  which  was  gathering 
like  a  thunder-cloud  upon  the  horizon.  Taking  up  his 
position  in  the  gate  of  the  Temple,  on  the  occasion  of  some 
great  festival  when  the  people  of  Judah  were  gathered  with 
the  citizens  of  Jerusalem  to  worship  Jehovah,  he  poured 
forth  a  torrent  of  remonstrance  and  appeal. 

He  was  not  unaware  of  the  attention  paid  by  the  nation 
to  outward  ritual,  which  they  mistook  for  religion.  The 
incense  of  Sheba,  and  the  costly  fine-scented  cane  fetched 
from  Arabia  or  India,  and  burnt  for  the  sake  of  its  rich 
perfume,  stole  through  the  Temple  precincts  (vi.  20).  They 
took  care  to  speak  of  the  Temple  as  the  House  of  God.  and 
to  stand  before  Him  as  his  people  (vh.  10).  The  burnt- 
offering  and  other  sacrifices  were  rigorously  distinguished 
from  one  another,  the  priests  and  people  feeding  on  those 
parts  alone  permitted  by  the  Mosaic  ritual  (vii.  21).  It 
was  the  boast  of  the  people  that  the  law  of  the  Lord  had 
been  committed  to  their  charge,  and  that  they  had  therefore 
special  claim  upon  his  forbearance  (viii.  8).  And  against 
every  accusation  which  the  prophet  laid  at  the  nation's  door, 
they  pointed  to  the  order  and  beauty  of  the  restored  ritual ; 
of  their  splendid  Temple ;  of  their  privileged  condition  as 
the  chosen  of  God  ;  and  cried,  "The  Temple  of  the  Lord,  the 
Temple  of  the  Lord,  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  are  these  ! " 


Religion  antr  ^oralB.  45 

But  alongside  of  this  outward  decorum,  the  grossest  sins 
were  permitted  with  unblushing  shame.  One  of  the  charges 
which  Jeremiah  brings  against  his  people  is,  that  thej'  had 
lost  the  power  of  blushing  (viii.  12).  The  shamefulness  of 
their  sin  was  apparent  in  their  shamelessness.  They 
oppressed  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow. 
Theft,  murder,  and  adultery,  showed  themselves  in  open 
day.  So  frequent  and  atrocious  w^ere  their  crimes  of 
violence,  that  they  seemed  transformed  into  a  horde  of 
robbers — the  Temple  their  den  ;  lies  flew  from  their  tongues 
like  arrows  from  a  bow ;  and  whilst  men  spake  peaceably  to 
their  neighbours  in  their  ears,  they  were  lying  in  wait  to 
betray  them.  Though  idolatry  had  been  overthrown  in  the 
high  places  of  the  land,  it  lingered  in  the  houses  of  the 
great,  who  squandered  their  silver  and  their  gold,  their  blue 
and  purple,  on  the  wood  which  they  had  shaped  into  the 
fashion  of  a  god. 

There  was  an  evident  divorce  between  religion  and 
morals ;  and  whenever  that  comes  into  the  life  of  a  nation 
or  an  individual,  it  is  fatal !  Satan  himself  has  no  objection 
to  a  religion  which  consists  in  postures,  and  ceremonies, 
and  rites.  Indeed,  he  fosters  it ;  for  the  soul  of  man 
demands  God,  and  craves  religion ;  and  it  is  the  art  of  the 
great  enemy  of  souls  to  substitute  the  counterfeit  for  the 
reality,  to  quiet  the  religious  appetite  with  the  shows  and 
effigies  of  the  eternal  and  Divine — much  as  a  man  might 
satisfy  his  hunger  with  food  that  lacked  the  elements  of 
nutrition,  whilst  his  strength  and  vigour  were  slowly  ebbing 
away.  It  can  never  be  too  strongly  emphasized  that  the 
soul  of  man  cannot  rest  or  be  content  without  God ;  but  it 
is  too  apt  to  be  cajoled  with  that  which  is  not  bread,  and 
which  satisfieth  not. 

III.  The  Excuses  beneath  which  the  Soul  of  Man 
Shelters  Itself. — (i)  Ritualism. — It  was  the  old  belief 
that   God   was   bound   to   help   a   nation   or  person   that 


46  ^t  tht  S^ctttplc  date*. 

steadfastly  complied  with  the  outward  forms  of  religion  ; 
as  if  He  had  no  alternative  but  to  help  his  devoted 
worshipper.  In  one  form  or  another  this  conception  has 
appeared  in  every  nation  and  age.  "  What  more  can  God 
want,"  the  heathen  cries,  "than  that  I  should  give  burnt- 
offerings  and  calves  of  a  year  old,  thousands  of  rams,  and 
ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil ;  my  first-born  for  my  trans- 
gression, the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul  ? " 
"What  more  can  God  want?"  cries  the  formahst  of  our 
time.  "  I  was  received  into  the  visible  church  as  soon  as  I 
was  born  ;  I  have  complied  with  all  her  regulations  ;  I  do 
my  best  to  maintain  her  institutions  and  services  ;  in  all 
weathers  I  am  present  when  her  doors  are  open  ;  and  there 
is  no  demand  made  by  her  representatives,  to  which  I  do 
not  comply  to  the  best  of  my  ability.     What  lack  I  yet  ?  " 

The  incessant  remonstrance  of  the  Bible  is  against  such 
protestations — whether  expressed  or  understood — as  these. 
"  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,"  says  Micah,  "  but  to 
do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy 
God  ?  "  (Micah  vi.  8).  "  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude 
of  your  sacrifices  unto  Me?"  saith  the  Lord,  in  one  of 
Isaiah's  earliest  sentences  ;  and  he  added,  still  speaking  in 
the  name  of  God,  "  Incense  is  an  abomination  to  Me." 
And  here  Jeremiah  takes  up  the  same  strain.  He  says,  in 
effect,  "  Put  all  your  offerings  together ;  abolish  the  sacer- 
dotal distinctions  which  Moses  bade  you  observe ;  relinquish 
all  ritual ;  end  festival  and  fast  alike."  These  things  are 
comparatively  indifferent  to  God,  when  substituted  for 
obedience  and  a  holy  walk  (vii.  22). 

Where  the  heart  is  right  with  God,  it  will  find  fit  and 
proper  expression  in  the  well-ordered  worship  of  the  sanc- 
tuary. It  will  find  the  outward  ordinance  a  means  of 
quickening  the  soul  by  the  laws  of  association  and  expres- 
sion ;  but  the  outward  can  never  be  a  substitute  for  the 
inward.  The  soul  must  know  God,  and  worship  Him  as  a 
Spirit.      There  must  be   faith,    repentance,    inward   grace. 


Wljz  Cyruses  oi  iHctt.  47 

"  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship 
Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  Throughout  the  ages  He  has 
been  seeking  such  to  worship  Him. 

(2)  Destiny. — Men  often  say,  as  the  Jews  did,  "We  are 
delivered  to  do  all  these  abominations  ;  we  were  made  so  ; 
we  are  swept  forward  by  an  irresistible  current,  which  we 
cannot  control "  (vii.  10).  How  many  a  man  lays  the 
blame  of  his  sin  upon  his  Creator,  alleging  that  it  is  only 
the  outworking  of  the  natural  tendencies  with  which  he  was 
endowed  !  How  many  a  woman  has  laid  the  blame  of  her 
unutterable  fall  upon  the  force  of  circumstances,  which  held 
her  in  their  grip  !  And  there  are  some  religious  fatalists 
who  have  gone  so  far  as  to  trace  their  sins  to  the  elective 
decrees  of  the  Almighty  !  Whatever  truth  there  may  be  in 
the  doctrine  of  Predestination,  it  will  not  absolve  you  from 
sin  in  the  sight  of  God  and  his  angels.  There  is  more  than 
enough  grace  in  God  to  counteract  the  drift  of  the  current, 
and  the  strength  of  passion. 

(3)  Special  Privilege. — Many  a  soul  has  presumed  on 
being  a  favourite  of  heaven.  "  I  am  wise  ;  the  law  of  the 
Lord  is  with  me.  He  needs  me,  for  the  preservation  of  his 
truth,  the  elaboration  of  his  scheme.  His  cause  is  too 
deeply  involved  with  me  for  Him  to  allow  me  to  be  a 
castaway.  I  may  do  as  I  will,  He  will  deliver."  Ah,  soul, 
beware  !  thou  art  not  indispensable  to  God.  Before  thou 
wert.  He  was  well  served ;  and  if  thou  fail  Him,  He  will 
call  others  to  minister  to  Him.  See  what  He  did  to  Shiloh 
(vii.  14)  and  to  Jerusalem  !  How  bare  the  site  ;  how 
woeful  the  overthrow  !  "  If  God  spared  not  the  natural 
branches,  take  heed  lest  He  also  spare  not  thee  ! "  Take 
heed  lest  the  kingdom  of  God  be  taken  from  you,  and  be 
given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof. 


VI. 

mt  foul's  "jitttftt." 

(Jeremiah  xi.  5.) 

"  Whatso  it  be,  howso  it  be,  Amen  ! 
Blessed  it  is,  believing,  not  to  see. 
Now  God  knows  all  that  is,  and  we  shall  then, 
Whatso  it  be. 
God's  will  is  best  for  man  whose  will  is  free, 
God's  will  is  better  for  us,  yea,  than  ten 

Desires  whereof  He  holds  and  weighs  the  key." 
^j  Christina  Rossetti. 

j|>^jg|/HE  words  of  the  prophet   in  chapter  xi.   5  are 

^jL|m       full   of    deep   significance   to   every   holy   soul 

njr'JB^y      summoned   to   stand   between   God  and  other 

^^^.  f       men.     It  has  also  far-reaching  meaning  for  all 

'^  T»fS        who  are  passing  through  the  Divine  discipline 

"*        m   this   strange   and   difficult    life.      Jeremiah 

was   conscious   of   the   special   current   of   Divine   energy 

which  was  passing  into  and  through  his  soul.     The  word 

had  come  to  him  "  from  the  Lord,"     This  is  one  of  three 

forms  of  expression  that  he  employs.      Sometimes,   "the 

word   of  the   Lord   that  came  to  Jeremiah";   sometimes, 

"thus  saith  the  Lord";  sometimes,  as  here,  "the  word  that 

came  to  Jeremiah  from  the  Lord."     Probably  he  felt  that 

word  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  his  bones,  which  he  could 

not  contain.      He  must  needs  give  vent  to  it ;  but  when  it 

has  passed  his  lips,  and  he  has  time  carefully  to  consider 

it,  he  answers  the  Divine  message  by  saying,  "Amen,  O 

Lord!" 

There  is  something  very  sublime  in  this  attitude. 
Jeremiah,  as  we  have  seen,  was  naturally  gentle,  yielding, 
gind  pitiful  for  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  his  people.     Nothing 


was  further  from  his  heart  than  to  "  desire  the  evil  day.'' 
Nothing  would  have  given  him  greater  pleasure  than  to 
have  played  the  part  of  Isaiah  in  this  decadent  period  of  his 
people's  history.  But  what  was  possible  to  the  great  evan- 
gelic prophet  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  was  impossible  now. 
In  Isaiah's  case,  the  noblest  traditions  of  the  past,  the 
patriotic  pride  of  his  people,  and  the  promises  of  God,  all 
pointed  in  the  same  direction.  But  for  Jeremiah  there  was 
an  inevitable  divorce  between  the  trend  of  popular  feeling 
led  by  the  false  prophets,  and  his  clear  conviction  of  the 
word  of  God.  It  must  indeed  have  been  hard  to  prove 
that  the  prophets  were  wrong,  and  he  was  right ;  they 
simply  reiterated  what  Isaiah  had  said  a  hundred  times. 
Why  was  the  policy  of  resistance  to  the  invader  wrong 
when  Jeremiah  spoke,  whilst  it  had  been  right  when 
Isaiah  fired,  with  his  own  mighty  faith,  the  entire  people? 
In  these  earlier  stages  of  his  ministry  especially,  it  must 
have  been  one  long  effort  to  stand  by  himself  against  the 
strong  current  of  popular  feeling  and  patriotism  which 
coloured  the  visions  of  the  false  prophets.  And  yet,  as  he 
utters  the  terrible  curses  and  threatenings  of  Divine  justice, 
and  predicts  the  inevitable  fate  of  his  people,  he  is  so 
possessed  with  the  sense  of  the  Divine  rectitude,  so  sure 
that  God  could  not  do  differently,  so  convinced  that,  judged 
by  the  loftiest  moral  standards,  the  sins  of  Israel  could  not 
be  otherwise  dealt  with — that  his  soul  rises  up,  and  though 
he  must  pronounce  the  doom  of  Israel,  he  is  forced  to 
answer  and  say,  "  Amen,  O  Lord  !  " 

There  is  something  like  this  in  the  history  of  the 
redeemed  Church.  When  God  has  judged  her  that  did 
corrupt  the  world  with  her  fornication,  and  has  avenged  the 
blood  of  his  servants  at  her  hand,  as  the  smoke  of  her 
destruction  arises,  the  blessed  spirits  who  had  been  learning 
the  deepest  lessons  of  Divine  love  at  the  very  source  and 
fount  of  love,  are  heard  crying,  "  Amen.     Hallelujah  ! " 

In  each  of  these  cases  it  is  extremely  interesting  to  see 

D 


50  Cbe  foul's  "  ^tnen." 

how  the  sense  of  justly-deserved  and  righteously-incurred 
judgment  corrects  the  verdict  of  mere  compassionateness, 
and  enables  the  most  sensitive  and  gentle  souls  to  acquiesce 
in  what  otherwise  had  been  resisted  to  the  uttermost. 

Beside  these  two  instances  we  may  place  a  third,  in 
which  our  Lord,  in  the  same  breath  as  He  appealed  to  tlie 
weary  and  heavy-laden  to  come  to  Him,  spoke  of  the 
mysteries  which  were  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent, 
but  revealed  to  babes  ;  and  said,  "Yea,  Father;  for  so  it  was 
well-pleasing  in  Thy  sight."  "  Yea''  is  close  akin  to  "Amen." 
"  How  many  soever  be  the  promises  of  God,  in  Him  is  the 
Yea :  wherefore  also  through  Him  is  the  Amen,  unto  the 
glory  of  God  through  us"  (Matt.  xi.  26;  2  Cor.  i.  20,  R.v.). 

This  is  also  the  utterance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  the 
voice  from  heaven  declares  the  blessedness  of  the  dead 
that  die  in  the  Lord,  "  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit."  All  through 
this  dispensation  the  Holy  Spirit  is  giving  his  affirmation 
to  the  utterances  of  the  Church,  and  to  the  procedure  of 
Divine  providence.  Too  deep  for  human  ears  to  detect, 
the  Spirit  utters  his  "  Amen.'^ 

L  The  Soul's  Affirmation. — (i)  //i  Providefice. — We 
often  seem  to  be  travelling  through  a  difficult  piece  of 
mountainous  country  in  company  with  a  strong,  wise,  and 
gentle  companion,  who  has  undertaken  to  guide  us  to  our 
destination.  There  are  foaming  torrents,  black  and  hurry- 
ing, which  we  have  to  ford  at  the  imminent  risk  of  being 
carried  off  our  feet ;  there  are  darksome  woods  and  forests, 
where  suns  have  seldom  penetrated,  and  where  wild  beasts 
have  their  lair ;  there  are  paths  paved  with  flints  so  sharp, 
and  slabs  of  rock  so  slippery,  that  progress  seems  impossible, 
except  at  too  great  a  cost ;  there  are  long  stretches  of  dreary 
desert,  where  the  glare  blinds,  the  sunbeams  cut  like  swords, 
and  the  shadow  of  a  tiny  retem  bush  provides  a  grateful 
relief;  there  are  steep  hills,  and  paths  so  narrow  that  there 
is  hardly  room  to  pass  along  the  ledge  of  rock,  whilst  the 


''  n  geliglit  to  bo  f  ^u  Mill."  51 

dark  precipice  waits  to  engulf.  In  earlier  days  the  soul 
started  back  horror-stricken ;  in  later  ones  we  pleaded  for 
an  easier,  pleasanter  path,  and  envied  the  lot  of  others  :  but 
now  our  life  has  become  one  long  and  deep  and  constantly 
repeated  "Amen"  to  the  choice  of  Him  who  goes  beside 
us,  and  in  whose  mind  each  step  has  been  previously 
conceived. 

Let  us  guard  against  mistake.  It  is  not  possible  at 
first  to  say  "Amen"  in  tones  of  triumph  and  ecstasy.  Nay, 
the  word  is  often  choked  with  sobs  that  cannot  be  stifled, 
and  soaked  with  tears  that  cannot  be  repressed.  So  it 
was  with  Abraham,  when  he  tore  himself  from  Ur  of  the 
C^haldees ;  when  he  waited  weary  years  for  his  son  ;  when  he 
climbed  with  aching  heart  the  steep  of  Moriah.  And  as 
these  words  are  read  by  those  who  lie  year  after  year  on 
beds  of  constant  pain  ;  or  by  those  who  have  lost  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  presence  of  their  twin- soul  ;  or  by  those  whose 
earthly  life  is  tossed  upon  the  sea  of  anxiety,  over  which 
billows  of  care  and  turmoil  perpetually  roll — it  is  not  im- 
probable that  they  will  protest  as  to  the  possibility  of  saying 
"  Amen  "  to  God's  providential  dealings,  or  they  will  ask,  Of 
what  avail  is  it  to  utter  with  the  lip  a  word  against  which  the 
whole  heart  stands  up  in  revolt?  Is  it  not,  it  may  be  asked, 
an  impiety,  a  hypocrisy,  to  say  with  the  mouth  a  word 
that  is  so  alien  to  the  sentiments  c^  the  heart  ? 

In  reply,  let  all  such  remember  that  our  blessed  Lord 
in  the  garden  was  content  to  put  his  will  upon  the  side 
of  God.  What  though  his  body  were  covered  with  the  dew 
of  anguish,  pressed  out  from  it  as  the  juice  of  the  grape  by 
the  tread  of  the  husbandman  !  He  did  not  chide  Himself. 
He  knew  it  was  enough  if,  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  to 
which  his  human  nature  had  descended.  He  was  able, 
unflinchingly  to  affirm,  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O  rny 
God  "  ;   "  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt !  " 

Dare  to  say  "  Amen "  to  God's  providential  dealings. 
Say  it,  though  heart  and  flesh  fail ;   say  it,  amid  a  storm 


52  ®;ijE  foul's  ''  %mznr 

ot'  tumultuous  feeling,  and  a  rain  of  tears ;  say  it,  though 
it  shall  seem  to  be  the  last  word  that  shall  be  spoken 
because  life  is  ebbing  so  fast  :  and  you  will  find  that  if 
the  will  doth  acquiesce,  the  heart  comes  ultimately  to 
choose  ;  and  as  days  pass,  some  incident,  some  turn  in 
the  road,  some  concurrence  of  unforeseen  circumstances, 
will  suddenly  flash  the  conviction  on  the  mind  and  reason 
that  God's  way  was  right,  the  wisest,  and  the  best.  "  What 
thou  knowest  not  now,  thou  shalt  know  hereafter,"  is 
the  perpetual  assurance  of  the  Guide  :  and  this  is  realized 
not  in  the  world  of  the  hereafter  only,  but  here  and  now,  on 
the  hither  side  of  the  Gate  of  Pearl. 

(2)  In  Revelation  there  are  mysteries  which  bafile  the 
clearest  thinkers,  the  most  profound  theologians,  the  Johns 
and  Pauls  of  the  Church  ;  paths  that  lose  themselves 
in  mere  tracks  on  the  moor  ;  snatches  of  music  and  colour 
which  no  mortal  genius  can  work  out ;  suggestions  of  move- 
ments in  the  spiritual  world  which  defy  the  apprehension  of 
the  subtlest  and  greatest  of  the  sons  of  men  to  follow.  The 
man  that  tracks  God's  footsteps  loses  them  in  the  depths  ; 
and  the  eye  that  pursues  his  workings  is  dazzled  by  a 
light  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun  ;  and  the  argument 
breaks  off  with  the  cry,  "  Oh,  the  depth  of  the  riches, 
both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowled2;e  of  God  I  How  un- 
searchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding 
out!"  It  must  be  so  whilst  God  is  God.  We  are  partakers 
of  his  nature,  as  a  child  is  of  his  father's  :  but  the  distance 
between  our  capacity  of  intelligence  and  the  thoughts  of 
God  is  not  measured  even  by  that  between  the  dawn  of 
a  child's  mind  and  the  full  splendour  of  his  father's  power ; 
because  this  moves  in  the  region  of  the  finite,  whilst  that 
is  a  difference  between  the  finite  and  the  infinite.  We 
cannot  by  searching  find  out  God,  or  know  the  Almighty. 
There  is  no  fathoming  line  long  enough,  no  parallax  fine 
enough,  no  standard  of  mensuration,  though  the  universe 
itself  be   taken  as   our  unit,  by  which  to   measure   God. 


High  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do  ?  Deep  as  hell, 
what  canst  thou  know? 

But,  though  we  cannot  comprehend,  we  may  affirm 
the  thoughts  of  God.  That  we  cannot  understand,  is 
due  to  the  immaturity  of  our  faculties.  We  are  in  our 
nursery  stage  :  our  words  are  the  babblings  of  infancy  ;  our 
ideas  the  thoughts  of  a  child.  But  we  can  accept,  and 
admit,  and  acquiesce  in,  and  affirm  the  things  which 
eye  could  not  see,  nor  the  heart  conceive,  but  which  are 
revealed  on  the  page  of  Scripture. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  has  fully 
met  the  demands  of  Divine  law ;  and  though  some  phases 
of  his  atonement  may  at  times  perplex  us,  yet  our  soul 
confidently  exclaims,  "  Amen,  Lord  !  "  We  are  ignorant 
why  God  chose  us  ;  how  Christ  could  combine  in  Himself 
the  nature  of  God  and  man ;  or  in  w^hat  manner  the  Holy 
Spirit  regenerates  the  soul.  "  How  can  these  things  be  ?  " 
is  the  question  which  often  occurs  to  the  devout  student  of 
revelation.  But  when  He  who  has  come  straight  from  the 
realms  of  eternal  day  steadfastly  affirms  that  which  He  knows, 
and  bears  witness  to  what  He  has  seen,  we  receive  his 
witness  and  say  reverently,  "  Amen,  Lord  !  " 

(3)  ^^  Judgment. — God's  judgments  on  the  wicked  are  a 
great  deep.  The  problems  that  encircle  the  question  of 
present  or  future  punishment  are  amongst  the  deepest  and 
most  awful  that  the  mind  of  man  can  approach.  Like 
Moses,  we  fear  and  quake  when  we  climb  the  storm-girt 
sides  of  Sinai,  and  hear  the  pealing,  thunderous  curse,  to  be 
followed  by  the  lightning  flash  of  fiery  indignation  devouring 
the  adversary.  We  may  well  turn  aside  from  such  considera- 
tions, and  ask  if  the  time  can  ever  come  when  we  shall  be 
able  to  consider  with  equanimity  the  awful  suffering  which 
they  must  incur  who  have  rejected  the  love  of  God  in  Christ. 
Will  heaven  have  any  bliss  to  us,  so  long  as  there  is  a  hell  ? 
Will  there  be  any  possibility  of  happiness  whilst  one  sheep  is 
lost,    one   link   absent    in   the   bridal    necklet,    one    stone 


54  ^h^  ^ovXs  *'  ^mctt." 

deficient  from  the  regalia,  one  voice  missing  in  the 
chorus?  A  partial  answer  at  least  is  given  to  these 
inquiries  when  we  hear  from  the  lips  of  the  most  gentle 
of  the  prophets,  anticipating  the  destruction  of  his  people, 
for  which  his  eye  was  to  trickle  down  with  tears,  "Amen, 
Lord !  -" 

At  present  we  cannot  expect  to  attain  to  much  of  this 
condition  of  mind  and  heart ;  because  our  views  of  the 
Divine  rectitude  are  so  imperfect,  our  estimate  of  sin  is  so 
slight,  our  knowledge  of  the  conditions  of  the  universe  so 
inadequate.  Did  we  know  more  of  sin,  of  holiness,  of  the 
love  of  God,  of  the  yearniiig  pleadings  of  his  Spirit  with 
men,  of  the  all-sufficiency  of  the  measure  He  has  taken  for 
their  arrest  and  salvation,  of  the  barriers  erected  to  stay  the 
precipitate  downward  course  of  the  wicked,  we  should 
probably  understand  better  how  Jeremiah  was  able  to  say, 
"Amen,  Lord!" 

There  is  a  striking  thought  in  Ezekiel  xiv.  22,  23,  in 
which  God  says  that  when  we  see  the  way  and  the  doings  of 
sinners  in  the  light  that  shall  be  flung  upon  their  entire  life- 
course  from  the  great  white  throne,  we  shall  be  comforted 
concerning  the  evil  that  He  shall  have  brought  upon  them. 
And  the  prophet  goes  on  to  show  that  God  will  make  us 
know  that  He  has  not  done  in  vain  anything  that  He  shall 
have  done.  That  era  has  not  yet  broken  ;  but  it  is  a 
wonderful  conception  of  the  comfort  and  resignation  which 
the  added  light  of  eternity  shall  bring  into  hearts  perplexed 
and  anxious  as  they  consider  the  fate  of  the  ungodly. 
Abraham  shall  be  comforted  over  the  destruction  of  the 
cities  of  the  plain  ;  Jeremiah  shall  be  comforted  as  he 
reviews  the  fate  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  Paul  shall  be  comforted 
as  he  considers  the  long  aHenation  of  the  seed  of  Abraham 
from  their  land,  and  their  exile  with  wandering  foot  and 
terror-stricken  heart  in  all  the  countries  of  the  world.  And 
we  shall  be  comforted  as  we  behold  the  destruction  of  the 
wicked. 


•*  3n  Sim  is  no  QarhitEss  at  all."  55 

II.  The  Ground  of  the  Soul's  Peace. — "  Yea, 
tather!"  It  may  seem  at  first  sight  as  though  it  were 
impossible  that  the  heart  of  man  could  ever  be  induced  to 
acquiesce  in  the  terrible  and  difficult  matters  touched  upon 
in  the  previous  paragraphs.  As  long  as  mothers  love  the 
sucking  child,  and  have  compassion  on  their  sons  ;  as  long 
as  soul  is  wedded  to  soul  by  the  strongest  and  most 
tenacious  bonds  of  human  love  ;  as  long  as  we  can  suffer, 
yearn,  fear,  hope,  pity  ;  whilst  memory  keeps  the  records  of 
the  past,  and  love  reigns,  and  the  mind  holds  her  seat — 
it  might  seem  the  impossible  dream  of  the  imagination 
that  what  appears  incompatible  with  the  tender  human 
feeling  can  be  consistent  with  the  love  of  God.  "  Surely," 
you  cry,  '*  there  are  things  to  which  I  never  can  assent ; 
decisions  I  can  never  reaffirm  ;  sentences  I  can  never 
countersign  ;  possibiHties  to  which  I  can  never  say,  '  Amen, 
Lord  ! ' " 

But  does  not  this  protest  of  the  soul  arise  from  the  fact 
that  you  judged  such  things  from  the  standpoint  of  pure 
emotion,  or  human  reasoning,  or  perverted  principles  of 
human  action  ;  and  that  you  need  to  stand  in  the  sanctuary 
of  God,  which  is  the  focus  and  metropolis  to  which  the 
loftiest  intelligences  converge,  in  order  to  come  in  contact 
with  the  lofty  morality  and  legislation  of  eternity  ?  And  do 
we  not  wrongly  think  that  our  love  is  more  tender,  our 
sympathy  more  delicate,  our  compassions  deeper,  than  those 
of  the  Father  ? 

When  tried  and  perplexed  with  the  troubles  of  hfe,  turn 
from  these,  which  will  make  the  brain  dizzy  and  the  heart 
sick,  and  consider  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
from  whom  every  ray  of  love  in  the  universe  has  emanated ; 
and  remember  that  nothing  can  be  permitted  or  devised  by 
Him  which  is  not  consistent  with  the  gentlest  and  truest 
dealings  that  an  earthly  father  could  mete  out  to  the  child 
of  his  right  hand,  his  Benjamin,  the  darling  of  his  old  age. 
So  shall  you  be  able  to  say,  "Amen,  Lord ! " 


56  ^b£  foul's  ''  ^mcu." 

When  face  to  face  with  the  mysteries  of  the  Atonement, 
of  substitution  and  sacrifice,  of  predestination  and  election, 
of  the  unequal  distribution  of  Gospel  light,  be  sure  to  turn 
to  God  as  the  Father  of  Light,  in  whom  is  no  darkness,  no 
shadow  of  unkindnesSj  no  note  inconsistent  with  the  music 
of  perfect  benevolence.  He  is  your  Father,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  from  whom  every  home 
life  receives  its  tenderest  touches.  Dare  to  trust  Him  ;  and 
in  the  strength  of  that  trust  to  say,  "  Amen,  Lord  ! " 

When  peering  over  the  strong  barrier  of  redemption  that 
intervenes  between  you  and  the  dark  fate  of  the  ungodly, 
when  tholights  will  force  themselves  upon  the  spirit,  as  the 
cry  of  the  insurgent  mob  might  penetrate  the  sacred  seclu- 
sion of  a  temple — look  away  from  this  and  gaze  into  the 
face  of  the  Father,  which  is  turned  in  the  same  direction, 
and  dare  to  believe  that  nothing  can  happen  in  heaven 
or  earth  or  hell  which  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  love 
that  has  inspired  parents  towards  their  children ;  that 
breathed  the  love  into  Mary's  heart  as  she  clasped  her 
babe  to  her  bosom ;  or  that  yielded  the  Only-begotten 
to  the  horror  of  the  cross  for  man's  redemption  :  so  there 
shall  be  a  new  tone  in  the  voice  of  the  soul  that  says, 
"  Amen,  Lord  ! " 

In  other  words,  we  must  not  look  into  the  dark  and 
perplexing  questions  that  seethe  and  boil  like  wreaths  of 
vapour  around  us.  We  must  look  up  to  the  blue  sky  of 
undimmed  sunshine,  our  Father's  heart.  He  must  be  love, 
beyond  our  tenderest,  deepest,  richest,  conceptions  of  what 
love  is.  In  his  dealings  with  us,  with  all  men,  and  especially 
with  the  lost  ones,  love  is  the  very  essence  and  law  of  his 
nature.  Somehow,  we  repeat  it,  everything  must  be  consis- 
tent with  this  all-persuasive  nature  and  temper  of  the  Divine 
Being ;  and  in  proportion  as  you  dare  to  believe  in  the 
Father,  you  will  be  able  to  say  "  Yes,"  which  is  a  true 
rendering  of  the  Greek  v>'ord  in  our  version  translated 
"Even  so"  (Matt.  xi.  26). 


**  (Pbcn  so,  JFatljcr  !  "  57 

III  The  Triumph  of  the  Affirming  Soul. — "Amen, 
Hallelujah ! "  Jesus  as  He  rested  in  his  Father  was  able  to 
say,  not  only,  "Even  so,  Father";  but,  "I  thank  Thee, 
Father  " :  and  so  there  shall  come  a  day  when  the  four-and- 
twenty  elders,  representinsr  the  redeemed  Church,  shall  see 
the  judgment  of  the  great  opponent  of  the  Lamb's  bride, 
and  say,  "  Amen,  Hallelujah  !  " 

Mark  the  addition  of  "Hallelujah"  to  the  "Amen." 
Here  the  Amen,  and  not  often  the  Hallelujah ;  there  the 
two — the  assent  and  the  consent ;  the  acquiescence  and  the 
acclaim ;  the  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  and  the  tri- 
umphant outburst  of  praise  and  adoration.  Let  us  anticipate 
that  age  when  we  shall  know  as  we  are  known,  and  when  we 
shall  be  perfectly  satisfied,  perfectly  jubilant,  perfectly 
blessed ;  when  every  shadow  of  misunderstanding  and 
misapprehension  shall  be  dispelled,  and  we  shall  join  in  the 
hymn  of  the  redeemed  Church  :  "  Great  and  marvellous  are 
Thy  works,  O  Lord  God.  the  Almighty ;  righteous  and  true 
are  Thy  ways,  Thou  King  of  the  Ages  "  (Rev.  xv.  3,  r.v.). 


VII. 

Whc  S»telltng  of  Jarban. 

(Jeremiah  xii.  5.) 

"  So  they  two  went  closer  down 
To  the  River-side, 
And  stood  in  the  heavy  shadows, 
By  the  black,  wild  tide. 

"  But  when  the  feet  of  the  Lord 
Were  come  to  the  waters  dim, 
They  rose  to  stand,  on  either  hand. 
And  left  a  path  for  Him." 

,  EZEKIEL  AND  OTHER  POEMS. 

.'jgC^  ETWEEN    the    incidents    already   described    and 
•^i^l     the   subject   of   the  present  chapter,  a  crushing 
calamity  had  befallen  the  kingdom  of  Judah.     In 


'■sQy**  ^^^  f'^-ce  of  urgent  remonstrances,  addressed  to 
V.  *^!}/  him  from  all  sides,  Josiah,  perhaps  desirous  of 
emulating  the  heroic  faith  of  Hezekiah  and 
Isaiah,  led  his  little  army  down  from  the  mountain  fast- 
nesses, to  attack  Pharaoh-Necho,  who  was  marching  up  by 
the  coast  route  to  participate  in  the  scramble  for  the  spoils 
of  Nineveh,  then  in  her  death-throes.  The  two  armies  met 
at  Megiddo,  at  the  foot  of  Carmel,  on  the  extreme  border 
of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  which  has  so  oft-en  been  a  decisive 
battlefield.  The  issue  was  not  long  in  suspense.  Josiah's 
army  was  routed,  and  himself  mortally  wounded. 

"  Have  me  away,  for  I  am  sore  wounded,"  said  the  dying 
monarch,  and  his  servants  bore  him  from  his  war  chariot  to 
another  in  reserve  ;  but  he  died  after  a  few  miles  drive, 
at  Hadadrimmon.  His  death  was  the  signal  for  such 
an  outburst  of  grief  throughout  the  land,   that  it  became 


SJIre  §catlj  of  Jostalj.  59 

in  after  years  the  emblem  of  excessive  sorrow.  Zechariah 
could  find  no  adequate  expression  for  the  anguish  of 
Jerusalem  when  the  people  shall  look  on  Him  whom 
they  pierced  and  mourn,  than  that  it  should  be  like  "the 
mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon," 
when  the  land  mourned,  every  family  apart.  It  has  been 
compared  to  the  grief  of  Athens,  when  tidings  came  that 
Lysander  had  destroyed  her  fleet  ;  and  to  that  of  Edin- 
burgh on  the  evening  of  Flodden.  Jeremiah  composed  an 
elegy  on  the  death  of  his  king  and  friend,  which  has  not  been 
preserved  ;  and  at  once  the  fortunes  of  Judah  were  overcast 
with  darkest  gloom  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  20-27  ;  Zech.  xii.  11). 

The  next  king,  Josiah's  son  Jehoahaz,  reigned  but 
three  months,  and  then  was  led  off  with  a  ring  in  his 
nose,  like  some  wild  beast,  to  Egypt,  where  he  died.  Necho 
instituted  his  brother  Jehoiakim  in  his  stead,  as  his  nominee 
and  tributary.  But  the  four  last  kings  of  Judah  reversed  the 
policy  of  Josiah.  They  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and 
of  Jehoiakim  it  is  recorded  that  he  wrought  abomination 
(2  Chron.  xxxvi.  1-8). 

At  the  death  of  Josiah,  the  large  party  that  favoured 
idolatry  again  asserted  itself.  Of  what  use  was  a  religion 
that  had  not  saved  its  chief  promoter  from  such  a  disaster  ? 
The  reformation  promoted  by  the  good  king  had  never 
struck  its  roots  deeply  in  the  land  ;  and  the  vigour  with 
which  he  had  carried  out  his  reforms  now  led  to  a  corres- 
ponding reaction.  The  reformers  fell  under  the  popular 
hate,  much  as  the  Puritans  did  in  the  days  of  the  Resto- 
ration ;  and  Jeremiah  especially  came  in  for  a  large  share 
of  it.  He  had  been  the  friend  and  adviser  of  the  late  king, 
and  had  not  scrupled  to  denounce  in  the  most  scathing 
terms  the  idolatry  and  licentiousness  of  his  age.  He  had 
uttered  terrible  predictions  of  coming  disaster,  which  were 
beginning  to  be  fulfilled.  Then  arose  the  mutterings  of  a 
coming  storm  of  hatred  and  murder.  Unknown  to  him, 
his  countrymen  were  devising  devices  against  him,  saying, 


6o  ®ljE  ^ineUittjj  of  Jloriratt. 

"  Let  us  destroy  the  tree  with  the  fruit  thereof,  and  let  us 
cut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  living,  that  his  name  may 
be  no  more  remembered." 

The  symptoms  of  this  rising  storm  were  less  likely  to  reach 
him,  because  he  had  been  commanded  to  itinerate  among  the 
cities  of  Judah,  as  well  as  the  streets  of  Jerusalem ;  and 
had  probably  started  on  a  prolonged  tour  throughout 
the  land,  standing  up  in  the  principal  market-places,  and 
announcing  everywhere  the  inevitable  retribution  that 
must  follow  on  the  breach  of  the  Divine  covenant  (xi.  8). 
The  issue  of  that  tour  was  profoundly  disappointing.  A 
conspiracy  was  found  among  the  men  of  Judah  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  They  turned  back  to  the  iniquities 
of  their  forefathers ;  each  city  had  its  tutelary  deity, 
each  street  its  altar  to  Baal.  And  the  conviction  was 
wrought  into  the  prophet's  heart  that  intercession  itself  was 
useless  for  a  people  so  deeply  and  resolutely  set  on  sin. 
They  had  sinned  the  sin  unto  death,  for  which  prayer 
is  in  vain  (xi.  14  ;  i  John  v.  16). 

Disappointed  and  heart-sick,  Jeremiah  retired  to  his 
native  place,  Anathoth.  He  was  unsuspicious  of  danger,  as 
a  gentle  lamb  led  to  the  slaughter.  Surely  among  his 
brethren,  in  the  house  of  his  father,  he  would  be  safe,  and 
able  to  find  the  sympathy  and  affection  for  which  his  sensi- 
tive heart  hungered,  but  which  evaded  him  everywhere  else. 
But  it  was  not  to  be.  In  this  also  he  was  to  be  like  the 
Lord  Jesus,  who  came  unto  his  own,  but  his  own  received 
Him  not,  and  led  Him  to  the  brow  of  the  hill  on  which  their 
city  was  built,  that  they  might  cast  Him  down  headlong. 
There  was  treachery  in  the  little  village.  The  sacred  tie  of 
kindred  was  too  weak  to  restrain  the  outbreak  of  fanatic  hate. 
The  priestly  houses  had  winced  beneath  the  vehement 
denunciations  of  their  young  relative,  and  could  bear  it  no 
longer.  A  plot  was  therefore  set  on  foot,  and  under  the 
shoAv  of  fair  words  they  conspired  to  take  the  prophet's  life. 
He  had  not  known  of  his  danger  but  for  Divine  illumination  : 


"The  Lord  gave  me  knowledge  of  it,  and  I  knew  it;  then 
Thou  shewedst  me  their  doings"  (xi.  i8). 

Stunned  with  the  sudden  discovery,  Jeremiah  turned  to 
God,  with  remonstrance  and  appeal.  Conscious  of  his  own 
rectitude  and  the  rectitude  of  God,  he  was  for  a  moment 
caught  in  the  outer  circles  of  the  whirlpool  of  questioning, 
which  has  ever  agitated  the  minds  of  God's  oppressed 
ones,  concerning  the  unequal  distribution  of  earthly  lots. 
"  Righteous  art  Thou,  O  Lord,  when  I  plead  with  Thee. 
Yet  would  I  reason  the  cause  with  Thee  :  wherefore  doth 
the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper?  w^herefore  are  all  they  at 
ease  that  deal  very  treacherously?"  (xi.  20;  xii.  i,  r.v.) 

L  The  Appeal  of  the  Maligned  and  Persecuted 
Soul. — (i)  He  was  Co?isdous  of  his  own  Integrity. — 
Without  doubt,  Jeremiah  was  profoundly  conscious  of  his 
unworthiness.  He  must  have  had  as  deep  a  conviction  of 
sinfulness  as  any  of  the  great  prophets  and  psalmists  of 
Israel.  None  could  have  hved  as  close  to  God  as  he  did 
without  an  overwhelming  sense  of  uncleanness.  What  Job 
felt,  and  Moses,  and  David,  and  Isaiah,  must  have  been 
constantly  present  to  his  consciousness  also.  But  in  respect 
to  this  special  outburst  of  hatred,  he  knew  of  nothing  for 
which  to  blame  himself.  He  had  not  hastened  from  being 
a  shepherd,  nor  desired  the  woeful  day,  nor  taken  pleasure 
in  the  disasters  he  announced,  nor  spoken  in  the  heat  of 
personal  passion.  The  sins  cf  the  people  had  procured  the 
evils  he  predicted ;  and  he  had  only  sought  to  warn  the 
reckless  mariners  of  the  rocks  that  lay  straight  in  their 
course. 

When  we  aie  reviled  and  hated,  we  should  carefully 
search  our  hearts  to  see  if  we  have  given  any  just  cause 
to  those  that  hate  and  persecute  us.  The  only  suffering 
which  comes  within  the  circle  of  Christ's  beatitude,  is  that 
which  is  inflicted  falsely,  wrongfully,  and  for  his  sake.  The 
man   who  endures  griefs,   suffering   wrongfully,   alone    can 


62  S^IjB  ji'luelling  of  lortian. 

claim  to  be  following  in  the  steps  of  the  Master,  and  to  be 
offering  a  sacrifice  which  is  acceptable  to  God.  He  only 
can  count  on  God's  delivering  aid. 

The  bursting  storm  should  lead  the  captain  to  see  that 
there  is  peace  amongst  his  crew,  and  amity  with  the  other 
ships  of  the  fleet  !  We  have  no  right  to  complain  of 
the  wrong-doings  of  others,  unless  we  are  sure  that,  so  far 
as  we  are  concerned,  we  have  given  no  just  cause.  But  if 
we  have  done  so,  there  is  no  option  but  to  agree  with  our 
adversary  quickly,  though  it  involve  leaving  our  gift  at  the 
altar.  Every  moment  of  delay  aggravates  the  case,  and  in- 
creases the  difficulty  of  reconcihation.  The  course  of  justice 
is  so  rapid,  from  the  adversary  to  the  judge,  the  judge  to 
the  officer,  and  the  officer  to  prison  (Matt.  v.  22-25). 

(2)  He  was  Perplexed  at  the  hiequality  of  Human  Lot. — 
Every  word  of  good  Asaph's  complaint  in  Psalm  Ixxiii. 
might  have  been  appropriated  by  Jeremiah.  He  had  never 
swerved  from  the  narrow  path  of  obedience  ;  at  all  hazards 
he  had  dared  to  stand  alone,  bereft  of  the  comforts  and 
alleviations  that  come  in  the  lot  of  men  ;  he  did  not  scruple 
to  bare  his  heart  toward  God,  knowing  that  lo  the  limit  of 
his  light  he  had  done  his  bidding.  But  he  was  hated, 
persecuted,  threatened  with  death  ;  whilst  the  way  of  the 
wicked  prospered,  and  they  were  at  ease  who  dealt  very 
treacherously.  Surely  it  was  in  vain  that  he  had  cleansed 
his  heart  and  washed  his  hands  in  innocency.  It  was  too 
painful  for  him.  His  feet  were  almost  gone,  his  steps  had 
well-nigh  slipped. 

It  is  the  question  of  all  ages,  to  be  answered  only  by 
remembering  that  this  world  is  upside  down ;  that  the 
course  of  nature  has  been  disturbed  by  sin  ;  that  the  prince 
of  the  power  of  the  air  is  god  of  this  world  ;  and  that  the 
servants  of  righteousness  fight,  not  against  flesh  and  blood, 
but  against  principahties  and  powers,  against  the  rulers  of 
the  darkness  of  this  world,  the  wicked  spirits  in  heavenly 
places. 


(3)  ^  was  Anxious  for  God^s  Character.— T\\qxq  is  a 
touch  of  apparent  vindictiveness  in  his  cry.  "  Let  me  see 
thy  vengeance  on  them ;  pull  them  out  like  sheep  for  the 
slaughter,  and  prepare  them  for  the  day  of  slaughter."  We. 
are  disposed  to  contrast  these  words  with  those  that  Jesus 
breathed  for  his  murderers  from  the  cross,  and  that  Stephen 
uttered  as  the  stones  crashed  in  upon  him ;  and  we  think 
that  there  is  an  alloy  in  the  fine  gold,  a  trace  of  dross  in 
the  saint. 

It  is  possible  to  adopt  the  suggestion  that  the  prophet 
was  predicting  the  fate  of  these  wicked  men,  or  that  he  was 
the  Divine  mouthpiece  in  this  solemn  pronouncement  of 
coming  doom.  But  a  deeper  and  more  correct  conception 
of  his  words  appears  to  be,  tliat  he  was  concerned  with  the 
effect  that  would  be  produced  on  his  people  if  Jehovah 
passed  by  the  sin  of  his  persecutors  and  intending  mur- 
derers. It  was  as  though  the  prophet  feared  lest  his  own 
undeserved  sufferings  might  lead  men  to  reason  that  wrong- 
doing was  more  likely  to  promote  their  prosperity  than 
integrity  and  holiness.  Josiah  was  the  one  God-fearing 
monarch  of  his  time,  but  he  was  slain  in  battle ;  he  was  the 
devoted  servant  of  God,  and  his  life  was  one  long  agony  : 
was  it  the  best  policy  then  to  fear  God.^  Might  it  not 
be  wiser,  safer,  better,  to  worship  the  gods  of  the  surround- 
ing peoples,  who  seemed  well  able  to  defend  their  votaries, 
and  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  great  kingdoms  that 
maintained  their  temples  ?  As  Jeremiah  beheld  the  blasting 
influence  of  .sin,  how  the  land  mourned,  and  the  herbs  were 
withered,  and  the  beasts  and  birds  consumed,  his  heart 
misgave  him.  He  saw  no  limit  to  the  awful  evil  of  his 
times,  so  long  as  God  seemed  indifferent  to  its  prevalence. 
Therefore  he  cried  for  vengeance — not  for  the  gratification 
of  his  own  feeling,  but  for  the  sake  of  Israel. 

(4)  He  also  Rolled  his  Cause  on  God. — So  might  xi.  20  be 
rendered :  "  On  Thee  have  I  rolled  my  cause."  Ah,  this 
was  wise  !     And  it  is  our  only  safety  in  times  of  great  soul- 


64  l^Ije  .^bTElling  of  Jortian. 

anguish.  The  Divine  Sufferer  did  this  on  the  cross.  "When 
reviled,  He  reviled  not  again  ;  but  committed  Himself  to 
Him  that  judgeth  righteously."  In  his  steps  we  must  plant 
our  feet.  When  men  malign  and  plot  against  us,  when 
friends  forsake,  when  difificulties  like  Atlantic  breakers 
threaten  to  engulf  us — we  must  roll  our  anxieties  from 
ourselves  upon  the  blessed  Lord,  our  burden-bearer,  and 
leave  them  with  Him.  The  care  ceases  to  be  ours  when 
it  has  been  committed  to  Him.  He  will  see  to  all  for 
us  with  a  love  so  strong  and  tender  and  true,  that  we  need 
have  no  further  cause  for  fear.  Roll  thyself,  thy  burden, 
and  thy  way,  on  the  Lord. 

n.  The  Divine  Reply. — God  stooped  over  his  life,  and 
said :  "  Do  you  not  remember  when  I  first  called  you  to  be 
my  prophet  that  I  foreshadowed  the  loneliness  and  isola- 
tion, the  difficulty  and  persecution,  which  were  in  store? 
Do  you  not  remember  that  I  told  you  that  you  would  have 
to  be  a  brazen  wall  against  the  whole  people?  Have  you 
already  lost  heart  ?  Are  you  so  soon  discouraged  ?  Has 
the  first  brush  of  opposition  mastered  your  heroic  courage  ? 
You  have  as  yet  run  with  footmen  ;  presently  you  v/ill 
encounter  horses :  you  are  now  in  the  land  of  comparative 
peace,  your  native  village,  where  those  surround  you  who 
have  known  you  from  your  childhood,  and  yet  you  are 
dismayed ;  but  how  will  you  do  when  a  tide  of  sorrow 
comes  upon  this  land,  as  when  the  Jordan  leaps  its  banks, 
and  swells  over  the  low-lying  land  around,  and  drives  the 
wild  beasts  from  their  lair— how  then  ?  " 

Does  not  God  ever  deal  with  us  thus  ?  He  does  not  put 
us  at  once  to  contend  with  horses,  but  tests  us  first  with 
footmen.  He  does  not  allow  any  one  of  us  with  frail  and 
fainting  courage  to  meet  the  overflowing  floods  of  Jordan  ; 
but  He  causes  us  first  to  be  tested  in  our  homestead — the 
land  of  peace,  where  we  are  comparatively  secure  amidst 
those  who  know  and   love  us.      God  graduates  the  trials 


*'g£  i^rue  to  (5o&! "  65 

of  our  life ;  He  allows  the  lesser  to  precede  the  greater. 
He  gives  us  the  opportunity  of  learning  to  trust  Him  in 
slighter  difficulties,  that  faith  may  become  muscular  and 
strong,  and  that  we  may  be  able  to  walk  to  Him  amid  the 
surge  of  the  ocean.  Be  sure  that  whatever  your  sorrows 
and  troubles  are  at  this  hour,  God  has  allowed  them  to 
come  to  afford  you  an  opportunity  of  preparation  for  future 
days.  Do  not  be  discouraged,  or  give  up  the  fight,  or  be 
unfaithful  in  the  very  little.  Do  not  say  you  cannot  bear  it. 
You  can 

There  is  sufficient  grace  in  Him  ;  appropriate  it,  use  it, 
rest  upon  Him.  Be  very  thankful  that  He  has  given  you 
this  time  of  discipline  and  of  searching  ;  and  now,  taking  to 
yourself  all  that  He  waits  to  give — the  grace,  and  comfort, 
and  assurance — go  forward !  He  cannot  fail  you.  What 
He  is  in  the  lesser  He  will  be  much  more  in  the  greater. 
The  grace  He  gives  to-day  is  but  as  a  silver  thread 
compared  to  the  river  of  grace  He  will  give  to  you  to- 
morrow. If  you  start  back  now,  you  will  miss  the  greater 
discipline  that  will  surely  come  ;  but  in  missing  it  you  will 
also  miss  the  greater  revelation  of  Himself  that  will 
accompany  the  discipline.  Be  true  to  God  !  Trust  in 
God,  and  remember  that  when  He  brings  you  to  the 
swelling  of  Jordan— not  necessarily  death,  but  some  awful 
flood  of  sorrow — that  then,  for  the  first  time  perhaps,  you 
will  meet  the  ark,  and  the  Priest  whose  feet,  when  they  dip 
in  the  margin  of  the  river,  w411  cause  it  to  part,  and  you 
will  go  over  dry-shod.  When  Jordan  overflows  its  banks, 
God  brings  his  chosen  people  to  the  brink,  and  it  is  then 
that  He  cleaves  the  path  through  the  heart  of  the  river,  so 
that  they  are  not  touched  by  its  descending  torrent. 


VIII. 

(Jer.  xiv, ,  XV.) 

"  If,  in  the  paths  of  the  world, 
Stones  might  have  wounded  thy  feet, 
Toil  or  dejection  have  tried 
Thy  spirit — of  that  we  saw 
Nothing  ;  to  us  thou  wast  still 
Cheerful,  and  helpful,  and  firm  ; 
Therefore  to  thee  it  was  given 
Many  to  save  with  thyself; 
And  at  the  end  of  thy  day, 
O  faithful  shepherd  !  to  come. 
Bringing  thy  sheep  in  thy  hand." 
^  _^  Arnold. 

WMHE  reign  of  Jehoiakim  was  still  young.  Necho 
was  back  in  Egypt ;  Nineveh  was  tottering  to 
her  fall ;  Babylon  was  slowly  growing  upon 
^K^^^i  the  horizon  as  the  rival  of  each  great  empire, 
'^y^fS  ^^"id  as  the  future  desolator  of  Judah,  Mean- 
while, the  chosen  people,  like  a  tree  whose 
heart  is  eaten  away  with  insects,  was  corrupted  by  innumer- 
able evils.  As  a  premonition  of  coming  destruction,  and 
as  though  the  Almighty  would  make  one  last  effort  to 
arouse  them  to  the  awfulness  and  imminence  of  their 
peril,  a  terrible  drought  cast  its  sere  mantle  over  the  land. 
It  had  often  been  predicted  amongst  the  other  results  of 
disobedience,  but  probably  never  before  had  it  fallen  with 
such  desolating  effect  (Lev.  xxvi.  20;  Deut.  xi.  17; 
xxviii.  23). 

The  whole  land  was  filled  with  mourning.  In  the  places 
of  public  concourse,  where  the  people  gathered  in  the 
burning  sunshine,   they  sat  in   black  garments   upon    the 


t  fitter  ©r^  oi  lerusaient.  67 

hard  ground.  Accustomed  to  rely  upon  the  natural 
resources  of  the  country,  nourished  by  the  rivers  and 
streams  that  gushed  from  valley  and  hill,  they  were  reduced 
to  the  dire  extremities  of  famine.  The  vines  on  the 
terraced  hills  were  withered,  the  cornfields  were  covered 
with  stubble,  and  the  pasture  on  the  wolds  was  yellow 
and  scorched.  The  very  dew  seemed  to  have  forsaken 
the  land ;  where  the  river  had  poured  its  full  tide,  there 
were  only  a  few  trickling  drops.  The  beds  of  the  water- 
courses were  filled  with  stones.  And  the  bitter  cry  of 
Jerusalem  ascended,  made  up  of  the  mingled  anguish  of 
men,  and  women,  and  children,  whose  parched  lips  might 
not  be  moistened. 

The  description  given  by  the  prophet  is  very  striking. 
Want  is  felt  in  the  great  houses  of  the  nobles,  who  send 
their  servants  for  water  without  avail.  The  ploughmen  sit 
in  their  barns  with  covered  heads ;  it  is  useless  to  think  of 
driving  their  ploughs  through  the  chapped  soil.  The  hind, 
whose  maternal  love  has  passed  into  a  proverb,  is  represented 
as  forsaking  her  young,  that  she  may  seek  for  grass.  The 
wild  asses  stand  on  the  bare  heights  and  eagerly  snuff  up 
what  breeze  may  pass  over  the  land  in  the  evening,  to 
relieve  the  agony  of  the  fever  of  their  thirst.  All  the  land 
bakes  like  an  oven ;  and  the  sun,  as  he  passes  daily  through 
a  leaden  sky,  looks  down  on  scenes  of  unutterable  horror. 

What  a  picture  is  this  of  the  desolation  that  sometimes 
overtakes  a  Christian  community !  Every  faithful  worker 
could  tell  of  periods  when  it  has  seemed  as  though  the 
cloud  and  dew  of  Divine  blessing  had  forsaken  the  plot  on 
\jhich  he  was  engaged.  There  are  no  tears  of  penitence,  no 
sighs  of  contrition,  no  blessed  visitations  of  the  dew  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  no  fresh  young  shoots  of  piety,  no  joy  in  the 
Lord,  no  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Ah !  then  work  is  hard  and 
difficult,  and  the  soul  of  the  worker  faints  and  is  discouraged. 
Blessed  is  that  church  which  has  not  known  this  time  of 
drought,  and  which  has  not  experienced  in  the  spiritual 


68  i:ije  Qrougljt. 

sphere  the  counterpart  of  the  utter  failure  of  moisture  in  the 
natural. 

It  is  at  such  times  that  the  lover  of  his  fellows  gathers 
himself  together  to  deal  with  the  Almighty.  You  can  see 
him  entering  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  prepared  to 
speak  with  God,  and,  if  possible,  secure  a  mitigation  of  the 
reign  of  the  brazen  sky,  and  a  return  of  those  times  of 
blessing  that  can  only  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 
His  face  is  set  with  a  resolute  purpose.  Through  the  weary 
eyes  the  fire  of  a  mighty  resolution  is  burning.  With  his 
two  hands  he  is  prepared  to  come  to  close  dealings  with  God, 
as  Jacob  when  he  made  supplication  with  the  angel.  Let 
us  draw  near,  and  overhear  the  colloquy  between  Jeremiah 
and  the  Almighty.  It  may  be  that  we  shall  discover 
arguments  that  we  may  take  upon  our  own  lips  when  days 
of  drought  are  visiting  the  Church  at  large,  or  that  sphere  of 
work  in  which  we  are  called  specially  to  labour.  It  is  thus 
that  the  soul  discourses  with  God. 

I.  The  Pleadings  of  the  Interceding  Soul. — "My 
God,  I  come  into  thy  presence  to  acknowledge  my  own  sin, 
and  especially  the  sins  of  my  people.  I  stand  before  Thee 
as  their  priest,  to  confess  the  sins  which  have  separated 
between  Thee  and  them,  incurring  thy  Divine  displeasure, 
and  closing  the  avenues  of  communion.  Our  iniquities 
testify  against  us,  and  our  backslidings  are  many.  Once 
Thou  seemedst  to  abide  in  our  midst ;  thy  smile  a  per- 
petual summer ;  thy  presence  one  long  stream  of  benedic- 
tion ;  thy  grace  like  a  river  making  glad  thy  city.  But  of 
late  thy  visits  have  been  few  and  far  between.  Thou  hast 
tarried  for  a  night,  and  been  away  again  at  dawn,  and 
we  sorely  miss  Thee.  Once  Thou  wert  as  a  mighty  man, 
our  Samson,  whose  arm  sufficed  to  keep  our  enemies  at 
bay ;  but  for  long  Thou  hast  seemed  overcome  by  an 
unnatural  stupor,  by  a  paralysis  that  holds  Thee  like  a  vice 
And  yet   Thou    hast   not  really  changed;    Thou   art   oui 


^leatrittjg  initlr  (Botr.  69 

Saviour ;  Thou  art  in  the  midst  of  us.  We  bear  thy  name. 
Thine  honour  is  impHcated  in  our  lot.  What  Thou  couldst 
not  do  for  any  merit  of  ours,  do  for  the  credit  of  thy  name ; 
do  for  the  sake  of  thy  Son ;  do  for  the  maintenance  of  thy 
cause  upon  earth.  Leave  us  not,  nor  let  that  foreboding 
prediction  of  Ezekiel  be  realized,  when  he  saw  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  recede  by  stages  from  the  holy  place,  until 
it  stood  outside  the  city  walls  "  (xiv.  7-9). 

The  Answer  of  the  Divine  Spirit. — There  are  times  when 
God  seems  to  speak  thus  to  the  soul — if  we  may  dare  put 
our  impression  of  his  words  in  our  own  phrase :  "  It  is 
useless,  my  servant,  to  pray.  My  grace  is  infinite ;  my 
mercy  endureth  for  ever ;  my  fulness  waits  to  pour  forth  its 
tides,  to  make  the  wilderness  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the 
rose.  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  parched  wilderness ;  I 
would  that  it  were  springs  of  water.  I  have  no  liking 
for  the  glowing  sand ;  I  would  that  it  might  become  a  pool. 
But  so  long  as  men  cling  to  their  sins,  so  long  as  they 
perpetrate  abominations  like  those  which  Ezekiel  saw  when 
in  the  chambers  of  imagery  he  beheld  the  elders  of  Israel 
offering  incense  to  creeping  things  and  abominable  beasts,  it 
is  impossible  for  Me  to  cause  rain  or  give  showers.  Beneath 
the  appearance  of  religious  worship  and  decorum,  evils 
are  breeding  that  separate  between  my  people  and  Myself, 
and  hide  my  face  from  them.  These  must  be  dealt  with. 
You  must  begin  to  search  the  chambers  of  their  hearts  with 
candles ;  to  show  my  people  their  transgressions,  and  the 
house  of  Israel  their  sins.  Your  work  just  now  is  not  that 
of  the  intercessor,  but  of  the  reformer ;  not  yet  to  plead  with 
Elijah  upon  the  brow  of  Carmel,  but,  like  Elijah,  to  extirpate 
the  lurking  evil  of  the  people,  as  when  he  dyed  the  waters  of 
Kishon  with  the  blood  of  Ahab's  priests"  (xiv.  10-12). 

II.  The  Lament  of  the  True  Shepherd. — "  Ah,  Lord 
God  !  True,  too  true,  sadly  too  true,  are  thy  words.  Thy 
people  deserve  all  that  Thou  hast  said.     Their  iniquities  are 


70  ®Ije  grotigljt. 

alone  accountable  for  their  sorrows.  But  remember  how 
falsely  they  have  been  taught.  The  land  is  full  of  those 
who  hide  thy  truth  under  a  cloud  of  words.  They  say 
that  the  outward  ritual  sufficeth,  howsoever  far  the  heart 
is  from  Thee.  There  is  grievous  fault;  but  surely  it  lieth 
at  the  door  of  those  who  mislead  the  fickle,  changeful  crowd. 
Their  mouths  are  lined  with  wool ;  they  cry  Peace  !  peace  ! 
when  there  is  none.  The  very  remonstrances  of  conscience 
are  drowned  by  their  delusive  assurances.  Spare  thy  people ! 
they  are  scattered  because  the  shepherds  have  failed  in  their 
high  commission  "  (xiv.  13). 

The  Answer  of  the  Divine  Spirit. — There  are  days  in 
the  history  of  the  Christian  when  he  is  called  to  walk 
upon  the  mountains  of  vision,  and  overhears  the  attendant 
shepherds,  of  whom  Bunyan  speaks,  talking  to  each  other  and 
saying,  "  Shall  we  show  these  pilgrims  some  wonders  ? " 
Beneath  their  guidance  he  cHmbs  to  the  top  of  the  hill 
called  Error,  which  is  very  steep  on  the  further  side.  At  the 
bottom  lie  several  men  all  dashed  to  pieces  by  a  fall 
from  the  top.  "  What  meaneth  this  ? "  is  the  obvious 
inquiry.  "Have  you  not  heard  of  Hymenseus  and  Philetus," 
is  the  reply,  "  who  erred  concerning  the  faith  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  ?  These  are  they."  So  in  our 
pleadings  for  men,  we  sometimes  obtain  a  glimpse  of  the 
inevitableness  of  the  Divine  judgments  and  the  irre- 
parableness  of  the  injury  that  false  teachers  may  do  to  their 
fellows.  There  is  no  fate  so  terrible  as  of  those  who 
have  not  only  erred  themselves,  but  have  caused  men  to  err; 
who  have  been  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  one  of  God's 
little  ones.  Better  be  dumb  and  not  able  to  speak,  than  say 
words  that  may  destroy  the  faith  of  childhood,  or  start 
questionings  that  may  shatter  by  one  fell  blow  the  con- 
struction of  years.  It  was  in  this  strain  that  God  replied  to 
the  prophet. 

"  The  doom  of  the  false  prophets  will  be  terrible.  Their 
fate  will  be  the  more  awful,  because  they  have  run  without 


yalse  Weachns,  71 

being  sent;  and  prophesied  without  having  seen  a  vision. 
There  has  been  no  Divine  impulse  energizing  their  words. 
Position,  bread,  power,  have  been  the  incentives  of  their 
office;  but  the  people  have  loved  to  have  it  so.  Their 
corrupt  morals  have  produced  a  corrupt  priesthood,  and 
a  crop  of  false  prophets.  The  men  of  whom  you  complain 
are  the  product  of  their  times.  'Siy  people,  enervated  with 
sloth,  luxury,  and  conceit,  would  not  endure  the  simple  truth 
of  the  Divine  word ;  and  this  evil  band  have  been  bred  and 
nurtured  in  the  stifling  corruption  of  the  age.  Until,  there- 
fore, the  people  themselves  have  put  away  their  sin,  and 
returned  to  Me  in  penitence  and  consecration,  they  must  be 
held  guilty  before  my  sight,  and  suffer  the  outworking  of 
their  sin.  '  I  will  pour  their  wickedness  upon  them.' " 
(xiv.  14-16). 

III.  The  Interceding  Soul. — "  Granted,  Great  God, 
that  Thou  art  just,  and  right :  yet  Thou  canst  not  utterly 
reject.  Thy  smiting  cannot  be  unto  death.  Thou  must 
heal.  Thou  mayest  cast  away  those  with  whom  Thou  hast 
not  entered  into  covenant  relationship,  or  on  whom  thy 
name  has  not  been  named,  or  amongst  whom  the  throne  of 
thy  glor)'  has  not  been  set  up  ;  but  Thou  canst  not  deal  with 
us  as  with  them.  There  is  a  tie  between  Thee  and  us  which 
our  sin  cannot  break.  There  are  claims  which  we  have  on 
Thee  as  our  Father,  which  the  far-country  wanderings  of  the 
prodigal  cannot  annul.  There  are  interweavings  of  thy 
character  and  prestige  with  our  history  which  no  stroke  of 
thy  pen  can  dissolve.  Remember  the  covenant ;  remember 
thy  promise  to  thy  Son ;  remember  thy  Bride,  whom  Thou 
canst  not  put  away ;  remember  that  we  have  no  help  but  in 
Thee ;  remember  the  word  on  which  Thou  hast  caused  us 
to  hope — therefore  we  will  still  wait  upon  Thee.  We  are 
not  worthy  to  be  called  thine;  but  we  claim  the  kiss,  the 
robe,  the  fatted  calf"  (xiv.  17-22). 

TAt  Answer  of  the  Divine  Spirit. — It  is  as  though  the 


72  i^Ije  grcugljt. 

Lord  said,  "I  am  wearied  with  repenting.  I  have  tried 
every  means  of  restraining  them,  and  turning  them  to  better 
things — now  by  winnowing  out  the  chaff ;  and  again  by 
bereavement  and  sorrow  ;  and  again  by  the  swift  destruction 
of  the  sword.  They  have  appeared  to  amend,  but  the 
improvement  was  only  superficial.  Now  my  mind  is 
thoroughly  made  up.  My  methods  must  be  more  drastic, 
my  discipline  more  searching  and  thorough.  I  will  turn 
my  hand  upon  my  people,  and  thoroughly  purge  away  their 
dross,  and  take  away  all  their  tin ;  and  I  will  restore  their 
judges  as  at  the  first,  and  their  counsellors  as  at  the 
beginning.  Thus  I  will  answer  thy  pleadings  on  their 
behalf.  The  destruction  of  the  city,  the  decimation  of  the 
people  by  sword  and  famine,  the  awful  sorrow^s  of  captivity 
shall  act  as  purging  fires,  through  which  they  shall  pass  to  a 
new  and  blessed  life.  Nothing  else  can  now  avail.  For  my 
love  of  them  I  cannot  spare  them.  The  prayers  of  my 
hohest  cannot  alter  my  determination,  since  only  thus  can 
my  eternal  purpose  of  redemption  be  realized"  (xv.  1-9). 

IV.  The  Cry  of  the  Intercessor. — Here  the  prophet 
falls  into  a  muse,  and  as  he  foresees  the  misrepresentation 
of  his  motives,  and  the  certain  hate  w^hich  his  unfaltering 
prediction  of  coming  doom  must  excite,  he  washes  that  he 
had  never  been  born.  So  does  the  heart  of  the  man  of 
God  fail ;  and  if,  like  Jeremiah's,  it  is  highly  strung  and 
keenly  sensitive,  it  becomes  the  prey  of  the  deepest 
anguish:  "Why,  O  God,  didst  Thou  make  me  so  gentle 
and  sympathetic  ;  so  naturally  weak  and  yielding ;  so  incap- 
able of  looking  calmly  on  pain  ?  Would  not  some  stronger, 
rougher  nature  have  done  thy  bidding  better  ?  Even  now, 
hast  Thou  not  some  man  of  ruder  make  to  whom  Thou 
canst  entrust  this  mission  ?  There  are  skins  more  imper- 
vious to  the  scorching  heat  than  mine ;  may  they  not  go 
into  these  flames  ?  Why  this  stammering  lip,  this  faltering 
heart,  this  thorn  in  my  flesh?"  (xv.  10). 


*'  fflv  dracc  is  .^nffinent."  73 

T/ie  Answer  of  the  Divifie  Spirit. — "  I  will  strengthen 
thee  for  good."  It  is  as  if  God  said,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient 
for  thee.  I  have  summoned  thee,  with  all  thy  weaknesses, 
to  perform  my  will,  because  my  strength  is  only  perfected 
thus.  I  need  a  low  platform  for  the  exhibition  of  my  great 
power.  To  those  that  have  no  might  I  impart  strength ;  in 
those  that  have  no  wisdom  I  unfold  my  deepest  thoughts. 
The  broken  reed  furnishes  the  pillar  of  my  Temple ; 
smoking  flax  gives  light  to  my  beacon  fires.  Be  content  to 
be  a  threshold,  over  which  the  river  passes ;  be  satisfied  to 
be  a  rod  in  my  hand  which  shall  achieve  the  deliverance  of 
my  people.  O  frail,  weak  soul,  thou  art  likeliest  to  be  the 
channel  and  organ  for  the  forthputting  of  my  energy.  Only 
yield  thyself  to  Me,  and  let  Me  have  my  way,  through  thee, 
with  thee,  in  thee ;  then  thou  shalt  be  as  the  northern  iron 
and  brass  which  man  cannot  break"  (xv.  11-14). 

V.  The  Response  of  the  Soul. — "  O  Lord,  Thou 
knowest.  Things  that  my  dearest  cannot  guess,  which  I 
cannot  utter,  which  I  am  slow  to  admit  even  to  myself ;  the 
hope  that  trembles  like  the  first  flush  of  dawn,  and  the  fear 
that  paralyzes ;  the  conflict ;  the  broken  ideals ;  the 
unfinished  sentences ;  the  songs  without  words.  Thou 
knowest.  Thou  art  my  all.  Thy  smile  strengthens  me 
against  reproach.  Thy  words  bring  rifts  of  joy  and 
rejoicing  in  my  saddest  hours.  Thy  presence  banishes 
loneliness  when  I  sit  alone.  And  yet  sometimes  a  dark 
foreboding  comes  that  Thou  wilt  be  to  me  as  a  deceitful 
brook,  whose  intermittent  waters  fail,  which  is  dry  when 
most  its  flow  is  needed.  I  know  it  cannot  be,  since  Thou 
art  faithful ;  and  yet  what  could  I  do  if,  after  having  made 
me  what  I  am,  Thou  shouldest  leave  me  to  myself  ? " 
(xv.  15-18). 

The  Ansiver  of  the  Divine  Spirit. — "  Renounce  thy 
forebodings,"  God  seems  to  say.  "  Come  back  from 
the  far  country  of  thy  despondency.     I  would  have  thee 


74  ^bt  grougbt. 

stand  face  to  face  with  JNTe  without  a  shadow  of  a  cloud. 
Wait  before  Me.  Consider  not  thy  frailty,  but  my  might  ; 
not  thy  foes,  but  my  dehverances.  Put  from  thee  that  which 
is  vile,  expose  thyself  to  my  refining  fires,  that  all  thy  dross 
may  be  expurgated.  Divest  thyself  of  all  that  is  incon- 
sistent with  thy  high  calling.  Then  thou  shalt  be  as  my 
mouth ;  thou  shalt  stand  amidst  the  surging  crowd  as 
a  fenced  brazen  wall ;  thou  shalt  be  impregnable  against 
the  assault  of  fear ;  in  the  darkest  hours,  when  floods  of 
ungodliness  might  make  thee  afraid,  and  the  fury  of  hell  be 
hurled  against  thee,  I  will  be  with  thee  to  save  and  deliver. 
Thou  mayest  have  neither  wife  nor  child  ;  but  I  will  be  to 
thee  more  than  they.  And  I  will  deliver  thee  out  of  the  hand 
of  the  wicked,  and  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
terrible."  "  This  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the 
Lord,  and  their  righteousness  is  of  Me,  saith  the  Lord" 
(xv.  19-21). 


IX. 

®n  tin  ^otitis  mhnl 

(Jeremiah  xviii.  4.) 

"He  fixed  thee  mid  this  dance 
Of  plastic  circumstance, 
This  present  thou,  forsooth,  wouldst  fain  arrest : 
Machinery  just  meant 
To  give  thy  soul  its  bent, 
Try  thee,  and  turn  thee  forth,  sufficiently  impressed.  ' 

R.  Browning. 

^  NE  day,  beneath  the  impulse  of  the  Divine  Spirit, 
Jeremiah  went  beyond  the  city  precincts  to  the 
Valley  of  Hinnom,  on  the  outskirts  of  Jerusalem, 
where  in  a  Httle  hut,  he  found  a  potter,  busily 
engaged  at  his  handicraft.  "  Behold,  he  wrought 
his  work  on  the  wheels."  Amid  the  many  im- 
provements of  the  present  day,  the  art  of  pottery  remains 
almost  as  it  was  as  many  centuries  before  Christ  as  we  live 
after. 

As  the  prophet  stood  quietly  beside  the  potter,  he  saw 
him  take  a  piece  of  clay  from  the  mass  that  lay  beside 
his  hand,  and  having  kneaded  it  to  rid  it  of  the  bubbles, 
place  it  on  the  wheel,  rapidly  revolving  horizontally  at 
the  motion  of  his  foot  driving  the  treadle.  From  that 
moment  his  hands  were  at  work,  within  and  without, 
shaping  the  vessel  with  his  deft  touch,  here  widening, 
there  leading  it  up  into  a  more  slender  form  ;  and,  again, 
opening  out  the  lip.  So  that  from  the  shapeless  clay 
there  emerged  a  fair  and  beautiful  vessel,  fit  for  the  Temple 
court  or  the  royal  palace.  When  it  was  nearly  complete, 
and  the  next  step  would  have  been  to  remove  it,  to  await 


76  (Bn  tlje  potter's  WihtzL 

ihe  kiln,  through  a  flaw  in  the  material  it  fell  a  shapeless 
ruin,  some  broken  pieces  upon  the  wheel,  and  others  upon 
the  floor  of  the  house. 

The  prophet  naturally  expected  that  the  potter  would 
immediately  take  another  piece  of  clay,  and  produce  in  its 
yielding  substance  the  ideal  which  had  been  so  hopelessly 
marred  under  his  hand.  Instead  of  this,  however,  to  his 
astonishment  and  keenly  excited  interest,  the  potter  with 
scrupulous  care  gathered  up  the  broken  pieces  of  the  clay 
and  pressed  them  together  as  at  the  first,  and  placed  the 
clay  again  where  it  had  lain  before,  and  made  it  again  into 
another  vessel,  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  to  make  it. 
Perhaps  this  second  vessel  was  not  quite  so  fair  as  the  first 
might  have  been,  still  it  was  beautiful  and  useful.  It  was  a 
memorial  of  the  potter's  patience  and  long-suflering,  of  his 
careful  use  of  material,  and  of  his  power  of  repairing  loss 
and  making  something  out  of  failure  and  disappointment. 

O  vision  of  the  long-suffering  patience  of  God  !  O  bright 
anticipation  of  God's  redemptive  work !  O  parable  of  re- 
made characters,  and  lives,  and  hopes !  To  us,  as  to 
Jeremiah,  the  Divine  thought  is  flashed,  "  Cannot  I  do  with 
you  as  this  potter  ?  saith  the  Lord.  Behold,  as  the  clay  is 
in  the  potter's  hand,  so  are  ye  in  mine  hand,  O  house  of 
Israel." 

The  purport  of  this  vision  seems  to  have  been  to  give  his 
people  hope  that  even  though  they  had  marred  God's  fair 
ideal,  yet  a  glorious  and  blessed  future  was  within  reach ; 
and  that  if  only  they  would  yield  themselves  to  the  touch  of 
the  Great  Potter,  He  would  undo  the  results  of  years  of  dis- 
obedience which  had  marred  and  spoilt  his  fair  purpose, 
and  would  make  the  chosen  people  a  vessel  unto  honour, 
sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use. 

The  same  thought  may  apply  to  us  all.  Who  is  there 
that  is  not  conscious  of  having  marred  and  resisted  the 
touch  of  God's  moulding  hands?  Who  is  there  that  does 
not   lament   opportunities   of  saintliness    which   were   lost 


CljE  ^rcat  potter.  77 

through  the  obdurateness  of  the  will  and  the  hardness  of  the 
heart  ?  Who  is  there  that  would  not  like  to  be  made  again 
as  seems  good  to  the  Potter  ?  "  But  now,  O  Lord,  Thou 
art  our  Father ;  we  are  the  clay,  and  Thou  our  Potter ;  and 
we  all  are  the  work  of  thy  hand.  Be  not  wroth  very  sore,  O 
Lord,  neither  remember  iniquity  for  ever." 

L  The  Divine  Making  of  Men. — (i)  T/ie  Potter  has  an 
Ideal. — Floating  through  his  fancy  there  is  the  vessel  that  is 
to  be.  He  already  sees  it  hidden  in  the  shapeless  clay, 
waiting  for  his  call  to  evoke.  His  hands  achieve  so  far  as 
they  may  the  embodiment  of  the  fair  conception  of  his 
thought.  Before  the  woman  applies  scissors  to  the  silk,  she 
has  conceived  the  pattern  of  her  dress ;  before  the  spade 
cleaves  the  sod,  the  architect  has  conceived  the  plan  of  the 
building  to  be  erected  there. 

So  of  God  in  nature.  The  pattern  of  this  round  world 
and  of  her  sister  spheres  lay  in  his  creative  thought  before 
the  first  beam  of  light  streamed  across  the  abyss.  All  that 
exists  embodies  with  more  or  less  exactness  the  Divine 
ideal — sin  alone  excepted.  So  of  the  mystical  body  of 
Christ,  the  Church,  his  Bride.  In  his  Book  all  his  members 
were  written,  which  in  continuance  were  fashioned  when  as 
yet  there  was  none  of  them.  So,  also,  of  the  possibilities  of 
each  human  life.  I  know  not  if  we  shall  ever  be  permitted, 
amid  the  archives  of  heaven,  to  see  the  transcript  of  God's 
original  thought  of  what  our  life  might  have  been  had  we 
only  yielded  ourselves  to  the  hands  that  reach  down  from 
heaven  moulding  men  ;  but  sure  it  is  that  God  foreordained 
and  predestinated  us,  each  in  his  own  measure  and  degree, 
to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son. 

See  that  mother  bending  over  the  cradle  where  her 
firstborn  baby  son  lies  sleeping  !  Mark  that  smile  which 
goes  and  comes  over  her  face,  like  a  breath  of  wind  on 
a  calm  summer's  day  !  Why  does  she  smile  !  Ah  !  she  is 
dreaming ;  and  in  her  dreams  is  building  castles  of  the 


7^  (Bit  tlje  potter's  WihccL 

future  eminence  of  this  child — in  the  pulpit,  or  the  senate  ; 
in  war,  or  art.  If  only  she  might  have  her  way,  he  should 
be  foremost  in  happiness,  renowned  in  the  service  of  men. 
But  no  mother  ever  wished  so  much  for  her  child  as  God 
for  us,  when  first  cradled  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross. 

To  be  like  Christ,  the  type  of  perfect  manhood  ;  to  be  as 
much  to  Christ  as  He  was  to  his  Father ;  to  reflect  the  face 
of  Christ  on  men,  as  He  the  face  of  God  ;  to  fulfil  the 
commission  of  Redemption ;  to  take  up  the  Cross ;  to 
be  crucified  with  Christ ;  to  rise  and  reign  with  Him — all 
this  is  God's  ideal. 

(2)  T/ie  Potter  achieves  his  purpose  by  means  of  the  Wheel. 
— In  the  discipline  of  human  life  this  surely  represents  the 
revolution  of  daily  circumstance  ;  often  monotonous,  com- 
mon-place, trivial  enough,  and  yet  intending  to  effect,  if  it 
may,  ends  on  which  God  has  set  his  heart. 

Many,  on  entering  the  life  of  full  consecration  and 
devotion,  are  eager  to  change  the  circumstances  of  their 
lives  for  those  in  which  they  suppose  that  they  will  more 
readily  attain  a  fully-developed  character.  Hence,  much  of 
the  restlessness  and  fever,  the  disappointment  and  wilfulness 
of  the  early  days  of  Christian  experience.  Such  have  yet  to 
learn  that  out  of  myriads  of  circumstances  God  has  chosen 
the  lot  of  each  as  being  specially  adapted  to  develop 
the  hidden  qualities  and  idiosyncrasies  of  the  soul  He  loves. 
Anything  else  than  the  life  which  you  are  called  to  live 
would  fail  in  giving  scope  for  the  evolution  of  properties  of 
your  nature,  which  are  known  only  to  God,  as  the  colours 
and  fragrance  w^hich  lie  enfolded  in  some  tropic  seed. 
Believe  that  all  has  been  ordered  or  permitted,  because  of 
that  which  lay  entombed  within  you  waiting  for  his  call, 
"  Come  forth  !  " 

Do  not,  therefore,  seek  to  change,  by  some  rash  and 
wilful  act,  the  setting  and  environment  of  your  life.  Stay 
where  you  are  till  God  as  evidently  calls  you  elsewhere 
as  He  has  put  you  where  you  are.     Abide  for  the  present 


Cije  gtanpUnc  of  B^i^^n  ffifc.  79 

in  the  calling  wherein  you  were  called.  Throw  upon  Him 
the  responsibility  of  indicating  to  you  a  change  when  it  is 
necessary  for  your  further  development.  In  the  meanwhile, 
look  deep  into  the  heart  of  every  circumstance  for  its 
special  message,  lesson,  or  discipline.  Upon  the  way  in 
which  you  accept  or  reject  these  will  depend  the  achieve- 
ment or  marring  of  the  Divine  purpose. 

You  complain  of  the  monotony  of  your  life.  "  Day  in, 
day  out,  the  same  round.  Year  after  year,  the  same  path 
trodden  to  and  fro ;  no  horizon ;  no  space  or  width ;  only 
the  same  lane  of  sky  between  the  high  houses  on  either 
side.  What  scope  is  there  here  for  the  evolution  of  noble 
character?  What  opportunity  to  meditate  and  achieve 
great  deeds?"  Yet  remember  that  the  passive  virtues  are 
even  dearer  to  God  than  the  active  ones.  They  take 
the  longest  learning  and  are  the  last  learnt.  They  consist 
in  patience,  submission,  endurance,  long-suffering,  persist- 
ence in  well-doing.  They  need  more  courage  and  evince 
greater  heroism  than  those  qualities  which  the  world 
admires  most.  But  they  can  only  be  acquired  in  just  that 
monotonous  and  narrow  round  of  which  many  complain  as 
offering  so  scant  a  chance  of  acquiring  saintliness. 

(3)  The  Bulk  of  the  Work  is  done  by  the  Potter's  fingers. — 
How  delicate  their  touch  1  How  fine  their  sensibility ! 
It  would  almost  seem  as  though  they  were  endued  with 
intellect,  instead  of  being  the  instruments  by  which  the 
brain  is  executing  its  purpose.  And  in  the  nurture  of 
the  soul,  these  represent  the  touch  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
working  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure. 
He  is  in  us  all,  his  one  purpose  being  to  infill  us  with 
Himself,  and  to  fulfil  through  us  "all  the  good  pleasure 
of  his  goodness,  and  every  work  of  faith  with  power; 
that  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  may  be  glorified  in 
us,  and  we  in  Him." 

But  we  are  too  busy,  too  absorbed  in  many  things,  to 
heed  the  eenile  touch.     Sometimes,   when   we  are   aware 


So  (Bn  tbc  Ipotter's  uMljEcl. 

of  it,  we  resent  it,  or  stubbornly  refuse  to  yield  to  it. 
Hence  the  necessity  of  setting  apart  a  portion  of  every  day, 
or  a  season  in  the  course  of  the  "vveek,  in  which  to  seclude 
ourselves  from  every  other  influence,  and  expose  the  entire 
range  of  our  being  to  Divine  influences  only. 

The  wheel  and  the  hand  worked  together ;  often  their 
motion  was  in  opposite  directions,  but  their  object  was  one. 
So  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God. 
God's  touch  and  voice  give  the  meaning  of  his  providences ; 
and  his  providences  enforce  the  lesson  that  his  tender 
monitions  might  not  be  strong  enough  to  teach.  When- 
ever, therefore,  you  are  in  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of 
certain  circumstances  through  which  you  are  called  to  pass, 
and  which  are  strange  and  inexplicable,  be  still ;  refrain 
from  murmuring  or  repining  ;  hush  the  many  voices  that 
would  speak  within  ;  and  hsten  until  there  is  borne  in 
on  your  soul  a  persuasion  of  God's  purpose;  and  let  his 
Spirit  within  co-operate  with  the  circumstance  without. 
It  is  in  the  equal  working  of  these  two — the  circumstance 
supplying  the  occasion  for  manifesting  a  certain  grace,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  supplying  the  grace  to  be  manifested — that 
the  spirit  soars,  as  the  bird  by  the  even  motion  of  its 
two  wings. 

H.  God's  Re-making  of  Men. — "He  made  it  again." 
The  potter  could  not  make  what  he  might  have  wished ; 
but  he  did  his  best  with  his  materials.  So  God  is  ever 
trying  to  do  his  best  for  us.  If  we  refuse  the  best.  He 
gives  the  next  best.  If  we  will  not  be  gold,  we  may  be 
silver ;  and  if  not  silver,  there  are  still  the  earthen  and 
the  wood.     How  often  He  has  to  make  us  again  ! 

He  made  Jacob  again,  when  He  met  him  at  the  Jabbok 
ford  ;  finding  him  a  supplanter  and  a  cheat,  but  after  a  long 
wrestle,  leaving  him  a  prince  with  God.  He  made  Simon 
again,  on  the  resurrection  morning,  when  He  found  him 
somewhere  near  the  open  grave,  the  son  of  a  dove — for 


**^t  fft^bc  it  ^0am/'  8i 

so  his  old  name  Bar-jonas  signifies — and  left  him  Peter,  the 
man  of  the  rock,  the  apostle  of  Pentecost.  He  made 
Mark  again,  between  his  impulsive  leaving  of  Paul  and 
Barnabas,  as  though  frightened  by  the  first  touch  of  sea- 
sickness, and  the  times  when  Peter  spake  of  him  as  his 
son,  and  Paul  from  the  Mamertine  prison  described  him 
as  being  profitable. 

I  have  been  told  of  a  gifted  son,  who,  when  night  has 
fallen,  and  his  old  father  has  gone  to  the  early  couch 
of  age,  comes  into  the  studio  where  the  old  man's  hands 
had  been  busily  engaged  all  day  modelling  clay,  not  without 
some  fear  that  they  are  losing  their  skill,  and  removes 
all  trace  of  senility  or  decay.  So  does  God  come  to  our 
work,  when  we  have  done  our  best  and  failed  ;  and  when 
men  have  turned  from  us  with  disappointment.  He 
perfects  that  which  concerns  us,  because  his  mercy  endures 
for  ever,  and  He  cannot  forsake  the  work  of  his  own 
hands. 

Are  you  conscious  of  having  marred  God's  early  plan  for 
yourself?  His  ideal  of  a  life  of  earnest  devotion  to  his 
cause  has  been  so  miserably  lost  sight  of !  Your  career,  as 
parent  or  child,  as  friend  or  Christian  worker,  has  been 
such  a  failure  !  The  grand  chord  struck  in  your  early  vows, 
at  the  marriage  altar,  or  on  the  day  of  ordination,  has  been 
lost  beyond  recall ;  and  the  whole  music  has  been  so 
halting  and  feeble  !  For  such,  science  and  the  competition 
of  modern  fife  have  little  encouragement.  There  seems  no 
alternative  but  to  go  off  into  the  rear,  and  let  others  carry 
away  the  prizes  that  come  so  easily  to  them.  Whilst  into 
the  soul  the  conviction  is  burnt  :  "  I  had  my  chance, 
and  missed  it ;  it  will  never  come  to  me  again.  The 
survival  of  the  fittest  leaves  no  place  for  the  unfit.  They 
must  be  flung  amid  the  waste  which  is  ever  accumulating 
around  the  furnaces  of  human  life."  It  is  here  that  the 
Gospel  comes  in  with  its  gentle  words  for  the  outcast 
and  lost.     The  bruised  reed  is  made  again  into  a  pillar 

F 


82  <®n  the  f  otter's  ^Ijeel. 

for  the  temple  of  God.  The  feebly-smoking  flax  is  kindled 
to  a  flame.  The  waste  products  are  shown  to  be  of  extra- 
ordinary value,  yielding  the  fairest  colours,  or  providing  the 
elementary  principles  of  life. 

III.  Our  Attitude  Towards  the  Great  Potter. — 
Yield  to  Him  !  Each  particle  in  the  clay  seems  to  say 
"  Yes  "  to  wheel  and  hand.  And  in  proportion  as  this  is 
the  case  the  work  goes  merrily  on.  If  there  be  rebellion 
and  resistance,  the  work  of  the  potter  is  marred.  Let  God 
have  his  way  with  you.  Let  his  will  be  done  in  you  as  in 
heaven.  Bear  it,  even  when  you  cannot  do  it.  Be  sure  and 
say  "  Yes."  There  are  times  when  we  are  not  conscious 
that  He  is  doing  right.  Life  is  often  like  the  gray  aspect  of 
nature  in  February,  when  spring  waits  just  outside  the 
portal,  longing  to  touch  all  things  with  her  magic  wand.  It 
seems  as  if  no  one  is  concerned  about  "all  the  miles  of 
unsprung  wheat,"  or  responsible  for  leaf  or  bud.  Yet  in 
myriads  upon  myriads  of  graves  where  seeds  lie  buried, 
God's  angels  are  busily  at  work,  rolling  away  stones,  and 
ushering  in  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth  of  spring. 
So  when  we  have  once  committed  ourselves  to  God,  we 
must  beheve  that  He  does  not  lose  a  single  moment,  but  is 
ever  hurrying  forward  the  consummation  of  his  ideal. 

We  cannot  always  understand  his  dealings,  because  we 
do  not  know  what  his  purpose  is.  We  fail  to  recognise  the 
design ;  the  position  which  we  are  being  trained  to  fill ;  the 
ministry  we  are  to  exercise.  What  wonder,  then,  that  we 
get  puzzled  and  perplexed  !  We  strive  with  our  Maker, 
saying,  W^hat  makest  Thou  ?  or.  He  hath  no  hands.  Yet 
surely  it  is  enough  to  know  our  Guide,  if  we  do  not  know 
which  point  He  is  aiming  for  in  the  long  chain  of  hills. 
He  knows  all  the  mountain-passes,  and  will  take  the 
easiest. 

There  is  special  comfort  in  these  thoughts  for  the  middle- 
aged  and  old.     Do  not  look  regretfully  back  on  the  wasted 


Wit  must  ^ieltr  tn  tht  ^potter.  83 

springtide  and  summer,  gone  beyond  recall ;  though  it  be 
autumn,  there  is  yet  chance  for  thee  to  bear  some  fruit, 
under  the  care  of  the  great  Husbandman.  In  all,  He 
inspires  hope.  He  can  turn  the  battle  from  the  gate  ;  and 
make  the  lost  iron  swim  ;  and  replenish  the  empty  pitchers 
with  new  good  wine ;  and  restore  the  years  the  cankerworm 
has  eaten  ;  and  make  failures  into  victories.  He  who  was 
able  to  transform  the  Cross  from  a  badge  of  shame  into  the 
sign  of  victory  and  glory  must  surely  be  able  to  tal^e  the 
most  hopeless,  disreputable,  and  abandoned  lives,  and 
make  them  bloom  with  flowers  heavy  with  fragrance  and 
full  of  blessed  promise.  Only  let  Him  have  a  free  hand. 
Whatsoever  He  says,  do  it,  or  suffer  it  to  be  done.  Seek 
forgiveness  for  thje  past,  then  restoration,  and  re-making  at 
his  hand.  Reckon  on  God  :  and  according  to  your  faith  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you. 

When  the  clay  has  received  its  final  shape  from  the 
potter's  hands,  it  must  be  baked  in  the  kiln,  to  keep  it ; 
and  even  then  its  discipline  is  not  complete,  for  whatever 
colours  are  laid  on  must  be  rendered  permanent  by  fire. 
It  is  said  that  what  is  to  become  gold  in  the  finished  article 
is  a  smudge  of  dark  liquid  before  the  fire  is  applied ;  and 
that  the  first  two  or  three  applications  of  heat  obliterate 
all  trace  of  colour,  which  has  to  be  again  and  again 
renewed.  So  in  God's  dealings  with  his  people.  The 
moulding  Hand  has  no  sooner  finished  its  work  than  it 
plunges  the  clay  into  the  fiery  trial  of  pain  or  temptation. 
But  let  patience  have  her  perfect  work.  Be  still,  and  know 
that  He  is  God.  Thou  shalt  be  compensated  when  the 
Master  counts  thee  fair  and  meet  for  his  use. 


(Jeremiah  xx.  9.) 

' '  There  is  a  stay,  and  we  are  strong  ! 
Our  Master  is  at  hand 
To  cheer  our  solitary  song 

And  guide  us  to  the  strand  !     .     . 
Or  if,  for  our  unworthiness, 

Toil,  prayer,  and  watching  fail, 
In  disappointment  Thou  canst  bless, 
So  love  at  heart  prevail !  " 
-  Keble 

XWEREMIAH'S   nature   reminds   us   of    the   .^olian 

^  ■■■•■■  1  "k 

liTx-lli^      harp,  which  is  so  sensitive  to  the  passing  breeze, 

now  waihng  with  sorrow,  now  jubilant  with  song ; 

so    delicately    strung,    so    sympathetic,    so    easily 

affected  by  every  passing  circumstance,  was   the 

soul  of   the   prophet.     The  whole  book   mirrors 

the  changefulness  of  his  mood,  as  the  ocean  the  perpetual 

heavens  outspread  above  it — now  blue  as  the  azure  sky, 

and  again  dark  with  the  brooding  storm. 

There  are  many  indications  of  this  in  the  chapters  before 

us.     For  instance,  there  is  the  exclamation  :  "  Cursed  be  the 

day  wherein  I  was  born ;  cursed  be  the  man  who  brou^jit 

tidings  to  my  father,  saying,  A  man  child  is  born  unto  thee. 

Wherefore  was  I  born  to  see  labour  and  sorrow?" 

fxx.   14-18).     But  in  the  same  breath  there  is  the  heroic 

outburst,   "The   Lord  is  with  me  as  a  mighty  One  and 

terrible ;   therefore  my  persecutors  shall  stumble,  and  they 

shall  not  prevail"  (xx.  11).     How  great  the  contrast  between 

these  moods  !     In  the  first,  he  is  traversing  the  valley  of  the 

shadow,  where  the  dark  trees  shut  out  the  sky,  and  the 


F 


^  ^triktttjj  Contrast.  85 

swollen  torrent  rushes  turbidly  through  the  gorge ;  in  the 
second,  he  stands  upon  the  heights  where  the  sun  shines, 
and  to  the  far  horizon  the  landscape  lies  outspread,  its  corn- 
lields  goldening  in  the  summer  sun. 

The  same  contrast  appears  in  this  verse.  There  we  find 
the  half-formed  resolution  to  make  no  further  mention  of 
God,  and  to  speak  no  more  in  his  name.  Then  he  is 
instantly  aware  of  his  inability  to  control  the  passionate  out- 
burst of  the  Spirit  within.  "There  is  in  mine  heart  as  it 
were  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  bones,  and  I  am  weary 
with  forbearing,  and  I  cannot  contain  "  (r.v.).  Oh,  won- 
derful heart  of  man  !  Who  can  understand  thee  ?  who  can 
estimate  the  heights  to  which  thou  canst  rise,  or  the  depths 
to  which  thou  canst  sink  ?  What  an  infinitude  of  bliss  and 
of  sorrow  is  within  thy  compass  !  How  radiant  thy  heavens, 
how  dark  thine  abyss  !  It  is  well  for  us  when  we  learn  to 
distinguish  between  the  life  of  our  emotions  and  that  of  our 
will ;  and  resolve  to  live  no  more  in  mood  or  emotion,  but 
to  build  the  edifice  of  our  life  upon  the  granite  of  the 
obedient  will. 

I.  The  Circumstances  out  of  which  these  Words 
Sprang. — Jeremiah's  Half-formed  Resolution.  —  "I  will  not 
make  mention  of  Him,  nor  speak  any  more  in  his  name." 
Not  improbably  by  this  time  Nineveh  had  fallen.  For  six 
hundred  years  she  had  ruled  surrounding  nations  with  a  rod 
of  iron  tyranny,  exerting  an  imperial  sway  with  merciless 
cruelty.  At  last  her  time  had  come.  A  vast  host  gathered 
from  Asia  Minor  as  far  as  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  from 
the  entire  valley  of  the  Tigris,  from  Armenia,  Assyria,  and 
the  wandering  tribes  of  the  desert,  and  settled  doAvn  on  her 
as  swarms  of  hornets  on  a  putrid  carcase.  For  two  years 
the  siege  had  lasted  under  the  direction  of  the  trusted 
general  of  the  last  king  of  Nineveh,  Nabopolassar,  whose 
son,  Nebuchadnezzar,  was  destined  to  be  the  "hammer  of 
God."     Rumours  of  this  catastrophe  were  spreading  through 


86  ®IjE  yire  of  Ifol^  Bfin}JttlaE. 

the  world,  carrying  everywhere  sense  of  relief  and  fore- 
boding— relief  that  the  tyrant  was  down,  foreboding  as  to 
w^ho  should  take  his  place. 

At  this  time,  Egypt  was  in  the  zenith  of  her  power. 
Amid  the  decrepitude  of  Nineveh,  Pharaoh  had  seized  the 
opportunity  of  extending  his  empire  to  the  banks  of  the 
Tigris.  The  kingdom  of  Judah,  like  all  neighbouring 
nations,  owned,  at  least  nominally,  the  king  of  Egypt  as 
suzerain.  Confidence  in  the  proximity  and  prowess  of  his 
great  ally  encouraged  Jehoiakim  in  his  career  of  shameless 
idolatry  and  sin.  The  whole  land,  as  we  have  seen,  was 
corrupt. 

Jeremiah,  the  foremost  of  the  little  band  that  remained 
true  to  the  best  traditions  of  the  past  never  lost  an  oppor- 
tunity of  lodging  his  complaint  or  striving  to  resist  the 
downward  progress  of  his  people.  In  doing  this,  he 
aroused  an  ever-growdng  weight  of  opposition.  The  plot 
of  his  native  town  of  Anathoth  was  the  first  volcanic 
outburst,  to  be  followed  by  a  long  series  of  plots,  and 
snares,  and  manifestations  of  hatred  on  the  part  of  those  for 
whom  he  would  have  gladly  given  his  life  as  he  daily  gave 
his  prayers.  He  sat  alone,  cast  out  by  prophet  and  priest, 
by  court  and  people. 

"  Come,"  they  said  on  one  occasion,  "  and  let  us  devise 
devices  against  Jeremiah  ;  for  the  law  shall  not  perish  from 
the  priest,  nor  counsel  from  the  w^ise,  nor  the  word  from  the 
prophet."  He  was  a  laughing-stock  all  the  day.  Every 
one  mocked  him.  The  word  of  the  Lord  was  made  a  re- 
proach to  him  and  a  derision  continually.  His  associates 
and  those  with  whom  he  came  in  contact  watched  for  his 
halting,  and  w^hispered  that  peradventure  he  would  be  enticed 
so  that  they  should  prevail  against  him,  and  take  their 
revenge  on  him. 

Matters  culminated  finally  in  the  episode  of  chapters  xix. 
and  XX.  Beneath  a  Divine  impulse  he  procured  a  common 
earthen  bottle,  and  gathering  a  number  of  the  elders,  led 


I 


**^  ^t^vo&th  anir  a  gsrision."  87 

them  forth  into  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  beside  the  gate  of 
the  potsherds.  On  this  spot  the  refuse  of  the  city  was 
perpetually  exposed  to  the  foul  birds  and  the  wild  dogs.  It 
was  a  place  of  abhorring  and  loathsomeness.  There 
he  uttered  a  long  and  terrible  indictment  of  the  sins  of  his 
people,  accompanying  it  with  predictions  of  the  certain 
and  irrevocable  doom  to  which  they  were  hurr>ung.  The 
men  of  Jerusalem  would  fall  there  by  the  sword  before 
their  enemies  ;  in  the  straitness  of  the  siege  they  would  eat 
the  flesh  of  their  sons  and  daughters.  The  city  itself  would 
fall  into  ruins  of  blackened  stones,  and  the  surrounding 
valley  be  filled  with  the  carcases  of  the  slain  making 
banquet  for  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  and  the  beasts  of  the 
earth.  To  emphasize  his  words  he  broke  the  potter's 
vessel,  pouring  forth  its  contents  in  token  that  the  blood 
of  his  countrymen  would  be  shed  to  bedew  and  saturate  the 
soil. 

Not  satisfied  with  this,  he  returned  from  Tophet  and 
stood  in  the  court  of  the  Temple,  perhaps  on  the  steps  that 
led  up  to  the  court  of  the  priests.  Crowds  of  people  were 
probably  at  the  time  engaged  in  some  sacred  rite  ;  it  may 
have  been  the  time  of  one  of  the  great  feasts.  When  his 
voice  was  heard,  a  vast  concourse  must  have  gathered, 
whose  angry  faces  and  vehement  gestures  indicated  the 
intensity  of  their  dislike  to  the  man  who  cast  the  shadow  of 
impending  destruction  over  their  gayest  hours.  The  en- 
durance of  one  of  them  at  least  had  at  last  reached  its 
limit.  Pashur,  the  chief  governor  of  the  Temple,  to  whose 
jurisdiction  its  order  was  entrusted,  gathering  a  band  of 
Levites,  or  Temple  servants,  seized  the  prophet,  threw  him 
on  the  pavement,  scourged  him  after  the  eastern  fashion, 
and  finally  thrust  him  into  the  stocks,  leaving  him  there  the 
whole  night,  to  the  ridicule  and  hatred  of  the  populace,  to 
the  cold  night  and  the  prowling  dogs. 

In  the  morning  Pashur  appears  to  have  repented  of  his 
harsh  treatment,  and  to  have  released  the  prophet,  whose 


88  ^bc  ytre  of  ^oln  impulse. 

strong  spirit  was  not  for  a  moment  cowed  by  the  indignity 
and  torture  to  which  he  had  been  exposed.  Turning  on  his 
persecutor,  he  told  him  that  he  would  live  to  be  a  terror  to 
himself  and  all  his  friends  ;  that  all  Judah  would  be  given 
into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  now  mentioned 
for  the  first  time  ;  that  the  people  would  be  carried  captives 
to  Babylon,  and  slain  there  with  the  sword  ;  and  that  all  the 
riches  and  gains  of  the  city,  and  all  the  precious  things 
thereof,  and  all  the  treasures  of  the  king  of  Judah,  should 
be  given  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies  to  carry  to  Babylon. 
It  is  this  fourfold  mention  of  Babylon  that  gives  colour  to 
the  suggestion  that  Nineveh  had  fallen  ;  and  that  the  strong 
hand  of  Nabopolassar  and  his  son  was  beginning  to  show 
itself,  and  to  wield  the  sceptre  which  was  falling  from  the 
faltering  grasp  of  one  of  the  oldest  and  greatest  empires  of 
antiquity. 

Set  free,  Jeremiah  went  to  his  home,  and  there  poured 
forth  that  marvellous  combination  of  heroic  faith  and 
wailing  grief,  which  is  recorded  for  us  that  we  may  know  the 
weakness  of  his  nature,  and  learn  how  earthen  was  the 
vessel  in  which  God  had  placed  his  heavenly  treasure.  No 
brazen  wall  was  he,  but  a  reed  shaken  by  the  wind  ;  no 
wise  strong  hero,  but  a  child.  What  he  did  and  said  when 
face  to  face  with  his  age  was  due  to  no  native  strength 
or  heroism  ;  as  he  says  himself,  his  was  "  the  soul  of  the 
needy  "  (ver.  13,  r.v.). 

What  a  tale  could  be  told  by  the  walls  of  the  secret 
chambers  of  God's  greatest  saints !  What  litanies  of 
tears  and  sighs  and  broken  sentences  have  beaten  against 
them  in  successive  billows  of  heartrending  sorrow  !  Take, 
for  instance,  that  outburst  of  Luther  on  the  eve  of  his 
appearance  before  the  Diet  of  Worms.  Those  who  have 
seemed  strongest  and  most  rock-like  in  the  presence  of 
their  fellows  have  sunk  most  helplessly  on  the  ground  in 
solitude,  confessing  that  none  were  so  weak  and  helpless 
as  they. 


^uvniuQ  from  ^ilan  to  (Boh.  89 

Our  prophet  seems  to  have  gone  even  further.  Then 
came  a  suggestion  to  his  heart  that  he  should  rehnquish  his 
labours,  and  renounce  public  for  private  life.  Why  struggle 
any  more  against  the  inevitable?  Why  set  himself  to 
convince  those  who  would  not  be  convinced,  and  who 
repaid  his  love  with  hate  ?  Why  surrender  name,  and  com- 
fort, and  human  love,  for  the  thankless  task  of  endeavouring 
to  stem  his  people's  career?  He  came  to  the  point  of 
saying,  "  Send  whom  Thou  wilt  send ;  entrust  thy  com- 
mission to  some  stronger  soul,  cast  in  a  more  heroic  mould ; 
let  me  go  back  to  the  seclusion  and  humble  toils  of  my 
village  home." 

Not  dissimilar  have  been  the  appeals  of  God's  servants  in 
every  age,  when  they  have  measured  their  weakness  against 
the  strength  of  the  evils  they  have  combated,  and  have 
marked  their  limited  success  :  the  handfuls  of  seed  wasted 
upon  barren  soil ;  the  word  spoken  in  he  ear  of  the  wind ; 
the  futility  of  opposing  an  Ahab  or  a  Jezebel ;  the  ingratitude 
of  those  whom  they  would  have  gladly  saved.  They  have 
been  disposed  to  cry,  with  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  "  It 
is  enough,  let  me  die  ! " 

II.  The  Irresistible  Impulse. — "  There  is  in  mine 
heart  as  it  were  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  bones,  and  I 
am  weary  with  forbearing  and  cannot  contain."  "  O  Lord, 
Thou  art  stronger  than  I,  and  hast  prevailed."  Three  things 
arrest  us  here. 

(i)  T/ie  Prophet's  Habit  of  turning  from  Alan  to  God. — 
Throughout  the  book  there  are  so  many  indications  of  the 
close  fellowship  in  which  he  lived  with  Jehovah.  God 
seemed  always  nigh  at  hand.  His  ear  always  bent  down  to 
the  least  whisper  of  his  servant's  need.  Compelled  to  live 
much  alone,  this  much-suffering  man  acquired  the  habit  of 
counting  on  the  companionship  of  God  as  one  of  the 
undoubted  facts  of  his  life.  He  poured  into  the  ear  of  God 
every  thought  as  it  passed  through  his  soul.      He  spread 


go  ^[}t  ytrc  of  ^oly  Smptilsc. 

forth  his  roots  by  the  river  of  God,  which  is  full  of  water. 
There  was  no  fear  therefore  that  his  leaf  would  become  sere 
in  the  summer  heat,  or  that  he  would  cease  from  yielding 
fruit  in  the  year  of  drought.  The  Lord  was  his  strength, 
his  stronghold,  and  his  refuge  in  the  day  of  affliction  ;  and  to 
Him  he  opened  his  cause.  "  Heal  me,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall 
be  healed ;  save  me,  and  I  shall  be  saved  :  for  Thou  art  my 
praise,  let  me  not  be  dismayed  or  ashamed"  (xvii.  14-18). 

Let  us  seek  this  attitude  of  soul,  which  easily  turns  from 
man  to  God,  not  foregoing  the  hours  of  prolonged  fellow- 
ship ;  but,  in  addition,  acquiring  the  habit  of  talking  over 
our  life  with  One  who  does  not  need  to  be  informed  of 
what  transpires,  but  awaits  with  infinite  desire  to  receive  the 
confidence  of  his  children.  Talk  over  each  detail  of  your 
life  with  God,  telling  Him  all  things,  and  finding  the  myriad 
needs  of  the  soul  satisfied  in  Him. 

(2)  T/ie  Bur7ii Jig  Fire. — We  have  sometimes  seen  a  little 
steamer,  like  The  Maid  of  ihe  Mist  at  the  foot  of  the  Falls 
of  Niagara,  resisting  and  gaining  upon  a  stormy  torrent, 
madly  rushing  past  her.  Slowly  she  has  worked  her  way 
through  the  mad  rush  of  waters,  defying  their  attempt 
to  bear  her  back ;  calmly  and  serenely  pursuing  her  onward 
course,  without  being  turned  aside,  or  driven  back,  or 
dismayed.  And  why  ?  Because  a  burning  fire  is  shut  up 
in  her  heart,  and  her  engines  cannot  stay,  because  impelled 
in  their  strong  and  regular  motion.  Similarly,  within 
Jeremiah's  heart  a  fire  had  been  lit  from  the  heart  of  God, 
and  was  kept  aflame  by  the  continual  fuel  heaped  on  it. 
The  diflficulty,  therefore,  with  him  was,  not  in  speaking,  but 
in  keeping  silent — not  in  acting,  but  in  refraining. 

This  sheds  some  light  upon  the  prophetic  impulse,  and 
helps  us  to  understand  what  the  apostle  Peter  meant  when 
he  said,  "  Holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved 
by  the  Holy  Ghost."  It  was  as  though  the  current  of 
thought  and  feeling  came  mightily  from  without,  and, 
passing  through  them,  swept  them  forward  irresistibly.      In 


iltobctJ  bn  tlje  S0I5  (Bhozt  91 

this  way  it  often  happened  that  the  prophets  did  not 
understand  words  which  were  put  into  their  hearts  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  of  whose  full  meaning  they  were 
ignorant. 

But,  after  all,  our  main  desire  is  to  know  how  we  may 
have  this  heart  on  fire.  We  are  tired  of  a  cold  heart 
toward  God.  We  complain  because  of  our  sense  of  effort 
in  Christian  life  and  duty ;  we  would  fain  learn  the  secret  of 
being  so  possessed  by  the  Spirit  and  thought  of  God  that 
we  might  be  daunted  by  no  opposition,  abashed  by  no  fear. 
The  source  of  the  inward  fire  is  the  love  of  God,  shed 
abroad  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  not  primarily  our  love  to  God, 
but  our  sense  of  his  love  to  us.  The  coals  of  juniper  that 
gave  so  fierce  a  heat  to  the  heart  of  a  Rutherford  were 
brought  from  the  altar  of  the  heart  of  God.  If  we  set 
ourselves  with  open  face  towards  the  cross,  which,  like  a 
burning  lens,  focuses  the  love  of  God,  and  if,  at  the  same 
time,  we  reckon  upon  the  Holy  Spirit — well  called  the 
Spirit  of  Burning — to  do  his  wonted  office,  we  shall  find  the 
ice  that  cakes  the  surface  of  our  heart  dissolving  in  tears  of 
penitence  ;  and  presently  the  sacred  fire  will  begin  to  glow. 
Then  the  love  of  Christ  will  constrain  us  ;  whether  we 
be  beside  ourselves,  or  be  sober,  will  not  be  the  subject 
of  our  consideration  :  but  his  Almighty  Spirit,  the  thought 
of  what  He  desires,  the  passion  of  fulfilling  his  will,  shall 
destroy  the  fire  of  self-esteem,  and  replace  it  with  the 
sacred  fire  of  passionate  devotion. 

\\'hen  that  love  has  once  begun  to  burn  within  the  soul, 
when  once  the  baptism  of  fire  has  set  us  aglow,  the  sins 
and  sorrows  of  men — their  impieties  and  blasphemies,  their 
disregard  of  God,  of  his  service  and  of  his  day,  their  blind 
courting  of  danger,  their  dalliance  with  evil,  will  only  incite 
in  us  a  more  ardent  spirit.  To  see  the  multitudes  rushing 
to  destruction,  to  hear  the  boast  of  the  blasphemer,  the 
taunt  of  the  infidel,  the  cry  of  the  oppressed,  the  ribald 
mirth  of  the  profane,  the  desecration  of  all  that  is  holiest 


92  CljE  S'txc  of  Solg  ifmpulsc. 

and  best  in  man ;  to  think  of  the  grief  caused  to  the  Spirit 
of  God,  the  dishonour  done  to  Him ;  to  anticipate  the  outer 
darkness,  the  undying  worm,  the  bottomless  pit — surely, 
these  will  be  enough  to  fan  the  smouldering  embers  till  they 
break  out  in  the  least  emotional ;  as  when  Jeremiah  said 
that  he  felt  an  inner  impulse,  to  restrain  which  was  a 
weariness,  to  stay  from  obeying  which  was  a  sin. 

(3)  T/ie  PropheVs  Safety.— '•'-^YiO.  Lord  is  with  me  as  a 
mighty  One  and  terrible ;  therefore  my  persecutors  shall 
stumble,  and  they  shall  not  prevail."  The  presence  of  God 
is  salvation.  When  Ezekiel  describes  the  plot  of  Edom 
to  possess  herself  of  the  land  of  the  chosen  people,  he 
indicates  by  a  single  phrase  the  futility  of  the  attempt, 
saying  significantly,  "Whereas  the  Lord  was  there"  (Ezek. 
XXXV.  10).  It  was  enough,  though  Israel  was  in  exile,  that 
God's  Spirit  was  brooding  over  their  desolate  land. 

Thus  Jeremiah  felt.  He  might  be  the  weakest  of  the 
weak,  having  neither  might,  nor  wisdom,  nor  power  of 
speech,  apparently  the  easy  prey  of  Pashur  and  Jehoiakim  ; 
but  since  God  was  with  him,  casting  the  mantle  of  his  pro- 
tection around  his  servant,  and  pledging  Himself  to  be  his 
stronghold  and  house  of  defence,  he  was  invulnerable. 

O  weak  and  trembling  soul,  if  thou  art  true  to  God,  God 
is  with  thee,  besetting  thee  behind  and  before,  and  covering 
thee  with  the  shadow  of  his  wing.  Thou  shalt  be  like 
the  city  of  the  great  King — the  kings  may  assemble,  but  so 
soon  as  they  see  thee,  they  shall  be  stricken  with  terror  and 
pass  away ;  whilst  thou  shalt  be  a  quiet  habitation,  a  tent 
that  shall  not  be  removed,  the  stakes  whereof  shall  never  be 
plucked,  neither  shall  any  of  the  cords  thereof  be  broken. 
"  This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever ;  He  will  be  our 
Guide  even  for  evermore  "  (Psa.  xlviii.  14,  r.v.  maj-g.). 


XL 

^ffltrtions,  Biatoss^s,  ®utnults. 

^ JEREMIAH   XXvi. ) 

' '  I  see  the  wrong  that  round  me  lies, 
I  feel  the  guilt  within  ; 
I  hear,  with  groan  and  travail-cries, 
The  world  confess  its  sin. 

"  Yet  in  the  maddening  maze  of  things, 
And  tossed  by  storm  and  flood, 
To  one  fixed  stake  my  spirit  clings — 
I  know  that  God  is  good." 
r^  Whittier. 

>  fcU*' EHOIAKIM  was,  perhaps,  the  most  despicable  of 
i^  the  kings  of  Judah.  Josephus  says  that  he  was 
unjust  in  disposition  ;  an  evil-doer ;  neither  pious 
towards  God,  nor  just  towards  men.  Something 
of  this  may  have  been  due  to  the  influence  of 
his  wife  Nehushta,  whose  father,  Elnathan,  was 
an  accomphce  in  the  royal  murder  of  Urijah.  "  Jehoiakim 
was  twenty-five  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign,  and 
he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem  ;  and  he  did  that 
which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  his  God."  Such 
is  the  inspired  epitaph  by  the  chronicler. 

Jeremiah  appears  to  have  been  constantly  in  conflict  with 
this  king ;  and  probably  the  earliest  manifestation  of  the  an- 
tagonism that  could  not  but  subsist  between  two  such  men 
occurred  in  connection  with  the  building  of  Jehoiakim's 
palace.  Though  his  kingdom  was  greatly  impoverished 
with  the  heavy  fine  of  between  forty  and  fifty  thousand 
^>ounds  imposed  by  Pharaoh-Necho,  after  the  defeat  and 
death   of  Josiah,  and   though   the   times   were  dark   with 


94  ^filicttotta,  gtstresBEs,  f^ttmulta. 

portents  of  approaching  disaster,  yet  he  began  to  rear  a 
splendid  palace  for  himself,  with  spacious  chambers  and 
large  windows,  floors  of  cedar  and  decorations  of  vermilion. 
As  Elijah  confronted  Ahab,  so  did  Jeremiah  confront  the 
young  king  with  his  terrible  woes:  ''Woe  unto  him  that 
buildeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness,  and  his  chambers  by 
injustice ;  that  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages, 
and  giveth  him  not  his  hire;  .  .  thine  eyes  and  thine 
heart  are  not  but  for  thy  dishonest  gain,  and  for  oppression, 
and  for  violence."  He  further  reminded  him  that  the 
stability  of  Josiah's  throne  depended  not  on  the  splendour 
of  his  palace,  but  upon  the  justice  with  which  he  judged 
the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy  (xxii.  13,  etc.). 

Clearly  such  a  monarch  must  have  entertained  a  mortal 
hatred  towards  the  man  who  dared  to  raise  his  voice  in  de- 
nunciation of  his  crimes ;  and,  hke  Herod  w^ith  John  the 
Baptist,  he  would  not  have  scrupled  to  quench  in  blood  the 
light  that  cast  such  strong  condemnation  upon  his  oppres- 
sive and  cruel  actions.  An  example  of  this  had  been 
recendy  afforded  in  the  death  of  Urijah,  who  had  uttered 
solemn  words  against  Jerusalem  and  its  inhabitants  in  the 
same  way  that  Jeremiah  had  done.  Such  fury  had  been 
excited  by  his  words  that  he  had  been  obliged  to  flee  to 
Egypt,  from  whence  the  king  had  secured  his  extradition, 
that  he  might  avenge  his  bold  denunciation  by  the  sword, 
and  fling  his  body  into  the  graves  of  the  common  people. 
Small  shrift,  then,  could  be  expected  by  Jeremiah,  if  the 
king  dared  to  take  measures  against  him.  But  it  would 
appear  that  this  time,  at  least,  his  safety  was  secured  by  the 
interposition  of  influential  friends  amongst  the  aristocracy, 
one  of  whom  was  Ahikam  the  son  of  Shaphan  (xxvi. 
20-24). 

I.  The  Divine  Commission. — Beneath  the  Divine  im- 
pulse, Jeremiah  went  up  to  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house, 
and  took  his  place  on  some  great  occasion  when  all  the 


^  dlrcat  (Bncmn.  95 

cities  of  Judah  had  poured  their  populations  to  worship 
there.  Not  one  word  was  to  be  kept  back.  We  are  all 
more  or  less  conscious  of  these  inward  impulses ;  and  it 
often  becomes  a  matter  of  considerable  difficulty  to  dis- 
tinguish whether  they  originate  in  the  energy  of  our  own 
nature,  or  are  the  genuine  outcome  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 
It  is  only  in  the  latter  case  that  such  service  can  be  fruitful. 
And  here  for  a  moment  we  will  turn  aside  to  see  how  the 
heart  of  man  may  become  the  medium  through  which  God 
can  pour  his  thoughts  on  men,  and  the  way  by  which  we 
may  recognise  his  inward  prompting. 

There  is  no  greater  enemy  of  the  highest  usefulness  than 
the  presence  of  the  flesh  in  our  activities.  There  is  no 
department  of  life  or  service  into  which  its  subtle,  deadly  in- 
fluence does  not  penetrate.  We  have  to  encounter  it  in  our 
unregenerate  life,  when  its  passions  reveal  themselves, 
brooking  no  restraint.  We  meet  it  after  we  have  entered 
upon  the  new  life,  striving  against  the  Spirit,  and  restraining 
his  gracious  energy.  We  are  most  baffled  when  we  find  it 
prompting  to  holy  resolutions  and  efforts  after  a  consecrated 
life.  The  apostle  Paul  calls  this  the  unequal  marriage  of  the 
flesh,  or  self-life,  with  the  holy  law  of  God,  a  union  which 
brings  forth  fruit  unto  death.  And,  lastly,  it  confronts  us 
in  Christian  work,  because  there  is  so  much  of  it  that  in 
our  quiet  moments  we  are  bound  to  trace  to  a  desire  for 
notoriety,  to  a  passion  to  excel,  and  to  the  restlessness  of  a 
nature  which  evades  questions  in  the  deeper  life,  by  flinging 
itself  into  every  avenue  ihrough  which  it  may  exert  its 
activities. 

There  is  only  one  solution  to  these  difficulties.  By 
the  way  of  the  cross  and  the  grave  we  can  alone  become 
disentangled  and  discharged  from  the  insidious  domination 
of  this  evil  principle,  which  is  accursed  by  God,  and  hurtful 
to  holy  living,  as  blight  to  the  tender  fruit.  In  the  cross  of 
Jesus,  when  He  died  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 
God  wrote  his  curse  upon  every  manifestation  of  selfish  and 


96  ^filtcttons,  distresses,  tumults. 

fleshly  energy  ;  and  now  it  remains  for  each  of  us  to 
appropriate  that  cross,  to  accept  the  Divine  sentence, 
to  He  in  the  grave  where  the  voices  of  human  ambition 
and  adulation  cannot  follow  us,  to  oppose  the  silence  of 
death  to  the  workings  of  our  evil  self.  Not,  however,  to 
stay  there ;  but  to  pass  up  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  into  the  pure  resurrection  air  and  light,  where  no 
face  is  visible  but  that  of  the  risen  Saviour,  where  no 
voice  is  audible  save  his,  and  where  in  the  hush  of 
perfect  fellowship  the  spirit  becomes  able  to  discern  the 
wish  of  its  Lord. 

II.  The  Message  and  its  Reception — There  was  a 
twofold  appeal  in  the  words  Jeremiah  was  commissioned 
to  deliver  on  this  great  occasion,  when  the  whole  land  stood 
intent  to  hear.  On  the  one  side,  by  his  lips,  God  entreated 
his  people  to  repent,  and  turn  from  their  evil  ways  ;  on 
the  other,  He  bade  them  know  that  their  obduracy  would 
compel  Him  to  make  their  great  national  shrine  as  com- 
plete a  desolation  as  the  site  of  Shiloh,  which  for  five 
hundred  years  had  been  in  ruins  It  is  impossible  to  realize 
the  intensity  of  passion  which  such  words  evoked.  They 
seemed  to  insinuate  that  Jehovah  could  not  defend  his  own, 
or  that  their  religion  had  become  so  heartless  that  He  would 
not.  Prophets  and  priests  had  assured  the  people  that 
the  very  presence  amongst  them  of  Jehovah's  Temple  was  a 
guarantee  of  their  safety  ;  and  to  suggest  that  a  fate  might 
overtake  them  like  that  which  in  the  days  of  Samuel  made 
the  ears  of  every  listener  to  tingle  seemed  the  height  of 
impertinence.  "  So  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jeremiah  had 
made  an  end  of  speaking  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  him 
to  speak  unto  all  the  people,"  that  he  found  himself  sud- 
denly in  the  vortex  of  a  whirlpool  of  popular  excitement. 
Thus  it  befell  Paul  in  after  days,  when  the  presumption  that 
he  had  defiled  the  holy  place  produced  so  intense  a  paroxysm 
of  popular  feeling  that  all  the  city  was  moved,   and  the 


''  Clje  ^toorii  0f  the  spirit."  97 

people  ran  together,  and  laid  hold  on  him,  and  dragged  him 
out  of  the  Temple,  so  that  he  was  with  difficulty  rescued  by 
a  regiment  of  Roman  soldiers,  who  bore  him  by  main 
force  from  the  violence  of  the  crowd,  the  multitude  following 
and  crying  out,  "Away  with  him!"  (Acts  xxi.  27-36). 
There  is  little  doubt  that  Jeremiah  would  have  met  his 
death  in  a  similar  emeute,  had  it  not  been  for  the  prompt 
interposition  of  the  princes. 

Such  is  always  the  reception  given  on  the  part  of  man  to 
the  words  of  God.  We  may  gravely  question  how  far 
our  words  are  God's,  when  people  accept  them  quietly 
and  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  Word  of  God  to  those  that 
hug  their  sin  can  only  be  as  fire,  a  hammer,  and  a  sharp 
two-edged  sword.  And  here  again  is  a  certain  test  whether 
our  message  is  the  product  of  our  own  fancy,  or  the  burden 
of  the  Lord.  That  which  men  approve  and  applaud 
may  lack  the  King's  seal,  and  be  the  substitution  on  the 
part  of  the  messenger  of  tidings  which  he  deems  more 
palatable,  and  therefore  more  likely  to  secure  for  himself  a 
larger  welcome. 

III.  Welcome  Interposition. — The  princes  were  seated 
in  the  palace,  and  instantly  on  receiving  tidings  of  the 
outbreak,  came  up  to  the  Temple.  Their  presence  stilled 
the  excitement,  and  prevented  the  infuriated  people  from 
carrying  out  their  designs  upon  the  life  of  the  defenceless 
prophet.  They  hastily  constituted  themselves  into  a  court 
of  appeal,  before  which  prophet  and  people  were  summoned. 
The  priests  and  prophets  acted  as  the  exponents  of  the 
people's  wish,  and  demanded  sentence  of  death,  turning 
from  the  court  to  the  people,  to  ask  their  concurrence. 
Then  Jeremiah  stood  on  his  defence.  His  plea  was  that  he 
could  not  but  utter  the  words  with  which  the  Lord  had  sent 
him,  and  that  he  was  only  re-affirming  the  predictions 
of  Micah  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.  He  acknowledged  that 
he  was  in  their  hands,  but  he  warned  them  that  innocent 

G 


98  Afflictions,  distresses,  tumults. 

blood  would  bring  its  own  Nemesis  upon  them  all ;  and 
at  the  close  of  his  address  he  re-affirmed  his  certain 
embassage  from  Jehovah. 

This  bold  and  ingenuous  defence  seems  to  have  turned 
the  scale  in  his  favour.  The  princes  gave  their  verdict : 
"  This  man  is  not  worthy  of  death,  for  he  hath  spoken  to  us 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God."  And  the  fickle 
populace,  swept  hither  and  thither  by  the  wind,  appear  to 
have  passed  over  en  masse  to  the  same  conclusion ;  so  that 
princes  and  people  stood  confederate  against  the  false 
prophets  and  priests.  The  conclusion  thus  gained  was 
further  confirmed  by  the  voice  of  certain  of  the  elders  of  the 
land,  who  had  come  from  all  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  who 
reminded  the  people  that  the  good  king  Hezekiah  had  acted 
very  differently  to  the  prophet  Micah  in  listening  to  his 
remonstrances,  entreating  the  favour  of  the  Lord,  and 
securing  the  reversal  of  the  Divine  sentence. 

Thus  does  God  hide  his  faithful  servants  in  the  hollow  of 
his  hand.  No  w^eapon  that  is  formed  against  them  prospers. 
They  are  hidden  in  the  secret  of  his  pavilion  from  the  strife 
of  tongues. 


Ibtstorlcal  Connection* 

We  have  no  narrative  in  Scripture  of  the  fall  of  Nineveh, 
except  the  prophecy  by  Nahum.  "  The  Assyrian  empire," 
says  Dean  Stanley,  "vanished  from  the  earth  so  suddenly, 
and  so  noiselessly,  that  its  fall  is  only  known  to  us  through 
the  reduced  grandeur  of  the  palaces  of  its  latest  king,  and 
through  the  cry  of  exultation  raised  over  its  destruction 
by  the  Israelite  prophet."  Upon  her  ruins  arose  the 
Babylonian  empire,  first  under  the  government  of  Nabopo- 
lassar,  and  afterwards  of  his  greater  son,  Nebuchadnezzar. 
Ezekiel  describes  it  as  the  rising  of  a  mighty  eagle,  with 
great  wings  full  of  feathers  of  divers  colours ;  as  though  to 
indicate  the  variegated  pennons  of  the  various  contingents 
that  composed  its  vast  hosts  (Ezek.  xvii.  3). 

In  a  previous  chapter  we  saw  that  Egypt  was  mistress  of 
all  lands  from  the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates.  But  as  soon  as  the 
Chaldeans  had  established  their  kingdom  upon  the  ruins  of 
Nineveh,  they  turned  their  attention  to  wrest  from  Pharaoh- 
Necho  some  portion  of  his  vast  empire.  Jeremiah  had  long 
before  seen  that  this  would  be  the  case,  and  had  depicted  in 
graphic  imagery  the  scene  and  issue  of  the  awful  battle  at 
Carchemish,  by  the  Euphrates,  where  the  two  mighty 
peoples  wrestled  for  the  supreme  power  of  the  world. 

He  heard  the  call  to  arms.  He  beheld  the  horses 
heavily  armed,  and  the  horsemen  with  flashing  spears  and 
coats  of  mail.  The  Egyptian  hosts,  like  the  Nile  at  flood, 
pour  themselves  against  the  solid  ranks  of  their  foes;  her 
tributaries  from  Cush  and  Put,  together  with  the  Ludim, 
famous  at  handling  the  bow,  strive  in  vain  to  check  the 
flight  of  Egypt's  mighty  men.  They  flee  apace,  and  look 
not  back ;  the  sword  devours  and  drinks  its  fill  of  blood ; 
the  cry  of  the  fugitive  hosts  fills  the  earth  with  clamour ;  and 
the  mighty  stumble  never  to  rise  (xlvi.  1-12).  Egypt  never 
rallied  again,  nor  dared  to  do  more  than  strive  against  the 


loo  historical  Connectiott. 

yoke  that  Nebuchadnezzar,  with  imperial  might,  fastened 
upon  her. 

After  this  there  was  nothing  to  stay  the  onset  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  who  probably  had  been  associated  in  the 
kingdom  with  his  aged  father,  and  the  first  year  of  whose 
reign  would  therefore  coincide  with  the  fourth  year  of 
Jehoiakim  (xxv.  i).  Like  a  leopard,  to  use  the  expression 
of  Habakkuk,  who  at  this  time  was  beginning  to  exercise 
his  ministry,  the  young  king  leapt  upon  the  peoples 
that  had  been  subject  to  Egypt,  and  had  aided  in  her 
expedition.  And,  as  the  tidings  of  his  prowess  spread 
through  the  world,  Jeremiah  foretold  that  he  would  be  the 
scourge  of  God,  to  punish  the  abounding  wickedness  of  the 
peoples.  "  I  will  send  unto  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  King  of 
Babylon,  my  servant,  and  will  bring  him  against  this  land, 
and  against  the  inhabitants  thereof,  and  against  all  these 
nations  round  about ;  and  will  utterly  destroy  them,  and 
make  them  an  astonishment,  and  an  hissing,  and  perpetual 
desolations,  and  this  whole  land  shall  be  a  desolation  and 
an  astonishment ;  and  these  nations  shall  serve  the  king  of 
Babylon  seventy  years." 

In  his  first  invasion  of  Judah,  the  king  of  Babylon 
contented  himself  with  binding  Jehoiakim  in  fetters  to 
carry  him  to  Babylon,  though  be  seems  afterwards  to  have 
changed  his  intention,  and  to  have  restored  him  to  his 
throne  as  his  vassal,  taking  an  oath  of  allegiance  (Ezek. 
xvii.  12,  13).  He  stripped  the  Temple  of  its  precious 
vessels  to  enrich  the  house  of  his  god  at  Babylon,  and 
carried  into  captivity  several  of  the  mighty  of  the  land, 
amongst  them  Daniel  and  his  three  friends  (Dan.  i.  i,  2). 
He  then  hastened  back  to  Babylon,  summoned  thither  by 
the  tidings  of  the  death  of  his  father,  Nabopolassar. 

For  three  years  Jehoiakim  remained  faithful  to  his  oath 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  i);  then  he  was  deluded  by  the  hope  of 
independence,  based  on  the  hope  of  forming  a  confeder- 
ation of  neighbouring  peoples.     Messengers  went  to  and  fro 


IJistnnral  €onmction.  loi 

between  himself  and  Pharaoh,  negotiating  for  horses  and 
much  people  ;  though  all  the  while  Ezekiel  and  Jeremiah 
protested  that  Jehovah  would  certainly  punish  him  for 
violating  his  pledge  to  the  king  of  Babylon.  This  was  a 
time  of  unusual  activity  for  the  prophets  of  Jehovah,  who 
strove  their  utmost  to  avert  a  political  mistake,  founded 
upon  a  moral  obliquity,  and  sure  to  incur  terrible  vengeance 
(Ezek.  xvii.  15-21). 

It  befell  as  they  feared.  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  was  not 
prepared  to  brook  such  infidelity  on  the  part  of  a  subject 
king,  soon  put  his  forces  in  motion,  and  prepared  to  advance 
across  the  desert  to  punish  the  weak  and  faithless  Jehoiakim. 
It  was  during  his  march  on  Jerusalem  that  the  incidents 
narrated  in  the  two  following  chapters  took  place,  the  one 
the  proclamation  of  a  fast,  the  other  the  gathering  of  the 
Rechabites,  with  other  fugitives,  into  the  shelter  of  the  city. 

We  have  no  certain  clue  to  the  prophet's  history  during 
these  three  or  four  years.  His  heart  must  have  been 
filled  with  the  patriot's  anguish  as  he  saw  the  coils  of 
invasion  drawn  closer  around  the  devoted  city.  To  him, 
indeed,  it  was  the  year  of  drought,  and  there  was  no  hope 
save  in  God  ;  and  often  upon  his  lips  must  have  been  words 
like  those  which  the  great  Florentine  addressed  to  the  city 
which  he  loved  with  the  passionate  affection  which  the 
Jews  always  cherished  towards  Jerusalem,  "  Thy  sins,  O 
Florence,  are  the  cause  of  these  stripes.  But  now  repent, 
offer  prayers,  become  united.  I  have  wearied  myself  all 
the  days  of  my  life  to  make  known  to  thee  the  truths 
of  the  faith,  and  of  holy  living ;  and  I  have  had  nothing 
but  tribulations,  derision,  and  reproach." 


XII. 

fbB    Untt^strurtibU    Math. 

(Jerf.miah  xxxvi.  23.) 

"  Truth,  crushed  to  earth,  shall  rise  again  : 
The  eternal  years  of  God  are  hers  ; 
But  error,  vanquished,  writhes  in  pain, 
And  dies  amid  her  worshippers." 

'E  are  admitted  to  the  prophet's  private  chamber, 
where  he  is  keeping  close  that  he  may  not 
excite  the  acute  animosity  and  hatred  of  the 
people.  Baruch,  his  trusted  friend,  a  man 
of  rank  and  learning,  sits  writing  with  labori- 
'"^  ous   care   at   the   dictation  of   the  prophet, 

whose  soul  is  borne  along  by  the  impulse  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  "  Tell  us,"  the  princes  said  afterwards  to  Baruch, 
"  how  didst  thou  write  all  these  words  at  his  mouth  ? " 
Then  Baruch  answered  them,  "  He  pronounced  all  these 
words  unto  me  with  his  mouth,  and  I  wrote  them  with  ink 
in  the  book." 

When  the  roll  was  filled,  Jeremiah,  not  venturing  to  go 
into  places  of  public  concourse,  entrusted  it  to  Baruch,  and 
bade  him  read  it  to  the  assembled  crowds.  Jerusalem  just 
then  was  unusually  full.  From  all  parts  of  Judah  people 
had  come  to  observe  the  great  fast  which  had  been  pro- 
claimed in  view  of  the  approach  of  the  Babylonish  army. 
Adopting  the  cry  which  Jeremiah  had  so  fervently  depre- 
cated, "  The  Temple  of  the  Lord,  the  Temple  of  the  Lord 
are  these,"  and  imagining  that  there  was  a  special  virtue  in 
the  Temple  precincts,  the  multitudes  had  crowded  thither 
in  an  agony  of  fear ;  hoping  by  their  black  vails,  and  covered 


Ilcatrm0  the  ^oU.  103 

lips,  and  heartrending  cries,  to  propitiate  the  x\hnighty,  and 
avert  the  fate  that  seemed  imminent. 

Choosing  a  position  in  the  upper  court  at  the  entry  of  the 
new  gate  to  the  Lord's  house,  Baruch  commenced  to  read, 
whilst  the  people  stood  densely  massed  around  him.  Amid 
the  awestruck  crowd  was  a  young  man,  Micaiah,  the  grand- 
son of  Shaphan,  who  was  so  impressed  and  startled  by  what 
he  heard  that  he  hastened  to  acquaint  the  princes,  then 
sitting  in  council  in  the  chamber  of  the  chief  Secretary 
of  State,  in  the  royal  palace.  They  in  turn  were  so  aroused 
by  what  he  told  them  that  they  sent  him  back  to  the 
Temple,  and  asked  Baruch  to  come  without  delay  and  read 
the  prophet's  words  to  them.  He  came  at  their  request, 
and  sitting  among  them,  commenced  to  read. 

In  the  group  of  princes  were  several  notable  men : 
Elishama,  the  Secretary  of  State ;  Elnathan,  the  father-in- 
law  of  the  king,  who  had  brought  the  prophet  Urijah  back 
from  Egypt  to  die ;  and  others.  A  great  fear  fell  upon 
them  as  they  heard  those  ominous  words,  which  were 
probably  closely  similar  to  those  recorded  in  the  twenty- 
fifth  chapter  of  this  book.  Though  they  had  joined  in  the 
general  hatred  of  the  prophet,  they  were  deeply  sensible 
that  there  was  everything  to  justify  him  in  his  prognostica- 
tions of  coming  trouble  ;  and  it  seemed  their  plain  duty  to 
acquaint  the  king  with  the  contents  of  the  roll. 

Before  doing  so,  however,  they  counselled  Baruch  and 
Jeremiah  to  conceal  themselves,  for  they  well  knew  the 
despotic  and  passionate  temper  of  Jehoiakim  ;  and  the  roll 
was  left  in  the  chamber  of  Elishama.  It  would  appear  that 
in  the  first  instance  they  thought  a  verbal  statement  of  the 
words  they  had  heard  would  suffice.  This,  however,  would 
not  satisfy  the  king,  who  bade  Jehudi  fetch  the  roll  itself 
It  was  winter,  the  month  of  December ;  the  king  was 
occupying  the  winter  quarters  of  his  palace,  and  a  fire  was 
burning  brightly  in  the  brazier.  It  is  a  vivid  picture — the 
king  sitting  before  the  fire;    the  princes  standing  around 


I04  Wh^  3ntie5trtirtibk  lEorlr. 

him  ;  Jehudi  reading  the  contents  of  the  roll ;  consternation 
and  panic  reigning  throughout  the  city  and  darkening  the 
faces  of  the  prostrate  crowds  in  the  Temple  courts.  As 
Jehudi  began  to  read,  the  royal  brow  knit,  and  symptoms  of 
a  tempest  of  anger  showed  themselves.  After  the  scribe 
had  read  three  or  four  columns,  Jehoiakim  snatched  the 
roll  from  his  hand,  and,  demanding  the  penknife  which  he 
carried  as  symbol  and  implement  of  his  calling,  began 
to  cut  the  manuscript  in  pieces,  which  he  flung  contemp- 
tuously into  the  fire.  The  worst  have  some  compunctions, 
and  for  the  most  passionate  there  are  warning  voices  that 
remonstrate  and  plead.  So  was  it  with  king  Jehoiakim. 
Delaiah,  Gemariah,  and  even  Elnathan,  tried  to  dissuade 
him  from  his  purpose ;  but  in  vain.  Nothing  could  stop 
him  until  the  whole  roll  was  cut  to  pieces,  and  every 
fragment  consumed.  Not  content  with  this  flagrant  act 
of  defiance,  he  gave  orders  for  the  immediate  arrest  of 
Jeremiah  and  Baruch ;  an  order  which  his  emissaries 
attempted  to  execute,  but  in  vain. 

The  destruction  of  the  roll  did  not  however  cancel  the 
terrible  doom  to  which  the  ship  of  State  was  hurrying, 
under  the  orders  of  its  passionate  and  wicked  captain.  On 
another  roll  all  the  words  of  the  book  which  he  had  burned 
were  written  again ;  and  others  were  added  foretelling  the 
indignity  and  insult  to  which  the  dead  body  of  the  king 
would  be  exposed.  "  His  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out  in 
the  day  to  the  heat,  and  in  the  night  to  the  frost." 

I.  Eyes  Opened  to  See. — There  w^as  a  vast  difference 
between  Baruch,  whose  heart  was  in  perfect  sympathy  with 
Jeremiah,  and  Jehudi  or  the  princes.  But  there  was  almost 
as  much  between  the  faithful  scribe  and  the  heaven- 
illumined  prophet.  The  one  could  only  write  as  the  words 
streamed  from  those  burning  lips ;  he  saw  nothing,  he 
realized  nothing ;  to  him  the  walls  of  the  chamber  were  the 
utmost   bound   of   vision  :    whilst    the    other    beheld    the 


whole  landscape  of  truth  outspread  before  him,  the  rocks 
and  shoals  on  the  margin  of  the  ocean,  the  inrolling  storm- 
billows  tipped  with  angry  foam,  the  gathering  clouds,  the 
ship,  straining  in  every  timber,  and  driving  sheer  on  the 
shore.  For  Jeremiah  the  walls  of  the  chamber  where  they 
sat  together  were  as  though  they  had  become  transparent ; 
he  looked  through  and  beyond  them,  and  read  off  his  mes- 
sage from  what  he  saw,  as  a  man  might  read  from  a  book. 

This  was  the  work  of  the  Spirit  who  inspired  him,  and 
whose  special  function  it  was  to  open  the  eye  of  the  seers  of 
the  old  time  to  the  great  facts  of  the  unseen  and  eternal 
world,  which  were  shortly  to  be  reduplicated  in  the  world  of 
the  temporal  and  visible.  They  beheld  visions  of  God  :  the 
sapphire  throne  upborne  by  the  strong  cherubim ;  the 
terrible  wheels  of  providence;  the  rise  and  fall  of  mighty 
empires ;  the  subdual  of  sin  and  pain  by  the  mighty 
sway  of  the  coming  One.  To  speak  what  he  knew,  and 
to  testify  what  he  had  seen — such  was  the  mission  of  the 
prophet. 

In  our  case  there  is  no  likelihood  of  this.  Yet  men  may 
be  seers  still.  Two  men  may  sit  together  side  by  side. 
The  vail  of  sense  may  hang  darkly  before  the  one,  whilst  for 
the  other  it  is  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom. 
There  no  thought,  no  ambition,  no  desire  for  aught  beyond 
the  temporal  and  seen ;  but  here  the  vision  of  the  presence 
and  care  of  God,  of  the  principalities  and  powers  in  the 
heavenlies,  of  the  ministry  of  angels,  and  the  opposition  of 
fiends,  of  the  chariots  and  horses  of  salvation,  of  the  prize 
and  crown,  of  the  awards  of  Christ's  judgment -seat,  and 
the  home  beyond  the  river.  Flesh  and  blood  do  not  reveal 
such  things,  but  the  Spirit  of  God.  They  are  hidden  from 
the  wise  and  prudent,  but  revealed  to  babes  who  love  God. 
Happy  are  they,  the  eyes  of  whose  heart  are  opened,  to 
know  what  is  the  hope  of  His  calling,  what  the  riches  of 
his  inheritance  in  the  saints,  and  what  the  exceeding 
greatness  of  his  power  toward  them  that  believe. 


io6  ®Ije  indestructible  Morti. 

It  is  very  important  that  all  Christians  should  be  alive 
to  and  possess  this  power  of  vision.  It  is  deeper  than 
intellectual,  since  it  is  spiritual ;  it  is  not  the  result  oi 
reasoning  or  learning,  but  of  intuition ;  it  cannot  be 
acquired  in  the  school  of  earthly  science,  but  is  the  gift 
of  Him  who  alone  can  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  and 
remove  the  films  of  earthliness  that  shut  out  the  eternal  and 
unseen.  If  you  lack  it,  reader,  seek  it  at  the  hands  of 
Jesus  ;  be  willing  to  do  his  will,  and  you  shall  know.  It  is 
a  thousand  pities  to  be  blind,  and  not  able  to  see  afar 
off,  when  all  around  stand  the  mountains  of  God  in  solemn 
majesty ;  as  the  Alps  around  the  Swiss  hostelry,  where 
the  traveller  arrives  after  nightfall,  to  eat  and  drink  and 
sleep,  unconscious  of  the  proximity  of  so  much  loveliness. 
It  is  related  of  Ampere,  the  electrician,  who  was  short- 
sighted, without  being  aware  of  it,  that  when  he  became 
conscious  of  his  defective  vision  through  the  casual  use 
of  the  eye-glasses  of  a  friend,  he  burst  into  tears  as  he 
realized  how  much  he  had  missed  throughout  his  life  of  the 
wonderful  beauty  and  interest  of  the  world  around  him. 
With  more  reason  will  many  of  us  have  to  lament  our 
untold  loss  through  that  spiritual  near-sightedness  of  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  speaks  (2  Pet.  i.  9,  r.v.). 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  have  the  opened  eye,  you 
will  not  need  books  of  evidences  to  establish  to  your 
satisfaction  the  truth  of  our  holy  religion  ;  the  glory  of 
the  risen  Lord  :  the  world  of  the  unseen.  With  the  woman 
of  Samaria,  you  will  say,  "  We  have  seen  it  for  ourselves." 
No  further  proof  will  be  needed  than  your  own  spiritual 
senses  afford.  And  though  a  series  of  well-ordered 
arguments  should  be  brought  into  array  to  assail  your 
position  as  a  believer,  you  would  be  bold  to  reply,  "Whereas 
I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  The  patriarchs  of  old  who  reached 
forth  their  hands  to  greet  the  vision  of  the  City  that  hath 
foundations,  the  New  Jerusalem — which  all  holy  souls  behold 
descending  out  of  heaven  from  God — furnish  the  model  for 


i;ijc  f  cnhittfc  of  gcstnxctton.  107 

spiritual  men  of  every  age  ;  and  they  who  see  these  things 
are  indifferent  to  the  privations  of  the  tent-hfe,  or,  as  in 
Jeremiah's  case,  rise  superior  to  the  hatred  of  man  and 
the  terrors  of  a  siege. 

II.  The  Use  of  the  Penknife. — Men  use  the  knife  to 
the  Bible  in  varied  ways.  Among  these  are  Systems  of 
Priestcraft  and  Error.  They  have  done  it.  They  will  do 
it  again.  They  are  wise  to  do  it — I  mean,  wise  in  their  own 
interests.  For  when  once  the  Bible  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
people,  the  false  teacher,  who  has  deluded  them  for  selfish 
purposes,  must  pack.  The  long  reign  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  church  was  broken  as  soon  as  Tyndale,  Erasmus, 
and  Luther,  opened  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  printing-press 
scattered  it  over  the  worid.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
therefore,  that,  as  long  as  possible,  fires  were  lit  for  Bible- 
burning,  in  every  chief  city  of  Europe,  and  the  knife  was 
freely  used  to  cut  out  whatever  condemned  the  office  of  the 
Pope,  or  the  system  to  which  he  belonged.  The  Vulgate, 
with  its  mutilations  and  excisions,  is  a  standing  evidence 
that  Jehudi's  penknife  survived  his  age. 

The  next  that  follows  Jehoiakim's  practice  is  the  hifidel, 
who  uses  the  keen  blade  of  bitter  sarcasm  and  miscalled 
reason  to  destroy  the  Scriptures.  The  hostility  that  mani- 
fested itself  in  the  winter-palace  among  the  princes  of  this 
worid,  has  wrought  in  the  halls  of  earthly  learning  and 
science,  instigating  similar  acts  to  theirs.  The  laboratory  of 
the  chemist,  the  hammer  of  the  mineralogist,  the  pry  of  the 
geologist,  the  telescope  of  the  astronomer,  the  calculation  of 
the  arithmetician,  and  the  explorations  of  the  discoverer — 
have  all  been  used  in  turn  as  the  penknife  of  destruction. 
The  Bible  is  cut  up  regulariy  once  in  each  generation  by 
men  like  these. 

The  next  are  the  Higher  Critics  of  our  time,  who  surely 
have  gone  beyond  the  necessities  of  the  case  in  their  ruthless 
use  of  the  knife.     Some  of  them  seem  to  delight  in  making 


io8  W\jz  Itttiestrurtibk  Wortr. 

havoc  of  the  sacred  writings,  hacking  at  the  Old  Testament 
especially,  and  whittling  away  from  the  reputed  work  of  a 
Moses,  an  Isaiah,  or  a  Daniel.  There  is  room  for  the 
honest  examination  of  the  fabric  of  sacred  Scripture,  its 
language,  the  evidence  furnished  in  its  texture  of  the 
successive  hands  which  have  re-edited  its  most  ancient 
documents ;  but  this  is  altogether  different  to  the  ruthless 
vandalism  that  wantonly  assigns  large  portions  of  the 
Pentateuch  to  the  age  of  Ezra,  and  the  Book  of  Daniel  to 
the  times  of  the  Maccabees. 

JVe  are  all  tempted  to  use  Jehudi^s  penknife. —  It  is 
probable  that  no  one  is  free  from  the  almost  unconscious 
habit  of  evading  or  toning  down  certain  passages  which 
conflict  with  the  doctrinal  or  ecclesiastical  position  in  which 
we  were  reared,  or  which  we  have  assumed. 

In  our  private  reading  of  the  Scripture,  we  must  beware 
of  using  the  penknife.  Whole  books  and  tracts  of  truth  are 
practically  cut  out  of  the  Bible  of  some  earnest  Christians — 
passages  referring  to  the  Second  Advent,  with  their  sum- 
mons to  awake  and  gird  on  the  armour  of  light ;  those  that 
deal  with  the  undying  worm,  the  unquenched  fire,  and 
the  inevitable  doom  of  the  ungodly  ;  those  that  describe  the 
types  and  shadows  of  the  ancient  law;  or  those  that  build  up 
massive  systems  of  truth  and  doctrine,  as  in  the  epistles. 
But  we  can  only  eliminate  these  things  at  our  peril.  The 
Bible  is  like  good  wheaten  bread,  which  contains  all  the 
properties  necessary  to  support  hfe.  And  we  cannot 
eliminate  its  starch  or  sugar,  its  nitrates  or  phosphates,  with- 
out becoming  enfeebled  and  unhealthy.  It  is  a  golden  rule 
to  read  the  Bible  as  a  whole.  Of  course  each  will  have  his 
favourite  passages,  dark  with  tears  and  use — Psalm  xxiii.  ; 
Isaiah  liii.  ;  John  xiv.— but,  beside  these,  there  should 
be  the  loving  and  devout  study  of  all  Scripture,  which 
is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  therefore  profitable, 
that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  to 
every  good  work. 


^ht  ^oii  fte-hrntteit.  109 

III.  The  Indestructible  Word. —  Men  may  destroy 
the  words  and  the  fabric  on  which  they  are  written,  but  not 
the  Word  itself.  It  is  the  incorruptible  Word  of  God  which 
liveth  and  abideth,  though  all  flesh  wither  as  grass,  and  the 
glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  the  field.  It  must  be  some- 
times an  uncomfortable  reflection  to  those  who  refuse  the 
testimony  of  the  Word  of  God,  who  to  all  intents  and 
purposes  destroy  it  and  despise  its  remonstrances  and 
warnings,  that  their  attitude  towards  the  message  cannot 
affect  the  reality  to  which  it  bears  witness. 

Jeremiah  wrote  another  roll.  The  money  spent  in 
buying  up  copies  of  the  Bible  to  burn  at  St.  Paul's  enabled 
Tyndale  to  re-issue  the  Scriptures  in  a  cheaper  form  and  a 
better  type.  And  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  fact  in  this 
connexion  is  that,  in  spite  of  all  that  has  been  done  to 
stamp  out  the  Bible,  it  exists  in  millions  of  copies,  and 
is  circulated  among  all  the  nations  of  the  world — not  a 
chapter  effaced,  not  a  parable  dropped  out,  not  a  miracle 
injured,  not  a  promise  scarred.  It  has  been  declared  over 
and  over  again  to  be  a  careless,  unauthenticated  collection 
of  works  of  different  periods,  having  no  unity  save  that 
given  by  the  bookbinder ;  yet  it  is  with  us  to-day  in 
unimpaired  authority. 

And  the  facts  to  which  Jeremiah  bore  witness  all  came  to 
pass.  Neither  knife  nor  fire  could  arrest  the  inevitable 
doom  of  king,  city,  and  people.  The  drunken  captain  may 
cut  in  pieces  the  chart  that  tells  of  the  rocks  in  the  vessel's 
course,  and  put  in  irons  the  sailor  who  calls  his  attention  to 
it ;  but  neither  will  avert  the  crash  that  must  ensue  unless 
the  helm  is  turned.  Let  those  beware  who  deny  the  testi- 
mony of  Scripture  to  the  retribution  of  sin  and  the  wrath 
of  God ;  these  things  are  as  true  as  the  throne  of  God  and 
the  reward  of  the  redeemed.  You  may  tamper  with  and 
destroy  the  record,  but  the  stubborn  facts  remain. 


XIII. 

( I  f:k.  XXXV.  6 — lo. ) 

"  Happy  if  full  of  days — but  happier  far 
If,  ere  we  yet  discern  life's  evening  star, 
Sick  of  the  service  of  a  world  that  feeds 
Its  patient  dnidges  with  dry  chaff  and  weeds, 
We  can  escape  from  custom's  idiot  sway, 
To  serve  the  Sovereign  we  were  born  to  obey. " 

^^  COWPER. 

a^^p^/HE  march  of  Nebuchadnezzar  on  Jerusalem  was 
^1^'      anticipated  by  incursions  of  Syrians,  Moabites, 
'icJ^^     and  the  children  of  Ammon.      These  may  be 
t^f\       compared  to  the  squadrons  of  light  cavalry  used 
^  y%i^        in    modern    warfare    to    harass   the   enemy  and 
^^'^       prepare  the  way  for  heavier  armaments.     They 
swept  up  the  valleys,  massacred  the  peasantry,  devoured  the 
crops,  and  spread  terror  on  every  hand.     The  inhabitants, 
therefore,  of  the  neighbouring  country,  eager  to  save  their 
lives  and  some  relics  of  their  property,  left  their  houses  and 
lands  to  the  mercy  of  the  invader,  and  fled  for  protection  to 
the  metropolis  ;  accounting  that  within  the  massive  walls  of 
Zion  they  would  find  safeguard.     What  a  stir  there  must 
have  been  as  day  by  day  the  motley    groups  pressed  in 
under  the  old  gateways,  gray  with  age,  and  sought  accom- 
modation and  food  in  the  already  over-crowded  tenements 
of  the  city  ! 

Amongst  the  rest  came  a  tribe  that  excited  much  curiosity 
by  reason  of  its  strange  and  antique  manners.  It  came  in 
full  force — of  men,  at  least.  The  sheikh's  name  was 
Jaazaniah — "he  whom  Jehovah  hears";  and   his  brethren 


and  sons  and  the  heads  of  other  households  were  with  him. 
They  refused  to  shelter  in  the  houses  or  permanent  buildings 
of  the  city,  but  pitched  their  dusky  tents  in  some  open  space 
within  the  walls,  and  there  awaited  the  turn  of  events. 

Their  record  was  an  honourable  one,  and  reached  far 
back  into  the  early  days  of  Hebrew  history.  When  Israel 
was  passing  through  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  the  tribe  of  the 
Kenites  showed  them  kindness  ;  and  this  laid  the  foundation 
of  perpetual  friendUness  between  the  two  peoples.  They 
seem  to  have  adopted  the  religious  convictions  of  Israel,  and 
to  have  accompanied  them  into  the  Land  of  Promise.  Re- 
taining their  integrity  as  a  pastoral  people,  the  Kenites 
maintained  these  friendly  relations  with  Israel  during  the 
intervening  centuries ;  and  it  was  of  this  tribe  that  the 
Rechabites,  for  such  was  the  name  of  this  strange  tent- 
loving  people,  had  sprung  (Judges  iv.  17-24  ;  i  Sam.  xv.  6  ; 
I  Chron.  ii.  55). 

About  the  time  of  Elijah,  and  perhaps  largely  influenced 
by  him,  the  sheikh,  or  leader  of  one  branch  of  the  Kenites, 
was  Jonadab  the  son  of  Rechab.  He  was  dismayed  at 
the  abounding  corruption  and  iniquity  of  the  time,  and 
especially  of  the  northern  kingdom,  then  under  the  fatal 
spell  of  Jezebel's  and  Ahab's  influence  ;  and  resembled  some 
rank  jungle  in  whose  steamy  air,  heavy  with  fever  and 
poison,  noisome  creatures  swarm,  and  foul  pestilences  breed. 
In  his  endeavour  to  save  his  people  from  such  a  fate,  this 
noble  man,  who  afterwards  became  Jehu's  confederate  in 
extirpating  idolatry,  bound  his  people  under  a  solemn 
pledge  to  drink  no  wine  for  ever ;  neither  to  build  houses, 
nor  sow  seed,  nor  plant  vineyards,  but  to  dwell  in  tents. 
Two  hundred  and  fifty  years  had  passed  since  then,  but 
when  they  arrived  in  Jerusalem  they  were  still  true  to 
the  traditions  of  their  race ;  and  with  sturdy  strength  stood 
out  among  the  effeminate  and  idol-loving  people  of  Jeru- 
salem, living  representatives  of  the  noblest  and  purest  days 
of  Hebrew  story. 


112  i;^e  Hechabites. 

I.  Jeremiah's  Test  of  the  Rechabites. — So  soon  as 
their  arrival  was  noised  abroad,  and  had  come  to  the  ears  of 
Jeremiah,  he  was  seized  by  a  Divine  impulse  to  derive  from 
them  a  striking  object-lesson  for  his  own  people.  With 
an  inventiveness  which  only  passionate  love  could  have 
suggested,  the  prophet  caught  at  every  incident,  and  used 
every  method  to  awaken  his  people  to  realize  their  true 
position  in  the  sight  of  God.  Taking  the  leaders  of  the 
Rechabites  with  him,  he  went  into  the  Temple,  to  a  room 
belonging  to  the  sons  of  Hanan,  known  as  a  man  of 
God,  immediately  adjacent  to  the  room  occupied  by  the 
princes,  and  above  that  occupied  by  the  gatekeeper. 

Probably  a  little  group  of  Jews,  arrested  by  the  prophet's 
association  with  these  strange-looking  men,  followed  them 
in  to  watch  the  proceedings.  They  were  curious  witnesses 
of  the  prophet's  action,  as  he  caused  bowls  of  wine  to  be  set 
before  the  tribesmen,  and  cups  to  be  offered  them,  that  they 
might  dip  them  in  and  drink.  They  also  heard  the  blunt 
unqualified  refusal  of  these  quaint  old-fashioned  Puritans, 
"We  will  drink  no  wine,"  followed  by  an  explanation  of  the 
solemn  obligation  laid  on  them  centuries  before. 

The  moral  was  obvious.  Here  were  men  loyal  to  the 
wish  of  their  ancestor,  though  he  was  little  more  than  a 
name  to  them,  and  refusing  the  offered  sweets  in  which  so 
many  freely  indulged.  How  great  a  contrast  to  the  people 
of  Jerusalem,  who  persistently  disregarded  the  words  of  the 
living  God  perpetually  remonstrating  against  their  sins ! 
The  prohibitions  of  Jonadab  were  largely  arbitrary  and 
external ;  whilst  those  of  Jehovah  were  corroborated  by  the 
convictions  of  conscience,  and  consonant  with  the  deepest 
foundations  of  religion  and  morality.  The  voice  of  Jonadab 
was  a  cry  coming  faintly  from  far  down  the  ages ;  whilst 
Jehovah  was  ever  speaking  with  each  new  dawn,  and  in 
the  voice  of  each  fresh  messenger  whom  He  rose  early 
to  send. 

There  could  be  but  one  result,     Judah,  eaten  through 


**ta  ^ianh  bziavt  <Bobr  113 

with  the  crimes  and  corruption  against  which  God  had 
protested  in  vain,  must  reap  the  whirlwind,  as  she  had  sown 
the  wind.  There  could  be  no  escape  from  the  judgment 
which  was  drawing  nearer  with  every  daybreak.  If  the 
people  could  not  heed  words  of  expostulation,  of  entreaty, 
and  warning,  accounting  them  exaggerated  and  vain,  they 
should  at  least  be  compelled  to  admit  that  not  one  of 
God's  threats  of  vengeance  fell  impotent  on  the  air  or 
missed  its  aim. 

On  the  other  hand,  such  devotion  to  principle;  such 
persistent  culture  of  simplicity,  frugaHty,  and  abstinence ; 
such  Hteral  adherence  to  the  will  of  the  father  of  their 
house — not  only  carried  within  them  the  assurance  of 
perpetuity  to  the  people  who  practised  them,  but  must 
receive  the  signature  and  countersign  of  the  Almighty. 
"  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel, 
Jonadab,  the  son  of  Rechab,  shall  not  want  a  man  to  stand 
before  Me  for  ever." 

This  phrase  had  a  very  profound  significance.  It  sug- 
gested, of  course,  obviously,  that  the  tribe  should  not  cease 
to  exist.  And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  Dr.  Wolff,  the  mission- 
ary traveller,  met  a  tribe  in  Arabia  who  claimed  to  be 
Rechabites,  and  read  to  him  these  words  of  Jeremiah  from 
an  Arabic  Bible ;  and  that  Signer  Pierotti,  near  the  south- 
east end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  met  a  tribe  who  also  called 
themselves  Rechabites,  and  quoted  these  words.  But  there 
was  a  yet  deeper  thought.  The  phrase  is  often  used  in 
Scripture  of  priestly  service.  And  may  we  not  infer  that 
where  we  meet  that  devotion  to  principle,  and  that  detach 
ment  from  the  world,  which  characterized  these  men,  there 
will  always  be  a  strong  religious  tone,  a  knowledge  of  God, 
a  power  in  prayer  and  intercession,  which  are  the  essential 
characteristics  of  the  priests  ?  This  will  lead  us  to  thoughts 
which  are  alike  suggestive  and  salutary. 

II.  The  Elements  of  a  Strongly  Religious  Life. — 

H 


114  ^h^  Herljabitea. 

The  phrase  "  to  stand  before  God  "  designates  a  high-toned 
rehgious  Ufe,  and  includes  the  knowledge  of  God,  the 
faculty  of  executing  his  commands,  and  the  power  of  inter- 
ceding for  others.  The  phrase  was  a  favourite  one  with 
Elijah,  as  expressing  the  spirit  of  his  great  career ;  and 
it  was  chosen  by  the  angel  Gabriel  as  conveying  to  the 
maiden  of  Nazareth  the  most  certain  guarantee  of  his 
authority  and  veracity.  Surely,  every  reader  of  these  words 
must  desire  that  the  spirit  and  attitude  of  all  coming  days 
may  be  designated  thus.  Oh  to  stand  always  before  Him, 
on  whose  face  the  glory  of  God  shines  as  the  sun  in  his 
strength  !  But  if  this  is  to  be  something  more  than  a  vague 
wish,  an  idle  dream,  three  things  should  be  remembered, 
suggested  by  the  words  of  the  Rechabites. 

(i)  There  must  be  dose  adhesion  to  great  principles. — 
Many  superficial  reasons  might  have  suggested  to  the 
Rechabites  compliance  with  the  prophet's  tempting  sug- 
gestion. The  wine  was  before  them ;  there  was  no  sin 
against  God  in  taking  it ;  the  people  around  had  no  scruples 
about  it ,  and  the  prophet  himself  invited  them.  But 
against  all,  they  stood  on  the  principles  which  Jonadab 
had  laid  down  to  guide  them  ;  and  they  did  not  hesitate 
to  avow  them,  let  those  ridicule  who  would. 

In  contrast  to  this,  it  is  the  general  tendency  amongst 
men  to  ask  what  is  the  practice  of  the  majority  ;  what 
is  done  by  those  in  their  rank  and  station  ;  and  what  will  be 
expected  of  them.  We  drift  with  the  current.  We  allow 
our  lives  to  be  settled  by  our  companions  or  our  whims,  our 
fancies  or  our  tastes  ;  and  if  ever  we  have  a  momentary 
qualm,  in  contrasting  our  lives  with  the  standards  of 
primitive  simplicity,  of  which  Scripture  and  old  biographies 
are  full,  we  excuse  ourselves  by  saying  that  so  long  as 
the  main  purpose  is  right  the  details  are  unimportant.  This 
reasoning  is  wrong.  We  make  a  grave  mistake  in  supposing 
that  the  main  purpose  of  our  life  is  something  different  from 
that  which  reveals  itself  in  details.     What  we  are  in  the 


i^ljc  ^vm  JKati.  115 

details  of  our  life,  that  we  are  really  and  essentially.  The 
truest  photographs  are  taken  when  we  are  unprepared  for  the 
operation.  The  true  man,  therefore,  is  always  settling  his 
life  in  its  details,  as  well  as  in  its  main  direction,  according 
to  great  principles.  Before  we  go  another  step,  let  me 
entreat  my  readers  not  to  allow  themselves  to  do  or 
permit  things  simply  because  custom,  or  taste,  or  public 
opinion  advocates  them ;  but  to  bring  their  entire  life  to  the 
touchstone  of  some  elementary  law  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  which  shall  do  in  the  moral  what  gravitation  does  in 
the  physical  sphere,  ordaining  the  course  of  worlds  and 
of  molecules  of  dust. 

And  if  it  be  asked,  What  principle  is  far-reaching  enough 
in  its  scope,  and  powerful  enough  in  its  force,  for  so  great  a 
work?  let  us  ponder  what  William  Law  so  perpetually 
insists  upon  in  his  Serious  Call-.  "The  first  and  most 
fundamental  principle  of  Christianity  is  an  intention  to 
please  God  in  all  our  actions.  It  is  because  the  generality 
of  Christians  have  no  such  intention  that  they  so  fall  short 
of  true  devotion."  And,  indeed,  when  we  consider  the 
characters  of  the  early  disciples  of  Jesus,  or  those  of  saints, 
martyrs,  and  confessors,  must  we  not  admit  that  they  were 
as  scrupulous  in  seeking  the  will  of  God  about  the  trifles 
of  their  life,  as  the  Rechabites  were  in  consulting  the  will 
and  pleasure  of  the  dead  Jonadab?  The  thought  of  God 
was  as  present  with  the  one,  as  of  Jonadab  with  the  other. 
And  was  not  this  the  secret  of  their  strong  and  noble 
lives  ? 

What  a  revolution  would  come  to  us  all  if  it  became  the 
one  fixed  aim  and  ambition  of  our  lives  to  do  always  those 
things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight !  It  would  not  make  us 
less  tender  in  our  friendships,  or  less  active  in  our  service. 
It  would  not  take  the  sparkle  from  the  eye ;  the  nerve  from 
the  grasp  ;  or  the  warm  glow  from  the  heart.  But  it  would 
check  many  a  vain  word,  arrest  many  a  silly  jest,  stop  much 
selfish  and  vainglorious  expenditure,  and  bring  us  back  to 


ii6  '^\jt  Kerljabites. 

whatsoever  things  are  true,  honourable,  just,  pure,  lovely, 
and  of  good  report. 

(2)  Abstinence  from  the  spirit  of  the  age, — It  was  an 
immense  gain  in  every  way  for  the  Rechabites  to  abstain 
from  wine.  Wine  was  closely  associated  with  the  luxury, 
corruption,  and  abominable  revelries  of  the  time  (Isa. 
xxviii.  1-8).  Their  abstinence  was  not  only  a  protest 
against  the  evils  which  were  honeycombing  their  age,  but 
was  a  sure  safeguard  against  participation  in  them. 

In  these  days,  the  same  principles  apply.  Whatever 
may  be  said  about  the  use  of  alcohol  in  certain  forms  of 
sickness  and  debilitated  health,  it  is  incontrovertible  that  it 
is  unnecessary  as  an  article  of  ordinary  diet.  It  is  very 
closely  identified  with  the  vilest  practices  of  impure  passion, 
the  obscenities  of  the  music-hall,  the  licence  of  the  stage, 
and  the  coarse  revelry  of  the  racecourse.  Its  fumes  fill  the 
card-room,  the  billiard-room,  and  the  scene  of  abandoned 
vice.  The  votaries  of  sin  confess  that  they  could  not  do  as 
they  do,  apart  from  its  excitement.  Add  to  all  this  the  incon- 
testable direct  results  of  the  drink  traffic  in  crime,  poverty, 
misery,  suicide,  and  death  ;  results  which  an  eminent 
statesman  once  declared  to  be  more  deplorable  than  those 
that  flow  from  famine,  pestilence,  and  war  combined. 
Surely,  then,  we  shall  do  well  to  say  with  the  Rechabites, 
whoever  may  ask  us  to  drink,  "  We  will  drink  no  wine." 

But  wine  may  stand  for  the  spirit  of  the  age,  its  restless- 
ness, its  constant  thirst  for  novelty,  for  amusement,  for 
fascination  ;  its  feverish  demand  for  the  fresh  play,  the  excit- 
ing novel,  the  rush  of  the  season,  the  magnificent  pageant. 
It  is  easier  to  abstain  from  alcohol  than  from  this  insidious 
spirit  of  our  time,  which  is  poured  so  freely  into  the  air,  as 
from  the  vial  of  some  demon  sorceress.  We  might  well  refer 
to  this  the  wise  words  of  the  apostle  :  "  Be  not  drunk  with 
wine,  wherein  is  excess,  but  be  filled  with  the  Spirit."  You 
cannot  exorcise  Satan  by  a  negation.  You  must  be  pre- 
occupied, prepossessed.     And  it  is  only  they  that  are  filled 


"  Strangers  atiii  pilgrims."  117 

by  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  his  blessed  energy,  who  are  proof 
against  the  intoxicating  cup  of  this  Circe  world. 

(3)  We  must  hold  lightly  to  the  things  around. — The 
Rechabites  dwelt  in  tents.  They  drove  their  vast  flocks 
from  place  to  place,  and  were  content  with  the  simple  life 
of  the  wandering  shepherd.  It  was  thus  that  the  great 
patriarchs  had  lived  before  them  (Heb.  xi.  9,  13).  And 
ever  since  their  days  the  tent-life  has  been  the  chosen 
emblem  of  the  life  that  is  so  strongly  attracted  to  the  other 
world  as  to  be  lightly  attached  to  this. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  what  worldliness  consists  in.  What 
would  be  worldly  to  some  people  is  an  ordinary  part  of  life's 
circumstances  to  others.  But  all  of  us  are  sensible  of  ties 
that  hold  us  to  the  earth.  We  may  discover  what  they  are 
by  considering  what  we  cling  to  ;  what  we  find  it  hard  to 
let  go,  even  into  the  hands  of  Christ  \  what  we  are  always 
striving  to  augment ;  what  we  pride  ourselves  in.  It  may 
be  name,  fame,  notoriety,  pride  of  fashion,  rank,  money. 
But  whatever  it  is,  if  it  hinders  us  from  living  on  the 
highest  level ;  if  it  is  a  weight  that  impedes  our  speed 
heavenward  ;  it  should  be  laid  deliberately  on  God's  altar, 
that  He  may  do  with  it  as  He  will,  and  that  we  may  be 
able,  without  let  or  hindrance,  to  be  wholly  for  God. 


/c^. 


XIV. 

'gibir^tt,  but  Eabiant! 

(Jeremiah  xxxvi.  26.) 

"  Be  still  and  strong, 
O  Man,  my  Brother  !  hold  thy  sobbing  breath, 
And  keep  thy  soul's  large  window  pure  from  wrong 

That  so,  as  Hfe's  appointment  issiieth, 
Thy  vision  may  be  clear  to  watch  along 

The  sunset  consummation-lights  of  death  !  " 

E.  B.  Browning. 


FTER  Jehoiakim  had  deliberately  cut  in  pieces  the 
^I^B^  prophet's  roll,  and  so  rejected  his  warnings  and 
Ja^^'lJ^  expostulations ;  and  when  in  addition  to  this 
f^\^^^  he  had  threatened  the  lives  of  God's  faithful 
^^^^  servants — it  became  clear  that  no  further  good 
could  be  gained  by  reiterating  his  messages. 
Thus  the  prophet's  voice  was  hushed,  apparently  for  the 
remainder  of  the  reign  of  this  bad  and  infatuated  king. 
This  is  one  of  those  principles  of  the  Divine  government — 
which  is  as  certain  in  its  operation  to-day  as  ever — that  after 
a  certain  time  the  Divine  voice,  being  unheeded,  ceases  to 
speak ;  and  those  who  will  not  retain  God  in  their  know- 
ledge are  given  up  to  the  workings  of  their  corrupt  minds, 
to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greediness.  We  recall  those 
ominous  words,  written  as  an  epitaph  on  the  grave  of  the 
first  king  of  Israel :  "  Samuel  came  no  more  to  see  Saul 
until  the  day  of  his  death,"  and  the  no  less  awful  words 
of  the  apostle  of  love  :  "  There  is  a  sin  unto  death ;  not  con- 
cerning this  do  I  say  that  he  should  make  request"  (i  John 
v.  16,  R.V.). 

Into  that  new  and  splendid  palace  of  Jehoiakim,  whose 


spacious  halls  were  ceiled  with  cedar  from  Lebanon,  lighted 
by  wide  windows,  and  painted  with  bright  colours,  the  one 
presence  never  entered  which  at  that  time  would  have  saved 
the  ship  of  State— as  the  timely  arrival  of  a  pilot  may  save 
an  ocean  steamer  from  the  fatal  ignorance  of  an  incompetent 
captain.  The  false  prophets  might  beguile  the  ears  of  king 
and  people  with  predictions,  bred  in  the  falsehood  of  their 
own  nature.  The  strong  Egyptian  partisans  might  urge  on 
the  kmg  alliance  with  Pharaoh  as  the  certain  cure  for  the 
difficulties  of  their  position.  But  Jeremiah's  voice,  during 
the  dark  and  troublous  days  that  succeeded  that  scene 
in  the  palace,  and  until  Jehoiakim's  body  was  cast  forth, 
unburied  and  unwept,  was  still.  How  did  it  fare  with  the 
prophet,  and  what  engaged  him  during  those  eventful 
years  ? 

I.  The  Lord  hid  Him.— What  that  precisely  means  it 
is  impossible  to  say.  Was  there  a  John  of  Gaunt  for  this 
Wycliff,  an  Elector  of  Saxony  for  this  Luther  ?  Did 
Ahikam,  who  had  before  interposed  on  his  behalf,  or  his 
sons — Gemariah,  who  lent  Jeremiah  his  room  in  the  Temple 
for  the  reading  of  his  roll,  and  Gedaliah,  who  became 
Governor  of  Judah  after  Zedekiah's  deportation — take  the 
prophet  under  their  care  ?  Or  was  this  hiding  something 
more  Divine  and  blessed  still  ?  In  any  case,  whether 
through  the  intervention  of  second  causes  or  directly, 
Jeremiah  was  hidden  in  the  covert  of  the  Divine  presence 
from  the  plottings  of  man,  and  was  kept  secretly  m  a 
pavilion  from  the  strife  of  tongues.  In  his  first  alarm  he 
had  said,  "  I  am  cut  off  from  before  thine  eyes."  Never- 
theless, God  had  heard  the  voice  of  his  supplication,  and 
had  preserved  his  faithful  servant. 

These  Divine  hidings  are  needed  by  us  all.  We  must 
obey  the  voice  that  cries  to  us,  as  it  did  to  Elijah,  "  Get 
thee  hence,  and  turn  thee  eastward,  and  hide  thyself."  We 
are   too   prominent,   too   self-important,   too    conscious    of 


I20  IJititicn,  but  flabiant ! 

ourselves.  Our  shadows  fall  too  much  in  front  of  us.  and 
we  see  them  on  the  sand,  clear-cut  and  defined.  We  need 
to  keep  our  faces  sunward,  that  our  shadow  may  be  well  out 
of  sight.  And  God  must  sometimes  hide  us  in  the  sick- 
chamber,  the  valley  of  shadow,  the  cleft  of  the  rock.  He 
calls  us  to  Zarephath,  or  Carmel,  to  the  privacy  of  obscurity, 
or  of  solitude.  It  is  only  when  self  is  hidden  in  the  darkness 
of  the  grave  that  the  true  light  shines  upon  our  hearts,  or 
the  power  of  the  true  life  emanates  from  our  acts. 

How  often  has  some  timid  nature  sheltered  and  hidden 
itself  in  a  stronger  personality  to  which  it  was  devotedly 
attached,  so  that  it  could  bear  unmoved  the  stare  of  in- 
difference, the  affectation  of  superiority,  the  sarcastic  taunt, 
the  injurious  act !  So  when  the  one  passion  of  our  nature  is 
Godward,  when  his  smile  is  our  sufficient  reward,  when  we 
have  no  aim  than  to  be  well-pleasing  in  his  sight,  we  are 
hidden ;  and  from  our  retreat  in  the  burning  glory  of  his 
light,  we  can  look  out  with  equanimity  on  the  forms  of 
dreaded  evils  as  they  pass  us  by. 

There  is  a  literal  sense  also,  O  tried  and  tempted  believer, 
in  which  God  will  hide  you.  It  is  stated  that  on  one 
occasion  when  the  dragoons  of  Claverhouse  were  scouring 
the  mountains  of  Scotland  in  search  of  the  Covenanters, 
a  little  party  of  these  Godly  folk,  gathered  on  the  hillside  for 
prayer,  must  have  fallen  into  their  hands,  had  not  a  cloud 
suddenly  settled  down,  effectually  concealing  them  from 
their  pursuers.  Thus  the  Son  of  God  still  interposes  for  his 
own.  Live  to  Him  alone.  Be  a  poHshed  shaft,  hidden  in 
the  hollow  of  his  hand.  Abide  m  Him.  Hark !  He  says 
to  thee,  as  David  to  Abiathar,  "  Abide  thou  with  Me ;  fear 
not !  for  he  that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh  thy  life ;  for  with 
Me  thou  shalt  be  in  safeguard." 

II.  He  re-edited  his  Prophecies. — To  this  period 
we  may  refer  the  Divine  injunction  :  "  Thus  speaketh  the 
Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  saying,  Write  thee  all  the  words 


^  yaitljfnl  yricntr.  121 

that  I  have  spoken  unto  thee  in  a  book"  (xxx.  i,  2).  It 
may  be  that  throughout  this  period  Baruch  continued  to  act 
as  his  faithful  amanuensis  and  scribe.  He,  at  least,  was 
certainly  included  in  the  Divine  hidings  (xxxvi.  26-32). 
It  was  at  great  cost  to  his  earthly  prospects.  He  came  of  a 
good  family,  his  brother  being  Seraiah,  who  held  high 
office  under  king  Zedekiah,  and  he  cherished  the  ambition 
of  distinguishing  himself  amongst  his  compeers.  "  He 
sought  great  things  for  himself."  But  he  was  reconciled  to 
the  lot  of  suffering  and  sorrow  to  which  his  close  identifica- 
tion with  Jeremiah  led  him,  by  a  special  revelation  assuring 
him  of  the  speedy  overthrow  of  the  State ;  and  that,  in  the 
general  chaos,  he  would  escape  with  his  life  (xlv.). 

By  the  aid  of  this  faithful  friend,  Jeremiah  gathered 
together  the  prophecies  which  he  had  uttered  on  various 
occasions,  and  put  them  in  order,  specially  elaborating  the 
predictions  given  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  against 
the  surrounding  nations.  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to 
him  concerning  the  PhiHstines,  and  Moab,  and  the  children 
of  Ammon  and  Edom,  Damascus  and  Kedar.  And  the 
devout  student  may  well  pause  to  read  again  the  marvellous 
paragraphs,  which  foretell  the  fate  of  these  nations,  beneath 
the  all-desolating  incursions  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his 
ruthless  soldiers.  "Thou  art  my  battle-axe  and  weapons 
of  war,"  said  the  prophet,  addressing  the  great  king  in 
Jehovah's  name;  "with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the 
nations,  and  with  thee  will  I  destroy  kingdoms."  (See 
xlvii.  to  xlix.  33.) 

This  time  of  Jeremiah's  seclusion  was  therefore  not  lost 
to  the  world.  It  was  fruitful  as  Bunyan's  in  Bedford  Gaol ; 
Luther's  in  the  Wartburg ;  Madame  Guyon's  in  the  Bastille. 
Unseen,  the  prophet  busied  himself,  as  the  night  settled 
down  on  his  country,  in  kindling  the  sure  light  of  prophecy, 
that  should  cast  its  radiant  beams  over  the  dark  waters  of 
time,  until  the  day  should  dawn,  and  the  day-star  glimmer 
out  in  the  eastern  sky.     Yield  your  whole  nature  to  God, 


122  '^'thbtn,  but  KaMattt! 

and  be  sure  that  He  will  bring  all  of  it,  and  every  moment, 
under  his  productive  cultivation ;  so  that  it  shall  become 
like  one  of  the  old-fashioned  wall-enclosed  country  gardens, 
every  square  inch  of  which  yields  some  produce  to  the 
skilful  hand  of  its  owner. 

III.  He  made  a  double  Journey  to  Babylon. — To 
this  period  we  must  also  refer  the  incident  of  the  Linen 
Girdle,  because  the  discourse  founded  on  it  was  delivered 
during  the  three  months'  reign  of  Jehoiachin,  which  was 
altogether  too  brief  to  admit  of  so  long  a  journey  as  was 
necessary  for  the  purposes  on  which  the  prophet  was  set 
(xiii. ;  notably  verse  i8). 

The  Israelite  was  extremely  particular  as  to  cleanliness, 
and  especially  of  linen.  It  therefore  attracted  universal 
notice  that  Jeremiah,  at  a  certain  period,  wore  a  newly- 
purchased  linen  girdle  without  washing  it.  When  it  was 
soiled  and  filthy,  he  took  it,  under  Divine  direction,  to  the 
river  Euphrates,  and  there  buried  it  in  a  hole  of  the  rock. 
Some  have  thought  that  this  is  the  description  of  a  vision  ; 
or  that  some  place  nearer  than  the  Euphrates,  which  was 
two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  distant,  is  intended.  But  there 
seems  no  good  reason  for  questioning  the  literal  interpreta- 
tion of  the  narrative,  as  given  by  the  prophet.  There  was 
no  special  demand  for  his  presence  in  Jerusalem,  but  the 
reverse.  Time  was  no  object  in  comparison  with  the  vivid- 
ness of  the  impression  that  would  be  produced.  Besides, 
large  purposes  were  served  by  his  becoming  familiarized 
with  the  condition  of  the  exiles  in  Babylon,  and  with  the 
drift  of  events  there.  In  the  prophecies  which  he  delivered 
afterwards  on  the  fall  of  Babylon,  there  are  touches  of 
description  so  minute  and  accurate  as  could  hardly  have 
been  given  by  one  who  was  not  familiar  with  the  city  from 
personal  observation. 

After  his  return  from  Babylon,  "  many  days "  passed. 
Indeed,  his  second  journey,  to  recover  his  marred  girdle, 


l^ljc  yigttrE  oi  tht  Wmtn  Q^'tvhlc.  123 

may  have  been  so  timed  by  Almighty  Providence  as  to 
secure  his  absence  from  the  city  during  the  last  scene  of 
Jehoiakim's  sad  and  tragic  history ;  and  to  bring  him 
thither  again  as  Jehoiachin  began  his  brief  reign.  But  that 
rotted  piece  of  linen,  held  up  before  the  eyes  of  his  people 
told  its  own  sad  story.  Judah  and  Jerusalem  might  have 
been  to  Jehovah  for  a  name,  a  praise,  and  a  glory ;  and  He 
would  have  caused  them  to  cleave  unto  Him  ;  but  they 
would  not  hear ;  they  went  after  other  gods,  to  serve  and 
worship  them.  Therefore  they  were  destined  to  be  cast 
aside  as  worthless  and  unprofitable. 

The  lesson  of  this  double  journey,  which  must  have 
meant  about  a  thousand  miles  on  foot,  teaches  us  that  no 
exertion  on  our  part  should  be  considered  excessive,  if  we 
can  execute  the  commissions  of  our  King.  Long  before, 
when  a  comparative  child,  Jeremiah  had  been  summoned  to 
perform  God's  errands  for  Him  (i.  7) :  and  it  was  not  for 
him  to  complain  if  any  special  errand  took  him  far  afield, 
or  involved  journeying  under  scorching  suns,  and  sleeping 
in  the  night  dews.  When  Jesus  bids  us  go  into  all  the 
world.  He  means  it ;  and  we  may  not  plead  before  Him  the 
distance  and  hardships  of  the  way.  It  is  enough  if  He  has 
said,  "  Go  to  Euphrates."  When  once  we  are  sure  of  this, 
we  must  imitate  the  prophet,  who  says,  with  charming 
simplicity,  "  So  I  went  to  Euphrates." 

IV.  He  had  Visions  of  the  New  Covenant. — There 
is  much  reason  for  supposing  that  it  was  in  this  time  of 
seclusion  that  Jeremiah's  eyes  were  opened  to  see  a  spiritual 
truth,  which  was  far  in  advance  of  any  contemporary 
revelation,  and  was  destined  to  become  the  mould  into 
which  some  of  the  richest  ore  of  Gospel  truth  should 
be  poured.  It  was  not  the  last  time  when  mortal  eyes  were 
closed  in  order  to  see  ;  shielded  from  the  glare  of  this  world 
that  they  might  behold  the  light  that  never  shone  on  sea  or 
shore.    The  d/i'nd  Milton  sang  of  Paradise  lost  and  regained. 


124  Uidirctt,  but  ^atitant ! 

The  exquisite  poem  to  which  we  must  now  turn  is 
contained  in  chapters  xxx.  and  xxxi.,  and  consists  of  some 
seven  stanzas.  The  prophet  is  no  longer  concerned  with 
Judah  alone  ;  his  thought  embraces  the  ten  tribes  also — 
"  Israel "  he  calls  them,  or  "  Ephraim,"  which  one  hundred 
and  seventy  years  before  had  been  carried  away  captive 
to  Nineveh.  But  his  heart  exults  as  he  anticipates  the 
return  of  the  entire  people  from  the  land  of  the  north, 
baptized  through  suffering,  into  a  purer,  nobler  life. 

On  many  of  the  exquisite  thoughts  and  phrases  of  this 
joyful  outburst,  we  might  long  and  profitably  dwell.  We  can 
only  cull  a  few  flowerets,  and  leave  them  to  tell  the  wealth  of 
the  garden  from  which  they  come  : — 

"  Fear  thou  not,  O  Jacob  my  servant,  saith  the  Lord, 
Neither  be  dismayed,  O  Israel ; 
For  lo,  I  will  save  thee  from  afar. 
And  thy  seed  from  the  land  of  their  captivity." 

"  I  will  restore  health  unto  thee. 
And  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  wounds,  saith  the  Lord." 

"  Yea,  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love, 
Therefore,  with  loving-kindness  have  I  drawn  thee. 
Again  will  I  build  thee. 
And  thou  shalt  be  built,  O  virgin  of  Israel  ; 
Thou  shalt  be  adorned  with  thy  tabrets, 
And  shalt  go  forth  in  the  dances  of  them  that  make  merry.'' 

"  My  people  shall   be   satisfied  with   my  goodness,   saith 
the  Lord." 

Transported  by  words  like  these,  as  he  lay  in  prophetic 
trance,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  Jeremiah  experienced,  after  a 
spiritual  sort,  the  ecstatic  joy  which  visits  the  soul,  when, 
between  sleeping  and  waking,  it  realizes  that  its  dearest 
hopes  are  being  fulfilled.  "Upon  this  I  awaked  and  beheld; 
and  my  sleep  was  sweet  unto  me  "  (xxxi.  26). 

But  the  more  stupendous  revelation  was  to  follow.  The 
dread  commands  of  Moses,  the  elaborate  forms  of  Temple- 
ritual,  the  pleadings  of  Deuteronomy,  enforced  as  they  had 


been  by  the  words  of  contemporary  prophets,  had  all  failed 
to  withhold  the  people  from  backsliding.  What  hope 
was  there  that  the  distant  future  would  not  repeat  the  bitter 
story  of  the  past  ?  But  God,  who  commanded  the  light 
to  shine  out  of  darkness,  shined  into  his  servant's  heart,  and 
unveiled  the  glory  of  the  new  covenant,  which  was  to 
be  sealed  by  the  Blood  of  the  Cross — "  the  new  testament 
in  my  blood,"  as  Jesus  called  it.  A  covenant  which  would 
no  longer  depend  on  man's  obedience  to  "  Thou  shalt,"  and 
"  Thou  shalt  not  "  ;  but  would  glisten  with  the  seven  times 
repeated,  I  will  of  God  (xxxi.  31-34;  Luke  xxii.  20; 
Heb.  viii.  8-12). 

That  the  law  of  God  should  not  be  without  as  a  precept, 
but  within^  as  though  inwrought  into  the  very  structure  of 
the  heart  and  will ;  that  religion  should  consist  primarily  in 
what  God  was  to  his  child,  rather  than  in  what  the  child  said 
or  did  towards  Him  ;  that  neither  priest  nor  Levite  should 
be  needed  any  more,  since  each  soul  would  possess  the 
right  of  direct  intercourse  with  its  Lord  ;  that  sin  should  be 
completely  forgiven,  as  if  it  had  never  been — this  was  the 
vision  which  shone  in  on  the  prophet's  heart,  and  is 
realized  in  Christ  for  all  who  belong  to  Him  by  faith.  This 
blessed  covenant  shall  yet  gather  Israel  within  its  pro- 
visions. 

It  is  a  serious  question  how  far  that  covenant  has  been 
fulfilled  in  our  experience.  We  are  enamoured  with  the 
life  it  foreshadows,  and  sometimes  we  think  that  our  inward 
parts  and  hearts  do  bear  its  sacred  inscriptions,  as  did  the 
stone  slabs  of  Sinai  the  writing  of  the  decalogue.  But  we 
become  suddenly  conscious  of  some  overwhelming  irruption 
of  covetousness,  envy,  pride,  and  wrath ;  as  though  a  sewer 
were  to  pour  forth  its  filth  over  the  mosaic  work  of  some 
splendid  pavement. 

Such  experiences  stagger,  but  they  should  not  discourage 
us.  They  probably  show,  not  that  God  has  not  commenced 
his  Divine  work,   but    that   we  have  momentarily   turned 


126  ^ibbcxt,  hut  flaMatit ! 

aside  from  Him  to  make  some  effort  of  our  own,  or  to 
pride  ourselves  on  what  has  been  accomplished.  Whenever 
God  grants  us  a  heavenly  vision  of  some  possibility  in  the 
Divine  life  that  beckons  us  from  afar,  as  the  stories  of  the 
world  beyond  the  ocean  stirred  our  sailors  in  the  reign 
of  Elizabeth,  it  is  a  positive  sign  that  a  time  has  come  in 
our  experience,  when  God,  who  taught  us  to  yearn  for  it, 
is  prepared  to  realize  it  for  us.  Whenever  Christ  says, 
"I  have  appeared  to  thee,"  He  adds,  "to  make  thee." 
Our  Father  never  discourages  us  by  a  promise  which  He 
is  not  prepared  to  fulfil ;  nor  by  a  hope  which  He  is 
not  eager  to  bring  to  fruition.  Let  us  turn  back  to 
Him.  Let  us  open  our  hearts  and  inward  parts  to 
his  finger.  Let  us  in  meek  humility  wait  for  Him  to 
grave  even  more  deeply  and  legibly  his  secret  thoughts 
upon  us.  Let  us  believe  that  He  is  doing  it.  Let  us 
reckon  on  Him  to  perfect  the  legend,  and  to  keep  it  clear 
and  clean. 

Thus  we  shall  know  God.  The  dead  past  will  bury  its 
dead.  The  sins  and  iniquities  of  former  days  will  be  strewn 
on  the  shore  like  the  corpses  of  the  Egyptians  from  whom 
Israel  had  got  free.  And  then  our  heart  shall  go  out  in  the 
dance  ;  our  mourning  will  be  turned  into  joy ;  our  soul  shall 
be  as  a  w^atered  garden  ;  and  God  will  comfort  us,  making 
us  rejoice  from  our  sorrow,  and  enabling  us  to  reap  in  joy 
what  w^e  sowed  in  tears  (xxxi.  10-14). 


XV. 


^\^e  iKintstrg  of  ^z^tvntiion. 

(Jeremiah  xxvii.— xxix.) 

"  Ours  the  shame  to  understand 
That  the  world  prefers  the  lie  ; 
That,  with  medicine  in  her  hand, 

She  7vi/l  sink  and  choose  to  die  ! 
Ours  the  agonismg  sense, 

Of  the  heaven  this  earth  might  be, 
If,  from  their  blank  indifference, 

Men  woke  one  hour  and  felt  as  we  !  " 

Houghton. 

C^HEN  Jeremiah  was  first  summoned  to  the 
i  work  of  prophet,  it  was  summarized  under 
six  distinct  divisions.  He  was  set  over 
nations  and  kingdoms  to  pluck  up,  and  to 
break  down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to  over- 
throw;  to  build  and  to  plant  (i.  lo).  Two- 
thirds  of  his  work  was  therefore  in  the  direction  of 
destruction.  It  is  not  pleasant  or  easy  work.  No  one 
would  choose  to  stand  amid  the  choking  dust  of  the 
crumbhng  brickwork,  which  is  being  destroyed  to  make  way 
for  some  palatial  structure  to  be  erected  on  the  site.  Vested 
interests,  long-established  abuses,  lucrative  wrongs,  cry 
out  loudly  against  any  attempt  to  interfere  with  their 
existence.  But  Elijah  must  precede  Elisha  ;  and  John  the 
Baptist  must  prepare  the  way  for  Christ.  Before  the 
seed-sowing,  the  plough  ;  before  the  outburst  of  the  spring, 
the  stern  disintegration  of  winter,  rubbing  the  soil  to  powder 
in  its  mighty  hands.  Such  was  the  work  that  fell  to  the 
lot  of  Jeremiah. 


128  i^lje  ittinxstru  of  destruction. 

I.  The  Work  of  Demolition. — {i)  Jehoiakim. — When 
Josiah  died,  the  whole  land  mourned.  Each  citizen  felt 
personally  bereaved,  and  appropriated  the  plaintive  cries 
of  professional  mourners,  saying,  "  Ah,  my  brother  I "  and 
"  Ah,  sister  !  "  The  air  was  full  of  the  words,  "  Ah,  Lord  !  " 
"  Ah,  the  glory  of  Israel !  "  But  Jeremiah  foretold  that 
at  the  death  of  Jehoiakim  there  should  be  no  such  expression. 
"  He  shall  be  buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass,  drawn 
and  cast  forth  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem."  And  again, 
somewhat  later,  when  the  king  in  impious  defiance  had 
burnt  the  roll,  the  prophet  said,  "  He  shall  have  none  to  sit 
upon  the  throne  of  David ;  and  his  dead  body  shall  be  cast 
out  in  the  day  to  the  heat,  in  the  night  to  the  frost " 
(xxii.  13-19;  xxxvi.  29-31). 

The  words  of  the  prophet  carried  with  them  the  imprima- 
tur of  Jehovah.  They  pronounced  the  inevitable  sentence 
which  He  executed.  And,  therefore,  though  we  have  no 
certain  record  of  the  manner  of  it,  it  is  more  than  probable 
that  on  his  return  from  his  second  journey  to  Babylon, 
Jeremiah  received  the  tidings  of  the  death  of  his  inveterate 
foe.  There  are  several  traditions  as  to  his  death — one  that 
he  was  assassinated  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  ;  another 
that  he  fell  in  a  skirmish  with  raiders,  who  had  been 
incited  by  Nebuchadnezzar  to  desolate  the  neighbourhood 
of  Jerusalem  ;  another  that  he  was  enticed  to  the  camp 
of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  there  treacherously  mur- 
dered ;  but  he  died  as  he  hved,  dishonourably  and 
miserably. 

(2)  fecofiiah. — His  was  a  reign,  like  Napoleon's  after  his 
return  from  Elba,  of  one  hundred  days.  He  was  eighteen 
when  he  was  called  to  the  throne,  and  he  occupied  it  for 
three  months  and  ten  days  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  9) ;  but  in  that 
brief  time  he  was  able  to  show  the  drift  of  his  character. 
"  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  His  mother, 
Nehushta,  daughter  of  Elnathan,  whose  hands  had  been 
imbrued  in  the  murder  of  Urijah,  and  the  strong  heathen 


^\jt  3F:erattEss  of  tlje  (Kijalticans.  129 

party  who  dominated  the  policy  of  the  court,  between 
them  moulded  the  young  monarch  to  their  will. 

Jeremiah  uttered  words  of  awful  significance.  Passing 
through  the  streets  he  showed  the  marred  linen  girdle, 
and  foretold  the  doom  of  the  king  and  queen-mother. 
"  Sit  down,"  he  cried,  "  in  the  dust ;  for  the  crown  of 
royalty  shall  be  rolled  from  your  brow  to  the  ground.  The 
cities  in  the  south  country,  the  beautiful  flock  of  towns 
and  villages,  are  already  in  the  hands  of  the  invader;  and 
the  whole  land  shall  shortly  be  carried  into  captivity, 
because  of  the  abominations,  the  pollution,  the  idolatries 
that  have  been  perpetrated  on  the  hills  of  the  field."  Then, 
coming  to  closer  dealings  with  the  royal  pair,  he  said  that 
Conlah  should  be  given  mto  the  hands  of  them  that  sought 
his  life,  and  of  those  of  whom  he  was  afraid  ;  that  Jehovah 
would  cast  his  mother  and  himself,  like  a  despised  broken 
vessel,  into  another  country,  where  they  were  not  born  ; 
that  there  they  should  die  ;  and  that  there  should  be  no 
return  to  the  land  they  loved  (xiii.  18-21  ;  xxii.  28-30). 

Thus,  too,  it  befell.  Such  was  the  bitter  fierceness  of  the 
Chaldeans,  who  were  again  besieging  the  city  to  punish 
Jehoiakim's  perfidy,  that  nothing  would  appease  them  but 
the  surrender  of  the  persons  of  the  king  and  his  mother. 
There  was  no  alternative  ;  and  so,  Josephus  tells  us,  a  sad 
procession  was  formed,  and  through  a  gateway — which  after- 
wards bore  the  kmg's  name,  but  was  bricked  up  so  that 
none  might  pass  by  a  path  which  had  been  the  scene  of 
such  a  disaster — the  king,  his  mother,  the  nobles  and 
officials,  went  forth  to  the  Chaldean  camp,  and  sat  down  on 
the  ground,  their  persons  robed  in  black,  and  their  faces 
veiled.  By  this  time  Nebuchadnezzar  had  returned  from 
fighting  against  Pharaoh-Necho,  who  had  marched  to  the 
relief  of  his  ally,  but  had  been  finally  quelled ;  and  he 
received  in  person  the  submission  of  the  royal  fugitives 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  7). 

The  spoliation  of  the  city  followed.  The  Temple  was 
I 


130  €bc  ^Hiniatrg  of  geatructton. 

stripped  of  its  gold  and  treasures.  All  the  princes,  and  the 
mighty  men  of  valour,  the  craftsmen  and  the  smiths,  the 
king's  harem  and  court  officials,  were  manacled  in  long 
Hnes,  and  torn  from  their  beloved  country,  which  the 
majority  of  them  were  never  again  to  behold.  Ezekiel  was 
one  of  that  sad  procession  ;  and  it  seemed  as  though  a 
pitiful  wail  arose  from  the  whole  country — from  Lebanon, 
and  Bashan,  and  Abarim — as  the  exiles  wended  their  way 
to  their  distant  destination.  And  the  prophet  wept  sore, 
his  eye  ran  down  with  tears,  because  the  Lord's  flock 
was  taken  captive. 

(3)  The  Prophets. — The  prophets  were  a  large  and 
influential  class.  Dating  from  the  days  of  Samuel,  their 
schools  had  poured  forth  a  succession  of  men,  who 
occupied  a  unique  position  in  the  land,  as  the  repre- 
sentatives of  God.  But  in  the  degenerate  days  of  which 
we  are  now  writing,  when  the  kingdom  of  Judah  was 
rapidly  tottering  to  its  fall,  they  seem  to  have  been  deeply 
infected  by  the  prevailing  vices  of  their  time.  They  were, 
as  Isaiah  says,  "  dumb  dogs  which  could  not  bark." 
Greedy  and  drunken,  lazy  and  dissolute,  dreaming,  lying 
down,  and  loving  to  slumber,  they  denied  the  Lord,  and 
said,  when  Jeremiah  spoke,  "  It  is  not  He."  They  had 
become  wind,  and  the  word  of  God  was  not  in  them 
(Isa.  Ivi.  9-12  ;  Jer.  v.   12,   13). 

It  must  have  been  very  painful  for  Jeremiah  to  oppose 
them,  and  counteract  their  influence  on  the  people;  but 
he  had  no  alternative.  His  heart  was  broken,  and  his 
bones  shook ;  he  was  in  a  stupor  like  a  drunken  man, 
and  like  a  man  whom  wine  had  overcome,  for  both 
prophet  and  priest  were  profane ;  and  in  God's  own 
house  wickedness  was  rife.  Listen  to  these  terrible  words, 
spoken  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  "  In  the  prophets  of 
Jerusalem  I  have  seen  a  horrible  thing :  they  commit 
adultery,  and  walk  in  lies ;  they  strengthen  also  the  hands 
of  evil-doers,  that  none  doth  return  from  his  wickedness ; 


®Ije  JFalsE  f  ropijcts.  131 

they  are  all  of  them  unto  me  as  Sodom,  and  the 
inhabitants  thereof  as  Gomorrah"'  (xxiii.  9-14). 

Jeremiah  entreated  his  people  not  to  hearken  to  these 
men,  who  spoke  the  vision  of  their  own  heart,  and  not 
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  Their  fatal  crime  was 
to  live  on  the  traditions  of  the  past,  and  to  encourage 
even  those  who  walked  in  the  stubbornness  of  their 
hearts,  by  assuring  them  that  no  evil  should  come  on 
them.  They  deUberately  set  themselves  to  lessen  the 
power  of  Jeremiah's  appeals  and  protestations  by  the 
promulgation  of  their  own  lying  dreams ;  as  though  they, 
and  not  he,  were  in  Jehovah's  secrets. 

Matters  came  to  a  pass  shortly  after  the  deportation 
of  Jeconiah.  Hananiah,  of  Gibeon,  which  was  one  of 
the  priestly  settlements,  rose  up  and  publicly  contradicted 
Jeremiah  when  he  was  speaking  in  the  Temple,  in  the 
presence  of  the  priests  and  of  all  the  people.  Using 
the  holy  name  of  Jehovah,  he  declared  it  had  been 
divinely  revealed  to  him  that  in  two  years  Jeconiah, 
and  all  the  captives,  and  all  the  sacred  vessels,  which 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  taken  away,  would  come  again.  In- 
stantly Jeremiah  spoke  up  from  amid  the  crowd.  "  Amen," 
he  cried ;  "  would  that  it  might  be  so ;  would  that  Jehovah 
might  bring  again  the  captivity :  but  it  shall  not  be ;  nay,  it 
cannot  be,  without  cancelling  words  that  have  been  uttered 
by  Him  through  the  prophets  before  me,  and  of  old." 

Not  content,  however,  with  his  words,  the  false  prophet 
snatched  from  Jeremiah's  shoulders  the  wooden  yoke 
which  he  carried  for  the  purpose  of  perpetually  reminding 
his  people  and  the  neighbouring  nations  that  they  must 
serve  the  king  of  Babylon  until  the  appointed  time  had 
gone.  He  broke  it  in  twain,  saying,  that  similarly  God 
within  two  years  would  break  Nebuchadnezzar's  yoke. 
Jeremiah  did  not  prolong  the  altercation ;  but  privately 
told  Hananiah  that  the  yoke  of  wood  would  be  replaced 
by  one  of  iron,   and  that  he  was  causing  the  people  to 


T32  i^lj£  Jltintatr^  of  geatmctioti. 

trust  a  lie.  "This  year  thou  shalt  die,"  he  said,  as  he 
turned  away ;  and  two  months  after  the  false  prophet 
was  a  corpse. 

(4)  The  Surroundwg  Natiotis. — On  two  occasions  Jere- 
miah protested  against  a  combination  of  the  surrounding 
nations  to  resist  the  growing  power  of  Babylon,  which 
without  doubt  was  fostered  by  the  neighbouring  power 
of  Egypt.  On  the  first  occasion  he  said  that  they 
would  have  to  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord's  fury  ;  and  on 
the  second,  that  they  must  bear  the  yoke  of  Babylon 
*'  Now  have  I  given  all  these  lands  into  the  hand  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  the  king  of  Babylon,  my  servant ,  and 
all  the  nations  shall  serve  him,  and  his  son,  and  his 
son's  son,  until  the  time  of  his  own  land  come"  (xxv. 
and  xxvii.). 

All  this  must  have  laid  the  prophet  open  to  the 
charge  of  the  want  of  patriotism  ;  his  words  weakened 
the  people  of  the  land ;  his  influence  withheld  them 
from  joining  a  great  league  of  emancipation.  He  had  no 
alternative,  however,  but  to  be  spokesman  of  that  great 
word  of  Jehovah,  "  I  will  overturn,  overturn,  overturn  " 

(5)  The  Exiles. — The  false  prophets  had  suffered  the 
fate  of  their  nation,  and  were  with  the  rest  in  captivity ; 
they  at  once  endeavoured  to  raise  the  hopes  of  the 
exiles,  by  prophesying  a  speedy  return.  "  It  is  of  no 
use,"  they  said  in  effect,  "  to  build  houses,  or  plant 
gardens,  or  enter  into  marriage  relations.  In  a  short 
time  we  shall  be  back  again  in  Jerusalem."  The  rmg- 
leaders  were  Zedekiah  and  Ahab,  men  of  grossly  immoral 
life,  who  were  made  an  example  of  by  being  roasted  alive 
(xxix.  21-23).  Still  the  ferment  continued,  and  the  people 
refused  to  settle  down  into  contentment  with  the  conditions 
of  their  captivity. 

Jeremiah  therefore  wrote  a  letter,  which  was  entrusted  to 
two  men  of  high  rank,  friendly  to  himself,  whom  Zedekiah, 
the  uncle  and  successor  of  Jeconiah,  sent  to  Babylon  with 


Itetter  to  tlje  (Bsiizs,  133 

assurances  of  his  fidelity.  "  Yield  to  the  will  of  God " 
was  the  burden  of  the  letter.  "  Build,  plant,  settle." 
"  Seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  God  has  caused  you  to 
be  carried  away  captives,  and  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  it : 
for  in  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace."  When 
Shemaiah,  one  of  these  false  prophets,  heard  this  letter,  he 
wrote  off  in  hot  haste  to  Zephaniah,  who  was  now  high 
priest,  and  demanded  that  the  prophet  should  be  put  into 
stocks,  and  his  head  into  a  collar,  as  a  madman.  The  high 
priest,  however,  contented  himself  with  reading  the  letter  to 
Jeremiah,  who  replied  by  sending  a  second  letter  to  the 
exiles,  assuring  them  that  God  would  punish  Shemaiah  and 
his  seed,  so  that  he  should  not  have  a  son  to  perpetuate  his 
name,  and  should  not  see  the  good  which  could  come  at  the 
end  of  the  predestined  time  (xxix.). 

These  denunciations  were  fraught  with  terror ;  and 
equally  terrible  was  the  fate  which  befell  these  men.  It  may 
be  said,  "  Surely  they  were  patriots,  eager  for  the  deliverance 
of  their  people.  They  were  fanatical  enthusiasts,  not  inten- 
tional criminals.  They  mistook  their  hopes  for  revelations." 
But  it  should  be  remembered  that  they  were  also  convicted 
of  immoral  and  evil  lives.  Their  sins  had  blunted  their 
perceptions  of  the  Divine  voice,  whilst  their  words  pandered 
to  their  people's  sins,  and  encouraged  them  in  their  lewd 
idolatries.  It  was  as  vicious  and  fallen  men,  as  well  as  false 
prophets,  that  they  incurred  the  awful  woes  which  befell 
them,  both  from  the  lip  of  the  prophet  and  the  hand  of  the 
Almighty. 

II.  His  Coadjutor. — Whilst  Jeremiah  was  exercising 
this  ministry  of  destruction  in  utter  loneliness  and  isolation, 
his  heart  must  have  often  misgiven  him.  Remember  that 
he  loved  his  country  with  all  the  passionate  patriotism  of 
which  the  Jewish  nature  was  capable,  and  which  expresses 
itself  so  plaintively  in  the  Book  of  Lamentations.  Matthew 
Henry  says,  "  It  is  not  easy  to  preach  Christ  crucified  in  a 


j34  ®^^  iilittistrj  of  gestrurtxon. 

crucified  spirit."  But  Jeremiah  did  a  harder  thing. 
Though  for  forty  years  he  was  constantly  in  antagonism 
with  the  sins  and  vices  of  the  people,  the  fountain  of  tears 
within  his  soul  seems  never  to  have  dried  up  or  become 
frozen  over.  He  preached  the  terrors  of  Sinai  with  the 
pathos  of  Calvary. 

It  was  just  because  he  loved  so  much  that  he  suffered  so 
keenly.  And  this  may  comfort  others  in  their  dark  sorrow 
and  despair  for  their  fellows.  They  say  that  their  natures 
are  too  tender  and  affectionate,  and  that  they  feel  everything 
too  keenly ;  as  though  to  infer  that  they  would  wish  to  have 
been  clothed  in  tougher  skin,  and  cast  in  a  rougher  mould. 
But  surely  it  would  be  a  fatal  mistake  to  barter  a  tender 
heart  with  its  faculty  of  suffering  for  a  callous  one  without 
that  liabihty.  "  Our  sorrow,"  says  Carlyle,  "  is  the  inverted 
image  of  our  nobleness.  The  depth  of  our  despair  measures 
what  capability  and  height  of  claim  we  have  to  hope. 
Black  smoke,  as  of  Tophet,  filling  all  your  universe,  it  can 
yet  by  true  heart  energy  become  flame  and  brilliancy  of 
Heaven.     Courage ! " 

You  fear  to  love,  lest  you  may  have  to  suffer ;  but,  ah, 
how  infinitely  you  lose  !  You  may  have  an  immunity  from 
one  sort  of  pain  ;  but  you  certainly  incur  the  pain  of  a 
selfish,  mean,  and  miserly  soul.  You  miss  the  valleys  of 
shadow  ;  but  you  also  miss  the  heights  of  transfiguration. 
You  save  your  life;  but  you  lose  it.  Suppose  that  Jeremiah 
had  put  away  the  Heavenly  summons,  and  had  lived  in 
the  sequestered  ease  of  Anathoth  :  he  might  have  secured  a 
respectable  and  peaceable  life,  but  Jehovah  would  never 
have  spoken  to  him  ;  the  Unseen  and  Eternal  would  never 
have  unfolded  to  his  vision  ;  he  would  never  have  felt 
the  supreme  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  he  had  done 
his  best ;  he  would  never  have  shone  like  a  star  amid 
the  darkening  clouds  of  Jerusalem's  fall ;  he  would  have 
missed  the  hero's  crown,  the  Master's  "  well  done,"  and 
the  exceeding  great  reward. 


leretnialj  anh  (B^zkid.  i35 

And  God  sent  him  an  ally  and  comrade.  In  the  heart  of 
the  exiles,  Ezekiel  arose,  uttering  the  same  messages,  though 
clothed  in  the  superb  imagery  of  his  gorgeous  imagination. 
He  too  denounced  his  people's  sins  ;  advised  them  to  settle 
in  the  land  of  exile ;  and  spoke  of  the  certain  doom  of  the 
people  and  city.  In  the  mouth  of  these  two  witnesses  every 
word  was  established.  Like  well-attuned  instruments,  they 
symphonized,  as  our  Lord  said  kindred  souls  must,  when 
they  ask  concerning  some  heavenly  gift.  They  were  like  the 
two  olive  trees,  and  the  two  candlesticks,  standing  before  the 
Lord  of  the  earth.  They  had  power  with  God  and  man  ; 
shutting  the  heaven,  turning  the  waters  into  blood,  and 
smiting  the  earth  with  a  curse.  So  the  beast  made  war  with 
them,  as  he  always  will.  Theirs  was  no  easy  task  ;  for  they 
were  hated  by  those  whom  their  words  tormented.  But  God 
has  long  since  called  them  to  his  throne,  where  they  stand  in 
the  foremost  rank  of  those  who,  having  fulfilled  the  will 
of  God,  have  received  his  welcome  and  reward. 

III.  The  Need  of  this  Ministry. — //  musf  be  fulfilled 
with  the  unconverted. — For  lack  of  it  much  Gospel  effort 
fails.  Of  what  use  are  appeals  to  come  to  Jesus  until  the 
sinner  has  been  led  to  see  the  awful  peril  which  he  has 
incurred  ?  Of  what  avail  to  extol  the  balm  of  Gilead  until 
the  soul  has  heard  and  accepted  the  diagnosis  of  its  fatal 
condition  ?  Of  what  advantage  to  offer  a  seat  in  the 
lifeboat,  so  long  as  the  sailor  is  full  of  confidence  in  his 
ship,  and  is  unaware  of  its  crazy  and  unseaworthy  condition? 
One  of  the  most  important  ministries  of  the  servant  of  God 
is  to  destroy  false  confidence,  to  pull  down  refuges  of  lies, 
and  to  show  the  utter  futility  of  venturing  on  the  sea  of 
eternity  in  any  other  craft  than  that  which  Christ  launched 
from  the  cross  of  Calvary. 

It  is  a  great  mistake  to  heal  the  wound  of  the  heart  too 
lightly.  The  consolations  of  the  Gospel  are  very  well ;  but 
they  must  be  withheld  until   men   have   seen  their  state 


136  ®IjE  ^iniatrn  of  destruction. 

before  God,  and  have  been  held  over  the  mouth  of  the 
bottomless  pit  of  their  own  sin.  The  greatest  revivals 
always -b  gin  in  a  thorough 'preaching  of  the  Law,  pressmg 
home  its  demands  upon  the  consciences  of  the  ungodly. 
Nor  is  it  enough  to  dwell  in  general  denunciation  ;  we  must 
particularize,  till  conscience  cries,  "  Thou  art  the  man  ! " 

//  77iust  be  fulfilled  ivith  those  who  lack  assurance.  — When 
men  say  that  they  cannot  believe,  it  is  probably  because  they 
are  harbouring  some  evil  thing  m  their  hearts,  or  are 
conscious  of  some  unrepaired  wrong  in  their  lives.  These 
must  be  dealt  with,  There  must  be  the  righting,  so  far  as 
possible,  of  ancient  injuries  ;  the  restitution  of  ill-gotten 
gains  ;  the  seeking  of  forgiveness  ;  the  adjustment  of  wrong. 
The  fixed  purpose  to  do  this,  when  an  opportunity 
presents  itself,  will  be  sufficient  to  remove  the  stumbling- 
block  to  faith,  which  will  gush  out  with  the  sparkle  and 
song  of  an  imprisoned  brook.  The  inability  to  realize 
acceptance  with  God  very  often  points  to  something  that  is 
grieving  the  Spirit ,  and  at  such  times  the  searching  ministry 
of  probing  and  testing  and  demolition  is  invaluable. 

//  must  be  fulfilled  i?i  the  higher  attainments  of  the  Divine 
life. — As  our  obedience  grows,  our  light  will  grow.  And  in 
the  growing  dawn,  we  shall  become  aware  of  evils  that  had 
passed  without  our  notice.  The  Holy  Spirit  will  lead  us  to 
discriminate  between  the  wrong  and  the  right,  and  reveal 
what  may  be  hindering  us.  Then  as  He  destroys  one 
subterfuge  after  another,  ploughs  up  the  fallow  ground, 
disinters  the  buried  secrets,  reveals  us  to  ourselves — we  may 
gratefully  accept  his  ministry ;  which  destroys  to  build, 
which  overthrows  to  plant,  which  leads  us  through  the 
grave,  that  He  may  minister  eternal  life.  Nor  must  we 
overlook  the  responsibility  of  exhorting  one  another,  o\ 
urging  to  repentance,  and  so  much  the  more  as  we  see 
the  day  approaching. 


XVI. 

(Jeremiah  li. ) 

"  God  spake  and  gave  us  the  word  to  keep  ; 
Bade  never  fold  the  hands,  nor  sleep 
'Mid  a  faithless  world — at  watch  and  ward. 
Till  Christ  at  the  end  relieve  our  guard. 
By  His  servant  Moses  the  watch  was  set : 
Though  near  upon  cock-crow,  we  keep  it  yet." 

Browning. 

LW^^T  was  a  very  deserted  Jerusalem  in  which  Jeremiah 
i^w.       dwelt,  after  king  Jehoiachin,  his  household  and 
TyiiP)      QQ^Yt,  princes  and   mighty   men   of  valour,  had 
been  carried  off  to  Babylon.     It  was  impossible 
to   take  ten   thousand   of  those  that  constituted 
^'  the    bone    and    muscle    of    the    State,    without 

leaving  an  attenuated  and  weakened  residuum.  Still,  the 
fertility  and  natural  resources  of  the  land  were  so  consider- 
able as  to  give  hope  of  its  comparative  prosperity,  as  a 
trailing  vine  dependent  on  Babylon  (Ezek.  xvii). 

Mattaniah,  the  third  son  of  Josiah — who  was  a  boy  of 
ten  years  of  age  when  tidings  came  of  the  awful  catastrophe 
at  Megiddo,  but  who  was  now  in  his  twenty-first  year — was 
called  to  the  throne  by  the  conqueror,  and  required  to  hold 
it  under  a  solemn  oath  of  allegiance,  which  was  asseverated 
and  sanctioned  by  an  appeal  to  Jehovah  Himself.  It  was 
as  though  the  heathen  monarch  thought  to  make  insubordi- 
nation impossible  on  the  part  of  the  young  monarch,  since 
his  word  of  honour  was  ratified  under  such  solemn  and 
august  conditions — conditions  which  under  similar  circum- 
stances the  heathen  king  would  probably  have  felt  binding 


13^  Jwetntalj's  (Brantiest  (^bz. 

and  final.  Alas  !  how  often  heathen  men  have  attached  an 
importance  to  religious  appeals  which  has  shamed  religious 
professors  !  And  how  often  they  must  have  marvelled  that 
we  could  so  lightly  disregard  them  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  13  ; 
Ezek.  xvii.  13). 

At  the  instance  of  his  conqueror,  the  young  king  took 
the  name  Zedekiah,  "  the  righteousness  of  Jehovah."  It 
was  an  auspicious  sign  ;  every  encouragement  was  given 
him  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  his  illustrious  father.  And 
throughout  his  reign  he  gave  evident  tokens  of  desiring 
better  things  ;  but  he  was  weak  and  irresolute,  lacking  the 
strength  of  purpose  necessary  to  assert  himself  for  good 
amid  the  confused  counsels  that  agitated  his  court.  He 
respected  Jeremiah,  but  did  not  dare  publicly  to  espouse 
his  cause,  showing  him  his  royal  favour  by  stealth. 

Meanwhile  the  kingdom  was  violently  agitated  by 
rumours  from  every  side,  which  encouraged  the  hope  that 
ere  long  the  power  of  Babylon  would  be  broken,  and  the 
exiles  return.  These  thoughts  were  rife  among  the  exiles 
themselves,  as  we  have  seen  ;  they  were  diligently  fostered 
by  the  false  prophets,  who  gladly  fell  in  with  the  current  of 
the  popular  wish ;  and  there  seem  to  have  been  various 
political  considerations  which  favoured  the  expectation  of 
a  speedy  reversal  of  conditions  that  chafed  the  proud 
Jewish  heart  beyond  endurance. 

About  this  time  there  was  a  revolt  in  Elam  against 
Babylon.  What  if  this  should  spread  until  the  empire 
itself  became  disintegrated  !  But  Jeremiah,  by  the  voice 
of  God,  said :  "  It  shall  not  be  ;  the  bow  of  Elam  shall 
be  broken  ;  her  king  and  princes  destroyed,  her  people 
scattered  toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven  *'  (xlix.  34-39). 

Then  there  was  the  seething  discontent  of  the  neigh- 
bouring peoples,  who,  though  they  had  accompanied  the 
invader  as  allies,  were  eager  to  regain  their  independence, 
and  desired  to  draw  Judah  into  one  vast  confederacy,  with 
Egypt  as  its  base.     "  No,"  said  Jeremiah ;  "  it  must  not  be  ; 


Zththmh^z  Jfotirne^  to  gaii^Inn.  139 

Nebuchadnezzar  is  doing  the  behest  of  Jehovah ;  all  the 
nations  are  to  serve  him,  and  his  son,  and  his  son's  son  " 
(xxvii.  6,  7).  Perhaps  it  was  at  Jeremiah's  suggestion  that 
Zedekiah  at  this  time  made  a  journey  to  Babylon,  to  pay 
homage  to  his  suzerain,  and  assure  him  of  his  fidelity. 

All  through  the  troubles  that  followed,  Jeremiah  pursued 
the  same  policy.  He  asserted  that  the  state  of  the  captives 
in  Babylon,  as  compared  with  that  of  the  remnant  at 
Jerusalem,  was  as  good  figs  to  bad  (xxiv.) ;  when  Pharaoh's 
army  produced  a  temporary  diversion,  and  compelled  the 
Chaldeans  to  draw  off,  he  said  that  they  would  certainly 
return,  set  fire  to  palace  and  temple,  and  burn  the  city 
(xxxvii.);  and  his  policy  was  so  well  known  among  the 
Chaldeans  that  in  the  final  overthrow  they  gave  him  his 
life,  and  allow^ed  him  to  choose  where  he  would  dwell  (xl.). 

Often  it  must  have  seemed  to  his  choicest  friends  as 
though  his  advice  were  pusillanimous  and  wanting  in  the 
courage  of  faith.  Did  he  really  favour  Babylon  above 
Jerusalem  ?  Was  he  traitorous  to  the  best  interests  of  his 
people  ?  But  if  they  ever  entertained  such  questionings, 
they  must  have  been  suddenly  and  completely  disillusion- 
ized, when  he  summoned  them  to  hear  the  tremendous 
indictment  he  had  composed  against  Babylon  in  the  early 
months  of  Zedekiah's  reign,  together  with  the  gTaphic 
description  of  its  fall.  A  copy  of  this  prophecy  was  en- 
trusted to  Seraiah,  the  chief  chamberlain,  who  went  in  the 
train  of  Zedekiah  to  Babylon,  with  instructions  that  he 
should  read  it  privately  to  the  exiles  ;  and  then,  weighting 
it  with  a  stone,  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  the  Euphrates, 
with  the  solemn  words,  that  must  have  thrilled  the  by- 
standers, "Thus  shall  Babylon  sink,  and  shall  not  rise 
again,  because  of  the  evil  which  God  will  bring  upon  her, 
and  her  might  shall  wax  faint  "  (li.  59-64). 

I.  The  Prophecy  of  the  Fall  of  Babylon. —  T/ie 
Glory  of  Babylon. — In  glowing  imagery  Jeremiah  depicts 


I40  Jcrcmialj's  Ciranticst  (Btiz.  d 

her  glory  and  beauty.  She  had  been  a  golden  cup  in  the 
hand  of  Jehovah ;  his  battle-axe  and  weapons  of  war. 
Her  influence  was  carried  far  and  '>vide.  She  dwelt  by 
Dany  waters,  rich  in  treasure,  and  the  wonder  of  the  earth. 
Like  a  mighty  tree,  she  stretched  her  branches  over  the 
surrounding  lands.  Queen  of  the  nations,  she  was  at  ease, 
and  thought  to  see  trouble  no  more.  "  Is  not  this  great 
Babylon,"  her  greatest  monarch  cried,  "  which  I  have  built 
for  the  royal  dwelling-place  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and 
for  the  glory  of  my  majesty  ?  " 

T/ie  Divine  Controversy. — The  Almighty  had  used  her 
for  great  purposes  of  disintegration,  doing  among  the 
nations  much  the  same  sort  of  work  that  the  icebergs  did 
among  the  rocks  of  the  primitive  world,  or  that  the  frosts 
do  each  winter  in  pulverizing  the  dust  of  the  earth.  But 
she  had  abused,  for  unrighteous  and  selfish  ends,  the  power 
which  God  had  entrusted  to  her.  Her  execution  of  the 
Divine  purpose,  her  administration  of  the  Divine  decrees, 
had  been  cruel  in  the  extreme.  The  track  of  her  armies 
had  been  marked  with  ruthless  and  wanton  bloodshed. 
She  had  floated  to  the  eminence  of  another  Ararat,  on  the 
waters  of  another  flood,  an  ocean  of  human  suffering. 
And  therefore  Jehovah  set  nets  for  her,  and  caught  her  as 
a  wild  beast.  He  opened  his  armoury  and  brought  out 
the  weapons  of  his  wrath - 

But  God  was  especially  against  Babylon  for  her  treat- 
ment of  his  people.  The  inhabitants  of  Zion  are  intro- 
duced, crying,  "  The  king  of  Babylon  has  devoured  us,  he 
hath  crushed  us,  and  hath  filled  himself  with  our  delicacies. 
The  violence  done  to  me  and  mine  be  upon  Babylon." 
Therefore  the  Most  High  would  take  up  their  cause,  and 
take  vengeance  on  their  behalf.  "  As  Babylon  caused  the 
slam  of  Israel  to  fall,  so  at  Babylon  shall  fall  the  slain  of  all 
the  earth  ;  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of  recompenses,  He  shall 
surely  requite." 

The  Summons  to  her  Foes. — The  standard  is  reared,  and 


'*  gab^lott,  tijat  (great  dit^r  141 

around  it,  at  the  sounding  of  the  trumpet,  the  nations 
gather.  The  wild  tribes  of  Ararat  and  Armenia  are  there, 
the  kings  of  the  Medes,  the  governors  thereof,  and  all  the 
lands  of  her  empire.  The  sure-footed  shaggy  horses  of  the 
mountaineers  are  like  the  rough  locusts,  that  fill  the  land 
with  their  countless  multitudes.  Sacrifices  are  offered  to 
propitiate  the  gods  of  battle  ;  and  the  tide  of  invasion 
begins  to  flow  against  and  around  the  massive  walls  of  the 
city.  The  very  earth  trembles  beneath  the  weight  of  the 
armaments,  and  the  tread  of  the  troops.  "  Behold  ! " 
the  prophet  cries,  "  a  people  cometh  from  the  north ;  and 
a  great  nation,  and  many  kings  shall  be  stirred  up  from  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  They  lay  hold  on  bow  and 
spear ;  they  are  cruel,  and  have  no  mercy ;  their  voice 
roareth  like  the  sea,  and  they  ride  upon  horses  ;  every  one 
set  in  array,  as  a  man  to  the  battle,  against  thee,  O  daughter 
of  Babylon"  (ii.  41,  42,  r.v.). 

The  Attack. — The  archers  invest  the  city -on  every  side, 
so  that  none  may  escape.  They  are  bidden  to  shoot  at  her, 
and  not  spare  their  arrows.  Now  the  battle-shout  is  raised, 
and  an  assault  is  made  against  her  walls.  See !  she  sub- 
mits ;  she  gives  her  hand  m  token ;  her  bulwarks  are 
fallen ;  the  bars  of  her  gates  are  broken  through  ;  her  walls 
are  thrown  down ;  the  mighty  men  of  Babylon  have  for- 
borne to  fight ;  their  might  has  failed ,  they  have  become 
as  women.  Lo,  the  fire  breaks  out  amid  her  dwelling- 
places.  The  messengers,  running  with  similar  tidings  from 
different  quarters  of  the  city,  come  to  show  the  king  of 
Babylon  that  the  fords  are  in  the  hand  of  the  foe,  and  that 
die  city  is  taken 

The  Overthrow  of  the  City. — Then  the  captured  city  is 
given  up  to  the  savage  soldiery.  Nameless  wrongs  are 
inflicted  on  the  defenceless  and  weak.  There  is  plunder 
enough  to  satisfy  the  most  rapacious.  Her  granaries  are 
despoiled ;  her  treasuries  ransacked  \  her  stores  winnowed. 
All   the   captive   peoples   who   had   been   held  by  her  in 


142  Jeretttialr'a  (iraniJcat  #tic. 

cruel  bondage  go  free,  and  especially  the  Jews.  "  Let  us 
forsake  her,"  they  cry,  "and  let  us  go  every  one  into  his 
own  country ;  for  her  judgment  reacheth  unto  heaven,  and 
is  lifted  up  even  to  the  skies." 

And  now  her  cities  become  a  desolation,  a  dry  land,  and 
a  desert,  a  land  wherein  no  man  dwelleth,  neither  doth  any 
son  of  man  pass  through  ;  but  the  jackals  dwell  there,  and 
it  lies  waste  from  generation  to  generation,  as  when  God 
overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  the  neighbour  cities 
thereof.  I 

Such  were  the  predictions  of  Jeremiah  concerning  the 
greatest  city  which  perhaps  the  world  has  ever  seen,  and 
which  was  then  rising  to  the  zenith  of  her  power  and  glory. 
Seventy  years  were  to  pass  before  his  words  would  be 
fulfilled ;  but  history  itself  could  hardly  be  more  definite 
and  precise.  Those  who  can  compare  this  prophecy  with 
the  story  of  the  fall  of  Babylon,  and  with  the  researches  of 
Layard,  will  find  how  exactly  every  detail  was  repeated, 
even  to  the  burning  of  the  reeds  in  the  river-bed,  the 
meeting  of  post  with  post  on  the  night  of  its  fall,  the 
deep  stupor  with  which  the  fumes  of  wine  had  dazed  the 
brave  men  of  Babylon,  and  the  utter  desolation  which  for 
centuries  has  reigned  over  her  site.  I 

"They  drank  wine,  and  praised  the  gods  of  gold,  and 
of  silver,  of  brass,  of  iron,  of  wood,  and  of  stone.  In  the 
same  hour  came  forth  fingers  of  a  man's  hand,  and  wrote 
over  against  the  candlestick,  upon  the  plaster  of  the  wall 
of  the  king's  palace.  In  that  night  Belshazzar  the  Chaldean 
was  slain,  and  Darius  the  Mede  took  the  kingdom." 

II.  Babylon  the  Great. —  In  every  age  of  the  world, 
Babylon  has  had  its  counterpart.  Over  against  the  line 
of  Seth,  with  its  reverence  for  God,  was  that  of  Cain, 
where  arts  and  science  were  cradled  and  nurtured.  Babel's 
tower  cast  its  shadow  over  the  primitive  races  of  mankind. 
Over    against    Shem    was   Ham  ;    over   against   Abraham, 


®^E  gcom  of  tlj£  oppressor.  143 

Chedorlaomer ;  over  against  Israel,  Nineveh ;  over  against 
Jerusalem,  Babylon  ;  over  against  the  Church,  Rome  ;  over 
against  the  New  Jerusalem,  Babylon  the  Great;  over  against 
the  Bride  of  the  Lamb,  the  scarlet  woman,  riding  upon  the 
beast.  Where  God  has  built  up  his  kingdom,  the  devil  has 
always  counterfeited  it  by  some  travesty  of  his  own. 

Jeremiah  comforted  his  heart  amid  the  desolations  which 
fell  thick  and  heavily  on  his  beloved  fatherland,  by  antici- 
pating the  inevitable  doom  of  the  oppressor.  And  his 
words,  read  amid  the  exiles  of  Babylon,  as  they  sat  beside 
the  rivers,  and  wept,  and  hanged  their  harps  upon  the 
willows,  may  have  inspired  that  marvellous  outburst  of  faith, 
and  patriotism,  and  undying  hatred — 

O  daughter  of  Babylon,  thou  art  to  be  destroyed  ; 
Happy  shall  he  be  that  rewardeth  thee  as  thou  hast  served  us. 
Happy  shall  he  be  that  taketh  and  dasheth  thy  little  ones  ag^ainst 
the  rock. 

In  the  same  way,  throughout  the  persecutions  of  the 
empire,  when  paganism  made  her  awful  attempts  to  stamp 
out  Christianity ;  and  afterwards  amid  the  horrors  of  Inquisi- 
tion, when  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  sought  to  extinguish 
the  true  light  of  the  Gospel,  which  in  no  age  has  been 
without  witnesses — the  suffering  children  of  God  have  turned 
to  the  Book  of  Revelation  to  read  the  doom  of  that  anti- 
Christian  power  which,  under  the  guise  of  paganism  or  of 
papalism,  always  sets  itself  against  God,  and  is  set  on  by 
the  undying  hatred  of  the  devil.  Her  fate  is  described  in 
words  that  strongly  recall  those  of  Jeremiah.  She  too  had 
the  golden  cup,  and  was  drunk  with  blood,  and  reigned 
over  the  kings  of  the  earth.  She  too  is  destroyed  by  a 
combination  of  those  that  had  owned  her  sway.  A  voice  is 
heard  bidding  God's  people  come  out  from  her,  lest  they  be 
involved  in  her  overthrow.  It  is  rendered  unto  her  as  she 
rendered,  and  double  is  mingled  into  her  cup.  As  Seraiah 
cast  a  stone  into  the  Euphrates,  so  a  strong  angel  casts 
a  great  millstone  into  the  sea,  saying,  "  Thus  with  a  mighty 


144  Jeremiad's  (Branticst  #trc. 


4 


fall  is  Babylon,  the  great  city,  cast  down,  and  shall  be 
found  no  more."  And  her  site  becomes  the  haunt  of 
demons,  and  a  hold  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird ;  the 
voice  of  harpers  and  mmstrels  for  ever  silenced ;  the  Hght 
of  the  household  lamp  for  ever  quenched ;  the  voice  of  the 
millstone  for  ever  still. 

Prophetic  students  have  always  identified  this  great 
persecuting  power  with  Rome,  the  city  of  the  seven  hills  ; 
and  if  this  mterpretation  be  correct,  without  doubt,  in 
the  millennial  age,  her  site  will  be  as  desolate  as  that  of 
Babylon  has  been  for  more  than  two  thousand  years. 
But  one  is  disposed  to  enlarge  the  scope  of  the  prophecy,  and 
to  believe  that  every  form  of  anti-Christian  power,  whether 
systems  of  false  philosophy,  or  structures  of  ancient  super- 
stition, or  gigantic  wrongs,  like  the  drink  traffic  and  the 
opium  trade,  shall  wither  and  die  before  the  all-conquering 
might  of  Emmanuel,  who  was  manifested  to  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil.  He  must  reign  till  all  enemies  are 
put  beneath  his  feet.  Then  shall  be  heard  in  heaven 
the  voice  of  a  great  multitude,  as  the  voice  of  many 
waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  mighty  thunders,  saying, 
"  Hallelujah  !  for  the  Lord  our  God,  the  Almighty, 
reigneth." 

Let  us  strengthen  our  confidence  in  the  certain  prevalence 
of  good  over  evil,  of  the  Church  over  the  world,  and  of 
Christ  over  Satan,  as  we  consider  the  precise  fulfilment 
of  Jeremiah's  predictions  concerning  the  fall  of  Babylon. 
"  So  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  O  Lord  :  but  let  them  that 
love  Thee  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his 
might." 

HL  Our  Own  Babylon.— Each  heart  has  its  special 
form  of  sin,  to  which  it  is  liable,  and  by  yielding  to  which  it 
has  been  perpetually  overthrown.  How  bitter  have  been 
your  tears  and  self-reproach  !  How  you  have  chafed  and 
foamed  beneath  the  strong  iron  bit  of  your  tyrant !     How 


CIjc  geliiiEnttg  ^chi£r  of  (Boh,  145 

hopeless  your  struggles  to  escape  from  the  tormenting 
net,  whose  meshes  refused  to  break,  whilst  every  plunge 
only  entangled  you  more  tightly  in  its  folds  ! 

But  there  is  a  deliverance  for  you,  as  for  those  weak 
and  misguided  but  suffering  Jews.  How  exactly  your 
life  history  is  delineated  in  theirs  !  They  were  the  children 
of  God ;  so  are  you.  They  might  have  lived  in  an 
impregnable  fortress  of  God's  covenant  protection  ;  so  might 
you.  They  forfeited  this  by  their  disobedience  and 
unbelief;  so  have  you.  They  tried  to  compensate  for 
the  loss  of  God's  keeping  power  by  heroic  resolutions 
and  efforts,  and  by  alliance  with  neighbouring  peoples ; 
so  have  you.  They  utterly  failed,  and  were  crushed  as 
a  moth  in  a  child's  hand  ;  so  has  it  been  with  you.  They 
almost  renounced  hope  ;  this,  too,  is  your  case — you  hardly 
dare  hope  for  deliverance.  But  as  God  saved  them  by 
his  own  right  hand,  so  will  He  save  you.  And  as  Babylon 
was  so  utterly  quelled  that  it  ceased  to  be  an  object  of 
alarm ;  so  God  is  able  so  entirely  to  deliver  you  that  you 
shall  no  more  fear  or  be  afraid— you  shall  see  the  bodies 
of  your  task-masters  dead  upon  the  sea-shore. 

Accept  these  rules,  if  you  would  have  this  blessed 
deliverance. 

1.  Put  out  of  your  life  all  known  sin.  Are  there  vows 
that  never  ought  to  have  been  made  ?  Recall  them  !  Are 
there  wrongs  that  lie  back  in  the  past  which  can  be  righted  ? 
Right  them  !  Are  there  secret  habits  and  practices  which 
eat  out  your  heart  ?  Be  willing  to  be  set  free,  and  de- 
liberately tell  God  so.  So  far  as  you  are  concerned,  put 
away  the  idols  that  have  provoked  God  to  jealousy. 

2.  Entrust  the  keeping  of  your  soul  to  God.  You 
cannot  control  it,  but  He  can.  He  made  you,  and  must 
be  able  to  keep  you.  One  of  his  angels  has  power  enough 
to  bmd  the  devil ;  surely  then  the  Lord  of  all  angels  can 
deliver  you  from  the  accursed  demons  that  make  sport  of 
you.     If  Christ  in  his  human  v/eakness  cleared  the  Temple, 

K 


146  Jcrcmtalj's  (iranheat  (Bht. 

He  must  be  able  to  drive  the  foul  things  from  your  heart , 
and  when  once  they  are  out,  it  will  be  easy  for  Him  to 
keep  them  out.  In  his  Ascension,  He  was  raised  above 
all  the  principalities  and  powers  of  darkness,  and  you  were 
raised  with  Him,  too,  if  you  only  knew  it ;  certainly  the 
living  Christ  can  tread  your  lion  and  dragon  beneath  his 
feet.  You  cannot,  but  He  can.  Put  the  case  deliberately, 
thoughtfully,  calmly  into  his  hand.  Do  not  say,  "  I  will 
try";  but  "  I  will  trust."  Do  not  look  at  your  faith,  but  at 
Him.  Do  not  cry,  "  Help  me  !  "  for  that  implies  that  you 
are  going  to  do  some  and  He  son>e,  and  your  part  will 
inevitably  vitiate  all ;  but  cry,  "  Keep  me  ! "  thus  throwing 
the  entire  responsibility  on  Him. 

3.  Reckon  that  the  Almighty  Saviour  accepts  your 
deposit  at  the  moment  of  your  making  it.  As  it  leaves 
your  hand,  it  passes  into  his.  Be  sure  that  He  has  under- 
taken it  all  for  you.  Do  not  try  to  feel  that  He  has,  but 
reckon  that  He  has.  Do  not  go  over  and  over  the  act  of 
committal,  to  see  whether  it  was  rightly  done.  Make  it  as 
well  as  you  can,  or  ask  Him  to  take  what  you  but  in- 
effectively transfer.  Never  doubt  that  He  reads  your 
motive  and  desire,  even  though  you  fail  to  do  as  you 
would ;  and  that  He  accepts  the  eager  willing  for  the 
nerfect  doing.  Then  steadfastly  resist  every  suggestion  to 
auuot  Him.  Dare  to  say  a  hundred  times  a  day,  "Jesus 
is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him  :  I  am 
a  worm,  weak,  witless,  worthless ;  but  the  Son  of  God  has 
me  in  his  safe  keeping;  He  hath  delivered.  He  doth 
deliver,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  He  will  yet  deliver." 
You  may  have  no  glad  emotion,  no  pean  of  victory,  no 
share  of  ecstasy ;  never  mind,  lie  still,  and  trust  Him. 
The  lion  may  roar  all  around,  but  the  weary  tired  sheep 
will  lie  within  the  fold,  absolutely  safe,  because  the 
Shepherd  interposes  his  mighty  keeping  between  it  and 
every  dreaded  ill. 


XVII. 


%ob3  a   ^th   Maoh   as   a  ^piUar. 

(Jeremiah   xxiv.  ;    xxxiv.  ;   xxxvii. ) 

"  Thou  wast  alone  through  Thy  redemption  vigil, 

Thy  friends  had  fled  ; 
The  Angel  at  the  garden  from  Thee  parted  ; 

And  solitude  instead, 
Mo;e  than  the  scourge  or  cross,  O  Tender-hearted  ! 

Under  the  crown  of  thorns,  bowed  down  Thy  head. 

"  But  I,  amid  the  torture  and  the  taunting, 
I  have  had  Thee  ! 
Thy  hand  was  holding  my  hand  fast  and  faster, 

Thy  voice  was  close  to  nie  : 
And  glorious  eyes  said,  '  Follow  Me,  thy  Master, 
Smile  as  1  smile  thy  faithfulness  to  see.'  " 

Mrs.  Hamilton'  King. 

O  a  sensitive  nature  it  is  an  agony  to  stand 
alone.  By  a  swift  and  unerring  instinct  such 
a  soul  can  detect  what  is  in  men's  hearts ; 
and  when  it  knows  intuitively  that  the  sym- 
pathy for  which  it  yearns  is  dried  up  like 
a  summer  brook ;  that  interest  has  changed 
to  indifference,  and  warmth  of  friendship  to  the  coldness 
of  disdain — whether  in  society  or  in  the  great  world  of 
human  life— its  energy  ebbs,  and  its  native  power  of  influence 
is  frozen  at  its  spring.  To  many,  the  sense  of  being 
esteemed  and  loved  is  the  very  breath  of  life.  They  would 
scorn  flattery,  and  the  adulation  of  wealth  or  fashion ; 
they  are  quite  content  to  dwell  among  their  own  people : 
but  they  are  so  constituted  as  to  require  an  atmosphere  of 
sympathy  for  the  full  forth-putting  of  their  powers. 

Many  strong  and  stalwart  souls,  cast  in  an  heroic  mould, 
have  no  experience  of  this  sensitive  and  tender  disposition. 


148  Hcthi  a  ^tth  stoctr  as  a  pillar. 

It  is  well  that  they  have  not.  They  were  born  to  be  the 
discoverers,  the  pioneers,  the  soldiers  of  the  race ;  theirs  the 
ribs  of  iron  and  the  nerves  of  steel  ;  theirs  the  courage 
which  mounts  higher  on  opposition  and  ill-will.  They  will 
never  realize  the  cost  at  which  those  do  their  work  and  bear 
their  testimony,  who  have  much  of  the  woman  in  their 
nature,  with  its  faculty  of  insight,  its  warmth  of  emotion, 
its  keen  sensitiveness  to  praise  or  hate,  its  yearning  for 
sympathy,  the  smile  of  approbation,  the  kind  word  of 
cheer. 

Jeremiah  was  one  of  the  latter  class.  Tender,  shrinking, 
sensitive,  with  a  vast  capacity  for  emotion,  strong  to  hate, 
and  therefore  to  love,  not  constituted  by  nature  to  stand 
alone.  But  herein  let  us  adore  that  grace  which  stepped 
into  his  life,  and  for  forty  years  made  him  a  defenced  city, 
and  an  iron  pillar,  and  brazen  walls  against  the  whole  land — 
against  princes,  priests,  and  people.  They  indeed  fought 
against  him ;  but  could  not  prevail,  because  God  was  with 
him.  He  out-lasted  all  his  foes,  and  maintained  the  stan- 
dard to  life's  end.  And  this  marvellous  endurance  and 
steadfastness  of  spirit  was  nowhere  so  conspicuous  as  during 
the  last  months  of  his  nation's  independence.  We  must 
tell  part  of  this  story  in  this  chapter,  that  none  may  miss  its 
helpful  inspiration ;  because,  if  the  presence  of  God  could 
do  so  much  for  him,  and  for  so  long,  it  is  sufficient  for  the 
weakest  child  of  His  that  may  read  these  words. 

L  Jeremiahs  attitude  towards  the  king. — We  gain 
much  information  concerning  the  situation  at  Jerusalem, 
during  the  reign  of  Zedekiah,  from  the  pages  of  Ezekiel  ; 
who,  though  resident  in  the  land  of  the  exile,  faithfully 
reflected,  and  in  prophetic  vision  anticipated,  what  was 
transpiring  in  the  beloved  city,  to  which  his  thoughts  were 
incessantly  directed.  His  prophecies  are  most  valuable  and 
interesting  when  read  in  this  light. 

Zedekiah,  as   we  have  seen,   on   ascending   the   throne, 


Eljc  JSropIret  anu  il)£  IS-ing.  149 

bound  himself  under  the  most  solemn  sanctions  to  be  loyal 
to  the  supremacy  of  Babylon  ,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that, 
at  the  time,  he  fully  intended  to  be  faithful,  the  more 
especially  as,  at  Nebuchadnezzar's  command,  he  took  the 
oath  of  allegiance  in  the  sacred  name  of  Jehovah.  But  he 
was  weak  and  young,  and  wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  strong 
court-party  that  favoured  an  alliance  with  Egypt,  and  the 
casting  off  of  the  Chaldean  yoke. 

Two  years  before  the  catastrophe  befell,  Ezekiel  clearly 
foretold  what  was  about  to  happen.  He  foresaw  the 
embassy  sent  to  Pharaoh  requesting  horses  and  people,  and 
asked  indignantly,  "  Shall  he  prosper  ?  shall  he  escape 
that  doeth  such  things  ?  or  shall  he  break  the  covenant,  and 
be  delivered?"  And  he  followed  up  his  bitter  remon- 
strances by  the  awful  words,  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord 
God,  surely  in  the  place  where  the  king  dwelleth  that  made 
him  king,  whose  oath  he  despised,  and  whose  covenant  he 
brake,  even  with  him  in  the  midst  of  Babylon  he  shall  die. 
Neither  shall  Pharaoh  with  his  mighty  army  and  great 
company  make  for  him  in  the  war"  (Ezekiel  xvii.  11-21). 

Jeremiah,  as  we  know,  earnestly  dissuaded  both  king 
and  princes  from  entering  into  the  alliance  which  was  being 
advocated  between  Judah  and  the  neighbouring  states  ;  and 
insisted,  in  the  face  of  the  false  prophets,  that  the  residue 
of  the  vessels  left  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  Temple  would 
certainly  be  transported,  as  the  rest  had  been,  to  Babylon, 
if  the  mad  project  were  persisted  in  (xxvii.).  Notwith- 
standing all  these  remonstrances,  however,  the  confederacy 
was  formed  :  and  in  a  fatal  moment  Zedekiah  renounced 
his  allegiance  to  the  king  of  Babylon. 

Then  it  befell  precisely  as  Ezekiel  had  foreseen.  Stung 
to  the  quick  by  the  perfidy  and  ingratitude  of  the  Jews, 
who  had  so  persistently  and  obstinately  outraged  him, 
Nebuchadnezzar  gathered  a  vast  army,  resolved  to  make 
a  public  example  of  them  to  surrounding  peoples,  by  the 
swiftness  and  mercilessness  of  his  vengeance.     "  A  sword, 


150  ftota  a  ^nb  stood  as  a  pillar. 

a  sword,  it  is  sharpened,  and  also  furbished :  it  is  sharpened 
that  it  may  make  a  slaughter ;  it  is  furbished  that  it  may  be  as 
lightning,  Cry  and  howl,  son  of  man  :  for  it  is  upon  my 
people,  it  is  upon  all  the  princes  of  Israel.  They  are 
delivered  over  to  the  sword  with  my  people :  smite  therefore 
upon  thy  thigh"  (Ezekiel  xxi.  8-17,  R.v.). 

The  king  of  Babylon  comes  to  the  junction  of  the  ways 
— this  to  Jerusalem,  that  to  Rabbah,  the  chief  city  of 
Amnion.  He  consults  the  usual  signs  of  divination,  which 
point  him  to  the  assault  of  Jerusalem,  with  battering  rams, 
and  mounts,  and  forts.  And  as  he  takes  the  road  to  the 
devoted  city,  the  voice  of  Jehovah  is  heard  bidding  the 
prince  of  Israel,  whose  day  is  come,  to  remove  the  mitre, 
and  take  off  the  crown,  because  Jehovah  was  resolved  to 
"overturn,  overturn,  and  overturn."  And  then,  as  though 
to  justify  the  awful  sentence,  there  is  given  an  enumeration 
of  the  crimes  which  were  making  the  streets  of  Jerusalem 
red  with  blood,  and  foul  with  impurity.  It  is  altogether  a 
terrible  description  of  the  state  of  things  in  the  city  during 
those  last  years  of  Zedekiah's  reign.  A  bitter  experience 
for  Jeremiah,  whose  soul  must  have  been  sore  vexed  from 
day  to  day,  in  seeing  and  hearing  their  lawless  deeds 
(Ezekiel  xxi.  18-27  ^  ^^i-  1-16). 

At  last,  in  December,  591  B.C.,  the  siege  began.  On 
the  approach  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  confederacy  had 
melted  away,  and  Jerusalem  was  left  alone,  an  islet  amid 
the  roaring  waves  of  Chaldean  armies.  But  the  citizens  had 
laid  in  a  good  store  of  provisions,  and  were  expecting  daily 
the  advance  of  Pharaoh-Hophra,  with  the  chivalry  of  Egypt, 
to  raise  the  siege. 

At  thi-s  juncture,  Zedekiah  sent  two  well-known  men  to 
Jeremiah,  to  ask  whether  Jehovah  would  not  interpose  for 
his  people,  as  He  had  done  in  the  great  days  of  the  past ;  as 
for  instance,  when  He  destroyed  the  host  of  Sennacherib  in 
a  single  night.  It  must  have  been  a  trying  ordeal  to  the 
prophet.      One  conciliatory  word  might  have  averted  the 


dislike  of  princes  and  people,  given  a  bright  glint  of  popu- 
larity and  hero-worship,  and  obliterated  the  charges  of 
mean-spiritedness  and  lack  of  patriotism  that  were  freely 
levelled  at  him.  Why  should  he  not  be  the  Isaiah  of  this 
new  siege  ?  Why  not  arouse  and  encourage  his  people  to 
indomitable  resistance  and  heroic  faith?  Why  not  blend 
his  voice  with  those  of  the  prophets  that  foretold  a  certain 
deliverance,  and  so  acquire  an  influence  over  them,  which 
might  be  used  ultimately  for  their  highest  good  ? 

It  is  not  impossible  that  such  considerations  passed 
before  his  mind.  But  if  so,  they  were  immediately  dis- 
missed. "  Then  said  Jeremiah  unto  them,  Thus  shall  ye 
say  to  Zedekiah  :  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel, 
Behold,  I  will  turn  back  the  weapons  of  war  that  are  in 
your  hands,  wherewith  ye  fight  against  the  king  of  Babylon, 
and  against  the  Chaldeans,  which  besiege  you  without  the 
walls,  and  I  will  gather  them  into  the  midst  of  this  city. 
And  I  myself  will  fight  against  you  with  an  outstretched 
hand  and  with  a  strong  arm,  even  in  anger,  and  in  fury, 
and  in  great  wrath.  And  I  will  smite  the  inhabitants  of 
this  city,  both  man  and  beast :  they  shall  die  of  a  great 
pestilence.  And  afterward,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  deliver 
Zedekiah,  king  of  Judah,  and  his  servants,  and  the  people, 
even  such  as  are  left  in  this  city  from  the  pestilence,  from 
the  sword,  and  from  the  famine,  into  the  hand  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, king  of  Babylon  :  and  he  shall  smite  them  with  the 
edge  of  the  sword  ;  he  shall  not  spare  them,  neither  have 
pity,  nor  have  mercy." 

He  followed  up  these  terrible  words  by  saying  that  the 
only  way  of  safety  was  to  go  forth  to  the  Chaldeans,  who 
were  now  investing  the  city  on  every  side.  All  who  stopped 
in  the  city  would  die  of  sword,  pestilence,  or  famine.  They 
would  be  accounted  as  figs  not  fit  to  be  eaten,  and  destined 
to  be  cast  away  as  refuse.  But  those  who  went  forth  and 
surrendered  themselves  to  the  king  of  Babylon  would  save 
their  lives  (xxi.  ;  xxii.  1-9  ;  xxiv.). 


152  Boto  a  Kcctr  stooi  as  a  pillar. 

Yet  once  again,  when  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  was  in 
progress,  and  every  day  the  air  was  full  of  the  cries  of  the 
combatants,  the  heavy  thud  of  the  battering-rams  against 
the  walls,  and  the  cries  of  wounded  men  borne  from  the 
ramparts  to  the  tendance  of  women — Jeremiah  went  fear- 
lessly to  Zedekiah  with  the  heavy  tidings  that  nothing  could 
stay  the  sack  and  burning  of  the  city,  since  God  had  given 
it  into  the  hands  of  the  king  of  Babylon  ;  and  that  he 
would  surely  be  taken,  and  behold  him  face  to  face.  "  He 
shall  speak  with  thee  mouth  to  mouth,  and  thou  shalt  go  to 
Babylon  "  (xxxiv.  1-7). 

At  the  same  time,  rolling  across  the  desert  waste,  and 
reverberating  like  a  funeral  knell,  came  the  terrible  voice  of 
Ezekiel :  "  Woe  to  the  bloody  city  !  Heap  on  the  wood  ; 
make  the  fire  hot  ;  then  set  it  empty  upon  the  coals  thereof, 
that  the  rust  of  it  may  be  consumed.  I  the  Lord  have 
spoken  it.  I  will  not  go  back,  neither  will  I  repent  " 
(Ezekiel  xxiv.  1-14). 

n.  His  Attitude  towards  the  Slave-Owning  Jews. — 
It  is  not  impossible  that  Jeremiah's  vehement  words  of 
reproof  aroused  the  deeply-drugged  conscience  of  his 
people  ;  and  they  resolved,  at  the  suggestion  of  Zedekiah, 
to  make  some  reparation  for  their  sins,  and  at  the  same 
time  strengthen  their  garrison,  by  setting  free  their  slaves. 
This  was  done  at  a  solemn  convocation,  specially  summoned 
in  the  temple  ;  and  the  national  resolve  was  ratified  before 
God  with  the  most  sacred  rites.  A  calf  was  cut  in  twain ; 
and  the  princes  of  Judah,  the  princes  of  Jerusalem,  the 
eunuchs  and  the  priests,  and  all  the  principal  people,  passed 
between  the  parts  of  the  calf,  as  much  as  to  say.  May  God 
part  us  in  twain,  as  this  beast  is,  if  we  turn  back  from  our 
vow  to  emancipate  our  brethren  and  sisters,  Hebrews  and 
Hebrewesses,  who  are  enslaved. 

Great  joy  spread  through  hundreds  of  hearts — a  body 
of  stalwart  defenders  was  raised  for  the  beleaguered  city. 


%hc  ^iab'C^  set  Jfrcc.  153 

Best  of  all,  the  nation  had  done  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord. 
Two  months  or  so  passed,  when,  to  the  unbounded  joy  of 
tiie  citizens,  the  attacks  of  Nebuchadnezzar  became  less 
frequent ;  the  lines  of  the  besieging  army  thinned  ;  and 
presently  the  tents  were  struck,  and  the  whole  host  moved 
off.  How  immense  the  relief,  when  the  crash  of  catapult 
and  ram  ceased,  and  the  population  pent  up  so  long  within 
their  walls  could  go  freely  forth  !  This  diversion  was  caused 
by  the  approach  of  Pharaoh's  army.  The  Jews  thought 
that  they  would  never  see  their  foes  ;  gain,  and  must  have 
derided  Jeremiah  mercilessly.  They  also  repealed  the  edict 
of  emancipation,  and  caused  the  servants  and  handmaidens 
whom  they  had  let  go  to  return  to  their  former  condition. 

In  that  tumult  of  national  rejoicing,  when  the  prophet's 
words  seemed  falsified,  and  when  the  fear  they  had  inspired 
turned  to  increased  hatred  against  the  man  who  had  t'poken 
them  ;  when  he  seemed  cast  off  and  disowned  by  Jehovah 
Himself,  it  must  have  needed  uncommon  faith  and  courage 
to  raise  a  bold  and  uncompromising  protest.  But  he  did 
not  swerve  by  a  hair-breadth  from  the  path  of  duty. 
The  infatuation  of  his  people ;  their  treachery  to  their 
plighted  oath ;  the  disappointment  and  sufferings  of  the 
enslaved  ;  and  the  honour  of  Jehovah  so  ruthlessly 
contemned — all  compelled  him  to  speak  out.  "  Behold, 
saith  the  Lord,  I  proclaim  liberty  to  the  sword,  to  the 
pestilence,  and  to  the  famine.  And  I  will  give  the  men  that 
have  transgressed  my  covenant  into  the  hand  of  their 
enemies,  and  their  dead  bodies  shall  be  for  meat  unto  the 
fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  to  the  beasts  of  the  earth.  And 
Zedekiah  king  of  Judah,  and  his  princes,  will  I  give  into  the 
hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon's  army,  which  are  gone  up  from 
you.  Behold,  I  will  command,  saith  the  Lord,  and  cause 
them  to  return  to  this  city ;  and  they  shall  fight  against  it, 
and  take  it,  and  burn  it  with  lire :  and  I  will  make  the  cities 
of  Judah  a  desolation,  without  inhabitant  "  (xxxiv.). 

It  needed  no  common  moral  courage,  and  sense  of  the 


154  lloto  a  ^ceb  ztooh  as  a  pillar. 

presence  of  God,  to  dare  to  speak  such  words  ;  and  they 
must  have  brought  down  on  the  devoted  head  of  the  lonely 
prophet  storms  of  abuse.  How  easy  to  ridicule  him  when 
it  seemed  so  sure  that  the  false  prophets  were  right,  and  he 
wrong  !  His  opponents  would  be  proportionately  indignant, 
as  the  voice  of  conscience,  not  yet  quite  silenced,  protested 
that  he  was  speaking  the  very  word  of  Jehovah. 

HI.  His  Attitude  during  the  Interval  of  Respite. — 
The  city  was  delirious  with  joy.  The  Chaldeans  had  with- 
drawn, Pharaoh  would  prove  more  than  a  match  for  them, 
they  would  not  return.  The  thunder-cloud  had  broken, 
there  was  nothing  to  fear.  But  Jeremiah  never  changed  his 
note.  It  seemed  like  a  raven's  croak  amid  the  songs  of 
spring-birds.  Very  depressing !  very  unpopular !  very 
likely  to  spread  suspicion  and  panic !  Only  too  gladly 
would  he  have  yielded  to  the  current  flowing  around  him. 
But  he  dared  not ;  and  when  the  king  sent  another  depu- 
tation to  inquire  through  him  of  Jehovah,  he  returned  this 
terrible  reply  :  "  Deceive  not  yourselves,  saying,  The  Chal- 
deans shall  surely  depart  from  us :  for  they  shall  not 
depart.  For  though  ye  had  smitten  the  whole  army  of 
the  Chaldeans  that  fight  against  you,  and  there  remained 
but  wounded  men  among  them,  yet  should  they  rise 
up  every  man  in  his  tent,  and  burn  this  city  with 
fire"  (xxxvii.  i-io). 

God's  prophets  had  too  clear  a  vision  of  the  issue  of  the 
duel  between  Chaldciea  and  Egypt,  to  be  able  to  buoy  up 
their  people  with  hopes  of  deliverance.  Jeremiah  had 
already  foreseen  that  the  daughter  of  Egypt  should  be  put 
to  shame,  and  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  people  of  the 
north  ;  he  had  even  asked  that  the  tidings  of  invasion  might 
be  published  in  her  principal  cities  (xlvi.  13-28).  Ezekiel 
was  not  less  decisive :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will 
strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  put  my 
sword  in  his  hand :    but  I  will  break  the  arms  of  Pharaoh, 


inialr's  ^iohnct.  155 

and  he  shall  groan  berore  him  with  the  groannigs  of  a  deadly 
wounded  man  "  (Ezekiel  xxx.). 

Shortly  after  this,  the  prophet  resolved  to  take  the 
opportunity,  offered  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  Chaldeans,  to 
visit  his  inheritance  at  Anathoth,  for  the  purpose  of 
receiving  his  portion  there,  perhaps  of  rent,  or  of  some 
division  of  tithes  amongst  the  priestly  families,  of  which  he 
was  a  member.  As  he  was  passing  out  through  the  gate 
of  Benjamin,  he  was  recognised  by  a  captain,  whose  family 
had  long  been  in  antagonism  with  him ;  and  he  was  not 
slow  to  turn  the  occasion  to  advantage,  by  repaying  a  long- 
standing grudge  (xxxvii.  13).  He  therefore  laid  hold  on  the 
prophet,  saying,  "  Thou  fallest  away  to  the  Chaldeans."  It 
was  an  absurd  charge ;  for  the  Chaldeans  had  raised  the 
siege,  and  it  was  supposed  they  would  not  return.  The 
pretext  however  was  sufficient  to  serve  Irijah's  purpose,  and 
though  it  was  indignantly  repudiated  by  Jeremiah,  he  was 
dragged  with  violence  into  the  presence  of  the  princes,  who 
were  as  glad  to  have  their  intractable  foe  at  their  mercy,  as 
the  priests  to  whom  Judas  offered  to  betray  his  Master. 

When  he  had  been  in  a  similar  plight  in  the  previous 
reign,  Ahikam  the  son  of  Shaphan  had  rescued  him,  like 
another  John  of  Gaunt :  but  he  was  now  dead  or  in  exile. 
Zedekiah  was  too  weak  to  interpose  to  rescue  the  prophet 
from  the  fury  of  his  lords,  even  if  he  were  acquainted  with 
his  peril.  And  so  they  adjudged  him  to  the  bastinado; 
forty  stripes  save  one  fell  from  the  scourge  on  his  bare 
back ;  and  he  was  then  thrust  into  a  dark,  underground, 
unhealthy  dungeon,  where  he  remained  many  days  at  the 
peril  of  his  life. 

After  awhile,  Zedekiah,  perhaps  pricked  by  remorse,  or 
alarmed  at  the  tidings  which  came  from  the  frontier,  sent 
for  him ;  much  as  Herod  was  wont  to  summon  John  the 
Baptist,  from  his  dungeon  to  converse  with  him  in  his 
palace-halls  above.  "Is  there  any  word  from  the  Lord?" 
the  king  asked,  anxiously. 


15^  HotD  a  ilecir  stootr  as  a  |1tUar. 

What  an  opportunity  was  here  for  Jeremiah  to  trim  his 
speech,  to  put  velvet  on  his  lips,  and  to  mitigate  the 
unwelcome  truth  !  Thus  he  might  curry  the  king's  favour, 
and  secure  for  himself  deliverance  from  his  intolerable 
sufferings.  But  again  there  was  no  compromise.  "  Aiid 
Jeremiah  said,  There  is.  He  said  also,  Thou  shalt  be 
delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon." 

He  then  pleaded  with  the  royal  clemency  for  a  mitigation 
of  the  severity  of  his  sentence,  with  such  good  success,  that 
he  was  committed,  at  the  king's  command,  to  the  court  of 
the  guard,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  palace  ;  and 
fed  daily  with  a  loaf  of  bread  out  of  the  baker's  street,  until 
all  the  bread  in  the  city  was  spent.  In  the  meanwhile  the 
army  of  the  Chaldeans,  having  defeated  Pharaoh,  returned; 
and  again  formed  their  thick-set  lines  around  the  city,  like  a 
fence  of  iron,  to  be  drawn  closer  and  closer  until  Jerusalem 
fell,  like  a  snared  bird,  into  their  grasp. 

It  is  impossible  to  recite  or  read  this  story  without 
admiration  for  the  man  who  dared  to  stand  alone  with 
God  against  a  nation  in  arms.  It  makes  us  thmk  of 
Ziegenbalg,  the  first  missionar}'  to  the  East  Indies,  standing 
alone  there  against  the  whole  force  of  the  authorities, 
determined  to  crush  his  mission  in  the  bud  ;  of  Judson, 
pursuing  his  work  for  the  salvation  of  Burmah,  amid  the 
treachery  and  hostility  of  the  king  ;  of  Moffat,  going  alone 
and  unarmed  into  the  territory  of  the  terrible  Africander ; 
of  John  Hunt  amid  the  ferocious  cannibals  of  Fiji ;  of 
John  G.  Baton,  who  was  preserved  amid  fifty  attempts  to 
take  his  life.  Our  sole  duty  is  to  see  that  we  are  on  God's 
plan  and  doing  his  work ;  to  wrap  around  our  souls  the 
sense  of  his  presence ;  to  keep  our  ears  open  to  the 
perpetual  assurance,  "I  am  with  thee,  to  deliver  thee." 
Then  we  shall  leap  barrier-walls,  pass  unscathed  through 
troops  of  foes,  and  stand  as  pillars  in  his  temple,  never  to 
be  removed. 


XVIII. 

(Jeremiah  xxxii.) 

' '  All  we  have  willed  or  hoped  or  dreamed  of  good  shall  exist ; 
Not  its  semblance,  but  itself,  no  beauty,  nor  good,  nor  power, 
Whose  voice  has  gone  forth,  but  each  survives  for  the  melodist 

When  eternity  affirms  the  conception  of  an  hour ; 
The  light  that  proved  too  high,  the  heroic  for  earth  too  hard, 

The  passion  that  left  the  ground  to  lose  itself  in  the  sky, 
The  music  sent  up  to  God  by  the  lover  and  the  bard  ; 

Enough  that  He  heard  it  once  ;  we  shall  hear  it  by  and  by.' 
v-^--*^^,^.  Browning. 

WfMTv^  shut    up    \n   the   court   of   the   prison, 

mW^- /  *      perhaps  fastened  by  a  cliain   that  restrained 
*^)i/M.iv       his  Hberty,  Jeremiah  received  a  Divine  intima 


'^-%r^'>^^  tion  that  his  uncle  would  shortly  come  to 
<^0  f''^  him  with  a  request  for  him  to  purchase  the 
family  property  at  Anathoth.  This  greatly 
startled  him  ;  because  he  had  so  clear  a  conviction,  which  he 
cherished  as  Divinely  given,  of  the  approaching  overthrow 
of  the  kingdom,  and  the  consequent  desolation  of  the  land. 
It  had  been  his  one  incessant  message  to  his  people  for 
nearly  forty  years,  that  the  land  must  keep  her  Sabbaths  as 
a  judgment  for  the  sins  of  the  people ,  and  now  it  seemed 
conflicting  and  inconsistent  to  be  told  to  purchase  the  field 
at  Anathoth,  as  though  it  were  needed  for  cultivation  The 
Divine  command  quite  staggered  him,  and  may  have  made 
him  for  a  moment  question  whether  there  had  not  been 
some  mistake  in  the  message  he  had  so  constantly  reiterated 
in  the  ears  of  his  people. 

He  gave,  however,  no  outward  sign  of  his  perplexities  , 
but  when  his  uncle's  son  entered  the  courtyard  with  his 


158  Hfttto  tbc  ^routtii,  to  gie. 

request,  the  prophet  at  once  assented  to  the  proposal,  and 
purchased  the  property  for  seventeen  shekels  (about  £2). 
A  similar  incident  is  recorded  in  Roman  history.  When 
Rome  was  being  besieged  by  Hannibal,  the  very  ground  on 
which  he  was  encamped  was  put  up  for  auction,  and  pur- 
chased ;  a  proof  of  the  calm  confidence  that  the  Romans 
possessed  of  the  ultimate  issue  of  the  conflict. 

In  addition  to  this,  Jeremiah  took  care  to  have  the 
purchase  recorded  and  witnessed  with  the  same  elaborate 
pains  as  if  he  were  at  once  to  be  entering  on  occupation. 
Not  a  single  form  was  omitted  or  slurred  over;  and  ulti- 
mately the  two  deeds  of  contract — the  one  sealed  with  the 
more  private  details  of  price ;  the  other  open,  and  bearing 
the  signatures  of  witnesses — were  deposited  in  the  charge  of 
Baruch,  with  the  injunction  to  put  them  in  an  earthen 
vessel,  and  preserve  them.  They  were  probably  not  opened 
again  until  the  return  from  the  captivity  ;  but  we  can  well 
imagine  how  strong  a  rush  of  emotion  and  confidence 
must  have  been  inspired,  as  the  men  of  that  day  perused 
the  documents. 

But  Jeremiah  was  not  a  sharer  in  that  glad  scene.  He 
did  as  God  bade  him,  though  the  shadow  of  a  great 
darkness  lay  upon  his  soul,  for  which  he  could  only  find 
relief,  as  the  Lord  on  the  cross,  in  recourse  to  the  Father. 
Indeed,  at  this  point  of  his  life,  he  resembles  the  hidden 
vessel,  which  contained  within  it  the  charter  of  the  nation's 
deliverence.  He  was  an  earthen  vessel  indeed,  but  he 
contained  heavenly  treasure.  He  fell  into  the  ground  to 
die,  as  the  seed  does,  which  holds  at  its  heart  a  principle  of 
life,  that  can  only  express  itself  through  death,  and  can 
only  bless  men  when  its  sowing,  amid  the  depression  ard 
decay  of  autumn,  has  been  complete. 

I.  Hours  of  Midnight  Darkness. — It  is  only  in 
service  that  anything  reaches  its  fullest  life.  A  bit  of 
iron    is    condemned    to    solitude    and    uselessness    till    it 


Sijc  fife  of  ^clf-genial.  T59 

becomes  part  of  a  great  machine.  A  seed  of  corn,  hidden 
for  three  thousand  years  in  a  mummy  case,  abides  alone, 
and  only  learns  the  motive  and  glory  of  existence  when, 
through  death,  it  learns  to  weave  the  chemical  juices  of  the 
earth,  and  dews,  sunbeams,  and  air,  into  the  fabric  of  the 
golden  corn.  A  man  who  lives  a  self-contained  life,  of 
which  the  gratification  of  his  own  ambition  and  self-hood  is 
the  supreme  aim,  never  drinks  the  sweets  of  existence,  nor 
attains  his  full  development.  It  is  only  when  we  live  for 
God,  and,  in  doing  so,  for  man,  that  we  are  able  to 
appropriate  the  rarest  blessedness  of  which  our  nature  is 
capable,  or  to  unfold  into  all  the  proportions  of  full  growth 
in  Christ.  In  the  deepest  sense,  therefore,  Jeremiah  could 
never  regret  that  he  had  given  the  strength  and  measure  of 
his  days  to  the  service  of  others.  If  he  had  not  done  so, 
but  had  shrunk  back  from  the  high  calling  of  his  early  life, 
his  misery  would  have  been  in  proportion  to  the  royal 
quality  of  his  nature,  and  his  power  to  enrich  the  life 
of  man. 

But  none  can  give  themselves  to  the  service  of  others, 
except  at  bitter  cost  of  much  that  this  world  holds  dear. 
In  the  words  of  Christ,  the  corn  of  w^heat  must  fall  into  the 
ground  and  die,  if  it  is  to  bear  much  fruit.  In  the  case  of 
the  wheat-corn,  death  is  necessary  to  break  up  the  case  in 
which  the  principle  of  life  lies  imprisoned.  And  in 
the  case  of  every  true  life,  there  must  be  death  to  the 
attractions  and  indulgences  of  the  self-life,  that  the  soul, 
being  at  leisure  from  itself,  may  go  forth  to  seek  its  supplies 
from  God,  and  to  weave  them  into  nourishing  food  for  the 
lives  of  those  around.  This  will  explain  the  privations  and 
sorrows  to  which  Jeremiah  was  subjected.  Death  wrought 
in  him,  that  life  might  work  in  Israel,  and  in  all  who  should 
read  the  book  of  his  prophecy. 

He  died  to  the  dear  ties  of  himian  love. — "  Thou  shalt  not 
take  thee  a  wife,  neither  shalt  thou  have  sons  or  daughters 
in  this  place,"  was  early  said  to  him.     The  men  of  Anathoth, 


i6o  Into  tht  OSrouttb,  to  gie. 

of  the  house  of  his  father,  conspired  against  him.  The 
friends  with  whom  he  took  sweet  counsel,  and  in  whose 
company  he  walked  to  the  house  of  God,  betrayed  him. 
What  he  held  in  his  heart  belonged  to  the  race,  and  might 
not  be  poured  forth  within  the  narrower  circle  of  the  home, 
of  priestly  temple-duty,  or  of  the  little  village  of  Anathoth. 

He  died  to  tJiz  goodwill  of  his  fellows. — None  can  be 
indifferent  to  this.  It  is  easy  to  do  or  suffer,  when  the  bark 
of  life  is  wafted  on  its  way  by  favouring  breezes,  or  the  air 
thrills  with  expressions  of  love  and  adulation.  Then  a  man 
is  nerved  to  dare  to  do  his  best.  And  a  nature  as  sensitive 
as  Jeremiah's,  is  peculiarly  susceptible  to  such  impressions. 
But  it  was  his  bitter  lot  to  encounter  from  the  first  an 
incessant  stream  of  vituperation  and  dislike.  We  have  no 
record  of  one  voice  being  raised  to  thank  or  encourage  him. 
"  Woe  is  me,  my  mother,"  he  cried  sadly,  "  that  thou  hast 
borne  me  a  man  of  strife  and  contention  to  the  whole  earth. 
I  have  not  lent  on  usury,  neither  have  men  lent  to  me  on 
usury  ;  yet  every  one  of  them  doth  curse  me." 

He  died  to  the  pride  of  ?iational  patriotism. — No  patriot 
allows  himself  to  despair  of  his  country.  However  dark 
the  louring  storm  clouds,  and  strong  the  adverse  current, 
he  believes  that  the  ship  of  State  will  weather  the 
storm.  He  chokes  back  words  of  despondency  and 
depression,  lest  they  should  breed  dismay.  He  does 
not  allow  his  heart  to  harbour  the  thoughts  of  despair 
that  flit  across  it,  and  knock  for  entrance ;  he  drives 
them  away,  and  treats  them  as  traitors,  guilty  of  high 
treason.  But  Jeremiah  v,-as  driven  along  an  opposite 
course.  A  truer  heart  than  his  never  beat  in  human 
breast.  A  loftier  patriotism  than  his  never  hazarded 
itself  in  the  last  breach.  His  belief  in  Israel  was  part 
of  his  belief  in  God.  But  he  found  himself  compelled 
to  speak  in  such  a  fashion  that  the  princes  proposed, 
not  without  show  or  reason,  to  put  him  to  death,  because 
he  weakened   the  hands  of  the  men  of  war. 


^  QCnxc  patriot.  i6i 

He  died  to  the  sweets  of  personal  liberty. — A  large 
portion  of  his  ministry  was  exerted  from  the  precincts 
of  a  prison.  Repeatedly  we  read  of  his  being  shut  up, 
and  not  able  to  go  forth.  His  friend,  Baruch,  had 
constantly  to  act  as  his  intermediary  and  interpreter. 
This,  too,  must  have  been  bitter  to  him.  His  writings 
abound  with  references  to  nature,  and  to  natural  pro- 
cesses; and  the  iron  fetters  of  restraint  must  have  eaten 
deeply  into  the  tender  flesh  of  his  gentle  heart. 

He  died.,  also.,  to  tke  ?neaning  he  had  been  wont  to 
place  071  his  own  prophecies. — Up  to  the  moment  when 
Jehovah  bade  him  purchase  the  property  of  Hanameel, 
he  had  never  questioned  the  impending  fate  of  Jerusalem. 
It  was  certainly  and  inevitably  to  be  destroyed  by  sword, 
famine,  pestilence,  and  fire.  All  that  he  had  ever  said  in 
private  or  public  was  but  the  fresh  assertion  of  this  bitter 
fate,  wuth  some  new  touch  of  pathos,  or  turn  of  emphasis. 
But  now,  the  word  of  God,  demanding  an  act  of  obedience, 
seemed  to  indicate  that  the  land  was  to  remain  under  the 
cultivation  of  the  families  that  owned  it. 

H.  Jeremiah's  Behaviour. — To  very  few  men  has  it 
been  given  so  closely  to  walk  along  the  path  which 
the  Redeemer  trod  during  his  early  life.  He  was  stripped 
of  almost  everything  that  men  prize  most.  But  amid 
it  all,  he  derived  solace  and  support  in  three  main 
directions. 

(i)  He  prayed. — Take  this  extract  from  his  own  diary: 
"  Now,  after  I  had  delivered  the  deed  of  the  purchase  unto 
Baruch,  the  son  of  Neriah,  I  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  saying. 
Ah,  Lord  God  ! "  Yea,  and  he  was  encouraged  in  this  holy 
exercise  ;  for  shortly  after  this  incident,  when  tidings  came 
to  him  that  the  houses  of  the  kings  of  Judah  were  being 
broken  down  to  provide  materials  for  the  building  of  an 
inner  line  of  defence,  behind  the  shell  of  wall  which  was 
nearly  demolished  by  the  terrible  battering-rams,  and  when 


i62  ^ttto  the  (BronntJ,  to  gic. 

his  heart  was  more  than  ever  dismayed,  the  word  of  the 
Lord  came  to  him,  saying :  "  Call  unto  Me,  and  I  will 
answer  thee,  and  will  show  thee  great  and  secret  [or  inac- 
cessible] things,  which  thou  knowest  not"  (xxxiii.  1-5)- 

There  is  no  help  to  the  troubled  soul  like  that  which 
comes  through  prayer.  You  may  have  no  clear  vision 
of  God.  You  may  be  only  able  to  grope  your  way  in  the 
direction  where  He  sits,  enshrouded  from  your  view  in  the 
thick  darkness.  You  may  be  able  to  do  little  more  than 
recite  things  which  God  and  you  know  perfectly  well ; 
ending  your  prayer,  as  Jeremiah  did,  with  the  words,  "  and 
behold  Thou  seest  it"  (24).  Nevertheless,  pray;  pray  on 
your  knees  ;  "  in  everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication,  let 
your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God":  and  the  peace 
of  God  will  settle  down  on,  and  enwrap,  your  weary, 
troubled  soul. 

He  rested  on  the  Word  of  God. — The  soul  of  the  prophet 
was  nourished  and  fed  by  the  Divine  word.  "  Thy  words 
were  found,"  he  cries,  "  and  I  did  eat  them  :  and  thy  words 
were  unto  me  the  joy  and  the  rejoicing  of  my  heart." 
It  sounds  but  hard  and  cold  advice  to  bid  a  man  in  sorrow 
to  read  his  Bible  ;  but  it  were  impossible  to  give  better. 
Because,  behind  the  words  is  the  Word  ;  in  this  garden  the 
Son  of  Man  walks  ;  in  this  tabernacle  the  Sun  shines  in 
whose  beams  are  health  and  comfort.  How  often  have 
God's  people  turned  to  the  Bible,  as  the  Saviour  did  in 
the  darkest  hours  that  swept  over  his  soul,  and  found 
in  a  psalm  or  a  chapter  the  balm  of  Gilead,  the  tree 
of  life  with  healing  leaves  ! 

He  faithfully  kept  to  the  path  of  duty. — "And  I  bought 
the  field."  It  does  not  always  happen  that  our  service 
to  men  will  be  met  by  rebuff,  ill-will,  and  hard  treatment ; 
but  when  it  does,  there  should  be  no  swerving,  or  flinching, 
or  drawing  back.  God's  sun  shines  on  the  evil  as  well 
as  the  good,  and  his  rain  descends  on  the  fields  of 
the  thankless  churl  equally  as  on   those  of  His  children. 


^ht  ^at^  of  Put^.  163 

The  fierce  snow-laden  blast,  driving  straight  in  your  teeth,  is 
not  so  pleasant  as  the  breath  of  summer,  laden  with  the 
scent  of  the  heather ;  but  if  you  can  see  the  track,  you  must 
follow  it.  To  be  anywhere  off  it,  either  right  or  left,  would 
be  dangerous  in  the  extreme.  And  often  when  the  lonely 
soul  has  reaped  nothing  but  obloquy  and  opposition, 
has  been  borne  to  a  cross,  and  crucified  as  a  malefactor, 
it  has  comforted  itself  with  the  prospects  of  the  harvests  of 
blessing  which  were  to  accrue  to  those  who  had  rejected  its 
appeals ;  just  as  Pentecost  came  to  those  who  had  been  the 
murderers  of  Christ. 

Such  are  the  resorts  of  the  soul  in  its  seasons  of  anguish. 
It  casts  itself  on  the  ground  crying,  "  Father,  Abba, 
Father  "  ;  it  stays  itself  on  the  w^ord  of  promise  that  comes 
to  it  in  angel-garb  ;  it  goes  forth  to  yield  itself  to  death, 
assured  that  life  awaits  it  and  the  objects  of  its  choice. 

III.  Compensations. — To  all  valleys  there  are  mountains, 
to  all  depths  heights ;  for  all  midnight  hours  there  are  hours 
of  sunrise ;  for  Gethsemane,  an  Olivet.  We  can  never  give 
up  aught  for  God  or  man,  without  discovering  that  at 
the  moment  of  surrender  He  begins  to  repay  as  He  foretold 
to  the  prophet :  "  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold,  and  for  iron  I 
will  bring  silver,  and  for  wood  brass,  and  for  stones  iron." 
We  do  not  make  the  surrender  with  any  thought  of  profiting 
by  it ;  but  when  we  make  it,  with  a  single  purpose  and  aim, 
we  learn  that  when  Christ  lays  a  requisition  on  boat  or 
sailor's  time.  He  returns  the  boat  laden  with  fish  to  the 
water's  edge. 

Nor  does  God  keep  these  compensations  for  that  new 
world,  "where  light  and  darkness  fuse."  It  were  long 
to  wait,  if  that  were  so.  But  here  and  now^  we  learn 
that  there  are  compensations.  It  may  seem  a  hardship 
to  the  man  to  leave  his  cell,  where  he  has  been  immured  so 
long  that  he  dreads  the  light,  the  stare  of  strange  eyes, 
the  call  for  exertion;   but  when   the  first  stiffness  of  the 


164  llnto  tlje  <iroutt5,  to  ^te. 

joints,  and  novelty  of  his  surroundings  have  passed  off,  will 
he  not  be  compensated?  The  first  movement  from  the 
selfish  life  may  strain  and  try  us,  the  indifference  of  our 
fellows  be  hard  to  bear ;  but  God  has  such  things  to 
reveal  and  give,  as  pass  the  wildest  imaginings  of  the 
self-centred  soul. 

So  Jeremiah  found  it.  His  compensations  came.  God 
became  his  Comforter,  and  wiped  away  his  tears ;  and 
opened  to  him  the  vista  of  the  future,  down  whose  long 
aisles  he  beheld  his  people  planted  again  in  their  own  land. 
He  saw  men  buying  fields  for  money,  and  subscribing 
deeds  and  sealing  them,  as  he  had  done  ;  he  heard  the 
voice  of  joy  and  the  voice  of  gladness  ;  the  voice  of  the 
bridegroom  and  the  voice  of  the  bride  ;  the  voice  of  them 
that  bring  the  sacrifices  of  joy  into  the  Lord's  house;  he  was 
assured  of  the  advent  of  the  Man,  the  branch  from  the  root 
of  David,  who  should  sit  upon  his  throne  (xxxii.,  xxxiii.). 
There  was  compensation  also  in  the  confidence  with  which 
Nebuchadnezzar  treated  him,  and  in  the  evident  reliance 
which  his  decimated  people  placed  in  his  intercessions,  as 
we  shall  see.  And  if  he  could  only  know  of  the  myriads 
who  had  been  comforted  by  the  story  of  his  griefs,  and  by 
the  assurances  of  his  prophecies — ruddy  juice  pressed  into 
the  golden  chalice  of  Scripture  by  the  sorrows  that  crushed 
his  heart — surely  he  would  feel  that  his  affliction  was  light, 
and  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  far  more  exceeding 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory  which  it  was  working  out. 

So  it  will  be  with  all  who  fall  into  the  ground  to  die, 
God  will  not  forget  or  forsake  them.  The  grave  may  be 
dark  and  deep,  the  winter  long,  the  frost  keen  and  pene- 
trating ;  but  spring  will  come,  and  the  stone  be  rolled  away  ; 
and  the  golden  stalk  shall  wave  in  the  sunshine,  bearing  its 
crown  of  fruit ;  and  men  shall  thrive  on  the  bread  of  our 
experience,  the  product  of  our  tears,  and  sufferings,  and 
prayers. 


XIX. 

®lj^  fall  of  l^rusaknt. 

(Jeremiah  xxxviii, ,  xxxix. ) 

"Among  the  faithless  faithful  only  he  ; 
Among  innumerable  false,  unmoved, 
Unshaken,  unseduced,  unterrified, 
His  loyalty  he  kept,  his  love,  his  zeal ; 
Nor  number,  nor  example  with  him  wrought 
To  swerve  from  truth,  or  change  his  constant  mind, 
Thoilgh  single.     From  amidst  them  forth  he  pass'd, 
Long  way  through  hostile  scorn,  which  he  sustain"d 
Superior,  nor  of  violence  fear'd  aught ; 
And  with  retorted  scorn  his  back  he  tumd 
On  those  proud  tow'rs  to  swift  destruction  doom'd. 

Milton. 

URING  those  long  dark  months  of  siege,  probably 
the  only  soul  in  all  that  crowded  city  which  was 
in  perfect  peace,  and  free  in  its  unrestrained 
liberty,  was  Jeremiah's.  Tethered  as  he  was 
by  an  iron  chain  to  the  wall  of  the  court  of 
the  guard,  he  passed  beyond  the  narrow  confines 
of  the  enclosure  to  the  great  age  that  was  to  be,  when 
Judah  should  be  saved  and  Jerusalem  should  dwell  safely, 
known  by  the  name  The  Lord  our  Righteousness. 
And  amid  the  cries  of  assailants  and  defenders,  unbroken 
by  the  thud  of  the  battering-rams,  deep  as  tlie  blue  Syrian 
sky  that  looked  down  upon  him,  was  the  peace  of  God 
that  passed  the  understanding  of  those  that  thronged  in  and 
out,  to  and  fro,  between  the  city  and  the  royal  palace. 

I.  The  Horrors  of  the  Siege. — It  lasted  in  all  foi 
about  eighteen  months,  with  the  one  brief  respite  caused 


1 66  i;ije  ^all  of  Jerusalem. 

by  the  approach  of  Pharaoh's  army  ;  and  it  is  impossible 
for  us  to  estimate  the  amount  of  human  anguish  which  was 
crowded  into  that  fateful  space.  Some  conception  of  it 
may  be  gathered  from  the  words  with  which  Ezekiel  antici- 
pated it.  As  in  a  mirror,  coming  events  were  forecast. 
The  caldron,  full  of  the  choicest  flesh,  hanging  over  the 
swift  fire  until  it  was  consumed ;  the  vision  of  the  iron 
pan  encircling  the  sun-burnt  brick,  as  the  iron  legions  of 
Chaldea  would  engirdle  the  beleaguered  city ;  the  meagre 
measure  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  beans,  and  lentils,  and 
millet,  and  spelt,  dealt  out  by  measure  day  by  day,  but 
barely  sufficient  for  the  prophet's  sustenance  ;  the  barley 
cakes  mingled  with  cow's  dung,  abhorrent  to  the  taste,  yet 
greedily  devoured ;  the  stealthy  preparation  of  his  house- 
hold stuff  for  removal ;  and  the  stealing  out  at  night  from 
his  house  by  a  hole  in  the  wall,  with  covered  face  and 
laden  shoulder — all  these  spoke  with  a  vividness  which  no 
words  could  equal  of  the  horrors  of  that  siege  (Ezekiel  iv.). 

Imagine  for  a  moment  the  overcrowded  city,  into  which 
had  gathered  from  all  the  country  round  the  peasantry  and 
villagers,  who,  with  such  of  their  valuables  as  they  had 
been  able  hastily  to  collect  and  transport,  had  sought  refuge 
within  the  gray  old  walls  of  Zion  from  the  violence  and 
outrage  of  the  merciless  troops.  If  wandering  tribes,  like 
the  sons  of  Rechab,  were  induced  for  once  to  break  the 
tradition  of  their  nomad  life,  to  shelter  themselves  within 
the  city  enclosure,  how  much  m.ore  would  the  terrified 
populations,  scattered  in  slight  habitations  over  the  hill 
country,  count  it  politic  to  do  the  same  !  This  mass  of 
fugitives  would  greatly  add  to  the  difficulties  of  the  defence 
by  their  demands  upon  the  provisions  which  were  laid  up 
in  anticipation  of  the  siege,  by  overcrowding  the  thorough- 
fares, and  impeding  the  movements  of  the  soldiery. 

The  incident  referred  to  in  our  last  chapter,  of  the 
demolition  of  a  portion  of  the  royal  palace  to  provide 
materials   for  an    inner   line   of  defence,  is  a  specimen  of 


®lje  (Earlier  ^ontljs  01  tlje  ^itQt.  167 

many  another  episode  in  that  intense  effort  of  Zedekiah 
and  his  people  to  hurl  back  the  tide  of  merciless  hate  and 
thirst  for  blood  that  broke  day  after  day  around  the  battle- 
ments ;  much  as  the  long  ocean  wave  sends  its  surges  up 
against  a  reef  of  rock,  and  casts  its  spHntered  forces  high 
in  air.  Here  there  was  a  scaling  party  which  must  be  flung 
back  on  their  ladders  ;  there,  an  attempt  to  run  a  mine 
which  must  be  intercepted ;  and  now  tidings  came  that  a 
portion  of  the  wall,  which  had  been  long  exposed  to  the 
battering-rams,  showed  signs  of  weakness,  and  must  be 
built  up  from  within ;  and  yet  again  precautions  must  be 
taken  against  fire  flung  in  missiles,  or  flights  of  arrows,  or 
stones  cast  by  catapults.  For  no  single  hour  could  the 
defenders  relax  their  vigilance.  A  council  of  princes  must 
Iiave  been  in  perpetual  session,  fertile  in  resource,  swift 
to  meet  the  craft  or  the  courage  of  the  foe.  And  all  the 
time  the  stock  of  provisions  was  becoming  less,  and  the 
store  of  water  diminishing,  as  in  the  case  of  Malchiah's 
dungeon,  leaving  nothing  but  wet  mud. 

So  much  for  the  earlier  months  of  the  siege  ;  but  as  the 
days  passed  on,  darker  shadows  gathered.  It  was  as  though 
the  very  pit  of  hell  added  in  human  passion  the  last  dread 
horrors  of  the  scene.  The  precious  sons  of  Zion,  com- 
parable to  fine  gold,  lay  by  scores  in  the  recesses  of  the 
houses,  broken  like  earthen  pitchers,  the  work  of  the  hand 
of  the  potter !  The  women  became  cruel,  and  refused  to 
spare  from  their  breast  for  their  young  the  nutriment  they 
needed  for  themselves.  The  tongues  of  the  sucking  babes 
became  so  dry  and  parched,  that  they  could  no  longer  cry. 
Young  children,  whose  weakness  constituted  a  first  claim, 
asked  for  bread,  and  asked  in  vain.  Highly-nurtured 
maidens  searched  over  the  dung-heaps,  in  hope  of  finding 
something  to  stay  the  craving  of  hunger.  The  nobles  lost 
their  portly  mien,  and  walked  the  streets  like  animated 
mummies.  The  sword  of  the  invader  without  had  fewer 
victims  than  that  which  hunger  wielded  within ;  and,  as  the 


1 68  ®Ij£  yall  of  Jerusalem. 

climax  of  all,  pitiful  women  murdered  their  own  little 
babes,  and  soddened  them  to  make  a  meal.  Finally, 
pestilence  began  its  ravages ;  and  the  foul  stench  of  bodies 
that  men  had  no  time  to  bury,  and  that  fell  thick  and  fast 
each  day  in  the  streets  of  the  city,  like  autumn  leaves, 
caused  death,  which  mowed  down  those  that  had  escaped 
the  foe  and  privation.  Ah,  Jerusalem  !  who  stonest  the 
prophets,  and  sheddest  the  blood  of  the  just,  this  was  the 
day  of  the  overflowing  wrath  and  fury  of  Jehovah !  No 
human  hand  lit  the  flame ;  no  mere  human  hate  was 
accountable  for  sufferings  so  complex  and  so  terrible. 
Thou,  O  God,  hast  slain  priest  and  prophet  in  thy  sanc- 
tuary ;  youth  and  age  in  the  streets.  I'hou  hast  slain  them 
in  the  day  of  thine  anger;  Thou  hast  slaughtered  and 
not  pitied. 

And  as  Jeremiah  waited  day  after  day,  powerless  to  do 
other  than  listen  to  tidings  of  woe  that  converged  to  him 
from  every  side,  he  resembled  the  physician,  who,  unable 
to  stay  the  slow  progress  of  some  terrible  form  of  paralysis 
in  one  he  loves  better  than  life,  is  compelled  to  listen  to  the 
tidings  of  its  conquests,  knowing  surely  that  these  are  only 
stages  in  an  assault  which  ultimately  must  capture  the 
citadel  of  life — an  assault  which  he  can  do  nothing  to  stay. 

II.  The  Prophet's  Added  Sorrows. — In  addition  to 
the  discomfort  which  he  shared  in  common  with  the  rest  of 
the  crowded  populace,  Jeremiah  was  exposed  to  aggravated 
sorrows.  It  would  appear  that  he  was  constantly  reiterating 
in  the  ears  of  all  who  passed  through  the  court-house  the 
message  which  he  had  previously  delivered  to  the  king,  that 
to  stay  in  the  city  was  to  incur  death  by  sword,  famine,  or 
pestilence ;  whilst  to  go  forth  to  the  lines  of  the  Chaldeans 
was  the  one  condition  of  life.  He  lost  no  opportunity  of 
asserting  that  Jerusalem  should  surely  be  given  into  the 
hands  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  that  he  would  take  it. 
As  these  words  passed  from  lip  to  lip,  they  carried  dismay 


Jeremtab  put  into  the  giingeott.  169 

throughout  the  city.  Men  repeated  them  as  they  did  duty 
on  the  walls,  or  met  around  the  bivouac  fires,  or  discussed 
the  probable  issues  of  the  siege ;  and  the  fact  that  Jeremiah 
had  so  often  spoken  as  the  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah  gave  an 
added  weight  to  his  words. 

It  was  quite  natural,  therefore,  that  the  princes,  who 
knew  well  enough  the  importance  of  keeping  up  the  courage 
of  the  people,  should  demand  the  death  of  one  who  was  not 
only  weakening  the  hands  of  the  people  generally,  but 
especially  of  the  men  of  war.  In  some  such  way  the 
drowsy  sleeper,  unwilling  to  be  aroused  by  the  barking 
of  the  watch-dog,  catches  up  his  revolver  to  shoot  him ; 
or  the  crew,  eager  for  carouse,  murders  the  watchman 
who  warns  them  off  the  white  surf  breaking  along  a  ragged 
rock-bound  shore.  The  young  king  was  weak  rather  than 
wicked,  a  puppet  and  toy  in  the  hands  of  his  princes  and 
court.  He  therefore  yielded  to  their  demand,  saying, 
"  Behold,  he  is  in  your  hand ;  for  the  king  is  not  he  that 
can  do  anything  against  you." 

Without  delay  Jeremiah  was  flung  into  one  of  those  rock- 
hewn  cisterns  that  abound  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  bottom 
of  which,  the  water  having  been  exhausted  during  the 
extremities  of  the  siege,  consisted  of  a  deep  sediment  of 
mud,  into  which  he  sank.  There  was  not  a  moment  to  be 
lost.  The  life  of  the  faithful  servant  of  God  was  not  to 
end  amid  the  damp  darkness  of  that  hideous  sepulchre, 
from  which  no  cry  could  reach  the  upper  air ;  and  help  was 
sent  through  a  very  unexpected  channel.  An  Ethiopian 
eunuch — who  is  probably  anonymous,  since  the  name 
Ebed-melech  simply  means  "the  king's  servant'' — with  a 
love  to  God's  cause,  which  was  sweetly  prophetic  of  the 
way  in  which  Gentile  hearts  would  be  opened  to  welcome 
and  forward  it  throughout  the  world,  hastened  to  the  king, 
then  sitting  to  administer  justice  at  one  of  the  gates  of  the 
city,  remonstrated  with  him,  and  urged  him  to  take  imme- 
diate steps  to  save  the  prophet  from  imminent  death. 


lyo  ^ht  3FaU  of  Jeruaalem. 

Always  swayed  by  the  last  strong  influence  brought 
to  bear  on  him,  the  king  yielded  as  easily  to  his  faith- 
ful servant,  who  was  probably  the  custodian  of  his  harem, 
as  he  had  done  to  his  lords ;  and  bade  him  take 
a  sufficient  number  of  men  to  secure  him  from  inter- 
ference, and  at  once  extricate  the  prophet.  There  was 
great  gentleness  in  the  way  this  noble  Ethiopian  executed 
his  purpose.  He  was  not  content  with  merely  dragging 
him  from  the  pit's  bottom,  but  placed  upon  the  ropes 
old  cast  clouts  and  rotten  rags,  fetched  hurriedly  from 
the  house  of  the  king ;  thus  the  tender  flesh  of  the 
prophet  was  neither  cut  nor  chafed.  It  was  an  act  of 
womanly  tenderness,  which  makes  it  as  fragrant  as  the 
breaking  of  the  box  over  the  person  of  the  Lord.  It 
is  not  enough  to  serve  and  help  those  who  need 
assistance ;  we  should  do  it  with  the  sweetness  and 
gentleness  of  Christ.  It  is  not  only  what  we  do,  but 
the  way  in  which  we  do  it,  which  most  quickly  in- 
dicates our  real  selves.  Many  a  man  might  have  hurried 
to  the  pit's  mouth  with  ropes ;  only  one  of  God's  own 
gentlemen  would  have  thought  of  the  rags  and  clouts. 
It  is  very  quaint  and  beautiful,  when  so  much  is  left 
untold,  that  a  dozen  lines  in  the  Word  of  God  should 
be  given  to  this  simple  incident,  and  the  hurried  advice 
thrown  into  the  darkness  of  the  lonely  prophet  by  his 
kind-hearted  deliverer.  "  Then  they  drew  up  Jeremiah 
with  the  cords,  and  took  him  up  out  of  the  dungeon ; 
and  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the  guard." 

From  that  moment  till  the  city  fell,  the  prophet  re- 
mained in  safe  custody  ;  and  on  one  memorable  occasion 
the  king  sought  his  counsel,  though  in  strict  secrecy.  Once 
more  and  for  the  last  time  those  two  men  stood  face  to  face — 
king  and  prophet — weakness  and  strength — representatives, 
the  one  of  the  fading  glories  of  David's  race,  and  the 
other  of  the  imperishable  splendour  of  truth  and  righteous- 
ness.    Once  more  Zedekiah  asked   what   the   issue  would 


yetincen  Ittfe  and  §eatlT.  171 

be :  and  once  more  received  the  alternatives  that  appeared 
so  foolish  to  the  eye  of  sense — Defeat  and  Death  by 
remaining  in  the  city ;  Liberty  and  Life  by  going  forth. 

"  Go  forth  ?  "  said  Zedekiah,  in  effect ;  "  never  !  It  would 
be  unworthy  of  one  in  whose  veins  flows  the  blood  of 
kings.  I  shall  expose  myself  to  the  ridicule  of  all  that 
have  fled  across  the  Chaldean  lines ;  and  the  Chaldeans 
themselves  would  deliver  me  into  their  hands." 

"  They  shall  not  deliver  thee,"  said  Jeremiah ;  and  then 
3egan  to  plead  with  him,  as  a  man  might  plead  for  himself. 
"Obey,  I  beseech  thee,  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  in  that 
which  I  speak  unto  thee ;  so  it  shall  be  well  with  thee,  and 
thy  soul  shall  live."  Finally,  in  graphic  words  he  painted 
the  picture  of  the  certain  doom  the  king  would  incur  if 
he  tarried  until  the  city  fell  into  the  captor's  hands.  For 
the  derision  of  the  few  Jews  that  had  fallen  away,  he 
would  then  be  exposed  to  the  taunts  of  his  wives  and 
children,  who  would  by  that  time  have  become  allotted 
to  their  captors,  and  would  seek  to  win  the  smiles  of 
their  new  lords,  by  taunting  the  fallen  monarch  in  whose 
smiles  they  had  been  wont  to  bask. 

In  this  advice  of  Jeremiah  we  are  reminded  of  words 
repeated  by  our  Lord  on  Ave  different  occasions,  and  in 
which  He  tells  us  that  those  who  keep  their  lives  lose 
them,  and  that  those  who  lose  their  lives  find  and  keep 
them.  Not  in  husbanding  our  strength,  but  in  yielding 
it  in  service ;  not  in  burying  our  talents,  but  in  administer- 
ing them;  not  in  hoarding  our  seed  in  the  barn,  but  in 
scattering  it ;  not  in  following  an  earthly  human  policy, 
but  in  surrendering  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God — do  we 
find  the  safe  and  blessed  path.  The  man  of  faith  judges 
not  after  the  sight  of  his  eyes,  or  the  judgment  of  sense; 
he  strikes  currents  flowing  unseen  by  the  world,  and  acts  on 
suggestions  received  by  direct  communication  from  the  Spirit 
of  God,  though  alwa}'s  through  the  Word  of  God,  and  con- 
sistent with  the  loftiest  dictates  of  sanctified  common-sense. 


172  ^Ije  JFall  of  lentsalcm.  i 

The  weakness  which  was  the  ruin  of  Zedekiah  came  out 
in  his  request  that  Jeremiah  would  not  inform  the  princes 
of  the  nature  of  their  communications,  and  would  hide 
the  truth  beneath  the  semblance  of  truth.  It  is  difficult 
to  pronounce  a  judgment  on  the  way  in  which  the  prophet 
veiled  the  purport  of  his  conversation  with  Zedekiah  from 
the  inquisitive  questions  of  the  princes.  There  is  an 
appearance  of  evasion  in  his  reply,  which  seems  a  little 
inconsistent  with  the  character  of  the  prophet  of  Jehovah. 
At  the  same  time,  the  princes  had  no  right  to  catechise 
him ;  and  he  was  not  obliged  by  his  duty  to  them  to 
tell  the  entire  truth.  We  are  under  no  obligation  to 
gratify  an  impertinent  curiosity ;  but  we  must  be  very 
careful  to  be  transparent  in  speech  and  in  act,  and  to 
be  utterly  true  when  we  profess  to  be  telling  the  whole 
truth  to  those  that  have  a  right  to  know.  In  the  present 
case,  the  prophet  shielded  the  king  with  a  touch  of  chivalrous 
devotion  and  loyalty  which  was  probably  the  last  act  of 
devotion  to  the  royal  house,  to  save  which  he  had  poured 
out  his  heart's  blood  in  tears  and  entreaties  and  sacrifices 
for  nearly  forty  years. 

III.  The  Fate  of  the  City. — At  last  a  breach  was 
made  in  the  old  fortifications,  and  the  troops  began  to  rush 
in,  like  an  angry  sea  which,  after  long  chafing,  has  made 
for  itself  an  entrance  in  the  sea-wall,  and  pours  in  turbulent 
fury  to  carry  desolation  in  its  course.  The  kings  of  the 
earth,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  could  never 
have  believed  that  the  adversary  and  the  enemy  should 
enter  into  the  gates  of  Jerusalem ;  yet  so  it  befell.  Then 
the  terrified  people  fled  from  the  lower  into  the  upper 
city ;  and  as  they  did  so,  their  homes  were  filled  with  the 
desolating  terror  of  the  merciless  soldiery. 

A  hundred  different  forms  of  anguish  gathered  in  that 
devoted  city,  like  vultures  to  the  dead  camel  of  the  desert. 
Woe,  then,  to  the  men  who  had  foufiht  for  their  very  life  ! 


^eirektalr's  gejjarturc.  173 

but  woe  more  utter  and  agonizing  to  the  women  and 
maidens,  to  the  children  and  little  babes !  War  is  always 
terrible  ;  but  no  hand  of  historian  dare  lift  the  veil,  and  tell 
in  unvarnished  words  all  the  horror  of  the  sack  of  a  city  by 
such  soldiery  as  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  generals  led  to 
war.  The  v/olves  of  the  Siberian  forest  are  more  merciful 
than  they.  "  All  the  princes  of  the  king  of  Babylon  came 
in,  and  sat  in  the  middle  gate,"  from  which  they  gave 
directions  for  the  immediate  prosecution  of  their  success 
upon  the  terrified  people,  who  now  crowded  the  upper  city, 
prepared  to  make  the  last  desperate  stand. 

Late  that  afternoon  the  old  palace  of  David  was  filled 
with  eager  consultation.  Everything  must  be  done  to 
preserve  the  royal  house,  "  the  breath  of  our  nostrils,  ^he 
anointed  of  the  Lord."  It  was,  therefore,  arranged  that,  as 
soon  as  night  fell,  Zedekiah  and  his  harem  should  go  forth 
under  the  protection  of  all  the  men  of  war,  through  a  breach 
to  be  made  in  the  walls  of  the  city  to  the  south  :  and 
exactly  as  Ezekiel  had  foretold,  so  it  came  pass.  '  The 
prince  that  is  among  them  shall  bear  upon  his  shoulder  in 
the  dark,  and  shall  go  forth  :  they  shall  dig  through  the 
wall  to  carry  out  thereby,  he  shall  cover  his  face  " 
(Ezekiel  xii.  12). 

A  long  line  of  fugitives,  each  carrying  property  or 
necessaries,  stole  silently  through  the  king's  private  garden, 
and  so  towards  the  breach  ;  and,  like  shadows  of  the 
night,  passed  forth  into  the  darkness  between  long  lines 
of  armed  men,  who  held  their  breath.  If  only  by  the  dawn 
they  could  gain  the  plains  of  Jericho,  they  might  hope  to 
elude  the  fury  of  their  pursuers.  But  all  night  Zedekiah 
must  have  remembered  those  last  words  of  Jeremiah  : 
"  Thou  shalt  not  escape ;  but  shalt  be  taken  by  the  hand 
of  the  king  of  Babylon."  "  Woe  to  him  that  striveth  with 
his  Maker,  Let  the  potsherd  strive  with  the  potsherds  of 
the  earth."  This  was  not  the  first  time,  nor  the  last,  that  man 
has  thought  to  elude  the  close  meshes  of  the  Word  of  God 


174  OTJjs  ?aU  of  Jjernsalent. 

Somehow  the  tidings  of  the  flight  reached  the  Chaldeans. 
The  whole  army  arose  to  pursue.  "  Our  pursuers  were 
swifter  than  the  eagles  of  the  heaven  :  they  chased  us  upon 
the  mountains,  they  laid  wait  for  us  in  the  wilderness,  the 
anointed  of  the  Lord  was  taken  in  their  pits."  That  is 
the  lament  of  Jeremiah ;  but  Ezekiel  gives  an  even  deeper 
insight  into  the  events  of  that  memorable  and  terrible  night. 
"  My  net  also  will  I  spread  upon  him,  and  he  shall  be  taken 
in  my  snare ;  and  I  will  scatter  toward  every  wind  all  that 
are  round  about  him  to  help  him,  and  all  his  bands"  (Lam. 
iv.  19,  20;  Ezekiel  xii.  13,  14). 

What  happened  the  next  morning  in  Jerusalem,  and  what 
befell  her  a  month  after,  when  the  upper  city  also  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  conqueror,  is  told  in  the  Book  of  Lamen- 
tations. The  streets  and  houses  were  filled  with  the  bodies 
of  the  slain,  after  having  been  outraged  with  nameless 
atrocities ;  but  happier  they  who  perished  then  than  the 
thousands  who  were  led  off  into  exile,  or  sold  into  slavery, 
to  suffer  in  life  the  horrors  of  death.  Then  the  wild  fury 
of  fire  engulfed  Temple  and  palace,  public  building  and 
dwelling-house,  and  blackened  ruins  covered  the  site  of  the 
holy  and  beautiful  city  which  had  been  the  joy  of  the  whole 
earth ;  and  the  ear  of  the  prophet  heard  the  spirit  of  the 
fallen  city  crying, 

"Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by? 
Behold  and  see  it  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow  which  is 

done  unto  me. 
Wherewith  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  me  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  anger !  " 

All  that  passed  by  clapped  their  hands  at  her ;  they  hissed 
and  wagged  their  heads  at  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem, 
saying,  Is  this  the  city  that  men  called  the  perfection  of 
beauty,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  ?  All  her  enemies  opened 
their  mouths  wide  against  her;  they  hissed  and  gnashed 
their  teeth ;  they  said.  We  have  swallowed  her  up.  Certainly, 
this  is  the  day  that  we  looked  for,  we  have  found  it,  we  have 
seen  it.      The  Lord  did  that  which  He  devised,  He  fulfilled 


®)ij£  (/Ditj  §c5tro^T£6.  175 

his  word,  He  threw  down  and  did  not  pity,  He  caused 
the  enemy  to  rejoice.  Foxes  walked  upon  the  desolate 
mountain  of  Zion  (Lam.  ii.,  v.). 

As  for  Zedekiah,  he  was  taken  to  Riblah,  where 
Nebuchadnezzar  was  at  this  time,  perhaps  not  expecting 
so  speedy  a  downfall  of  the  city.  With  barbarous  cruelty 
he  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  before  his  eyes,  that  the 
last  sight  he  beheld  might  be  of  their  dying  agony.  He  v.-as 
also  compelled  to  witness  the  slaughter  of  all  his  nobles. 
Then  as  a  coup  de  grace,  with  his  own  hand  probably,  Nebu- 
chadnezzar struck  out  Zedekiah's  two  eyes  with  his  spear. 

It  were  indeed  a  subject  for  an  artist  to  depict,  the  long 
march  of  the  exiles  on  the  way  to  their  distant  home. 
It  has  been  compared  to  the  long  lines  of  exiles  which 
are  constantly  passing  from  Russia  to  the  steppes  of  Central 
Asia,  and  to  the  barren  wastes  of  Siberia.  Delicate  women 
and  little  children  forced  to  travel  day  after  day,  irrespective 
of  fatigue  and  suffering ;  prophets  and  priests  mingled 
together  in  the  overthrow  they  had  done  so  much  to  bring 
about ;  rich  and  poor  marching  side  by  side,  manacled,  and 
urged  forward  by  the  spear-point  or  scourge.  All  along  the 
valley  of  the  Jordan,  past  Damascus,  and  then  for  thirty 
days  through  the  inhospitable  wilderness,  retraversing  the 
route  trodden  in  the  dawn  of  history  by  Abraham,  their 
great  progenitor,  the  Friend  of  God,  whilst  all  the  nations 
round  clapped  their  hands.  In  after  years,  the  bitterest 
recollection  of  those  days  was  in  the  exultation  of  the 
Edomites  in  the  fall  of  their  rival  city.  "  Remember,  O 
Lord,  against  the  children  of  Edom,  the  day  of  Jerusalem  ! " 
"And  the  one  warlike  strain  of  the  evangehcal  prophet  is 
inspired  by  the  hope  that  the  Divine  Conqueror  should 
come  knee-deep  in  Idumean  blood." 

Thus  God  brought  upon  his  people  the  king  of  the 
Chaldeans,  who  slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword  in  the 
house  of  their  sanctuary,  and  had  no  compassion  upon 
young   man    or   maiden,    old   man    or    ancient,    but   gave 


176  ^ht  yall  0f  Jerusalem. 

them  all  into  his  hand.  And  all  the  vessels  of  the  house  of 
God,  great  and  small,  and  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  the  treasures  of  the  king  and  his  princes,  all  these 
he  brought  to  Babylon.  And  they  burnt  the  house  of  God, 
and  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and  burnt  all 
the  palaces  thereof  with  fire,  and  destroyed  all  the  goodly 
vessels  thereof.  And  them  that  had  escaped  from  the 
sword  carried  he  away  to  Babylon,  and  they  were  servants  to 
him  and  his  sons. 

Years  before,  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim, 
as  his  friend  and  amanuensis,  Baruch,  was  lamenting  the 
sore  tribulation  that  befell  him  in  executmg  Jehovah's 
commissions,  Jeremiah  had  assured  him  that  at  least  his 
life  would  be  preserved  in  the  midst  of  the  final  catastrophe. 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  :  Behold,  that  which  I  have  built  will 
I  break  down,  and  that  which  I  have  planted  I  will  pluck 
up  ;  and  this  in  the  whole  land.  And  seekest  thou  great 
things  for  thyself?  seek  them  not:  for,  behold,  I  will  bring 
evil  upon  all  flesh,  saith  the  Lord :  but  thy  life  will  I  give 
unto  thee  for  a  prey  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest."  As 
Noah  was  saved  from  the  waters  of  the  flood,  and  Lot 
from  the  overthrow  of  Sodom,  and  the  early  Christians  by 
their  flight  to  Bella  from  the  horrors  of  the  last  Fall  of 
Jerusalem,  so  did  the  faithful  Baruch  pass  unscathed 
through  those  awful  scenes.  The  man  with  the  ink-horn 
had  marked  him,  and  the  six  men  with  their  slaughter 
weapons  touched  him  not  (xlv. ;  Ezekiel  ix.). 


XX. 

(Jeremiah  xl. — xliv.) 

••  Therefore  to  whom  turn  I  but  to  Thee,  the  ineffable  Name  ? 
Builder  and  maker  Thou  of  houses  not  made  with  hands  ! 
What !  have  fear  of  change  from  Thee,  who  art  ever  the  same  ? 

Doubt  that  thy  power  can  fill  the  heart  that  thy  power  expands  ? 
There  never  shall  be  one  lost  Good  !     What  was,  shall  live  as  before  , 

The  Evil  is  null,  is  naught,  is  silence  implying  sound  ; 
What  was  good,  shall  be  good,  with  for  evil  so  much  good  more ; 
On  the  earth  the  broken  arcs— in  the  heaven  a  perfect  round !  " 

Browning. 

hMf^  the  closing  verses  of  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  were 
t(r  'bitten  by  his  own  hand,  he  must  have  Hved 
■  ^^  for  twenty  years  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem;  but 
they  partook  of  the  same  infinite  sadness  as 
the  forty  years  of  his  public  ministry.  It  would 
appear  that  so  far  as  his  outward  lot  was  con- 
cerned, the  prophet  Jeremiah  spent  a  hfe  of  more  unrelieved 
sadness  than  has  perhaps  fallen  to  the  lot  of  any  other,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Divine  Lord.  This  was  so  apparent  to 
the  Jewish  commentators  on  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  that 
they  applied  to  him  the  words  of  the  fifty-third  chapter, 
which  tell  the  story  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows  who  was 
acquainted  with  grief,  and  stood  as  a  sheep  dumb  before 
her  shearers.  Of  course,  in  the  light  of  Calvary,  we  see  the 
depths  of  substitutionary  suffering  in  those  inimitable  words 
which  no  mortal  could  ever  realize ;  but  it  is  nevertheless 
significant  that  in  any  sense  they  were  deemed  applicable  to 
Jeremiah. 

His  sufferings   may  be  classed  under  three  divisions — 

M 


178  ^  (KIcutiEti  Sunset. 

those  recited  in  the  Book  of  Lamentations,  and  connected 
with  the  fall  of  Jerusalem ;  those  connected  with  the 
murder  of  Gedaliah,  and  the  flight  into  Egypt ;  and  those 
of  the  exile  there.  But  amid  the  salt  brine  of  these  bitter 
experiences,  there  was  always  welling  up  a  spring  of  hope 
and  peace.  Oppressed  on  every  side,  but  not  straitened ; 
perplexed,  yet  not  unto  despair  \  pursued,  yet  not  forsaken ; 
smitten  down,  yet  not  destroyed ;  always  delivered  unto 
death,  yet  passing  through  death  into  the  true  life,  sure  that 
the  Lord  would  not  cast  off  for  ever ;  but  though  he  caused 
grief.  He  would  have  compassion,  according  to  the  multitude 
of  his  mercies. 

I.  The  Desolate  City. — It  is  only  latterly  that  any 
question  has  been  raised  as  to  the  authorship  of  the  Book 
of  Lamentations.  In  the  text  no  author  is  named,  and 
these  exquisite  elegiacs  have  descended  to  us  anonymously. 
But  a  very  old  tradition  ascribes  them  to  our  prophet.  In 
the  Septuagint  translation,  made  in  the  year  280  b.c,  the 
following  introduction  is  prefixed  to  the  book  :  "  It  came  to 
pass,  after  Israel  was  taken  captive,  and  Jerusalem  made 
desolate,  Jeremiah  sat  weeping,  and  lamented  this  lamenta- 
tion over  Jerusalem."  To  this  the  Vulgate  adds,  "in  bitter- 
ness of  heart  sighing  and  crying."  The  cave  in  which 
Jeremiah  is  said  to  have  written  them  is  still  shown  on  the 
western  side  of  the  city;  and  every  Friday  the  Jews 
assemble  to  recite  as  his  these  plaintive  words,  at  their 
wailing-place  in  Jerusalem,  where  a  few  of  the  old  stones 
still  remain.  There  is  no  good  reason,  therefore,  for 
disassociating  the  Book  of  Lamentations  from  the  authorship 
of  Jeremiah. 

This  being  so,  what  a  flood  of  light  is  cast  upon  the 
desolate  scene  when  Nebuzar-adan  had  completed  his  work 
of  destruction,  and  the  long  lines  of  captives  were  already 
far  on  their  way  to  Babylon  !  How  many  went  into  exile 
we  have  no  means  of  knowing ;  the  number  would  probably 


W\jt  .^oUtarj  CDit^.  179 

amount  to  several  thousands,  principally  of  the  wealthier 
classes.  Only  the  poor  of  the  people  were  left  to  cultivate 
the  land,  that  it  might  not  revert  to  an  absolute  desert. 
But  the  population  would  probably  be  very  sparse — a  few 
peasants  scattered  over  the  sites  which  had  teemed  with 
crowds. 

The  city  sat  solitary,  which  had  been  full  of  people.  She 
had  become  as  a  widow.  Night  and  day  it  seemed  to  the 
eye  of  her  patriot  lovers  as  though  she  were  weeping  sore, 
and  her  tears  were  upon  her  cheeks  ;  the  holy  fire  was 
extinct  upon  her  altars ;  pilgrims  no  longer  traversed  the 
ways  of  Zion  to  attend  the  appointed  feasts  ;  her  gates  had 
sunk  into  the  ground  ;  and  her  habitations  were  pitilessly 
destroyed  by  fire.  How  often  would  Jeremiah  pass  mourn- 
fully amid  the  blackened  ruins  !  Here  was  the  sight  of  the 
altar ;  there  of  the  most  holy  place.  That  was  the  palace  of 
David ;  this  the  new  palace  that  Jehoiakim  had  made  for 
himself,  with  its  wide  windows  and  heavy  coatings  of  ver- 
milion ;  yonder  was  the  court  of  the  guard,  where  he  had 
suffered  so  many  months  of  confinement ;  and  there,  again, 
was  the  place  where  he  had  so  often  stood  to  warn  his 
people  of  their  sins. 

Above  and  around,  nature  preserved  the  unbroken  round 
of  her  seasons  and  months,  of  day  and  night.  The  old 
mountains  which  had  stood  around  the  city  in  the  days  of 
David  and  Hezekiah  glowed  with  the  morning  light,  and 
softened  in  the  darkening  shadows  of  the  night.  The  sun 
arose  over  Olivet,  and  set  in  the  western  sea.  The  pano- 
rama of  hill  and  valley,  which  lay  around  like  the  undula- 
tions of  a  sea  of  rock,  spread  itself  in  its  accustomed 
strength  and  beauty ;  for  Zion  had  always  been  beautiful 
in  her  situation.  But  upon  the  site  of  the  virgin  daughter 
of  Zion  the  stillness  of  death  had  fallen,  broken  only  by  the 
cry  of  jackal  and  wild  dog. 

What  all  this  meant  to  Jeremiah  words  fail  to  say.  No 
truer  heart  ever  beat  in  patriot's  bosom.     What  Phocion 


i8o  X  (Kloutreii  ^utiiet. 

felt  for  Athens,  what  Savonarola  for  Florence,  what  the 
elder  Pitt  for  England,  amid  the  catastrophes  that  darkened 
his  latter  days — that  in  a  concentrated  form  must  Jeremiah, 
whose  love  for  country  was  so  intimately  bound  up  with 
his  religious  life,  have  felt  and  suffered.  Anticipating  the 
words  of  One  who  in  after  days  was  to  sit  on  the  same 
mountain  and  look  across  the  valley,  he  might  have  said, 
"O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  that  killest  the  prophets,  and 
stonest  them  that  are  sent  unto  thee !  How  often  would 
I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen 
gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not ! 
Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate  ! " 

II.  Gedaliah's  Murder. —  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his 
chiefs  had  evidently  been  kept  closely  informed  of  the 
state  of  parties  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem ;  and  the 
king  gave  definite  instructions  to  his  chief  officers  to  take 
special  precautions  for  the  safety  of  Jeremiah.  When  the 
upper  city  fell  into  their  hands,  they  sent  and  took  him 
out  of  the  court  of  the  guard  ;  and  he  was  brought  in 
chains  among  the  other  captives  to  Ramah,  about  five 
miles  north  of  Jerusalem. 

In  a  remarkable  address  which  the  captain  of  the  guard 
made  to  Jeremiah,  he  acknowledged  the  retributive  justice 
of  Jehovah — one  of  the  many  traces  of  the  real  religiousness 
that  gave  a  tone  and  bearing  to  these  men  by  which  they 
are  altogether  removed  from  the  category  of  ordinary 
heathen.  "The  Lord  thy  God  pronounced  this  evil  upon 
this  place,  and  the  Lord  hath  brought  it,  and  done  accord- 
ing as  He  spake ;  because  ye  have  sinned  against  the 
Lord,  and  have  not  obeyed  his  voice,  therefore  this  thing 
is  come  upon  you." 

The  chains  were  then  struck  from  off  his  fettered  hands, 
and  liberty  was  given  him  either  to  accompany  the  rest 
of  the  people  to  Babylon,  or  to  go  where  he  chose  through- 
out the  land.     Ultimately,  as  he  seemed  to  hesitate  as  to 


(SctraUalr's  Unit,  i8i 

which  direction  to  take,  the  Chaldean  general  urged  him 
to  make  his  home  with  Gedaliah,  to  strengthen  his  hands, 
and  give  him  the  benefit  of  his  counsel  in  the  difficult 
task  to  which  he  had  been  appointed.  Thus  again  he 
turned  from  rest  and  ease  to  take  the  rough  path  of  duty. 

Gedaliah  was  the  grandson  of  Shaphan,  king  Josiah's 
secretary,  and  son  of  Ahikam,  who  had  been  sent  to 
inquire  of  the  prophetess  Huldah  concerning  the  newly- 
found  book  of  the  law.  On  a  former  occasion  the  hand 
of  Ahikam  had  rescued  Jeremiah  from  the  nobles.  Evi- 
dently the  whole  family  was  bound  by  the  strongest, 
tenderest  ties  to  the  servant  of  God,  imbued  with  the 
spirit,  and  governed  by  the  policy  which  he  enunciated. 
These  principles  Gedaliah  had  consistently  followed ;  and 
they  marked  him  out,  in  the  judgment  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
as  the  fittest  to  be  entrusted  with  the  reins  of  government, 
and  to  exert  some  kind  of  authority  over  the  scattered 
remnant.  To  him,  therefore,  Jeremiah  came,  with  an  allow- 
ance of  victuals  and  other  marks  of  the  esteem  in  which 
the  conquerors  regarded  him. 

For  a  brief  interval  all  went  w^ell.  The  new  governor 
took  up  his  residence  at  Mizpah,  an  old  fort  which  Asa 
had  erected  three  hundred  years  before,  to  check  the 
invasion  of  Baasha.  The  town  stood  on  a  rocky  eminence  ; 
but  the  castle  was  supplied  with  water  from  a  deep  well. 
Chaldean  soldiers  gave  the  show  of  authority  and  stability 
to  Gedaliah's  rule.  To  Mizpah  the  scattered  remnant  of 
the  Jews  began  to  look  with  hope.  The  captains  of  the 
forces  which  were  in  the  fields  still  holding  out,  as  roving 
bands,  against  the  conqueror,  hastened  to  swear  allegiance 
to  the  representative  of  the  Jewish  state,  and  the  Jews  who 
had  fled  to  Moab,  Edom,  and  other  surrounding  peoples, 
returned  out  of  all  places  whither  they  had  been  driven, 
and  they  came  to  the  land  of  Judah  to  Gedaliah  unto 
Mizpah, 

How  glad  must  Jeremiah  have  been  to  see  this  nucleus  of 


1 82  ^  Cloutreti  Sunset. 

order  spreading  its  influence  through  the  surrounding  chaos 
and  confusion ;  and  with  what  eagerness  he  must  have  used 
all  the  energy  he  possessed  to  aid  in  the  establishment  of 
Gedaliah's  authority  !  The  fair  dream,  however,  was  rudely 
dissipated  by  the  treacherous  murder  of  Gedaliah — who 
seems  to  have  been  eminently  fitted  for  his  post — by 
Ishmael,  the  son  of  Nethaniah.  In  the  midst  of  a  feast 
given  by  the  unsuspecting  governor,  he  was  slain  with  the 
sword,  together  with  all  the  Jews  that  were  with  him  and  the 
Chaldean  garrison.  On  the  second  day  after,  the  red- 
handed  murderers,  still  thirsting  for  blood,  slew  seventy 
pilgrims  who  were  on  their  way  to  weep  amid  the  ruins  of 
Jerusalem,  and  lay  offerings  on  the  site  of  the  ruined  altar. 
The  deep  well  of  the  keep  was  choked  with  bodies,  and 
shortly  afterwards  Ishmael  carried  off  the  king's  daughters 
and  all  the  people  that  had  gathered  around  Gedaliah,  and 
started  with  them  for  the  court  of  Baalis,  the  king  of  the 
children  of  Ammon,  who  was  an  accomplice  in  the  plot. 

It  was  a  bitter  disappointment ;  and  to  none  would 
the  grief  of  it  have  been  more  poignant  than  to  Jeremiah, 
who  in  the  demohtion  of  this  last  attempt  to  effect  the 
peaceable  settlement  of  his  country,  saw  the  irreconcilable 
antagonism  of  his  people  against  the  reign  of  the  king 
of  Babylon.  This  he  knew  must  last  for  at  least  seventy 
years. 

The  people  themselves  appear  to  have  lost  heart :  for 
though  Johanan  and  other  of  the  captains  of  roving 
bands  pursued  Ishmael  and  delivered  from  his  hand  all 
the  captives  he  had  taken,  and  recovered  the  women  and  the 
children,  yet  none  of  them  dared  to  return  to  Mizpah  ;  but 
like  shepherdless  sheep,  harried  by  dogs,  driven,  draggled, 
panting,  and  terrified,  they  resolved  to  quit  their  land, 
and  retire  southwards,  with  the  intention  of  fleeing  into 
the  land  of  Egypt,  with  which  during  the  later  days  of  their 
national  history  they  had  maintained  close  relations. 

They  carried  Jeremiah  with  them.     They  had  confidence 


fntiirrc5m0  for  Ijis  people.  1S3 

in  his  prayers  and  in  his  veracity,  since  his  predictions  had 
been  verified  so  often  by  the  event.  They  knew  he  stood 
high  in  the  favour  of  the  court  of  Babylon.  They  beheved 
that  his  prayers  prevailed  with  God.  And,  therefore,  they 
regarded  him  as  a  shield  and  defence ;  a  noble  representative 
of  the  highest  hopes  and  traditions  of  their  people  ;  one  in 
whom  the  statesman,  sage,  and  prophet,  mingled  in  equal 
proportion. 

Halting  at  the  caravanserai  of  Chimham,  whose  name 
recalls  David's  flight  from  and  return  to  Jerusalem,  the  spot 
where  travellers  left  the  frontiers  of  Palestine  for  Egypt,  the 
people  earnestly  debated  whether  they  should  go  forward  or 
return.  They  came  also  to  Jeremiah,  and  asked  him  to 
give  himself  to  prayer,  that  the  Lord  his  God  should  show 
them  the  way  wherein  they  should  walk,  and  the  thing 
they  should  do.  They  professed  their  willingness  to  be 
guided  entirely  by  the  voice  of  God,  though  in  this  they 
were  probably  not  sincere.  They  dealt  deceitfully  against 
their  own  souls  by  appearing  to  desire  only  God's  ways ; 
whilst,  in  point  of  fact,  they  were  determined  to  enter  into 
Egypt. 

For  ten  days  Jeremiah  gave  himself  to  prayer.  Then  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him,  and  he  summoned  the 
people  around  him  to  declare  it.  Speaking  in  the  name 
of  the  Most  High,  he  said :  "  If  ye  will  still  abide  in  this 
land,  there  will  He  build  you,  and  not  pull  you  down ; 
He  will  plant  you,  and  not  pluck  you  up.  Be  not  afraid 
of  the  king  of  Babylon,  for  He  is  with  you  to  save  you, 
and  to  deliver  you  out  of  his  hand."  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
they  persisted  in  going  into  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  hope 
that  they  would  see  no  more  war,  nor  hear  the  sound  of  the 
trumpet,  nor  have  hunger  of  bread,  then  they  would  be 
overtaken  there  by  the  sword,  the  famine,  and  the  pesti- 
lence; they  would  be  an  execration,  an  astonishment,  a 
curse,  and  a  reproach  ;  and  they  should  never  again  see 
their  native  land.      As  he  spoke  he  seems  to  have  been 


i84  ^  CItmtieti  Sunset. 

sadly  aware  that  during  the  ten  days  devoted  to  intercession 
on  their  behalf  the  prepossession  in  favour  of  Egypt  had 
been  growing,  and  that  his  words  would  not  avail  to  stay 
the  strong  current  which  was  bearing  them  thither. 

So  it  befell.  When  he  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  all 
the  words  wherewith  the  Lord  had  sent  him  to  them, 
the  chiefs  accused  him  of  speaking  falsely,  and  of  mis- 
representing the  Divine  word.  Not  willing  to  accuse 
him  flatly  of  treachery,  they  suggested  that  Baruch,  who  was 
still  accompanying  him  as  his  faithful  friend,  had  incited  him 
to  urge  the  return  to  Canaan  with  the  view  of  betraying 
them  into  the  hand  of  the  Chaldeans  for  death  or  exile. 
So  the  terrified  people  pursued  their  way  to  Egypt,  and 
settled  at  Tahpanhes,  which  was  ten  miles  across  the 
frontier. 

Almost  the  last  ingredient  of  bitterness  in  Jeremiah's  cup 
must  have  been  furnished  by  this  pertinacious  obstinacy, 
which  would  not  be  controlled  by  his  word,  which  resisted 
his  entreaties,  and  suggested  that  his  advice  was  tinctured 
by  treachery  in  their  best  interests.  How  terrible  that  they 
should  malign  and  misunderstand  the  man  who  had  spent 
forty  years  of  consistent  public  ministry  in  efforts  to  save 
them  from  the  effects  of  evil  counsel,  and  to  recall  them  to 
a  simple  and  absolute  faith  in  the  God  of  their  fathers  ! 

III.  Egypt. — His  life  of  protest  was  not  yet  complete. 
No  sooner  had  the  people  settled  in  their  new  home  than 
he  was  led  to  take  great  stones  in  his  hand  and  lay  them 
beneath  the  mortar  in  some  brickwork  which  was  being 
laid  down  at  the  entry  of  Pharaoh's  palace  in  Tahpanhes. 
"  On  these  stones,"  he  said,  "  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  set 
his  throne,  and  spread  out  his  royal  pavilion  upon  them. 
He  shall  smite  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  kindle  a  fire  in  the 
houses  of  its  gods,  and  array  himself  in  her  spoils,  as 
easily  as  a  shepherd  throws  his  outer  garment  around 
his   shoulders.      The   obelisks   of  Hehopolis  will  be  also 


^  ^cbzvz  ^Iterratfon.  185 

burnt  with  fire.  To  have  come  here,  therefore,  is  not  to 
escape  the  dreaded  foe,  but  to  throw  yourselves  into  his 
arms." 

Some  years  must  have  followed  of  which  we  have  no 
record,  and  during  which  the  great  king  was  engaged  in 
the  siege  of  Tyre,  and  therefore  unable  to  pursue  his  plans 
against  Pharaoh.  During  this  time  the  Jews  scattered  over 
a  wide  extent  of  territory,  so  that  colonies  were  formed  in 
Upper  as  well  as  Lower  Egypt,  all  of  which  became  deeply 
infected  with  the  prevailing  idolatries  and  customs  around 
them.  Notwithstanding  all  the  bitter  experiences  which 
had  befallen  them  in  consequence  of  their  idol-worship,  they 
burnt  incense  unto  the  gods  of  Egypt,  and  repeated  the 
abominations  which  had  brought  such  disaster  and  suffering 
upon  their  nation. 

Taking  advantage,  therefore,  of  a  great  convocation  at 
some  idolatrous  festival,  Jeremiah  warned  them  of  the 
inevitable  fate  which  must  overtake  them  in  Egypt,  as  it 
had  befallen  them  in  Jerusalem.  "  Behold,"  said  the 
faithful  prophet,  "  God  will  punish  you  who  dwell  in  the 
land  of  Egypt  as  He  punished  Jerusalem,  by  sword,  by 
famine,  and  by  pestilence ;  so  that  none  of  the  remnant  of 
Judah,  which  are  gone  into  the  land  of  Egypt  to  sojourn 
there,  shall  escape,  or  remain,  or  return  to  the  land  of 
Judah  to  dwell  there." 

A  severe  altercation  then  ensued.  The  men  indignantly 
protested  that  they  would  still  burn  incense  unto  the  queen 
of  heaven  as  they  had  done  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem ; 
and  they  even  ascribed  the  evils  that  had  befallen  them  to 
their  discontinuance  of  this  custom.  Jeremiah,  on  the 
other  hand,  gray  with  age,  his  face  marred  with  suffering, 
an  old  man  now,  did  not  hesitate  to  insist,  in  the  name  of 
the  God  he  served  so  faithfully,  that  the  sufferings  of  the 
people  were  due,  not  to  their  discontinuance  of  idolatr}', 
but  to  their  persistence  in  its  unholy  rites.  "  Because  ye 
have  burned  incense  and  sinned  against  the  Lord,  and  have 


t86  ^  Cbttbcti  .^itnsct. 

not  walked  in  his  law,  his  statutes  or  his  testimonies,  there- 
fore is  this  evil  happened  unto  you,  as  it  is  this  day."  He 
went  on  to  predict  the  invasion  of  Egypt  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, which  took  place  in  the  year  B.C.  568,  and  which 
resulted,  as  Josephus  tells  us,  in  the  carrying  off  to  Babylon 
of  the  remnant  of  Jews  who  had,  against  Jeremiah's  advice, 
fled  there  for  refuge.  So  it  was  proved  whose  word  should 
stand,  God's  or  theirs. 

Through  all  these  dark  and  painful  experiences,  the  soul 
of  Jeremiah  quieted  itself  as  a  weaned  babe.  When  he  said 
his  strength  was  perished,  still  his  expectation  was  from  the 
Lord.  When  his  soul  remembered  its  wormwood  and  gall, 
he  recalled  to  mind  the  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and 
sure;  therefore  he  had  hope.  The  Lord  was  his  portion, 
and  he  hoped  and  quietly  waited  for  the  salvation  of  God. 
He  knew  that  God  would  not  cast  off  for  ever ;  but  though 
He  caused  grief,  yet  He  would  have  compassion  according 
to  the  multitude  of  his  mercies.  He  knew  that  his 
Redeemer  lived,  who  would  arise  for  his  cause,  and 
render  a  recompense  to  his  foes.  He  looked  far  away 
beyond  the  mist  of  years,  and  saw  the  expiry  of  the 
sentence  of  captivity ;  the  return  of  his  people  ;  the  re- 
building of  the  city ,  the  holy  and  blessed  condition  of  its 
inhabitants ;  the  glorious  reign  of  the  Branch,  the  scion  of 
David's  stock  ;  the  new  covenant,  before  which  the  old 
should  vanish  away.  Probably,  therefore,  his  days  were 
not  all  dark  ;  but  aglow  with  the  first  rays  of  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  smiting  the  Alpine  peaks  of  his  holy  and 
loyal  spirit.  The  Comforter  must  have  come  to  him. 
God,  who  comforteth  those  that  are  cast  down,  must  have 
spoken  words  of  balm  and  tender  peace.  Never  yet  in  the 
history  of  the  world  has  He  permitted  his  servants  to  sink 
m  unrelieved  and  hopeless  midnight.  Unto  the  upright 
there  always  arises  light  in  the  darkness.  The  gloomiest 
hours  that  ever  brooded  over  the  Son  of  Man  broke  up  with 
the  cry.  *'  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 


''  ^Ijp  Mill  be  gone."  iS^i 

If  these  words  should  be  read  by  some  whose  life,  like 
Jeremiah's,  has  been  draped  with  curtains  of  sombre  hue, 
shutting  out  the  glad  light  of  day,  who  have  trodden  the 
path  of  sorrow  and  the  valley  of  shadow,  let  them  know 
that  nothing  brings  men  into  such  intimate  relationship 
with  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  that  to  none  does  the  Infinite 
One  stoop  so  closely  as  to  those  that  are  sore  broken  on 
the  wheel  of  affliction.  It  is  only  when  we  fall  into  the 
ground  and  die  that  we  cease  to  abide  alone,  and  begin  to 
bear  much  fruit.  Do  not  try  to  feel  resigned.  M^ill  resig- 
nation. Submit  yourself  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God. 
If  you  can  say  nothing  else,  fill  your  nights  and  days  with 
the  cry  or  sob  of  "  Father,  not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done." 
Never  doubt  the  love  of  God.  Never  suppose  for  a  moment 
that  He  has  forgotten  or  forsaken.  Never  yield  to  the  sug- 
gestion of  the  adversary  that  the  harvests  which  you  are  to 
garner  could  have  been  procured  at  any  less  cost.  As  for 
God,  his  way  is  perfect,  and  He  makes  our  way  perfect. 

Scripture  says  nothing  about  the  death  of  Jeremiah. 
Whether  it  took  place,  as  Christian  tradition  affirms,  by 
stoning  in  Egypt,  or  whether  he  breathed  out  his  soul 
beneath  the  faithful  tendance  of  Baruch,  in  some  quiet 
chamber  of  death,  v/e  cannot  tell.  The  Bible  makes 
comparatively  little  of  death-scenes,  that  it  may  throw  into 
greater  prominence  the  prolonged  narrative  of  the  One 
Death,  which  has  abolished  death.  God's  chief  interest 
is  focussed  on  the  life  and  work  of  his  servants.  What 
they  did,  said,  and  suffered,  is  more  to  Him  than  how  they 
surrendered  their  hves  at  his  bidding.  Indeed,  to  know 
how  a  man  has  lived  is  to  make  us  largely  indifferent  of 
information  regarding  his  last  hours.  The  sculptured 
column  projects  its  shaft  in  perfect  symmetry  upward  from 
the  earth,  though  we  may  not  be  able  to  follow  it,  because 
the  mass  of  waving  verdure  veils  it  from  our  gaze.  But  we 
know  it  is  beautiful,  and  in  perfect  harmony  with  all  we 
behold. 


i88  %  Clcmtre^  Sunset. 

But  how  gladly  did  the  prophet  close  his  eyes  upon  the 
wreck  that  sin  had  wrought  on  the  chosen  people,  and  open 
them  on  the  land  where  neither  sin,  nor  death,  nor  the 
sight  and  sound  of  war  break  the  perfect  rest !  What  a 
look  of  surprise  and  rapture  must  have  settled  upon  the 
worn  face,  the  expression  of  the  last  glad  vision  of  the  soul 
as  it  passed  out  from  the  body  of  corruption,  worn  and 
weary  with  the  long  conflict,  to  hear  the  "  Well  done  !  "  and 
welcome  of  God.  His  memory  was  cherished  with  excep- 
tional reverence.  It  seemed  to  the  restored  people  as  if 
his  tender  spirit  were  watching  over  their  interests.  The 
struggles  of  Judas  Maccabaeus  were  cheered  by  the  thought 
that  he  had  come  to  succour  him.  It  was  believed  that  he 
continued  in  heaven  the  intercessions  for  which  he  had 
been  so  famous  on  earth  ;  and,  in  the  days  that  preceded 
the  second  siege  of  Jerusalem,  it  was  supposed  that  he  had 
reappeared  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  Man. 


Morgan  and  Scott  Ltd.,  12,  Patkrnosteh  Buildings,  London. 


Dr.  F.  B.  Meyer's 
INSPIRING  BOOKS 


PETER :    Fisherman,    Disciple,    Apostle 
Cloth  Boards 4/6  net 

DAVID  :  Shepherd,  Psalmist,  King 

ISRAEL  :  A  Prince  with  God 

PAUL  :   A  Servant  of  Christ 

JEREMIAH  :   Priest  and  Prophet 

CHRIST  IN  ISAIAH 

ELIJAH  :  And  the  Secret  of  his  Power 

JOSEPH  :  Beloved— Hated— Exalted 

JOSHUA  :  And  the  Land  of  Promise 

JOHN  THE  BAPTIST 

MOSES  :   The  Servant  of  God 

ABRAHAM  :  Or,  the  Obedience  of  Faith 

SAMUEL  THE  PROPHET 

THE  PfiOPHET  OF  HOPE :  Studies  in  Zcchariah 

REVERIES  AND  REALITIES 

THE  BELLS  OF  IS 

THE  LIGHT  AND  LIFE  OF  MEN 

LOVE  TO  THE  UTTERMOST 

DIRECTORY  OF  THE  DEVOUT  LIFE 
Cloth  Boards 2/-  net  each 

,- OUR  DAILY  HOMILY  ^— , 

I        GEMS   OF    THOUGHT   FROM    EVERY 
CHAPTER  IN  THE  BIBLE.    COMPLETE 
'  IN  FIVE  VOLUMES 

I         Cloth  Boards per  volume,  2/-  net 

I         Cloth  Boards,  in  case  to  match 10/-  net 

MORGAN  &  SCOTT  Ltd.  E.G.  4 


The  Pocket  Companion  Series 

BY   THE 

Rev.  ANDREW  MURRAY,  D.D..  D.Litt. 


THE    SECRET 
OF    THE    CROSS 

A  new  volume  in  this  handy  and  attrac- 
tive series  of  little  devotional  books  will  be 
welcomed  bythe  many  admirers  of  this  deeply 
devotional  writer.  Each  neat  little  pocket 
volume  contains  a  text  and  a  brief  discourse 
by  Dr.  Murray  for  each  day  for  30  days. 
"  These  little  books,"  says  Dr.  Murray, 
"  have  been  prepared  with  the  view  of 
rousing  Christians  to  some  right  sense  of 
the  solemn  duty,  of  the  high  privilege,  and 
of  the  wonderful  power  of  intercession." 

Uniform  with 
THE  SECRET  OF  FELLOWSHIP 
THE  SECRET  OF  UNITED  PRAYER 
THE  SECRET  OF  INTERCESSION 
THE  SECRET  OF  ADORATION 
THE  SECRET  OF  THE  FAITH  LIFE 
THE  SECRET  OF  INSPIRATION 
THE   SECRET   OF    THE   ABIDING 

PRESENCE 
Paper,  Is.  net ;  Limp  cloth,  Is.  4d.  net 
In  Cloth  Case,  6  Vols.,  Limp  cloth,  8s.  net 


MORGAN 

Publishers 


&  SCOTT   LTD. 
-       E.C.4 


For  books 


BY 


D.  L.  MOODY 

Dr.  HARRINGTON  C  LEES 

Preb.  H.  E.  FOX.  M.A. 

Rev.  DAVID  BARON 

Rev.  W.  Y.  FULLERTON 

Dr.  ANDREW  MURRAY 

Dr.  J.  STUART  HOLDEN 

Dr.  JAMES  W.  THIRTLE 

Rev.  J.  RUSSELL  HOWDEN,  B.D. 

Canon  R.  B.  GIRDLESTONE 

Dr.  GRATTAN  GUINNESS 

R.  CALDWELL.  F.R.G.S. 

Rev.  E.  L.  LANGSTON,  M.A. 

P.  WHITWELL  WILSON 

Rev.  W.  GRAHAM  SCROGGIE 

AND   MANY  OTHERS   SEE 

Morgan  &-  Scott's 
NEW    BOOK    LIST 

SENT POST  FREE ON  APPLICATION 


A    WEEKLY    PAPER    FOR 
THE    CHRISTIAN     HOME 

®h£  Cljrtstiati 


Every  Thursday 


Twopence 


Every  Week  a  Live  Message  on  a 
Vital  Topic  "'  News  of  the  Work 
of  God  in  Revival  '"  Sermons  and 
Articles  by  leading  Evangelical 
Preachers  and  Writers  "'  Aids  to 
Bible  Study  and  Outline  Hints  for 
Addresses  '--  The  Christian  View- 
point of  Passing  Events 

Send  a  Post   Card  for 
a  Free  Specimen  Copy 


SANKEY'S 


1200  Hymns 


Sacred  Songs  &  Solos 

Is  the  Best  Hymn  Book  alike  for  Public 

Worship,    Mission  Services,  and  Open' 

air  Meetings 

A   cotnpiete  Price   List  sent 
post  free on  application 


Morgan  A  Scott  Ltd.,  12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  E.C.4 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UN.VERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


O  1- 


