Fd 


Je sus CHRIST the only Way fo Salvation. 


SERMON 


KENNINGTON-COMMON: 


B Y 


' GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. 
of Pembroke College, Oxro RD. 


LOND O N: 
Printed for C. WHiTEFIELD, in the Year 
Mp cc xxx1x. 


4 5 8 o - * i" f ww 7 + ali q 3 2 * 4 
2 " * n ow nd” tat * * Oo or af, — © 
en 7 * * , N b n C a. : 4 
> ** ; : 7 \ LA - * 
4 ; 0 MN „ « 
. 7 Fa 
. A : 
= © * 
= 
. l . 
5 * * 
N *. . * 
©. +; 3 2.5 gow FI 1 
A 1 o . n f F ol 4 F ”y * f 
4 : % Y SIS Ss 1 * 19 1 f : . n 
; = 8 TR." * 5 * % - I # * 4 3 
= o 
= * - 
5 — 
* « |} 
d, Y 77 Fl . 
* * : ” 
x , G% x. , * - 
. : . , — vow es „ _ - ” - — 
7 : * ; , * l 
* 4 ' ; : 
— 4 
p . 
1 4 
ns \ 
5 1 = - , 
4 - 
- . 
* „ 
; © 5, 
* % 
bf = PET - 0 
- 4 * 
8 1 20 * 7 ? 1 22 *2 5 mw 
4 i; 9 1 + 5 
NN 1 5 . „ *Y 
. 8, y 5 . - ( > 
120 by. | N * _— 
| y ) ö EY 4 
7 ; 7 
92 ff 8 0 d N. * 
0 0 
= 
5 * a 
— - * 
4 FT 
N * 5 * — 
4 -” 0 = 
. * 4 * 
> F 4 * Sa 
* 
” 1 * Ty) 
* 
; N 
* 
. % l 
£4 1 
8 | 
-— — o | 
7 T# OSS K- 


- . „ 


N " _ 3 nnn VE 3% — 
- 


ou a 
e OW 


4d 4 : 1 , * ? * : k . FY 1 ow” 
J 7X IS £4 rg %4 ES L.A 4 1 1 KTI 99 A U I'S f ? 
A 4 N 4 a ; wh 


* * , 
. ba 0 7 GN * * , - 
3 rw * — 8 1 2 N 2 * A% : 4 9 + : — - 3 * 
' : : Gi ie ; 4 
— » of 3 ” 2 Dus LA tn Ms. 4 * 429 3% — 
* * o 1 * Cd — 
4 * * / 
WV * . 
s F * 
. 
_ 535 * WA de * . 
. A 2 
* | > 2 12 ” © c.- * 
£ * oe ö WA 
. % * . 
1 6 * * 
* ö FEI +*Þ 
. Wen 8 4 | 
%; 9 N gs. ” 
o ; ra * a 4 7 
* " "— i... 4 71 - 1 
TU ” * 
N "oy w_ , 
» a * 
* 
. * — 
Sk... wy n Wann. ene F . : 
n a f. * I RG *. 3. NEW Reg ape * 
* wh. * 7 4 
* * " * -- — 
* 1 3 4 % * q A 6 1 . pA 5 
7 fo IJ Oh Ven O | 
1 * * * oo 
2 * . * 5 * 3 — q - " q* * 
p | V: f * — 7 my oy. * 7 oth ” 2 F * 2 
i * = 4. 4 * 6 * 2 * 4 * r +, 7 3 . 
- = 


4 E 8 1 4 * # * 
0 tf . e. a 
» 4.” x ; a * 944 ; 4 1 . by \ 


: > 
7 
- k 
>». 
ö * 
* 
F. #, 


Joux 11, 3. 


3 


Except a Man be born again, he cans ee the | 


Kingdom ef God. 


| 'H E N Jeſus Chriſt came * Saw 
Heaven, which was in the Fulneſs 
of Time, he came and dwelt upon 
| Earth, and took up his Abode among the Sons 
of Men; he was "ke unto. us, my Brethren, 


in all Things, Sin only excepted, and his con- 


Kant Practice was, going up and down con- 
tinually doing Good; he went about to do the 
Will * his E ather ; his Obedience otherwiſe 


would have been imperfect, and then his Sa- 
tis faction to the divine Majeſty would have 


been ſo too, and then his Death and Sufferings 
for our Sins, would have been of no Significa- 
tion; but, my dear Brethren, Chriſt ſo fully 


ſatisfied the Juſtice of his offended Father, 


that he will accept of the Sinner, how vile, 
how. finful, how heinous ſoever he be, fo he 


does but come unto him, thro the Lord Jeſus 


Chriſt; come, and plead what Chriſt has done 
and ſuffered for you, and God will receive 
you thro the Merits of his Son; therefore 
ſeek unte him, that ye may be born again; 


on 


* 


_— 
PR. 
f a 
= 
. 
; P 
- - 
» 
1 a 
11 
y 
- 8 | 
& "F 
_ 
+4 2 
+; | 
? 
o 
Y 
o 


[4] 

for if you are regenerated, if you do not ex- 
perience the Pangs of the New-Birth, you 
cannot, indeed, my Brethren, you cannot be 
ſaved: You may flatter yourſelves by imagi- 
ning that you are in a ſafe State, if you do but 
lead civil honeſt moral Lives, but you are 

much miſtaken, for you may not only be 

great Moraliſts, but have great Gifts from the 
| Spirit of God, for if you were by the Spirit 


of God enabled to overcome the greateſt Dif- | 


ficulty, to remove Mountains, to ſtop the Sun 
in its Courſe, what Service would this be to 
thee, if thou hadſt not the Graces of it? It 
would, my Brethren, be of no more Service 
to thee than to hurry thee to Hell with the 
greateſt Solemnity. You muſt have the Spirit 


in its ſanctifying Influences, working upon 


your Souls; you muſt have the Spirit of Chriſt, 
vr you are none of his 
And is it not amazing, my Brethren, that any 
one who call themſelves Members of the 
Church of England, who are Teachers there- 

of, ſhould deny this Doctrine of being born 
again? and indeed, my Brethren, too many 
of our Clergy do deny this Doctrine, tho it 
is the very Words of Chriſt ; for as it is ſaid, 
Verily, verily, I fay unto you, except a Man 
be born again, he cannot enter into the King- 
dom of Heaven; and it is repeated twice vor 
thrice in the ſame Chapter, and yet it is e- 
ſteemed, by many of our learned 
| uffi- 


[5] 

ſufficiently done, and as compleated when you 
are baptiz d in your Infancy; but, my Bre- 
thren, you muſt be baptized with the Spi- 
rit as well as with Water, or your Baptiſm 
will be of no Signification : : And our learned 
Rabbies of this Age ſeem to me to be as ig- 
norant of the true Nature and Effect thereof 
as Nicodemus was, when he came to Chriſt, 
and ask d, how ſuch Things could be; he could 
not think that being born a ſecond Time was 
poſſible ; Can 4 Man, ſays he, enter again 
ino his Mother's Womb, and be born? And 
are not our learned Rabbies of this Day much 
the ſame? Do not they deny all inward Feel- 
ings, and inward Holineſs? They do not in 
Words directly deny the Operation of the Spi- 
. rit of God, but they ſay, they muſt not feel 
it; but this, my Brethren, 1s contrary to all 
* Scripture and Experience, for as Peoples Con- 
ſciences tell them when they are committin 
Evil, and running directly oppoſite to the 
Word of God, ſo, my dear Brethren, when 
the Spirit of God has been at Work upon any 
of our Souls, we muſt certainly feel its Ope- 
rations thereon ; for how can I tell I have re- 
ceiv'd the Holy Gboſt, if I cannot feel it? 
Ti true, the Clergy of this Age, theſe 
learned Rabbies, charge us with being over- 
righteous ; but let them take Care leſt den are 
not over-remiſs; let them examine to find out 
the Beam in their own Eyes, before they offer 
. 1 


[ 6 
to pull the Mote out of others Eyes; ; let them 
examine their own Lives before they condemn 
others for Enthuſiaſts: It is manifeſt that theit 
Actions are unbecoming of Chriſtians, and 
more eſpecially are they unbecoming of Mi- 
niſters of the Church of England. They make 
no Scruple of frequenting Taverns and pub- 
| lick Houſes, they make no Conſcience of play- 
ing ſeveral Hours at Billiards, Bowls, and 
other unlawful Games, which they eſteem as 
innocent Diverſions: Plurality of Livings, 
and not the Salvation of your Souls, is the 
Am, the chief Aim of many, Very Opry: of 
. Clerg yu. OS 
have quite forſaken. the good old 
Way, — brought up a ne one which their 
Fathers knew not. They don't catechize, 
they don't viſit from Houſe to Houſe, they 
don't watch over their Flock, by examining 
their Lives; they keep up no conſtant religi- 
ous Converſation in Families under their Care: 
No, my Brethren, theſe Things are neglected, 
and if they were to be acted by, any one, 
the Perſon would be eſteemed as an Enthuſi- 
aſt, and one who was over-righteous. 
But, for my Part, if I had a Pariſh, I would 
not, I dare not act in this Manner for the 
whole World; I would not have ſo many 
Souls under my Miniſtry, and I ſo uncon- 
cern'd for their Welfare, not for Ten Thou- 
ſand Worlds ; 3 no, let the World ſay e 
N [ vY 


[79 


they pleaſe, let Men deſpiſe me, let Devils. 


rage, and his Agents breathe out Threatninge, 
yea, my Brethren, if they breath'd out Slaugh- 
ter too, I would not regard them, I would vi- 
fit that Flock that was committed to my 
Charge; I would, I fay, viſit them, and pray 
with them, I would adviſe them that wanted 
it, I would reprove, exhort and comfort them, 
and in all their Difficulties, I would beſeech 
them to have Recourſe unto Jeſus Chriſt. 

If this was practiſed among my Letter- 
learned Brethren, we ſhould have Hopes of 


ſeeing Chriſtianity more than a bare Name, 


and Chriſtians would not be then contented 
with the Name without the Subſtance. No, 
my Brethren, Chriſtianity would flouriſh, and 


be the Joy of the whole Land; if the Mini- 


{ters lived up to their Articles, if they lived to 
and for Jeſus themſelves, as well as preach 
him to others, then they might, with ſome 


Reaſon, charge others with being Enthuſiaſts, 
if they ſaw a Cauſe ; but now, while they are 


ſo very remiſs in their Duty, we may juſtly 
cry to them, Phyſician, heal yourſelves, and 


don't flatter yourſelves that a long Gown, and 


great Preferment among Men, authorizes you 
to ſpeak, write, or preach againſt the Mini- 
ſters, or the Doctrines of the Lord Jeſus 


Chriſt: No, my Letter-learned Pleaſure-ſeek- 
ing Brethren, Jeſus Chriſt will, at the Day 


of Judgment, judge ye, not as Doctors and 


Rulers, 


181 

Rulers, no, but by the Deeds done in the Bo- 
dy, whether they be good, or whether they 
be evil: At the great Day, my Brethren, we 
ſhall be all upon the Level, no Diſtin&ion 
there, no Difference there, there they'll be 
ſenſible that there has been ſome Good done 
by Field-preaching, and if they had preach'd 
Jeſus Chriſt in Sincerity and Truth, 1 would 
not have open'd my Mouth againſt them; 
but, when they cry: out, The Temple of the 
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and are build- 
ing up the Temple of the Devil, if I was not 
to preach, the very Stones would cry out; and 
tho' they thruſt me out of their Churches, 
they cannot thruſt me from the Church of 
Chriſt. | 92 
1 ſhall now ſhew that we muſt receive the 
Spirit of God, er we can be made meet 
for the Kingdom of God, FT 

This is what I chiefly had in View, my 
Brethren; for it is with Concern I ſpeak a- 
gainſt any of the preſent Clergy, and nothing 
but the utmoſt Neceſſity ſhould occaſion it. 
Nothing leſs than the receiving the Spirit 
of God, can make you ſound Chriſtians in- 
_ deed; not Parts, not Gifts, my Brethren, tho 
_ ever ſo eminent, no, it muſt be ſomething 
more excellent, not outward Privileges, not 


being baptized by Water, but the Baptiſm of bt: 


the Heart, of the Spirit, not being frequently 
admitted to the Sacrament, and having been 
75! K conſtant 


191 

conſtant Hearers of the Word of God, or fre- 
quently Readers of it, you may value the Mi- 
niſters of God, and be efteem'd by them, this 
may be, my Brethren, and yet you may never 
be ſound Chriſtians, no, it muſt be a true Con- 
verſion beſpeaks you ſuch, it is having a ſav- 
ing experimental Knowledge of the Lord Je- 
ſus Chriſt, it 1s experiencing the Work of the 
Spirit upon your Souls, your being born again, 
not meer Morality; or leading civil decent 
Lives, carrying it fair to the World, no, my 
Brethren, tho' theſe are very commendable, 
yet they fall ſhort of true Chriſtianity, and 

theſe Things, if reſted in; are only beautiful 
Abominations, a ſmoother Way to Hell. 
Neither are they Forms or Profeſſions of 
Godlineſs ; this is as a whited Sepulchre, fair 
without, but foul and loathſome within ; you 
may be exact and formal in your Lives, my 
Brethren, but if Chriſt is not formed in you, 
you are none of his. | 
You muſt be juſtified, you muſt be ſancti- 
fied, or you never can be glorified, Sanctifi- 
cation is not, as our modern polite Preachers 
tell us, the Cauſe of our Juſtifigation, and 
that God ſeeing you a good Creature, beſtows 
upon you his Grace; this is the Doctrine we 
have now among us, but it is not the Doc- 
trine of Chriſt, it is not, my Brethren, the 
Doctrine I preach, no, I preach Salvation is 


the free Gift of God, that Chriſt juſtifies us 
)) © Croc, while 


[ 20 ] 
while we are ungodly, that it is by God's free 
Grace, if we are ſaved, not of Works, leaſt 
any one ſhould boaſt; Man has no Fitneſs, 
my Brethren, but a Fitneſs for eternal Dam- 
nation; we are all born in Sin, we brin 
Guilt into the World with us, Adam's Guilt 
is imputed to all his Poſterity ; Deiſts, Arians, 
and Socinians, deny the Doctrine of Original 
Sin, and, God knows, too many of our polite 
Clergy deny this Doctrine, and they, my Bre- 
thren, who deny original Sin, go againſt plain 
Scripture, Reaſon, and the Experience of Man- 
kind; for, I ſay, this is a Doctrine founded 
on the Word of God, by one Man Sin came 
into the World, and Death by Sin, for we 
have all ſinned. We are all gone out of the 
Way, we are all become unprofitable, there 
is none that doth Good, no, not one; and 
this Sin would have been ſufficient to have 
ſunk the whole World into Hell, if the Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt had not ſuffered, and died. 

- Unleſs, therefore, my Brethren, you have 
the Spirit of God, you arc Reprobates ; and 
when you have received the Spirit of - Chriſt, 
he will eſteem you as his own, you ſhall find 
Comfort and Joy in your own Souls. 

Put your Souls, therefore, my Brethren, into 
the Hands of Jeſus Chriſt your Saviour, it is 
he that purchaſed them, and therefore loved 
them; it is he, my Brethren, that is the Owner 
of them, by the Right of Redemption ; 8 
e . - ne 


— 


[12] 

_ Chriſt in all that concerns you, remember that 
he knoweth what you know not; he is poſſeſſ- 
ing Heaven for you, my Brethren : And is it 
not a Comfort to you, my dear Brethren, that 
you have a Head, a Saviour in Heaven, and 
that Heaven and Earth are in his Power; and 
as he hath ſaved you from Sin, ſo he will 
ſave you from Hell. 

Come then from the World, from the vain 
unſatisfying Pleaſures of this lower Earth, 
come to Chriſt, and do but taſte of his Love, 
and you will no more take up with ſuch poor 
periſhing Things as this World affords; and 
if, my Brethren, you do but come unto Chriſt, 
it will be Matter of Joy to Chriſt and Angels, 
he will welcome you to Heaven with the dear- 
eſt Love; deliver, therefore, up your Soul to 
Chriſt : There i is, indeed, my Brethren, there 
is, all Things in him which thou needeſt. 
Art thou afraid of the Guilt of thy Sins ? Je- 
ſus Chriſt pardoneth all Sin : Art thou afraid 
of the Law? Jeſus Chriſt has done away the 
Law: Art thou afraid of the Wrath of God? 
in Jeſus Chriſt God is well pleaſed : Art thou 
afraid of Hell? Jeſus Chriſt will give thee 
Heaven. 

Truſt then, my dear Brethren, your Souls 
into ſuch a Saviour, and diſtract not your 
Mind with unbelieving Fears, Jeſus Chriſt 
hath Power to ſave you, Jeſus Chriſt hath 
Wiſdom to ſave you, and Jeſus Chriſt hath 

Love 


[414] 
Love to ſave you; and do you, queſtion the 
Love, when he, my Brethren, hath teſtified 
it at ſo dear a Rate? | LOSES Welt 
I am now ſpeaking to you, my Brethren, 
who are under the Pangs of the New-Birth, 
who are convinced of Sin, who are weary and 
' Heavy laden with the Guilt thereof, who feel 
themſelves loſt, undone, damned Sinners; Tam 
not talking to you, Phariſees, who think you 
are wiſe enough already; my talking to you, at 
this Rate, would be Enthuſiaſm to you, you'd 
ſay, and only Cant; but to you, who feel the 
Weight of your Sins, this Doctrine of the 
Love of Jeſus Chriſt, in dying for you, is as 


Life from the Dead; it is the very News that 


will enliven you; it is the only Balm that can 
be brought from Gilead, to heal your wound- 
ed Souls; therefore come unto Chriſt: in the 
Way he hath appointed, and he will fave you, 
indeed, my guilty Brethren, he will fave you, 
for it is his proper Work and Office. His 
Work in Heaven is to prepare a glorious Re- 
ceptacle for you, and there he is 5 
for you to that End. It is Faith in Chri 

which we muſt live and die by; if we will 
live and die in a well- grounded Peace, devote, 
muy Brethren, yourſelves entirely to God, and 
make it your whole Study to pleaſe him, do- 
ing all Good, even to your Enemies, for Soul 
and Body; if they point at you, with a here 
comes another Troop of his Followers, or with 
8 Het | looking 


[ 23] | 
looking on you as a Parcel of Rabble, a de- 
laded Multitude, don't permit, my Brethren, 
an angry Thought to ariſe towards them; 
they ſaid a little while ago, that you only 
come out of Curioſity, but I hope better Things 
of you now, for I think your Curioſity, is pret- 
ty well over, I hope that is ſatisfied, and you 
have higher Views, and a better End in thus 
coming to hear a poor deſpiſed Field-preacher, 
a Boy, Enthuſiaſt, a Madman, as they call 
me, but, my Brethren, if you and I do but 
meet in Glory together, you will not complain 

that a Babbler was the Inſtrument ; God often 

chuſes the weak Things of this World to con- 
found the Strong, and the fooliſh Things there- 

of to confound the Wiſe, that his own Wiſ- 
dom and Power might appear plain: But 

they are welcome to ſay what they pleaſe of 
me; they may caſt me out, and ſay all Man- 

ner of Evil againſt me, yea, put me to Death, 

I queſtion not, but as my Day is, ſo my 

Strength ſhall be; therefore all their Malice 

and Rancour hurts me not, neither do I re- 

gard it, I have a gracious Maſter, and into 

his Hands I commit myſelf, and all my Af- 

fairs, leaving it to his wiſe Direction. Only 

ſhall beg one Thing of you, my Brethren, 

that is, that I may be prepared againſt the 

breaking of that Cloud which is now a ga- 

thering, tho' it is no bigger than a Man's 
Hand at preſent, yet by and by it will over- 

2 | | ” 4 | ſpre ad 


3 


* 


[ 74 ] 
ſpread the Heavens, and when it is full, then, 
then, my Brethren, it will burſt, and I do ex- 
pect it to burſt upon my Head firſt; and 
therefore I beſeech you, my dear Brethren, 
in the Mercies of God, in Chriſt Jeſus, to pray 
for me, that I may not fear the Face of Man, 
but that I may go on conquering and to con- 
quer; and if 1 am but the Means of bringing 
you to Jeſus Chriſt, let me ſuffer what the Ma- 
lice of the Devil can ſtir them up to, I ſhall 
rejoice, yea, and I will rejoice. _ 31,0- 5c; 

But now, my Brethren, let me beſeech you 
once more, to ſeek for the Spirit of Chriſt. 
You muſt indeed be a Believer, you muſt be 
ſanctified by his Spirit, before you are in a 
State of Salvation; live not to the Fleſh, but 
unto God, and how weak ſoever your Begin- 
nings are, ſtill ſeek to Chriſt, and he. will 
ſtrengthen all your Weakneſs, he will remove 
all your Uneafineſs about your Souls, and will 
give you all Comfort, he will give you him- 
ſelf. * Nan enen 
Thus I have ſhewn you the Neceſſity of 
receiving the Spirit of God. I now proceed, 


2dly. To tell you, my Brethren, who this 
Spirit is. | n Hort 
And now, you Deiſts, Arians, and Socini- 
ans, if you would not hear what will be dif- 
pleaſing to you, you muſt go to your Enter- 
tainments, you may go to a Play, or a Ball, 
* | or 


[ 15 ] 
or the neighbouring Place of Vanity, for I ſhall 
ſpeak to your Conſciences. 

The Spirit is the Holy Ghoſt, the third Per- 
ſon in the ever- bleſſed Trinity, neither made 
nor created, but was from all Eternity, pro- 
ceeding from the Father and the Son, God of 
God, Light of Light, very God of very God, 
and therefore, as we ſay on 7. rinity-Sunday, 
the: Father is God, the Son is God, and the 


Holy Ghoſt is God, and yet there: s not three 


Gods but one God. 1 

And this God can be bo one, becauſe two 
Infinites, two Almighties, moſt Wiſe, moſt 
Good, and firſt Cauſes is a Contradidtion. 
For if there be two, one is but half, and fo 
not infinite or perfect, and that one is not the 
Cauſe of the other, or the End. 

And tho' this is deny'd by all Arians, and 
Socinians, yet it is the plain Doctrine of Seri 


ture, and J would not caſt ſuch Diſhonour 


upon my Saviour, upon the Lord that bought 

me, not for ten thouſand thouſand Worlds. 
Therefore, I beſeech you, conſider what you 
are doing of, when you are jeſting with the 


- Deity of Chriſt, when you are jeſting with his. 


Incarnation, Death and Sufferings; for if you 
die in this State, you are ruined to all Eternity, 

you can have no Salvation while in that State, 
you are running Headlong to your own. De- 


ſtruction; therefore, for your Souls Sake, my 
con Friends, examine your own Hearts, and 
C ſeriouſly | 


[ 16 ] 
ſeriouſly look into the Filth and Pollution that 
is lodged there, and turn unto the Lord, and 
he will have Mercy ; for you muſt only ex- 
pect Wrath, and a fearful looking for the 
Judgment of God to fall on you, and that 
to all Eternity, unleſs you turn unto the Lord, 
before you are ſentenced to be cut off from 
amongſt the Living, and be numbered amongſt 
the Dead, and have your Soul amongſt the 
Tranſgreſlors; and can you bear to think to 
appear before an angry God, with all your 
Sins unrepented off? How, how, my Bre- 
thren, will you look that Jeſus in the Face, 
whom you have diſown'd? How, I fay, can 
you think, without trembling, to fee your 
Enemy, your Judge ? Then you will find, un- 
to your unſpeakable Horror, that he is a migh- 
ty God]; but, God forbid it ſhould be left un- 


Hp denied till then: . Conſider, Oh confider 


now, and ſeek the Lord while he may be 
found; perhaps many of you will think I 
have gone too far, but, my Brethren, I ſhall 
goa great deal farther Les and that 


Zaly, You muſt. receive the Spirit of God 'Y 
he muſt be in your Hearts, or elſe ow will 
oy no Share in his Favour. 
I do not queſtion but the Pharife i is ie 
in many of you, againſt me, becauſe J fay 
the Spirit of God muſt be in you; why, my 
Brethren, it is the pp Words of Scripture, 
Unle 95 


[17 ] 
Unleſs Chrift be in you, you are Reprobates ; the 
Spitit of God in its ſanctifying Influences will 
guide, and direct, and aſſiſt you in all Truth; 


therefore, do not, my Brethren, quench the 


Spitit of Grace, for that will be your only 
Comforter ; you may think of Chriſt, and read 
over the Promiſes, and think of Heaven, and 
all will have little Power upon you, if the Spi- 
rit help you not. There is no effectual Light 
in any Knowledge, my Brethren, no holy 


Love, no Delight in God, no ſpiritual Life in 


any of 'our Thoughts, but what is wrought 
by the illuminating, ſanctifying, and quickning 
Spirit. | 

Oh therefore, my Brethren, cheriſh this 
heavenly Gueſt, if ever you would have Joy 
in the Holy Ghoſt. Do not, my Brethren, 
refiſt the Spirit, when it convinceth you, re- 
proveth you, and ſtriveth with your Hearts ; 
and yet, how often have you grieved the Spi- 
rit of God? And when any of its Convictions 
have been on your Hearts and Conſciences, 
have not you run into Company, into Diver- 
fion, or Gaieties of Life? But this, my Bre- 
thren, is wrong; you ſhould have gone into 
your Cloſet, and prayed over thoſe Convicti- 
ons, and 'begg'd that they might have ended 


in Converſions ; therefore, my dear Brethren, 


if you have any Defires after this Spirit be- 
ing in your Hearts, don't go this Evening to 
| the Tavern or Alehouſe, don't go and converſe 


Oz: idly 


Þ 
[ 
| 


„ 


; 
* 


[ 38 ] 
idly and unprofitably, but retire to your Clo- 
ſet, and there pray to the Lord to give you 
his Spirit. 4 
And now, my dear Brethren, let me exhort 
all of you, high and low, rich and poor, one 
with another, to ſtrive for the Spirit of God, 
whereby you are ſealed to the Day of Redemp- 
tion. Jeſus Chriſt is the only Way whereby 
you can be ſaved, and why will you not come 
unto him for Life and for Salvation ; here is 
Grace oftered to every one who does but ask 
for it. Come to him by Faith; I do not 
preach up your Works, tell you to do ſuch 
and ſuch Duties, and then Chriſt will accept 
of you; No, I ſhew you a more excellent 
Way, come only to him as poor loſt, undone 
Sinners, and Chriſt will receive you ; his 
Grace is free, my Brethren; come unto him 
all ye who are weary of your Sins, and you 
' ſhall find Reſt for your Souls; Chriſt is the 
Phyſician of Value, for he is juſt ſuch a one 
as you and I want. O my Brethren, come, 
here 1s a gracious Declaration ; Ho ! every one 


that thirſteth, come and buy Wine and Milk, 


| without Money, and without Price. Sure here 


is Love 'which has no Bounds, Love without 
End; and will not the Love of Chriſt melt 
you? What! is there no Form, is there no 
Beauty in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt ? Has the Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt ſhed his Blood, my Brethren, for 
you, and yet is there nothing dete * 


1191 
him? What! my Brethren, will not the Love 
of a dying Jeſus melt your Hearts, to ſee his 
Hands nailed, his Feet nailed to the accurſed 
Tree, to ſee his Side pierced, his Head crown- 
ed with Thorns; to ſee him buffeted, ſcourg- 
ed, whipped; to ſee the Lord of Glory ſuffer- 
ing this; to hear him cry out, My God, my 
God, why haſt thou forſaken me? To ſee all 
this, my Brethren, and think, my Brethren, 
it was our Sins was the Occaſion thereof, and 
what muſt your Hearts be then, if they do 
not melt into Tears of Contrition at the Con- 
ſideration hereof? Sure your Hearts are harder 
than Adamant, if you can hear theſe Truths, 
and not be concerned; but I hope moſt of 
you, my Brethren, are full of Concern at the 
Thoughts hereof, and are reſolved to accept 
of the Offers of Grace and Salvation which 
are made to all that come unto the Lord Je- 
ſas Chriſt, I offer Jeſus Chriſt to every one 
that hear me this Night; come unto Jeſus 
_ Chriſt, my Brethren, if you value your own 
Souls; come unto him, and you ſhall find 
Reſt for your Souls; make no Excuſes, let 
not the World keep you back one Moment 
from coming to Chriſt, make ſure of the pre- 
| lent Time, don't delay, but come immediate- 
ly unto the Lord Jeſus Chriſt ; conſider the 
Danger you are expoſed to, if you die without 
an Intereſt in Chriſt; there is nothing to be 
got in the Grave; if you have not Jeſus Chriſt 
* C.-2 now, 


(EQ, 
now, you' never have him: Conſider, my 
dear Brethren, of your Condition, and do not 
let that Soul for which Chriſt came into the 
World, be loſt, becauſe you will not come 
unto him; the Lord Jeſus Chriſt is ready and 
willing to receive you; then do not let the 
Devil and Sin have any more of your Time, 
but give it all to that Jeſus who is only wor- 
thy of it. 5 2 525 > 

Let not the Playhouſe, a Ball, a Maſque-. 
rade, keep you from coming to the Lord Jeſus 
Chriſt, for he is a Saviour, who is full of Love, 
Love is his Delight, he is Love himſelf, then 
do, my Brethren, I beſeech you come unto 
him - by Faith; give the World the Lye, do 
not let the Phariſees have any Cauſe to re- 
proach us; they are continually raiſing their 
Reports now, of which, bleſſed be God, we 
are intirely innocent, and they themſelves know 
we are, but are willing to ſay any Thing A- 
gainſt us, without Reaſon, and, blefled be God, 
our own' Conſciences do not reproach us with 
thoſe Things they charge us with; if to wor- 
ſhip God in Sincerity and Truth, if that is 
Enthuſiaſm, God grant we may be all more 
and more guilty of it. FEUD Ff 

O my dear Brethren, do not think it ſtrange 
if you meet with Perſecution in the World, 
for they that will live godly muſt ſuffer Per- 
ſecution ; you muſt, my dear Brethren, have 
your Name held in Scorn and Reproach; do 

AS not 


211 
not regard being eſteem'd a Fool for: Chriſt's 
Sake, only reflect on what the Lord Jeſus 


Chriſt underwent, and then ſure a little R- 


h, my Brethren, will not make you 
aſhamed of the Goſpel of Jeſus : Or if, my 
Brethren, you do be conſider how ſhort it 
will be, Death, my Brethren, will put a Stop 
to all their Scoff; and if they were to take 
away your Lives, it will only be a Means 
of ſending you to the Lord who bought 
you, to Jeſus who came down from Heaven 
on your Accounts; then, O ye Sinners, ye 
Phariſees, leave your own Righteouſneſs, and 
come unto the Lord, who will take away 
your Righteouſneſs, and give you his own 
white Robes, he will give you a Wedding 
Garment, he will cloath you with a new 
Nature, he will give you his Spirit, he will 
take away all your Filth, all your Sin, and 
give you Grace. O then, do not plead your 
own Morality, your leading civil, honeſt, de- 
cent Lives, your doing no Body any Harm, 
but come unto Chriſt as blind, as poor, na- 
ked, miſerable, deſtitute of all Help ; come, 


1 my Biethren, to Chriſt in this Condition, 


and he will not ſend you empty away; no, 
he will fill you with his lr be take away all 


your Corruption, and will be one with you, 


as + and his Father are one, then why halt 
What! my Brethren, are you afraid 
Grit will not _ you ? Indeed, my Bre- 

8 thren, 


( 22 ] 
thren, he is well pleaſed to ſee poor Sinners 
come unto him; then, my Brethren, he has 
engaged his Word, that whoſoever came to 
him ſhould in no wiſe be caſt out; then, 
fear not, my Friends, my guilty Brethren, let 
me not riſe up in Judgment againſt any of you 
that hear me this Night. Oh, my Brethren, 
I could ſpeak till Midnight, fo I might be a 
Means of ſaving one of your precious Souls 
from Deſtruction. Why will you let the Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt die in vain? Why, my Brethren, 
do you make his Blood of no Effect, by not 
coming unto him, that you might have Life? 
Oh, my Brethren, if it had not been for your 
Sakes, Chriſt had not died, he would not have 
left the Boſom of his Father to.have took upon 
him our Nature, if it had not been for you ; 
therefore while you are ſtanding out againſt 
God, you are againſt your own Happineſs, 
againſt your own eternal Welfare; and what, 
my Brethren, are you reſolved to turn the deaf 
Ear unto all the Invitations that is making to 
you ? If this 1s the Caſe, if you are reſolved 
to go on in this Manner, your Damnation 
will be of yourſelves; my Maſter is willing to 
receive you, and you will not come, you re- 
fuſe Jeſus Chriſt now, and he will reject you 
before his Father: Your Blood, therefore, will 
be upon your own Heads; I have gave you 
fair Warning, and if you periſh, you periſh 
now, not becauſe you did not. know what 
7 you 


[ 23 ] 
you muſt do to be ſaved, but becauſe you will 
not leave your Sins, you will not leave your 
Pleaſures for ' Jeſus Chriſt. | 
But I have far better Thoughts concerning 
you, and I hope you will not let me go to 
Chriſt without you, I would have you all go 
with me, I would not go to my Maſter, and 
tell him, you will not accept of his Calls, nor 
his Invitation, but I would have you with 
me; come then, my Brethren, and taſte how 
gracious a Maſter you have, he is ready to 
embrace you in the Arms of his Love, he is 
full of Love, and do you not want JeſusChriſt to 
be a Propitiation for you, to preſent you faultleſs 
before his Father's Throne; why, do but come 
unto him, and he will do all this for you. 
Oh, that I did but know with what Words to 
woo you; Oh that I did but know what Ar- 
guments to uſe, that would pierce your Souls, 
that would enter into your Hearts, how wil- 
lingly would I uſe them; how deſirous I am 
for you to come to Chriſt, God is my Wits 
neſs. 

Indeed, my dear Brethren, I would go to 
Priſon, I would go to Death for you, but I 
cannot bare to go to Heaven without you, I 
cannot think of leaving you to the Prey of that 
Devil who will deſtroy your Souls, and ſend 
them into eternal Deſtruction, and muſt be tor- 
mented without End. Then, my Brethren, 
you will with, and lament, and curſe your 

Folly ; 


[-23]] 
Folly; then you will, bewaill your Stupidity, 
«29 you did not accept Jeſus Chriſt; you muſt 
be faved by Jeſus Chriſt, there is no other 
Name whereby you can be ſaved, but that of 
the Lord Jokus Chriſt he is the only Salva- 
tion. 

My Brethren, were 900 but ſenſible of your 
Danger, you would not reſt a Moment from 
coming to jeſus Chriſt; why linger ye? De- 
lays are dangerous: 0 methinks I ſee ſome 
poor Sinner ready to come, but it fears that 
he has committed ſo many ALY, that Jeſus 
Chriſt will not forgive them. O this, my 
Brethren, is only from the Devil, to' keep 
your Souls back from coming to the Lord je- 
ſus Chriſt; therefore do not mind it, Jeſus 


Chriſt will have Mercy upon you, he will not 


let you go away empty, you ſhall unmedi- 
ately know him to be a gracious, a kind, and 
loving Maſter, and will-not go from him, 
you will not leave him ;.no, my Brethren, I 
am perſuaded that Jeſus Chriſt will be ſo lovely 


to your Souls, that you will never be eaſy 


when he is abſent from you; do but come un- 
to him, and he will accept you, you ſhall find 


him a God, ready to pardon all thy Sins, and 
to put away all thy Tranſgreſſions; then do 
not fear his accepting of you, but come, my 
Brethren, and try, and you will ſoon fad he 
will receive you in his Arms, and embrace you 
in 


[ 24 ] 
in his Love, and you ſhall ſing Hallelujahs 
to him unto all Eternity. 

I know not how to leave you 'till Jeſus 
Chriſt is formed in your Hearts by Faith ; I 
cannot go from you; methinks, IJ am full of 
Love to you, and this Love conſtrains me to 
ſpeak, it is for your Sakes that I thus am will- 
ing to ſpend, and be ſpent for you. O do not 
let me entreat you all in vain, but I beſeech 
you, in all Tenderneſs, come unto Chriſt, and 
you ſhall receive all Bleſſings that your Souls 
want. And then at the great Day of Accounts 
we ſhall be called, with a Come ye Bleſſed ; 
while if we refuſe to come, it will be with a 
Go ye Curſed : Now, which of theſe Sounds, 
my Brethren, is moſt pleaſing? And if you 
would hear the firſt, come unto Jeſus Chriſt, 
and as he is ſet down with his Father upon his 


Throne, ſo you ſhall ſet down with him on 


his Throne, you ſhall live and love, and love 
and live with him, praiſing and adoring the 
Lamb that died for you to all Eternity. 


Which Ged of his infimte Mercy grant, &c. 


