of Theology


at Clar


“Wil io





Sa
2 5
> os


Theology Library


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
California











Sige Oe +





ae) ae ee ee | eee ee eee


a eae eee m
: POP aS 5 ee te
-


Fi ry ~
rt "








BY REV, JOHN A. BROADUS, D.D., LL.D.


ON THE PREPARATION AND DELIVERY
OF SERMONS. 16th EpiTion. Crown


8vo, cloth, Se ee cm ee Poe ee Legs


LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF
PREACHING. i12mo, cloth, . . . . 1.50


SERMONS AND ADDRESSES, with Por-
trait of the author. Crown 8vo, cloth, . 1.50


COMMENTARY ON MATTHEW. -Crown
8vo, cloth, Fine SMD tame Metiacy” hye cid pGaer e


x*, Any of the atove sent by mail, post-paid, to any
part of the United States or Canada, on recetpt of price,


by
A. C. ARMSTRONG & SON,
714 Broadway, New York.





feos to OF NAZ ARE TH,


tt


I, HIS PERSONAL CHARACTER.
i, HIS ETHICAL TEACHINGS,
45? Ill, HIS SUPERNATURAL WORKS.


THREE LECTURES BEFORE THE VVC Aan OL
JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY, IN
LEVERING HALL,


JOHN A. ,BROADUS, DD: ELD;
President of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.


SECOND EDITION,


NEW YORK:
A. CG. ARMSTRONG & SON,
714 BROADWAY,
1890.


CopPyYRIGHT, 1890,
By JOHN A. BROADUS.


University ot Southern Ualitornt


Transterred —


gl


Jal, @$2.9 SF634
~ ($40


PREFACE,


These lectures were delivered in March, 1890,
at the instance of Eugene Levering, Esq., of Balti-
more, in the Hall which he has recently erected and
given to the Johns Hopkins University, for the use
of the Young Men's Christian Association of that
institution; and the President of the Y. M. C. A. .
specially requested their publication. They were
not designed as class-room lectures, since many not
connected with the University were invited to
attend.

The subject treated seems to possess an ever-
deepening interest at the present time. The per-
sonal character of Jesus is now widely perceived to
be an important guarantee of his teachings and
works. This character is presented by the first


lecture in a way that to some nay appear lacking


in devout warmth; but the object was to gain the
3 ;


4 Preface.


concurrence of every person who will calmly survey
the historical facts, and thus to lay a foundation for
what would follow. It is hoped that the second lect-
ure will tend to rectify certain erroneous but quite
prevalent views of the Saviour’s teaching ; and that
the third lecture may be found to have some argu-
mentative force in regard to his mission and claims.

The little volume is the fruit of life-time studies,
and has been prepared with the author’s best exer-
tions, and a great desire to promote “the knowledge


of Jesus, the most excellent of the sciences.”


JAW.
LOUISVILLE, Ky.,
May, 1890.


CONTENTS.


LECTURE I.


Tur PrrsonaL CHARACTER OF JESUS. . .. c« . 9


LECTURE II.


Tur Ersica TeacwiInes of JESUS .... . . 39


LECTURE III.


Tur SupERNATURAL WorKS oF JESUS ..... TI





I.


The Personal Character of Iesus,





THE PERSONAL CHARACTER OF JESUS.


OV ES a ie else many of us believe as to
Jesus the Saviour, all men believe in his
thorough humanity. The orthodox world has often
failed to make full practical recognition of his nu-
manity, through an exclusive attention to other
views of his person and work; and the modern his-
torical spirit has been a benefactor to orthodoxy by
bringing out his human character and life as a vivid


reality. Jesus of Nazareth, the Founder of Chris- -


tianity, stands before us to-day as one of the defi-
nite personages of human history. The leading
facts of his career, the chief peculiarities of his
teaching, the distinctive traits of his character, are
now really beyond dispute. And the excellence of
his character, its high and peerless excellence, is
now recognized not only by Christians of every
type and by many Jews, but by persons holding
almost every form of unbelief. Time was, even in
the modern centuries, when some men of talents
and culture reviled him as an impostor or a fanatic,
as did some of the blinded Jews who were his con-
temporaries. But there is hardly a man in all
the world who would speak thus to-day. Even


persons who allow themselves to ridicule the Bible,
9


ed


10 Jesus of Nazareth.


and the God whom it describes, are unwilling now to
speak lightly of Jesus; and if in some rare cases a
man-attempts to hint possible and slight defect, he
seems to do so with reluctance, and turns quickly
away to join the chorus of eulogy. Robert Brown-


. ing, in a letter published since his death, cites sey-


=e


eral utterances of men of genius as to the Christian
faith, and among them one from Charles Lamb.
“Tn a gay fancy with some friends, as to how he
and they would feel if the greatest of the dead were
to appear suddenly in flesh and blood once more-——
on the final suggestion, ‘ And if Christ entered this
room?’ he changed his manner at once and stut-
tered out, as his manner was when moved, ‘ You
see, if Shakespeare entered we should all rise; if


_ he appeared, we must kneel.’” Such reverence is


not a mere result of Christian education, of Chris-
tian literature and art and usages; it will be felt by
any person of susceptible nature who will thought-
fully read one of the gospels at a single sitting, and
alone with his beating heart and his God.

Ofa character thus unique, unparalleled, univer-
sally reverenced, how can we attempt a portraiture ?
The effort is fore-doomed to failure. It must be
disappointing to taste and unsatisfying to devotion.
No painter among all the great names has made a
picture of Jesus which a loving reader of the gos-
pels can feel to be adequate. How can we depict
his character in words? But if one undertakes the
task, of all things he must beware of high-wrought
expressions. The most inadequate language is less
unworthy of Jesus than inflated language. And it
may contribute towards the design of these lectures


His Personal Character. 11


if we attempt, in sheer simplicity, to bring before
our minds the circumstances of his self-manifesta-
tion, and the more easily apprehended traits of his
character. The present sketch has been wrought
out from the gospels themselves, with suggestions
afterwards welcomed from several recent writings.
For the present we must leave almost entirely out
of view the Saviour’s beautiful teachings and glori-
ous works, which are to be considered on other
occasions.

Notice first the external conditions of his life. We
all know that he was reared in a small and obscure
village, whose inhabitants were rude and violent,
and had an ill-name among their neighbors. Not
once nor twice only have the world’s wisest and
greatest, the world’s teachers and rulers, sprung
from some petty village or country neighborhood.
We know that Jesus was reared in poverty, and
was himself a mechanic, a worker in wood. Justin
Martyr, who lived a hundred years later in the
same region, states the tradition that he made
ploughs and ox-yokes. It ought to be clearly
brought out in our time that the Founder of Chris-
tianity spent his early life as what we call a work-
ing-man. Yet remember that from boyhood he
went at least once a year, and probably oftener, to
the great city of Jerusalem, making the journey
amid scenes of varied natural beauty and all man-
ner of sacred associations, to mingle with vast
crowds from every district of the Holy Land and
from many a distant country, and to take part in
impressive religious ceremonies, to join in chanting
the sweet Psalms of David, and listen long to


12 Jesus of Nazareth.


the fervent reading of ancient record and high pro- -
phetic instruction and exhortation. It is difficult to

estimate the benefits that would be derived by a

highly impressible youthful nature during the whole

period between the age of twelve and that of thirty,

from such journeys and weeks of abiding in the

Holy City.

During his public ministry he had no home, and
spent most of his time in travelling, on foot, busy
with public and private teaching, and sustained by
the hospitality of friends and sometimes of stran-
gers, or by money contributed by generous women
for the support of himself and his followers. Yet
observe that he did not do this as meritorious
asceticism, but simply from a desire to spend his
whole time in doing good, throughout a ministry
which he foresaw must be short. Even among
ourselves there are men so devoted to science or
art, to authorship or teaching or religious ministra-
tions, that they often share the feeling of the great
scientific man who said, ‘I haven’t time to make
money.” This early life was very different from
that of Sakhya Muni, the Founder of Buddhism,
who is represented as the son of a wealthy king,
dwelling for years in a home of luxury, and leaving
_ it to become an ascetic. Jesus showed no tinge of
, asceticism. John the forerunner made his life an
object lesson to a luxurious age, as Elijah had done
long before, by dwelling for years among the wild
hills, with the garb and the food of the poorest.
But it was quite otherwise with Jesus. He wore
good clothing, for we read of a tunic woven without
seam, which at that day must have been a costly


His Personal Charactar. 18


garment. IIe spent days at a wedding feast,
which the forerunner would probably not have con-
sented to attend. He accepted invitations from
the rich, and conformed to social usage by reclining
on a couch beside the table in the luxurious
Persian fashion; and, as he himself expressly
mentions, ate and drank what others did, though it
exposed him even then to misconception and un-
kind remark. Jesus touched life at many points,
yet it was mainly and essentially the life of the
poor. The profound literary and artistic interest
now felt in the life of the poor, as dealing with what
is ‘common to man,” ought to awaken sympathy
with the Beginnings of Christianity.

Quietly pursuing the healthy duties of an humble ~
calling, profoundly pondering from boyhood the
prophetic writings, Jesus patiently waited till the
time came for him to appear and act. The earliest
period at which a man was then supposed to be
mature enough for highly responsible functions was
something like the age of thirty. At that age the
Saviour came forth without delay, and after a min-
istry of not more than three or four years he left
the earth. He taught and died a young man. To
all the other great achievements of young men must
be added this incomparable fact, that a young man
gave us Christianity.

Consider next the personal religious life of Jesus.
It is remarkable how often we find mention of his
praying. The innocent and holy One gave frequent
recognition of dependence on God, which is one of
the chief elements of religious feeling and convic-
tion. If any human being was ever able to stand


/ ; | 7 j ra poss 4 he. ath 4-
» 4 kA Legs Ateaturne Q hn ok a a. ~7 “LE shes Rig i é be ch


, nm wv = ‘ olen Bove
Din eek 4 Fad OQ Presri-oy , debsob » po
e - ae gam Ret al f
14 Jesus of Nazareth.


alone in the universe, without leaning on God, it
might have been true of him. Not the guilty alone,
nor~the perilously weak, have occasion to lift the
heart in prayer. Jesus habitually and lovingly
prayed. Nor did he merely keep up the habit of
stated devotion, but he made special prayer upon
various recorded occasions. At his baptism we are
told that he was praying, and also on the Mount of
Transfiguration. He spent a night in prayer when
about to select the Twelve. They were to be the
companions of his remaining life, and the responsi-
ble messengers of his teaching after that life should
be ended. The selection was therefore immensely
important, and he made it after protracted and
special prayer. When the fanatical multitude of
five thousand vehemently declared that they would
make him king even against his will, and all his pa-
tient spiritual instructions seemed to have gone for
nothing, he bade them depart and went up into the
mountain to pray. Thrice in Gethsemane he with-
drew to agonize in prayer, and his last words on
the cross were words of prayer. Strange that
heedless, bustling, self-sufficient humanity does not
see its own folly when contemplating that life of
prayer.

Remarkable familiarity with the sacred writings
appears already in the glimpse we catch of Jesus
at the age of twelve years, and comes out in his
constant use of Scripture for argument and instruc-
tion throughout his ministry. He also used it for
his personal support in times of special trial. In
the strange and wonderful scene of manifested temp-
tation, he three times quotes the book of Deuteron-


Thane Orrersy On Grn a fre FE.


His Personal Character. 15


omy as an answer to the tempter, and on the cross
three times quotes the Psalms.

Jesus habitually attended upon public worship in
the synagogues. He must have been often pained
or repelled by wrong explanations of the sacred
writings, by the repetition of foolish traditions, by
unwise counsel and exhortation, but we are ex-
pressly told that it was “his custom” to go into the
synagogue. How little did the men who spoke
imagine the thoughts revolving in the mind of a
quiet youth in the assembly; even as we now little
know the slowly-developing wisdom, the latent po-
tencies of some student to whom we lecture, some
child to whom we preach.* Jesus also went regu-
larly, as we have already seen, to the great relig-
ious festivals at the temple.

From the means contributed to the support of
himself and his followers he was accustomed to give
something to the poor. Thus when Judas went out
from the last paschal supper, after the Master had
said, ‘‘ What thou doest, do quickly,” some of the
disciples thought it meant that he should give to
the poor. The Saviour once declared that ‘“ it is
more blessed to give than to receive.” In spiritual
things he and his apostles were constantly the
givers; but even in temporal things, where it was
their part to receive, they must not be denied some
share in the higher happiness of giving.

In every way Jesus radiated forth an atmosphere
of goodness; he presented the beauty of holiness in
living incarnation. We can see that to be near him


* Compare Stalker, “ Imago Christi.”


16 Jesus of Nuzareth.


often awakened in men the feeling that God was
near. It is so now. Many shrink from reading
the ‘gospels attentively because getting near to
Jesus makes holiness seem so real, and renders
their own sinfulness a matter of painful conscious-
ness.

Yet this great Teacher of spiritual truth, and
model of public worship and private devotion, was
constantly manifesting a deep interest in Nature,
and in the outward life of men. He watched the
dark, violet-colored lily of Galilee, recalling the
purple robes of Solomon in all his glory, and the
minute mustard-seed which grew into so large a
plant. He saw with interest the little sparrow fly-
ing or falling to the ground, and the eagles swoop-
ing down from a distance upon their proper food.
He loved retirement to some mountain top. In the
last summer of the Galilean ministry he kept with-
drawing from Capernaum, in the deep and heated
caldron of the Lake of Galilee, far below the level
of the Mediterranean, to mountain regions in every
direction. No one can clinib the high hill west of
Nazareth without fancying that often, when the
day’s work was done, the young carpenter climbed
to that summit, gazing with delight upon the blue


mee then in another direction upon the


ae


¢


ow-clad range of Mount Lebanon, and far and
wide over the Holy Land.

He was also a close observer of ordinary human
pursuits. He drew illustration in his teaching
from patching clothes, and bottling wine, and sow-
ing wheat, and reaping when the stalks were white


for the harvest, and from boys at play. Some


a


His Personal Character. 17


great painter ought to have given us that scene,
children sitting in the market-place engaged in
their sports, while Jesus stood by and looked with
kindly face upon them. He dearly loved little
children, and they for their part would leap from
their mothers’ arms into his arms. He was deeply
interested in human enjoyments. He not only at-
tended the wedding feast at Cana, but practically
ministered to the gratification of the guests and
aided the bridegroom in hospitality. When re-
clining at the tables of the rich, at feasts made in
his honor, he was not silent nor severe, but con-
versed with the company, and introduced religious
lessons suggested by the circumstances. It is
indeed remarkable, as some one has observed, how
many of his most striking sayings are literally
“ table-talk.” *

Look now at the private relations ot Jesus, con-
cerning which we are not without interesting
' points of information. As a child of twelve years,
on his first visit to Jerusalem, he was found in one
of the theological colleges, sitting in the midst of
the rabbinical professors, listening intently and
eagerly questioning ; and all present were amazed,
not simply at his questions, for many a child asks
wonderful questions, but “ at his understanding “>
his answers.” He expressed surprise that Josep
and Mary should not know where to find him, for
of course he ought to be in his Father’s house, at
the temple. He really was, in some respects, what
many boys imagine they are, wiser than his par-


* Stalker.


18 Jesus of Nazareth.


ents ; and yet, as an obedient child, he left that scene
of delightful studies and went back with them to
Nazareth, and was subject unto them. This filial
subjection doubtless continued until his public
ministry began. At the wedding of Cana he in-
timated to his mother that she must not now seek
to control his actions. The language employed is
not unkind, as some think it in our version. For
the term “woman” was also employed by him
when speaking to her upon the cross; and the
phrase rendered “what have I to do with thee ?”
means rather, what have we in common ?—a not un-
kind suggestion that he had now entered upon
duties which she must not attempt to control. One
of the well-known Latin hymns of the great me-
dizeval period gives a most pathetic picture of the
mother of Jesus standing sad and tearful beside his
cross. The Saviour was dying, a young man ; and
beholding his widowed mother, he felt, amid all his
strange sufferings, the loving impulse with which
every young man can sympathize, to make some
provision for her earthly future. He had a faithful
friend standing by, the friend of his bosom, known
among all the rest as one peculiarly loved. This
friend was not destitute, but had a home of his
own; and to him the dying Teacher commended his
mother, that henceforth they should be mother and
son. The simple words possess for all earth’s sons
and all earth’s mothers an unspeakable pathos.

We have just been reminded that certain of his
followers appear as in a peculiar sense the friends
of Jesus. So it is expressly stated that “Jesus
loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.” We


x


His Personal Character. 19


ean see that the Twelve and some other friends
were familiar with him, freely offering counsel and
even making complaint. The ardent Peter, when
told more than six months in advance that the
Master was going to Jerusalem and would there be
crucified, eagerly remonstrated: ‘Be it far from
thee, Lord; this shall never be unto thee.” When
the loving family at Bethany first appear in the
history Martha says, “‘ Lord, carest thou not that
my sister hath left me to serve alone?” implying
that he ought to care. When he heard of Lazarus’
sickness, and after two days’ delay proposed a return
to Judea, the disciples olyjected, saying that the
Jews in Jerusalem had recently sought to stone
him, and it was imprudent to go thither again.
When he arrived at Bethany, and the two sisters
met him separately, each of them said in a com-
plaining tone, ‘* Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother had not died.” These expressions show
that he admitted his friends to the closest intimacy.
Great as was the reverence awakened by his char- |
acter and teachings and works, they did not ex-
clude the familiarity of friendship. And we ought |
to note how exactly Jesus suited himself to the
disposition of his friends; as for example on meet-
ing the sorrowing sisters at Bethany, he reasoned
with the active and energetic Martha, and with the
gentle, contemplative Mary he wept in silent sym-
pathy. At the crisis of agony in Gethsemane
he wished to have near him the three most
cherished friends among his followers; as any one
in a season of great suffering desires to be much
alone, and yet to have dear friends close by..


20 Jesus of Nazareth.


This great instructor of mankind was a notable
Teacher of teachers. The twelve disciples were
subjected to a very careful and protracted training.
We can discern the successive stages. He first
called one and another to come and follow him.
After some months, he carefully selected twelve of
these, to be his special companions, and in the com-
ing time his messengers and representatives. At
the time of this choice he addressed to them and the
multitude the wonderful discourse called the Sermon
on the Mount, which was peculiarly fitted to open
up before them the true nature of the Messianic
reign, and the relation of his teachings to the law
of Moses and its current interpretations. For a
long time the Twelve followed him about, hearing
all his instructions to public assemblies or in the
homes they visited, and encouraged to question him
freely in private. At length he sent them out on a
temporary mission in Galilee, to practise their ap-
pointed task of religious instruction. After their
return he spent six months almost wholly in seclu-
sion, in districts outside of Galilee, evidently devot-
ing his time mainly to careful instruction of the
Twelve, and at length beginning to tell them in
confidence how differently his ministry would end
from their expectations concerning the Messiah.
Observe that although much of his teaching was
private, and some things concerning the foreseen
end of his ministry were to be temporarily kept to
themselves, there was yet nothing here of that
esoteric teaching which some ancient philosophers
practised, directing that certain truths should be
kept always confined to an immer circle. Jesus


His Personal Character. 21


expressly told his disciples that what they heard
in the ear they were ultimately to proclaim upon
the housetops, and carry to all the nations.

The Great Teacher showed in a high degree that
patience upon which all good teaching makes large
demands. Yet we know of one occasion on which
he was much displeased with the Twelve. He had
been giving instruction on the important subject of
divorce, and in the house the disciples were ques-
tioning him further. Just then some mothers
brought to him little children for his blessing, as
they were wont to do with a revered rabbi. The
disciples were unwilling that this should interrupt
the instructions they were seeking on so important
a practical question, and so they rebuked the
mothers. “But when Jesus saw it, he was moved
with indignation,” at their repulsing those in whom
he felt so deep an interest, and from whom, as
examples of docility and loving trustfulness, they
themselves had so much to learn. We have seen
that the reverence of his friends did not prevent
familiarity, and we must add that their familiarity
did not diminish reverence. As the end drew on,
though it was an end which involved apparent fail-
ure and multiplied ignominy, both friend and foe
manifest an awe that ever grows upon them, and
cannot be shaken off.*

We may next notice that Jesus treated the pub-
he authorities with deference and due subjection.
He said to Peter that there were reasons why he
might have claimed exemption from paying the


Compare Bushnell, “‘ Nature and the Supernatural.”


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY


22 Jesus of Nazareth.


annual half-shekel for the support of the temple ;
and yet directed him to pay for them both. He
told the disciples and the multitudes to do what the
scribes bade them, because they sat on Moses’ seat,
were recognized interpreters of the law, but not to
imitate their conduct. By a skilful and promising
plot, representatives of the Pharisees and of the
Herodians, or supporters of the Herod dynasty,
approached him together one day, with honeyed
words of flattery, asking, “Is it lawful to give
tribute unto Cesar or not?” They wished an
answer, yes or no, and thought they were present-
ing a perfect dilemma. If he had said yes, the
Pharisees would have gone out among the Jews,
many of whom were very reluctant to recognize the
Roman rule, and especially to pay the Roman trib-
ute, and would have diligently used against him the
offensive statement that it was proper to pay trib-
ute to Cesar. If he had said no, the Herodians
would have gone to the Roman authorities, and
charged him with encouraging the people to refuse
payment of tribute, a point on which the Romans
were very sensitive. It really seemed a hopeless
dilemma. But he cut through the midst of it by
pointing out a distinction between civil and religi-
ous duties, of which they had never thought, and
which to our modern world, after being long ob-
scured, has again become clear and cardinal, ‘to
Cesar the things that are Cesar’s, to God the
things that are God’s.”

He was indeed teaching ideas that would ulti-
mately transform society; yet he was no violent and
revolutionary reformer, but quietly respected the


His Personal Character. 23


existing authorities. At Gethsemane, he did not
simply yield to force, he surrendered to representa-
tives of the high priest, accompanied by Roman sol-
diers. Jesus never plunged into politics, but direct-
ly concerned himself with spiritual ideas and influ-
ences. By this course he has actually done more
for civilization than could possibly have resulted
had he fallen in with the common Jewish expecta-
tion and become a civil ruler. The indirect influ-
ence of his unworldly aad spiritual reign is helpful
to all the highest interests of humanity. Still, he
could not fail to be deeply moved by the civil and
social, as well as the religious condition of the cho-
sen people. And when he wept over the foreseen
destruction of Jerusalem, it was doubtless the grief
of a patriot as well as of a Saviour.

In considering the association of Jesus with the
people at large, we are struck at once with the fact that
though pure and sinless, he did not shrink from con-
tact with the most sinful and the most despised. He
was in this respect the very opposite of the Phari-
sees. Their name signifiesseparatists. /undamen-
tal in their conception of a pious life was the idea
of scrupulously avoiding any social intercourse, or
even the slightest contact, with persons who habitu-
ally violated the ceremonial law, as well as with
those guilty of gross immorality. This was
the idea of personal purity materialized, and
pushed to an utter extreme. Accordingly, the
Pharisees found it hard to believe that one could be
a prophet, a teacher come from God, who. would
consent to eat at the table of a publican, or would
allow his feet to be washed with the tears of a fall-


24 Jesus of Nazareth.


en woman. Jesus often found it necessary to ex-
plain and vindicate his course in this respect; and
it was for this purpose that on one occasion he gave
the three beautiful parables which tell of joy at the
recovery of the lost sheep, the lost coin, the lost son.
Contact with vile people is proper or improper ac-
cording to our aim and the probable results. It
must be avoided or carefully limited, if of such a
character as would probably assimilate us to them.
But the thoughtful and consistent followers of Jesus
have been moved by his example and teachings to
far more of kindly effort to redeem the vile than
ever existed in the world beyond the influence of
Christianity; and to do still more in this direction
would only be acting according to his spirit. Jer-
-emy Taylor has said that Jesus moved among the
‘despised of humanity like sunshine, which falls
among foul things without being itself defiled. To
| imitate this in our measure must be an attainment
full of blessedness for us and rich in blessing to
others. Jesus was very weary with months of
earnest teaching as he sat that day beside Jacob’s
well; yet he aroused himself to speak most kindly
with one who came to draw water, and that a
woman who was living sinfully with a man not her
husband. His conversation with her is a suggestive
model of skill in the introduction of religion into pri-
vate conversation—one of the finest of allaccomplish-
ments for Christian men and women. The delicate
tact with which he aroused her conscience, and
thus turned her thoughts away from the mere satis-
faction of bodily thirst to the water of eternal life,


His Personal Character. 25


is among the most wonderful touches in his consum-
mate teaching.

Jesus was not only friendly to the poor, but he
evidently counted largely, from beginning to end,
on their reception of his influence and their support
of his movement. Ile has been called “the poor


‘ man’s philosopher; the first and only one that had ever


appeared.”* He expected, and found, the chief
results of his ministry among the poor, the masses
of mankind. Even ignorance may not be so great
a hindrance to the sympathetic reception of moral
and spiritual truth as a sophisticated culture, and
a selfish contentment with existing social and moral
conditions. No religious movement can have large
and blessed results which does not adapt itself to
the poor. No Christians are worthy to bear the
name of their Master, who do not, like him, delight
in preaching the gospel to the poor, and in minister-
ing to their needs. Yet Jesus was no partisan of
the poor. He also mingled freely with the rich,
entering with equal freedom and equal Panay,
as his ministers should strive to do, into the lowliest
and the loftiest homes.

We ought to notice how he dealt with hypocrites,
and with the fanatical multitudes. Again and again
he withdrew from the fanatical excitement of great
crowds who thought themselves his followers, so as
to leave time for such feelings to subside. Sober
men of the world are at times specially disgusted
with certain fanatics they hear of, and tempted to
regard all apparently earnest piety as mere fanati-


* Bushnell.


26 Jesus of Nazareth.


cism. They ought to observe how carefully the
Founder of Christianity repressed everything of the
kind. The worst hypocrites were among men of
high station or influence. These hypocrites Jesus
rebuked many times, and in burning words of
righteous indignation. Some have thought these
words out of harmony with his characteristic gentle-
ness and love. But it is right to abhor and hate ali
forms of vile wickedness, however we may pity the
humanity that lies behind them. Many of his con-
temporaries imagined that the prophet of Nazareth
must be one of the grand old prophets come to life
again. And it is noteworthy, as a recent writer
remarks,* that some thought he was Jeremiah, the
tender and pathetic, while others thought he was
Elijah, bold and stern in rebuking. May we not
suppose that these had only observed different
manifestations of a many-sided character? Or
rather, that like God his Father, the compassionate
love of Jesus towards human weakness was but an-
other aspect of the same essential character which
showed itself in burning indignation towards human
wickedness?

Having thus gone over the principal relations
which Jesus sustained in his private and public life,
noticing how in each of these his character was
manifested, we may now come nearer to certain
personal traits that appear throughout the history.

The humility of Jesus stood in striking contrast
to rabbinical and Pharisaic pride. Men often
greatly wondered at his words and actions, his


* Stalker.


His Personal Character. 27


wisdom and power; they compared him to the most
celebrated prophets, they expected him to become
a more splendid king than David or Solomon; but
he was gentle and humble. Moreover, he himself
made the most extraordinary claims. ‘ When the
Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of
his glory; and before him shall be gathered all
the nations.” ‘ He that hath seen me hath seen
the Father.” ‘No one knoweth the Father, save
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to
reveal him.” Yet in immediate connection with
this great claim he said, ‘ Take my yoke upon
you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart.” It was indeed Jesus who caused humil-
ity to be classed among the virtues. The Greek
word thus translated had in Greek literature almost
always a bad sense, at best sometimes denoting
modesty, the absence of arrogance ; the Latin word
which we borrow made no approach to a good sense;
Christianity gives to humility a notable position
among virtues and graces. Yet, as if to correct
the natural tendency to misapprehension in regard |
to this virtue,.the Saviour was always eminently
self-respecting, and spoke and acted with a per-
sonal dignity which even his enemies could not but
recognize. When questioned by Annas, the ex-
high priest, about his teaching, Jesus answered him,
‘“T have spoken openly to the world; I ever taught
in synagogues, and in the temple, where all the
Jews come together ; and in secret spake I nothing.
Why askest thou me? Ask them that have heard
me, what I spake unto them.” To this dignified


28 Jesus of Nazareth.


answer corresponds his dignified silence when
brought before the Sanhedrin. He knew that his
condemnation was a foregone conclusion. He had
resolved to go straight forward to the crucifixion
which awaited him. He would not condescend to
answer, save when it became proper to make the —
decisive avowal of Messiahship. Before Pilate, who
was himself a prisoner to his own previous acts of
wrong-doing, and had no courage to decide accord-
ing to his own sense of right, Jesus speaks with
dignified compassion and quiet superiority. How-
ever hard most of us may find it to combine humil-
ity with personal dignity, yet in the Christian
theory and in the Christian. Exemplar they blend
in perfect harmony.

The readiness of Jesus to forgive was often
manifested. Remember his lamentation over Jeru-
salem: ‘How often would I have gathered thy
children together, but ye would not.” Remember
how he warned Peter that headstrong self-reliance
would lead him that very night into shameful and
repeated denial of his Master, and yet how soon
afterwards he appeared separately to the fallen but
repentant disciple, forgiving and encouraging him.
For the Roman soldiers who were fastening him to
the cross with cruel pangs, he prayed, ‘ Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do.”
Yet observe in these very words the intimation that
if they had known what they were doing, he might
not have asked that they should be forgiven. So
he said in substance to Pilate, “‘The high priest’s
sin is greater than thine.” Here then is no weak
forgiveness of everybody for everything, penitent


His Personal Character. 29


or impenitent, such as some people imagine to be
set forth in the teachings and the example of the
Founder of Christianity.

Tt is evident that his nature was exceedingly
sensitive. On one occasion, when the Pharisees
showed their hostility and determination not to be
convinced, we are told that “he sighed deeply in
his spirit.” When predicting some months in ad-
vance his dread baptism of suffering he added,
“and how am I straitened till it be accomplished.”
Once wher apparently quite out of heart with the
- unbelief of his disciples and the multitude, he said,
“© faithless generation, how long shall I be with
you? how long shall I bear with you?” A few
days before the crucifixion, after predicting his
speedy death, he broke out, ‘‘Now is my soul
troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour? but for this cause came I unto this
hour. Father, glorify thy name.” No one who
ever read or heard the sacred story can forget how
in Gethsemane three times over he said, “If it be
possible”; how on the cross he cried with a loud
voice, “‘ Why hast thou forsaken me?” Certainly
these are impressive proofs that his nature was ex-
quisitely sensitive. And yet how patient he was!
True patience is a very different thing from insen-(
sibility. Only one who feels sensitively can be \
nobly patient. In general Jesus showed great /
calmness. And an occasional utterance of grief
and pain only sets that habitual calmness in a
clearer light. The world has dwelt not too much
but too exclusively on the gentle and patient traits
of the Saviour’s character ; and we do well to re-


DEER. aa ea


30 Jesus of Nazareth.


mind ourselves that he also exhibited the keenest
sensibility, along with the loftiest moral courage,
the .noblest strength of character. An English
writer * has produced a little volume entitled “‘ The
Manliness of Christ”; and though the term may
strike us as inadequate, if not incongruous, yet it
helps to impress an important element in the Sa-
viour’s character ; for people are ever inclined to fall
back upon the notion that goodness, innocence, pa-
tience, purity belong to feeble characters, when the
fact is far otherwise.


‘* How beauteous were the marks divine,
That in thy meekness used to shine,
That lit thy lonely pathway, trod
In wondrous love, O Son of God!


‘Oh, who like thee, so calm, so bright,
So pure, so made to live in light?
Oh, who like thee did ever go
Sofpatient through a world of woe


**Oh, who like thee so meekly bore
The scorn, the scoffs of men, before?
So meek, forgiving, godlike, high,
So glorious in humility?


‘Even death, which sets the prisoner free,
Was pang, and scoff, and scorn to thee ;
Yet love through all thy torture glowed,
And mercy with thy life-blood flowed.


“Oh, in thy light be mine to go,
Tluming all my way of woe!
And give me ever on the road
To trace thy footsteps, Son of God


With all its difficulties and sorrows, Jesus de-
lighted in his work. He loved to do good, even


* Thomas Hughes.





Sec MSS ips





»e


45s


At a ne es “i a hae a inane
ee ee Bk otk 4nd eee Cuan eS oh


¥.


~


PRA “nl
4 Phe,


ee


a





EO REE
a *4 .


His Personal Character. $1


when it appeared to be on the smallest scale. The
disciples had left him worn and weary beside Ja-
cob’s well, and on their return found him alert,
with beaming eyes and cheerful voice. They won-
dered whether any one had brought him food in
their absence, and at first knew not the meaning
when he said, “I have food to eat that ye know


not of. My food is to do the will of him that sent


me, and to accomplish his work.” He had found
an opportunity to do good, and the suggestion of
other possibilities in those whom this poor woman
might influence. Again and again we see him


shaking off weariness, arousing himself with inter-


est and delight, when there was any opening for ,
usefulness. In the highest degree he possessed
and exhibited what has been called * “an enthusi-
asm of humanity.” He loved men, and was glad to


_do them good. He loved God, and it was a joy to
_ do him honor.


At various turning-points of his ministry, we
find the Saviour exercising a remarkable prudence,
He knows what will be the consequences of a col-


 lision with the Jewish authorities, and wishes to


delay the crisis until there has been time to devel-


op his teachings and present them in every quar-


ter of the Holy Land, and to train his chosen dis-
ciples. Accordingiy, during his early ministry in
Judea, when he knew that the Pharisees had heard
that he was now making more disciples than his fore-
runner, he at once left Judea and retired to Galilee.
Towards the latter part of the ministry in Galilee


* Seeley, ‘‘ Ecce Homo.”


32 Jesus of Nazareth


he kept withdrawing into surrounding districts, to
avoid further exciting the alarm of Herod the te-
trarch, and further kindling the fanaticism of the
common people, who were bent on making him
king, and might by their excited talk have drawn
upon him the jealousy of the Roman rulers. Again
and again, at Nazareth and at Jerusalem, when
some angry crowd were about to inflict upon him mob
violence, he quietly went away. When the high
priest and the Sanhedrin heard what had happened
to Lazarus in Bethany, and deliberately plotted the
death of Jesus, he left Jerusalem and returned no
more till the final passover. And when his “ hour
was come,” the quiet boldness with which he
moved forward was but the same moral courage
which he had repeatedly shown in prudently with-
drawing. However men may stigmatize or ridi-
cule prudence, it often requires and manifests the
highest courage. Remember too that his prudence
was united with transparent sincerity. We can
clearly see combined in him, what he bade his dis-
ciples cultivate, the prudence of the serpent and the
simplicity of the dove.

And now the most remarkable thing about this
strong, sensitive, richly developed, beautifully sym-
metrical character, the wonderful thing which can
be said of him alone among all the good and noble
of human history is this: his character stands out
as faultless, perfect. So thoroughly symmetrical is
this character in all its proportions that the
careless observer docs not realize to what an
extent it is at the same time great and strong.
Yet as it grows to our thoughtful contemplation,


His Personal Character. a3


grows exalted and sublime, it is so harmonious as
still to appear simple and winning. Can it indeed
be that in this world of ours, in this our human
nature, there has been a character really and ab-
solutely perfect? Men who do not believe in the
Saviour’s divine mission and personal claims have
been naturally slow to admit that he was perfect;
and some of them have Keenly searched among all
the abounding details of his action and speech for
some ground of fault-finding. All that I know of
as said in this direction at the present day would
be the following points. Theodore Parker * sug-
gested that his driving out the money-changers
from the temple, with uplifted scourge, shows un-
seemly anger and violence. But to ordinary sober,
judgment it is plain that the anger was seemly
enough and richly deserved; while the uplifted
scourge was but a symbol of authority and reminder
of ill-desert, like many an object-lesson taught by the
old prophets. Some have complained that he pro-
nounced a curse upon a fig-tree which by its leaves
made pretence of having also fruit. But this with-
ered fig-tree has stood as another object-lesson to
all the ages, full of instruction; and there is not
the slightest indication or reason to suppose that
the curse was pronounced from any wrong person-
al feeling. Francis William Newman, skeptical
brother of the great cardinal, censured the Saviour
for quietly yielding himself to death when he could
so easily have avoided it. But this reproach was
accepted beforehand, for Jesus declared that like a


* Bushnell.


34 Jesus of Nazareth,


good shepherd, he voluntarily laid down his life for
the sheep. A _ well-known American lecturer
against the Bible once almost found fault with Je-
sus for something or other, but I really do not even
remember what it was. It seems idle to discuss, and
almost useless to mention, such points as these; but
the fact that perverse ingenuity can indicate no
semblance of fault in Jesus that will bear the sim-
plest inquiry, only brings us back to the conclusion
already reached, that he stands out before us as
really faultless and perfect. During his ministry,
the Jewish rulers repeatedly charged him with de-
ceiving the people, but at the trial before the San-
hedrin, they could adduce nothing but silly and
contradictory perversions of what he had said, and
they finally condemned him only upon his own avowal
that he was the Messiah, which the high priest de-
clared to be in itself an act of blasphemy. Before.all
history, Jesus of Nazareth stands as sinless, even
as he himself one day said in the temple court,
“Which of you convicteth me of sin?” It might
indeed be suggested that the evangelists have only
carried unusually far the tendency of biographers
to keep faults in the background. But read, and
you sce that they freely record varied accusations
made against him, and often without stopping to
reply; while they relate his profoundest sayings
and most astonishing actions with such simplicity
and quietness of tone as to constitute a unique lit-
erary phenomenon.

Yet this perfect character stands before us as in-
_viting imitation. Its outward conditions do not
withdraw him from our sympathy and make imita-


/


|


|


i


FMis Personal Character. as 15


tion seem difficult, for he did not live as a king, or
as a retired student, or a recluse ascetic. His ex-
ample is not like a copy set with intricate flour-
ishes, but in clear and simple lines, perfectly beau-
tiful, but not discouraging the effort to imitate.*
Of him alone among all ethical teachers can it be
said that to imitate his example and to obey his
precepts would amount to precisely the same thing.
It is a remarkable statement which John Stuart
Mill, trained from childhood to disbelief of the
Bible, makes in one of his posthumous “‘ Essays on
Religion,” that it would not even now “be easy,
even for an unbeliever, to find a better translation


of the rule of virtue from the abstract into the con-


erete, than to endeavor so to live that Christ would
approve our life.”

The German scholar Rothe is quoted as saying
in his work on Ethics, ‘I know no other ground
on which I could anchor my whole being, and par-
ticularly my speculations, except that historical
phenomenon, Jesus Christ. He is to me the un-
impeachable Holy of Holies of humanity, ....
and a sun-rising in history whence has come the
light by which we sec the world.”

How strongly attractive, to all who will dwell
upon it thoughtfully, is the personality of Jesus the
Saviour. All around us are children who as they
study the Sunday School lessons from the gospels,
feel their tender hearts drawn out to love Jesus, to
confide in him, to follow him though unseen. And
for us all, however mature and instructed, it would


*Isaac Barrow.


36 Jesus of Nazareth.


assuredly be the best fruit of the historical spirit,
the summit of true philosophy, the crown of all
culture, to read afresh these gospel records with
the simplicity of a little child, and learn to love and
confide in Jesus.


II.


The Ethical Teachings of desus.


37





THE ETHICAL TEACHINGS OF JESUS.


le is a notable characteristic of Christianity that ,
the ethical teachings of its Founder are insepa- |
rably connected with his religious teachings. “Thou!
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself” is not given by
him as a separate and detached precept, but as one
of two. ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind. This is the great and first commandment.
And a second like unto it is this, thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself. On these two command-
ments hangeth the whole law and the prophets.”
Observe that the two precepts are not simply placed
side by side, they are united: “on these two.” In
like manner the first four of the ten commandments
present duties to God, the others present duties to
men; the opening petitions of the Lord’s Prayer
are that God may be honored, the others that we
may be blessed. In the great judgment scene de- \
scribed by Jesus, where he himself will sit as king,
the rewards and punishments of the future life are
made to turn upon the performance or the neglect
of duties to him in the person of his people. Every- |
thing religious in Christianity is made to furnish a /


motive to morality,
ome 39


a


40 Jesus of Nazareth.


We all condemn the fanatics who would make
religion sufficient without ethics. Some teachings
of this sort are absurd, and some disgusting. But
on the other hand, shall we think it wise to regard
ethics as sufficient without religion? Is it not true
that he who woild divorce religion and morality is
an enemy to religion, and at best only a mistaken
friend to morality ?

Among the Greeks and Romans, in the historical
period, these two were little connected. They
were not even generally taught by the same per-
sons; the priests taught religion, the philosophers
taught morality. Some of the actions ascribed to
the deities themselves were grossly immoral. The
Jewish contemporaries of Jesus were severely re-
buked by him for their traditional directions as to
Corban. A man might refuse food to his own father
by saying that this particular food was Corban, a
thing offered to God, thus setting aside for the sake
of a supposed religious service the profound moral
obligation and the express commandment of God’s
law, to honor father and mother. So likewise Jesus
pronounced woes upon the hypocritical Pharisees
for scrupulously tithing the least important vege-
tables that grew in their gardens, and then leaving
“undone the weightier matters of the law, justice
and mercy and faith”; for carefully cleansing the
outside of the cup and the dish, while their contents
were the product of extortion and excess.

Ethical obligation, according to the Saviour’s
teachings, is enforced by the yet higher religious
obligation. Our duties to men are really a part of
our all-comprehensive duty to God. Why must I


His Ethical Teachings. 41


love my neighbor as myself? If it be placed on
utilitarian grounds, meaning personal utility, then I
ought to love my neighbor as myself because it will
benefit me, that is, because I love myself better
than my neighbor. If the utility consulted be gen-
eral, then why ought I to care as much for the gen-
eral good as for my own? We are back where we
started. Herbert Spencer, with all the ability and
earnestness shown in his ‘ Data of Ethics,” makes
a reply which I think men in general cannot recog-
nize as philosophically conclusive or practically
cogent. Natural sympathy with others, we are
told, if frequently exercised, hardens by force of
habit into altruism, a sense of obligation to others.
Is that all? Nay, I must love my neighbor as
myself because I am the creature and’ the child
of God, whom I must love with all my heart,
more than my neighbor and more than myself.
Shall we then, it may be asked, accuse every man
who is not definitely religious of being gravely im-
moral? Nay, individual moral convictions may be
largely the result of inheritance, education and
present environment, and may subsist notwithstand-
ing the individual lack of those religious convictions
which are their proper, and, as a general fact, their
actual support.

Observe further that Jesus not only tells us
what we ought to do, but shows how we may be able
to do so. He presents in his own character and life
an inspiring example, satisfying our noblest ideal
of morality, and yet conforming itself to the con-
ditions of our own existence. He tells how we may
obtain divine assistance in obeying his precepts.


42 Jesus of Nazareth.


Many other teachers have given wholesome pre-
cepts, but left men to keep them in their unaided
strength. Jesus tells of a divinely-wrought change
so thorough as to be called a new birth, of a divine
spiritual help which our heavenly Father will
readily give. It is in this, and not simply in the
great superiority of his precepts, that we find the
unapproachable excellence of the Christian ethics.

In connection with this point we must remember
that Jesus constantly pre-supposes the sinfulness of
human nature. Many ethical precepts, and even
whole systems of ethics, appear to assume that men
have no particular bias toward evil. But it is far
otherwise with him; and he meets the demands of
the situation by providing atonement, renewal and
divine sanctification.

Another thing quite without parallel is the
unique authority which these ethical instructions
derive from the faultless life and character of the
Teacher himself. Every other instructor in morals
comes manifestly short of his own standard, as in-
deed befalls the teacher in every other department
of practical human exertion. Even the lessons
given by the best parents to their children are sub-
ject to inevitable discount on account of the faults
in parental character and conduct of which the
children are aware and the parents are conscious.
Here alone among all moral instructors the example
ts absolutely equal to the precept.

Are the ethical teachings of Jesus original ?
Some have thought this a question of great import-
ance. Opponents have taken immense pains to
show that certain of his precepts find a partial


His Ethical Teachings. 43


parallel in previously existing pagan writings; and
some Christian apologists have been nervously un-
willing to recognize the fact. It needs no great
reflection to see that a wise teacher of morals must
bring his instructions into close connection with
what men already know, or what they will in-
stinctively recognize as true when suggested by his
lessons. Ifyou are teaching a child, you do not
present ideas entirely apart from and above the
child’s previous consciousness; you try to link the
new thoughts to what the child has thought of be-
fore. We need not then be at all unwilling to
admit that fer the most part Jesus only carried
farther and lifted higher and extended more widely
the views of ethical truth which had been dimly
caught by the universal human mind, or had at
least been seen by the loftiest souls. This was
but a part of the wisdom of his teachings. The
most familiar and striking instance is the so-called
golden rule, something more or less similar to which
is ascribed to various contemporaries of Jesus
and to earlier teachers. Thus Hillel said, ‘‘ What
is hateful to thee, do not do to another,” and he
was but repeating a passage in the book of Tobit,
“What thou hatest, do to no one.” <A Greek
biographer of Aristotle relates that being asked
how we should behave towards our friends he
answered, ‘‘ As we should wish them to behave
towards us”; and Isocrates had previously said,
‘What you are angry at when inflicted on you by
others, this do not do to others.” A similar neg-
ative form of the precept is also frequently quoted
from Confucius, ‘“ What you do not like when done


44 Jesus of Nazareth.


to yourself, do not do to others.”. But Confucius
really taught, though not in form, the positive side
of the same idea. A follower asked, ‘Is there one
word which may serve as a rule of practice for all
one’s life?” Confucius replied, ‘‘ Is not recipro-
city such a word? What you do not want done to
yourself, do not do to others.” Dr. R. H. Graves,
a distinguished missionary for many years in Can-
ion, who went from Baltimore, replies to my in-
quiries that ‘reciprocity ” seems to be a fairly
correct translation. And this saying of the Ana.
lects is in the doctrine of the mean so illustrated as
to leave no doubt that Confucius intended a posix
tive, and not merely a negative precept. I have
taken pains to bring out this fact as a matter of sim-
ple justice and exact truth. And indeed if we did
not gladly “ seize upon truth where’er ’tis found,”
we should not be faithful to the spirit of Jesus.

A recent writer * has pointed out that the Chris-
tian ethical system harmoniously combines prin-
ciples which had been separately emphasized by the
Greek philosophers. The Epicurean laid stress on

- self-love; the Stoic on love for others; the Platonist
on love to God, in a certain limited sense. There
can indeed be no basis for moral conduct other than
“the love of self, the love of humanity, the love of
God; and the religion which unites these has become
the foundation cf absolute morality.” This is not at
all saying that Jesus derived these ideas from the

, pagan philosophers. In fact. they reside in the
moral nature of man, and his relations to the nature


* Matheson, ‘‘ Landmarks of New Testament Morality.”


His Ethical Teachings. 45


of things and to the Creator. Jesus combines |
in harmonious completeness truths which one or |
another had separately and imperfectly taught.

The Old Testament ethical teachings he assumes
as already received among his hearers, and in a
general way endorses. The two foundation pre-
cepts, as to love of God and love of our neighbor,
were both drawn from the law of Moses, though not
there given together, nor either of them presented
as fundamental.. But have we not been frequently
told of late that Jesus undertook to revolutionize
the Old Testament ethics? Did he not supplant
the law of Moses by his own authoritative and
better teachings? No, nothing of the kind. He
expressly declared in the Sermon on the Mount,
that he came not to destroy the law, as some Jews
imagined the Messiah would do in order to make
life easier, but came to complete the law. And the
examples which follow this statement are not at
all examples of teaching contrary to the law of
Moses, but in every case of going further in the
same direction. Thus the law condemned killing;
he condemns hate and anger. The law forbade »
adultery; he declared that a lustful look is virtual
adultery. The law forbade false swearing; he goes
further and commands not to swear at all. The
only saying he condemns is the phrase, ‘and hate
thine enemy”; but this was not a part of the law, it
was a Rabbinical addition, ‘ Thou shalt love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy.” And the only
ease in which he appears to condemn an ethical
teaching actually found in the Old Testament is
_really to the same effect as the others. The Mosaic


46 * Jesus of Nazareth.


law of divorce was really a restriction upon the
otherwise existing facility of divorce, in that the
preparation of a document gave time for reflection,
and the possession of it afforded some protection to
the wife turned away. Jesus was going further in
the same direction when he restricted divorce within
narrower limits. And while he said that Moses for
the hardness of their hearts allowed divorce for
various causes, his own teaching expressly went
back to the original constitution of human beings as
laid down in the Old Testament. There is thus no
ground for the assertion that Jesus taught as a
revolutionary reformer, or proposed to set aside the
Old Testament ethics as essentially erroneous. He
always went further in the same direction, he com-
pleted the law,

It is often asserted by some modern writers that
the Founder of Christianity derived much of his
teaching from the current traditions of Rabbinical
sayings, as shown by the existence of similar ideas
or expressions in the Talmud and other late Jewish
writings. The alleged proofs of this indebtedness
are few and curiously inadequate. It is folly to
say that Jesus derived the golden rule from his
older contemporary, Hillel, for we have scen that it
existed centuries before. The statement is fre-
quently made that the Lord’s Prayer is all found in
the Talmud or in the liturgies now used in syna-
gogues. I have investigated all the proofs of this
adduced by accessible writers, and the facts are as
follows: the only exact parallels presented in the
Talmud and the liturgies are to the address, ‘ Our
Father, who art in heaven,” and the two petitions,


His Ethical ‘Teachings. 47.


“€ Hallowed: be thy namé,” and “ Bring’ us not inte
temptation.” There are phrases somewhat resem-
bling “ Thy kingdom come,” and “ Deliver us from
the evil one.”. There is no parallel. to “‘ Thy will
be done, as in heaven, so on earth,” or to ‘ Give
us this day our daily bread,” or to the petition
which Jesus emphasized by repeating it after the
prayer, ‘Forgive us our debts, as we also have
forgiven our debtors.” Thus the most characteris-
tic petitions of the prayer are wholly without Jewish
parallel, and the scattered ‘phrases similar to some
of its expressions are such as devout Jews could
hardly fail sometimes to employ. The image of the
mote and the beam, and two or three other expres
sions elsewhere employed by Jesus, are found in. the
Talmud. They may have been proverbial.. Or it
is entirely possible that the Talmud and other late
Jewish writings really borrowed sometimes from
the New Testament. The Jews in Alexandria,
early borrowed largely from the Greek philosophers,
and at a later period the Jews are said to have
borrowed from the Arabs; why might they not adopt
an occasional phrase from the Christian writers,
whom they could so easily claim as really of their
own race? Thus the charge of indebtedness to
Hillel, or to the traditions in general, so far as I
can find evidence, quite breaks down.*

Let us next consider that the ethical teachings
of Jesus do not usually undertake to give mere rules,
but to set forth principles. The Jewish traditions |
had run everything into rules. They called it


* Comp. Delitzsch, ‘‘ Jesus and Hillel.”


48 Jesus of Nazareth.


making a fence around the law, to encompass it
with all manner of minute directions, which would
keep men away from breaking the law. It is a
general tendency of mankind to save themselves the
trouble of thinking, by expressing principles in the
form of rules. Many schools and some colleges
undertake to regulate the whole behavior of the
student by a set of rules; and churches sometimes
show the same tendency. Jesus evidently set him-
self against this disposition, He did not wish his
followers to be burdened by stiff and narrow rules;
he taught them principles, which are at once more
_ eomprehensive and more flexible. And the think-
ing which is required in order to apply prin-
ciples brings with it a most valuable part of our
moral discipline.

Some sayings of Jesus have often been taken for
rules which were meant only as striking statements
of a principle; for example, ‘‘ Whosoever smiteth
thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also,”
If any proof be needed that this was not meant as a
rule, let us judge of the Saviour’s meaning from the.
course which he himself pursued, for he, as we have
said before, is the one teacher whose example never
fell short of his precepts. When one of the high
priest’s officers struck him at the trial, we do not
read that he turned the other cheek. He calmly
remonstrated: ‘If I have spoken evil, bear witness
of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?”
Here, as in many other cases, we can interpret his
saying by his action. In like manner he said,
‘ Resist not him that is evil; ” and many have taken
this as a rule and have inferred that war is always


His Ethical Teachings. 49


wrong, and that a man must never defend himself
when attacked. Yet Jesus did not tell the believing
centurion at Capernaum to abandon his calling, nor
in any case intimate that it was wrong to be a sol-
dier. We must remember that the Saviour was
often a field-preacher, or a preacher in public
squares. It was necessary to hold the attention of
his audience, whom no decorum restrained from
leaving. Some had never heard him _ before,
some would never hear him again; it was necessary
to drive a truth into unsympathetic minds, to fix it
there in permanent remembrance. He did this
partly by a great variety of images and illustrations,
and partly by paradoxical statements which would
compel reflection and ensure recollection. Thus
the saying, “‘ Turn to him the other cheek also,”
has beea very often misunderstood, and may have
been misunderstood by some of those who first
heard it; but did any one ever forget that saying?
Better that many should misunderstand, than that
none should remember. We interpret such sayings
by their general connection, or by the Saviour’s own
example, or his teaching on other occasions. This
is a very different thing from explaining away his
teachings because not in accordance with our views
or wishes; this is only trying to determine what he
really meant. He said, “Swear not at all,” and
many persons, including some devoted Christians,
have understood that he forbids taking an oath in a
court of justice. Yet they ought to have noticed
that he himself did that very thing. The high
priest presiding in the Sanhedrin said, ‘I put thee
on oath by the living God, that thou tell us whether


50 Jesus of Nazareth.


thou art the Christ, the Son of God.” To answer
at all was to answer on oath; and Jesus answered.
So then his prohibition of swearing must have re-
lated to the sadly common use of oaths in ordinary
conversation. His example interprets his precept.

Again he said, “‘ Give to him that asketh thee.”
People suppose that here is a rule for unrestricted
observance, though perhaps no one in real life ever
attempted to carry it out. But in the same discourse
he said, ‘‘ Ask, and it shall be given you.” In this
latter case he goes on to compare the heavenly
Father’s giving to that of parents. These, with all
their human infirmity, “‘ know how” to give good
things to their children, and will not weakly give
what the children ask through mistake; much more
must the Father in heaven know how to give, and
withhold where that would be truer kindness. Then
if the promise as to God’s giving what we ask is lim-
ited by the nature of the case, so must be the direc-
tion to give to others what they ask of us. He also
says, “‘ Love your enemies. . .. that ye may be
sons of your Father who is in heaven.” Yet the
heavenly Father does not love enemies as he loves
friends; he cannot love enemies with a love of com-
placency, as he loves the obedient and holy. ‘ He
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the good,
and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust.” So
we should love our enemies, and gladly do them
good; but this does not mean that we ought to love
them as we love our friends.

In like manner then we must interpret what the
Saviour said as to revenge. The law of Moses
confined the requital of injuries to exact retaliation,


His Ethical Teachings. 51


“an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,” while
natural human passion would tend to make the
requital far surpass the injury. Jesus goes further
in the same direction as the law, and entirely for-
bids revenge. So great an evil is revenge, so care-
fully must we avoid it, that he says, better give the
litigant the exempted garment as well as the other,
better invite still ‘further exactions from the im-
pressing officer, better turn the other cheek for a
second blow, than to practise revenge. I repeat,
we must not explain away the Saviour’s sayings
to suit our own notions, but we must seek to ascertain
his real meaning. And I think itis clear that some
of these sayings were not at all designed to be taken
as rules, but were only a paradoxical or otherwise
striking expression of a principle.

Because of these paradoxical expressions many
have declared the morality taught by Jesus to be
unpractical, and so have disregarded any and all
of his teachings as much as they please. Some
sincerely devout persons have excused themselves
for falling short of other precepts on the ground
that several of his sayings could not be literally
obeyed. Some Christians have made a point of
refusing to bear arms, or to practise any sort of
resistance to wrong. Count Tolstoi, a man of great
imagination and dramatic power, but morbid and a
trifle fantastical, supposes himself to have discovered,
as a new thing in the world, that Jesus meant these
paradoxical statements of a principle for precise
rules. He does not know that the same notion has
been held by some persons in almost every age and
country. And the gifted old nobleman tries to live


52 Jesus of Nazareth.


according to his discovery, so far as his own wiser

instincts and the control of those around him will

allow. Tell him that if such notions were generally

adopted it would break up society, and like many

others of his countrymen at the present day, he

would reply that society ought to be completely

demolished, so that we may see if the survivors

cannot build something bette*. In like manner
Ibsen in one of his dramas makes the hero attempt
to act upon these sayings as rules, but shows that
the result must be to crush the individual attempt--
ing it, and supposes himself thereby to prove that
the existing constitution of society in Christian
countries is aqhally contrary to the real teachings of
the Founder of Christianity. But did Jesus ever
mean thus to teach? Has he not been simply

misunderstood ?

We turn now to consider the great motive which
Jesus connects with his ethical teachings. That
motive, as already intimated, and as well known, is
Love. The love of God is to be supreme. The
love of one’s neighbor is to be in equipoise with the
love of self. This makes a distinct recognition of
self-love as essentially right. And Jesus elsewhere
appeals to self-interest in the highest sense, saying,
“It is profitable for thee,” ‘ What shall it profit a
man?” Nor was this self-love forbidden by the self-
renunciation which he enjoined. One who proposed
to be his follower must renounce himself, and take
up his cross, and follow on as ready to re crucified.
And so it is added, ‘ Whosoever shall lose his life
for my sake shall find it.” Self-renunciation for his
sake was thus encouraged by a higher self-love.


His Ethical Teachings. | 53


In sinful beings self-love constantly gravitates
downwards towards selfishness. The remedy is to
keep it balanced by love of our neighbor, while love
to God is exalted above both, and holds them in
symmetrical relation. A man’s duties to himself,
as accordant with and implied in Christ’s teachings,
would form a wholesome subject of reflection and
discussion. An English literary man tells us,
“The philosophy of the past said, Know thyself;
the philosophy of the present says, Improve thy-
self.” In sooth, neither of these will make much
progress without the other.

Yet the powerful instinct of self-love needs far
less encouragement in ethico-religious teaching than
the disposition to love our neighbor. Accordingly,
the one is simply implied in the teachings of Jesus,
the other is repeatedly and strongly urged. The
race antagonisms and national animosities which so
abounded in the world that Christianity entered,
which caused every foreigner to be instinctively re-
garded as an enemy, led the Jewish Rabbinical in-
structors to quibble with the command, ‘‘Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself.” They would say,
Certainly, but who is my neighbor? <A dog of a
Gentile is not my neighbor. An abominable Samar-
itan is not my neighbor. And so there arose the
fashion of making an addition to the law, “ Thou
shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.” It
is easy to exclaim against the scribes and lawyers
for such a gloss; but it ought to be a warning. We
are all in danger of adding to, or subtracting from,
or somehow modifying, a law of man or a law of
God that interferes with our interests, passions or


54 _. desus of Nazareth.


prejudices. We read that a certain lawyer, that is
a professional student of the law of Moses, under- |
took one day to test the wisdom of Jesus by asking,
‘Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life ?
And he said unto him, What is written in the law?
How readest thou? And he answering said, Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and thy
neighbor. as thyself.” Here we see that at least
some of the Jewish teachers were already accus-
tomed to put the two commandments together. * And
Jesus said unto him, “Thou hast answered right,
this do, and thou shalt live. But he, desiring to
justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my
neighbor?” This shows the process above men-
tioned. He wished to justify himself for a conscious
lack of general benevolence by restricting the defi-
nition of the term neighbor. Having perceived
this, we see the point of the Saviour’s reply in the
parable of the Good Samaritan. A Jew fell among
robbers, who left him half dead. Two-of his own
people, not merely private citizens, but one a priest
and the other a Levite, successively saw his hapless
plight and kept on the other side of the way. Pres-
ently he was relieved, with -kindliest care, by a
Samaritan. Let us be thankful that-with all our
modern bad feeling of many kinds, we find it hard
to realize the burning hatred which existed between
the Jews and the Samaritans: a hatred compounded
of race antagonism, oft-repeated national strife,
utter non-intercourse socially or even in_ business,
and, religious bigotry and jealousy. The point. is
then that a neighbor, in the sense of the law, is even


His Ethical Teachings. © 5d


one of the most hostile and hated, scorned and
loathed, of human beings, when you find him need-
ing human help. Notice in this case, as heretofore,
how strongly the Great Teacher presents a general
truth by a single illustrative example. If Jew and
Samaritan were to be neighbors, in the sense of the
law, there could be no limit within the bounds of
universal humanity. Wherever we see need, we
see a neighbor. And the priest and the Levite,
stepping along the opposite side of the road, are a
warning to all religious officials, who have no taste,
or fancy they have no time, for the relief of suffer-
ing humanity.

We must observe that in general Jesus did not
merely enjoin the duty of caring for others. The
whole tendency of his teachings, his example, the
spirit he infuses, has always been to awaken a burn-
ing enthusiasm-for the relief, the improvement, the
increased welfare of our fellow-men. Make liberal
concession, far more liberal than any known facts
might indicate, as to the human kindness often
manifested before Christ came, yet every one must
acknowledge that Christianity has in this respect
given a new meaning to such words as benevolence
and humanity. With all the misapprehensions and
corruptions of Christian teaching which have pre-
vailed, with all the grievous imperfections and in-
consistencies so widely existing among professed
Christians, yet the story of Christian benevolence,
jn its various departments. and throughout the
Christian ages, shines among the fairest and most
inspiring pages of human history... And how far its


56


psc at
, Many have considered that the Sa i





forgive seven times a day, to forgivl till seventy
times seven, to forgive those who tres] ass against
us, or else we cannot hope that our Heavenly
Father will forgive our trespasses against him, be-
longs to some lofty ideal that we may admire like
the stars, but to which ordinary humanity can never
climb up. But is there not an important distinction
here between forgiveness and the love of enemies ?
We may illustrate again by the example of God
himself. He does not forgive his enemies until
they repent and change into friends; yet he loves
his enemies who have not repented, and sends upon
them rain and sunshine, the common blessings of
his Providence. So we ought to love those who
have wronged us, and be glad to do them any kind-
ness which would not promote their evil designs
against us; but we are under no obligation, in fact
we have no right to forgive them in the strict sense
of the term, to restore them to our confidence and —
affection, until they repent, until we have good rea-
son to believe that they will henceforth act other-
wise. If this be the correct idea of Christian for-
giveness, it is not impracticable, and we should not
exempt or excuse ourselves from performing the
duty so often enjoined. As to love of enemies, with.
all the imperfection of our actual Christianity, it
has wrought a great change in the views and feel-
ings of mankind. Among the ancients “that man
considered himself fortunate who on his death-bed


i






oi, His Ethical Teachings. 57







me more sabe to ren friends or more mischief
mi This was the celebrated felicity of
s is the crown of Xenophon’s panegyrice
on Cyrus the Younger.” The author of “ Ecce
Tlomo” adds, “‘ When therefore people deliberately
consider it mean to forgive extreme injuries, they
are really setting a limit, not to the duty of forgive-
ness, but to thes possibility of genuine repentance.
The words ‘there are some injuries that no one
ought to forgive,’ mean really ‘there are some in-
juries ee: it is impossible to repent.’” And
again, he forgiveness of injurics, which was re-
garded in the ancient world as a virtue indeed, but
an almost impossible one, appears to the moderns
in ordinary cases a plain duty. . . And soa
new virtue has been introduced into human life.”
Many in Christian countries still practice unforgiv-
ing hatred and even ferocious revenge, but few de-
fend it, and all know that it is utterly forbidden by
Christianity.

A kindred subject will be our Lord’s teachings
as to the poor. The Jews have always been in an
eminent degree lovers of money, and gifted in ac-
quiring it, being in that, as in most respects, one of
the foremost races of mankind. They interpreted
the Old Testament promises of providential reward
and punishment to the effect that if a man was
prosperous and rich it showed him to be an uncom-
monly good man, a favorite of heaven; and if he
-was poor and suffering, this was the punishment of
his uncommon sinfulness. So the friends of Job
insisted that he must h een guilty of great sins,


_ os


58 Jesus of Nazarcth.


though nobody. knew what they were, for here was
the manifest penalty and proof in his great sufferings.
If a Jew had passed by and observed the scene
described in the parable of the rich man and Laz-
arus, his natural thought would have been, yonder
man of wealth must be a very good man, and this
poor wretch at the gate must have been very
wicked. Now the author of the parable made it
teach the opposite of their views in this case. He
did not mean that all rich men are bad, and will
one day lift up their eyes, being in torment, nor
that all poor men are good, but he gave a case in
point, diametrically opposed to Jewish opinion.
Yet even here the dying beggar was carried by
angels into the bosom of Abraham, who had been a
Prince of the East, a man of great wealth. Jesus
rebuked the Jewish error as to riches and poverty,
showed himself the friend of the poor, and found
among them the great majority of his followers.
Yet the family at Bethany, whom he especially
loved, were manifestly rich. One of the sisters
had a box of perfumery, which was declared by a
man interested in money-values, named Judas Is-
cariot, to be worth more than three hundred dena-
ries. Now a denary was the common price of a
day’s labor, and, allowing for Sabbaths and feast-
days, this box of perfumery was worth more than
a whole year’s work of a laboring man. Mary of
Bethany could not have possessed it, or if possess-
ing by gift or inheritance, could not have rightly
used it in an unpractical way, had they not been a
wealthy family—which also accounts for the fact
that “‘ many of the Jews” went out from Jerusalem


His Ethical Teachings. 59


to the suburban village to comfort the sisters: when
their brother died. The Saviour had the previous
day commended the holy enthusiasm of a poor
widow, who gave more than all the rich, gave all
she had to live on. And here he justifies Mary for
using this costly article of luxury in a quite un-
practical expression of affection, though there were
thousands of poor in the great city two miles away.
_ The occasion was extraordinary, she was showing
that she understood better than the Twelve the
Master’s intimations of his approaching death, and
that the recognition of it did not weaken her faith
or her love, and “ she did what she could” to cheer
him as the dark shadows gathered. But though
the incident was extraordinary in its circumstances,
it certainly proves that wealthy people may some-
times lawfully express affection to God or man by
costly gifts, though there be many all around who
are poor and needy.

The words of Jesus to the young ruler, ‘‘ Sell all
thou hast and give to the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in heaven; and come, follow me,” are of-
ten spoken of as if he had enjoined this upon all
who propose to follow him. Yet there is no record
of his laying such requirement upon any one else,
except that Matthew the publican and the two sons
of Zebedee left their business to follow him as per-
manently attached disciples. The “one thing”
lacked by the young ruler was that he should not
only care much for eternal life, but care more for it
than all things else.. The test was, whether he
would sacrifice what he valued most in this world,
out of supreme devotion to Jesus. That which he


60 Jesus of Nazareth.


valued most was his vast wealth, and this test he
could not stand. The test for another man would
be whether out of devotion to Jesus he could aban-
don sinful pleasures, or relinquish worldly ambitions.
The principle involved is that the service of God
must be supreme. In a certain sense, “ religion
must be everything, or it is nothing.” One who
retains or acquires wealth, one who pursues ambi-
tion or indulges in pleasures, must subordinate all to
his Christian discipleship, or he is no disciple.

It was to Jewish hearers an almost unequalled
paradox to say, ‘‘ How hard is it for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of heaven. It is easier for
a camel to pass through the eye of a needle.”
Various and strange attempts have been made to
explain away this comparison. Yet it is an
obvious hyperbole—the largest familiar animal
passing through the smallest familiar orifice, rep-
resenting impossibility. The Talmud has a similar
saying, only substituting the elephant, a still larger
animal. The disciples understood Jesus as mean-
ing an impossibility, for they replied, ‘‘ Who then
can be saved?” Ifthe rich cannot, who can be ?
And Jesus answered, ‘‘ With men it is impossible ;
but with God all things are possible.” On the
other hand, the Sermon on the Mount begins with
a series of sayings quite the reverse of Jewish
opinion. This opinion was, Happy the rich, the
well-fed, the merry, those who taste the sweetness
of revenge. Jesus says, Happy the poor, the hun-
gry, themourners, the meek and merciful, the peace-
makers. Why should the poor be called happy ?
Because they were more likely to accept the good


His Ethical Teachings. 61


news of the Messianic reign, and thus to enjoy its
high spiritual blessing; because the poor in posses-
sions were more likely to become the poor in spirit,
This reconciles for us the phrase in Luke, “ Happy
are ye poor,” with that in Matthew, “ Happy are the
poor in spirit.” In like manner the Saviour more
than once set it forth as a sign of his Messiahship, a
sign predicted by Isaiah, ‘‘ To the poor the gospelis
preached.” It requires an almost impossible effort
of historical imagination to appreciate the change
which Christianity has wrought in the feelings of
mankind with regard to the poor. Still, alas!
even in Christian countries, they are often despised
and neglected and wronged. But this much at
least is true, that all men know it ought to be
otherwise, and that very many strive, in various
' and helpful ways, to have it otherwise. Jesus of
Nazareth has been the best friend the poor have
ever had in human history; and his faithful and
wise followers will try in this also to be like him.
Yet we have seen that he was no enemy of wealth,
that he had special friends and devoted followers
who were wealthy; and there is nothing in his
teachings to encourage the notion that equality in
human possessions is desirable or possible.

In this connection it may be well to make a slight
digression, and notice a very common and very
grave misunderstanding as to the generosity of the
Saviour’s followers in Jerusalem during the years
that immediately succeeded his departure. The
phrase is used in Acts, “they had all things com-
mon”; and it is stated that even the holders of
real estate would sell it and bring the money to


62 Jesus of Nazareth.


the Apostles for the support of the brethren.
Hence the idea has grown widely current that
these Christians at Jerusalem were really Com-
munists, that every one who joined them at once
gave up his entire possessions to a common fund,
and there was no longer any private ownership ;
and from this supposed fact various inferences have
been drawn by friend and foe. But it is not a fact.
It can be proven from the record that they were
not Communists. When Ananias sold a piece of
land, and brought a part of the proceeds to the
Apostles, making the impression that he had
brought all, as others were doing, Peter said to him,
“While it remained, did it not remain thine own? .
and after it was sold, was it not in thy power?”
His sin was not in withholding a part, but in lying
to. inspired men, lying against God. Now this
language of Peter is absolutely incompatible with
the idea that every Christian at once gave up all
his property to a common fund. The Apostle
declares that the property was his own while it re-
mained unsold; and that after it was sold, the
money was in his own power. He was under no
‘necessity of selling, or of turning over the proceeds.
Think of it, and this clearly shows that no real
Communism prevailed among them. What then is
meant by the phrase, ‘they had all things com-
mon”? It means that they held all their property
as for the common benefit. Listen: ‘ and not one
of them said that aught of the things which he
possessed was his own; but they had all things
common.” No one said that any part of his prop-
erty was his own; it was his own, but he did not


His Ethical Teachings. 63


so speak of it; he regarded and treated his prop-
erty as held for the benefit of his brethren. A
reader of the Greek will notice that here and
throughout the following passage every verb is in
the imperfect tense, showing what happened from
time to time, as the brethren saw need and felt
moved: “fas many as were possessors of lands or
houses sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold, and laid them at the Apostles’
feet; and distribution was made unto each, ac-
cording as any one had need.” Every verb is
in the imperfect tense. (Acts 4: 32-35; like-
wise in 2: 43-47.) One Christian this month, and
another the next month, would bring money, even
selling property for the purpose; and this went on
during the several years embraced in the first
six chapters of Acts. Thus you see that this was
not at all a case of Communism. It was a case
of extraordinary generosity, called for by extraor-
dinary needs. Many of these first believers had
come up to the great Pentecost, with only money
enough for a short visit anda return, and here they
were remaining for months and years; others had
been fishermen on the Lake of Galilee, andat Jerusa-
lem had no means of livelihood; others were poor
Jews at Jerusalem, accustomed to receive help from
the contributions of wealthy Jews in foreign coun-
tries, and cut off from this as soon as they became
Christians. Rejoicing together in their new faith
and hope and loye,. those of them who had property
gladly contributed, as they saw occasion, for the
support of their brethren. All this ceased of course
when the disciples were scattered in every direction


64 Jesus of Nazareth.


by the persecution that arose in connection with
Stephen. And it is greatly to be regretted that
this. magnificent example of Christian generosity
should be popularly mistaken for an attempt at
Communism, and even sometimes represented as
turning out to be impracticable, and thereby show-
ing itself to be unwise.

The fact that in this and various other cases the
ethical teachings of Christianity have been widely
misunderstood, must not prevent us from recogniz-
ing and endeavoring fully to appreciate how much
the Saviour really taught that was new to the
world, and among the greatest blessings ever
brought to mankind. When he said “ give to him
that asketh,” it was (as we have seen) not a mere
rule, requiring or authorizing us to scatter alms
with blind negligence, since Gel, who is held
forth as our example, gives to those who ask him,
but gives wisely; and yet it is a precept that
stirs every true Christian heart to benevolence.
Whether we shall give to needy individuals upon
casual application, or shall in general prefer to give
through carefully organized effort, is a question of
expediency and practical wisdom ; but in some way,
yea, in all ways that are not palpably unwise, we
must give. And it is in accordance with the whole
spirit of Christianity that we should not merely
relieve human suffering, but that we should strive
to prevent it. The principles which Jesus taught
will be found to apply with the most flexible
adaptation to whatever may be required and justi-


fied by our growing knowledge of sanitary and
social conditions.


His Ethical Teachings. 65


I should be very glad, if we had time, to dwell
on many details of the Saviour’s ethical instruction.
Especially should I like to show—what we all
know in a general way—how he has put unspeak-
able honor upon the lowlier and more passive vir-
tues, which the pride of human strength is so apt
to neglect or even to despise. But it is impossible
now to attempt any detailed exhibition of his moral
teachings. I know of no one who questions that as
a whole they are greatly superior to those of any
other teacher, or of all other teachers combined.
The only drawback with some minds has been the
existence of certain sayings supposed to be impracti-
cable, and these I have tried to show have been sim-
ply misunderstood. The only ethical teachings now
compared by any one with those of Jesus are the
ethics found in the Buddhist writings. Let us glad-
ly recognize all in these that is true and wholesome,
and the great good they have done on a wide scale
in the Asiatic world, as supplanting ideas that
- formerly prevailed among many races. The recent
fashion of favorably comparing Buddhism with
Christianity has been thought by some to find
countenance in Sir Edwin Arnold’s poem, ‘ The
Light of Asia.” It may have been justifiable in a
poem that he should borrow Christian terms, and
add no small tinge of Christian sentiments, in order
to make pleasing poetry for Christian readers; the
trouble is that many have failed to distinguish in
this case between a poem and a history. As I
heartily admire many parts of “ The Light of Asia,”
I am glad to quote words taken down from the au-
thor’s lips during his recent voyage across the


66 Jesus of Nazareth


Pacific by a man whom I personally know to be of
the highest character and intelligence. Sir Edwin
said to Dr. Ashmore, ‘‘I have been criticised for
an ‘implied comparison between Buddhism and
Christianity in regard to doctrines derived from
them and principles contained in them respectively.
No such object was in mind. For me Christianity
rightly viewed is the crowned queen of religions, im-
mensely superior to every other, and though I am
so great an admirer of much that is great in Hindu
philosophy and religion, I would not give one verse
of the Sermon on the Mount away for twenty epic
poems like the Mahabharata, nor exchange the
golden rule for twenty new Upanishads.”

It may be mentioned in conclusion that some
propose to exalt the moral teachings of Jesus by
saying that for them no further religion is necessary.
They will live by the Sermon on the Mount alone.
But he who spoke that great and inspiring discourse
gave many other teachings, ethical and spiritual.
Were they superfluous? Shall we be really honor-
ing him, or acting wisely and safely for ourselves,
if we presume to select one discourse of his and
treat all the rest of his teaching and his work as
unnecessary and useless?

Besides, who does really uve up to the Sermon
on the Mount? Who can afford to slight the relig-
ion of Jesus, upon the assumption of fully conform-
ing to his ethical instructions? To end as we began.
He gave ethical and religious teachings together—
he stands as not merely a teacher, but a Saviour.
Others have taught well and helpfully, though not


His Ethical Teachings. 67


in a way comparable to his teaching, as to how we
ought to live; he alone can also give the spiritual
help we need in order actually to live as his teach-
ings require.





Til.


The Supernatural Works of Iesus.





THE SUPERNATURAL WORKS OF JESUS.


ROFESSOR Huxley, in his “ Life of David

- Hume” and in some recent magazine articles,
admits that Hume’s once celebrated position in regard
to miracles cannot be maintained. Hume held that
from the nature of the case, no amount of testimony
can establish a miraculous event. Huxley prefers
to say that alleged miraculous events require
“evidence of a cogency proportionate to their
departure from probability.” To this, as a general
principle, we should all readily agree. The testi-
mony for a miracle must be exceedingly strong and
clear. Tell me that a man who died in Washington
last week has come to life, and if the matter
seemed worthy of attention I should scrutinize the
evidence narrowly and patiently, and engage
others to do likewise with the most earnest and
unwearied effort, before I could think of admitting
that the alleged occurrence is real.

But in the case of Christ’s miracles this need of
immensely strong evidence is in a great degree
offset by the fact that the miracles stand in
immediate and inseparable connection with his
perfect character and his peerless teachings. We


have tried on former occasions to attain some
z 71


\


72 Jesus of Nazareth.


conception of the Saviour’s personal character, and
of his exalted ethical instruction. Now in the
records these are inextricably interwoven with his
supernatural works. Tear out all the supernatural
elements from the gospels, and the remainder will
be no history at all, but a mass of shattered and
broken matters worse than the ruins of so many
noble buildings which the other day I left shapely
and useful in the city where I dwell. Jesus him-
self speaks of his miracles as real. In several in-
stances he promises beforehand, as in regard to
Lazarus, and especially in regard to his own
resurrection. In other cases he points back to his
past miraculous work. Take the gospels as they
stand, in all their beauty and simplicity, their
pathos and power, and if Jesus of Nazareth did not
perform supernatural works, he many times spoke
falsely. The very suggestion is painful, even to
many who altogether deny the supernatural. But
whatever efforts may be made to evade it, the
alternative faces us squarely. Either he who
spake as never man spake, and in whose character
no criticism can discern a fault, who shines as
clear and sweet as the very morning star of human-
ity, either he did perform supernatural works or he
spoke falsely. It might be possible that in some
cases bystanders should be mistaken; but he him-
self could not be mistaken. Thus then there isa
highly important difference between the common
run of alleged miracles, ancient or modern, and
the miracles of Jesus Christ. And Iam not rea-
soning in a circle—not proving the person by the


| miracles and the miracles by the person ; but they


-


His Supernatural Works. 73


stand like the opposite parts of an arch, upholding
each other, and both together upholding all that
rests upon them, even the divinity of Christ’s mis-
sion, and the truth of all his personal claims.
Moreover, when we survey the supernatural
works ascribed in the New Testament to Jesus
Christ, we find them to differ very widely as to
their intrinsic character from many alleged mira-
cles. They are all beneficent, ministering to
human need, relieving human distress. ‘‘ He went
about doing men good.” The one or two cases in
which his miracles seemed not beneficent are of the
very slightest importance and could be easily ac-
counted for. Again, the miraculous healing of dis-
eases on the part of Jesus cannot be explained by
the faith of those concerned. He usually required
faith in the applicants, and probably a good many
persons at the present time have an uneasy feeling
that this resembles what is now popularly called
faith-cure, and that perhaps it might be explained
by the mere natural influence of awakened expecta-
‘tion and confidence. But the Saviour healed in
various instances where the sufferer was at a dis-
tance, and only the friends making the application
had faith. He raised the widow's son at Nain
without any request or expectation. He rose him-
self from the dead when his followers were not at
all expecting it. He wrought miracles upon inani-
mate nature, the winds and the waters, and the
food which he multiplied. So we cannot explain
the healings by the mere natural effect of faith.
Why then, it may be asked, did he so generally


condition his miraculous healings upon faith? The


74 Jesus of Nazareth.


answer seems to be, that he was always wishing to
make bodily healing the occasion of spiritual bene-
fit, and for this it was indispensable that they
should have faith in him and his teachings. We
can also see that his miracles were dignified, and
worthy to be associated with a revelation from God.
These superhuman events were the sign-manual of
the Most High, given to authenticate messages sent
forth from the headquarters of the universe. There
isan unspeakable difference between alleged miracles
sometimes trivial in themselves, and having no con-
nection with divine revelation, and the miracles of
Jesus Christ. To confound them as some objectors
do, to place them all on the same footing, is to com-
mit a profound and far-reaching error. The Saviour
gave no encouragement to those who would value
miracles for their own sake. He never wrought a
miracle when it was demanded. Rebukingly he
said, ‘ Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not
believe.” What he offered them was high spirit-
ual and moral instruction, to be prized on its own
merits, and at the same time given by one haying a
divine mission, one of whom Nicodemus the San-
hedrist said, for himself and others, “We know
that thou hast come from God as a teacher, for no
man can do these signs which thou doest, except
God be with him.” He did not wish to be heeded
simply because of the supernatural works. Yet he
distinctly and repeatedly appealed to these as at-
_ testation “The works that I doin my Father's
| name, they bear witness of me.” ‘ But that ye
' may know that the Son of man hath power on earth
to forgive sins—he said to the paralytic, Arise and


His Supernatural Works. 75


walk.” And so he bade John’s messengers carry
back word that they found him healing the blind,
raising the dead, and preaching good news to the
poor. Thus we see that he gave no warrant for
over-valuation of the miraculous, nor yet for under-
valuing and neglecting it.

But how about the evidence that Jesus of Naz-
areth really did perform supernatural works? This
is a matter upon which great stress is naturally
laid by thoughtful inquirers, and which deserves
the most earnest consideration.

Attempts are made in various ways to cut the
_ matter short. Some claim that theological writers
and all defenders of orthodox Christianity are con-
strained by hopeless prejudice, or by the necessities
of their intellectual or their temporal position, to
take the views they hold, and that only skeptical
or agnostic writers are unprejudiced seekers after
truth. Well, we human beings are all subject to
prejudice, all liable to be constrained by the logical]
limitations of any undertaking whatsoever. They
who wish to judge wisely must recognize this as a
difficulty attending all human investigation. I do
not at all deny that the danger exists for those who
advocate the truth of Christianity as a supernatural
revelation ; but how strange it is for men who oppose
Christianity to imagine themselves exempt from
this danger. These men are compelled to explain
away the Christian evidences, or else they must ad-
mit that Christianity is true; and they will feel
this admission to be important just in proportion as
they are men of earnest soul. For here Christian-
ity is, in the world—often grievously corrupted, to


76 Jesus of Nazareth.


be sure, taken by Constantine and others as a plank
in their political platform, often held as the mere
maid-servant of government, sometimes honey-
combed with errors, encompassed with hypocrisies,
and yet what a power through all the centuries ;
how inseparably and influentially associated with
the best civilization! Now the Christ of the gos-
pels accounts for Christianity. It rests its strong-
est claim upon his resurrection. And the evidence
of his resurrection is immediately associated with
his personal character and his noble teachings.
The objectors, just in proportion as they have
moral earnestness, are absolutely compelled to in- |
validate the evidence. They are not at all im-
partial nor disinterested. It is just as necessary
for their intellectual and moral position to assail the
evidences of Christianity as for others to maintain
them.

“Well then,” some one might be tempted to say,
‘since both sides are liable to be prejudiced and
warped in judgment, we cannot hope to reach any
satisfactory conclusion on the questions involved.”
That view of the matter, if consistently carried out,
would lead us to doubt everything, since human in-
firmity may attach, in some way or other, to every
exercise of the human faculties. But we cannot
doubt everything. Some things must be true. In
other directions we do rely on our faculties; why so
ready. just here to decry them? We must all
earnestly endeavor, whichsoever side we assume with
regard to any great question, to escape the dominion
of prejudice and to see things as they are. And we
must remember that it is the cheapest and most


His Supernatural Works. bs


facile, and perhaps the most blinding of all preju-
dices, to take for granted that other men are preju-
diced, and we alone are exempt.

Moreover, everybody knows that a skilful lawyer,
who has a case to make out, can of course give
some plausibility to his contention, and cast some
suspicion upon opposing testimony and argument.
One who is very ingenious may temporarily per-
plex many of his hearers in regard to a sufficiently
clear case. Now the methods which some skeptical
writers employ in casting a cloud of doubt about the
evidences as to the character, teachings and super-
natural works of Jesus, could be made just as effect-
ive in regard to many of the best known persons
and events of history. This has been illustrated
many times, notably by Archbishop Whately in his
taking brochure, ‘ Historic Doubts Concerning Na-
poleon Bonaparte.” I knew of a University student
who read this work, and said with every appearance
of sincerity that he very much questioned whether
such a man as Napoleon Bonaparte ever lived. An
interesting example is also given by Henry Rogers
in a chapter of his work entitled “‘ The Eclipse of
Faith.”

Another short method of ending the question as-
serts that “‘nothing is certain but what is demon-
strated or demonstrable.” Then a man can never
be certain that his wife loves him, or that his de-
parted mother did. Then a man cannot be certain
as to any historical occurrence, or any current
events that lie beyond his own observation, and
even our senses are quite as apt to err as our men-
tal faculties. Then a man cannot be certain that


78 Jesus of Nazareth.


anything is right, or any other thing is wrong. Hu-
man life rests mainly upon practical certainties, ac~
companied by other matters of reasonable probabil.
ity, and not exclusively or chiefly upon things
demonstrated or demonstrable.*

Another class of objectors end the matter by saying
that such miracles are impossible, if not theoretically
impossible, yet practically and inevitably incredible.
They simply cannot believe in any such interrup-
tion as they think a miracle involves in the uniform
action of physical forces according to those beauti-
ful fixed laws, about which we have been learning
so much and which we ought all not only to admire
with delight, but to respect and obey. But if
this is a reason for summarily rejecting the possibil-
ity of miracles, that it involves such a change in the
uniformity of natural action, one thing will certainly
follow: The person who thus maintains will be


*It frequently happens that a young man just grown is
rather skeptical about the truth of Christianity, but after
some years these doubts have disappeared, without any
obvious cause. The explanation is commonly this. When
his mind first expanded to comprehend things, and to dis-
criminate sharply, he craved absolute certitude about every-
thing. But entering the various practical relations and pur-
suits of life, he becomes accustomed to decide important
questions of duty and interest upon a mere practical centainty,
or even upon fairly probable grounds, and thus he learns by
degrees in the school of life a lessea which Butler’s ‘‘ Analogy ”
has enabled some other young men to anticipate, that in
many of our most important affairs ‘‘ probability is the law
of life.” What a pity when a young man takes such early
questionings as an excuse for falling into habits of immorality,
or assumes a position of antagonism to Christianity, or habit.
ually neglects its instructions and influences, so as to become
disqualified for profiting by these important lessons of life’s
experience.


His Supernatural Works. 79


utterly inconsistent if he does not also hold that
creation is an impossible conception. If one can-
not believe that a superior power has ever caused
physical forces to act otherwise than according to
the observed uniformity, then how can he believe that
. these ever went through the unspeakable change
of passing out of non-existence into existence? . Say
that miracles are essentially incredible, and how
can you consistently be a Theist? Surely the
Creator of these grand physical forces, who caused
them to work according to these beautiful laws,
surely he can interpose his higher force to control
them into some unwonted action, without violating
their essential nature or disturbing the harmony of
the universe he created. Some, alas! accept the
alternative, and say that they cannot believe in crea-
tion or a Creator. And the popular fashion at present
is to call themselves Agnostics. They do not care
to maintain that there is no God, and no future life
for mankind; they simply do not know. Now and
then one says this seriously and therefore of neces-
sity sadly, and such persons deserve respect and
consideration. But others seem to say it with easy
indifference or even with arrogance. They do not
know, nor care. Or they do not know, and feel
proud of the recognized ignorance, and liken them-
selves to Socrates. Some people might remember
our political Agnostics, the ‘‘ Know-Nothings” of.
35 years ago, and how short a time that ‘“ fad”
lasted. Mr. Spurgeon remarks that this boasted
name Agnostic means the same thing as ignoramus.

But it is more common at the present day to im-
peach the contemporary testimony to the supernat-


80 Jesus of Nazareth.


ural works of Jesus on the ground that the wit-
nesses were predisposed to believe in miracles.
Suppose we state this baldly. If men are willing
to believe in miracles, their testimony as to the
occurrence of miracles must be rejected; only men
who begin by rejecting miracles can be believed on
that subject. John Stuart Mill says that the com-
monest of all fallacies is begging the question. I
know of course that the unbelieving critic would wish
to state the matter otherwise. Le would say, If
men strongly incline to believe in miracles their
testimony on that subject must be taken with
reserve and discount, though they be quite credible
on other subjects. Very well, only remember that
the witnesses to the Christian miracles have also
presented us the character of Christ and his ethical
teachings. But on the other hand, if men instan-
taneously reject a miracle whenever presented to
their mind, then their judgment on that question is
subject to a like discount. Those who hold that
miracles are practically impossible, are they good
judges of the testimony to a miracle? Those who
follow Matthew Arnold in one of his favorite neat
phrases, and oracularly say that ‘miracles simply
do not happen,” are they good judges? Those who
admit that the question of miracles is a question of
evidence, but when asked to consider the evidence
for any particular miracle, obviously reject the
miracle in advance, and investigate the evidence
with a manifest and exclusive view to weaken it, are
they good judges ? ;

There are of course various kinds of testimony,
and each requires a certain training, that we may


His Supernatural Works. 81


with critical care and sound judgment determine
its value. The great facts and principles of modern
astronomy have had to work their way into general
reception through immense opposition, not only
from the ignorant masses of mankind, who would
not believe what seemed to contradict their senses,
but from many cultivated men, whose mental train-
ing had been exclusively on other sides, so that
most of them could not appreciate the testimony of
astronomical experts, and some gravely doubted
whether the Integral Calculus was not a mere work
of imagination, and Celestial Mechanics a figment
of fancy. In like manner, a lack of qualification to
appreciate the evidence has caused many to be
very slow in accepting the best attested results of
geology, or of biology, or of sociology. But the
same thing is true of some admirable adepts in
physical observation, some eminent specialists in
one department or another of physical science, when
called to judge of historical evidence. A long-con-
tinued exclusive mental devotion to facts and
methods of quite a different kind has made it as
difficult for them to estimate rightly the evidence of
some great historical event as the classes of persons
previously described have found it to judge rightly
concerning the results of physical science. The fact
is, that knowledge has become so widely developed,
and specialized into so many distinct lines of inves-
tigation, and each of these pushed into such a mul-
tiplication of facts and inquiries, awakening such
eagerness of effort to go farther still, as to involve all
of us who are earnestly devoted to the pursuit of
knowledge in great peril of becoming one-sided in


82 Jesus of Nazareth


our aevelopment, and correspondingly ill-qualified
to judge concerning the offered results of investiga-
tion in departments quite unlike our own. I am
often grieved, aud sometimes angry, to see theolo-
gians and preachers undertaking to pass judgment
upon any and every question in the exact sciences,
and appearing to think that their views on these
subjects carry the authority which attaches to the
religious and moral lessons they draw from revela-
tion. Shall I then think it wise for men who have
given their whole lives to matters of physical
observation and mathematics, and in those direc-
tions have gained deserved reputation, to take it for
granted that they are equally qualified to pass
judgment off-hand upon questions of general phi-
losophy, or upon the validity of historical -testi- -
mony? Yetnot more ready are some preachers to
settle authoritatively in a single sermon the most
difficult questions as to evolution, than are some
sensation preachers of physical science to settle ina
fugitive essay the largest questions of religious his-
tory and belief, really seeming to imagine that their
views of any and all subjects are entitled to as much
respect as men justly pay to the results of their
life-long devotion in their own lines of investigation,
In this respect we are all in danger of error. And
what shall be the remedy for this tendency to grow-
ing narrowness of view and one-sidedness of judg-
ment? Just in proportion as knowledge is becom-
ing more specialized it seems increasingly im-
portant that a man’s early training, what we call in
the technical sense his education, should not be ex-
clusively special, but so far as possible general and


His Supernatural Works. 83


symmetrical. And then as we push out into our sev-
eral lines of busy investigation, we should try through
life to keep in sight and in hail of all our fellow inves-
tigators on whatsoever other lines across the broad
and busy fields of inquiry. Mr. Darwin, to whom
we are all so much indebted, stated, toward the close
of his life, that he had lost all relish for poetry.
Was not that a pity and really a blunder? [
remember a few years since to have asked in a
circle of some twenty cultivated gentlemen, that
each would tell who was his favorite poet. Even a
dear lover of poctry might be at a loss to make
instant reply, but it was amusing to see how some
eminent judges and other lawyers, some highly-
intelligent and well-read bankers and merchants,
would take on a far-away look at the very idea of
having any favorite poet at all. Now ought not all
of us in our several specialties of investigation or of
practical activity to keep at least in general sym-
pathy with all the other great departments of knowl-
edge and reflection and living interest? Even if
- this should restrict somewhat a man’s acquaintance
with the actual and possible knowledge pertaining
to his specialty, would it not more than compensate
by giving a sounder judgment and a_ healthier
mental action, even in regard to his own proper
pursuits ?

When we turn to examine the evidence that
Jesus wrought supernatural works, we find one of
these standing out in singular prominence, namely
his own resurrection. He is recorded as having re-
peatedly predicted to his disciples that he would be
killed and would rise again after three days. Let


84 Jesus of Nazareth.


us attentively consider, so far as can be done in a

short time, the evidence that this predicted resurrec-

tion actually occurred. I trust you will bear me

witness that throughout these lectures I have tried

to avoid extravagance of language and vehemence

of assertion, have tried to speak soberly, in words

duly weighed. It is to my mind only an apparent

departure from this course to make the following

statement: If I donot know that Jesus of Nazareth

rrose from the dead, then I know nothing in the his-

\ tory of mankind. If the evidence, when fully ex-

| amined with a calm willingness to be convinced,

| does not in this case warrant a practical certainty,

a1 ! then there is no adequate evidence of any historical

\y/ event. Let us rapidly look at the principal testi-

monies, remembering that such a view must nec-
essarily be quite incomplete.

No person whatever, so far as I know, now-
questions that the Apostle Paul wrote the Epistles
to the Corinthians, the Galatians and the Romans.
There is, in fact, equally good reason to believe
that he wrote other Epistles, but let that pass for ~
the present. In the latter part of Paul’s life we
reach firm ground as to the dates, because Roman
history tells when Festus succeeded Felix as proc-
urator of Palestine. We thus determine that
First Corinthians was written A. D. 57. Now the
death of Christ cannot have been earlier than A.
D. 30. So the time which had elapsed when Paul
wrote this Kpistle was at most 27 years, just the
tims from the battle of Gettysburg to the present
day. Take any intelligent man among us, who has
reached middle age, and consider how near to him


His Supernatural Works. 85


seem the events of that great war, how clear and
sure is his recollection of them. Well, in the fif-
teenth chapter of First Corinthians, that wonderful
passage which has invested so many Christian
funerals with immortal hope and unspeakable conso-
lation, Paul declares that Christ was raised on the
third day, that he appeared to Cephas and James,
twice to the Twelve, and once to above five hun-
dred brethren at once, the greater part of whom he
declares to be still living. Nothing could be more
explicitly asserted. And it would have been folly ,
to make the assertion, in the face of so many skep-
tical and inquisitive Greeks, and so many hostile
Jews in constant connection with Palestine, and the
height of folly to build upon this asserted resurrec-
tion of Christ, his entire argument for a Christian
doctrine which some of the Church at Corinth were
- explicitly denying, if there had been the least
doubt that these numerous surviving witnesses ex-
isted and could be found. Paul risks his own ve-
racity and all his influence as an Apostle, risks the
entire truth of Christianity, upon the one point.
“If Christ hath not been raised, then is our preach-
ing vain, your faith also is vain.” He builds
everything upon this great fact. Several times in
Second Corinthians also he speaks of the Lord
Jesis as raised from the dead; also in Galatians,
anil again and again in the great Epistle to the
Romans, written a few months after those to the
Corinthians. Here he again makes the fact of
Christ’s resurrection the starting point for proofs
concerning him and his mission and work, and he
declares that to believe that God raised Jesus from


88 Jesus of Nazareth.


the dead is the faith of the gospel, carrying every-
thing with it. In his earlier epistles to the Thes-
salonians, written as much as five years before Cor-
inthians, he not only speaks of Jesus as raised from
the dead, but argues from that fact. “If we be-
lieve that Jesus died and rose again, even so them
also that are fallen asleep in Jesus will God bring
with him.” The same fact is also asserted in his
later epistles, as Colossians, Ephesians, Timothy.
And besides formal assertions, he often speaks of it
as a matter of course, recognized by all.

Now Paul the Apostle was assuredly no ordinary
man. It does not require life-long study such as I
have given to his history and writings to perceive
that he was a man of powerful intellect, immense
force of character, unimpeachable sincerity, and—a
matter which will grow upon one when his attention
has been turned to it—a man of singular common
sense. We know that he was at first utterly op-
posed to the faith of the Christians, denying, de-
spising, perseculing with all the passionate ardor of
his soul, and sincerely believing that in all this he
was doing his duty. He had been the foremost
student in the leading College at Jerusalem; the
highest prizes of attainment, distinction and power
that pertained to his country and his calling were
easily within the reach ot his ardent and ambitious
soul. When he turned from all this to join the few
thousands of the sect which he had persecuted and
seemed likely to crush, and which had nothing
worldly to offer, it was assuredly a notable event,
ore which has profoundly impressed itself upon
thoughtful minds through all the ages. Let me.


His Supernatural Works. 87


tell an old story. In the middle of the last century
an Englishman, Lord Lyttelton, and his friend Gil-
bert West, a brother of the great painter, concerted
together, being unbelievers in the Bible as a reve-
lation, that each should select some Bible topic and
after thorough study prepare a small treatise upon
it, for the purpose of showing the absurdity of the
Christian claims. West chose the Resurrection of
Christ, and Lyttelton the Conversion of Paul.
When they met some time afterwards each ex-
pected to surprise and grieve the other by confess-
ing that his researches had led ‘him to believe in
Christianity and the Bible, and each published a short
treatise on the subject to that effect. West’s has
been superseded by more vigorous discussions.
But Lord Lyttelton’s little work, ‘‘ Observations on
the Conversion of St. Paul,” is still current. Gruff
old Dr. Johnson called it ‘‘a treatise to which in-
fidelity has never been able to fabricate a specious
answer.” Lyttelton has most impressively argued
that Paul’s conversion cannot be explained as due
to imposture or fanaticism ; and his conversion oc
curred only a few years after Christ’s departure.
This highly intelligent and strongly prejudiced man
had every opportunity of. knowing the facts, and
every inducement to examine them with care, and
_he became fully convinced that Jesus of Nazareth
had risen from the dead, and in that conviction
lived and labored, suffered and died. Keim, in his
“ Jesus of Nazara,” a work of great compass and of
unsurpassed learning and ability, is sufficiently
skeptical and destructive as a critic, for he rejects
the fourth gospel, and cuts away from the others


88 Jesus of Nazareth.


whatever he pleases; yet Keim declares, “‘ Paul’s
help supplies the whole question with its fixed
point, its Archimedean fulcrum; and the universal
conviction of earliest Christendom acquires the his-
torical basis which gives it certainty and clothes it
with flesh and L‘ood.’ This universal conviction
was of itself able to stand against a doubt of its
truth; but in the face of the testimony of Paul, the
force of such a doubt is doubly lost.” Keim held
that historical science is bound within the limits of
“material perception and the natural order of the
world.” With this definition he of course thought
that there can be no scientific proof of Christ’s
resurrection. But he insists that Christian faith in
that resurrection “is not only beyond the reach of
refutation, since science is compelled to leave the
mystery of the final events of Jesus’ career unsolved
without weakening the foundations of faith by a
single comment; but it completes and illumines
what to science remained an obscure point and a
vexatious limitation of its knowledge.” And where
is the propriety of thus limiting historical science
to the range of material perception, and the sphere
of natural order? If any supernatural events have
really occurred, they are a part of the facts of his-
tory, and can not be omitted from the view of a
just historical science. As well justify the Ptole-
maic astronomy, which held that the heavens re-
volve round the earth, and being unable to account
for the changing position of certain bright stars,
simply called them “wanderers,” planets. Thus
likewise some produce very symmetrical systems of
theology, by omitting inconvenient facts of revela-


His Supernatural Works, 89


tion or of consciousness. In excluding the super-
natural from history by his very definition, Keim
makes, I think, an arbitrary assumption. But all
the more remarkable and significant is the practi-
cal conclusion he so strongly announced as to the
fact of Christ’s resurrection.

Now remember that the testimony of Paul’s con-
temporary letters, accompanied by his remarkable
conversion and his noble character and career,
though many regard it as in itself ample evidence,
by no means stands alone. Peter also speaks of
the Saviour’s resurrection in his first epistle, speaks
of it as a matter of course, recognized by all his
readers, just as Paul had often done. And Peter
repeatedly makes strong statements to the same
effect in his speeches recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles. This book of Acts was forty years ago
vehemently assailed by Baur, and the once famous
Tiibingen school which he founded, for whom it
was necessary to throw the book overboard because
forsooth it conflicted with their theory. Baur held
that the vonflict between Paul and certain Jewish
Christians, who. insisted that all Gentile converts
ought to be cireumcised and live as Jews, and who
claimed Peter and Jamesas their leaders and declared
Paul to be no apostle, was really a conflict between
the apostles themselves; that Paul and his followers
on the one hand, and Peter and James with their
followers on the other hand, were bitterly hostile.
Baur thought he could find proof of this in the second
chapter of Galatians especially, and also to some
extent in Romans and in First and Second Corin-
thians. He could not discern any semblance of


90 Jesus of Nazareth.


such proof in the other epistles of Paul, and it was
for this reason, and so far as I can see for this rea-
son alone, that he declared Corinthians, Galatians
and Romans t¢ be the only genuine epistles of Paul.
This statement or expression was taken up by
second-hand organs of skeptical opinion, and has
continued fashionable to the present time. We are
perfectly at liberty to show that these four epistles
which all acknowledge to be genuine contain am-
ple proof of the resurrection of Christ, and also con-
tain all the leading facts as to his person and work,
and the leading doctrines ef the Christian system.
But there is positively no reason, apart from Baur’s
theory, for refusing to recognize Thessalonians and
Philippians, which so closely resemble the four
above-mentioned. Nor is there any good reason for
rejecting Colossians and Ephesians, or Titus and
Timothy. For, while these differ from the earlier
groups in their leading topics, they are simply the
topics suggested by the rise of new errors to be com-
bated. And while the style of these later groups of
epistles is unlike that of the earlier, it is only such a
change of style as will always be observable in a first-
rate writer when his subjects change—a fact which
Bishop Westcott once happily expressed in a pri-
vate letter by borrowing a phrase from the higher
mathematics and saying that “ style is a function of
the subject as well as of the author.” Holding then
that Paul was really at enmity with Peter and James,
as supposed to be shown by Galatians, and finding
that the book of Acts represents these apostles as
repeatedly consulting together and entirely har-
monious, Baur coolly declared that the book of Acts


His Supernatural Works. 91


was spurious; that it was written at a later period
when the Paul party had triumphed, for the purpose
of concealing the original conflict. But all this Tii-
bingen theory, which once attracted immense atten-
tion and threatened to darken the whole heavens,
has blown away, leaving scarce a rack behind.
Bishop Lightroot, Dr. Fisher of Yale and others, as
well as many in Germany, conclusively showed that
the second chapter of Galatians not only fails to
confirm the theory, but actually disproves it. There
is to-day no historical ground to maintain that Paul
was arrayed against the other apostles; no reason to
question the account given in the book of Acts,
that while some Judaizers claiming Peter and
James as their leaders, were hostile to Paul, there
was no hostility nor disagreement between the
apostles themselves. And if any still assert the
contrary, they belong to that class of English and
American writers who set forth as surprising novel-
ties, or as the best results of recent inquiry, German
theories long ago dead and buried in their native
land. Whether some popular and very noisy theo-
ries now prevalent as to the Old Testament will in
like manner pass away, is not for me to predict,
But we hear scarcely anything now against the
authenticity of the book of Acts, much of it so evi-
dently the work of an eye-witness, and all giving
proof of careful research and remarkable accuracy.
Its accuracy at various points has been curiously
confirmed by recent excavations in Cyprus and
Ephesus, and by researches concerning the account
of Paul’s voyage and shipwreck. Renan, who is
surely skeptical enough for ordinary demands, has


92 Jesus of Nazareth.


stated that there is little or no reason to question
that the third gospel and the book of Acts, which are
evidently from the same hand, are the works of
Luke, a companion of the Apostle Paul.

Now this book of Acts, as already said, abounds in
passing references as well as express assertions con-
cerning the resurrection of Christ. And Part I. of
the same work on the Beginnings of Christianity,
or what we call the Gospel according to Luke, gives
details of that wonderful event, and touchingly
narrates appearances of the risen Lord to some of
his followers.

This reminds us that each of the four gospels not
only states but describes with more or less detail,
the Saviour’s resurrection, and some of his subse-
quent appearances. It is a strange thing to find
some objectors still repeating that these four ac-~
counts are contradictory in their details, and there-
fore not trustworthy. One charitably supposes
that they must be merely repeating without person-
al investigation what used to be said when the so-
called “discrepancies” of the gospels were the
stock in trade of certain critical assailants. Over
and over again it has been shown, and I think con-
clusively shown, that here and elsewhere the differ-
ence in details of the parallel narratives in the gos-
pels must really strengthen their credibility. Per-
sons who have often attended upon trials in court,
to say nothing of these who have studied legal
treatises on evidence, are well aware that when
several witnesses in narrating a series of events
agree as to the main facts, their united testimony
is only strengthened and confirmed by disagree-


His Supernatural Works. 93


ment in minor details, even if occasionally we do not
quite see how some slight point of disagreement is to
be explained. If they coincided in every minute
particular, we should know the witnesses had put their
heads together, and should not believe them at all.
The application of this to the gospels has for a
good many years been so well recognized by most
of those who really examine the matter, that we
find the allegation of contradiction in the gospel
narratives now rarely made except by second-
hand writers, who borrow from older works. I
have sometimes half imagined that the change in
Germany of late years is partly due to the intro-
duction, after 1848, of trial by jury. I wonder
whether those magnificent devotees to study who
lead the world in scholarly attainment, have per-
haps mixed enough with the active world, or looked
in enough upon the courts of justice, to get some
inkling of the laws of evidence in respect to this
matter. However that may be, the change is
doubtless mainly due to the usual oscillations of
speculation and inquiry. Instead of now troubling
themselves with points of disagreement in the gospels,
many German critics, andsome in other countries, are
greatly exercised to account for the agreement. Va-
rious theories have been proposed to explain the
fact that considerable portions of Matthew, Mark
and Luke contain not only the same substantial
matter, but often quite similar phraseology. Thus
some hold that Matthew and Luke drew from Mark;
others that Mark and Luke drew from Matthew; yet
others that all three drew from some pre-existing
document or documents which soon perished. A.


O4. Jesus of Nazareth.


view which I should prefer, if compelled to choose,
is that the apostles in their oral teaching
gradually fell into a certain cycle of selected say-
ings and actions of their Master; and that we can
thus account for the agreement at many points.
Many of us, however, have really no theory to offer
as to the agreement of the three gospels, and are
patiently waiting to see if any valuable results will
come from the tossing to and fro of ingenious spec-
ulations and elaborate inquiries.

But what proof have we that the gospels are
of apostolic origin? For any thorough examination
of this question, most persons have to rely on those
who make it a specialty. We need not be surprised
at such a necessity. We have to rely on lawyers
as to the titles to our property, on physicians to
determine our diseases and prescribe remedies, and
on druggists to prepare the medicine. Any one
of these may err and ruin us, but we have to make
the best selection in our power, and take the conse-
quences. Why wonder that a similar situation ex-
ists as to determining the external proof for the
canon of Scripture? As regards the internal evi-
dences, every thoughtful reader can largely judge
for himself. Andif only men would thoughtfully read
the gospels, coming near in historical imagination to
the person they exhibit, and listening with simple
candor to his words of wisdom and love, many who
are skeptical now would feel all that is best in them
drawn toward him in living sympathy and devotion.
The Scriptures in general, and the four gospels in
particular, carry credentials of their own on every


page.


His Supernatural Works. 95


In respect then to the external evidence, I shall
say but little. Yet it may be mentioned that inter-
esting progress has been made within a few years.
The Tiibingen school used to maintain. that the
fourth gospel was not written till after the middle
ofthe second century. Their really able and learned
efforts to maintain this theory have led to thorough-
going investigation, and the date of this gospel’s
historically ascertained existence has been pushed
back farther and farther, until one of the representa-
tives of the school admitted that it existed as early
as A. D. 120, which is only some twenty-five years
later than the ordinarily assigned date of its composi-
tion. The late Professor Ezra Abbot of Harvard,
probably the foremost American scholar in this par-
ticular department, undertook some years ago to
investigate the origin of the fourth gospel, with a
pre-disposition (as he afterward avowed) to regard
it as decidedly post-apostolic. Going into the mat-
ter with his usual thoroughness and patience, he
reached the opposite conclusion, and published an
elaborate essay to prove that the fourth gospel was:
written by the Apostle John. This work, along
with various discussions in Germany and England,
must in my judgment be regarded as practically
settling that question. The Tiibingen school has
broken down here as completely as with reference
to the book of Acts; and as often occurs in every
department of human inquiry, patient examination
has at length overtaken and overcome the most fleet
footed and shrill-voiced hypothesis.

We have long known from ample historical evi
dence that our four gospels were unhesitatingl)


96 Jesus of Nazareth.


received in every section of the Christian world in
the latter part of the second century. This is fully
shown by the statements of Irenzus, Clement of
Alexandria and Tertullian, by the use of the four
gospels in the two Egyptian versions, in the Old
Latin version or versions, and in the Old Syriac
version, which was discovered some thirty years
ago. Quite recently we have regained the long-lost
Diatessaron of Tatian, the earliest known Harmony
of the gospels, prepared soon after the middle of the
second century; and it makes at once manifest the
fact that Tatian’s four gospels were ours. Import-
~ ant light has also been thrown upon the numerous
citations from the gospels in the works of Justin
Martyr, now believed by many to have been written
earlier than A. D. 150. Justin’s quotations, though
evidently the same in substance with passages in
our gospels, differ widely in the expressions em-
ployed and often confound or mingle similar pass-
ages; and sometimes he adds curious statements of
things said or done which must have been traditional.
Accordingly some objectors have earnestly contend-
ed that his gospels must have been different from
ours, though they have found it hard to account for
the sudden disappearance of every vestige of these
supposed earlier writings. Now it has long beea
observed, as is shown in Dr. Gildersleeve’s excel-
lent edition of Justin’s Apologies, that he quotes with
great looseness from the Septuagint also, and great-
ly alters the phraseology of favorite passages in Plato
and Xenophon which must have been thoroughly fa-
miliar to the philosophic emperors he addressed. We
see that his memory was quite inaccurate as to de-


His Supernatural Works. 97


tails, though he scarcely ever misrepresents the sub-
stance. Even in our day of convenient printed
editions and concordances, inexact quotation of
Scripture is quite frequent. But still, Justin’s addi-
tional statements drawn from tradition were not
accounted for. Now the epoch-making labors of
Westcott and Hort concerning the Greek text
of the New Testament have shown that Justin habit-
ually used what is technically called the ‘‘ Western”
type of text, which was very corrupt and had va-
rious additions from tradition, and was widely dif-
fused before the middle of the second century ; and
existing documents of that ‘‘ Western” text present
in one case or another the very additions which
Justin gives. So there is no longer any parti-
cle of reason to think that he had different gos-
pels; he simply used our gospels in the “ Western ”
text. If one is startled at the idea that a very cor-
rupt text of the gospels was used in many quarters
before the middle of the second century, a little
reflection will show in this fact a clear and strong
proof that the gospels had been long in existence
and widely received—an argument which Tischen-
dorf already wrought out in his little work on the
“Origin of the Gospels.”

The historical existence of the gospels of Mat-
thew and Mark is pushed still further back by well-
known statements of Papias, written about A. D.
130 to 140; and the gospel of Matthew is quoted
as Scripture in the so-called Epistle of Barnabas,
which must have been written very early in the
century. The recently discovered and already
famous little treatise entitled ‘Teaching of the


98 _ Jesus of Nazarcth.


Apostles,” upon which Professor Rendel Harris and
many others have labored, certainly belongs to the
second century, and is by most writers referred to
the beginning of the century; and it contains
numerous quotations from Matthew and Luke.
There are also gospel quotations in the Epistles of
Ignatius, and in the Epistle of Clement of Rome,
which was written before the end of the first cen-
tury, the earliest extant Christian writing after the
New Testament.

On the historical evidence thus briefly stated I
may remark two things. We find references to the
gospels wherever we could possibly. expect to find
them, considering the paucity of early Christian
literature, and the character and design of the
extant writings. The other remark is, that the
Christians of the first centuries had much more
copious information than they have transmitted to
us, and however uncritical they may seem to us in
some respects, were extremely solicitous about the
ascertainment and recognition of apostolic writings.

Now let us return to the resurrection of Jesus.
Besides the great and varied testimony of Paul,
which many careful enquirers have regarded as in
itself amply sufficient, besides the testimony of
Peter in his epistles and the numerous and implied
statements in the book of Acts, we have the four
gospels, giving their four independent narratives,
with multiplied details, of the resurrection of Christ.
Even if Matthew, Mark, and Luke be supposed to
have drawn some statements from a pre-existmg
document, or from a common cycle of oral instruc-
tion, they separately. adopt these statements and thus


His Supernatural Works. 99


separately endorse them. I wish there was time to
dwell on the beautifully diversified and yet not
really conflicting details with which the four
gospels describe the Lord’s resurrection; and on
the varied, suggestive, and deeply impressive ap-
pearances after the resurrection which one or another
of them records. I should like to present, as I have
tried to do elsewhere in print, some obvious con-
siderations, which go to account for his appearing
to believers only, as for example that any public
appearance would have stirred the Jewish multi-
tude into fanatical frenzy, and with their notions
concerning the Messiah, into mad revolution, and
would likely enough have aroused the Jewish
rulers into some scheme of putting him to death
again, as they had muttered a purpose of doing with
Lazarus. ;

Those who are determined not to accept the
various and multiplied evidence of the Saviour’s
resurrection must of course suggest some explana-
tion of the unquestionable belief in it among the
first Christians. Nobody now calls the story an
imposture ; all that passed away with such writers
as Tom Paine. Some imagine that the Saviour
had not really died. But remember Pilate’s spe-
cial inquiry and the official examination, remem,
ber the soldier’s spear, upon which special stress is
laid by the apostolic eye-witness who wrote the
fourth gospel, remember the Saviour’s personal]
veracity in predicting that he would die and in
saying afterwards that he had died and risen again,
remember the agreement with prophecies, which
were not understood by the apostles in advance,


100 ~ Jesus of Nazareth.


but became clear afterwards. Some say that cer-
tain followers of Jesus saw mere visions of him and —
pursuaded the rest that these were real appearances.
Renan actually imagines that the whole belief came
from Mary Magdalene, whom he calls “a _halluci-
nated woman,” and who led the apostles and above
five hundred persons, and finally all Christians, to
believe that the Saviour had appeared to her alive.
Yet in the records the apostles and others seem to
us passing slow to believe, almost rudely repelling
the first testimonies of the women, and convinced
only when Jesus appeared in the midst of their
circle, inviting examination of his person, and giy-
ing irrefragable proof that here was no vision, but
a body with flesh and bones, and bearing the marks
of crucifixion. As was long ago said, ‘they
doubted, that we might not doubt.” And if others
are imagined to have presently shared the visions
and thought them actual appearances, why were
these visions so few, so brief and orderly and sober,
and why did they so early cease? How can those
who have given us the character and teachings of
Jesus, before which all the world stands in admir-
ation, and who were so despairing and slow of
belief, have been convinced by mere dreams? The
Apostle Paul says he had several visions, giving
him divine direction and encouragement at turning-
points of his ministry, but he expressly distinguishes
from these the appearance which occasioned his
conversion, saying that it occurred at midday, while
he was journeying, and that Jesus spoke to him out
of heaven, and that he saw Jesus Christ the Lord.
‘Oh, but it was all so long ago.” Yet we must


His Supernatural Works. 101


remember that their testimony was recorded, and
was confirmed by anew and permanent religious
organization, and by new and significant symbols of
ceremony, which have come down all the centuries
parallel with the records. ‘“ But how do we know
that the supernatural elements of the gospeis were not
added by other writers in the generation immedi-
ately following the apostolic age, from which we
have so little historical information?” I answer,
What reason is there for thinking that they were so
added? The writings have unity, of character and
aim, and of style and tone. Nobody would dream
of cutting out large portions of such writings, with-
out the slightest external ground, except persons
who were determined beforehand to reject at all
hazards whatever savors of the supernatural. And
what is this but simply and flagrantly begging the
question ? There is a homely story of a Scotch-
man who said, “I am open to conviction, but I'd
like to see the mon that could convince me.” Now
I do not apply this to every one who questions, or
hesitates to accept, the reality of our Lord’s resur-
rection—by no means; but only to those who with-
out the slightest external warrant or internal opening
would pluck out and relegate to a later period the
supernatural elements of the gospels, and then coolly
say that the genuine records of Jesus contain noth-
ing supernatural.

It has not been possible in so brief a compass to
give any adequate statement of the evidences which
to my mind so conclusively show that the Founder
of Christianity did actually rise from the dead, as
all his first followers believed, including those ie


102 Jesus of Nazareth


wrote the wonderful books we call the New -Testa-
ment, as they attested by all manner of sacrifice and
heroism, and many of them by martyr deaths. The
proofs are eminently cumulative in their character,
and in many cases depend greatly on appreciation
of the details. But I am fully persuaded that who-
ever will read over the references to this subject in
the Acts and Epistles, and the descriptions given in
the four gospels, and will consider all the cireum-
stances, and reflect upon the power which a belief
in the Lord’s resurrection gaye to Christianity,
whoever will examine the whole matter with the
evidence that is open to us all, and with ordi-
nary human willingness to be convinced, must be
very profoundly impressed by the multiplied evi-
dence ; and I see not how sucha one can fail to
accept that sublime fact which from the outset
formed the central pillar of the Christian evidences.

When once this great supernatural work of Jesus
is accepted, there is little need to argue as to the
intrinsic probability or attendant circumstances of
his other miracles. If he rose from the dead,
according to his own prediction, this authenticates
all his teachings and all his claims. Then indeed,
| as Paul wrote to the Romans, he ‘‘ was born of the
_ seed of David according to the flesh, and was de-
clared to be the Son of God with power according
| to the spirit of holiness by resurrection from the
dead.” For this resurrection set the seal of
divine approval upon all that he claimed, and he
claimed to be the Son of God. If he rose from
the dead; then his teachings, which profess to be a
revelation from God, are to be so received, with all


His Supernatural Works. 103


confidence and all submission. Revelation itself,
however given, is necessarily supernatural; and
other supernatural works accompanying a revela-
tion may well seem to us altogether in place, acting
as external credentials in harmony with its own in-
ternal claims and adaptations. If Jesus Christ
rose from the dead, then his immediate followers, te
whom he promised the special mission of the di-
vine Spirit, to bring all things to their remembrance
which they had heard from him, and to guide them
into all the truth, are themselves also authoritative
instructors concerning him and in his name. If
he rose from the dead, then we need have no difficul-
ty in accepting whatever is clearly and surely taught
in the accompanying revelation concerning his
Incarnation, his Atonement, and the work of
Regeneration by the Spirit whom he sent as his
successor. Then also Jesus Christ authenticates
for us the Old Testament. For he and his
apostles have repeatedly declared the Scriptures to
be from God, and to be of indestructible authority.
But we know from ample Jewish and Christian
evidence, that what his hearers would inevitably
understand by the term Scriptures, and what he
therefore must have meant, would be exactly the
books which we call the Old Testament. And behold,
what new views we gainas to the meaning of that
wonderful collection of ancient and varied writings,
the Old Testament, when it is seen how all their
teachings converge toward him, and become one
great History of Redemption.

But still, I can imagine some one saying, it is so
hard to bring that first Christianity near to our-


104 ~ Jesus of Nazareth.


selves. It shines like a star, but it seems so dis-
tant. Christianity has indeed been by many sadly
corrupted, grievously abused. But consider, every
gift of genius is abused by many, every form of
government has been corrupted, every dearest re-
lation of life that ought to make us blessed may be
so misused as to render us miserable. And think
how much good Christianity has done, and how
much more good it assuredly would do, if we who
call ourselves Christians would live more faithfully
according to its requirements and in the inspiration
of its motives and hopes, and would more zealously
carry out the departing Saviour’s commission, and
preach repentance and remission of sins unto all
nations.

Let us remember too that believing in Jesus
Christ and his religion is not like believing in some
mathematical formula, or some metaphysical conclu-
sion, or some ascertainment of general history. If
| Christianity be true, it is gloriously true—yea,
_ and tremendously true. Remember furthermore ;
Christianity is not only a system of ethics, or a
system of doctrines, it is embodied in a person.
Egotism is often ridiculous ; but take one step up-
ward, and behold it is a sublime egotism when
Jesus Christ says, ‘‘I am the way, and the truth,
and the life. No one cometh unto the Father but
through me.” Through him, then, let us draw
near, on him let us personally rely. It may be that
differences of doctrinal conception are at present
unavoidable, but why shall we not all trust and
lovingly obey the personal Saviour? Nor must we
forget that to hold aloof from Christianity is not


His Supernatural Works. 105


simply rejecting some creed, or system of opinion,
it is rejecting Jesus Christ himself, the Son of God,
the Saviour of men. Cannot each one of us say at
least so much as this, “‘ Lord, I believe, help thou
mine unbelief?” Behold, he who one day said
that to Jesus was heard and blessed.


Aone! Awe. !9) (922.


DR. BROADUS’S WORK ON PREACHINC.





ON THE PREPARATION AND DELIVERY OF SERMONS,


By Joun A, Broapus, D.D., LL.D.


Cloth, $1.75. 16th Edition.


Crown 8vo. 514 pages.


RG No other work on the same subject, published in this country, has sold so
largely in so short a time, while the religious and secular press, in all parts of the
country, has almost universally commended it in strong and earnest notices.

Its immediate REPUBLICATION IN LonDON, w7zth an Introduction by Rev. Foseph
Angus, D.D., was followed by the indorsement of Bishop Ellicott, Rev. C. H. Spurgeon,
and the religious periodicals, demonstrating that it met with equal favor abroad.

The work not only meets the wants of students and young ministers, but is very


suggestive and stimulating to those of maturer age.
Sunday-school teachers, lay preachers and, public speakers in general.


It ¢s warmly commended to
It takes


unusual pains to give suggestions for the preparation and conduct of what is called
extemporaneous discourse, while doing full justice to all the methods.


NOTICES OF


‘Prepared by a very ableteacher. He
has had a practical knowledge of his sub-
ject, is intimately acquainted with the lit-
erature of all parts of it, and has treated
the whole with devoutness, thoroughness,
blended scholarship, and good sense.”—
Dr. Angus, in Preface to London edition.


‘The preacher who desires to have an
intelligent appreciation of the demands of
his work, and of the way in which he may
attain excellency in it, cannot do better
than study this thoughtful and suggestive
treatise.”—English Independent.


“A book on preaching, by a master of
the art. Everywhere in his book there is
that intensity of earnestness which is at
once the charm and characteristic of his
vreaching.”—Keligious Herald,


“A judicious and exhaustive treatise—
destined, we think, to occupy a very promi-
nent, if not the highest place among
books on Homiletics,”—Methodist Home
Journal,


‘‘Abounds in excellent hints, rules, and
suggestions. It is very lucid in style—
must do good on a large scale,”— Southern
Presbyterian,


“Tt bears the marks of close study, of
careful deliberation, is always suggestive,
breathes a good pure spirit, and has a style
that is always clear and attractive,”—
Lutheran and Missionary.


THE WORK.


‘‘A rich mine of the best thoughts on the
grandest subject.” — Raleigh Episcopal
Methodist.


‘*Elaborate in plan and execution, syste-
matically arranged—we commend the vol-
ume as one of the best of its kind.”—7he
Advance,


««The most complete and comprehensive
work of the kind published in this country,”
— Christian Intelligencer.


“A good book ; full of instruction, rich,
varied, and exhaustive.”—Princeton Review.


“T know of no one book from which a
clergyman can learn so much of the art of
preaching.”—W. Sparrow, D.D., Prof. in
Prot, Epis. Theol. Seminary of Va.


“*Even for the general reader it has un-
usual attractions, It is exceedingly read-
able and charmingly written.”- The World.


**Sabbath-school superintendents and
teachers will be guided, helped, and
strengthened by it.”—S. School Times.


“Tt abounds in suggestions which may
be turned to profitable account, not only by
preachers, but by lawyers, and all others
who are called upon to address public au-
diences.”—American Lit. Gazette.


_ ** We have read the book with absorbing
interest. Rich, deep thoughts and emi-
nently practical suggestions abound
through these pages.” —Associate Reformed
Presbyterian,





Copies sent by mail on receipt of price.


IMPORTANT RELICIOUS WORKS.


MR. SPURGEON’S NEW BOOK:
The Cheque-Book of the Bank of Faith.


BEING PRECIOUS PROMISES’ ARRANGED FOR DAILY USE.
With Brief Experimental Comments. Nearly 4co pages, 12mo, $1 50.

“* When tt is stated that this well-named book contains a Scripture Prom-
ise for each day in theyear, commented on, in his best vein, by the prince
of practical and experimental preachers, enough has been said to comm. nd it
as first in its class.” —N. Y. Christian Intelligencer,

“It is done in the great preacher’s inimitable style, and SPEAKS IIOME
ON EV=RY PAGE to the heart and need of the believer.” —M. ¥. Indepenu’t,

“< Ur. Spurgeon’s words are so plain, his style so sparkling, and his
spirit so devout, that the reading of his productions is almost sure to excite
a mental glow and awakcn holy aspirations. This book is brimful of
quickening, soothing, soul-lifting power.” — N. Y. Witness.

‘* As there are three hundred and sixty-five cheques in this book, the man
who makes right use of them is rich indeed.” —/V. Y. Observer.


Palestine in the Time of Christ.


By EpMUND STAPFER, D. D., of the Protestant Faculty, Paris. With map,
and plans. Uniform with Stanley’s ‘* Sinai and Palestine.’’ ‘Crown
8vo, cloth, $2.50.

“« There is so much here of accurate learning, and of matter extremely
valuable in respect to the personal and every-day life of the people, that ‘it
fills a piace not filled’ by any other volume within our knowledge. Jtisan
excellent book for reference for all who would like to interpret biblical
passages for homuletic purposes with minute and accurate statement.” —-
N. Y. Christian Advocate and Journal.

‘¢ Dr, STAPFER may be congratulated on the successful way in which he
has accomplished his task. He has studied the diversified topics he treats
of, and has generally drawn his material from the best authorities, arrang-
ing it in lucid order. Few guides will be found more useful in surveying
the varied details into which a comprehensive subject leads him. There is
no English book that can be put beside itas occupying the same ground,”—
London Atheneum.


“<De Pressense’s Brilliant Book.”


THE ANCIENT WORLD AND CHRISTIANITY. By E, pr PressEnsE,
D. D., author of a ‘‘Study of Origins,’”’ etc. Cr. 8vo, 500 pages, $1.75.
“Tt is an admirable hand-book of comparative religion. It is a sub-

stantial, learned, and instructive treatment of a most important subject. ””—

british Weekly.

‘¢ 4 brilliant book. . . . Vo one who cpens the book ts likely to fail
' to admire the ingenuity of the treatment of the beliefs of the primitive
man.’’—London Literary World.

‘Brilliant in style, lucid in exposition, comprehensive in philosophic
grasp, it presents a fair specimen of what modern scholarship and scientific
thought can accomplish, together with a firm belief in the fundamental
propositions of Christianity.” —Boston Advertiser. ;

“¢ This book is a great treasury of gathered learning, presented in a pop»
ular form.”—/V. Y. Observer.

Copies sent by mail, post-paid, on veceipt of price.


A. C. ARMSTRONG & SON, 714 Broadway, New York,





STANDARD RELICIOUS WORKS.
New and Enlarged [ 4{th | Edition, in Cheaper Form,


CHARLES L. BRACES GESTA CHRISTL


A HISTORY OF HUMANE PROGRESS UNDER CHRIS-
TIANITY. With New Preface and Supplemen-
tary Chaptem 540 pp., cloth.
Price reduced from $2.50 to $1.50.


“Tt is especially adapted to assist the clergyman and religious teacher in his strug-
gles with honest, thoughtful infidelity.”

“It presents a storehouse of facts bearing on the influences of Christianity upon
such important topics as the paternal power, the position of woman under custom and
law, personal purity, and marriage, slavery, cruel and licentious sports, ane all matters
of humanity and compassion, etc, THE THOUGHTFUL READER WILL HERE GATHER IN-
FORMATION WHICH COULD ONLY BE OBTAINED FROM LIBRARIES OR MANY VOLUMES,”


Rev. Dr. R. S. STORRS says: “IT IS A BOOK THAT
DESERVES THE VERY WIDEST CIRCULATION FOR ITS CAREFUL-
NESS AND CANDOR, ITS AMPLE LEARNING, its just, discrimina-
ting analysis of historical movements as initiated or governed by


moral forces, and for the fine spirit which pervades it.”


“The skill and industry with which Mr. Brace has gleaned and sorted the vast ac-
cumulation of material here gathered together, the better to show forth the power and
influence, direct and indirect, of Christ’s teachings, is not only praise-worthy, but even
ina certain sense wonderful, Hehas a complete mastery of his subject, and many
chapters in the book are of exceeding value and interest.” —London Morning Post.


A NEW and REVISED EDITION, with NEW MAPS and ILLUSTRATIONS,


STANLEY'S SINAL AND PALESTINE.


In Connection with their History. By Dean A. P. STANLEY.
With 7 Elaborate and Beautifully Colored
Maps, and other Illustrations.


Large Crown Svo Vol., Cloth, 640 pp. Price reduced from $4 to $2.50.


The late Dean Stanley published a new and revised edition of his
“‘SINAI AND PALESTINE.” In it he made considerable additions and cor
rections, giving the work the final impress of his scholarship, taste and
ability. This edition has been carefully conformed to the last English
edition—including the new maps and illustrations, and is herewith com-
mended anew AS THE MOST READABLE AS WELL AS THE
MOST ACCURATE WORK ON THE SUBJECT IN THE ENG.
LISH LANGUAGE.

Rev. Dr. H, M. Field, Editor of “N.Y. Evangelist,” says of Stanley's “ Sinai
and Palestine” ; ‘*Wehad occasion for its constant use in crossing the desert, and in
journeying through the Holy Land, and can bear witness at once to its accuracy and ta


the charm ofits descriptions. O/ all the helps we had it was by far the most cap»
tivating.”


Copies sent by mail on receipt of price.


A. C. ARMSTRONG & SON, 714 Broadway, New York.
r


REV. DR. ALEXANDER BRUCE’S WORKS,


——


THE MIRACULOUS ELEMENT IN THE GOSPELS.


By ALEXANDER BALMAIN Bruck, D.D., Author of ‘*The Parabolic
Teaching of Christ.” 8vo, cloth. $2.50.





This work, though constructed on a different method, may be regarded as a com-
pan.on to my work on THE PaRAgBoLic TEACHING OF CHRIST, published a few years
azo. In the Fifth and Sixth Lectures I have considered from my point of view, at
considerable length, a large number of the miraculous narratives, and made observa-
tions on nearly the whole of the narratives of this character contained in the Gospels
My object in these portions of the work is not to expound homiletically the whole
narrative in which a miracle is recorded, but to inquire whether the eyent recorded be
indeed a miracle,


“Tt will take rank at once among the standard treatises upon its always impor-
tant and engrossing theme. It is an elaborate study—the fruit of wide-reaching and
profound research and patient reflection. The result of these studies is that the
volume is a powerful defense of the miracles as an essential feature of the religion: of
Christ. Itis a cause of congratulation to the whole Christian public that so valuable
vourse of lectures has been given to the whole world in so available shape,’?—BosTon
CoNGREGATIONALIST.


** An exhaustive discussion of the New Testament Miracles, The topics are
candidly, lucidly, and very ably considered, The volume isarich addition to our
apologetic literature, which every Biblical studext will desire to add to his library.”’=
Sion’s Herald.


The Parabolic Teaching of Christ.


A Systematic and Critical Study of the Parables of our Lord. By Rev.
Prof. A. B. Bruce, D.D. 1 vol., 8vo, cloth, 527 pp. Price, $2.50.


“A work which will at once take its place as a classic on the Parables of our Sa-
viour. No ministershould think of doing without it.”—American Presbyterian Review.
American Literary Churchman says: ** We recommend this book with the most
confident earnestness, It is a book to be bought and kept; it has both depth and
breadth and minute accuracy; it has a living sympathy with the teaching of the Para-
bles and with the spirit of the Master.”
ENGLISH NOTICES,

“‘ Prof. Bruce brings to his task the learning and the liberal and finely sympathetic
spirit which are the best gifts of an expositor of Scripture. His treatment of his subject
is vigorous and original, and he avoids the capital mistake of overlaying his exegesis
with a mass of other men’s views.” —Sfectator.

“The studies of the Parables are thorough, scholarly, suggestive and practical.
| Fullness of discussion, reverence of treatment, and sobriety of judgment, mainly chare
acterize this work.”—Christian World. ; .

‘‘Each Parable is most thoughtfully worked out, and much new light is thus thrown
on the difficulties which surround many of these beautiful and suggestive examples of
Divine teaching.” —Clergymen’s Magazine.

«This volume has only to be known to be welcomed, not by students alone, but by
all earnest students ot Christ’s oracles. On no subject has Dr. Bruce spoken more
wisely than on the question why Jesus spoke im parables. The one end the author sets
before himself is, to find out what our Lord really meant. And this he dues with a
clearness and fullness worthy of all praise. Familiar as we are witk some of
the best and most popular works on tke Parables, we do not know any to
which we could look for so much aié in our search after the very meaning
which Christ would have us find in His words.” —Wonconformis:.





Copies sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of prite.
A. C. ARMSTRONG & SON, 714 Broadway, New York.


STANDARD RELIGIOUS WORKS.
IS THERE SALVATION AFTER DEATH 4


A Treatise on the Gospel in the Intermediate State.


By E. D. Morris, D.D., LL.D., Professor in Lane Theological Sem:
inary, Cincinnati. Crown 8vo, cloth, $1.25. 2d Edition.

WN. Y. Observer says: “The various views are stated with fairness and precision,
the specific passages of Scripture, bearing upon the subject, are carefully considered,
as well as the general testimony of Scripture in relation to it, Wecommend the
volume to ministers and teachers,” ;

N. Y. EvanceE.ist : ‘‘ Clear ix method and cogent in argument, it is saturated
throughout with the large literature of its sulyect, 7s freefrom all acerbity and un-
[atrness, and is loyalto God’s Word as the final test of Christian truth. It will settle
doubt and confirm faith.”


THE HUMILIATION OF CHRIST
In its Physical, Ethical, and Official Aspects.


(Being the Sixth of the Cunningham Lectures.) By Rev. A. B. BRucE
D.D. Octavo, cloth, gilt top, $2.50. Uniform with the samc
author’s ‘‘ Parabolic Teaching of Christ,” and ‘‘ Miraculous
Llement in the Gospels.”


“ These lectures are well worthy of the name they bear, and of their precursors
in the series; and the book in which they are published, with ample notes and refer-
ences, will be valuable to theologians, supplying a want tn the literature of the subject,
and containing many fruitful germs of theught. Dr. Bruce’s siyle ts uniformly
clear and vigorous, and this book has the rare advantage of being at once stimulating
and satisfying to the mind ina high degree. He has given us a book that wil really
advance the theological understanding of the great truth that formes its subject >—
BritisH AND ForEIGN EVANGELICAL REVIEW.

The English Churchman says: ‘‘The title of the book gives but a faint concep-

. tion of the value and wealth ofits contents. . . . . Dr. Bruce’s work isreally one
of exceptional value; and no one can read it without perceptible gain in theological
knowledge,”








BY REV. DR. A. B. BRUCE.


THE TRAINING OF THE TWELVE,
Or, PASSAGES OUT OF THE GOSPELS.


Exhibiting the twelve Disciples of Jesus under Discipline for the Apostle-
ship. Uniform with same Author’s “The Humiliation of Christ,”
&c. Octavo, nearly 600 pages, cloth, gilt top, $2.50,


‘A really great book on an important, large, and attractive subject—a book full of
loving, wholesome, profound thoughts abovt the fundamentals of Christian faith and
practice.”—British and Foreign Avangelical Review.

“Full of suggestion and savour. It should be the companion of the minister, for the
theme is particularly related to himself, and he would find it a very pleasant and profit-
able companion.” —Spurgeon’s Sword and Trowel.

** A more wise, scholarly, and more helpful work has not been published for many
years past.”— Wesleyan Magazine.





Copies sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of price, by
A. C. ARMSTRONG & SON, 714 Broadway, New York.
4


University ot Southern California





nin in oC .


" —a= Oe

































BT201 .B58 1
Broadus, John
Jesus o






90
Ibert, 1827- 71895,


8
A
f Nazareth


BT a

201 109562
B58

1890 Broadus, John Albert
Jesus of Nazareth











pre gE vomonens











Broadus
Jesus


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


(bay PRINTED IN 'I S.A,
