Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 


It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 


Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work 1s expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 


We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book ts still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 


About Google Book Search 


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 


atthtto://books.google.com/ 


(teste, Va 
een a( (eth) ee 
| Bre cue OF THE © 


NIVERSITY OF Mi AIG 


We 
a 
yi 
13 
i| 
5 
a 


PM TLOMLO WLLL CEEOL UT 


| Le 
ee oe eres eee ee 
| im 


Shiktisaati pTebertayTospe suena aascceruitag a mab otto} puramabe visio vubesdmenediitiié 


= 
=z 
4 
= 
=| 
2 
iz 
E 
ie 
=e 
é 


Rev 
ET 


een 
wf O 
we 
/ BE 
1917 


er = ree 


JESUS IS COMING 


ew =f CL 
| ' lackstene , 
By W. E. B. _ 


“Seek ye out of the book of the Lord and read."— Isaiah zaztv: 16 


(Presentation Edition) 


Translations into 25 Languages 
Total Issues 386,000 


Chicago, New York, Toronto The 


Fleming H. Revell Moody Bible Institute 
Company of Chicago 


London and Edinburgh 153-163 Institute Place 


PRESENTATION COPY 


HE honored author of this book has com- 
missioned the Moody Bible Institute of Chicago 
to send copies gratuitously to ministers missionaries and 
thealogical students, especially in his own dearly-loved 
Methodist Episcopal Church. For sixty-four years he 
‘has been a member of that church, and for a good part 
of the time one of its most fruitful local preachers. 
How the Lord has used him in its activities at home 
and abroad will make a rich chapter in its history when 
the record of these years is set down. 

If extent of travel, fidelity to the Bible, lucidity in 
its exposition, and enthusiasm for preaching the Gospel 
“*to the Jew first and also to the Gentile’’ are a criterion, 
then Mr. Blackstone must be counted among the first 
of missionaries in the generation to which he belongs. 


The story of the circulation of the Word of God and 


other devotional literature under his personal super- 


vision in China and other heathen lands, is more 
fascinating than any romance. A truly wonderful 
ministry has been his. 

The book speaks for itself. Its treasures are beyond 
estimate. Its careful and prayerful reading and study 
will bring the richest blessing to the soul. 


JAMES M. GRAY. 
Chicago, October, 1916. | 


Copyright 1908, Fleming H. Revell Company 


wrw 


CD) Up greet 


APPRECIATIVE COMMENDATIONS 


The book, “Jesus is Coming,” by W. E. B., was the 
first book that made the coming of Jesus Christ a liv- 
ing reality to me. I had already become convinced 
that our Lord’s coming would be before the millennium, 
having reached that conclusion in studying the works 
of the Danish theologian, Martensen, but it was merely 
a theological conception until I read the book “Jesus 
is Coming.” It was this that first brought me to definite con- 
victions and made the doctrine not only clear, but very pre- 
cious. It is one of the books that has had a decidedly form- 
ative influence on my life and teaching. I always recommend 
it to those who are beginning the study of the subject. 
I hope that it may be as much blessed to others as it has 
been to me. 
R. A. TORREY, 
Dean, Bible Institute of Los Angeles, Cal. 


A number of years ago I had placed in my hands the 
little book, “Jesus is Coming,” by W. E. B. Prior to that time 
I had no defined method of Bible study, and I confess with 
shame that I had very little passion for Bible reading and for 
the winning of souls. 


This book completely revolutionized my thinking, save 
me a new conception of Christ and a new understanding of 
what it meant to work for Him. I most cordially commend 
it to Christian workers everywhere. 


J. WILBUR CHAPMAN, 


° 


RBPUBPPPrBD™*D™AD AP 


See Additional Testimonials on Page 246 


(S378134 


To my Brethren in 
The Christian Ministry, 


Dearly Beloved: 


‘ Having found in over forty years’ experience the ‘ ‘Blessed 
Hope” of our Lord’s return to be a most precious influence 
in my Christian life, promoting holiness, consecration of time 
and substance, and intense activity in our Master’s service, | 
humbly commend it to each of you for personal comfort, and 
as meat in due season to preach to your congregations. 

Let me emphasize the plain exhortations of the Holy Spirit, 
— ‘These things speak” Titus 2:15; “Comfort one another 
with these words’ 1 Thes. 4:18. 

Oh! Brethren! There are tens of thousands sitting under 
your ministry who would be comforted by the simple testimony 
of the Scriptures on this all important subject. 

Thank God there are many who do exalt this truth, but 
how it must grieve the Master to see the multitude of preachers 
who are indifferent to his promised return, and eliminate the 
comfort which he has commanded and which the masses 
need. 

Thirty-nine years ago I was providentially led to issue the . 
first edition of “Jesus Is Coming,”’ which has been followed 
by numerous editions totaling over three hundred and fifty 
thousand copies wiih translations into twenty-five different 
languages encircling the world. 

Most rapturously do I praise our coming Bridegroom that 
he has let his “‘errand boy’ have so wide a testimony. 

With all my heart in this my seventy-sixth year do I im- 
plore you to read this book. Many have testified that 
it has made the Bible a new book to them. May it be soto 
you, and may we all, some day, rejoice together with Luther, 
Melanchthon, Calvin, Knox, and the Wesleys, singing 
Charles beautiful hymns as a welcome to our descending 

ord. 


Yours in patient waiting. 


5425 Pasadena Ave., WM. E. BLACKSTONE. ' 
Los Angeles, Cal., Jan., 1917. 


Acknowledgment of receipt of book malied to above address 
will be appreciated. 

If you already have a copy kindly pass this on to one to whom 
you think it may be heipful. 


THE SECOND ADVENT 


Lo! He comes, with clouds descending, 
Once for favored sinners slain; 
Thousand thousand saints attending, 
Swell the triumph of his train; 
Hallelujah! 
God appears on earth to reign. 


Every eye shall now behold him 
Robed in dreadful majesty; 
Those who set at naught and sold him, 
Pierced and nailed him to the tree, 
Deeply wailing 
Shall the true Messiah see. 


All the tokens of his passion 
Still his dazzling body bears, 
Cause of endless exultation 
To his ransomed worshipers; 
With what rapture 
Gaze we on those glorious sears. 


Yea, Amen! let all adore thee, 
High on thy eternal throne; 
Savior, take the power and glory; 
Claim the kingdom for thine own: 
Jah! Jehovah! 
Everlasting God, come down! 
—Charles Wesley. 


Preface to the Third Revision. 


We dedicate this book to those who “love our Lord’s 
appearing.” It has been our prayerful desire to furnish, in 
abbreviated form, a hand book that might serve as a con- 
venient reference in the study of this truth, and as an aid 
in the presentation of it to others. 

We gratefully acknowledge the blessing of God, which has 
rested upon it so that it has passed through many editions 
and also been issued in twelve foreign languages.* We have 
no desire for controversy, but have only sought to testify 
our convictions regarding the scriptural importance of this 
subject, and to aid candid inquirers in obtaining “like 
precious faith with us.’”’ After continued, earnest and 
prayerful study, we are more than ever confirmed in the 
faith that Christ’s coming will be pre-millennial, and this 
all important point we would emphasize, if possible, with 
the zeal and earnestness manifested by the early disciples, 
who repeatedly taught us to look for Jesus. Phil. 3:20; Tit. 
2:18; Heb. 9:28; 2 Pet. 3:14. 

We would not be dogmatic concerning the order of events 
which cluster about our Lord’s return and, should any hold 
views different from what we have set forth as the result 
_of our study, we will cordially strike hands with them if we 
may unite upon the great fact that His return will be pre- 
millennial and that the time of it is uncertain and imminent 
(Matt. 24:42); and further that this hope (‘Blessed Hope,” 
Tit. 2:13) begets a purifying separating power in the heart, 
winning us unto holiness, love and service. 

“And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I 
pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved 
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.”’ ° 

“Faithful is He that calleth you, who also will do it.” 
1 Thes. 5:23-24. 

For the kind criticism and helpful suggestions of breth- 
ren dearly beloved—we express our sincere thanks, and we 
humbly pray for the continued blessing of “the Coming 
One.” W. B. B. 

* Now twenty-five foreign languages, 


©) 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. Page 

JESUS IS COMING... .ccccccccccvesccces cecccccccccevess Lh 

“I don’t care anything about | 5 Sag 12 

The true incentive to a holy life........... as eececes 14 

“Oh, that’s Second Adventism”..........cccccccces 15 

“It don’t concern me,” CtC. .......cccccccccccccces . 16 

Its Importance in the Word—Practical......... 17, 116 

Forty statements showing its practical character.. .180 

We are not “speculating”’...... ce cccccccccccccccece LY 
CHAPTER II. 

LITERARY INTERPRETATION—Luke, 1:31-83 ..........0.00% 20 

Conversation between a Christian and a Jew..... - 20 

Symbols, figures and allegories.............0cceee 21 


“Spiritualizing”’ subverts the authority and power 
of the Word, and saps the foundation of every 
Christian doctrine—Purpose of language....... 22 

Prophecies literally fulfilled at His first coming.... 23 

Prophecies to be literally fulfilled at His second 


COMING ..cccccccsecccccccsscens cer ecccccceves Of 
CHAPTER III. 

His Comine Dors Nor MEAN DEATH...........cccccceee 26 
Death igs an CNEMY....... ccc ccc cece cece ccc ccnccces 26 
It will not apply in Scripture referring to His 

COMING ...-ccevecceee soccer ec cee cere cecccccecce 23 
Intermediate state of the dead.......ccsccccccccens 29 
Dr. David Brown’s testimony.........ccccceccccccs 30 
Substituting death for His coming degrades the 

doctrine of the resurrection.............ccceee8 31 
We are not taught to watch for death, but for 

Christ’s Coming—Search the Scriptures...... .. 31 

CHAPTER IV. 

THe THREE APPEARINGS.....cceseees ec cececccces cecees OO 
His departure and His promise........ cc ceeee coos Of 
The Lord’s Supper, & token........csccccccccece .- 34 
The very Pole Star of the Church..........ccceeees 35 
Believed by the Fathers, and its History........ 35, 66 
Origen and his “spiritualizing”’ error....... pe cccee 36 


6) 


CONTENTS. 7 


CHAPTER V. Page 
THE MILLENNIUM......ccccescccccccccces ce ccccccccsccs OF 
CHAPTER VI. 
POST-MILLENNIALISM .......cccccccccccccccvcccces cocee 41 
The principal question,—Is the coming to be Pre- 
Millennial or Post-Millennial? ...........cccees 41 


CHAPTER VII. 


ARGUMENTS SHOWING THE COMING TO BE PRE-MILLENNIAL— 


No. 
No. 
No. 
No. 
No. 
No. 


No. 


a 


O Om go bo 


(f 


Antichrist ..... ccc ccc ccc crc c cc ccvccccececs 43 
Immediately after the Tribulation......... 43 
Persecuted Church .......cccccccccvccccees 44 
Tares and Wheat .......cccccccccccccccese 44 
Literal Reign of Christ.........ccccccccces 46 


Argument from Order of the Resurrection... 47 
Order of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15:22-26.. 48 
Dead in Christ rise first, 1 Thes. 4:13-17... 48 
The First Resurrection, Rev. 20:4-14....48, 62 


His Coming Before the Millennium........ 49 
Objections to literal first resurrection con- 
sidered— 
1. No right thus to aggregate texts... 50 
2. Only souls mentioned in Rev. 20:4.. 50 
3. Spiritual life in Paradise........... 52 
4. Only the beheaded mentioned, etc... 52 
5. Last day, = 1000 years............. 54 
6. Mentioned in same verse, therefore 
just and unjust rise simultaneously 55 
7. Only ome passage........cccccescecs 57 
Dean Alford’s Ccomment...........cccccees 358 
Resurrection from the Dead............... 59 
Argument from the Greek text............ 59 
Watching 0... .ccccccccccccccccenscsssceces 63 
Continue to Watch—“‘A Little While’”..... 65 
The Faith of the Early Church............ 66 
Hold the traditions (teachings), 2 Thes. 
2:15—Apostles not mistaken........... 69 


Barly Christians did not hold false hope... 69 
We must watch as they did....... ccc cccces 70 


8 JESUS I8 COMING. 


CHAPTER VIII. Page 

DracRAM—OUTLINE OF EVENTS, AND EXPLANATIONS...... 72 
CHAPTER IX. 

THE RAPTURE AND THE REVELATION DISTINGUISHED...... 75 
CHAPTER X. 


THE CHURCH AND THE MILLENNIAL KINGDOM DISTINGUISHED 83 
The Church—A distinct body (éxxAnoia Assembly). 83 


A Mystery, 89; A Virgin of Sorrow .......... 90 

TO be rewarded ...ccccccccccccccsccvcccccerves 93 
The Kingdom is the manifestation of the glory of 

Christ and His saints.................e0e: 83 

Its manifestation is still future................ 84 

It is now hid in mystery........ ccc cece cece nee 86 
Explanation of its coming “nigh” or being “at 

hand” when Christ came............ccc00. 88 

Nominal Christians .......ccccccccccccccccccccces Q4 

The True Church—The Body of Christ.............., 95 

The Bride of Christ... .....ccceccccccccccs 96, 202 

CHAPTER XI. 

THE TRIBULATION, THE RESURRECTION AND THE JUDGMENT. 98 
The Resurrection ..... ccc ccc cece cece cc ccccccccces 99 
Four Judgments ......ccccrccccccscccccces ce esees 103 

CHAPTER XII. 
THE ANTICHBIST ......cccccccccccccacesscccessccccens 107 
CHAPTER XIII. | 

THE PRINCIPAL EVENT.......ccccccccccccccccccccceccccs 113 
The Pre-Millennial Coming.............. Poe esceene 113 
Post-Millennial Questionings .........cccecccccccce 113 
Pre- vs. Post-Millennialism ..........ccccecces eoee eld 
Preach the Word—Comfort One Another........... 115 
Solemn Warning .....cccscccsscccccccccsccccccces 116 


Pre-MiHennialism, Vital and Inspiring............ 116 


CHAPTER XIV.. 
Some OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 


No. 1. It discourages Missions...........cccceees 118 
No. 2. It discourages Work .........ccceceees eee 119 
No. 3. Too many unsaved friends..........cscceee 119 
No. 4. “My kingdom is not of this world”........ 120 


No. 5. “The Kingdom of God is within you”...... 17 


CONTENTS. 9 


Page 

No. 6. “The Kingdom of God is not meat and 
GVINK” .. cece cece cece cere ee ccccces 124 

No. 7. “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the King- 
GOM,” CCC. ccccccncccccccnncccvssccece 125 
No. 8. It disparages the work of the Holy Spirit. .129 
No. 9. It makes the Gospel a failure.............. 131 
No. 10. The Gospel not preached in all the world. .132 
When the Witness is complete...:........ 133 

Only God KNOWS .....cccccsccccccncccccces 134-- 


No. 11. “There be some standing here,” Mat. 16:28..135 
“Spiritual” Coming, “Typical” Coming... .135 


Some of them did see the Kingdom........ 138 
Peter saw it ......... cece cc eeee becccccces 139 
John saw it—Paul saw it..............0-- 146 
“Ye shall not have gone over the cities of 
Israel.” Mat. 10:23... ..ccccccccscccecs 141 
No. 12. Gloomy view of the future....... ccc cceeeee 142 
“The days are evil” .... ccc cece ccc cccces 144’ 
Cannot average Church and World....... 145 
Triumphs of Art and Science do not argue 
an increase in Godliness............6- 147 
‘ The World not Growing Better............ 148 
Civilization and Refinement not the source 
Of Holimess ...... ccc ccc ccccvsccvees 150 
Is the Church Progressing? ..........ce008- 151 
The Light and the Salt of the World....... 151 
Loosing the Saltness .......ccccscccseees 152 
The Parables of Mat. 18...........cccecoes 152 
The Faithful Remnant ..... cece cece oo ee 156 
No. 13. Cruel to the unsaved millions.............6. 158 
This World dies every 33 years............ 158 
No. 14. Israel—the generation which passes not 
away ....... "Sew ccceee ccc cccccs es ccee LOO 
CHAPTER XV. 

ISRAEL TO BE RESTORED.............0. ce ccees cece cence 162 
The Second Time......... cece cece cece once ceccecs 167 
Permanent Restoration .........c.cc0- occ eccccens 169 
All Nations shall flow unto Israel........ ve ewecees 169 


They shall “Look upon Me”............ re Wi! 


10 | JESUS I8 COMING. 


Page 
The Cleansing of Israel ....... ree iy 6 | 
Confusing Israel with the Church..........ceceeees 172 
The Day of Jacob’s Trouble... .... cc ccc ke cco esecce 174 
CHAPTER XVI. 
THE STUDY OF PROPHECY. .......ccccccccccccccccceccecs 177 


The best weapon to meet Sophistry and Skepticism .179 
CHAPTER XVII. 


A PBACTICAL DOCTBINE .. cc cccccccccccccccccccccccccce cl al 
CHAPTER XVIII. 
OUTLINE OF THE ORDER OF EVEWTS.......ccccccccces 183, 195 


References to Principal Passages.......cceccceecceLDG 
CHAPTER XIX. 


ANATHEMA OB COMFORT........0000. nr rrrrre &: 
Jesus Christ Coming in the Flesh..............000- 200 
The Sweetest Comfort...........ccccccccccccccccce 201 
CHAPTER XX 

THE TIME ...cccccccccsees ec ec c cece ccc cccecccccccses 207 
The Jews Returning..... cece cece ccc c ec cccceceees 210 
Watchman, What of the Night?.........ceseceesee 218 

CHAPTER XXI. 

PLAN OF THE AIONS (AGES)........00- ccc cece cece ecces 218 
The Time of the BEnd........ ccc ccc cccccccccs ~ 00 e204 
Diagram ...........eceeeee cece ccececestecces ey 745) 

CHAPTER XXII. 

SIGNS or CHRIST’S SPEEDY COMING.........ccccccccccces 228 

1. The Prevalence of Travel and Knowledge. ..228 

2. Perilous Times .....cccccccccscvcccccces » 230 

8. Spiritualism .... ccc eevee crn ccccccccccces 231 

4, Apostacy ......cccccccccccccccccccceces 2.231 

5. World Wide Evangelism .............cce00. 232 

6. Rich Mem ........cccccccccccccccces coeee saad 

%. Israel co.cc cece ccc cece ccc cccecccccece eee ee cod 

8. Zionism 2... cece ccccccscvccccvcccces ose. 200 

Watch ......-. ccc cece cece cae ees ecccce cee eececes 242 

Ye Shall be Witnesses. ........cccccccccvvccccccces 243 

Missionary Periodicals ..........sceeee ee eeee eevee 244 
Appreciative Commendations ........cccsceeees 3, 246. 


Textual Index .......cccccccccccsccccccer oenecces 249 


¢ 


Jesus is Coming. 


CHAPTER L 


) Jesus is Coming Again. 


Reader, do you know that Jesus is coming again? 
He said, “I will come again” (John 14:3) and His word 
endureth forever,! for He is the truth.? 


The angels said He would come again. 


“The same Je- 


sus,” “and in like manner,’’? and they were not mistaken 
when they announced His first coming.‘ 

The Holy Spirit, by the mouth of the aposties, hath re- 
peatedly said He would come again.® Is not such an event, 
stated upon such authority, of vital importance to us? 


(1) 1 Pet. 1:25. But the 
word of the Lord endureth for 
ever. And this is the word 
which by the gospel is preached 
unto you. 

(2) John 14:6. Jesus saith 
unto him, I am the way, the 
truth, and the life: no man 
cometh unto the Father, but by 
me. 

(3) Acts 1:11. Which also 
said, Ye men of Galilee, why 
stand ye gazing up into heaven? 
this same Jesus, which is taken 
up from you into heaven, Shall 
so come in like manner as ye 
have seen him go into heaven. 

(4) Lu. 1:26. And in the 
sixth month the angel Gabriel 
was sent from God unto a city 
of Galilee, named Nazareth, 

27. To a virgin espoused to 
@ man whose name was Joseph, 
of the house of David; and the 
virgin’s name was Mary. 

28. And the angel came in 
unto her, and said, Halil thou 
that art highly favoured, the 
Lord és with thee: blessed art 
thou among women. 

30. And the angel said unto 


her, Fear not, Mary: for thou 
hast found favour with God. 

31. And, behold, thou shalt 
conceive in thy womb, and 
bring forth a son, and shalt call 
his name JESUS. 

32. He shall be great, and 
shall be called the Son of the 
Most High; and the Lord God 
shall give unto him the throne 
of his father David. , 

33. And he shall reign over 
the house of Jacob for ever and 
of his kingdom there shall be 
no end. 

See also Lu. 2 :8-18. 

(5) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God: and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first: 

Heb. 9:28. So Christ was 
once offered to bear the sins of 
many; and unto them that look 
for him shall he appear the 
second time without sin unto 
salvation. 

Heb. 10:37. For yet a little 
while, and he that shall come 
will come, and will not tarry. 


(11) 


12 JESUS I8 COMING. 


At His first coming, the world rejected Him. He was the 
despised Nazarene. But when He comes again, He will ap- 
pear as “the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings 
and Lord of Lords.’”* 

He is coming to sit upon the throne of His glory,’ and 
te be admired in all them that believed, and to rule, in 
judgment ana equity, all the nations of the earth.® 

How glorious it will be to see the King in His beauty.’ 

Perhaps you are not a Christian, and say— 


‘‘I Don’t Care Anything About It.’’ 


Then, dear friend, we point you to the crucified Savior as 
the only hope of salvation. 

We beg of you to “kiss the Son,” lest ye perish from the 
way. Blessed are all they that put their trust nm Him.™ 
What shall it profit you if you gain the whole world and 


(6) 1 Tim. 6:13. I give thee 
charge in the sight of God, who 
quickeneth all things, and before 
Christ 

14. That thou keep this com- 
mandment without spot, un- 
rebukeable, until the appear- 
ing of our Lord Jesus Christ: 

15. Which in his times he 
shall shew, who is the blessed 
and only Potentate, the King of 
kings, and Lord of lords. 

(7) Mat. 25:31. When the 
Son of man shall come in his 
glory, and all the holy angels 
with him, then shall he sit upon 
the throne of his glory. 

(8) 2 Thes. 1:10. When he 
shall come to be glorified in his 
saints, and to be admired in all 
them that believe (because our 
testimony among you was be- 
lieved) in that day. 

(9) Psa. 2:9. Thou shalt 
break them with a rod of iron; 
thou shalt dash them in pleces 
like a potter’s vessel. 

Isa. 9:6. For unto us a child 
is born, unto us a son is given: 
and the government shall be 
upon his shoulder: and his 
name shall be called Wonderful, 
Counsellor, The Mighty God, 


The Everlasting Father, The 
Prince of Peace. 

7. Of the increase of his gov- 
ernment and peace there shalt 
ve no end, upon the throne of 
David, and upon his kingdom, 
to order it, and to establish it 
with judgment and with justice 
from henceforth even for ever. 
The zeal of the Lord of hosts 
will perform this. 

Rev. 2:25. But that which 
ye have already, hold fast till 
I come. 

26. And he that overcometh, 
and keepeth my works unto the 
end, to him will I give power 
over the nations: 

27. And he shall rule them 
with a rod of iron; as the ves- 
sels of a potter shall they be 
broken to shivers: even as I 
received of my Father. 

(10) Isa. 33:17. Thine eyes 
shall see the King in his beauty ; 
they shall behold the land that 
is very far off. 

(11) Psa. 2:12. Kiss the 
Son, lest he be angry, and ye 
perish from the way, when his 
wrath is kindled but a little. 
Blessed are all they that put 
their trust in him. 


, 


- 2 ewe — 2 


“KISS THE SON.” pr 


lose your own soul?!* He is coming, and we know neither 
the day, nor the hour, when He may come.4* What if He 
should come now? Would you be found of Him in peace,'* 
or would you be left behind to endure the terrible things 
which shall come upon the world,!5 while the church is with 
Christ in the air,® and be made at His appearing?” to 
mourn!’ and pray to the mountains and rocks to hide you 
from His face #?® 

“Prepare to meet thy God,” was the solemn injunction to 
Israel (Amos 4:12), and every one of us, both Jew and 
Gentile, must meet Him, either in grace or in judgment. 

We, then, as ambassadors for Christ, beseech you: be ye 


(12) Mat. 16:26. For what 
is a man profited, if he shall 
gain the whole world, and lose 
his own soul? or what shall a 
man give in exchange for his 
soul? 

27. For the Son of man shall 
come in the glory of his Father 
with his angels; and then he 
shall reward every man accord- 
ing to his works. 

(13) Mat. 25:13. Watch 
therefore; for ye know neither 
the day nor the hour wherein 
the Son of man’ cometh. 

(14) 2 Pet. 8:14. Where- 
fore, beloved, seeing that ye look 
for such things, be diligent that 
ye may be found of him in 
peace, without spot, and blame- 
less. 

(15) Luke 21:25. And there 
shall be signgy in the sun, and 
in the moon, and in the stars; 
and upon the earth distress of 
nations, with perplexity; the sea 
and the waves roaring; 

26. Men’s hearts failing them 
for fear, and for looking after 
thaqse things which are coming 
on the earth: for the powers 
of heaven shall be shaken. 

(16) Luke 21:36. Watch ye 
therefore, and pray always, that 
ye may be accounted worthy to 
escape all these things that 
shall come to pass, and to stand 
before the Son of man. 


1 Thes. 4:17. Then we which 
are alive and remain shall be 
caught up together with them 
in the clouds, to meet the Lord 
in the air: and so shall we ever 
be with the Lord. 

(17) 2 Thes. 1:7. And to you 
who are troubled rest with us, 
when the Lord Jesus shall be 
revealed from heaven with his 
mighty angels, 

8. In flaming fire taking ven- 
geance on them that know not 
God, and that obey not the gos- 
pel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 

9. Who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of his power; 

10. When he shall come to be 
glorified in his saints, and to 
be admired in all them that be- 
lieve (because our testimony 
among you was believed) in 
that day. 

(18) Mat. 24:30. And then 
shall appear the sign of the Son 
of man in heaven: and then 
shall all the tribes of the earth 
mourn, and they shall see the 
Son of man coming in the 
clouds of heaven with power and 
great glory. 

(19) Rev. 6:16. And said to 
the mountains and rocks, Fall 
on us, and hide us from the face 
of him that sitteth on the 
throne, and from the wrath of 
the Lamb. 


4 JESUS I8 COMING. 


reconciled to God,2° now, in the accepted time, in the day 
of salvation.21 Do let us entreat you to repent and be 
converted, that your sins may be blotted out,?? and that 
you may turn “to serve the living and true God, and to 
wait for his Son from Heaven,’’?* and be unblamable at the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.** 

But if you are a Christian, then we point you to Hes 
coming again, as 


The True Incentive to a Holy Life.?® 
Jesus is coming, therefore mortify your members which 


ee ener ee eee 


(20) 2 Cor. 5:20. Now then Acts 17:30. And the times of 


we are ambassadors for Christ, 
as though God did beseech you 
by us: we pray you in Christ's 
stead, be ye reconciled to God. 


(21) 2 Cor. 6:2. (For he 
saith, I have heard thee in a 
time accepted, and in the day 
of salvation have I succoured 
thee: behold, now és the ac- 


cepted time; behold, now és the, 


day of salvation.) 


Luke 14:31. Or what king, 
going to make war against an- 
other king, sitteth not down 
first, and consulteth whether he 
be able with ten thousand to 
meet him that cometh against 
him with twenty thousand? 


32. Or else, while the other is 
yet a great way off, he sendeth 
an ambassage, and desireth con- 
ditions of peace. 

33. So likewise, whosoever he 
be of you that forsaketh not all 
that he hath, he cannot be my 
disciple. 

(22) Acts 10:42. And he 
commandeth us to preach unto 
the people, and to testify that it 
is he which was ordained of 
God to be the Judge of quick 
and dead. 

43. To him give all the proph- 
ets witness, that through His 
name whosoever believeth in 
him shall receive remission of 
sins. 


this ignorance God winked at ; 
but now commandeth all men 
every where to repent: 

31. Because he hath appointed 
a day, in the which he will 
judge the world in righteous- 
ness by that man whom he hath 
ordained; whereof he hath given 
assurance unto all men, in that 
he hath raised him from the 
dead. 


(23) 1 Thes. 1:9. For they 
themselves shew of us what man- 
ner of entering in we had unto 
you, and how ye turned to God 
from idols to serve the living 
and true God; - 

10. And to wait for his Son 
from heaven, whom he raised 
from the dead, even Jesus, which 
delivered us from the wrath to 
come. 

(24) 1 Thes. 3:13. To the 
end he may stablish your hearts 
unblamable in holiness before 
God, even our Father, at the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
with al] his saints. 

(25) 1 John 3:2. Beloved, 
now are we the sons of God, and 
it doth not yet appear what we 
shall be: but we know that, 
when he shall appear, we shall: 
be like him; for we shall see 
him as he is. 

3. And every man that hath 
this hope in him purifieth him- 
self, even as he is pure. 


= wee oe 


rE Re 


THE SECOND ADVENT. 15 


are upon the earth, that you may appear with Him in 


glory.?¢ 


Strive and pray for purity of heart, that you may “be 
like Him and see Him as He is.”27 Search the Word, that 
you may be sanctified and cleansed thereby,?® and that your 
whole spirit, and soul, and body may be preserved blameless 
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.?® But possibly 


you say, with contempt, 


‘‘Oh, That’s Second Adventism.’’ 


Beloved, have you considered that Moses,®®° David,?2 
Isaiah,®? Jeremiah,®* Daniel,?* Zecariah,*® all the prophets 


(26) Col. 3:4. When Christ, 
who ts our life, shall appear, 
then shall ye also appear with 
him in glory. 

5. Mortify therefore your mem- 
bers which are upon the earth; 


fornication, uncleanness, inor- 
dinate affection, evil concu- 
piscence, and covetousness, 


which is idolatry. 

(27) Mat. 5:8. Blessed are 
the pure in heart: for they shall 
see God. 

1 John 3:2. Beloved, now 
are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we 
shall be: but we know that, 
when he shall appear, we shall 
be like him; for we shall see 
him as he is. - 

3. And every man that hath 
this hope in him purifieth him- 
self, even as he is pure. 

(28) Eph. 65:26. That he 
might sanctify and cleanse it 
with the washing of water by 
the word. 

(29) 1 Thes. 5:23. And the 
very God of peace sanctify you 
wholly; and I pray God your 
whole spirit and soul and body 
be preserved blameless unto the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

(30) Deut. 33:2. And he said, 
The Lord came from Sinai, and 
rose up from Seir unto them; 
he shined forth from Mount 
Paran, and he came with ten 
thousands of saints: from his 


right hand went a flery law for 
them. 

(31) Psa. 102:16. When the 
Lord shall build up Zion, he 
shall appear in his glory. 

(32) Isa. 59:20. And the Re- 
deemer shall come to Zion, and 
unto them that turn from 
transgression in Jacob, saith the 
Lord. 

Isa. 60:1, Arise, shine; for 
thy light is come, and the glory 
of the Lord is risen upon thee. 

(33) Jer. 23:5. Behold the 
days come, saith the Lord, that 
I will raise unto David a right- 
eous Branch, and a King shall 
reign and prosper, and shall ex- 
ecute judgment and justice in 
the earth. 

6. In his days Judah shall be 
saved, and Israel shall dwell 
safely: and this is his name 
whereby he shall be called, THE 
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

(34) Dan. 7:13. I saw in the 
night visions, and, behold, one 
like the Son of man came with 
the clouds of heaven, and came 
to the Ancient of days, and they 
brought him near before him. 

(35) Zech. 14:4. And his feet 
shall stand in that day upon the 
mount of Olives, which {4s be- 
fore Jerusalem on the east: and 
the mount of Olives shall cleave 
in the midst thereof toward the 
east and toward the west, and 


16 JESUS IS COMING. 


and apostles,2* were believers in the second advent of 
Christ? And because some, by setting dates, and other 
errors, have brought disrepute upon this doctrine, shall we 
east it aside altogether? 

But it may be you say (as we have been pained to hear 
from so many even earnest Christians) : 


‘*Well, I Don’t Think It Concerns Me Much, Anyway; 


I’ve always thought that in most cases it meant death, and 
if I’m prepared for death, that’s enough; and there is too 
much speculation about it to suit me; and I don’t believe 
il’s a practical doctrine; and, more than that, I think it’s a 
mistake to pay so much attention to it.” 

Yes, even thus do many Christians,—who profess to be 
members of the body of Christ,?*7 and: who have been 
espoused unto one husband, that they may be presented to 
Him *8—summarily dispose of this precious truth, that 
Jesus is coming, to take unto Himself His bride.®* 

O, beloved, do not thus deprive yourself of this ecomfort- 
ing truth. Please take your pencil and mark in your Bible 


the passages that pertain to it; and see 


there shali be a very great val- 
ley; and half of the mountain 
shall remove toward the north, 
and half of it toward the south. 


5. And ye shall flee to the 
valley of the mountains; for the 
valley of the mountains shall 
reacb unto Azal: yea, ye shall 
flee, like as ye fled from before 
the earthquake in the days of 
Uzziah king of Judah: and the 
Lord my God shall come, and all 
the saints with thee. 

(36) Acts 15:15. And to this 
agree the words of the prophets ; 
as it ls written, 


16. After this I will return, 
- and will build again the taber- 
nacle of David, which is fallen 
down; and I will build again 
the ruins thereof, and I will set 
it up: 

17. That the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord, and 


all the Gentiles, upon whom my 
name is called, saith the Lord, 
who doeth all these things. 


(37) 1 Cor. 12:27. Now ye 
are the body of Christ, and mem- 
bers in particular. 

(38) 2 Cor. 11:2. For I am 
jealous over you with godly 
jealousy: for I have . espoused 
you to one husband, that I may 
present you as a chaste virgin 
to Christ. 4 

_ (39) John 14:3. And if I go 
and prepare a place for you, I 
will come again, and receive you 
unto myself; that where I am, 
there ye may be also. 

Eph. 5:23. For the husband ie 
the head of the wife, even as 
Christ is the head of the church: 
and he is the Saviour of the 
body. " 

32. This is a great mystery: 
but I speak concerning Christ 
and the church. 


‘IMPORTANOH IN THE WORD. — 


How Large a Portion of the Word Is Devoted to It. 


If the Holy Ghost has deemed it so important, is it not 
worthy of our attention? The Word exhorts us *® to give 
attention to it;*! and the danger of condemnation is to 
them who do not.*? 

Again, please to examine the passages cited under the 
heading, “A Practical Doctrine,” on page 180 and see how 
Jesus and the apostles used this doctrine to incite us to 
watchfulness, repentance, patience, ministerial faithfulness, 
brotherly love, etc., and then decide whether anything could 
be more practical. 

Surely no doctrine, in the Word of God, presents a deeper 
motive for crucifying the flesh, and for separation unto 


(40) 1 Thes. 4:18. Wherefore 
eomfort one another with these 
words. 

1 Cor. 1:7. So that ye come 
behind in no gift; waiting for 
the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ: 

(41) Rev. 1:3. Blessed is he 
that readeth, and they that hear 
the words of this prophecy, and 
keep those things which are 
written therein: for the time is 
at hand. 

(42) Luke 12:45. But and if 
that servant say in his heart, 
My lord delayeth his coming; 
and shall begin to beat the men- 
servants and maidens, and to eat 
and drink, and to be drunken; 

46. The lord of that servant 
will come in a day when he 
looketh not for him, and at an 
hour when he is not aware, and 
will cut him in sunder, and will 
appoint him his portion with the 
unbelievers. 

Luke 21:34. And take heed to 
yourselves, lest at any time your 
hearts be overcharged with sur- 
feiting, and drunkenness, and 
cares of thfs life, and so that 
aay some upon you unawares. 

%. For as a snare shall it 
come on all them that dwell on 
the face of the whole earth. 


36. Watch ye therefore, and 
pray always, that ye may be ac- 
counted worthy to escape all 
these things that shall come to 
pass, and to stand before the 
Son of man. 


1 Thes. 5:1. But of the times 
and the seasons, brethren, ye 
have no need that I write unto 
you. 


2. For yourselves know per- 
fectly that the day of the Lord 
so cometh as a thief in the 
night. 


3. For when they shall say, 
Peace and safety; then sudden 
destruction cometh upon them, 
as travail upon a woman with 
child; and they shall not escape. 


4. But ye, brethren, are not in 
darkness, that that day should 
overtake you as a thief. 


8. Ye are all the children of 
light, and the children of the 
day: we are not of the night, 
nor of darkness. 


6. Therefore let us not sleep, 
as do others; but let us watch 
and be sober. 


7. For they that sleep sleep 
in the night; and they that be 
drunken are drunken in the 
night. 


“18 JESUS IS COMING. 


God, and to work for souls, as our hope and joy and crown 


of rejoicing*® than this does. 


For the whole teaching of it is, that our conversation 
(citizenship) is in heaven; from whence, also, we look for 
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our 
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious 
body.** It awakens groaning for the adoption, to wit, the 


redemption of our body.*® 


It gives us a view of the world, as a wrecked vessel,é® 


(483) 1 Thes. 9:19, For what 
ds our hope, or joy, or crown of 
rejoicing? Are not even ye in 
the presence of our Lord Jesus 
Christ at his coming? 

Dan. 12:3. And they that be 
wise shall shine as the brightness 
of the firmament; and they that 
turn many to righteousness as 
the stars for ever and ever. 

(44) Phil. 3:20. For our con- 
versation is in heaven; from 
whence also we look for the 
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: 

21. Who shall change our vile 
body, that it may be fashioned 
like unto his glorious body, ac- 
cording to the working where- 
by he is able even to subdue all 
things unto himself. 

(45) Rom. 8:23. And not 
only they, but ourselves also, 
which have the first fruits of 
the Spirit, even we ourselves 
groan within ourselves, waiting 
for the adoption, to wit, the re- 
demption of our body. 

Luke 21:28. And when these 
things begin to come to pass, 
then look up, and lift up your 
heads; for your redemption 
draweth nigh. 

(46) Matt. 7:18: Enter ye in 
at the strait gate: for wide is 
the gate, and broad és the way, 
that leadeth to destruction, and 
many there be which go in 
thereat ; 

14. Because strait is the gate, 
and narrow is the way, which 
leadeth unto life, and few there 
be that find it. 

1 Thes. 5:3. For when they 


shall say, Peace and safety; 
then sudden destruction cometh 
upon them, as travail upon a 
woman with child; and they 
shall not escape. 

2 Pet. 2:3. And through cov- 
etousness shall they with feigned 
words made merchandise of you: 
whose judgment now of a long 
time lingereth not, and their 
damnation slumbereth not. 

4. For if God spared not the 
angels that sinned, but cast them 


-down to hell, and delivered them 


into chains of darkness, to be 
reserved unto judgment; 

5. And spared not the old 
world, but saved Noah the eighth 
person, a preacher of righteous- 
ness, bringing in the flood upon 
the world of the ungodly; 

6. And turning the cities of 
Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes 
condemned them with an over- 
throw, making them an ensample 
unto those that after should live 
ungodly ; 

7. And delivered just Lot, 
vexed with the filthy conversa- 
tion of the wicked: 

8. (For that righteous man 
dwelling among them, in see- 
ing and hearing, vexed his 
righteous soul from day to day 
with their unlawful deeds :) 

9. The Lord knoweth how to 
deliver the godly out of temp- 
tation, and to reserve the un- 
just unto the day of judgment 
to be punished: 

2 Pet. 5:5. For this they will- 
ingly are ignorant of, that by 


SURE WORD OF PROPHECY. 19 


and stimulates us to work with all our might that we may 
save some.*? Most, if not all, of the evangelists of our day 
are animated by this doctrine, and surely their work is 
practical. 

Again, Peter says, “We have a more sure word of proph- 
ecy*, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed (as unto 
a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, 
and the day star arise) in your hearts” ;**f and he exhorts 
us to be mindful of these words.*® Therefore we are not | 
speculating when we prayerfully study prophecy. 


*Gr, We have the prophetic word more confirmed. 
tSee Tregelles’ punctuation. 


the word of God the heavens 
were of old, and the earth stand- 
ing out of the water and in the 
water ; 

6. Whereby the world that 
then was, being overflowed with 
water,, perished : 


7. But the heavens and the 
earth, which are now, by the 
game word are kept in store, 
reserved unto fire against the 
day of judgment and perdition 
of ungodly men. 

8. But, beloved, be not igno- 
rant of this one thing, that one 
day is with the Lord as a thou- 
sand years, and a thousand years 
@s one day. 

9. The Lord is not slack con- 
cerning his promise, as some 
men count slackness; but is 
*-~gsuffering to us-ward, not 
willing that any should perish, 
but that all should come to 
repentance. 


10. But the day of the Lord 
will come as a thief in the 
night: in the which the heavens 
shall pass away with a great 
noise, and the elements shall 
melt with fervent heat, the earth 
also and the works that are 
therein shall be burned up. 


11. Seeing then that all these 
things shall be dissolved, what 
Manner of persons ought ye to 


. be in ali holy conversation and 


godliness, 

12. Looking for and hasting 
unto the coming of the day of 
God, wherein the heavens being 
on fire shall be dissolved, and 
the elements shall melt with fer- 
vent heat? 

(47) 1 Cor. 9:22. To the 
weak became I weak; that I 
might gain the weak: I am made 
all things to all men, that I 
might by all means save some. 

(48) 2 Pet. 1:19. We have 
also a more sure word of proptL- 
ecy; whereunto ye do well that 
ye take heed, as unto a light 
that shineth in a dark place, 
until the day dawn, and the day- 
star arise in your hearts: 

(49) 2 Pet. 3:1. This second 
epistle, beloved, I now write unto 
you; in both which I stir up 
your pure minds by way of re- 
membrance: 

2. That ye may be mindful of 
the words which were spoken be- 
fore by the holy prophets, and 
of the commandment of us the 
apostles of the Lord and Sa- 


vior. 


CHAPTER Ir. 
Literal Interpretation. 


Perhaps you ask, ‘‘ Are not these prophecies to be inter- 
preted ‘spiritually’? And does not this ‘coming’ mean 
our acceptance of Him at conversion, and the witness of 
the spirit? Or does it not mean His reign over the 
Church?’’ ete. 

No! Not at.all. Think a.moment. Do you condemn 
the Jews for rejecting Christ, when He came in sueh literal 
fulfillment of prophecy, and yet reject the same literalness 
about his second coming? This is not consistent, and while 
we believe Luke 1:31, to be literally true, let us believe 
likewise in regard to verses 32 and 33. 


Luke 1:31-33. 


“31. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and 
bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus. 

“32. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the 
Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne 
of His Father, David. 

“33. And He shall reign over the house of Jacob for- 
ever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end.” 

The inconsistency of accepting literally verse 31, and 
‘spiritualizing’ 32 and 33, is clearly illustrated by the fol- 
lowing account of a conversation between a Christian min- — 
aster and a Jew: 

“Taking a New Testament and opening it at Luke 1:32, 
the Jew asked: ‘Do you believe that what is here written 
shall be literally accomplished,—The Lord God shall give 
unto Him the throne of His Father, David; and He shall 
reign over the house of Jacob forever?’ ‘I do not,’ an- 
swered the clergyman, ‘but rather take it to be figurative 
language, descriptive of Christ’s spiritual reign over the 
Church.’ 

“‘ Then,’ replied the Jew, ‘neither do I believe literally the 

(20). 


LITERAL INTERPRETATION. — 21 


words preceding, which say that this Son of David should 
be born of a virgin; but take them to be merely a figurative 
manner of describing the remarkable character for purity 
of him who is the subject of the prophecy.’ ‘But why,’ 
continued the Jew, ‘do you refuse to believe literally verses 
32 and 33, while you believe implicitly the far more incredi- 
ble statement of verse 319’ ‘I believe it,’ replied the clergy- 
man, ‘because it is a fact,’ ‘Ah!’ exclaimed the Jew, with 
an inexpressible air of scorn and triumph, ‘You believe 
Scripture because it is a fact; I believe it because it is the 

Word of God.’” 

And now, dear reader, was not the argument, of the Jew 
candid and forcible? There are symbols, figures or tropes, 
metaphors, etc., used in Scripture and there are, also, al- 
legories. : 

But, unless they are so stated in the text, or plainly 
indicated in the context, we should hold only to the literal 
sense. 

The words of Christ int John 7:38 we are told in the 
very next verse were spoken “of the Spirit, which they that 
believe on him should receive.” 

The allegory in Gal. 4:24-31? in no possible manner 
detracts from the literal sense of Scripture, but on the é 
contrary it confirms it. We know that both Hagar and 
Sarah had a literal physical existence. Mt. Sinai and Jeru- 
salem are literal. 

We have a literal Christ, the mediator of the new cove- 
nant.2 And so we believe that the Jerusalem which is 


(1) John 7:38. He that be- 
lieveth on me, as the Scripture 
hath said, out of his belly shall 
flow rivers of living water. 

39. (But this spake he of the 
Spirit, which they that believe 
on him should receive: for the 
Holy Ghost was not yet given; 
because that Jesus was not yet 
glorified.) 

(2) Gal. 4:24. Which things 
are an allegory: for these are 
the two covenants; the one from 

the mount Sinai, which gender- 


eth to hondage, which is Agar. 


25. For this Agar is mount 
Sinai in Arabia, and answereth 
to Jerusalem which now is, and 
is in bondage with her children. 

26. But Jerusalem which is 
above is free, which is the 
mother of us all... 


(3) Heb. 12:24. And to Je- 
sus the mediator of the new 
covenant, and to the blood of 
sprinkling, that speaketh better 
things than that of Abel. 


+t 


22 JESUS IS COMING. 


above,” of which Sarah is typical—“the heavenly Jeru- 
salem,’* “the new Jerusalem which cometh down out of 
heaven from God,”® is also literal, tangible and real. How 
then, are we authorized, from such examples as these (which 
are most prominent among those cited by Post-millennial- 
ists as authority for ‘‘spiritualizing’’), to do away with 
the literal sense of Luke 1:32-33, or of the multitude of 
passages which predict the restoration of Israel, the com- 
ing of Christ, or which describe His glorious Kingdom? 
There can be no warrant for it. It subverts the authority 
and power of the Word of God, and Post-millennialists, by 
so doing, open wide the door for skeptics and latitudina- 
rians of all descriptions. There are a portion of the Israel- 
ites in the present day who style themselves ‘‘reformed’’ 
or ‘‘liberal.’’ They likewise spiritualize the Old Testament 
prophecies and have therefore ceased to look for any literal 
Messiah. One of them not long since said to the writer 
“the nineteenth century is the Messiah,” and this absurd 
doctrine is now quite generally preached in their principal 
congregations. That even Jews should thus join with Gen- 
tiles in-‘‘spiritualizing’’ Scripture, is a marvelous sign of 
the times in which we live. [(“When the Son of Man 
cometh shall He find (the) faith on the earth?” Luke 18:8.] 
Why! the same process of spiritualizing away the literal 
sense of these plain texts of Scripture will sap the founda- 
tion of every Christian doctrine and leave us to drift into 
absolute infidelity, or the vagaries of Swedenborgianism. 
What is the purpose of language, if not to convey definite 
ideas? Surely the Holy Spirit could have chosen words 


(4) Heb. 12:22. But ye are and I will write woon him my 
come unto mount Sion, and unto new name. 
the city of the living God, the 


heavenly Jerusalem, and to an 
innumerable company of angels, 

(5) Rev. 3:12. Him that 
overcometh will I make a pillar 
in the temple of my God, and 
he shall go no more out: and I 
will write upon him the name of 
my God, and the name of the 
city of my God, which is new 
Jerusalem, which cometh down 
out of heaven from my God: 


Rev. 21:2. And I John saw 
the holy city, new Jerusalem, 
coming down from God out of 
heaven, prepared as a bride 
adorned for her husband. 


10. And he carried me away 
in the spirit to a great and high 
mountain, and shewed me that 
great city, the holy Jerusalem, 
Gegending out of heaven from 

) 


LITERAL INTERPRETATION. 23 


to convey His thoughts correctly. Indeed it is all summed 
up in the inguiry of a little child, “If Jesus didn’t mean 
what He said, why didn’t He say what He meant?” But 
we believe that He did mean what He said, and that His 
words will “not pass away.” Mat. 24:35. 

He said that He came “not to destroy the law or the 
prophets, but to fulfill,” and “Till heaven and earth pass, 
one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till 
all be fulfilled.” Mat. 5:17-18. 


Prophecies Literally Fulfilled at the First Coming. 


If He came and literally fulfilled the prophecies of a suf- 
fering Messiah, Psa. 22, Isa. 53, ete., will He not as surely 
come and likewise fulfill the prophecies of a glorified Mes- 
siah reigning in victory and majesty? Psa.2;72; Dan.7: 
13-14, Isa. 9; 11; 60, ete. Think of the many prophecies 
descriptive of a suffering Messiah, which we have seen 
Eterally fulfilled, and upon which we rest, as such strong 
evidence for the truth and inspiration of the Word, to wit: 

Isa. 7:14—Born of a virgin. 

Mic. 5:2—At Bethlehem. 

Jer. 31:15—Slaughter of the children. 

Hos, 11:1—Called out of Egypt. 

Isa, 11:2—Anointed with the Spirit. 

Zech. 9:9—Entry into Jerusalem. 

Psa, 41:9; 55: 12-14—Betrayed by a friend. 

Zech. 13 '7—Diseiples forsake Him. 

 —11:12—Sold for thirty pieces of silver, 
 —11:13—Potter’s field bought. 

Isa. 50:6—Spit on and scourged. 

Ex. 12:46; Psa. 34:20—Not a bone broken. 

Psa. 69 :21—Gall and vinegar. 

Psa, 22—Hands and feet pierced. 

— Garments parted—lots cast. 

Isa. 53—Poverty, suffering, patience, and death. And _ 
many other passages. 

All these were literally fulfilled when Christ came. Do 
not, then, reject the literal fulfillment of those numerous 
propheeies which describe His future coming, and His 
glorious reign upon the earth. Namely :— 


24 JESUS IS COMING. 


Prophecies to be Literally Fulfilled at the Second 


Coming. 
That He shall come Himself,— 1 Thes. 4:16, 
That He shall shout,— 1 Thes. 4:16. 
That the dead will hear His voice,— John 5:28. 
That the raised and changed believers will be caught 
up to meet Him in the air,— 1 Thes, 4:17. 
That He will receive them unto Himself,— John 14:3. 
That He will minister unto His watching servants,— 
Lu. 12:37. 
That He will come to the earth again,— Acts 1:11. 
To the same Mount Olivet from which He as- 
cended,— Zech. 14:4. 
In flaming fire,— 2 Thes. 1:8. 
In the clouds of heaven with power and great 
glory,— Mat. 24:30; 1 Pet. 1:7; 4:13. . 
And stand upon the earth,— Job 19:25, 


That His saints (the Church) shall come with Him,— 
Deut. 33:2; 1 Thes. 3:13; Jude 14. 
That every eye shall see Him,— Rev. 1:7. 
That He shall destroy Antichrist,— 2 Thes. 2:8. 
That He shall sit in His throne,—Mat. 25:31; Rev. 5:13. 
That all nations will be gathered before Him, and 
He will judge them,— Mat. 25 :32, 
That He shall have ‘the throne of David,— 
Isa. 9:6-7; Lu. 1:32; Ezek. 21 :25-27. | 
That it will be upon the earth,— Jer. 23 :5-6, 
That He shall have a kingdom,— Dan. 7 :13-14. 
And rule over it with His saints,— 
Dan. 7 :18-22-27; Rev. 5:10. 
That all kings and nations shall serve Him,— 
Psa. 72:11; Isa. 49:6-7; Rev. 15:4. 
That the kingdoms of this world shall become His 


kingdom,— Zech. 9:10; Rev. 11:15. 
That the people shall gather unto Him,— Gen. 49:10, 
That every knee shall bow to Him,— Isa. 45 :23, 


That they shall come and worship the King,— 
Zech. 14:16; Psa. 86:9. 
That He shall build up Zion,— Psa. 102 :16. 


re 


LITERAL INTERPRETATION. 25 


That His throne shall be in Jerusalem,— 
Jer. 3:17; Isa. 33 :20-25. 
That the Apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones, judg- 
ing the twelve tribes of Israel,— 
Mat. 19:28; Lu. 22:28-30. 
That He shall rule all nations,— Psa. 2:8-9; Rev. 2:27. 
That He shall rule with judgment and justice,— Isa. 9:7. 
That the Temple m Jerusalem will be rebuilt 
(Ezek. chapters 40-48), and the glory of the 
Lord will come into it,— Ezek. 43 :2-5; 44:4. 
That the glory of the Lord shall be revealed,— Isa. 40:5. 
That the wilderness shall be a fruitful field,— Isa. 32:15. 
That the desert will blossom as the rose,— Isa. 35 :1-2. 
And His rest shall be glorious,— Isa. 11:10. 
And many more we might mention. 

Surely, there is no symbolism in these plain prophecies, 
which gives us any authority to “spiritualize” them. Rather 
let us expect that He will as literally fulfill these as He 
did the others at His first coming. 


CHAPTER III. 
His Coming Does Not Mean Death. 


His first coming did not mean death to the Jews, and 
they did not so understand it; neither does His second 
coming mean death to Christians, nor should they so un- 
derstand it. 

Jesus makes a clear distinction between death and His 
coming in John 21.1 He tells Peter how he should die, and 
then, by contrast, He speaks of John, saying: “If I will 
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?” That is, 
that John might not die, but live till Jesus should come 
again. The disciples so understood it, and reported that 
he should not die. 

Death is an enemy,? and at Christ’s coming we are raised 
from the dead, and shout victory over death and the grave. 
“OQ Death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy vic- 
tory 76 


(1) John 21:18. Verily, ver- what is that to thee? Follow 
ily, I say unto thee, When thou thou me. 
wast young, thou girdedst thy- 23. Then went this saying 
self, and walkedst whither thou abroad among the brethren, that 
wouldest: but when thou shalt that disciple should not die: yet 
be old, thou shalt stretch forth Jesus said not unto him, He 
thy hands, and another shall shall not die; but, If I will that 
gird thee, and carry thee whither he tarry till I come, what is thai 
thou wouldest not. to thee? 

19. This spake he, signifying (2) 1 Cor. 15:26. The last 
by what death he should glorify enemy that shall be destroyed és 
God. And when he had spoken’ death. ‘ 
this he saith unto him, Follow (3) 1 Cor. 15:23. But every 
me. man in his own order: Christ 


20. Then Peter, turning about, the firstfruits; afterward they 


that are Christ’s at his coming. 
seeth the disciple whom Jesus 
loved following; which also 54. So when this corruptible 


leaned on his breast at supper, shall have put on incorruption, 


and said. Lord, which is he that and this mortal shall have put 
betrayeth thee? on immortality, then shall be 


brought to pass the saying that 
21. Peter seeing him saith to ig written, Death is swallowed 
man. do? 55. O death, where fe thy 
22. Jesus saith unto him, If I sting? O grave, where és thy 
will that he tarry till I come, victory? 


(26) 


~ 


NOT DEATH. 27 


If we are faithful unto death (that is, though faithful- 
ness cost us our lives) He has promised us a crown‘ but 
we do not receive it until He comes.® 

Nothing is promised us at death, except to be at rest® 
in Paradise.*? But we are promised all things in the resur- 


rection, when Jesus comes.® 


Therefore we find Paul yearning for this resurrection.® 
He did not want to be unclothed by death but clothed 


upon by the resurrection.?° 


(4) Rev. 2:10. Fear none of 
those things which thou shalt 
suffer: behold, the devil shall 
cast some of you into prison, 
that ye may be tried; and ye 
shall have tribulation ten days: 
be thou faithful unto death, and 
I will give thee a crown of life. 

(5) 2 Tim. 4:8. Henceforth 
there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness, which the Lord, 
the righteous judge, shall give 
me at that day: and not to me 
only, but unto all them also that 
love his appearing. 

1 Pet. 5:4. And when the 
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye 
shall receive a crown of glory 
that fadeth not away. 

(6) 2 Thes. 1:7. And to you 
who are troubled rest with us, 
when the Lord Jesus shall be re- 
vealed from heaven with his 
mighty angels. 

Rev. 14:13. And I heard a 
voice from heaven ,saying unto 
me, Write, Blessed are the dead 
which die in the Lord from 
henceforth. Yea, saith the 
Spirit, that they may rest from 
their labours; and their works 
do follow them. 

(7) Luke 16:22. And it came 
to pass, that the beggar died, 
and was carried by the angels 
into Abraham’s bosom: the rich 
man also died, and was buried. 

Luke 23:43. And Jesus said 
unto him, Verily I say unto thee, 
Today shalt thou be with me in 
paradise. 

(8) Luke 14:14. And thou 
shalt be blessed; for they can- 


‘put on incorruption, 


not recompense thee: for thou 
shalt be recompensed at the res- 
urrection of the just. 

Luke 20:35. But they which 
shall be accounted worthy to ob- 
tain that world, and the resur- 
rection from the dead, neither 
Marry, nor are given in mar- 
riage; 

36. Neither can they die any 
more: for they are equal unto 
the angels; and are the children 
of God, being the children of the 
resurrection. 

Rom. 8:32. He that spared 
not his own Son, but delivered 
him up for us all, how shall he 
not with him also freely give us 
all things? . 

(9) Phil. 8:11. If by any 
means I may attain unto the 
resurrection from the dead. 

(10) 2 Cor. 5:4. For we that 
are in this tabernacle do groan, 
being burdened: not for that we 
would be unclothed, but clothed 
upon, that mortality might be 
swallowed up of life. 

1 Cor. 15:51. Behold, I shew 
you a mystery; We shall not all 
sleep, but we shall all be 
changed, 

52. In a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, at the last 
trump: for the trumpet shall 
sound, and the dead shall be 
raised incorruptible, and we shall 
be changed. 

58. For this corruptible must 
and this 
mortal must put on immortality. 

54. So when this corruptible 


28 JESUS IS COMING. 


Let any one insert “death” in the passages which speak 
of Christ’s coming and he will see that tt will not apply. 
For instance: | 

“For ‘death’ shall come in the glory of His Father.” 
Mat. 16:27. 

“When ‘death’ shall sit in the throne of His glory.” 
Mat. 19 :28. 

“Hereafter shall ye see ‘death’ sitting on the right hand 
of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.” Mat. 26:64. 

“Behold be (death) cometh with clouds and every eye 
shall see Him.” Rev. 1:7. 

“For our conversation is in heaven, from whence,’ also, 
we look for ‘death.’” Phil. 3:20. - 

If the reader thinks that these are exceptional passages, 
we beg of you to try it in other Scripture referring to His 
coming. The only possible similarity consists in analogy— 
viz.: in the fact that we do not know the time when we shall 
die. But thanks be to God, we may not die at all, for 
“We shall not all sleep.” 1 Cor. 15:51. | 

There will be one generation, at least, who will realize 
that the coming of our Lord is not death. 

And if it is not admissible to say “for ‘death,’ himself, 
shall descend from heaven with a shout” (1 Thes. 4:16), 
neither is it admissible to say, “Watch, therefore; for ye 
know not what hour ‘death’ doth come.” Mat. 24:42. 

For, by such wresting of Scripture, we jostle this promi- 
nent truth, of our Lord’s advent, into the back-ground, and 
substitute therefor the ‘grim monster,’ death. 


Death Is Not Practically the Coming of the Lord. 


It is assuming too much, to say that death is practically, 
to the believer, the commg of the Lord. For we do not 
know it, and the Scriptures do not assert it. On the con- 
trary, the events which occur, as the Scriptures teach us, 
when the Lord comes, do not occur at the death of a Chris- 
tian. The dead are not then raised, nor are the living be- 


shall have put on incorruption, brought to pass the saying that 
and this mortal shall have put is written, Death is swallowed 
on immortality, then shall be up in victory 


“e ne er ER RR 
———— 
a 


NOT DEATH. 29 


lievers changed, as they will be when the Lord comes. We 
know very little about Hades or the intermediate state of 
the dead. It is probably true that, since the resurrection of 
our Lord, the souls of believers, at death, go to a Paradise 
above, so that Paul could say “absent from the body, pres- 
ent with the Lord.” 2 Cor. 5:8. But it would appear, 
from Rev. 6:9-11,"' that certain of the departed souls yearn 
for the execution of Judgment, which occurs when the Lord 
comes.12 Spiritually, the believer is with Christ now, and 
always,!® but, to be with Christ, bodily,!* is only to be at- 
tained by the resurrection, at His coming.1® Therefore, it 


(11) Rev. 6:9. And when he 
had opened the fifth seal, I saw 
under the altar the souls of 
them that were slain for the 
word of God, and for the testi- 
mony which they held: 

10. And they cried with a loud 
voice, saying, How long, O Lord, 
holy and true, dost thou not 
judge and avenge our blood on 
them that dwell on the earth? 

11. And white robes were 
given unto every one of them; 
and it was said unto them, that 
they should rest yet for a little 
season, until their fellow serv- 
ants also and their brethren, 
that should be killed as they 
were, should be fulfilled. 

(12) 1 Cor. 4:5. Therefore 
judge nothing before the time, 
until the Lord come, who both 
will bring to light the hidden 
things of darkness and will make 
manifest the counsels of the 
hearts: and then shall every 
man have praise of God. 

2 Tim. 4:1. I charge thee in 
the sight of God, and of Christ 
Jesus, who shall judge the liv- 
ing and the dead, and by his 
appearing and his kingdom: 

Rev. 11:18. And the nations 
were angry, and thy wrath is 
come, and the time of the dead, 
that they should be judged, and 
that thou shouldest give reward 
unto thy servants the prophets, 
and to the saints, and them that 


fear thy name, small and great: 
and  shouldest destroy them 
which destroy the earth. 

Also Mat. 25 :31-40. 


(13) John 14:23. Jesus an- 
swered and said unto him, If a 
man love me. he will keep my 
words: and my Father will love 
him, and we will come unto him, 
and make our abode with him. 


Mat. 28:20. Teaching them 
to observe all things whatsoever 
I have commanded you: and, lo, 
I am with you alway, even unto 
the end of the world. Amen. 


(14) John 12:26. If any man 
serve me, let him follow me; 
and where I am, there shall also 
my servant be: if any man serve 
me, him will my Father honour. 


John 17:24. Father, I will 
that they also, whom thou hast 
given me, be with me where I 
am; that they may behold my 
glory, which thou hast given me: 
for thou lovedst me before the 
foundation of the world. 


(15) John 14:3. ‘And if I go 
and prepare a place for you, £ 
will come again, and receive you 
unto myself; that where I am, 
there ye may be also. 


1 Thes. 4:17. Then we which 
are alive and remain shall be 
caught up together with them in 
the clouds, to meet the Lord in 
the air: and se shall we ever be 
with the Lord. 


30 JESUS I8 COMING. 


is entirely unscriptural to instruct the believer to look for 
death, as being synonymous with, or equivalent to, the 
Lord’s coming. 


Dr. David Brown’s Testimony. 


Rev. David Brown, although a prominent Post-millenial- 
ist, recognizes this and he says: “The coming of Christ to 
individuals at death—however warrantably we may speak 
so, and whatever profitable considerations it may suggest— 
is not fitted for taking that place in the view of the be- 
liever which Scripture assigns to the Second Advent.” And 
he very properly illustrates by the following passages: 

“Tet not your heart be troubled (said Jesus to his sor- 
rowing disciples): In my Father’s house are many man- 
sions; I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go away’ 
— What then? ‘Ye shall soon follow me? Death shall short- 
ly bring us together?’ Nay; but ‘If I go away, I will come 
again and receive you unto myself; that where I am there 
ye may be also.’ John 14:3. 

“‘éAnd while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as He 
went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; 
which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing 
up into heaven, this same Jesus which is taken up, from 
you into heaven shall’)—What? Take you home soon to him- 
self at death? Nay, but shall ‘so come in like manner as 
ye have seen Him go into heaven.’ Acts 1:10-11.” 

“And,” he adds, “how know we that by jostling ‘this 
event (the Advent) out of its scriptural place in the ex- 
pectations of the Church, we are not, in a great degree, de- 
stroying its character and power as a practical principle? 
Can we not believe, though unable to trace it, that God’s 
methods are ever best; and that as in nature, so perhaps in . 
revelation, a modification by us of the divine arrangements, 
apparently slight, and attended even with some seeming 
advantages, may be followed by a total and unexpected 
change of results, the opposite of what is anticipated and 
desired? So we fear it to be here.”’* We would that we 
had space to quote more, for we admire this frank admis- 


* Second Advent, pages 21, 22. 


SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES. 31 


sion—that death is not the coming of our Lord—from 
one who labors so hard to support post-millennialism. 
Again, the substitution of death for the coming of the 
Lord practically degrades the grand doctrine of the resur- 
rection, from its lofty prominence in Scripture, to almost 
an unnecessary appendage. 

But we believe in the preaching of Jesus and the resur- 
rection,® and we look forward with joyous anticipation to 
the resurrection from the dead, as the time when Jesus 
shall give us the victory over death.1? 

Oh! that Christians might realize “the grace that is to 
be brought unto” us (not at death but) “at the revelation 
of Jesus Christ.’’1§ 

Nowhere in the Savior’s teachings are we commanded to 
watch or prepare for death. But we are commanded to 
watch and prepare for Christ’s coming. 

Therefore, let us not be deceived by the thought that our 
great enemy, Death, is the precious coming of Jesus. 

So, beloved, we conclude that this glorious doctrine does 
concern you. 

Search the Scriptures. 


Perhaps, you say: “I don’t know much about it, and I 
can’t understand it.” But do you want to understand it? 
If so, God’s word is open to you. The Holy Spirit will 
teach you./® He will show you things to come,?° and these 


(16) Acts 4:2. Being grieved 
that they taught the people, and 
preached through Jesus the res- 
urrection from the dead. 


Acts 17:18. Then certain 
philosophers of the Epicureans, 
and of the Stoics, encountered 
him. And some said, What will 
this babbler say? other some, 
He seemeth to be a setter forth 
of strange gods: because he 
preached unto them Jesus, and 
the resurrection. 


(17) 1 Cor. 15:54. But when 
this corruptible shall have put 
on incorruption, and this mortal 
shall have put on immortality, 
then shall come to pass the say- 


ing that is written, Death is 
swallowed up in victory. 

55. O death, where is thy vic- 
tory? O death, where is thy 
sting? 

(18) 1 Pet. 1:13. Wherefore 
gird up the loins of your mind, 
be sober, and hope to the end 
for the grace that is to be 
brought unto you at the revela- 
tion of Jesus Christ. 

(19) John 14:26. But the 
Comforter, which is the Holy 
Ghost, whom the Father will 
send in my name, be shall teach 
you all things, and bring all 
things to your remembrance, 
whatsoever I have said unto you. 

(20) John 16:13. Howbeit 


$2 JESUS I8 COMING. | 


pages are written with the earnest desire to aid you in the 
study of this truth. 

Will you study it? Will you search for yourself, as did 
the noble Bereans??+ not merely to read through this lit- 
tle book, but to use it simply as an index, and go to the 
Word, search out the passages herein referred to, read 
them and pray over them, until the Holy Spirit guides 
you into the truth? If so, we believe that you will see 
the light, and find comfort to your soul. 

Said a Christian, who had long opposed the truth of 
the pre-millennial coming of Christ: “I have spent the 
happiest night of my life, for last evening I saw the truth 
concerning the second coming.” It filled him with joy, 
and he is one who has been greatly used in leading souls 
to Christ. May God bless and thus use you, dear reader. 


when he, the Spirit of truth, is 
come, he will guide you into all 
truth: for he shall not speak of 
himself; but whatsoever he shall 
hear, that shall he speak: and 
he will shew you things to come. 

(21) Acts 17:10. And the 
brethren immediately sent away 
Paul and Silas by night unto 


Berea: who coming thither went 
into the synagogue of the Jews. 
11. These were more noble 
than those in Thessalonica, in 
that they received the word with 
all readiness of mind, and 
searched the Scriptures dally, 
whether those things were so. 


ee meen ne eee 


CHAPTER IV. 
The Three Appearings. 


The grandest fact in history is that Jesus Christ, the 
Lord of Glory, has been in this world. 

And the most important fact of the present is that He 
is now in Heaven making intercession for us.* 

And the greatest prophesied event of the future is, that 


He is coming again. 


These three appearings are beautifully set forth in the 


9th of Hebrews.? 


His appearing upon earth “to put away sin by the sac- 


rifice of Himself.” 


Verse 26. 


His entering “into Heaven itself, now to appear in the 


presence of God for us.” 


Verse 24. 


“And unto them that look for Him shall He appear 
the second time, without sin unto salvation.” Verse 28. 


While He was here upon earth He said: 


“It is expe- 


dient for you that I go away.”® and He went away.* He 


said, “I go to prepare a place for you.” 


But 


(1) Heb. 7:25. Wherefore he 
is able also to save them to the 
uttermost that come unto God 
by him, seeing he ever liveth to 
make intercession for them. 

Rom. 8:34. Who is he that 
condemneth? Jt is Christ that 
died, yea rather, that is risen 
again, who is even at the right 
band of God, who also maketh 
intercession for us. 

1 John 2:1. My little chil- 
dren, these things write I unto 
you, that ye sin nat. And if 
any man sin, we have an advo- 
cate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous: 

(2) Heb. 9:24. For Christ is 
not entered into the holy places 
made with hands, which are the 
figures of the true; but into 
heaven itself, now to appear in 
the presence of God for us: 


26. For then must he ofter 
have suffered since the founda- 
tion of the world: but now once 
in the end of the world hath he 
appeared to put away sin by the 
sacrifice of himself. 

28. 8o Christ was once offered 
to bear the sins of many; and 
unto them that look for him 
shall he appear the second time 
without sin unto salvation. 

(3) John 16:7. Nevertheless 
I tell you the truth; It is ex- 
pedient for you that I go away: 
for if I go not away, the Com- 
forter wiil not come unto you; 
but if I depart, I will send him 
unto you. 

(4) Acts 1:9. And when he 
had spoken these things, while 
they beheld, he was taken up, 
and a cloud received him out of 
their sight. 


G2) 


34 JESUS IS COMING. 


He Promised, — 


“Tf I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, 
and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye 
may be also.” John 14:2-3. He gave us this promise 
as our hope and comfort while He is away. 

He said: “In the world ye shall have _ tribulation” 
(John 16:33), “ye shall weep and lament, and...be sor- 
rowful....but I will see you again, and your heart shall 
rejoice.” Verses 20, 22. 

Nothing can be more comforting to the Church, the 
bride of Christ,’ then this precious promise which our 
absent Lord has left us, that He will come and receive us 
unto Himself, and that we shall be with Him, to behold 
His glory.® 

He has given us 

The Lord’s Supper, 


that we should take the bread and the cup in remembrance 
of Him,’ and to show His death, till He come.* We have 
this simple and loving memorial for a continual sign of 
this promise during all the earthly pilgrimage of the 


(5) Eph. 6:25. #Husbands, 
love your wives, even as Christ 
also loved the church, and gave 
himself for it; 

26. That he might sanctify 
and cleanse it with the wash- 
ing of water by the word, 

27. That he might present it 
to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot, or wrinkle, or 
any such thing; but that it 
should be holy and without blem- 
ish. 

28. So ought men to love their 
wives as their own bodies. He 
that loveth his wife loveth him- 
self. 

29. For no man ever yet hated 
-his own flesh; but nourisheth 
and cherisheth it, even as the 
Lord the church: 

30. For we are members of 
his body, of his flesh, and of his 
bones, ; 


31. For this cause shall a man 
leave his father and mother, and 
shall be joined unto his wife, 
and they two shall be one flesh. 

82. This is a great mystery; 
but I speak concerning Christ 
and the church. 

(6) John 17:24. Father, I 
wiil that they also, whom thou 
hast given me, be with me where 
I am; that they may behold my 
glory, which thou hast given me; 
for thou lIovedst me before the 
foundation of the world. 

(7) Luke 22:19. And he took 
bread, and gave thanks, and 
brake it, and gave unto them, 
saying, This is my body which 
is given for you: this do in re- 
membrance of me. 


(8) 1 Cor. 11:26. For as 


often as ye eat this bread, and 
drink this cup, ye do shew the 
Lord’s death till he come. 


THE FAITH OF THE FATHERS. 35 


Chureh,® and through it we look forward from the cross 
to His coming, when He will drink it anew with ns, in 
His Father’s kingdom,!° at the marriage feast of the 
Lamb.!2 ; 

It is a constant reminder of His promise, pointing our 
eye of faith to His coming again. “He is faithful that 
promised”?2 and we are exhorted to have confidence and 
patience, that we may “receive the promise,” “for yet a 
little while, and He that shall come, will come, and will 
not tarry.” Heb. 10:35-37. 

One has truly said that the coming of Christ is 


The Very Pole Star of the Church,* 


and the apostle Paul calls it “That blessed hope.” 
Jesus and the apostles and the prophets have given 
great prominence in the Scriptures to this inspiring 
theme. THE EARLY FATHERS and the Christian 
Church, for the first two centuries of our era, found in it 


*Rev. David Brown, D. D. 


(9) Heb. 11:13. These all 
died in faith, not having re- 
ceived the promises, but having 
seen them afar off, and were 
persuaded of them, and embraced 
them, and confessed that they 
were strangers and pilgrims on 
the earth. 

1 Pet. 2:11. Dearly beloved, 
I beseech you as strangers and 
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly 
lusts, which war against the 
soul. 

(10) Mat. 26:29. But I say 
unto you, I will not drink hence- 
forth of this fruit of the vine, 
until that day when I drink it 
new with you in my Father’s 
kingdom. 

(11) Mat. 22:2. The king- 
dom of heaven is like unto a 
certain king, which made a mar- 
Triage for his son. 

Rev. 19:9. And he saith unto 
me, Write, Blessed are they 
which are called unto the mar- 
Tiage supper of the Lamb. And 


he saith unto me, These are the 
true sayings of God. 
Also Luke 14 :16-24, 


(12) Heb. 10:22. Let us draw 
near with a true heart in fut. 
ness of faith, having our hearts 
sprinkled from an evil con- 
science: and having our body 
washed with pure water, 


23. Let us hold fast the con- 
fession of our hope that it waver 
not; for he is faithful that prom- 
ised ; 

24. And let us consider one 
another to provoke unto love and 
good works; 

25. Not forsaking our own as- 
sembling together, as the cus- 
tom of some is, but exhorting 
one another; and so much the 
more, as ye see the day draw- 
ing nigh. 

(18) Tit. 2:18. Looking for 
that blessed hope, and the glo- 
rious appearing of the great God 
and our Saviour Jesus Christ. 


36 JESUS IS COMING. 


their chief source of hope and comfort. The belief that 
Jesus was coming in glory to reign with His saints on the 
earth, during the Millennium, was almost universal with 
them. 

But in the third century there arose a school of inter- 
preters, headed by Origen, who so “spiritualized” the 
Scriptures that they ceased to believe in any literal Millen- 
nium whatsoever. Their system of interpretation has been 
severely condemned by Martin Luther, Dr. Adam Clarke 
and other commentators. 

When Constantine was converted and the Roman em- 
pire became, nominally, Christian, it appeared to many 
that the Millennium had come, and that they had the king- 
dom on earth. The Church, hand in hand with the world, 
plunged into the dark ages, until awakened by the great 
reformers of the sixteenth century, who again began to 
proclaim the comforting hope and blessed promise of the 
coming of Christ; and since that time the subject so long 
neglected has been studied and preached with increasing 
interest. Indeed, in the last two centuries, it seems to 
have risen (with the doctrine of salvation by simple faith 
in @ crucified Saviour) into somewhat the same promi- 
nence which it occupied in the early enurch. God be 
praised for it. 


cee 


. Toto ee | 
i 


OHAPTER V. 
The Millennium. 


Millennium (Latin) is the same as Chiliad (Greek), 
and both mean a thousand years. Both terms stand for the 
doctrine of a future era of righteous government upon the 
earth, to last a thousand years. 

Jewish writers throughout the Talmud hold that this 
Millennium will be chiefly characterized by the deliverance 
of the Jews from all their enemies, recovery of Palestine 
and the literal reign of their Messiah in unequaled splen- 
dor therein. 

Pre-millennial Christians hold much in common with 
the Jews, but also that our Lord Jesus Christ is the 
Messiah; that He is to return to the earth and overthrow 
Satan, all ungodly government and lawlessness, and es- 
tablish a kingdom of righteousness, having the Church, 
with Himself as sovereign, Jerusalem as the capital, re- 
gathered and converted Israel as the center, and all na- 
tions included in a universal, world-wide kingdom of pure 
and blessed government. { 

Post-millennialists, for the most part, hold that the pres- 
ent preaching of the gospel will result in the conversion 
of the world and usher in a golden era of righteousness 
and a government of justice and peace to last a thousand 
years, after which the Lord will return for a “general 
judgment” and introduction of an eternal state. It is 
well to have these distinctive views of the Millennium 
clearly in mind. 

Contrary to the post-millennial view, the literal reign 
of Christ, with His saints, for a thousand years is plainly 
stated in the twentieth chapter of Revelation.: Six times 

(1) Rev. 20:1. And I saw an 2. And he laid hold on the 
angel come down from heaven, dragen, that old serpent, which 
having the key of the bottom- is the Devil, and Satan, and 
less pit and a great chain in his bound him a thousand years, 
hand. 3. And cast him into the bot- 


(82) 


[ 


38 JESUS I8 COMING. 


is the expression “A thousand years,” repeated. Verses 
2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. The teaching is so plain that “way- 
faring men shall not err therein.’’ Isa. 35:8. 

But those who oppose this “blessed hope,” of the pre- 
millennial coming of our Lord usually begin their arguments 
by the assertion that the doctrine of the Millennium is no- 
where taught in Scripture except in this 20th chapter of 
Revelation, and that the symbolical character of this book 
forbids our founding any doctrine upon it. The super- 
ficial character of such a statement is glaringly apparent 
from the fact that the Jews had fully developed the doc- 
trine of the Millennium as the teaching of the Old Testa- 
ment scriptures long before the Book of Revelation or 
any portion of the New Testament was written. It was 
the view most frequently expressed in the Talmud that 
“the Messianic kingdom would last for one thousand 
years,” and this was commonly believed among the Jews. 
It is easy to discern upon what they founded the doctrine. 
It is the Sabbath of God’s weeks. 


The division of time into sevens, or weeks, permeates 
the Scriptures. A fundamental enactment of the Mosaic 


tomless pit, and shut him up, 6. Blessed and holy és he that 


and set a seal upon him, that he 
should deceive the nations no 
more, till the thousand years 
should be fulfilled: and after 
that he must be loosed a little 
season. 

4. And I saw thrones, and 
they sat upon them, and judg- 
ment was given unto them: and 
I saw the souls of them that 
were beheaded for the witness of 
Jesus, and for the word of God, 
and which had not worshipped 
the beast, neither his image, 
neither had received his mark 
upon their foreheads, or in their 
hands; and they lived and 
reigned with Christ a thousand 
years. 

5. But the rest of the dead 
lived not again until the thou- 
sand years were finished. This 
és the first resurrection. 


-_ “% 


hath part in the first resurrec- 
tion: on such the second death 
hath no power, but they shall be 
priests of God and of Christ, and 
shall reign with him a thousand 
years. 


7. And when the thousand 
years are expired, Satan shall be 
loosed out of his prison, 


8. And shall go out to deceive 
the nations which are in the 
four quarters of the earth, Gog 
and Magog, to gather them to- 
gether to battle: the number of 
whom is as the sand of the sea. 


8. And they went up on the 
breadth of the earth, and com- 
passed the camp of the saints 
about, and the beloved city: and 
fire came down from God out of 
heaven and devoured them. 


THE MILLENNIUM. 39 


law was the keeping of the Sabbath, Ex. 20:8. This was 
based upon God’s great rest day in Gen. 2. Upon this is 
founded not only the week of days, but also the week of 
weeks unto Pentecost (Lev. 23:15-16); the week of 
months, with the Atonement and seven days’ feast of 
Tabernacles in the seventh month (Lev. 23:27-28); the 
week of years, ending with the Sabbatic year (Lev. 25:4) ; 
the week of weeks of years, ending with the seventh Sab- 
batic year, and followed by the year of Jubilee (Lev. 25: 
8-12). 

Even the duration of Israel’s great punishments was 
based upon this law of the sevens. Their captivity in 
Babylon was for seventy years. Jer. 25:11-12; Dan. 9:2. 
The great period revealed to Daniel (Ch. 9), unto the 
coming of the Messiah was divided into seventy sevens. 
The unequaled period of Israel’s punishment and disper- 
sion in the lands of their enemies, prophesied by Moses, 
is, with four-fold emphasis, specified to be for seven temes. 
(Lev. 26:18, 21, 24, 28). This sacred seven is woven into 
the laws, life and history of the chosen people, with whom 
God established His theocracy. And notwithstanding all 
of Israel’s rebellion and sinfulness and consequent chas- 
tisement, there still remains for them and the whole world 
a keeping of the Sabbath. Heb. 4:9 margin. With God 
a day is as a thousand years (Psa. 90), and a thousand 
years as one day. 2 Pet. 3:8. 


Upon this rock of the sacred sevens we can consistently, 
with the Jews, base our conclusion that as we have the 
scriptural week, week of weeks, week of months, week of 
years, week of weeks of years, week of seventy years, week 
of times, week of olams or aions (ages), see page 222, 
so we also have the great week of Millenniums. Six thou- 
sand year days of labor and then the Millennium, or 
blessed seventh thousand years of rest. 


This scriptural doctrine of the Millennium cannot be 
shaken. Its root is in the Sabbath of Genesis, and its 
fruit is in the thousand-year kingdom of Revelation. It 
shines throughout the Word of God as a glorious hope for 
the nations, whom God has promised to bless. Gen. 12:3. 


‘stamp upon our hearts the warning that, “If any man 
shall take away from the words of the book of this proph- 
esy, God'shall take away his part from the Tree of Life.” 
Rev. 22:19.* | 

A Ne a OE eae ee ee 


*For a mcre full statement of this doctrine see the au- 


40 JESUS IS COMING. 
Shine on, O blessed Revelation of God, and the Lord 
thor’s pamphlet “The Millennium,” F. H. Revell Co, 


Eee = ee 
ee 


CHAPTER VI. 
Post-Millennialism. 


About the year seventeen hundred a new error crept 
jnto the Church, to-wit, Post-millennialism. 

This was instituted by Daniel Whitby, an English di- 
vine, or proclaimed by him as a new hypothesis, namely, 
that the Church would prosper and extend until the world 
should be converted, and this triumph of the Church 
would constitute the Millennium; and that Jesus would not 
come until after the Millennium. 

No wonder that he calls it a “new hypothesis,” for he 
himself bears testimony in his “Treatise on Traditions” 
that the doctrine of the Millennium, or the reign of Saints 
on earth a thousand years, passed among the best of Chris- 
tians for two hundred and fifty years, for a tradition 
apostolical, and as such is delivered by many fathers of the 
second and third century, who speak of it as the tradition 
of our Lord and His apostles. 

For want of space we refer the reader to “The Voice of 
the Church,” by D. T. Taylor, to show the long line of 
eminent witnesses, embracing Hermas, Justin and the Mar- 
tyrs, Luther, Melanchthon, Mede, Milton, Burnett, Isaac 
Newton, Watts, Charles Wesley, Toplady, and a host of 
others, illustrious in the annals of the Church, who, 
through the past eighteen centuries, have borne overwhelm- 
ing testimony to the truth of the pre-millennial coming of 
Christ.* 

Strange, indeed, that the Church, in the face of such 
evidence, should drift away from the simple teaching of the 
Word and the faith of the fathers. And yet, though of 
such recent origin, this error of post-millennialism has not 
only crept into the Church, but has been aceepted by the 
great majority of Christians, pastors and people. 

This, then, 1s the principal point of the question, 


*See also page 66. 
(41) 


42 JESUS I8 COMING. 


namely: Will the coming of Christ oecur before the Mil- 
lennium, and may it therefore happen at any moment, as 
Pre-millennialists believe, or will it occur after the Mil- 
lennium, and thus be, at least, a thousand years in the 
future, as Post-millennialists believe? 


CHAPTER VII. 
Pre-Millennial Arguments. 


We now invite your prayerful attention to the follow- 
ing scriptural arguments, which, we believe, show that the 
coming of our Lord will be pre-millennial. 


No. I. The Antichrist. 


In 2 Thes. 2:8,! The Antichrist, who is on all sides con- 
fessed to be pre-millennial, is to be destroyed with the 
brightness of His (Christ’s) coming, or more literally the 
epiphany (appearing*) of His own presence. This fixes 
the coming of Christ to be pre-millennial. 

Bishop MelIlvaine says of this argument that “it is 
wholly unanswerable.” 

Even Mr. Brown, the great champion of post-millennial- 
ism, admits that this is an apparent evidence for the pre- 
millennial advent, and he has been obliged to meet it by 
that process of “spiritualizng” Scripture which has been 
so condemned by Dr. John Pye Smith, Martin Luther, Sir 
Isaac Newton, Bishop Hooker, Dr. Adam Clarke, and oth- 
ers. On this argument alone we might rest, but we have 
others fully as conclusive. 


No. Il. Immediately After the Tribulation. 


In Mat. 24:29-31,2 the coming of the Son of Mant 
is said to be immediately after the Tribulation. But this 


*See Greek émddvea Same word used in 1 Tim. 6:14; 2 Tim. 
1:10; 4:1; 4:8; and Titus 2:13; in each place translated ap- 
pearing. 

tThis is His coming at the Revelation; see diagram, 
page 72. 


(1) 2 Thes. 2:8. And then  MIly after the tribulation of those 
shall that Wicked be revealed, days shall the sun be darkened, 
whom the Lord shall consume and the moon shall not give her 
with the spirit of his mouth, and light, and the stars shall fall 
shall destroy with the bright- from heaven, and the powers of 
ness of his coming: the heavens shall be shaken: 

(2) Mat. 24:29. Immediate- 80. And then shall appear the 


(48) 


“4 JESUS I8 COMING. 


Tribulation is pre-millennial, or before the reign of peace.® 
See also the diagram on page seventy-two. Therefore the 
eoming is pre-millennial. 

No. Il. A Persecuted Church. 

The true Church is a persecuted, suffering, cross-bearing 
people‘ thereunto appointed,® so that “all that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution” (2 Tim. 
3:12), and this will continue until Christ comes,® which 
precludes any Millennium until after His coming. 

No. IV. Tares and Wheat. 


We are nowhere in the New Testament directed to look 
for the Millennium before the coming of Christ. But we 


sign of the Son of man in 
heaven: and then shall all the 
tribes of the earth mourn, and 
they shall see the Son of man 
coming in the clouds of heaven 
with power and great glory. 

(3) Mat. 24:21. For then 
shall be great tribulation, such 
as was not since the beginning 
of the world to this time, no, 
nor ever shall be. 

Isa. 24:20. The earth shall 
reel to and fro like a drunkard, 
and shall be removed like a cot- 
tage; and the transgression 
thereof shall be heavy upon it; 
and it shall fall, and not rise 
again. 

21. And it shall come to pass 
in that day, that the Lord shall 
punish the host of the high ones 
that are on high, and the kings 
of the earth upon the earth. 

22. And they shall be gathered 
together, as prisoners are gath- 
ered in the pit, and shall be 
shut up in the prison, and after 
many days shall they be visited. 

28. Then the moon shall be 
confounded, and the sun 
ashamed, when the Lord of hosts 
shall reign in mount Zion, and in 
Jerusalem, and before his an- 
cients gloriously. 

Also Luke 21:24, etc. 

(4) John 15:19. If ye were 


of the world, the world would 
love his own; but because ye are 
not of the world, but I have 
chosen you out of the world, 
therefore the world hateth you. 

20. Remember the word that 
I said unto you, The servant je 
not greater than his lord. If 
they have persecuted me, they 
will also persecute you; if they 
have kept my saying, they will 
keep yours also. 

21. But all these things will 
they do unto you for my name’s 
sake, because they know not him 
that sent me. 

Also John 16:38. 

(5) 1 Thes. 3:3. That no 
man should be moved by these 
affictions: for yourselves know 
that we are appointed thereunto. 

(6) 2 Thes. 1:7. And to you 
that are afflicted rest with us, 
at the revelation of the Lord 
Jesus from heaven with the an- 
gels of his power in flaming 
fire, 

8. Rendering vengeance to 
them that know not God, and to 
them that obey not the gospel 
of our Lord Jesus: 

9. Who shall suffer punish- 
ment, even eternal destruction 
from the face of the Lord ang 
from the glory of his might, 


THE TARES AND WHEAT. 45 


are expressly taught that the tares and the wheat will 
grow together until the end (of this age); that evil men 
and seducers will wax worse and worse; that as it was in 
the days of Noah and Lot, so shall it be at the coming 
of the Son of Man.* And such is the character and num- 
ber of the tares that their destruction, before the harvest, 
would endanger the children of the kingdom. Mat. 13:29. 
This absolutely precludes the idea of a millennial reign 
of righteousness in this dispensation. 


From the time that the first Adam surrendered the king- 
dom to Satan, the effort to re-establish it with man has 
been a continual failure, though it was given to Noab,® 


"10. When he shall come to be 
glorified in his saint3, and to be 
marvelled at in all them that 
believed (because our testimony 
ant you was believed) in that 

y. 


(7) Mat. 13:29. But he said, 
Nay; lest while ye gather up 
the tares, ye root up also the 
wheat with them. 


80. Let both grow together 
until the harvest: and in the 
time of harvest I will say to 
the reapers, Gather ye together 
first the tares, and bind them in 
bundles to burn them: but 
gather the wheat into my barn. 


2 Pet. 3:3. Knowing this first, 
that there shall come in the last 
days scoffers, walking after their 
own lusts, 


4. And saying, Where is the 
promise of his coming? for since 
the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the 
beginning of the creation. 


1 Tim. 4:1. Now the Spirit 
speaketh expressly, that in the 
latter times some shall depart 
from the faith, giving heed to 
seducing spirits, and doctrines of 
devils. 

2 Tim. 8:13. But evil men 
and seducers shall wax worse 
and worse, deceiving, and being 
deceived. 


Luke 17:26. And as it was in 
the days of Noe, so shall it be 
also in the days of the Son of 
man. 


27. They did eat, they drank, 
they married wives, they were 


- given in marriage, until the day 


that Noe entered into the ark, 
and the flood came, and de- 
stroyed them all. 


28. Likewise also as it was in 
the days of Lot; they did eat, 
they drank, they bought they 
sold, they planted, they builded ; 


29. But the same day that Lot 
went out of Sodom it rained 
fire and brimstone from heaven, 
and destroyed them all. 


30. Even thus shall it be in 
the day when the Son of man 
is revealed. 


Also 2 Tim. 4:3-4; Mat. 24: 
87-61, 


(8) Gen. 9:1. And God 
blessed Noah ana his sons, and 
said unto them, Be fruitful, and 
multiply, and replenish the 
earth. 


2. And the fear of you and the 
dread of you shall be upon every 
beast of the earth, and upon 
every fowl of the air, upon all 
that moveth upon the earth and 
upon all the fishes of the sea; 
into your hand are they de- 
livered. 


46 JESUS I8 COMING. 


Saul (1 Sam. 9:16; 13:13), Nebuchadnezzar® and others, 
And it will be a failure in this sin-cursed earth until the 
second Adam, who has overcome Satan, shall return to 
purify the earth and establish the kingdom on resurrection 
ground. Therefore there will be no Millennium until 
Christ comes. 

But while we are not told to look for the Millennium, 
we are repeatedly and most solemnly enjoined to look for 
the return of our Lord. So we again conclude that His 
return must be pre-millennial. 


No. V. The Literal Reign of Christ. 
The millennia! kingdom will be a literal reign of Christ 


on the earth, and not simply a spiritual exaltation of the 


Church, 


“A king shall reign in righteousness” (Isa. 32:1; Jer. 
23 :1-6), “upon the throne of David”?® “in Jerusalem.’ 
The apostles shall sit upon the twelve thrones (Mat. 19:28), 
and the Saints shall reign upon the earth. Rev. 5:10. 


Speaking of the kingdom, or crown of Israel, the Lord 


God says: 


“I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it 


(9) Dan. 2:37. Thou, O king, 
art a king of kings: for the God 
of heaven hath given thee a 
kingdom, power, and strength, 
and glory. 

88. And wheresoever the chil- 
dren of men dwell, the beasts 
of the field and the fowls of the 
heaven hath he given into thine 
hand, and hath made thee ruler 
over them all. Thou aré this 
head of gold. 

(10) Isa. 9:7 Of the in- 
crease of his government and 
peace there shalt be no end, 
upon the throne of David, and 
upon his kingdom, to order it, 
and to establish it with judg- 
ment and with justice from 
henceforth even for ever. The 
zeal of the Lord of hosts will 
perform this. 

Luke 1:32. He shall be 
great, and shall be called the 


Son of the Highest: and the Lord 
God shall give unto him the 
throne of his father David: 


83. And he shall reign over 
the house of Jacob for ever; 
and of his kingdom there shall 
be no end. 


(11) Jer. 3:17. At that time 
they shall call Jerusalem the 
throne of the Lord; and all the 
nations shall be gathered unto 
it, to the name of the Lord, to 
Jerusalem: neither shall they 
walk any more after the imag- 
ination of their evil heart. 

Zech. 14:16. And it shall 
come to pass, that every one 
that is left of all the nations 
which came against Jerusalem 


shall even go up from year to 
year to worship the King, the 
Lord of hosts, and to keep the 
feast of tabernacles. 


LITERAL REIGN OF CHRIST. 47 


shall be no more, until He come whose right it is; and I 
will give it Him.” Ezek. 21:27. 

The multitude of passages which bear upon this fact we 
can not even refer to. Dr. J. Pye Smith says that they are 
far more numerous than those which describe the humilia- 
tion and suffering of Christ. 

And they are so specific, so full of detail, so like the 
prophecies concerning the first coming, nm their literalness, 
that our post-millennial brethren are compelled to do the 
utmost violence to the laws of interpretation in the “spir- 
itualizing’”’ method with which they meet this argument. 

We believe that we have the word of prophecy spoken 
by “holy men of God,” “as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost” (2 Peter 1:19), and that we should direct our first 
efforts toward understanding the literal sense (as it 1s 
called), “which alone,” as Martin Luther says, “is the sub- 
stance of faith and of Christian theology.” 

Jesus is in “heaven,” at “the right hand of God” (1 Pet. 
3:22), “upon the throne with the Father’ (Psa. 110:1; 
Rev. 3:21), in the Holy of Holies, or true Holy Place 
(Heb. 9:24), making intercession (Rom. 8:34), for those 
that come unto God by Him. Heb. 7:25. But Heaven 
has only received Him until the time of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all His 
holy prophets (Acts 3:21), when He shall come again, te 
sit in the throne of His Father David.!? 

This again proves His coming to be pre-millennial.* 


No. VI. Argument From the Order of the Resurrection. 


We believe we have a conclusive argument based upon 
the Resurrection, which may be briefly stated as follows: 
All the dead will be raised, but, as Jesus was raised out 
of the dead and the rest of the dead were left, so the dead 


*For further evidence of the distinction between the 
Church and the Kingdom, see page 83 


(12) Acts 8:20. And he shall tution of all things, which God 
send Jesus Christ, which before hath spoken by the mouth of all 
was preached unto you; his holy prophets since the world 

21. Whom the heaven must began. 
receive until the times of resti- 


5 oe] JESUS IS COMING. 


in Christ that are His at His coming, will be raised out of 
the dead, and the rest of the dead will be left until another 
and final resurrection, and the Millennium will occur be- 
tween these two resurrections, thus clearly showing Christ’s 
coming to be pre-millennial. 

We believe that any unprejudiced mind will be con- 
vineed of this by simply reading the following passages : 


Order of the Resurrection. 


1 Cor. 15:22-26. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ 
shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order. 
Christ the first fruits; afterwards they that are Christ’s at 
His coming. Then (or afterwards) the end*......The last 
enemy that shall be destroyed is death. 


Dead in Christ Rise First. 

1 Thes. 4:138-17. But I would not have you to be ignorant, 
brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow 
not, even as others which have no hope. For IF WE BELIEVE 
that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which 
sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him......For the Lord 
Himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the 
_ voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God, and the 
dead in Christ shall rise first. 


The First Resurrection. 


Rev. 20:4-14. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon 
them....and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded 
for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and 
which had not worshipped the beast .... and they lived 
and reigned with Christ a thousand years. BUT THE REST 
OF THE DEAD LIVED NOT AGAIN UNTIL THE THOUSAND YEARS 
WERE FINISHED. THIS IS THE FIRST RESURRECTION. Blessed 
and holy‘is he that hath part in the FIRST RESURRECTION, 
on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be 
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with Him a 
thousand years. And when the thousand years are ex- 


pired Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go” 


out to deceive the nations...... And I saw & GREAT WHITE 
THRONE, and. Him that sat on it, from whose face the earth 

*The Greek era (ita) here signifies next in order, but not 
necessarily immediate, as will be seen by the use of the 
same word in Mark 4:17, 28:1 Tim. 2:18. And in this same 
chapter (vs. 5-7), it is used interchangeably with érara (epita). 
This fact seems to have been altogether overlooked by Post- 
millennialists who have therefore entirely misconstrued the 
passage. 

When the Holy Spirit means immediately He uses éfavriy 
eb¥dws OF mapaxpha See Acts 10:33; Mat. 4:22; Luke 1:64, eta 


————— = 


ORDER OF THE RESURRECTION. 49 


and the heaven fled away;...... And I saw the dead, small 
and great, stand before God;...... and the sea gave up the 
dead which were in it, and death and hell (Hades) delivered 
up the dead which were in them...... 


These three passages are so plain that the wayfaring 
man need not err therein. 

In the first, we are told the order of the resurrection— 
each “in his own order” (Gr. Band.). The figure is taken 
from troops moving by bands or regiments. 

First, Christ (“the first born from the dead.” Col. 1: 
18). | 

Next, the godly, who die in Christ and who are His at 
His coming. 

Next, the end, when “the rest of the dead” (who are not 
Christ’s) shall come forth and death itself be destroyed. 

The second passage reiterates and emphasizes the fact 
that the dead in Christ shall rise first and that they rise 
when the Lord descends from Heaven with a shout. The 
resurrection of the ungodly is not spoken of, for they have 
no part in this blessed first resurrection. 

In the third passage we have the first resurrection com- 
pleted by the resurrection of the Tribulation Saints (see 
page 101) and the reign with Christ for a thousand 
years is stated to occur before the rest of the dead are 
raised. And after the thousand years the rest of the dead, 
who lived not again until the thousand years were finished, 
stand before God, and death and Hades deliver up the 
dead in them. 

This one thousand years is the Millennium (Latin, mille 
annum). What could be plainer than this proof that 
Christ’s coming is to be pre-millennial? The dead in Christ 
are raised at His coming and they are raised before the 
millennium. Therefore His coming must be pre-millennial. 


60 JESUS I8 COMING. 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 
The Use of Scripture Passages. 


It is objected that we have no right thus to bring to« 
gether these passages from different parts of the Word. 

We answer—why not? Are they not all inspired?** Are 
they not all the product of one mind? See how plainly we 
are taught that they are all the utterances of the Holy 
Spirit.4 And it is clear that they all relate to the same 
subject, viz.: the resurrection. 

Paul uses quotations in the same manner in Rom. 3 to 
prove that all have sinned, and again in Rom. 10 to prove 
the righteousness which is of faith, and in Heb. 11 to 
show the fruits of faith. We must certainly acknowledge 
the propriety of following his example. 

Indeed, the same method of aggregating proof texts is 
used and relied upon to show the divinity of Christ and 
every evangelical doctrine. 


Only Souls Mentioned. 


It is objected that only the souls are mentioned in Rev. 
20 and therefore it cannot be a literal resurrection, but is 
only the regeneration, or spiritual resurrection and present 
life of believers in Christ. 


(13) 2 Tim. 3:16. All Scrip- things to your remembrance, 
ture is ;iven by inspiration of whatsoever I have said unto you. 


God, anc is profitable for doc- John 16:18. Howbelt when 


trine, fox reproof, for correction, he, the Spirit of truth, is come, 


for instruction in righteousness. 

2 Tim. 3:16 (R. V.). Every 
scripture inspired of God és also 
profitable for teaching, for re- 
proof, for correction, for instruc- 
tion which is in righteousness: 

17. That the man of God may 
be complete, furnished com- 
pletely unto every good work. 

Or, Every scripture is inspired 
of God and profitable. 

(14) John 14:26. But the 
Comforter, which is the Holy 
Ghost, whom the Father will 
send in my name, he shall teach 
you all things, and bring all 


he will guide you into all truth: 
for he shall not speak of him- 
self; but whatsoever he’ shall 
hear, that shall he speak: and 
he will shew you things to come. 


1 Cor. 2:10. But God hath 
revealed them unto us by his 
Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth 
all things, yea, the deep things 
of God. 


2 Pet. 1:21. For the proph- 
ecy came not in old time by the 
will of man: but holy men of 
God spake as they were moved 
by the Holy Ghost. 


ee oe 


OBJEOTIONS. 51 


The fallacy of this is easily seen, for these holy dead 
enjoyed the spiritual resurrection before they “were be- 
headed for the witness of Jesus.” Clearly, it was because 
of this spiritual life in Christ and their faith in the Word 
of God, that they became witnesses for Jesus and refused 
to worship the beast, or his image or receive his mark, 
and therefore they were beheaded (see chap. 13:11-15). 
Besides, Yvyds (psukas—souls) means also life, person or 
individual. See same word in Acts 2:41, “there were 
added unto them about three thousand souls (persons)” 
and in Acts 7:14; 27:10-37; 1 Cor. 15:45; 1 Pet. 3: 
20; Rev. 12:11; 16:3, it unmistakably means persons,?5 
A spirit could not be beheaded. Only a person having 
body and spirit could be beheaded, and such it is evident 
these were. But they suffered physical death; that is, separ- 
ation of soul and body, and became part of the great com- 
‘pany of the dead. The 5th verse emphatically confirms 
this—these being that portion of the dead ones (vexpéyv) 
who lived, while “the rest of the dead lived not again until 
the thousand years were finished,” and “this is the first 
resurrection.” 


In this objection Post-millennialists manifest one of 
their most remarkable inconsistencies. They labor assidu- 
ously to disprove the literalism of the first resurrection, 
described in verses 4-6, where Cdu -zao=—to live and 
dévdoraots- anastasis resurrection are each twice used, 
‘while they hold that verses 12 and 13 do describe a literal 
resurrection, though neither zao nor anastasis are used 
therein. Consistency requires that, if either is spiritual, 
it should be the latter. How much better to accept both 
as literal. 


(15) Acts 7:14. ‘Then sent  longsuffer'ng of Ged waited in 


Joseph, and called his father 
Jacob to him, and all his kin- 
dred, threescore and fifteen souls. 
Acts 27:37. And we were in 
all in the ship two hundred 
threescoré and sixteen souls. 


1 Pet. 8:20. Which sometime 
were disobedient, when once the 


the days of Noah, while the ark 
was preparing, wherein few, that 
is, eight souls were saved by 
water. 

Rev. 16:8. And the second 
angel poured out his vial upon 
the sea; and it became as the 
blood of a dead man: and every 
living soul died in the sea. 


~ 


$2 JESUS IS COMING. 


Spiritual Life in Paradise. 


Equally fallacious is the interpretation which claims that 
the first resurrection is the spiritual life of believers with 
Christ in Paradise (the intermediate place of the holy 
dead). For this spiritual life begins, not at death, but at 
the regeneration. It begins with the first exercise of faith 
in Christ. “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life.” John 3:36. Hath it now. Is quickened already 
(Col. 2:13), and has been raised (Eph. 2:6; Col. 3:1), 
and lives the life he now lives by the faith of the Son of 
God. Gal. 2:19, 20. This spiritual resurrection spoken of 
in Eph. 2:6; Col. 2:12, 13; 3:1, is expressed by words 
entirely different from anastasis, which is used in Rev. 20: 
5-6, and which everywhere in the New Testament expresses 
a literal resurrection. 


Only the Beheaded Mentioned. 


Again it is objected that only the beheaded are men- 
tioned and those who have specially to do with the beast 
and His image. 

This is true of the latter part of the verse only. And 
we believe that these are the Tribulation Saints who accept 
of Christ and become His martyrs under the reign of Anti- 
christ,*° after the Church has been caught up to meet 


(16) 2 Thes. 2:1. Now we be- 
seeck you, brethren, by the com- 
ing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and by our gathering together 
unto him, 

2. That ye be not soon shaken 
in mind, or be troubled, neither 
by spirit, nor by word, nor by 
letter as from us, as that the 
day of Christ is at hand. 

3. Let no man deceive you by 
any means: for that day shall 
mot come, except there come & 
falling away first, and that man 
of sin be revealed, the son of 
perdition ; 


4. Who opposeth and exalteth 
himself above all that is called 
God, or that is worshipped; so 
that he as God sitteth in the 
temple of God, shewing himseif 
that he is God. 

5. Remember ye not, that, 
when I was yet with you, I told 
you these things? 

6. And now ye know what 
withholdeth that he might be 
revealed in his time. 

7. For the mystery of iniquity 
doth already work: only he who 
now letteth will let, until he be 
taken out of the way. 


OBJECTIONS. 53 


Christ in the air.*7 (See page 101.) But notice that the 
first part of the verse speaks of some as though they had 


already been raised. 


“And I saw thrones, and they sat 


upon them, and judgment was given unto them.” 


Nothing is said about the resurrection of these because 
they had already been raised at the Rapture previous to 


the Tribulation. 


They are all ready to occupy the thrones and reign upon 


the earth according to the promises.1® 


But John sees the 


8. And then shall that Wicked 
be revealed, whom the Lord shall 
consume with the spirit of his 
mouth, and shall destroy with 
the brightness of his coming: 

9. Even him, whose coming is 
after the working of Satan with 
ail power and signs and lying 
wonders. 

Rev. 13:11. And I beheld an- 
other beast coming up out of the 
earth; and he had two horns 
like a lamb, and he spake as a 
dragon. 

12. And he exerciseth all the 
power of the first beast before 
him, and causeth the earth and 
them which dwell therein to wor- 
ship the first beast, whose deadly 
wound was healed. 

18. And he doeth great won- 
ders. so that he maketh fire 
come down from heaven on the 
earth in the sight of men, 

14. And deceiveth them that 
dwell on the earth by the means 
of those miracles which he had 
power to do in the sight of the 
beast; saying to them that dwell 
on the earth, that they should 
make an image to the beast, 
which had the wound by a sword, 
and did live. 

15. And he had power to give 
life unto the image of the beast, 
that the image of the beast 
should both speak, and cause 
that as many as would not wor- 
ship the image of the beast 
should be killed. 

16. And he causeth all, both 
emall and great, rich and poor, 


free and bond, to receive a marh 
in their right hand, or in their 
foreheads : 

17. And that no man might 
buy or sell, save he that had 
the mark, or. the name of the 
beast, or the number of his 
name, 

18. Here is wisdom. Let him 
that hath understanding count 
the numoer of the beast: for it 
is the number of a man; and his 
number is Six hundred three- 
score and six. 

(17) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God: and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first: 

17. Then we which are alive 
and remain’ shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: and 
so shall we ever be with the 
Lord. 

18. Wherefore comfort one an- 
other with these words. 

(18) Mat. 19:28. And Jesus 
said unto them, Verily I say 
unto you, That ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration 
when the Son of man shall sit 
in the throne of his glory, ye 
also shall sit upon twelve 
*hrones, judging the twelve tribes 
of Israel. 

1 Cor. 6:2. Do ye not know 
that the saints shall judge the 
world? and if the world shall 
be judged by you, are ye un- 


64 JESUS I8 COMING. 


Tribulation Saints also raised to take part in this reign with 
Christ, which is in perfect accord with the order of the first 


resurrection. 


CHRIST.................e000eee0+eTHE FIRST FRUITS. 


The Church and the Old Testament Saints 


Next, 
they who 


are 


who are raised at the Rapture when 
Christ comes in the air. 


Christ’s 


The Tribulation Saints who are raised at the 


at His 


Coming. 


Revelation when Christ comes 
to the earth. 


The Last Day. 


Again we hear it objected that Christ said He would 
raise up those who believe in Him at the last day (John 
6:39, 40, 44, 54), and if it is at the last day there can 
not follow a thousand years before the unbelievers are 
raised. But Peter says “one day is with the Lord as a 


thousand years and a thousand years as one day.” 


2 Pet. 


3:8. This is the great Millennial day ushered in and end- 
ing with resurrection and judgment, and during which 
Christ shall rule the nations and judge the world in right- 


eousness.22 


worthy to judge the smallest 
matters? 

3. Know ye not that we shall 
judge angels? how much more 
things that pertain to this life? 

Rev. 3:21. To him that over- 
cometh will I grant to sit with 
me in my throne,:even as I also 
overcame, and am set down with 
my Father in his throne. 

(19) Acts 17:31. Because he 
hath appointed a day, in the 
which he will judge the world 
in righteousness by that man 


tit Whom he hath ordained ; whereof 


he hath given assurance unto 
all men, in that he hath raised 
him from the dead. 

Isa. 11:9. They shall not 
hurt nor destroy in all my holy 
mountain: for the earth shall be 
full of the knowledge of , the 
Lord, as the waters cover " the 
sea. 

10. And in that day there 
shall be a root of Jesse, which 
shall stand for an ensign of the 
people; to it shall the Gentiles 


epee and his rest shall be glo- 
rious. 

11. And it shall come to pass 
in that day, that the Lord shall 


THAT DAY. 55 


It is “the day of an age” as the Holy Spirit designates 
. it in 2 Pet. 3:18. See the Greek ‘‘ijuépay aidvos ” 
(heemeran aionos). In harmony with this we find that 
the same word yuépa (heemera—day) signifies “a long 
period,” in John 8:56; 9:4; Rom. 10:21; 2 Cor. 6:2; Heb. 
4 :7-8. 


‘That Day ”’ 


is the key to the book of Isaiah and many of the other 
prophets. Note how frequently it occurs, Isa, 2:11; 3:7, 
18; 4:1, 2; 5:30; 7:18, 20, 21, 23; 10:27, ete.; Jer. 25:33; 
Ezek. 38:14, 16; 39:11; 48:35; Joel 3:18; Amos 9:11; 
Micah 4:6; 7:11, 12; Zeph. 3:11, 16; Hag. 2:23; Zech. 
9:16; 12:3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11; 13:1, 2, 4; 14:6, 8, 13, 21; 
Mal. 3:17; Mat. 7:22; 24:36; Mark 13:32; Lu. 21:34. 

See how plainly it is identified with the Day of the 
Lord. Compare Isa. 2:12 with 20. “For the day of the 
Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and 
lofty. . . . . In that day a man shall cast his idols 

- « « to the moles and bats.” Also Zeph. 1:14, 15. 
“The great day of the Lord is near . . . that day isa 
day of wrath.” 

See the same in Zech. 14:1-4. 

In Hosea 6:2 we read “After two days will He revive 
as; in the third day He will raise us up.” These are evi- 
dently three days of one thousand years each, for “one 
day is with the Lord as a thousand years.” So “that day” 
is doubtless the last thousand year day of God’s great 
week of aions (ages). See page 218. 


Mentioned in Same Verse. 
Again it is objected that, while there will be a great dif- 


ference in the character of the resurrection of the just and 
of the unjust, yet they must be simultaneous in time, for 


set his hand again the second Cush, and from Elam, and from 
time to recover the remnant of Shinar, and from Hamath, and 
his people, jwhich shall be lett from the islands of the sea. 
rom Assyria, and from Egyp 

and from Pathros, and from Also Rey. 2:27. 


56 JESUS IS COMING. 


both are mentioned in conjunction, that is in the same 
verse,?° 

But Jesus has taught us that this objection has no force, 
by giving us a remarkable example to the contrary. In 
Luke 4:16-21, we read, that He opened the book, found the 
place and read from Isa. 61,21 to the comma (or division 
of clauses) in verse 2, and closed the book, saymg: “This 
day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.” Why did He 
stop there? Because the time had not come to proclaim 
“the day of vengeance.” That comma has been over 
eighteen centuries long and will continue until Christ (hav- 
ing gathered His saints, 1 Thes. 4:16-17) shall appear with 
them executing vengeance on the ungodly. 2 Thes. 1:7-10; 
Jude 14, 15. Therefore, Jesus, Himself, having taught us, 
that two events, stated consecutively in Isa, 61:2, are sep- 


(20) Dan. 12:2. And many 
of them that sleep in the dust of 
the earth shall awake, some to 
everlasting life, and some to 
shame and everlasting contempt. 

Jobn 65:29. And shall come 
forth; they that have done good, 
unto the resurrection of life; 
and they that have done evil, 
unto the resurrection of damna- 


tion. 

Acts. 24:15. And have hope 
toward God, which they them- 
selves also allow, that there 
shall be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and un- 
just. 

(21) Isa. 61:1. The Spirit of 
the Lord God is upon me; be- 
cause the Lord hath anointed me 
to preach good tidings unto the 
meek; he hath sent me to bind 
up the broken-hearted, to pro- 
claim liberty to the captives, and 
the opening of the -prison to 
hem that are bound; 

2. To proclaim the acceptable 
year of the Lord, and the day 
of vengeance of our God; to com- 
fort all that mourn; 

3. To appoint unto them that 
mourn in Zion, to give unto them 
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy 
for mourning, the garment of 
praise for the spirit of heavi- 
ness; that they might be called 


Trees of righteousness, The 
planting of the Lord, that he 
might be glorified, 

Luke 4:16. And he came to 
Nazareth, where he had been 
brought up: and, as his custom 
was, he went into the synagogue 
on the sabbath day, and stood 
up for to read. ’ 

17. And there was delivered 
unto him the book of the prophet 
Hsaias. And when he had 
opened the book, he found the 
place where it was written, 

18. The Spirit of the Lord és 
upon me, because he hath 
anointed me to preach the gos- 
pel to the poor; he hath sent me 
to heal the broken-hearted, to 
preach deliverance to the cap- 
tives, and recovering of sight to 
the blind, to set at liberty them 
that are bruised, 

19. To preach the acceptable 
year of the Lord. 

20. And he closed the book, 


and he gave it again, to the | 


minister, and sat down. And the 
eyes of all them that were in 
the synagogue were fastened on 
him. 

21. And he began to say unta 
them, This day is this Scripture 
fulfilled in your ears. 


ara = 


OBJECTIONS. 57 


arated by more than eighteen hundred years, surely we 
should respect God’s Word, when it so plainly states that 
there will be a period of a thousand years between the 
resurrection of the “blessed and holy,”’—and that of “the 
rest of the dead.” . 

The word dpa (hora—hour) which Jesus used in John 
5:28 is the same word as that used in verse 25.22 The 
latter we all believe has been over eighteen hundred years 
long. Why, then may not the former be at least a 
thousand years long and thus perfectly harmonize with 
Rev. 20? See also John 4:21, 23 and Rom. 13:11 (high 
time —= @pa ==it is already the hour) in each of which 
hour signifies a long period. 

Tregelles—who is supported by the Jewish commenta- 
tors—renders Dan. 12:2 as follows: 

“And many from among the sleepers of the dust of 
the earth shall awake; these shall be unto everlasting life; 
but those (the rest of the sleepers who do not awake at 
this time) shall be unto shame.” (See Jamieson, Fausset 
and Brown on this passage.) It is needless to add that this 
most intensely confirms the doctrine of the first resurrec- 
tion. 

Only One Text. 


Lastly it is objected that a difference in time for the 
resurrection of the just from that of the unjust is stated 
in only one place in the Word, to-wit: Rev. 20, and that 
this is a book so symbolical, that we must not rely upon 
it for such an important fact. 

Only one place indeed! But is not that enough? Why! 
the existence of all light rests upon the single sentence in 
Gen. 1:3,? and it rests safely, because God spoke those 
words. The most marvelous fact, in connection with our 
Lord’s first appearing, was the immaculate conception. It 


(22) John 5:25. Verily, ver- hour is coming, in the which 
ily, I say unto you, The bour is all that are in the graves shall 
coming, and now is, when the hear his voice. 
dead shall hear the voice of the (23) Gen. 1:3. And God said 
Bon ees and they that hear fot there be light: and there was 

28, Marvel not at this: forthe et 


58 JESUS I8 COMING. 


has caused suspicion of Mary’s character, and it calls for 
the greatest exercise of faith to believe in the Holy Ghost 
Fatherhood of her Son. It professes the holiest purity 
where the world can see only fornication and shame. And 
yet this astonishing event rested for centuries upon a 
single passage of prophecy, “Behold a virgin shall con- 
ceive and bear a son.” Isa. 7:14, and although it was 
given by the Lord to the Jews as a special and important 
eign they will not rely upon it, because it occurs in a 
poetical book, and so they reject the Babe of Bethlehem. 

But shall we,—who believe that Isa. 7:14 has been 
literally fulfilled—condemn the Jews for not accepting it, 
and yet justify ourselves in rejecting the literal fulfillment 
of this plain statement in Rev. 20? God: forbid. Remem- 
ber that He says, “Behold I come quickly; blessed is he 
that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book.” 
Rev. 22:7; 1:3. Ob then let us earnestly entreat you, to 
heed this one passage even though it may pierce through 
your established opinions.2* Don’t reject it. Don’t pervert 
its simple teaching, for it is God’s holy Word of prophecy 
and is as immovable as the rocky fastness of the moun- 
tains—yea more—for these shall pass away ‘‘but the 
Word of the Lord endureth forever.’’ 


Dean Alford’s Comments. 


And here, dear reader, let us invite your careful atten- 
tion to Dean Alford’s comment upon this passage, viz.: 
“this is the first resurrection.” He says: “It will have been 
long ago anticipated by the readers of this commentary, 
that I cannot consent to distort its words from their plain 
sense and chronological place in the prophecy, on account 
of any considerations of difficulty, or any risk of abuses 
which the doctrine of the Millennium may bring with it. 
Those who lived next to the Apostles, and the whole 
Church for three hundred years, understood them in the 
plain literal sense; and it is a strange sight in these days 


pp rs ergerannereeneneneniy esa 

(24) Heb. 4:12. For the word viding asunder of soul and spirit, 
of God {fs quick, and powerful, and of the joints and marrow, 
and sharper than any twoedged and fe a discerner of the 
sword, piercing even to the di- thoughts and intents of the heart. 


DEAN ALFORD’S COMMENT. 59 


to see expositors who are among the first in reverence of 
antiquity, complacently casting aside the most cogent in- 
stance of unanimity which primitive antiquity presents. 
As regards the text itself, no legitimate treatment of it 
will extort what is known as the spiritual interpretation 
now in fashion. If, in a passage where two resyrrections 
are mentioned, where certain souls lived at the first, and 
the rest of the dead lived only at the end of a specified 
period after that first, if in such a passage, the first resur- 
rection may be understood to mean spiritual rising with 
Christ, while the second means literal rising from the 
grave; then there is an end of all significance in language, 
and Scripture is wiped out as a definite testimony to any- 
thing. If the first resurrection is spiritual, then so is the - 
second, which I suppose no one will be hardy enough to 
maintain. But if the second is literal, then so is the first, 
' which in common with the whole primitive church and 
many of the best modern expositors, J do maintain and 
receive as an article of faith and hope.’’* 


Resurrection From the Dead. 


Now if Christ is coming to raise the righteous a thou- 
sand years before the ungodly, it would be natural and im- 
perative that the former should be called a resurrection 
from, or out of the dead, the rest of the dead being left 
until after the thousand years. We rejoice therefore that 
this is just what is most carefully done in the Word, and in 
this we believe we have another most comprehensive and 
definite proof of the pre-millennial coming of Christ. It 
consists in the use made, in the Greek text of the words 
éxvexpov (ek nekron). 

These words signify “from the dead” or, out of the 
dead, implying that the other dead are left. 


The resurrection vexp®v or tov vexpoy (nekron, or ton 
nekron-of the dead) is applied to both classes because all 


*See also the quotations from distinguished authorities, 
both English and German given as critical testimonies in 
the appendix to Pre-millennial Essays, published by F. H. 
Revell, Chicago, Ill. 


60 JESUS I8 COMING. 4 


will be raised. But the resurrection é& vexpoy (ek nekron 
= out of the dead) is not once applied to the ungodly.* 
The latter phrase is used altogether 49 times, to-wit: 
34 times, to express Christ’s resurrection, whom we 
know was thus raised out of the dead.t 
3 times, to express John’s supposed resurrection, who, 
as Herod thought, had been thus raised out of the dead.f} 
3 times, to express the resurrection of Lazarus, who was 


also raised out of the dead.|| 


3 times, it is used figuratively, to express spiritual life: 


out of the deadness of sin. 

Rom. 6:13: “As those that are alive from the dead’’; 
11:15: “Life from the dead.” 

Eph. 5:14: “Arise from the dead.” 

It is used in Luke 16:31. Parable of the rich man. 
“Though one rose from the’ dead.” 

And in Heb. 11:19. Abraham’s faith that God could 
raise Isaac from the dead. 

And the remaining 4 times it is used to express a future 
resurrection out of the dead, namely, in Mark 12:25, where 
Jesus says: “When they shall rise from the dead (é€x 
vexpov ) they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but 
are as the angels which are in heaven,” and in Luke 20:35- 
36. “But they which shall be accounted worthy to ob- 
tain that world, and the resurrection which is from among 
(the) dead (rio dyacrdcews rio éx vecpOv), neither mar- 
ry, nor are given in marriage; neither can they die any 
more; for they are equal unto the angels; and are the chil- 
dren of God, being the children of the resurrection. 


*Mat. 22:31; Acts 17:32; 23:6; 24:15, 21; 1 Cor. 15:12, 138, 21, 
42 and especially John 5:28-29 (R. V.): 28. Marvel not at this: 
for the hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs 
shall hear his voice, 29 and shall come forth; they that have 
done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have 
done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment. 

+Mat. 17:9; Mark 9:9-10; Luke 24:46; John 2:22; 20:9; 21:14; 
Acts 3:15; 4:10; 10:41; 13:30; 13:34; 17:3; 17:31; 26: 23; Rom. 
1:4; 4:24; "6:4-9: 7:4; 8:11: 10:7, 9; 1 Cor. 15:12, 20; Gal. 1:1; 
Eph. 1:20: Col. 4:18: 2:12; 1 Thes. 1:10: 2 Tim. 2:8; Heb. 13:20: 
1 Pet. 1: 3, 21. 

tMark 6:14, 16; Luke 9:7. 

[|John 12:1, 9, 17. 


- a 


RESURRECTION FROM THE DEAD. 61 


In Acts 4:1-2: The Sadducees were grieved because 
Peter and John “preached, through Jesus, the resurrection 
which ts from among (the) dead” (rw dydoracw tH éx 
vexpor). 7 

And in Phil. 3:11, it is used in a manner remarkably sig- 
nificant. Our version renders it, “resurrection of the 
dead,” which is especially wrong, tor the Greek preposi- 
tion ek occurs here in a duplicate form, in all the oldest 
manuscripts.* The phrase is ny éfavdoracw riv éx vexpav + 
(teen exanastasin teen ek nekron), and the literal transla- 
tion 1s the out resurrection from among the dead, which 
peculiar construction of language gives a special empha- 
sis to the idea that this is a resurrection out from among 
the dead. 

These passages clearly show, that there is yet to be a 
resurrection out of the dead; that is, that part of the dead 
will be raised, before all are raised. Olshausen declares 
that the “phrase would be inexplicable if it were not de- 
rived from the idea that out of the mass of the dead some 
would rise first.” 

That no unrighteous have part in this “first resurrection” 
is evident from Luke 20:36: they “are the children of 
God” and “equal unto the angels.” 

It is the resurrection of a select class only, viz.: the 
righteous, and therefore Jesus calls it the resurrection of 
the just. Luke 14:14,—“And thou shalt be blessed; for 
they can not recompense thee: for thou shalt be recom- 
pensed at the resurrection of the just.” 

‘Paul ealls it the better resurrection.25 It is the resur- 
rection of those that are Christ’s at his coming,?® “the dead 
in Christ,” who shall “rise first.”’27 


*See Jamieson, Fausset and Brown, Alford, and Dr. Adam 
Clark. 

+Greek text, Tischendorf and Alford. 

tVol. 2, p. 183 Am. Ed. 


(25) Heb. 11:35. Women re- 
ceived their dead raised to life 


man in his own order: Christ 
the firstfruits; afterward they 


again; and others were tortured, 
not accepting deliverance; that 
they might obtain a better resur- 
rection. 

(26) 1 Cor. 15:23. But every 


that are Christ’s at his coming. 

(27) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with 


€2 JESUS I8 COMING. 


The First Resurrection. 


“Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resur- 
rection.” Rev. 20:6. 

Paul, as a Pharisee, believed in the general fact of the 
resurrection.2® But we see from the foregoing, why he 
counted all things but loss that he might win Christ, 
. « + and know Him, and the power of His resurrec- 
tion, and the fellowship of His sufferings, . . . if by 
any means he might attain unto the out resurrection from 
among the dead. Phil. 3:8-11. 

And we see also, why the three favored disciples were 
“questioning one with another what the rising from the 
dead should mean.”?® They understood perfectly, what 
the resurrection of the dead meant, for this was a com- 
monly accepted doctrine of the Jews.°®° But the resurrec- 
tion from the dead was a new revelation to them. 

And it is an important revelation to us, for it is “the 
resurrection of life.”51 

But there is also to be a resurrection of judgment (so 
the Greek). John 5:29. It is the resurrection of the un- 
just.®? It is the completion of the resurrection (vexpév or 


the trump of God: and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first: 
; (28) Acts 23:6. But when 

Paul perceived that the one part 
were Sadducees, and the other 
Pharisees, he cried out in the 
council, Men and brethren, I am 
a Pharisee, the son of a Phari- 
see: of the hope and resurrec- 
tion of the dead I am called in 
question. 

7%. And when he had so said, 
there arose a dissension between 
the Pharisees and the Sadducees; 
and the multitude was divided. 

8. For the Sadducees say that 
there is no resurrection, neither 
angel, nor spirit: but the Phari- 
sees confess both. 

(29) Mark 9:10. And they 
kept that saying with themselves, 
questioning one with another 
what the rising from the dead 
should mean. 


(30) Heb. 6:2. Of the doc- 
trine of baptisms, and of laying 
on of hands, and of resurrection 
of the dead, and of eternal judg- 
ment. 

(31) John 5:29. And _ shall 
come forth; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of 
life; and they that have done 
evil, unto the resurrection of 
damnation (judgment). 

Dan. 12:2. And many of them 
that sleep in the dust of the 
earth shall awake, some to ever- 
lasting life, and some to shame 
and everlasting contempt. 

(32) Acts 24:15. And have 
hope toward God, which they 
themselves also allow, that there 
shall be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and un- 
just. 

Rev. 20:12. And I saw the 
dead, small and great. stand be- 


WATCHING. 63 


Tav vexpov) of the dead. Hence we see there is a difference 
in time as well as in character, in the order of the resurrec- 
tion; the first being that of the just, and the second that 
of the unjust; and this difference.-in time is perfectly in 
accordance with the account in Rev. 20, where the interval 
is stated to be the 1000 years of the Millennial. kingdom. 
And as Christ comes at the resurrection of the just, or 
those who sleep in Him (1 Thes. 4:13-16), His coming 
must be pre-millennial.* 


No. VII. Watching. 


We are commanded to watch for His coming. 

Again and again did Jesus tell His disciples to watch? 
He said: “Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour 
your Lord doth come.” Mat. 24:42. “Watch therefore, 
for ye know neither the day nor the hour.” Mat. 25:13. 
Adding, “And, what I say unto you, I say unto all,— 
Watch.” Mark 13:35-37. He places especial emphasis on 
the word Watch, particularly in Rev. 16:15, “Blessed is he 
that Watcheth.” (See Greek.) 

Now it is absolutely inconsistent with the constitution 
of the human mind, thus to watch for an event which we 
believe to be one thousand years or more in the future. 

And yet this is just the position which Post-millennial- 
ists are forced to take. 


*We humbly invite a candid and prayerful consideration 
of the above argument, on the part of Greek students. 

Dr. David Brown quite superficially disposes of it by the 
erroneous presumption that Pre-millenarians apply the 
resurrection (vexpay or rHy vexpay ), of the dead, only to 
the ungodly. Whereas, we hold that it embraces all, even 
Christ Himself, but that (é« vexpav) from the dead ap- 
plies only to the select class who have part in the first 
resurrection. Again is he wrong in his citation of the texts 
Mark 9:9-10; Acts 10:41; 13:34; 26:23, and Rom. 1:4, each of 
which, according to Griesbach have de vexpav or df dvacrécqs 
veepov. Second Advent, p. 198. 
a 9$9€$8$ 8 Ew 
fore God; and the books were 13. And the sea gave up the 
opened; and another book was dead which were in it; and death 
opened, which is the book of life: and hell delivered up the dead 
and the dead were judged out of which were in them: and they 
those things which were written were judged every man accorde 
in the books, according to their ing to their works. 
works. 


64 JESUS I8 COMING. 


Matthew Henry, commenting on Luke 12:45, says: “Our 
looking at Christ’s second coming as a thing at a distance 
is the cause of all those irregularities which render the 
thought of it terrible to us.” And on watching, he says : 
“To watch implies not only to believe that our Lord will 
come, but to desire that He would come, to be often think- 
ing of His coming, and always looking for it as sure and 
near, and the time of it uncertain.” 


As followers of Christ we are compared to soldiers, fight- 
ing the fight of faith (1 Tim. 1:18; 6:12; 2 Tim. 2:3; 
4:7), and perhaps no better illustration could be given us 
of watching, than that of picket duty in the army. 


Old soldiers know that out on the skirmish line it is 
full of life and excitement, because they are watching for 
something immediately possible. But in camp it is a dull, 
soulless drudgery, because they are expecting nothing until 
the outer pickets, perhaps five or six miles away, are driven 
in, ' 

How intensely do we increase this difference in watch- 
ing, if we separate the pickets by a thousand years. And 
this is what post-millennialism does. 


We believe this argument appeals to the common sense 
of every person, and we pray God that these seven argu- 
ments may be blessed to the perfecting of that which is 
lacking in your faith.®® 


He is faithfu’ that hath promised, an’ He’ll surely come 
again, 

He'll keep his tryst wi’ me, at what hour I dinna ken; 

But he bids me still to wait, an’ ready aye to be, 

To gang at ony moment to my ain countrie. 


So I’m WATCHING aye, and singing o’ my hame as I wait, 

For the soun’ing o’ His footfa’ this side the gowden gate, 

For His bluid hath made me white, and His hand shall 

dry my e’e 

When He brings me hame at last to my ain countrie. 
nD 

(33) 1 Thes. 8:9. For what 10. Night and day praying ex- 
thanks can we render to God - ceedingly that we might see your 
again for you, for all the joy face, and might perfect that 
wherewith we joy for your sakes which is lacking in your faith? 


before our God; 


CONTINUE TO WATCH. 65 


True watching is an attitude of mind and heart which 
would joyfully and quickly turn from any occupation to 
‘meet our Beloved, rapturously exclaiming “this ts the Lord; 
we have waited for Him.” Isa. 25:9, 


Continue to Watch. 

But, perhaps, you say: “The Church has been watching 
for eighteen hundred years and He has not come, and He 
may not come for eighteen hundred years more.” 

Well, possibly He may not; but do we know He will not? 
and shall we set a date for His coming? and cease to 
watch? | 

Post-millennialists say that He will not come for a thou- 
sand years or more, which is equivalent to setting a date, 
as it places His coming out of all possibility in our life- 
time; and then, dear reader, how quickly do we lay down 
our watching., 

The principal condemnation pronounced in the Scrip- 
ture, in regard to the Lord’s return, is to those who say 
“My Lord delayeth His coming.’’%4 . 

It is immeasurably better to be ready than to be late.®5 

Pre-millennialists believe that He may come. any mo- 
ment, and that we should ever be found watching. and 
waiting, with our loins girded about, and our lights burn- 
ing, and ourselves like men that wait for their Lord. Lu. 
12:35. 

The eighteen hundred years which have passed only make 
“our salvation” much “nearer than when we believed,” and 
it is “high time to awake out of sleep.” Rom. 13:11. 

A Little While. 

There is no prophesied event which has to be fulfilled be- 

fore His coming in the air to receive the Church. Therefore 


(84) Mat. 24:48. But and if 51. And shall cut him asun- 


that evil servant shall say in his 
heart, My lord delayeth his com- 
Ing ; 
49. And shall begin to smite 
his fellow servants, and to eat 
and drink with the drunken; 
60. The lord of that servant 
shall ccme in a day when he 
looketh not for Aim, and in an 
hour that he is not awaro of, 


der, and appoint him his portion 
with the hypocrites: there shall 
be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. 

See also Luke 12:45. 

(35) Mat. 25:10. And while 
they went to buy, the bridegroom 
came; and they that were ready 
went in with him to the mar- 
riage: and the door was shut. 


66 JESUS I8 COMING. 


we have need of patience that we may receive the promise: 
“For yet a little while’ (Greek—very, very little while) 
“and He that shall come will come, and will not tarry.” 
Heb. 10:37. 

“But,” you say, “it is not a little while.’ Ah! beloved, 
does it seem long to you from creation to the flood, or 
from the flood to Christ? The “little while” of Hag. 2:6- 
7,°° we believe, has not ended yet,®? and it certainly covered 
the five hundred years up to Christ’s first coming. Re- 
member that God speaks to you as to an immortal soul. 

Wait until you have realized a few of the mighty cycles 
of eternity, and then these eighteen centuries will indeed 
appear to be “a very, very little while.” 

O! let us fix our eyes upon Jesus. Let us watch and 
wait for the King Eternal.®* 


' The Faith of the Early Church. 


It is admitted on all sides that the pre-millennial coming 
of Christ, and His reign with His saints upon the earth a 
thousand years, was the faith of the early church. Indeed, 
this is substantiated by such an abundance of evidence, 
that it cannot be denied. 

We would that we had space to quote at length, from 
the many authorities on this point, but must be content 


to select a few: 


(36) Hag. 2:6. For thus saith 
the Lord of hosts; Yet once, it is 
a little while, and I will shake 
the heavens, and the earth, and 
the sea, and the dry land; 

7 And I will shake all na- 
tions, and the Desire of all na- 
tions shall come: and I will fill 
this house with glory, saith the 
Lord of hosts. 

(37) Joel 3:16. The Lord also 
shall roar out of Zion, and ut- 
ter his voice from Jerusalem; 
and the heavens and the earth 
shall shake: but the Lord will be 
the hope of his people, and the 
strength of the children of Is- 
rael. 

17. So shall ye know that I 


uae, om the Lord your God dwelling 


in Zion, my holy mountain: then 
shall Jerusalem be holy, and 
there shall no strangers pass 
through her any more. 

Heb. 12:26. Whose voice then 
shook the earth; but now he 
hath promised, saying, Yet once 
more I shake not the earth only, 
but also heaven. 

27. And this word, Yet once 
more, signifieth the removing of 
those things that are shaken, as 
of things that are made, that 
those things which cannot be 
shaken may remain. 

(88) 1 Tim. 1:17. Now unto 
the King eternal, immortal, in- 
visible, the only wise God, be 
honour and glory for ever and 
ever. Amen. 


/ 


FAITH OF THE EARLY OHUROHG. 67 


Mosheim says: “The prevailing opinion that Christ was 
to come and reign a thousand years among men before the 
final dissolution of the world had met with no opposition 
previous to the time of Origen.” (Vol. 1, p. 89.) 

Geisler says: “In all the works of this period (the 
first two centuries) Millenarianism is so prominent that we 
can not hesitate to consider tt as universal.”* 

Chillingworth, with his characteristic invulnerable logic, 
argues: “Whatever doctrine is believed and taught by the 
most eminent Fathers of any age of the Church and by 
none of their cotemporaries opposed or condemned, that 
is to be esteemed the Catholic doctrine of the Church of 
those times. But the doctrine of the millenaries was be- 
lieved and taught by the most eminent Fathers of the age 
next after the Apostles, and by none of that age opposed 
or’ condemned; therefore, i¢ was the Catholic doctrine of 
those times.”** 

Stackhouse, in his “Complete Body of Divinity” (Vol. 
1, p. 597), says: “It cannot be denied but that this doc- 
trine (Millenarianism) has its antiquity, and was once the 
general opinion of all orthodox Christians.” 

Bishop Newton says: “The doctrine of the Millennium 
(as held by Millenarians) was generally believed in the 
first three and purest ages.”’> 

Bishop Russell, though an anti-millenarian, says: “Down 
to the beginning of the fourth century, the belief was 
universal and undisputed.” 

Gibbon, who is at least an unprejudiced witness, says: 
“The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium was 
carefully inculcated by a succession of Fathers from Justin 
Martyr and Irenzus, who conversed with the immediate 
disciples of the Apostles, down to Lactantius, who was the 
preceptor of the son of Constantine. It appears to have 
been the reigning sentiment of orthodox believers.” 

He also says: “As long as this error (as he calls it) 
was permitted to subsist in the Church, it was productive 


*Geisler’s Church History. Vol. 215. 
*¢Chillingworth’s Works, Phila. Batt, 1844, p. 730. 
TDissertations on the Prophecies, p. 527. 
{Discourse on the Millennium, p. 236. 


68 JESUS IS COMING. 


of the most salutary effects on the faith and practice of 
‘ Christians.’’* 

Dr. Daniel Whitby,—the father of the modern post-mil- 
lennial theory,—in his “Treatise on Traditions,’ candidly 
acknowledges that, “the doctrine of the Millennium passed 
among the best of Christians, for two hundred and fifty 
years, for a tradition apostolical, and as such is delivered 
by many Fathers of the second and third centuries, who 
speak of it as a tradition of our Lord and His Apostles, 
and of all the ancients who lived before them, who tell us 
the very words in which it was delivered, the Scriptures 
which were so interpreted, and say that it was held by ali 
Christians that were exactly orthodox.” 

Lest anyone should lose the full force of these quota- 
tions, it may be proper to state, that this “ancient and 
popular doctrine of the Millennium,” as Gibbon styles it, 
was the belief in the pre-millennial coming of Christ, and 
His reign on the earth for a thousand years. It was com- 
monly e¢alled chiliasm, which see in Webster’s Dictionary. 

Such, in brief, is the testimony of historians, both ecclesi- 
astical and profane upon this subject. And some of the 
early Fathers, of whom they speak, were very nearly, if 
not quite, the cotemporaries with the Apostles. 

Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis in Phrygia, who was a 
disciple of St. John, or who at least received his doctrines 
from the immediate followers of the Apostle, was an ex- 
treme Millennialist, and has been called the father of 
Millenarianism. (See McClintock and Strong’s Enc.) 
Irenzus, as a disciple of Polyearp, Bishop of Smyrna, was 
directly connected with St. John. And also Justin Martyr 
was one of the earliest of the Fathers. 

Ts 1t not solemnly incumbent upon us, to respect and 
heed this doctrine, which these eminent Christian Fathers 
so undisputedly taught, as being the “tradition of our Lord 
and His Apostles’? Why is it, that, upon every other 
subject connected with our holy religion, such as Baptism, 
Church government, Forms of worship, Articles of faith, 
etc., we go back and search diligently to ascertain the doc- 


baal 


*Milman’s Gibbon’s Rome, Vol. 1, p. 262. 


—— 


THE APOSTLES NOT MISTAKEN. 69 


trine of the Fathers, placing so much stress upon what we 
think they believed and taught, and yet upon this most 
important theme, cast aside what we know was their faith 
and testimony? Is it consistent? Dear reader, do let us 
here emphasize Paul’s exhortation to the Thessalonians: 
“Brethren, stand fast and 


Hold the Traditions 


(teachings) which ye have been taught whether by word or 
by our epistle.”8® That is, whether taught in writing, or or- 
ally, see Verse 5. Now, what were these traditions (teach- 
ings) if not the coming of Christ and the Reign of the 
Saints, of which Paul and the other Apostles wrote so 
freely? Being thus exhorted, it is reasonable to believe 
that they did hold them, and that they are the very tradi- 
tions which Whitby and the other authorities clearly prove 
were held by the early Church. Then let us also hold,—not 
the comparatively modern post-millennial theory of Whitby, 
—but the aged faith of the Fathers. 


The Apostles Were Not Mistaken. 


We cannot believe (as some assert) that the Apostles 
were mistaken, and consequently not inspired upon this 
theme, nor that they and all the early Christians mocked 
themselves with false hopes m regard to the pre-millennial 
coming of Christ. They watched and waited for the return 
of our Lord, as a sure event, the hour of which none but 
the Father knew, but which had been enjoined upon them 
as uncertain*® and imminent.*4 And as they passed away 


(39) 2 Thee. 2:5. Remember in what watch the thief would 
ye not, that, when I was yet come, he would have watched, 
with you, I told you these and would not have suffered his 
things? house to be broken up. 

15. So then, brethren, stand 44. Therefore be ye also 


fast and hold the _ traditions 
which ye were taught whether 
by word, or by epistle as of ours. 

(40) Mat. 25:42. Watch 
therefore; for ye know not what 
hour yeur Lord doth come. 

43. But know this, that if the 
goodman of the house had known 


ready: for in such an hour as ye 
think not the Son of man com- 
eth. 

(41) Luke 12:35. Let your 
loins be girded about, amd your 
lights burning; 

36. And ye yourselves like un- 
to men that wait fer their lord, 


-_ = 


70 JESUS I8 COMING. 

to the unseen domain of Paradise, they have left us the 
written Word, their reiterated traditions (teachings handed 
down), and their great hope. So we take up their vigil, 
hopefuily watching, not daring to say that He will come to- 
morrow, nor a thousand years hence, but only this are we 
sure oi, He may come now. 

s ‘ Expectancy. 

God has held this glorious hope constantly before the 
Church, to keep her in her proper attitude of expectancy 
and longing, until the Bridegroom comes. Like Israel in 
the wilderness, we should realize that we are pilgrims and 
strangers, seeking a Land, a City, and a King, which are 
beyond our Jordan of death and resurrection. 

Death and Resurrection is the common lot of the great 
mass of the Church. But, of course, there will be some liv- 
ing when Christ comes,*? who will not die but be changed 
in a moment,#® and be caught up, like Elijah, with the 
raised saints to meet the Lord in the air. 1 Thes. 4:16-18. 


when he will return from the 
wedding; that, when he cometh 
and knocketh, they may open 
unto him immediately. 

37. Blessed ore those servants, 

whom the lord when he cometh 
shall find watching: verily I say 
unto you, that he shall gird him- 
self, and make them to sit down 
to meat, and will come forth and 
serve them. . 
. 88. And if he shall come in 
the second watch, or come in the 
third watch, and find them 50, 
blessed are those servants. 

39. And this know, that if the 
goodman of the house had known 
what hour the thief would come, 
he would have watched, and not 
have suffered his house to be 
broken through. 

40. Be ye therefore ready 
also: for the Son of man cometh 
at an hour when ye think not. 

Heb. 10:37. For yet a little 
while, and he that shall come 
will come, and will not tarry. 


(42) 1 Thes. 4:15. For this 
we say unto you by the word of 
the Lord, that we which are 
alive and remain unto the com- 
ing of the Lord shall not pre- 
vent them which are asleep. 

16. For the Lord himself shall 
descend from heaven with a 
shout, with the voice of the arch- 
angel, and with the trump of 
God: and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first: 

17. Then we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: and 
so shall we ever be with the 
Lord. 

18. Wherefore comfort one an- 
other with these words. 

(43) 1 Cor. 15:51. Behold, I 
shew you a mystery: We shall 
not all sleep, but we shall all 
be changed, 

52. In a moment, in the twinke« 
ling of an eye, at the last trump 3 
for the trumpet shall sound, ana 


EXPECTANCY. 71 


It may be at morn, when the day is awaking, 
When sunlight thro’ darkness and shadow is breaking, 
That Jesus will come in the fullness of glory, 

To receive from the world “His own.” 


It may be at midday, it may be at twilight, 
It may be perchance, that the blackness of midnight 
“Will burst into light in the blaze of His glory, 


When Jesus receives 


“His own.”’ 


While its hosts cry Hosanna, from heaven descending, 
With glorified saints and the angels attending, 
With grace on His brow, like a halo of glory, 

Will Jesus receive “His own.’’ 


Oh, joy! Oh, delight! should we go without dying; — 


No sickness, no sadness, no dread 


» and no crying; 


Caught up thro’ the clouds, with our Lord, into glory, 


When Jesus 


receives 


“His own.’’ 


erent i PP 


the dead shall be raised in- 


corruptible, and we shall be 
changed. 
Mat. 23:37. O Jerusalem, 


Jerusalem, thou that killest the 
prophets, and stonest them which 
are sent unto thee, how often 
would I have gathered thy 


children together, even as a hen 


.gathereth her chickens under her 


wings, and ye would not! 


38. Behold, your house is left 
unto you desolate. 


89. For I say unto you, Ye 
shall not see me henceforth, till 
ye shall say, Blessed 4s he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord. 


OHAPTER VIII. 
Diagram. 
We here present the following diagram, merely as an 


outline of the order of events, in connection with our 
Lord’s return. We exhort (1 Thes. 4:18, margin) a faith- 
ful study of it, together with the references and explana- 
tions appended, believing that, as an object lesson, it will 
be a great help to the reader to understand these mighty 


questions. 


Dt 


qk 


Ase 


eee 


ad 


by 

& 

p>] 

as. 37. 39 r 
< 

& 


HXPLANATION. | 
*—Yhe birth of Christ, the King of the Jews. Mat. 2:2. 
{—The death and resurrection of Christ. 


A—Ascension of Christ. : Acts 1:9. 
D—Descent of the Holy Ghost. Acts 2. 


OUTLINE OF EVENTS. 73 


Church—Mystical body of Christ. Eph. 1:22-23; 3:3-6; 
Rom. 12:4-5; Col. 1:24-27; 1 Cor. 12:12-27; and the 
Bride of Christ, Eph. 5:21-23. 

De—Descent of the Lord (1 Thes. 4:16) to receive His 
Bride. John 14:3. 

R—Resurrection of the just. Lu. 14:14; Acts 24:15; 1 
Thes. 4:15-16; and change of living believers. 1 Cor. 
15 :23, 51, 52. 

Rapture—Translation of the saints who- (like Enoch) are 
caught up to meet Christ in the air. 1 Thes. 4:17. 

U—The meeting of Christ and His Bride. 1 Thes. 4:17; 
Eph. 5:21-32; 2 Cor. 11:2. 

This is our gathering together unto Him. 2 Thes. 2:1. 

And the marriage of the Lamb. Mat. 22:2-10; 25:10; 
Lu. 14:15-24; Rev. 19 :7-8. 

So shall we ever be with the Lord. John 12:26; 14:3; 
17:24; 1 Thes. 4:17. 

It is the Hope of the Church. Phil. 3:20-21; Tit. 2:13; 
1 John 3:2-3. 

And the redemption mentioned in Lu, 21:28; Rom. 8:23; 
Eph. 4:30. 

Wherefore, comfort one another with these words. 1 
Thes. 4:18. . 

Thus the Church escapes the tribulation. Lu. 21:36; 2 
Pet. 2:9; Rev. 3:10. 

' 7.—Period of unequaled tribulation to the world (Dan. 
12:1; Mat. 24:21; Lu. 21:25-26), during which—the 
Church having been taken out—God begins to deal with 
Israel again (Acts 15:13-17; Psa. 51:18; 102:16), 
and will restore them to their own land. Isa. 11:11; 
60; Jer. 30:3; Jer. 31; 32:36-44; Amos 9:15; Zech. 
8:10; Rom. 11. 

Antichrist will be revealed. 2 Thes. 2:8. 

The vials of God’s wrath poured out. Psa. 2:1-5; Rev. 
6:16-17; Rev. 14:10; 16. But men only blaspheme 
God. Rev. 16:11-21. Israel accepts Christ (Zech. 
12 :10-14; 13:6), and are brought through the fire. 
Zech. 13:9. They pass not away. Mat. 24:34; Psa. 
22 330. 


74 JESUS IS COMING. 


Rev.—The revelation of Christ and His saints (Col. 3:4; 
1 Thes. 3:13), in flaming fire (2 Thes. 1:7-10) te 
execute judgment on the earth. Jude 14-15. 

This is Christ’s second coming to the earth. Acts 1:11; 
Deut. 33:2; Zech. 14:4-5; Mat. 16:27; 24:29-30. 
J—Judgment of the nations, or the quick. Mat. 25:31- 

46; 19:28; Acts 10:42; 1 Pet. 4:5. 

Antichrist is destroyed. 2 Thes. 2:8. The Beast and the 
False Prophet are taken. Rev. 19:20. Gog and his 
allies are smitten. Ezek. chapters 38 and 39. 


Satan-is bound. Rev. 20:1-3; Rom. 16:20. 

R. T.—Resurrection of the Tribulation Saints, which com- 
pletes the First Resurrection. Rev. 20:46. 

Miil’m.—The Millennium. Christ’s glorious reign on the 
earth for 1,000 years (Rev. 20:4) with His Bride, 2 
Tim, 2:12; Rev. 5:10; Isa. 2:2-5; 4; 11:1-12; 25:6-9; 
Isa. 65:18-25; Mic. 4:1-4; Zeph. 3:14-20; Zech. 8:3-8; 
Zech. 8 :20-23; 14 :16-21. 

S—Satan loosed for a little season, and destroyed with 
Gog and Magog. Rev. 20:7-10; Heb. 2:14. 


Res.—The Resurrection of Judgment. Rev. 20:12-15; John 
5:29; Dan. 12:2. 


J. W.T.—Judgment at the Great White Throne of all the 
remaining dead. Rev. 20:11-15. 


Death and Hell destroyed. Rev. 20:14; 1 Cor. 15:26. 
£. E.—Eternity, or rather, The aions to come. Eph. 2:7.® 
a 


*These events, we believe, are platnly foretold in the 
Word, though we would not be dogmatic as to the precise 
order in which they are given above (see preface). But we 
trust it will enable the reader to apprehend, in some de- 
gree, the extent to which the future has been revealed, unto 
us, by the Spirit (2 Pet. 1:21; John 16:18; 1 Cor. 2:10) and 
to realize that ETERNITY ITSELF will not be a blank, or 
statue like condition, but a continually unfolding mani- 
festation of God to us throughout the “ages to come” (Eph. 
2:7) even the “AGES OF AGES.” See Greek Gal. 1:5; Eph. 
3:21; Phil. 4:21; 1 Tim. 1:17; 2 Tim. 4:18; Heb. 13:21: 1 Pet. 
4:11; Rev. 1:6, 18; 4:9, 10; 5:13; 7:12; 10:6; 11:15; 14:11; 15:7; 
19:8; 20:10; 22:5. See page 218. 


CHAPTER IX. 
Rapture and Revelation. 


Two things are of vital importance, in order to the right 
understanding of this subject, and these are: 


First. 
Revelation. 


The distinction between the Rapture and the 


Rapture means to be caught up, or away. 

Revelation (dmoxdAvfus—apokalupsis) means Appearing 
or shining forth or manifestation.’ 

The Rapture occurs when the Church is caught up to 
meet Christ in the air,? before the tribulation; and 

The Revelation occurs when Christ comes, with His 
saints, to end the Tribulation, by the execution of right- 
eous judgment upon the earth.* 

At the Rapture, Christ comes into the air for His 


saints. 


At the Revelation, He comes to the earth with them.5 He 


(1) Rom. 8:19. For the 
earnest expectation of the crea- 
ture waiteth for the manifesta- 
tion of the sons of God. 

(2) 1 Thes. 4:14. For if we 
believe that Jesus died and rose 
again, even so them also which 
sleep in Jesus will God bring 
with him. 

17. Then we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air, so 
shall we ever be with the Lord. 

(3) 2 Thes. 1:7. And to you 
who are troubled rest with us, 
when the Lord Jesus shall be 
revealed from heaven with his 
_ Mighty angels. 

8. In flaming fire taking 
vengeance on them that know 
not God, and that obey not the 
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 

9. Who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of his power; 


4 


10. When he shall come to be 
glorified in his saints, and to be 
admired in all them that believe. 

Jude 14. And Enoch also, the 
seventh from Adam, prophesied 
of these, saying, Behold, the 
Lord cometh with ten thousand 
of his saints. 

15. To execute judgment upon 
all, and to convince all that are 
ungodly among them of all their 
ungodly deeds which they have 
ungodly committed, and of all 
their hard speeches which un- 


godly sinners have spoken 
against him. 
(4) John 14:3. And if I go 


and prepare a place for you, I 
will come again, and receive you 
unto myself; that where I am, 
there ye may be also. 

(5) 1 Thes. 8:18. To the end 
he may stablish your hearts un- 
blamable in holiness before 
God, even our Father, at the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
with all his saints. 


(7 


16 | JESUS I8 COMING. 


certainly must come for them before He can come with 
them. The assurance that God will bring them (Greek— 
lead them forth) with Jesus (1 Thes. 4:14) is evidence 
that He will first come for them, they being caught up to 
meet him in the air. Verse 17. The Greek word here ren- 
dered “to meet” signifies a going forth, in order to return 
with. The same word is used in Acts 28:15,° where the 
brethren came out to meet Paul and had a season of thanks- 
giving with him at Appu Forum and the Three Taverns, 
when he was on his way to Rome. This exactly accords 
with our being caught up to meet Christ and afterward 
returning to the earth with Him. 

Again, at the Rapture Christ comes as the Bridegroom” 
to take unto Himself His bride, the Church.® 

At the Revelation, He comes, with His bride, to rule the 


nations.® 


— 


Zech. 14:5. And ye shal] flee 
to the valley of the mountains; 
for the valley of the mountains 
shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye 
shall flee, like as ye fled from 
before the earthquake in the days 
of Uzziah king of Judah: and the 


Lord my God shall come, and 
all the saints with thee. 
(6) Acts 28:15. And from 


thence, when the brethren heard 
of us, they came to meet us 
as far as Appii Forum, and the 
Three Taverns; whom when 
Paul saw, he thanked God, and 
took courage. 

(7) Mat. 25:10. And while 
they went to buy, the bridegroom 
came; and they that were ready 
went in with him to the mar- 
riage: and the door was shut. 


(8) Eph. 6:25. Husbands, 
love your wives, even as Christ 
also loved the church, and gave 
himself for it; 


26. That he might sanctify 
and cleanse it with the washing 
of water by the word. 

27. That he might present it 
to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot, or wrinkle, or 


apy such thing; but that it 


should be holy and _ without 
blemish. , 

28. So ought men to love 
their wives as their own bodies. 
He that loveth his wife loveth 
himself. 

29. For no man ever yet 
hated his own flesh; but nourish- 
eth and cherisheth it, even as 
the Lord the church: 

30. For we are members of 
his body. 

31. For this cause shal] a man 
leave his father and mother, and 
shall be joined unto his wife, 
and they two shall be one flesh. 

32. This is a great mystery: 
but I speak concerning Christ 
and the church. 

(9) Rev. 2:26. And he that 
overcometh, and keepeth my 
works unto the end, to him will 
I give power over the nations: 

27. And he shall rule them 
with a rod of fron; as the ves- 
sels of a potter shall they be 
broken to shivers: even as I ree 
ceived of my Father. 

Rev. 5:10. And madest them 
to be unto our God a kingdom 
and priests; and they reign upon 
the earth. 


RAPTURE AND REVELATION. T% 


At the Rapture He comes only to meet the saints in 


the air, 1 Thes. 4:17. 


At the Revelation, He comes to the earth,® and His 
feet stand upon the same Mount Olivet from which He 


ascended.!2 


At the Rapture the Church, like Enoch, is taken out of 


the world.?? 


At the Revelation, the Millennial Kingdom is begun.}? 


In Luke 21:28, the Rapture is referred to at the begin- 
ning of the Tribulation. ‘When these things begin to come 
to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your 


redemption draweth nigh.” 


(Redemption here meaning the 


first resurrection, same as in Rom. 8:23.) 1% 

In Luke 21:31, the Revelation is referred to, when 
“these things” (the Tribulation) have come to pass, and the 
kingdom of God draweth nigh. 


Rev. 19:15. And out of his 
mouth goeth a sharp sword, that 
with it he shoulc smite the 
nations; and he shall rule them 
with a rod of iron: and he 
treadeth the winepress of the 
fierceness and wrath of Almighty 
God. 

See also Rev. 12:5. 

(10) Acts 1:11. Which also 
sald, Ye men of Galilee, why 
stand ye gazing up into heaven? 
this same Jesus, which 1s taken 
up from you into heaven, shall 
se come in like manner as ye 
bave seen him go into heaven. 

(11) Zech. 14:4. And his 
feet shall stand in that day upon 
the mount of Olives, which is 
before Jerusalem on the east; 
and the mount of Olives shall 
cledve in the midst thereof to- 
ward the east and toward the 
west, and there shall be a very 
great valley; and half of the 
mountain shall remove toward 
the north, and half of it toward 
the south. 

5 . . . And the Lord my 
God shalt come and all the 
saints with thee. 


(12) Acts 15:13. And after 
they had held their peace, James 
answered, saying, Men and 
brethren, hearken unto me: 


14. Simeon hath declared how 
God at the first did visit the 
Gentiles, to take out of them 
@ people for his name. 


15. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets; as it is 
written, 


16. After this I will return, 
and will build again the taber- 
nacle of David, which is fallen 
down; and I will build again 
the ruins thereof, and I will set 
it up: 


17. That the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord, and 
all the Gentiles, upon whom 
my name is called, saith the 
Lord, who doeth all these things. 


(13) Rom. 8:23. And not 
only they, but ourselves also, 
which have the first-fruits of the 
Spirit, even we ourselves groan 
within ourselves, waiting for 
the adoption, to wit, the redemp- 
tion of our body. 


amen e- ee - 


Be. tae 2. 


7% JESUS I8 COMING. . 


The Rapture may occur any moment." 

The Revelation can not occur, until Antichrist be re 
vealed, and all the times and seasons (which point to the 
day of the Lord) in Lev. 26, Daniel and Revelation be 
fulfilled. 

The Revelation ushers in the day, the Day of the Lord.’ 

The failure to make this distinction has led to great con- 
fusion among commentators upon this subject. 

For instance: In 2 Thes. chapter 2, the apostle, in 
the first verse, speaks of the Rapture, to-wit: the coming 
of the Lord and our gathering together unto Him, o- which 
He had written so fully in the previous epistle, especially 
in the 4th chapter. 

In the second verse he speaks of: the Revelation, or Day 
of the Lord,* which could not come, except there be a fall- 
ing away first, and the “man of sin” and “that wicked,” or 
the Antichrist, be revealed. 

And yet, most commentators have argued that the 
apostle, in both of these verses, referred to one and the 
same event, and thus they have made Scripture contradict 
itself. 

But we see plainly, that Paul had no intention of contra- 
dicting Christ’s admonitions, unto all, to watch for His 
coming, as being imminent. Mark 13:35-37; Luke 12:35- 
40. He only made the distinction, as above stated, between 
the Rapture and the Revelation. The persecuted Thessalo- 
nians thought that they were im the Tribulation, and that 
the Day of the Lord had set in. But Paul corrects them, 
first by reminding them that the Lord had not come for 

*Greek, the oldest MSS. read «vpiov = Lord, not xpiorot = 
Christ. See Bengels’ Gnomon and others. 

t évdommxey (enesteeken) which authorized version renders 
“at hand,’”’ means to be present, or to have set in. See same 


word in Rom. 8:38; 1 Cor. 3:22; 7:26; Gal. 1:4; Heb. 9:9, in 
each place rendered “present.” 


(14) Mat. 24:42, Watch aa thief in the night. 


therefore; for ye know not what Luke 17:30. Even thus shall 

bour your Lord doth come. it be in the day when the Son 
(15) 1 Thes. 5:2. For your- of ~:an is revealed. 

selves know perfectly that the Aliso 2 Thes. 1:7-10; 2 Pet, 


Gay of the Lord so cometh as 8:10-12, etc. 


or ee eg ee 
. 


RAPTURE AND REVELATION. 19 


them yet, as He had said that He would (1 Thes. 4:15-17), 
and then by adding certain other things which must occur 
before the Day of the Lord should come. He had told them 
that the Day of the Lord should come as a thief in the 
night (1 Thes. 5:2), but that they were not of the night, 
and therefore He exhorts them to watch and be sober. (See 
also Lu. 21:36.1°) 

: Another evidence of the difference between the Rapture 
and Revelation consists in the fact that the Church is to 
escape the Tribulation, which precedes the Revelation. 
| (Mat, 24:29-30.) 

Enoch, a type of the Church, by his rapture,—that is by 
being caught away or translated (Heb. 11:5) —escaped the 
flood. 

Christ says, in Luke 21:36, “Watch ye therefore, and 
pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape 
all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand be- 
fore the Son of man.” 

And in keeping with this injunction He gave a blessed 
promise to the Church, in Rev. 3:10, viz.: “Because thou 
hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee 
from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all 
the world, to try tnem that dwell upon the earth. Behold 
I come quickly,’ ete. A special hour, or time, of tempta- 
tion—i. e., trial—is here mentioned, which shall come upon 
all the world ( olxovpévn-oikoumenee — the whole habitable 
—same word in Mat. 24:14—all the world). 

It is a time of trouble not limited to Judea, but as ex. 
tensive as the inhabited earth. This accords with the great 
tribulation described in Mat. 24:21, a “tribulation, such as 
was not since the beginning of the world . .. nor 
ever shall be.” 

Jesus promises to keep the Church from, or (é&) out 
of this tribulation, or hour of temptation, that is, the 
watchful and prayerful believers will escape it. Luke 
21:36. Now, as it covers the whole earth, there is no way 


(16) Luke 21:36. Watch ye escape all these things that shall 
therefore, and pray always, that come to pass, and to stand be- 
ye may be accounted worthy to fore the Son of man. 


80 JESUS I8 COMING. 


of escape from it, but to be taken out of the world, and 


this is accomplished by the Rapture. 


Acts 15:14, and 1 


Thes. 4:17, which thus presents a glorious deliverance for 


the Church. 


The elect,17 a portion of Israel,1® ‘will be gathered back 
to Jerusalem,!® and pass through the fire, or great trial.?° 
Like Enoch, the Church escapes from it. 


(17) Mat. 24:22. And except 
those days should be shortened, 
there should no flesh be saved: 
but for the elect’s sake those 
days shall be shortened. 

(18) Isa. 65:9. And I will 
bring forth a seed out of Jacob, 
and out of Judah an inheritor of 
my mountains: and mine elect 
shall inherit it, and my servants 
shall dwell there. 

See also verses 15 and 22, and 
Rom. 11:5-7. 

(19) Isa. 1:26. And I will 
restore thy judges as at the first, 
and thy counsellors as at the 
beginning: afterward thou shalt 
be called, The city of righteous- 
ness, The faithful city. 

27. Zion shall be redeemed 
with judgment, and her converts 
with righteousness. 

Zech. 10:6. And I will 
strengthen the house of Judah, 
and I will save the house of 
Joseph, and I will bring them 
again to place them: for I have 
mercy upon them: and they shall 
be as though I had not cast 
them off: for I am the Lord 
their God, and will hear them. 

7. And they of Ephraim shall 
be like a mighty man, and their 
heart shall rejoice as through 
wine: yea, their children shall 
see if, and be glad; their heart 
shall rejoice in the Lord. 

8. I will hiss for them, and 
gather them; for I have re- 
deemed them: and they shall 
increase as they have increased. 

9. And I will sow them among 
the people: and they shall re- 
member me in far countries; 


and they shall live with their 
children, and turn again. 


10. I will bring them again 
also out of the land of Egypt 
and gather them out of Assyria; 
and I will bring them into the 
land of Gilead and Lebanon; and 
place shall not be found for 
them. 

(20) Zech. 13:8. And it shall 
come to pass, that in all the 
land, saith the Lord, two parts 
therein shall be cut off and die; 
but the third shall be left there- 
in. 

9. And I will bring the third 
part through the fire, and will 
refine them as silver is refined, 
and will try them as gold is 
tried; they shall call on my 
name, and I will hear them: I 
will say, It is my people; and 
they shall say, The Lord is my 
God. 

Psa. 57:1. Be merciful unto 
me, O God, be merciful unto 
me; for my soul trusteth in 
thee: yea, in the shadow of thy 
wings will I make my refuge, 
until these calamities be over- 
past. 

Isa. 26:20. Come, my people, 
enter thou into thy chambers, 
and shut thy doors about thee: 
hide thyself as it were for a 
little moment, until the indigna- 
tion be overpast. 

21. For, behold, the Lord 
cometh out of his place to punish 
the inhabitants of the earth for 
their iniquity: the earth also 
shall disclose her blood, and 
shall no more cover her slain. 

Also Psa. 27:56; 81:20 


RAPTURE AND REVELATION. 81 


Like Noah, Israel passes through it. 


So the Chureh should humble herself to walk with God 
(Micah 6:8), as Enoch did (Gen. 5:24), having the tes- 
timony that she pleases God,?1 and watch for the Rapture 
at any moment. 


The Jews, through their dates and seasons, may look 
for the Revelation, or day of the Lord, a day of thick 
darkness to them, in which there is no light at all.2? Yet, 
in it they will accept Christ?*® and “at evening time it 
shall be light,” and “living waters shall go out from Je- 
rusalem.” Zech, 14:6-8. 


The Rapture, or being caught away, at the coming of 
the Bridegroom, is full of the sweetest comfort for the be- 
liever, and therefore Paul says, “Comfort one another 
with these words.” 1 Thes. 4:18. 

But the Revelation of Christ with His Saints, to take 
vengeance on the ungodly, is full of solemnity and terror 
to them who obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus 


Christ.?4 


(21) Heb. 11:5. By faith 
Enoch was translated that he 
should not see death; and was 
not found, because God had 
translated him: for before his 
translation he had this testi- 
mony, that he pleased God. 

(22) Amos 6:18. Woe unto 
you that desire the day of the 
Lord! to what end is it for you? 
the day of the Lord is darkness, 
and not light. 

19. As if a man did flee from 
a@ lion, and a bear met him; or 
went into the house, and leaned 
his hand on the wall, and a 
serpent bit him. 

20. Shall not the day of the 
Lord be darkness, and not light? 
even very dark, and no bright- 
ness in it? 

(23) Zech. 12:9. And it shall 
come to pass in that day, that 
I will seek to destroy all the 
nations that come against Jeru- 
salem. 

10. And I will pour upon the 


house of David, and upon the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the 
spirit of grace and of supplica- 
tions; and they shall look upon 
me whom they have pierced, and 
they shall mourn for him, as 
one mourneth for his only son, 
and shall be in bitterness for 
him, as one that is in bitter- 
ness for his first-born. 

(24) Rev. 6:12. And I beheld 
when he had opened the sixth 
seal, and, lo, there was a great 
earthquake; and the sun became 
black as sackcloth of hair, and 
the moon became as blood; 

13. And the stars of heaven 
fell unto the earth, even as a 
fig tree casteth her untimely figs, 
when she is shaken of a mighty 
wind. 

14. And the heaven departed 
as a scroll when it is rolled to- 
gether; and every mountain and 
island were moved out of their 
places. 

15. And the kings of the 


-— ee 


82 JESUS IS COMING. 


earth, and the great men, and 
the rich men, and the chief cap- 
tains, and the mighty men, and 
every bond man, and every free 
man, hid themselves in the dens 
and in the rocks of the moun- 
tains ; 

16. And said to the mountains 


and rocks, Fall on us, and hide 
us from the face of him that 
sitteth on the throne, and from 
the wrath of the Lamb: 

17. For the great day of his 
wrath ig come; and who shall 
be able to stand? 

Also 2 Thes. 137-10. 


CHAPTER X. 
The Church and the Millennial Kingdom. 


The second point is: The distinction between the Church 
and the Millennial Kingdom. 

The Christian Church ( éxxAyoia—ekkleesia), meaning 
assembly or congregation, is distinct from the congrega- 
tion of the Mosaic dispensation, or Church in the wilder- 
ness. For, until after Christ came, it was a thing of the 
future. This is proved by His assertion in Mat. 16:18, 
“On this rock will I build my Church,” showing that it 
had not yet been built. 


And, it is likewise distinct from the Millennial King- 
dom, which is to follow it. 

The Church is a companion of Christ in His humilia- 
tion, manifesting His sufferings and filling up the afilic- 
tions which are behind.? 

The Kingdom is the manifestation of the glory of Christ 
which shall follow,* when He “shall sit in the throne of 
His glory,’”? and when they who have suffered with Him 
during this time of the trial shall also be exalted to regal 
power and authority. This Kingdom was at hand,® that 


(1) Acts 7:38. This is he, in them did signify, when it 


that was in the church (ecclesia 
—congregation) in the wilder- 
ness with the angel which spake 
to him in the mount Sinai, and 
with our fathers: who received 
the lively oracles to give unto 


8: 

(2) Col. 1:24. Who now re- 
joice in my sufferings for you, 
and fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ in my 


flesh for his body’s sake, which. 


is the church. 

Also 2 Cor. 1:5-6; Phil. 8: 
10; 2 Tim. 1:8. 

(8) 1 Pet. 1:11. Searching 
what, or what manner of time 
the Spirit of Christ which was 


testified beforehand the suffer- 
ings of Christ, and the glory 
that should follow. 


(4) Mat. 19:28. And Jesus 
said unto them, Verily I say 
unto you, That ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration 
when the Son of man shall sit 
in the throne of his glory, ye 
also shall sit upon twelve 
thrones, judging the twelve tribes 
of Israel. 


Also Luke 22 :28-380. 


(5) Mat. 3:2. And saying, 
Repent ye: for the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. 

Also Ch. 4:17 and 10:7. 


&4 JESUS I8 COMING. 


is, it came nigh® (or approached, same Greek word),? 
when Jesus, the King, came. So much so, that the three 
favored disciples witnessed a foretaste of its glory and 
power on the Mount of Transfiguration.® 

But the Jews rejected it and slew their King. They 
were not willing to have this man reign over them, and 
therefore the Kingdom did not “immediately appear.” It 
became like a nobleman which “went into a far country, to 
receive for himself a kingdom and to return.” See Luke 
19 :11-27. By this parable Jesus distinctly taught that 
the Kingdom was in the future. 


The Kingdom Still Future. 


It was in the future when Christ said: 
you, I will not any more eat thereof (the passover) until 
it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God,” and again, “For I 
say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine 


“T say unto: 


until the Kingdom of God shall come.” Luke 22:16-18; 
also Mat. 26:29; Mark 14:25. 


(6) Luke 10:9. And heal the 
sick that are therein, and say 
unto them, The kingdom of God 
is come nigh unto you. 

10. But into whatsoever city 
ye enter, and they receive you 
not, go your ways out into the 
streets of the same, and say, 

11. Even the very dust of 
your city, which cleaveth on us, 
we do wipe off against you: 
notwithstanding, be ye sure of 
this, that the kingdom of God 
is come nigh unto you. 

(7) Heb. 10:25. Not forsak- 
ing the assembling of ourselves 
together, as the manner of some 
¢3; but exhorting one another: 
and so much the more, as ye 
see the day approaching. 

Also Luke 12 :33. 

(8) Mat. 17:1. And after 
six days Jesus taketh Peter, 
eames, and John his brother, 
and bringeth them up into a 
high mountain apart, 

Z. And was transfigured be- 
fore them: and his face did shine 


‘88 the sun, and his raiment was 


white as the light. 

3. And, behold, there appeared 
unto them Moses and Blias talk- 
ing with him. 

4. Then answered Peter, and 
said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good 
for us to be here: if thou wilt, 
let us make here thrvo taber- 
nacles; one for thee, and one 
for Moses, and one for Elias. 

5. While he yet spake, behold, 
a bright cloud overshadowed 
them: and behold a voice out 
of the cloud, which said, This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased; hear ye Him. 

6. And when the _ disciples 
heard if, they fell on their face, 
and were sore afraid. 

7. And Jesus came and touch- 
ed them, and said, Arise, and be 
not afraid. 

8. And when they had lifted 
up their eyes, they saw no map, 
save Jesus only. 

8. And as they came down 
from the mountain, Jesus 


é 


THE CHURCH AND THE KINGDOM. 85 


It was in the future when the thief cried, “Lord re- 
member me when Thou comest into Thy Kingdom.” Luke 
23:42. Joseya of Arimathea, who laid Jesus’ body in the 
sepulchre, “waited for the Kingdom of God,” which also 
indicates that it was still in the future. Mark 15:43. 


It was still future when Paul exhorted the disciples to 
continue in the faith, and said “that we must through 
much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God.” Aets 
14:22. It was in the future while the persecuted Thessa- 
lonians suffered, that they might “be counted worthy of the 
Kingdom of God.” 2 Thes, 1:4-5. 


It was most assuredly future when, years afterward, 
Peter gave his exhortations as follows: “Wherefore the 
rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and 
election sure; for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. 
For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abun- 
dantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Sav- 
ior, Jesus Christ.” 2 Pet. 1:10-11. And it has been fu- 
ture during all the long, sad history of the faithful and 


_ godly Church, while she has suffered the terrible persecu- 


tions of fagot, inquisition, banishment, ridicule and false 
accusation.® 


And it will be future until Jesus, “having received the 
Kingdom,’?® shall return to recompense tribulation to 


charged them, saying, Tell the This is my beloved Son, in whom 


vision to no man, until the Son 
of man be risen again from the 
dead. 


Also Mark 9:1-10; Luke 9: 
27-386. 


2 Pet. 1:16. For we have 
not followed cunningly devised 
fables, when we made known 
unto you the power and coming 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, but 
were eyewitnesses of his maj- 
esty. 

17. For he received from God 
the Father honour and glory, 
when there came such a voice 
to him from the excellent glory, 


I am well pleased. 

18. And this voice which came 
from heaven we heard, when we 
were with Him in the holy 
mount. 

(9) 2 Tim. 8:12. Yea, and 
all that will Hve godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution. 

(10) Luke 19:15. And it 
came to pass, that when he was 
returned, having received the 
kingdom, then. he commanded 
these servants to be called unto 
him, to whom he had given the 
money, that he might know how 
much every man had gained by 
trading. 


86 _- JEBUS8 I8 COMING. 


‘ 


those who have troubled the Church!! and “sit in the 


throne of His glory.” 


Then the Kingdom, which, for these centuries, has been 
hid in mystery, shall be manifested in power and glory.’ 
Then shall “the kingdom of the world become our Lord’s 
and His Christ’s,’!® and then shall the Kingdom be given 


(11) 2 Thes. 1:6-10. Seeing 
it is a righteous thing with God 
to recompense tribulation to 
them that trouble you. 

7. And to you who are 
troubled rest with us, when the 
Lord Jesus shall be revealed 
from heaven with his mighty 
angels. 

8. In flaming fire taking 
vengeance on them that know 
not God, and that obey not the 
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 

9. Who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of his power; 

10. When he shall come to be 
glorified in his saints, and to be 
admired in all them that be- 
lieve. 

Also Luke 19 :27. 


(12) Mat. 19:28. ’ And Jesus 
said unto them, Verily I say 
unto you, That ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration 
when the Son of man shall sit 
in the throne of his glory, ye 
also shall sit upon twelve 
thrones, judging the twelve 
tribes of Israel. 

(18) Mat. 13:11. He an- 
swered and said unto them, Be- 
cause it is given unto you to 
know the mysteries of the king- 
dom of heaven, but to them it 
is not given. 

Also Mark 4:11; Luke 8:10. 

(14) Mat. 18:43. Then shall 
the righteous shine forth as the 
sun in the kingdom of their 
Father. Who hath ears to hear, 
let him hear. 


Also Luke 13 :25-29. 


Rom. 8:17. And if children, 
then heirs; heirs of God, and 


joint-heirs with Christ; if so be 
that we suffer with him, that 
we may be also glorified to- 
gether. 


18. For I reckon that the suf- 
ferings of this present time are 
not worthy to be compared with 
he glory which shal] be revealed 
D wus. 


19. For the earnest expecta- 
tion of the creature waiteth for 
the manifestation of the sons 
of God. 


20. For the creature was made 
subject to vanity, not willingly, 
but by reason of him who hath 
subjected the same in hope; 


21. Because the creature it. 
self also shall be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into 
the glorious liberty of the 
children of God. 


22. For we know that tha 
whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until 
now. 

28. And not only they, but 
ourselves also, which have the 
first-fruits of the Spirit, even 
we ourselves groan within our- 
selves, waiting for the adoption, 
to wit, the redemption of our 
body. 

(15) Rev. 11:15. And _ the 
seventh angel sounded; and 
there followed great voices in 
heaven, and they said, 

The kingdom of the world 

is become the kingdom of 

our Lord, and of his Christ: 
and he shall reign for ever 
and ever. 

Dan. 7:14. And there was 
given him dominion, and glory. 


THE KINGDOM STILL FUTURBD. 


81 


unto the Saints of the Most High.1* Therefore we pray, 


as Jesus taught us, 


‘*Thy Kingdom Come.’’ 


The Church militant, which was begun on the day of 
Pentecost (Acts 2) ends at the Rapture, before the Tribu- 


lation. 


The Kingdom begins with the Revelation, at the close 


of the Tribulation. 


It is the personal reign of Christ on earth. 

He was prophesied to be king of the Jews. Isa. 9:6. 

He was born King of the Jews. Mat. 2:2. 

He said he was the King of the Jews. Mat. 27:11. 

He was crucified as King of the Jews. Mat. 27:37. 

He came preaching the gospel of the Kingdom, saying, 
“The time is fulfilled, the Kingdom of God ts at hand.” 


Mark 1:14-15. 


He said the Kingdom was among them. Luke 17:21, 


margin. 


He came unto His own, but His own received Him not. 


John 1:11. 7 


He would have set up the Kingdom (Mat. 23:37-39), 
but they rejected and crucified Him. 
However, God raised Him from the dead and set Him 


on high.?? 


and a kingdom, that all people, 


nations, and languages, should 
serve him: his dominion ¢s an 
everlasting dominion, which shall 
not pass away, and his kingdom 
that which shail not be de- 
stroyed. 

(16) Dan. 17:27. And the 
kingdom and dominion, and the 
greatness of the kingdom under 
the whole heaven, shall be given 
to the people of the saints of the 
Most High, whose kingdom is an 
everlasting kingdom, and all do- 
minions shall serve and obey 
him. 

(17) Heb. 10:12. But this 
man, after he had offered one 


‘sacrifice for sins for ever, sat 
Gown on the right hand of God; 

13. From henceforth expect-. 
ing till his enemies be made 


his footstool. 


Acts 2:34. For David is not 
ascended into the heavens: but 
he saith himself, The Lord said 
unto my Lord, Sit thou on my 
right hand, 

385. Until I make thy foes thy 
footstool. 

86. Therefore let all the house 
of Israel know assuredly,: that 
God hath made that same Je- 
sus, whom ye have crucified, both 
Lord and Christ. 

Also Mat. 22:44, 


88 JESUS IS COMING. 


He sent the Holy Ghost into the world, and under His 
power and guidance the apostles went out preaching the 
good news of the Kingdom (Acts 2, ete.) to the Jews 
first,® but they rejected it, and the disciples turned to the 
Gentiles.1° Thus the Kingdom came nigh unto the Jews, 
who spurned it, and while it waits*®° God visits “the Gen- 
tiles, to take out of them a people for His name” (Acts 
15:14), breaking down the middle wall of partition to 
make of twain (all Jews and Gentiles who believe in His 
name) one new man,” that is, the Church, or Mystical 
Body of Christ.?* 


*This we believe is the true explanation of this subject. 
The Kingdom did come “nigh” when Christ came, and had 
they received Him, it would have been manifested, but now 
it is in abeyance, or waiting until He comes again. 

However the Greek word ¢éyrvé# = engizo, which is trans- 
lated at hand in Mat. 3:2; 4:17; 10:7, and is come nigh in 
Luke 10:9-11, does not necessarily mean immediately near. 
For we find the same word used in Rom. 13:12: “The day 
is at hand,” and in Heb. 10:25, “as ye see the day approach- 
ing’? and in James 5:8, “The coming of the Lord draweth 
nigh,” and in 1 Pet. 4:7, “the end of all things is at hand,” 
each of which passages are yet unfulfilled. 

So we see that the word engizo (is at hand) covers a 
period of more than 1800 years, and reaches unto the second 
coming of the Lord. ° 


Also Acts 18:6 and 28:28. 
(20) Mat. 23:39. For I say 


(18) Acts 3:26. Unto you 
first God, having raised up his 


Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, 
in turning away every one of 
you from his iniquities. 

Rom. 1:16. For I am not 
ashamed of the gospel of Christ: 
for it is the power of God unto 
salvation to every one that be- 
lieveth;: to the Jew first, and 
also to the Greek. 

Also Mat. 10:6. 

(19) Acts 13:46. Then Paul 
and Barnabas waxed bold, and 
said, It was necessary that the 
word of God should first have 
been spoken to you: but seeing 
ye put it from you, and judge 
yourselves unworthy of everlast- 
ing life, le, we turn to the Gen- 
tiles. 


unto you, Ye shall not see me 
henceforth, till ye shall say, 
Blessed is he that cometh in 
the name of the Lord. 

(21) Eph. 2:14 For he is 
our peace, who hath made both 
one, and hath broken down the 
middle wall of partition between 
Us 5 

15. Having abolished in his 
flesh the enmity, even the law 
of commandments contained in 
ordinances; for to make in him- 
self of twain one new man, 80 
making peace. 

(22) Eph. 4:12. For the per- 
fecting of the saints, for the 
work of the ministry, for the 
edifying of the bedy of Christ; 


THE CHURCH AND THE KINGDOM. 89 


The Mystery. 


Thus the Church came in as a mystery, and was but 
rarely, if at all, spoken of in the Old Testament prophe- 
cies. For we read in Rom. 16:25 that it is a “mystery, 
which was kept secret since the world began,” and in Eph. 
3:3-6, ‘‘The mystery . . . which in other ages was 
not made known unto the sons of men,’’ and in Col. 1:24- 
27. +. +. ‘Even the mystery which hath been hid from 
ages and from generations, but now is made manifest 
. . . the riches of the glory of this mystery among the 
Gentiles.’’ 


It was this mystery of the Church which so puzzled the 
prophets and caused them to inquire and search diligently 
what the Spirit meant when it testified beforehand the 
sufferings of Christ. See 1 Pet. 1:10-12.28 They could un- 


13. Till we all come in the 
unity of the faith, and of the 
knowledge of the Son of God, 
unto a perfect man, unto the 
measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ: 

Eph. 5:23. For the husband 
fis the head of the wife, even as 
Christ is the head of the 
Church; and he is the Saviour 
of the body. 

24. Therefore as the Church 
is subject unto Christ, so let the 
wives be to their own husbands 
in everything. 

25. Husbands, love your wives, 
even as Christ also loved the 
church, and gave himself for it; 


26. That he might sanctify 
and cleanse it with the washing 
of water by the word. 

27. That he might present it 
to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot, or wrinkle, or 
any such thing; but that it 
should be holy and without 
blemish. 

28. 80 ought men to love 
their wives as their own bodies. 
He that loveth his wife loveth 
himself. 

29. For no man ever yet 
bated his own Sesh: but nour- 


isheth and cherisheth it, even 
as the Lord the church: 

30. For we are members of 
his body. 

31. For this cause shall a man 
leave his father and mother, 
and shall be joined unto his 
wife, and they two shall be one 
flesh. 

32. This is a great mystery: 
but I speak concerning Christ 
and the church. 

(23) 1 Pet. 1:10. Of which 
salvation the prophets have in- 
quired and searched diligently, 
who prophesied of the grace that 
should come unto you: 

11. Searching what, or what 
manner of time the Spirit of 
Christ which was in them did 
signify, when it testified before- 
hand the: sufferings of Christ, 
and the glory that should fol- 
low. 

12. Unto whom it was re- 
vealed, that not unto themselves, 
but unto us they did minister 
the things, which are now re- 
ported unto you by them that 
have preached the gospel unto 
you with the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven; which things 
the angels desire to leek into. 


Oe Se OM 


90 JESUS IS COMING. 


derstand the glory of the Kingdom, which should follow, 
but could not understand the mystery, which has been re- 
vealed unto us, and which interested the angels; to-wit, a 
suffering Messiah and a persecuted Church. 


The Church is to be the Bride of Christ, which He is 
going to present unto Himself. Eph. 5:23-32. 
But now she is a Virgin of sorrow and affliction, a com- 


panion in suffering with her espoused Husband—the Lord 
Jesus Christ.?4 


He said: “Because ye are not of the world, but I have 
ehosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth 
you,” and “if they have persecuted me, they will also per- 
secute you” (John 15:19-20), and “in the world ye shall 
have tribulation” (John 16:33), and the apostle says, 
“yea; and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution.” 2 Tim. 3:12. See also John 17:14; 1 Thes. 
3:3.25 And this is perfectly consistent. For this world 
has murdered the Son of God, and is guilty of His blood, 
but the Father bears this insult to His matchless love and 
grace, patiently staying the day of vengeance, being long 
suffering and not willing that any should perish.*6 


If He thus bears with the murderers of His Son, will 
He not bear with the persecutors of His Church? 


And this persecution will continue until Jesus comes | 


and takes the Church away,?* and saves her from the 
great hour of temptation (or trial), which shall come upon 


(24) 2 Cor. 11:2. For I am is not slack concerning his prom-~ 
jealous over you with godly jeal- ise, as some men count slack- 


ousy: for I have espoused you 
to one husband, that I may pre- 
sent you as a chaste virgin to 
Christ. 

(25) John 17:14. I have 
given them thy word; and the 
world hath hated them, because 
they are not of the world, even 
as I am not of the world. 

1 Thes. 3:3. That no man 
should be moved by these af- 
flictions: for yourselves know 
that we are appointed thereunto. 

(26) 2 Pet. 3:9. The Lord 


ness; but is longsuffering to us- 
ward, not willing that any should 
perish, but that all should come 
to repentance. 

(27) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God: and the 
dead in Christ shall rise first; 

17. Then we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: 
and so shall we ever be with 
the Lord. 


THE CHURCH AND THE KINGDOM. 91 


all the world,2 when He shall recompense tribulation to 
them that have troubled her.?® And this spirit of rebellion 
and persecution will continue, even through the tribula- 
tion®® and up to the very day of the Lord,?! when Christ 
shall be revealed in flaming fire,** with His Saints, to 


(28) Rev. 3:10. Because thou 
hast kept the word of my pa- 
tience, I also will keep thee from 
the hour of temptation, which 
shall come upon all the world, 
to try them that dwell upon the 
earth. 

(29) 2 Thes. 1:6. Seeing ét ts 
a righteous thing with Gud to 
recompense tribulation to them 
that trouble you; 

(30) Rev. 16:9. And men 
were scorched with great heat, 
and blasphemed the name of 
God, which hath power over 
these. 

11. And blasphemed the God 
of heaven because of their pains 
and their sores, and repented not 
of their deeds. 

14. For they are the spirits 
of . devils, working miracles, 
which go forth unto the kings 
of the earth and of the whole 
world, to gather them to the bat- 
tle of that great day of God Al- 
mighty. 

21. And there fell upon men 
a@ great hail out of heaven, every 
stone about the weight of a tal- 
ent and men blasphemed God be- 
cause of the plague of the hail; 
for the plague thereof was ex- 
ceeding great. 

(31) 2 Pet. 3:1. This second 
epistle, beloved, I now write unto 
you; in both which I stir up 
your pure minds by way of re- 
membrance ; 

2. That ye may be mindful of 
the words which were spoken be- 
fore by the holy prophets, and 
of the commandment of us the 
apostles of the Lord and Saviour: 

38. Knowing this first, that 
there shall come in the last days 
scoffers, walking after their own 
jlusts, 


4. And saying, Where is the 
promise of his coming? for since 
the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the 
beginning of the creation. 

5. For this they willingly are 
ignorant of, that by the word of 
God the heavens were of old, 
and the earth standing out of the 
water and in the water: 

6. Whereby the world that 
then was, being overflowed with 
water, perished ; 

7. But the heavens and the 
earth which are now, by the 
same word are kept in store, re- 
served unto fire against the day 
of judgment and perdition of un- 
godly men. 

8. But, beloved, be not igno: 
rant of this one thing, that one 
day is with the Lord as a thou. 
sand years, and a thousand years 
as one day. 

9. The Lord is not slack con- 
cerning his promise, as some men 
count slackness; but is long- 
suffering to us-ward, not willing 
that any should perish, but that 
all should come to repentance. 

10. But the day of the Lord will 
come as a thief in the night; in 
the which the heavens shall pass 
away with a great noise, and the 
elements shall melt with fervent 
heat, the earth also and the 
works that are therein shall be 
‘burnt up. 

(32) 2 Thes. 1:7. And to you 
thet are afflicted rest with us, 
at the revetation of the Lord 
Jesus from heaven with the an- 
gels of his power in flaming, 
fire, 

8. Rendering vengeance to 
them that know not God, and to 
them that obey not the gospel 
of our Lord Jesus: 


92 | JESUS IS OOMING. 


execute judgment upon the earth. So we see that there 
is no place in the whole earthly history of such a perse- 
cuted Church, for the Millennial Kingdom. For, in that 
time, “righteousness and peace” shall kiss each other, 
“truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall 
look out of heaven.” Psa. 85. 

“A King shall reign in righteousness, and Prinees shall 
rule in judgment.” Isa. 32:1. With righteousness shall 
He judge the poor.; Judah and Israel shall be restored 
and dwell safely. There shall be no harm nor destruction 
in all God’s holy mountain, and even the animals shall be 
at peace.®4 

Again, from all of these passages, and especially Isa. 60, 
we see that restored Israel and Jerusalem are to be the 
very central glory of the Millennial Kingdom. But God 
does not restore Israel and rebuild Zion, or Jerusalem, 
until He appears in His glory. 

‘‘When the Lord shall build up Zion, He shall appear 
in His glory.” Psa. 102:16. And He does not build up 


® Who shall suffer punish- 
ment, even eternal destruction 
from the face of the Lord and 
from the glory of his might, 

10. When he shall come to be 
glorified in his saints, and to be 
marvelled at im all them that 
believed (because our testimony 
unto you was believed) in that 
day. 
(83) Jude 14. And Enoch also, 
the seventh from Adam, prophe- 
sied of these, saying, behold, the 
Lord cometh with ten thousand 
of his saints. 

15. To execute judgment upon 
all, and to convince all that are 
ungodly among them of all their 
ungodly deeds which they have 


ungodly committed, and of all” 


their hard speeches which un- 
godly sinners have spoken 
against him. 

(34) Isa. 11:4. But with 
righteousness shall he judge the 
poor, and reprove with equity 
for the meek of the earth: and 
he shall smite the earth with the 
tod of his mouth, and with the 


breath of his lips shall he slay 
the wicked. 

5. And righteousness shall be 
the girdle of his lofns, and faith- 
fulness the girdle of his reins. 

6. The wolf also shall dwell 
with the lamb, and the leopard 
shall lie down with the kid; and 
the calf and young lion and the 
fatling together; and a little 
child shall lead them. 

7. And the cow and the bear 
shall feed ; their young ones shall] 
lie down together: and the lion 
shall eat straw like the ox. 

8. And the sucking child shall 
play on the hole of the asp, 
and the weaned child shall put 
his hand on the cockatrice’ den. 

9. They shall not hurt nor de- 
stroy in all my holy mountain: 
for the earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord, as the 
waters cover the sea. 

Rom. 8:21. Because the crea- 
ture itself also shall be deliv- 
ered from the bondage of cor- 
ruption into the glorious liberty 
of the children of God. 


THE CHURCH AND THE KINGDOM. 93 


Zion or the tabernacle of David until He has taken out 
the Church.*5 

Thus we see a clear distinction between the suffering 
Chureh and the glorious Kingdom, which are separated by 
the Tribulation, to-wit: 


| 
THE CHURCH. q raisutation 2 THE KINGDOM. 


See Diagram, page 72. 
The Church Shall Be Rewarded. 


But, do you ask: “Is the Church always to suffer and 
be persecuted 9” 

Surely not. For she shall yet be married. And the 
light affliction shall work out a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory in the things which are not (yet) 
seen,®* and the church shall be counted worthy of the 
Kingdom of God for which she suffers, when the Lord 


Jesus is revealed from heaven.** Therefore we glory in 


22. For we know that the 

whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until 
now. 
* 23. And not only they, but 
ourselves also, which have the 
first-fruits of the Spirit, even 
we ourselves groan within our- 
selves, waiting for the adoption, 
to wit, the redemption of our 
body. : 

Also Jer. 23:3-8 and 32 :36- 
44: Ezek. 34, 36 and 37 and 
many others, 

(35) Acts 15:18. And after 
they had held their peace, James 
answered, saying, Men and 
brethren, hearken unto me: 

14. Simeon hath declared how 
God at the first did visit the 
Gentiles, to take out of them a 
people for his name. 

15. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets; as it is 
written, 


16. After this I will return, 
and will build again the taber- 
nacle of David, which is fallen 
down; and I will build again 
the ruins thereof, and I will set 
it up; 

17. That the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord, and 
all the Gentiles, upon whom 
my name is called, saith the 
Lord who doeth all these things. 

(36) 2 Cor. 4:17. For our 
light affliction, which is but for 
& moment, worketh for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory; 

18. While we look not at the 
things which are seen, but at 
the things which are not seen: 
for the things which are seen 
are temporal; but the things 
which are not seen are eternal. 

(37) 2 Thes. 1:4. So that we 
ourselves glory in you in the 


04 JESUS IS COMING. 


tribulations, knowing that tribulation worketh patience; 
and patience, experience; and experience, hope. Rom. 
5:3-4. And when Christ, who is our hope (1 Tim. 1:1) 
and our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with 
Him in glory.®* If we suffer with Him we shall also reign 
with Him.*® We shall reign on the earth. Rev. 5:10. 
Hence we conclude that the Church shall be recompensed- 
in reigning, with Christ, over the Millennial Kingdom. 
“Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure 
to give you the kingdom.” Lu. 12:32; Dan. 7 :18-22-27. 
O! then, let us pray as Jesus taught us: “Thy kingdom 
come.” 


| Nominal Christians. 


But, do you say, “The Church is not persecuted, and 
does, even now, enjoy comparative peace” ? ; 

We answer, it is because the professing Church (and 
by this we include Roman Catholics, Greeks and all nomi- 
‘nal Christians—in all perhaps 400,000,000) has conformed 
so largely to the world that the world has little, if any, 
controversy with her. 

Of what avail to God are nominal, cold-hearted, world- 
conforming Christians? He wants a separate and holy 


churches of God for your pa- 
tience and faith in all your per- 
secutions and tribulations that ye 
endure ; 


5. Which is a manifest token 
of the righteous judgment of God, 
that ye may be counted worthy 
of the kingdom of God, for which 
ye also suffer: 


6. Seeing it is a righteous 
thing with God to recompense 
tribulation to them that trouble 
you; 

7. And to you who are trou- 
bled rest with us, when the Lord 
Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven with his mighty angels, 


8. In flaming fire taking ven- 
' geance on them that know not 
God, and that obey not the gos- 
pel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 


@é 

9. Who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of his power; 

10. When he shall come to be 
glorified in his saints, and to be 
admired in all them that believe 
(because our testimony among 
you was believed) in that day. 

(38) Col. 3:4. When Christ, 
who ts our life, shall appear, 
then shall ye also appear with 
him in glory.” 

(39) Rom. 8:17. And if chil- 
dren, then heirs, heirs of God, 
and joint heirs with Christ; if 
so be that we suffer with him, 
that we may be also glorified to- 
gether. 

2 Tim. 2:12. If we suffer, we 
shall also reign with him; if we 
deny him, he also will deny us. 


THE TRUE CHURCH. 95 


people, and the command is, “Come out and be ye sepa- 
rate.” 2 Cor. 6:14-18. 

We believe that the birds of the air and the leaven in 
the parables of Mat. 13 represent the children of the 
wicked one, or hypocrites, which have lodged in the Church 
and the false doctrines which have crept in and so per- 
vaded the professing Church that it has, in the main, be- 
come merely formal and nominal. 

God wants zealous Christians, in whom the Word of 
Life shall burn as it did in Jeremiah’s bones. And are 
not the number of these few, even today? 

The professing Church is luke-warm, and, we fear, al- 
most ready to be spued out of the Master’s mouth, But, 
thanks be unto His name, there are those who are rebuked 
and chastened, and who are buying gold and white raiment 
and anointing their eyes that they may see, and who will 
overcome and sit down with Christ in His throne. Rev. 
3 314-22, 

The True Church. 


"There is truly a Church, and it is THE BODY OF 
CHRIST,* one and indivisible,*1 composed of all true be- 
lievers in Him4? It may be called a church within, or 
among the churches—the wheat among the chaff. And let 
us remember that this true Church of Christ is appointed 
unto affliction, and that the intervals of rest (Acts 9:31) 
only strengthen her to endure new and varied forms of 
persecution. This has been her history, and we may ex- 
pect it will be her future, amid the scoffers, evil men and 
seducers of the last times.*® 


(40) Eph. 1:22. And hath 
put all things under his feet, and 
gave him to be the head over all 
things to the church, 

23. Which is his body, the ful- 
ness of him that filleth all in 
all. 

(41) 1 Cor. 12:12. For as the 
body is one, and hath many 
members, and all the members 
of that one body, being many, 
are one body: so also és Christ. 

13. For by one Spirit are we 
all baptized into one body, 


whether we be Jews or Gen- 
tiles, whether we be bond or 
free; and have been all made to 
drink into one Spirit. 

(42) Eph. 4:11. And he gave 
some, apostles; and some, proph- 
ets; and some, evangelists; and 
some, pastors and teachers; _ 

12. For the perfecting of the 
saints, for the work of the min- 
istry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ. 

(43) 2 Pet. 3:3. Knowing this 
first, that there shall come in 


06 JESUS IS COMING. 


And yet it is her blessed privilege, in all her affliction, 
to know that she travails in the birth of souls,“ which sre 
born from above by the Holy Ghost (John 3), and that 
the gospel (good news) of the Kingdom, which she preaches 
is the power of God unto salvation unto all who believe.*® 


The Bride of Christ. 


“Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved 
the Church, and gave Himself for it, that He might sanc- 
tify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, 
that He might present it to Himself a glorious Church, 
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that 
it should be holy and without blemish.” 

In this precious passage (Eph. 5) the Church, as the 
Bride of Christ, is typified by the most intimate, tender 
and sacred relationship known among the children of men. 

Abraham’s servant went into a far country (Gen. 24) 
to seek a bride for Isaac, who was the honored type of 
Christ as a sacrifice. Gen. 22. So has the Holy Spirit 
come into the world to seek a Bride for Jesus. The ser- 
vant said, “Hinder me not.” So the Holy Ghost is striv- 
ing with the world, and pleading with cold-hearted pro- 
fessors, that He may hasten the presentation of the bride 
to the Bridegroom. See Mat. 22:2-10. 

Rebekah said, ‘‘I will go.’’ So the Bride should be 


the last days scoffers, walking 
after their own lusts. 

im. 4:1. Now the Spirit 
speaketh expressly, that in the 
latter times some shall depart 
from the faith, giving heed to 
seducing spirits, and 
of devils. 

2 Tim. 83:1. This know ulso, 
that in the last days perilous 
times shall come. 

2. For men shall be lovers of 
their own selves, covetous, boast- 
ers, proud, blasphemers, diso- 
bedient to parents, unthankful, 
unholy, 

3. Without natural affection, 
trucebreakers, false accusers, in- 
continent, flerce, despisers of 
those that are good, 


doctrines 


4. Traitors, heady, highmind- 
ed, lovers of pleasures more than 
lovers of God; 


5. Having a form of godli- 
ness, but denying the power 
thereof : from such turn away. 


Also 2 Tim, 4:1-5. 


(44) Gal. 4:19. My little 
children, of whom I travail in 
birth again until Christ be 


formed in you. 


Also 1 Cor. 4:15; Phile. 10. 

(45) Rom. 1:16. For I am 
not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ: cor it is the power of 
God unto salvation to every one 
that believeth; to the Jew first, 
and also to the Greek. 


~~ eee ee 


THE BRIDE OF CHRIST. 97 


yearning to go. God has made the wedding and prepared 
the feast, and all things (except the Bride) are ready for 
the rapturous meeting, and blessed are they who are 
called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. Rev. 19:9. 
O! that the Church would work a hundredfold more 
earnestly for the conversion of souls and the edifying of 
the body of Christ, that the bride might be complete, and 
thus hasten the coming of her Lord,*® ever listening to 
catch the midnight ery: “Behold the Bridegroom cometh!” 
and “so be ready to go out to meet Him.” Mat. 25:6. 


“O! Iam my Beloved’s, and my Beloved is mine; 

He brings a poor vile sinner into His ‘house of wine.’ 
I stand upon His merit—I know no safer stand, 
Not e’en where glory dwelleth in Immanuel’s land. 


The bride eyes not her garment, but her dear Bridegroom’s 


face; 


I will aot gaze at glory, but on my King of Grace; 
Not at the crown He giveth, but on His pierced hand— 
The Lamb is all the glory of Immanuel’s land.” 


(46) 2 Pet. 3:11. Seeing then 
that all these things shall be dis- 
solved, what manner of persons 
eught ye to be in all holy con- 
versation and godliness, 


12. Looking for and hasting 
the coming of the day of God, 
wherein the heavens being on 
fire shall be dissolved, and the 
elements shall melt with fer- 
vent heat? 


OHAPTER XL 
TRIBULATION—RESURRECTION—JUDGMENT. 
The Tribulation. 


We use this term to designate the whole period of earthly 
history, between the Rapture and the Revelation, or be- 
tween the Church and the Millennial Kingdom. It will not 
altogether be a time of tribulation, for in it “they shall 
rejoice and send gifts one to another’ (Rev. 11:10), and 
shall say “peace and safety.” 1 Thes. 5:3. We believe 
that it will be comparatively a short season, because the 
6,000 years and the times, or year-days, of prophecy have 
nearly run out. Doubtless it embraces the last one of 
Daniel’s seventy weeks,! for the reason that then God be- 
gins to deal with Israel again, after He has taken the 
Church away,? and yet it is probable that it includes much 
more than the seven years of that week. 

It is certain that there will be in it a period of un- 
equalled trial, sorrow and calamity,’ spiritual darkness and 
open wickedness.‘ It is the night of the world.5 But the 


(1) Dan. 9:27. And he shall 
confirm the covenant with many 
for one week: and in the midst 
of the week he shall cause the 
sacrifice and the oblation to 
cease, and for the overspreading 
of abominations he shall make ét 
desolate, even until the consum- 
mation, and that determined 
shall be poured upon the deso- 
late. 

(2) Acts 15:13. And after 
they had held their peace, James 
answered, saying, Men and 
brethren, hearken unto me: 

14. Simeon hath declared how 
God at the first did visit the 
Gentiles, to take out of them 
a veople for his name. 

15. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets: as it is 
written, 

16. After this I will return, 
and will build again the taber- 
nacle of David, which is fallen 


(98) 


down; and I will build again 
the ruins thereof, and I will set 
it up: 

17. That the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord, and 
all the Gentiles, upon whom 
mv name is called, saith the 
Lord, who doeth all these things. 

(3) Mat. 24:21. For then 
shall be great tribulation, such 
as was not since the beginning 
of the world to this time, no, 
nor ever shall be. 

Also Dan. 12:1. 


(4) 2 Pet. 3:8. Knowing this 
first, that there shall come in 
the last days scoffers, walking 
after their own lusts, 

4. And saying, Where is the 
promise of his coming? for since 
the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the 
beginning of the creation. 

Also Luke 18:7. 


(8) John 9:4. IY must work 


THE RESURRECTION. 99 


true Church, which is not of the night, being watchful 
and prayerful, will be accounted worthy to escape it, by 
the Rapture, and to stand before the Son of Man,’ while 
a third part of Israel will be brought through it,® and for 
the elect’s sake the days of this culminating tribulation 
shall be shortened® by the revelation of Christ.° From 
Isa., chapters 24 to 28, an idea may be gained of the ter- 
rible character of this period, during which Antichrist will 
also be revealed (see p. 107). Some, especially from the 
remnant of Israel, will- accept of Christ and become His 
witnesses, and be slain by Antichrist. These we call the 
tribulation saints, who are to be raised at the close of the 
great tribulation, as the gleanings of the great harvest of 
the first resurrection. 


The Resurrection. 


In regard to the Resurrection, we would say that the 
literal rendering of 1 Cor. 15:23, is “but each one in his 
own band.” 

It seems plain that the resurrection of those “who are 
Christ’s at His coming,” ineludes both those who consti- 
tute the Bride, who are raised at the Rapture, when Christ 


the works of him that sent me, (8) Zech. 13:9. And-I will 


while it is day: the night com- 
eth, when no man can work. 


Luke 17:34. I tell you, in 
that night there shall be two 
men in one bed; the one shall be 
taken, and the other shall be 
left. 

(6) 1 Thes. 6:4 But ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, 
that that day should overtake 
you as a thief, 

5. Ye are all the children of 
light, and the children of the 
day: we are not of the night, nor 
of darkness. 

(7) Luke 21:36. Watch ye 
therefore, and pray always, that 
ye may be accounted worthy to 
escape all these things that shall 
come to pass, and to stand be- 
fore the Son of man. 

Also Rev, 3:10. 


bring the third part through the 
fire, and will refine them as sil- 
ver is refined, and will try them 
as gold is tried: they shall call 
on my name, and I will hear 
them: I will say, It is my peo- 
ple; and they shall say, The 
Lord is my God. 

(9) Mat. 24:22. And except 
those days should be shortened, 


there should no flesh be saved:. 


but for the elect’s sake those 
days shall be shortened. 

(10) 2 Thes. 1:7. And to you 
who are troubled rest with us, 
when the Lord Jesus shall be 
revealed from heaven with his 
mighty angels. 

Thes. 2:8. And then shal! 
that Wicked be revealed, whom 
the Lord shall consume with the 
spirit of his mouth, and shall 
@estroy with the brightness of 
his coming. eo ue as 


os war dl 
wd ’ 
a 


s 
ne a ee 
i 


100 


JESUS IS COMING. 


comes into the sir; and the Old Testament saints,4 the 
friends of the Bridegroom,!* who doubtless are raised in 
a different band from the Church, see Rev. 6:9-11,1* and 
also those who believe and suffer during the tribulation,!* 
who will be raised at the Revelation (when Christ comes 
to the earth), to take part with Him in the Millennial 


Kingdom.5 


(11) Job 19:25. For I know 
that my Redeemer liveth, and 
that he shall stand at the latter 
day upon the earth: 

26. And though after my skin 
worms destroy this body, yet in 
my flesh shall I see God: 

- 27. Whom I shall see for my- 
self, and mine eyes shall behold, 
and not another; though my 
reins be consumed within me. 

Isa. 26:19. Thy dead men 
shall live, together with my 
dead body shall they arise. 
Awake and sing, ye that dwell 
in dust: for thy dew is as the 
dew of herbs, and the earth shall 
cast out the dead. 

Hos. 13:14. I will ransom 
them from the power of the 
grave; I will redeem them from 
death: O death, I will be thy 
plagues; O grave, I will be thy 
destruction: repentance shall be 
hid .from mine eyes. 

Ezek. 37 :12. Therefore 
prophesy and say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord God; Be- 
hold, O my people, I will open 
your graves, and cause you to 
come up out of your graves, and 
bring you into the land of Israel. 

13. And ye shall know that I 
am the Lord, when I have 
opened your graves, O my peo- 
ple, and brought you up out of 
your graves, ; 

14. And shall put my Spirit 
in you, and ye shall live; and I 
shall place you in your own 
land: then shall ye know that I 
the Lord have spoken (ét, and 
performed ¢t, saith the Lord. 

Also Heb. 11 :39-40. 


(12), cho 3:28. 


Ye your- 


selves bear me witness, that i 
said, I am not the Christ, but 
that I am sent before him. 

29. He that hath the bride is 
the bridegroom: but the friend 
of the bridegroom, which stand- 
eth and heareth him, rejoiceth 
greatly because of the bride- 
groom’s voice: this my joy 
therefore is fulfilled. 

(13) Rev. 6:9. And when he 
had opened the fifth seal, I saw 
under the altar the souls of them 
that were slain for the word of 
God, and for the testimony 
which they held: 

10. And they cried with a loud 
voice, saying, How long, O Lord, 
holy and true, dost thou not 
judge and avenge our blood on 
them that dwell on the earth? 

11. And white robes were 
given unto every one of them; 
and it was said unto them, that 
they should rest yet fer a little 
season, until their fellow serv- 
ants also and their brethren, 
that should be killed as they 
were, should be fulfilled. 

(14) Rev. 13:15. And he had 
power to give life unto the image 
of the beast, that the image of 
the beast should both speak, and 
cause that as many as would 
not worship the image of the 
beast should be killed. 

(15) Rev. 20:4 And I saw 
thrones, and they sat upon them, 
and judgment was given unto 
them: and I saw the souls of 
them that were beheaded for the 
witness of Jesus, and for the 
word of God, and which had 
not worshipped the beast, neither 
his image, neither had received 


JUDGMENT. 


101 


This latter we represent by “R. T.” on the diagram. 
Then, the great harvest of the first Resurrection—or the 
Resurrection of Life—includes: 


- THE FIRST FRUITS. 


CHRIST - - - 
63 THE CHURCH 
THE 
euzy | 4H 6 AND OLD TESTAMENT 
: ea SAINTS INGATHERING. 
THAT ARE\ < < TS. 
CHBIST'S v 
| @) 
AT HIS | f H THE TRIBULATION 
EA THE 
COMING. | & SAINTS. GLEANING. 
es) 
ea 


The second Resurrection, or Resurrection of Judgment,!* 
occurs after the Millennium, and includes the remaining 


Judgment. 


We often hear Post-millennialists use the expression 
“General Judgment,’ thereby conveying the idea of some 
future day in which all mankind will simultaneously ap- 
pear before God to be judged. 


dead.+? 


his mark upon their foreheads, 
or in their hands: and they 
lived and reigned with Christ a 
thousand years. 


5. But the rest of the dead 
lived not again until the thou- 
sand years were finished. This 
és the first resurrection. 

_ 6. Blessed and holy ¢s he that 

hath part in the first resurrec- 
tion: on such the second death 
hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, 
and shall reign with him a thou- 
sand years. 

Also Rom. 11:15. 

(16) John 8:29. And shall 
come forth; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of 
life; and they that Lave done 


evil, unto the resurrection of 
damnation (judgment). 

(17) Rev. 20:12. And I saw 
the dead, small and great, stand 
before God: and the books were 
opened; and another book was 
opened, which is the book of 
life: and the dead were judged 
out of those things which were 
written in the books, according 
to their works. 


13. And the sea gave up the 
dead which were in it; and death 
and hell delivered up the dead 
which were in them: and they 
were judged every man accord- 
4ng to their works. 

14. And death and hell were 
cast into the lake of fire. This 
is the second death. 


102 JESUS IS COMING. 


The expression is not in the Scriptures. Pre-millen- 
nialists believe that the Judgment is general, only in the 
sense that all are judged—but not all at the same time. 

The Judgment of believers, as sinners, is past, being 
accomplished in Christ on the cross, 

“He that heareth my word, and believeth on Him that 
sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into con- 
demnation (Greek, Judgment); but.is passed from death 
unfo life.” John 5:24. See also John 3:17-19 (R. V.) 
Judged instead of condemned.?® 

There is a Judgment day coming, not a day of twenty- 
four hours, but a long series of years. Day is used to 
designate such a period in 2 Cor. 6:2; Eph. 6:13, and Heb. 
3:8.1° The “Hour”? in John 5:25, has been over eighteen 
centuries long. So “the hour” in John 5:28 may be cen- 
turies of years. 

This “Day of Judgment’ is also called “The Day of 
the Lord,’’> ‘*The Last Day,’’¢ and ‘*The Great Day.’’4 


It is ushered in with plagues®® and closes in fire,?! be- 
a Mat. 10:15; 11:22; 11:24; 12:36; Mar. 6:11; 2 Pet. 2:9; 3:7; 


1 John 4:17. 


bisa. 2:12; 13:6, 9; 34:8; Lam. 2:22; Ezk. 13:5; Joel 1:15; 


2:1; 3:14; Amos 5:18; Obd. 15; Zeph. 1:7, 


8, 18; 2:2, 3; Zech. 


14:1; 1 Cor. 5:5; 2 Cor. 1:14; 1 Thes. 5:2; 2 Pet. 8:10 

¢ John 6:39, 40, 44, 54; 11:24; 2 Tim. 3:1. 

d Jer. 30:7; Hos. 1: 1i; Joel 2:11, 31; Zeph, 1:14; Mal, 4:5; 
Jude 6; Rev. 6:17; 16: 14: Acts 2: 20. 


(18) John 3:17. For God sent 
not the Son into the world to 
judge the world; but that the 
world should be saved through 
him. 


18. He that believeth on him 
is ‘not judged: he that believeth 
not hath been judged already, 
because he hath not believed on 
the name of the only begotten 
Son of God. 


(19) 2 Cor. 6:2. (For he 
saith, I have heard thee in a 
time accepted, and in the day 
of salvation have I succoured 
thee: behold, now és the ac- 
cepted time; behold, now és the 
day of salvation.) 


Bph. 6:18. Wherefore take 


unto you the whole armour of 
Go@, that ye may be able to 
withstand in the evil day, and 
having done all, to stand. 

Heb. 3:8. Harden not your 
hearts, as in the provocation, in 
the day of temptation in the 
wilderness. 

(20) 2 Thes. 1:6. Seeing ¢# 
4s a righteous thing with God 
to recompense tribulation to 
them that trouble you; 

7. And to you who are trou- 
bled rest with us, when the Lord 
Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven with his mighty angels, 

8. In flaming fire taking ven- 
geance on them that know not 
God, and that obey not the gos- 
pel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 

9. Who shall be punished with 


a RET 


pm em a a er nn ee ae 
ewe ewe re er 


\ THE JUDGMENTS. 103 


tween which lies a long season of the “sure mercies of 
David,”2? or the Millennium.?* In it there will be four 
visible judgments, in the following order: 


Four Judgments. 


I. The Judgment of the Saints for their works.?* 

This is not on earth. Compare 1 Thes. 4:13-18, with 2 
Thes. 1:6-10; Rev. 19:11-16. See (20) (32) and (33). 

These glorified Saints receive their judgment undeniably 
before that of the ungodly. See Mat. 25:14-30. The 


everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord, and from 
the glory of his power; 

10. When he shall come to be 
glorified in his saints, and to be 
admired in all them that believe 
(because our testimony among 
you was believed) in that day. 


(21) Rev. 20:10. And the 
Gevil that deceived them was 
cast into the lake of fire and 
brimstone, where the beast and 
the false prophet are, and shall 
be tormented day and night for 
ever and ever. 


15. And whosoever was not 
found written in the book of life 
was cast into the lake of fire. 

(22) Isa. 55:3. Incline your 
ear, and come unto me: hear, 
and your soul shall live; and I 
will make an everlasting cove- 
nant with you, even the sure 
mercies of David. 

Acts 13:34. And ab concern- 
ing that he raised him up from 
the dead, now no more to re- 
turn to corruption, he said on 
this wise, I will give you the 
sure mercies of David. 


(23) Rev. 20:4. And I saw 
thrones, and they sat upon them, 
and judgment was given unto 
them: and I saw the souls of 
them that were beheaded for the 
witness of Jesus, and for the 
word of God, and which had 
not worshipped the beast, neither 
his image, neither had received 


his mark Upon their foreheads, 


or in their hands: and they 
lived and reigned with Christ a 
thousand years. 

5. But the rest of the dead 
lived not again until the thou- 
sand years were finished. This 
fe the first resurrection, 

6. Blessed and holy is he that 
hath part in the first resurrec- 
tion: on such the second death 
hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, 
and shall reign with him a thou- 
sand years. 

(24) 1 Cor. 4:5. Therefore 


judge nothing before the time, 


until the Lord come, who both 
will bring to light the hidden 
things of darkness, and will 
make manifest the counsels of 
the hearts: and then shall every 
man have praise of God. 

1 Cor. 3:13. Every man’s 
work shall be made manifest: 
for the day shall declare it, be- 
cause it shall be revealed by 
fire; and the fire shall try every 
man’s work of what sort it is. 

14. If any man’s work abide 
which he hath built thereupon, 
he shall receive a reward. 

15. If any man’s work shall 
be burned, he shall suffer loss: 
but he himself shall be saved; 
yet so as by fire. 

2 Cor. 5:10. For we. must all 
appear before the judgment seat 
of Christ; that every one may 
receive the things done in his 
body, according to that he hath 
done, whether it be good or bad. 

Also Rom. 14:10-12. 


104 JESUS IS COMING. 


judgment of the servants occurs before the judgment of 
the nations. Mat. 25:31-46. See also 1 Pet. 4:17-18.25 

II. The Judgment of the living nations, who are upon 
the earth at the Revelation. Jesus is Judge of the quick 
(or living) and dead.*® 

The Church or Saints, having been before caught up in 
the Rapture, come with Christ to execute judgment?’ upon 
the world or living nations.?®& This is the judgment of the 
quick, or those who are living upon the earth, when Christ 
comes at the Revelation. He separates the sheep from the 
goats, gathering out all things that doth offend (Mat. 13: 
41-42), and sets up His kingdom (verse 43). The third 
party, His brethren, are the Israelites,?® who are never to 
be reckoned among the nations.®° 

Then follows the Millennium, which is one continuous 
day of Judgment (Acts 17:31), when the righteous Judge 
will be upon earth (2 Tim. 4:8), and when judgment shall 


(25) 1 Pet. 4:17. For the 


time is come that judgment must 
begin at the house of God: and 
éf it first dDegin at us, what shall 
the end be of them that obey 
hot the gospel of God? 


(26) Acts 10:42. And he 
commanded us to preach unto 
the people, and to testify that it 
is he which was ordained of God 
to be the Judge of quick and 
dead. 

Also 2 Tim. 4:1; 1 Pet. 4:5. 

(27) 1 Cor. 6:2. Do ye not 
know that the saints shall judge 
the world? and if the world shall 
be judged by you, are ye un- 
worthy to judge the smallest 
matters? 


Also Jude 14-15. 


(28) Mat. 13:40. As there- 
fore the tares are gathered and 
burned in the fire; so shall it 
be in the end of this world. 

41. The Son of man shall send 
forth his angels, and they shall 
gather out of his kingdom all 
things that offend, and them 
which do iniquity; 


42. And shall cast them into 
a furnace of fire: there shall be 
walling and gnashing of teeth. 


43. Then shall the righteous 
Shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. Who 
hath ears to hear, let him hear. 


(29) Psa. 122:8. For my 
brethren and companions’ sakes, 
I will now say, Peace be within 
thee. 


(30) Num. 23:7. And he took 
up his parable and said, Balak 
the king of Moab hath brought 
me from Aram, out of the moun- 
tains of the east, saying, Come, 
curse me Jacob, and come, defy 
Israel. 


8. How shall I curse, whom 
God hath not cursed? or how 
shall I defy, whom the Lord hath 
not defied? 


9. For from the top of the 
rocks I see him, and from the 
hills I behold him: lo, the peo- 
ple shall dwell alone, and shall 
not be reckoned among the na- 
tions. 


THE JUDGMENTS. 


105 


be laid to the line and righteousness to the plummet. Isa. 


28 :17. 


Iii. The judgment of the dead at the Great White 


Throne.®! 
IV. 


The Judgment of angels,®* into fire “prepared for 


(31) Rev. 20:12. And I saw 
the dead, small and great, stand 
before God: and the books were 
opened; and another book wa3 
opened, which is the book of life: 
and the dead were judged out 
of those things which were writ- 
ten in the books, according to 
their works. 

13. And the sea gave up the 
dead which were in it; and death 
and hell delivered up the dead 
which were in them: and they 
were judged every man accord- 
ing to their works. 

14. And death and hell were 
cast into the lake of fire. This 
is the second death. 

15. And whosoever was not 
found written in the book of life 
was cast into the lake of fire. 

2 Pet. 2:9. The Lord know- 
eth how to deliver the godly out 
of temptation, and to reserve the 
unjust unto the day of judg- 
ment to be punished. 

Also Mat. 10:15; 11:21-24; 
12 341-42; Rom. 2:15-16. 

(32) 1 Thes. 4:15. For this 
we say unto you by the word of 
the Lord, that we which are 
alive and remain unto the com- 
ing of the Lord shall not pre- 
vent them which are asleep. 

16. For the Lord himself shall 
descend from heaven with a 
shout, with the voice of the 
archangel, and with the trump 
of God: and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first: 

17. Then we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: 
and se shall we ever be with the 
Lord. 

18. Wherefore comfort one an- 
other with these words. 

(38) Rev. 19:11. And I saw 
heaven opened, and behold a 


white horse; and he that sat upon 
him was called Faithful and 
True, and in righteousness he 
doth judge and make war. 

12. His eyes were as a flame 
of fire, and on his head were 
many crowns; and he had a 
name written, that no man knew, 
but he himself. 

13. And he was clothed with 
a vesture dipped in blood: and 
his name is called The Word of 
God. 

14. And the armies which were 
in heaven followed him upon 
white horses, clothed in fine 
linen, white and clean. 

15. And out of his mouth go- 
eth a sharp sword, that with it 
he should smite the nations; and 
he shall rule them with a rod 
of iron: and he treadeth the 
winepress of the flerceness and 
wrath of Almighty God. 

16. And he hath on his ves- 
ture and on his thigh a name 
written, KING OF KINGS, AND 
LORD OF LORDS. 

19. And I saw the beast, and 
the kings of the earth, and their 
armies, gathered together’ to 
make war against him that sat 
on the horse, and against his 
army. 

20. And the beast was taken, 
and with him the false prophet 
that wrought miracles before 
him, with which he deceived 
them that had received the mark 
of the beast, and them that wor- 
shipped his image. These both 
were cast alive into a lake of 
fire burning with brimstone. 

(34) 2 Pet. 2:4. For if God 
spared not the angels. that 


‘sinned, but cast them down to 


hell, and delivered them into 
chains of darkness, to be re- 
served unto judgment. 


106 JESUS IS COMING. 


the devil and his angels.” The ungodly go there first, 
Compare Rev. 19:20 with Rev. 20:7-10; 2 Pet. 2:4; Jude 
6,35 


Such events, requiring intervals of time, preclude the 
idea expressed in the term, “general judgment.” 

The “Day of the Lord” has two aspects, to-wit: Judg- 
ment on God’s enemies, and deliverance and blessing on 
God’s people.*6 

So we have the Judgment: 

Of believers, as to their character, on the cross. 


Of believers, as to their works, at the Judgment seat of 


Christ. 


Of the living nations at the Revelation. 
Of the ungodly at the Great White Throne. 


Jude 6. And the angels 
which kept not their first estate, 
but left their own habitation, he 
hath reserved in everlasting 
chains under darkness unto the 
judgment of the great day. 

Also 1 Cor. 6:3; Rev. 20:10. 

(35) Rev. 19:20. And the 
beast was taken, and with him 
the false prophet that wrought 
miracles before him, with which 
he deceived them that had re- 
ceived the mark of the beast, and 
them that worshipped his image. 
These both were cast alive into 
a lake of fire burning with brim- 
stone. 

Rev. 20:7. And when the 
thousand years are expired, 
Satan shall be loosed out of his 
prison, 

8. And shall go out to deceive 
the nations which are in the four 
quarters of the earth, Gog and 
Magog, to gather them together 
to battle: the number of whom is 
as the sand of the sea. 

9. And they went up on the 
breadth of the earth, and com- 
passed the camp of the saints 
about, and the beloved city: and 
fire came down from God out 
of heaven, and devoured them. 


10. And the devil that de- 
ceived them was cast into tho 
lake of fire and brimstone, where 
the beast and the false prophet 
ere, and shall be tormented day 
and night for ever and ever. 

And 2 Pet. 2:4; Jude 6. 


(36) Isa. 2:2. And it shall 
come to pass in the last days, 
that the mountain of the Lord’s 
house shall be established in the 
top of the mountains, and shall 
be exalted above the hills; and 
all nations sharl flow unto it. 


8. And many people shall go 
and say, Come ye, and let us go 
up to the mountain of the Lord, 
to the house of the God of Jacob; 
and he will teach us of his ways, 
and we will walk in his paths; 
for out of Zion shall go forth 
the law, and the word of the 
Lord from Jerusalem. 


17. And the loftiness of man 
shall be bowed down, and the 
haughtiness of men shall be 
made low: and the Lord alone 
shall be exalted in that day. 

Also Isa. 4:1-6; Joel 2:21- 
27, 21; 3:12-17; Dan. 7:98- 
14: Zech. 14:1-21; Zeph 8:8-9; 
Mal. 4:1-8. 


oe we eee Ee _ 


OHAPTER XII. 
Antichrist. 


This name introduces to us one of the most solemn and 
foreboding subjects in-the Word of God. An antichrist— 
one absolutely opposed to Jesus Christ—we are told, shall 
come, The spirit of antichrist is already in the world, de 
nying the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh, either in the 
past? or in the future.* 


This spirit of antichrist, now possessed by many, will 


culminate in one person, the Antichrist, who will deny both 
the Father and the Son.‘ 

That he is a single individual is plainly taught in 2 
Thes. 2, where he is called “that man of sin”... “the 
son of perdition”—“that wicked,” or properly, “the law- 
less one.” 

As Christ is the express image of God,® so it appears 
that antichrist is the culminating manifestation of Satan, 
“the prince of this world.”® His coming is “after the 
working (energy, or inward working) of Satan, with all 
power and signs and lying wonders and deceivableness of 


unrighteousness.” 


(1) 1 John 2:18. Little chil- 
dren, it is the last time: and as 
ye have heard that antichrist 


* shall come, even now are there 


many antichrists; whereby we 
know that it is the last time. 


(2) 1 John 4:8. And every 
spirit that confesseth not that 
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh 
is not of God: and this is that 
spirit of antichrist, whereof ye 
have heard that it should come; 
and even now already is it in 
the world. 

(3) 2 John 7. For many 
deceivers are entered into the 
world, who confess not that Je- 
sus Christ is come in the flesh. 


This is a deceiver and an anti- 
christ. 

(4) 1 John 2:22. Who is a 
iar but he that denieth that Je- 
sus is the Christ? He is anti- 
christ, that denieth the Father 
and the Son. 

(5) Heb. 1:3. Who being the 
brightness of his glory, and the 
express image of his person, and 
upholding all things by the word 
of his power, when he had by 
himself purged our sins, sat 
down on the right hand of the 
Majesty on high. 

(6) John 14:30. Hereafter I 
will not talk much with yuu? 
for the prince of this world com- 
eth, and hath nothing in me. 


(107) 


108 JESUS I8 COMING. ‘ 

He will be a “strong (or inward working) delusion,” 
to them who believe not the truth.’ 

This mystery of Lawlessness (so the Greek) already 
worked in the days of the apostle, but there has been a 
hindering power, which, we believe, is the Holy Spirit, 
in His present manifestation, or office, viz: as the re- 
prover of the world and gatherer of the Church. When 
He, the restraining one, is taken out of the way (or out 
of the midst), at the rapture of the Church, then shall the 
mystery be unveiled, and the Lawless one be: revealed. 
(Verses 7 and 8). | 

He will be received, even by the Jews,® who, having re- 
turned to their own land and rebuilt their temple, will 
make a treaty with him, called by the prophet “a covenant 
with death and an agreement with hell.”® And antichrist 


(7) 2 Thes. 2:3. Let no man 
deceive you by any means: for 
that day shall not come, except 
there come a falling away first, 
and that man of sin be revealed, 
the son of perdition ; 

4. Who opposeth and exalteth 
himself above all that is called 
God, or that is worshipped; so 
that he as God sitteth in the 
temple of God, shewing himself 
that he is God. 

6. And now ye know what 
withholdeth that he might be re- 
vealed in his time. 

%. For the mystery of iniquity 
doth already work: only he who 
now letteth will let, until he be 
taken out of the way. 

8. And then shall be revealed 
the lawless one, whom the Lord 
Jesus shall slay with the breath 
of his mouth, and bring to 
hought by the manifestation of 
mis coming; 

9. Even him, whose coming is 
after the working of Satan with 
all power and signs and lying 
wonders. 

10. And with all deceivable- 
ness of unrighteousness in them 
that perish; because they re- 
ceived not the love of the truth, 
that they might be saved. 


11. And for this cause God 
shall send them strong delusion, 
that they should believe a Me: 

12. That they all might be 
damned who believed not the 
truth, but had pleasure in un- 
righteousness. 

(8) John 5:43. I am come in 
my Father’s name, and ye re- 
ceive me not: if another shall 
come in his own name, him ye 
will receive. 

(9) Isa. 28:14. Wherefore 
hear the word of the Lord, ye 
scornful men, that rule this peo- 
ple which is in Jerusalem. 

15. Because ye have said, We 
have made aé covenant with 
death, and with hell are we at 
agreement; when the overflow- 
ing scourge shall pass through, 
it shall nut come unto us: for 
we have made lies our refuge, 
and under falsehood have we hid 
ourselves, 

16. Therefore thus saith the 
Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion 
for a foundation a stone, a tried 
stone, a precious corner stone, a 
sure foundation: he that believ- 
eth shall not make haste. 

17. Judgment also will I lay 
to the line, and righteousness to 
the plummet: and the hail shall 


ANTICHRIST. 109 


will exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is 
worshipped, so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God 
(the rebuilt temple at Jerusalem) and sheweth himself 
that he is God. 2 Thes, 2:4. Doubtless he is the king de- 
scribed in Dan. 11:36, etc.,1° who shall do according to his 
own will and magnify himself above every god. Again, 
he is seen as the beast described in Rev. 13:11-181! whose 
number is the number of a man, 666, and who performs 
“sreat wonders and deceiveth them that dwell upon the 
earth,” by means of his miracles, and has the power to 
kill those who will not worship the image of the beast. 
‘And again he is seen in Lucifer, or the day star, of Isa. 
14,127 of whom the king of Babylon was a type, and who 


eweep away the refuge of lies, 
and the waters shall overflow the 
hiding place. 

18. And your covenant with 
death shall be disannulled, and 
your agreement with hell shall 
not stand; when the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, then 
ye shall be trodden down by it. 

(10) Dan. 11:36. And the 
king shall do according to his 
will; and he shall exalt himself, 
and magnify himself above every 
god, and shall speak marvellous 
things against the God of gods, 
and shall prosper till the indig- 
nation be accomplished: for that 
that is determined shall be done. 

(11) Rev. 18:11. And I be- 
held another beast coming up 
out of the earth; and he had 
two horns like a lamb, and he 
spake as a dragon. 

12. And he exerciseth all the 
power of the first beast before 
him, and causeth the earth and 
them which dwell therein to 
worship the first beast, whose 
deadly wound was healed. 

13. And he doeth:’ great won- 
ders, so that he maketh fire 
eome down from heaven on the 
earth in the sight of men, 

14. And decefveth them that 
dwell on the earth by the meana 
of those miracles which he had 
power to do in the sight of the 
beast; saying to them that dwell 
on the earth, that they should 


make an image to the beast, 
which had the wound by a 
sword, and did live. 


15. And he had power to give 
life unto the image of the beast, 
that the image of the beast 
should both speak, and cause 
that as many as would not wor- 
ship the image of the beast 
should be killed. 

16. And he causeth all, both 
small and great, rich and poor, 
free and bond, to receive a mark 
in their right hand, or in their 
foreheads ; 

17. And that no man might 
buy or sell, save he that had 
the mark, or the name of the 
beast, or the number of his 
name. 

18. Here is wisdom. Let him 
that hath understanding count 
the number of the beast: for it 
is the number of a man; and 
his number is Six hundred three- 
score and six. 

(12) Isa. 14:12. How art 
thou fallen from heaven, O Luci- 
fer, son of the morning! how art 
thou cut down to the ground, 
which didst weaken the nations! 

18. For thou hast said in 
thine heart, I will ascend into 
heaven, I will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God: J will 
sit also upon the mount of the 
congregation, in the sides of the 
north : 


14. I will ascend above the 


110 JESUS IS COMING. 


weakens the nations, exalts his “throne above the stars of 
God,” and sits “upon the mount of the congregation.” 


Such, in brief, is the awful picture which Scripture gives 
us of this great opponent of Christ. Many think that he 
has already been manifested in Antiochus Epiphanes—or 
the Popes of Rome—or Mohammed and his successors, all 
of which we regard as erroneous. The Popes have received 
their exaltation and power, as the pretended vicars of 
Christ, and not as His opponent. It is a great mistake, 
therefore, to call them the antichrist, or the opposing one. 
Antiochus was doubtless a type of antichrist. And in his 
opposition to the worship of Jehovah, his sacrifice of the 
hated ‘swine in the temple and his merciless treatment of 
the Jews, he has given us a miniature picture of what the 
final antichrist will do. But he passed away long before 
Paul and John wrote of the antichrist to come. Likewise 
Mohammed may be in some sense a type, hut that is all. 


No, antichrist is still in the future, and he will not be 
manifested until the true Church has been taken away, at 
the rapture, as described in 1 Thes. 4.15 For Paul says, 
‘““We beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto Him,”’— 
that is, by this very fact of the rapture, of which he had 
previously written them,!* and which must first occur be- 


me... 


heights of the clouds; I will be 
like the Most High. 

15. Yet thou shalt be brought 
down to hell, to the sides of the 
pit. 

16. They that see thee shall 
Narrowly look upon thee, and 
consider thee, saying, Is this the 
man that made the earth to 
tremble, that did shake king- 
doms. 

(13) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God: and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first: 

17. Then we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, 


to meet the Lord in the air; and 
so shall we ever be with the 
Lord. 


18. Wherefore comfort one ane 
other with these words. 

(14) 2 Thes. 2:1. Now we 
beseech you, brethren, by the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and by our gathering together 
unto him, 

2. That we be not soon shaken 
in mind, or be troubled, neither 
by spirit, nor by word, nor by 
letter as from us, as that the 
day of Christ is at hand. 

7. For the mystery of law- 
fessness doth already work: only 
there +s one that restraineth now, 
until he be taken out of the 
way. 


ANTICHRIST. 111 


fore the apostasy should come to the full, and the man of 
sin be revealed. This is confirmed by verse 7. The Holy 
Spirit, who, while he is gathering the Bride,!® reproves the 
world of sin, righteousness and judgment,!® will, when he 
is taken out of the way, catch up the Bride to meet the 
Lord in the air, leaving the apostate church, adulterous 
Israel and the ungodly world, to believe a lie,1* and then 
shall the lawless one be revealed. Praise God, that the 
Church is to be kept from this awful hour of temptation.1® 
She shall be with her Lord,!® while the world is ruled by 
antichrist. 

But, though antichrist shall so greatly exalt himself and 
rule over the world with such power, yet “shall he come 
to his end, and none shall help him.’’?° The Lord shall 
destroy him “with the brightness of His coming,’ literally 
“will paralyze (him) with the forthshining of His ar- 
rival’’21 (See Rotherham’s translation), when He shalt 


(15) 1 Cor. 12:12. For as the 
body. is one, and hath many 
members, and all the members 
of that one body, being many, 
are one body: so also és Christ. 

18. For by one Spirit are we 
all baptized into one body, 
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, 
whether we be bond or free;. 
and have been all made to drivk 
into one Spirit. 

Eph. 4:30. And grieve not 
the Holy Spirit of God, whereby 
ye are sealed unto the day of 
redemption. 

(16) John 16:8. And when 
he is come, he will reprove the 
world of sin, and of righteous- 
ness, and of judgment. 

(17) 2 Thes. 2:11. And for 
this cause God shall send them 
strong delusion, that they should 
believe a lie. 

(18) Luke 21:36. Watch ye 
therefore, and pray always, that 
ye may be accounted worthy to 
escape all these things that shall 
come to pass, and to stand before 
the Son of man. 

Rev. 8:10. Because thou hast 
kept the word of my patience, I 


also will keep thee from the 
hour of temptation, which shall 
come upon all the world, to try 
them that dwell upon the earth. 

(19) 1 Thes. 4:17. Then we 
which are alive and remain 
shall be caught up together with 
them in the clouds, to meet the 
Lord in the air; and so shall 
we ever be with the Lord. 

18. Wherefore comfort one an- 

other with these words. 
. 1 Thes. 5:9. For God hath 
not appointed us to wrath, but 
to obtain salvation by our Lord 
Jesus Christ, 

10. Who died for us, that, 
whether we wake or sleep, we 
should live together with him. 

(20) Dan. 11:45. And he 
shall plant the tabernacles of 
his palace between the seas in 
the glorious holy mountain; yet 
he shall come to his end, and 
none shall help him. 

(21) 2 Thes. 2:8. And then 
shall be revealed the lawless 
one, whom the Lord Jesus shall 
slay with the breath of his 
mouth, and bring to nought by 
the manifestation of his coming, 


112 JESUS IS COMING. 


come, with His saints, to execute judgment upon the un- 
godly.22_ Yes, he shall “be brought down to hell (sheol), 
to the sides of the pit.” They that see him shall narrowly 
look upon him and consider hin, saying, “is this THE MAN 
that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; 
that made the world as a wilderness and destroyed the 
cities thereof?” Isa. 14:15-17. 

We would call special attention to the fact that antichrist 
denies the Father and the Son,?* and that the Greek words 
in 2 Thes. 2:7-8 should be rendered “the mystery of law- 
lessness”—“the lawless one.” This, we think, gives an 
alarming significance to the atheistic and lawless trio of 
socialism, nihilism and anarchy, so rapidly spreading in 
our day, and which seeks to wipe out all law relating to 
marriage, property, ete. 

It may be that these are the immediate precursors of 
antichrist. At any rate, he is surely coming, and sad in- 
deed is the thought of a godless world, rushing on to such 
a culmination of evil.* 


*For a more extended statement of this subject of the 
antichrist; the rebuilding of Babylon, as Satan’s earthly 
capitol and the headquarters of commercialism, its com- 
plete overthrow and destruction, and other co-relative 
events, see the author’s pamphlet, “Satan, his kingdom and 
its overthrow.” F. H. Revell Co., Chicago, New York, etc. 


(22) Jude 14. And to these 
also Enoch, the seventh from 
Adam, prophesied, saying, Be- 
hold, the Lord came with ten 
thousand of his holy ones, 

15. To execute judgment upon 
all, and to convict all the un- 
godly of all their works of un- 
godliness which they have une 


godly wrought, and of all the 
hard things which ungodly sin. 
ners have spoken against him. 


(23) 1 John 2:22. Who is a 
liar but he that denieth that Je- 
sus is the Christ? He is anti- 
christ, that denieth the Father 
and the Son. 


CHAPTER XTII. 
The Principal Event. 


We believe that the foregoing outline of the order of 
events will commend itself to every careful student of the 
Word. However, we persistently urge but ONE POINT, 
and that is the PRE-MILLENNIAL COMING OF CHRIST AND 
RAPTURE OF THE SAINTS. This we believe to be the GreaT 
HOPE for the church, and the principal event for which be- 
lievers wait.? 


Much has been revealed in regard to the Tribulation, the 
Kingdom, ete., which follow the Rapture; but it is, as it 
were, only an outline. And, dear reader, let us not be 
discouraged if we cannot fully understand it. 

Do not forget that THs Kine is coming. And when HE 
comes it will be time to make known, in detail, the manner 
of the Kingdom.” 


Post-Millennial Questionings. 


Post-millennialists apparently forget this altogether, and 
because they cannot fully understand those things in re- 
gard to the Lord’s coming, which we now see through a 
glass darkly, they reject what is plainly revealed. 

If, even in the present dispensation, we cannot explain 
the doctrines of “Free Will,” and “God’s Sovereignty,” to 
our mutual understanding,—much less can we comprehend 
the glory, which shall be revealed in us, in the coming 


(1) 1 Thes. 1:9. For they uel said to all the people, See ye 
themselves shew of us what man- him whom the Lord hath chosen, 
ner of entering in we had unto that there is none like him 
you, and how ye turned to God among all the people? And all 
from idols to serve the living the people shouted, and said, 
and true God; God save the king. 

10. And to wait for his Son 25. Then Samuel told the peo- 
from heaven, whom he raised ple the manner of the kingdom, 
from the dead, even Jesus, which and wrote it in a book, and laid 
delivered us from the wrath to tf up before the Lord. And 
come. Samuel sent all the people away, 
(2) 1 Sam. 10:24. And Sam- every man to his house. 


113 


114 


JESUS I8 COMING. 


Kingdom. Let us not be disturbed, then, by the questions 


which they ask; such as— 


How will men be saved during the Millennium? 

What will be the means of grace? 

What may take the place of the preaching of the gospel? 
‘and of the sacraments of the Church? | 

The Jews could not have answered similar questions 
before the first coming of Christ. It was not revealed unti} 


He came. 


Jesus is coming AGAIN, and it is just as consistent that 
we shall receive an addition to the revealed Word of 
God when He comes, as it was when He came before. 

He will speak again, who spake as never man spake,® 
even the dead will hear His voice,* and the gracious words 
which shall proceed out of His mouth® will be a continual 


revelation.® 


It will all be plain when Jesus comes, for we shall be 
like Him and see Him as He is,’ eye to eye,® face to face.® 
Post-millennialists seem to think that all must be accom- 
plished under the Church, and with present instrumentali- 


ties. 


Pre-millennialists look for the main accomplishment 
under Christ Himself, who will cut short the work in 
righteousness,?© and with different instrumentalities,2 _ 


(3) John 7:46. The officers 
answered, Never man spake like 
this man. 

(4) John 5:28. Marvel not 
at this: for the hour is coming, 
in the which al] that are in the 
graves shall hear his voice, 

(5) Luke 4:22. And all bare 
him witness, and wondered at 
the gracious words which pro- 
_ ceeded out of his mouth. And 

they said, Is not this Joseph’s 
eon? 

(8) Mat. 11:27. All things 
are delivered unto me of my 
Father: and no man knoweth the 
Son, but the Father; neither 
knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whom- 
soever the Son will reveal him, 

(7) I John 38:2. Beloved, 


now.are we the sons of God, 
and it doth not yét appear what 
we shall be: but we know that, 
when he shall appear, we shall 
be like him; for we shall see 
him as be is. 

(8) Isa. 52:8. Thy watch- 
men shall lift up the voice; with 
the voice together shall they 
sing: for they shall see eye to 
eye, when the Lord shall bring 
again Zion. 

(9) 1 Cor. 18:12. For now 
we see through a glass, darkly; 
but then face to face: now I 
know in part; but then shall I 
know even as also I am known. 

(10) Rom. 9:28. For he will 
finish the work, and cut i? short 
in righteousness: because a 


PREACH THE WORD. 115 


Post-millennialism exalts the Church. 


Pre-millennialism exalts Jesus and fills the heart of 
the believer with a LIVING, PERSONAL, COMING Savior. 

Post-millennialists, though ACKNOWLEDGING that the 
Second Advent of Christ is the very POLE sTAB of the 
Church, have little heart in it, and are disposed to say 
very little about it. This is natural and perfectly con- 
sistent for those who believe the event is at least a thou- 
sand years away. 


They very seldom preach or talk about it. 


Preach the Word. 


What a contrast to Paul, who charged Timothy to 
PREACH THE WORD (2 Tim. 4:2);* and when writing to 
Titus, of the blessed hope and glorious appearing of Jesus, 
he said: “THESE THINGS SPEAK.” Ch. 2:15. 


And again, when writing to the Thessalonians of the de- 
scent of the Lord and the rapture of the church, he said: 
“‘WHEREFORE COMFORT (or exhort) ONE ANOTHER WITH 


THESE WORDS.” Ch. 4:18; see also 2 Tim. 3:16; Heb. 10:25; 
2 Pet. 1:19.12 


We ask our post-millennial brethren, Why do you not 
give the Church these comforting words,—this “meat in 


*“T bear full witness, in presence of °God and Christ 
Jesus °who is about to be judging living and dead, both as: 
to His °forthshining and His kingdom proclaim the Word.” 


Rotherham’s N. T. from the Gr. text of Tregelles. 


short work will the Lord make 
upon the earth. 

(11) Isa. 4:4. 
Lord shall have washed away 
the filth of the daughters of Zion, 
and shall have purged the blood 
of Jerusalem from the midst 
thereof by the spirit of judg- 
ment, and by the spirit of burn- 
ing. 

Also Zech. 14. 

(12) 2 Tim. 8:16. All Scrip- 
ture is given by fnspiration of 
God, and (is profitable for doc- 
4rine, for reproof, for correction, 


When the 


for instruction in righteousness. 


Heb. 10:25. Not forsaking 
the assembling of ourselves to- 
gether, as the manner of some- 
ds; but exhorting one another: 
and so much the more, as ye see- 
the day approaching. 


2 Pet. 1:19. We have also a 
more sure word of prophecy; 
whereunto ye do well that ye. 
take heed, as unto a light that 
shineth in a dark place, until 
the day dawn, and the daystat 
arise in your hearts. 


116 JESUS IS OOMING. 


due season?” “Blessed is that servant whom His Lord 
when He cometh shall find so doing.” Lu. 12:43. 

Ah! brethren, post-millennialism is hiding this staR OF 
HOPE from the church, and inenrring thereby a responsi- 
bility that Gdd alone can estimate. The Church is lan- 
guishing because of this neglected truth. 


Solemn Warning. 


We beg of you to heed the following solemn words from” 


Dr. Hugh McNeill: “My reverend brethren, watch, preach 
the coming of Jesus. I charge you, in the name of our 
common Master,—PREACH THE COMING or JESUS; solemnly 
and affectionately, in the name of God, I charge you,— 
PREACH- THE COMING OF JESUS. WarTCH ye, therefore, lest, 
coming suddenly, He find the porter sleeping.” 

Pre-millennialism has a vital life in tt, and gives the dis- 
ciple a real love and relish for the Word of God, which 
opens up to him like a new book. 

Even Dr. Brown recognizes this, and he says: “Pre- 
millennialists have done the Church a real service by call- 
ing attention to the place which the second advent holds in 
the Word of God and the scheme of divine truth.’’* 

Many have we heard say, “Why, the Bible is another 
book to me since I accepted this truth.” And though one 
is almost lost in the unfolding majesty and infinity of 
God’s plans revealed therein, yet do we find it such a store- 
house of truth and comfort, that continual study ever gives 
us richer food. 

It is the MOST PRACTICAL DOCTRINE in the Christian faith, 
for “every man that hath this hope in Him (Christ) puri- 
fieth himself even as He (Christ) is pure.” 1 John 3:3. 
And do we not want PRACTICAL HOLINESS? 

Again, this doctrine when received into the heart is a 
mighty power to separate one from the love of the worid. 
And were it thoroughly believed and preached in the 
Church, she would readily give of her substance so liber- 
ally that we should not be begging for money to sustain 
our missions. 


*The Second Advent, Page 13. 


7s 0 a eg — aut. 


4N INSPIRING DOCTEINE. 117 


It was this doctrine that inspired the sainted Bliss, and 
gave his songs such favor. How all of us love to sing 
“WHEN JESUS Comes,” or “Houp THE Fort ror I am 
Comina.” The Church and the people want this truth, 
and God wants them to have it, we are assured, by the 
manifest interesé and attention with which He blesses its 
presentation. 


e 


CHAPTER XIV. 
SOME OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 
No. I. It Discourages Missions. 


It is objected that this doctrine discourages missions. 

This is not true. The missionary spirit among the evan- 
gelists of to-day is a sufficient answer to this. And let us 
name, among the missionaries who held this faith, Ben 
Ezra, Joseph Wolf, James McGregor Bertram, L. D. Mans- 
field, Gonsalves, Dr. Kelley and Hewitson. 

“This was the hope that inspired Heber, the great mis- 
sionary bishop of the English Church, who gave us that 
glorious missionary hymn, ‘From Greenland’s Icy Moun- 
tains,’ and who spent his strength and rested from his la- 
bors ‘on India’s coral strand!’ 

“This was the hope that energized Gutzlaff, the opener of 
China, and Bettleheim, the opener of Japan; that inspired 
the noble Duff, who, under its influence, woke moderate 
Scotland from its lethargy, and was the pioneer of his in- 
domitable race in India. This was the hope that inspired 
and cheered and everjoyed McCheyne and our own Poor, 
and Lowrie, and Rankin, and Lowenthal, and a host of 
others.” 

Mr. Lord affirms that among missionaries of all denomi- 
nations, there is as great proportion of pre-millennialists, 
as there is among the ministry at home. They earnestly 
labor, as did the apostle, to save some from the wrath to 
come.? 


(1) Rom. 11:14. If by any’ selves shew of us what manner 


means I may provoke to emula- 
tion them which are my flesh, 
and might save some of them. 

1 Cor. 9:22. To the weak 
became I as weak, that I might 
gain the weak: I am made all 
things to all men, that I might 
by all means save some. 

1 Thes. 1:9. For they them- 


of entering in we had unto you, 
and how ye turned to God from 
idols to serve the living and true 
God; 

10. And to wait for his Son 
from heaven, whom he ,ratsed 
from the dead, even Jesus, which 
delivered us from the wrath to 
come. 


(118) 


canoe oh as meena 2d 


Pt 


OBJECTIONS OONSIDERED. 119 


No. II. It Discourages Work. 


It is objected that it discourages work. This is most. 
ineonsistent and untrue, for the very essence of the doctrine 
is to WaTcH, WORK AND Walt, and to work now for the 
night cometh when no man can work.? 


No. III. So Many Unsaved Friends. 


Some object that they have so many unsaved friends, 
they cannot wish Jesus to come. 

Work THEN, for we read “all that my Father giveth me 
shall come to me” (John 6:37-39), and whosoever will may 
eome.® Knowing the terror (fear) of the Lord, let us per- 
suade men. -2 Cor. 5:11. 

The Antedeluvians would not heed the preaching of 
Noah, and even Lot’s kindred (his sons-in-law) would not 
go with him out of Sodom. So there will be those who will 
not accept of Christ. But of all who believe in Him‘ not 
one will be lost.© The Israelites were often led to repent- 
ance, in the midst of adversity and calamity, and so if our 
friends will not be entreated to accept of Christ now, it 
is perhaps possible that they may do so under the visible 
judgments of God, during the Tribulation. 

But whethér they will or not, let us consider, that the 
great mass of humanity are engulfed in the maelstrom of 
sin, which is sweeping its millions down to graves of de- 


Jas. 5:20. Let him know, that 
he which converteth the sinner 
from the error of his ways shall 
save a soul from death, and shall 
hide a multitude of sins. 

(2) John 9:4. I must work 
the works of him that sent me, 
while it is day: the night com- 
eth, when no man can work. 

See also page 143. 

(3) Rev. 22:17. And the 
Spirit and the bride say, Come. 
And let him that heareth say, 
Come. And let him that is 
athirst come. And whosoever 
will, let him take the water of 
life freely. 


(4) John 1:12. But as many 
as received him, to them gave he 
power to become the sons of God, 
even to them that believe on 
his name: 

(5) John 10:27. My sheep 
hear my voice, and I know them, 
and they follow me: 

28. And I give unto them eter- 
nal Hfe; and they shall never 
perish, neither shall any man. 
pluck them out of my hand. 

Mat. 7:13. Enter ye ia at 
the strait gate: for wide ig the 
gate, and broad isa the way, that 
leadeth to destruction, and many 
there be which go in thereat. 


120 JESUS IS COMING. 
struction (Mat. 7:13), and compared to them, in numbers, 
the true believers are but a handful. In the Millennium 
all this will be changed, “for the earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea” (Isa. 
11:9), and all men shall bow to the righteous scepter of 
King Immanuel.® 

We would not sacrifice the hundreds of lives upon a 
passenger train, to save the life of even a FRIEND who will- 
fully exposed himself to danger upon the track; and are 
not all men our brothers? and shall we not yearn to save 
them from the tide of spiritual death? Oh! then, let us 
ery with the Holy Spirit: “Even so come, Lord Jesus.” 
Rev. 22:20. For when He comes the work will be cut short 
in righteousness.’ 


No. IV. My Kingdom Is Not of This World. 


It is objected that Jesus said: “My Kingdom is not 
of this world.” John 18:36. True! not of the spirit of 
the world (1 John 2:15-17); just as believers are not of 
the world. John 15:19. The correct rendering of the pas- 
sage is, “My Kingdom is not (ex) out of this world.” That 
is, it does not emanate from this world. He is not («) 
out of this world. Both He and His Kingdom are from 
above.® But it will be set up on this earth, in accordance 


(6) Isa. 45:22. Look unto and shall be called the Son of 


me, and be ye saved, all the ends 
of the earth: for I am God, and 
there is none else. 

23. I have sworn by myself, 
the word is gone out of my 
mouth in righteousness, and 
shall not return, That unto me 
every knee shall bow, every 
‘tongue shall swear. 

Phil. 2:10. That at the name 
of Jesus every knee should bow, 
of things in heaven, and things 
in earth, and things under the 
earth ; 

11. And that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ 
4s Lord, to the glory of God the 
Father. 

Luke 1:32. He shall be great, 


the Highest; and the Lord God 
shall give unto him the throne 
of his father David: 

33. And he shall reign over 
the house of Jacob for ever: and 
of his kingdom there shall be 
no end. 

Also Rom, 14:11; Mic. 4:1-7. 

(7) Rom. 9:28. For he will 
finish the work, and cut ¢t short 
in righteousness: because a short 
work will the Lord make upon 
the earth. 

(8) John 8:23. And he sald 
unto them, Ye are from beneath; 
I am from above: ye are of this 
world; I am not of this world. 

(9) Col. 3:1. If ye them be 
risen with Christ, seek those 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 121 


with the prayer which He taught us “Thy Kingdom come. 
Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth.” Luke 11:2.2¢ 
Earthly kingdoms are corrupted by the deception of Satan. 
But in the Millennial Kingdom he will not deceive them, 
for he shall be bound.** 


There is nothing essentially sinful in matter. Adam was 
sinless before his fall and he had a material body. Christ 


has a material body and is without sin. The earth was _ 


cursed because of sin and the spirit of the world clings to 


sin? But when the curse is removed,’® and all things 
that offend are gathered out of the kingdom,?* then shall 
a 


things which are above, where 
Christ sitteth on the right hand 
of God. 

2. Set your affection on things 
above, not on things on the 
eurth. 

3. For ye are dead, and your 
life is hid with Christ in God. 

4. When Christ, who és our 
life, shall appear, then shall ye 
also appear with him in glory. 


Gal. 4:26. But Jerusalem 
which is above is free, which is 
the mother of us all. 


(10) Dan. 2:44. And in the 
days of these kings shall the 
God of heaven set up a kingdom, 
which shall never be destroyed: 
and the kingdom shall not be 
left to other people, Dut it shall 
break in pieces and consume all 
these kingdoms, and it shall 
stand for ever. 


Dan. 7:18. But the saints of 
the Most High shall take the 
kingdom, and possess the king- 
dom for ever, even for ever and 
ever. 


Jer. 23:5. Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will 
raise unto David a _ righteous 
Branch, and a King shall reign 
and prosper, and shall execute 
judgment and justice in the 
earth. 

6. In his days Judah shall be 
saved, and Israel shall dwel2 


safely: and this és his name 
whereby he shall be called, THE 
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


(11) Rev. 20:1. And I saw 
an angel come down from 
heaven, having the key of the 
bottomless pit and a great chain 
fin his hand. 


2. And he laid hold on the 
dragon, that old serpent, which 
is the Devil, and Satan, and 
bound him a thousand years, 


8. And cast him into the bot- 
tomless pit, and shut him up, 
and set a seal upon him, that 
he should deceive the nations no 
more, till the thousand years 
should be fulfilled: and after 
that he must be loosed a little 
season. 


(12) Rom. 1:32. Who, know- 
ing the judgment of God, that 
they which commit such things 
are worthy of death, not only do 
the same, but have pleasure in 
them that do them. 

(18) Rev. 22:3. And there 
shall be no more curse: but the 
throne of God and of the Lamb 
shall be in it; and his serv- 
ants shall serve him. 

(14) Mat. 13:41. The Soa 
of man shall send forth his an- 
gels, and they shall gather out 
of his kingdom all things that 
offend, and them which do in- 
iquity. 


XN 


eT ey, 


122 JESUS IS COMING. 

all creation have that for which it groans,!® and the 
righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of 
their Father.'* 


No. V. The Kingdom Within You. 


It is objected, that the kingdom of God is not material 
and visible, but that it is spiritual and invisible. In sup- 
port of this the following words of Jesus in Luke 17 :20-21 
are cited: “When He was demanded of the Pharisees, 
when the kingdom of God should come, He answered them 
and said: The kingdom of God cometh not with observa- 
tion; neither shall they say, lo, here! or lo, there! for be- 
hold, the kingdom of God is within you.” 

Observation should be translated “careful watching,” 
see Dr. Adam Clarke, or “narrow watching,” see Rother- 
ham. The marginal, and better reading for “within you” 
is “among you,” see Rotherham, Wilson, Prof. Whitting, 
and others. He did not say that the kingdom of God was 
within, or in the hearts of those wicked Pharisees, but that 
it was among them, viz.: within the Jewish nation. As 
Bengel states it, “within is here used, not in any respect of 
the heart of individual Pharisees, .... but in respect 
to the whole Jewish people. The King, Messiah, and 
therefore the kingdom is here: ye see and ye hear.” 

The sense, then, is as follows: The kingdom of God 
cometh not with “careful watching.” That is, not in such 
@ way as to be discerned only by sagacious critics, nor is it 


(15) Rom. 8:19. For the 
earnest expectation of the crea- 


travaileth in pain together until 
now. 


ture waiteth for the manifesta- 
tion of the sons of God. 

20. For the creature was 
made subject to vanity, not 
willingly, but by reason of him 
who hath subjected the same in 
hope ; 

21. Because the creature it- 
self also shall be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into 
the glorious liberty of the chil- 
dren of God. 

22. For we know that the 
@hole creation groaneth and 


23. And not only they, but 
ourselves also, which have the 
firstfruits of the Spirit, even 
we ourselves groan within our- 
selves, waiting the adoption, 
fo wit, the redemption of our 
body. 

(16) Mat. 13:42. And -shall 
cast them into a furnace of fire: 
there shall be wailing and 
gnashing of teeth. 

48. Then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. Who 
bath ears to hear, let him hear 


OBJECTIONS OONSIDERED. 123 


to be seen only by those who are scrupulously watching for 
it. They shall not say, Behold here or there, for the king. 
dom of God is among you, to-wit: it was then visibly pres- 
ent among them, in the person of Jesus the King. And 
so it will be visibly present when He comes again.’* It 
did not, and will not, need scrupulous watching to discern 
it, Had they received Him with faith,—instead of (nar- 
rowly) watching Him with deceitful spies,1* they might 
have realized that their King was then visibly present, and 
ready to usher in the universal manifestation of the king- 
dom, which had been seen by the favored disciples of the 
Mount.4® How gladly He would have then fully mani- 
fested Himself as King, and established His Kingdom 
‘among them, is shown by His words of tender yearning in 
Mat. 23 :37-39: 


“O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, 
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would 
I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gath- 
ereth her’ chickens under her wings, and ye would not! 
Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For I say 
unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, 
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.” 


He came in His Father’s name; but the Israelites to 
whom He spoke would not receive Him.”° 


(17) Rev. 6:16. ‘And said to 
the mountains and rocks, Fall on 
us, and hide us from the face of 
bim that sitteth on the throne, 
and from the wrath of the 
lamb ; 

17. For the great day of his 
wrath is come; and who shall 
be able to stand? 

(18) Luke 20:20. And they 
watched him, and sent forth 
spies, which should feign them- 
gelves just men, that they might 
take hold of his words, that so 
they might deliver him unto the 
power and authority of the gov- 
ernor. 

(19) Mat. 17:9. And as 
they came down from the moun- 
tain, Jesus charged them, say- 
{ng, Tell the vision to no man, 


until the Son of man be risen 
again from the dead. 

2 Pet. 1:16. For we have not 
followed cunningly devised fa- 
bles, when we made known unto 
you the power and coming of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, but were 
eyewitnesses of his majesty. 

17. For he received from God 
the Father honour and glory, 
when there came such a voice to 
him from the excellent glory, 
This is my beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased. 

18. And this voice which came 
from heaven we heard, when we 
were with him in the holy 
mount. 

(20) John 5:48. I am come 
in my Father’s name, and ye 
receive me not: if another shall 


14 JESUS I8 COMING. 

“He came unto His own and His own received Him not.” 
John 1:11. 

Preferring a robber, they rejected and crucified their 
King and so the kingdom waits until they shall accept 
Him,” when the kingdom of the world shall become the 
kingdom of our Lord’s and of His Christ’s and He shall 


reign for the acres or aces. See Greek.?? 
Oh! Blessed “Kina or Kinas!” coms, and may “Tuy 


Kiyepom Comer.” 


The King there in His beauty, 
Without a veil is seen; 
It were a well-spent journey, ~ 
Though sev’n deaths lay between, 
The Lamb, with His fair army, 
Doth on Mount Zion stand, 
And glory, glory dwelleth 
In Immanuel’s land. 


No. VI. The Kingdom Is Not Meat and Drink. 


It is objected that Paul said, “The Kingdom of God 
(s not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and 


joy in the Holy Ghost.” 


Rom. 14:17. 


come in his own name, him ye 
will receive. 

(21) Zech. 12:10. And I will 
pour upon the house of David, 
and upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace 
and of supplications; and they 
shall look upon me whom they 
have pierced, and they shall 
mourn for him, as one mourn- 
eth for his only son, and shall 
be in bitterness for him, as one 
that is in bitterness for his first- 
born. 

Zech. 13:6. And one shall say 
unto him, What are these wounds 
in thine hands? Then he shall 
answer, Those with which I was 
wounded in the house of my 
friends. 

Mat. 23:89. For I say unto 
you, Ye shall not see me hence- 
forth, till ye shall say, Blessed 
de he that cometh in the name of 
the Led. 


” 


Rom. 11:25. For I would not, 
brethren, that ye should be ig- 
norant of this mystery, lest ye 
should be wise in your own con- 
ceits, that blindness in part is 
happened to Israel, until the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles be come in. 

26. And so all Israel shall be 
saved: as it is written, There 
shall coms out of Sion the De- 
liverer, and shall turn away un- 
godliness from Jacob: 

27. For this és my covenant 
unto them, when I shall take 
away their sins. 

28. As concerning the gospel, 
they are enemies for your sakes: 
but as touching the election, they 
are beloved for the fathers’ 


sakes, 
(22) Rev. 11:15. And the 
seventh angel sounded: and 


there followed great voices in 
heaven, and they said, 
The kingdom of the world 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 125 


Indeed it is not “meat and drink,” or eating and drink- 
ing, or simply outward observances, Neither was the King- 
dom of Israel meat and drink, nor the Roman Empire. 
But the subjects of each did eat and drink, and Paul simply 
taught that they should do so circumspectly and with 
charity. So will the subjects of the kingdom of God eat 
and drink. “Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the king. 
dom of God.” Luke 14:15. “Blessed are they which are 
called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb.” Rev. 19:9, 
See the Feast of Isa. 25:6-8.7% 

Jesus himself said, “I will not drink henceforth of this 
fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with 
you in my Father’s kingdom.” Mat. 26:29. 

And again: “I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my 
Father hath appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink 
at my table in my kingdom.” Luke 22:29-30. This is the 
strongest proof that the kingdom will be literal and ma- 
terial, though it shall be freed from the curse of sin.” 


No. VII. Flesh and Blood. 


It is objected that flesh and blood cannot inherit the 
kingdom of God.?5 

Certainly we do not INHERIT it through the flesh—the 
unregenerate man. But through the Spirit we are born 


is become the kingdom of faces; and the rebuke of his peo - 
our Lord, and of his Christ: ple shall he take away from off 
and he shall reign® for ever all the earth: for the Lord hath 
and ever. spoken #f. 

*Gr. unto the ages of the ages. (24) Mat. 18:41.. The Son 


(23) Isa. 25:6. And in this of man shall send forth his an- 


mountain sball the Lord of hosts 
make unto all people a feast of 
fat things, a feast of wines on 
the lees, of fat things full of 
marrow, of wines on the lees 
well refined. 

7. And he will destroy in this 
mountain the face of the cover- 
ing cast over all people, and the 
veil that is Spread over all na- 


ons. 

8. He will swallow up death 
in victory; and the Lord God 
will wipe away tears from off all 


gels, and they shall gather out 
of his kingdom all things that 
offend, and them which do in- 
iquity ; 

42. And shall cast them into 
a furnace of fire: there shall be 
wailing and gnashing of teeth. 

43. Then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. Who 
hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

(25) 1 Cor. 15:50. Nove this I 
say, brethren, that flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the king- 
dom of God. 


-—h 


126 JESUS I8 COMING. 


again,?® created anew in Christ Jesus,?7 and made “joimt 
heirs” with Him.?® The flesh profiteth nothing. The 
Spirit quickeneth.?® 

Paul in this chapter (1 Cor. 15) is treating of the sub- 
ject of the resurrection which he proves to be so important, 
that without it, we could not inherit, or become possessed 
of the kingdom of God. “Flesh and blood” he says cannot 
inherit it, and therefore he shows that at the resurrection, 
our bodies of corruptible flesh and blood, which have died, 
shall be raised in incorruption and immortality. And the 
budies of those who are living at that time shall be 
changed and ‘‘fashioned like unto His glorious body.’’*° 
Now, in our flesh and blood, we are bearing the image of 
Adam, the first man, ‘‘which is of the earth, earthy.’’ 
But at the resurrection we shall be changed so as to ‘‘ bear 
the image of the heavenly’’ ‘‘the second man,’’ ‘‘the Lord 


from heaven.’7?1 


(26) John 3:3. Jesus an- 
swered and said unto him, Ver- 
ily, verily, I say unto thee, Ex- 
cept a man be born again, he 
sannot see the kingdom of God. 

4. Nicodemus saith unto him, 
How can a man be born when 
he is old? can he enter the sec- 
ond time into his mother’s womb, 
and be born? 

5. Jesus answered, Verily, ver- 
fly, I say unto thee, Except. a 
man be born of water and of 
the Spirit, he cannot enter into 
the kingdom of God. 

(27) Eph. 2:10. For we are 
his workmanship, created in 
Christ Jesus unto good works, 
which God hath before ordained 
that we should walk in them. 

(28) Rom. 8:15. For ye 
fave not received the spirit of 
bondage again to fear; but ye 
have received the Spirit of adop- 
tion, whereby we cry, Abba, 
father. 

16. The Spirit itself beareth 
witness with our spirit, that we 
are the children of God: 

17. And if children, then 
heirs; heirs of God, and joint 


heirs with Christ; if so be that 
we suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together. 

(29) John 6:63. It is the 
Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh 
profiteth nothing: the words that 
I speak unto you, they are spirit, 
and they are life. 

(30) Phil. 8:20. For our con- 
versation is in heaven; from 
whence also we look for the Sa- 
viour, the Lord Jesus Christ: 

21. Who shall change our vils 
body, that it may be fashioned 
like unto his glorious body, ac- 
cording to the working whereby 
he is able even to subdue all 
things unto himself. 

(31) 1 Cor. 15:45. And so it 
is written, The first man Adam 
was made a living soul; the last 
Adam was made a quickening 
spirit. 

46. Howbeit that was not first 
which is spiritual, but that which 
is natural; and afterward that 
which is spiritual. 

47. The first man és of the 
earth, earthy: the second man és 
the Lord from heaven. 

48. As is the earthy, such are 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 127 


And He who raised up Christ from the dead, and who 
hath given us the Spirit of adoption (sonship) whereby 
we become heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ, will, 
by His Spirit that dwelleth in us, also quicken (or make 
alive) our mortal bodies.** Then, and then only, can we 
inherit,®> or come into possession of the kingdom,®* which 
God hath promised to give unto us.®® Hence, we see the 
vital importance of the resurrection, without which we could 
not inherit the kingdom of God,* verse 50. The evident 
purpose of this objection is to support the assertion made 
by Post-millenialists that the kingdom is only spiritual and 
that there is nothing literal or material in it. But Paul 
says nothing of the kind and his whole argument is entirely 
to the contrary. For he asserts that our cdpa (soma— 
body) which is sown in corruption, dishonor and weakness, 
will be raised in incorruption, glory and power, or if living, 
will be changed in the twinkling of an eye.** In these 
glorified bodies we shall “inherit the kingdom prepared 


*Here let it be noticed is another evidence that the King- 
dom is yet future, 


ne OE 
they also that are earthy: and little flock; for it is your 
as is the heavenly, such are Father’s good pleasure to give 
they also that are heavenly. you the kingdom. 

49. And as we have borne the (36) 1 Cor. 15:42. S80 also 
fmage of the earthy, we shall és the resurrection of the dead. 
also bear the image of the heav- It is sown in corruption, it is 
enly. raised In incorruption : 

(32) Rom. 8:11. But if the 43. It is sown in dishonour, it 


Spirit of him that raised up Je- 
sus from the dead dwell in you, 
he that raiseth up Christ from 
the dead shali also quicken your 
mortal bodies by his Spirit that 
Gwelleth in you. 

(33) 1 Cor. 15:50. Now this 
I say, brethren, that flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the kingdom 
of God; neither doth corruption 
inherit incorruption. 

(34) Dan. 7:22. Until the 
Ancient of days came, and judg- 
ment was given to the saints of 
the Most High; and the time 
eame that the saints possessed 
the kingdom. 

(35) Luke 12:32. Fear not, 


ig raised in glory: it is sown in 
weakness, it is raised in power: 

44. It is sown a natural body, 
it is raised a spiritual body 
There is a natural body, anc 
there is a spiritual body. 

51. Behold, I shew you a mys- 
tery; We shall not all sleep, 
but we shall all be changed, 

52. In a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, at the last 
trump: for the trumpet shall 
sound, and the dead shall be 
raised incorruptible, and we shall} 
be changed. 

53. For this corruptible must 
put on incorruption, and this 
mortal must put on immortality. 


128 JESUS IS COMING. 


for’ us “from the foundation of the world.”’?? For Christ 
the rightful heir of all things**® will be there and we shalz 
be there to reign with Him.*® 


And He will have his glorified body, His body that was 
raised*® and ascended*! and entered into heaven.*? 


The glorified body which Stephen saw there,** and which 
Paul saw (Acts 9:5) and also John, Rev. 1:13. 


The body which bears the scars of the cross;** “A Lamb 
as it had been slain.” Yes, He will return in the flesh. 
Acts 1:11. The true reading of 2 John 7, is, “who confess 
not Jesus Christ coming* in the flesh.” See also Isa. 63: 
1-6, and Rev. 19:11-16. And “we know that when He shall 
appear, we shall be like Him.” 1 John 3:2. Therefore it 
is clear, that we, in these same bodies, changed into the 
image of Christ’s glorious body, shall inherit the Kingdom 


of God. 


*Gr. épxépevov coming. See page 200. 


(37) Mat. 25:34. Then shall 
the King say unto them on his 
right hand, Come, ye blessed of 
my Father, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foun- 
Gation of the world. 

(88) Mat. 21:38. But when 

the husbandmen saw the son, 
they said among. themselves, 
This is the heir; come, let us 
kill him, and let us seize on his 
inheritance. 
' Heb. 1:2. Hath at the end 
of these days spoken unto us in 
his Son, whom he appointeth heir 
of all things, through whom also 
he made the “worlds. 

*Gr. ages. Comp. 1 Tim. 1:17. 

Also 1 Tim. 6:15. 

(39) 2 Tim. 2:12. If we suf- 
fer, we shall also reign with 
him: if we deny him, he also 
will deny us. 

Also Rom. 8:17; John 17 :24. 

(40) Luke 24:39. Behold my 
hands and my feet, that it is I 
myself: handle me, and see: for 
& spirit hath not flesh and boneg 
as ye see me have. 


(41) Acts 1:9. And when he 
had spoken these things, while 
they beheld, he was taken up; 
and a cloud received him out of 
their sight. 


(42) Heb. 9:24. For Christ 
is not entered into the holy 
Places made with hands, which 
are the figures of the true; but 
into heaven itself, now to appear 
in the presence of God for us, 


Also Heb. 4:14. 


(43) Acts 7:55. But he, be- 
ing full of the Holy Ghost, 
looked up steadfastly into 
heaven, and saw the glory of 
God, and Jesus standing on the 
right hand of God. 


(44) Rev. 5:6. And I beheld, 
and, lo, in the midst of the 
throne and of the four beasts, 
and in the midst of the elders, 
stood a Lamb as it had been 
slain, having seven horns and 
seven eyes, which are the seven 


Spirits of God sent forth into all 


the earth. 


a A 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 


129 


No. VIII. The Work of the Holy Spirit a Failure. 
It is objected that this doctrine disparages the work of 


the Holy Spirit. 


Not so! For what is the work of the Holy Spint? He 


is gathering the bride. 


He teaches, guides, and comforts 


her,*® until she is presented to Christ.‘ 

At the same time he reproves the world of sin, and of 
righteousness, and judgment. John 16:8. 

He may be grieved,*’ resisted,*® and quenched*® now, but 


He will not always strive with man.°° 


His present work 


will be finished, and the King of kings and Lord of lords 
will come forth with the armies of heaven to subdue His 
enemies (Rev. 19) and finish the work." 


(45) John 14:17. Even the 
Spirit of truth; whom the world 
cannot receive, because it seeth 
him not, neither knoweth him: 
but ye know him; for he dwell- 
eth with you, and shall be in 
you. 

26. But the Comforter, which 
és the Holy Ghost, whom the 
Father will send in my name, 
he shall teach you all things, and 
bring all things to your remem- 
brance, whatsoever I have said 
unto you. . 


John 16:13. Howbeit when 
he, the Spirit of truth, is come, 
he will guide you into all truth: 
for he shall not speak of him- 
self; but whatsoever he shall 
hear, that shall he speak: and 
he will shew you things to come. 

14. He shall glorify me: for 
he shall receive of mine, and 
shall shew {t unto you. 

15. All things that the Father 
hath are mine: therefore said I, 
that he shall take of mine, and 
shal] shew it unto you. 

(46) Eph. 5:25. Husbands, 
love your wives, even as Christ 
g@lso loved the church, and gave 
himself for it; 

26. That he might sanctify 
and cleanse it with the washing 
of water by the word, 

27. That he might present it 
to himself a glorious church, 


not having spot, or wrinkle, or 
any such thing; but that it 
should be holy and without blem< 
ish, 

(47) Bph. 4:30. And grieve 
not the Holy Spirit of God, 
whereby ye are sealed unto the 
day of redemption. 

(48) Acts 7:51. Ye stiff- 
necked and uncircumcised in 
heart and ears, ye do always re- 


sist the Holy Ghost: as your 
fathers did, so do ye. 
(49) 1 Thes. 5:19. Quench 


not the Spirit. 

(50) Gen. 6:3. And the Lord 
said, My Spirit shall not always 
strive with man, for that he also 
és flesh: yet his days shall be an 
hundred and twenty years. 

(51) Rev. 19:11. And I saw 
heaven opened, and behold a 
white horse; and he that sat 
upon him was called Faithful 
and True, and in righteousness 
he doth judge and make war. 

12. His eyes were as a flame 
of fire, and on his head were 
many crowns; and he had a 
name written, that no man 
knew, but he himself. 

13. And he was clothed with 
a vesture dipped in blood: and 
his name is called The Word of 


God. 

14, And the armies which were 
in heaven followed him upon 
white horses, clothed in fine 


Hnen, white and clean. 


130 JESUS IS COMING. 

It was “the Spirit of God,” which “moved upon the face 
of the waters” in the beginning (Gen. 1:2), and we believe 
He had a part in all the work of creation, Gen. 1:26. He 
strove with sinners before the flood, Gen. 6:3. He spake 
by the prophets, Acts 1:16; 2 Pet. 1:21. He was specially 
granted unto Joseph and others. Gen. 41:38; Ex. 31:3; 
Num. 11:17; 24:2; 27:18; 2 Kings 2:9, ete. In short, 
He has been engaged in all the work of creation and re- 
demption. We do not believe that His work is a failure 
because of the flood, nor because the Jews have rejected 
Christ, and as natural branches, have been broken off. 

Rom. 11:20. Neither do we believe His work will be a 
failure, though the preaching of the gospel in the present 
dispensation shall only result in the salvation of “some.’’52 


We eel sure that He shall have a part in the glory and ° 


triumph of the millennial dispensation, for even the Israel- 
ites shall then have a new Spirit within them.5* And the 
nations are to be ruled, in peace and righteousness, by 


Him upon whom the Spirit of the Lord doth rest.5* 


15. And out of his mouth go- 
eth a sharp sword, that with it 
be should smite the nations, 
and he shall rule them with a 
rod of iron: and he treadeth 
the winepress of the flerceness 
and wrath of Almighty God. 

16. And he hath on his ves- 
ture and on his thigh a name 
written, KING OF KINGS, 
AND LORD OF LORDS. 

Rom. 9:28. Por he will finish 
the work, and cut ¢¢ short in 
righteousness: because a_ short 
work will the Lord make upon 
the earth. 

(52) Luke 18:23. Then said 
one unto him, Lord, are there 
few that be saved? And he said 
unto them, 

24. Strive to enter in at 
the strait gate: for many, I say 
unto you, will seek to enter in, 
and shall not be able. 

25. When once the master of 
the house is risen up, and hath 
shut to the door, and ye begin 
to stand without, and to knock 
at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, 


we a eee ee 0, —— 


open unto us; and he shall an- 
swer and say unto you, I kaow 
you not whence ye are. ; 

1 Cor. 9:22. To the weak be- 
came T as weak, that I might 
gain the weak: I am made all 
things to all men, that I might 
by all means save some. 

(53) Ezek. 11:19. And I will 
give them one heart, and I will 
put a new spirit within you; and 
I will take the stony heart out 
of their flesh, and will give them 
an heart of flesh. , 

See references. 

(54) Isa. 11:2. And the 
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon 
him, the spirit of wisdom and 
understanding, the spirit of coun- 
sel and might, the spirit of 
knowledge and of the fear of 
the Lord; 

8. And shall make him of 
quick understanding in the fear 
of the Lord: and he shall not 
judge after the sight of his eyes, 
neither reprove after the hear- 
ing of his ears: 


ie ies | 


OBJEOTIONS OONSIDERED. 131 
Let us then have no fear of jealousy on the part of the 
Spirit, because of the triumphs of Christ. Rather let us be 
sure that He seeks to hasten the presentation of the bride, 
—which is being sealed by Him (Eph. 4:20),—unto her 
Lord—who hath the Spirit without measure," that these 
twain, united into one,®* may be the one perfect man,” the 
Holy temple,®* built for the habitation of God in Spirit.®® 
And who can estimate what shall be accomplished by the 
Spirit, through this holy, living Temple, in which He shall 
dwell. No wonder that He yearns to hasten its completion. 
See the type of His haste in Gen. 24:56.°° But this com- 
pletion shall not take place until the Lord comes, when the 
, Head shall forever be united to the body. 1 Thes. 4:18. 
Therefore, in this we may realize, to some extent, the mean- 
ihg of that yearning cry of the Spirit “EvEN so come 
Lorp Jesus.” Rev. 22:20. 


No. IX. The Gospel a Failure. 


It is said that it makes the gospel a failure. 


But this is not so. 


Man is a failure. 


The gospel is the 


4. But with righteousness 
shall he judge the poor, and re- 
prove with equity for the meek 
of the earth: and he shall smite 
,the earth with the rod of his 
mouth, and with the breath of 
his lips shall he slay the wicked. 

_ Isa. 61:1-3 See pg. 56. 

(55) John 3:34. For he whom 
God hath sent speaketh the words 
of God: for God giveth not the 
Spirit by measure unto him. 


(56) Eph. 6:30. Because we 
are members of his body. 


81. For this cause shall a man 
leave his father and mother, and 
shall cleave to his wife; and the 
two shall become one flesh. 


32. This mystery is great: but 
I speak in regard of Christ and 
of the church. 

(57) Epb. 4:13. Till we all 
come in the unity of the faith, 
and of the knowledge of the Son 
of God, unto a perfect man, unte 


the measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ. 

(58) 1 Cor. 3:16. Know ye 
not that ye are the temple of 
God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you? 

Also 6:19 and 2 Cor. 6:16. 


(59) Eph. 2:20. Being built 
upon the foundation of the apos- 
tles and prophets, Christ Jesus 
himself being the chief corner 
stone ; 

21. In whom each several 
building, fitly framed together, 
groweth into a holy temple in 
the Lord; 

22. In whom ye also are 
builded together for a habita- 
tion of God in the Spirit. 

(60) Gen. 24:56, And he 
said unto them, Hinder me not, 
seeing the Lord hath prospered 
my way; send me away that I 
may go to my master. 

57. And they said, We will 


132 JESUS I8 COMING. 
power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth 
(Rom. 1:16). It is not the incompetency of the gospel, 
but the willful unbelief of sinners that prevents the con- 
version of the world. Jesus said: ‘‘Him that cometh 
unto me I will in no wise cast out.” John 6:37. But He 
also said “Ye will not come unto me that ye might have 
life.” John 5:40. While we are to. preach the gospel 
everywhere, we are not to expect that all will receive it. 
For, when He said unto them, “Go ye into all the world, 
and preach the gospel to every creature,’ He also added, 
“He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he 
that believeth not shall be damned.” Mark 16:15-16. But 
“what if some did not believe? Shall their unbelief make 
THE TruTH of God of none effect? God forbid.” Rom. 
3:3. Salvation shall be revealed in the last time.*! 

Jesus shall see of the travail of His soul and be satisfied, 
Isa. 53:11. 

“After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which na 
man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, 
and tongues, stood before the throne and before the Lamb, 
clothed with white robes and palms in their hands, and 
cried with a loud voice, saying: Salvation to our God 
pvhich sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.” Rev. 
79-10. 
0 Alleluia: Amen; Alleluia. 

No. X. The Gospel Not Preached in All the World. 


It is objected that the gospel has not yet been preached 
in all the world, as Christ asserted it should be, in Mat. 
24:14, and therefore we cannot yet look for Christ, nor the 
end to come. Let us carefully examine this passage: 

“This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the 


world, for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the 
end come.” 


call the damsel, and enquire at 
her mouth. 

58. And they called Rebekah, 
and said unto her, Wilt thou go 
with this man? And she said, I 
will go. 

(61) 1 Pet. 1:5. Who are 
xept by the power of God through 


faith unto salvation ready to be 
revealed in the last time. 

Col. 1:28. If ye continue in 
the faith grounded and settled, 
and de not moved away from the 
hope of the gospel, which ye 
have heard, and which was 
preached to every creature which 
is, under heaven. 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 133 


1st. The end is unquestionably the end of the age (roo 
aldévos —tou aionos) of which the disciples asked in verse 3. 

2d. The world (oixovpévy—oikoumenee) means habi- 
table, that is, the inhabited earth. 

3d. The gospel of the kingdom is the good news, or 
glad tidings of the kingdom to come. 

These glad tidings, it is asserted, shall be proclaimed in 
all the inhabited earth for a witness unto all nations and 
then (rdére—tote) shall come the end of this age—or dis- 
pensation. It will be noticed that the time, during which 
the preaching shall continue, is determined entirely by the 
qualifying clause “for a witness unto all nations.” When 
the witness is complete, then shall the end come. 


When the Witness Is Complete. 


Now, no finite mind can determine when the witness is 
complete. If we could, the evidence is to the effect that 
it has passed already. For when the gospel was preached 
on the day of Pentecost, there were present “devout men 
out of every nation under heaven.” Acts 2:5. Afterward 
the disciples were scattered abroad and went about preach- 
ing the Word. Acts 8:4. “And they went forth and 
preached everywhere.” Mark 16:20.* Paul says, in Rom. 
10:18, “Their sound went into all the earth, and their words 
unto the ends of the world,”*+ (world here being from the 
same word oixovpévy —oikoumenee that is used in Mat. 
24:14). 

And again he says in Col. 1:23*+ that the gospel had 
already been “preached to every creature which is under 
heaven.” 


These inspired statements as to the universal preaching 
of the gospel ought to be conclusive. Mighty as it makes 
the work of the early disciples, I do not see how we can 
refuse to accept it. (See Dr. A. Clarke on Mat. 24:14 as 
to the special point of the universality of this preaching, 
also the authorities previously cited.) Surely we must 


-*See Bengell’s Gnomon. 
tSee Jamieson, Faussett and Brown, also Alford. 


184 JESUS 18 COMING. 


give no broader meaning to the word olxovpéy (oikoume: 
nee) used by the Holy Spirit in Mat. 24:14 than in Rom. 
10:18, or than to the equally strong words used in Col. 1:6 
and 23.52 If we limit the one, we can, with equal propriety, 
limit the other. Because we have so full an account of 
Paul’s work, we are apt to depreciate what was accom- 
plished by the other Apostles and Disciples. Peter was in 
Babylon (1 Pet. 5:13), and tradition gives us account of 
the preaching of the gospel in Parthia, India, Ethiopia, 
Scythia, Spain and Britain. 

So then we may rest confidently on the plain statement 
of Col. 1:23, as being such fulfillment of Mat. 24:14, that 
the Church from that day to the present has not had, 
neither can have, in this, any sign or prophesied event 
standing between believers and the Lord’s coming. If we 
take it upon ourselves to judge that the witness is not com- 
plete, or more presumingly, that it cannot be complete for 
centuries to come, then are we foolishly assuming a pre- 
rogative which belongs to God only. 


Only God Knows. 


Surely, only God can judge when the witness to all na 
tions is complete, and here lies the essence of this entire 
question. If the Church is the agent which is to pro- 
elaim the gospel until the witness is complete, no mortal 
- ean judge but what the witness shall be completed this 
moment. But we have no evidence that the Church is the 
only agent, and it is quite probable that she is not, for 
we read of another agent in Rev. 14:6.® 


Therefore the witness may not be completed, until after 
the Church is taken away, and this other heavenly mes- 
senger proclaims the everlasting gospel to them that dwell 
on the earth, even unto every nation and tribe and tongue 


(62) Col. 1:6. Which is come (63) Rev. 14:6. And I saw 
unto you, as é#@ ia in all the another angel fiy in the midst 
world; and bringeth forth fruit, of heaven, having the everlast- 


as it doth also in you, since the 
day ye heerd of it, and knew the 
grace of God in truth. 

23. See page 182. 


ing gospel to preach unto them 
that dwell on the earth, and to 
every nation, and kindred, ané@ 
tongue, and people, 


~ 


° © id nn 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 135 
and people. Rev. 14:6 (see Greek). In this case it is not 
the Church which shall complete the witness and it evi- 
dently can be no sign to her. 


We conclude then that like the “day and hour,” it is 
known to God only, and the Church can have no definite 
sign in it. Therefore nothing is left for us to do, but 
faithfully to continue proclaiming the glad tidings of the 
coming kingdom while we watch momentarily for the Bride- 
groom. 

No. XI. Some Here Live to See Kingdom. 


It is objected, that we are taught in Mat. 16:28; Mark 
9:1, and-Luke 9 :27,°5 that the coming of Christ, and of the 
kingdom, should occur during the lifetime of some of the 
multitude (Mar. 8:34)** to whom Jesus spake, and that 
therefore His coming and kingdom can only be interpreted 
spiritually, viz.: the establishment of the power of the 
gospel by the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, on the day 
of Pentecost, or as some hold, figuratively, viz.: the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem and the Jewish polity by the Romans, 
and the establishment of the Church. That is, as they 
say,—Christ came, by His Spirit, on the day of Pentecost 
and manifested His power through the disciples, in the 
preaching of the gospel, performing of miracles, ete.,—or, 
He came through the Roman army, destroyed Jerusalem 
and overthrew the Jewish polity,—and that His Kingdom 
is the Church over which He now reigns, or (as some say) 
in which or through which He now reigns over the nations 
of the earth. 


(64) Mat. 24:36. But of that 
day and hour knowetk no man, 
no, not the angels of heaven, but 
my Father only. 

(65) Mat. 16:28. Verily I 
say unto you, There be some 
standing here, which shall not 
taste of death, till they -see the 
Son of man coming in his king- 
dom. 

Mark 9:1. And he said unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, 
That there be some of them that 
stand here, which shall not taste 


of death, till they have seen the 
kingdom of God come with power. 

Luke 9:27. But I tell you of 
a truth, there be some standing 
here, which shall not taste of 
death, till they see the kingdom 
of God. 

(66) Mark 8:34. And when 
he had called the people unto 
him with his disciples also, he 
said unto them, Whosoever. will 
come after me, let him deny him- 
self, and take up his cross, and 


-follow me. 


136 JESUS IS COMING. 

We answer—The Holy Spirit is a distinct person, not te 
be confounded with the person of Christ. The Savior ex- 
pressly said: “I will pray the Father and He shall give 
you another comforter” (John 14:16), and if it be another, 
it cannot be Himself. He, the Holy Spirit, came aceording 
to the promises,** and it is entirely incohsistent to con- 
found this event with Christ’s return, which latter is in 
accordance with other promises, that He should Himself 
come again. They are two events, as distinct as the births 
of Moses and John. 

It is true that Christ is spiritually with, or in, believ- 
ers,°> and it is just as true that He always has been, 
and that in this sense He has never left them, for He 
said: “Lo! I am with you alway,’ Mat. 28:20. Mark 
the language: “I am with you alway.” He was with them 
during those days of prayer previous to the day of Pente- 
cost, and He has been with His people all the time. But 
suddenly the (Parakleetos) Comforter came, another per- 
son and for a special and glorious purpose. It is, therefore, 
conclusive, that this coming of the Holy Spirit is a mani- 
festation of the Divine presence, entirely different from, 
and superadded to, the spiritual presence of Christ, which 
latter, according to His own language, has never been with- 
drawn from His people. He never went away spiritually, 
but He did go bodily and visibly, and in like manner shal! 
He return.®® 


(67) John 14:16. And I will 
pray the Father, and he shall 
give you another Comforter, that 
he may abide with you for ever; 


26. But the Comforter, which 
4s the Holy Ghost, whom the 
Father will send in my name, 
he shall teach you all things, 
and bring all things to your re- 
membrance, whatsoever I have 
said unto you. 

Also 15:26 and 16:7. 

(68) John 14:23. Jesus ane 
swered and said unto him, If a 
man love me, he will keep my 
words: and my Father will love 
him, and we will come unto him, 


— ee 


and make our abode with him. 
John 17:23. I in them, and 
thou in me, that they may be 
made perfect in one; and that 
the world may know that thou 
hast sent me, and hast loved 
them, as thou hast loved me. 


Gal. 4:19. My little children, 
of whom I travail in birth again 
until Christ be formed in you. 


(69) Acts 1:11. Which also 
said, Ye men of Galilee, why 
stand ye gazing up into heaven? 
this same Jesus, which is taken 
up from you into heaven, shall 
so come in like manner as ye 
have seen him go into heaven. 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 133 

Again, after the day of Pentecost, the discipies continued 
to talk of the coming of Christ, which they surely would 
not have done if His promise to return was fulfilled on that 
day. And after the destruction of Jerusalem (about A. D. 
71), St. John wrote the book of Revelation (about A. D. 
96), in which he repeatedly speaks of the coming of Christ 
as being yet future, clearly showing that it could not have 
been fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem. 


Again, as we have before shown, the Church is not the 
kingdom, but the body of Christ,7° and His bride. Eph. 5. 
She is not to be reigned over," but to suffer and reign 
with Christ.72 She is “to be counted worthy of the King- 
dom of God for which she suffers,’’** and therefore Paul 
exhorts the disciples (members of the Church) “that they 
must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of 
God” (Acts 14:22), and Peter stirs us up, putting us in 
remembrance to add the Christian graces and give all dili- 
gence to make our calling and election sure, for so an en- 
trance shall be ministered unto us “into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.” 2 Pet. 
1:5-11. 

Surely this language plainly distinguishes between the 
Church and the kingdom, and as plainly asserts that the 
kingdom is yet future. So we see that both the spiritual 
and figurative interpretations of the coming of Christ are 
without foundation. 

Another theory has been advanced, viz.: that the com- 
ing of Christ in His Kingdom (Mat. 16:28) was fulfilled 


(70) Eph. 1:22. And hath 


dren, then heirs; heirs of God, 


put all things under his feet, 
and gave him fo be the head over 
all things to the church, 

23. Which is his body, the ful- 
ness of him that filleth all in all. 

(71) John 15:15. Henceforth 
I call you not servants; for the 
servant knoweth not what his 
lord doeth: but I have called you 
friends; for all things that I 
have heard of my Father I have 
made known unto you. 

(72) Rom. 8:17. And if chil- 


and joint heirs with Christ: if 
so be that we suffer with him, 
that we may be also glorified to- 


"gether. 


2 Tim. 2:12. If we suffer, we 
shall also reign with him: if we 
deny him, he also will deny us: 

(73) 2 Thes. 1:5. Which is a 
manifest token of the righteous 
judgment of God, that ye may 
be counted worthy of the king- 
dom of God, for which ye also 
suffer. 


138 JESUS I8 COMING. 

in what they term the spiritual coming on the day of 
Pentecost,—and that His coming in the clouds of heaven, 
in the glory of His Father, with the holy angels, etc., is 
his real, personal, visible coming at the end of the gospel 
age (which they also hold to be the end of time and of the 
world). 

This seems to us to be founded upon a mere distinction 
of terms, where there is no difference in fact. For is it not 
at His coming in His Kingdom that He shall be mani- 
fested in His glory?’ History proves—and all our ideas 
of the glory of Kings coincide with the fact—that such 
glory is identical with thé majesty and manifestation of 
their kingdoms. 

It is in Christ’s Kingdom that He shall rule all nations 
with a rod of iron,?® and it is in His Kingdom that He is 
to be manifested as “the Blessed and only Potentate, the 
King of kings, and Lord of lords.”7* Therefore His com- 
ing in His Kingdom and His coming in His glory are 
synonymous, and both are yet future. 


Some of Them Did See the Kingdom. 


Then what do the passages mean, to wit: Mat. 16:28, 
“verily I say unto you, there be some standing here which 
shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of Man coming 
in His Kingdom,”—or as in Mark 9:1, “till they have seen 
the Kingdom of God come with power,’—or as in Luke 
9 :27, “till they see the Kingdom of God.” 

We answer first, the limiting clause “shall not taste of 


(74) 2 Thes. 1:10. When he 
shall come to be glorified in his 
saints, and to be admired in all 
them that believe (because our 
testimony among you was be- 
lieved) in that day. 

(75) Psa. 2:8. Ask of me, 
and I shall give thee the heathen 
for thine inheritance, and the 
uttermost parts of the earth for 
thy possession. 

9. Thou shalt break them with 
a rod of iron; thou shalt dash 
them in pieces like a potter’s 
vessel. 


- 


Also Rev. 12:5 and 19:15. 


(76) 1 Tim. 6:14. That thou 
keep this commandment without 
spot, unrebukable, until the ap- 
pearing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ: 


15. Which in his times he 
shall shew, who is the blessed 
and only Potentate, the King of 
kings, and Lord of lords. 

Rev. 19:16. And he hath on 
his vesture and on his thigh a 
name written, KING OF KING& 
AND LORD OF LORDS. 


OBJHOTIONS CONSIDERED. 139 
death” may have the deep signification, in which sense the 
true believers, who were standing there, shall never experi- 
ence it.77 This is certainly the signification the same lan- 
guage has in Heb. 2:9," and if we understand it likewise 
in these passages, then we have all eternity for the fulfill- 
ment. However we only suggest this. We do not rely 
upon it, for we believe the word “till” more than intimates 
that the “some” should taste of death, and that therefore 
natural death or separation of soul and body was meant. 


Peter Saw It. 


But now let us mark well what the “some” standing 
there were to see, and then let us go up the Mount of 
Transfiguration, and gaze through the favored eyes of 
Peter, James and John upon the scene which is recorded 
immediately after the passage we are considering. Behold 
His face shining as the sun and His raiment white and 
glistening as the snow, or as the light. See Moses and Elias 
as they appear in glory with Hin, and listen to the com- 
munings of this exalted trio. Then bow in silent awe, as 
the cloud of surpassing glory overshadows them, and rever- 
ently listen to the voice of God, the Father, saying “This is 
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him.” 
No wonder that even the favored and beloved disciples 
trembled with fear beneath this supernatural majesty and 
effulgent glory. Surely this was 1 Am’*® spanning the 
centuries and giving these apostles a view of His coming 
and kingdom. 

So they understood it and Peter especially confirms it. 


“Yor,” he says, “we have not followed cunningly devised 
fables, when we made known unto you the power and com- 


(77) John 8:51. Verily, veri- 


Jesus, 
ly, I say unto you, if a man 


little 
lower than the angels for the 


who was made a 


keep my saying, he shall never 
see death. 

52. Then said the Jews untod 
him, Now we know that thou 
hast a devil. Abraham is dead, 
and the prophets; and thou say- 
est, If a man keep my saying, 
be shall never taste of death. 

(78) Heb. 2:9. But we see 


suffering of death, crowned with 
glory and honor; that He by 
the grace of God should taste 
death for every man. 


(79) John 8:58. Jesus said 
unto them, Verily, verily, I say 
unto you, Before Abraham was, 
I am. 


40 JESUS I8 COMING. 


ING of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye witnesses of His 
majesty. For He received from God the Father honor and 
glory, when there came such a voice to Him from the excel- 
lent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, 
when we were with Him in the holy mount.” 2 Pet. 1:16-18. 


We cannot tell how much of the future they saw in that 
enraptured hour, but doubtless they had a specific vision of 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in His kingdom and 


glory. 
John Saw It. 


We have only to turn to Revelation, where we find 
that He “which is and which was, and which is to come” 
permitted John to see (Rev. 1:2, 11, ete.) it most definitely. 
His enraptured vision swept the centuries. Time, to him, 
was annihilated and he gazed upon the literal facts. He 
actually saw them. Thirty-six times does he say “I saw,’ 
seven times “I beheld,” and five times “I looked,” besides 
many similar expressions, And he saw the very things 
mentioned in the passages. 

“And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; 
and He that sat upon him was called Faithful and Truth, 
and in righteousness He doth judge and make war. His 
eyes were as a flame of fire and on His head were many 
crowns,. . . . and He was clothed with a vesture dipped 
in blood: and His name is called the Word of God. And the 
armies which were in heaven followed Him upon white 
horses, clothed in fine Hnen, white and clean... . . And 
He hath on His vesture and on His thigh a name written, 
KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS. 

He saw the beast and kings of the earth gathered and 
taken and cast into the lake of fire. He saw Satan bound, 
and he saw Christ and His saints reigning for a thousand 
years. He saw it all in perfect fulfillment of the statements 
in the passages we are considering. Rev. 19:20. 


Paul Saw It. 


Paul also saw Christ in His glory and doubtless he saw 
all that John did, and probably more, for he saw things 
that it was impossible for a man to utter. (2 Cor. 12:4, 
margin.) Surely these are an absolute and literal fulfill- 


—. 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 141 
ment of what Jesus promised “some” should see, and satis- 
factorily explain the passages in question. 


Ye Shall Not Have Gone Over the Cities of Israel. 


Another passage is cited in support of the above theories, 
viz.:, the spiritual coming on the day of Pentecost or the 
figurative coming, in the destruction of Jerusalem, etc., and 
that is Mat. 10:23, “verily. I say unto you ye shall not have 
gone over (or finish) the cities of Israel, till the Son of 
Man be come.” 

‘In regard to this we answer, that this was spoken to the 
twelve disciples, when Jesus sent them forth two by two, 
with a message especially for and exclusively to Israel. We 
find from Mark 6:30, and Luke 9:10,®° that they returned 
to the Master, of course, without finishing the cities. And 
there is no evidence that they. ever, in like manner, renewed 
the visitation preaching the message “the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand.”®! Indeed they could not, for Israel 
had rejected their King, and the kingdom had become 
like a nobleman which went into a far country to receive 
for himself a kingdom and return.®? 

But from the force of the word “till” we believe that 
the message will be renewed (perhaps by the “two wit- 
nesses” after the Church is taken away), to the unbeliev- 
ing Israelites, who shall yet return to their land and re- 
store Judaism,®* and before they shall have gone over 
the rebuilt cities, the Son of Man shall appear again. 


(80) Mark 6:30. And the 
apostles gathered themselves to- 


they heard these things, he add- 
ed and spake a parable, be- 


gether unto Jesus, and told him 
all things, both what they had 
done, and what they had taught. 

Luke 9:10. And the apostles, 
when they were returned, told 
him all that they bad done. And 
he took them, and went aside 
privately into a desert place be- 
longing to the city called Beth- 
saida. 

(81) Mat. 10:7. And as ye 
go, preach, saying, The kingdom 
of heaven is at hand. 


(82) Luke 19:11. And as 


cause he was nigh to Jerusalem, 
and because they thought that 
the kingdom of God should im- 
mediately appear. 

12. He said therefore, A cer- 
tain nobleman went into a far 
country to receive for himself a 
kingdom, and to return. 

(83) Isa. 40:9. O thou that 
tellest good tidings to Zion, get 
thee upon a high mountain; O 
thou that tellest good tidings to 
Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with 
strength; lift it up, be not 


JESUS IS COMING. 


No. XII. Gloomy View of the Future. © 


It is objected that this doctrine presents a gloomy view 
of the future; that “it is the philosophy of despair,’’—- 
that it stands opposed to the popular idea, viz.: that the 
world is growing better, and “if it is true,” it is sarcas- 
tically said, “we might as well fold our hands and wait 
for Christ to come.” 


We candidly think that many who raise these objections 
have altogether mistaken the spirit and work of pre-mil- 
lennialists. 


We do Not Despair. 


We neither despair, nor fold our ‘hands to sleep. On 
the contrary, we are filled with a lively (Greek—living) 
hope (1 Pet. 1:3), the most “blessed hope” (Tit. 2:13), 
while we strive to save some from this worldly, sinful and 
adulterous generation, which is nigh unto cursing and 
whose end is to be burned.® 


We would not deceive them with the hallucination that 
they are “growing better,’ for, as the apostle has said, 
“we know that we are of God and the whole world lieth 
in wickedness” (Greek—in the wicked one), 1 John 5:19— 
and therefore we would tell them in the plain words of 
Scripture, that they are in the broad way that leadeth to 
destruction (Mat. 7:13), and that they must repent or 
perish. Luke 13:3. And further, that this same world, 
once overflowed by the flood, is now “stored witb fire* 


*See the Greek. 


afraid; say unto the cities of 
Judah, Behold your God; 


(84) Gal. 1:4. Who gave 
himself for our sins, that he 


10. Behold the Lord Jehovah 
will come as a mighty one, and 
his arm will rule for him: Be- 
hold his reward is with him, and 
bis recompense before him. 

11. He will feed his flock like 


a shepherd, he will gather the - 


lambs in his arms, and carry 
them in his bosom, and will 
gently lead those that have their 
young. 


might deliver us from this pres- 
ent evil world (age), accord- 
ing to the will of God and our 
Father. 

Heb. 6:8. But that which 
beareth thorns and briers és re- 
jected, and és nigh unto cursing; 
whose end is to be burned. 

Mal. 4:1. For, behold, the 
day cometh that shall burn as 
an oven; and all the proud, yea, 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 143 


against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly 
men.” 2 Pet. 3:5-7. 

We rejoice over every one of those, who, by believing 
the gospel, the good news of the coming kingdom,®* are 
saved from this awful fate and made “joint heirs with 
Christ” (Rom. 8:16-17) “to an inheritance . . . re 
served in heaven for us,” and “who are kept by the power 
of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed 
in the last time,” and who “hope to the end for the grace 
that is to be brought unto” us “at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ.” 1 Pet. 1:4-5-13, 

Surely this positive conviction of coming doom is a 
mightier incentive to action than can be the quieting fal- 
lacy that things are moving on prosperously and that EVEN 
THE WORLD IS GETTING BETTER. 

And this is clearly proved by the zeal and faithful work 
of the ministers, evangelists and laymen, who hold and 
proclaim this doctrine of the pre-millennial coming of 
Christ. 

It is true that they do not expect the conversion of the 
world in this present evil age* (Gal. 1:4), but they do 
believe that a millennial age of peace is coming, and they 
do strive “in the midst of a crooked and perverse genera- 
tion,” to “shine as lights in the world holding forth the 
word of life’ (Phil. 2:15-16), that they may snatch some 
brands from the burning (Mal. 4:1; 1 Cor. 3:13-15; Jude 
23), to increase the godly company who shall be ready to 
welcome the Bridegroom.®® “ 


*See the Greek. 


and all that do wickedly, shall 
be stubble: and the day that 
cometh shall burn them up, saith 
the Lord of hosts, that it shall 
leave them neither root nor 
branch. 

(85) Acts 14:21. And when 
they had preached the gospel to 
that city, and had taught many, 
they returned again to Lystra, 
and to Iconium, and Antioch, 

22. Confirming the souls of 
the disciples, and exhorting them 


to continue in the faith, and 
that we must through much trib- 
ulation enter into the kingdom 
ef God. 

(86) Mat. 25:10. And while 
they went to buy, the bridegroom 
came; and they that were ready 
went in with him to the mar- 
riage: and the door was shut. 

11. Afterward eame also the 
other virgins, saying, Lord, 
Lord, open to us. 

12. But he answered and said, 


F 


144 JESUS IS COMING. 


Why, then, should they be so bitterly opposed for pro- 
claiming this scriptural doctrine? Are they not all mem- 
bers of the body of Christ?®* And, as such, do they not 
merit the warmest sympathy and prayers of the Church? 
Shall they be condemned because, like the early Church, 


they are holding the traditions (or teachings handed down) 
of the apostles,8* and looking for Jesus?®® God forbid! 
But let us remember that “we be brethren,” strangers and 
pilgrims (Heb. 11:13), whose “citizenship” is in heaven 


(Phil. 3:20). 


And let us speak “the truth in love,’ be 


built up in love (Eph. 4:15-16), and “walk in love” (Eph. 
'§:2), “redeeming the time, because the days are evil.”9° 


The Days Are Evil. 


Yes, THE DAYS ARE EVIL, and we freely admit that this 
doctrine does present a gloomy future in the present evil 
age, for this world of sinners, who are full of unbelief 
and radically opposed to Christ, His people and His sal- 


vation.®! 


3 


They are rejecting God’s gracious entreaties for 


Verily I say unto you, I know 
you not. 

13. Watch therefore; for ye 
know neither the day nor the 
hour wherein the Son of man 
cometh. 

(87) 1 Cor. 12:25. That 
there should be no schism in the 
body; but that the members 
should have the same care one 
for another. 

26. And whether one member 
suffer, all the members suffer 
with it; or one member be hon- 
oured, all the members rejoice 
with it. 

(88) 2 Thes. 2:5. Remember 
ye not, that, when I was yet 
with you I told you these 
things? 

15: Therefore, brethren, stand 
fast, and hold the traditions 
which ye have been taught, 
whether by word, or our epistle. 

(89) Phil. 3:20. For our 
conversation is {n heaven; from 
whence also we look for the 
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ. 


Heb. 9:28. So Christ was 
once offered to bear the sins of 
Many; and unto them that look 
for him shall he appear the sec- 
ond time without ‘sin unto sal- 
vation. 

Also Tit. 2:13. 

(90) Eph. 65:15. See them 
that ye walk circumspectly, ~nof 
as fools, but as wise, 

16. Redeeming the time, be- 
cause the days are evil. 

(91) 2 Cor. 6:14. Be ye not 
unequally yoked together with 
unbelievers; for what fellowship 
hath righteousness with unright- 
eousness? and what communion 
hath light with darkness? 

15. And what concord hath 
Christ and Belial? or what part 
hath be that believeth with an 
infidel? 

16. And what agreement hath 
the temple of God with idols? 
for ye are the temple of the 
living God; as God hath said, 
I will dwell in them, and walk 
in them; and I will be their 


( 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 145 
reeonciliation,®*? and rushing madly on toward the day of 
wrath. Rev. 6:15-17. 

Bat there is no gloom in the future for those “who have 
fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us,’ 
and “who have received the Spirit of adoption,” become 
“children” and “heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ ' 
. - » For I reckon that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that 
shall be revealed in us.” Rom. 8:15-18. 

There seems to be a prevailing disposition to balance 
up the good and the bad in the world by a process of gen- 
eral average, in which the triumphs of art and ‘science, 
the progress in inventions, discoveries, ete., are counted as 
moral goodness, and it is concluded that the world, on the 
average, is growing better. 

But this is utterly fallacious and, we fear, a grand de- 
ception of Satan. 


The Church and the World. 


First, there is no such thing as averaging together the 
true church and the world. There is no possible consan- 
guinity. The one is “from beneath,’—the other “from 
above.” The one “is of this world,’—the other “not of 
this world.” John 8:23. They must not be yoked to- 
gether, for there is no fellowship, communion, concord, 
part or agreement between them. They are and always 


God, and they shall be my peo- 
ple. 

17. Wherefore come out from 
among them, and be ye sepa- 
rate, saith the Lord, and touch 
not the unclean thing; and I 
will receive you, 

18. And will be a Father unto 
you, and ye shal! be my sons. 

Eph. 5:11. And have no fel- 
lowship with the  unfruitful 
works of darkness, but rather re- 
prove them. 

12.. For it is a shame even to 
speak of those things which are 
done of them in secret... 

1 John 2:15. Love not the 
world, neither the things that 


are in the world. If any man 
love the world, the love of the 
Father is not in him. 

Also John 14:18-22, 16:33, 
17:14, James 4:14, 1 John 
5:19. 

(92) 2 Cor. 5:20. Now then 
we are ambassadors for Christ, 
as though God did beseech you 
by us: we pray you in Christ’s 
stead, be ye reconciled to God. 

21. For he hath made him to 
be sin for us, who knew no sin; 
that we might be made the 
righteousness of God in him. 

(93) Heb. 6:13. That by two 
immutable things, in which ¢€ 
was impossible for God to Ife, 


146 JESUS IS COMING. 


must be separate.® The true church is in the world, but 
not of it.°* There are three parties in the world, viz.: 
the Jew, the Gentile and the Church of God.®°5 As the 
Jews were a separate, called-out and peculiar people,®* 
not to be reckoned among the nations,®* so is this true 
church a separate and peculiar people,®® called unto cleans- 
ing and holiness,®® sealed by the Spirit of God, unto the 
day of redemption (Eph. 4:30), no longer darkness, but 
“children of light,” and exhorted to “have no fellowship 
with the unfruitful works of darkness” (Eph. 5:8-11). They 
are of God, while the whole world lies in the wicked 


one.!°° There is an irrepressible conflict between them— 


we might have a strong con- 
solation, who have fled for refuge 
to lay hold upon the hope set 
before us: 

19. Which hope we have as an 
anchor of the soul, both sure 
and steadfast, and which enter- 
eth into that within the vail; 

20. Whither the forerunner is 
for us entered, even Jesus, made 
a high priest for ever after the 
order of Melchisedec. 

(94) John 17:11. And now 
I am no more in the world, but 
these are in the world, and I 
come to thee. Holy Father, 
keep through thine own name 
those whom thou hast given me, 
that they may be one, as we are. 

15. I pray not that thou 
shouldest take them out of the 
world, but that thou shouldest 
keep them from the evil. 

16. They are not of the world, 
even as I am not of the world. 

*See (91) pg. 144. 

(95) 1 Cor. 10:32. Give none 
offence, neither to the Jews, nor 
to the Gentiles, nor to the church 
of God. 

(96) Ex. 19:5. Now there- 
fore, if ye will obey my voice 
indeed, and keep my covenant, 
then ye shall be a peculiar treas- 
ure unto me above all people: 
for ail the ear:h is mine. 

6. And ye shall be unto me a 
kingdom of priests, and an holy 


nation. These are the words 
which thou shalt speak unto the 
children of Israel. 

Ex. 33:16. For wherein shall 
it be known here that I and thy 
people have found grace in thy 
sight? Js it not in that thou 
goest with us? so shall we be 
separated, I and thy people, from 
all the people that are upon the 
face of the earth. 

Also Deut. 7:6, Psa. 135 :4. 

(97) Num. 23:9. For from 
the top of the rocks I see him, 
and from the hills I behold him: 
lo, the people shall dwell alone, 
and shall not be reckoned among 
the nations. 

(98) Tit. 2:14. Who gave 
himself for us, that he might 
redeem us from all iniquity, and 
purify unto himself a peculiar 
people, zealous of good works. 

1 Pet. 2:9. But ye are a 
chosen generation, a royal priest- 
hood, a holy nation, a peculiar 
people; that ye should shew forth 
the praises of him who hath 
called you out of darkness into 
his marvellous light. 

(99) 2 Cor. 7:1. Having 
therefore these promises, dearly 
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves 
from all filthiness of the flesh 
and spirit, perfecting holiness in 
the fear of God. 

Also Eph. 5 :25-27. 

(100) 1 John 5:19. We know 


OBJECTIONS OONSIDERED. 147 
no possible harmony exists. On the contrary, their prin- 
ciples and tendencies are absolutely opposite. It is there- 
fore entirely inconsistent that they should be spoken of 
as forming one general mass. 


Art, Science and Invention. 


Second, the triumphs of art and science, the progress 
in inventions, discoveries, etc., by no means argue an in- 
crease in godliness. 

Many of the acknowledged leaders today in science and 
philosophy—yes, even those who rank the very highest 
among them, are positive infidels. And very many more, 
who disclaim absolute infidelity, deny the divinity of Jesus 
Christ. 

It is strange, indeed, that the Christian optiniists, in 
their noisy trumpetings of the strides of science, should 
lose sight of this momentous fact. And history bears a 
similar testimony. The power, splendor and wisdom of 
David and Solomon were followed by the idolatry and 
innocent blood of Ahab and Manasseh, resulting in the 
overthrow of Jerusalem and the Babylonish captivity. 

The temple, ‘built by Herod, was one of the grandest 
works of art. It fairly flashed with splendor, and the 
temple service was conducted on a magnificent scale. The 
Jews of his time enjoyed great privileges in literature and 
learning, and yet they crucified the Lord Jesus. 

The Greeks rose to a pinnacle of triumph in literature, 
poetry and art, and yet they failed by wisdom to find out 
God. To them he was the unknown God.!%! See how 
plainly this is brought out in 1 Cor. chapters, 1, 2 and 3: 
“For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wis- 
dom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of 
preaching to save them that believe” (1:21). The trouble 
is not with the heads, but with the hearts of men. No 
matter how great the learning, man must have @ new 


that we are of God, and the 
whole world Meth in the evil 
one. 
(101) Acts 17:23. For as I 
passed by, and beheld your devo- 


tions, I found an altar with this 
inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN 
GOD. Whom therefore ye ig- 
norantly worship, him declare } 
unto you. 


148 JESUS IS COMING. 

heart, and this is obtained not by education, but by the 
operation of the Spirit of God. It was not many wise men 
after the flesh who received the grace of God in Corinth, 
but the simple and the despised. “I thank Thee, O Father, 
Lord of heaven and earth,” said Jesus, “that thou hast hid 
these things from the wise and prudent (discerning ones) 
and hast revealed them unto babes.” Luke 10:21. 

The world, then, by “wisdom” or “philosophy” (Col. 2: 
8), or “science falsely so called” (1 Tim. 6:20), can never 
find out God. Indeed, we have a clear evidence of this in 
the rationalism, infidelity and atheism of our day. No 
matter how refined and polished is their garb or the deli- 
cacy with which they may be set forth, still they are only 
the poisonous deceptions of him who can appear as “an 
angel Of light.”1°2 The truth is that Satan is the arch 
enemy of God, and the world, in this present evil age (Gal. 
1:4), is in his power (1 John 5:19), so that he besets the 
people of God with his “wiles,” and arrays against them 
“principalities . . . . powers... . and the rulers of the 
darkness of this world.” Eph. 6:11-13. Therefore the 
Christian must “love not the world, neither the things 
that are in the world. If any man love the world, the 
love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the 
world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and 
the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.” 
1 John 2:15-16. 


The World Not Growing Better. 


Surely, then, this wicked world, which is so radically 
opposed to God, and under the present control of His 
arch enemy, is not growing better. On the contrary, 
judgment, fire and perdition are before it.1°* Perilous 


(102) 2 Cor. 11:13. For such 
are false apostles, deceitful 
workers, transforming themselves 
into the apostles of Christ. 

14. And no marvel; for Sa- 
tan himself is transformed into 
an angel of light. 

15. Therefore it is no great 
thing if his ministers also be 


transformed as the ministers of 
righteousness; whose end shall 
be according to their works. 

(103) 2 Pet. 2. And many 
shall follow their pernicious 
ways; by reason of whom the 
way of truth shall be evil spoken 
of. 

3. And through covetousness 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 149 


times are coming.*°* “Evil men and seducers shall wax 
worse and worse, deceiving and beimg deceived.” The 
tares, which naturally grow much faster than the wheat, 
shall continue up to the harvest. Mat. 13:40. “The mys- 
tery of iniquity” which already worked in the days of 
the apostles, shall culminate in “the man of sin,” the per- 
sonal antichrist, whom even the mass of the Jews will re- 
celve,!°> and who will be so great and rule with such uni- 
versal authority that he is to be destroyed only by the 
personal appearing of the Lord Huimself.1° 

There is no hope, then, for the world, but in the coming 
of Christ the King. And, praised be God for the prom- 
ises, the Lord will come at the end of this age. Antichrist 
will be destroyed.1°* All things that offend shall be gath- 
ered out,’°* and the Millennial Kingdom of righteous- 
ness shall be established on the earth. So, while there is 
a gloomy prospect for the world during this evil age, there 
is a bright and glorious prospect during the coming mil- 


lennial age. 


shall they: with feigned words 
make merchandise of you: whose 
judgment now of a long time 
lingereth not, and their damna- 
tion slumbereth not. 

2 Pet. 3:7. But the heavens 
and the earth, which are now, 
by the same word are kept in 
store, reserved unto fire against 
the day of judgment and perdi- 
tion of ungodly men. 

Also Jude 7, Mark 9 :43-48. 

(104) 1 Tim. 4:1. Now the 
Spirit speaketh expressly, that 
in the latter times some shall 
depart from the faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits, and doc- 
trines of devils; 

2 Tim. 3:1. This know also, 
that in the last days perilous 
times shall come. 

(105) John 5:43. I am come 
in my Father’s name, and ye re- 
ceive me not: if another shall 
come in his own name, him ye 
will receive. 

Alsa Isa. 28 315-22. 


(106) 2 Thes. 2:8. And then 
shall that Wicked be revealed, 
whom the Lord shall consume 
with the spirit of his mouth, and 


‘shall destroy with the brightness 


of his coming: 


9. Even him, whose coming is 
after the working of Satan with 


all power and signs and lying . 


wonders, 
Also Rev. 19:20. 


(107) Matt. 13:41. The Son 
of man shall send forth his an- 
gels, and they shall gather out 
of his kingdom all things that 
offend, and them which do in- 
iquity ; 


42. And shall cast them into 
a furnace of fire: there shall be 
wailing and gnashing of teeth. 


43. Then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the sun in, the 
kingdom of their Father. Who 
hath ears to hear, let him heart. 


150 JESUS IS COMING. 


Oivilization and Beneficent Institutions. 


But perhaps it is still insisted that the world has made 
great progress in civilization and refinement, in benevo- 
lence, in personal liberty, international fraternity, Chris- 
tian work, etc. In proof of this, the abrogation of slavery 
is cited; also the cessation of the inquisition and martyr- 
dom, the establishment of charitable institutions, the great 
postal and commercial means of communication, built upon 
the agencies of steam and lightning; the right of trial by 
jury, international arbitration, missionary triumphs, ete. 

Well, first of all we answer that Civilization and Re- 
finement are not the Scurce of Holiness. They may ele- 
vate the head, while the heart is untouched. The gilded 
palace of sin is as certainly the gateway to hell as the 
darkest den of vice. 

The cultured and scientific atheist is as surely in the 
service of Satan as the thief or the murderer. Jesus Him- 
self classed them all together when He said, “He that is 
not with Me is against Me.” Mat. 12:30. So it matters 
not how much more like an angel of light the serpent may 
appear, nor how civilized and refined the world may be. 

Satan is the devil still. 

And the world is still the world. 

His manifestations and methods may be changed, but 
the spirit of darkness is the same. And accordingly we 
see that while slavery is disappearing, communism, social- 
ism and nihilism are lifting their godless, headless forms. 
And darker are their forebodings than were even the days 
of the inquisition and martyrdom. Oppressing monopo- 
lies, systematic peculation and fraud sare parallel with 
charitable institutions. The mails, so useful for news and 
correspondence, afford a most convenient agency for dis. 
seminating the flood of obscene literature which is blasting 
the morals of the young. Trtal by jury has too often 
proved a mere farce, in which the criminal escapes. ~The 
nation which opened the way for the missionary also 
forced upon the teeming millions of China the awful 
curse of opium. 


OBJEOTIONS CONSIDERED, pay 

While missionary efforts have been greatly blessed 
abroad (and praise God that they have), infallibility, 
ritualism, skepticism and desecration of the Lord’s day 
have more than equally triumphed at home. And let it 
not be forgotten that the monstrous assumption of infalli- 
bility has triumphed in what was once an apostolic chureh. 
of Christ. | 


The past century has had its full share of war and car- 
nage. Numerous, dark and fearful have been the fields 
of blood up to this very year. In short, Satan is on the 
alert and fully up to the times, multiplying his deceptions 
on either hand, as he will continue to do, until chained by. 
the angel at the beginning of the Millennium. 


Is the Church Progressing? 


Lastly, it is argued that, as Christians are the light of 
the world and the salt of the earth,°* the greatly in- © 
creased number of professed Christians must certainly have 
augmented the light and the salt, and consequently have 
made the world better. 

- Jesus was indeed the light of the world, but He shone in 

the darkness and the darkness comprehended it not. Men 
loving and clinging to the darkness, because their deeds 
were evil, would not see the light, and were not made bet- 
ter by it.12° So true Christians, reflecting the light from 


(108) Rev. 20:1. And I saw 
an angel come down from 
heaven, having the key of the 
bottomless pit and a great chain 
in his hand. 

2. And he laid hold on the 
dragon, that old serpent, which 
is the Devil, and Satan, and 
bound him a thousand years, 

8. And cast him into the bot- 
tomless pit, and shut him up, 
and set a seal upon him, that 
be should deceive the nations no 
more, till tke thousand years 
should be fulfilled: and after 
that he must be loosed a little 
season. 

(109) Mat. 5:18. Ye ase the 
salt of the earth: but if the 


salt have lost his savour, where- 
with shall it be salted? it ts 
thenceforth good for nothing, but 
to be cast out, and to be trodden 
under foot of men. 

Phil. 2:15. That ye may be 
blameless and harmless, the sons 
of God, without rebuke, in the 
midst of a crooked and perverse 
nation, among whom ye shine as 
lights in the world. 

(110) John 1:4. In him was 
life; and the life was the light 
of men. 

5. And the light shineth in 
darkness; and the darkness com- 
prehended {t not. 

John 3:19. And this is the 
condemnation, that light is come 


‘162 JESUS I8 COMING. 
heaven, only intensify the darkness about them. The dark- 
ness is still darkness and cannot be improved. The sinner 
must forsake it and come to the light, or he can never be 
saved. 

Losing the Saltness. 


Let us notice carefully that Jesus. speaks of the salt 
losing its saltness and becoming good for nothing, and He 
also intimates that the light may be hid under a bushel. 
And therefore He exhorts, “Have salt in yourselves.” Mark 
9:50. Evidently the Jews lost their “savour” (Mat. 5:13) 
and “were broken off.”141_ This leads to the solemn query, 
is the professing Church progressing or declining in faitl 
and spiritual life? sO 

The kingdom in mystery,!!? or the state of Christendom 
until Christ comes again, is taught us, we believe, by the 
parables of Mat. 13. 

The Parables. 


“The parable of the Sower shows the varied and imper- 
fect reception of the Word. The parable of the Tares 
shows the early and continued effects of Satan’s presence 
among the saints. The parable of the Mustard-seed shows 
outward growth sheltering evil. The parable of the Leaven 
shows the gradual and utter corruption of the truth. The 
parable of the Treasure hid in a field shows what Israel 
is to be in the world. The parable of the Pearl of great 
price shows what the Church is to Christ. And the parable 
of the Dragnet shows the cleansing of the kingdom at His 
second coming.” 


into the world, and men loved by faith. Be not highminded, 


darkness rather than light, be- 
cause their deeds were evil. 

20. For every one that doeth 
evil hateth the light, neither 
cometh to the light, lest his 
deeds should be reproved. 

21. But he that doeth truth 
cometh to the light, that his 
deeds may be made manifest, 


. that they are wrought in God. 


(111) Rom. 11:20 Well; be- 
cause of unbelief they were 
broken off, and thou standest 


a eel 


but fear: 

21. For if God spared not the 
natural branches, take heed lest 
he also spare not thee. 

(112) Mat. 13:10. And the 
disciples came, and said unto 
him, Why speakest thou unto 
them in parables? 

11. He answered and said unto 
them, Because it is given unto 
you to know the mysteries of 
the kingdom of heaven, but to 
them it is not given. 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 


The Leaven. 


There is, perhaps, but little opposition to this interpreta-. 
tion of the parables, excepting that of the Leaven, which 
has quite extensively been interpreted to teach exactly the 
opposite, viz.: that the power and influence of the gospel or 
Christian life is to permeate the masses of the world, 
until the whole is leavened into holiness, The inconsistency 
of this is seen when we consider that precisely the contrary 
is taught by the parable of the sower and the tares, each 
of which most undisputedly shows that evil is to continue 
and grow up to the end of the age. This is surely the most 
sufficient and scriptural reason for assigning the same 
typical meaning to the Leaven, in this and the correlative 
passage,!44 which we find it to bear in the numerous other 
passages, where the same word is used, viz.: the corrupting 
influence of evil and the symbol of death. See carefully 


Mat. 16 :6-12.11* 


(113) Luke 13:20. An@ again 
he said, Whereunto shall I liken 
the kingdom of God? 

21. It is like leaven, which 
a woman took and hid in three 
measures of meal, till the whole 
was leavened. 

(114) Mat. 16:6. Then Je- 
sus said unto them, Take heed 
and beware of the leaven of the 
Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 

%. And they reasoned among 
themselves, saying, It is because 
we have taken no bread. 

8. Which when Jesus per- 
ceived, he said unto them, O ye 
of little faith, why reason ye 
among yourselves, because ye 
have brought no bread? 

11. How is it that ye do not 
understand that I spake it not 
to you concerning bread, that ye 
should beware of the leaven of 
the Pharisees and of the Sad- 
ducees ? 

12. Then understood they how 
that he bade them not beware 
of the leaven of bread, but of 


the doctrine of the Pharisees an 
of the Sadducees, ~ 
Mark 8:15. And he charged 
them, saying, Take heed, beware 
of the leaven of the Pharisees, 
and of the leaven of Herod. 
Luke 12:1. In the mean time, 
when there were gathered to- 
gether an innumerable multitude 
of people, insomuch that they 
trode one ypon another, he be- 
gan to say unto his disciples first 


-of all, Beware ye of the leaven 


of the Pharisees, which is hy- 


pocrisy. 
1 Cor. 5:6. Your glorying ig 
not good. Know ye not that a 


little leaven leaveneth the whole 
lump? 

7. Purge out therefore the old 
leaven, that ye may be a new 
lump, as ye are unleavened. For 
even Christ our passover is sac- 
rificed for us< 

8. Therefore let us keep the 
feast, not with old leaven, neither 
with the leaven of malice and 
wickedness; but with the un- 


154 JESUS 18 COMING. 


Here then we are most emphatically taught not only that 
the world is growing no better, but that the professing 
Church itself will lose its saltness, becoming nominal and 
lukewarm, fit only to be spued out of the Master’s mouth.225 
The entire ee of the Word of God, we believe, agrees 
with this, 


And we have but to take an unprejudiced survey of the 
Church even now, to see the truth of it. The loss of spiri- 
tual power in the different branches of the great nominal 
Chureh has not resulted from the casting out of truth, 
but from the imbibing and internal workings of false doe- 
trine, which, like leaven, has fermented the mass. Little 
by little the ordinary bishop of Rome has developd into an 
infallible Pope. Image worship, the confessional, world 
conformity and post-millennialism have all worked out their 
enormous growth like the little leaven in the meal. 


How do the great Papal and Greek churches, in their 
stateliness, formality, popularity and spiritual weakness of 
to-day, compare with the despised Nazarene and his follow- 
ers,1!° or with the persecuted, consecrated and godly con- 
gregations (ekkleesias) of the first two centuries? 


And are not the present evangelical denominations, by 
worldly conformity and increeping doubts regarding the 
inspiration of the Word, etc., dangerously tending in the 
same direction? How very few of the members in them are 
to-day crying out for separation and holiness. Surely, no 
one can fail to see the corrupting influences of the leaven 
permeating them. 

We realize that this is an awful fact. It is not even 
pleasant to state it. But, while Noah’s preaching was not 
pleasant to them that heard it, still it was true and the 


leavened bread of sincerity and (115) Rev. 3:16. So then be- 
truth. cause thou art lukewarm, and 


Gal. 5:7. Ye did run well; neither cold nor hot, I will spew 
who did hinder you that ye 
should not obey the truth? 

8. This persuasion cometh not 
of him that calleth you. 

9. A little leaven leaveneth 
the whole lump. 


thee out of my mouth. 

(116) 1 John 4:17. Herein is 
our love made perfect, that' we 
may have boldness in the day of 
judgment: because as he is, so 
are we in this world. 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 


flood did come. 


155 


Likewise the prophesying of Jeremiah 


was exceedingly unpleasant, but it was true and was fol- 
lowed by the terrible fate of the city, and the Babylonian 
captivity. The preaching of Jesus was at times of fearful 
severity? but was it not true? So would we humbly yet 


faithfully proclaim the 


Word of God. We would “ery 


aloud and spare not,”11® fully believing that, upon an apos- 
me 


(117) Mat. 11:20. Then Be- 
gan he to upbraid the cities 
wherein most of his mighty 
works were done, because they 
repented not: 


21. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! 
woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for 
if the mighty works, which were 
done in you, had been done in 
Tyre and Sidon, they would have 
repented long ago in sackcloth 
‘and ashes. 


22. But I say unto you, It 
shall be more tolerable for Tyre 
and Sidon at the day of judg- 
ment, than for you. 


23. And thou, Capernaum, 
which art exalted unto heaven, 
shalt be brought down to hell: 
for if the mighty works, which 
have been done in thee, had been 
done in Sodom, it would have 
remained until this day. 


24. But I say unto you, That 
it shall be more tolerable for 
the land of Sodom in the day of 
judgment, than for thee. 


Mat. 18:7. Woe unto the 
world because of offences! for it 
must needs be that offences 
come; but woe to that man by 
whom the offence cometh! 


8. Wherefore if thy hand or 
thy foot offend thee, cut them 
off, and cast them from thee: 
it {s better for thee to enter in- 
to life halt or maimed, rather 
than having two hands or two 
feet to be cast into everlasting 
fire. 


9. And if thine eye offend thee, 
pluck it out, and cast i¢ from 


thee: it is better for thee to en- 
ter into life with one eye. 


Mat. 23:13. But woe unto 
you, scribes and Pharisees, hypo- 
crites! for ye shut up the king- 
dom of heaven against men: for 
ye neither go in yourselves, nei- 
ther suffer ye them that are en- 
tering to go in. 


14. Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye de- 
vour widows’ houses, and for a 
pretence make long prayer: 
therefore ye shall receive the 
greater damnation. 


15. Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye 
compass sea and land to make 
ene proselyte; and when he is 
made, ye make him twofold more 
the child of hell than yourselves. 


27. Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are 
like unto whited  sepulchres, 
which indeed appear beautiful 
outward, but are within full of 
dead men’s bones, and of all 
uncleanness. 


31. Wherefore ye be witnesses 
unto yourselves, that ye are the 
children of them which killed the 
prophets. 


82. Fill ye up then the meas- 
ure of your fathers. 


33. Ye serpents, ye generation 
ef vipers, how can ye escape the 
damnation of hell? 


(118) Isa. 58:1. Cry aloud, 
spare not, lift up thy voice like 
a trumpet, and show my people 
their. transgression, and the 
house of Jacob their sins. 


156 JESUS I8 COMING. 


tate church,!!® rebellious and murderous Israel,!2° and a 


sinful world, the day of darkness is coming.’** 


The Faithful Remnant. 


But even in the darkness, so gloomy for the ungodly, 
there is hope—bright, glorious hope for the faithful.??? 
For God always has had, and ever will have a faithful 


remnant.}23 


There were those, in blind unbelieving Israel, 


who waited for and a¢cepted the Messiah. Luke 2, ete. So 
there will be those in the Church who will wait for (1 


(119) 2 Tim. 4:2. Preach the 
word; be instant in season, out 
of season; reprove, rebuke, ex- 
hort with all longsuffering and 
doctrine. 

3. For the time will come 
when they will not endure sound 
doctrine; but after their own 
lusts shall they heap to them- 
selves teachers, having itching 
ears ; 

4. And they shall turn away 
their ears from the truth, and 
shall be turned unto fables. 

Also 2 Tim. 3:5-9, Rev. 17. 

(120) Mat. 27:25. Then an- 
swered all the people, and sald, 
His blood be on us, and on our 
children. 


(121) Joel 1:15. Alas for the 
day! for the day of the Lord és 
at hand, and as a. destruction 
from the Almighty shall it come. 

' Amos 6:18. Woe unto you 
that desire the day of the Lord! 
to what end jis it for you? the 
day of the Lord és darkness, and 
not light. 

19. As if a man did flee from 
a lion, and a bear met him; or 
went into the house, and leaned 
his hand on the wall, and a ser- 
pent bit him. 

20. Shall not the day of the 
Lord be darkness, and not light? 
even very dark, and no bright- 
ness fn it? 

2 Pet. 2:17. These are wells 
without water, clouds that are 
earried with a tempest; to whom 


the mist of darkness is reserved 
for ever. 

Also Zeph. 1:14-18; Mal. 4:1; 
Jude 5-13. 

(122) 1 Thes. 5:4. But ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness 
that that day should overtake 
you as a thief. 

5. Ye are all the children of 


‘light, and the children of the 


day: we are not of the night, 
nor of darkness. 

6. Therefore let us not sleep, 
as do others; but let us watch 
and be sober, 

7. For they that sleep sleep 
in the night; and they that be 
drunken are drunken in the 
night. 

8. But let us, who are of the 
day, be sober, putting on the 
breastplate of faith and love; 
and for a helmet, the hope of 
salvation. 

1 Pet. 1:18. Wherefore gird 
up the loins of your mind, be 
sober, and hope to the end for 
the grace that is to be brought 
unto you at the revelation of 
Jesus Christ. 

(128) 1 Kings 19:18. Yet I 
have left me seven thousand in 
Israel, all the knees which have 
not bowed: unto Baal, and every 
mouth which hath not kissed 
him. 

Rom. 11:5. Evem so then at 
this present time also there is a 
remnant according to the elec- 
tion of grace. 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 157 
Thes. 1:10) and welcome the coming Bridegroom, Mat. 
25:10. And there shall be a remnant in Israel, who, pass- 
ing through the darkness and fire (Zech. 13:9), will yet 
accept their King. Zech. 12:10; Rom. 9:27; 11:25-26. And 
there shall even be a remnant (residue or remainder) 
among the Gentiles (ungodly world) who shall seek after ° 
the Lord.124 

Glory to God! the darkness shall yet flee away before the 
Sun of Righteousness, arising with healing in His 
wings,’75 when He comes to sit in the throne of His 
glory.’*° The mountain of the Lord’s house shall be estab- 
lished and all nations shall flow unto it (Isa. 2:1-6; Mie. 
4:1-5, please read it) during that bright millennial day of 
peace and glory,’” which shall follow “this present evil 
age” (Gal. 1:4) and in which even the creature “shall be 


(124) Acts 15:16. After this 
I will return, and will build 
again the tabernacle of David, 
which is fallen down; and I will 
build again the ruins thereof, 
and I will set it up: 


17. That the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord, and 
all the Gentiles, upon whom my 
name is called, saith the Lord, 
who doeth all these things. 

(125) Mal. 4:2. But unto 
you that fear mv name shall the 
Sun of righteousness arise with 
healing in his wings; and ye 
shall go forth, and grow up as 
Ccalvns of the stall. 


3: And ye shall tread down 
the wicked; for they shall be 
ashes under the soles of your 
feet in the day that I shall do 
this, saith the Lord of hosts. 

(126) Mat. 19:28. And Je- 
sus said unto them, Verily I 
say unto you, That ye which 
have followed me, in the regen- 
eration when the Son of man 
shall sit fn the throne of his 
glory, ye also shall sit upon 
twelve thrones, judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel. 

(127) Acts 17:31. Because he 
hath appointed a day, in the 


which he will judge the world 
in righteousness by that man 
whom he hath ordained; whereof 
he hath given assurance unto all 
men, in that he hath raised him 
from the dead. 

Rom. 13:12. The night is far 
spent, the day is at hand: let us 
therefore cast off the works of 
darkness, and let us put on the 
armour of light. 

Rev. 20:4. And I saw 


thrones, and they sat upon them, 
and judgment was given unto 
them: and I saw the souls of 
them that were beheaded for the 
witness of Jesus, and for the 
word of God, and which had 
not worshipped the beast, neither 
his image, neither had received 
his mark upon their foreheads, 
or in their hands: and they 
lived and reigned with Christ a 
thousand years. 

5. But the rest of the dead 
lived not again until the thou- 
sand years were finished. This 
4s the first resurrection. 

6. Blessed and holy is he that 
hath part in the first resurrec- 
tion; on such the second death 
hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, 
and shall reign with him a thou- 
sand years. 


158 JESUS IS COMING. 


delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious 
liberty of the children of God.” Rom. 8:21. “They shall 
not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth 
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters 
cover the sea.” Isa. 11:9. 


“A better day is coming, a morning promised long, 

When girded Right, with holy Might, will overthrow the 
wrong; 

When God the Lord will listen to every plaintive sigh, 

And stretch His hand o’er every land, with justice by and by. 


The boast of haughty Error no more will fill the air, 

But Age and Youth will love the truth and spread it every- 
where; 

No more from want and sorrow will come the hopeless cry; 

And strife will cease, and perfect peace will flourish by 
and by. 


Oh! for that holy dawning we watch, and wait, and pray, 

Till o’er the height the morning light shall drive the gloom 
away; 

And when the heavenly glory shall flood the earth and sky, 

We'll bless the Lord for all His Word, and praise Him by 
and by.’ 


No. XIII. Cruel to the Unsaved. 


It is objected that it would be eruel for Christ to come 
in Judgment. upon the world, while there are so many mil- 
lions unsaved. 

We answer,—Is not such a declaration a presumptious 
criticism of God’s motives? Was the flood an expression 
of cruelty, or rather was it not a manifestation of God’s 
love and mercy, toward them who should live after, in that 
He swept away the great overflow of wickedness? Surely 
it was done in mercy. And now let us remember that this 
world DIES every thirty-three years. The average of human 
life is even a little less than this. The world is in the power 


of the devil,'?® and he has the power of death.12® He has 


(128) 1 John 5:19. We know 
that we are of God, and the 
whole world lieth in the evil 
one. 

(129) Heb. 2:14. Forasmuch 
then as the children are par- 
takers of flesh and blood, he 
also himself likewise took part 


of the same; that through death 
he might destroy him that had 
the power of death, that is, the 
devil ; 

15. And deliver them, who 
through fear of death were all 
their lifetime subject to bondaga., 


OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 159 
slain this world with the sword of death, over fifty times 
in the present dispensation. 


Think of it! more than fifty worlds gone down in the 
whirlpool of death. Each generation brings on to the 
scene an entirely new world. And how few out of these 
are converted. How few are reached by the gospel life- 
boat, and how few of those reached heed the message of 
salvation. The great mass sweep on, like a wrecked vessel, 
in darkness and unbelief, to the Judgment. 


The coming of Christ will inaugurate a far better state 
of things. For, when He comes, all things that offend shall 
be gathered out and the kingdom shall be established in 
righteousness,4®° And even though the subjects of the king- 
dom (not the reigning ones)1%! may die during the millen- 
nial age, yet. shall they die in a good old age, the child 
even a hundred years old,!*? and their death shall be 
blessed,185 and though the Millennium is not the perfect 
state, yet Judgment will speedily follow the sinner of that 
day, or the nation which shall swerve from serving God.154 


(130) Mat. 13:49. So shall 
it be at the end of the world: 
the angels shall come forth, and 
sever the wicked from among 
the just, 


50. And shall cast them into 
the furnace of fire: there shall 
be wailing and gnashing of teeth. 

Also verses 31-43. 


(131) Luke 20:35. But they 
which shall be accounted worthy 
to obtain that world, and the 
resurrection from the dead, 
neither marry, nor are given in 
marriage: 


36. Neither can they die any 
more: for they are equal unto 
the angels; and are the children 
of God, being the children of the 
resurrection. 

Also Rev. 20 :4-6. 


(132) Isa. 65:20. There shall 
be no more thence an infant of 
days, nor an old man that hath 
not filled his days: for the child 
shall die an hundred years old; 
but the sinner, being an hun- 


dred years old, shall be ac- 
cursed. 

(133) Rev. 14:13. And I 
heard a voice from heaven say- 
ing unto me, Write, Blessed are 
the dead which die in the Lord 
from henceforth: Yea saith. the 
Spirit, that they may rest from 
their labours. 

(1384) Zech. 14:16. And it 
shall come to pass, that every 
one that is left of all the na- 
tions which came against Jeru- 
salem shall even go up from 
year to year to worship the King, 
the Lord of hosts, and to keep 
the feast of tabernacles. 

17. And it shall be, that who- 
so will not come up of ail the 
families of the earth unto Jeru- 
salem to worship the King, the 
Lord of hosts, even upon tem 
shall be no rain. 

18. And if the family of Baypt 
go not up, and come not, that 
have no rain, there shall be the 
plague wherewith the Lord will 
smite the heathen that come not 


160 . JESUS I8 COMING. 

Surely, then, His speedy coming cannot be counted an 
unmereiful event. The wonder is rather at the long-suffer- 
ing of God, which now'*® (as before the flood!**) waits in 
such patient pleading. But He will fulfill His promise, and 
the Coming One* will come!*”? and cut short the work in 
righteousness. Rom. 9:28. 

Then let us not look upon Christ’s coming as cruel or 
unmerciful. He has said “SURELY I COME QUICKLY,” and 
let us have the mind of the Holy Spirit, who replied “EvEN 
80 comME Lorp Jesus.” Rev. 22:20. 

‘Then welcome, thrice welcome, ye tokens of God. 

What else but His coming can comfort afford? 


What presence but His set this prisoned earth free? 
O Star of the Morning, our hope is in Thee!”’ 


No. XIV. This Generation. 


Jesus said: “This generation shall not pass away till 
all be fulfilled.’ Lu. 21:32. See also Mat. 24:34; Mar. 
13 :30. 

Some have construed “generation” to mean a time of 
thirty or forty years; and, as Jerusalem was destroyed 
within forty years after Christ spoke, they refer all he said 
to that event. 


Israel the Generation That Passes Not Away. 


We believe “generation,” as there used, means the whole 
existence of the Israelitish race. Compare the following 
passages where the same Greek word is used.1** 


*So the Greek. 


up to keep the feast of taberna- sometime were disobedient, when 


cles. N 
19. This shall be the punish- 
ment of Egypt, and the punish- 
ment of all nations that come 
not up to keep the feast of taber- 
nacles. Also Isa. 65:20. 

(135) 2 Pet. 8:9. The Lord 
is not slack concerning his prom- 
ise, as some men count slack- 
ness; but is longsuffering to us- 
ward, not willing that any should 
perish, but that all should come 
to repentance. 

(186) 1 Pet. $:20. Which 


once the longsuffering of God 
waited in the days of Noah, 
while the ark was a preparing, 
wherein few, that is, eight souls 
were saved by water. 

(187) Heb. 10:36. For ye 
have need of patience, that, after 
ye have done the will of God, ye 
might receive the promise. 

37. For yet a little while, and 
he that shall come will come, 
and will not tarry. 

(188) Mat 11:16. But 
whereunto shall I liken this gen- 


OBJEOTIONS OONSIDERED. 161 


In Psa. 22:30, we read: “A seed shall serve Him; it 
shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.” And in 
Psa. 24:6: “This is the generation of them that seek Him.” 


In Prov. 30:11-14, the generation of the righteous and 
the generation of the wicked are clearly distinguished. 
Hence we conclude that the generation of the Israelites 
were not only to see the destruction of Jerusalem, but the 
coming of Christ (at the revelation) and the end of the 
age. Mat. 24:3. 


And their wonderful preservation, as a distinct people, 
through all the persecutions, vicissitudes and wanderings of 
the past eighteen centuries down to the present moment, is 
a standing miracle, attesting the truth of God’s word, and 
assuring us of His purposes in their future history. 

Said Frederick the Great to his chaplain: “Doctor, if 
your religion is a true one, it ought to be capable of very 
brief and simple proof. Will you give me an evidence of 
its truth in ONE worD?” The good man answered, “Israel.” 

Other nations come and go, but Israel remains. She 
passes not away. God says of her, “For a small moment 
have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather 
thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a 
moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy 
on thee, saith the Lord, thy Redeemer.” Isa. 54:7-8. 


eration? It is like unto chil- prophets, which was shed from 


dren sitting in the markets, and 
calling unto their fellows. 

Mat. 16:4. A wicked and 
adulterous generation seeketh 
after a sign; and there shall no 
sign be given unto it, but the 
sign of the prophet Jonas. And 
he left them, and departed. 

Luke 9:41. And Jesus an- 
swering said, O faithless and 
perverse generation, how long 
shall I be with you, and suffer 
you? Bring thy son hither. 

Luke 11:49. Therefore also 
said the wisdom of God, I will 
send them prophets and apostles, 
and some of them they shall 
slay and persecute: 

50. That the blood of all the 


the foundation of the world, may 
be required of this generation; 


51. From the blood of Abel 
unto the blood of Zacharias, 
which perished between the altar 
and the temple: verily I say 
unto you, It shall be required 
of this generation. 


Phil. 2:15. That ye may be- 
come blameless and harmless, 
children of God without blemish 
in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse generation, among 
whom ye are seen as lights in 
the world, 

Also Mark 8:38. 

Luke 7:31; 11:29, 30, 31, 32; 
16:8; 17:26. Acts 2:40. 


a nn . 


CHAPTER XV. 
Israel Is to Bo Restored. 


But, perhaps, you say: “I don’t believe the Israelites are 
to be restored to Canaan, and Jerusalem rebuilt.” 

Dear reader! have you read the declarations of God’s 
word about it? Surely nothing is more plainly stated in 
the Scriptures. We would that we had space to quote the 
passages, but we can only give you a portion of the refer- 
ences. We beg of you to read them thoughtfully. Divest 
yourself of prejudice and preconceived notions, and let 
the Holy Spirit show you, from His word, the glorious 
future of God’s chosen people, “who are beloved” (Rom. 
11:28), and dear unto Him as “the “pple of His eye.” 


Zech. 2:8. 


~ 


ist. God calls Abraham. Gen. 12:1.1 
2nd. God's promise to Abraham. Gen, 12:2-7. 


Gen. 13:14-17.2 


ss as “ Gen. 15:18. 
bd “8 oe Gen. 17:8. 
ore he ae Isaac. Gen. 26:1-5. 
(1) Gen. 12:1. Now the there builded he an altar unto 


Lord had said unto Abram, Get 
thee out of thy country, and from 
thy kindred, and from thy 
father’s house, unto a land that 
I will show thee: ... 

2. And I will make of thee a 
great nation, and I will bless 
thee, and make thy name great; 
and thou shalt be a blessing: 

8. And I will bless them that 
bless thee, and curse him that 
curseth thee: and in thee shall 
all families of the earth be 
blessed. 

6. And Abram passed through 
the land unto the place of 
Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. 
And the Canaanite was then in 
the land. 

7. And the Lord appeared wn- 
to Abram, and said, Unto thy 
seed will I give this land: and 


the Lord, who appeared unto 
him. 


(2) Gen. 13:14. And _ the 
Lord eaid unto Abram, after that 
Lot was separated from him, Lift 
up now thine eyes, and look 
from the place where thou art 
northward, and southward, and 
eastward, and westward; 


15. For all the land which 
thou seest, to thee will I give it, 
and to thy seed for ever. 


16. And I will make thy seed 
as the dust of the earth: so that 
if a man can number the dust - 
of the earth, then shall thy seed 
also be numbered. 

17. Arise, walk through the 
land, in the length of it, and in 
the breadth of it; for I will give 
it unto thee. 


(162) 


RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 


God’s promise to Jacob. 


$rd. 
Deut. 84:1-4; Josh. 1:2-6. 
4th. 
5th. 
89; Deut. 4:22; 28:15; 31:16. 
6th. Israel’s sins. 


163 


Gen. 28:1-15. 
Gen. 35:10-12. 


The land described. Ex. 23:31; Nu. 34; Deut. 11:24; 


The land partially possessed. 1 Kings 4:21. 
Punishment prophesied for disobedience. 


Lev. 26:14- 


Judges 2:11-19; 1 Sam. 8:6; 2 Kings 21: 


11; 2 Kings 24:3; Jer. 15:4; and many others, ESPECIALLY 


Mat. 27:25. 


7th. The promises to be remembered and restoration as- 


sured: 


Lev. 26:40-45, especially verses 42, 44, 465.8 


Deut. 4:30-31.4 


“ 30:1-10, especially verses 4, 5, 6.5 


2 Sam. 7:10-11.6 
Joel 2:18-32. 
“¢ 3:1-21, 


(3) Lev. 26:44. And yet for 
all that, when they be in the 
land of their enemies, I will not 
cast them away, neither will I 
abhor them, to destroy them ut- 
terly, and to break my covenant 
with them: for I am the Lord 
their God. 

45. But I will for their sakes 
remember the covenant of their 
ancestors, whom I brought forth 
out of the land of Egypt in the 
sight of the heathen, that I 
might be their God: I am the 
Lord. 

(4) Deut. 4:80. When thou 
art in tribulation, and all these 
things are come upon thee, even 
in the latter days, if thou turn 
to the Lord thy God, and shalt 
be obedient unto his voice; 

$1. (For the Lord thy God ¢e 
a merciful God;) he will not for- 
sake thee, neither destroy thee, 
nor forget the covenant of thy 
fathers which he sware unto 
them. 

(5) Deut. 30:1. And it shall 
come to pass, when all these 
things are come upon thee, the 
blessing and the curse, which I 
have set before thee, and thou 
shalt call them to mind among 
all the nations whither the Lord 
thy God hath driven thee, 

2. And shalt return unto the 


Lord thy God, and shalt obey his 
voice, according to all that I 
command thee this day, thou 
and thy children, with all thine 
heart, and with all thy soul; 

3. That then the Lord thy God 
will turn thy captivity, and have 
compassion upon thee, and will 
return and gather thee from all 
the nations, whither the Lord 
thy God hath scattered thee. 

4. If any of thine be driven 
out unto the outmost parts of 
heaven, from thence will the 
Lord thy God gather thee, and 
from thence will he fetch thee: 

5. And the Lord thy God will 
bring thee into the land which 
thy fathers possessed, and thou 
shalt possess it; and he will do 
thee good, and multiply thee 
above thy fathers. 

6. And the Lord thy God will 
circumcise thine heart, and the 
heart of thy seed, to love the 
Lord thy God with all thine 
heart, and with all thy soul, that 
thou mayest live. 

(6) 2 Sam. 7:10. Moreover 
I will appoint a place for my 
people Israel, and will plant 
them, that they may dwell in a 
place of their own, and move no 
more; neither shall the chil- 
dren of wickedness afflict them 
any more, as beforetimea 


164 


JESUS IS COMING. 


Amos 9:11-15, especially verse 15.7 


Hosea 1:10-11. 
“ 2:14~23. 
“ 3:4-5. 
Isa. 2:2-6. 
“  -9:6-7, 


“ 10:20-23, especially verses 21, 22. 
« 11:10-16, especially verse 11, SECOND TIME, 


“*  19:23-25. 
27:12-13.8 
*¢  33:20-24. 


* §6©43:1-7, especially verses 5, 6, 7. 
“«« 49:13-26, especially verses 22, 23. 
** 60:1-22, especially verses 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 18, 2L 


* §61:1-1L 

“*  62:1-12. 

“*  65:8-10. 

“© 65:17-25. 

“ §=6©66:19-24. | 

Jer. 3:12-19, especially verses 17, 18. 


“  11:4-5, 
“* ~—-16:14-16.9 


(7) Amos 9:11. In that day 
will I raise up the tabernacle of 
David that is fallen, and close 
up the breaches thereof; and I 
will raise up his ruins, and I 
will build it as in the days of 
old: 


12. That they may possess the 
remnant of Edom, and of all the 
heathen, which are called by my 
name, saith the Lord that doeth 
this. 


13. Behold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, that the plowman 
shall overtake the reaper, and 
the treader of grapes him that 
soweth seed; and the mountains 
shall drop sweet wine, and all 
the hills shall melt. 


14. And I will bring again the 
captivity of my people of Israel, 
and they shall build the waste 
cities, and inhabit them; and 
they shall plant vineyards, and 
drink the wine thereof; they 
shall also make gardens, and 
eat the fruit of them. 


15. And I will plant them 
upon their land, and they shall 
no more be pulled up out of 


their land which I have gives 
them, saith the Lord thy God. 

(8) Isa. 27:12. And it shalf 
come to pass in that day, that 
the Lord shall beat off from the 
channel of the river unto the 
stream of Egypt, and ye shali 
be gathered one by one, O ye 
children of Israel. 

13. And it shall come to pass 
in that day, that the great 
trumpet shall be blown, and 
they shall come which were 
ready to perish in the land or 
Assyria, and the outcasts in the 
land of Egypt, and shall worship 
the Lord in the holy mount at 
Jerusalem. 

(9) Jer. 16:14. ‘Therefore, 
behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that it shall no more be 
said, The Lord liveth, that 
brought up the children of Israel 
out of the land of Egypt; 

15. But, the Lord liveth that 
brought up the children of Israel 
from the land of the north, and 
from all the lands whither he 
had driven them: and I will 
bring them again into their !and 
that I gave unto their fathers, 


RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 166 


Jer. 23:3-8, especially verses 3, 4, 6. 
66 


29:10-14. 


“© ~=30:1-24, especially verses 8, 9, 10, 11, 20. 

‘© = 81:1-40, especially verses 8, 9, 10, 12, 28, 33, 38. 
‘© 32:36-44, especially verses 37, 39, 40, 41, 42. 

‘¢ 6 34:7-17, especially verses 7, 8, 14, 15, 16. 


6 44:28. 
‘¢  46:27-28. 
“= «B48. 


© -60:17-20. 


Ezek. 6:8-10, especially verse 9. 
“* ~—«- 2036-44, especially verses 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.10 
‘6 28:24-26, especially verses 25, 26. 
© =: $4:11-31, especially verses 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 26, 28. 
‘* —$6:1-88, especially verses 8, 10, 11, 12, 15, 21, 28, 31, 35, 


87, 38. 


‘© ~=—s«-$7:1-28, especially verses 11, 12, 14, 16 to 28. 
‘= s- 8 9:23-29, especially verses 25, 26, 27, 29. 
Chapters 40 to 48 the New Temple. 
See the order in which the tribes shall be settled, Ch. 4. 


Micah 4:1-7. 


“ 7:8-20, especially verses 12, 19, 20.11 


16. Behold, I will send for 
many fishers, saith the Lord, and 
they shall fish them; and after 
will I send for many hunters, 
and they shall hunt them from 
every mountain, and from every 
bill, and out of the holes of the 
rocks. 

(10) Ezek. 20:40. For in 
mine holy mountain, in the 
mountain of the height of Israel, 
saith the Lord God, there shall 
all the house of Israel, all of 
them in the land, serve me: 


there will I accept them, and. 


there will I require your offer- 
ings, and the first-fruits of your 
oblations, with all your holy 
things. , 

41. 1 will accept you with 
your sweet savour, when I bring 
you out from the people, and 
gather you out of the countries 
wherein ye have been scattered ; 
and I will be sanctified in you 
before the heathen. 

42. And ye shall know that I 
am the Lord, when I shall bring 
you into the land of Israel, into 
the country for the which I lifted 
up mine hand to give it to your 
fathers. 


43. And there shall ye remem- 
ber your ways, and all your do- 
ings, wherein ye have been de- 
filed; and ye shall loathe your- 
selves in your own sight for all 
your evils that ye have com- 
mitted. 

44, And ye shall know that I 
am the Lord, when I have 
wrought with you for my name’s 
sake, not according to your 
wicked ways, nor according to 
your corrupt doings, O ye house 
of Israel, saith the Lord God. 


(11) Mich. 7:18. Who és a 
God like unto thee, that par- 
doneth iniquity, and passeth by 
the transgression of the remnant 
of his heritage? he retaineth not 
his anger for ever, because he 
delighteth in mercy. 

19. He will turn again, he will 
have compassion upon us; he 
will subdue our iniquities; and 
thou wilt cast all their sins into 
the depths of the sea. 


90. Thou wilt perform the 
truth to Jacob, and the mercy tt» 
Abraham, which thou hast sworn 
unto our fathers from the Gage 
of old. 


166 JESUS I8 COMING. 


Zeph. 3:8-20, especially verses 11, 13, 19, 20.12 


Zech, 2:4-13, 


8:1-10, especially verse 9. 
**  8:1-23, especially verses 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 17, 20 to 23. 


** —- 10:5-12, all of them.18 


** —-12:1-14, especially verses 10, 11. 
“ —18:1-9, especially verses 6, 8, 9. 
“* 14:1-21, especially verses 11, 16, 20, 2. 


Mal. $:10-12.14 


Mat. 23:37-39, especially in verse 39, TILL. 
Luke 13:34-35, especially in verse 35, UNTIL. 


*“* =621:24, especially UNTIL. 


“Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles UNTIE 


the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.’”’ 
Rom. 11:17-28, especially verses 17, 20, 28 to 28.15 


(12) Zeph. 3:19. Behold, at 
that time I will undo all that 
afflict thee; and I will save her 
that halteth, and gather her that 
was driven out; and I will get 
them praise and fame in every 
land where they have been put to 
shame, 

20. At that time will I bring 
you again, even in the time that 
I gather you: for I will make 
you a name and a praise among 
all people of the earth, when I 
turn back your captivity before 
your eyes, saith the Lord. 

(13) Zech. 10:6. And I will 
strengthen the house of Judah, 
and I will save the house of Jo- 
seph, and [ will bring them 
again to place them: for I have 
mercy upon them: and they shall 
be as though I had not cast 
them off: for I am the Lord 
their God, and will hear them. 

7. And they of Ephraim shall 
be like a mighty man, and their 
heart shall rejoice as through 
wine: yea, their children shall 
see it, and be glad; their heart 
shall rejoice in the Lord. 

8. I will hiss for them, and 
gather them; for I have re- 
deemed them: and they shall in- 
crease as they have increased. 

9. And I will sow them among 
the people: and they shall re- 
member me in far countries; 
and they shall live with their 
children, and turn again. 


- a 


10. I will bring them again 
also out of the land of Egypt, 
and gather them out of Assyria ; 
and I will bring them into the 
land of Gilead and Lebanon; and 
place shall not be found for 
them. 


(14) Mal. 3:11. And I will 
rebuke the devourer for your 
sakes, and he shall not destroy 
the fruits of your ground; 
neither shall your vine cast her 
fruit before the time in the field, 
saith the Lord of hosts. 

12. Aud all nations shall call 
you blessed: for ye shall be a 
delightsome land, saith the Lord 
of hosts. 

(15) Rom. 11:11. I say then, 
Have they stumbled that they 
should fall? God forbid: but 
rather through their fall salva- 
tion is come unto the Gentiles, 
for to provoke them to jealousy. 

12. Now if the fall of them be 
the riches of the world, and the 
diminishing of them the riches of 
the Gentiles; how much more 


‘ their fulness? 


13. For I speak to you Gen- 
tiles, inasmuch as I am _ the 
apostle of the Gentiles, I mag- 
nify mine office: 

19. Thou wilt say then, The 
branches were broken off, that 
I might be graffed in. 

20. Well; because of unbelief 
they were broken off, und thoy 


ee 


RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 167 


Acts 15:13-16,—very important, as it is the apostle’s sum- 
mary of the prophets,16 
Psa. 61:18; 102:16. 


And now, reader, if you have faithfully studied these 
passages, or if you have even read them, do you wonder 


that the great mass of Jews, at the present time, have an 
abiding faith that they are to be returned to Canaan? 


All the orthodox Jews tenaciously cling to this hope; 
and shall we, who have accepted so much greater light, re- 
fuse this overwhelming testimony of the Word? God for- 
bid. 

It may be that you say, “These prophesies were fulfilled 
in the return from Babylon.” 


Not so, that was the rirst Time. But there is to be 


A. Second Restoration. 


“And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall 
set His hand AGAIN the SECOND TIME to recover the remnant 
of His people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from 
Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, 
and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of 
the sea.” Isa. 11:11. 


In the first restoration only those who were MINDED came 
back from Babylon (Ezra 7:13), while many remained both 


standest by faith. Be not high- 
minded, but fear: 


21. For if God spared not the 
natural branches, take heed lest 
he also spare not thee. 


25. For I would not, brethren, 
that ye should be ignorant of 
this mystery, lest ye should be 
wise in your own conceits, that 
blindness in part is happened 
to Israel, until the fulness. of the 
Gentiles be come in. 

26. And so all Israel shall be 
saved: as it is written, There 
shall come out of Sion the De- 
liverer, and shall turn away un- 
godliness from Jacob: 

27. For this 4s my covenant 
unto them, when I shall take 
away their sins. 


(16) Acts 15:18. And after 


they had held their peace, James 
answered, saying, Men and 
brethren, hearken unto me: 


14. Simeon hath declared how 
God at the first did visit the Gen- 
tiles, to take out of them a peo- 
Ple for his name. 

15. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets; as it is 
written, 

16. After this I will return, 
and will build again the taber- 
nacle of David, which is falien 
down; and I will build again the 
ruins thereof, and I will set it 
up; 

17. That the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord, and 
all the Gentiles, upon whom my 
name is called, saith the Lord, 
who doeth all these things. 


168 JESUS I8 COMING. 


there, and in Egypt and elsewhere. But i the future, or 
second restoration, not one will be left. 


‘If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of 
heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and 
from thence will He fetch thee.”’ Deut. 30:4. 

“Fear not; for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from 
the east, and gather thee from the west; I will say to the 
north, give up; and to the south, keep not back; bring my 
sons from far, and my daughters fram the ends of the 
earth; EVEN EVERY ONE that is called by my name: for I 
have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I 
have made him.” Isa. 43:5-7. 

“For thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I, even I, will both 
search my sheep and seek them out. As a shepherd seeketh 
out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are 
scattered, so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them 
out of all places where they have been scattered in the 
cloudy and dark day; and I will bring them out from the 
people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring 
them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains 
of Israel.” Ezek. 34:11-13. 

“Then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, 
which caused them to be led into captivity, among the 
heathen; but I have gathered them unto their own land, 
and HAVE LEFT NONE OF THEM ANY MORE THERE,” Ezek. 
39: 28-29. 


In the first restoration it was only Jews who returned. 

In the second, or future restoration, it will be both Judah 
(the two tribes) and Israel (the ten tribes).* 

“In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the 
house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the 
land of the north to the land that I have given for an 
inheritance unto your fathers.” Jer. 3:18. 

“And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, 
EVEN ALL OF IT, and the cities shall be inhabited, and the 
wastes shall be builded.” Ezek. 36:10. 

Ezekiel was directed to take two sticks, representing 
Judah and Joseph, which should be joined and become one 
stick in his hand, and when the people enquired what it 
meant, he was directed to say unto them: 

“Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the chil- 
dren of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be 


gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them 
into their own land: and I will make them ONE NATION in 


*Except in this place, we use the word Israel in its broader 
sense, meaning the whole twelve tribes. 


é 


wow a 


RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 169 


\ 


the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall 
be king to them ALL; and they shall be NO MORE two nations, 
neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more 
at all.” Ezek. 37:15-22. 


At the first restoration they returned to be overthrown 
and driven out again. But in the second, they shall return 
to remain, no more to go out. They shall be exalted and 
dwell safely, and the Gentile nations shall flow unto them. 


Permanent Restoration. 


“I will plant them upon their land, and they SHALL No 
MORE BE PULLED UP out of their land which I have given 
them, saith the Lord their God.”” Amos 9:15. 

“And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither 
shall the beasts of the land devour them: but they shall 
DWELL SAFELY, and none shall make them afraid.” Hzek. 
34:28, 

“And I will settle you after your old estates, and will do 
better unto you than at your beginnings:—yea, I will cause 
men to walk upon you, even my people Israel;—and thou 
shalt NO MORE HENCEFORTH BEREAVE THEM OF MEN.” Ezek. 
36:11-12. 

‘“‘Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no 
man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excel- 
lency, a joy of many generations. Thou shalt also suck 
the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breast of kings; 
and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy 
Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.” Isa. 60:15-16. 


All Nations Shall Flow Unto Israel. 


“As I LIVE, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clathe thee 
with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, 
as a bride doeth.. . . I will lift up my hand to the Gen- 
tiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall 
bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be 
carried upon their shoulders, and kings shall be thy nursing 
fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers; they shall 
bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and 
lick up the dust of thy feet.” Isa. 49:18, 22, 23. 

“But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the 
mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in 
the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the 
hills; and people shall flow into it. And many nations 
shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the moun- 
tain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; 
and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in His 
paths: for the law shall go forth of: Zion, and the word 
of the Lord from Jerusalem.” Mic. 4:1-2. 


10 JESUS IS COMING. 


“Thus saith the Lord of hosts; it shall yet come tc pass, 
that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many 
cities. And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, 
saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to 
seek the Lord of hosts: I will also go. Yea, MANY PEOPLE 
and STRONG NATIONS shall come to seek the Lord of hosts 
in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Thus saith the 
Lord of hosts; In those days it shall come to pass, that ten 
men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, 
even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, 
saying, We will go with you: for we have heard that God 
is with you.” Zech. 8:20-23. 

“And it shall come to pass, THAT EVERY ONE THAT IS LEFT 
OF ALL THE NATIONS which came against Jerusalem, shall 
even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord 
of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.” Zech. 14:16. 


In the first Restoration, because of their blindness, and 
hard, stony hearts, they rejected and killed Jesus. ‘But in 
the future Restoration they shall REPENT of all this, and 
have CLEAN HEARTS, and ACCEPT OF CHRIST, who will be their 
King. 

Look Upon Me. 


“And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of suppli- 
cations; and they shall look upon me whom they have 
PIERCED, AND THEY SHALL MOURN FOR HIM, AS ONE MOURN~ 
ETH FOR HIS ONLY SON, AND SHALL BE IN BITTERNESS FOR 
HIM, AS ONE THAT IS IN BITTERNESS FOR HIS FIRST-BORN. 
In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, 
as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megid- 
don. And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the 
family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; 
the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives 
apart; the family of the house of Levi apart, and their 
wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives 
apart; all the families that remain, every family apart, and 
their wives apart.” Zech. 12:10-14. 


“They shall come with weeping and with supplications 
will I lead them; I will cause them to walk by the rivers 
of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: 
for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first-born. 
Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in 
the isles afar off, and say, He that scattereth Israel will 
gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock. 
But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the 
house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put 
my law in their INWARD PARTS, AND WRITE IT IN THEIR 
HEARTS; and will be their God, and they sha!l be my peo- 
vle.” Jer. 31:9, 10, 38. 


_ 


RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 171 


‘The Cleansing of Israel. 


“For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather 
you out of all countries, and will bring you into your own 
land. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you 
shall be clean: from _ all your filthiness, and from all your 
idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you. 
and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away 
the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a 
heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and 
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my 
judgments, and do them. And ye shall dwell in the land 
that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, 
and I will be your God. I will also save you from all your 
uncleanness: and I will call for the corn, and will increase 
it, and lay no famine upon you.” Ezek. 36:24-28. 

“Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their 
idols nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their 
transgressions; but I will save them out of all their dwell- 
ing places, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse 
them; so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. 
And David my servant shall be king over them; and they 
all shall have one shepherd: . . . and they shall dwell 
in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, where- 
in your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, 
even they and their children and their children’s children, 
forever: and my servant David shall be their prince, for- 
ever, . . . my tabernacle shall also be with them: yea, I 
will be their God and they shall be my people.” Ezek. 37:23- 
27. 
“And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all 
countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them 
again to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase, 
And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed 
them: and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither 
shall they be lacking, saith the Lord. Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will raise to David a righteous 
Branch and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall exe- 
cute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah 
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is 
his name whereby he shall be called, ‘THE LORD OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS.’ ” [Jehovah, Tsidkenu,] Jer. 23:3-6. 

“And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall 
feed them, even my servant David: he shall feed them, and 
he shall be their shepherd. And I the Lord will be their 
God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the 
Lord have spoken it.” Ezek. 34:23-24., 


Nothing has ever yet been built like the temple which 
Ezekiel describes in chapters 40 to 48, and this includes a 


172 . JEBUS I8 COMING. 
definite description of the location of each tribe, as they 
shall be settled in this great future restoration. See Ch. 
48. 

Confusing Israel with the Church. 


It would seem that such overwhelming testimony would 
convince every fair-minded reader, that there is a glorious 
future restoration in store for Israel. And yet, many say, 
that we must interpret all this Scripture “spiritually,” and 
they fritter away the point and the force of such explicit 
declarations, in attempting to apply them to the persecuted 
Church. 

This is a very great error, and we believe it has arisen, 
principally, from a misunderstanding of Paul’s arguments 
in his epistles. He does not confound Israel with the 
Church when he says, “They are not all Israel which are of 
Israel.” Nor does he confound the Church with Israel 

when he makes us children of Abraham by faith; but he 
' demonstrates that we all stand by faith alone. In 1 Cor. 
10 :32,17 he makes a clear distinction between the Jews, the 
Gentiles, and the Church of God.* There are special bless- 
ings for the Church, and special blessings for Israel. He 
plainly shows that not all the natural seed are. true Israel- 
ites. He only is a Jew who has circumcision of heart in 
the spirit.1® And though multitudes of Israel have passed 
away in unbelief, still Paul distinctly declares that there 
is a remnant WHICH SHALL BE SAVED.’® He so loved them 
that he could sacrifice himself, and even be separated from 
Christ for their sakes.2° He saw their future glory, as the 


*The Jews who accept Christ in this dispensation become 
part of the Church. See page 88. 


(17) 1 Cor. 10:32. Give none 
offence, neither to the Jews, nor 
to the Gentiles, nor to the church 
of God. 

(18) Rom. 2:29. But he ds 
a Jew, which is one inwardly; 
and circumcision is that of the 
heart, in the spirit, and not in 
the letter; whose praise és not 
of men,.but of God. 

(19) Rom. 9:27. Esaias also 
earieth concerning Israel, Though 


the number of the children of 
Israel be as the sand of the sea, 
& remnant shall be saved. 


Rom. 11:5. »Even so then at 
this present time also there is a 
remnant according to the elec- 
tion of grace. 


(20) Rom. 9:3. For I could 
wish that myself were accursed 
from Christ for my brethren, my 
kinsmen according to the flesh. 


RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 173 
natural branches yet to be grafted into their own olive tree, 
which should be nothing less than life from the dead.?* 
Jesus said, in Luke 21:24, “And they shall fall by the 
edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into 
all nations; and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the 
Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” And 
Paul understood this mystery, that when “the fullness of 
the Gentiles be come in,” “there should come out of Zion 
the Deliverer, who should turn away ungodliness from 
Jacob.” Rom. 11 :25-26. 


And this is fully confirmed by the following: In Amos 8 
and 9, we read of the awful calamities which should come 
upon Israel. And not until they had been sIFTED AMONG 
ALL NATIONS would the Lord gather and plant them, and 
raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen. When the 
apostles and elders were gathered in the first council at 
Jerusalem, considering this same question about Israelites 
and the Church, the Holy Spirit directed the mind of 
James to this very prophecy in Amos, to show that during 
this sifting of Israel, God was to TAKE ovuT of the Gentiles a 
people to His name, and Arter THIS to build again the . 
tabernacle of David. Acts 15:13-17. So we see that these 
restoration prophecies can not be applied to the Church, 
which is first to be TaKEN OUT before Israel and Jerusalem 
are to be restored. 


Again, one of the most specific prophecies of their re- 
storation is addressed, not to the people, but to the Moun- 
TAINS OF ISRAEL, which leaves no possible doubt as to the 
LITERAL MEANING intended.?? 


(21) Rom. 11:15. For if the my people of Israel; for they are 


casting away of them be the 
reconciling of the world, what 
shall the receiving of them be, 
but life from the dead? 

(22) Ezek. 36:1. Also, thou 
son of man, prophesy unto the 
mountains of Israel, and say, Ye 
mountains of Israel, hear the 
word of the Lord: 

8. But ye, O mountains of Is- 
rael, ye shall shoot forth your 
branches, and yield your fruit to 


at hand to come. 

9. For, behold, I am for you, 
and I will turn unto you, and ye 
shall be tilled and sown: 

10. And I will multiply men 
upon you, all the house of Israe:, 
even all of itf and the cities 
shall be inhabited, and the 
wastes shall be builded: 

11. And I will multiply upon 
you man and beast; and they 
shall increase and bring fruit: 


174 


JESUS I8 COMING. 


The Day of Jacob’s Trouble. 


Surely Israel SHALL BE RESTORED; but there is an AWFUL 


TIME OF TROUBLE awaiting her. 


Their sins are mountain 


high. Upon them is the guilt of innocent blood, even the 
precious blood of Jesus Christ. Mat. 27:25. 


The faithful prophet saw it when he wrote: 


“And these ara the words that the Lord spake concern- 
ing Israel and concerning Judah. | 

“For thus saith the Lord: We have heard a voice of 
trembling, c* fear, and not of peace. 


“Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with 


child? wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his 
loins, as a@ woman in travail, and all faces are turned into 


paleness. 


“Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is 
even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved out 


of it.” Jer. 30:4-7. 


“Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your 
doings that were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in 
your own Sight for your iniquities and for your abomina- 


tions.”” Ezek. 36:31. 


Yes, they shall repent and loathe themselves. 
They “shall pass through the sea with affliction.”2° 
Many shall die, but the third part shall be saved. 


and I will settle you after your 
old estates, and will do better 
unto you than at your begin- 
nings; and ye shall know that 
am the Lord. 


(23) Zech. 10:11. And he 
shall pass through the sea with 
affliction, and shall smite the 
waves in the sea, and all the 
deeps of the river shall dry up; 
and the pride of Assyria shall be 
brought down, and the sceptre 
of Egypt shall depart away. 

Ezek. 7:1. Moreover the 
word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, 

2. Also, thou son of man, thus 


saith the Lord God unto the land 
ef Israel; An end, the end {is 


come upon the four corners of 
the land. 

3. Now {fs the end come upon 
thee, and I will send mine anger 
upon thee, and will judge thee 
according to thy ways, and will 
recompense upon thee all thine 
abominations. 

4. And mine eye shall not 
Spare thee, neither will I have 
pity: but I will recompense thy 
ways upon thee, and thine abom- 
inations shall be in the midst of 
thee; and ye shall know that I 
am the Lord. 

8. Now will I shortly pour out 
my fury upon thee, and accom- 
plish mine anger upon thee; and 
I will judge thee according to 
thy ways, and will recompense 


RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 175 


“And I will bring the THIRD PART through the fire, and 
will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as 
gold is tried; they shall call on my name and I will hear 
them; I will say, it is my people; and they shall say, the 
Lord is my God.” Zech. 13:9. 


All this is intimately connected with the coming of 
Christ, not at the Rapture, but ‘at the Revelation. (See 
diagram page 72.) 

For we read, “When the Lord shall build up Zion, Hz 
SHALL APPEAR IN His cuory.” Psa. 102:16. 

It is when He appears with His saints (the Church) in 
flaming fire to execute judgment (2 Thes. 1:7-10; Jude 14) 
upon the nations and upon Israel, who are the third party 
in Mat. 25:36, etc.,2* and who are not to be reckoned among 
the nations, Nu. 23:9. It is when He sits as a refiner and 
purifier. 


‘Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare 
the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek, shall sud- 
denly come to His temple, even the messenger of the cove- 
nant, whom ye delight in: behold, He shall come, saith the 
Lord of hosts. 

“But who may abide the day of His coming? and who 
shall stand when He appeareth? for He is like a refiner’s 
fire, and like fuller’s soap. 

“And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and 
He shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold 
and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in 
righteousness. 

“Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be 
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in 
former years. 

“And I will come near you to judgment; and I will be 
a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the 
adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those 
that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the 
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, 
and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts.” Mal. 3:1-6. 


“He shall indeed refine Israel in the furnaee of af- 


thee for all thine abominations. (24) Mat. 25:40. And _ the 
9. And mine eye shall not King shall answer and say unto 
spare, neither will I have pity: them, Verily I say unto you, 
I will recompense thee accord- Inasmuch as ye have done ét un- 
ing to thy ways and thine abom-_ to one of the least of these my 
inations that are in the midst of brethren, ye have done ¢ unto 
thee; and ye shall know that I me, 
am the Lord that smiteth. 


176 JESUS 18 COMING. 


fliction.”*5 
LIGHT SHALL COME.*® 
Arise and shine in youth immortal, 
Thy light is come, thy King appears! 
Beyond the centuries’ swinging portal, 
Breaks a new dawn-—THE THOUSAND YEARS! 

We might fill a book with comments upon how Israel 
shall be restored, but all we have desired to do was to show 
that it is an incontrovertible fact of prophecy, and that it is 
intimately connected with our Lord’s appearing, and this 
we trust we have satisfactorily accomplished. 

The detail of the manner of their restoration, and of 
their repentance and acceptance of Christ, is not so im- 
portant to us. For those who are of the Church are to 
be taken away first, in the Rapture,.and escape all these 
things through which Israel must pass.?7 

True, many have found the study of this detail a rich 
blessing, and we give the result which one has reached on 
pages 187 to 195, and yet we believe that we cannot now 
discern the order of these things so clearly as Israel will 
in the great rush of events, after the Church is taken 
away, and when the Book is more completely unsealed and 
opened. Dan. 12:4. 

It is enough for us to know that it will be in the Larrer 
Days (Isa. 2:2) that Antichrist is to be revealed and 
destroyed by Jesus the King of the Jews, who is coming 
(2 Thes. 2:8), and that Israel, His people, “are at hand to 
come.” Ezk. 36:8. 


(25) Isa. 48:10. Behold, I 
have refined thee, but not with 
silver; I have chosen thee in 
the furnace of affliction. 

Psa. 66:10. For thou, O God, 


8. And the Gentiles shall come 
to thy light, and kings to the 
brightness of thy rising. 


4. Lift up thine eyes round 


hast proved us: thou hast tried 
us, as silver is tried. 

(26) Isa. 60:1. Arise, shine; 
for thy light is come, and the 
glory of the Lord is risen upon 
thee. 

2. For, behold, the darkness 
shall cover the earth, and gross 
darkness the peoples but the 
Lord shall arise upon thee, and 
his glory shall be seen upon thee. 


about, and see: all they gather 
themselves together, they come 
to thee: thy sons shall come 
from far and thy daughters shall 
be nursed at thy side. 


(27) Luke 21:86. Watch ye 
therefore, and pray always, that 
ye may be accounted worthy to 
escape all these things that shall _ 
come to pass, and to stand before 
the Son of man. , 


And they shall arise and shine, for THER 


CHAPTER XVI. 
The Study of Prophecy. 


It may be you disapprove the study of prophecy, because 
Jesus said: “But of that day and hour knoweth no man” 
(Mat. 24:36), and, “It is not for you to know the times 
or the seasons which the Father hath put in his own 
power.” Acts 1:7. 


Dear reader! do not conceive that the study of prophecy 
consists merely in the setting of dates or forecastmg future 
events. For wise reasons the Master has withheld from us 
“the day and the hour” when He will come, but He called 
the Pharisees hypocrites, because they could not discern the 
signs of the times, and He has commanded us to warTcH, 
and he has pronounced a blessing upon the study of proph- 
ecy.? 

Peter exhorts us to GIVE HEED unto the sure word of 
prophecy.? “All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, — 
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness.” 2 Tim. 3:16. 


The greater part of this Scripture consists of prophecy, 
and if Christians would give more attention to it, they 
would not find themselves distracted from present service, 
but “they would find much light thrown on their present 
path, much practical encouragement given to their minis- 
try.” Their faith would rest upon a broader and deeper 
comprehension of God’s character and ways, and their 
spiritual horizon would stand out in clearer outline than 
before. 


(1) Rev. 1:3. Blessed is he Luke 11:28. But he said, Yea, 


that readeth, and they that hear 
the words of this prophecy, and 
keep those things which are writ- 
ten therein: for the time ds at 
hand. 

Rev. 22:7. Behold, I come 
quickly: blessed {s he that keep- 
eth the sayings of the prophecy 
of this book. 


rather, blessed are they that hear 
the word of God, and keep it, 

(2) 2 Pet. 1:19. And we have 
the word of prophecy made more — 
sure; whereunto ye do well that 
ye take heed, as unto a lamp 
shining in a dark place, until 
the day dawn, and the day-stas 
arise in your hearts. 


(177) 


178 JESUS IS COMING. 

“But to perceive and understand all this requires much 
more than a surface study of Scripture, or the mere fore- 
casting of future events. It must be read in its profounder 
teachings, in those wonderful depths of meaning that under- 
lie its illustrations, its metaphors, its history, as well as 
sparkle up to the sunlight, in its bright prophetic an- 
nouncement of coming glory.” Such a study of God’s 
word will be found of paramount importance to meet the 
skepticism of the day, “for it furnishes us out of God’s own 
armory, and trains us in His school of warfare.” See how 
God uses prophetic truth to confound the philosophers and 
skeptics. And He points to the prophecies fulfilled as an 
assurance of the accomplishment of the new things de- 
’ dared by Him. “Before they spring forth I tell you of 
them.”* And He sets forth Israel as the witnesses be- 
fore all nations of the Word He has declared and that He 


is God.5 
And such they sre to-day. 
Prophecy is their history. 


Who but God couid thus preserve them? 


(3) Isa. 41:21. Produce your 
cause, .saith the Lord; bring 
forth your strong reasons, saith 
the King of Jacob. 

22. Let them bring them 
forth, and show us what shall 
happen: let them show the for- 
mer things, what they de, that 
we may consider them, and know 
the latter end of them; or de- 
clare us things for to come. 

23. Show the things that are 
to come hereafter, that we may 
know that ye are gods; yea, do 
good, or do evil that we may 
be dismayed, and behold it to- 
gether. 

(4) Isa. 42:8. I am _ the 
Lord; that is my name: and my 
glory will I not give to another, 
neither my praise to graven im- 
ages, 

9. Behold, the former things 
are come to pass, and new things 
do I declare: before they spring 
forth I tell you of them. 


> 


(5) Isa. 43:9. Let all the 
nations be gathered together, and 
let the people be assembled: who 
among them can declare this, 
and show us former things? let 
them bring forth their witnesses, 
that they may be justified: or 
let them hear, and say, Jt és 
truth. 


10. Ye are my witnesses, saith 
the Lord, and my servant whom 
I have chosen; that ye may 
know and believe me, and un- 
derstand that I am he: before 
me there was no God formed, 
neither shall there be after me. 


11. I, even I, am the Lord; 
and besides me there is no sa- 
viour. 


12. I have declared, and have 
saved, and I have showed, when 
there was no strange god among 
you: therefore ye are my wit- 
nesses, saith the Lord, that I am 


PROPHECY THE BEST WEAPON. 179 


Who but God could foretell their history? 

“This weapon alone out of God’s armory can cut 
through all the sophistries and opposition of men.” 

God forbid then that we should despise prophecies, 1 
Thes. 5:20. (axpopyreias — Prophecies. ) 

“Q Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord.” 
Jer. 22:29. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
A Practical Doctrine. 


We have asserted that this truth of the coming of the 
Lord is eminently practical. In proof of this, we here ap- 
pend the following references, to show how Jesus and the 
Apostles used the prophecies of His coming again as 2 
motive to incite us. 


iL 


fab fo 


ESS ON Ore wh 


To watchfulness,— Mat. 24 :42-44; 25:13; Mark 13:32- 
37; Lu. 12:35-38; Rev. 16:15. 
To Sobriety,— 1 Thes. 5:2-6; 1 Pet. 1:13; 4:7; 5:8. 


To repentance,— Acts 3:19-21; Rev. 3:3. 
To fidelity,— Mat. 25:19-21; Lu. 12:42-44; 19:12-13. 
Not to be ashamed of Christ,— Mar. 8:38. 
Against worldliness,— Mat. 16 :26-27 
To moderation or mildness,— Phil. 4:5. 
To patience,— Heb. 10:36-37; James 5:7-8. 
To mortification of fleshly lusts,— Col. 3 :3-5. 
To sincerity,— Phil. 1:9-10. 
To the practical sanctification of the entire 
being, — 1 Thes. 5:23. 
To ministerial faithfulness,— 2 Tim. 4:1-2, 
To induce obedience to the Apostle’s in- 
junctions, — 1 Tim. 6:13-14. 
To pastoral diligence and purity,— 1 Pet. 5:2-4, 
To purify ourselves,— 1 John 3:2-3. 
To abide in Christ,— | 1 John 2:28. 
To endure manifold temptations and _ the 
severest trial of faith,— 1 Pet. 1:7. 
To bear persecution for the sake of our 
Lord,— 1 Pet. 4:13. 
To holy conversation and godliness,— 2 Pet. 3:11-13. 
To brotherly love,— 1 Thes. 3 :12-13. 


To keep in mind our heavenly citizenship,— 

, Phil. 3:20-21. 
To love the second coming of Christ,— 2 Tim. 4:7-8 
To look for Him,— Heb. 9 :27-28, 


(180) 


A PRACTICAL DOCTRINE. 181 


24. To confidence that Christ will finish the work,— 
' Phil. 1:6. 
25. To hold fast the hope firm unto the end,— 
Rev. 2:25; 3:11. 
26. To separation from worldly lusts and to live 


Godly,— Titus 2:11-13. 

27. To watchfulness because of its suddenness,— 
Lu, 17 :24-30. 
28. To guard against hasty judgment,— 1 Cor. 4:5. 
29. To the hope of a rich reward,— Mat. 19 :27-28. 


30. To assure the disciples of a time of rejoicing,— 
2 Cor. 1:14; Phil. 2:16; 1 Thes. 2:19. 

31. To comfort the apostles in view of Christ’s de- 
parture from them,— John 14:3; Acts 1:11. 

32. Practical faith in the second coming, is a 

crowning grace and assurance of blameless- 


ness in the day of the Lord,— 1 Cor. 1:48. 
33. It is the principal event for which the be- 

liever waits,— 1 Thes. 1:9-10. 
34. It is declared to be the time of reckoning with 

the servants, — Mat. 25:19, 
35. Of judgment for the living nations,— Mat. 25:31-46. 
36. Of the resurrection of the saints,— 1 Cor. 15:23. 


37. Of the manifestation of the saints,— 

2 Cor. 5:10; Col. 3:4. 

38. It is declared to be the source of consolation 

to those who sorrow over the dead who sleep 
| in Jesus,— 1 Thes. 4:14-18. 

39. It is declared to be the time of Tribulation to 
unbelievers, — 2 Thes. 1:7-9, 

40. It is proclaimed every time the Lord’s Supper 
is celebrated,— 1 Cor, 11:26. 


Such are some of the uses made of this doctrine in the 
New Testament. It is employed to arm the appeals, to 
point the arguments, and to enforce the exhortations. 
What is there more PRACTICAL in any other doctrine? We 
would that we had space to give the passages referred to 
in full. But it will be a greater blessing to you, dear 
reader, if you will go to the Word and search them eut. 


182 JESUS IS COMING. 


We have made no distinction between those passages which 
refer to the Rapture, and those which refer to the Reve!a- 
tion, both classes being equally used as a motive for the 
practical purposes mentioned. 

The following outline and arrangement of Seripture has 
been taken principally from a little pamphlet published in 
London. It is a concise view of the pre-millennial coming, 
with plain proof-texts of the same, conveniently arranged 
for reference and study. As the texts cited are necessarily 
brief, it will be found of great profit to read the context of 
each in the Word. 

In connection with the diagrams on pages 72 and 225, we 
believe it will enable every prayerful reader to apprehend 
the order of events that pertain to the coming of Christ, 
both as THe BripecRooM and as Tux KING. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
THE COMING OF THE LORD 


And Some ‘Subsequent Events in Their Connection with 
the Church’s Future, 


ne a 


“Howbeit, when He, the Spirit of truth is come,. .... He wili show you 
shings to come.*’ John 16:18. 


THE LORD’S “IT go to prepare a place for you. And if 
PROMISE. I go and prepare a place for you, I will 
come again, and receive you unto myself.” 

Jno. 14:2, 3. 

“IT go away, and come again unto you.” 

Jno. 14:28. 

“A’ little while, and ye shall not see me: 

and again a little while, and ye shall see 

me, because I go to the Father.” Jno. 16:16, 

“I will see you again, and your heart 


shall rejoice.’’ Jno. 16:22. 
His “The Lord is not slack concerning His 
Faithfulness. promise.” 2 Pet. 3:9. 


“Let us hold fast the confession of our 
hope (4) without wavering; for He is 
faithful that promised; ... and so much 
the more as ye see the day approaching.”’ 

He, 10:28, 26. 

“For yet a little while, and He that 

shall come will come, and will not tarry.” 
He. 10:37. 

“The coming of the Lord draweth nigh.”’ 
James 5:8. 

“Surely I come quickly: Amen.” 

Rev. 22:20. 

The Hope of ‘Unto them that look for Him shall He 
the Church.(b) appear the second time, without sin, unto 
salvation.” He. 9:28. 


(a) So the Greek. 
(b) All believers of the present dispensation. 1 Co. 12:12, 18, 37. 


(188) 


184 


JESUS I8 COMING. 


THE COMING 
of the LORD 
as the Bride- 
groom, into 


“Our conversation (0) is in heaven; from 
whence also we look for the Savior, the 
Ph. 


Lord Jesus Christ.” 


3:20. 


“Waiting for the adoption, to-wit, the 


redemption of our body.” 


Rom. 8:23. 


“Waiting for the coming of our Lord 


Jesus Christ.” 


1 Cor. 1:7. 


“Looking for that blessed hope.” 


Ti. 2:13. 


“The patient waiting for Christ.” 


2 Th. 3:5. 


“To wait for His Son from heaven, 
whom He raised from the dead, even 


Jesus.” 


1 Th. 1:10. 


THE RAPTURE. 


“The Lord Himself (4) shall descend 
from heaven with a shout, (¢) with the 
voice of the archangel and with the trump 
of God.” (f) 

“At the last trump (/f); for the trumpet 


1 Th. 4:16. 


the Air, for His shall sound.” 1 Cor. 15:52. 
Church. (c) “Them also which sleep in Jesus will 
God bring with him.” (yg) 1 Th. 4:14. 

The Dead in “The dead in Christ shall rise 
Christ raised. first.” 1 Th. 4:16. 
“In Christ shall all be made alive.... 
They that are Christ’s at His coming.” 
1 Cor. 15:22, 23. 
“The dead shall be raised incorrupti-. 
ble.”’ 1 Cor. 15:52. 
“Raised in incorruption; ... raised in 
glory; ... raised in power; ... raised 
a spiritual body.” 1 Cor. 16:42-44, 
(b) Or “Citizenship,” see Jno. (f) The trumpet sounded twice 
17:16; Ep. 2:19; He. 11:10, when the Lord descended 
13, 16; 12:22. upon Sinai, see Ex. 19:11, 
(c) “Watch, therefore; for ye 17. And so when He de- 


(da) 


(e) 


know not what hour your 
Lord doth come.” Mk. 13: 
82, 3%; 1 Th. 5:6. 

That is, personally, yet 
seen by none but believers; 
vide Jno. 14:19; Acts 1:3, 4, 
9; 9:7; 10:40, 41; 1 Co. 15: 
5-8. 

Understood by those only to 
whom addressed; see Jno. 
12:28, 29; Ac, 9:4 7. 


(g) 


scends to take the church 
unto Himself, at its first 
sounding the dead in 
Christ will be raised, and 
at its last sounding, the liv- 
ing saints will be changed. 


The Old Testament saints 
also will doubtless at this 
time receive their glorified 
bodies, see Heb. 11:39, 40 


THE RAPTURE. 185 


Living Believ- “We which are alive, and remain unto 
ers Changed. the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent 
(@) them which are asleep.” 1 Th. 4:15 


“We shall not all sleep, but we shall all 
be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye... . and we shall be changed.’’ 
(2) 1 Cor. 15:51, 52. 


“The Lord Jesus Christ .. . shall 
change our vile body, (c) that it may be 
fashioned like unto His glorious body.” 

Ph. 3:20, 21. 


“And as we have borne the image of the 
earthy, we shall also bear the image of 
the heavenly.” 1 Cor. 15:49. 


“For this corruptible must put on incor- 
ruption, and this mortal must put on im- 
mortality.” 1 Cor. 15:53. 
“Then we which are alive and remain, 
Both Caught shall be caught up together, with them 
up into the in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the 
Clouds. (d) air.” 1 Th. 4:17. 
“The coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and . . . our gathering together unto 
Him.” 2 Th. 2:1. 
Je be Ever “So shall we ever be with the tor. 
th the Lor “That where I am, there ye may be 
also.” Jno. 14:3. 
‘“‘Where I am, there shall also my serv- 
ant be.’’ Jno. 12:26. 
‘With me where I am; that they may 
behold my glory.” Jno. 17:24. 
“They shall never perish.” Jno. 10:28. 
‘Because I live, ye shall live also.” » 


Jno. 14:19. 

“That. we should live together with 

Him 1 Th. 5:10. 
“An ... eternal weight of glory. ” 

2 Cor. 4:17. 


“Bternal inheritance.” 
He. 9:15; 1 Pet. 1:4. 


“He (€) shall go no more out.” 


, Rev. 3:12. 
(a) That a ‘Anticipate’ or ‘go or “low estate,” Lu. 1:48; 
befor Ac. 8:83; Ph. 2:8. 
(bd) Then - -.« Death is swal- (dad) “The redemption of the 
lowed up in victory,’’ 1 Co. purchased possession.’’ Ro. 
15:54; and “Mortality swal- 8:23; Ep. 1:14. 


lowed up of life.”” 2 Co. 6:4. (e) The overcomer, Re, 3:12; 1 
(c) The body of our “humble” Jno. 5:4, 6. 


i) 


JESUS I8 COMING. 


The 
JUDGMENT 
SEAT 
of Christ. (b) 


Manifestation 
of Works. 


Whether Good 


or Bad. 


Reward. 


“We (c) must all appear before the 
judgment seat of Christ; that every one 
may receive the things done, in his body, 
according. to that he hath done, whether it 
be good or bad.” 2 Cor. §:10. 

“We (c) shall all stand before the judg- 
ment seat of Christ; ... every one of us 
shall give account of himself to God.’’ 

Rom. 14:10-12. 

“Behold, I come quickly; and my re- 
ward is with me, to give every man ac- 
cording as his work shall be.” Rev. 22:12. 

“Every man’s work shall be made mani- 
fest: . . . and the fire shall try every 
man’s work of what sort it is.”” 1 Co. 3:13. 

“Therefore judge nothing before the 
time, until the Lord come, who both will 
bring to the light the hidden things of 
darkness, and will make manifest the 
counsels of the hearts.’’ 1 Co. 4:5. 

“If any man’s work abide which he hath 
built thereupon, (4) he shall receive a re~ 
ward.” 1 Co. 3:14. 

‘“‘Whatsoever good thing (€) any man 
doeth, the same shall he receive of the 
Lord.” Ep. 6:8. 

“But he that doeth wrong shall receive 
for the wrong which he hath done.” 

Col. 8:26. 

‘If any man’s work shall be burned, he 
shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be 
saved; (f) yet so as by fire. ... For the 
temple of God is holy which temple ye 

are.”’ 1 Cor. 3:15-17. 

“Every man shall receive his own re- 
ward according to his own labor.” 
1 Cor. 3:8. 
“The prize of the high calling.” 
Ph. 3:14. 
“The reward of the inheritance.” 
Col. 8:24. 
“The kingdom.” Jas. 2:5. 
“The crown Of life.” 
Jas. 1:12; Rev. 2:10. 


(db) For Christians only, in ref- Jesus Christ.” Isa. 28:16; 
erence to service. Ro. 14: 1 Co. 3:11. 


4, 1 


» 10, 12. 
(c) “The church, the saints.” 


(e) me ey. as to the Lord.” 
p. 6:7. 
f) “No condemnation.” Jno. §: 


2 . Ll. 
(@) The foundation, “which is 24; Ro. 8:1. 


. THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB. 181 
nn EERE 


“A crown of Righteousness.” 2 Tim. 4:8. 
“A crown of glory.” 1 Pet. 5:4. 
“An incorruptible” (crown). 1 Cor. 9:25. 
“The things which God hath prepared.” 


1 Cor. 2:9. 
“And then shall every man have praise 
of God. 1 Cor. 4:5. 


“The marriage of the Lamb is come, 
and his wife (¢) hath made herself ready. 


MARRIAGE And to her was granted that she should 
of the Lamb be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; 

and for the fine linen is the righteousness of 
the Church. saints.’ Rev. 19:7, 8. 


“Christ also loved the Church, and gave 
Himself for it, - - e that He might 
present it to Himself a glorious Church, 
not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing; but that it should be holy and 
without blemish.” Eph, 65:26-27. 


(The Tribulation, or Time between the Rapture and the Revela- 
tion in which there will be a period of seven years, (1) at the com- 
mencerrent of which those Jews who shall have returned to their 
land in unbelief, (2) and have rebuilt or be rebuilding their temple, 
(3) enter into a seven-years’ covenant with the Antichrist. (4) On 
the expiration of three and a half years he is revealed in his true 
character as the Man of Sin, (5) kills the two witnesses who had 
been prophesying during that time, (6) stops the daily sacrifice 
which had been resumed, (7) and has his own Image set up in the 
Holy Place. (8) The Devil and his angels are cast out into the 
earth, having great wrath, because their time is short. (9) Then 
follow, during the last three and a half years (10) the treading 
under foot of the holy city (11) and the time of the “great tribula- 
tion, such as was not since the beginning of the world, no, nor ever 
shall be,’® (12) which, under the Antichrist (13) and his Prophet, 
(14) shall come upon all the world; (15) the penalty of death being 
suffered by as many as refuse to worship the Image of the Beast, 
(16) and unparalleled persecution undergone by all who have not 
received his mark. (17) A third part of the Jews in the land are 
brought through this time of trouble, (18) and are gathered by the 
Lord into Jerusalem, (19) to be purged of their dross. (20) The 


(a) mo teks and the church.” (11) Dan. 9:26; Iw 21:24; Rev. 
. §:82. 1:2. 
(1) Dan. 9:27; Rev. 11:3, 7 with - (12) Jer, 80:7; Dan, 12:1; Mat. 


13:5. 
0126 . . . . 24:21; Rev. 13:14, 17. 
(2) Isa, 6:18; 17:10, 11; 18:4, 5; (as) Dan. 1:21, 25; 2 Th. 2:2: 
$) Isa. 66:1, 2; Rev. 11:1, 2. ev. 8. 
Dan. 9:27; Jno. 5:43. (14) Rev. 13:11, 17; 19:20. 
(5) Dan, 9:27; 2 Th. 2:3; Rev, (15) Rev. 8:10. 
11:7; 18:1. (18) Rev, 18:15; 20:4. 
(6) Rev. 11:8-7. (17) Rev. 13:16, 17. 
(7) Dan. 9:27; 11:81; 12:11. (18) Zec. 13:8, 9. 
(8) Mat. 24:15; 2 Th, 2:4; Rev. (19) Eze. 22:19. 
13:14, 16. (20) Isa. 1:21-26; 4:4; Bze. 22: 
) Rev. 12:7-12. 17-22: Zep. 1:18, 18; Zee. 


(9 
(10) Dan. 7:25; 9:27; Rev, 18:5. 18:9. 


188 JESUS 18 COMING. } 


nations are assembled against the city; which is taken by them, 
great suffering being inflicted upon the inhabitants, half of whom 
are carried into captivity. (21) The remnant no more again stay 
upon him that smote them, but stay upon the Lord, the Holy One 
of Israel, in truth. (22) The kings of the earth are gathered to 
battle against Jehovah and against his Anointed. (23) Then shali 
the Lord go forth, (24) with his saints, for the destruction of his 
enemies and the deliverance of his people. (25)] 


The Revelation. 
THE COMING “THIS same Jesus, Which is taken up 
of the LORD, from you into heaven, shall so come in 
as King te the like manner as ye have seen Him go in- 
Earth. to heaven.” Acts 1:1L 
“And His feet shall stand in that day 


upon the mount of Olives.” Zech.14: 4. 
‘Immediately after the tribulation of 
those days .. . they shail see the Son 
of man coming in the clouds of heaven, 
with power and great glory.” 
Mat. 24:29, 30. (Mk. 18:26; Lu. 21-27.) 
*Ye shall see the Son of man sitting on 
the right hand of power, and coming in 
the clouds of heaven.”’ 
Mk. 14:62. (Mat. 26:64.) 
“Behold, He cometh with clouds; and 


every eye shall see Him.” Rev. 1:7. 
“And they shall look upon me whom 
they have pierced.”’ Zech. 12:10. 


“The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven with His mighty angels.” 

2 Thes. 1:7. (Mat. 25:31.) 

“And I saw heaven opened, and behold 

a white horse, and he that sat upon him 


was called Faithful and True.’ 
Rev. 19:11. 


“Behold, the Lord cometh out of His 
place to punish the inhabitants of the 


earth for their iniquity.” 
Isa. 26:21. (Mi. 1:3.) 


“The Redeemer shall come to Zion, and 
unto them that turn from transgressions 
in Jacob.”’ Isa. 59:20. 

“Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion; 
for lo, I come, and I will dwell in the 
midst of thee, saith the Lord.” Zec. 2:10, 


J 
eeepc Cn Ee TD 
(21) Zee. 14:2. (24) ert 18:8-6; 26:21; Zee 


(22) Isa, 4:3; 10:20, 21; 17:6-8; 
Jer. 2:27; Hos. 5:15; Zec. (25) Isa. 60:3; 66:5, 6: Hos 8: 


18:9. 15; Zec. 12:9, 10; Mal. 4:de 
(33) Ps. 2:1-8; Rev. 16:14, 16; . ‘21-92. , mo 


Together with 
the Church 


THE REVELATION. 189 


“And the armies which were in heaven, 
followed him upon white horses, clothed 
in fine linen, white and clean.” (@) 

Rev. 19:14. 

“They that are with Him are called, 
and chosen and faithful.” (0) Rev. 17:14. 


“The LORD my God shall come, and all 
the saints with thee.” Zech. 14:5. 
“Behold the Lord cometh with ten 
thousand of His saints.”’ Jude 14. 
“The coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
with all his saints.” 1 Thes. 3:13. 
“When Christ, who is our life, shall ap- 
pear, then shall ye (c) also appear with 
Him in glory.’ Col 3:4. 


“When He shall appear, we shall be like 


Him.” 1 Jno. 3:2. 
“The manifestation of the sons of God.” 
Rom. 8:19. 


{The power of the Antichrist is broken and destroyed by the 
voice of the Lord; (1) he and the False Prophet are taken and cast 
alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone, (2) and the ten 
allied kings and their armies are slain by the sword proceeding out 
of the mouth of the King of Kings. (3) The Devil is bound for a 
thousand years in the bottomless pit, (4) during which time the 
martyrs under the Antichrist, who shall have been raised as the 
completion of the first resurrection, will reign over the earth with 
the Lord Jesus and their fellow-saints. (5)] 


The 
Resurrection 


of 
LIFE. (a) 


“AND I saw the souls of them that were 
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and 
for the word of God, (0) and which had 
not worshipped the beast, neither ‘his 
image, neither had received His mark 
upon their foreheads, or in their hands; 
and they lived and reigned with Christ 
a thousand years.’ Rev. 20:4. 

“Shall come forth; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of life.’ 

Jno. 6:29. 


(a) “The fine linen is the right- (2) Isa. 30:31, 33; Rev. 17:2- 
eousness of saints,’”’ Rev. 19: 19:20. 
8 


(b) “Called,” 


did foreknow,’’ 


30; Mat. 


*“*‘Chosen,” 
fal," Ep. 1:1. 
tec} “The saints,” Col. 1 


(3) Ps. 2:4, 5; 310:5; Zec. 12: 
“whom he 9; Rev. 17:14; 19:21. 

~ 4-6. ( Rev. 20:2-8. 

Beith, (5) Rev, 20:4-6. 


(a) For the rest of the dead, 
gee Rev. 20 


32. 
(1) Tas. 11:4; Dan. 7:11; 2 Th. (bd) Under Antichrist, Rev. 6:93 


190 JESUS I8 COMING. 


“Shall awake, » » - to everlasting 


life.” Dan. 12:2. 
“This is the first resurrection.” (c) 

Rev. 20:6. 

THE LORD “And in the days of these kings (4d) 

REIGNS ehall the God of heaven set up a kingdom 
over which shall never be destroyed.” 

the Earth. Dan. 2:44. 

; *‘T will raise unto David a righteous 


Branch, and a king shall reign and pros- 
per, and shall execute judgment and 
justice in the earth.” Jer. 23:6 
“And the Lord God shall give unto him 
the throne of his father David.” 

Lu. 1:32. (Usa. 9:7.) 

“My king upon my holy hill of Zion.” 
Ps. 2:6. 
“The Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount 
Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his an- 
cients, gloriously.” Isa. 24:23. (Mi. 4:7.) 
“The king of Israel, even the LORD is in 
the midst of thee.’’ Zep. 3:15. 
“He must reign till He hath put all 


enemies under his feet.” (¢) 
1 Cor. 15:26. 


“Yea, all kings shall fall down before 
Him; all nations shall serve Him.” 
Ps. 72:11. 
“The kingdoms of this world are be- 
come the kingdoms of our Lord and of 
His Christ.” Rev. 11:16. 
“Fre shall have dominion also from sea 
to sea and from the river unto the ends 
of the earth.” Ps. 72:8. (Zec. 9:10.) 
“And the Lord shall be king over all 
the earth; in that day there shall be one 


LORD, and His name one.” Zec. 14:9. 
: “King of kings, and Lord of lords.” 
With His , Rev. 19:16. 
° ‘We shall also reign with Hira.” 
the Church. 2 Tim, 2:12. 


“Heirs of God, and joint-heirs with 


Christ; . » e glorified together.” 
Rom. 8:17. 


ea a 
(c) Including, “Christ the first (da) Antichrist and the allied 
fruits; afterward they that kings, Dan. 7:24; Rev. 17: 
are Christ’s at his coming,” 12-13. 
the Ingathering, 1 Cor. 15: (e) “Unto me every knee shall 
23; and here the martyrs bow,” Isa. 45:38; Ph. 3:% 
under Antichrist (the iL 
Gleanings), Rev. 20:4. 


THE MILLENNIAL REIGN. 191 


“To him that overcometh will I grant 
to sit with me in my throne.” 

Rev. 3:21. 

“Thou .. . hast made us unto our 

God kings and priests; and we shall 

reign on (4) the earth.” Rev. 5:9, 10. 


“Kings and priests unto God and His 
Father.” Rev. 1:6. 
“The Father .. . who hath trans- 
lated us into the kingdom of His dear 
Son.” Col. 1:12, 13. 
“And I saw thrones, and they (%) sat 
upon them, and judgment was given un- 
to them.’’ Rev. 20:4. 


“The saints shall judge the world.” 
1 Cor. 6:2. 


{The Kingdom having been set up, and all that offend gathered 
out of the land, (1) the Lord Jesus judges first his own people, the 
Jews, as to their fidelity to him, (2) and then the nations on earth 
as to their treatment of his people in their trouble. (3) The ten 
tribes of Israel, after purification, (4) are brought into the land (5) 
and together with the two tribes of Judah become one nation. (6) 
The Lord makes the new covenant with his people, Israel and 
Judah, (7) forgiving their iniquity, and remembering their sin ne 
more; (8) while punishments are visited by him upon his enemies, 
(9) including Gog and his armies, (10) who are overthrown and 
destroyed. (11) The Jewish people come into possession of the full 
extent of their land (12) according to promise, (18) including the 
Great Desert, which “blossoms as the rose.” (14) The temple (15) 
and the city (16) are rebuilt after the Divine plan; and the Leviti- 
cal sacrifices and form of worship are with some modifications re-es- 
tablished. (17) Nothing shall hurt or destroy in all the holy 
mountain. (18) The Lord sets his hand again the second time to 
recover the remnant of his people, both Israel and Judah, from the 
four corners of the earth. (19) Jerusalem is made a praise, the 


(a) Or, Over. Eze. 28:26; Mic. 6:15; Nah. 


(b) The saints, “the armies 1:8. 
which were in  heaven,’’ (10) Bze. 38:1-17. 
Rev. 19:8, 14. (11) Eze. 38:18 to 39:21. 


I 13:9; 33: 14; - 18:80, 
(1) Ina. Mat. 18 (12) Eze. 47:18 to 48:29. 
(2) Mat. 25:14-80; Lu. 19:12-27. (13) Gen. 15:18; Dew 11:24; 


(8) Joel 8:2, 12; Mat. 25:31-46; Josh. 1:4. 

Acts 17:31. (14) Isa. 32:15; 86:1, 23; 51:8; 
(4) Eze. 20:33-38; Am. 9:9, 10. Eze. $6:33-86. 
(5) Isa. 49:12-23; Eze. 20:40-42; (15) Eze. 40:1 to 43:17. 

86:24; Am. 9:14, 15. (16) Isa. 60:10; Jer. 81:38, 40; 


(6) Isa. 11:13; Eze. 37:16-24; 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


Hos, 1:11. 

Jer. 81:31-83; 82:40; 60:4, 
5; Eze. 37:26; Ro. 11:26, 27; 
He. 8:8-11. 

Isa. 60:21; Jer. 81:34; 33:8; 
50:20; Eze. 36:25-38; Mic. 7: 
18, 19; Heb. 8:12. 

Isa. 2:17-21; 26: 9; 84:2; 


Eze. 48:15-17. 30-85; Zec. 

14:10, 11. 

ize. [his to 46:24; Mal. 
78, 4. 

Isa. 11:6-9; '$83:24: $6:9; 
55:13; 65:25; Eze. 84:26; 

Hos. 2: 18; Rev. 22:3. 

Eze. $9: 26, 28 


193 JESUS IS COMING. 


Joy of the whole earth. (20) The Lord in her midst (21) is he 
giory and everlasting light; there shall be no night there. (22) 
All nations go to worship the King and keep the feast of taber- 
nacles. (23) The earth is full of the glory of the Lord. (24)] 


The Heavenly “And there came unto me one of the 
City, the Heme geven angels .. . saying, Come hither, 
of the Bride. I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb’s 


wife. And he .. . shewed me that 
great city, the holy Jerusalem, descend- 
ing out of heaven from God.” 
Rev. 21:9-10. 
“The city of my God, which is New 
Jerusalem, which cometh down out of 
heaven, from my God.” Rev. 3:12. 
Ns Magnitude “And had a wall great and high, and 
and ty. had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve 
angels, and names written thereon, which 
are the names of the twelve tribes of the 
children of Israel.” Rev. 21:12. 
“And the wall of the city had twelve 
foundations, and in them the names of 
the twelve apostles of the Lamb.” 
Rev. 21:14 
“And the building of the wall of it 
was of jasper; and the city was pure 
gold, like unto clear glass.” Rev. 21:18 
“And the foundations of the wall of the 
city were garnished with all manner of 
precious stones.’’ Rev. 21:19. 
“And the twelve gates were twelve 
pearls; every several gate was of one 
pearl, and the street of the city was pure 
gold, as it were transparent glass.”’ 


Rev. 21:21. 

“And I eaw no temple therein, for the 

et Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are 
the temple of it. And the city had no 


need of the sun, neither of the moon to 
shine in it; for the glory of God did 
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light 
thereof.”’ Rev. 21:22, 23 

“Having the glory of God; and her 
light was like unto a stone most precious, 


even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal.” 
Rev. 21:1. 


(20) Ps. 48:2: Isa. 1:26; 60:14; Rev. 22:5. 
62:7; 65:18; Jer. 31:28; Zec. (28) Isa. 2:1-8; Jer. 8:17; Mie 
8:3. 4:2; Zec. 8:20-22, 14:16- 
(21) Eze. 48:35; Joel 3:17, 21: 19. 
$:15-17; Zec. 2:10. (24) Num. 14:21; re 72:19; Isa 


Zeph. 
(32) Ina. 60:19, 20; Zec. 2:63 11:9; Hab. 2:1 


* 


THE HOLY OITY. 193 


“And the nations of them which are 
saved shall walk in the light of it; and 
the kings of the earth do bring their 
glory and honor into it. And the gates 
of it shall not be shut at all by day; for 
there shall be no night there. And they 
shall bring the glory and honor of the 
nations into it.” Rev. 21:24-26. ° 

“And there shall in no wise enter into 
it any thing that defileth, neither what- 
soever worketh abomination, or maketh 
a lie; but they which are written in the 
Lamb’s book of Life.’ Rev. 22:27. 


{On the expiration of the Millennium, or thousand years, Satan 
being loosed from his prison for a little season, (1) goes out to 
deceive the nations in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and 
Magog, and to gather them together to battle. (2) They compass 
the camp of the saints and the beloved city, (8) but fire from God 
out of heaven devours them, (4) and the Devil who deceived them 
is cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and ths 
False Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night forever 
and ever. (5)] 


The JUDGE of “And I saw a great white throne, and 
all the Earth. Him that sat on it.” Rev. 20:11. 
“The Lord Jesus Christ, who shall 
judge the quick and the dead.” 
2 Tim. 4:1 
“He which was ordained of God to be 
the Judge of quick and dead. 
Ac. 10:42. (1 Pe. 4:5.) 
“The Father .. . hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son.” Jno. 5:22. 
“And I saw the dead (2) small and 
great stand before God” (0) Rev. 20:12. 
“And the sea gave up the dead which 


Resi ecotion were in it and death and hades (¢) de- 

livered up the dead which were in them.” 

os Rev. 20:13. 

Damnation. “Shall come forth .. . they that 

have done evil, unto the resurrection of 

damnation.” Jno. 5:29. 

“Shall awake ... to shame and 

everlasting contempt.” Dan. 12:2. 

‘And the books were opened; and an- 

The Last other book was opened, which is the book 

Judgment. of life; and the dead were judged out of 

ener 

(sy Re. 30:8-7. (2) Re. 20:8. the first resurrection, see 
(3) Jerusalem, see Isa. :3 Rev. 20:5 


4:3. , 6. 
(4) Re. 20:9. (5) Re. 20:10. (b) “The Son,” see Jno. §:23; 


Rom, 2:16. 
(a) Those who had no part in (c) Bo the Greek, 


104 


Heaven and 
Earth pass 
away. 


New Heavens 


an 
New Earth. 


JESUS IS COMING. 


those things which were written in the 
books, according to their wor 
Rev. 20:12. 
“And whosoever was not found written 
in the book of life was cast into the lake 
of fire.’’ Rev. 20:15. 
“The lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone; which is the second death.” 


Rev. 21:8 
“The last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death.”’ 1 Cor. 15:26. 


“And death and hades (c) were cast 
into the lake of fire. This is the second 
death.’’ Rev. 20:14. 


“Heaven and earth shall pass away.” 
Mark 13:31 


“The heavens shall pass away with @ 
great noise, and the elements shall melt 
with fervent heat; the earth also, and 
the works that are therein, shall be 
burned up. (@) . . The heavens, being 
on fire, shall be dissolved, and the ele 
ments shall melt with fervent heat.’ 

2 Pe. 3:10-13. 

“The heavens shall vanish away like 
smoke, and the earth shall wax old like 
@ garment.” Isa. 51:6. 

“They shall perish . . . they all shall 
wax old as doth a garment; and as a4 
vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they 
shall be changed.” Heb. 1:11-12. 

“From whose face the earth and the 
heaven fled away; (%) and there was 
found no place for them.” Rev. 20:11. 

“And he that sat upon the throne said, 
Behold, I make all things new.” 

Rev. 21:6 

“Behold, I create new heavens and a 
new earth.’’ Isa. 65:17. 

“And I saw a new heaven and a new 
earth; for the first heaven and the first 
earth were passed away; and there was 
no more sea.” Rev. 21:1. 

“New heavens and a new earth, where- 


in dwelleth all righteousness.’’ 
2 Pe. 3:13. 


(c) So the Greek. 


2 Pet. 3:7. 


(a) Compare Gen. 6:11, 18; 9, (b) See also Ps, 68:8: Nah. 1: 6; 


11, 16. 


Isa. 24:5; and Job 15:15; 26: 5. 


GOD ALL IN ALL, 195 


-GOD “Then cometh the end, when he shall 
ALL IN ALL. have delivered up the kingdom to God, 
even the Father; when he shall have 

put down all rule and all authority and 

power.” 1 Cor. 15:24. 

“And when all things shall be subdued 

unto Him, then shall the Son also Him- 

self be subject unto Him, that put all 

things under Him, that God may be ‘all in 


all.” 1 Cor. 15:28. 
The Lamb’s “And I John saw the holy city, New 
Wife. Jerusalem, coming down from God out of 
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for 
her husband.” (4) Rev. 21:2. 
GOD « : 
Dwells with Behold, the tabernacle of God is with 
Men men, and He will dwell with them, and 
° they shall be His people, and God Hime 
self shall be with them and be their God. 
And God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes; and there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more pain; for the 
former things are passed away.” 
Rev. 21:3-4. 
{a) “That in the: ages to come his kindness toward us 
he might show the exceed- through Christ Jesus. Eph. 
ing riches of his grace in 2:7. 


“Bye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered 

into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto 
us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 
deep things of God.” 1 Cor. 2: 9, 10. 


‘Now he that hath wrought us for this selfsame thing is 
God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirif.” 
2 Cor. 5: 5. 


“Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus through- 
out all ages, world without end. Amen.” Eph. 3: 21 


“Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, 
be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without 
spot, and blameless.” 2 Pet. 3:14. 


JESUS IS COMING. 


REFERENCES. 


For convenience we give the following references to some 
of the principal passages which refer to our Lord’s return, 
in the consecutive order in which they occur in the Word, 
together with catch words to distinguish the same: 


Deut. 33:2. 


Psa. 2. 
“ 67:4. 
“ 96:10-13. 
“ 98 :9. 
“ 102 :16. 
Dan. 7:13. 


Hos. 6:3. 
Zech. 12:10. 
“14:4. 
“ 14:5. 
Mat. 16 :26-27, 
“19:28. 
“624, 
“  25::1-12., 
“25: 13-30. 
«25 :31-46. 
“26 :64. 
Mark 8:38. 


& 13. 
“14:62, 
Luke 9:26. 


« 1235-48, 


“ 17 :20-37. 
“« 18:8. 
“  19:11-28, 


“ 21 


—Mt. Sinai, Mt. Seir, Transfiguration 
and Second Coming. 

—The Son’s possession, ete. 

—Judge and govern the nations. 

—The Lord cometh to judge. 

—The Lord cometh to judge. 

—Build up Zion and appear in glory. 

—Son of man cometh to possess the 
kingdom. 

—He comes as the latter and former rain. 

—Israel sez and accept Christ. 

—He stands upon the Mount of Olives. 

—Comes with the saints. 

—Shall come in glory of His Father. 

—Sit in throne of His glory. 

—The three questions answered. 

—The Bridegroom. 

— Judgment of Servants. 

—Judgment of Nations. 

—Coming in the clouds of heaven. 

—Of Him, Son, be ashamed wken He 
cometh. 

—The three questions answered. 

—Coming in the clouds of heaven. 

—Of Him, Son, be ashamed when He 
cometh. 

—Loins girded—lights burning. 

—Noah, Lot, ete. 

—Little faith on earth. 


—Gone to receive kingdom and return. 


The ten talents. 
—The three questions answered. 


. gyno. 1:51, 
“14:3. 

“14:18, 
“14:28, 
“21:22, 

Acts 1:10-11, 
“ 3:19-21. 

1 Cor. 1:48. 


2 Cor.'?1 14, 
Phil. 1:6-10., 
“ 2:16. 


“ 4:5. 


“ 8:23. 
2 Thes. 1:7-10. + 
6 2:1-8, 


1 Tim. 6:13-15. 


2 © 4:1, 
“4:8. 
Tit. 2:11-15. 


Heb. 9 :24-28. 
& 10 :22-24. 
« 10:25. 

“ 10 :35-37. 

James 5:7-8. 


REFERRENCES. 197 


—Heaven open, angels descending. 

—The promise. Come and receive you. 

—I will come to you. | 

—Go away and come again. 

—If he tarry till I come. 

—The same Jesus come again. 

—The times of refreshing. 

—Waiting for the coming. 

—Judge nothing until Lord come. 

—Communion, till He e. 

—Order of Res.—Christ’s at His coming, 

—Anathema Maran-atha. 

—Rejoicing in the day of Lord. 

—Till the day of Christ. 

—Rejoicing in the day of Christ. 

— Resurrection from among the dead. 

— Citizenship— Looking for the Savior. 

—The Lord is at hand. 

—Appearing with Him. 

—Wait for His Son from heaven. 

—Hope, joy, crown at His coming. 

—Unblamable, at the coming. 

—The Rapture. 

—Times and seasons—night and day. 

—Blameless unto the coming. 

—Revealed in flaming fire. 

—That wicked destroyed with the bright- 
ness of His coming. 

—Keep the commandment until the ap- 
pearing. 

—Judge, at appearing and kingdom. 

—Crown for all that love His appearing. 

—The blessed hope and glorious appear- 
ing. 

—The three appearings. 

—Faith, hope, love. 

—Day approaching. 

— Patience, a little while. 

—Be patient unto the coming—early and 
latter rain. 


198 


1 Pet. 1:7. 
“1:13. 
“ 4:13. 
“« §:14. 
2 Pet. 3. 
1 Joba 2:28. 


“ 3:2-3. 


2 John 7. 
Jude 14:15. 


Rev. 1:7. 
“ 2:25. 
“ 3:3. 
“ 3:10-1L 


“ 14:14-16. 
“ 16:15. 


“ 22:20. 


JESUS I8 COMING. 


—Trial of faith. 

—Hope to the end. 

— When His glory shall be revealed. 

— When the Chief Shepherd shall appear. 

—Scoffers—The day of the Lord. 

—~When He shall appear we may have 
confidence, 

—Now sons—shall be like Him—hath 
this hope—purifieth himself. 

—Coming in the flesh. 

—Thke Lord cometh with saints to exe- 
cute Judgment. 

—Behold He cometh with clouds. 

—Hold fast till I come. 

—If not watch, come on thee as a thief. 

—Keep thee from the hour of tempta- 
tion—Behold I come quickly. 

—The earth reaped. 

—Behold, I come as a thief—Blessed is 
he that WATCHETH. 

—Even so come Lord Jesus, 


OHAPTER XIX. 
Anathema or Comfort. 


There are several passages which convey a very solemn 
import in connection with this subject, especially two, 
which we mention, as follows: One occurs in the saluta- 
tion of Paul, 1 Cor. 16:22. Before he pronounces the 
BLESSING, he excludes those who do not love Jesus, in the 
following words: “If any man love not the Lord Jesus 
Christ, let him be 


Anathema Maran-Atha!’’ 


Anathema means accursed, condemned, devoted to de- 
struction. 


Maran-atha means, the Lord cometh. 
Let him be accursed—the Lord cometh. 


It is easy now, while the long suffering of God waits* 
for men to reject, despise and hate the Lord Jesus. But 
JESUS IS COMING, and woe be unto them who now reject 
Him, “when once the Master of the house is risen up and 
hath shut to the door.”? Paul understood this, and there- 
fore he says, “I am made all things to all men, that I 
might by all means save some” (1 Cor. 9:22), “from the 


(1) 1 Pet. 3:19. By which 
also he went and preached unto 
the spirits in prison; 

20. Which sometime were dis- 
obedient, when once the long- 


suffering of God waited in the. 


days of Noah, while the ark was 
a preparing, wherein few, that 
is, eight souls were saved by 
water. 

2 Pet. 8:9. The Lord is not 
slack concerning his promise, a9y 
some men count slackness; but 
is longsuffering to us-ward, not 
willing that any should perish, 
but that all should come to re- 
pentance. 


(2) Luke 13:25. When once 


the master of the house is risen 
up, and hath shut to the door, 
and ye begin to stand without, 
and to knock at the door, say- 
ing, Lord, Lord, open unto us; 
and he shall answer and say un- 
to you, I know you not whence 
ye are. 

Mark 13:35. Watch ye there- 
fore: for ye know not when the 
master of the house cometh, at 
even, or at midnight, or at the 
cockcrowing, or in the morning: 

36. Lest coming suddenly he 
find you sleeping. 

87. And what I say unte you 
TI say unto all, Watch. 


(199) 


‘200 JESUS I8 COMING. 
wrath to come.” 1 Thes. 1:10. O! that men would “seek 
the Lord while He may be found,’* and “flee from the 
wrath to come.”* 

The other passage is in 2 John 7: “For many deceivers 
have entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus 
Christ is come (coming) in the flesh. This is a deceiver 
and an Antichrist.” The correct rendering of épxdpevov 
(erkomenon) is COMING. Jesus was especially called the 
“Coming One.”5 But these deceivers denied the inearna- 
tion—the coming of Christ in the flesh—either past or 


future. See Alford, also Jamieson, Fausset and Brown. 


This, then, is of special significance. 


He that denies 


Jesus Christ’s Coming in the Flesh 


is a deceiver and an Antichrist. That is, he is possessed 
of the same spirit, which will ultimately find its personi- 
fication in the GREAT PERSONAL ANTICHRIST, 


It is lamentable that this passage has been so improper- 


ly translated in our version. 


It 1s such a strong asser- 


tion that Jesus is coming in the flesh, that it would doubt- 
less have prevented much of the unwarrantable “spiritual- 
izing’ of Scripture, which has prevailed so largely. 


(3) Isa. 55:6. Seek ye the 
Lord while he may be found, 
call ye upon him while he is 
near. 

Also 2 Cor. 6:2. 

(4) Mat. 3:7. But when he 
saw many of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees come to his baptism, 
he said unto them, O generation 
of vipers, who hath warned you 
to flee from the wrath to come? 

(5) Mat. 11:3. And said un- 
to him, Art thou he that com- 
eth, or look we for another? 

Heb. 10:87. For yet a very 
little while, he that cometh shall 
come, and shall not tarry. 

Rev. 1:7. Behold, he cometh 
with clouds; and every eye shall 
seo him, and they also which 
pierced him: and all kindreds 


of the earth shall wail because 
of him. Even so, Amen. 

8. Iam Alpha and Omega, the 
beginning and the ending, saith 
the Lord, which is, and which 
was, and which is to come, the 
Almighty. 

Rev. 4:8. And the four liv- 
ing creatures, having each one 
of them six wings, are full of 
eyes round about and within: 
and they have no rest day and 
night, saying, 

Holy, holy, holy, ¢s the 

Lord God, the Almighty, 

who was and who is and 

who is to come. 


John 6:14. Then those men, 
when they had seen the miracle 
that Jesus did, said, This {s of 
a truth that Prophet that should 
come into the world. 


ANATHEMA OR COMFORT. 201 
Jesus is coming Hruseur at the Rapture,® to receive us 
unto Hisexrs,’ and He is coming to this earth again, at 
the Revelation,® the samm JESUS, and in LIKE MANNER as 
He went away.*® 
Lo! He comes, with clouds descending, 
Once for favored sinners slain; 
Thousand thousand saints attending, 
Swell the triumphs of His train; 
Hallelujah! 
God appears on earth to reign. 
But while there is such fearful foreboding of impending 
judgment and just retribution to those who love not the 
Lord Jesus, there is, on the other hand, 


The Sweetest Comfort 


for those who do love our Lord’s appearing. 

This is apparent when we understand the true position 
of the Church. We have seen that it is not to be con- 
founded with the coming Kingdom, neither does it include 
the Old Testament Saints, for it was founded after Christ 


eame.,?° 


It was begun on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2) 


*That is corporally, in the flesh. 


(6) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven, with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God: and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first; 

17. Then we that are alive, 
that are left, shall together with 
them be caught up in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: 
and so shall we ever be with 
the Lord. 


18. Wherefore comfort one 
another with these words. 
(7) John 14:3. And if I go 


and prepare a place for you, I 
will come again, and receive you 
unto myself; that where I am, 
there ye may be also. 

(8) 2 Thes. 2:7. For the 
mystery of iniquity doth already 
work: only he who now Iletteth 
will tet, until he be taken out 
of the way. 


8. And then shall that Wicked 
be revealed, whom the Lord shall 
consume with the spirit of his 
mouth, and shall destroy with 
the brightness of his coming: 

9. Even him, whose coming is 
after the working of Satan with 
all power and signs and lying 
‘wonders, 

10. And with all deceivable- 
ness of unrighteousness in them 
that perish; because they re- 
ceived not the love of the truth, 
that they might be saved. 

(9) Acts 1:11. Which also 
said, Ye men of Galilee, why 
stand ye gazing up into heaven? 
this same Jesus, which is taken 
up from you into heaven, shall 
so come in like manner as ye 
have seen him go into heaven. 

(10) Mat. 16:18. And I say 
also unto thee, That thou art 
Peter, and upon this rock I will 


202 JESUS IS COMING. 


And will be complete at the Rapture. 1 Thes. 4:17. It is 
like a parenthesis in God’s dealing with His people, Israel. 
While they are broken off because of unbelief, the Church 
is grafted in.!! 

And being a companion in suffering with her Lord,‘ 
following His example,!* walking in humility (Phil. 2:2-8; 
1 John 2:6), during His humiliation,#* she shall “be 
counted worthy’!® of the greatest blessing in her exaltation 
with Him.'¢ 

The Bride of Christ. 


Jesus is the Bridegroom, and the Church is His Bride. 


John the Baptist stood as the last representative of the 
Mosaic dispensation. He said, “I am not the Christ. . . . 


build my church; and the gates 
of hell shall not prevail against 
it. 

(11) Rom. 11:17. And if 
some of the branches be broken 
off, and thou, being a wild olive 
tree, wert graffed in among 
them, and with them partakest 
of the root and fatness of the 
olive tree. 

(12) Acts 5:41. And they de- 
parted from the presence of the 
council, rejoicing that they were 
counted worthy to suffer shame 
for his name. ; 

Phil. 1:29. For unto you it 
is given in the behalf of Christ, 
not only to believe on him, but 
also to suffer for his sake. 

Also Heb. 10:34. 

(13) John 13:15. For I have 
given you an example, that ye 
should do as I have done to you. 

1 Pet. 2:21. For even here- 
unto were ye called: because 
Christ also suffered for us, leav- 
ing us an example, that ye 
should follow his steps: 

(14) Acts 8:33. In his hu- 
miliation his judgment was taken 
away: and who shall declare his 
generation? for his life ie taken 
from the earth. 

(15) 2 Thes. 1:5. Which is 
@ manifest token of the righteous 


judgment of God, that ye may 
be counted worthy of the king- 
dom of God, for which ye also 
suffer. 

Rom. 8:17. And if children, 
then heirs; heirs of God, and 
joint heirs with Christ; if so be 
that we suffer with him, that we 
may be also glorified together. 

(16) Phil. 2:5. Let this 
mind be in you, which was also 
in Christ Jesus: 

6. Who, being in the form of 
God, thought it not robbery to 
be equal with God: 

7. But made himself of no rep- 
utation, and took upon him the 
form of a servant, and was made 
in the likeness of men: 

8. And being found in fashion 
as a man, he humbled himself, 
and became obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross. 

9. Wherefore God also hath 
highly exalted him, and given 
him a name which is above every 
name: 

10. That at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow, of things 
in heaven, and things in earth, 
and things under the earth; 

11. And that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ 
is Lord, to the glory of God the 
Father. 


THE BRIDE OF CHRIST. 203 


He that hath the Bride is the Bridegroom, but the friend 
of the Bridegroom which standeth and heareth Him, re- 
joiceth greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice; this, 
my joy, therefore, is fulfilled.’ John 3:28-29. Here we 
have a clear distinction between the Old Testament Saints 
and the Bride of Christ. 

They shall be perfeeted, but God has “provided some 
better thing for us, that they without us should not be made 
perfect.” Heb. 11:40. Not that the Church is more wor- 
thy, but because, that in the overflowing grace of God!” 
He has chosen the Church to be the heavenly Bride of 
Christ.* 

The Church is the body of Christ,!® and her precious 
union with Him is most clearly set forth in the epistle to 
the Ephesians. She is there regarded as spiritually quick- 
ened?® and seated in the heavenlies®® with her risen Lord,?4 
having been “chosen in Him before the foundation of the 


world” to 


“be holy and without blame before Him in 


love.”22, She is to be “to the praise of the glory of His 
e.. . . accepted in the Beloved,’’?? being “sealed 
with that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of 


*Israel was an earthly bride, comforted with temporal 
blessings, and to these she shall be restored. Though now 
through unbelief she is desolate, her children shall yet be 
as the sand of the sea. Isa. 54; Jer. 3:1-18; 31:32; Ezk. 16; 
Hos. 1:10, 11; 2; 3. See page 162. 


(17) Eph. 2:7. That in the 
ages to come he might shew the 
exceeding riches of his grace, in 
his kindness toward us, through 
Christ Jercus. 


(18) 1 Cor. 12:27. Now ye 
are the body of Christ, and mem- 
bers in particular. 


(19) Eph. 2:1. And you hath 
he quickened, who were dead in 
trespasses and sins. 


(20) Eph. 1:3. Blessed be 
the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Chrjst, who hath blessed 
us with all spiritual blessings in 
heavenly places in Christ. 


Eph. 2:6. And hath raised us 
up together, and made ue sit to- 


gether in heavenly places in 
Christ Jesus. 

(21) Eph. 1:20. Which he 
wrought in Christ, when he 
raised him from the dead, and 
set him at his own right hand 
in the heavenly places. 

(22) Eph. 1:4. According as 
he hath chosen us in him be- 
fore the foundation of the world, 
that we should be holy and with- 
out blame before him in lova: 

5. Having predestined us un- 
to the adoption of children by 
Jesus Christ to himself, accord- 
ing to the good pleasure of his 
will. 

6. To the praise of the glory 
of his grace, wherein he hath 
made us accepted in the beloved. 


ll 


204 JESUS IS COMING. 
her inheritance until the redemption of the purchased pos- 
session,’’28 

Oh! that we might receive “the spirit of wisdom and 
revelation in the knowledge of Him” to “know what is the 
hope of His calling and what the riches of the glory of His 
inheritance in the saints.” 1:17-18. We should not walk 
“as other Gentiles walk,” “but speaking the truth in love,” 
grow up into Christ our living head, working together for 
the “increase of the body” and edification “in love” (4:15- 
17) “till we all come into the unity of the faith and of the 
knowledge of the Son of God, unto A PERFECT MAN, unto 
the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.” 4:12 
That is, Christ as the head, and the Church as the body, will 
make one perfect man. “They twain shall be one flesh,?# 
“the NEw MAN which is created in righteousness and true 
holiness” (4:24). The true seed of the woman, which 
shall bruise the serpent’s head.?5 

Wherefore, the Church is exhorted to “grieve not the 
Holy Spirit of God whereby” she is “sealed unto the day 
of redemption” (Eph. 4:30), but to be “kind one to an- 
other, tender-hearted” (4:32), “walking in love” (5:2) “as 
children of light” (5;8), “cireumspectly” and “wise, re- 
deeming the time” (5:15-16), “filled with the Spirit 
(5:18), nourished and cherished (5:29) until sanctified and 


(23) Eph. 1:13. In whom ye 
also trusted, after that ye heard 
the word of truth, the gospel of 
your salvation: in whom also, 
after that ye believed, ye were 
sealed with that Holy Spirit of 
promise, 

14. Which is the earnest of 
our inheritance until the redemp- 
tion of the purchased possession, 
unto the praise of his glory. 

(24) Mat. 19:4. And _ he 
answered and said unto them, 
Have ye not read, that he which 
made them at the beginning 
made them male and female, 

5..And said, For this cause 
shall a man leave father and 
mother, and shall cleave to his 
wife: and they twain shall be 
ene flesh? 


aes, 


6. Wherefore they are no 
more twain, but one flesh. What 
therefore God hath joined to- 
gether, let not man put asunder. 


Eph. 6:31. For this cause 
shall a man leave his father and 
mother, and shal! be joined unto 
his wife, and they two shall be 
one flesh. 


(25) Gen. 3:15. And I will 
put enmity between thee and the 
woman, and between thy seed 
and her seed; it shall bruise thy 
head, and thou shalt bruise his 
heel. 

Rom. 16:20. And the God of 
peace shall bruise Satan under 
your feet shortly. The grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ be with 
you. Amen. 


ee ee 


THE BRIDE OF OCFRIST. 205 


cleansed, she is presented unto the Lord “Himself a 
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing,” but “holy and without blemish,” the Bride of 
Christ. “For we are members of His body.”2° Can there 
be anything more precious than the thought of Jesus com- 
ing to take unto Himself His Bride? It is full of ten- 
derness and love. What will He not do for her when He 
presents her unto Himself! The ecstasy of that meeting 
is above the power of description by tongue or pen. “Eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard; neither have entered into 
the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love Him.” 1 Cor. 2:9. We have indeed 
‘an earnest” “by His Spirit,”—the “first fruits” a fore- 
taste of the joys to come. But THEN shall the Church 
experience the rest of love—the fulness of communion— 
the rapture of her Lord’s embrace, and be satisfied in the 
sweetness of His love. 

The comfort of this truth is all lost if we fail to make 
the proper distinction between the Church and the King- 
dom. The Church is not to be reigned over, but is to 
reign with Christ.?7 

No more heart-pangs nor sadness 
When Jesus comes; 


All peace and joy and gladness 
When Jesus comes. 


He’ll know the way was dreary, 
When Jesus comes; 

He’ll know the feet grew weary, 
When Jesus comes. 


(26) Eph. 5:25. # Husbands, 31. For this cause shall a man 


love your wives, even as Christ 
also loved the church, and gave 
himself up for it; 

26. That he might sanctify it, 
having cleansed it by the wash- 
ing of water with the word, 

27. That he might present the 
church to himself a_ glorious 
church, not having spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing; but 
that it should be holy and with- 
out blemish. 

80. Because we are members 
ef his body. 


leave his father and mother, and 
shall cleave to his wife; and the 
two shall become one flesh. 

32. This mystery is great: but 
I speak in regard of Christ and 
of the church. 

(27) 2 Tim. 2:11. It és a 
faithful saying: For if we be 
dead with him, we shall also 
live with him: 

12. If we suffer, we shall al- 
so reign with him; if we deny 
him, he also will flegy wp. 


ay 2 
a a 


206 JESUS IS COMING. 


He'll know what griefs oppressed me, 
When Jesus comes; 

Oh, how His arms will rest me! 
When Jesus comes. 


This subject of our Lord’s coming again is of such vital 
importance ‘and is so largely interwoven with the whole 
of Seripture, that it affords a boundless field of investi- 
gation and an exhaustless mine of truth. There is much 
more we would be glad to say about it, but our little book 
has already exceeded the intended limit,* and we will only 
add a few words in regard to the time. 


*To those who may wish for further information on this 
subject, we would recommend, among other helps, the ser- 
mon by Mr. Moody. “Maran-atha,” by Dr. Brookes. “He 
Will Come,” by Dr. Tyng. “Plain Papers on Prophetic 
Subjects,” by W. Trotter. Also the published addresses de- 
livered at the conferences in England, to-wit: “Sixteen Ad- 
dresses on the Blessed Hope,” and “Our God Shall Come,”’ 
and especially the Pre-Millennial Essays, delivered at the 
Prophetic Conference in New York and “The Great Proph- 
ecies,”” by Geo, H. Pember. 


CHAPTER XX. 
The Time. 


And first let us make a clear distinction between the 
time of the Rapture and the time of the Revelation.t (See 


diagram.) 


The prineipal thought in regard to the former is that it 


may happen Now. 


Nothing is given us in Scripture so 


definite as to form a sign of or date for the Rapture. We 
are to be always watching and waiting for it, and expect- 


ing it at any moment. 


It is true that the Church may see the “fig tree signs” 
BEGIN to come to pass! before she shall be taken out of 
the world to escape the Tribulation.? 

But these signs are of such a nature, especially the 
“wars and earthquakes,” “distress of nations, sea and 
waves roaring,” that the Chureh in each of the past eight- 


tFailure to do this has led many to make grievous errora - 
in setting dates for our Lord’s return. 


(1) Lu, 21:25. And _ there 
shall be signs in the sun, and 
in the moon, and in the stars; 
and upon the earth distress of 
nations, with perplexity; the 
sea and the waves roaring; 

26. Men’s hearts failing them 
for fear, and for looking after 
those things which are coming 
on the earth: for the powers of 
heaven shall be shaken. 

27. And then shall they see 
the Son of man coming in a 
cloud with power and _ great 
glory. 

28. And when these things be- 
gin to come to pass, then look 
up, and lift up your heads; for 
your redemption draweth nigh. 

29. And he spake to them a 
parable; Behold the fig tree, and 
all the trees; 


30. When they now shoot 


forth, ye see and know of your 
own selves that summer is now 
nigh at hand. 

31. So likewise ye, when ye 
see these things come to pass, 
know ye that the kingdom of 
God is nigh at hand. 

(2) Lu. 21:34. But take heed 
to yourselves, lest haply your 
hearts be overcharged with sur- 
feiting, and drunkenness, and 
cares of this life, and that day 
come on you suddenly as a 
snare: 

35. For so shall it come upon 
all them that dwell on the face 
of all the earth. 

36. But watch ye at every 
season, making supplication, that 
ye may prevail to escape all 
these things that shall come to 
pass, and to stand before the 
Son of man. 


(207) 


208 JESUS IS COMING. 
een centuries might consistently have believed that the 
signs were BEGINNING. 

So we have no date for the Rapture, onLy that it will 
precede the Revelation. That is, that Christ will come for 
His Church® before He comes with His Chureb,‘ the period 
of the Tribulation lying between the two. 

The time of the Revelation, we believe, is designated 
by many prophetic periods, in Lev. 26, Daniel and Reve- 
lation. But their symbolical character and our imperfect 
chronology render the interpretation of them difficult and 
uncertain. We must not take space here to consider them, 
but we venture to state that earnest and prayerful study 
of them has given us an assured conviction that ey are 


rapidly drawing to a close. 


Two events must precede the Revelation, which will 
indicate its proximity, to-wit: the Restoration (partial at 
least) of Israel,® and the rise of Antichrist.¢ 


(3) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven, with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God: and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first; 

17. Then we that are alive, 
that are left, shall together with 
them be caught up in the clouds, 
to meet the Lord in the air: 
and so shall we ever be with the 
Lord. 

(4) Jude 14. And Enoch also, 
the seventh from Adam, prophe- 
sied of these, saying, Behold, the 
Lord cometh with ten thousand 
of his saints. 

(5) Ezek. 22:19. Therefore 
thus saith the Lord Gop; Be- 
cause ye are all become dross, 
behold, therefore I will gather 
you into the midst of Jerusalem. 

20. As they gather silver, and 
brass, and fron, and lead, and 
tin, into the midst of the 
furnace, to blow the fire upon 
it, to melt it; so will I gather 
you in mine anger and in my 
fury, and I will leave you there, 
and melt you. 

21. Yea, I will gather you, and 
blow upon you in the fire of my 


wrath, and ye shall be melted in 
the midst thereof. 

22. As silver is melted in the 
midst of the furnace, so shall ye 
be melted in the midst thereof; 
and ye shall know that I the 
Lorp have poured out my fury 
upon you. 

(6) Zech. 13:8. And it shall 
come to pass, that in all the 
land, saith the Lord, two parts 
therein shall be cut off and die; 
= the third shall be left there- 


as And I will bring the third 
part through the fire, and will 
refine them as silver is refined, 
and will try them as gold is 
tried: they shall call on my 
mame, and I will hear them: I 
will say, It és my people: and 
ae shall say, The Lord és my 

od, 

2 Thes. 2:7. For the mystery 
of iniquity doth already work: 
only he who now letteth will 
tet, until he be taken out of the 
way. 

8. And then shall that Wicked 
be revealed, whom the Lord shall 
consume with the spirit of his 
mouth, and shall destroy with 
the brightness of lis coming. 


THE TIME. 208 


But Antichrist will not be revealed—as we understand 
from 2 Thes. 2:7,—until after the Rapture. Neither is it 
probable that the restoration of Israel (except partially in 
unbelief, Zeph. 2:1-2), will take place until after that event. 
For “Jerusalem shall be trodden down . .. . until the 
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled” (Luke 21:24), and the 
tabernacle of David shall not be rebuilt until He has taken 
out of the Gentiles a people to His name. Acts 15:14-16. 


It has pleased God to give signs, or evidences, of the 
approach of these events and by which we might know 
that the day was drawing near,’ but, as we have before 
said, they have been of such a character that the Church 
could see them repeated in each generation. And this we 
believe was purposely designed, in order to give the church 
NO DATE and NO SIGN which might so definitely indicate 
the time of her Rapture, that she should in any interval 
cease to be vigilant. It was evidently all planned, so that 
the unfolding of events should be, to her, a constant in- 
centive to watchfulness. 

The High Priest went into the Holy of Holies alone, 
and the whole congregation waited in expectation without 
until he had made the offering and came forth to bless 
them. Lev. 16; Nu. 6:23-26; Lu. 1:10. So has our High 
-Priest entered once for all into the TRUE HOLY PLACE, and 
the Church should look for Him in fervent expectation, 
until He appears the second time without sin unto salva- 
tion. She must watch “with loins girded about and lights 
burning, like men that warr for their Lord.” 


(7) Heb. 10:25. Not forsak- 
ing the assembling of ourselves 
together, as the manner of some 
is; but exhorting one another: 


place every year with blood of 
others ; 


26. For then must he often 
have suffered since the founda- 


and so much the more as ye see 
the day approaching. 

(8) Heb. 9:24. For Christ is 
not entered into the holy places 
made with hands, which are the 
figures of the true; but into 
heaven itself, now to appear in 
the presence of God for us: 

25. Nor yet that he should 
offer himself often, as the high 
priest entereth into the holy 


tion of the world: but now once 
in the end of the world hath he 
appeared to put away sin by the 
sacrifice of himself. 


27. And as {ft is appointed un- 


to men once to die, but after this 
the judgment: 


28. So Christ was once offered 
to bear the sins of many: and 
unto them that look for him 


210 JESUS IS COMING. 


Yet we have the blessed assurance that every passing 
day brings our salvation nearer than when we believed.’ 
And, while it is true that the church, during all her his- 
tory, has had repeated evidence that the day was approach- 
ing, we ask, what are these evidences in our time? Surely 
they are of especial significance. 

We believe, if we can rightly read the signs of the 
times, that the godless, lawless trio of communism, nihil- 
ism and anarchy, so alarmingly permeating the nations 
today, are unclean spirits preparing the way for Anti- 
christ. 

The Jews Returning. 


And, again, the Jews are, even now, returning to Jeru- 
salem. 

It is said that, “At the beginning of the nineteenth 
century the Porte allowed no more than three hundred of 
the hated people to live in the city. Forty years later that 
restriction was removed, but another still remained, by 
virtue of which they were permitted only to reside in a 
particular quarter of the town, which was much too small 
for them. It was in the year 1867 this last regulation was 
removed and since then the progress made by the Jews in 
peopling their ancient capital has been extraordinary. Al- 
most every one of the old houses as it fell vacant has been 
bought by them while they have built a prodigious num- 
ber of new ones in all parts of the town. Schools, hospitals 
and religious associations have been started on a grand 
scale, as also a school for manual training and of agri- 
culture.” 

At the present time, 1908, the city of Jerusalem has 
spread over a large extent of ground outside the walls. 
Great hospices, hotels, churches, stores, etce., have been 
erected, but most notable of all, a multitude of dwellings 
for the Jews. 

The number of Jews now residing in the inner and outer 


shall he appear the second time high time to awake out of sleep; 
without sin unto salvation. for now és our salvation nearer 

(9) Rom. 13:11. And that, than when we believed. 
knowing the time, that now it és 


ISRAEL RETURNING. 211 


city is estimated at from 40,000 to 50,000, being more than 
half the entire population. Besides these, there are large 
colonies at Tiberias, Safed, Joppa and Hebron, and several 
other smaller ones in various parts of the country. The en- 
tire Jewish population of Palestine is said to be more than 
80,000, so that a greater number have already returned 

than the 49,697 who went up with Zerubbabel from Baby- 
lon. Ezra 2:64-65. 

The anti-semitic agitations in Germany, Austria and 
France, and the fierce persecutions in Russia and Roumania, 
have stirred up the Jews of the world as the eagle doth 
her nest. Deut. 32:11. 

‘National hopes and aspirations have found vent in the 
organization of Chovevi Zion (Lovers of Zion) societies, 
and Shova Zion (colonization) societies throughout Europe 
and America. Land is being purchased and funds raised, 
on installment plans, to send back the members by lot. 

A railroad has been completed from Joppa, and the en- 
gine speeds up to Jerusalem like one of Nahum’s “flaming 
torches,” (Nahum 2, 3) which, the prophet says, “shall be 
in the day of His preparation,” over the roadway which the 
Arabs call “Trek el Kods,” significantly coinciding with the 
Hebrew “Derech Hakodesh” (Way of Holiness) of Isa. 
35:8, 

This “highway,” cast up as the Hebrew “Maslol’” indi- 
cates, is a special preparation for the return of the people 
to Zion. Isa. 35:10. 

Other lines of railway are projected or actually under 
construction to Hebron, Jericho, Acre, Tiberias and Damas- 
cus. 

The Turkish hold upon the country is continually weak- 
ening, and there is considerable talk of a Jewish state. 
May we not conclude that the Lord is even now setting 
“His hand again the second time” for the restoration of 
His people ??°® : 


(10) Isa. 11:11. And it shall 
come to pass in that day, that the 
Lord shall set his hand again 
the second time to recover the 
remnant of his people, which 
shall be left, from Assyria, ane 


from Egypt, and from Pathros, 
and from Cush, and from Blam, 
ana from Shinar, and from 
Hamath, and from the islands of 
the sea. 


212 JESUS I8 COMING. 


“He that scattereth Israel will gather him, and keep 
him as a shepherd doth his flock.” Jer. 31:10. 

Besides these, we have other evidences. Many are run- 
ning to and fro upon the highways of travel, or searching 
diligently through and through the prophetic Word, which 
is doubtless the true meaning of the passage (Dan. 12:4) 
and which is a sign of “the time of the end.” 

The awful dearth of spiritual life in the great nominal 
church is another evidence. 

The restless and perplexed condition of the nations is 
also suggestive. And there are several other evidences of 
which we might speak, all of which substantiate the faci 
that the day is “approaching.” Heb. 10:25. 

And lastly, while it is entirely unscriptural and wrong 
to put the second coming of our Lord any distance into the 
future, and likewise unscriptural and wrong to fix a date, 
or name the time when He shall come for His bride, yet 
there will be & privileged company of saints living upon the 
earth! at the time when He shall descend from heaven,?* 
and who shall say that they will all be taken by surprise? 
Every generation that has lived since He went away, how- 
ever dark and unspiritual it may have been, has had its 
band of faithful watching ones. 

Shortly previous to the first coming of Christ, the Holy 
Ghost, although He had given, through Daniel, the definite 
prophecy of the seventy weeks, gave a special revelation 
unto the devout Simeon,—who was “waiting for the con- 
solation of Israel,” to-wit: “that he should not see death 
before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. Luke 2:26. And 
this leads us to ask: May not the same blessed Spirit, 
who thus revealed this mighty event to Simeon of old (and 
probably to the aged Anna, tlso)?* likewise give unto a 


(11) 1 Cor. 15:51. Behold, I corrruptible, and we shall be 
shew you a mystery; We shall changed. 
not all sleep, but we shall all be (12) 1 Thes. 4:16. For the 
changed. Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven, with a shout, with the 
52. In a moment, in the twink- voice of the archangel, and with 
ling of an eye, at the last trump: the trump of God: and the dead 
for the trumpet shall sound, im Christ shall rise first. 
and the dead shall be raised in- (18) Lu. 2:86. And there 


eee ee 


THE TIME. ° 213 


favored one, or a chosen few of the faithful watching 
ones, to know that their glad eyes shall see His appearing, 
and that they shall never taste of death.* Even so now, 
many of the most devout and faithful of God’s people, 
in all denominations, both in this and foreign lands, are 
seriously impressed with the conviction, that the coming of 
the Lord is near. 

These are certainly sufficient evidences to enforce the 
apostle’s injunction, that we should exhort one another 
“and so much the more as” we “see the day approaching.” 
Heb. 10:25. 

For, if the day, or Revelation, is near, the Rapture is 
still nearer. And again the general conviction among 
Bible students and earnest Christians, that the great pro- 
phetic periods, which point to the Revelation are nearly 
ended, and the deep conviction expressed by many, includ- 
ing even statesmen and scientists, that some great event is 
near, may well lead us to enquire, 


Watchman, What of the Night? 


Ever since the sin of Adam and Eve this world has been 
& DARK PLACE,'5 qa moral “Night.”2¢ By faith the believer 
looks forward, through prophecy, to the Day,?®* the glori- 
ous Day, which is coming, when salvation, which is now by 


was one Anna, a prophetess, the 


daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe 
of Aser: she was of a great age, 
and had lived with a husband 
seven years from her virginity ; 

87. And she was a widow of 
about fourscore and four years, 
which departed not from the 
temple, but served God with 
fastings and prayers night and 
day. 

88. And she coming in that 
instant gave thanks likewise un- 
to the Lord, and spake of him to 
all them that looked for redemp- 
tion in Jerusalem. 

(14) John 11:26. And who- 
soever liveth and believeth in 
me shall never die. Believest 
thou this? 

(15) 2 Pet. 1:19. We have 


also a more sure word of proph- 
ecy; whereunto ye do well that 
ye take heed, as unto a light 
that shineth in a dark place, un- 
til the day dawn, and the day- 
star arise in your hearts. 

(16) John 1:5. And the light 
shineth in darkness; and the 
darkness comprehended it not. 

10. He was in the world, and 
the world was made by him, and 
thé world knew him not. 

John 3:19. And this is the 
condemnation, that Hight is come 
into the world, and men loved 
darkness rather than light, be- 
cause their deeds were evil. 

20. For every one that doeth 
evil hateth the light, neither 
cometh to the light, lest his 
deeds should be reproved. 


214 JESUS IS COMING. 


faith and hope,?” shall be revealed?® in all its grandeur and 
glory.1® For this Day the hearts of God’s people yearn 
with earnest desire. 

“Watchman, what of the Night?” 

“Watchman, what of the Night?” 

The watchman said: “The Morning cometh, and alsa 
the Nicut.” Isa. 21:11-12. 

To the believer it will be Morning; 

To the ungodly it will be Night. 

Jesus is the Morning Star,?° and He is also the Sun of 
Righteousness.21, Only those who are up early and watch- 
ing see the Morning Star. So it will be only the true and 
faithful church which will see Christ at the Rapture as the 
Bright and Morning Star. 

As the Son of Righteousness He will appear to Israel, 
and all the world, at the Revelation. . 

Over forty centuries of the Night were past when Paul 
wrote, “the Night is far spent, the Day is at hand.” (Rom. 
13:12). And surely, as eighteen centuries have since 
passed, it must now be aLMost MORNING. 

O! then, dear reader, “let us who are of the Day, be 
sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and 
for an hemlet, the Hope oF SatvaTion. For God‘hath not 
appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our 


(17) Rom. 8:24. For we are 
saved by hope: but hope that is 
seen is not hope: for what a man 
seeth, why doth he yet hope for? 

25. But if we hope for that we 
see not, then do we with patience 
wait for it. 

(18) 1 Pet. 1:5. Who are 
kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation 
ready to be revealed in the last 
time. 

6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, 
though now for a season, if need 
be, ye are in heaviness through 
manifold temptations: 

7. That the trial of your 
faith, being much more precious 
than of gold that perisheth, 
though it be tried with fire, might 
be found unto praise and honor 


* 


and glory at the appearing of 
Jesus Christ: 

(19) 1 Cor. 2:9. But as it is 
written, Eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man, the 
things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. 

(20) Rev. 22:16. I Jesus 
have sent mine angel to testify 
unto you these thiugs in the 
churches. I am the root and the 
offspring of David, and _ the 
bright and morning star. 

Also 2 Pet. 1:19. 

(21) Mal. 4:2. But unto you 
that fear my name shal! the Son 
of righteousness arise with heal- 
ing in his wings; and ye shall go 
forth, and grow up as calves ef 
the stall. 


THE TIME. 215 


Lord Jesus Christ.” 1 Thes. 5:8-9. Therefore let us not 
sleep, as do others, but let us Watch and be Sober. 1 Thes, 

A dear brother writes us as follows: “I find so many 
who are wiiling to receive the truth of the Second Coming, 
but it is generally those who are passing through affliction, 
or those living very near the Lord. Those who are enjoying 
the well watered plains of this world, seem to care very 
little about seeing the Owner of the Estate. But He will 
come. Hallelujah! He will come. Yes! He is coming. 
The bride who knows the Bridegroom, and is true, says, 
He is coming. ‘Come Lord Jesus,’ Come! Come!! Come!!! 
Come!!!! A poor cursed earth (Rom. 8:19-22) groans 
out Come! Thank heaven, He speaks: 


SURELY I Come QUICKLY.’ ” 
Rev. 22:20. 


I’m waiting for Thee, Lord, 
Thy beauty to see, Lord, 
I’m waiting for Thee, 

For Thy coming again. 


Thou’rt gone over there, Lord, 
A place to prepare, Lord, 
Thy home I shall share 

At Thy coming again. 


"Mid danger and fear, Lord, 
I’m oft weary here, Lord, 
The time must be near 

Of Thy coming again. 


Whilst Thou art away, Lord, 
I stumble and stray, Lord, 
Oh, hasten the day 

Of Thy coming again. 


Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he 
cometh, shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that 
He shall gird Himself and make them to sit down to meat, 
and will come forth and serve them. Lu. 12:37. 


6 


216 JESUS I8 COMING. 


“Occupy Tru. I Com.” 


WAITING FOR THE Morning 
Rev. 19:7. 


There is no roof in all the world, of palace or of cot. 

That hideth not some burdened heart, nigh breaking for its 
lot; 

The earth is sunk in pain and tears, and closer draws the 
gloom; 

And balm for cure there can be none, till Christ, the Lord, 
shall come. 


*Q morn, when like a summer bird, my spirit shall go 
free,— 

_ When I shall see Thee as Thou art, and be, my God, like 
Thee! 

Like Thee! like Thee! All spotless white—this heart, this 
will, as Thine! 

O love of God, O blood of Christ, O grace and power divine! 


“My Saviour, who doth know the thirst the longing spirit 


feels,— 

O Bridegroom, now eo long afar, why stay thy chariot- 
wheels? 

Were ever eyes so dim with grief, breasts so oppressed 
with care? 


Did ever hearts so yearn to catch Thy whisper from the 
air?’’ 

Thou lonely one, lift up thy head, array thee for the feast: 

He that hath tarried long is near—the glow is in the East! 

O Morning Star, so soon to lead Thy chosen one away— 

O Sun of Righteousness, bring in the everlasting day! 


“REDEMPTION DrawetTH Niex.” 
Luke 21:28. 


My soul crieth out for a jubilee song! 

There is joy in my heart, let me praise with my tongue; 
For I know, though the darkness of Egypt still lowers, 
That the time ere release is not ages, but hours. 


As sailors, not yet within sight of the strand, 

Know well their approach by the “loom of the lIand;” 
So they, who will bend but a listening ear, 

Can now catch the whisper that telis He is near. 


He 1s near—the stars in their courses prepare 
To utter the sign He hath bid them declare! 
The world in its guilt waxeth haggard and grim, 
And its cup of iniquity fills to the brim! 


REDEMPTION DRAWETH NIGH. 247 


‘The curse so long camped upon Bosphorus’ side,— 
And she that sits queen upon Tiber’s foul tide,— 
And Famine and Pestilence stalk in the band 

Of witness, attesting the Lord is at hand. 


Spent at last the long cycle of wilderness dearth, 
Once again sounds of latter-rain gladden the earth 
In the land, still despised, but preparing e’en now 
For the feet that shall stand upon Olivet’s brow. 


And thither to gather the tribes have begun, 

From the East and the West, from the climes of the sun 
For the times of the Gentiles have answered their need, 
And the hiss has gone forth unto Israel’s seed. 


The world as of yore, naught of all doth divine,— 
Saith again that believers are filled with new wine,— 
Suffers warning to pass all unseen and unheard, 

And, like Herod, fulfills while opposing His word. 


Then welcome, thrice welcome, ye tokens of God! 
What else but His coming can comfort afford? 
What presence but His set this prisoned earth free? 
O Star of the Morning, our hope is in Thee! 


—From “Waiting for the Morning and Other Poems,* 


CHAPTER XXI. 
Plan of the Aions (Ages). 


The following diagram is intended to illustrate the chro- 
nological arrangement of the dispensations and some of 
the principal events of Bible History. 

The division of time into days, months and years, is 
fixed by the movements of the earth and moon. The term 
century is not used in the Scriptures, but the next greater 
measure of time above the year (Sabbatic year and Jubilee 
year) is the Greek term AIon or English non, from which 
comes our word age. This word is used 124 times in the 
New Testament and is translated by eight different English 
words, viz: “WORLD” 35 times. 


Matt. 12:32 Luke 1:70 1 Cor. 1:20 Gal. 1: 4 
“ 13 3:22 bid 16: 8 a 2: 6 Eph. 1:91 
s 13:39 “ 18:30 “ 2:6 8 3:9 
ae 13 :40 " 20 :34 . es 3-21 
= 13:49 = 20 :35 “s 2:8 1 Tim 6:17 
= 24: 3 John 9 332 is 3:18 2 Tim. 4:10 
“a 28:20 Acts 3:21 se 8:13 Titus 2:12 

Mark 4:19 ‘* 15:18 «s 10:11 Heb. 6: 5 

10:30 Rom. 12:2 2 Cor. 4: 4 
“WORLDS,” twice, Heb. 1:2 and 11:13. 
“COURSE,” once, Eph. 2:2. 
“BHTERNAL” twice, Eph. 3:11 and 1 Tim. 1:17. 
“END,” once, Eph. 3:21. 
“AGES,” twice, Eph. 2:7 and Col. 1:26. “EVER,” 30 times— 

Matt. 6:13 John 8 335 Heb. 5: G6 2 Pet. 2°17 
= 21:19 12 :34 6:20 "7 3-18 

Mark 11:14 e 14:16 “ T:17T 1 John 2-117 

Luke 1:33 Rom. 1:25 “ 7:21 2 Joba 2 
= 1:55 9: 5 “ 7:24 Jude if 

John 6:51 0 « 11:36 ‘“ fa: 0° = 2 
i 6:58 « 16:27 1 Pet. 1:28 
sg 8:35 2 Cor. : 9 as 1:25 
With a negative “NEVHR” 7 times— 

Mark 8:29 John 8:51 John 10:28 John 18: 8 

John 4:14 " ' 8:52 “ 11:26 
“HVERMORH,” 3 times— 

2 Cor. 11:31 Heb. 7:28 Rev. 1:18 
“BVER AND EVER,” 21 times— — 

Gal. 1: 5 Heb. 13:21 Rev. 4:10 Fev, 11:15 

Phil. 4:20 1 Pet. 4:11 os 5:13 7 14:11 

1 Tim. 1:17 . 5:11 “ R14 re 1b: 3 

2 Tim. 4:18 Rev. 1: 6 so T +12 19: 6 

Heb. 1: a 4:9 « m:6 ° 20 :10 

aa Ped " 7 
(218) 


PLAN OF THE AIONS. 219 


or 42 times, for in each of these 21 passages it is used 
twice, and, in all but Heb. 1:8, it is in the plural and 
multiplied "form, “alons of AIons.” It is also plural in 


Lube 1:83 1 Cor. 2: 7 Eph. 3:11 Heb. 9 :26 
Rem ab aor, HH on =F als 
: . : 1. :26 ss 13: 8 

“ 11:36 Eph. 2: 7 1Tim. 1:17 Jud 

‘s 16 327 “ 3: 9 Heb. 1: 2 ° 


If the reader will carefully examine these passages, and 
substitute the original word aion or aions, he will at once 
see that it is used not to indicate the material or physical 
world, but as a measurement of time. 

“It shall not be forgiven him, neither in this _aion, 
neither in the ation to come.” Mat. 12:32. 

“The harvest is the end of the aion.”—“So shall it ‘be at 
the end of this aion.” Mat. 13:39-40. 

‘‘Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for an aion.” 
Mat. 21:19. 


‘What shall be the sign of thy coming and of the end 
of the ation.” Mat. 24:3. 


“Hath not forgiveness to (or for) the aion, but is in 
danger of aionian* sin.” Mark 3:29. 


“But he shall receive .... in the aion to come eternal 
life.’ Mark 10:30. 


*The adjective “aionios” is used 70 times, as follows: 


Matt. 18: 8 John 5:24 Rom. 6:23 Philm. 15 
“ 19:16 “ 5:39 “s 16:25 Heb. 5: 9 
“ 19 :29 “e 6:27 .e 16 :26 “s 6: 2 
“ 25 3:41 ad 6:40 2 Cor. 4:17 “ 9:12 
“ 25 :46 “ 6 :47 ‘ 4:18 “ 9:14 

Mark 3:29 “s 6 354 “ 5:1 bd 9:15 
“ 10:17 “s 6 :68 al. 6: 8 “s 13 :20 
“ 10 :30 ae 10:28 2 Thes. 1:9 1 Pet. 5:10 

Luke 10 :25 “ 12 :25 sé 2:16 2 Pet. 1:11 
‘ 16: “ 12:50 1 Tim 1:16 1John 1: 2 
“ 18 :18 “e 17: 2 “ 6:12 “ 2:25 
“ 18 sé 17: 8 °° 6:16 “ 8:15 

John 3:15 Acts 13 :46 “e 6:19 “ 5:11 

8:16 “6 8:48 2 Tim. 1: 9 “ 5:13 

“ 8:36 Rom. 2: 7 2:10 ss 8:20 

as 4:14 “ §:21 Titus 1:2 Jude 7 
“ 4:36 “ 6 :22 3: 7 “ 

Rev. 14:6 


It is translated everlasting, eternal or forever except in three 
passages, where it is world, Rom. 16:25 aionian times, 2 Tim. 1%, 
and Titus 1:2 before aionian times. 


220 JESUS IS COMING. 


“For ever,” ¢. e. for the atons. Luke 1:33; Rom. 1:25; 
9:5; 11:36; 2 Cor. 11:31; Heb. 13:8. 

“For ever,” s. e. for the aion. Luke 1:55; John 6:51-58; 
8:35; 12:34; 14:16; 2 Cor. 9:9; Heb. 5:6; 6:20; 7:17; 21, 
24, 28; 1 Pet. 1:25; 1 John 2:17; 2 John 2; Jude 13. 

“The children of this aion are... . wiser than the chil- 
dren of light.” Luke 16:8. 


“The children of this aion marry. ... but they which 
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that aion and the resur- 
rection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in 
marriage.” Luke 20:34-35. 

“Shall thirst not for the aion.” John 4:14. 

“Not for the ation.” John 8:51-52; 10:28; 11:26; 13:8; 
1 Cor. 8:13. 

“Known unto God are all his works from the beginning 
of the aion.” (lit. from an aion). Acts 15:18. 

“To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for 
the aion.” Rom. 16:27. 


“Not the wisdom of this aion, nor of the princes of this 
aion.... but we speak .... even the hidden wisdom 
which God ordained before the aions.” 1 Cor. 2:6-7. 


“For our admonition upon whom the ends of the aions 
are come.” 1 Cor. 10:11. 


“In whom the God of this aion.” 2 Cor. 4:4, 

‘Who gave himself .... that He might deliver us 
from this present evil aion.” Gal, 1:4. 

“Not only in this aion, but also in that which is to come.’ 
Eph. 1:21. 

“That in the aions to come.” Eph. 2:7. 

“The mystery which from the aions hath been hid.” 
Eph. 3:9. 

“According to the purpose (plan) of the ations.” Eph. 
3:11 


“Unto him be glory .... throughout all the genera: 
tions of the aion of the aions.” Eph. 3:21. 


—_—‘(<‘ Cs. 


PLAN OF THE AIONS. 221 


“Now unto the king of the ations.” 1 Tim. 1:17. 


“Demas hath forsaken me having loved this present 
ation.” 2 Tim. 4:10. 


“By whom also he made the aion.” Heb. 1:2. 

“Thy throne, O God, is for the aion.” (“of the aion” 
not authentic.) Heb. 1:8. 

“And have tasted .... the powers of the ation to come.” 
Heb. 6:5. 

“But now once in the end (lit. conjunction) of the 
aions.”” (overlapped). Heb. 9:26. 

“Through faith we understand that the aions were 
framed.” (adjusted). 

“Both now and for the day of the aion.” 2 Pet. 3:18. 

“Both now and throughout all the aions.” Jude 25. 

“The smoke of their torment ascendeth up for aions of 
aions.” Rev. 14:11. 

“Her smoke rose up for the aions of the aions. Rev. 
19 :3. ! 

“Shall be tormented day and night for the ations of the 
aions.” Rev. 20:10. 

“They shall reign for the aions of the aions.” Rev. 22:5. 

Notice that we have the singular aion, the plural atons 
and aion of aions (a great aion composed of aions), and 
the multiplied form aions of ations, 

An sion has an end (see Mat. 13:39, 40, 49; 24:3; 
28:20), and as another follows (see Mat. 12:32; Mark 
10:30; Luke 18:30 and 20:35; Eph. 1:21), it must have a 
beginning. The end of one and beginning of another 
overlap so that Paul could say “the ends of the aions 
have come upon us.” 1 Cor. 10:11. There are many 
aions,? both in the past? and in the future.® 


(1) Heb. 11:3. Through faith 
we understand that the worlds 
(aions) were framed by the 
word of God, so that things 
which are seen were not made of 
things which do appear. 

(2) Col. 1:26. Even the 
mystery which hath been hid 


from ages (aions) and from 
generations, but now is made 
manifest to his saints. 

(3) Eph. 2:7. That in the 
ages (aions) to come he might 
show the exceeding riches of his 
grace, in his kindness toward 
us, through Christ Jesus. 


222 JESUS IS COMING. 

Jesus is the King of the aions,* and they are all made 
by Him® according to a Divine Plan, see Greek, “purpose 
(or plan) of the aions.”¢ 

The diagram is intended to illustrate a minute section of 
this infinite plan, showing seven of the aions. The diverg- 
ing lines represent the increase of population suddenly 
cut down to eight at the flood and to be again greatly re- 
duced at the close of the present dispensation.” 

1. Eden the aion of Innocence terminating in the ex- 
pulsion. 

2. Antediluvian, the aion of freedom (eonscience the 
only restraint) terminating in the flood and reduction of 
the race to the eight persons of Noah and his family. 
During this aion Enoch is caught up, a type of the coming 
rapture of the Church. 

3. Post-diluvian, the aion of government, man put 
under civil authority,® terminating in the destruction of 


Sodom. 


4. Patriarchal, the pilgrim aion,® terminating in the 
overthrow of Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea. 
5. Mosaic, the Israelitish aion, terminating in the ernci- 


fixion and destruction of Jerusalem. 


In this Elijah be- 


comes another type of the rapture. 
6. Christian, the aion of mystery, terminating in the 


(4) 1 Tim. 1:17. Now unto 
the King eternal (of the aions), 
immortal, invisible, the only 
wise God, be honor and glory 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

(5) Heb. 1:2. Hath in these 
last days spoken unto us by his 
Son, whom he hath appointed 
heir of all things, by whom also 
he made the worlds (aions). 

Also Heb. 11:3. 

(6) Eph. 3:11. According to 
the eternal purpose which he 


purposed in Christ Jesus our. 


Lord: 

(7) Rev. 9:18. By these three 
was the third part of men 
killed, by the fire, and by the 
amoke, and by the brimstone, 
which issued out of their mouths. 


Also Zech. 13:8, 14:12-18: 
Rev. 14:18-20, 19:19-21. 

(8) Gen.’ 9:5. And surely your 
blood of your lives will I re- 
quire; at the hand of every 
beast will I require it, and at 
the hand of man; at the hand of 
every man’s brother will I re- 
quire the life of man. 

6. Whoso sheddeth man’s 
blood, by man shall his blood be 
shed: for in the image of God 
made he man. 

(9) Heb. 11:13. These all 
died in faith, net having received 
the promises, but having seen 
them afar off, and were persuad- 
ed of them, and embraced them, 
and confessed that they were 
strangers and pilgrims on the 
earth. 


PLAN OF THE AIONS. 223 
great tribulation,!® the coming of the Lord, the Judgment 
of Nations,“ and another great reduction of ‘he world’s 
population. During this aion the Jews are seattered among 
all nations.!* 

7. Millennium, the aion of manifestation, (Rom. 8:19) 
terminating in Satan’s last deception and the Judgment of 
the great white throne.'® 

Beyond this is the New Heavens and New Earth wherein 
dwelleth righteousness,1* probably the beginning of another 
series of aions. For, these seven make a week of aions, 
corresponding to the expression in Eph. 3:21, ation of 
aions, or one great aion composed of these seven aions. 
And, in harmony with the weeks of years appointed unto 
Israel (Lev. 25:8-11), other great aions are to follow cor- 
responding to the expression aions of aions. See Gal. 1:5 
and the other passages cited above. Possibly the fiftieth 
aion may be like the Jubilee of Lev. 25 and then again, 
aions of aions. See lower section of diagram. 

But, says one, if aions are measured periods then all 
Bions are measured, and there will be an end to the sorrows 
of the ungodly,!® and the glory and dominion of the Lamb 


(10) Matt. 24:21. For then 
shall be great tribulation, such 
as was not since the beginning 
of the world to this time, no, 
nor ever shall be. 

(11) Matt. 25:31. When the 
Son of man shall come in his 
glory, and all the holy angels 
with him, then shall he sit upon 
the throne of his glory: 

82. And before him shall be 
gathered all nations: and he 
shall separate them one from an- 
other, as a shepherd divideth his 
sheep from the goats: 

(12) Amos 9:9. For, lo, I 
will command, and I will sift the 
house of Israel among all na- 
tions, like as corn is sifted in a 
sieve, yet shall not the least 
grain fall upon the earth. 

Lu. 21:24. And they shall 
fall by the edge of the sword, 
and shall be led away captive 
into all mations: and Jerusalem 


shall be trodden down of the 
Gentiles, until the times of the 
Gentiles be fulfilled. 

(13) Rev. 20:11. And I saw 
a great white throne, and him 
that sat on it, from whose face 
the earth and the heaven fied 
away; and there was found no 
Place for them. 

12-15 See page 105. 

(14) Isa. 65:17, For, behold, 
I create new heavens, and a new 
earth: and the former shall not 
be remembered, nor come into 
mind. 

2 Pet. 3:18. Nevertheless we, 
according to his promise, look for 
new heavens and a new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness. 

Also Isa. 66:22; Rev. 21:1. 

(15) Rev. 14:11. And _ the 
smoke of their torment ascend- 
eth up for ever and ever: (aions 
of aions) and they have no rest 
day nor night, who worship the 


- 


224 ‘JESUS IS COMING. 

and his saints.1¢ No, beloved! for the best idea we mortals 
can have of infinity or eternity is that of continual meas- 
urement, and this is exactly the idea conveyed by the in- 
definite expression aions of atons. 


It will be noticed in the diagram that the aions are not 
of the same duration, but each marks a change in God’s 
method of dealing with mankind. Probably the aions of 
the past, the Hebrew olams of the Old Testament mark the 
geological periods of the earth and the various eras in the 
development of the universe. And as the past has been an 
orderly unfolding of creation and revelation of the Crea- 
tor, so shall the future be, not a limitless aion called eter- 
nity, but a limitless succession of aions measuring infinite 
duration. Time is the measure of eternity and eternity is 
the continued measurement of time. Take for instance a 
yard stick, and it measures only three feet. But turn it 
over and over and over, and you pass around the world, 
out to the moon, the sun, the stars, the farthermost nebula, 
and all the limits of imagination, and still the little measure 
goes on and on into the unthinkable. In like manner the 
Scriptural succession /of aions measures eternity. 


The events at the beginning of this present aign, viz: 
the crucifixion and ascension of our Lord and the descent 
of the Holy Spirit are well understood. The events at its 
close constitute 

‘*The Time of the End ’’ 


and are briefly as follows: The descent of the Lord with 
a shout, the resurrection of those who sleep in Jesus, the 


beast anc his image, and who- ever. Amen. 


soever receiveth the mark of his 
name. 

Rev 20:10. And the devil, 
that deceived them, was cast in- 
to the lake of fire and brim- 
stone, where the beast and the 
false prophet are, and shall he 
tormented day and night for 
ever and ever (aions of aions). 

(16) Rev. 1:6. And hath 
made us kings and priests unto 
God and his Father; to him be 
glory and dominion for ever and 


Rev. 11:15. And the seventh 
angel sounded; and there were 
great voices in heaven, saying, 
The kingdoms of this world are 
become the kingdoms of our 
Lord, and of his Christ; and he 
shall reign for ever and ever 
(aions of aions). 

Rev. 22:5. And there shall be 
no night there; and they need 
no candle, neither light of the 
sun; for the Lord God giveth 
them light: and they shall reign 


gO SNOIV 


OORRDOROOE 


SNOIy 40 SNOIV 


SEINSNOBLHOIY 
ALITISAG NISUIHM 
Hiv’ MIN 


avus] waowg lO 8 wonssty 


BONZOONN) 


226 JESUS IS COMING. 

change in a moment of those believers who are alive (1 
Cor. 15), their rapture, or being caught up to meet the 
Lord in the air (1 Thes. 4:13-18), to enjoy the marriage 
feast of the King’s Son, the Lamb of God. Mat. 22:2, 
ete.; 25:10; 2 Cor, 11:2; Eph. 5;25-32; Rev. 19:7, and 
Song of Solomon, 

While this is oceurring in the air, Israel gathered 
to Palestine in unbelief,}7 rebuild their temple, establish 
their ancient sacrifices and plunge from bad to worse until 
Antichrist arises, and they make a covenant with him,?* 
which the prophet calls a covenant with death and sheol.'® 
Terrible persecutions shall follow, called “the time of 
Jacob’s trouble.’’?° 

When it would seem that a!l wast lost,2! then the Lord 


for ever and ever (aions of 
aions). 


(17) Zeph. 2:1. Gather your- 
selves together, yea, gather to- 
gether, O nation not desired ; 


2. Before the decree bring 
forth, before the day pass as the 
chaff, before the flerce anger of 
the LorgD come upon you, before 
the day of the Lornp’s anger come 
upon you. 

(18) Dan. 9:27. And he shall 
confirm the covenant with many 
for one week: and in the midst 
of the week he shall cause the 
sacrifice and the oblation to 
cease, and for the overspreading 
of abominations he shall make 
ét desolate, even until the con- 
summation, and that determined 
shall be poured upon the deso- 
late. 


John 5:43. I am come in my 
Father’s name, and ye receive me 
not; if another shall come in his 
own name, him ye will receive. 


(19) Isa. 28:15. Because ye 
have said, We have made a cov- 
enant with death, and with hell 
are we at agreement; when the 
overflowing scourge shall pass 
through, it shall not come unto 
us: for we have made Hes our 


refuge, and under. falsehood 
have we hid ourselves. 
(20) Jer. 30:65. For thus 


saith the Lord; We have heard 
a voice of trembling, of fear, 
and not of peace, 

6. Ask ye now, and see wheth- 
er a man doth travail with 
child? wherefore do I see every 
man with his hands on his loins, 
as a woman in travail, and all 
faces are turned into paleness? 

7. Alas! for that day is great, 
so that ‘none és like it: it és 
even the time of Jacob’s trouble. 
But he shall be saved out of it. 

(21) Zech. 14:1. Behold, the 
day of the Lord cometh, and thy | 
spoil shall be divided in the 
midst of thee. 

2. For I will gather all na- 
tions against Jerusalem to bat- 
tle; and the city shall be taken, 
and the houses rifled, and the 
women ravished; and half of the 
city shall go forth into captivity, 
and the residue of the people 
shall not be cut off from the 
city. 

3. Then shall the Lord go 
forth, and fight against those 
nations, as when he fought in 
the day of battle. 

See verses 4 and 5. 

Also Jude 14; 2 Thes. 2:8. 


PLAN OF THE AIONS. 27 


shall come with His saints down to the earth and destroy 
this lawless Antichrist, deliver Israel, who will then look 
upon “Him they have pierced,”*? and a nation shall be born 
in a day, or at once.?* He will judge the living nations 
and establish His millennial kingdom. Psa. 2; Dan. 2:44; 
Rev. 11:15. 


But let it be distinctly remembered that we have no 


date for the rapture, the coming of our Lord to the tryst- 
ing place in the air.24 We are to live with our loins girt 
and our lamps burning like men that wait for their Lord. 
Luke 12:35-40. And yet, in the unfolding of events we 
may see the day approaching,”® the beginnings that shall 


cause us to lift up our heads.*® 


(22) Zech. 12:9. And it shall 
come to pass in that day, that I 
will seek to destroy all the na- 
tions that come against Jerusa- 
lem. 

10. And I will pour upon the 
house of David, and upon the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the 
spirit of grace and of supplica- 
tions; and they shall look upon 
me whom they have pierced, and 
they shall mourn for him, as 
one mourneth for his only son, 
and shall be in bitterness for 
him, as one that is in bitter- 
ness for his first-born. 

11, In that day shall there be 
a great mourning in Jerusalem, 
as the mourning of Hadadrim- 
mon in the valley of Megiddon. 

12. And the land shall mourn, 
every family apart; the family 
of the house of David apart, and 
their wives apart; the family 
of the house of Nathan apart, 
and their wives apart; 

13. The family of the house 
of Levi apart, and their wives 
apart; the family of Shimei 
apart, and their wives apart; 

14. All the families that re- 
main, every family apart, and 
their wives apart. 

(23) Isa. 66: 8. Who hath 
heard such a thing? who hath 
seen such things? Shall the 
earth be made to bring forth in 
one day? or shall a nation be 


born at once? for as soon as 
Zion travailed, she brought forth 
her children. 

(24) Mark 13:32. But of 
that day and that hour knoweth 
no man, no, not the angels 
which are in heaven, neither the 
Son, but the Father. 


33. Take ye heed, watch and 
pray: for ye know not when 
the time is. 

34. For the Son of man is as 
a man taking a far journey, 
who left his house, and gave 
authority to his servants, and to 
every man his work, and com- 
manded the porter to watch. 


35. Watch ye therefore: for 
ye know not when the master of 
the house cometh, at even, or at 
midnight, or at the  cock- 
crowing, or in the morning: 

36. Lest coming suddenly he 
find you sleeping. 

37. And what I say unto you I 
say unto all, Watch. 

(25) Heb. 10:25. Not forsak- 
ing the assembling of ourselves 
together, as the manner of some 
48; but exhorting one another: 
and so much the more as ye see 
the day approaching. 

(26) Luke 21:28. And when 
these things begin to come to 
pass, then look up, and lift up 
your heads; for your redemp- 
tion draweth nigh. 


é 


_ CHAPTER XXII. 
Signs of Christ’s Speedy Coming. 


We believe that the coming of our Lord is to be personal 
and premillennial, also, that it is imminent. Let us re- 
member the admonition that we must distinguish between 
the Rapture—His coming into the air to receive His saints, 
1 Thes. 4, which may occur at any moment—and the Reve- 
lation—His coming down to the earth with His saints— 
which latter will not occur until after the preaching of the 
gospel as a witness,! the gathering of Israel, in unbelief, 
the manifestation of Antichrist, and other prophesied 
events. Now we are to consider, what are the evidences 
for also believing that His coming, the Rapture, is near. 
Out of many reasons we will give seven, as follows: 


I. The Prevalence of Travel and Knowledge. 


“Shut up the words and seal the book even to the time 
of the end: many shall run to and fro and knowledge shall 
be increased.” Dan, 12:4. 

A comparison of recent years with the present shows a 
most marvelous increase in both travel and knowledge. 

An incident is told of a woman in England who, after 
long consideration had decided on a journey. Friends 
gathered to assist her departure and walked by the con- 
veyance a mile or more to bid her God-speed, but lo, her 
entire journey was only fifty miles. 

Now, invention has chained the mighty forces of steam 
and electricity to palatial carriages by land and sea, so 
that one can go round the world, with comfort and ease, in 
sixty days. 

Railways cover the earth and steamers track the sea like 
a mighty spider’s web. 

Our text says, Many shall run to and fro. In the year 


(1) Matt. 24:14. And this . witness unto all nations; and 
gospel cf the kingdom shall be then shall the end come. 
preached in all the world for a 


SIGNS OF HI8 COMING. 229 


1896 the number of passengers carried on the railroads in 
the United States was 535,120,756 and the mileage was 
13,054,840,243, and in the whole world the railroad pas- 
sengers were 2,384,000,000 and the mileage 28,677,000,000. 
Add to this the travel by steamers and private conveyance, 
the explorations into every conceivable corner of the earth, 
from the equator to the poles, and the enormous aggregate 
is surely a literal fulfilment of this sign of the end. 

And knowledge shall be increased. 

The unprecedented educational facilities are a remark- 
able feature of our time. We have public schools for our 
youth, colleges and universities for higher education, and 
denominational schools for religious education. 

The public press, with its ceaseless streams of news and 
information, covers the earth with its ever increasing cir- 
culation, like falling leaves from some mighty tree of 
knowledge. And, of the making of many books, there is 
truly no end. — 

The means of communication by the mail, telegraph and 
telephone have been multiplied in geometrical progression. 

By the Universal Postal Union, printed matter is carried 
as cheaply to Iceland or China as to the next street in 
Chicago. 

But perhaps the prediction of our text refers more espe- 
cially to the increase of Bible study, and here again we 
have a wonderful fulfilment. Since the year 1804 over 
230,000,000 of Bibles, Testaments, and portions have 
been distributed by the Bible Societies alone, and millions 
more by private publication agencies. The Bible has been 
translated into over 287 languages, and parts into 340. 
Over nine-tenths of the race have the Bible to read in 
their own language. 

Religious papers and periodicals are issued by the mil- 
lion. The great system of universal Sunday-school lessons, 
the Bible Institutes, the Chautauqua Summer Schools and 
_ Bible Conferences have developed a world-wide study of 
the Word of God. 

With this there has come a wide-spread study of the 
Prophetic Word, especially concerning Israel and our 


230 JESUS I8 COMING. 


Lord’s return.. While the skeptic and destructive critic 
are studying about the Word, trying to undermme and 
tear it down, the reverent students by the thousand are 
looking into the sure Word of Prophecy as to a light that 
shineth in a dark place. 


Il. Perilous Times. 


“This know also that in the last days perilous times 
shall come.” 2 Tim. 3:1. Perilous times. 

a. Physically: Pestilence, famine, earthquakes, cyclones, 
etc. ‘ 

Possibly the recently vented oil and gases of the earth 
are a preparation for some mighty conflagration to be 
aided by newly manifested heat and electrical forces from 
the sun.? 

b. Politically and Socially. 

Under this head we need only refer to the progress of 
Nihilism, Socialism, Communism and Anarchy. Could 

‘there be anything worse than the creed of the latter, viz.: 
The first lie is God and the second is Law. They openly 
avow that their mission is to destroy the present social 
structure, and they prophesy (perhaps with the accuracy 
of Caiphas), that something better will come. . 

c. Distress of Nations. 

National jealousies have caused offensive and defensive 
preparations on a scale of such magnitude as to literally 
grind out the life of the people with oppressive taxation. 

All Europe is practically a soldiers’ camp, with 23,000,- 
000 of drilled men ready to fly at each other in a universal 
war, with weapons so ingenious and deadly as to put all 
the past record beneath the shadow of comparison. 

Governments vie with each other in the suicidal policy 
of adding corps to corps and ships to ships, piling up 
their national debts in the fact of absolute bankruptcy. 


(2) 2 Thes. 1:8. In flaming that now are, and the earth, by 
fire taking vengeance on them the same word have been stored 
that know not God and that obey up for fire, being reserved 
not the gospel of our Lord against the day of judgment and 
Jesus Christ: destruction of ungodly men. 

2 Pet. 3:7. But the heavens 


SIGNS OF HIS COMING. 231 


It is appalling to contemplate the woe and carnage that 
would follow in the wake of these forces, if once let loose. 
No wonder the statesmen strain every nerve to defer that 
day by their struggle to preserve the peace of Europe. 

In the very midst of the scene, lawlessness lifts its hydra- 
head. Capital cringes before the coming revenge of labor. 
Jas. 5. Men’s hearts fail them for fear of the things that 
be coming on the earth. And well they may, for Satan 
will combine all these forces in his mighty culminating 
effort to stamp out the name of God from the earth. He 
will head them up in his masterpiece, the atheistic Anti- 
christ, who will deny both the Father and the Son. 


Il. Spiritualism. 


“Now the Spirit speaketh expressly that in the latter 
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to 
seducing spirits and doctrines of devils.” 1 Tim. 4:1. 

Modern Spiritualism is by no means mere trickery. 
There is plenty of fraud and deception that requires dark- 
ened rooms and suspicious cabinets, but there are also un- 
questionable mysteries and ‘spirit manifestations, demons 
that long to possess the bodies of men, wicked spirits 
which love darkness rather than light. 

It is a definite sign of the times. 

So also is Christian Science a doctrine of devils, for, like 
Theosophy, it denies the atonement of Christ, and asserts 
that every man is his own Savior. 

There are said to be more esoteric Buddhists in and 
about Boston than there are natives in Australia. Chris- 
tian Science has swept over the country like a prairie 
fire, and Spiritualism has its myriads of adherents. This 
surprising prevalence of these three delusions is, like a 
eloud of darkness, a sign that the end is near. 


IV. Apostacy. 


The day of the Lord (the revelation), shall not come, 
“except there come a falling away first.” 2 Thes. 2:3. 

The Laodicean, or the last state of the Church, is one so 
sickening that the Lord says He will spue it out of His 


232 JESUS I8 COMING. 


mouth. There is to be a dearth of faith especially im 
regard to the coming of the Lord. “Nevertheless, when 
the Son of Man cometh shall, He find the faith on the 
earth?” Luke 18:8. 

An aged minister once said that he did not believe the 
Lord was coming for 60,000 years. I concluded that he 
could not be watching for it. | 

Post-Millennialists say very little about the coming of 
the Lord. An elderly Methodist clergyman in Florida, 
said that he had never heard only five sermons on the 
Lord’s coming, and he preached them all himself. In many 
large audiences where an expression has been taken it is 
surprising to see what a great majority have never heard 
a single sermon on this Blessed Hope, which finds so large 
a place in the Holy Scriptures. 

There is a notable dearth of power in the preaching of 
the Word to-day! Men descant on how to reach the 
masses but the masses go on unreached. 


Every period of hard times and business depression 
heretofore, has been followed by a wonderful revival. But 
not so this last time. Why so few conversions during this 
last era of hard times? There is evidently one answer. 
The attacks by Higher Critics upon the inspiration of the 
Bible have found so many adherents in the ranks of the 
clergy and theological professors who proclaim their 
doubts that the faith of the masses has beeh undermined 
and the great truths of the Bible have no longer that firm 
hold upon their consciences which has heretofore stimu- 
lated the disciples to faithful service, and brought sinners 
to repentance. With the great Greek church wedded to 
politics, the Catholic church worshiping Mary in the place 
of Christ and pronouncing blessing upon those who idola- 
trously kiss the toe of the image of Agrippina and Nero,* 


*In the church of Saint Augustino, in Rome, is @ marble 
statue of a woman and child, which, it is generally claimed 
represents Agrippina and Nero. This is denied by the 
Roman Church, but it appears to be evidenced, by the fact 


(3) Rev. 3:16. So then be- neither cold nor hot, I will spew 
cause thou art lukewarm, and thee out of my mguth. 


. SIGNS OF HIS COMING. 233 


and the Protestant churches so largely stiffened with for- 
malism and honeycombed with infidelity, we see the apos- 
tacy moving forward with such rapid strides that we again 
conclude the end is near. 


V. World-wide Evangelism. 


“This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the 
world for a witness to all nations, then shall the end come.” 
Mat. 24:14. 

We ought just here to explain that while the Chureh is 
the present agent for the world’s evangelization she may 
be caught away at any moment. Then the tribulation 
saints—those who will believe by the very fact of the 
Church being caught away—may become the agents, for 
God will always have a witness in the earth. Later it may 
be converted Israel. Lastly it is to be a heavenly mes- 
senger.* " 

So we are simply to work. while the day lasts, watching 
and waiting because we have no sign nor event that stands 
between us and the coming of the Lord. 

But let us see what has been accomplished. 

What is a witness? 


We have only one exemple or illustration in the Word, 
and that is J onah’s three days preaching in the streets of 
Nineveh. 


Every nation in the world to-day has a testimony com- 
paratively as great, with the exception of Tibet, Nepaul 
and Bhotan and the Mohammedan countries of Afghan- 


that the latter is crushing a bird against his breast, show- 
ing the ferocious cruelty of his nature. This image has 
been consecrated by the highest authorities of the Catholic 
Church to represent the virgin Mary and the child Jesus. 
On the pedestal underneath is this inscription in Latin: 
‘‘Our Lord, the Pope Pius 7th, concedes perpetually 100 
days of indulgence, to be used once’a day, to all those .who 
devoutly kiss the foot of this holy image, reciting one Ave 
Maria for the needs of the Holy Church. June 7, 1822.’’ 


(4) Rev. 14:6. And I saw that dwell on the earth, and to 
ancther angel fly in the midst every nation, and kindred, and 
of heaven having the everlast- tongue, and people. 
ing goenel to preach unto them 


o34 JESUS I8 COMING. 


istan and the Soudan, and into the former the Bible has al- 
ready gone in great numbers, and missionaries stand at the 
doors waiting the privilege of entering in. 

Is it not impressively significant that the missionaries 
sent forth during this century have seemingly without any 
human supervision, been impelled to go to every land, 
island, nation and tribe of the earth. 


\ “Oh, Church of Christ, behold at last 
The promised sign appear; 
The gospel preached in all the world, 
And lo! the King draws near.” 


VI. Rich Men. 


“Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your 
miseries that shall come upon you. ... Ye have 
heaped treasures together for (in) the last days.” James 
6:1, 8. 

The accumulation of riches, in the hands of a few men, is 
specially characteristic of the present times. 

It is needless to mention the financial kings who, through 
trusts:and various manipulations, continue to add to their 
enormous estates. 

If Adam had lived to the present time and accumulated 
$10,000 additional wealth each year of his life, this vast 
aggregate would not equal several individual fortunes 
which have been amassed in recent years. 

What limit these colossal estates shall attain by joining 
“house to house” and “field to field,” none can tell. But we 
know that “woe” has been uttered concerning it,5 and that 
it is distinctively a sign of the last days. 


VII. Israel. 
God’s sun-dial. 
If we want to know our place in chronology, our posi- 
tion in the march of events, look at Israel. 
God says of Israel: “I will make a full end of all the 


(5) Isa. 5:8. Woe unto them 9. In mine ears said the Lord 
that join house to house, that lay of hosts, Of a truth many houses 
an Aner till ee ibe ae shall be desolate, even great and 
place, a ey may be place » without inhabi ; 
alone in the midst of the earth! Beaty MCeDOUy saneD ent 


SIGNS OF HIS COMING. | 


235 


nations whither I have scattered thee, but I will not make 


a full end of thee.” 


Jer. 30:11, RB. V. 


‘Like Tennyson’s brook they can sing, nations come and 


nations go, but I go on forever. 


which pass not away. 


They are the generation 


Israel shall be restored to Palestine and no more be 


pulled up out of their land.® 


Hundreds of prophecies affirm this dispensational truth. 
Like the red thread in the British rigging, it runs through 


the whole Bible. 


Prophecies to the people lke Ezek. 37, 


and prophecies to the land like Ezek. 36. 


The title deed to Palestine is recorded, not in the Mo- 
hammedan Serai of Jerusalem nor the Serglio of Constan- 
tinople, but in hundreds of millions of Bibles now extant 
in more than three hundred languages of the earth. 


The restoration was summed up at the first council of 
the apostles in Jerusalem, as their conclusion based upon 


the words of the prophets.” 


&s the fig-tree which Jesus found bearing nothing but 
leaves, Israel hath been set aside for a whole (aion) dis- 


pensation.® 


(6) Amos 9:15. And I will 
plant them upon their land, and 
they shall no more be pulled up 

‘ out of their land which I have 
given them, saith the Lord thy 
God. 


(7) Acts 15:18. And after 
they had held their peace, James 
answered, saying, Men and 
brethren, hearken unto me; 


14, Simeon hath declared how 
God at the first did visit the 
Gentiles, to take out of them a 
people for his name. 

15. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets; as it is 
written, 

16. After this I will return, 
and will build again the taber- 
nacle of David, which is fallen 
down; and I will build again the 


ruins thereof, and I will set it 
up: 

17. That the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord, and 
all the Gentiles, upon whom my 
name is called, saith the Lord, 
who doeth all these things. 

18. Known unto God are all 
his works from the beginning of 
the world. 

(8) Mark 11:13. And seeing 
a fig-tree afar off having leaves, 
he came, if haply he might find 
any thing thereon: and when he 
came to it, he found nothing but 
leaves; for the time of figs was 
not yet. ° 

14. And Jesus answered and 
said unto it, No man eat fruit 
of thee hereafter for ever (an 
aion). And his disciples heard 
éé. 


236 JESUS IS COMING. 


Jerusalem was to be trodden down until the times of the 
Gentiles be fulfilled.® 

But note carefully that a little later Jesus said, “Now 
learn a parable of the fig-tree (and all the trees) : when 
her branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know 
that summer is near. So likewise, ye, in like manner, 
when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it 
is nigh, even at the doors.” Mark 13:28; Luke 21-29. 

In Ezek. 31 the trees are used as symbols of the nations. 

“The fig-tree was THE JEWISH PEOPLE full of the leaves 
of an useless profession, but without fruit.’"—Dean Al 
ford. 

Now if Israel is beginning to show signs of national life 
and is actually returning to Palestine, then surely the end 
of this dispensation “is nigh, even at the doors.” 

This brings us to speak of 

Zionism, 
the present movement of the Jews to return to the land of 
their fathers. 

Zionism is a modern term expressing the national hopes 
and sentiments of the Jews. 

These sentiments, however, are based upon widely differ- 
ent views, as held by the most extreme sections of the 
parties into which the Jews are divided. 

As is well known the Jews have, in the past fifty years, 
become divided into three great sections, viz.: the ortho- 
dox,. the status quo, and the reformed. 

The orthodox hold to the Old Testament Scriptures, as 
interpreted by the Talmud, as the literal Word of God, and 
also to the hopes and heritage of their ancestors founded 
thereon. They believe in the oft repeated utterances of the 
prophets, that some day they shall return to Palestine and 
become permanently settled as a holy and happy nation, 
under the sovereignty of their coming Messiah. 


i es 
(9) Lu. 21:24. And they shall shall be trodden down of the 

fall by the edge of the sword, Gentiles, until the times of the 

and shall be led away captive Gentiles be fulfilled. 

gpto all nations: and Jerusalem 


SIGNS OF HIS COMING. 237 

These hopes are the very core of their intensely religious 
life, and are embedded in the most solemn devotions of 
their prayer-book. 

Every morning, throughout every nation and clime, 
whither they are scattered over this whole world, the or- 
thodox Jew lifts up his prayer: 

“Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together 
and deliver us from the nations.” 

“May it be acceptable unto thee, Eternal; our God and 
the God of our Fathers, that the sanctuary may be rebuilt 
speedily in our days and our portion assigned us in thy 
law. There will we serve thee in reverence as of old, in 
days of yore.” 

In that solemn service of the Passover they cry out, 

“At present we celebrate it here, but the next year we 
hope to celebrate it in the land of Israel,’ and again, 

“QO build Jerusalem the holy city speedily in our days. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord!” 

With such faithful and earnest prayers have these ortho- 
dox Jews kept alive the fires of devotion and the glorious 
hopes of restoration, while being driven up and down the 
earth with the rods of enmity, ostracism and banishment. 
But for over seventeen centuries, while they have thus fer- 
vently prayed, they have made no effort to return to Pales- 
tine, believing that they should wait until God Himself, 
brought about their restoration by supernatural means. . 

About 200 years ago the persecutions began to abate, 
and in the eighteenth century they were gradually eman- 
cipated from these various disabilities. With this coming 
of liberty, there was a noise and a shaking and the dry 
bones of Ezek. 37 began to come together.?° 


(10) Ezek. 87:1. The hand of man, can these bones live? 


of the Lord was upon me, and 
carried me out in the Spirit of 
the Lorp, and set me down in 
the midst of the valley which 
was full of bones, 

2. And caused me to pass by 
them round about: and, behold, 
there were very many in the 
open valley; and, lo, they were 
very dry. 

8. And he seid unto ma, Sonu 


And I answered, O Lord Gop, 
thou knowest. 

4. Again he said unto me, 
Prophesy upon these bones, and 
say unto them, O ye dry bones, 
hear the word of the Lorp. 

5. Thus saith the Lord Gop 
unto these bones, Behold, I will 
cause breath to enter into ydu, 
and ye shall live: 

6 And I will lay sinews upon 


238 JESUS I8 COMING. 


The Universelle Israelite Alliance was organized in Paris 
in 1860, and later the Anglo-Jewish Association in Eng- 
land. Through these powerful organizations the Jews can 
make themselves felt throughout the world. And now, 
within a few years, there have been organized Chovevi 
(lovers of) Zion and Shova (colonizers of) Zion societies, 
mostly among the orthodox Jews of Russia, Roumania, 
Germany, and even in England and the United States. This 
is really the first practical effort they have made to regain 
their home in Palestine. 

In a few words, followers of the status quo are striving 
to reconcile the genius of Judaism with the requirements 
of modern times, and in Western Europe are in a great 
majority. 

The Reformed Jews or Neologists have rapidly thrown 
away their faith in the inspiration of the Scriptures. They 
have flung to the wind all national and Messianic hopes. 
Their Rabbis preach rapturously about the mission of 
Judaism, while joining with the most radical higher critics 
in the destruction of its very basis, the inspiration of the 
Word of God. Some have gone clear over into sagnosti- 
cism. 

Strange to say, from these agnostics now comes the 
other wing of the Zionist party. And not only have they 
joined this party, but they furnished the leaders, viz.: 
Dr. Max Nordau of Paris, and Dr. Theodore Herzl of 
Vienna. 

The orthodox Jews who have enlisted under the Zionist 
banner, are animated by the most devout religious mo- 
tives. But the agnostics aver that this is not a religious 
movement at all. It is purely economic and nationalistic. 
Dr. Herzl, its founder and principal leader, espoused it as 
a dernier resort, to escape the persecutions of anti-semitism, 
which has taken such a firm hold of the masses of the Aus- 


you, and will bring up flesh upon commanded: and as I prophesied, 
you, and cover you with skin, there was a noise, and behold a 
and put breath in you, and ye shaking and the bones came to- 
shall live; and ye shall know gether, bone to his bone. 
that I am the Lorp. See also verses 8 to 14. 

7. So I prophesied as I was 


SIGNS OF HIS COMING. 239 


trian people. He conceived the idea that if the Jews 
could regain Palestine and establish a government, even 
under the suzerainty of the Sultan, it would give them a 
national standing which would expunge anti-semitism from 
the other nations of the world, and make it possible for all 
Jews to live comfortably in any nation they may desire. 

Not all the orthodox Jews have joined this movement. 
Indeed, the leaders of the Chovevi Zion Societies hold 
aloof. 

The call, issued by Dr. Herzl, for the Zionist Congress, 
held in Basle, Switzerland in 1897 met with severe oppo- 
sition from the German Rabbis and also a large portion of 
the Jewish press, as well as the mass of rich reformed 
Jews. Nevertheiess, over 200 delegates, from all over 
Europe and the Orient and some from the United States, 
met and carried through the program of the congress with 
tremendous enthusiasm. 

Memorials, approving the object of the congress, came 


in from all sections, signed by tens of thousands of Jews. | 


The congress elected a central committee and authorized 
the raising of $50,000,000 capital. | 

It has certainly marked a wonderful innovation in the 
attitude of the Jews and a closer gathering of the dry 
bones of Ezekiel. 

And now, after ten years of wonderful growth and 
progress it remains to be seen what the providential open- 
ings in the Ottoman Empire may be that shall give op- 
portunity to realize its object. 

Zionism is now the subject of the most acrimonious de- 
bate among the Jews. Many of the orthodox criticise it as 
an attempt to seize the prerogatives of their God. 

While others say that God will not work miracles to 
accomplish that which they can do themselves. 

Most of the reformed Jews, now that they can no longer 
ridicule the movement, decry it, as an egregious blunder 
that will increase instead of diminishing anti-semitism. 

They have no desire to return to Palestine. They are 
like the man in Kansas, who, in a revival meeting said he 
did not want to go to heaven, nor did he wish to go to 


ee ee ee ee 


- 


240 JESUS I8 COMING. 


hell but he said he wanted to stay right there in Kansas, 

Just so these reformed Jews are content to renounce 
all the prophesied glory of a Messianic kingdom in the 
land of their ancestors, preferring the palatial homes and 
gathered riches which they have acquired in Western 
Europe and the United States. They coolly advise their 
persecuted brethren, in Russia, Roumania, Persia and 
North Africa, to patiently endure their grievous persecu- 
tions until anti-semitism shall die out. 

But these brethren retort that their prudent advisers 
would think very differently if they lived in Morocco or 
Russia, and that even in Western Europe anti-semitism 
instead of dying out, is rather on the increase. 

In the midst of these disputes, the Zionists have seized 
the reins and eschewing the help of Abraham’s God they 
have accepted agnostics as leaders and are plunging madly 
into this scheme for the erection of a Godless state. 


But the Bible student will surely say, this godless nation- 
al gathering of Israel is not the fulfilment of the glorious 
divine restoration, so glowingly described by the prophets. 

No, indeed! Let it be carefully noted that while God has 
repeatedly promised to gather Israel, with such a magnifi- 
eent display of His miraculous power, that it shall no 
more be said, “The Lord liveth that brought up the children 
of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but the Lord liveth, 
that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the 
north and from all the lands whither he had driven them,” 
Jer. 16:14; yet has He also said, “Gather yourselves to- 
gether, yea, gather together, O nation that hath no long- 
ing, before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as 
the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon 
you.” Zeph. 2:1, 2. Could this prophecy be more literally 
fulfilled than by this present Zionist movement? 

One of the speakers at the first congress said of the 
Sultan, “If His majesty will now receive us, we will ac- 
cept Him as our Messiah.” 

God says, “Ye have sold yourselves for nought and ye 
shall be redeemed without money.” Isa. 52:3. 

But Dr. Herzl is reported to have said, “We must buy 


SIGNS OF HIS COMING. 241 


our way back to Palestine, salvation is to be by money.” 

What a sign is this that the end of this dispensation is 
near. 

If it stood alone we might well give heed to it. But 
when we find it supported by all these other signs, set 
forth in the Word, how can we refuse to believe it? 

Shall we Christians eondemn the Jews for not accept- 
ing the cumulative evidence that Jesus is the Messiah; and 
ourselves refuse this other cumulative evidence that His 
second coming is near? 

It is significant that this first Zionist congress assembled 
just 1,260 years after the capture of Jerusalem by the Mo- 
hammedans in A. D. 637. Dan. 12:7. 

It is probable that “the times of the Gentiles” are near- 
ing their end, and that the nations are soon to plunge into 
the mighty whirl of events connected with Israel’s god- 
less gathering, “Jacob’s trouble” (Jer. 30:6, 7), that aw- 
ful time of tribulation, like which there has been none in 
the past, nor shall be in the future. Mat. 24:21. 

But we, brethren, are not of the night. We are to 
watch and pray always that we may escape all these 
things that shall come to pass and stand before the Son of 
Man. Lu. 21:36. 

Oh! glorious Hope. No wonder the Spirit and the 
Bride say come. No wonder the Bridegroom saith, “Sure- 
ly I come quickly,” and shall not we all join with the 
enraptured apostle, 

“Even so come, Lord Jesus’? 


“I must work the works of Him that sent me while tt 
ts day: the night cometh when no man can work.”’—John 
9:4, 

All the World-Wide Mission Field demands increased 
consecration of ourselves, our time, and our substance. 

O fellow servants, let us improve the wonderful oppor- 
tunities of our day to make investments for eternity. 


Jesus is Coming Again 


‘‘WATCH 


therefore; for ye know not what hour your Lord doth 
come.” 


Matthew 24:42. 


‘“‘WATCH 
therefore; for ye know neither the day nor the hour.” 
Matthew 25:13. 


‘‘Take Ye Heed, 
WATCH 
and pray; for ye know not when the time is.” 


‘‘WATCH 


ye therefore; for ye know not when the Master of the 
house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the 
cock crowing, or in the morning, lest, 
coming suddenly, He 
find you sleeping. And what I say unto you I say unte 
ALL, WATCH.’’ 


Mark 13 :33-387. 


“Blessed is he that WATCHETH, and Reepeth his 
garments.” Rev, 16:15. 


“If therefore thou shalt not 
WATCH 
I will come on thee as a thief.” 


““BEHOLD, I COME QUICKLY.” 
Rev. 3:3, 11. 
(243) 


‘*‘YE SHALL BE WITNESSES.’’ 


Reader, what shall be our occupation, as disciples of the 
Lord Jesus, while we watch and wait for His return? It 
is not enough that we have a personal experience of re- 
pentance, faith, forgiveness, adoption and sanctification; 
it is not enough that we study the Word to search out the 
deep things of Providence and prophecy. We must join 
heart and hand in the great practical work of 


EVANGELIZING THE WORLD. 


For this is our Lord’s command: “Go ye into all the 
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature” (Mat. 
28:19); and He has said “This Gospel of the Kingdom 
shall be preached in all the world, for a witness to all na- 
tions, and then shall the end come.” (Mat. 24:14.) While 
the Church remains on earth (see page 86) she is certain- 
ly the agent to accomplish this purpose, because Jesus said: 
“Ye shall be witnesses unto me . . . unto the utter- 
most part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8; Luke 24:47-48.) 

Let us engage, with all our might, in this world-wide mis- 
sion work. Let us give of our means, our prayers and 
our words of encouragement to those who go to preach 
in the by-ways and hedges and in distant lands (Rom. 
10:15), and, if possible, let us go ourselves, thereby in- 
suring ourselves of His fellowship Who said, “and lo, I 
am with you alway.” 

Thus shall we best please the Master. 

Thus shall we hasten the day of Gad. (2 Pet. 3:12 mar- 
gin Mat. 24:14.) 

The progress already made inspires us to greater effort. 
The world is belted with centers of evangelization. From 
Greenland to Patagonia, from Norway to Good Hope, 
from Siberia to Tasmania, and throughout the Islands of 
the sea, multitudes of Gospel messengers are proclaiming 
the Word of Life. Only a few strongholds of Satan are yet 
without any witness, and of these Nepaul and Tibet are 
opening their doors to waiting missionaries, while Central 
Africa unbars her millennial fastness to advancing heroes 


(248) 


244 JESUS IS COMING. 


from every quarter. Read the missionary periodicals, es- 
pecially those giving general news, and your soul will re- 
joice in the hope that even now the witness is almost com- 
plete. Then arouse ye, comrades, and let us obey our 
marching orders, until we hear the welcome “well done” 
when the “ambassadors” are called home. 


MISSIONARY PERIODICALS. 


Nearly every missionary society has its own periodical, 
and we earnestly exhort every reader to subscribe for some 
one or more. A partial list is here given: 

Alliance Weekly, The, 690 Eighth Ave., New York. 
Assembly Herald, The (Presby.), Philadelphia, Pa. 
American Friend, The (Friends), Richmond, Ind. 

American Missionary, The (Con’l), 287 Fourth Ave., N. Y. | 
Bible Society Record, The (Amer. Bible Soc.), New York. | 
China’s Millions (C. I. M.), 507 Church St., Toronto, Ont. | 
Christian Missionary, The (Christian), Dayton, O. 
Christian Worker, The (Ind.), Toronto, Ont. 
Christian Workers’ Magazine, The (M. B. I.), Chicago. | 
Darkness and Light, 113 Fulton St., New York. 

Echoes of Service, 692 Eighth Ave., New York. 

Evangelical Christian and Witness, The, Toronto, Ont. 
Evangelical Visitor, The (Brethren), Washingtonboro, Pa. 
Free Methodist, The, 1132 Washington Blvd., Chicago. 
Fliegende Mission-Blatter (Ger. Ev. Assn.), Buffalo, N. Y. 
Gospel Message (Ind.), Euclid & Seventh, Kansas City, Mo. 
Glory of Israel (Jewish), 333 42d St., Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Gospel Herald, The (Mennonite), Freeport, Il. 

God’s Revivalist and Missionary Advocate, Cincinnati, O. 

Home and Foreign Fields (So. Bapt.), Nashville, Tenn. 

Home Mission Monthly (Presby.), 156 Fifth Ave., N. Y. 
Inland Africa, The, 2244 N. 29th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 

Jewish Era, The, 1425 Solon Pl., Chicago. 

Jewish Missionary Herald, The, Bedford Row, London, Eng. 
Kingdom Tidings (Gen.), Germantown, Philadelphia, Pa. 

Light Bearer, The, 32 W. Stafford St., Germantown, Pa. 


~~  « 


MISSIONARY PERIODICALS. 245 


Lutheran Chureh Work (Ev. Luth.), Baltimore, Md. 
Mission Field (Dutch Reformed), 25 E. 22d St., New York. 
Mission Herald, The, 624 S. 18th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Missionaeren (Swedish), W. Wrightwood Ave., Chicago. 
Missions (Baptist), Ford Bldg., Boston, Mass. 

Missionary Advance, The, 904 U. B. Bldg, Dayton, O 
Missionary Herald, The, 14 Beacon St., Boston, Mass. 
Missionary Intelligencer, The (Disciples), Cincinnati, O. 
Missionary Link, The (U. Missionary Soc.), New York. 
Missionary Messenger, The (Ev. Asso.), Cleveland, O. 
Missionary Outlook, The (Meth.), Toronto, Ont. 
Missionary Reporter, The, 150 Fifth Ave., New York. 
Missionary Review of the World, The, New York. 
Missionary Survey, The (Presby.), Atlanta, Ga. 
Missionary Tidings, The (Disciples), Indianapolis, Ind. 
Missionary Tidings, The (U. Ev.), Lebanon, Pa. 
Missionary Visitor, The (Ch. of Brethren), Elgin, IIL 
Missionary Voice, The (Meth. So.), Nashville, Tenn. 
Neglected Continent, The, 135 Isabella St., Toronto, Ont. 
North Africa (N. A. M.), 18 John St., London, Eng. 

Olive Trees (Ref. Presby), 4031 Locust St., Philadelphia. 
Our Missions, 15 Devonshire St., E. C., London, Eng. 
Other Sheep (Nazarene), 2109 Troost Ave., Kansas City. 
Outlook of Missions, The (Ger. Ref.), Philadelphia, Pa. 
Over Land and Sea (Presby.), 156 Fifth Ave., New York. 
Prayer & Work for Israel, 2654 Marion Ave., New York. 
Presby. Record, The (Presby.), Toronto, Ont. 

Record of Christian Work, East Northfield, Mass. 

Regions Beyond, The (R. B. M. U.), London, Eng. 

South African Pioneer, The (S. A. G. M.), Brooklyn, N. Y. 
South America, Paternoster Row, London, Eng. 

South American Missionary Magazine, The, London, Eng. 
Spirit of Missions, The, 281 Fourth Ave., New York. 

Voice of Missions (African M. E.), Bible House, New York. 
Wesleyan Methodist, The, Sheridan, Ind. 

Woman’s Home Missions, 150 Fifth Ave., New York. 
Woman’s Missionary Record (Meth. Prot.), Baltimore, Md. 
Woman’s Work (Presby.), 156 Fifth Ave., New York. 
World Outlook, The, 150 Fifth Ave., New York. 


JESUS IS COMING 


By W. E. B. | 


The following testimonials are given with special refer 
ence to the main teachings of this book, always allowing 
for difference in minor details, regarding so vast a subject. 


TESTIMONIALS 


“I regard the little book as the best brief compendium I 
Shave seen on the Lord’s Coming, and I wish for it a large 
circulation.”’ A. T. PIERSON, 

Edttor Missionary Review of the World. 

‘The late Bishop Stephen M. Merrill of the Methodist 
Bpiscopal Church, speaking of the value of a belief in the 
pre-millennial Coming of Christ, once said: ‘It kindles the 
fires of devotion and lifts the soul into an atmosphere of 
warmth and loyalty to Christ and contempt for the world.’ 

“In my own Christian life <.nd ministry I have found this 
to be exactly true; and, because of it I am glad to know 
that there are to be issued other editions of ‘Jesus is Com- 
ing,’ which has had so wide a circulation and performed so 
blessed and useful a ministry. I hope it will reach the ends 
of the earth for the great good I know it will do.” 

L. W. MUNHALL (Evangelist). 
Germantown, Phila, Pa. 


Church of the Atonement, 

Germantown, Philadelphia, Pa. 
“T do not know of any text book on the coming of Christ 
so clear and comprehensive as ‘Jesus is Coming’ by W. E. 
B. For years I have commended it to any desirous of look- 
ing into this great and all important topic, and I am con- 

tinually speaking of it at my Bible classes.” 
REV. D. M. STEARNS. 


The Moody Bible Institute of Chicago, 
. Office of the Dean. 
“To the Christian just awakening to the truth of Christ’s 
second coming and full of inquiries, I always recommend 
the book ‘Jesus is Coming’ by W. E. B., and yet to the 
student who has given years of thought to the subject, it is 
still a handy thesaurus.” JAMES M. GRAY. 


“TI believe that the book ‘Jesus is Coming’ is the very best 
presentation of the subject of the second coming of our Lord, 
that I have seen. I commend it most heartily to all students 


of the Word.” LEN G. BROUGHTON, 
. Pastor Baptist Tabernacle 
Atlanta, Ga. 


TESTIMONIALS. 247 


“In all the range of prophetic testimony with which I am 
familiar, I know of nothing so clear, concise and convincing, 
as ‘Jesus is Coming.’ My prayer is that it may help others, 
@s it has helped me, to some appreciation of the glorious 
theme of Which it treats.” ForD C. OTTMAN, 


Pastor First Presbyterian Church, 
Stamford, Conn. 


“‘ ‘Jesus is Coming’ has done an immense good in arresting 
the attention of Christians, and compelling them to the 
study of Prophecy, for which I am truly thankful.” 

RrEv. W. J. ERDMAN, 
Germantown, Pa. 


“By the reading of this book, ‘Jesus is Coming,’ I know of 
several men being led to seek Christ, and of many Christians 
being drawn to a higher appreciation of the Word of God, 
and of many being led to a more separated life from the 
world, and of many becoming more earnest for the salvation 
of souls. The author of this blessed little book has given us 
the Bible for every statement. May the Lord speed it on its 
mission till the morn breaks.” 

MAJOR JAMES H. COLE, 
Evangelist. 


“YT heartily commend the book wZesus is Coming.’ For 
fifteen years I have recommended it to friends who wished 
to study the subject of our Lord’s return. I pray that it 
may be a blessing to all Bible students, and I am sure it will 
be where it has a fair unprejudiced examination.” 

P. V. JENNESS, 


Pastor First Presby. Church, 
Kirkwood, Mo. 


‘tT rejoice in the sending forth of a new edition of ‘ Jesus is 
Coming.’ I trust that this fresh issue of the book will be 
greatly blessed to multitudes of souls. I am sure the abundant 
testimony from Scripture, which is adduced in support 
of the precious doctrine of the Lord’s speedy coming, will 
find lodgment in many hearts. In some details of the 
doctrine, I would differ to a small extent, but on the main 
fundamental truth I am in hearty agreement.’? ° 

Pror. WM. G. MooREHEAD, 
Theological Seminary, 
Xenia, Ohio. 


248 JESUS IS COMING. 


“The book, ‘Jesus is Coming,’ is, in my judgment, one of 
the most useful contributions to premillennial literature on 
either side of the Atlantic. In brief space there is overwhelm- 
ing Seripture testimony, clearly and forcibly set forth, to the 
personal, pretribulation and premillennial coming of our 
blessed Lord. I rejoice to hear of the large circulation 
already secured in our own and other languay,es.”’ 

JAMES E. MATHIESON, 
London, England. 

“T gladly bear testimony to the great value of the con- 
cise and comprehensive little volume ‘Jesus is Coming.’ I 
consider it by far the most useful and serviceable manual, 
on this great theme, that has been published. I commend it 
most heartily to all inquirers, students and Christian work- 
ers.”” A. B. SIMPSON, 

Pres. Ch. & Mis’y. Alliance. 

“The book entitled ‘Jesus is Coming’ I recommend most 
heartily to every prayerful student of the Word. The book 
is known to have been a blessing to many and I believe a 
prayerful and thoughtful reader will get much blessing in 
reading it.” JOHN WILLIS BAER, 

Pres. Occidental College, 
Los Angeles, Cal. 

“The first reading of ‘Jesus is Coming’ marked a distinct 
epoch in my own life, I am sincerely anxious that the book 
may have a broadcast distribution.” GILES KELLOGG, 

Los Angeles, Cal. 


“The book ‘Jesus is Coming’ has been for many years a 
great inspiration to me in my Christian work. The sound and 
exceedingly lucid arguments of the author in connection 
with the various scriptures to which he refers, all of which 
point most clearly to the consummation of ‘That blessed hope 
and glorious appearing of The Great God and Our Saviour, 
Jesus Christ.’ Titus 2:18, will I am sure prove an inspira~ 
tion to all who with open heart and mind peruse its pages, 
leading them to a greater love for the Bible, to holier liv- 
ing, and a more earnest endeavor to work while it is day 
for ‘the night cometh when no man can work.’ ” 

D. W. POTTER, Evangelist, 
Chicago, Ils. 


“Y remember very well when I first saw the book ‘Jesus 
is Coming’ at Northfield, twenty years ago, and how I 
studied it then. That summer was the first time the truth 
of our Lord’s return came to me, and I am very thankful 
for the thorough reference to Scripture for the better under- 
standing of that truth, and the firmer faith in it which the 
little book gave me.” ROBERT EH. SPEER, 

Sec’y Bd. of Foreign Missiong 
Presby. Church in U. 8. A. 


oe: 


Pa 

1:2 ee | 

1: eeevseveres 
1:26 ecccvcecslSO 
2 cpasreiee ee aOe 
3:15 e'eeeaweleeOe 
8: ares co 

6:3 eeeavueeeeond 
9:1-2 PE |. 
222 


13:14-17 .....162 
2 6 


24 ite ob a-ete eo OO 
24:56-568 .....181 
19:5-6 6 
20:8 
83:16 


ccc ee 1486 


se 26 eee eooe e 
+ 26:18-28 eoe 39 
#¢ 26 44-45 e@eeoe 168 
Num. 6:23-26 eece 2090 
ae 23: * @eneoe 104 
“623: . 146, 175 
Deut. 4:30-31 ..... 
** 80:1-10 .163, 168 
*¢ 82:11 .......211 
*¢ §83:2 .....15, 176 
1 Sam. 9: eeeseoce 
ss 10:2 -25 eeene 118 
+e 18:13 e@eeeeeee 


2 Sam. 7:10-11 ....163 
Ki. 19 


218 ccccee - 156 


Ezra 2:64- eevee 
ad 7:13 ese eevee 
Job. 19: 2-27 eeeece 00 
Ba. 2:8-9 ecee el z-l38 
“ 2:1 eeoeeeceor 
he 22 eeeoeenenaes 
*¢ §-22:380 .....-.161 
ae 24:6 e@eerevece 
es 27:5 eveeceserve 
ae 81:20 e@eseeces 
#6 57:1 eeeeeeoee NV) 
ae 85 Seoeeeeeerves 
ae 90 eeeeeeenece 
. 102:16. eeesee 
tie .15, 92, 175 
ae 110:1 eeevecses 
MF 12238. ous. n0. 104 
Prov. 80:11-14 ....161 
Isa. 1.26-27 eeeserve 
ae +) 4 Gee eee 
ree *" 187, 176 
«9:19 ooo. 05 
 4:1-6 ...106, 115 
oe 8:8-9 @eeeoeene 


Textual Index. 


Note.—In some instances a brief text is paged under the ref- 
erence to a larger one which includes it. 
may be found under 2 Thes. 1:7-10, etc. 


Page 
Isa. 7:14......28, 58 
** 9:6-7 ..12, 46, 87 
“¢ 11:2-4 1... 130 
sé 11:4-9 oe .92, 158 
a 11:9-1 eceee 
54. 167, 211 
66 14:12-17 109, 112 
es 21: 11-12 eee 214 
es 24 :16- cee 44 
as 25 :6-8 Pee b5) 
id 25:9 Sone wate OO 
#6 26:19 eeeeeee 00 
ee 26:20 eeoeeee ~2-30 
se 321 @eeeee .80 
oe 27:12-13 eee 164 
s¢  28:15-22 -108 
149, 226 
ane?) ee 46, 92 
“* 33:17, -21.. 
Neer - 12, 121 
** §©85:8-10 ..38, 211 
4s 40:9-11 eevee 141 
as 41:21- eee 178 
a 2:8-9 erever 178 
be 43:1-7 00000 168 
ag 43:9-12 @eoe 1%78 
“6 §6©405:23-24 ....120 
«6 8:10 easee 176 
= 49:18- eee 169 
st 52:8 eoesneeen 240 
sbi 52:8 eeevnvves 114 
ee 53:3 eeeneese 03 
cf $3:11 dora acacevs Vokes 
$6 54:7-8 ese s 161 
ae 55:6 sesecews 200 
. 58:1 Pees 1):) 
SOS -BO520) oe cetee 151 
** §60:1-4 ...15, 176 
*  60:15- .169 
“*  §61:1-3_...56, 131 
“¢ 65:9, 15, ..80 
#§ 65:20 eeseee? 189 
oe 65:17-25 ee 223 
ad eer +f 
Jer, $:1-18 eeovee 46, 
203 
- 16:14-16 oe. 164 
“© 98:1-6 ae 46, 121 
“¢ 93:3-8 ...93, 171 
ae 25:11-12 eneeee 
pe arr ee 
.-174, 226, 241 
a ab eee ie 
Si 81 39, 10 eee 83, 
Howmet ene , 212 
** $82:36-44 ......93 
Ezek. 7: 1-9 re WC | 
11:19 .......130 
** 20:40-44 ....165 


249 


Example; 2 Thes. 1:10 


Pa 


ge 
Ezek, 21:25-27 .....47 
208 


22:19-22 
34 eoeecee .93 
$4:11-28 168, 169 

171 


7 : ex 

sd 37:12-14 e ee 
‘¢ =§©-37:1-28 .171, 237 
ae 37:15-2 eee .169 
‘. 39 :28-29 eee 168 
Dan. 2:37-88 ...... 48 
«© 2:44 ...121, 227 
‘* ~§-9:18-14 15, 23, 86 
$6 ee es 87 
Sore. , 121, 127 
se 9:2 @eeese e .39 
** 9:27 .....78, 226 
 }1: weeee.- 109 
“¢. T13 ere) bt | 
sie 0-3 Ee ene eee 98 
12:2 ~—C«w 56, 57, 62 

haere? 6s ee a nee 

s¢ 12:4 176, 212, 228 
Hosea 6:2 .........58 
* 13:1 eceeee- 100 
Joel 1:15 wee .156 
“© 3:16- . 66, 106 
Amos 4:12 .........18 
** §:18-20 ..81, 156 

< 9:9 eee eeeoeeae 
is ioe eosveanvee 164 
" ee TD 


Zeph. | 1:71 14 ........55 
2:1-2 


209, 226 


sf 3: 19-20 ee 18S 
Hag. 2: 6-7 eveveoes 

Zech. 8: 20-23 @eee 170 

10:6-12 ..80, 166 

174 

“¢ 12:10-14 .81, 124 

157, 170, 227 

+8 3:6 eeoeachnrer®stt 124 
“¢ §-13:8-9....80, 99, 
... 157, ar, 208 

. 11-3 ...... 228 
“¢ §-14:1-21 55, 106, 
*¢  -14:4-5 .15, 76, iT 
*¢ 14:6-8 22.005. 81 

“* 14:16... 46, 170 

‘* §-14:16-19 ....150 
Mal. 8:1-5 eoothne 176 


250 


Mal. 


8:11-13 a8 
4:1-8 ...142, 187, 


@eeeevceaeseseosn 
@eseeseed 
@eenvooaoeeven 


18, 119 


fisae 
126, 143 
88 


11: 120-24 105, 155 


11: 27 eeoeveoee 114 
12:30 oe @eeee 
12:41-42 .... 
1B ........ 2 ee 


18:29-80 .. 5 
18:35-37 ..... Bf 
13:89-40 - 149,219 
241-42, 44..1 
121, 1, 122, 125, » 148 
18:49-50 -. 159 
16:4 ........ 161 
16:6-12 ..... 1538 
16:18 ...83, 201 
16:26-27 ..13, 28 
16:28 ...135, 137 
17:1-9....84, 123 
18:7-9 . ee 155 
19:4-6 ......204 
19: 46, 


2:28 e@e 28, 

31 53, 88, 86, 157 
22:1-10 er.) 
22:44 


23:37-89 .71, 87, 


eseeers 


JESUS IS COMING. 


Mat. 27: 11 ee) 


27:25 ..156, 174 
87 


hd 27:87 e @eeeoeanee 
*¢ 28:19 ....... 248 
*¢ 28:20 =... .28, 189 
hd 28:29 cece e238 
Mark 1:14-15 ..... 87 
“ 4:11 eeenseaeeends 
** 6:30 .....6. 141 
ss 8:15 eeees ee 158 
“s 8:34 ee 03°) 
$6 9:1-10 eaceecoe 
wees 85, 135, 1388 
** 9:10 .... 62, 68 
“ 9:50 =... 1862 
“6 11:138-14 eos 236 
“s 228 fw wanes 236 
“¢ —18:30-31 160 
‘¢ §13:32-37 ..... 63, 
oeese 8, 227, 242 
“s 14:25 ........ 84 
ed 15 343 ee @eeee 
*¢ 16:20 ...... . 133 
Luke 1:10 ........208 
** = 1:26-38 --e il 
“e 1:31-33 e ve 
senses 20, » 120 
“¢ 62:26, 36-38. ..212 
*¢ §-4:16-21 ..... 56 
a. +7) 14 
* 8:10 wo ae enee 
“* 9:10 ........141 
“* 9:27, 38..... 
wees 85, 135, 138 
** 90:41 ........161 
*¢ 10:9-11 ..84, 88 
*¢ 10:21 ........148 
s¢ 11:28 ........ 177 
‘6 —11:29-32, 50, 
eseeeee ee Ol, 161 
ss 12:1 @eeo5usee8 153 
*¢ 12:33 ........ 
‘¢ -12:35-40, .65, 
cecees , 78, 
‘* 12:37, 43... 
oeeeese- 116, 215 
‘* §12:45-46 .17, 64 
18:3) ow... 142 
*¢ -13:20-21 153 
‘© 18:23-25 180, 199 
“ 3:25-29 even 
** 14:14 ....27, 61 
‘* §14:15-24. .35, 125 
“6 14:31-33 eevee 14 
** 16:22 ........ 27 
** —17:20-21. .87, 122 
‘¢ §-17:24-30 . 45 
‘¢ —-17:26-87..45, 78 
“8 17:34 . seacvee OD 
“6 18:7 erecevese 98 
‘* 18:8 . » 282 
ss 19:11-27 e ee 
ee eeee 85, 86, 141 
ee 20: eoeoceene 123 
*¢ §20:35-36 .... 
secces 27, 61, 159 
s¢  21:24....44, 178, 
- 200, , 236 
‘* '91:25-81 


eeeee13, 207, 286 


Lake 21:28.18, 77 eT 


9 
‘¢ = 21:31-32..T7, 160 
21 :34-36. .13, 1%, 
78, 79, 99, 111, 

- 176, ’ 

hd 22:19 e@oae ocd 

“22: - 83, 125 
$6 23: 2 eesceaune oe 85 
“6 23:48 @evuoveeoee 2 
sé 24:39 aecaeoeoese ~128 


24 :47-48 248 
John 1:5-10...151 218 


1:11 ....87%, 
212 


$:3-5 
8:17-19 
8:28, 29.100, 208 
3:34 


8:36 @~eeoeoeo ease 832 
6:24-25. e 57, 102 
eceee 60, 102, 114 
8: es@eeeceaeneve 

. 2.2.60, 62, 101 
5:40 ........ 18 
5:43 108, 123, 
yaad 149, 226 
6:37, 89.119, 132 
6:39 . , &4 
eoseeeaeteoeeeneenveeee 54 
6:63 es ci wee 128 
7:38 ee weee 21 
ey | Ser 114 
8:23 ....120, 145 
8:51- 4 wee LBD 
8:58 ........139 
9:4 98 Tis’ oe 
@eseee 9 
10:27-28 ....119 
12:26 eeseeesees 29 
18:35 @eeegpmetes 202 
14; eeccee 


4:23 ee ? 136 
14:26 .....81, 50 
15:15 ........137 
15:19-21 ..... 
eo ance 120 
16:7 ....38, 138 
16:8....111, 
16:13-1 ee 
e@eeoeeone 3 ) 9 129 
16:20-22 .... 3 
16:33 ........84, 
wee 44 90, 145 
17:11-16 ....146 
17:14 ... 90, 145 
17:28 ..... . 186 
17:24.29, 34, 128 
18:36 ee +] 
21:18-23 eevee 2 
1: PPPs Wf é 


78 248 
1:9 coves sBae 128 


Acts 1:10-11 11, 30, T 
is¢, ' 201 


“ 16 eccccee lL 
as 2:34-38 @eeesee 87 
ee 2:41 @eeseaeedne S81 
es 3:20-21 eeeese 47 
ss 8:26 eeeeoeeeaneo 
se 4:2 ccccecdl, 61 
da 6:41 eee @ed @ © 
ee 7:14 @eeeeeneoeeo $1 
ae 7:38 eauvenasned 83 
ha £:) Gee 
hd y £4 @aeseededes 
es 8: eccceccerlad 
** 8:88 wccccdes 
“e 9:5 re +. | 
se 9:31 eegeeoeved 9S 
«s 10:41 eeeeeeos 63 
*¢ =6-10:42-48..14, 104 
“s 8: ---68, 103 
as 18:46 @eeoeoeee0 
os 14:21-22 eeoce 
3000 el, 7, 148 
 15:18-17..16, 77, 
157, 167, ' 178, 
@eeeeoee s 235 
* =§17:10-11 .... 83 
** 17:18 ....... 81 
* §17:23:~—(iw« wes 147 
“ss 17:30-31 wvee eld 
Laces 54, 157 
es 18: eeee eee 88 
oe 23: eeoonoeaeoved# 62 
es 24:15......86, 62 
$6 27337 coc cccee Sl 
a 28: 15 eeeeee08 16 


‘ 1:16. « '° 96, 182 
“6 : ere b 4 | 
hd 2:15-16 coc LAO 
“ 2:29 @eesevece 
es 5:3-4 eeeevonan 
se 6:13 eoveceece 60 
“* 8311-17. .127, 202 
*¢ § 8:15-18..126, 145 
“© 8:17-23 ...... 
....94, 128, 18 
“ 8:19-23 75, 7%, 
..122, 215, 
“ 8:21-33.. 92, 158 
** 8:23 ..... 18, 77 
‘ 8:24-25 eeee 214 
“ 8:32 @oeeersee 
“6 8°34 0000 0d, 4 
““ 9:3 eeevscse ° 
“ 9:27 ....157, 172 
“s 9:28 aeeeereons ry 
....120, 180, 160 
abd 10:18 eeecnevaccoe 
“a 11:5-7 eseovse 
eee -80, 156, 172 
11:14 .......118 
12:15 x... 
o.---6O, 101, 173 
** 11:17-28.166, 202 
*e 11:20 ..130, 152 


28:28 eeeenovece 88 


11:25-28 
eee AZ, 157, 178 


TEXTUAL INDEX. 


Rom. 18:11... 65, Pato 


1.108, 120 


6:2-3 @eeeonseee 
.....53, 104, 106 
8:19 see wceceld Sl 
119, 118, ‘199 
10:82....146, 17 172 


weccees 83 
8 @eeee 93 


:8 @eeeeevreseve 29 
6:10, 11.1038, 119 
: : 145 


2119-20" 


154 
133 ......00- 203 
1:4-6 ....... 203 
1:138-14 ee 204 


1:20-21 |. ...208 
1:22.23. . .95, 137 


We 20 69 CORO DOES NOLS 


~~ 


' Phil. 1:29 


2 Thes. A: 4-5 


aS1 


Page 
ecccveccldl 


** =68:25-27 


B: 15 
‘« §:30-82..131, 204 
“6 6:11-13 -108, 148 
eccccc eens 
as 2310-11 eel 120 
“6 2:15-18 eaetecnee 

:...148, 151, 161 
$:8-1 83 


“ 3:11... 61 
“ §3:20-21....5,° 18, 


2:5-11 


@eesonees 49 
133 


6 8:45 


¢ 4:18.17, Sh 110 


..»-111, 115, 81 
*¢ ~65:1-10 ....... 
“6 5:2 re (5 Bs 
“e638 weees |: 98 
“ 5:48 ...99, 156 
“s 5:8-9 eccces thd 
hd 5:9-10 eoocverdll 
* 5:19 ........129 


“s 5:20 Perr rre vt: ) 
“s 5:23-24 22 0, bs 


‘6 4:7-8,.18, 27, 44, 
“© 2:1-8..52, 78, 99, 
.+010%, 110, 118 


@ Thes. 2 ta 108, ai 


2 Tim, 1:8 ciieceee 88 


4 ecccece OF 
1:17.66, 


128, 222 
1: eeennece 64 
4:1 ..... 231 
4:1- eevee r) 149 
6:12 eeccennece 64 
6:13-1 @eeeve 


eseee 12, 128, 138 


eovcceceld 


1 ee 

1 e 

13 e@oaoaodee 
rs 115, 177 
1-5 eeveee 
22-4 @eeeee08 


7 @eeese@eoeoevee8 

38 abe 271 
1 sesccccelldD 
318....... 5, 85, 


wececceel 


DECC REP RTRLELRCR TELE 


2 ere >. 5 222 

rrr Ut 
39 . re bs!) 
1 @eeoee 58 
escceceeckOe 


e ee +>} 
eseeeoesu eve 62 
re & y 


: 45 
24-28 ..83, 47 
9:2A-26, erceoe 
sees 33, 128, 208 
728 wwe ee wee 
.-5, 11, 88, 144 
10:12-13 -- &T 
10:22-25 * 35 
at t 


70, ° 


JESUS I8 COMING. 


P 
Heb. 11:35 ree «1 
30-40 


11: ..100, 203 
‘6 12:22-24..21, 22 
‘4 -12:26-27 .... 6B 
James 5:1-8....88, 

5: wecceelell® 
1 Fet. 1:3, ccccccesld4e 

1:5-1 "148. 2 


1 John 2: 2 
2:1 


+100 214 
i > 89 


rr * * ’ 31, ° 156 


:20 
@eet 51, 160, "190 
8:22 


eoeeeevesnen 


ish, 143 


seeee ’ iba: 140 
1:19...... 19, 47, 
...-115, 177, 218 
1:21. ....60, 130 
2:2-4 -105, 148 
2:3-9 eee 18, 108 
2:17 eooavee 156 


eS 18 
1 e@oeeeone 8080 


55 
6:5-12 ...... 18 


. 145 
2: ig.17.i86, 148 
2:18 ........107 
2:22 ... "107, 112 


allt, 116, 128 
4:17 ooo 2154 
5:19... «142, 

146, 148, 158 


2 John 7. 107, 128, 


ee@eeen q, 177 
1:6 eeeoeooeve 224 
1:7-8 see 28, 200 
1:18 
2:10 


cece ces 0128 * 


P 
Rev. 2:25-17. oo 12, “Ts 


y $0. 7, 91; 111 
3:12 


eos Geese 


3:14-18 eeeeo@ 
, 4, 233 
ce AT, 54 
a6 oceccee- 200 
128 


6: 14 eesceo 81 
6:15-17 ..18, 81, 
45 


123, 1 

eccecclae 
“Seseeee 98 
eesnegee 29 
12:5 22000022188 
13: 11-18 coee 61, 
108 


venierpeee 
2.2%, 159, 228 


: eeeeeenn 5 


39: 15-16 .77, 138 
... 106, 140, “149 
20 


20:1-3 ..121, 151 


27-10 e 106 
20:1U-15__..... 
....108, » 2a 

: 223 


eovcenee lO 9 


21:2, eeeoeve 
22:3 eeevacteoe 
22:5 @eeseces 
22:7 -.. 8, 177 
22:16 coscesstl4 
22:17 eoceeeeklD 
22:1 

22: 


20 
..--120, 181, 160 


See numerous pas- 
gages qno on ee 
23 re 


to 
102, 162 to 167 
-to 181, 188 to 19% and 
218 to 221 


25, 7% to is 


Printed in the United States of America 


BOOKS ON PROPHETIC SUBJECTS 


Jesus Is Coming 
By Wm. E. Blackstone. 256 pages. Paper, 
net $0.50 


The Coming and Kingdom of Christ 


Addresses at the International Prophetic 
Conference in Chicago, 1914. Paper, 25c; 
cloth t 1.00 


The Lord’s Return 


History of Premillennialism. By Jesse Forest 
Silver 


The Return of the Lord Jesus 
By R. A. Torrey. Paper, 25c; cloth 
The Second Coming of Chris 
By Robert E. Speer 
The Harmony of the Prophetic Word | 
By A. C. Gaebelein 
Lectures on Revelation 
~ By W. Lincoln 
The Parables of the Kingdom 
Expositions of Matthew 13. By G. Campbell 
Morgan, D.D...... ccc cc cece cence ccces net 1.5 
Notes on Daniel 
. By Wm. Kelly. Paper, 40c; cloth 
Great Epochs of Sacred History 
By James M. Gray. Paper, 15c; cloth....net 
The War and the Jew 
By S. B. Rohold 


Sermons on the Second Coming of Christ 
By D. L. Moody, Major Whittle, Bishop Ryle, 
and others. 


Christianity and Anti-Christianity 
In Their Final Conflict. By Samuel J. An- 150 
net 1. 


Fleming H. Revell Co., Publishers 
New York Chicago 


