
z/px/ $/iSi!>raJ%L 0€f/& - 



JOSEPH 


BELOVED— HATED— EXALTED 


JOSEPH 

BELOVED— HATED— EXALTED 


Bv 


F. B. MEYER, B.A. 

Author o/ 

PAULI A Servant of Jesus Christ 
ELIJAH : and the Secret of His Power 
DAVID ; Shepherd —Psalmist — King 

e/e., etc . 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Ltd. 
(Office of ®Ij z (UIjrijBitatt) 

12, Paternoster Buildings 

LONDON MCMX 


SCRIPTURE BIOGRAPHIES 
by Rev. F. B. Meyer. B A. 

DAVID 

Shepherd, Psalmist, King. 

^ ELIJAH 

And the Secret ok his Power. 

ISRAEL 

A Prince with God. 

JOSEPH 

Beloved — Hated — Exalted. 

MOSES 

The Servant of God. 


1 / 


PAUL 

A Servant of Jesus Christ. 
CLOTH, Is. NET EACH 


MORGAN AND 300TT LTD 

LONDON. 


$xefsct. 


Y first essay at Scripture Biography was 
made on the Life of Joseph. And ever 
since Joseph’s life has had a special charm 
for me, not only for its intrinsic beauty, 
but because of its vivid anticipations of the Life that 
lights all lives. 

I remember seeing the huge Matterhorn reflected, 
in its minutest details, in a small mountain lakelet, 
many miles distant; and similarly, the life of Jesus 
is remarkably mirrored in this touching story. 

In fact, there are scenes in the life of Joseph which 
probably foreshadow events that are timed to happen 
In the near future, and which depict them with a 
vividness and minuteness not to be found elsewhere 
on the page of Scripture. It is here only Jhat we 
can fully realize what will take place when the Lord 



VI 


preface. 


Jesus makes Himself known to his brethren accord- 
ing to the flesh, and they exclaim, “ It is Jesus our 
brother ! ” 

The substance of this Biography was published 
some years ago ; but it has been re-written, and 
much new matter has been added; so that in fact 
this is a new book : and it is offered to the Christian 
public in the hope that it may find favour, and be of 
especial interest and use to the young, and, indeed, 
to all who love to hear again the stories that fasci- 
nated their earliest years, as they were, perhaps, first 
told by sainted lips, now for ever silent. 


ft. ynju^jLA. 


iKoittfnt? 


I. Early Days ... 


II. 

The Pit 

i3 

III. 

In the House of Potipiiar 

2 9 

IV. 

The Secret of Purity 

43 

V. 

Misunderstood and Imprisoned 

... 49 

VI. 

The Steps of the Throne 

64 

VII. 

Joseph's First Interview with his Brethren ... 79 

VIII. 

Joseph's Second Interview with his 

Brethren 93 

IX. 

Joseph making Himself known 

... 106 

X. 

Joseph's Administration of Egypt .. 

118 

XI. 

Joseph's Father 

129 

XII. 

Joseph at the Death-bed of Jacob 

I4 1 

XIII. 

The Secret of Fruitfulness ... 

154 

XIV. 

The Secret of Strength 

164 

XV. 

The Secret of Blessedness ... 

170 

XVI 

Joseph’s Last Days and Death 

179 


JOSEPH: 

BELOVED — HATED — EXALTED. 
CHAPTER I. 

(Ear Ig ®ags. 

(Genesis xxxvii.) 

*' Behind our life the Weaver stands 
And works his wondrous will ; 

We leave it all in his wise hands, 

And trust his perfect skill. 

Should mystery enshroud his plan, 

And our short sight be dim. 

We will not try the whole to scan, 

But leave each thread to Him." 

C, Murray. 

r was said by Coleridge that our greatest mission 
is to rescue admitted truths from the neglect 
caused by their universal admission. There is 
much force in this. When a truth is fighting 
for existence, it compels men, whether they 
love it or not, to consider it. But when its position is 
secured, it becomes like a well-used coin, or the familiar 
text which hangs unnoticed on the wall It is a great 
mission to rescue such truths from neglect ; to flash upon 
them the strong light which arrests attention ; to play the 
part of Old Mortality, who, chisel in hand, was wont to 



IO 


(Karlu Qaijs. 

clear the mould of neglect from the gravestones of the 
Covenanters, so that the legend might stand out clear-cut. 
It is something like this that I attempt for this exquisite 
story. We think we know all about it ; and yet there may 
be depths of meaning and beauty which, by their very 
familiarity, escape us. Let us ponder together the story 
of Joseph 3 and as we do so, we shall get many a fore- 
shadowing of Him who was cast into the pit of death, 
but who now sits at the right hand of Power, a Prince 
and a Saviour. 

I. The formative influences of his early life. — 
Seventeen years before our story opens, a little child was 
borne by Rachel, the favourite wife of Jacob. The latter 
was then living as manager for his uncle Laban, on the 
ancient pasture-land of Charran, situated in the valley of 
the Euphrates and the Tigris, from which his grandfather 
Abraham had been called by God. The child received 
an eager welcome from its parents, and from the first gave 
unusual promise. He was like one of those children, whom 
we sometimes meet in large families, who bear a marked 
contrast to the rest ; and who grow up like some fair Saxon 
child amid the swarthy natives of a tent of gipsies who have 
made it their prize. 

But what a history has passed in that interval ! When 
yet a child he was hastily caught up by his mother, and 
sustained in her arms on the back of a swift camel, urged to 
its highest speed, in the flight across the desert that lay, 
with only one oasis, between the bank of the Euphrates 
and the green prairies of Gilead. He could just remember 
the panic that spread through the camp when tidings came 


II 


that Esau, the dread uncle, was on his march, with four 
hundred followers. Nor could he ever forget the evening 
full of preparation, the night of solemn expectancy, and 
the morning when his father limped into the camp, maimed 
in body, but with the look of a prince upon his face. 

More recently still, he could recal the hurried flight 
from the enraged idolaters of Shechem ; and those solemn 
hours at Bethel where his father had probably showed him 
the very spot on which the foot of the mystic ladder had 
rested, and where the whole family formally entered into 
a new covenant with God. It may be that this was the 
turning point of his life. Such events make deep impres- 
sions on young hearts. As they stood together on that 
hallowed spot, and heard again the oft- told story, and 
clasped each other’s hands in solemn covenant, the other 
sons of Jacob may have been unmoved spectators; but 
there was a deep response in the susceptible heart of the 
lad, who may have felt, “This God shall be my God for 
ever and ever ; He shall be my Guide, even unto death.” 

If this were so, these impressions were soon deepened 
by three deaths. When they reached the family settlement, 
they found the old nurse Deborah dying. She was the last 
link to those bright days when her young mistress Rebekah 
came across the desert to be Isaac’s bride ; and they buried 
her with many tears under an ancient but splendid oak. 
And he could never forget the next. The long caravan 
was moving slowly up to the narrow ridge along which 
lay the ancient village of Bethlehem : suddenly a halt was 
called ; the beloved Rachel could go not another step ; 
there as the sun was westering, amid scenes where in 
after-years Ruth met Boaz, and David watched his sheep, 


12 


and the good Joseph walked beside the patient ass with 
its precious burden — there Rachel, Joseph’s mother, died. 
This was the greatest loss that he had ever known. A 
little while after, the lad stood with his father and brethren 
before Machpelah’s venerable grave, to lay Isaac where 
Abraham and Sarah and Rebekah awaited him, each on 
a narrow shelf; and where, after a space of seven-and-twenty 
years, he was to place the remains of his father Jacob. 

These things made Joseph what he was. And the little 
sympathy that he received from his family only drove him 
more apart, and compelled him to live “by the well” 
(Gen, xlix. 22), and to strike his roots deeper into the life 
of God. 

It may be that these words will be read by youths of 
seventeen who have passed through experiences not unlike 
Joseph’s. They have lost sainted friends. They have 
been emptied from vessel to vessel. They feel lonely 
in the midst of their home. Let me solemnly ask them 
if they have entered into covenant with God. Have 
you avouched God to be your God ? Have you put your 
hand into the hand of “the mighty God of Jacob”? It is 
an urgent question, for the answer to it may mark the crisis 
of your lives. Choose Christ; and, in choosing Him, 
choose life, and blessedness, and heaven. And when 
you have chosen Him, cleave close to Him, and send the 
rootlets of your existence deep down into the hidden wells 
of communion and fellowship. 

II. The experiences of his home life.— Joseph was 
endowed with very remarkable intelligence. It would almost 
seem as if he were chief shepherd (ver. 2), the sons of 


%\jz Coat of JltattiT Colours. 13 

Bilhah and Zilpah acting as his subordinates and assistants. 
The Rabbis describe him as a wise son, endowed with 
knowledge beyond his years. It was this, combined 
with the sweetness of his disposition, and the memory of 
his mother, that won for him his father’s peculiar love. 
“ Israel loved Joseph more than all his children.’’ 

And this love provided the coat of many colours. We 
have been accustomed to think of this coat as a kind of 
patchwork quilt, and we have wondered that grown men 
should have been moved to so much passion at the sight 
of the peacock plumes of their younger brother. But 
further knowledge will correct these thoughts. The 
Hebrew word means simply a tunic reaching to the 
extremities, and describes a garment commonly worn in 
Egypt and the adjacent lands. Imagine a long white 
linen robe extending to the ankles and wrists, and em- 
broidered with a narrow stripe of colour round the edge 
of the skirt and sleeves, and you will have a very fair 
conception of this famous coat. 

Now we can understand the envy of his brothers. This 
sort of robe was worn only by the opulent and noble, by 
kings’ sons, and by those who had no need to toil for their 
living. All who had to win their bread by labour wore 
short, coloured garments that did not show stain, or cramp 
the free movement of the limbs. Such was the lot of Jacob’s 
sons, and such the garments they wore. They had to wade 
through morasses, to clamber up hills, to carry wandering 
sheep home on their shoulders, to fight with robbers and 
beasts of prey ; and for such toils the flowing robe would 
have been quite unfit. But when Jacob gave such a robe 
to Joseph, he declared in effect that from such hardships 


*4 


(Sarl£ §airs. 

and toils his favourite son should be exempt Now in 
those times the father’s will was law. When, therefore, 
they saw Joseph tricked out in his robe of state, the 
brethren felt that in all likelihood he would have the 
rich inheritance, whilst they must follow a life of toil. 
“And when his brethren saw that their father loved him 
more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not 
speak peaceably unto him.” 

The case was aggravated by his plain speaking. “He 
brought unto his father their evil report.” At first sight 
this does not seem a noble trait in his character. Love 
covereth the multitude of sins, as the two elder sons of 
Noah covered their father’s shame. At the same time 
there may have been circumstances that justified, and 
even demanded, the exposure. It is sometimes the truest 
kindness, after due and repeated warning, to expose the 
evil deeds of those with whom we live and work. If they 
are permitted to go on in sin, apparently undetected, they 
will become hardened and emboldened, and eager to go to 
greater lengths. Moreover, Joseph was probably placed over 
them, and was responsible to his father for their behaviour. 
He was jealous for the family name, which they had 
already “made to stink among the inhabitants of the 
land.” He was eager for the glory of God, whose name 
was continually blasphemed through their means. And, 
therefore, without attempting to conceal the evil, he told 
their father just how matters stood. 

But this was enough to make them hate him. “ Every one 
that doeth evil hateth the light.” “ I hate him,” said the infuri- 
ated Ahab when speaking of Micaiah, “ because he doth not 
prophesy good of me, but evil.” “The world cannot hate 


Josephs 0 reams. 15 

you/’ our Lord said sadly; “but Me it hateth, because I 
testify of it, that its works are evil.” So will it be always : 
if the world loves us and speaks well of us, we may gravely 
question if we are salt, pure and stinging, amid its corrup- 
tion, or lights in its midnight gloom. As soon as our lives 
become a strong contrast and reproof, we shall arouse its 
undying hate. “What evil have I done,” said the ancient 
Cynic, “ to make all men speak well of me ? ” 

But still further, Joseph dreamed that he should become the 
centre of the family life. All young people dream. Unless 
our lot has been peculiarly hard and untoward, we all, in 
the sunny days of youth, don Joseph’s tunic, and dream — 
how great and successful we shall be ! — how noble and 
heroic! — how much good we are to get and give! The 
heavens shall rain soft showers of benediction ! The earth 
shall yield flowers for our feet and fruits to our taste! 
We shall surpass all who have preceded us ; sitting on the 
throne of supremacy, whilst our detractors and foes do us 
obeisance ! Alas, our raiment soon drips with blood, and 
we find ourselves down in the pit, or sold into captivity. 
But there was this in Joseph’s dreams, they foretold not 
only his exaltation, but his brothers’ humiliation. If he 
were the central sheaf, their sheaves must do obeisance, 
by falling to the earth around it. If he were on the throne, 
sun, moon, and stars must do him homage. This was 
more than the proud spirits of his brethren could brook, 
and “ they hated him yet the more.” 

But the root of their enmity lay even deeper. In Eden, 
when addressing the serpent, God said: “I will put enmity 
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and 
her seed.” That is one of the profoundest sayings in the 


i6 


4 


)\ 


Bible. It is the key to Scripture. All that comes after 
only proves the virulence and the universality of the con- 
flict between the children of God and the children of the 
devil. It broke out between Cain and Abel. It has em- 
bittered every family. It has rent every home. It shall 
yet convulse the universe. This was the secret of the con- 
flict that raged around Joseph. I grant that the home was 
ill-organized; that all the evils incident to polygamy were 
there; that Jacob was incompetent to rule. But still I see 
there an instance of that conflict of which Christ spake: 
“I am come to set a man at variance against his father, 
and the daughter against her mother; . . . and a man’s 
foes shall be they of his own household.” 

Do you know by sad experience what Joseph felt beneath 
those Syrian skies? Do the archers shoot at you? Are 
you lonesome and depressed, and ready to give up ? Take 
heart ! — see the trampled grass and the snapped twigs ; others 
have gone this way before you. Christ your Lord suffered 
the same treatment from His own. Go on doing right, in 
nothing terrified by your adversaries. Be pitiful and gentle, 
forgiving and forbearing. Be specially careful not to take 
your case into your own hands ; demanding redress in im- 
perious and vindictive tones. If you are servants, forbear 
to answer back. Give your backs to the smiters, and your 
cheeks to them that pluck off the hair. Avenge not your- 
selves, but rather give place unto wrath. Put down your 
feet into the footprints of your Saviour, who left an example 
that we should follow Him. He did no sin, neither was 
guile found in His mouth : and yet, when He was unjustly 
reviled, He reviled not again; when He suffered beneath 
undeserved contumely and reproach, He did not even 


“ Artist in tljc lEoritl” 


T 7 


remind the perpetrators of the righteous judgment of 
God, but was dumb as a lamb, and threatened not, and 
committed Himself to Him that judgeth righteously 

And what was the result? Joseph was carried through 
the hatred and opposition of his foes ; and his dreams were 
literally fulfilled in the golden days of prosperity, which came 
at length. Just as Jesus was eventually seated at the right 
hand of God, as Prince and Saviour. And your time, sufferer, 
shall come at length, when God shall vindicate your 
character, and avenge your sorrows. “ Trust in the Lord, 
and do good; fret not thyself in anywise to do evil; for 
evil-doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the 
Lord, they shall inherit the earth. He shall bring forth 
thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the 
noonday ” (Psa. xxxiv.). 


I 


CHAPTER II. 


$ a. 

(Genesis xxxvh.) 

“ All is of God that is, and is to be ; 

And God is good 1 Let this suffice us still ; 

Resting in childlike trust upon his will. 

Who moves to his great ends, unthwarled by the ill." 

J. G. Whittier. 

HE cross of our Lord Jesus Christ is the centre of 
human history. It is the sun around which the 
firmament circles ; the key to all Scripture 
history and type; the fact which gives meaning 
and beauty to all other facts. To ignore the 
cross is to repeat the error of the old philosophers; who 
thought that the earth, and not the sun, was the centre of 
our system, and to whom therefore the very heavens were 
in confusion. To know and love the cross— to stand beside 
it as the faithful women did when Jesus died — is to obtain 
a deep insight into the harmonies of all things iii heaven 
and earth. 

It is remarkable to learn that, on the day of our Saviour’s 
passion, it being equinox, the whole habitable world was lit 
up between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. Could 
an angel have poised himself in mid-air during those 
memorable hours, he would have seen each continent 
bathed in successive sunshine. At nine a.m. it was noon 



19 


Work rrf tfre (S5rcat Jlrtist* 

in India, and all Asia was in light to its far eastern fringes • 
at noon all Europe and all Africa was in light ; at 6 p.m. 
the whole continent of America had passed into the golden 
glory. This may serve as a parable. Poise yourself above 
the cross ; look back to the morning of earth’s history, and 
onward to its evening— and all will be light. The radiance 
that streams from the cross illumines all events, and 
banishes all darkness. 

When an artist in music, colour, or stone, conceives a 
beautiful idea, he seems reluctant to let it drop : he hints at 
it before he expresses it in complete beauty ; nor is he satis- 
fied until he has exhausted his art by the variety of ways in 
which he has embodied his thought, The practised sense 
may detect it now in the symphony, and then in the chorus ; 
now in the general scheme, and again in the minute detail. 
It recurs again and again. There is the hint, the outline, 
the slight symptom, anticipating the fuller, richer revela- 
tion. Is not this true also of the death of our beloved 
Lord ? 7 he Great Artist of all things, enamoured with the 
wondrous cross, filled the world with foreshadowings and 
anticipations of it long before it stood with outstretched 
arms on the little hill of Calvary. You may find them in 
heathen myths, or in ancient sayings and songs. You 
may find them in touching incidents of human history. 
You may, above all, find them upon the pages of the Bible. 
The ages that lie on this side of the cross are full of 
references to it — it shapes them as it shapes each cathedral 
church j but I suppose that the ages on the other side were 
quite as full, though the observers may not have been so 
keen to see them. 

The sun which now shines, so to speak, from the other 


20 


%bt W tl - 

side of the cross, so as to fling its shadow forward clear 
and sharp on the canvas of the present, once shone from 
where we now stand, and flung its shadow backward upon 
the canvas of the past. One of these shadows is caught 
and photographed for us in this sweet story of Joseph. 

To the casual reader the story of Joseph’s wrongs, and of 
his rise from the pit to vice-regal power, is simply interesting, 
as an old-world story must ever be, for its archaic simplicity 
and the insight into the past which it affords. But to the 
man on whose heart the cross is carved in loving memory 
there is a far deeper interest. It is Calvary in miniature. 
It is the outline sketch of the Artist’s finished work. It is 
a rehearsal of the greatest drama ever enacted amongst 
men. 

We can do no better than take it line by line, and mark 
the fulfilment of the shadow in the glorious reality. 

I. Joseph’s Mission. — “ Jacob dwelt in the land of his 
father’s sojournings.” When he had buried his old father he 
continued to reside in the Vale of Hebron, where Isaac had 
dwelt for nearly two hundred years, and where Abraham abode 
before him. This was the head-quarters of his vast encamp- 
ment. But rich as were the pasture-lands of Hebron, they 
were not sufficient to support the whole of the flocks and 
herds. The sons were compelled to drive these by slow 
stages to distant parts of the land ; and were even forced, 
by stem necessity, to brave the anger of the people of 
Shechem, whom they had grievously wronged, and who 
had vowed vengeance on them for their foul behaviour. 

It was this that gave point to Jacob’s question, " Do not 
thy brethren feed the flock at Shechem ? ” He had heard 


21 


JJnaeplj sent to Jsfreeljcm. 

them speak of going there in search of pasture ; long weeks 
had passed since he received tidings of their welfare, and 
the memory of the past made him very anxious about them. 
And this solicitude became so overpowering that it forced 
him to do what otherwise would never have entered his 
thoughts. 

He was alone in Hebron with Joseph and Benjamin: 
they were his darlings ; his heart loved them with some- 
thing of the intense devotion which he had felt towards 
their mother. Benjamin was young; but Joseph was seven- 
teen years old. The old man kept them with him, reluctant 
to lose them from his sight. Hebron means fellowship,* 
and was a fitting residence for hearts so closely knit as 
theirs. But still, on the other hand, the old man yearned 
with anxious love over his absent sons; and at last, after 
many battlings and hesitations, he suddenly said to the 
dearly-loved Joseph, “ Come, I will send thee : go, I pray 
thee, and see whether it be well with thy brethren, and 
bring me word again.” 

On Joseph's part there was not a moment's hesitation. 
In the flash of a thought he realized the perils of the 
mission — perils of waters, perils of robbers, perils of wild 
beasts, perils in the lonely nights, perils among false 
brethren, who bitterly hated him. But “none of these 
things moved him, neither counted he his life dear unto 
himself.” As soon as he knew his father's will, he said, 
“ Here am I.” “So Jacob sent him ; and he came.” 

But Joseph did not go in search of his brethren simply 
because his father sent him. Had this been the case, he 
would have returned home when he found that they had 

* pinn Kheurbn : Associating, joining together. 


22 


mje $tL 

safely left the dreaded Shechem. But instead of that he 
sought them, because he loved them, and went after them 
until he found them. 

Is not all this full to overflowing of a yet loftier theme ? 
Our Lord never wearied of calling Himself the Sent of the 
Father. There is hardly a page in the Gospel of John 
in which He does not say more than once, “ I came not 
of Myself, but My Father sent Me.” He loved to find an 
analogy to His mission in the name of the brooklet that 
flowed “hard by the oracle of God,” and which was called 
Siloam (which is by interpretation, “ Sent ”). Thus it be- 
came a constant expression with the New Testament 
writers, “God sent forth his Son;” “The Father sent the 
Son to be the Saviour of the world.” 

It must have cost Jacob something to part with the beloved 
Joseph : and this can be gauged by those who have lost 
their beloved. But who can estimate how much it cost 
the Infinite God to send his only-begotten Son, who had 
dwelt in his bosom, and who was his Fellow from everlast- 
ing? Let us not think that God is passionless as the 
sphinx, which, with expressionless face and with stony eyes, 
stares unmoved, unfeeling, over the desert waste. If his 
love be like ours (and we know it must be), He must suffer 
from the same causes that work havoc in our hearts, only 
He must suffer proportionately to the strength and infinite- 
ness of his nature. How much, then, must God have loved 
us, that He should be willing to send his Son ! Truly 
God so loved the world ! But who shall fathom the depths 
of that one small word ? 

But our Saviour did not come solely because He was sent. 
He came because He loved his mission. He came to seek 


2 3 


Jfa gretljrett fount* in gotban. 

and to save that which was lost. And He especially came 
in search of his brethren, his own, the children of the 
Hebrew race. Could you have asked Him, as you met 
Him traversing those same fields, “What seekest Thou ? ” 
He would have replied in the self-same words of Joseph,. 
“I seek my brethren.” Nor was He content with only 
seeking the lost ; He went after them until He found them. 
“Joseph went after his brethren until he found them in 
Dothan.” 

Beautiful as is the parable of the Prodigal Son, to me 
there is a no less priceless beauty in the parables of the 
Lost Sheep and the Lost Silverling, because in each of 
these two there was seeking on the part of one who could 
not bear to lose, and the seeking was never abandoned until 
the lost was found. It may be that the Lord Jesus is seek- 
ing you : for many weary days He has been seeking for 
you, with bleeding feet or with a lighted candle. You of 
yourself might never have the desire or the courage to seek 
Him ; yet take heart, since He will never rest till He has 
found you. 

II. Joseph’s Reception. — “They saw him afar off, even 
before he came near unto them, and they conspired against 
him to slay him.” And he would doubtless have been 
ruthlessly slain, and his body flung into some pit, awaj 
from the haunts of men, if it had not been for the mercifik 
pleadings of Reuben, the eldest brother. “And it came 
to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they 
stripped him of his coat, his coat of many colours, and 
they took him, and cast him into a pit.” Our mother earth 
has seen many dark crimes committed on her surface by 


24 W* flit 

her children j but she has never seen a darker one than 
this. It was a mean, cowardly, dastardly deed for nine 
grown men to set upon one timid, unresisting lad. 

The calm prose of the historian does not dwell on the 
passion of the brothers, or on the anguish of that young 
heart, which found it so hard to die, so hard to say good- 
bye to the fair earth, so hard to descend into that dark 
cistern, whose steep sides forbade the hope that he could 
ever scramble back into the upper air. But the confession 
of those cruel men, made to one another after the lapse of 
twenty-five years, enables us to supply the missing colour- 
ing for this deed of horror. 

Years after they said one to another, “We are verily 
guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish 
of his soul, when he besought us and we would not hear.” 
What a revelation there is in these words ! We seem to 
see Joseph, in those rude hands, like a fleecy lamb in the 
jaws of a tiger. He struggles to get free. He entreats 
them with bitter tears to let him go. He implores them 
for the sake of his old father, and by the tie of brotherhood. 
The anguish of his soul is clearly evident in his bitter cries, 
and tears, and prayers. Alas, poor young sufferer ! Would 
that we could believe that thine were the only anguished 
cries which brutal passion has extorted from gentle 
innocence ! 

What a genesis of crime is here f There was a time when 
the germ of this sin alighted on their hearts in the form of 
a ruffled feeling of jealousy against the young dreamer. If 
only they had quenched it then, its further progress would 
have been stayed. Alas! they did not quench it; they 
permitted it to work within them as leaven works in meal. 


^Rforjjtbeit jjtn. 25 

And “ lust, when it had conceived, brought forth sin ; and 
sin, when it was finished, brought forth death.” Take care 
how you permit a single germ of sin to alight and remain 
upon your heart. To permit it to do so, is almost certain 
ruin. Sooner or later it will acquire overwhelming force. 
Treat that germ as you would the first germ of fever that 
entered your home. At the first consciousness of sin, seek 
instant cleansing in the precious blood of Christ. 

Unforgiven sin is a fearful scourge. Year passed after 
year; but the years could not obliterate from their memories 
that look, those cries, that scene in the green glen of 
Dothan, surrounded by the tall cliffs, over-arched by the 
blue sky, whose expanse was lit up by a meridian sun. 
They tried to lock up the skeleton in their most secret 
cupboard, but it contrived to come forth to confront them 
even in their guarded hours. Sometimes they thought they 
saw that agonized young face in their dreams, and heard 
that piteous voice wailing in the night wind. The old 
father, who mourned for his son as dead, was happier than 
were they, who knew him to be alive. One crime may 
thus darken a whole life. There are some who teach that 
God is too merciful to punish men ; yet He has so made 
the world that sin is its own Nemesis — sin carries with it 
the seed of its own punishment. And the men who carry 
with them the sense of unforgiven sin, will be the first to 
believe in a vulture for ever tearing out the vitals, a worm 
that never dies, a fire that is never quenched. 

But Joseph's grief was a true anticipation of Christ's. 

“ He came to his own, but his own received Him not.” / s 
They said, “This is the heir, come let us kill Him, and 
the inheritance shall be ours.” “They caught Him, and 


26 


%ht $it. 

cast Him out, and slew Him.” “ They parted his raiment 
among them.” They sold Him to the Gentiles. They 
sat down to watch Him die. The anguish of Joseph's 
soul reminds us of the strong cryings and tears wrung 
from the human nature of Christ by the near approach 
of His unknown sufferings as the scapegoat of the race. 
The comparative innocence of Joseph reminds us of the 
spotlessness of the Lamb who was without blemish, and 
whose blamelessness was again and again attested before 
He died. No victim destined for the altar was ever 
more searchingly inspected for one black hair or defect 
than was Jesus, by those who were compelled to confess, 
“ This Man hath done nothing amiss.” 

Here y however , the parallel stays. Joseph’s sufferings 
stopped before they reached the point of death ; Jesus 
tasted death. Joseph's sufferings were personal; the 
sufferings of Jesus were substitutionary and mediatorial ; 
“ He died for us ; ” “ He gave Himself for me.” Joseph's 
sufferings had no efficacy in atoning for the sin that caused 
them ; but the sufferings of Jesus atone not only for the 
guilt of his murderers, but for the guilt of all ; “ He is the 
propitiation for our sins ; and not for ours only, but also for 
the whole world” 

III. Joseph's Fate. — “They sat down to eat bread.” 
With hardened unconcern they took their midday meal. 
Just at that moment a new and welcome sight struck their 
gaze. They were sitting on the plain at Dothan, a spot 
which still retains its ancient name ; and any one stationed 
there, and looking eastward towards the valley of the 
Jordan, would be able to trace the main road that led 


“Cbrotttj trf filter/' 


27 


from the fords of the Jordan towards the coast of the 
Mediterranean. This road was one of the main thorough- 
fares of Palestine ; it connected Gilead and the other 
territories beyond the Jordan with the sea-coast ; and 
when once the . coast was struck, the way was easy south- 
wards through Philistia to the Delta of the Nile. Along 
this road at that moment a caravan was travelling. The 
brothers could readily descry the long string of patient 
camels moving slowly up the valley towards them. They 
guessed at once who the parties were and whence they 
came. Without doubt 'hey were of the Arab race, the 
sailors of the desert in all ages, descendants of Ishmael; 
and they were coming from Gilead, bearing spicery and 
balm and myrrh, natural aromatic products which abound 
in the woods and pasture-lands of Eastern Palestine, and 
which were in great request in Egypt for purposes of 
embalmment. 

The sight of these travelling merchants gave a sudden 
turn to the thoughts of the conspirators. They knew that 
there was in Egypt a great demand for slaves, and that 
these merchantmen were in the habit of buying slaves 
in their passage and selling them in that land, which has 
always been the great slave-mart of the world. Why not 
sell their brother ? It would be an easy way of disposing 
of him. It would save them from fratricide. So, acting 
upon the suggestion of Judah, they lifted Joseph out of 
the pit, and, as money was no object to them, they sold 
him for twenty rings of silver — about three pounds. 

It was the work of a few minutes; and then Joseph 
found himself one of a long line of fettered slaves, bound 
for a foreign land Was not this almost worse than death ? 


28 


What anguish still rent his young heart I How eager his 
desire to send just one last message to his father ! And 
with all these thoughts, there would mingle a wondering 
thought of the great God whom he had learned to worship, 
What would He say to this? Little did he think then that 
hereafter he should look back on that day as one of the most 
gracious links in a chain of loving providences ; or that he 
should ever say, “Be not grieved, nor angry with your' 
selves : God did send me here before you.” It is very 
sweet, as life passes by, to be able to look back on dark 
and mysterious events, and to trace the hand of God 
where we once saw only the malice and cruelty of man. 
And no doubt the day is coming when we shall be able 
to speak thus of all the dark passages of our life. 

Joseph was betrayed by his brothers ; Jesus by His friend. 
Joseph was sold for money; so was our Lord. Joseph 
followed in the train of captives to slavery; Jesus was 
numbered with transgressors. The crime of Joseph’s 
brothers fulfilled the Divine plan; and the wicked hands 
of the crucifiers of Jesus fulfilled the determinate counsel 
and foreknowledge of God. 

God will “ make the wrath of man to praise Him ; and 
the remainder of wrath will He restrain.” “ Oh, the depth 
of the riches both of the wisdom and of the knowledge of 
God ! how unsearchable His judgments, and His ways past 
finding out ! ” 


CHAPTER III. 


Stt tijt $mts* oi ftotipfrar. 

(Genesis xxxix.) 

' ' Many, if God should make them kings, 
Might not disgrace the throne He gave ; 
How few who could as well fulfil 
The holier office of a slave I 


*' Great may he be who can command, 

And rule with just and tender sway ; 

Yet is diviner wisdom taught 
Better by him who can obey." 

A. A. Proctor. 



ftl HE Midianite merchantmen, into whose hands his 
brethren sold Joseph, brought him down to 
Egypt — with its riband of green pasture-land 
amid the waste of sand. In some great slave 
market he was exposed for sale, together with 
hundreds more, who had been captured by force or stealth 
from the surrounding countries. No doubt the regions of 
the Upper Nile and of Central Africa were drained then 
as now, to meet the insatiable demand for slaves. And 
the delicately complexioned lad may have found himself 
close to the swarthy children of the lands that lie beneath 
the tropic sun; lands which have been trodden in recent 
times by English soldiers, and which will for ever be 
sacred to our countrymen because of the soldiers’ graves 
that seam the wastes of sand. 


30 3 ht tire Hmtse of ^Jotipljar. 

He was bought by Potiphar, “the captain of the guard.” 
The margin tells us he was the chief of the slaughtermen 
or executioners. He was, in all likelihood, the chief of the 
military force employed as the royal body-guard, in the pre- 
cincts of the court. The Egyptian monarchs had the absolute 
power of life and death y and they did not scruple to order 
the infliction of a variety of summary or sanguinary punish- 
ments, the execution of which was entrusted to the military 
guard, which was always at hand, and afforded the readiest 
and most efficient instrument for torture or death. 

Potiphar was an Egyptian grandee ; a member of a proud 
aristocracy ; high in office and in court favour. He would 
no doubt live in a splendid palace, covered with hiero- 
glyphs and filled with slaves. The young captive, accus- 
tomed to the tendernesses of his simple and beldved home, 
must have trembled as he passed up the pillared avenue, 
through sphinx-guarded gates, into the recesses of that 
strange, vast Egyptian palace, where they spoke a language 
of which he could not understand a word, and where all 
was so new and strange. But “God was with him”; the 
sense of the presence and guardianship of his father’s God 
pervaded- and stilled his soul, and kept him in perfect 
peace; and, though severed from all whom he knew, it 
was rest and strength to feel that the mysterious wings, 
engraved on the porticoes of so many Egyptian buildings, 
were emblems to him of the outstretched wings of his great 
Father’s care — an unsleeping care beneath which his soul 
might nestle evermore. Who would not rather, after all, 
choose to be Joseph in Egypt with God, than the brothers 
with a blood-stained garment in their hands and the sense 
of guilt on their soul ? 


u %\it Sorb hms fottfr bn*.” 3 1 

Let us consider how Joseph fared in Potiphar’s house. 

I. Joseph's Promotion. — “The Lord was with Joseph , 
and he was a prosperous man.” The older versions of the 
Bible give a curious rendering here “The Lord was with 
Joseph ; and he was a luckie fellow.” I suppose the 
meaning is that everything he handled went well. Success 
followed him as closely as his shadow, and touched all his 
plans with her magic wand. Potiphar and his household 
got into the way of expecting that this strange Hebrew 
captive could' untie every knot, disentangle every skein, 
and bring to successful issues the most intricate arrange- 
ments. This arose from two causes. 

In the first place, though stripped of his coat \ he had not 
been stripped of his character. See to it, young people, that 
no 'one rob you of that: everything else may be replaced 
but that! He was industrious, prompt, diligent, obedient, 
reliable. ' When sent to find his brothers, he had carried 
out, not the letter only, but the spirit of his father’s instruc- 
tions, and did not rest till he had traced them from 
Shechem to Dothan. And this was the spirit of his life. • 
He did his work, not because he was obliged to do it, but 
because God had given it to him to do, and had called him 
to do it. He read the will of God in “the daily round, 
the common task.” He said to himself, as he said in after- 
life, “God did send me hither” (xlv. 5). He felt that he 
was the servant— not so much of Potiphar as — of the God 
of Abraham and Isaac. There, in the household of Poti- 
phar, he might live a devout and earnest life as truly as 
when he spent the long, happy days in Jacob’s tent : and 
he did. And it was this which made him so conscientious 


32 3 ti tip* fjcmse of IJotipbar. 

and careful, qualities which in business must ensure 
success. 

When his fellow-servants were squandering the golden 
moments, Joseph was filling them with activities. When 
they were content with a good surface appearance, he 
toiled upward to success from carefully-laid foundations. 
When they worked simply to avoid the frown or the lash, 
he worked to win the smile of the great Taskmaster, whose 
eye was ever upon him. They often pointed at him with 
envy, and perhaps said, “ He is a lucky fellow.” They did 
not think that his luck was his character ; and that his 
character meant God. Men often speak thus of each other, 
“ He was always a lucky fellow ” ; “ He was born beneath a 
lucky star “ He is sure to have good luck.” But there is 
no such thing as luck, except that luck means character. And 
if you wish to possess such a character as will insure your 
success in this life, there is no true basis for it but Jesus 
Christ. You must build on Him; or your structure will be 
swept away in the first hurricane. But when' once you 
have touched Him, the living stone, with the first courses 
of faith — then rear the building after the plan given in His 
own lovely life. Tier on tier let it rise : and you will find 
that “ Godliness is profitable unto all things, and has the 
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is 
to come.” 

In the second place : w The Lord made all that he did to 
prosper . The Lord blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's 
sake ; and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had 
in the house, and in the field." This blessing was not the 
exclusive privilege of Joseph : it is promised to overtake all 
those “ who hearken diligently unto the voice of God, and 


33 


31 stable feample. 

who observe to do all His commandments ” (Deut. xxviii. 
i, 2). Such blessing would oft be ours if we walked as near 
to God as Joseph did. It is of little use to cry with Jabez, 
“ Oh that Thou wouldest bless me indeed ! ” unless, like 
him we add, “ Keep me from evil.” But when the blessing 
comes, “it maketh rich, and addeth no sorrow.” Let us see 
to it that we live so that God may be with us. “ The Lord 
is with you, while ye be with Him : and if ye seek Him, 
He will be found of you ; but if ye forsake Him, He will 
forsake you.” 

These words may be read by servants of various kinds — the 
household domestic, the office-boy, the apprentice, the clerk. 
And if so, they will surely be helped by the example of this 
noble youth. He did not give himself to useless regrets and 
unavailing tears. He girded himself manfully to do with his 
might whatsoever his hand found to do. He was “ faithful 
in that which was least,” in the most menial and trivial 
duties of his office. He believed that God had put him 
where he was; and in serving his earthly master well he 
felt that he was really pleasing his great heavenly Friend, 
who was as near him in those hieroglyphed palaces as in 
Jacob's tents. This is the spirit in which all service should 
be done. “Stay where you are,” said the apostles to the 
vast slave populations of their time, who gladly embraced 
the Gospel that made them free with a freedom which no 
thongs or chains could limit But “ let every man, wherein 
he is called, therein abide with God. Art thou called, 
being a servant? care not for it; for he that is called in 
the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's freeman.” "Ye serve 

the Lord Christ. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to 
c 


34 Itt flje House at ^oftjrljar. 

the Lord, and not unto men.” “Be obedient to them that 
are your masters, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ.” 
“Adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.” 
“Christ”— the great Servant— “ suffered for us, leaving us 
an example that ye should follow His steps.” 

These voices from the page of inspiration still speak to 
servants, If only they were acted upon, all such would as 
much ask the will of Christ before leaving a situation as a 
minister before leaving his charge. The most trifling things 
would be done on the loftiest principles, just as the shape of 
a dew-drop upon a rose-leaf is determined by the same laws 
as controlled the moulding of our earth into its present 
form. Yes : and every kitchen, dwelling-room, and office, 
would be trodden with the same reverence and love as the 
floors of a temple or the golden pavement of heaven. Our 
lots in life are much more even than we think. It is not 
so important what we do as how we do it. The ‘'motive 
that inspires us is the true gauge and rheasureTif the worth 
or importance of our life. A mean man may belittle the 
most momentous affairs by the paltriness of his spirit. A 
noble man may so greaten trifles by his nobility, that they 
shall become subjects for the conversation of burning 
seraphim, or of cherubim with folded wing. 

These words may be read by masters. We cannot estimate 
the worth of a true Christian servant. Happy the house- 
hold which is thus equipped! The Egyptian Potiphar 
must have been agreeably surprised at the sudden tide of 
prosperity which set in towards him. All things went well 
with him his cattle throve in the field j his affairs prospered 
in the house. He may often have questioned the cause, 


35 


% Wtxxfldz ^etttpiattun. 

but little guessed at first that it was owing to the Hebrew 
slave. “ The Lord blessed the Egyptian's house for 
Joseph’s sake ” ; He paid him handsomely for His servant’s 
keep. So is it still. Ungodly masters owe many a blessing 
to the presence of some Christian servant or employ k beneath 
their roof. No angel would ever alight there; no living 
spring would bubble there ; no music would ever sweeten 
the daily din of work ; no ladder would link that building 
to the skies — if it were not for some Eliezer, or Joseph, or 
Rhoda, that was living there. When we reach heaven, and 
are able to trace the origin of things, we shall find that 
many of the choicest blessings of our lives were procured 
by the prayers or presence of very obscure and unrecognised 
people who were dear to God. 

II. Joseph’s Temptation. — Years passed on, and Joseph 
became a prosperous man, the steward and bailiff in his 
master’s house. “ He left all that he had in Joseph’s hand ; 
and he knew not aught he had, save the bread which he 
did eat.” And it was just here that Joseph encountered 
the most terrible temptation of his life. 

.We may expect temptation in days of prosperity and ease 
rather than in those of privation and toil. Not on the 
glacier slopes of the Alps, but in the sunny plains of the 
Campagna; not when the youth is climbing arduously the 
steep ladder of fame, but when he has entered the golden 
portals ; not where men frown, but where they smile sweet 
exquisite smiles of flattery— it is there , it is there , that the 
temptress lies in wait I Beware! If thou goest armed 
anywhere, thou must, above all, go armed here. Yet this 
is so hard. It is easy to keep the armour on when we 


36 


In tbc Sons* nf ^ntrpfrar. 

ascend the desolate mountain pass, struggling against the 
pitiless blast, and afraid that any boulder may hide an 
assassin. It is hard to keep it buckled close when we , 

have reached the happy valley, with its sultry air. But ' 

unless we keep armed there, we are lost. “Watch and 
pray, that ye enter not into temptation. The flesh is j 

weak.” 

Temptation is hardest to resist when it arises from the least j 
expected quarter. Egyptian women in those days enjoyed 
as much liberty as English women do now : this is con- I 
clusively proved by the Egyptian monuments, which also 
testify to the extreme laxity of their morals. It may be 
that Potiphar’s wife was not worse than many of her sex, 
though we blush to read of her infamous proposals. They j 

must have startled Joseph like a shock of earthquake, and 
filled him with a sudden tumult of thoughts. The sudden j 

appeal to his passions invested the temptation with tenfold | 

force. God has so arranged it that, for the most part, f 

the sailor is warned against the coming storm; he is j 

able to reef his sails, and close his port-holes: but, alas 
for him if he is caught by a sudden squall ! Christian, j 

beware of sudden squalls! Men are suddenly overtaken ) 

by faults. 

Policy and conscience a?-e often at variance in respect to j 

temptation. It seemed essential to Joseph to stand well J 

with his master’s wife. To please her would secure his j 

advancement. To cross her would make her his foe, and ^ 

ruin his hopes. How many would have reasoned that, by j, 

yielding for only a moment, they might win influence which .j 

they could afterwards use for the very best results I One j 

act of homage to the devil would invest them with power J 


37 


®Ije 3teas0tthtj3 of fpnliqr. 

which they might then use for his overthrow. This is the 
reasoning of policy, one of the most accursed traitors in 
man’s heart. It is this policy which leads many to say, 
when tempted to do wrong, by master, or mistress, or fore- 
man, or chief customer, “ I did not care for it, or wish it. 
I yielded because my bread depended on it; I did not 
dare offend them.” The only armour against policy is 
faith that looks to the long future, and believes that in 
the end it will be found better to have done right, and to 
have waited the vindication and blessing of God. Well 
was it for Joseph that he did not heed the suggestions of 
policy : had he done so, he might have acquired a little 
more influence in the home of Potiphar; but it could 
never have lasted — and he would never have become 
prime minister of Egypt, or had a home of his own, or 
have brought his boys to receive the blessing of his dying 
father. 

The strength of a temptation lies in the response of our 
nature to its suggestions. It is said that the germs of the 
potato and vine disease are always floating in the air ; but 
they can find no place of operation — no bed— in healthy 
plants. But directly plants become degenerate and unable 
to resist their attacks, then they sweep away the farmer’s 
hopes in dreadful ruin. So it is with us ; if only we were 
like our Lord, we should pass unscathed through a whirl- 
wind of temptations ; they would find nothing in us. It is 
because our hearts are so desperately wicked that we need 
to stand in constant watchfulness. “Keep thy heart with 
all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.” There is 
no sin in having certain tendencies, appetites, and desires ; 
else there would be sin in hunger, and in drowsiness leading 


33 Itt tlyz 'get use rrf |tottjrlrar. 

to soft sleep. But the danger lies in the fear that they 
should be gratified to an immoderate excess, or from wrong 
and improper sources. Human nature is very liable to 
this. It is biassed thus; and stolen waters are sweet. 
Therefore Joseph must have suffered the more. 

We should always carefully distinguish between the 
appetites and desires which are natural to us ; and those 
which we have acquired by evil habit. About the latter 
we need have no hesitation. We can give them no quarter. 
They must be cut up root and branch; as weeds from 
garden soil are thrown upon the bank, that the sun may 
scorch out their life. But the former need careful 
watching; because though in themselves they are natural 
and beautiful, yet they are always liable to demand 
excessive gratification in respect to right objects, or 
gratification in directions which are unnatural and for- 
bidden. We must never expect the time to arrive, on 
this side of death, when these natural tendencies will 
be rooted out; and so long as they remain in us, they 
will constitute a nidus in which the germs of temptation 
may sow themselves, and fruit. No thoughtful man, who 
knows his own weakness, can ever dare to affirm his 
immunity from temptation, or the impossibility of his 
yielding. If he stand it is only by the grace of God. 

There were peculiar elements of trial in Joseph* s case. 
The temptation was accompanied by opportunity : “ there 
were none of the men there within.” It was well timed, 
and if he had yielded, there was not much fear of 
detection and punishment; the temptress would never 
publish her own shame. The temptation was also repeated 
day by day. How terrible must have been that awful 


39 


%\jt Secret cf jffciorg. 

persistency ! Water, by constant dropping, will wear away 
rocks ; and the temptation that tries at last to win its way 
by its very importunity is to be feared most of all. 

Yet Joseph stood firm. He reasoned with her. He 
urged his master’s kindness and trust. He held up the 
confidence which he dared not betray. He tried to recal 
her to a sense of what became her as his master’s wife. 
But he did more. He brought the case from the court 
of reason to that of conscience, and asked in words for 
ever memorable, and which have given the secret of 
victory to tempted souls in all ages : 11 How shall I do this 
great wickedness, and sin against God ! ” 

There are few subjects which require more notice both 
from speakers and writers than this great subject of 
chastity. Society is merciless on the occasional con- 
sequences of unchastity and on the wretched victims ; 
but it hears of the sin itself with an averted smile, or 
calls it by some other name. But there is no one sin 
which sooner corrupts the heart, weakens the intellect, 
and destroys the body. The poet Robert Bums wrote 
out of a bitter experience in his “Letter to a Young 
Friend ” 

“The hallowed lowe o’ weel-placed love. 

Luxuriantly indulge it ; 

But never tempt the illicit rove, 

Though naething should divulge it. 

I waive the quantum o' the sin. 

The hazard o ’ concealin 1 ; 

But oh, it hardens a' within, 

And petrifies the feelin'." 

And Lord Byron, ending his brief and unchaste life at the 
age of thirty-six, closed his last poem with these mournful 
words : — 


40 


In tjtf ®mt»e of 

“ My days are in the yellow leaf. 

The flower and fruit of love are gone : 

The worm, the canker, and the grief, 

Are mine alone 1 " 

There is no one sin which will sooner bring about a 
nation’s fall. If history teaches anything, it teaches that 
sensual indulgence is the surest way to national ruin. 
Society in not condemning this sin condemns herself. 

It is said that the temptations of our great cities are too 
many and strong for the young to resist. Men sometimes 
speak as if sin were a necessity. Refuse to entertain such 
thoughtlessness and dangerous talk. Whilst the case of 
Joseph remains on record, it is a standing contradiction to 
the whole. A young man can resist ; he can overcome ; he 
can be pure, and chaste, and sweet. We must, however, 
obey the dictates of Scripture and common sense. Avoid 
all places, books, and people which minister to evil 
thoughts. Resist the first tiny rill of temptation, lest it 
widen a breach big enough to admit the ocean. Re- 
member that no temptation can master you unless you 
admit it within your nature; and since you are too weak 
to keep the door shut against it, look to the mighty Saviour 
to place Himself against it. All hell cannot break the 
door open which you entrust to the safe keeping of 
Jesus. 

What a motto this is for us all! “ How can I do this 
great wickedness ? ” /, for whom Christ died. “ How can 
I do this great wickedness ?” Others call it “gaiety”; 
“being a little fast”; “sowing wild oats.” I call it sin. 
“How can I do this great wickedness?” Many wink at 
it ; to me it is a great sin. “ How can I sin against God ? ” 


“'Shi Jloutljfnl $usts.' 


4 * 


It seems only to concern men ; but in effect it is a personal 
sin against the holy God. 

It might have been better if Joseph had not gone into the 
house to do his business ; but probably he had no choice 
except to go. He took care not to be with her (ver. 10) 
more than he could help. We have no right to expect God 
to keep us if we voluntarily put ourselves into temptation. 
But if we are compelled to go there by the circumstances 
of our life, we may count upon His faithfulness. If the 
Spirit drive th us into the wilderness to be tempted, we may 
expect to enjoy also the ministry of the angels. 

Joseph did a wise thing when he fled. Discretion is often 
the wisest part of valour. Better lose a coat and many a 
more valuable possession than lose a good conscience. 
“ Flee youthful lusts.” Do not parley with temptation. 
Do nqt Linger in its vicinity. Do not stay to look at it. 
It will master you if you do. “ Escape for thy life ; look 
not behind thee, neither stay in all the plain.” 

There is no_ sin Jn bein& -tempted. The Sinless One 
Himself was tempted of the devil. The mob may batter 
at the palace gates ; but the national life is safe so long as 
sin does not penetrate into the throne-room, and thrust 
itself into the royal seat. The will is the citadel of our 
manhood ; and so long as there is no yielding there, there 
is none anywhere. I cannot be accused of receiving stolen 
goods, if I am simply asked to take them in — a request 
which I indignantly repudiate. The sin comes in when 
I assent, and acquiesce, and yield. At the same time, it 
is in the highest degree unwise to relinquish the battle 
until it comes into the inner shrine of our being. Much 
better fight it in the first circle of defence — in the first 


42 


Hitt tl jt of Jpattpljar. 

suggestion, or insinuation, or desire. Resist the devil 
there/ and he will flee from you; and you will be saved 
a struggle within, which will leave its scar on your soul for 
years to come. 

May we have grace and faith to imitate the example of 
Joseph, and, above all, of our stainless Lord. We may 
be quite sure that no temptation will be permitted to 
assail us — but such as is common to man, or that we are 
able to resist. The onset of temptation indicates that 
God knows that we are strong enough to resist, and that 
sufficient grace is surely within our reach. And the 
Almighty Father would lead us to put forth that strength, 
and to avail ourselves of His resources. “ He that 
abideth in Him sinneth not He that sinneth hath not 
seen Him, neither known Him.” Never forget that we 
who believe in Jesus are seated with Him at the right 
hand of power ; nor that Satan is already, in the purpose 
of God, a defeated foe beneath our feet Let the Over- 
comer into your heart, for Him to overcome in you, as 
He overcame in His own mortal life (i John iv. 4; 
and John xvi. 33.) Open your whole being to the 
subduing grace of the Holy Spirit. And thus we shall 
be more than conquerors through Him who loves us. 


CHAPTER IV. 


®Ij£ %ttxA nf ijtoritg. 

{Genesis xxxrx. See also Prov. iv. 23 ; 1 Pet. i. 5 ; 2 Tim. i. 12.) 

" Against the threats of malice, or of sorcery, or that power 
Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm : 

Virtue may be assailed, but never hurt ; 

Surprised by unjust force, but not enthralled ; 

Yea, even that which mischief meant most harm, 

Shall, in the happy trial, prove most glory," 

Milton. 

OSEPH learnt, hundreds of years before our 
Saviour taught it from the Mount of the Beati- 
tudes, the blessedness of the pure in heart. He 
could not have anticipated the exquisite symmetry 
of the form in which the law of that blessedness 
was expressed. That could only be coined and minted 
by the lips which spake as never man spake. But he most 
certainly drank a deep draught of divine sweetness and 
light from the crystal vase of his manly purity. 

There is nothing which we more earnestly admire than 
purity, like tliat which Milton, our great Puritan bard, so 
exquisitely paints in his “ Cornu s and which, like the sun- 

beam striking through the atmosphere of some foetid court, 
can pass through the murkiest conditions, without surren- 
dering a ray of its celestial glory. Men familiar with the 
secret of self-control — or who, not having been exposed to 
the gusts of temptations which sweep over and master 



44 


®Im» %zcvzt 0f |Jurttir. 

other lives, have never sullied their robes — always attract 
to themselves the admiration and reverence of their fellows. 
The snow-capt summits of purity, in their lofty, heaven- 
reaching majesty, appear so inaccessible to ordinary men, 
that they wonder greatly at any who are able to scale their 
rugged sides and breathe the rare atmosphere of the 
heavenly world. 

We must always bear in mind that there is no part of 
our nature, no function of our human life, which is in itself 
common or unclean. As Adam came from his Maker’s 
hand, and stood before Him in his native innocence, he 
did not even need the fig-leaf drapery. AH was sweet, and 
pure, and right, and very good. There was no desire or 
appetite of his nature which in itself was less sacred than 
any other. And if only he had ever willed God’s will — it 
only the will, and law, and purpose of God had been kept 
supreme in his inner economy — there had been no lust, no 
inordinate desire, no passion, in the world. Like Moses, 
the great lawgiver, on the wilderness march, who received 
the commands of God and handed them to the officers and 
elders for the obedience of the host, so could conscience 
have received from God, and transmitted to the entire 
economy of our human nature, those enactments, the legiti- 
mate outworking of which had been towards the glory of 
God on the one hand, and man’s well-being on the other. 

But when man sinned in the glades of Paradise, he 
changed the pivot of his being from God to self; he loved 
and served the creature more than the Creator; he took 
the sun out of the centre of the inner sphere, which im- 
mediately fell into confusion, each part working for its own 
selfish and immediate gratification. And from that time 


45 


Stelftefr Mtalgente. 

man’s highest law has consisted in the indulgence of appe- 
tite, flinging the reins on the neck of inordinate desire, 
whether of gross physical indulgence, or of imagination and 
thought; the only restraint being imposed by the fear of 
disastrous consequences in name or position; in mind, 
body, or estate. 

This fact must be borne in mind then, in considering our- 
selves or others ; and we must take into account the opera- 
tion of the great law of heredity* by which we have become 
possessed of appetites and tendencies, which, however pure 
in their original intention, have been vitiated through the 
abuse of the many generations from which we have sprung. 
And there is, therefore, a strong tendency in us all by 
nature towards the forbidden fruit. Who amongst us has 
not been often conscious of a bias towards selfish in- 
dulgence in two distinct ways; first, to gratify the senses 
in directions which are wholly forbidden; and next, to 
gratify them to an excessive extent in directions which are 
in themselves legitimate ? 

It is inevitable, therefore, that we should begin life under 
serious disadvantages, since by our very origin we are 
closely related to a race which, through ages of previous 
history, has been tainted by the poison of self-will, and 
swept by the storms of passion. We cannot but start 
under serious disadvantages as compared with Adam. Not 
that we are condemned for his sin, for we are told that the 
second Adam has met for us all those penal consequences 
which must otherwise have accrued to us on that account ; 
but that we are terribly handicapped by the disadvantage 
of being the children of a fallen race. And is not this 
what is meant by the theological term, original sin ; and by 


46 


Secret oi tpuritg. 

St. Paul’s phrase, w the law in the members ” ? And if it 
should be alleged that some mysterious change has passed 
over our physical nature, by which the inherited morbid 
operation of natural appetite has been reversed, we ask for 
proof and Scriptural warrant. Certainly, the presence of 
disease in the bodies of some of the holiest people is a 
strong presumptive proof against any such change having 
been effected. We must either hold that we have already 
received the resurrection-body, or that there are per- 
verted natural tendencies towards unholy and selfish 
gratification. 

To guard against all possible misconstruction, we reiterate 
that we do not hold sin to consist in a merely physical 
state or act ; but that we are predisposed to sin by the very 
nature which we have inherited, and which is so susceptive 
of Satanic temptation on the one side, and so subtle, swift, 
and disastrous in its influence on the will upon the other : 
and no philosophy of the inner life can be satisfactory 
that does not recognize the presence of this body of 
flesh, which is not in itself sin, but which so readily lends 
itself to evil suggestion, that, falling on it as sparks on 
gunpowder, tends to inflame the imagination, heart, and 
will. 

So long, therefore, as we are in the body, we cannot say 
that we stand where Adam stood when he first came from 
the moulding hand of God. There is a great difference 
between us and him, in that at that moment his nature 
had never yet yielded to evil ; whilst ours has done so 
thousands of times, both in those from whom we have 
received it, and in our own repeated acts of self-indulgence. 
The glad time is coming when we shall exchange this 


47 


Wl)& $obaz x of t \ft HoIjt spirit. 

body of humiliation for one in the likeness of our 
Saviour’s Resurrection. Then one great source of temp- 
tation and failure will be removed, and we shall no longer 
have to complain that the law in our members wars against 
the law of our mind, with the design of bringing us into 
its fatal captivity. 

Is there then no deliverance in this life from that 
bondage? Surely there is. The law in the members 
may war against the law of the mind, and yet not succeed 
in bringing it into captivity, because it shall be garrisoned 
and held by the law of the Spirit of Life, which is in 
Christ Jesus, and which makes free from the law of sin 
and death. 

The one-sufficient power by which the promptings of 
our evil nature can be held in check is by the indwelling 
and infilling of the Holy Spirit. “Walk in the Spirit, and 
ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. The flesh lusteth 
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, that 
ye may not do the things that ye would.” 

Never in this life will the tempter cease to assail. Even 
in the heavenly places — the upper regions of spiritual 
experience — we shall still be exposed to the attacks of 
the hosts of wicked spirits ; and so long as we tabernacle 
in this body, we shall carry with us that susceptibility to 
evil which is the bitter result of Adam’s fall. Like a 
thrill of electricity which pervades in a single moment 
the entire range of a telegraphic . system, so some flash of 
unholy suggestion may rush through our nature, causing 
it for a moment to vibrate and thrill. 

But when the Holy Spirit fills us, the tempter may s 
do his worst, and his suggestions will fall fruitless and 


4 8 


Clre %ztvzt of 

ineffectual at our feet ; our nature will not respond to the 
solicitations which are made to it from without We all 
know what happens when matches are struck on damp 
surfaces; and it will be thus with our temptations. The 
old nature, which was once as inflammable as gunpowder, 
will be deprived, so to speak, so long as the Spirit is in 
possession, of its terrible facility of response. And even 
more, when the Spirit is in mighty power within, He will 
take away the very desire to yield to sin, and change the 
old love into hate, so that we shall loathe and shudder 
at things which we formerly chose and revelled in. 

And in many cases, where He is trusted to the uttermost, 
He does his work so quietly and effectually in keeping the 
sinful tendencies in the place of death, that the happy 
subject of His grace supposes that they have been extracted 
from the nature. They are as if they were not. The 
self-life seems to hybernate; and this blessed experience 
continues, just so long as the soul lives in the full enjoy- 
ment of the Blessed Spirit’s work. 

Would that it might be the happy portion of each reader 
of these lines 1 


CHAPTER V. 


Jftismttrmtoaii atii Jntpmatwir.* 

{Genesis xxxix., xl. See also Psa, cv. 17-19.) 

“ Choose for us, Lord, nor let our weak preferring 
Cheat us of good Thou hast for us designed : 

Choose for us, Lord ; Thy wisdom is unerring, 

And we are fools and blind. 

" Let us press on, in patient self-denial. 

Accept the hardship, shrink not from the loss : 

Our portion lies beyond the hour of trial, 

Our crown beyond the cross. ” 

W. H. Burleigh, 

ETWEEN the pit and the prison there was only a 
transient gleam of sunlight and prosperity. The 
sky of Joseph’s life was again soon overcast. 
For when Potiphar heard the false but plausible 
statement of his wife, and saw the garment in 
her hand, which he recognized as Joseph’s, his wrath 
flamed up ; he would hear no words of explanation, but 
thrust him at once into the state prison, of which he had 
the oversight and charge. 

I. The Severity of his Sufferings. It was not a 
prison like those with which we are familiar — airy, well-lit, 
and conducted by humane men. To use Joseph’s own 

* Some thoughts in this chapter were suggested by an article in the 
“Expositor's Notebook-" by Rev. S. Cox. 

D 



50 $tt«mtterj5t00& attir ffmprismtcir. 

words, in the Hebrew, it was a miserable “ hole.”* I 
have done nothing that they should put me into the 
‘ hole.' ” We are reminded of the words, describing old 
Bedford prison, with which Bunyan commences his 
matchless allegory : “As I walked through the wilderness 
of this world, I lighted on a certain place where was a den, 
and I laid me down in that place to sleep; and, as I slept, 
I dreamed a dream.” Two or three little rooms, crowded 
with prisoners, stifling in air, foetid with ill odours, perhaps 
half-buried from the blessed sunshine — this was the sort 
of accommodation in which Joseph spent those two 
miserable years. 

Those who have seen the dreary prison at Tangier will be 
able to form a better conception of what that “ hole ” must 
have been like. Imagine a large gloomy hall, with no 
windows, paved with flags black with filth, no light or air, 
save what may struggle through the narrow grated aperture, 
by which the friends of the wretched inmates, or some 
pitying strangers, pass in the food and water which are the 
sole staff of life : no arrangements of any kind being 
made for cleanliness, or for the separation of the prisoners. 
All day long there is the weary clank of fetters round 
manacled feet, as the victims slowly drag themselves over 
the floor, or revolve again and again around the huge stone 
columns which support the roof, and to which their chains 
are -riveted. In more ways than one does the Gospel of 
Christ preach deliverance to the captives. In some such 
sunless “hole” must Joseph have been confined. 

And this was hard enough for one who was wont to 
wander freely on the broad Syrian plains. Confinement 


* 'Ite-Bor. 


ymitom iz Jfokekaa. 5T 

is intolerable to us all, but especially to youth, and of all 
youth most so to those in whose veins flows something of 
that Arab blood which dreads death less than bondage. 

I do not wonder at the pathetic story which tells how, on 
London Bridge, a sunburnt sailor, fresh from the docks, 
bought cage after cage of imprisoned wild birds, and let 
them fly rejoicing to their native woods, assigning as his 
reason to the wondering on-lookers that he had languished 
too long in a foreign prison not to know how sweet freedom 
Jwas. We do not realize how priceless freedom is, because ■ 
/we have never lost it. And Joseph never valued it as he 
di d wh en he found himse lf shut up in that stifling “hole.” 

But in addition to the confinement of the prison, there 
was the constant clank of the fetter. He was bound, and 
his feet were hurt by fetters. True, he enjoyed the favour 
of the keeper of the prison, and had exceptional liberty 
within the gloomy precincts so as to reach the inmates ; 
but still, wherever he moved, the rattle of the iron reminded 
him that he was a prisoner still You remember a touching 
allusion of another of the Lord ’s prisoners to this self-same 
thing. So Paul took from the hand of his amanuensis the 
pen with which to write his autograph, “ the token in every 
epistle” of genuineness and authenticity ; and as he did so, 
he felt the pull of the chain that fastened him to the soldier 
of the imperial guard ; and we can almost hear the clanking 
of the iron in the words, “ Remember my bonds ” (Col. 
iv. 18). 

But besides all this, his religious notions added greatly to 
his distress. He had been taught by Jacob the theory 
which comes out so prominently in the speeches of Job’s 
three friends, and which was so generally held by all their 


52 Jtttettit&erstoif attir Jtnpriaritteir. 

teachers and associates in that olden, Eastern, philosophic, 
deeply-pondering world : that good would come to the 
good, and evil to the bad ; that prosperity was the sign of 
the Divine favour, and adversity of the Divine anger. And 
Joseph had tried to be good. Had he not always kept his 
father’s commandments and acted righteously, though his 
brethren were men of evil report, and tried to make him 
as bad as themselves? But what had he gained by his 
integrity? Simply the murderous jealousy and hatred of 
his own flesh and blood. Had he not, in the full flush of 
youthful passion, resisted the blandishments of the beautiful 
Egyptian, because he would not sin against God? And 
what had he gained by that? Simply the stigma which 
threatened to cling to him of having committed the very 
wickedness it was so hard not to commit ; and, in addition, 
an undeserved punishment. Had he not always been kind 
and gentle to his fellow-prisoners, listening to their stories, 
speaking comfort to their hearts? And what had he gained 
by that ? To judge by what he saw, simply nothing ; and 
he might as'well have kept his kindness to himself. 

“ Was it of any use, then, being good? Could there be 
any truth in what his father had taught him of good coming 
to the good, and evil to the bad? Was there a God who 
judgeth righteously in the earth? You who have been 
misunderstood, who have sown seeds of holiness and love 
to reap nothing but disappointment, loss, suffering, and 
hate — you know something of what Joseph felt in that 
wretched dungeon hole. 

Thetiy tooy disappointment poured her bitter drops into the 
bitter cup. What had become of those early dreams, 
those dreams of coming greatness, which had filled his 


“Hail (Soil ftraafutt {rim?” 


53 


young brain with splendid phantasmagoria? Were these 
not from God ? He had thought so — yes, and his 
venerable father had thought so too ; and he should have 
known, for he had talked with God many a time. Were 
those imaginings the delusions of a fevered brain, or mock- 
ing lies ? Was there no truth, no fidelity, in heaven or earth? 
Had God forsaken him ? Had his father forgotten him ? Did 
his brothers ever think of him ? Would they ever try and 
find him ? Was he to spend all his days ih that dungeon, 
dragging on a weary life, never again enjoying the bliss of 
\ freedom : and all because he had dared to do right ? Do 
I you wonder at the young heart being weighed almost to 
\ breaking? 

And yet Joseph's experience is not alone. You may have 
never been confined in a dungeon ; and yet you may have 
often sat in darkness, and felt around you the limitation 
which forbade your doing as you wished. You may have 
been domg w right, and doing righTlnayHfiive brought you 
into some unforeseen difficulty; and you are disposed to 
say, “I have been too honest.” Or you may have been 
doing a noble act to some one, as Joseph did to Potiphar, 
and it has been taken in quite a wrong light. Who does 
not know what it is to be misunderstood, misrepresented, 
accused falsely, and punished wrongfully ? 

Each begins life so buoyantly and hopefully. Youth, 
attempting the solution of the strange problem of 
existence, fears nothing, forbodes no ill. The minstrel, 
Hope, keys her chords to the loftiest strains of exultation. 
The sun shines ; the blue wavelets break in music around 
the boat ; the sails swell gently ; Love and Beauty hold the 
rudder-bands; and though stories of the wreckage of the 


54 flttauit&mtotr anb Imprisoneft. 

treacherous sea are freely told, there is no kind of fear that 
such experiences should ever overtake that craft. But 
presently disappointment, sorrow, and disaster overcloud 
the sky and blot out the sunny prospect ; and the young 
mariner wakes as from a dream, “ Can this be I, who 
imagined that I should never see ill?” Then come 
several tremendous struggles of the soul to wrench itself 
free. .The muscles are strained as whipcord ; the beads of 
perspiration stand on the brow: but every effort only 
entangles the limbs more helplessly. And at last, ex- 
hausted and helpless, the young life ceases to struggle, 
and lies still, cowed and beaten, as the wild denizen of 
the plains, when it has lain for hours in the hunter’s snare. 
Surely there was something of this sort in Joseph’s con- 
dition, as he lay in that wretched dungeon. 

II. These Sufferings Wrought very Beneficially. — 
Taken on the lowest ground, this imprisonment served 
Joseph's temporal interests. That prison was the place 
where state prisoners were bound. Thither court magnates 
who had fallen under suspicion were sent. Chief butler 
and chief baker do not seem much to us, but they were 
titles for very august people. Such men would talk freely 
with Joseph; and in doing so would give him a great 
insight into political parties, and a knowledge of men 
and things generally, which in after-days must have been 
of great service to him. 

But there is more than this. Psalm cv. 18, referring to 
Joseph’s imprisonment, has a striking alternative rendering, 
“ His soul entered into iron.” Turn that about, and render 
it in our language, and it reads thus, Iron entered into his soul. 


“ Iron jfcfnte*' 


55 


Is there not a truth in this ? It may not be the truth intended 
in that verse, but it is a very profound truth, that sorrow and 
privation, the yoke borne in the youth, the soul's enforced 
restraint, are all conducive to an iron tenacity and strength 
of purpose, an endurance, a fortitude, which are the 
indispensable foundation and framework of a noble charac- 
ter. Do not flinch from suffering. Bear it silently, 
patiently, resignedly ; and be assured that it is God's way 
of infusing iron into your spiritual make. 

As a boy, Joseph’s character tended to softness. He 
1 was a little spoilt by his father. He was too proud of his 
j coat. He was rather given to tell tales. He was too full 
! of his dreams and foreshadowed greatness. None of 
I these were great faults ; but he lacked strength, grip, power 
j to rule. But what a difference his imprisonment made in 
[ him ! From that moment he carries himself with a 
j wisdom, modesty, courage, and manly resolution, that never. 

; fail him. He acts as a born ruler of men. He carries an I 
1 alien country through the stress of a great famine, without 
a symptom of revolt. He holds his own with the proudest 
: aristocracy of the time. He promotes the most radical 1 
j changes. He has learned to hold his peace and wait. : 
Surely the iron had entered his soul! 

It is just this that suffering will do for you. The world 
wants iron dukes, iron battalions, iron sinews, and thews 
of steel. God wants iron saints ; and since there is no way 
of imparting iron to the moral nature than by letting his 
people suffer, lets them suffer. “No chastening for the 
present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous ; nevertheless 
afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness 
unto them which are exercised thereby.” Are you in prison 


5 6 |ttisuttireretmr& nnb Bittprisotteft. 

for doing right? Are the best years of your life slipping 
away in enforced monotony ? Are you beset by opposition, 
misunderstanding, obloquy, and scorn, as the thick under- 
growth besets the passage of the woodsman pioneer ? Then 
take heart ; the time is not wasted ; God is only putting 
you through the iron regimen. The iron crown of suffering 
precedes the golden crown of glory. And iron is entering 
into your soul to make it strong and brave. 

Is some aged eye perusing these words? If so, the 
question may be asked, Why does God sometimes fill a 
whole life with discipline, and give few opportunities for 
showing the iron quality of the soul? Why give iron to 
the soul, and then keep it from active service? Ah, that 
is a question which goes far to prove our glorious destiny. 
There must be another world somewhere, a world of glorious 
ministry, for which we are training. “ There is service in 
the sky.” And it may be that God counts a human life of 
seventy years of suffering not too long an education for a 
soul which may serve Him through the eternities. It is in 
the prison that Joseph is fitted for the unknown life of 
Pharaoh’s palace ; and if he could have foreseen the future, 
he would not have wondered at the severe discipline. If 
only we could see all that awaits us in the palace of the 
Great King, we should not be so surprised at certain ex- 
periences which befal us in earth’s darker cells. You are 
being trained for service in God’s Home, and in the upper 
spaces of his universe. 

III. Joseph’s Comfort in the Midst of these Suf- 
ferings. — 41 He was there in the prison ; but the Lord was 
with him.” The Lord was with him in the palace of 


“<Bo& faras toitb Ijint." 


57 


Potiphar ; but when Joseph went to prison, the Lord went 
there too. The only thing which severs us from God is 
sin : so long as we walk with God, God will walk with us; 
and if our path dips down from the sunny upland lawns 
into the valley with its clinging mists, He will go at our 
side. The godly man is much more independent of men 
and things than others. It is God who makes him blessed. 
Like the golden city, he has no need of sun or moon, for 
the Lord God is his everlasting light. If he is in a palace 
he is glad, not so much because of its delights as because 
God is there. And if he is in a prison he can sing and give 
praises, because the God of his love bears him company. 
To the soul which is absorbed with God, all places and 
experiences are much the same. “If I say, Surely the 
darkness shall cover me; even the night — (of sorrow and 
of confinement) — shall be light about me: yea, the night 
shineth as the day.” 

Moreover, the Lord showed him mercy. Oh, wondrous 
revelation ! He did not stand in a niche on the mountain- 
side, as Moses did, whilst the solemn pomp swept past; 
and yet the Lord showed him a great sight — He showed 
him his mercy. That pr ison-c ell was the mount of . vision, 
f rom the height of which he saw, as he had never seen 
before, the panorama of Divine loving kindness. It were 
well worth his while to go to prison to learn that. When 
children gather to see the magic lantern, the figures may 
be flung upon the sheet, and yet be invisible, because the 
room is full of light. Darken the room, and instantly the 
round circle of light is filled with brilliant colour. God 
our Father has often to turn down the lights of our life 
because He wants to show us mercy. Whenever you get 


53 ^Eiatmirrattruh anti Smpmoueh. 

into a prison of circumstances, be on the watch. Prisons 
are rare places for seeing things. It was in prison that 
Bunyan saw his wondrous allegory, and Paul met the 
Lord, and John looked through heaven’s open door, 
and Joseph saw God’s mercy. God has no chance to 
show his mercy to some of us except when we are in some 
sore sorrow. The night is the time tojsee the stars. 

God can also raise up friends for his servants in most un- 
likely places, and of most unlikely people. “ The Lord 
gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.” 
He was probably a rough, unkindly man, quite prepared 
to copy the dislikes of his master, the great Potiphar, and 
to embitter the daily existence of this Hebrew slave. But 
there was another Power at work, of which he knew nothing, 
inclining him towards his ward, and leading him to put him 
in a position of trust. All hearts are open to our King : 
at his girdle swing the keys by which the most unlikely 
door can be unlocked. “When a man’s ways please the 
Lord, He maketh even his enemies to be at peace with 
him.” It is as easy for God to turn a man’s heart, as it is 
for the husbandman to turn the course of a brook to carry 
fertility to an arid plot. 

There is always alleviation for our troubles in ministry to 
others. Joseph found it so. It must have been a welcome 
relief to the monotony of his grief when he found himself 
entrusted with the care of the royal prisoners. A new interest 
came into his life, and he almost forgot the heavy pressure 
of his own troubles amid the interest of listening to the 
tales of those who were more unfortunate than himself. 
It is very interesting to notice what a deep human interest 
he took in the separate cases of his charges, noticing the 


MmisUnng to <Dtt,us. S9 

expression of their faces, inquiring kindly after their welfare 
sitting down to listen to their tale. Joseph is the patron 
of all prison philanthropists; but he took to this holy work 
not primarily because he had an enthusiasm for it, but 
because it gave a welcome opiate to his own griefs. 

There is no anodyne for heart-sorrow like ministry to 
others. If your life is woven with the dark shades of 
sorrow, do not sit down to deplore in solitude your hapless 
lot, but arise to seek out those who are more miserable 
than you are, bearing them balm for their wounds and love 
for their heart-breaks. And if you are unable to give 
much practical help, you need not abandon yourself to 
t e gratification of lonely sorrow, for you may largely 
help the children of bitterness by imitating Joseph 
m listening to their tales of woe or to their dreams of 
foreboding. It is a great art to j?e a good listener. The 
burdened heart longs to pour out its tale in a sympathetic 
ear. . There ,s immense relief in the telling out of pain. 
But it cannot be hurried ; it needs plenty of time • it 
cannot clear itself of its silt and deposits unless ft i s 
allowed leisure to stand. And so the sorrowful turn away ' 
from men engaged in the full rush of active life as too 
; busy, and seek out those who, like themselves, have been 
1 ™ n S ed ’” and are obliged to go softly, as Joseph was, j 
jw en the servants of Pharaoh found him in the Egyptian ; 
j ungeon. If you can do nothing else, listen well, and f 
^comfort others with the comfort wherewith you yourself / 
have been comforted by God. I 

And as you listen, amTcomfort, and wipe the falling 
tears, you will discover that your own load is lighter, and 
that a branch or twig of the true tree-the tree of the 


60 JUfetmtoerstanto ditto Intjndsntteto, 

Cross — has fallen into the bitter waters of your own life, 
making the Marah, Naomi, and the marshes of salt tears 
will have been healed. Out of such intercourse you will 
get what Joseph got — the key which will unlock the heavy 
doors by which you have been shut in. 

And now some closing words to those who are suffering 
wrongfully . Do not be surprised. You are the followers 
of One who was misunderstood from the age of twelve to 
the day of his ascension ; who did not sin, and yet was 
counted as a sinner • concerning whom the unanimous 
testimony was, “I find in Him no fault at all ” ; and yet 
they called Him Beelzebub ! If they spoke thus of the 
Master of the house, how much more concerning the 
household! “Think it not strange concerning the fiery 
trial that is to try you, as though some strange thing 
happened unto you ” ; only be sure that you suffer wrong- 
fully, and as a Christian. 

Do ?iot get weary in well-doing. Joseph might have said, 
“ I give all up ; of what profit is my godliness ? I may as 
well live as others do.” How much nobler was his course 
of patient continuance in well-doing ! Do right, because 
it is right to do right ; because God sees you ; because it 
puts gladness into the heart. And then, when you are 
misunderstood and ill-treated, you will not swerve, or sit 
down to whine and despair. 

Above all , do not avenge yourselves. When Joseph 
recounted his troubles, he did not recriminate harshly 
on his brethren, or Potiphar, or Potiphar’s wife. He 
simply said : “ I was stolen away out of the land of the 
Hebrews, and here also have I done nothing that they 
should put me into the hole.” He might have read the 


31 fErampfomt Clearing. 61 

words of the apostle, “ Avenge not yourselves, but rather 
give place unto wrath.” “ If when ye do well, and suffer 
for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.” 
We make a great mistake in trying always to clear our- 
selves ; we should be much wiser to go straight on, humbly 
doing the next thing, and leaving God to vindicate us. 

“ He will bring forth our righteousness as the light, and 
our judgment as the noonday.” In Psa. cv. 19 there 
follow words which, rightly rendered, read thus: “The 
word of the Lord cleared him.” What a triumphant 
clearing did God give His faithful servant ! 

There will come hours in all our lives, when we shall 
be misconstrued, misunderstood, slandered, falsely accused, 
wrongfully persecuted. At such times it is very difficult 
not to act on the policy of the men around us in the world. 
They at once appeal to law and force and public opinion. 
But the believer takes his case into a higher court, and lays ! 
it before his God. He is prepared to use any means that 
may appear divinely suggested. But he relies much more 
on the divine clearing than he does on his own most perfect 
arrangements. He is content to wait for months and 
years, till God arise to avenge his cause. It is a very little 
thing for him to be judged adversely at the bar of man : 
he cares only for the judgment of God, and awaits the 
moment when the righteous shall shine forth in the 
kingdom of their Father, as the sun when it breaks from 
all obscuring mists. “ When Christ, who is our life, shall 
be manifested, then shall ye also with Him be manifested 
in glory.” Ah ! what a clearing-up of mysteries, what 
dissipating of misunderstandings, what vindication of 
character shall be there ! Oh, slandered ones, you can 


62 ifeuttirjjrjBtooii atttr Umprismtrir. 

afford to await the verdict of eternity ; of God, who will 
bring out your righteousness as the light, and your 
judgment as the noonday. 

In all the discipline of life it is of the utmost importance 
to see but one ordaining overruling will. If we view our 
imprisonments and misfortunes as the result of human 
malevolence, our lives will be filled with fret and unrest. 
It is hard to suffer wrong at the hands of man, and to 
think that perhaps it might have never been. But there 
is a truer and more restful view, to consider all things 
as being under the law and rule of God ; so that though 
they may originate in and come to us through the spite and 
malice of our fellows, yet, since before they reach us they 
have had to pass through the environing atmosphere of the 
Divine Presence, they have been transformed into his own 
sweet will for us. 

It was Judas who plotted our Saviour’s death, and filled 
the garden with the capturing bands and flashing lights; 
and yet the Lord Jesus said that the Father was putting 
the cup to his lips. And though He was murdered by the 
chief priests and scribes, yet He so thoroughly acquiesced 
in the Father’s appointment, that He spoke of laying down 
His life, as if His death were entirely His ow r n act. There 
is no evil to them that love God ; and the believer loses 
sight of second causes, so absorbed is he in the contempla- 
tion of the unfolding of the mystery of his Father’s will. 
As the dying Kingsley said, “ All is under law.” 

We must not be surprised when dark passages come in 
our outward life, or our inner experience. Unbroken sun- 
shine would madden our brains; and unsullied prosperity of 
soul or circumstance would induce a spiritual excitement, 


44 9bt garkaontc (Blest.” 


6 3 


which would be in the last degree deleterious. We must be 
sometimes deprived of feeling, that we may acquire the art 
of walking by faith. We must lose the supporting cork 
belts that we may be compelled to trust ourselves to the 
buoyant wave. We must descend into the darksome glen, 
that we may test for ourselves the reliability of the staff and 
the rod, which before we may have considered as superfluities 
or as ornaments. 


He sent a man before them, 

Even Joseph, who was sold for a servant, 
Whose feet they hurt with fetters ; 

He was laid in iron, 

Until the time that His word came : 

The word of the Lord tried him. 

The king sent and loosed him, 

Even the ruler of the people. 

And let him go free. 

He made him lord of his house, 

And ruler of all his substance j 
To bind his princes at his pleasure, 

And teach his senators wisdom. 

Psalm cv. 17-22. 


CHAPTER VI. 


af lift WijtOM. 

{Genesis xli.) 

“ The heights by great men reached and kept 
Were not obtained by sudden flight ; 

But they, while their companions slept, 

Were toiling upward in the night. 

Standing on what too long we bore. 

With shoulders bent and downcast eyes. 

We may discern — unseen before — 

A path to higher destinies 1 ” 

Longfellow. 

HE facts of Joseph’s exaltation from the prison- 
cell in which we left him, to the steps of 
Pharaoh’s throne, are so well known that we 
need not describe them in detail. We will 
dwell briefly on the more salient points. 

I. Hope Deferred. — u Remember me when it shall be 
well with thee.” It was a modest and pathetic prayer that 
Joseph made to the great officer of state, to whose dream 
he had given so favourable an interpretation. Some, how- 
ever, have said he had no right to make it. They have said 
that he had no right to ask this man to plead with Pharaoh, 
when he himself had access to the King of kings, and could 
at all times plead his case at His court. The Moslem 
thought embodies itself in a characteristic legend. It says ) 
that God had changed his cell into a pleasant and cheerful j 



" ItentEmta tn t ! ” 


65 

place by causing a fountain to spring up in the midst, and 
a tree to grow at the door with shadowing branches and 
luscious fruit : but that, when he made this request to the 
chief butler, the fountain fell down and the tree withered ; 
and this because, instead of trusting in God, he had relied 
on the help of a feeble man. 

Well, there may be some truth at the foundation of all 
this; and yet it ill becomes us to bear hardly on the captive 
in the hour of his soul’s deepest anguish. The strongest 
faith has wavered at times. Elijah sank down on the 
desert sand, and asked that he might die. John the 
' Baptist, daunted and despondent, sent from his gloomy 
cell in Herod’s castle to know if Jesus were indeed the 
Christ. Savonarola, Luther, Edward Irving, passed through 
I darkness so thick that it almost put out the torch of their 
heroic faith ; and if at this moment Joseph eagerly snatched 
at human help, as being nearer and more real than the 
help of God, who of us can condemn him ? who of us can 
help sympathizing with him? who of us would not have 
behaved in like manner? Many a time when we have pro- 
, fessed that our soul waited only upon God, we have either 
eagerly hinted at or openly shown our needs to those whom 
we thought likely to assist. 

This cry, “ Remember me,” reminds us of the prayer of 
the dying thief to our Lord, as he was entering into the 
thick darkness. But how different the reply ! The pro- 
I mise was quickly made and swiftly kept And as the sun 
I was setting over the western hills, the believing penitent had 
entered the city which is never bathed in sunset gloiy, and 
had learnt what it is to be in Paradise with Christ. Far 
! otherwise it was with Joseph. 


66 


$tqis of itje ^Ijrotte. 

The great man no doubt readily acceded to his request, 
and promised all he asked. “ Remember you, he said . 

“ of course I will.” And, doubtless, in the fulness of his 
heart, he resolved to give Joseph a place among the under- 
butlers, or perhaps in the vineries. And as he passed out, 
we can imagine him saying, “ Good-bye : you will hear from 
me soon.” But he “forgat.” Oh, that word “forgat ”! 
How many of us know what it means ! Day after day, as 
Joseph went about his duties, he expected to receive some 
token of his friend’s remembrance and intercession. Week 
after week he watched for the message of deliverance, and 
often started because of some sudden knock which made 
him think that the warrant for his release had come. Then 
he invented ingenious excuses for the delay. No doubt 
the butler had had to receive the congratulations of his 
friends; arrears of business had perhaps accumulated in 
his absence, and now engrossed his attention ; many things 
had probably gone wrong which required time and pains to 
set right ; or perhaps he was waiting for a good opportunity 
to urge the claims of his prison friend on the king. How 
many houTS of anxious thought were spent thus, hoping 
against hope, combating a sickly fear, which he hardly 
dared to entertain ! But at last it was useless to hide from 
himself the unpalatable truth, which slowly forced itself 
upon his mind, that he was forgotten. 

Hope deferred must have made his heart sick. But he 
kept steadfast. If he was disappointed in man, he clung 5 
the more tenaciously to God. “ My soul,” said he, in 
effect, “wait thou only upon God; for my expectation 
is from Him. He only is my rock and my salvation.” 
Nor did he trust in vain ; for, by a chain of wonderful 


“tifco&e ysz tom 


6r 


providences, God brought him out of prison, and did 
better for him than could have been done by the chief 
butler of Pharaoh’s court. 

It may be that some who read these lines are in per- 
plexity or distress which may be compared to that of Joseph 
when in the dungeon. And they have again and again 
schemed to effect their own deliverance. They helped a 
friend to emigrate, on the understanding that, if he got on 
well, he should send money to help them over too. They 
have applied to people who were befriended by them when 
they lived in the same poor street, but who have subse- 
quently risen greatly in the world. They have got certain 
manufacturers and men of influence to make a note of their 
name and address in their pocket-book. But nothing has 
come of it all. They were at first very hopeful. They 
thought each post would bring the expected letter. There 
was a woman in America who went every morning for ten 
years to the village post-master to ask for a letter from her 
son, which he promised to send, but which had never come. 
But the embers have grown colder and colder still. Hope 
has flickered out. It is sad enough to be disappointed; but 
the sting of disappointment is when we are forgotten. 

II. Three Brief Pieces of Advice to those in 
Similar Circumstances. 

I ' v i. Cease ye from man , whose breath is in his nostrils I 
i We cannot live without human sympathy and friendship. 

; We long for the touch of the human hand and the sound 
: of the human voice. We eagerly catch at any encourage- 

i ment which some frail man holds out, as a drowning man j 
1 catches at twigs floating by on the stream. But men fail/ 

\ I 

\ 


68 


%\jz j^tejrs nf t&c flftroite. 

us ; even the best prove to be less able or less willing than 
we thought : the stream turns out to be a very turbid one 
when we reach it, in spite of all reports of its sufficiency. 
“Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh 
flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord : 
for he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see 
when good cometh ; but shall inhabit the parched places in 
the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited.” 

2. Turn from the failure a?id forgetfulness of man to the 
constancy and faithfulness of God I “ He abideth faithful.” 
He cannot promise and fail to perform. He says Himself : 
“ Thou shalt not be forgotten by Me.” A woman may 
forget her sucking child, and be unmindful of the son of 
her womb, “ yet will I not forget thee.” He may leave you 
long without succour. He may allow you to toil against 
a tempestuous sea until the fourth watch of the night. He 
may seem silent and austere, tarrying two days still in the 
same place, as if careless of the dying Lazarus. He may 
allow your prayers to accumulate like unopened letters on 
the table of an absent friend. But at last He will say, “O 
man, O woman, great is thy faith : be it unto thee even as 
thou wilt.” 

3. Wait for God / We are too feverish, too hasty, too 
impatient. It is a great mistake. Everything comes only 
to those who can wait. “ They that wait on the Lord shall 
inherit the earth.” You may have had what Joseph had 
when still a lad — a vision of power and usefulness and 
blessedness. But you cannot realize it in fact All your 
plans miscarry. Every door seems shut. The years are 
passing over you with the depressing sense that you have 
not wrought any deliverance in the earth. Now turn your 


(foots is yattljfnL 69 

heart to God ; accept his will ; tell Him that you leave to 
Him the realization of your dream. “ Wait on the Lord, and 
keep his way, and He shall exalt thee to inherit the land: 
when the wicked are cut off thou shalt see it.” He may 
keep you waiting a little longer; but you shall find Him 
verify the words of one who knew by experience his trust- 
worthiness: “The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord; 
He is their strength in the time of trouble. And the Lord 
shall help them, and deliver them ; He shall deliver them 
from the wicked and save them, because they trust in 
Him.” 

III. The Links in the Chain of Divine Providence. — 
First, the wife of Potiphar makes a baseless charge, which 
leads to Joseph’s imprisonment ; then, the young prisoner 
ingratiates himself with the keeper of the prison, and is 
allowed to have free access to the prisoners ; then it 
happens at the very time that two state officials are 
thrown into gaol on suspicion of attempting to poison their 
royal master; then the verification of Joseph’s interpreta- 
tion of their dreams shows that he is possessed of no 
common power ; then that department of memory in which 
Joseph’s face and case are hidden becomes sealed, lest any- 
thing premature should be attempted on his behalf; then, 
after two full years, the king of Egypt dreams. To the 
casual observer there might seem a great deal of chance in 
all this ; but the historian, directed by the Holy Spirit, lifts 
the veil, and shows that God was working out, step by step, 
His own infinite plans. 

The dream was twice repeated, so similarly as to make 
it evident to the dullest mind that something was intended 


7 ° 


®ke J^teps of tfye ®fjroit£. 

of unusual importance. The scene in each case was the 
river bank ; first the green margin of grass, next the rich 
alluvial soil. To say the least, it was a bad omen to see 
the lean kine devour the fat, and the withered ears devour 
the full : nor can we wonder that the monarch of a people 
who attached special importance to omens and portents 
should send in hot haste for the army of priests who were 
always in close attendance upon him; and who on this 
occasion were reinforced by all the wise men, adepts in this 
branch of science. But there was none that could interpret 
the dream of Pharaoh. “ God made foolish the wisdom of 
this world.” 

Then, amid the panic of the palace, the butler suddenly 
remembered his prison experiences, and told the king of 
the young captive Hebrew. Pharaoh eagerly caught at the 
suggestion : he sent and called Joseph ; and they brought 
him hastily out of the dungeon — the margin says, “they 
made him rqn.” Still the king’s impetuous speed was 
compelled to wait till he had shaved himself and changed 
his prison garb. Perfect cleanliness and propriety of dress 
were so important in the eyes of Egyptians that the most 
urgent matters were postponed until they were properly 
attended to. Alas, that men should be so careful of their 
appearance before one another, and so careless of their 
appearance before God ! Many a man who would not 
think of entering a drawing-room if his linen were not 
snowy white is quite content to carry within his breast a 
heart as black as ink. 

It is beautiful to notice Joseph’s reverent references to 
God in his first interview with Pharaoh. “ It is_no£ in.me : 
God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.” 


“God hath 


"Jilt ^ttstaer trf Jiaa/* 7 1 

showed Pharaoh what He is about to do.” “The thing is 
established by God ; and God will shortly bring it to pass.” 
The hypocrite is quick enough to interlard his conversation 
with the name of God : no doubt this is owing to his belief 
that a true child of God will often do so; and there is 
some truth in the belief. When the heart is full of God, 
the tongue will be almost obliged to speak of Him ; and all 
such references will be easy and natural as flowers in May. 
Oh that our inner life were more full of the power and love 
and presence of Jesus ! If our hearts were inditing a good 
matter they would boil over, and we should speak more 
frequently of the things that touch our King. Joseph was 
not ashamed to speak of his God amid the throng of 
idolaters in the court of Egypt : let us not flinch from 
bearing our humble witness in the teeth of violent opposi- 
tion and supercilious scorn. 

This position of recognizing Jehovah being assumed and 
granted, there was no difficulty in interpreting the consump- 
tion of the seven good kine by the seven lean kine, and of 
the seven full ears by the seven empty ears, blasted by the 
east wind; or of indicating that the seven years of great 
plenty should be followed by seven years of famine, sa 
sore that all the plenty should be forgotten in the land of 
Egypt, and that plenty should consume the land. 

Now that the interpretation is before us, it seems wonder- 
ful, not that Joseph gave it, but that the wise men of 
Pharaoh’s court failed to discover it. But perhaps God 
ordered it that the diviners should be rendered stupid and 
“mad,” so that an opportunity should be made for the 
advancement, to which, from his childhood, Joseph had 
been destined. In this, as so often befals, there was ait 


72 


%ljz Stops of tire ® bruit*. 

illustration of the Divine words, “Thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them 
unto babes : even so, Father, for so it seemed good in 
thy sight.” 

Then, in the presence of the thronged and breathless 
court, surrounded by the evil eyes of the magicians, who 
could ill afford to surrender their prestige and place, or 
the rich emoluments of their office, the young Hebrew 
interpreted the royal dream. That dream was framed in a 
thoroughly Egyptian setting, and was connected with the 
Nile, whose waters were regarded by the natives with an 
enthusiastic regard, whether for their peculiarly luscious, 
refreshing, and nutritive qualities, or for the annual inunda- 
tion which bore far afield the rich, fertilizing soil. Indeed, 
for these and similar considerations the river was the object 
of idolatrous worship. The buffalo, a species of ox, well- 
known anciently in Egypt, delights to stand in the water in 
hot countries, remaining for hours in that cooling bath, 
with all the body, except the head, immersed. The sight 
of horned cattle coming up out of a river would, therefore, 
not be a rare occurrence; and Joseph had no difficulty in 
carrying his audience with him, when he said that these 
seven kine — as also the seven ears of corn on one stalk, 
after the nature of that species of bearded wheat still 
known as Egyptian wheat — were emblems of seven years of 
great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt. 

But perhaps the thing which gave Joseph most influence 
in that court was not his interpretation, but the wise and 
statesmanlike policy on which he insisted. As he detailed 
his successive recommendations : the appointment of a 
man discreet and wise with this exclusive business as his 


31 toonircrful asrcnt. 


73 


life-work; of the creation of a new department of public 
business for the purpose of gathering up the resources of 
Egypt in anticipation of the coming need; of the vast 
system of storage in the cities of the land — it was evident 
that he was speaking beneath the glow of a spirit not his 
own; and with a power which commanded the instant 
assent of the monarch and his chief advisers. “ The thing 
was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his 
servants. And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we 
find such an one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of 
God is ? ” Oh that we might cany with us, even into 
business relationships, the evident stamp of the Spirit of 
God ! It were worth languishing, even in a dungeon, if 
only we might have time to seek it. But it is to be had 
on easier terms : “ Ask and have ; seek and find ; open 
your heart and receive.” 

There is an interesting illustration given to us here of the 
words, “Them that honour Me, I will honour.” When 
Joseph had interpreted the dream and given his advice — 
little thinking as he did so that he was sketching his own 
future — Pharaoh said unto his servants, “Can we find such 
an one as this is, a man in whom is the Spirit of God?” 
Then he turned to Joseph and said, “Forasmuch as God 
hath showed thee this, there is none so discreet and wise as 
thou art : thou shalt be over my house, and according to 
thy word shall all my people be ruled : only in the throne 
will I be greater than thou. See, I have set thee over the 
whole land of Egypt.” 

It was a wonderful ascent, sheer in a single bound 
from the dungeon to the steps of the throne. His 
father had rebuked him ; now Pharaoh, the greatest 


74 


%\)t of tljc ®(jrott£. 

monarch of his time, welcomes him. His brethren despise^ 
him ; now the proudest priesthood of the world opens its 
ranks to receive him by marriage into their midst, con- 
sidering it wiser to conciliate a man who was from that 
moment to be the greatest force in Egyptian politics and 
life. The hands that were hard with the toils of a slave 
are adorned with a signet ring. The feet are no longer 
tormented by fetters; a chain of gold is linked around 
his neck. The coat of many colours torn from him by 
violence and defiled by blood, and the garment left in the 
hand of the adulteress, are exchanged for vestures of fine 
linen drawn from the royal wardrobe. He was once 
trampled upon as the offscouring of all things; now all 
Egypt is commanded to bow before him, as he rides forth 
in the second chariot, prime minister of Egypt, and second 
only to the king. What a comment is this on that rap- 
turous outburst, on the model of which the Virgin Mother 
composed her happy ode ! 

•'The Lord killeth, and maketh alive ; 

He bringeth down to the grave. 

And briugeth up. 

The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich ; 

He bringeth low, and lifteth up. 

He raisetb up the poor out of the dust, 

And lifteth up the beggar 
From the dunghill, 

To set them among princes, 

And to make them inherit 
The throne of glory." 

All this happened because one day, for the sake of God, 
Joseph resisted a temptation to one act of sin. If he had 
yielded, we should probably never have heard of him again; 
he would have been slain by the the siren who has slain so 


75 


ffojscplr attir Jtaus. 

many more strong men, and would have gone down to the 
dark chambers of death. No happy marriage, no wife, no 
child, would have fallen to his lot. No honour or use- 
fulness, or vision of the dear faces of his kin, would ever 
have enriched his life with their abundant blessing. What 
a good thing it was that he did not yield ! 

Let us stand firm ; let us seek first the kingdom of God 
and his righteousness * let us deny ourselves immediate 
pleasure for the sake of the far-off harvest of content; 
let us honour God by obedience to his least command; 
let us dare to say, No ; let us be willing to decrease. And 
then the tide will turn: God will not be unfaithful to 
forget; He will turn again and have mercy upon us, and 
will exalt us to inherit the earth. 

And when that day comes, let us ascribe all to God. 
I admire the names which Joseph gave to his sons. They 
show the temper of his heart when in the zenith of his 
prosperity. Manasseh means u forgetting” — God had 
made him forget his toils. Ephraim means “fruitful- 
ness” — God had caused him to be fruitful. Be true! 
you shall forget your sorrow and long waiting; you shall 
be fruitful. Then be sure and give God the praise. 

IV. The Parallel between Joseph and the Lord 
Jesus. — It is surely more than a coincidence. “Coming 
events cast their shadows before.” The Holy Spirit, 
enamoured with the mystery of love which was coming, 
anticipated its most striking features in the life of Joseph. 
Joseph was rejected by his brethren; Jesus by the Jews, 
his brethren according to the flesh. Joseph was sold for 
twenty pieces of silver to the Ishmaelites ; Jesus was sold 


76 f&]jz j^teps of tire QDfrrotte. 

by the treachery of Judas for thirty pieces, and then 
handed over to the Gentiles. Joseph was cast into 
prison; Jesus abode in the grave. Joseph in prison was 
able to preach the gospel of deliverance to the butler; 
Jesus went and preached the gospel to the spirits in the 
prison. The two malefactors of the cross find their 
counterpart in Joseph's two fellow-prisoners. Joseph, 
though a Jew by birth and rejected by his own brethren, 
nevertheless was raised to supreme power in a Gentile 
state, and saved myriads of them from death ; Jesus, of 
Jewish birth and yet disowned by Jews, has nevertheless 
been exalted to the supreme seat of power, and is now 
enthroned in the hearts of myriads of Gentiles, to whom 
He has brought salvation from death, and spiritual bread 
for their hunger. The very name that Pharaoh gave to 
Joseph meant “ Saviour of the world ” — our Saviour’s title. 
Yes, and we must carry the parallel still farther. After 
Joseph had been for some time ruling and blessing Egypt, 
his very brethren came to him for forgiveness and help ; so 
in days not far away we shall see the Jews retracing their 
steps and exclaiming — as thousands are now doing in 
Eastern Russia — “ Jesus is our brother.” So all Israel 
shall be saved ! 

We have now, therefore, to think of Jesus as seated on 
his throne, Prime Minister of the universe, the Interpreter 
of his Father’s will, the Organ and Executor of the 
Divine decrees. On his head are many crowns; on his 
finger is the ring of sovereignty; on his loins the girdle 
of power. Glistering robes of light envelop Him. And 
this is the cry which precedes Him, “Bow the kneel” 
Have you ever bowed the knee at his feet ? It is of no 


SHjc Worlii'a J&ecii. 


77 


avail to oppose Him. The tongue of malice and envy 
may traduce Him, and refuse to let Him reign. But 
nothing can upset the Father’s decree and plan. “Yet 
have I set my Son upon my holy hill.” “ In his name 
every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess that 
He is Lord.” Agree with Him quickly. Ground your arms 
at his feet. “ Kiss the Son, lest He be angry.” 

V. The World’s Need for Christ. — You remember 
Pharaoh’s dream. Seven buffaloes, which had escaped 
from the torturing heat into the comparative coolness 
of the water, came up on to the banks and began feeding 
on the sedge. Shortly after, seven lean kine came up, 
and, finding nothing left for them to eat, by one of those 
strange transformations common to dreams, swallowed up 
their predecessors. So the seven shrivelled ears devoured 
those which were rank and good. This is a symbol of a 
fact that is always happening, and is happening now. 

Our rulers, like Pharaoh, are having troublesome visions 
just now. In Europe and in England weak things are 
destroying the strong; hungry creatures are devouring the 
flourishing and the fat ; the sterile is swallowing up the 
fruitful : and there is no visible improvement. Those who 
know how much we sp end each year jbr d rink and for our 
army ; for ex tr a vagance ajid s ho w— will unders land what I 
mean. T)hj it is grievous to see how much is being 
squandered to no purpose on all these things, when our 
toiling masses are sinkingdeeper-and, deeper into misery 
and need] And where is the cure?. It seems beyond our 
reach. Our wisdom, with its parliaments, its learned 
articles, its congresses, seems at its wits’ end and 


78 


%\ 7t Steps of tire ^brone. 

non-plussed. At this very hour, for want of something 
better, millions of men are under arms to keep the hungry 
and weak from further devouring the flourishing and fat. For 
God Himself is bringing Egypt to despair, that it may 
learn the need of that Jesus who — like Joseph once — is now 
hidden from its view. Then these Bibles shall be searched 
for guidance, and places of Christian worship shall be 
crowded ; and the Rejected One shall reign, and his bride 
shall be given Him. Then shall earth rejoice; for He 
cometh to rule in equity, and his reign is goodwill to 
men ! 

It may be that seven years of famine have been passing 
over you, devouring all that you had accumulated in happy 
bygone times, and leaving you bare. Do you not guess 
the reason? There is a rejected Saviour transferred to 
some obscure dungeon in your heart. There never can 
be prosperity or peace so long as He is there. Seek Him 
forthwith. Cause thyself to run to Him. Ask Him to 
forgive years of shameful neglect. Reinstate Him on the 
throne. Give the reigns of power into his hand. And He 
shall restore to thee the years that the cankerworm has 
eaten. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Stosepb'* first Sttferfauto tmtlj tia fBrrtljrrn, 

(Genesis xlii.) 


“ Oil hateful spell of sin !— when friends are nigh 
To make stern memory tell her tale unsought, 

And raise accusing shades of hours gone by. 

To come between us and all kindly thought 1 " 

ICeble. 


life of Joseph, as the Prime Minister of Egypt, 
• UiV was a very splendid one. Everything that could 
please the sense or minister to the taste was his. 
The walls of Egyptian palaces still exist in the 
rainless air to attest the magnificent provision 
that was made for all necessaries and luxuries. In point of 
fact, the civilization of our nineteenth century in many 


points has nothing of which to boast over that of the age 
in which he lived, and of which the record still remains. 
His palaces would consist of numberless rooms opening 
into spacious courts, where palms, sycamores, and acacia 
trees grew in rare luxuriance. The furniture, consisting of 
tables, couches, and consoles, would be elegantly carved 


from various woods, encrusted with ebony and adorned 
with gilding. Rare perfumes rose from vases of gold and 
bronze and alabaster j and the foot sank deep in carpets 
covering the floors, or trod upon the skins of lions and 
other ferocious beasts. Troops of slaves and officials 


80 Joseph'* JFtrat Itttgrbtchi toritfr IS is grctljreit. 

ministered to every want. Choirs of musicians filled the 
air with sweet melody. Such is said to be a true descrip- 
tion of the outward circumstances of Joseph’s lot. 

But though one of rare spendour, his life must have been 
one of considerable anxiety. He had to deal with a proud 
hereditary nobility, jealous of his power, and with a popu- 
lace mad with hunger. During the first seven years of his 
premiership he went throughout all the land of Egypt 
superintending the dykes and ditches which should utilize 
as much as possible the unusual rise of the Nile ; building 
vast granaries, and buying up a fifth of the vast profusion 
of grain. “The earth brought forth by handfuls; and 
Joseph gathered com as the sand of the sea, very much, 
until he left numbering, for it was without number.” All 
this must have involved a great deal of anxiety; it must 
have been difficult for this young foreigner to carry out his 
wide-reaching plans in face of the stolid apathy or the 
active opposition of great officials and vested interests. 

He was, however, eminently qualified for this work ; for 
there was something in him that could not be accounted 
for by any analysis of his brain. As Pharaoh had said 
most truly, “ He was a man in whom was the Spirit of 
God.” Oh, when will men learn that the Spirit of God 
may be in them when they are buying and selling, and 
arranging all the details of business or home? When 
will they believe that those will do their part best in the 
market-place, and in the house, who are most sensible of 
the gracious and forceful indwelling of the Holy Ghost? 
May God send us all the simple reverent spirit of this man, 
who amidst the spendour and business of his proud posi- 
tion set God always before his face ! Such a temper of 


JJactrb’js <$mf. 


81 


mind will make us a blessing to our times ; for, at last, 
when the days of famine came, Joseph was able, as he 
afterwards said, to be a “ father ” unto Pharaoh, and to save 
the land. 

All these events took time. Joseph was a lad of seventeen 
summers when he was tom away from his home; and he 
was a young man of thirty when he stood for the first time 
before Pharaoh. Seven years for the golden time of plenty 
must be added ■ and perhaps two more whilst the stores of 
the granaries were being slowly exhausted : so that prdbably 
twenty “five years had passed between the tragedy at the 
pit’s mouth and the time of which we are thinking now. 
During those years the life in Jacob’s camp had flowed 
uneventfully and quietly through the same unchanging 
scenes, like the course of some river in a flat, unbroken 
country, where a quick eye is required to discover the 
direction of the stream. The chief sign of the number of 
the slow passing years was the growing weakness in the 
old father’s step and the increasing infirmity of his form. 
He pathetically speaks much of his “grey hairs.” The 
sons of Israel had need to “carry Jacob their father.” 
This was not simply the result of age, but of sorrow; he 
bore in his heart the scars of many wounds, the chief of 
which was grief for his beloved Joseph. It was grief that 
he was compelled very largely to nurse alone ; and it was, 
perhaps, the keener because of the suspicions of foul play 
that seem to have suggested themselves to his mind. He 
went step by step down towards the grave “mourning for 
his son.” He never could forget the sight of the blood- 
bedabbled coat, the dear relic of one whose face he never 
thought to see. 

F 


82 


Joseph's First J it i trim to tottlj fjis fSretbMit. 

Meanwhile, the sons had become middle-aged men, with 
families of their own. They probably never mentioned that 
deed of violence to each other. They did their best to 
banish the thought from their minds. Sometimes in their 
dreams they may have caught a glimpse of that young face 
in its agony, or heard the beseechings of his anguished 
soul ; but they sought to drown such painful memories by 
deep" draughts of the Lethe-stream of forgetfulness. Con- 
science slept. Yet the time had come when God meant 
to use these men to found a nation. And in order to fit 
them for their high destiny it was necessary to bring them 
into a right condition of soul. Yet how could their soul 
be in health, so long as they had not repented of the sin 
which cast its lurid light over their history? The great 
Physican never heals over a wound from above, but from 
below, and after careful probing and searching. The founda- 
tions of noble character must touch the rock of genuine 
repentance. But it seemed almost impossible to secure 
repentance in those obtuse and darkened hearts. How- 
ever, the Eternal brought it about by a number of wonderful 
providences ; and as we study them, let us notice how God 
will subordinate all the events of our outward lives to try us 
and prove us, and see what there is in our hearts, and to 

bring us to Himself. a , , 

This, then, is our theme: God's gracious methods 0/ 

awakening the consciences of these men from their long and 
apparently endless sleep. And it is a theme well worth our 
study; for if there is one thing more than another that is 
needed in Christian congregations and in the world, it is 
the deep conviction of sin. Well would it be if some 
resurrection trumpet could sound and awaken the sleeping 


%bz JFirat 83 

consciences of men, causing long* forgotten but unfor- 
given sins to arise and come forth from their graves. Of 
what use is it to present the Saviour to those who do not 
feel to need Him ? And who can scatter seed with hope of 
harvest, unless the ploughshare has first driven its iron 
into the soil ? 

I. The First Step towards their Conviction was 
the Pressure of Want.— There was dearth in all lands ; 
and the famine reached even to the land of Canaan. 
Often before, in the lives of the patriarchs, had they been 
driven by famine down to Egypt; and Jacob aroused his 
sons from the hopeless lethargy into which they were sink- 
ing by saying, “Why look ye on one another? Behold, I 
have heard that there is com in Egypt ; get you down there 
and buy for us, that we may live and not die. And Joseph’s 
ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt." 

So long as the hills were green and the pastures clothed 
with flocks ; so long as the valleys were covered over with 
corn and rang with the songs of reapers — just so long Jacob 
might have mourned alone; but Reuben, Simeon, and the 
rest of them would have been unconcerned and content. 
But when the mighty famine came, the hearts of these 
men were opened to conviction ; their carnal security was 
shattered ; and they were prepared for certain spiritual expe- 
riences of which they would never have dreamed. Yes ; and 
they were being prepared for the meeting with Joseph. 

It is so that God deals with us. He breaks up our nest. 
He loosens our roots. He sends a mighty famine which- 
cuts away the whole staff of bread. And at such times, 
weary, worn, and sad, we are prepared to confess our sins, 


84 JcrsEpb’s Jurat Uitterfittta hritlj ’ffits fO ret bran. 

and to receive the words of Christ, when He says, “ Come 
unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, and I will 
give you rest.” Is your life just now passing through a 
time of famine ? Do your supplies threaten to fail ? Does 
your heart fail you, as you look forward to the disasters that 
menace you ? Yet take courage ; this is simply the motion of 
the current which is drifting you to Christ and to a better 
life. In after-days those men looked back upon that time 
of sore straitness as the best thing that could have hap- 
pened to them : nothing less would have brought them to 
Joseph. Yes, and the time is coming when you will bless 
God for your times of sorrow and misfortune. You will 
say, “ Before I was afflicted I went astray ; but now have I 
kept thy Word.” 

II. The Second Step was the Rough Usage they 
Received at the Hands of Joseph. — It would seem that 
in some of the larger markets he superintended the sale of 
the corn himself. He may even have gone there on 
purpose, prompted by a sort of hope that he might catch 
sight of one of the Ishmaelites, whose faces he never could 
forget; or in some other way hear tidings of his home. 
He may have even cherished, and prayed over, the fancy 
that his brethren might come themselves. At last the 
looked-for day arrived. He was standing as usual at his 
post, surrounded by all the confusion and noise of an 
Eastern bazaar, when all of a sudden his attention was 
attracted by the entrance of those ten men. He looked 
with a fixed, eager look for a moment, his heart throbbing 
quickly all the while ; and he needed no further assurance : 
■“ he knew them.” 


spiikc sung Mg to item.” 


85 



Evidently, however, they did not know him. How should 
they ? He had grown from a lad of seventeen to a man of 
forty. He was clothed in pure white linen, with ornaments 
of gold to indicate his rank, a garb not altogether unlike that 
famous coat, which had wrought such havoc. He was 
governor of the land, and if they had thought of Joseph at 
all when entering that land (and no doubt they did), they 
expected to see him in the gangs of slaves manacled at 
work in the fields, or sweltering in the scorching brick- 
yards, preparing material for the pyramids. So, in uncon- 
scious fulfilment of his own boyish dream, they bowed 
down themselves before him with their faces to the earth. 

Joseph instantly saw that they failed to recognize him ; 
and partly to ascertain if his brethren were repentant, partly 
in order to know why Benjamin was not with them, he made 
himself strange unto them. He spake roughly to them. 
He accused them of being spies. He refused to believe 
their statements, and put them in prison until they could 
be verified. He kept Simeon bound. 

In all this, I believe he repeated exactly the scene at the 
pit's mouth ; and indeed w’e may perhaps see what really 
happened there, reflected in the mirror of this scene. It is 
not unlikely that when they saw him coming towards them, 
in his princelike dress, they had rushed at him, accusing 
him of having come to spy out their corrupt behaviour, 
and take back an evil report to their father, as he had done 
before : if so, this will explain why he now suddenly 
accused them of being spies. No doubt the lad protested 
that he was no spy — that he had only come to inquire after 
their welfare ; but they had met his protestations with rude 
violence in much the same way as the rough-speaking 


86 JFrrst 3’nterbtfiin fottlj f5is Drclljrett. 

governor now treated them. It may be that they had even 
thrust him into the pit with the threat to keep him there 
until his statements could be verified* in much the same 
way as Joseph now dealt with them ; and Simeon may have 
been the ringleader. If this were the case— and it seems 
most credible — it is obvious that it was a powerful appeal 
to their conscience and memory, and one that could not 
fail to awaken both. 

You remember the story of Hamlet. Hamlet’s uncle 
murdered his brother, the father of Hamlet, and King of 
Denmark. The deed was done secretly ; but the young 
prince knew of it, and instructed the players to repeat the 
murder, in dumb show, before the royal but guilty pair, and 
their guests.. They did so. At last the king could bear it 
no more. He rose hastily from his seat and went from the 
hall, saying : 

1 ' Oh, my offence is rank, it smells to Heaven ; 

It hath the primal eldest curse upon it, 

A brother's murder." 

And as those men, each in his dungeon, considered the 
usage which they had experienced, it must have vividly 
brought to their minds their treatment of that guileless lad, 
years on years before. 

There is another story in the Old Testament of which we 
are reviindcd now — that scene at Zarephath when the child 
died, and the mother burst into the presence of the prophet 
saying, c ’ Hast thou come to call my sin to remembrance ? ’> 
She had tried to forget her sin. She had buried it deep in 
a far down dungeon, like that in the old castle of Chillon 
beneath the blue waters of Geneva’s lake. But there was 
Something in that dead child which brought it all back to 


** JHemorjr ” anti " ftccaUtttton.” 87 

her mind ; she lived it over again : but not its pleasure, 
that had long since passed away ; only its pain was left. 

Memory is one of the most wonderful processes of our 
nature . It is the faculty that enables us to record and 
recal the past. If it were not for this power the mind 
would remain for ever in the blank condition of childhood, 
and all that had ever passed before it would leave no more 
impression than images do upon the plain surface of a 
reflecting mirror. But important as it is, it conducts its 
operations in perfect mystery. The room is shuttered from 
all human gaze; the camera is covered by a black veil. 
This, however, is the one fact of interest to us —that it has 
a universal retentiveness. Nothing has ever passed athwart 
it that has not left a record on its plastic slabs. 

It is important \ however, to distinguish between memory 
and recollection.' • We remember all things ; there is a 
record of everything that ever we saw or did, somewhere 
in the archives of memory ; but we cannot always recollect 
an incident, or recal it at the required moment. Supposing 
you were never to burn your letters, but kept them all in 
one huge box — that would resemble memory ; but suppos- 
ing you were never to index or classify them, so as to be 
unable readily to lay your hands on the one required — that 
would be like a failure of recollection; whilst a ready 
recollection would find its analogy in the ease with which 
you could produce a required letter at a given time. The 
failure to find a letter would not argue that the letter was 
not in the box, but simply that the classification was bad ; 
so the failure to recal the past does not argue that it 
is. lost to memory, but simply that the power of recollec- 
tion is feeble. In other words, our memory really retains 


88 ■ Jfcrseplr's yirat Shtterlmhi hrttlj SJis grstljren, 

everything ; and though sometimes our recollection is bad, 
yet a very trivial thing may excite it and enable it to fetch 
up things long past from the deep compartments of memory 
into which they have been cast, and in which they have 
been unceasingly held. 

The reader may have been brought up in a house sur- 
rounded by an old-fashioned country garden; but you 
have not thought of it for years, till the other day you 
happened to see a plant or smell a scent peculiarly asso- 
ciated with it, which brought the whole back to your 
recollection. So is it with sin. Long years ago, you may 
have committed some sin ; you have tried to forget it. 
It has not been forgiven and put away ; you have almost 
succeeded in dropping it from your thoughts : but believe 
me it is still there ; and the most trivial incident may at 
any moment bring it all back upon your conscience, as 
vividly as if committed only yesterday. If sin is forgiven, 
it is indeed forgotten : God says, “ I will remember it no 
more.” But if only forgotten, and not forgiven, it may 
have a most unexpected and terrible awakening. 

This was the case with Joseph! s brethren. They said one to 
another, as they heard the reiterated demand of the strange 
governor for evidence that they were not spies, “We are 
verily guilty concerning our brother ; in that we saw the 
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would 
not hear : therefore is this distress come upon us.” 

III. The Third Step towards Conviction was the 
giving of Time for them to listen to God’s Spirit, 
SPEAKING TO THEM IN THE SlLENCE OF THE PRISON- 
CELL.— Without the work of the Holy Ghost they might 


“ Wiz are frerily (Ssrilttr ! " 89 

have felt remorse, but not guilt. It is not enough to feel 
that sin is a blunder and a mistake, but not guilt. This 
sense of sin, however, is the prerogative of the Spirit of 
God. He alone can convict of sin. When He is at work, 
the soul cries out, “ Woe is me, I am a sinful man ! ” “We 
are verily guilty concerning our brother.” 

Will not these words befit some lips that read these pages ? 
Are you not verily guilty ? In early life you may have 
wronged some man or some woman. You may have 
taught some young lad to swear. You may have laughed 
away the early impressions from some anxious seeker, until 
they fled to return no more. You may not have done 
your best to save those committed to your care. And 
now others seem to be treating you as you treated the 
associates of earlier days. You now are eager for salvation; 
and you learn the bitterness of being ridiculed, thwarted, 
tempted, and opposed. You recal the past ; it flashes before 
you with terrible intensity. You cry, “ God forgive me ! I 
am verily guilty concerning that soul whom I betrayed or 
wronged.” And this is the work of the Holy Spirit. Let 
Him have his blessed way with you till you are led by Him 
to the foot of that tree which buds like Aaron’s rod, though 
for eighteen hundred years it has ceased to grow, and the 
leaves of which are for the nations ! 

There is at least one Brother whom you have wronged. 
Need I mention his name? He is not ashamed to call 
you brother; but you have been ashamed of Him. He 
did not withhold Himself from the cross ; but you have 
never thanked Him. He has never ceased to knock at 
the door of your heart for admittance to - bless you ; but 
you have kept Him waiting amid the dropping dews of 


9° Josephs JFtast ^ntcrMetn hritfr gwiljrcn. 

night. He has freely offered you the greatest gifts ; but 
you have trampled them beneath your feet, and done 
despite to Him, and crucified Him afresh. There is, no 
doubt, a time coming when the Jews shall say of Him, 
whom they once rejected and put into the pit of death, 
but who has since been giving corn to the Gentiles, “ We 
are verily guilty concerning our Brother.” But these words 
may also be humbly and sorrowfully appropriated by many 
of us. We must plead, “ Guilty ! guilty ! guilty ! guilty 
concerning our Brother ! ” 

Whilst these men spoke thus, Joseph stood by them. 
There was no emotion on those compressed features, no 
response in those quiet eyes. “They wist not that he 
understood them.” Ah, how often do anguished souls go 
to priests, ministers, and friends, with the bitter tale of 
anguish ! They wist not that One is standing by who 
hears and understands all, and longs to throw aside every 
barrier in order to bring them aid. True, He speaks to 
them by an interpreter; but if they would only speak 
straight to Him, He would speak directly to their waiting 
hearts. 

There is a curious contrast in the twenty-fourth verse. 
First, we learn that “ he turned himself about from them 
and wept n ; and next we are told that he “ took Simeon 
and bound him before their eyes.” The brethren saw only 
the latter of these two actions, and must have thought him 
rough and unkind. How they must have trembled in his 
presence ! But they knew not the heart of tender love 
that was beating beneath all this seeming hardness. Nor 
could they guess that the retention of Simeon was intended 
to act as a silken cord to bring the brothers back to him, 


31 purpose of nterrp. 9 r 

and as part of the process of awakening the memory of 
another brother, whom they had lost years before. 

It is thus continually in life’s discipline. We suffer, and 
suffer keenly. Imprisoned, bereaved, rebuked, we count 
God harsh and hard. We little realize how much pain He 
is suffering as He causes us pain ; or how the tender heart 
of our Brother is filled with grief, welling up within Him 
as He makes Himself strange, and deals so roughly with 
us. If we could but see the tender face behind the vizor, 
and know how noble a heart beats beneath the mailed 
armour, we should feel that we were as safe amid his 
rebukes as ever we were amid his tenderest caresses. 

There were alleviations also in their hardships. The 
sacks were filled with corn; provision was given for the 
journey home, so that they needed not to come on the 
stores they were carrying back for their households ; and 
every man’s money was returned in his sack’s mouth 
(verse 25). All this was meant in tender love ; but their 
hearts failed them with fear, as they emptied their sacks and 
saw the bundles of money fall out among the corn. A 
guilty conscience misinterprets the kindest gifts and mer- 
cies wtych God sends to us, and with evil ingenuity distils 
poison out of the sweetest flowers. How often, like these 
men, we cry, “ What hath God done to us ? ” and are filled 
with fear, when, in point of fact, God’s dealings with us 
brim with blessing, and are working out a purpose of 
mercy which shall make us rejoice all our days. 

There is no lot, however hard, without its compensations. 
Be sure to look out for these. Prize the little touches of 
tender love which reveal the heart of Jesus, as a girl will 
dwell upon the slightest symptoms of an affection which, for 


92 Jo«jrfr*# JTirat teedriefo faiitlr a greiJjren* 

some reason, must be concealed beneath a strange and 
unconcerned exterior. Amidst his chastenings, the Master 
inserts some delicate souvenirs of his love to keep the heart 
from entire despair. Make much of them until the disci- 
pline is over, and the sun of his regard bursts from all 
restraining clouds. 

“Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 

But trust Him for his grace ; 

Beneath a frowning Providence 
He hides a smiling face.” 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Jtasepl/a Steoidi In ittbuhx hritlj Hxa %x&bnn~ 

(Genesis xliii.) 


! 

i* * Kind hearts are here ; j r et would the tenderest one 
Have limits to its mercy :• God has none. 

I And man’s forgiveness may be true and sweet, 

| But yet he stoops to give it. More complete ' 

i Is Love that lays forgiveness at thy feet, j 

\ And pleads with thee to raise it. Only he ayen. I 
\ Means cr owned, not vanquished , whe n it s ays * Forgiven ! ’ ,r 
I A. A. Proctor. 


HERE is there such another story as this of 
Joseph ? It seems sometimes impossible to 
believe that the events happened thirty-five 
centuries ago, in the solemn, rainless land of 
the Nile and the Pyramids. They might have 
occurred within our own memory, the experience is so- 
natural, so life-like, so like our own. And yet orientalists, 
assure us that, in its minutest details, it is verified by the 
paintings which;, to this day, exist on the walls of palaces 
and temples, unimpaired and fresh. 

I feel it impossible to dwell on it line by line ; I must 
content myself with taking only the broad outlines of the 
story. 

Our next chapter will deal with that affecting scene* 
when Joseph caused every man to go out from him, while- 
he cast aside his dignity, stepped down from his throne, and 1 
fell upon the necks of his brethren and wept. We have ai 



94 fcrseplj’s jfeamfr &ttterfrfeta toitij gndfrrett. 

lesser task just now, yet full of interest ; we have to con- 
sider the successive steps by which that wayward family 
was brought into a position in which its members could be 
forgiven and blessed. May the Holy Spirit help us to under- 
stand this ; because Joseph, who was exalted from the pit 
to the palace, is an evident picture of Him who lay in the 
grave, but is now exalted to the right hand of the Father to 
give repentance unto Israel and the remission of sins ! And 
as we review the successive steps by which Joseph led his 
brethren, we shall probably catch a glimpse of those various 
processes by which the Saviour humbles us and leads us to 
Himself. Should these words be read by the members of 
some family which is living in this famine-stricken world, 
minding only the things of sense and sin, ignorant of the 
great Brother who lives yonder on the throne of God and 
loves us — let them read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest 
them, for they may shed a light on some dark landings of 
their life, and explain things hard as the riddle of the 
Sphinx. 

I. There was the Pressure of Poverty and Sor- 
row (xliii, i). Jacob had never turned his thoughts to 
Egypt if there had been plenty in Canaan. The famine 
drove the sons of Israel into Egypt to buy corn. And even 
though poor Simeon was bound in Egypt, the brothers had 
not gone a second time if it had not been for the rigour of 
that necessity, which sometimes drives the most timid birds 
and deer to the homes and haunts of men. At first the 
old father strongly opposed the thought of their taking 
Benjamin, even if they went themselves ; and his children 
lingered. 


95 


©chtjj hototi to <&ggpi. 

There is a touching picture given of the conversation 
between the old man and his sons, a kind of council of 
war. Reuben seems already to have lost the priority which 
his birthright would have secured, and Judah held the 
place of spokesman and leader amongst the brethren. He 
undertook to deal with the old man for the rest. At the 
outset, Jacob’s request that they should go down to buy 
food was met with the most distinct refusal, unless Benjamin 
was permitted to accompany them. And when he com- 
plained of their having betrayed the existence of another 
brother, the whole of them vindicated their action, and 
declared that they could not have done otherwise. At last 
Judah made himself personally responsible for the lad’s 
safety, a pledge which, as we shall see, he nobly redeemed. 
And so, at last, the old man yielded, proposing only that 
they should take a present to mollify the ruler’s heart, a 
double money to replace what had been returned in their 
sacks, and uttering a fervent prayer to the Almighty on 
their behalf. Thus God in his mercy shut up every other 
door but the one through which they might find their way 
to plenty and blessedness. There was no alternative but 
to go down to Egypt. 

So is your life . You have had all that this world could 
give. Beauty, money, youth, health, success, have come 
up and poured their horns of plenty into your lap. You 
have had all that man could wish. But what has been 
your state of heart meanwhile? Have you bethought 
yourself of your ill-treatment of your great Elder Brother ? 
Have you set your affections upon things above ? Have 
you lived for that W’orld which lies beyond the narrow 
horizon of the visible ? You know you have not. So God 


96 Jfasejr h’s BfitterMeln faritlj f§is fSjretljrctt. 

has called for a famine on your land, and broken the whole 
staff of your bread. You have lost situation and friends. 
Your business is broken. Beauty, youth, health — all have 
vanished. Joseph is not; Simeon is not; and Benjamin 
is on the point of being taken away. Everything has been 
against you. 

It is a severe measure : how will you bear it ? In the first 
burst of the tempest, you say stubbornly, “ I will not go 
down ; I will not yield ; I will stand out to the last.” But. 
beware ! It is a fatal mistake to wrestle against the love of 
God. Jacob tried it by the Jabbok ford ; and he limped on 
a halting thigh until he gathered his feet up into his death- 
bed. God will have his way at last if not at first. The 
famine must continue until the wanderer arises to return to 
the Father, with words of penitent contrition on his lips. It 
is in vain to row to bring the ship to land : , the sea will not 
cease her raging until the runaway prophet is on his way 
back to his home. “I will be,” saith the Lord, “unto 
Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of 
Judah. I, even I, will tear and go away ; and none shall 
rescue. I will go and return to my place, till they acknow- 
ledge their offence, and seek my face ; in their affliction 
they will seek Me early.” Oh that your reply might be ! — 
“ Come, and let us return unto the Lord ; for He hath tom, 
and He will heal us ; He hath smitten, and He will bind us 
up.” 

II. There was the Awakening of Conscience. For 
twenty years conscience had slept. And as long as this 
was the case there could be no real peace between Joseph 
and his brethren. They could never feel sure that he had 


Confidence ntoakeneir. 


97 


forgiven them. He would always feel that there was a 
padlock on the treasure-store of his love. You never can 
feel at perfect rest with your friend, so long as there is 
some unexplained wrong between you. Conscience must 
awake and slowly tread the aisles of the temple of peni- 
tence, telling the beads of confession. This is the clue to 
the understanding of Joseph’s behaviour. 

Joseph, to arouse their dormant consciences, repeated as 
nearly as possible to them , their treatment of himself This 
has already engaged our thought. “Ye are spies,” was the 
echo of their own rough words to himself. The prison, in 
which they lay for three days, was the counterpart of the 
pit in which they placed him. Men will best learn what is 
the true nature of their own iniquities when they experience 
the treatment which they meted out to others. And 
Joseph’s device was a success. Listen to their moan, “We 
are verily guilty because of our brother.” 

Here again is a clue to the mysteries of our own lives. 
God sometimes allows us to be treated as we have treated 
Him, that we may see our offence in its true character, and 
may be obliged to turn to Him with words of genuine 
contrition. Your child has turned out badly enough : you 
did everything for him; now he refuses to do what you 
wish, and even taunts you. Do you feel it ? Perhaps this 
will reveal to you what God feels, in that, though He has 
nourished and brought you up, yet you have rebelled 
against Him. Your neighbour, when in trouble, came to 
you for help, and promised to repay you with interest, with 
many protestations : now he prospers, and you ask him to 
repay you ; but he either laughs at you, or tells you to wait 
Do you feel it ? Ah, now you know how God feels, He who 


9 8 frratpb’a Inierinein tatil; Ilia irttljren. 

helped you in distress, to whom you made many vows, but 
who reminds you in vain of all the past You know what 
it is to stand day after day a suppliant, waiting at a gate 
which never opens, listening for a footstep that never 
comes. Do you feel it? Ah, now you know what He 
feels who twenty years ago stood at the door of your heart 
and knocked, and is there now waiting, full-handed, to 
enrich you. That conscience must indeed be fast in 
slumber that awakens not at such appeals. 

HI. There was the Display of much Tender Love 
towards Them. As soon as Joseph espied them he 
invited them to his own table to feast with him. The 
brothers were brought into bis house, where every kindness 
was shown to them ; as if, instead of being poor shepherds, 
they were the magnates of the land. Their fears as to the 
return of the money were allayed by the pious, though 
prevaricating, assurance of the steward that if they had 
discovered it in their sacks it must have been put there by 
God, as there was no doubt about the price of their corn 
having come into his hands. And when Joseph came they 
prostrated themselves before him in striking fulfilment o 
his own boyish dream. He asked them tenderly about the 
well-being of their father; and there must have been a 
pathos in his words to Benjamin which would have revealed 
the whole secret if they had not been so utterly unprepared 
to find Joseph beneath the strange guise of the great 

E What an inimitable touch is that, which tells us how 
Joseph’s heart welled up into his eyes, so that he needed 
to make haste to conceal the bursting emotions, which 


99 


©Ijc rt jerteir gnrifrcr. 

threatened to overmaster him. “He sought where to 
weep, and he entered into his chamber, and wept there. 
And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained 
himself; and said, Set on bread.” 

There may be prophetic touches here. And we may yet 
see the counterpart of this scene literally fulfilled, when the 
Lord comes forward to recognize and receive his ancient 
people. But in the mea?vwhiie what shall we say of his love 
to ourselves ? Ah, we need the fervid heart and the 
burning words of a Rutherford to deal with such a theme. 
The rejected Brother may seem strange and rough. He 
may cause sorrow. He may bind Simeon before our eyes. 
But, beneath all, He loves us with a love in which is con- 
centrated the love of all parents to their children, and of 
all friends for their beloved. And that love is constantly 
devising means of expressing itself. It puts money into 
our sacks; it invites us to its home, and spreads banquets 
before us; it inclines stewards to meet us peacefully; it 
washes our feet; it takes a tender interest in those we love; 
it wishes us grace from God; it adjusts itself to our tem- 
peraments and puts us at our ease, so that gleams of light 
as to the love of Jesus strike into our hearts ! He feels 
yearnings over us which He restrains, and dares not betray 
till the work of conviction is complete, and He can pour 
the full tides of affection on us, without injury to others or 
harm to ourselves. 

IV. There was the Destruction of their Self- 
confidence. They thought their word was good; but 
when they told their family history, Joseph refused to 
believe it, and said it must be proved. They w r ere confident 


ioo Josef's ScionD interbUta fotf& %" ia ¥ tEt b rcn - 

in their money ; and as they paid down the shining 
pieces, they congratulated themselves that in this respect at 
least they were even with this rough governor— now at 
least he cannot touch them or count them as defaulters. 

But when they reached their first halting-place on their way i 
home, “as one of them opened his sack to give his ass 
provender, he espied his money; for, behold, it was m the 
sack’s mouth; and he said unto his brethren, My money 
is restored ; and 16 it is even in my sack : and their heart 
failed them, and they were afraid, saying , one to another, j 
What is this that God hath done unto us ? ” 

How often this happens in the experience of sinful men! I 
They want to stand right with God ; but they like to do so 
in their own way. Like Cain, they bring the fruit which 
their own hands have raised. Like these men, they bring 
their hard-earned money. Like the Pharisees, they bring 
prayers and tithes and gifts. But when these gifts have 
been laid upon the altar, their donors are amazed to find 
that they count for nothing, and are even given back. No ! 
the mercy of God, which is the true bread of the spirit, is 
not to be bought by anything we can bring; it must be 
received as a gift without money and without price. Jacob 
said, “ Perad venture it was an oversight” : but it was not; 
it was part of a deeply-laid plan, designed and executed for 
a special purpose. There is no oversight, and no per- 
adventure, in the life of man. 

i 

41 All nature is but art unknown to thee ; # 

All chance, direction which thou canst not see ; j 

AH discord, harmony not understood ; 

All partial evil, universal good." 

They were confident also in their integrity. Little 


I 

I- 

I 

44 Mbat shall foe sag ? '* i°r i 

knowing what was in the sack of one of them, when the 
morning was light they started on their return journey for 
the second time. They were in high spirits. Simeon was 
with them ; so was Benjamin, notwithstanding the nervous 
forebodings of the old father. They were evidently in 
high favour with the governor, else they had not been 
treated to so grand a feast on the previous day. Their 
sacks were as full as they could possibly hold. But they 
had hardly got clear of the city gate, when they were 
arrested by the steward’s voice. “ Stop ! Stop ! Why 
have ye rewarded evil for good ? ” And they said, “ Where- 
fore saith my lord these words ? Behold, the money which 
we found in our sacks’ mouths we brought again unto 
thee : how then should we steal silver or gold out of thy 
lord’s house ? ” And, so sure were they of their integrity, 
that they went further and said : “ With whomsoever thy 
master’s cup is found, let him die, and we also will be my 
lord’s bondmen.” “Then they speedily took down every 
man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his 
sack.” And the steward searched them there on the bare 
road, beginning with the eldest to the youngest, “ and the cup 
was found in Benjamins sack Well might Judah and his 
brethren come to Joseph’s house and fall before him on 
the ground, and say, “ What shall we say unto my lord ? 

What shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? 

God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants.” They 
were stripped of every rag of self-confidence, and were 
shut up to his uncovenanted mercy. 

Some men resemble Benjamin. They are naturally guile- 
less and beautiful. Some faint traces of original innocence 
linger about them. Their type is shown forth in the young 


102 fcseplfs %uanb Snterbtem fautlj W& gwtbreit. 

man whom Jesus loved, as he stood before Him breathless 
with haste, protesting that he had kept all the command- 
ments blameless from his youth. We do not reckon sin 
to such ; and they do not reckon it to themselves. The 
publican and the sinner may stand in urgent need of the 
blood of Christ 5 but surely nitre and soap will suffice for 
them. But this reasoning is full of flaws. Such people seem 
good, only because they are compared with sinners of a 
blacker dye. Compare them with the only standard of 
infinite purity j and they are infinitely condemned. If I 
wash myself with snow-water, and make my hands never so 
clean, yet shalt Thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine 
own clothes shall abhor me.” The servants think the 
linen clean as it hangs upon the line, contrasted with the 
dingy buddings around ; but when the snowflakes fall, they 
wonder that they never before discerned its lack of white- 
ness. The schoolboy thinks his writing good, only so long 
as he contrasts it with that of a worse penman than himself ; 
but he soon alters his opinion when he catches sight of 
the copy. So estimable characters pride themselves on 
their morality, only until they behold the seamless robes of 
Christ, whiter than any fuller on earth could whiten them. 
But these must be taught their utter sinfulness ; they must 
learn their secret unworthiness ; they must be made to take 
their stand with the rest of men. Benjamin must be 
reduced to the level of Simeon and Judah. The cup 
must be found in Benjamin's sack. 

A preacher of the Gospel was once speaking to an old 
Scotchwoman, who was commonly regarded as one of the 
most devout and respectable people in that part of the 
country. He was impressing on her her need of Christ. 




31 (ftujr. 

At last, with tears in her eyes, she said, “ Oh, sir, I have 
never missed a Sabbath at the kirk ; and I have read my 
Bible every day ; and I have prayed and done good deeds 
to my neighbours ; and I have done all I knew I ought to 
do : and now do you mean to tell me that it must all go for 
nothing ? ” He answered, “ Well, you have to choose 
between trusting in these and trusting in the redemption 
which God offers you in Christ. You cannot have both. 
If you are content to part company with your own 
righteousness, the Lord will give you his ; but if you cling 
to your Bible -reading and Sabbath-keeping and good deeds, 
the Lord’s righteousness cannot be yours.” It was quite 
a spectacle, he said afterwards, to see that old woman’s 
face. The cup was foutid in Benjamin's sack. For some 
time she sat in silence, her elbows on the table, her face 
buried in her hands : a great struggle was going on within. 
At length the tears began to stream from her eyes, and, 
lifting up her clasped hands to heaven, she cried out, 
“ Oh, my God, they shall all gang for naething ! ” In a 
moment more she cast herself on her knees, and accepted 
the Lord Jesus as her Saviour. It is when the cup is 
found in Benjamin’s sack that he, too, is brought to the 
feet of Jesus. 

There is a stolen cup in your sack , my respectable, 
reputable, moral friend. You are probably unconscious of 
it. You pride yourself upon your blameless life. You 
suppose that Christ Himself has no controversy with you. 
But if you only knew, you would see that you are robbing 
Him of his own. You use for yourself time and money 
and talents which He bought with his own precious blood, 
and which He meant to be a chosen vessel unto Himself. 


io4 Joseph* Sttco tth Ittferbleta fautfr §Fs gretb«iL 

It is remarkable that you, who are so scrupulous in paying 
every man his dues, should be so careless of the daily 
treachery of which you are guilty in defrauding the Lord of 
his own purchase. But if you hide the unwelcome truth 
from yourself, you cannot hide it from your Lord. “Wot 
ye not that such an one as He can certainly divine?” 
“He searcheth the hearts and trieth the reins of the 
children of men.” And “ he that is first in his own 
cause seemeth just ; but his neighbour cometh and 
searcheth him,” 

How then shall we act ? First, Do not linger . “ Except 

we had lingered, surely now ere this we should have 
returned twice.” Except you had lingered, ere this you 
would have become an earnest, happy Christian. “ The 
angels hastened Lot as he lingered.” Make haste ! The 
door is shutting ; and when it shuts it will lock itself. The 
entrance is nearly bricked up. The hour-glass is nearly run 
out, and when its last grain has gone the court of mercy 
will close. 

Secondly, Make full confession or restitution. “They 
came near to the steward of Joseph’s house and communed 
with him,” and told him all about the finding of the money, 
and offered it back in full weight. Commune with Christ 
as you close this story. Tell Him all that is in your heart. 
Restore what you have taken wrongfully from Him or from 
others. Make full and thorough restitution. “ When I 
kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all 
the day long ; for day and night thy hand was heavy upon 
me : my moisture was turned into the drought of summer. 
I acknowledged my sin unto Thee, and my iniquity have I 
I not hid. And thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.” 


®!re tqr for tttetxg. io 5 

“ He that covereth his sins shall not prosper ; but whoso 
confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.” 

Thirdly, Throw yourself on the mercy of Christ. Judah 
did not excuse himself or his brethren ; he had been non- 
suited if he had. He adopted a wiser course — he pleaded 
for mercy. Mercy for their own sakes ! mercy for the lad’s 
sake ! mercy for the sake of the old father with his grey 
hairs at home ! Try that plea with your Lord. You will 
find that it will not fail you. Say, as you beat upon your 
breast, “ Be merciful unto me, the sinner ! ” He will not be 
able to refrain. He will say, in broken accents, “Come 
near unto Me; I am Jesus your Brother : your sins nailed 
Me to the cross, but speak of it no more ; grieve not for it. 
God has overruled it for good, that I might save yo.ur lives 
by a great deliverance.” 


CHAPTER IX. 


Josuplj making krtttstflf knohm. 

(Genesis xlv.) 

“ Thou know’st our bitterness— our joys are Thine — 

No stranger Thou to all our wanderings wild : 

Nor could we bear to think, how every line 
Of us, thy darkened likeness, and defiled, 

Stands in full sunshine of thy piercing eye, 

Bul that Thou call's! us Brethren : sweet repose 
Is in that word — the Lord who dwells on high 
Knows all, yet loves us better than He knows." 

Keble. 

HE cup was found in Benjamin’s sack.” What a 
discovery was that ! There in the open road, 
in the early morning light, as the villagers were 
passing into the city with melons and leeks and 
onions, and as the city was beginning to bestir 
itself, the cup of the great Premier, in whose hands was the 
power of life and death, was found lying in the com, half 
hidden, as by stealth. But how did it come there? The 
brothers could not tell. They neither could nor would 
believe that Benjamin had known anything of it. Yet how 
to explain the mystery was a problem they could not solve. 
It seemed as if some evil genius were making them its 
sport, first in putting the money in their sacks, and then 
in concealing the cup there. 

And yet, in a moment, each brother must have wished 
that the cup could have been found in any sack rather 
than in Benjamin’s. They all remembered their father’s 



31 garfe 107 

strange unwillingness to let him come. The old man had 
seemed to have a presentiment of coming disaster. When 
first they returned from Egypt he said decisively, “ My son 
shall not go down with you ; for his brother is dead, and he 
is left alone : if mischief befal him by the way in the which 
ye go, then shall ye bring down my grey hairs with sorrow to 
the grave.” And when the pressure of famine compelled 
them, the last words of the timid and stricken parent were, 
“God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he 
may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be 
bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.” All the time his 
heart was filled with the presages of coming sorrow ; and 
now . those forebodings seemed about to be fulfilled. 
Each of those men must have thought to himself, as he 
followed in the sad procession back, “ How dare I face my 
father? When first we reach home, he will be sure to 
look first for Benjamin ; and if he does not see him with 
us, he will receive a stab of grief in his heart from which 
he will never rally, and his grey hairs will go down with 
sorrow to the grave.” But there was nothing for it except 
to reload their asses and return. Oh, how different the 
road seemed to what it had been a little before ! The 
same sun was shining ; the same busy scene surrounded 
them — but a dark veil was spread over sky and earth. 

Let us study the scene that followed. It demands our 
care ; for it throws light on our Lord’s dealings with contrite 
souls, and it is an anticipation of the time when Israel shall 
seek with tears unto Him who once was nailed by them to 
the cross, but who is “exalted a Prince and a Saviour, to 
give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins.” 


io8 Joseph making himself hitcfam. 

I. Notice the Circumstances in which they Found 
Themselves. Their conscience was now awakened , and it 
was til at ease. There, was no need for them to mention 
that crime of twenty years before; and yet it seemed 
impossible for them to refrain from mentioning that 
which was uppermost in their minds. They were evidently 
thinking deeply of that dark deed by the pit’s mouth; 
their own sorrows had brought the sorrows of that frail 
young lad to their minds; they could not but feel that 
there was some connection between the two; and thus the 
first words uttered by Judah their spokesman, as they 
entered the audience-chamber of Joseph, betrayed the dark 
forebodings of their thoughts : “ What shall we say unto my 
Lord ? What shall we speak ? or how shall we clear 
ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy 
servants.” 

God will always find out our iniquity. The sleuth- 
hound is on your track : it may take years to run you 
down; but it will never leave the trail until it has dis- 
covered your hiding place and found you out. “ Be sure 
your sin will find you out.” Tens of years may pass over 
your life ; and like these brethren you may be congratulating 
yourself that the sin is forgotten, and you are safe : and 
then a train of circumstances, little suspected, but mani- 
pulated by a Divine hand, will suddenly bring the truth to 
light, and write God’s sentence in flaming characters upon 
the walls of the house in which you riot in careless ease. 
The unforgiven sinner is never safe. A terrible incident 
in point is recorded by Dr. Donne, once Prebendary 
of St. Paul’s. On one occasion some excavations were 
being made in the precincts of the cathedral, and amongst 


Wqz ottliT fUfttg t. I0 9 

other relics thrown up to the surface, there was a skull with 
a nail in it. He happened to be standing by ; and having 
taken up the skull, and examined it, he asked the old 
sexton if he knew whose it was, and how the owner died. 

“ Ah,” said he, carelessly, “it is the skull of an aged man, 
who died very suddenly some years ago: his wife is living 
yet ; she married again soon after his death.” Dr. Donne 
found her out, and confronted her with the skull. The 
woman turned at once deadly pale ; and confessed that she 
had taken her husband’s life, and that she had had no rest 
since by day or by night. This is a terrible example of a 
frequent law of God’s world. And if all sin is not traced 
home to its authors in this world, at least there is enough to 
show how terrible that moment will be, when, at the “great 
white throne,” the secrets of all hearts will be disclosed, and 
God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness. 
There is absolutely no chance of escape for a man, save in 
the wounds of Jesus 5 these are the city of refuge into which 
the pursuer cannot enter, and in which the fugitive is safe. 

But , in addition , they felt that they were absolutely in 
Joseph's power. There he stood, second to none but 
Pharaoh in all the land of Egypt. Legions of warriors, 
like those depicted on the pyramids were at his beck and 
call. If he had said that these men were all to be taken 
and imprisoned for life, or that Benjamin should be retained 
whilst the others were set free, there was absolutely no 
appeal : none could hinder him for a single moment. And 
the counterpart of this must surely be an alarming thought 
to the awakened sinner— that he is entirely at the mercy of 
the Judge of the quick and dead. There is none that can 
deliver out of his hand, or say, “What doest Thou?” 


no fhisepfr mailing himself bitotoit. 

The lamb in the power of the lion, the moth in the grasp 
of the hand, are not more entirely helpless than are sinners 
in the hand of God. “ Agree with thine adversary quickly, 
whilst thou art in the way with him ; lest haply the adver- 
sary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee 
to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.” 

Moreover , they saw that appearances were strongly against 
them. There was no doubt that the cup had been found 
in Benjamin's sack; and though they were certainly in- 
nocent of the theft, yet they could not but feel that they 
were unable to clear or excuse themselves. As far as the 
evidence went, it pointed clearly and decisively to their 
guilt. 

The divining cup is familiar enough to all students of 
ancient literature. It was sometimes made of crystal and 
of precious stones; and it was supposed that all secrets 
would be reflected by the liquid it contained. Homer 
sings of the cup of Nestor. And our own Spenser tells us 
how the royal maiden, Britomart, found Merlin’s cup in 
her father’s closet, and used it to discover a secret which 
-closely concerned her. We, of course, do not believe that 
Joseph used such a cup for such a purpose; but it was 
his desire to maintain the character of an Egyptian of 
high rank. All Egyptian noblemen used such a cup. To 
appeal to it was most natural ; and in their conscience- 
stricken condition, the brothers were too depressed to 
■contest its decisions, or to ask for one more decisive test 
of their innocence or guilt. 

II. Notice their Behaviour. “ They fell before him 
an the ground As they did so, they unconsciously 


Ill 


Jfa&alj's flies. 

fulfilled his own prediction, uttered when a boy. How 
vividly that memorable dream of the harvest field must 
have occurred to Joseph’s mind ! Here were their sheaves 
making obeisance to his sheaf, standing erect in the 
midst. 

But who was to be their spokesman ? Reuben had 
always had something to say in self-justification, and had 
been so sure that all would be right that he had pledged 
the lives , of his children to his father for the safety of 
Benjamin ; but he is dumb. Simeon was probably the cruel 
one, the instigator of the crime against Joseph; but he dares 
not utter a word. Benjamin, the blameless one, the proto- 
type of the young man whom Jesus loved, is convicted of 
sin, and has nought to say. Who then is to speak ? There 
is only one, Judah, who at the pit’s mouth had diverted the 
brothers from their first thought of murder. And notice 
how he speaks. He does not attempt to hold up any 
extenuating circumstances, or to explain the past, or to 
excuse Benjamin or themselves. He throws himself help- 
lessly on Joseph’s mercy: “What shall we say unto my 
lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear our- 
selves ? ” 

This is a good example for us to follenv still. There is no 
doubt about our guilt. We are verily guilty concerning 
our treatment of that great Brother-man, who once lay in 
the pit, but who is now seated at the right hand of power. 
If we try to extenuate our faults, to excuse ourselves, to 
explain away the past, we shall only make bad worse : we 
shall be brought face to face with the damning evidence of 
our guilt; every mouth will be stopped; and we shall.be 
obliged to cry, “ God hath found out the iniquity of his 


1 12 Jfnscplj nrahhtg Ijimself httalmt. 

servants.” But if we throw ourselves on his mercy, we 
cannot fail. 

We stand on surer ground than ever they did. They had 
no idea of the gentleness of Joseph’s heart; they had not 
seen him turn aside to weep ; they had not understood why 
on one occasion he had hastened from their presence ; 
they could not guess how near the surface lay the fountains 
of his tears. They only knew him as rough, and stern, and 
hard. “The man, who is lord of the land, spake roughly 
to us.” But we know the gentleness of the Lord Jesus. 
We have seen his tears over Jerusalem ; we have listened to 
his tender invitations to come to Him ; we have stood 
beneath his cross and heard his last prayers for his mur- 
derers, and his words of invitation to the dying thief ; we 
know that He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench 
the smoking flax. We then need not fear for the issue when 
we cast ourselves upon his mercy. We then need not 
stand trembling in the ante-chamber, saying, “ If I perish, 
I perish.” We need not look nervously towards his throne 
to see if the golden sceptre of his grace is extended 
towards us. Failure and rejection are alike impossible to 
the soul that pleads guilty, and that casts itself on the 
mercy of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. 

In all literature , there is nothing more pathetic than this 
appeal of Judah. The eagerness that made him draw 
near; the humility that confessed Joseph’s anger might 
righteously burn, since he was as Pharaoh ; the picture of 
the old man, their father, bereft of one son, and clinging 
to this little one, the only relict of his mother; the recital 
of the strain which the governor had imposed on them, by 
demanding that they should bring their youngest brother 


<©ur jUtaate. 1x3 

down ; the story of their father’s dread, only overmastered 
by the imperious demand of a hunger that knew no law, 
and brooked no check; the vivid picture of the father’s 
eagerness again to see the lad, in whose life his own was 
bound up; the heart-breaking grief at not seeing him 
amongst them; the heroic offer to stay there a slave, as 
Benjamin’s substitute, if only the lad might go home ; the 
preference of a life of slavery rather than to behold the old 
man sinking with sorrow into his grave— all this is touched 
with master-hand. Oh, how much of poetry and pathos 
lie behind some of the roughest men, only waiting for 
some great sorrow to smite open the upper crust, and bore 
the Artesian well ! But if a rough man could plead like 
this, think, ah think, what must not those pleadings be 
which Jesus offers before the throne ! What moonbeams 
are to sunshine; what the affection of a dog is to the 
passionate love of a noble man — such is the pleading of 
Judah compared to the intercession of our great High- 
Priest ! We have an Advocate in the Court of King’s 
Bench who never lost a case : let ns put ourselves into his 
hands, and trust Him when He says, “ I have prayed for 
thee.” “ Such a High-Priest became us.” 

Thus Joseph's object was attained. He had wished to 
restore them to perfect rest and peace ; but he knew that 
these were impossible so long as their sin was unconfessed 
and unforgiven. But it had now been abundantly con- 
fessed. 1 hen, too, he had been anxious to see how they 
felt toward Benjamin. With this object in view he had 
given him five times as much as he had given them. 
Some think that he did this to show his special love. It 

may have been so ; but probably there was something 
H 


1 14 Jtoflepfr making him&df biurfim. 

deeper. It was his dream of superiority that aroused their 
hatred against himself : how would they feel toward 
Benjamin, if he, the, younger, were treated better than 
them all ? But notwithstanding the marked favour shown 
him, they were as eager as before for his return with them. 
Besides, he wanted to see if they could forgive. It was 
Benjamin who had brought them into all this trouble : 
had they treated him in the spirit of former days, they 
would have abandoned him to his fate ; but if so, they 
could not have been forgiven. “ If ye forgive not men 
their trespasses, neither will your Heavenly Father forgive 
you.” But they had no malice against this young lad. 
So far from showing malice, they tenderly loved and clung 
to him for the old father’s sake and his own. Evidently 
then all Joseph’s purposes were accomplished ; all the 
conditions were fulfilled ; and nothing remained to hinder 
the great unveiling that was so near. 

III. Notice the Revelation and Reconciliation. 

“ Then Joseph could not refrain himself There was no 
effort needed to bring himself to the point : the effort 
consisted in having restrained himself so long. If he 
had yielded to his natural feelings, he would have broken 
out long before. It was only because he studied their 
lasting welfare, that he refrained himself so long. But 
when Judah’s voice ceased its pathetic pleading, he could 
restrain himself no more. It may be that some one will 
read this who has been disposed to think that our Saviour 
is hard to please * needing so much ere He unbends ; 
distant and reticent. Ah, it is the other way ! He is 
gentle and easy to be entreated ; He is brimming over 


Menu faritfr jfojjgjrfr. 1 15 

with yearning love: and if He seem indifferent, it is not 
for want of love— it is indeed a positive effort to Him even 
to seem so ; but He will go through with it in order to 
prove, and test, and teach us. He loved the dear inmates 
of the home in Bethany, but He refrained Himself, and 
abode two days still in the same place where He was, so that 
Lazarus died; and then He went that He might work 
his greatest miracle at the grave in which hope itself lay 
buried. Whilst we are being tried, He will invite us to 
his table, and speak some words of love ; yet there will be 
a veil between us : but when the trial is over, He will 
refrain Himself no more, but will manifest Himself to us 
as He does not unto the world. “ His going forth is 
prepared as the morning,” 

And Joseph cried , lt Cause every man to go out from me:* 
There was great delicacy here. He did not want to expose 
his brethren ; and yet he wanted to say words which could 
not be understood by the curious ears of mere courtiers and 
place-seekers. His brethren, too, must have a chance to be 
themselves. “ And so there stood no man with him, 
while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.” We 
must stand alone before Christ, if we would know Him. 
The priest, the minister, or the Christian friend, must alike 
go out. There are joys, as there are sorrows, in which no 
stranger can intermeddle. As Peter met our Lord alone on 
the resurrection morning, for “ He was seen of Cephas ” — so 
alone must each man meet Christ. Why not at once ? 

And he wept aloud. He gave forth his voice in weeping, 
so that the Egyptians heard the unusual sounds and 
wondered. Was this joy or grief ? I am disposed to 
think it was neither. It was pent-up emotion. For many 


ii 6 Joseph making himself kttoUm. 

days he had been in suspense ; so anxious not to lose 
them, so afraid that they might not stand the test. When 
from some secret coign of vantage he had watched them 
leave the city in the grey light, he may have chided himself 
for letting them go at all. His mind had been on the 
stretch ; and now that the tension was removed, and that 
there was no further necessity for it, he wept aloud. Ah, 
sinner, the heart of Christ is on the stretch for thee ! 

And he said, “ I am Joseph .” He spoke in deep 
emotion ; yet the words must have fallen on them like a 
thunderbolt. “Joseph!” Had they been dealing all the 
while with their long-lost brother ? “ Joseph ! ” Then they 
had fallen into a lion’s den indeed. “ Joseph ! ” Could it 
be ? Yes, it must be so ; and it would explain a great many 
things which had sorely puzzled them. Well might they 
be troubled and terrified. Astonishment as at one risen 
from the dead, terror for the consequences, fear lest he 
would repay them the long-standing debt — all these emo- 
tions made them dumb. They could not answer him. 
So he said again, “ I am Joseph, your brother , whom ye 
sold into Egypt”; and he added very lovingly, “Be not 
grieved, nor angry, for God did send me.” How much 
this reminds us of another scene, not far from the gates 
of Damascus, when Jesus arrested the young persecutor 
with the words, “Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” And 
he said, “ Who art Thou, Lord ? ” And the answer came 
back, “I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest.” Penitent 
sinner ! it is thus that thy Saviour speaks to thee. “ I am 
Jesus, your brother, whom thou hast sold and crucified ; yet 
grieve not for that. I was delivered by the determinate 
counsel and fore-knowledge of God ; though the hands 


“(Smite near unto me!" 117 ! 

have been none the less wicked by whom I have been 
crucified and slain. But if you repent, your sins shall be 
blotted out. All manner of sin shall be forgiven unto the 
sons of men, and the blasphemies wherewith soever they 
may have blasphemed.’'* 

“ And Joseph said unto his brethren , Come near unto me A 
They had gone farther and farther back from him ; but now 
he bids them approach. This is a beautiful illustration of 
the way in which a sinner may be reinstated in the loving 
favour of God. We are not set to serve a time of probation. 

We need not stand afar off. We may step right into the ! 

deepest and closest intimacy with the Son of God. Once 
“far off,” but now “made nigh” by the blood of Jesus. 

One moment the rugged road of repentance ; the next the 
Father’s kiss and the banquet in the Father’s home. 

A moment more saw him and Benjamin locked in each 
other’s arms, their tears freely flowing. And he kissed 
all his brethren. Simeon? Yes. Reuben? Yes. Those 
who had tied his hands and mocked his cries? Yes. 

He kissed them all And after that they talked with 
him. So shall it be one day. The Jews are slowly 
filtering back to Palestine in unbelief. Sore troubles 
await them there, to prepare them to recognize their 
rejected Messiah. But the time is not far distant when 
they shall be prepared to hear Him say, “I am Jesus, 
your brother, whom ye crucified ; but be not grieved with 
yourselves, for God has brought good out of evil, both for 
Gentile and for Jew, by saving life with a great deliver- 
ance.” “And they shall look upon Him whom they 
pierced, and mourn because of Him.” “And so all 
Israel shall be saved.” 


CHAPTER X. 


lustplj’s ^tmuniatralintt of ®sgpt- 

{Genesis xlvii.) 

«* We see him as he moved, 

How modest, kindly, all-accomplished, wise, 

With what sublime repression of himself, 

And in what limits, and how tenderly." 

Tennyson. 

HILE all the domestic details on which we 
have been meditating were transpiring, 
Joseph was carrying his adopted country 
through a great crisis — I might almost call 
it a revolution. When he became Prime 
Minister, the Egyptian monarchy was comparatively weak ; 
but after he had administered affairs for some thirteen 
years, Pharaoh was absolute owner of all the land of 
Egypt. As it was in England in the old feudal times, so 
it was in Egypt : all the land became held in fief from the 
crown. The history of this change deserves more atten- 
tion than we can give it now ; but from first to last it was 
due to the statesmanship of the young Hebrew. Nor is 
this the only instance of a Hebrew conducting his adopted 
country through extraordinary perils by the exercise of 
extraordinary genius. 

During the seven years of plenty, Joseph caused one- 
fifth of all the produce of every district to be hoarded up 



%\jz ^eara of ITanttitc. 119 

in its town ; so that each town would contain, within 
immense granaries, the redundant produce of its own 
district. At last the years of famine came. And recent 
sad experiences in India will help us to realize something 
of the meaning of the words : “ There was no bread in all 
the land, for the famine was very sore ; so that the land of 
Egypt, and all the land of Canaan, fainted by reason of 
the famine.” No doubt, had there been no provision 
made by Joseph, the streets would have been filled by 
emaciated skeletons picking their way feebly amid the 
heaps of the dying and the dead; men, women, and 
children would have fallen before the scythe of famine- 
fever; and it would have taken years for the country to 
be repopulated to its former extent. 

The slender stores of the Egyptians were soon ex- 
hausted ; and when all the land of Egypt was famished, 
the people cried unto Pharaoh, saying : “ Bread ! bread ! 
give us bread ! ” Did they invade the palace precincts, 
flow into the corridors, and force their way into the royal 
presence, as the Parisian mob has done more than once in 
the awful days of revolution? We do not know. But 
Pharaoh had a ready answer : “ Go unto Joseph ; and what 
he saith unto you, do.” “Then Joseph opened all the 
storehouses and sold unto the Egyptians.” This was right 
and wise. It would have been a great mistake to give. In 
the Irish famine the Government set the people to earn 
their bread by making the roads, since it would have done 
them lasting injury to have allowed them to receive help 
without rendering some kind of equivalent. And it is not 
too much to say that it would have taken the Egyptians 
one or two generations to recover their moral tone if. 


120 


Jtoscjrlj’B jLirmmiatration: of (Bjjiipt. 

instead of selling, Joseph had given the corn. Joseph's 
policy was in exact accord with the maxims 'of modem 
political economy. 

But the money was soon exhausted: it lasted just one 
year. What was to be done now ? There was nothing left 
but persons and lands ; the people were naturally loth to 
pledge these, but there was no alternative ; and so they 
came to. Joseph, and said, “ Why should we die ? Buy us 
and our land for bread.” In other words, they became 
Pharaoh’s tenant farmers, and paid him twenty per cent., 
or one-fifth of their returns, as rent. This may seem a 
heavy tax ■ but it is not heavier than the rentage in almost 
every European country in the present day. 

I. Let us Study the Spirit of Joseph’s Administra- 
tion. It is summed up in three brief sentences : He was 
“diligent in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.” 

Of his diligeTice in business there is ample proof. When 
first raised to the proud position of Premier, “ he went out 
through all the land of Egypt.” The granaries were built 
and the corn stored under his personal supervision. And 
when the famine came, the corn was sold under his own 
eye. The whole pressure of arrangements seems to have 
rested entirely upon his shoulders. Pharaoh wiped his 
hands of it, and said, Go to Joseph. Joseph gathered up 
all the money that was found in all the land of Egypt. 
Joseph bought the whole land for Pharaoh; and Joseph 
superintended the removal of the people into the cities 
from one end of the country to the other for the easier 
distribution of food. Joseph made the laws. “ Seest thou 
a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before kings. 


“ giltgent in gusitt css/’ 


121 


he shall not stand before mean men.” Young men, make 
Joseph your model in this. Some men do their lifework 
as if every joint were stiff with rheumatism, or as if they 
were exuding some adhesive viscus, making their snail 
progress as painful as it is slow. Others are somnambu- 
lists, looking for something and forgetting what they seek ; 
not able to find their work, or, having found it, not able to 
find their tools : always late, taking their passage when the 
ship has sailed ; insuring their furniture when the house is 
in flames; locking the door when the horse is gone. 
Beware of imitating any of these. First choose a pursuit, 
however humble, into which you can rightly throw your 
energy, and then put into it all your forces without stint. 

These are simple rules, but most important. Make the 
most of your time . The biggest fortunes that the world 
has seen were made by saving what other men fling away ; 
so be miserly over the moments, and redeem the gold-dust 
of time, and they will make a golden fortune of leisure. 
Be punctual . Some men are always out of step with old 
Father Time. They do not miss their appointments ; but 
they always arrive five minutes late. It would seem as if 
they were bom late, and have never been able to catch up 
their lost moments. Be methodical. Arrange, so far as 
you can, your daily work, as postmen do their letters, in 
streets and districts ; subject always, of course, to those 
special calls which the Almighty may put in your way. 
Be prompt. If your work must be done, do it at once : 
well-earned rest is sweet. Be energetic . An admirer of 
Thomas Carlyle met him once in Hyde Park, and broke 
in upon his reverie with an earnest request for a motto. 
The old man stood still for a moment, and then said, 


122 Jfoaqrfr’* ^irmnnafratrott of %trpt. 

“There is no better motto for a young man than the 
words of the old book : ‘ Whatsoever thy hand findeth 
to do, do it with thy might.’” 

But Joseph was also fervent in spirit “ He was a 
fruitful bough by a well, whose branches ran over the 
wall.” It is almost impossible to exaggerate the beauty 
of this similitude. Yonder is the scorched land. You 
dare not expect verdure, much less fruit. Suddenly you 
descry greenery, and far-reaching boughs laden with 
luscious grapes. Why? Ah! down there lies a deep, 
deep well, and the rootlets of the vine go down into 
those cool depths, and draw up a moisture which the 
torriu heat cannot exhaust. Joseph’s life was spent in a 
dry and thirsty land; there was not much in Egypt to 
nourish his spiritual life, yet to its close he bore fruit, 
which refreshed man and pleased God. Love, joy, peace, 
long-suffering, meekness, goodness, self-control, all these 
were in him even to abounding. And it was, no doubt, 
owing to his fervour of heart. It is related of a Grand 
Vizier, who in early life had been a shepherd, that he set 
apart one room in his palace for his exclusive use. No 
one was permitted to enter it. It was filled with the 
simple furniture of his early home, and the implements 
of his humble calling. And he entered it each day for 
quiet meditation on what he had been, that he might not 
be proud. So, surely, in Joseph’s palace there was a 
retired room, where he spent many hours each week in 
communion with the God of his fathers, to whom he owed 
everything he had. 

Would that more of our business men were “ fervent in 
spirit ” ! There is too little of this. Time for the ledger, 



"jfafojti Jti sqprmt.” 


123 


but none for the Bible. Time for the club or society, but 
none for the prayer-meeting. Time for converse with 
friends, but none for God. And, as the result, the bloom 
soon passes off the spirit, and the light dies away from the 
eyes, and the elasticity from the step. Men get to look 
wearied, tired, restless, and dissatisfied. Life bears a 
sombre aspect And men in this condition are not able to 
refresh weary souls that pass hard by, searching in vain for 
the rich clusters of refreshing fruit. We cannot produce 
fruit by any efforts of our own. We can only be fruitful by 
sending our rootlets down to the well. We must make 
time for private prayer and for the loving study of the 
Bible. Then the glow of fervour would never die down 
in the heart ; and the leaf would never look sere ; and 
seasonable fruit would never be wanting. Think not that 
fervour of spirit is impossible to those who live amid the 
stir of business. It was not impossible to J oseph : it 
need not be impossible to any who will adopt the simple 
rules of the Bible and of common sense. It is not 
enough to light a fire — we must feed it. And yet how 
many of my readers may have gradually sunk into habits 
of carelessness in private devotion, such as are bound to 
reduce and extinguish fervour of soul ! There is the well 
of God’s own Word ! Get near it ; strike deep into it ; 
draw up from it by loving habitual study. Thus shall you 
be able to resist the insidious agencies that would drain 
away your enthusiasm and your power. 

But Joseph was also a servant of God. God was in all 
his thoughts. “ I fear God,” was his motto. “ It was not 
you that sent me hither, but God ; and He hath made me 
. . . ruler throughout all the land of Egypt ” : this was the 


124 Jnsepli’a ^irniiuiatraiurn nf %«pt. 

inspiration of his life* f n saying that, he showed that he 
felt accountable to God for all he was and did. Now we 
surely need a principle to bind together our daily life and 
our religious exercises. So many live in business on one 
set of principles — and put on another set with their Sunday 
clothes. Where is the principle that will bring all our life 
beneath one blessed rule ? I know of no other principle 
than that laid down by the good centurion, when he said, 

“ A man under authority ” We must feel hour by hour 
that we are men and women under the authority of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. The law of gravitation rules the 
sweep of the planets round the sun, and the course of 
a grain of dust in the autumn breeze. So obedience in 
everything to our Saviour will simplify and regulate all 
things, and reduce the chaos of our life to one symmetrical 
and beautiful whole. If there is anything in your life, 
any habit, any dress, any pursuit, which Christ cannot 
approve, it must be laid aside. His name must be written 
upon all the bells of life, or they must cease to ring. 
The Apostle invested with new dignity the existence of 
the poor slaves of his time, by saying, “Ye are servants 
of Christ : do service with a will, not as unto men, but as 
unto Christ.” And it is of no consequence how menial 
your position is, you may do it for your dear Lord, 
whispering again and again, “This is for Thee, gracious 
Master, all for Thee.” What a check this would put on 
hurried and superficial work ! 

There are a good many unfaithful servants about in the 
world ; and if you rebuke them, you receive as answer, 
“ My wages are so poor “ My mistress takes no interest 
in me ” ; “I am treated as a slave ” j “I shall leave as 


“ Sfethmy fire Qtttb” 


125 


soon as I can.” Stop! Who put you where you are? 
Had Christ anything to do with it ? If not,, how came 
you there without asking his leave ? If He had, how dare 
you leave unless you are sure He calls you away ? And 
as for service — why do you serve? For money, or thanks, 
or habit ? No, for Christ. Then do your best for Him. 
Every room you enter is a room in his temple. Every 
vessel you touch is as holy as the vessels of the Last 
Supper. Every act is as closely noticed by Him as the 
breaking of the alabaster box. On every fragment of your 
life you may write, “ Sacred to the memory of Jesus 
Christ.” This would give a new dignity to toil, and a new 
meaning to life. Let us never forget how the thought of 
our dear Lord will equalize all life, and act as the comple- 
ment of its needs. Those who are called as free, are slaves 
to Him 5 and those who are slaves to men are free in Him. 
And all life reaches its true unity and ideal just in so far as 
He is its Head, and Lord (1 Cor. vii. 22). 

II. Notice the Confession of the Egyptians. 
“Thou hast saved our lives” (Gen. xlvii. 25). What a 
splendid endowment is coolness, foresight, presence of 
mind ! They are the gift of God ; and they have enabled 
many men to be the saviours of their fellows. That 
engineer had it who, some time ago, turned off the steam 
from the broken cylinder on the ocean steamer that seemed 
doomed. Livingstone and Stanley have had it among 
travellers ; and it often saved them and their followers 
from infuriated mobs of savages. Cromwell and Wellington 
had it among soldiers, and it enabled them to extricate 
their men from positions in which death seemed certain. 


126 Iftracplr's Jl&mittt&iratiott at (Kjjjijrt. 

Cavour, Pitt, and Bright have had it pre-eminently among 
statesmen. Any of these might have been addressed in 
the words of the Egyptians : “ Thou hast saved our lives.” 
But there is something higher than this. As I see these 
Egyptians crowding round Joseph with these words upon 
their lips, it makes me think of Him of whom Joseph was 
but a type. Joseph lay in the pit j and from the pit was 
raised to give bread to the brethren who had rejected him, 
and to a nation of Gentiles. Jesus lay in the grave ; and 
from its dark abyss He was raised to give salvation to 
his brethren the Jews, and to the millions of Gentile 
people. Already I hear the sound of countless myriads, 
as they fall before the sapphire throne, and cry, “ Thou 
hast saved us ! ,J The Egyptian name of Joseph meant, 
11 the Saviour of the world ” y but the salvation wrought by 
him is hardly to be named in the same breath with that 
which Jesus has achieved. Joseph saved Egypt by 
sagacity ; Jesus saved us by laying down his life. Joseph’s 
bread cost him nothing ; but the bread which Jesus gives 
cost Him Calvary, Joseph was well repaid by money, 
cattle, and land ; but Jesus takes his wares to the market 
of the poor, and sells them to those who have no money 
or price. He can supply all our need. His only condition 
is that He should do it freely. To offer Him anything in 
exchange is to close all dealings with Him. But if you 
are willing to go without gold in your hand, and with an 
empty sack, He will give without stint, with both hands, 
pressed down, and running over. “ He will fill the hungry 
with good things ; but the rich He will send empty away.” 
“ Blessed are ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of 
heaven.” 


®(je of Ctrmt. 127 

III. Remark the Resolve of these Egyptians. 
“ Let us find grace ; and we will be Pharaoh’s servants.” 
“Thou hast saved our lives ; and we will be thy servants.” 
How could we state better the great argument for our 
consecration to our Saviour ? “ He has saved us : ought 

we not to be his servants?” 

There are many arguments by which we might urge 
acceptance of the yoke of Christ. There is such dignity 
in it : the old butler is proud to wear the livery of a ducal 
house ; but what livery is so worthy as that which Christ’s 
servants wear ? “I bear the marks of the Lord Jesus.” 
There is such happiness in it ; it is perfect freedom. To 
be free of Christ is to grind in slavery. To obey Christ — is 
to go forth into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. 

But I pass by these arguments now to present one more 
cogent, more pathetic, more moving. It is this : Jesus 
has saved you — will you not serve Him ? These are the 
successive steps : mark them well ! Recognize that Jesus 
bought you to be his by shedding his own blood as your 
ransom-price, and by giving his flesh for you and for the 
life of the world. Then give yourself entirely to Him, 
saying, humbly, lovingly, trustfully, “I do now, and here, 
offer a present unto Thee, O Lord, myself, my soul and 
body, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice to Thee.” 
From that moment you are no more your own, but his ; 
He takes what we yield, at the moment of yielding ; reckon 
on Him to keep you, and to supply all your need. Take 
Jesus to be moment by moment your Saviour, Friend, 
and Lord; and yield to Him an obedience which shall 
cover the entire area of your being, and shall comprehend 
every second of your time. When solicited to leave 


128 fosqxlj's JUnttmafraftmt of (Bgirpt. 

Him, appropriate the words of the ancient Hebrew slave, 
and say, “ I love my Master ; I will not go out free.” 

He deserves this. For you He lay in Bethlehem’s 
manger. For you He was homeless and poor. For you 
He sweat the drops of blood and poured out his soul unto 
death. For you He pleads in heaven. “I beseech you 
then, by the mercies of God, that ye present yourselves to 
Him, living sacrifices, which is your reasonable service.” 


CHAPTER XI. 

(Genesis xlvii. i-ii.) 

" We live in deeds, not years ; in thoughts, not breaths ; 

In feelings, not in figures on a dial ; 

We should count time by heart's throbs. He most lives 
Who thinks feels the noblest, acts the best." 

P. J. Bailey. 

E always turn with interest from an illustrious 
man to ask about his father and his mother. 
The father of Martin Luther and the mother 
of the Wesleys hang as familiar portraits in 
the picture-gallery of our fancy. It is not, 
therefore, to be wondered at that we find in the Bible 
something to gratify this innocent curiosity ; and especially 
in the story of Joseph we are permitted to glance behind 
the scenes, and to consider the relations between him and 
his old father, Jacob. 

I. Joseph’s Undiminished Filial Love. From the first 
moment that Joseph saw his brethren among the crowd of 
all nationalities that gathered in the corn-mart, it was 
evident that his love to his father burnt with undiminished 
fervour. Those brethren little guessed how eager he was to 
learn if the old man was yet alive, nor what a thrill of 
comfort shot through his heart when they happened to say, 
“ Behold, our youngest brother is this day with his father/* 
i 



l3 o JPatljec* 

Evidently, then, though twenty-five years had passed since 
he beheld that shrunken,' limping, yet beloved form, his 
father was living still. 

And when his brethren came the second time, they must 
have been surprised to notice the delicate tenderness with 
which he asked them of their welfare, and said, “Is your 
father well, the old man of whom ye spake? is he yet 
alive?” Yes ; and Judah little realized what a tender 
chord he struck, and how it vibrated, almost beyond 
endurance, to his touch, when he spoke again and again of 
the father at home, an old man, who so tenderly loved the 
young lad, the only memorial of his mother: that father 
who had been so anxious lest mischief should befal him ; 
and whose grey hairs would go down with sorrow to the 
grave, unless he came back safe. It was this repeated 
allusion to his father that wrought on Joseph’s feelings so 
greatly as to break him down. “ He could not refrain 
himself.” And so the very next thing he said, after the 
astounding announcement, “I am Joseph,” was, “Doth 
my father yet live? ” And in the tumultuous words which 
followed, words throbbing with passion and pathos, sen- 
tences about the absent father came rolling out along with 
utterances of reconciliation and forgiveness to his brethren : 
just as the swollen mountain flood hurries along in its 
eddies, boulders, timber, and everything that barred the 
way. “ Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto 
him : Thus saith thy son Joseph, ‘ God hath made me lord 
of all Egypt : come down unto me ; tarry not.’ . . . And 
ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all 
that ye have seen; and ye shall haste, and bring down 
my father hither.” 


The weeks and months that intervened must have been 
full of feverish anxiety to Joseph ; and when at last he 
heard that the old man had reached the frontier of Egypt, 
in one of the waggons which, with thoughtful consideration, 
he had sent to fetch him, he “made ready his chariot, 
and went up to meet Israel his father.” Oh, that meeting ! 
If the old man was sitting in some recess of the lumbering 
wain, weary with the long journey, how he would revive 
when they said “ Joseph is coming ” ! I think he would 
surely dismount, and wait, straining his aged eyes at the 
approaching company, from out the midst of which there 
came the bejewelled ruler to fall on his neck and weep 
there a good while. “ Let me die,” said he, as he looked 
at him, from head to foot with glad, proud, satisfied eyes : 
“ let me die, since I have seen thy face ; because thou art 
yet alive.” I wonder how he felt, as he recalled his sad 
lament, “ All these things are against me.” 

But this was not all. Joseph loved his father too well to 
be ashamed of him. When Pharaoh heard of the arrival 
of his father and brethren, he seemed mightily pleased, 
and he directed Joseph to see to their welfare. “ The land 
of Egypt is before thee ; in the best of the land make thy 
father and brethren to dwell ; in the land of Goshen let 
them dwell : and if thou knowcst any men of activity 
among them, then let them be rulers over my cattle.” 
After this Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him 
before Pharaoh. 

We cannot but admire the noble frankness with which 
Joseph introduced his father to the splendid monarch, 
habituated to the manners of the foremost court of the 
world. There was a great social gulf fixed between Egypt 


1 32 yatlxer. 

and Canaan, the court and the tent, the monarch and the 
shepherd. And if Joseph had been any less noble or 
simple than he was, he might have shrunk from bringing 
the two extremes together; might have feared to recal the 
comparative lowliness of his origin ; might have been 
ashamed of his relations, who needed to become pensioners 
on the land of his adoption. But all these thoughts were 
forgotten in presence of another ; this withered, halting, 
famine-pursued man was his father. 

There is a great laxity in these respects in all classes of 
our community, but especially among the children of 
working men in large industrial towns. The young people 
are able to earn such good wages as to be largely im 
dependent of their parents. And when they have paid 
some small amount for their keep, they are apt to imagine 
that their parents have no further claim. They forget the 
long arrears of obligation. They do not care to remember 
the cost of those long years of helpless childhood, when 
they were only a burden and a care. They are unmindful 
of the tender kindness that nursed them through long and 
dangerous illnesses; that freely sacrificed sleep and rest; 
that thought them angels, saints, and heroes ; that bore with 
their petulance and fretfulness ; or that sat far into the night, 
contriving dresses, playthings, and other pleasant surprises. 

In some cases the behaviour of grown-up children to their 
parents is still more dishonourable. It is a common thing 
to see men rise in a few years from obscurity to consider- 
able wealth. With increasing money there comes a vast 
change in a man’s social position. He puts the magic 
letters “Esq.” after his name. He lives in a fine house, 



farirfj before JlfranurJr. 133 

and gives large parties. He keeps his carriage, and sends 
his children to expensive schools. But what of his aged 
parents? He allows them a meagre annuity; but takes 
care to keep them out of his family and his home — for, to 
tell the truth, he is rather ashamed of them. It is a false 
shame indeed! And the man who does so is almost 
certain, unconsciously, to say or do something which will 
reveal to his new associates his lowly origin far more readily 
than the mere presence of his parents at his board could 
do. I prefer the noble magnanimity of Joseph, who seemed 
proud to introduce the withered, crippled patriarch to his 
mighty friend and liege lord. 

Young people, honour your parents ! Do not treat them 
the worse, just because you know they love you enough to 
bear with your impertinences. The politeness is mere veneer 
which is not gentle to near kin. Do not call them by 
slang or unmeaning names: glory in the noble titles, 
“Father,” “Mother.” They may have their peculiarities and 
faults ; but it is ungenerous and unkind to dwell on them. 
It is possible so to fix your attention on these minor 
points as to become oblivious to many noble qualities, 
which are more than a compensation. Imitate the sons of 
Noah in the filial respect which flung a mantle even over 
their father’s sin. 

II. Pharaoh’s Question. “How old art thou?” 
This was Pharaoh’s first inquiry, as Jacob entered his 
presence. It was, perhaps, suggested by the patriarch’s 
withered look and bent form. It is a question that often 
rises to our lips ; but it is suggested by a very false standard 
of estimating the length of a man’s life. 


134 Jxr«fV« Ifai&cr* 

The length of a life is not measured by the number of 
its days ; no, but by the way in which its days have been 
used 

" We live in thoughts, not breaths ; 

In feelings, not in figures on a dial." 

Some live for many years , and at the end have little or 
nothing to show for them. Take out the wasted hours, 
hours of drowsy lethargy, hours of luxurious sloth, and 
hours of self-indulgence ; and only a few hours of real life 
are left. There are men who will be seventy next birthday, 
but who have only lived six months out of the whole time. 
It is surprising in Liverpool to see the great bales of cotton 
compressed under the vast pressure of the hydraulic press ; 
and so lives shrink into a very insignificant space, beneath 
the mighty pressure of reality. Our real life dates, not 
from our first birth, but from our second. All before that 
counts for nothing. 

Others live for few years , but they have crowded them 
with strenuous, noble life: they have been punctual, 
industrious, methodical : they have redeemed the time ; 
they have treasured the moments with frugal and miserly 
care ) they have made the most of odd bits which others 
would have flung away as useless — and, as the result, they 
have much to show. What books they have read ! What 
deeds they have done ! What ministries they have set 
afoot ! What friends they have made ! What characters 
they have built up ! They have lived long. They will be 
thirty next birthday ; but in those few years they have lived 
the life which most men live in sixty years. 

Permit a stranger to ask of each reader, standing in the 
palace of life, “ How old art thou ? ” 


*35 


“$0far hlfo art ifroa? 

How old art thou? Seventeen ? That is indeed a 
critical time. It is the formative time : what thou art 
now, thou wilt be. Thou art leaving the sheltered bay 
of early life to launch out into the great ocean. Beware I 
it is winsome-looking, but it is treacherous. Be sure and 
take on board the great Master, Christ : none but He can 
pilot thee through the shoals and quicksands which lie 
hidden on thy course. Take on board none but those 
whom He chooses as the crew. 

How old art thou ? Twenty-one ? That is often de- 
scribed as the time of a man’s majority, or independence. 
Never forget that there is at least One of whom thou canst 
never be independent, Thou mayest disown Him, and go 
into a far country to waste his substance and thine own in 
riotous living ; but thou wilt have to come back to Him at 
last. There is no true rest, or food, or honour, outside his 
palace-home. Prodigal child, come home ! Come home ! 

How old art thou? Thirty ? It was at that age that 
our Lord emerged from obscurity : and think how many 
men have lived a great life and died before they reached 
this age. Alexander among generals ; Kirke White among 
singers; McCheyne and Spencer among ministers. What 
art thou doing in the world ? Come, make haste ! Thy 
life will soon slip away. Take care, lest at the close thou 
be constrained to say, “ I have spent my life in laboriously 
doing trifles.” 

“ ‘ Tis a mournful story, 

Thus in the car of pensive eve to tell 
Of morning's firm resolves the vanished glory, 

Hope’s honey left within the with ’ring bell, 

And plants of mercy dead, that might have bloomed so well. 

But this need not be your sad retrospect, if only you 


136 foxtpY* Jatlrcr* 

will yield your whole being to the Lord Jesus, asking Him 
to keep down your self-life, and to think in your brain, to 
live in your heart, to work through your life, and to fulfil in 
you the good pleasure of his will, “and the work of faith 
with power.” 

How old art thou? Forty ? Take care! Very 
few are ever converted who have reached the downward 
slopes of forty. If thou art not Christ’s yet, the chances 
of thy becoming his lessen at a tremendous ratio every 
week. 

How old art thou ? Fifty ? Sixty ? Seventy ? The 
snows are beginning to silver thy head. Familiar pursuits 
must be abandoned. Familiar places must be visited no 
more. Affairs once thy pride must be given over to the 
stronger nerve of others. The dip in yonder path shows 
how near is the valley of the shadow of death, with its 
dark, dark river. How art thou going to meet it ? Shiver- 
ing, cringing, cowering, the victim of an irresistible fate? 
Or with brave welcome, such as animated the worn 
prisoner of the Mamertine dungeon? “I have fought a 
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the 
faith ; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of right- 
eousness.” Old friends, we look on you to teach us 
how to await our end, and how to die. 

It is a solemn question, How old art thou ? It is well to 
face the growing fewness of our years ; to see how envious 
Time is eating away the narrow shoal on which we stand. 
My favourite piece in all Milton’s works is his address to 
Time; and often have I loved to read the passage in 
Charles Kingsley’s Life, which tells how on his dying bed 
he read it again and again, — 


Jacob's ^itatoer. 137 

" Fly, envious Time, till thou run out of race." 

Oh to be able to say that without tremor or misgiving ! 

III. Jacob’s Answer. “ And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, 
The .days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred 
and thirty years; few and evil have the days of the 
years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days 
of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their 
pilgrimage.” They had been Jew in comparison with 
those of his ancestors. Terah reached the age of 205; 
Abraham of 175; Isaac of 180. But “the whole age of 
Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.” They 
had been evil. As a young man he was wrenched from 
his dearest associations of home and friends, and went 
forth alone to spend the best years of his life as a stranger 
in a strange land. Arduous and difficult was his service to 
Laban, consumed in the day by drought, and in the sleep- 
less night-vigils by frost. He escaped from Laban with 
difficulty ; and no sooner had he done so than he had to 
encounter his incensed and impetuous brother. In the 
agony of that dread crisis he met with the Angel Wrestler, 
who touched the sinew of his thigh, so that he halted to 
the end of his life. These calamities had hardly passed 
when he was involved in extreme danger with the 
Canaanites of Shechem, and passed through scenes 
which have blanched his hair, furrowed his cheeks, 
and scarred his heart. Thus he came to Luz, and 
Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, died, and was buried beneath 
an oak, which was thenceforth called the Oak of Weeping. 
“And they journeyed from Bethel, and there was but a 
little way to come to Ephrath, and Rachel (his favourite 


138 9 o*t$V* Jatljcr. 

wife) bare a son ; and it came to pass, as her soul was 
departing, for she died, that she called his name Ben-oni, 
the son of my sorrow.” A little further on he came 
to Mamre, arriving just in time to bear the remains of his 
own father to the grave. And what sorrows befel him 
after that, have already touched our hearts, as we have 
studied the wondrous history of his son, Joseph. Reuben 
involved his name in shameful disgrace. Judah trailed 
the family honour in the mire of sensual appetite. To all 
appearance Joseph had been torn to pieces by wild beasts. 
The dissensions of his sons must have rent his heart. And 
even after his meeting with his long-lost son he was to 
linger for seventeen years a pensioner on the bounty of 
the king of Egypt : far from the glorious heritage which 
had been promised to his race. 

Such was the exterior of Jacobis life. Few have trod a 
path more paved with jagged flints, or hound around their 
brows a crown more full of thorns. You would have called 
his life a failure. Compare it with the lot of Esau; and 
what a contrast it presents ! Jacob obtained the birthright; 
but what a life of suffering and disaster was his ? Esau lost 
the birthright; but he had all that heart could wish. 
Wealth, royalty, a line of illustrious sous— these were the 
portion of his cup. The thirty-sixth chapter of Genesis 
contains a list of the royal dukes of his line. How often 
must Esau have pitied his brother 1 “ My poor brother, he 
was always visionary, counting on the future, building 
castles in the air; as for myself, I say, make the best of 
this world while it lasts. Let us eat and drink, for 
to-morrow we may die.” 

And yet when this same Jacob stands before Pharaoh, 


^aroir Westell 139 

the greatest monarch of the world bends eagerly to catch 
his blessing. “Jacob blessed Pharaoh.” I know that 
Jacob in his earlier life was crafty, a mere bargain-maker, a 
trickster ; but all seems to have been eliminated in the 
fierce crucible of suffering through which he had passed; 
and he had reached a grandeur or moral greatness which 
impressed even the haughty Pharaoh. Esau would never 
have been able to bless Pharaoh. But this way-worn 
pilgrim can now do that which his wealthy and successful 
brother never could have done. “Without contradiction, 
the less is blessed of the greater.” Evidently, then, Jacob 
was a greater man than the greatest monarch of his time. 
There is, therefore, a greatness which is wholly inde- 
pendent of those adventitious circumstances which we 
sometimes associate with it. The ermine does not make 
a judge; a crown does not make a king; nor does 
wealth, or rank, or birth make a great man. Jacob was 
one of the truly great. He was a royal man with a 
Divine patent of royalty. God Himself said, “ Thy name 
shall be no more called Jacob, but Israel (a prince of 
God), for as a prince hast thou power with God, and with 
men.” 

Three things made Jacob royal ; and will do as much for 
us. (1) Prayer. On the moorland strewn with boulders, 
he saw in his dreams the mighty rocks pile themselves into 
a heaven-touching ladder. This struck the keynote of his 
life. He ever after lived at the foot of the ladder of 
prayer, up which the angels sped to carry his petitions, and 
down which they came, with beautiful feet, to bring the 
golden handfuls of blessing. Learn to pray without 




i4° JFatter. 

ceasing. It is the secret of greatness. He who is oft in the 
audience-chamber of the great King becomes kinglike. 

(2) Suffering. His nature was marred by selfish, base, 
and carnal elements. He took unlawful advantage of his 
famished brother ; deceived his aged father ; increased his 
property at the expense of his uncle ; worked his ends by 
mean and crafty means. But sorrow ate away all these 
things, and gave him a new dignity. So does it work still 
on those who have received the new nature, and who 
meekly leam the lesson which God's love designs to teach 
them. Do not shrink from pain and sorrow; they come to 
crown you. The Lamb sits on the throne to-day because 
He was slain ; and the throne is reserved for those who 
have learnt to suffer with Him, and with Him to die. 

(3) Contact with Christ. “There wrestled a man with 
him until the breaking of the day.” Who was He? 
Surely none less than the Angel Jehovah, whose face may 
not be seen, or his name known. It was the Lord 
Himself, anticipating his incarnation, and intent on 
ridding his servant of the evil and weakness which 
had clung so long and so closely to him, sapping his 
spiritual life. And from that hour Jacob was “ Israel.” Ah, 
my readers, be sure of this, that Jesus, the immortal lover 
of souls, is wrestling with you, longing to rid you of 
littleness and selfishness, and to lift you also to a royal life. 
Yield to Him, lest He be compelled to touch the sinew 
of your strength. If you let Him have his way, He will 
make you truly Princes with God ; and even those above 
you in this world’s rank will gladly gather round you for 
the sake of the spiritual blessings you shall bestow. 


CHAPTER XII. 


Jhmplj at tht Biatlj-Steb of Jarob, 

{Genesis xlvit. 27-31.) 

“ This hath He done ; and shall we not adore Him ? 

This shall He do ; and can we still despair ? 

Come, let us quickly fling ourselves before Him, 

Cast at His feet the burden of our care. 

“Yea, thro’ life, death, thro’ sorrow, and thro' sinning. 

He shall suffice me, for He hath sufficed : 

Christ is the end— for Christ was the beginning ; 

Christ the beginning— for the end is Christ.” 

F. W. H. Myers. 



1 ACOB dwelt in the land of Goshen ; there his sons 
led their flocks over the rich pasture-lands, and 
laid the foundation of the great wealth which has 
ever been a distinguishing mark of this highly- 
favoured nation. “They grew and multiplied 
exceedingly.” So seventeen uneventful years went by. 
And as the old man became more and more infirm, his 
spirit was cheered and sustained by the love of Joseph, and 
by the satisfied joy of his heart in the honour and splendour 
of his soil. Evidently Joseph was the stay of that waning 
life; and it is not remarkable therefore that the patriarch 
summoned him not once, or even twice, but thrice to his 
death-bed. It is on those visits that we may dwell for a 
little now. 

Evidently there is something to repay us. The Bible is 


142 


iJosepfr at l\)Z gjtatfj-gcb of ffacotr. 

a book of life. Its pages are devoted to the deeds rather 
than the deaths of its heroes. Their biographies fill whole 
books, whilst single verses are enough for their dying 
words. Whenever, therefore, a death-scene is described 
with some minuteness, we may be sure that there is some- 
thing which demands our attentive heed. So it is here. 

I. Joseph’s First Visit. — “The time drew nigh that 
Israel must die." How inexorable is the “must” of death t 
There is no possibility of evading its summons. When it 
lays its long, cold hand on the shoulder of the Ancient 
Mariner, however eager the guests to hear his story, he 
must arise and follow. By many years had Jacob exceeded 
the ordinary span of modem life; and, in spite of much 
hardship and privation, like the apple at the extremity 
of the bough, which eludes the hand of the gatherer, 
he had evaded the reach of death ; but this could not be 
for ever. The failing powers of his life gave warning 
that the silver cord was strained to breaking, and that the 
machinery of nature was on the point of giving way. 
He must die. 

But his death was a rift in the dark clouds that veiled 
the future world from his sons and their children, giving 
them a glimpse of its reality and beauty. And we can 
gather some of the conceptions which must have flashed 
across the mind of Joseph, as he obeyed the summons of 
his father, and stood beside that dying bed. 

One of the most sublime verses in the New Testament 
declares that “Christ has abolished death, and brought life 
and immortality to light through the Gospel.” There is a 
most inspiring rhythm in the words; but we must not 


& dlnrtous flrnsperL 143 

suppose that the Gospel has revealed that concerning 
which nothing was previously known. Long before our 
Lord walked this world, carrying at his girdle the keys of 
Resurrection and Life, men cherished the hope of eternal 
life : the Gospel simply threw fuller light on that which 
had been before partially hidden, as the rising sun reveals 
the clear outlines of the landscape which had lain in- 
distinct and hazy in the grey dawn. Christ drew from the 
window the curtain, through which the morning light had 
been feebly struggling to the sleeper’s eyes. 

The evidence of this is not far to seek. Daniel teaches 
in 'plainest language the truth of a general resurrection to 
endless life or endless shame. Ecclesiastes closes with an 
explicit statement of the spirit’s return to its giver, and of 
final judgment. The book of Job, whatever date may be 
assigned to it, has been called a very hymn of immor- 
tality : he knew at least that his “Redeemer lived, and 
that he should stand up at the last upon the earth, and 
after his skin had been destroyed, yet from his flesh he 
should see God” (Job xix. 25, 26, R.v.). In the Book of 
Psalms we have no uncertain evidence of the tenacity with 
which pious Jews clung to these hopes. “Thou wilt not 
leave my soul in sheol ; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy 
One to see corruption. Thou wilt show me the path of 
life” (Psa. xvi. 10 , it, r.v.). And it is just this faith in and 
yearning after a life beyond the grave which is the true 
key-note of the lives of the three great patriarchs who 
lie together in Machpelah’s ancient cave. 

Why did they wander to and fro in the land of promise 
as sojourners in a strange land? Why were they content 
to have no inheritance — no, not so much as a place to put 


144 Joseph at the letith-geir alganb. 

their feet on? Why did Abraham dwell with Isaac and 
Jacob in frail, shifting tents, rather than in towns like 
Sodom and Gomorrah? What did Abraham mean when 
he said to the sons of Heth, “I am a stranger and a 
sojourner with you"? And what was the thought in 
Jacob’s mind, when, in the presence of the haughty 
Pharaoh, he described his life as a “pilgrimage”? The 
answer is clearly given in the roll-call of God’s heroes 
contained in Hebrews xi. : “ They sought a country, a 
fatherland.” And they were so absorbed with this one 
thought, that they could not settle to any inheritance in 
Canaan. Their refusal to have anything more than a 
grave in the soil of the promised land shows how eagerly 
they looked for the land that was very far off. 

At first, no doubt, they thought that Canaan was to be 
the land of promise. But when they waited for it year 
after year, and still it was withheld, they looked into the 
deed of gift again, and learned that there were depths in 
it of which they had never dreamed ; and as they .still 
watched and waited, the gauzy mists of time parted, and 
in the dim haze there loomed upon their vision a land of 
which the land of milk and honey was a poor type; and 
instead of a city built by human hands, there arose before 
them the fair vision of the crystal walls and the pearly 
gates of the city which hath foundations, whose builder 
and maker is God, and which He hath prepared for them 
that love Him. Yonder was their fatherland. Yonder 
their true city. Yonder their home. And their pilgrim- 
life bore evidence to the reality and certainty of their 
faith. 

This belief in “ the city of God,” of which in after-days 


■* (8/ljese nil hifib tit JFattfr.” 


i4S 


Augustine wrote on the coast of Africa, and which has 
sustained so many saintly souls, animated their lives, 
cheered them in death, and cast a bright ray across the 
gloom of the grave. “ These all died in faith, not having 
received the promises, but having seen them afar off (as 
the minarets and parapets of some distant city), and were 
persuaded of them and embraced them.” The Revised 
Version says, “ They greeted them from afar,” as the 
wanderer greets his longed-for home, when he sees it 
from afar. With what eagerness, with what earnest 
yearnings, with what fond anticipation, must these weary 
wanderers have looked for heaven ! Well might Jacob, on 
this his death-bed, stay the progress of his parting exhor- 
tations to say, “ I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.” 
This took the bitterness out of his death. 

And notice, Jacob did not regard the future life as a 
mere state of existence stript of all those associations which 
make life worth the having. Indeed, in this he seems to 
have had truer thoughts than many who are found in 
Christian churches. He said, “ I am to be gathered unto 
my people.” He surely did not mean simply that he was 
to be buried in their tomb, for he expresses that thought 
afterwards in the words, “ Bury me with my fathers in the 
cave of Machpelah ” Nay, he meant to say that for him 
the city to which he went was the gathering-place of his 
clan, the rendezvous of elect souls, the home of all who 
were his people because they were God's. 

Year after year the people have been gathering there, 
as highland clans in olden days were gathered to a central 
trysting-place by the bearers of the Fiery Cross. All 
noble, saintly souls are assembled yonder, and await us, 

K 


*4 6 Jcrseplr at tlr* geatb-glsir nf Jacob, 

And when we leave this world, it will not be to go into a 
cold, unsympathizing, grave-like realm, where no voice 
shall greet, no smile welcome us. But we shall go to our 
people; those whom we have loved and lost; those who 
are awaiting our coming with fond affection, and who will 
administer a choral entrance to us into that world of 
everlasting re-union. 

But it was not simply to express these hopes that the 
dying patriarch summoned the beloved Joseph to -his side. 
The father wanted to bind the son by a solemn promise 
not to have him buried in the land of his exile, but to carry 
him back to that lone cave, which seemed an outpost in 
the hostile and distant land of Canaan. For seventeen 
years Jacob had been familiar with Egypt’s splendid 
temples, obelisks, and pyramids ; he had been surrounded 
with all the comforts that Joseph’s filial love could devise 
or his munificence execute ; but nothing could make him 
forget that distant cave, which was before Mamre, in the 
land of Canaan. To him interment in the most splendid 
pyramid in Egypt was not for a moment to be compared 
with burial in that solitary and humble sepulchre, where 
the mortal remains of Abraham and Sarah, of Isaac and 
Rebekah, and of the faithful Leah, lay waiting the day of 
resurrection. 

Human nature was not different then from what it is 
today. Our truest home is still by the graves of the 
beloved dead. Wherever we wander, our hearts return 
thither, as the eye of the sailor to the Pole-star. And for 
this cause, many a warrior, dying in some distant land, has 
asked that his remains might be placed, not in the splendid 
Minster or the national Walhalla, but in the quiet country 


147 


®Ijc Canftircnre of JIacalr. 

graveyard, where the moss-covered tombstones repeat in 
successive generations, the family name. It was natural, 
then, for Jacob to wish to be buried in Machpelah. 

But there ivas something more than natural sentiment. 
He was a man of faith. He knew and cherished the 
ancient promise made by God to His friend, the patriarch 
Abraham, that Canaan should become the possession of 
his seed. That promise was the old man’s stay. He knew 
that Canaan and not Egypt was the destined abiding-place 
of his people. They would not always live in Egypt, how- 
ever fertile its Goshens or friendly its peoples. The trumpet 
would sound the summons of their departure. If, then, he 
were buried in Egypt, he would be left behind, a stranger 
amongst strangers. No, this could not be. If they are 
to leave, he must leave before them. If they are to settle 
in the land of promise, he will go first as their forerunner. 
And though he could not share the perils and pains and 
glories of the exodus, he will be there to meet them when 
in after-years their bands enter upon their inheritance. 

“ If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray 
thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly 
with me. Bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt : but I will 
lie with my fathers 3 and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt 
and bury me in their burying-place.” What son could 
resist that appeal ? Can any of us resist the last appeals 
of our beloved? Joseph was too good and tender to 
hesitate for a single moment. “ And he said, I will do as 
thou hast said.” But the old man was not content with a 
mere promise. “And he said, Swear unto me. And he 
sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed’s 
head.” So ended Joseph’s first visit to his dying father. 


143 Jfxrscplj at i \)t gcatfr-grtr ai $&tob. 

II. Joseph's Second Visit. Tidings came to the Prime 
Minister of Egypt that his father was sick and wished to 
see him. And he went to him without delay, taking with 
him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. He, no doubt, 
guessed that his father’s sickness was the last stage of his 
decay ; and the form of the message may have been 
agreed on by them in previous conversations as the 
significant sign from one to the other that the sands of 
time had nearly run out in that aged, battered, and time' 
worn body. 

When Joseph arrived at his father’s dwelling, the gift of 
his own munificence, the aged patriarch seems to have 
been lying still, with closed eyes, in the extreme of 
physical exhaustion. He was too weak to notice any 
of those familiar forms that stood around him. But 
when one told him and said, “Behold, thy son Joseph is 
come,” the sound of that loved name revived him, and he 
made a great effort, and, propped by pillows, sat up upon 
the bed. 

There was clearly no decay in his power of recollection, 
as the old man reviewed the past. Again he seemed to be 
lying at the foot of the mystic ladder, with its angels troop- 
ing up and down, whilst God Almighty stood above, and 
pledged Himself to make him fruitful, and to give to him 
and his seed the land in which his forefathers had been 
strangers, for an everlasting possession. No lapse of time 
could erase the impression which those words had made. 
Even though he had lived to out-measure the years of a 
Methuselah, they would still ring in musical cadence within 
his heart. And had not God fulfilled them a thousand 
times over, so that not one good thing had failed ? — and 


149 


(Ephraim anh ^lanaasrh. 

his seed was sure of the land, though as yet far removed 
from its actual possession. And as his recollection embraced 
the past, it was also vividly alive to more recent incidents 
in the family history. He did not forget that Joseph, who 
leant over his dying form, had two sons ; and he announced 
his intention of adopting them as his own. “ Thy two sons, 
which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt, before I 
came unto thee into Egypt, are mine : as Reuben and 
Simeon, they shall be mine.” By that act, whilst Joseph’s 
name was expunged from the map of Canaan, yet he 
himself became possessed of a double portion of his area, 
because Ephraim and Manasseh would henceforth stand 
there as his representatives. 

And when he had said so much his mind wandered away. 
He saw again that scene on the hilly road to Bethlehem, 
just outside the little village, where his onward progress 
was suddenly halted, and all his camp was hushed into the 
stillness of a dread suspense, as the life of the beloved 
Rachel trembled in the balance. He could never forget 
that moment. His dying eyes could see again the spot 
where he buried her, “ there in the way of Ephrath.” 

'* Be near me when all else is from me drifting, 

Stars, sky, home-pictures, days of shade and shine, 

And kindly faces to my own uplifting, 

The love that answers mine. 

■ ' Suffice it, if my good and ill unreckoned. 

And both forgiven by Thine abounding grace, 

I find myself by hands familiar beckoned, 

Unto my fitting place." 

Whittier. 

When the old man came back from his pathetic reverie, 
the first sight which arrested him was the presence of the 


150 Josepfj at tjje $eatlj-|letr of Jfatafr. 

awe-struck boys, who were drinking in every look and word, 
with fixed and almost breathless heed. 

“ Who are these ? ” said Israel. 

“They are my sons,” was the proud and immediate 
reply, “ whom God hath given me in this place.” 

And Israel said, “ Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and 
I will bless them.” 

And so they were brought near, and the aged lips were 
pressed on the young foreheads, and the aged arms were 
put feebly around the young and slender forms. And then 
again the dying man wandered back to a grief which had 
left as deep a scar as his sorrow for the beloved Rachel, 
and turning to Joseph, he reminded him of the long years 
during which he thought he would never look again upon 
his face. But now, God, who may keep men waiting, but 
loves to fill their lives ultimately with blessing, had shown 
him also his seed. 

With prophetic insight he crossed his hands, as the two 
lads waited before him for his blessing, so that his right 
found its way to the head of the younger, whilst his left 
alighted on that of the elder. By that act he reversed the 
verdict of their birth, and gave the younger precedence 
over the elder. It was useless for Joseph to remonstrate, 
and to urge the claims of his first-bom. The old man 
knew quite well what he was doing, and that he was on the 
line of the divine purpose. " I know it, my son, I know it ; 
he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great : 
but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and 
his seed shall become a multitude of nations.” 

There was nothing arbitrary in this • for in all likelihood 
there were qualities in Ephraim, as afterwards in his 


decendants, which naturally put him in the foremost 
place. The Old Testament is full of hope for younger 
sons: Jacob was a younger son; so was Moses; so was 
Gideon ; so was David. It is not an unmitigated blessing 
to be born into the world with a great name and estate 
and traditions; it is better to trust in one’s own right arm 
and in the blessing of the Almighty. God is no respecter 
of persons, and He will lift the youngest into the front rank 
if only he sees the qualities which warrant it; whilst He 
will put back the foremost into the lower ranks if they are 
deficient in noble attributes. Thus the first become last, 
and the last first. 

With hands crossed over the young heads the patriarch 
spoke sweet and grateful words of the . Angel who had 
redeemed him from all evil ; and his words are so chosen, 
and that name is so placed in parallelism with the name of 
God who had shepherded him all his life long, that we are 
convinced that he is speaking of the Angel-Jehovah, who 
is so often referred to on the pages of the Old Testament ; 
and who can be no other than the Second Person of the 
ever-blessed Trinity, whose delights have always been with 
the sons of men, and who, before He took on Himself the 
form of a man, was often found in that of an angel. 

We, too, have an Angel guardian, yea, the Angel, who 
is Jesus Christ the Lord. If you want to be redeemed 
from all evil, especially from the evil of sin, make much of 
Him. And if He began his redemptive work long years 
before He suffered, died, and rose, how much more will 
He do for us now that He sits on the right hand of God ! 
Take heart, you who are anxious about your daily food. 
Listen to the testimony of this dying man, that God had 


i5 2 Jlrrseplx at tfee gcatiy-getr uf Jaroh. 

fed him all his life long unto that day. And if God did so 
for a hundred and forty-seven years, surely He will not 
forget you during the briefer span of your few days. 

There was one thing only more to say, before this 
memorable interview ended. Years before, Jacob had 
become embroiled through the dastardly treachery of his 
sons, in conflict with the original inhabitants of Canaan, 
and had been compelled, in self-defence, to acquire by force 
a parcel of land, with his sword and with his bow. This he 
gave as an additional portion to his favourite son. 

Would that all young persons who read these lines may 
so act towards their parents that they may never give them 
an anxious moment : that they may be their pride in life ; 
their stay in death : so that in after-years they may have the 
memory of death-bed blessings, and may have nothing to 
regret ! A parent’s dying blessing is a richer legacy than 
gold or lands. 

III. Joseph’s Third and Last Visit. — Once more 
Joseph visited that death-chamber. This was the third time 
and the last. But this time he stood only as one of twelve 
strong, bearded men, who gathered around the aged form 
of their father, his face shadowed by death, his spirit aglow 
with the light of prophecy. How intense the awe with 
which they heard their names called, one by one, by the 
old man’s trembling voice, now pausing for breath, now 
speaking with great difficulty ! The character of each is 
criticized with prophetic insight ; the salient points of their 
past history are vividly brought to mind; and some fore- 
shadowing is given them of their future. 

This scene is an anticipation of the Judgment-seat : where 


f arut u gathered uttia I jta people." 


i53 


men shall hear the story of their lives passed under review ; 
and a sentence passed, against which there shall be no 
appeal. 

But the dying patriarch speaks with peculiar sweetness 
and grace, when he comes to touch on the destiny of his 
favourite son. His words brim with tenderness, and move 
with a stateliness and eloquence, which indicate how his 
heart was stirred to its depths. This was his swan-song, 
the final outburst of the music of his soul, the last flash 
of that Spirit of Inspiration, which dwelt also in him. 
What a glimpse is given to us into the depths of his soul ; 
the secret thoughts of fruitfulness, patience, and strength, 
and the far-reaching conceptions of blessedness, which had 
been wrought out within him by the slow process of years 
of sorrow and training ! 

A few more sentences to Benjamin, and the venerable 
patriarch drew up his feet into his bed, and quietly 
breathed his last, and was gathered unto his people. But 
that eager, much-tried spirit passed up and away into 
other scenes of more exalted fellowship and ministry, with 
no pause in his life, for in after-years God attested his 
continued existence and energy when He called Himself 
“ the God of Jacob,” for God is not God of the dead, but 
of the living. And Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and 
wept upon him, and pressed his warm lips on the death- 
cold clay ; and he commanded the physicians to embalm 
his body, so cheating death of its immediate victory. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


®l(j* Start t of Jruttfttltass. 

(Genesis xlix. 22.) 

M Do I need here 

To draw the lesson of this life : or say 

More than these few words, following up the text : — 

The vine from every living limb bleeds wine, 

Is it the poorer for that spirit shed ? 

Measure thy life by loss instead of gain ; 

Not by the wine drunk, but the wine poured forth ; 

For love's strength stand eth in love’s sacrifice ; 

And whoso suffers most hath most to give. ” 

Mrs. Hamilton King. 



FRUITFUL bough by a well.” Often had the 
eyes of the dying man been refreshed by such a 
spectacle greeting him amid wastes of sand — 
an oasis in the desert. For hours the weary 
caravan has been pressing on, parched tongues 
cleaving to the mouths, eyes scorching in the head, the 
strength of the patient beasts and of the women and children 
almost giving out. When, lo, the monotony of desert is 
broken by a welcome sight ! Over some grey crumbling 
stones a vine reaches out its verdant and fruitful arms ; and 
all press forward with redoubled haste, knowing most surely 
that down beneath the rootlets must be spreading them- 
selves in dark, cool depths, where the longed-for water is 
stored. 


We Jfrmtful Wtxtz. 155 

It will well repay us to go into the vinery, and talk with 
some experienced vine-dresser of the growth of the vine, 
which had been a familiar object with our blessed Lord 
from early boyhood, and led Him to select the vine as the 
emblem of the union between Himself and those who 
believe. “ I am the true Vine,” said He, the Vine of 
which all others are parables and types. He might have 
chosen the summer corn, or the olive, or the forest tree ; 
but He chose the vine, which clings, stretching out 
innumerable tendrils by which to hold and climb. 


"And as it grows it is not free to heaven, 

But tied unto a stake ; and if its arms stretch out 
It is but cross- wise, also forced and bound ; 

And so it draws out of the hard hill-side, 

Fixed in its own place, its own food of life." 

Visit the vine in the late autumn, when its treasure's 
have been tom from it. Whilst the land is full of joy it 
stands stripped and desolate. Its sap sinks down to the 
root ; its branches are cut back to the stem ; its very bark 
is peeled off ; and it is left to the nipping of the merciless 
frost. Nothing more desolate and dismal can be conceived 
in plant-life than the death which reigns supreme over the 
vine through the long, lone, winter. And as we contrast 
the glory of the spring with such desolation, we remember 
the words of Him who said, w Except a corn of wheat fall 
into the ground and die, it abideth alone ; but if it die, 
it bringeth forth much fruit”; and how, outcast and 
forsaken, He hung upon the Cross, in what may well be 
said to have been the darkest, saddest, hour of winter 
through which earth ever passed. 

But when the sun leads back the spring, the sap begins 


156 ®Ije Secret of Jfnutfutoss. 

to flow again ; and beneath its impulse the branches start 
right and left from the long bare stems, and presently, 
when there is sun, flowers and the promise of fruit appear. 

“ The flower of the vine is but a little thing, 

The least part of its life. You scarce could tell 
It ever had a flower ; the fruit begins 
Almost before the flower has had its day." 

Sunshine is essential. Without it the vine bears “ nothing 
but leaves ” — leaves in profusion, but leaves only. It is 
not enough for us to be connected by a living faith to 
Jesus : we must hold fellowship with Him, sunning ourselves 
in his smile, communing with Him, and surrended to his 
companionship ; so only can we hope to bear something 
more than the leaves of a mere profession. 

But though the vine needs sunshine, it must also have the 
darkness. During the night it is said to rest ; it does not 
grow ; but it recuperates itself and prepares for the putting 
forth of fresh energy. During the day it consumes more 
sap than it can draw up from the root \ and during the dark 
hours of night it is accumulating stores on which to feed. 
And this may suggest why sometimes after periods of much 
activity the great Husbandman draws down the blinds and 
plunges us into the black night of sorrow, or soltitude, or 
depression. We have been too prodigal of our resources, 
and need time in order to recuperate our exhausted 
vigour, and to gather up stores for days to come. 

The fruitfulness , however , of the vine largely depends on the 
care with which it is pruned. There is no tree pruned so 
mercilessly and incessantly, first with the sharp knife, and 
then with scissors. The Lord has many such implements. 
There is the golden pruning knife of his Word, by which 


*57 


fruiting tire ffttre. 

He would prune -us if we would let Him (John xv. 3), so 
escaping the rougher and more terrible discipline of the 
iron pruning knife of affliction. Our Lord uses the knife, 
with its sharp clean strokes, which cut deep into our nature, 
and leave scars which it will take years to heal, or even to 
conceal. And there are the scissors also in his hand — cross 
events, daily circumstances which appear contrary to each 
other, but which nevertheless work together in the end for 
good. 

So great are the spring prunings that more branches are 
taken out than left in; and the cuttings which litter the 
ground are said to be utterly worthless an 1 fit only for the 
fire. Apple and pear prunings are used in many ways, 
such as supports for young and frail plants ; but not so these. 
And so there are many professors amongst us, who have 
neither part nor lot with us, who must be taken away ; 
just as there are many things in us all which need pruning 
out. What a comfort it is that the Vine-dresser leaves the 
pruning to no ’prentice hand ! The novice does anything 
but that. No hand but the most skilled may handle the 
knife. “ My Father is the husbandman.” 

It is a recognized rule that no shoot should have 
more than one bunch of grapes. All but that one are 
nipped off. And I am told that the vine dresser will 
obtain a greater weight of better grapes in that one bunch, 
than he would by permitting two or three clusters to form. 
And so with merciless hand he picks off bunch after bunch 
of unformed fruit and berry after berry from the reddening 
swelling cluster. It is thus that we are sometimes shut 
away from one after another of our chosen directions of 
Christian activity : not that our Father would diminish our 


158 t ferret cf JFruit fulness. 

fruit-bearing, but that the strength of our life may be saved 
from dissipation, and conducted by one channel to a better 
and richer fruitage. 

How many pruned ones may read these words ! They are 
inclined to say that the Lord hath dealt very bitterly with 
them. Husband and sons buried in a distant land ; poverty 
and want supreme in a deserted and darkened home; 
only one left of all the merry circle of bygone years : 
and yet out of all this shall come a golden harvest of 
blessing ; and the one little grandson pressed to the heart, 
and his line to David, the sweet Psalmist and mighty king, 
shall be better than seven sons, and shall make the aged 
heart young again. “No chastisement for the present 
seemeth to be joyous, but grievous : nevertheless afterward 
it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them 
■which are exercised thereby” (Ruth iv. 15 ; Heb. xii. n). 

It is very needful that the pruned branch should abide 
constantly in the vine . “Abide in Him !” (1 John ii. 28). 
This command was given first to little children . It was thus 
the beloved Apostle, whose head was silvered with many 
winters, wrote to young men and fathers, in the tender 
relationship of their father in the Gospel of Jesus. But 
there is a sense in which we too must become as little 
children, ere we can learn this sweet lesson of abiding in 
Him. 

The little child is not self-confident : it fears the untried 
and unknown; it seeks the companionship of mother or 
friend ; and it is willing to be led. Oh for the child-heart, 
with its simplicity and trust; its unbounded faith and 
lovely guilelessness 1 Many strong men may read these 
words who glory in their strength; but they must be 


“ 3^-bttre in 5Jim ! ” 


*59 


convertedj and become as little children, if they would 
learn the secret of abiding in Him. When we are emptied 
of our own strength and self-confidence, and are utterly 
beaten and broken, we shall be ready to obey this saintly 
counsel, which is the echo of the Master’s own command — 
“ Abide in Me ! ” 

It is said of the great soldier Naaman that “his flesh 
came to him as the flesh of a little child. ,, It was a 
splendid combination ! The stalwart form of the man of 
war combined with the soft, sweet flesh of childhood. 
And these qualities . should blend in each of us — strong 
and simple, manly and childlike ; like David, the champion 
of Israel, whose heart was not haughty, or exercised in 
matters too great, but was like a child weaned from its 
mother. Such are counted by the Father as his babes ; fed 
with the sincere milk of the Word ; taught secrets which 
are hidden from the wise and prudent; and instructed in 
the art of abiding in Him. 

It is not easy to abide in Christ all at once , It is the 
growth of years; the result of perpetual watching and self- 
discipline; the outcome of the blessed Spirit's tender 
influence on the inner life. It is not at first easy to get the 
creeper to entwine itself in some chosen direction. The 
string, and hammer, and knife, must be used ; but in time it 
is satisfied to adopt the new and forced attitude. And the 
clinging of the soul to Christ comes as the result of 
prolonged habit and self-discipline beneath the culture- of 
the Spirit of God. 

The Holy Spirit will teach us to abide in Him. “The 
anointing which ye have received of Him abideth in you ” ; 
and anointing vs always used as a symbol of the Spirit’s 


160 ®Ij t %icvtt at SFrtuifultusc. 

grace. “ And even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide 
in Him” This blessed art is taught by the Holy Spirit to 
those who are willing — eager — to learn. Never leave your 
room in the morning without lifting up your heart to Him 
and saying, “Teach me, O blessed Spirit, to abide in 
Christ for to-day: keep me in abiding fellowship with 
Him ; even when I am not directly thinking of Him, may 
I be still abiding.” Expect that He will do this. And 
when drifting from these moorings lift up your heart and 
say, “ O my Lord, who art the Life and Light of men, give 
me more of thy Spirit, that I may better abide in Thee.” 

Abiding in Christ does not mean that you must always be 
thinking about Christ. You are in a house, abiding in its 
enclosure or beneath its shelter, though you are not always 
thinking about the house itself. But you always know 
when you leave it. A man may not be always thinking of 
his sweet home circle ; but he and they may nevertheless be 
abiding in each other’s love. And he knows instantly when 
any of them is in danger of passing out of the warm tropic 
of love into the arctic region of separation. So we may 
not always be sensible of the revealed presence of Jesus ; 
we may be occupied with many things of necessary duty — * 
but as soon as the heart is disengaged it will become aware 
that He has been standing near all the while ; and there will 
be a bright flash of recognition, and a repetition of the 
Psalmist’s cry, “Thou art near, O Lord!” Ah, life of 
bliss, lived under the thought of his presence ; as dwellers 
in Alpine valleys live beneath the solemn splendour 
of some grand snow-capped range of mountains ! 

Abiding in Christ tneans a life of converse with Him. To 
tell Him all; to talk over all anxieties and occurrences with 


©rmtmutttmt tail) (frljxizt. !6i 

Him ; to speak with Him aloud as to a familiar and in- 
terested friend ; to ask his counsel or advice ; to stop to 
praise, to adore, and utter words of love ; to draw heavily 
upon his resources, as the branch on the sap and life of the 
vine ; to be content to be only a channel, so long as his 
power and grace are ever flowing through ; to be only the bed 
of a stream hidden from view beneath the hurrying waters, 
speeding without pausing towards the sea. This is abiding 
in Christ; this is what David must have meant when he 
said, “One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I 
seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all 
the days of my life : to behold the beauty of the Lord, 
and to inquire in his temple.” 

When this abiding is secured y the root will supply all 
needed power in fruit-bearing. Methinks I have overheard 
the branches complaining that it is quite impossible to 
expect from them the ruddy clusters of the autumn. 
“Alas!” they sigh, “if you look for fruit from us, you 
are expecting impossibilities : we can never produce 
it.” But they are not expected to produce it ; they have 
only to be still, and let the root pour its tides of sap 
through their open ducts. And it will be discovered in 
blessed experience that there need be no striving, no 
effort, no “ must ” in the matter ; but that spontaneously 
and naturally and easily the juices of the plant will break 
forth into manifestation, and will swell into the luscious 
cluster of purple grapes. The difficulty will not be in 
bearing, but in not bearing. There is a whole heaven of 
difference between fruit and works— the fruits of the Spirit, 
and the works of the flesh. 

Oh that Christian people would learn that there is a 
L 


1 62 ffcfje jfcmt ttf JTruitfttlntas. 

great danger in their putting forth their own self-directed 
energies in Christian living; and that their true power 
consists in being still, while Jesus from his hidden life in 
heaven pours out through them his grace and power and 
blessing on the world. 

This is the true cure for depression on the one hand, 
and for pride on the other. For depression : because 
however weak we are, our weakness cannot be a barrier to 
the forth-putting of his might Indeed, it will be the 
chosen condition of its greatest manifestation ; for surely 
more glory will accrue to Him, if He produces much fruit 
through those from whom no such results could otherwise 
have been anticipated. For pride : because clearly the 
branch cannot exalt itself as the creator of the fruit, when 
it has been simply the channel through which the fruit has 
been produced. 

The whole life of the vine with its fruitful boughs is a 
parable of self-sacrifice . The one aim of its existence is to 
bear fruit, “ to cheer God and man.” Not even rule over 
the trees is to be compared with this (Judges ix. 13). 
And the passion which fills the heart of Jesus, and of us 
also, if we have drunk into his spirit, is to bear fruit for the 
glory of the Father, in the blessing and salvation of men. 
Our Lord is set on revealing to men those hidden beauties 
of the nature of God, with which He has been familiar 
from before the birth of time ; and He communicates this 
desire to his true disciples (John xv. 8). 

It is clear, therefore, that our pleasure and plans and 
personal gains must all be laid aside in order that this 
purpose may be secured. It was said by James Hinton, 
who had seen deeply into the heart of Christ, “ If God 


&elf- Sacrifice, 


163 

could give us the best and greatest gift, that which above 
all others we might long for and aspire after, even though 
in despair, it is this — that He must give us the privilege He 
gave his Son, to be used and sacrificed for the best and 
greatest end.” But how few of us have really entered into 
the spirit of this thought ! We seek our life ; we hedge 
ourselves about ; we are ambitious to get a brief 
power; we give to others what we can easily spare. 
And so we lose from our lives their joy and power. But if 
we could but learn to efface ourselves in daily, hourly 
self sacrifice, always considering what Jesus desires to do 
by us, and what will best promote the highest welfare of 
earth’s weary and toiling myriads, then our joy would be 
full; we should live at the ■well-head of life; we should 
climb with elastic steps those higher levels of experience, 
where men may see the pavement of sapphire stones and 
the clearness of the light of heaven. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


®l ; t of Sfmgtlj. 

(Genesis xlix. 24.) 

“ My faith looks up to claim that touch divine 
Winch robs me of this fatal strength of mine, 

And leaves me wholly resting, Lord, on thine. 

“ Yea, make me such an one as Thou canst bless ; 

Meet for thy use, through very helplessness — 

Thine, only thine, the glory of success," 

Lucy A, Bennett, 



S the battle swept over the fatal field of Mount 
Gilboa, on which David wished that no dew 
might ever fall again, as if to mark his horror 
at the tragedy enacted there ; we are told that 
“ the battle went sore against Saul, and the 
archers hit him ; and he was sore wounded of the archers.” 
A side-light is thus cast on the dying words of Jacob, in 
which he referred to the cruelty and malignity which had 
followed his beloved Joseph from childhood. “The 
archers,” said the old man, “ have sorely grieved him, and 
shot at him, and hated him.” One can almost see the 
faces of those bitter foes, stem with cruel hate, the bow- 
strings drawn tight back against their ears, as they hotly 
follow on the steps of their prey, and sorely grieve him. 

Is it not marvellous then that he should be able to add, 
14 but his bow abode in strength”? It is one of those 


Human Weakttm. 165 

strange paradoxes, of which there are so many instances in 
Scripture. Here are some of them : “ The lame take the 
prey”; “When I am weak, then am I strong”; “God hath 
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things 
which are mighty.” These are specimens of many more, 
in which the natural weakness and impotence of the 
mortal is nevertheless made sufficient to withstand the 
onsets of the foe, and hurl them back, becoming more than 
victorious. 

Has not this been also proved true in our own 
experience ? We too are weak enough, sorely pressed by 
our foes, and sometimes almost driven to despair. And 
yet we have continued until now; nay, we have been 
enabled to abide in some measure of strength. The foe 
has not prevailed. At the moment when he seemed on 
the point of victory, he has suddenly been compelled to 
give way ; his legions have been scattered as by the invisi- 
ble, but irresistible breath of God. The fire has burned 
under water. One has chased a thousand ; and two have 
put ten thousand to flight. 

The secret is not a hidden one. It is dearly revealed in 
the following words, which tell us that 

“ The arms of his hands were made strong 
By the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. ” 

It is a beautiful picture. There stands the weak child in 
whose slender arms there are no muscles strong enough 
to draw the string or bend the bow, which he vainly tries 
to use. They resist his utmost endeavours. Evidently he 
has neither might nor strength. 

But now see, on his weak hands there are laid other 
hands, mighty hands, hands that wove the tapestry of 


t66 


Secret of JStangtfr. 

the heavens, and that hold in their hollows the depths of the 
seas : one of these is placed where the left hand holds the 
bow; the other where the right hand plucks the string. 
And now with what ease those thin hands wield the bow; 
it is a plaything in their grasp ; and without apparent strain 
the arrow flies to its mark. Is not this what David meant 
in after-days, when he sang, 

“ He teachelh my hands to war, 

So that a bow of steel is broken 
By mine arms " ? 

There is another Old Testament incident, which gives a 
vivid illustration and enforcement of these striking words. 
Elisha was near his end. His had been a mighty life. Like 
a war-chariot with its fiery steeds he had brought deliver- 
ance to his fatherland. What wonder then, in that sad 
time when disasters were falling thick and fast on Israel 
and the royal house, that the king came down for a final 
word of cheer and help. The answer of the dying seer was 
remarkable. It seemed as if the heart of a soldier had 
beaten under his prophet’s robe, and that the ruling passion 
had flamed up strong in death. 

“ Take bow and arrows,” said he. “ And the king took 
unto him bow and arrows.” Then as the king put his 
strong muscular sun-browned hands on the bow, the old 
man put his above them, and the two shot the arrow of the 
Lord’s deliverance through the window opened toward the 
sun-rising, where beyond the Jordan valley the land of the 
Syrians lay. 

Perhaps this touching incident would have better illus- 
trated the words of Jacob, if the chill hands of the dying 
prophet had been under the warm powerful palms of the 


“ JPelktasbip/' 


167 


king. But still the main point is to notice the combination ; 
and to see how weakness becomes able for deeds of 
strength, when it permits itself to be moulded, guided, 
wielded, used, by the hands of a mighty man of valour. 

The Apostle, who was the most like Christ, and the best 
loved, tells us a secret when he says, “ Our fellowship is 
with the Father, and with his Son, Jesus Christ.” And 
the word rendered fellowship might be translated partner- 
ship] the common interests into which the saintly heart 
may enter with the mighty God. Ah, what a combination 
is here! We cannot; but He can! Our weakness supple- 
mented by his Strength ! Our impotence married in 
immortal union with his Omnipotence. Here, indeed, is 
a compensating balance. The less there is of us, and the 
feebler our condition, the greater scope is there for the 
forth-putting of a Might before which cables snap as stalks 
of straw; and by which opposition is swept away as the 
cobweb swung across the garden path is caught on the 
dress of the impetuous child rushing along in an ecstasy of 
exuberant life. 

The old legend tells us that Ulysses, returning home 
after long years, proved his identity by bending a bow 
which had defied the efforts of the stoutest heroes who had 
tried it in his absence. There are a good many of these 
defiant bows lying all around us. Tasks that deride our 
puny efforts; empty churches that will not fill; wicked 
neighbourhoods that will not yield; hardened soils that 
will not admit the ploughshare to cut into their crust. 
The one thing of which we need to assure ourselves is — 
whether it be God’s will for us to take them in hand: 
if not, it is useless to attempt the task; we may as well 


168 flftc Secret of 

husband and reserve our strength. But if it is made clear 
to us that we are to take up armour, methods, instru- 
mentalities, once wielded by giant-hands, but now as 
unbefitting these poorer times as the armour of the age of 

chivalry mocks at the smaller make of modern warriors 

let us not hesitate for a single moment, let us assume the 
armour of defence and the weapons of attack ■ and, as we 
do so, we shall become aware of a strength being infused 
into us— not ours, but his : "the arms of our hands will be 
made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob.” 

The condition of this strength is our consciousness of 
utter weakness. We are too strong for God. Our self- 
confidence shuts Him out of our lives. We require to be 
taken down to Gideon’s brook/that we may be reduced to 
the minimum of our own energy, and be filled to the 
maximum of his. It was this that made Paul glory in his 
infirmities, where other men would have thought their 
infirmities debarred them from Christian usefulness. He 
accounted that they were the greater reason for anticipating 
success. Tell him that his words lack eloquence, or 
that his appearance was unprepossessing, or that his thorn 
in the flesh made him a cripple in Christ’s army— he would 
have answered, “ I rejoice in them all— nay, I glory in them. 
All hail, ye blessed arguments for self-abasement, and for 
reckoning more completely on the mighty power of 
Christ!” 

Do not longer assume that you cannot bend the bow of 
difficulty lying at your feet. You cannot do it alone ; but 
God and you can do it together. Only do not try to feel 
able to do it before you take it up. You will never feel 
strong enough ; but when you take it in hand and try to 


j&rarre of ^|ohi£r. 169 

bend it, you will discover that as your day so is your 
strength. In the act of getting up, the paralyzed man 
received strength to stand. Act as if you had omnipotent 
power; and you will discover that you have it allied with 
you, and working through you, to the accomplishment of 
purposes of which you had not dared to dream in the 
wildest flights of fancy. 

“All power,” said our Lord, « is given to Me in heaven 
and on earth: go ye therefore, and teach.” And it is 
added, with blessed emphasis, by another evangelist, and in 
beautiful corroboration of the spirit of these words, “ They 
went forth and preached everywhere; the Lord working 
with them, and confirming the Word with signs following.” 
This was no extraordinary circumstance; it is simply the 
normal state of those who have yielded themselves up as * 
channels for the mighty God to work through their lives. 

A telegraph wire may as easily carry the power generated 
by a Niagara as by a water-wheel, to light some distant city, 
or drive some vast machinery. And we can be vehicles 
through whom Divine power can reach a dying world. Till 
now our own energy and might have passed through us as a 
slow goods train over the metals; but they will as easily 
sustain the rush of the express. There is no reason why, 
from this moment, each earnest reader of these lines may 
not become a medium through whom the mighty God of 
Jacob shall work some marvellous exhibition of power: 
and when it is achieved there shall be no envy or pride ; 
because it will be obvious that He has a perfect right to 
use what vessel He pleases, and the glory of the issue 
must be given to Him whose mind planned, and whose 
power executed, the fair and blessed result. 


CHAPTER XV. 


®lj* of %Uz%zbM%%. 

(Genesis xlix. 25, 26.) 

41 He always wins who sides with God — to him no chance is lost; 

God’s will is sweetest to him, when it triumphs at his cost. 

Ill that He blesses is our good, and unblest good our ill ; 

And all is right that seems most wrong, if it be His sweet will.” 

F. W. Faber. 

NTO what a rapture did the old man rise when 
, describing the blessedness of his favourite son. 
Indeed his language failed him. His words 
staggered beneath the weight of meaning with 
which he charged them. Reverting to the 
blessings which his progenitors had invoked on their first- 
born sons, and recalling the memorable words which in 
that strange moment of mingled emotion- the patriarch 
Isaac had uttered years before over his own bowed head, 
he declared that his blessings prevailed above the blessings 
of all who had preceded him. And then, as old men will, 
he travelled away from the flat sand plains of Egypt, 
unbroken by mound or hill, to the mountainous country of 
his earliest years, and avowed that his desire for the 
blessedness of Joseph reared itself above all other, as the 
everlasting hills tower up above the plains lying outspread 
at their feet. 

But even though he had gone on to heap metaphor on 



Uorir t& itt|r helper.’ ' 171 

metaphor, hyperbole on hyperbole, he could have given 
but vague hints of that weight of glory and blessedness 
which are ours in Him of whom Joseph was an imperfect 
representative and type. Yea, even the multiplied Beati- 
tudes of Deut. xxviii, do but furnish the barest outlines for 
us to fill in with colours borrowed from the palettes of the 
Gospels and Epistles. The last glimpse that the Apostolic 
band caught of the ascending Lord was with the outspread 
hands of blessing. So He left us : so He continues through 
the ages. He still sits on the Mount, calling his disciples 
.unto Him, and saying “Blessed.” And in the Apocalypse 
there are several additional Beatitudes recorded, part of a 
great multitude which no man can number, ever proceeding 
from his dear lips. “ Blessed be the God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual 
blessings in heavenly places in Christ.” 

The Blessings of Daily Help. — “The God of thy 
father shall help thee.” The earthly father must die ; but 
the Heavenly Father abides as a very present and unfailing 
help. In every emergency we may hear His still small 
voice hushing our fear, and saying — 

" Fear tliou not ; for l am with thee : 

I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, 

Saying unto thee, 

Fear not, I will help thee.” 

Well then may we join with one sacred writer in boldly 
saying, “ The Lord is my helper ; and I will not fear what, 
man shall do unto me ” ; and with the Apostle, who more- 
than most had learnt to lean hard on God's helpfulness, 
” Having, therefore, obtained help of God, I continue unto 
this day.” 


172 Semi of glcvsetaeft*. 

God's help does not, for the most part, come miraculously 
or obviously. It steals as gradually into our life as the 
grass of spring clothes the hills with fresh and verdant 
robes. Before men can say, “ Lo, here ! or lo, there ! ” it 
has suddenly entered into our need and met it. A smile, a 
flower, a letter, a burst of music, the picture of a bit 
of mountain scenery, a book, the coming of a friend — 
such are the ways in which God comes to our help. Not 
helping us far in advance, but just for one moment at a time. 
Not giving us a store of strength to make us proud, but 
supplying our need as the occasion comes. Sometimes the 
Almighty helps us by putting his wisdom and strength and 
grace into our hearts ; sometimes by manipulating circum- 
stances in our behalf ; and sometimes by inclining friends or 
foes to do the very thing we need. But it matters little as 
to the channel— only let us rest confidently in the certainty 
of receiving what we need. It may be delayed to the last 
moment; but it will come. “God shall help when the 
morning appeareth ” (Psa. xlvi. 5, marg.). If the last post 
has come in without bringing the expected assistance, then 
wait up and expect a special messenger. “ There is none 
like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the 
heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.” 

When the godly man ceaseth and the faithful fail, there 
is no cry that so befits our lips as the brief ejaculation 
with which the Psalmist commences Psalm xii. ; and this is 
the response attested by old experience, and by the spirit of 
inspiration : “ The God of thy father shall help thee.” 

The Blessings of Heaven Above. All that God is 
and has He has deposited in our blessed Lord Jesus, as 
the Trustee and Representative of his own. “ It was the 


stores of (Srare. 


*73 

good pleasure of the Father that in Him should all the 
fulness dwell.” And thus it is gloriously true, that “in 
Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily j and 
in Him ye are made full.” (Col. i. 19; ii. 9, 10, r.v.) 

This fulness of heavenly blessing is laid up for us in 
Jesus, as water is stored in Eastern countries for use 
through the long drought. The only difference being that 
in the latter case the sun may dry up, or the dam break, or 
the demand be too great for the supply. But in the case 
of Christ, the stores of grace have never ceased to brim. 
In spite of all the demands made on Him by ages of 
needy saints He is as full at this hour as ever. The sun 
may shine less brilliantly ; the moon grow withered through 
the ages ; the course of Nature waste more quickly than the 
reparative processes can renew— but the stores of Jesus 
are absolutely as they were when, in the first flush of his 
Ascension glory, He sat down at the right hand of the 
throne of God. “They shall perish ; but Thou con- 
tinuest : and they all shall wax old as doth a garment ; 
and as a mantle shalt Thou roll them up — as a garment — 
and they shall be changed : but Thou art the same, and 
Thy years shall not fail” (r.v.). 

The difference that exists between believers lies, not in 
any arbitrary distinction in the Divine allotment, for God 
gives to each one of us all that He has and is ; and to each 
He says, “All that I have is thine.” But the difference 
lies in the use which each makes of his divine portion. 
It is as if a wealthy father were to bequeath to each of his 
five sons the sum of ^10,000. One of them is unable to 
believe that so great a sum stands to his name in the bank, 
and so makes no use of it at all, leads a pauperis life, and 


*74 


®l)e tercet oi glfiBSE&jtEss. 

dies in an almshouse. Others have faith enough to believe 
that there may be j£i,ooo to their credit, and work up to 
that limit, thankful for so much, but fearing to go beyond. 
Whilst the fifth, and youngest, believes that the father has 
not promised what he could not perform, and so goes on 
claiming more and ever more, till his whole patrimony has 
been absorbed; and then he discovers that a proviso in his 
father’s will also permits him to use all the unemployed 
sums which had stood in his brother’s names, but which 
they had forborne to use. “ Take the talent from him, and 
give it unto him which hath ten talents. For unto every 
one that hath shall be given ; and he shall have abundance.” 
The same unsearchable riches are for each and all : but 
some do not use their rightful portion ; others only in part ; 
and the number is comparatively small of those who really 
dip deeply into the perennial all-sufficiency of Jesus. 

It is the work of the Holy Spirit to convey these heavenly 
blessings into the soul. From his throne our Master is 
ever sending fleets of heavy-laden argosies to us beneath the 
convoy and guidance of the Holy Spirit, who glorifies 
Christ in revealing what He is, and making us the happy 
recipients of grace on grace. 

What blessedness might be ours if only we opened all 
the ports of our being to the heavenly merchantmen bearing 
in to us from all the winds of heaven S It would be in the 
inner realm, as it is said to have been in Jerusalem in the 
days when Hiram’s navy brought to it the wealth of the 
Orient : w And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as 
stones ; and cedars made he to be as the sycomore trees that 
are in the vale, for abundance.” 

We are to be in this world as our Master was : we are to 


Safi ’a inicnttan for na. 


% 


*75 


have a similar access to the throne of grace, and the same 
power in prayer; to share his joy, his peace, his power; 
to be the members of the body through which He works, 
and on which He expends tender care in nourishing and 
cherishing it ; to be called his friends, to whom He confides 
those secret things which his Father makes known to Him. 
We are to be so filled with all the fulness of God; so 
strong, and healthy, and robust, that there shall not be 
“ one feeble person ” in all the host, but that “ the feeble 
shall be as David, and the house of David as God, as the 
angel of the Lord before them.” All this is God's intention 
for us, and might be ours if only we would arise to claim 
by faith that which is ours by the gift of our Heavenly 
Father, and the purchase of the precious blood. 


The Blessings of the Underlying Deep. — In all 
likelihood these words refer to some kind of thought that 
underneath the surface of the earth there lie vast deeps of 
water which supply “ the brooks of water, of fountains, and 
depths that spring out of valleys and hills.” 

There is physical truth in this ; and, above all, spiritual 
truth. For the depths have also blessings for us. The 
deep things of God, which pass the comprehension of the 
natural man : which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor 
the heart conceived ; but which God hath prepared for them 
that wait for Him, and revealed to them that love Him — 
what deeps are these ! The deep of his Eternal prescience 
and counsel. The deep of his covenant, spanning with 
rainbow arc the dark mystery of evil, and ordered in all 
things and sure. The deep of a love which would descend 
to shame and agony ; willing rather to bear our sin than to 


i7fi We Stwczt oi jSJtaE&ttejss. 

lose as. The deep of his marvellous patience, which tires 
not amid our fretful petulance and frequent backslidings, 
Ah, what deeps are these ! Deep calls unto deep, as wave 
challenges wave ; and the Atlantic calls across the Isthmus 
of Panama to .the mighty Pacific, the ocean of the thousand 
isles. Here is food for thought ! How foolish are we so 
to feed the outer sense, that the spiritual vision becomes 
darkened through disuse ; and we get to know so little of 
the great abyss which we call God, which engirdles us as a 
summer sea does the coral islet floating upon its breast. 
These are things into which angels desire to look, and stoop 
that they may behold ; but we unfortunately refuse to 
imitate them, and, reversing the Apostle's attitude, look at 
the things which are seen, rather than at the things which 
are not seen, and which are eternal. “ The deep that lieth 
under ! ” 

The Blessings of Children. — The Eastern glories in 
the number of his children. “Blessed is the man that 
hath his quiver full of them," is the glad response to the 
primal command, “ Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish 
the earth.” Nor was there any need to dread the multipli- 
cation of children in a land where shepherds were needed 
for flocks, and high-born maidens did not shrink from what 
we should call menial work. And then there were abundant 
spaces on the rolling pasture-lands, or on the lone hill-sides, 
for the vast expansion of the arts of life ; and for husbandry 
and tillage. Under such circumstances children were indeed 
welcome for the defence and aggrandisement of family life ; 
and such thoughts must have been in the heart of the 
dying man. 


“Cite ^paratet* JEjfe.” 177 

And there is a sense in which we may say that God has 
no higher blessing to give than to allow us to look on many 
spiritual children. To be greeted as the instrument of 
the salvation of many who but for us had never known 
Christ and his salvation ; to anticipate the moment of 
standing with them before God, saying, “ Behold, I and the 
children whom the Lord hath given me ” ; to think of the 
ever-widening circles of influence which must spread from 
any one soul truly bom for our Redeemer : is there under 
the sun a purer joy than this? But this blessing is within 
our reach, through the grace of God. 

We must never forget, however, the condition on which all 
these blessings depend. “They shall be on the crown of 
the head of him that was separate from his brethren.” We 
must not expect that we can have these choice blessings 
from God, unless we devote ourselves exclusively to Him 
and to his service. He gives his prizes, as the world gives 
its, to those who devote themselves wholly to their pursuit 
Joseph was not only separated from his brethren and father 
by the distance which lay between Egypt and Canaan, but 
by the temper of his mind when he lived amongst them. 
Their aims were not his; nor his theirs. His heart was 
absorbed with motives and desires which found no place in 
theirs, or which would have been treated as unwelcome 
intruders. And it was this consciousness which embittered 
them against him, and led to his violent expulsion from 
their midst. The citizens of Vanity Fair cannot away with 
pilgrims, whose garb is outlandish, whose faces are set on a 
goal beyond their city, and who hasten through their streets, 
crying, “ We buy the truth.” 

We, too, must come out and be separate; not adopting 

M x 


178 Sftfre ferret of gleascimejss. 

any particular style of dress, but cultivating the inner 
temple, which confesses that its true home lies beyond the 
stars 3 that its aim is to do the will of God ; and that its 
loftiest ambition is to have the smile of the Master’s glad 
“ Well done ! ” 

And when once the will has assumed this position, 
surrendering many things for the one thing — not only is 
there a great peace in the heart, but there is a growing 
appreciation of the blessings which we have so inadequately 
portrayed. They seem to bulk more largely on the vision 3 
to become more real, and precious, and satisfactory ; until 
they engross the soul with their rapturous fascination into an 
even greater separation from the passing shows of time. 
These two tempers act and re-act. On the one side we 
choose the blessedness of the separated life, because God 
bids us : and on the other, the more we know of it, the 
more we are weaned away from the delights with which 
the world attracts its votaries 3 and we say with the Psalmist, 
“ Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty 3 
neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or in things 
too high for me. Surely I have behaved and quieted 
myself, as a child that is weaned of his mother : my soul is 
even as a weaned child.” 


CHAPTER XVI. 


last Saga an& 

(Genesis l. 24, 25.) 


" Twilight and evening hell. 

And after that the dark ; 

And may there be no sadness of farewell 
When I embark. 


For when from out our bourne of time and place, 

The flood shall bear me far, 

I hope to see my Pilot face to face. 

When I have crossed the bar." 

Tennyson. 

JfOD will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up 
my bones from hence.” These were the dying 
words of Joseph. And it is somewhat remark- 
able that these are the only words in his whole 
career which are referred to in the subsequent 
pages of the Scriptures. His life was a noble one, and, 
with one exception, the most fascinating in the sacred 
record ; but this last dying speech is singled out from all 
the rest for special notice of the Holy Ghost Of course, 
I refer to those words in Heb. xi., where it is said, “By 



faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the exodus 
of the children of Israel; and gave commandment con- 
cerning his bones.” 

Let us notice — 


I.— The Circumstances under which these Words 
were Spoken. Joseph was now an old man. One 


180 loacplr’s ?aat gap attir gcatlj. 

hundred and ten years had stolen away his strength, and 
left deep marks upon his form. It was three and ninety 
years since he had been lifted from the pit to become a 
slave. Eighty years had passed since he had first stood 
before Pharaoh in all the beauty and wisdom of his young 
manhood. And sixty years had left their papyrus records 
in the State archives, since, with all the pomp and 
splendour of Egypt’s court, he had carried the remains 
of his old father to Machpelah’s ancient cave. So old 
was he that he saw the bright young faces of his great- 
grandchildren : “ they were brought up upon Joseph’s knees.” 
With long life and many days God had blessed his faithful 
servant. And now, stooping beneath their weight, he was 
fast descending to the break-up of natural life. 

But the shadows of his own decay were small compared 
with those which he saw gathering around his beloved people. 
Sixty years before, when Jacob gathered up his feet upon 
his bed and died, his favourite son was in the zenith 
of his glory. The days of mourning for the patriarch, 
just because he was Joseph’s father, were only two less in 
number than those of a king. There was no difficulty 
in obtaining from Pharaoh the necessary permission to go 
three hundred miles to inter the remains beside those of 
Abraham and Sarah, of Isaac and Rebekah, and of Leah. 

And, indeed, that funeral procession must have been of 
a sort hot often seen. There was not only the family of 
Israel, but the officers of the court, and all the elders of 
the land of Egypt. In other words, the proud and titled 
magnates of Egypt, the most exclusive aristocracy in the 
world, were willing to follow the remains of a shepherd 
and a Jew to their last resting-place, out of honour for his 


31 Contrast. 


181 


son. “ There also went up chariots and horsemen, so that 
it was a very great company.” 

But sixty years had brought great changes of which 
there is evidence in the text. When Jacob died all was 
bright ; and he was honoured with a splendid funeral, 
because he had given to the land of Egypt so great a 
benefactor and saviour in the person of his son; but 
when Joseph died, all was getting dark, and the shadow of 
a great eclipse was gathering over the destinies of bis 
people. No notice seems to have been taken in Egypt 
of his death. No splendid obsequies were voted to him 
at public expense. No pyramid was placed at the disposal 
of his sons. And he addresses his brethren gathered 
about him as being sorely in need of help. It is as if he 
had said : “ I have done my best for you, but I am dying ; 
nevertheless God will fill my place, and do for you all, and 
more than all, that I would have done myself.” There is 
a tone of comfort in these words, which indicates how 
much they needed an advocate at court, and an assurance 
of Divine visitation. 

Three hundred years before, the great founder of the 
nation had watched all day beside an altar, scaring away 
the vultures which, attracted by the flesh that lay upon it, 
hovered around. At length, as the sun went down, the 
watcher fell asleep — it is hard to watch with God — and in 
his sleep he dreamt. A dense and awful gloom seemed to 
enclose him, and to oppress his soul, and on it, as upon a 
curtain, passed successive glimpses of the future of his 
race — glimpses which a Divine voice interpreted to his ear. 
He saw them exiled to a foreign country, enslaved by the 
foreigner, and lingering there whilst three generations of 


182 losqrtfr fast anti geat^r. 

men bloomed as spring flowers, and were cut down before 
the keen sickle of death. And as he beheld all the terror 
of that enslavement, the horror of a great darkness fell 
upon his soul. We know how exactly that horror was 
justified by the events which were so soon to take place. 

“ The Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with 
rigour : and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, 
in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the 
field ; all their service, wherein they made them serve, was 
with rigour.” The first symptoms of that outburst of popular 
« Jew-hate ” were already, like stormy petrels, settling about 
the closing hour of the great Egyptian premier. 

We cannot tell the precise form of those symptoms. 
Perhaps he had been banished from the councils of 
Pharaoh; perhaps he was already pining in neglect; 
perhaps the murmurs of dislike against his people were 
already rising, just as the roar of the breakers against a 
harbour-bar tells how the mighty ocean is arousing itself 
to frenzy; perhaps acts of oppression and cruelty were 
increasingly rife, and increasingly difficult to bring to 
justice. In any case, the twilight of the dark night was 
gathering in ; and it was this which made his words more 
splendid : they shone out as stars of hope. 

Moreover , his brethren were around hwi. His forgiveness 
and love to them lasted till the testing-hour by that great 
assayer, Death. Nor did they fail. From something 
narrated in the previous verses of this chapter, it would 
appear that, for long, his brethren, judging of him by their 
own dark and implacable hearts, could not believe in the 
sincerity and genuineness of his forgiveness. They 
thought that he must be feigning more than he felt, in 


^ yorcstratrofarittg of Incarnate ftobe. 183 

order to secure some ulterior object, such as the blessing 
and approval of their old father. And so they feared that, 
as soon as Jacob was removed, Joseph's just resentment, 
long concealed with masterly art, would break forth against 
them. It seemed impossible to believe that he felt no 
grudge, and would take no action at all with reference to 
the past; and they said, “Joseph will certainly requite 
us all the evil which we did unto him.” And Joseph wept 
when they spake ; wept that they should have so misunder- 
stood him after his repeated assurances ; wept to see them 
kneeling at his feet for a forgiveness which he had freely 
given them years before. “ Fear not,” said he in effect/ 
“do not kneel there; I am not God: ye thought eviv 
against me; but God meant it for good, to save much 
people alive, as it is this day.” 

This forgiveness might well be wonderful to these men ; 
because it was not of this world at all. The Lord Jesus, 
who lighteth every man coming into the world, was in 
Joseph’s heart, though less clearly in Joseph’s creed; and 
his behaviour was a foreshadowing of Incarnate Love. 
Reader! He waits to forgive thee thus. Though thou 
hast maligned, and refused, and crucified Him afresh, and 
put Him to an open shame ; yet, for all that, He waits to 
forgive thee so entirely, that not one of these things shall 
be ever mentioned against thee again ; yea, if they are 
looked for, they shall never be found, any more than a 
stone can be found which has been cast into the bosom of 
the Atlantic waves. Oh, give Christ credit for his free 
and entire forgiveness ! And remember that when once 
He forgives, it is unnecessary and distrustful to go to Him 
again about the same sin. He cannot forgive the same sin 


,8 4 loaeplr’* fast Sags anil 

twice - and when once He has pronounced the Words of 
Absolution over a kneeling penitent, that penitent need 
never go to Him, as did the brethren of Joseph, and say, 
Forgive, I pray thee, my trespass and my sin, concerning 
which, Thou knowest, I came to thee with tears and sighs 
so many years ago. 

It is said of the love of the Lord Jesus that, having loved 
his own, which were in the world, He loved them unto the 
end ■ or, as the margin of the Revised Version puts it, “ to 
the uttermost.” He is able to save to the uttermost, 
because He loves to the uttermost. So was it with the love 
of Joseph ; it had outlived the frosts of the early spring, 
and it bore fruit and looked fresh now in the late autumn 
of his last days. Oh that we might love and forgive like 
this ! It is possible on one condition only— viz-, that we 
open our hearts for the entrance and indwelling of Him who, 
so long before his incarnation, had already found a home 
beneath the doublet of this great Egyptian statesman. 

Lastly, he was dying. He had warded off death from 
Egypt ; but he could not ward it off from himself. I die. 
They were among the last words that he had caught from 
his father’s dying lips (chap, xlviii. 21), and now he appro- 
priates them to himself; yes, and in doing so, he touches 
the zenith of his noble confidence and hope. Oh that 
each of us may go on shining more and more each day 
until our last, and that, when heart and flesh are failing 
most conspicuously, the life of the spirit may flash out 
with its most brilliant coruscations, like the lights from 
Gideon’s broken pitchers. There is no better proof of 
immortality than this : that in us must be a something more 
than flesh and blood, which, when these are most impaired, 


" (gcii tall surely biait gan.” 185 

is most bright and most alive to the realities of the eternal 
world. And there must be a sphere appropriate to the 
ethereal tenant, who stands so keen and eager, reaching forth, 
with unimpaired vitality and with unquenchable vigour. 

It was under all these circumstances that Joseph said, 
“ God will surely visit you ; and ye shall carry up my bones 
from hence.” 

II. Let us Investigate the full Importance of 
these Words. And we may do so best by comparing 
them with Jacob’s dying wish : “Bury me with my fathers 
in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah.” This was 
most natural : we all love to be buried by the beloved dust 
of our departed And Jacob knew that there would be no 
great difficulty in carrying out his wish. Joseph was then in 
the plenitude of his power. There was no great faith therefore 
in asking for that which could so easily be accomplished. 
But with Joseph it was different He too wanted to be 
buried in the land of Canaan ; but not at once— not then ! 
There were two things he expected would happen : the one, 
that the people would go out of Egypt; the other, that they 
would come into the land of Canaan. He did not know when 
or how ; he was only sure that so it would be : “surely.” 

To Joseph’s natural vision these things were most 
unlikely. When he spoke, Israel was settled in Goshen, 
and so increasing in numbers and in wealth that any 
uprooting was becoming daily more unlikely. And as to 
the oppression which was perhaps beginning to threaten 
them, what chance would they have of ever being able to 
escape from the detaining squadrons of Egypt’s chivalry, 
supposing they wished to go ? But his anticipation of the 


i86 


losers fast an b 

future was not founded on human foresight, but on the 
distinct announcements of the Almighty. He remembered 
how God had said to Abraham, as he stood upon his 
mountain oratory, “Look from the place where thou art, 
northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward; 
for all the land that thou seest, to thee will I give it, and 
to thy seed for ever.” That promise was repeated to Isaac. 
“Unto thee, and unto thy seed, will I give all these 
countries; and I will perform the oath which I sware unto 
Abraham thy father.” 

Again was that promise reiterated to Jacob as he lay at 
the foot of the shining ladder, “The land whereon thou 
liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed.” These 
promises had been carefully treasured and handed on, as 
in the old Greek race they handed on the burning torch. 
Jacob on his death-bed re-assured Joseph that God would 
certainly bring them to the land of their fathers; and now 
Joseph re-animated the trembling company that gathered 
around him with the self-same hope. In the memories of 
all these men the word spoken two hundred years before rang 
like a peal of silver bells in a moss-grown tower. “ They 
shall come hither again ” (Gen. xv. 16). Joseph could not 
trace the method of the Divine workmanship : it was enough 
for him to know that God had said, “ They shall come hither 
again.” And so he commanded that his bone? should be 
unburied, so that at any moment, however hurried, when the 
trumpet of exodus sounded, they might be ready to be caught 
up and borne onward in the glad march for Canaan. 

What a lesson must those unburied bones have read to 
Israel ! When the taskmasters dealt hardly with the 
people, so that their hearts fainted, it must have been sweet 


Irts CCrmfiirent 187 

to go and look at the mummy case which held those 
mouldering remains, waiting there to be carried forward j 
and, as they did so, this was doubtless their reflection, 
“Evidently then, Joseph believed that we were not to stay 
here always, but that we should sooner or later leave for 
Canaan : let us brace ourselves up to bear a little longer, 
it may only be a very little while ! ” Yes, and when some 
were tempted to settle down content with prospering 
circumstances, and to feast upon leeks, garlics, and onions, 
it was a check on them to think of those bones, and say, 
“ Evidently we are not to remain here always : we should 
do well not to build all our hopes and comfort on the 
unstable tenure of our sojourn in this place.” And, often- 
times, when the people were ready to despair amid the 
difficulties and weariness of their desert march, those bones 
borne in their midst told them of the confident hope of 
Joseph — that God would bring them to the land of rest. 

We have no unburied bones to animate our faith, or to 
revive our drooping zeal ; but we have something better — 
we have an empty grave. Oh, what volumes does that 
mutely tell us ! When John the Baptist died, his disciples 
dispersed ; when Jesus died, his disciples not only clung 
together, but sprang up into an altogether new vigour. 
And well they might ! And the difference was made by that 
empty grave in the garden of Joseph of Arimathea. And 
what it did for them it will do for us. It tells us that He is 
risen. It tells us that not death, but life, is to be the guardian 
angel of our desert march. It tells us that this world is not 
our resting place or home ; but that we must seek these 
above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God. It 
tells us that resurrection is not possible only, but certain ; 


,83 Joseph's fast gags anb geatb- 

and that ere long we shall be where He is. He will go with 
ms along the desert pathway, till we go to be with Him, 
where the shadow of death is never flung over flower, or 
child, or friend. 

III. Let us Realize the Spirit that Underlay and 
Prompted these Words. It was above all a pilgrim 
spirit. Joseph bore an Egyptian title. He married an 
Egyptian wife. He shared in Egyptian court-life, politics, 
and trade. But he was as much a pilgrim as was 
Abraham pitching his tent outside the walls of Hebron, or 
Isaac in the grassy plains of the south country, or Jacob 
keeping himself aloof from the families of the land. “ He 
filled his place at Pharaoh’s court ; but his dying words open 
a window into his soul, and betray how little he had felt 
that he belonged to the order of things in the midst of 
which he had been content to live. Though surrounded 
by an ancient civilization; and dwelling among granite 
temples and solid pyramids and firm-based sphinxes, the 
very emblems of eternity; he confessed that he had here 
no continuing city, but sought one to come.” * 

We sometimes speak as if the pilgrim-spirit were impossi- 
ble for us who live in this settled state of civilization. Our 
houses are too substantial; our lives too unromantic ; our 
movements too closely tethered to one narrow round. But 
if that thought should ever cross our hearts again, let us 
turn to the life of Joseph, and remind ourselves how 
evidently he was animated by the spirit of those “who 
confessed that they were pilgrims and strangers on the 
earth.” Ah, friends, what are we living for? Are our 


Maclaren’s Sermons ; second series, p. 139. 


%\ft ^iljgrhtt- spirit. 189 

pursuits bqunded by the narrow horizon of earth, and 
limited to the fleeting moments of time ? Are we con- 
stantly engaged in lining as warmly as possible the nest 
in which we hope to spend our old age and die? Are we 
perpetually seeking to make the best of this world ? I fear 
me, that these are the real aims of many professing 
Christians ; and, if so, it is simply useless for them to claim 
kinship with that mighty stream of pilgrims, which is con- 
stantly pouring through the earth, bound to the city which 
hath foundations, their true home and mother-city. On the 
other hand, it is quite conceivable that you may be at the 
head of a large establishment, engaged in many permanent 
undertakings, closely attached to the present by imperious 
duties; and yet, like Joseph, your heart may be detached 
from things seen and temporal, and engaged, in all its secret 
longings, to the things unseen and eternal. 

The pilgrim-spirit will not make us unpractical. Joseph 
was the most practical man in his time. Who are likely 
to be as prompt, as energetic, as thorough, as those who 
feel that they are working for eternity, and that they are 
building up day by day a fabric in which they shall live 
hereafter ? Each day is character-building for better or for 
worse : each deed, well or ill done, is a stone in the edifice ; 
each moment tells on eternity. We shall receive a reward 
according to our deeds. 

But the pilgrim-spirit will make us simple. There are two 
sorts of simplicity : that of circumstances ; and that of heart. 
Many a man sits down to bread and milk at a wooden 
table, with a heart as proud as pride can make it : whilst 
many another who eats off a golden plate is as simple as 
Cincinnatus at his plough. The world cannot understand 


i od Joacplr’a gags 

this. But here in Joseph is an illustration. Ah, my 
friend, it is not the unjewelled finger, nor the plain attire, 
nor the unfurnished room, that constitutes a simple un- 
affected life : but that vision of the spirit, which looks 
through the unsubstantial wreath-vapours of the morning 
to the peaks of the everlasting hills beyond and above. 

What a contrast there is between the opening and dosing 
words of Genesis / Listen to the opening words : “ In the 
beginning, God.” Listen to the closing words, u A coffin 
in Egypt” And is this all ? Is all God’s work to end in one 
poor mummy case ? Stay. This is only the end of Genesis, 
the Book of Beginnings. Turn the leaf, and there are 
Exodus, and Joshua, and Kings, and Prophets, and Christ. 
God is not dependent on any one of us. We do our little 
work and cease, as the coral-insects which perish by myriads 
on the rising reef. But God’s work goes on. His temple 
rises age after age. And it is enough for each of us, 
like Joseph, to have lived a true, pure, strong, and 
noble life — and to leave Him to see after our bodies ; our 
beloved, whom we leave so reluctantly ; and our work. Nor 
will He fail. “ And Moses took the bones of Joseph with 
him,” on the night of the exodus (Exod. xiii. 19) ■ “ and they 
buried the bones of Joseph in Shechem : . . . and it became 
the inheritance of the children of Joseph” (Josh. xxiv. 32). 


Londoo: Morgan and Scott Ltd.,, 12, Paternoster Buildings, E.C. 


By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A, 


Ubc “Ejyoaltoii?” Series. 

CHRIST IN ISAIAH. A Series of Expositions. 

THE PROPHET OF HOPE. Studies in Zechariah. 

THE DIRECTORY OF THE DEVOUT LIFE. (As contained 
in Matt. V., VI., VII.) 

THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN. Expositions of the 
Gospel of John, Chaps, i.-xii. 

LOVE TO THE UTTERMOST. Expositions of the Gospel 
of John, Chaps, xiii.-xxi. 

THE WAY INTO THE HOLIEST. Expositions of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews. 

TRIED BY FIRE. Expositions of the First Epistle of 
Peter. 

Each Volume Cloth Boards, 2a. 6d- 


OUR DAILY HOMILY. Gems of Thought from Every 
Chapter in the Bible. 

Vol. i, Genesis — Ruth. Vol. 2, i Samuel — Job. 

Vol. 3, Psalms— Song of Solomon. Vol. 4 , Isaiah— Malachi. 
Vol. 5, Matthew — Revelation. 

Each Volume Cloth Boards, la. 6d. ; Cloth, Bevelled Boards, Gilt 
Edges, 2s. The Five Volumes in Cloth Case, Ea., 6a. 6d., and 
10a. 0<L net. 


REVERIES AND REALITIES 1 Life and Work in London# 
With Life-like Portrait of the Author. Cloth, 2s. 0d. 

MORGAN AND SCOTT Ltd., LONDON. 



®lj£ (Eljristian 

WITH WHIOH IB INCORPORATED ' THE REVIVAL.*' 

“FIRST THINGS FIRST.” 

ILogal to lEbangel itai JBoctrine* 

ffiljriBtrHti is a weekly record of Evangelistic Effort and Missionary 
Enterprise, a regular feature in its contents being Sketches (with Portraits) 
of eminent Christian workers. There are also Articles of an Expository 
and Devotional character, in addition to 

DAILY BIBLE READINGS, 

and a Young People’s Page with Bible-Searching Competitions. 


EVERY THURSDAY. ONE PENNY. 

®(je (EIjrisftatt may be ordered in advance from the Publishers, at 1/8 
for three months, 3/3 for six monLhs, or at 6,6 per annum, at home or 
abroad, post free. 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Ltd., LONDON. 




