Class    k-    "   '  '_  •  '  2fcw- 

University  of  Chicago  Library 

GIVEN  BY 


Besides  the  -main  topic  this  book  also  treats  of 
Subject  No.  On  page        _Subject  No.  On  page 


Hints  for  LOT 

.     s     £s 


.  =  3 

;»'.'•* 


"..    »      a  „<> 


By 

F.    B.    MEYER 

Author  of  "The  Shepherd  Psalm,"  "Lovers  Alway," 
"  Our  Daily  Homily,"  etc. 


NEW  YORK         CHICAGO         TORONTO 

Fleming   H.   Revell   Company 

LONDON    AND    EDINBURGH 


•   :  .*...* ..  • 

•  •  v    •  V.      ••• 
••.•••    ••• 


"'  ••••// 


'»•':;•  /-.  :•:.;;::    :    .-.  .-. 

.       ••    ••     •••••«       .       •     .         . 

-  ••:."•..•:••.::..:    '..:•.•..•. 


V 


PREFACE 

ON  each  Lord's  day  large  numbers  of  devoted 
men,  who  have  not  received  special  training  for 
their  noble  work,  go  forth  to  preach  the  unsearch- 
able riches  of  Christ. 

It  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the  worth  of 
their  self-sacrificing  labours.  Thousands  of  pulpits 
in  town  and  country  would  stand  empty  and  silent 
but  for  them.  And  the  standard  of  excellence  set 
before  them  and  realised  is  very  high. 

I  have  put  together  these  chapters  in  as  brief 
a  form  as  possible,  because  I  am  addressing  busy 
men ;  but  they  contain  the  results  of  a  good  deal 
of  experience  and  observation,  and  they  come  with 
much  cordial  esteem  to  those  whom  I  may  fitly 
claim  as  brethren  and  fellow-workers  in  the  gospel 
of  our  Lord. 

P.  B.  MEYER. 


AUGUSTINE'S  CREED 

A  whole  Christ  for  my  Salvation. 
A  whole  Bible  for  my  Staff. 
A  whole  Church  for  my  Fellowship. 
A  whole  World  for  my  Parish. 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

I.  BE  SURE  OF  YOUR  MESSAGE  ...  9 

II.  ONE  AIM  AND  PURPOSE         .  .  .  .14 

in.  THE  PREACHER'S  OBJECTIVE  .          .          .19 

IV.   THE  DEMONSTRATION  OF  THE  SPIRIT  .  .          27 

v.  "WORKERS  TOGETHER"  WITH  GOD          .          .       32 

VI.  A  DIVINE  PASSION      .  .  .  .  .38 

VII.  SERMON  CONSTRUCTION          .  .  .  .48 

VIII.   THE  LEGITIMATE  USE  OF  SCRIPTURE  .  $6 

IX.   EXPOSITORY  PREACHING  .  .          6l 

X.   A  GREAT  SERMON        .  .  .  .  .          6j 

XI.   MY  OWN  METHOD       .....          73 

XII.  ON  THE  USE  OF  OTHER  MEN'S  THOUGHTS   .  .          78 

XIII.  ON  YOUR  DELIVERY   .....          84 

XIV.  THE  USE  OF  ILLUSTRATION  .  .  .  .89 
XV.  THE  DEVOTIONAL  SERVICE     .              .              .  •         97 

XVI.   PUBLIC  PRAYER  .....        IO3 

XVII.   FAULTS  TO  GUARD  AGAINST  .  .  .Ill 

XVIII.  YOUR  CHARGE  OF  YOURSELF  .  .  .        122 


"IPs  a  Coal  from  God's  Altar  mast  kindle  car 
Fires  And  without  Fire,  true  fire,  no  acceptable 

sacrifice." 

WILLIAM  PBMN. 


JOTTINGS   AND    HINTS 

FOR  LAY  PREACHERS 


BE  SUKE  OF  YOUB  MESSAGE 

THERE  is  all  the  difference  possible  between  de- 
livering a  sermon  and  uttering  a  message. 

In  the  first  instance,  you  feel  much  as  a  lecturer 
or  professor  who  receives  a  definite  salary  for 
definite  work.  It  may  be  very  interesting  and 
congenial  work,  engaging  his  whole  soul,  and  filling 
him  with  pride  and  thankfulness — still,  it  is  work, 
and  it  is  expected  of  him.  At  a  certain  hour  he  is 
due  at  a  certain  spot,  where  his  audience  awaits 
him,  and  he  must  do  his  best  to  instruct  and 
interest  the  people  until  the  hands  of  the  clock 
have  revolved  to  a  given  point. 

There  is  a  tendency  in  some  preachers  to  view 
their  work  in  this  way.  They  have  an  appointment ; 

their  names  axe  down  on  a  preaching  list;  or  the 

& 


io  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

stated  demands  of  their  pulpit  appeal  to  them.  It 
is  necessary  to  speak  for  half  an  hour,  more  or  less, 
on  some  sacred  theme — it  doesn't  much  matter 
what  They  begin  to  think  over  subjects;  they 
casually  open  volumes  of  sermons  to  obtain  the 
suggestions  of  other  men's  minds ;  they  look  over 
lists  of  likely  texts  which  they  have  jotted  down 
in  their  note-books.  Ultimately  they  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  they  can  make  something  of  a  given 
subject ;  or  a  text  is  suggested  which  is  capable  of 
bright  and  original  treatment;  or  the  next  para- 
graph in  their  scheme  of  scriptural  exposition  claims 
thoughtful  treatment.  Thereupon  they  laboriously 
accumulate  all  the  light  and  information  which  can 
be  obtained  from  such  authors  as  are  within  their 
reach,  collate  their  thoughts  into  some  kind  of 
order,  and  with  much  pains  write  out,  or  in  some 
other  way  prepare,  their  discourse.  This  may  be 
good,  elaborate,  and  interesting,  but  when  it  is 
preached  it  fails  to  grip  the  hearers ;  it  resembles  a 
glass  of  mineral  water,  once  bubbling  and  sparkling, 
but,  through  standing  long,  the  special  effervescence 
which  constituted  its  attractiveness  has  entirely 
passed  away. 

We  would  not  for  a  moment  affirm  that  sermons 
made  in  this  way  do  not  realise  a  purpose,  and  are 
not  used  for  the  conversion  and  edification  of  the 
souls  of  men ;  but  only  that  they  do  not  realise  the 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  n 

highest  ideal  of  what  a  sermon  may  be,  when  it  is 
delivered  as  a  message  from  the  Most  High. 

It  was  stated  in  a  newspaper  paragraph  which  I 
came  across  the  other  day,  that  a  certain  foreign 
hypnotist  had  been  of  considerable  service  to  various 
clergymen  who  had  resorted  to  him  because  he 
.  impressed  them  with  the  idea  that  they  were  God's 
mouthpiece,  and  that  the  Divine  Spirit  was  speak- 
ing through  them ;  but  surely  it  is  not  needful  to 
call  in  the  assistance  of  hypnotism  to  imbue  us 
with  such  a  thought  as  that.  It  was  simply  the 
ordinary  position  that  was  assumed  by  each  of  the 
holy  men  who  spoke  for  God  in  the  old  time,  and 
which  was  the  perpetual  standpoint  of  the  apostles. 

Take,  for  instance,  Acts  xv.  12:  "Barnabas  and 
Paul  rehearsed  what  signs  and  wonders  God  had 
wrought  through  them";  also  Eom.  xv.  18:  "I 
will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  things  save  those 
which  Christ  wrought  through  me  for  the  obedience 
of  the  Gentiles."  Everything  depends  on  our 
entering  deeply  into  the  meaning  of  that  preposition, 
and  whether  we  work  for  God  or  realise  that  God 
is  working  in  and  through  us. 

I  remember  well  one  of  the  most  widely  used 
evangelists  in  the  United  States  standing  up  before 
a  great  gathering  of  brother  ministers  and  testify- 
ing that  his  whole  life  had  been  altered  by  seeing 
a  sentence  in  an  address  of  mine,  delivered  at 


12  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

Northfield,  in  which  I  insisted  that  our  usefulness 
in  God's  service  was  largely  affected  by  the  question, 
whether  we  worked  for  God,  or  allowed  God  by 
His  Spirit  to  speak  and  work  through  us.  He 
knelt  down  beside  his  study  table  and  vowed  that 
from  that  hour  he  would  yield  himself  to  be  the 
medium  and  instrument  by  which  the  divine  words 
should  be  spoken  and  His  will  effected;  and  the 
result  was  a  vast  increase  in  his  power  and  useful- 
ness. When  that  position  has  been  taken  up,  the 
one  desire  of  the  servant  of  God  is  to  realise  that 
he  is  intrusted  with  a  message,  that  his  address  to 
his  congregation  is  not  that  of  an  advocate,  but  of 
a  witness,  and  that  he  is  the  medium  of  passing  on 
the  special  burden  of  the  Lord.  "We  would  not  say 
that  they  who  prepare  their  sermons  after  the 
former  manner  are  not  also  the  messengers  of  the 
Lord  of  Hosts;  but  he  who  waits  in  prayer  and 
faith  before  God,  that  he  may  be  charged  with  a 
message,  is  pre-eminently  such. 

We  obtain  such  a  message  in  prayer  when  we 
wait  upon  God,  or  when  dealing  with  some  specific 
cases  of  spiritual  difficulty.  Sometimes  I  have 
found  that  the  newspapers,  either  religious  or 
secular,  and  the  monthly  periodicals,  which  have 
revealed  some  tendency  of  current  thought  or 
the  growing  prevalence  of  some  special  form  of 
wickedness,  have  laid  on  my  soul  the  sense  of 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  13 

responsibility  to  speak  the  divine  message  so  far 
as  I  have  been  able  to  catch  and  reflect  it. 

As  to  the  form  in  which  the  message  is  stated, 
that  needs  careful  and  thoughtful  elaboration.  We 
have  no  right  to  deliver  the  divine  thought  in  a 
slipshod  or  slovenly  manner.  The  apple  of  gold 
must  be  set  in  the  frame  of  silver.  The  King's 
words  must  be  engrossed  on  parchment  or  vellum. 
There  must  be  a  full  use  of  every  method  which 
would  enhance  to  others  the  sense  of  the  glory 
and  claims  of  Him  for  whom  we  speak. 

Preach  all  your  sermons  over  to  yourself. 
Eemember  that  your  own  heart  must  ever  be  your 
first  congregation.  Take  for  yourself,  that  you 
may  know  if  it  be  digestible,  some  of  the  food 
which  you  are  preparing  for  others. 


n 

ONE  AIM  AND  PUBPOSE 

THE  longer  I  live,  and  study  the  effect  of  sermons 
and  speeches,  the  more  sure  I  am  that  it  is  a 
profound  mistake  to  introduce  too  many  divergent 
themes,  any  one  of  which  is  useful  and  interesting, 
but  none  stands  out  with  such  marked  prominence 
and  distinctness  as  to  arrest  the  attention  of  the 
congregation. 

What  a  contrast  there  is  between  the  styles  of 
some  preachers  and  that  of  the  barrister.  They 
talk  about  their  subject,  and  say  many  pretty  and 
edifying  things,  which  sound  well,  and  would  read 
well,  which  are  pleasantly  conceived  and  elegantly 
expressed.  They  walk  about  Zion,  and  go  round 
about  her,  telling  her  towers,  and  considering  her 
palaces,  but  they  do  not  dream  of  making  a  breach 
in  her  walls,  and  carrying  them  by  an  assault. 
The  other  fixes  on  some  salient  point  in  his  brief 
which  is  capable  of  being  driven  home,  as  a  wedge 
to  split  a  tree.  However  far  he  may  seem  from 
it,  he  always  returns  to  it  at  last;  and  the  jury 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  15 

leave  the  box  with  one  thought  or  fact  that  de- 
mands consideration,  and  becomes  the  standpoint 
from  which  they  view  the  whole  case. 

Surely  the  latter  is  the  truer  method,  and  the 
more  effective.  He  is  a  successful  preacher  of  the 
highest  order  who  manages  to  present  one  great 
conception  before  his  people  each  time  he  addresses 
them,  so  that,  as  they  break  from  the  spell  of 
his  influence,  they  may  be  possessed  by  one  thought, 
inspired  by  one  motive,  and  compelled  towards  one 
act. 

Two  of  the  greatest  preachers  of  modern  times, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  and  Phillips  Brooks,  though  so 
different  in  almost  every  other  respect,  were  alike 
in  this,  that  each  of  their  sermons  would  gather 
round  one  central  thought,  which  burnt  itself  into 
brain  and  heart.  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  show  how 
that  one  thought  appeared  under  the  light  of 
each  of  the  doctrines  of  grace,  how  it  had  to 
do  with  every  possible  experience,  how  it  solved 
every  kind  of  difficulty.  "As  you  listened  to  him, 
you  began  to  realise  the  importance  of  some  frag- 
ment of  truth  which  you  had  previously  hardly 
considered.  For  the  moment,  it  filled  the  entire 
horizon  of  your  souL  You  ruminated  about  it, 
spoke  of  it,  began  to  find  it  for  yourself  every- 
where, and  felt  permanently  richer.  So  with  the 
great  Boston  preacher :  his  sermons  are  delightful 


16  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

models  of  what  each  of  us  should  aim  at  (I 
will  not  stand  sponsor  for  all  his  theology)  in 
the  presentation  of  truth.  In  the  first  one  or 
two  paragraphs  he  states  the  truth  which  he  has 
discovered  in  his  text,  and  begins  to  illustrate 
and  enforce  it  by  references  to  that  world  of  men 
of  which  he  was  so  accurate  an  observer. 

In  the  beginning  of  our  ministry,  our  sermons 
are  crowded  with  too  many  differing  thoughts, 
suggestions,  and  references  to  foreign  objects;  we 
fear  that  we  shall  not  last  out;  we  hurry  from 
one  subject  to  another,  as  the  bee  flits  from 
flower  to  flower.  At  the  close  of  our  address 
our  hearers  have  but  a  vague  and  hazy  concep- 
tion of  what  we  have  been  speaking  about;  they 
may  feel  that  it  has  all  been  very  good,  but  they 
have  no  definite  conception  left  with  them,  and 
they  certainly  do  not  feel  compelled,  as  the 
Athenians  were  after  hearing  Demosthenes,  "to 
go  and  fight  Philip." 

Let  it  be  clearly  borne  in  mind  that  a  redundancy 
of  thought  may  be  a  great  cause  of  weakness  in 
a  sermon.  Everything  that  detracts  from  the 
main  end  in  view  should  be  carefully  eschewed 
and  cut  out;  and  the  current  of  thought  should 
be  kept  within  as  narrow  a  channel  as  possible, 
that  it  may  flow  swiftly,  and  move  the  machinery 
along  its  banks. 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  17 

This  type  of  preaching  makes  heavier  demands 
on  careful  preparation  than  that  which  is  more 
discursive.  Every  new  paragraph  has  to  be 
weighed,  and  its  place  carefully  considered,  with 
the  view  of  ascertaining  whether  it  will  add 
cogency  to  the  argument  and  force  to  the  appeal. 
But  at  the  same  time  it  will  suggest  lines  of 
argument  and  side-lights  of  illustration  which 
will  be  fresh,  vivid,  and  illuminating.  We  are 
all  tempted  to  put  an  illustration  or  piece  of 
scenery  into  our  sermons  because  it  is  striking 
and  picturesque;  and  there  is  often  no  reason  to 
bar  such  things  from  entrance.  But  no  true 
preacher  who  had  adopted  the  ideal  for  which 
we  are  arguing  would  admit  such  pleas  for  a 
moment.  With  merciless  rigour  he  would  cut 
out  every  piece  'of  needless  rhetoric,  as  the  great 
artist  struck  the  exquisitely  painted  chalice  out 
of  his  picture  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  because  it 
attracted  attention  which  he  meant  to  focus  on 
the  face  of  Christ.  But  when  you  have  a  point 
before  you  which  you  want  to  make  clear  and 
operative  to  your  hearers,  as  you  revolve  it  you 
will  be  glad  to  catch  at  the  assistance  of  incidents 
and  illustrations  which  you  would  not  employ  for 
their  beauty  or  pathos,  but  which  admirably  serve 
the  purpose  you  have  in  view.  You  refrain  from 

using   anything   that    will   not   really   illuminate, 
2 


1 8  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

and   enforce,   and   add    to    the    power    of    your 
appeal. 

It  might  be  supposed  that  the  methodical 
expositor  of  the  Bible  would  be  unable  to  model 
his  discourses  on  this  pattern.  But  it  is  not  so. 
It  is  always  possible,  in  a  paragraph  of  Scripture, 
to  discover  the  one  pivot-sentence  on  which  the 
whole  context  turns,  and  around  which  every 
clause  may  be  grouped.  Let  this  be  announced 
as  the  text,  and  the  attention  of  every  thoughtful 
person  will  be  enlisted  to  see  how  central  and 
pertinent  the  selected  clause  is  to  the  remainder 
of  the  paragraph. 

In  every  sermon  we  should  present  our  theme 
to  the  intellect  with  a  thoughtful  exposition  of 
its  truth;  to  the  imagination,  that  it  may  be 
seen  under  the  prismatic  lens ;  to  the  conscience, 
that  it  may  receive  the  sanction  and  acquiescence 
of  what  is  best  in  man;  to  the  heart,  that  the 
fountain  of  emotion  may  be  deeply  stirred ;  to  the 
will,  that  it  may  be  forced  to  take  sides,  and 
choose.  Take  your  wares,  oh,  heavenly  merchant- 
man, to  each  door  in  MansouL  Perchance,  if  one 
is  barred  against  you,  another  may  be  opened. 
Only  take  no  refusal,  and  persist  in  the  reiteration 
from  every  key,  and  instrument,  and  dialect,  of 
the  one  message  which  the  Spirit  has  laid  upon 
your  soul 


Ill 

THE  PEEACHEE'S  OBJECTIVE 

ONE  of  the  greatest  texts  which  illuminate  the 
apostle's  practice  and  suggests  our  own  is  that  in 
which  he  said  that  he  was  not  anxious  to  commend 
himself,  or  furnish  letters  of  commendation,  because 
he  sought  by  the  manifestation  of  the  truth  to 
commend  himself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the 
sight  of  God.  The  poet  appeals  to  the  imagination, 
the  essayist  to  the  sense  of  culture,  the  logician  to 
the  intellect,  and  if,  as  preachers,  we  vie  with  any 
of  these,  we  expose  ourselves  to  certain  disappoint- 
ment. The  true  preacher  passes  by  them  all,  and 
though  he  is  not  indifferent  to  the  claims  of  fancy, 
art,  and  thought,  he  strikes  at  the  spiritual  life  of 
men,  and  appeals  to  their  conscience  in  the  sight  of 
God.  The  conscience  is  our  true  objective.  It  is 
little  for  us,  therefore,  that  men  should  say  they 
are  pleased  with  our  discourses,  or  have  enjoyed 
our  sermons.  We  can  never  rest  satisfied  with 
such  phrases  as  these.  If  they  sum  up  the  whole 
effect  of  our  work,  we  may  hang  our  heads  in 


20  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

shame  and  feel  that  we  have  failed.  It  is  only 
when  we  have  so  wrought  with  God  that  the 
conscience  has  heen  pricked  and  stirred,  or  led  to 
yield  its  willing  or  unwilling  testimony  to  the 
truth  of  our  statements,  that  we  can  feel  that  the 
true  object  of  our  mission  has  been  attained. 

The  following  illustration  has  always  appeared 
to  me  to  set  forth  the  relation  which  we  should 
hold  with  conscience. 

On  his  way  back  from  the  Crusades,  Kichard  I. 
was  entrapped  by  his  enemies,  and  imprisoned  in  a 
lonely  castle  in  Austria.  His  subjects  were  wholly 
in  ignorance  as  to  his  whereabouts,  and  it  seemed 
as  though  it  would  be  impossible  to  discover  their 
lost  monarch.  He  had,  however,  a  favourite 
minstrel,  Blondin,  who  had  composed  many  songs 
with  Eichard,  and  he  started  forth  to  play  the 
familiar  tunes  which  they  loved  in  common, 
beneath  the  prison  walls  of  the  chief  castles  in 
Europe.  After  a  weary  search  he  was  at  last 
rewarded  by  hearing  a  responsive  strain  come  back 
from  a  dungeon  cell,  in  which  he  recognised  his 
master's  voice  and  touch.  This  led  finally  to 
Eichard's  recovery  of  liberty  and  kingdom. 

Is  not  this  an  illustration  of  what  happens 
while  the  Christian  minister  and  preacher,  with 
the  instrument  of  the  Word  of  God  in  his  hand, 
tells  the  story  of  the  love  of  God,  reasons  of 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  21 

righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come? 
From  within  the  heart  of  man,  the  voice  of  con- 
science answers  back,  note  for  note,  bar  for  bar. 
The  Word  of  God  finds  us  at  deeper  depths  than 
any  other  book,  and  thus  proves  itself  to  have  come 
from  Him  who  constituted  our  moral  nature.  The 
deep  of  our  moral  nature  calls  to  the  deep  of  the 
Word  of  God.  Oh,  minstrels  of  the  gospel  story, 
sing  it  before  the  dark  dungeons  in  which  the  con- 
sciences of  men  are  imprisoned  until  there  be  a 
response  that  shall  be  the  best  vindication  that  you 
are  servants  of  the  Most  High ! 

Once  when  I  was  preaching  in  the  Free  Church 
Assembly  Hall  in  Edinburgh,  at  the  close  of  the 
afternoon  address,  I  heard  two  ladies  as  they 
descended  the  staircase  saying  to  one  another, 
"Was  it  not  beautiful?"  However  gratifying  the 
testimony  was  in  one  way,  in  another  it  filled  me 
with  a  sense  of  failure,  because  I  knew  that  so 
searching  an  address  as  I  had  delivered  should 
have  led  to  self-examination  and  prayer  rather 
than  to  such  a  remark  as  that.  So  in  the  evening 
I  introduced  my  sermon  by  saying  that  I  was  sorry 
to  have  failed  so  absolutely  in  the  afternoon ;  and 
when  a  look  of  surprise  passed  over  the  faces  of 
my  audience  I  explained  the  ground  of  my  remark, 
adding,  "When  a  patient  has  left  the  operating- 
room  and  his  flesh  is  freshly  quivering  from  the 


22  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

surgeon's  knife,  you  hardly  expect  him  to  say 
'  How  beautiful  it  was  !'  but  rather,  *  How  searching, 
how  painful;  yet  how  glad  I  am  to  have  endured 
the  knife,  if  it  saved  me  from  a  lingering  death ! ' 
And  when  Jacob  limped  into  the  camp  and  entered 
Rachel's  tent,  on  the  morning  after  his  wrestling 
with  the  angel,  we  cannot  imagine  him  saying, '  Oh, 
wife,  I  have  had  such  a  lovely  and  beautiful  night ! ' 
but  rather,  *  Wife,  I  have  passed  through  an  experi- 
ence which  I  shall  never  forget.  I  shall  limp  till 
my  dying  day,  and  shall  never  be  quite  the  same 
again,  but  I  realise  that  henceforth  there  are 
possibilities  within  my  reach  which  could  not  have 
been,  had  I  not  known  those  hours  of  awful 
agony.' " 

Am  I  not  speaking  that  which  every  true  man 
knows  to  be  right  when  I  say  that  in  our  best 
moods  it  matters  little  to  us  that  the  people  go  out 
from  our  services  passing  high  encomiums  on  our 
eloquence,  learning,  or  faculty  for  interesting  them  ? 
The  one  supreme  authentication  which  we  desire  is 
that  men  should  be  pricked  to  the  heart  and  cry 
out  in  the  throes  of  conscience,  "  What  must  I  do 
to  be  saved  ?" 

The  word  "conscience"  is  derived  from  the 
Latin,  and  means  literally  "  to  know  with,"  that  is, 
it  deals  with  what  a  man  knows  with  himself. 
Other  definitions  have  been  given.  Our  conscience 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  23 

has  been  described  as  our  "  self-knowledge,  of  acts, 
or  states,  or  character,  as  to  right  or  wrong,"  or 
"the  faculty  which  decides  upon  the  lawfulness 
or  unlawfulness  of  our  actions,"  or  "  the  judgment 
which  we  pronounce  upon  our  actions  or  states, 
whether  the  judgment  be   true   or   false."     The 
Bible  speaks  of  it  under  the  emblem  of  a  lamp, 
whose  light  searches  the  hidden  and  dark  places  of 
the  souL     But  perhaps  it  is  better  to  think  of  con- 
science not  as  one  separate  substantial  faculty  of 
our  nature,  but  as  rather  "  the  sum  total  of  all  our 
faculties."     It   is  a  soul  conscious  of  itself,  and 
passing  judgment  upon  its  own  states  and  actions. 
It  is  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  set  up  in  our 
nature.    It  is  the  Great  White  Throne  in  miniature. 
It  is  a  premonition  and  presage  of  the  Last  Assize. 
It  is  the  voice  of  Nathan  saying  to  David, "  Thou 
art  the  man,"  or  the  reproving  figure  of  Elijah  at 
the  gate  of  ISTaboth's  vineyard.     For  long  years  it 
may  be  stupefied,  gagged,  neglected,  resisted,  but 
whenever  it  hears  the  word  of  truth  proclaimed  in 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  it  stirs  again  and 
awakens.     It  always  recognises  the  sound  of  truth 
for  which  it  was  made.    Concerning  the  expediency 
or  inexpediency  of  an  action,  conscience  has  nothing 
to  say.     Whether  a  certain  course  be  wise  or  the 
reverse  is  a  matter  on  which  conscience  offers  no 
opinion;  but  when  it  is  a  question  of  right  or 


24  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

wrong,  conscience  arises,  and,  without  hesitation, 
like  another  John  the  Baptist  in  the  palace  of 
Herod,  cries,  "  It  is  not  lawful ;  it  is  not  right." 
What  an  ally  this  is  to  the  summons  of  the  King 
of  kings  at  the  gateway  of  the  soul — our  willing 
coadjutor,  our  Heaven-sent  confederate  I 

The  old  school  men,  of  whom  Thomas  Aquinas 
was  one,  were  wont  to  divide  the  judging  function 
of  the  conscience  into  eight  parts : — 

1.  Conscience   testifies.      It   renders   a   witness 
concerning  this  or  that  state,  this  or  that  action, 
and  announces  whether  it  is  good  or  bad. 

2.  It  obliges,  that  is,  it  acquaints  the  will  with 
its  duty,  and  declares  that  the  thing  which  it  points 
out  is  bound  to  be  undertaken. 

3.  It  instigates,  inciting  the  soul  in  the  right 
direction. 

4.  It    accuses,   enumerating    our    offences,   and 
pointing  out  the  details  and  circumstances  of  our 
evil  deeds. 

5.  It  excuses,  declaring  that  this  or  the  other 
action  is  unnecessary. 

6.  It  blames,  pressing  home  upon  the  sinner  that 
it  is  his  fault,  and  his  alone,  which  has  brought 
about  his  vile  condition. 

7.  It  causes  remorse. 

8.  It  pronounces  sentence. 

These  distinctions  have  been  lately  insisted  upon 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  25 

by  a  noted  evangelist,  and  I  think  they  deserve 
to  be  carefully  pondered  by  us;  as  also  the  old 
Eastern  tale  about  the  magic  ring,  which  is  quoted 
in  the  same  connection.  Placed  upon  the  finger  of 
the  sultan  by  a  wandering  fakir,  this  ring  possessed 
the  power  of  being  able  to  prick  its  wearer  when- 
ever he  was  tempted  to  do  wrong.  The  hidden 
lancet  from  within  its  sheath,  in  a  mysterious 
manner,  advertised  the  sultan  when  he  was  in 
danger  of  committing  an  injustice.  Conscience  is 
that  ring,  notifying  us  of  the  quality  of  our  actions 
in  advance,  and  always  after  some  offence  has  been 
committed.  Its  universality  is  of  the  highest  im- 
portance. As  a  Greek  orator  said,  it  speaks  one 
language  at  Athens  and  Borne,  and  has  a  sanction 
in  every  heart,  and  therefore,  wherever  we  go,  we 
are  sure  of  an  ally  in  the  breast  of  Eastern  and 
Western,  learned  and  ignorant,  young  and  old. 

In  the  preparation  of  your  sermons  be  sure  to 
consider  how  far  they  may  arouse  the  conscience ; 
and  notice  that  the  apostle  distinctly  affirms  that 
we  shall  do  this  best  "  by  the  manifestation  of  the 
truth."  It  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  argue  the 
truth  or  prove  the  truth,  it  is  sufficient  to  attest  it, 
to  manifest  it,  to  explain  its  peculiar  bearings ;  and 
as  certainly  as  we  hold  up  the  truth  before  men  it 
will  work  its  own  effect  in  its  unadorned  majesty 
and  strength. 


26  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

Let  us  be  indifferent  to  letters  of  commendation. 
Let  us  count  it  a  matter  of  unconcern  whether  men 
are  pleased  or  otherwise.  Let  our  one  aim  be  so  to 
act "  in  the  sight  of  God "  that  the  conscience  of 
our  hearers  may  accuse  or  excuse  them,  and  bear 
testimony  that  in  holiness  and  godly  sincerity,  not 
in  fleshly  wisdom,  but  the  grace  of  God,  we  have 
behaved  ourselves  and  spoken. 

Eemember  always  those  words  of  Ohrysostom: 
" '  Feed  my  sheep/  Not  to  priests  only  is  this  said, 
but  to  every  one  of  us  also,  who  are  also  entrusted 
with  a  little  flock.  But  do  not  despise  it  because 
it  is  a  little  flock.  For  'My  Father/  He  saith, 
c  hath  pleasure  in  them.'  Each  of  us  hath  a  sheep ; 
let  him  lead  that  to  the  proper  pasture." 


rv 

THE  DEMONSTRATION  OF  THE  SPIRIT 

IT  is  interesting  to  watch  a  well-managed  lecture 
at  the  Eoyal  Institution  or  elsewhere.  Whilst  the 
lecturer  is  proceeding  with  his  discourse,  explaining 
to  his  audience  the  laws  of  light  or  sound  or  the 
comhination  of  gases,  his  assistant  conducts  the 
practical  experiments  that  appeal  to  the  eye,  and 
demonstrate  the  truth  of  what  is  heing  advanced. 

Similarly,  when  we  have  lantern  mission  services 
on  Sunday  evenings  at  Christ  Church,  my  secretary 
and  I  work  out  a  subject  between  us,  and  he  obtains 
the  loan  of  illustrative  slides,  which  he  casts  on  the 
screen,  one  after  another,  as  I  reach  the  special 
point  of  my  talk  which  requires  illustration.  Whilst 
I  have  been  addressing  the  people  as  well  as  I 
could,  behind  me  the  same  truths  have  been  pre- 
sented to  the  eye,  so  that  every  word  has  been 
substantiated  by  two  witnesses. 

In  the  same  way,  when  the  preacher  is  delivering 
the  message  with  which  God  has  intrusted  him,  he 

has  a  perfect  right  to  count  on  the  fellowship  and 

w 


28  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

co-witness  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  according  to  the 
promise  of  our  Lord.  Did  He  not  say  that  the 
Comforter  should  bear  witness  to  His  truth  and 
glory,  and  that  His  disciples  should  do  the  same  ? 
(John  xv.  26,  27).  Did  not  the  apostles  realise 
the  fulfilment  of  that  mighty  assurance,  when  before 
the  Sanhedrim  they  cried,  "We  are  witnesses  of 
these  things,  and  so  is  also  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom 
God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey  Him  "  ?  (Acts  v. 
32).  Are  we  not  assured  that  on  the  first  great 
missionary  journey,  as  Barnabas  and  Paul  spoke 
boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  He  bore 
witness  to  the  word  of  His  grace?  (Acts  xiv.  3). 
And  is  it  not  written  that  God  Himself  bore 
witness  to  the  earliest  preachers  of  the  gospel  by 
signs  and  wonders,  and  by  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
according  to  His  own  will  ?  (Heb.  ii.  4). 

Surely  these  passages,  which  might  be  largely 
matched  from  all  parts  of  the  Bible,  go  to  show 
that  the  almighty  Spirit  waits  to  corroborate  and 
confirm,  to  substantiate  and  enforce  every  word  of 
His  faithful  messenger.  Just  as  our  Lord  was 
conscious  ever  that  His  Father  was  bearing  witness 
to  His  words  (John  v.  36),  so  every  devoted  servant 
of  His  may  reckon  on  His  standing  beside,  and 
bearing  witness,  and  giving  the  seal  and  demonstra- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  surely  what  the 
Apostle  Paul  meant  when  he  reminded  the  Thessa- 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  29 

lonians  that  the  gospel  came  to  them  not  in  word 
only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
in  much  assurance  (1  Thess.  i.  5). 

It  may  seem  like  straining  the  passage,  but  I 
almost  think  that  it  will  bear  the  interpretation, 
when  we  find  another  statement  of  the  same  great 
fact  in  Eevelation  xiv.  13.  The  beloved  disciple 
first  hears  a  great  voice  from  heaven  proclaiming 
a  truth  of  immense  interest  and  importance;  and 
suddenly  he  detects  another  voice  asseverating  the 
same  blessed  truth  from  amid  the  heart  of  the 
Church — "  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit."  A  friend,  know- 
ing how  much  these  words  meant  to  me,  illuminated 
them,  and  they  hang  framed  on  my  vestry  wall.  I 
trust  that  I  may  never  say  aught  from  my  pulpit 
to  which  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  be  unable  to  affix 
His  yea,  and  it  would  be  the  most  desirable  of  all 
attestations  if  to  each  message  delivered  from  that 
or  any  other  pulpit  the  Holy  Spirit  might  be 
able  to  add,  whilst  the  sermon  was  in  process  of 
delivery,  His  deliberate,  emphatic,  and  spirit-thril- 
ling Amen. 

When  He,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  said  our 
Lord,  He  will  convince  the  world  of  sin,  righteous- 
ness, and  judgment ;  and  when  is  He  so  likely  to 
do  this  as  when  His  chosen  messenger  is  delivering 
His  truth  and  using  the  Word  of  God,  which  is 
His  sword?  It  seems  as  though  our  mental  and 


30  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

spiritual  attitude  during  the  delivery  of  a  sermon 
must  be  one  of  constant  expectation;  that  our  Divine 
Ally,  who  has  also  been  at  His  work  by  our  side, 
will  drive  home  His  word  with  irresistible  power,  to 
the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  of  the  joints 
and  marrow,  discerning  and  criticising  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  each  heart.  Especially  when  one  is 
unusually  conscious  of  one's  weakness  and  inability 
to  make  the  desired  impression,  one  turns  to  Him, 
crying,  "Put  on  Thine  extraordinary  might,  oh 
blessed  Spirit,  since  I  am  more  weak  than  usual ; 
let  Thy  might  be  perfected  in  my  weakness;  be 
more  than  sufficient  to  compensate  for  my  failure. 
My  edge  is  blunt ;  I  lean,  therefore,  more  heavily  on 
Thee ;  fail  not  of  Thy  purpose." 

When  we  are  preaching  under  the  deep  impres- 
sion of  the  Spirit's  fellowship,  or,  as  the  apostle 
puts  it,  of  "  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  we 
are  almost  indifferent  to  the  presence  or  absence  of 
certain  people,  or  to  the  largeness  or  smallness  of 
our  congregation.  Our  one  aim  is  to  please  Him 
who  has  chosen  us  as  His  associates  in  the  work  of 
glorifying  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  glorify  whom  He  has 
come  to  reside  in  the  heart  of  the  Church. 

And  when  the  sermon  is  ended,  we  are  not 
anxious  to  obtain  the  plaudits  of  our  fellows.  If 
all  men  applaud  us,  we  are  dissatisfied  if  we  miss 
His  assurance  that  we  have  wrought  with 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  31 

If  all  men  are  silent,  yet  if  He  tell  us  that  He  is 
well  pleased,  we  ask  no  further  tribute. 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  sense  of  rest 
and  peace  which  overspreads  the  soul  when  a  man 
begins  to  live  like  this.  He  becomes  quieter  in  his 
manner.  Aforetime  he  supposed  that  he  could  best 
enforce  his  meaning  by  shouting  aloud,  by  vigorous 
gesticulation,  and  by  peculiar  mannerisms,  which 
really  distracted  and  worried  the  audience.  One 
of  the  most  celebrated  actors  has  left  his  opinion 
on  record,  that  gesticulation  distracts  people  from 
catching  the  sense  of  the  words  that  are  being 
spoken.1  This  is  strikingly  true,  and  when  one  is 
conscious  that  the  Spirit  is  present,  accompanying 
the  word  with  signs  and  wonders  in  the  hearts  and 
lives  of  those  present,  one  is  apt  to  become  more 
quiet,  self-possessed,  and  natural.  Again  those  old 
words  come  to  mind — so  deep  and  true,  so  restful 
and  quieting — "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but 
by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts." 

1  Macready  records  in  his  diary  that  he  lost  hold  of  his  audience 
in  a  certain  scene,  and  he  attributed  this  to  excess  of  gesture.  On 
this  account  he  determined  to  go  through  the  same  scene  the  next 
night  with  his  hands  behind  him.  The  result  was  a  great  success. 


"WORKERS  TOGETHER"  WITH  GOD 

IN  my  early  ministry  I  was  greatly  hindered  by  a 
leading  man  in  the  church — rather  vain  and  self- 
opinionated — who  used  to  stand  at  the  bottom  of 
the  pulpit  stairs  at  the  close  of  the  Sunday  morning's 
sermon,  and  welcome  me  as  I  came  down  with  the 
words,  "  That  was  a  splendid  effort  this  morning." 
It  was  very  flattering,  and  his  words  continually 
proved  an  incentive  in  the  composition  of  my 
sermons,  that  by  the  glowing  rhetoric,  the  intro- 
duction of  poetry,  and  brilliant  quotations,  I  might 
secure  for  myself  the  coveted  eulogy.  If  the  well- 
known  sentence  were  missing  for  two  or  three 
Sundays,  I  was  aroused  to  keen  anxiety,  and 
wrought  with  my  utmost  industry  and  care  to 
obtain  the  pleasure  of  its  sweet  fragrance.  Indeed, 
I  am  afraid  that  I  sometimes  went  to  his  house, 
and  took  supper  with  him  on  Sunday  night,  with 
the  one  hope  that  I  should  be  able  jto  extract  from 
him  words  of  similar  commendation. 

As  I  look  back  on  it  now  I  feel  ashamed  that  I 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  33 

could  ever  have  prostituted  my  opportunities — the 
ministry  of  Christ's  gospel — to  such  an  unholy 
purpose.  I  used  the  pulpit  as  an  opportunity  for 
ministering  to  my  own  vanity  and  self-congratula- 
tion. May  God  forgive  me!  But  let  every 
preacher  who  reads  these  words  he  warned.  Let 
each,  as  in  a  mirror,  see  the  temptation  to  which 
he  is  exposed.  We  are  none  of  us  beyond  the 
temptation  of  preaching  to  one  or  two  special 
people  •  in  the  audience,  for  whose  delectation  we 
prepare  our  discourses,  whose  presence  or  absence 
makes  all  the  difference  to  us  in  delivering  them, 
and  whose  word  of  commendation  is  greatly  desired 
at  the  close. 

Yet  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  good  for  every 
preacher  to  have  an  incentive,  that  in  preparing 
beforehand,  and  while  uttering  his  message,  he  may 
be  stirred  to  do  his  best.  And  if  that  stimulus 
may  not  be  derived  from  the  congratulations  of  our 
fellows,  where  shall  we  obtain  it  ?  May  it  not,  I 
ask,  be  supplied  by  the  consciousness  that  we  are 
"  workers  together  "  with  God ;  that  He  has  done  us 
the  infinite  honour  of  asking  us  to  co-operate  with 
Him  in  the  divine  work  of  redemption;  that  He 
has  summoned  us  from  the  pruning-hook  and  the 
fishing-net  to  co-operate  with  Him  in  bringing  men 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  thraldom  of 
Satan  into  the  kingdom  of  His  dear  Son  ?  Surely 


34  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

in  all  the  world  there  is  no  dignity  to  be  compared 
with  that  which  accrues  from  association  with  such 
a  Worker  in  such  a  work. 

Such  co-operation  as  this  does  not  for  a  moment 
lead  to  indolence  and  lethargy.  On  the  contrary, 
it  stimulates  us  to  the  highest  activity.  You  will 
remember  how  the  great  apostle  to  the  Gentiles 
tells  us  that  he  laboured,  agonising  according  to 
His  working  who  wrought  within  him  mightily 
(Col.  i.  29).  And,  indeed,  this  is  the  natural 
result  with  all  who  truly  realise  that  their  fellow- 
ship is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus, 
and  that  they  have  been  called  into  a  divine 
partnership  with  the  blessed  God,  travailing  in 
birth  for  souls,  presenting  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus,  and  bringing  their  converts  through  the 
initial  difficulties  which  beset  the  entrance  of  the 
strait  gate,  until  their  faltering  footsteps  are  firmly 
placed  upon  the  way  that  leadeth  to  everlasting 
life. 

Suppose  the  great  artist  Herkomer  were  to  tell 
one  of  his  students  that  he  proposed  to  spend  an 
entire  morning  helping  him  to  finish  a  picture 
which  had  long  been  waiting  on  the  easel  for  the 
completing  touch.  Can  we  for  a  moment  suppose 
that  the  young  novice  would  count  the  coming  of 
the  master  a  reason  for  slothful  indolence  ?  Would 
it  not  rather  be  an  incentive  to  the  most  careful 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  35 

preparation  of  brush,  and  palette,  and  canvas,  so 
that  everything  might  be  ready  to  hand,  and  that 
no  single  moment  of  precious  time  might  be 
squandered?  Would  he  not  be  on  the  alert  with 
miserly  care  to  garner  every  suggestion  ?  Have 
we  not  seen  how  the  presence  of  a  teacher  in  the 
classroom  has  communicated  the  heat  of  his  passion 
to  the  young  natures  which  have  gathered  around 
him,  and  which  have  become  ignited  with  a  similar 
glow  ?  Does  not  the  presence  of  the  officer  in  the 
midst  of  his  men,  so  far  from  leading  them  to 
lethargy,  stimulate  them  to  the  highest  heroism? 
Surely,  then,  the  presence  of  Christ,  known  and 
felt  by  the  preacher,  should  be  enough  to  raise  his 
spirit  to  the  highest  degree  of  enthusiasm,  so  that 
it  should  be  pervaded  by  the  Master's  love  for 
men,  and  energised  by  the  spirit  of  His  untiring 
devotion. 

Some  time  ago,  as  I  was  walking  along  a  country 
road,  I  came  on  a  deep  saw-pit.  On  the  edge  of 
the  pit  a  sawyer  stood,  handling  one  end  of  a  long 
iron  saw,  the  farther  end  of  which  was,  of  course, 
hidden  in  the  earth;  but  I  knew  that  there  was 
another  man  deep  in  the  pit,  who  was  acting  in 
concert  with  the  one  I  saw,  and  the  rhythm  of  the 
movement  of  whose  body  was  in  exact  accordance 
with  that  of  him  who  stood  in  the  spring  sunlight. 
The  two  men — one  seen,  the  other  unseen — who 


36  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

were  engaged  on  the  same  work,  were  indeed 
"  workers  together."  It  struck  me— and  I  have 
often  returned  to  the  image  since — that  that  was  a 
precise  figure  of  what  was  intended  when  it  was 
said  of  our  Lord  that  He  worked  together  from 
heaven  with  His  disciples,  as  they  went  forth  and 
preached  everywhere  (Mark  xvi  20).  [Compare 
2  Cor.  vi  1.] 

Throughout  His  life  He  was  always  working 
with  His  apostles,  and  honouring  them  by  fellowship 
with  Himself.  The  part  they  played  was  very 
simple  and  limited;  but  He  treated  it  as  being 
indispensable  to  the  perfecting  of  His  plans.  He 
was  the  root  elaborating  the  precious  juices  of  the 
heavenly  wine ;  but  they  were  necessary  to  Him  as 
the  branches  reaching  over  the  well,  covered  with 
clustered  fruit.  And  now  that  He  is  in  glory,  it  is 
by  His  power  alone  that  men  are  regenerated  and 
saved;  but  it  is  for  us  to  preach  the  Word,  be- 
lieving in  His  co-operating  grace,  and  afterwards 
helping  those  who  have  been  impressed  and  con- 
victed to  come  to  the  fulness  of  His  salvation. 

What  a  difference  this  makes  before  we  enter 
the  pulpit!  We  make  the  passage  between  the 
vestry  and  the  place  from  which  we  face  the 
audience,  whether  the  rostrum  be  fenced  with 
simple  wooden  railings  or  enclosed  in  stone, 
leaning  heavily  upon  Christ,  and  saying  to  Him, 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  37 

"I  will  not  go  unless  Thou  go  with  me";  we 
stand  before  the  people,  more  conscious  of  His 
presence  than  of  theirs;  and  whilst  we  are 
preaching  we  keep  saying  in  our  heart,  "Dear 
Lord,  these  words  of  mine  are  poor  and  simple, 
but  let  Thy  Holy  Spirit  fix  them  as  nails  in  a 
sure  place."  And  when  the  sermon  is  over,  we  do 
not  seek  the  flattery  and  commendation  of  men ;  it 
is  enough  to  know  that  He  who  has  summoned  us 
to  work  with  Him  is  satisfied,  and  that  we  have, 
done  that  which  He  sent  us  to  do. 

In  a  Norwegian  hotel  the  other  day  a  little  girl 
with  one  finger  was  strumming  over  a  tune,  the 
only  one  she  knew,  to  the  distraction  of  all  the 
occupants  of  the  room,  when  an  accomplished 
pianist  sat  down  beside  her  and  improvised  a 
ravishing  accompaniment.  After  they  had  finished, 
he  led  the  child  round  the  company,  saying,  "This 
is  the  young  lady  whom  you  must  thank."  So 
may  God  ever  accompany  our  poor  words  with  the 
demonstration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  I 


VI 

A  DIVINE  PASSION 

THE  other  day  it  was  my  lot  to  hear  a  mission 
sermon.  Its  exegesis  was  correct,  its  illustrations 
apt,  its  spirit  evidently  sincere.  It  was  altogether 
above  the  average  of  pulpit  productions.  But  some- 
how it  failed  to  move,  because  the  preacher  was 
not  moved.  It  did  not  kindle,  because  the  preacher 
did  not  glow.  There  was  no  passion  in  the  utter- 
ance, no  magnetic  intensity ;  nothing  to  show  that 
the  speaker  realised  that  he  was  standing  between 
the  living  and  the  dead,  and  was  called  to  plead 
with  men  as  one  who  must  give  an  account.  And 
as  I  listened,  I  realised  that  a  mirror  was  being 
held  up  to  myself ;  for  too  often  that  divine  passion 
for  the  souls  of  others  has  been  sadly  absent,  and 
not  always  missed. 

We  are  all  lamenting  in  these  days  the  ebb  of 
religious  interest  on  the  part  of  vast  masses  of  the 
people,  and  seek  to  account  for  it  in  various  ways. 
But  may  we  not  ask  whether  some  of  the  fault 
is  not  traceable  to  ourselves, — not  that  we  are 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  39 

deficient  in  the  traits  of  a  consistent  character; 
not  that  we  are  lacking  in  correct  views  of  truth, 
or  in  laborious  endeavour  to  give  them  a  worthy 
representation;  not  that  we  are  lazy,  indolent,  or 
careless, — but  that  we  are  deficient  in  passion,  in 
enthusiasm,  in  glow,  and  intensity  of  spirit  ?  We 
may  be  lights  in  the  world,  and  shining  lights ;  but 
there  is  a  whole  hemisphere  of  difference  between 
being  a  shining  light  and  a  burning  and  shining 
light. 

ILLUSTRIOUS  EXAMPLES. 

Allow  me  to  recall  to  your  minds  the  illustrious 
examples  of  men  who  have  been  consumed  by  this 
divine  passion — of  Oliver  Heywood,  who,  in  one 
year,  besides  his  stated  work  on  the  Lord's  day, 
preached  one  hundred  and  fifty  times,  kept  fifty 
days  of  fasting  and  prayer,  and  nine  of  thanks- 
giving, and  travelled  fourteen  hundred  miles  on 
horseback,  in  the  prosecution  of  his  laborious 
ministry.  Of  Baxter,  whose  Reformed  Pastor,  more 
than  any  other  book  of  the  same  description,  glows 
with  a  divine  passion  which  all  the  persecutions 
he  endured,  and  his  excruciating  physical  sufferings, 
could  not  extinguish — nay,  rather  stirred  to  an 
intenser  vehemence.  Of  Whitfield,  who  would 
spend  whole  days  in  Moorfields,  at  fair  times, 
encountering  the  hubbub  of  crowds,  the  ridicule  of 


40  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

Merry  Andrews,  the  personal  violence  of  dastardly 
ruffians,  the  rain  of  stones,  dirt,  rotten  eggs,  and 
pieces  of  dead  cats.  Of  Wesley,  who  wore  out  his 
life  in  labours  so  great,  that  it  seemed  as  though 
he  was  in  haste  to  die.  Of  Brainerd,  dwelling 
among  savages,  inhabiting  an  ill-furnished  hut  in 
the  forest,  when  the  home  of  Jonathan  Edwards 
was  open  to  him;  living  on  the  hardest  fare, 
praying  till  he  was  in  a  heavy  sweat,  though  a 
cold  wind  was  blowing,  and  dying  in  his  young 
life,  literally  worn  out  by  his  labours.  Or  of  Dr. 
Payson,  who  impaired  his  health  by  the  frequency 
of  his  fastings  and  the  importunity  of  his  prayers, 
and  of  whom  it  is  said  by  his  biographer,  that  his 
language,  his  conversation,  and  his  whole  deport- 
ment were  such  as  brought  home  to  and  fastened 
on  the  minds  of  his  hearers  the  conviction  that  he 
"believed,  and  therefore  spoke.  You  may  remember 
that  he  regarded  it  as  so  important  to  produce  such 
an  impression  on  the  attendants  of  his  ministry, 
that  he  announced  as  the  topic  of  one  of  his 
addresses  to  his  fellow-ministers,  "  The  importance 
of  convincing  our  hearers  that  we  believe  what  we 
preach."  And  what  shall  I  more  say,  for  the  time 
would  fail  to  tell  of  Venn,  Berridge,  and  Komaine ; 
of  Newton,  Cecil,  and  Simeon;  of  Joseph  Alleine 
and  John  Howe ;  of  Thomas  Spencer,  of  Liverpool, 
and  Murray  McCheyne,  of  Dundee, — of  whom  it 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  41 

may  almost  be  said  that  the  Almighty  made 
winds  His  messengers,  and  His  ministers  flames  of 
fire. 

When  I  speak  of  the  divine  passion  which  should 
burn  in  our  manner  and  words  when  we  are  handling 
the  divine  mysteries,  and  standing  before  men  on 
the  behalf  of  God,  I  want  to  make  myself  clear.  I 
do  not  for  a  moment  advocate  a  mere  emotionalism, 
a  continuous  address  to  feeling,  an  excited  and 
vehement  series  of  appeals  which  become  vapid  and 
vain  because  not  based  on  the  exposition  and  en- 
forcement of  truth.  I  do  not  mean  the  suspense 
of  the  reasoning  faculties  or  the  judgment.  Still 
less  do  I  advocate  a  hysterical  throwing  about  of 
the  arms,  contortions  of  the  face,  ranting  and 
shouting  with  the  voice,  or  foaming  at  the  lips. 
I  should  judge  that  Jonathan  Edwards'  mighty 
sermon  was  almost  entirely  an  appeal  to  the 
reason,  and  that  it  might  be  described  as  "logic 
on  fire."  It  is  not  by  showing  the  excessive  signs 
of  emotion  that  a  speaker  will  beget  emotions. 
The  excessive  display  of  our  own  emotion  diverts 
the  minds  of  our  hearers  from  the  thoughts  that 
should  excite  emotion.  Their  observing  faculties 
are  so  occupied  with  the  gymnastic  performance 
which  is  being  provided  for  them,  or  they  are  so 
deafened  by  the  roar  of  artillery,  that  they  have  no 
time  to  think.  It  is  compressed  steam  that  drives 


42  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

our  engines.  Our  inspiration  is  not  gauged  by  our 
perspiration,  and  we  shall  not  arouse  our  audiences 
to  go  and  fight  Philip  merely  by  fanning  the  flames 
of  their  fanaticism. 

SOUECES    OF   THIS   DlVINE   PASSION. 

The  sources  from  which  this  divine  passion  is 
fed  are  various,  and  yet  one. 

1.  In  order  to  obtain  it,  we  must  have  a  purpose 
in  each  discourse  we  deliver.  It  is  not  enough  to 
explain ;  we  must  enforce.  We  must  not  be  con- 
tent with  a  nice  discrimination  of  doctrine,  a  state- 
ment of  truth,  a  pretty  handling  of  our  theme,  an 
ingenious  analogy  and  beautiful  crust  of  poetical 
sentiment.  We  must  seek  to  elicit  some  personal, 
inner,  and  spiritual  response  from  the  consciences 
of  our  hearers.  We  must  aim  at  producing  revolu- 
tions; at  leading  up  to  crises  in  experience;  at  effect- 
ing some  definite  result  in  each  of  those  whom  we 
address.  Each  sermon  should  be  inscribed  with 
the  words,  "  One  thing  I  do."  We  must  enter  our 
pulpits  or  platforms  intent  on  carrying  out  one 
point.  If  one  method  of  address  fails,  we  must  try 
another.  We  knock  at  each  door  of  the  House  of 
the  Soul,  now  at  the  door  of  the  Intellect,  then  of 
the  Imagination,  then  of  the  Emotions.  We  refuse 
to  take  a  denial ;  we  must  succeed,  or  perish  in  our 
attempt,  till  presently  we  ram  our  whole  being  into 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  43 

the  cannon's  mouth,  and  discharge  ourselves,  for  all 
we  are  worth,  at  the  minds  and  hearts  that  have 
resisted  minor  appeals. 

2.  Moreover,  the  majesty  of  truth  will  inflame 
the  holy  passion  of  our  souls.     When  the  knight, 
in  the  old  days  of  chivalry,  knelt  before  the  lady  of 
his  choice,  her  pure  virginal  presence,  her  stainless 
character,  her  high  and  noble  spirit,  stirred  his  soul 
to  deeds  of  heroism,  which  would  have  been  im- 
possible apart  from  the  glow  of  an  intense  devotion. 
So  when  the  servant  of  God  enters  the  Temple  of 
Truth,  and  beholds  the  sweet  and  majestic  presence 
of  this  earliest  daughter  of  the  Eternal,  "  whom  He 
possessed  in  the  beginning  of  His  way,  before  His 
works  of  old,"  his  soul  cannot  but  kindle,  not  with 
sensuous  passion,  but  with  that  high  sentiment  of 
reverence,  of  devotion,  of  enthralment  to  her  service, 
which  bums  on  the  altar  of  the  inner  shrine  with 
quenchless  ardour. 

3.  The  sacred  fire  of  this  divine  passion  is  also 
fed  by  the  quiet  realisation  of  the  infinite  problems 
which  are  being  faced  day  by  day  by  the  souls 
before  us,  even  by  those  that  give  the  slightest 
possible  symptoms  of  religious  earnestness.     What 
heights  of  aspiration,  and  what  depths  of  failure ! 
What   hopes,   and  what   disappointments !     What 
sorrows,  which,  come  near  to  heartbreak,  crying  for 
balm !    What  mysteries  crying  for  solution !    What 


44  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

sins  crying  for  forgiveness !  If  we  more  often 
substituted  a  consideration  of  the  tragedy  of  human 
life  as  it  is  transacting  under  our  eyes,  not  only  in 
the  glare  of  the  great  city,  but  in  the  annals  of 
a  quiet  neighbourhood;  if  we  realised  the  vast 
interests  that  may  impinge  on  the  delivery  of  a 
single  sermon ;  if  we  entered  more  deeply  into  our 
Master's  estimate  of  the  value  of  a  single  soul,  as 
the  block  from  which  an  angel  or  a  demon  may  be 
hewn,  it  would  be  impossible  to  be  listless  and 
insipid,  icily  elegant,  or  faultlessly  correct. 

"A  want  of  earnestness,"  says  John  Angell 
James,  "in  the  execution  of  that  commission, 
which  is  designed  to  save  immortal  souls  from 
eternal  ruin,  and  raise  them  to  everlasting  life,  is 
a  spectacle  which,  if  it  were  not  common,  would 
fill  us  with  amazement,  indignation,  and  contempt." 
We  have  read  the  speeches  of  the  great  masters  of 
eloquence,  of  their  intense  anxiety,  their  untiring 
effort,  and  the  mighty  periods  that  flashed  from 
their  burning  souls ;  and  do  we  condemn  as 
enthusiasts  the  Athenian  orator  who  agonised  to 
save  his  country  from  the  yoke  of  Philip,  the 
majestic  Koinan  who  roused  the  indignation  of 
the  republic  against  the  treason  of  Cataline,  or  our 
own  Wilberforce,  who  for  twenty  years  appealed 
to  the  justice  and  mercy  of  a  British  Parliament 
against  the  atrocities  of  the  slave  trade  ?  On  the 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  45 

contrary,  we  deem  no  eulogy  sufficient  to  express 
our  admiration  of  their  noble  enthusiasm.  But  our 
panegyric  upon  them  is  a  condemnation  upon  our- 
selves; for  how  far  short  of  them  do  we  fall  in 
earnestness,  though  the  salvation  of  a  single  soul, 
out  of  all  the  multitudes  that  come  under  the  in- 
fluence of  our  ministrations,  is  an  event  which,  in 
its  consequences,  is  inconceivably  more  momentous 
than  all  the  objects  for  which  these  men  exhausted 
the  energies  of  their  intellect  and  life  ! 

When  the  soul  is  filled  with  this  divine  passion, 
intent,  on  the  one  hand,  on  the  glory  of  the 
Eedeemer,  and,  on  the  other,  on  the  comfort,  help, 
and  blessedness  of  mankind,  it  will  insensibly 
acquire  all  the  attributes  of  good  preaching.  It 
is  a  profound  belief  of  mine  that  truth  is  always 
allied  to  beauty,  and  that  those  who  present  her, 
though  in  unadorned  nakedness,  can  hardly  fail  to 
attain  to  a  high  standard  of  diction  and  eloquence. 
In  reading  the  speeches  of  that  consummate  orator 
the  late  John  Bright,  one  is  struck  by  the  absence 
of  anything  like  meretricious  ornament;  there  is 
no  straining  for  effect ;  the  illustrations  are  com- 
paratively few,  and  are  not  introduced  for  their 
own  sakes;  and  yet  what  majesty,  what  impres- 
siveness  in  every  oration ! 

Voltaire  remarks  of  Cavalier  that  in  the  end 
"  he  much  failed  of  his  first  enthusiasm."  It  may 


46  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

be  that  some  of  us  are  liable  to  the  same  charge. 
But  we  must  remember  that  those  who  wait  on  the 
Lord  change  their  strength  before  they  mount  up. 
They  leave  behind  the  strength  of  their  young  life, 
which  is  resourceful  and  self-reliant,  and  take 
instead  an  enduring  enthusiasm  which,  as  in  the 
case  of  Christ,  eats  them  up  in  self-forgetting 
zeal. 

But  there  is  one  supreme  and  transcendent 
source  of  this  divine  passion.  Our  Lord  said 
that  He  had  come  to  send  fire  on  the  earth. 
He  was  the  divine  Prometheus  who  first  taught 
the  secret  of  a  baptism  of  flame.  Ascended  to 
the  Father's  right  hand,  He  sent  forth  the  Divine 
Spirit,  who  descended  as  tongues  of  fire  and  set 
hearts  aflame.  Shall  we  not  seek  our  share  in  that 
Pentecostal  gift  ?  And  shall  we  not  ask,  that  in 
the  stillness  of  this  hour  we  may  each  realise  that 
the  Fire  of  God  has  again  fallen  on  the  sacrifice, 
and  that,  after  a  spiritual  fashion,  we  have  again 
ignited  our  torches  from  the  Divine  Flame,  as  once 
a  year  they  do  in  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  ? 
And  when  the  Holy  Spirit  has  done  His  most  effectual 
work,  we  shall  not  be  conscious  of  Him,  but  of  Jesus 
Christ;  and  each  shall  be  able  to  say,  with  Zinzendorf, 
*'  I  have  but  one  passion :  it  is  He,  and  He  only." 

All  around  the  world  is  throbbing  with  passion, 
whether  in  the  pursuit  of  trade,  of  science,  of  politics, 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  47 

or  of  pleasure ;  let  not  our  congregations  then  feel, 
as  they  listen  to  our  sermons  on  the  Lord's  Day 
and  compare  them  with  what  they  have  encountered 
during  the  week,  that  they  are  turning  from  the 
brilliant  glow  of  the  electric  light  to  the  thin  yellow 
flame  of  a  small  gas  jet.  In  view  of  the  swift 
movement  around  us,  it  should  be  impossible  for 
any  of  us  to  preach — to  make  use  of  a  coachman's 
phrase — "  without  turning  a  hair." 


vn 

SERMON   CONSTRUCTION 

IN  making  a  sermon,  you  must  first  be  sure  that  you 
have  a  definite  message.  It  is  not  that  you  have 
discovered  a  fantastic  or  striking  way  of  treating  a 
text  of  Scripture,  nor  that  you  can  bring  either 
poetry  or  learning  to  bear  upon  its  treatment; 
certainly  not  that  the  hour  is  at  hand  when  you 
must  fulfil  an  engagement — none  of  these  should 
be  the  primary  cause  of  making  a  sermon.  You 
must  ask  your  Lord  and  Master  to  lay  on  you  a 
message  from  Himself. 

It  is  always  a  matter  of  thankfulness  when  that 
message  at  once  associates  itself  with  some  massive 
word  of  Scripture — a  text  with  sea-room,  which  will 
be  a  blessing  to  the  soul  that  perhaps  can  remember 
nothing  of  the  sermon  but  the  text — a  text  with  far- 
spreading  roots  to  it,  yet  tapering  to  a  single  flower, 
which  offers  itself  for  your  hand  to  pluck  and  bear 
to  your  congregation.  This  is  why  I  urge  the 
habit  of  exposition  on  those  who  fulfil  a  regular 
ministry,  because  necessarily  they  are  compelled  to 

48 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  49 

deal  with  considerable  paragraphs  of  Scripture,  even 
though  they  may  announce  for  their  text  but  the 
clause  of  a  verse. 

Take  great  Texts. — It  is  a  good  rule  to  take  great 
texts,  even  though  they  seem  deeper  than  any 
plumb-line  that  you  possess.  Their  very  majesty 
will  quicken  your  thoughts  and  arouse  your  heart. 
I  think,  too,  that  we  do  well  to  keep  constantly 
before  our  minds  great  subjects,  which  touch  the 
very  fundamentals  of  our  faith,  in  the  confident 
belief  that  the  Master's  message  will  associate  itself 
with  one  of  these. 

When  the  message  is  obtained,  and  the  text 
chosen,  it  is  well  to  jot  down  the  first  thoughts  that 
suggest  themselves,  in  any  order  in  which  they 
come  tumbling  out  of  the  mind.  As  likely  as  not 
you  will  not  use  one  of  them,  but  they  will  suggest 
others,  which  you  will  use.  If  you  are  able  to 
leave  your  text  or  message  to  simmer  in  the  sub- 
conscious portion  of  your  mind  for  a  few  hours,  so 
much  the  better.  Go  about  your  daily  business, 
and  whenever  a  thought  or  illustration  strikes  you 
note  it  down  on  a  piece  of  paper,  carried  in  a  con- 
venient pocket  for  the  purpose.  If  you  sleep  on 
your  subject,  still  so  much  the  better.  Extra- 
ordinary things  are  done  during  sleep  in  the  labora- 
tory of  the  mind.  Only  have  your  paper  and  pencil 

ready  by  your  bed,  to  jot  down  your  first  waking 
4 


50  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

thoughts — the  first  pure  product  of  swS-conscious, 
or  unconscious,  cerebration. 

We  all  know  the  famous  story  of  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
who  retired  to  rest  one  night,  without  being  able  to 
find  the  clue  to  the  tangled  skein  of  his  sermon  for 
the  following  day.  In  the  morning  he  said  to  his 
wife,  "  I  wish  that  I  could  only  recall  a  treatment 
of  my  subject  which  presented  itself  in  my  dreams, 
but  it  is  entirely  gone  from  me."  "  Go  to  your 
table,"  was  the  reply,  "and  see  what  you  have 
written  there."  On  going  across  the  room,  he 
found  the  skeleton  of  a  sermon  on  the  text  which 
had  refused  to  yield  itself  to  treatment  on  the 
previous  night,  but  which  had  yielded  its  inner 
heart  to  the  quiet  reverie  of  the  night.  It  appeared 
that  Mrs.  Spurgeon  had  noticed  her  husband  arise 
from  bed,  go  to  the  table,  write  down  his  thoughts 
in  brief,  and  return  to  bed,  apparently  without 
awaking. 

It  is  to  compare  very  small  things  with  great,  to 
say  how  often  I  have  thrown  all  kinds  of  material 
into  the  mill  of  my  mind,  to  find  the  rags  turned 
out  as  a  woven  tissue  of  paper,  in  which  all  the 
processes  of  manufacture  were  obliterated,  and 
only  the  result  remained.  But  this  does  not 
mean  that  you  should  be  lazy  all  the  Saturday 
morning  and  afternoon,  read  a  number  of  com- 
mentaries over  on  Saturday  night,  and  expect 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  51 

to  find  your  sermon  ready  issued  on  Sunday 
morning.  It  is  only  when  there  has  been  honest, 
painstaking  work  that  we  can  count  on  the  help 
of  the  Comforter  to  perfect  our  poor  work,  as  a 
great  painter  may  go  over  the  rude  attempts  of 
some  tyro  in  art,  removing  the  traces  of  im- 
maturity, and  leaving  on  the  canvas  the  touch 
of  a  master-hand. 

Study  what  others  have  said. — One  of  the  earliest 
processes  in  sermon-building,  and  only  after  you  have 
jotted  down  all  that  may  have  occurred  to  your  own 
mind,  is  to  consider  what  others  have  said  about  the 
theme  in  hand.  It  is  only  wise  and  right  that  you 
should  read  every  commentary,  and  weigh  the 
various  renderings  of  the  passage.  If  you  can  find 
sermons  on  the  same  topic,  it  may  be  perilous,  but 
there  is  no  harm  in  reading  them,  so  long  as  you 
allow  them  to  suggest  thoughts  to  your  own  mind, 
whilst  steadfastly  refusing  to  transfer  their  para- 
graphs, as  they  stand,  to  your  own  use.  There  is 
every  reason  why  you  should  study  other  men's 
thoughts,  for  no  one  supposes  that  your  poor  cranium 
contains  the  knowledge  of  the  world,  only  let  the 
thoughts  which  others  give  pass  through  your  own 
mind,  and,  being  sown  in  its  soil,  they  will  appear 
in  quite  another  shape  than  that  in  which  they  were 
first  presented  to  you.  They  will  have  become  your 
own. 


53  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

The  Order  of  a  Sermon.— -The  INTJRODUCTION  will 
probably  be  the  last  thing  you  will  think  of.  When 
the  main  divisions  are  fixed  upon,  and  the  general 
drift  decided,  you  will  see  in  a  moment  what  to 
place  in  your  Introduction,  which  may  recount  some 
local  circumstance  or  event  out  of  which  your 
discourse  has  sprung,  may  show  the  connection 
between  your  text  and  the  context,  or  indicate  that 
the  message  which  it  is  on  your  heart  to  give  is  the 
natural  burden  of  the  words  you  have  announced. 
It  is  so  necessary,  in  your  Introduction,  to  state 
clearly  the  lesson  which  you  are  going  to  enforce, 
and  to  prove  that  it  is  the  legitimate  voice  of  the 
passage.  Often,  when  dealing  with  some  historical 
scene,  it  is  quite  wise,  with  a  few  graphic  touches, 
to  supply  the  local  colouring  and  background  of  the 
incident;  but  do  not  spend  too  much  elaboration 
here. 

The  DIVISIONS  of  your  sermon  must  be  clear  and 
definite.  There  need  not  be  three,  there  is  no 
reason  why  there  should  not  be  two,  or  four,  or 
more.  For  myself,  I  have  a  mysterious  and  nervous 
dread  of  swc,  which  is  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and 
one  less  than  perfection ;  but,  with  that  exception, 
I  would  use  indifferently  each  figure  of  the  numerals. 

Your  divisions  may  not  overlap.  For  instance, 
suppose  a  preacher,  in  considering  the  text,  "  Thy 
kingdom  come/'  were  to  say,  "  We  will  consider  the 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  53 

kingdom  of  God  as  it  is — I.  Chronologically.  IL 
Geographically.  III.  Dispensationally.  IV.  Typi- 
cally. V.  Eternally."  Do  you  not  see  that  the 
third  and  fourth  divisions  would  collide?  They 
cover  the  same  ground.  Indeed,  the  phrases  are 
largely  indentical,  for,  when  you  talk  of  dispensa- 
tional  truth,  you  mean  that  the  same  general 
principles  have  reappeared  under  different  forms 
in  following  ages;  and  you  are  driven  to  treat  of 
David's  kingdom  (for  instance)  as  foreshadowing 
the  reign  of  the  Messiah ;  yet,  what  is  this  but  to 
deal  with  the  story  of  the  Jews  as  typical  of  things 
that  were  to  be  revealed  ? 

Suppose,  also,  that  a  preacher  were  to  take  as 
his  text,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,  and  I 
will  give  you  rest,"  and  should  announce  as  his 
divisions — I.  The  Sympathy  of  Christ's  Call.  IL 
The  Universality  of  its  Appeal.  III.  The  In- 
dividuality of  its  Acceptance.  IV.  The  Simplicity 
of  it.  V.  The  Persons  Addressed.  There  would 
be  many  serious  mistakes,  that  would  greatly  disturb 
the  success  of  the  appeal,  besides  hurting  the  sense 
of  symmetry  in  any  thoughtful  persons  who  might 
be  in  the  audience.  First,  the  last  division  really 
comes  in  under  the  second,  because,  in  dealing  with 
the  universality  of  the  call  you  naturally  dwell,  not 
only  on  the  word  all,  but  on  the  fact  that  all  men 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden.  Secondly,  it  would  be 


54  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

much  wiser  to  put  the  sympathy  (I.)  and  the  sim- 
plicity (IV.)  of  the  call  under  one  head,  as  indicating 
the  characteristics  of  the  speaker ;  and  you  might 
add  two  or  three  other  traits  of  the  same  kind. 
Finally,  the  sermon-sketch  might  come  out  thus: — 

I.  THE  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  SPEAKER — 

(a)  He  is  sympathetic  (tender  ?). 

(b)  He  is  conscious  of  all-sufficiency  in  His 

person  and  work. 

(c)  He  is  untiring  (as  fresh  to-day  as  ever). 

(d)  He  is  urgent  ("  How  shall  we  escape," 

etc. — Heb.  ii.  1—4). 

(e)  He  is  meek,  and  lowly  in  heart. 

II.  THE  UNIVERSALITY  OF  His  APPEAL — 

(a)  All  mankind  are  included  in  His  in' 

-carnation  and  propitiation. 

(b)  The  characters  described  are  appropriate 

to  every  age  and  rank. 

(c)  The  Son  of  Man  is  above  all  tribal  and 

racial  distinctions. 

III.  THE  KESPONSE  IT  DEMANDS — , 

(a)  It  must  be  personal.     Each  for  himself. 

(b)  It  should  be  immediate.     To-day,  hear 

His  voice. 

(c)  It  may,  in  the  first  steps  of  it,  be  wholly 

unemotional.     "  Whosoever  will." 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  55 

The  CLOSING  APPEAL  should  be  the  most  care- 
fully prepared.  What  is  said  last  will  linger 
longest.  Don't  leave  the  closing  words  to  haphazard. 
An  illustration,  an  apt  and  brief  incident,  a  verse  of 
a  familiar  hymn — anything  which  will  gather  up 
your  meaning  concisely  and  definitely — is  good.  Let 
these  closing  words  be  delivered  in  a  quiet,  but 
intense,  manner  ;  not  vociferously,  nor  excitedly,  nor 
with  the  declamation  of  an  orator.  Let  them  be 
spoken  as  by  one  who  pleads  with  the  souls  of  men, 
and  in  God's  stead  entreats  them  to  be  reconciled. 
Let  every  previous  part  of  the  sermon — its  argu- 
ments, its  illustrations,  its  quoted  texts,  its  appeals 
to  the  emotion  or  fancy — and  in  every  sermon  each 
of  these  should  be  in  evidence — conduce  to  the 
weight  and  impressiveness  of  these  last  words, 
which,  delivered  in  co-operation  with  the  Spirit  of 
God,  shall  be  like  the  last  assault,  that  cannot  be 
withstood,  and  before  which  the  evil  things  which 
had  proudly  raised  themselves  against  the  will  of 
God  must  yield,  and  Mansoul  capitulate. 


vm 

THE  LEGITIMATE  USE  OF  SCEIPTUEE 
SEKMON-MAKING 


IT  has  been  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  of 
my  ministry  never  to  put  an  unnatural  interpreta- 
tion on  Scripture,  nor  to  use  any  Scripture  tortuously 
or  unfairly.  I  have  not  heard  many  sermons  in 
the  last  thirty  years,  but  I  can  remember  a  few, 
in  which  the  texts  have  been  forced  to  bear  an 
unnatural  meaning,  and  it  seemed  .as  though,  during 
the  sermon,  they  were  in  torture,  crying  out  and 
protesting  at  the  usage  to  which  they  were  being 
forced.  This  is  surely  what  the  Apostle  Peter 
referred  to  when  he  said  that  "No  Scripture  is 
of  private  interpretation."  Too  many  preachers 
put  their  private  interpretation  on  striking  phrases 
of  the  Word  of  God,  and  make  them  subserve  a 
meaning  which  the  Spirit  of  God  can  hardly  have 
intended. 

This  practice  is  neither  reverent  nor  wise.  It 
is  not  reverent  ;  because,  surely,  it  is  more  becoming 
to  learn  what  may  have  been  the  divine  purpose 

56 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  57 

in  any  passage  of  Scripture  than  to  impress  it  to 
our  own  purpose.  And  it  is  not  wise,  because 
thoughtful  men  who  listen  feel  that  the  Bible  can 
be  made  to  mean  almost  anything  that  its  expositors 
desire,  and  that  their  method  of  interpretation  differs 
widely  from  that  to  which  all  other  books  are  sub- 
jected. I  should  judge  that  nothing  has  done  more 
to  undermine  the  olden  faith  in  the  Word  of  God 
than  the  habit  of  preachers  in  divorcing  texts  from 
the  contexts,  and  making  them  pegs  from  which 
to  fasten  ideas  and  exhortations  which  have  no 
more  natural  connection  with  them  than  a  coat 
with  the  brass  hook  on  which  it  hangs.  With  all 
my  soul  I  protest  against  this  use  of  the  Bible, 
and  thank  God  that  the  influence  of  my  sainted 
and  beloved  friend,  Eev.  C.  M.  Birrell,  has  always 
made  it  an  impossibility  for  myself. 

Shakespeare  says  that  the  devil  can  quote 
Scripture  to  his  purpose,  and  you  will  remember 
that  on  the  one  occasion  when  he  quoted  it  to 
Christ,  he  so  divorced  an  injunction  from  its 
associated  verses  that  our  Lord  had  to  correct 
him  by  saying,  "It  is  written  again."  A  great 
many  of  the  difficulties,  which  trouble  people 
concerning  certain  statements  in  the  Scripture, 
would  disappear  if  only  they  would  carefully  read 
the  whole,  paragraph  or  book  of  which  they  form 
a  part,  and  explain  the  part  by  the  whole. 


58  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

It  would  be  possible  to  prove  every  assertion 
of  the  agnostic  or  materialistic  philosophy  of  the 
present  day  by  isolated  passages  culled  from  the 
Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  It  is  absolutely  essential  in 
the  case  of  that  book  to  read  it  from  end  to  end, 
when  at  once  one  discovers  that  it  is  a  satire  on 
life  spent  "  under  the  sun,"  without  reference  to 
the  unseen  or  eternal  realities  for  which  the  heart 
of  man  was  made.  And  there  are  isolated  texts, 
or  fragments  of  texts,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
which  appear  full  of  condemnation  to  the  soul  that 
has  taken  one  backward  step,  until  the  whole 
treatise  is  read  from  end  to  end,  when  it  is  seen 
that  the  writer  is  endeavouring  to  show  that 
Christianity  is  the  supreme  message  of  God,  which 
can  have  no  sequel,  and  that  therefore  to  reject 
it  is  to  throw  away  the  only  rope  that  hangs  over 
the  face  of  the  precipice,  and  to  refuse  the  one 
boat  that  lies  on  the  desolate  shore  of  time. 

These  two  instances  are  sufficient  to  prove  my 
point.  But  I  remember  a  further  illustration  of 
a  preacher  who  announced  as  his  text  the  words, 
"  I  will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up ;  and  to  the  south, 
Keep  not  back."  The  north,  in  his  sermon,  stood 
for  evil  companions  and  unholy  associates ;  whilst 
the  south  stood  for  the  public-house,  the  house  of 
shame,  and  such  like  haunts  of  evil.  It  was,  no 
doubt,  a  striking  sermon,  but  I  gravely  question 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  59 

whether  he  could  not  have  found  other  texts  which 
would  have  served  his  purpose  better  than  in 
wresting  the  Scripture  in  this  way. 

Our  main  end  in  preaching  is  not  to  bring  our 
thoughts  to  the  Bible,  but  to  bring  out  God's 
thoughts  before  the  gaze  of  our  fellows.  This 
habit  will  demand  more  thoughtful  attention,  care, 
and  time,  but  it  will  have  its  abundant  compensa- 
tions. It  will  afford  an  unfailing  well-spring  of 
interest;  it  will  keep  the  speaker  fresh  and  in- 
teresting; it  will  attract  thoughtful  people  who 
love  the  Word  of  God;  and  it  will  enable  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  wield  His  own  sword  with  un- 
failing effect.  Nothing  so  absolutely  overcomes 
the  resistance  of  the  sinner  as  to  be  met  with, 
«  Thus  saith  the  Lord." 

When  a  text  strikes  you,  be  sure  to  put  it  down 
instantly  in  your  memorandum  book  with  the 
thoughts  that  gather  freshly  around  it.  It  is  most 
important  to  do  this.  You  may  imagine  that  you 
will  recall  them,  but  it  is  as  impossible  to  do  so 
as  to  describe  the  hues  of  sunset  after  they  have 
faded.  Then  at  your  leisure  open  to  the  passage, 
read  the  entire  paragraph,  especially  as  it  is  given 
in  the  Eevised  Version.  See  if  it  will  naturally 
bear  the  use  that  you  are  disposed  to  make  of 
it.  If  not,  dare  to  refuse  to  use  the  text  in  that 
sense,  and  wait  until  you  can  deduce  the  same 


60  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

lesson  obviously  and  naturally  from  some  other 
passage.  It  is  well,  also,  to  turn  to  the  original, 
or  if  it  be  in  the  Epistles,  to  Oonybeare's  and 
Howson's  translation  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  or  to 
some  first-rate  commentary,  that  with  the  help 
of  other  minds  you  may  be  able  to  determine  the 
fundamental  meaning  and  drift  of  the  context. 

I  referred  in  my  last  paper  to  the  right  methods 
of  expository  preaching.  But  let  it  be  remembered 
that  he  is  an  expositor  who  carefully  weaves  the 
context  into  the  sermon,  which  he  delivers  on  some 
pivot  text,  quite  as  much  as  he  is  who,  Sunday 
after  Sunday,  pursues  his  way  through  some  entire 
book  of  Scripture.  In  this  sense  Dr.  M'Laren  is 
a  true  expositor,  for  though  he  rarely  goes  through 
an  entire  book  consecutively,  yet  he  never  takes 
a  subject  without  showing  how  naturally  it  arises, 
not  only  from  the  text,  but  also  from  the  context. 

But  always  recollect  that  you  are  not  warranted 
in  preaching  to  others  that  which  you  have  not 
made  a  matter  of  your  personal  religious  conscious- 
ness. Nothing  so  injures  us  as  to  preach  beyond 
our  own  experiences  and  aims. 


IX 

EXPOSITORY  PEEACHING 

I  HAVE  already  touched  on  this  matter  in  the  previ- 
ous pages,  but  its  importance  demands  that  some 
further  words  be  said  on  it,  though  perhaps  they 
are  more  pertinent  to  those  who  address  the  same 
stated  audience  than  to  the  temporary  supply  or  the 
local  preacher. 

It  has  been  the  almost  invariable  rule  of 
Presbyterian  ministers  to  expound  books  of  Scrip- 
ture in  regular  course  at  one  or  both  of  the  services 
on  each  recurring  Lord's  day.  And  from  them  the 
habit  has  been  passed  on  to  many  of  our  strongest 
preachers,  the  freshness  and  resourcefulness  of  whose 
pulpit  instruction  have  held  large  congregations 
through  long  pastorates.  As  I  write,  I  recall  two 
remarkable  examples  of  this  practice — men  whom 
I  knew  and  admired,  each  of  whom  is  now  with 
God — Hugh  Stowell  Brown  of  Liverpool,  W.  M. 
Taylor  of  New  York ;  and  with  these  may  be  classed 
Dr.  Dale  of  Birmingham,  whose  preaching  was 
largely  formed  on  this  model. 

61 


62  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

There  are  two  methods  of  preaching  which  are 
far  as  the  poles  asunder,  the  topical  and  the  exposi- 
tory. In  the  former  the  preacher  selects  as  his 
theme  some  subject  in  theology  or  philosophy, 
or  some  topic  suggested  by  the  current  life  and 
table  talk  of  the  day,  makes  his  address,  and  then 
looks  into  his  Bible  or  concordance  for  an  appro- 
priate motto-text,  more  or  less  suitable,  but  there 
is  perhaps  the  smallest  possible  connection  between 
the  discourse  and  the  text.  In  the  latter  the 
preacher  prayerfully  selects  some  extended  tract  of 
Scripture  on  which  he  proposes  to  concentrate  him- 
self for  a  considerable  term  of  services ;  carefully 
breaks  it  up  into  paragraphs,  each  of  which  will 
probably  yield  him  at  least  one  sermon;  studies 
the  whole  to  get  the  general  tenor,  and  then  con- 
centrates himself  on  each  separate  part,  with  the 
result  that  his  soul  is  dyed  with  the  message  that 
burdened  the  prophet  or  evangelist  who  spoke, 
centuries  ago,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  former  method  needs  a  much  cleverer  man; 
the  latter  will  enable  a  man  of  very  moderate 
abilities  to  fulfil  a  long  and  useful  pastorate  which 
will  make  his  people  Bible  students,  acquainted 
with  the  whole  range  of  Scripture  truth,  and  less 
liable  than  most  to  be  swept  away  by  every  wind 
of  doctrine  and  sleight  of  cunning  craftiness. 

It  may  be  objected  that  people  will  weary  of  this 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  63 

kind  of  preaching.  If  they  do,  it  is  because  of 
some  mistake  in  the  method  by  which  the  preacher 
sets  to  his  work.  Of  course,  if  he  persists  in  the 
microscopic  examination  of  every  verse  as  the 
Puritan  Caryl  on  the  Book  of  Job,  who,  I  believe, 
devoted  seven  years  to  his  painstaking  toil,  he  may, 
like  his  illustrious  predecessor,  begin  with  a  crowd 
and  end  with  an  audience  of  seven  persons,  faint,  yet 
pursuing.  In  his  biography  of  my  predecessor  in 
the  pastorate  at  Surrey  Chapel  and  Christ  Church, 
Dr.  Allon  relates  that  the  Eev.  James  Sherman  con- 
fessed to  have  made  a  mistake  in  expounding  the 
Psalms  in  a  series  of  sermons,  through  a  succession 
of  years,  because  there  was  necessarily  so  much 
sameness  in  the  theme  and  his  treatment.  But 
these  cases,  whilst  serving  to  show  where  the  rocks 
lie,  need  not  dissuade  us  from  launching  on  the 
broad  bosom  of  the  noble  current  of  Bible  exposi- 
tion. We  must  see  to  it  that  our  course  of  sermons 
should  not  last  for  more  than  six  or  seven  months, 
unless,  as  is  generally  the  case,  we  find  the  interest 
deepening  and  widening  to  such  an  extent  that  we 
feel  justified  in  pursuing  a  leisurely  course.  An 
epistle  need  not  take  more  than  that  time,  while  a 
gospel  may  demand  a  year  and  more. 

The  wrong  method  of  expository  preaching  is  to 
give  out  ten  or  a  dozen  verses  as  your  text,  which 
has  the  immediate  effect  of  depressing  your  hearers, 


64  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

who  naturally  wonder  how  long  it  will  take  you  to 
treat  so  many  verses  when  so  short  a  text  as  "  Jesus 
wept "  will  occupy  you  at  least  forty  minutes.  The 
children,  whose  parents  expect  them  to  write  out 
or  learn  the  text,  are  naturally  the  most  depressed 
of  all.  It  is  a  bad  start,  but  the  bad  is  made  worse 
if  the  unlucky  preacher  goes  on  to  say,  "  I  propose 
to  make  a  few  remarks  on  this  passage."  Oh,  those 
few  remarks !  First,  they  are  not  likely  to  be 
few ;  second,  they  show  that  he  has  probably  not 
studied  his  subject,  and  is  simply  hoping  to  get  a 
start  from  one  of  the  verses,  and  that  if  he  is  per- 
secuted in  one,  he  will  flee  to  another ;  and,  third, 
he  is  likely,  like  a  dishonest  milkman,  to  add  so 
much  water  to  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word  that 
his  audience  will  become  as  attenuated  as  children 
who  are  fed  on  skimmed  milk. 

The  right  method  of  exposition  is  to  discover  the 
pivot  verse,  on  which  the  whole  paragraph  revolves, 
and  in  which  it  centres.  That  is  likely  enough  to 
burn  itself  into  your  heart  as  the  message  of  the 
Lord,  like  the  focal  point  of  a  burning  lens.  You  will 
then  find  that  you  can  draw  upon  the  whole  passage 
for  the  elucidation  or  enforcement  of  this  one  brief 
sentence.  Every  clause  falls  into  its  place  and 
order,  so  that  you  have  no  lack  of  forceful  material 
for  the  elaboration  of  your  theme.  Of  course,  you 
announce  this  as  your  text.  If  there  are  strangers 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  65 

present,  they  do  not  feel  as  though  they  must  suffer 
loss  by  reason  of  having  missed  the  former  sermons ; 
the  discourse  appeals  to  them  as  a  completed  picture; 
and  perhaps  only  your  own  people  are  aware  that 
it  is  part  of  a  series.  In  my  judgment,  it  is  even  a 
mistake  to  spend  too  much  time  in  recapitulation ; 
it  is  much  better  to  plunge  at  once  into  the  state- 
ment of  the  theme  which  your  text  has  suggested, 
and  to  open  up,  as  you  should  always  do  in  your 
introduction,  the  method  of  treatment  which  you 
intend  to  pursue. 

The  advantages  of  this  habit  are  threefold. 

First.  Your  people  will  be  kept  in  constant  con- 
tact with  the  Word  of  the  living  God. 

Second.  They  will  be  interested  to  come  again 
and  again  to  pursue  the  line  of  teaching  which  has 
blessed  or  helped  them,  as  people  will  buy  the 
magazine  in  which  the  serial  story  ends  with  the 
words,  To  le  continued  in  our  next. 

Third.  You  will  be  led  to  consider  passages  of 
the  Word  of  God  which  your  own  temperament  or 
habit  of  thought  might  lead  you  to  avoid,  and  which 
might  seem  so  pertinent  to  the  case  of  people  in 
your  audience  that  you  might  be  accused  of  being 
too  personal.  But  these  objections  do  not  hold 
when  the  passage  which  is  so  peculiarly  appropriate 
comes  in  the  regular  order  of  exposition.  I  have 

found  again  and  again  that  nothing  has  so  pulled 
5 


66  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

up  a  flagging  congregation,  or  retained  a  full  one, 
as  a  series  of  expositions ;  and  if  I  may  refer  to  my 
own  books,  they  have  all  come  into  existence  in 
this  way. 

Let  me  give  one  caution.  Though  you  shall 
carefully  study  every  authority  in  your  reach,  and 
especially  the  original  Hebrew  or  Greek,  it  is  not 
wise  to  needlessly  obtrude  the  names  of  your 
authorities  or  your  knowledge  of  the  original 
languages  on  your  audience.  Give  your  people 
the  results,  and  do  not  worry  them  with  the  pro- 
cess. It  is  enough  for  the  bees  to  give  us 
honey;  you  know  in  a  moment  if  the  amalgam  is 
right.  It  is  not  necessary  for  our  tiny  purveyors 
to  tell  us  how  far  they  flew  over  the  clover  fields, 
and  what  were  the  names  of  the  flowers  from 
which  they  gathered  their  precious  and  appetising 
stores. 

"  Then  bless  thy  secret  growth,  nor  catch 

At  noise,  but  strive  unseen  and  dumb  j 
Keep  clean,  bear  fruit,  earn  life,  and  watch, 
Till  the  white-winged  reapers  cojne." 


A  GEEAT  SEEMON 

THE  greatest  sermon  ever  preached  since  the  re- 
surrection of  our  Lord  was  that  of  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  the  notes  of  which  are  recorded  for  our 
instruction,  not  only  as  to  the  matter,  but  the 
manner.  Few  things  are  more  helpful  to  a  young 
preacher  than  to  take  up  the  masterpieces  of  pulpit 
eloquence,  with  which  literature  abounds,  to  analyse 
them,  and  to  try  and  discover  their  salient  char- 
acteristics. We  may  learn  all  we  need  to  know  of 
the  art  of  pulpit  eloquence  by  studying  the  sermons 
of  a  M'Laren,  Spurgeon,  or  Phillips  Brooks — each 
of  which  stands  for  a  distinct  method.  How  much 
more,  then,  may  we  learn  by  a  careful  study  of  this 
great  sermon,  which  inaugurated  the  movement  of 
which  the  Christianity  of  to-day  is  the  lasting 
memorial  ? 

1.  In  glancing  down  that  sermon  we  are  arrested 
first  by  the  fact  that  it  consists  so  largely  of  quota- 
tion. Out  of  twenty-two  verses,  ten  at  least  are 
given  up  to  the  quotation  of  Scripture  from  the 

67 


68  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

Old  Testament.  .This  well  deserves  attention. 
Modern  sermons  are  not  sufficiently  filled  •with  the 
Word  of  God. 

It  is  the  custom  of  some  well-known  preachers, 
who  have  always  secured  a  wide  and  intelligent 
audience,  to  quote  various  corroborative  passages 
from  the  Bible,  accustoming  their  hearers  to  turn 
from  verse  to  verse  in  their  company.  I  cannot 
but  feel  that  this  is  a  most  instructive  way  of 
preaching,  and  it  is  much  better  to  read  the  Word 
of  God  with  your  people  than  misquote  it.  This 
habit  serves  to  keep  your  congregation  on  the  alert. 
The  rustle  of  leaves  is  very  significant  of  their 
painstaking  interest  and  desire  to  search  the  Word 
of  God,  and  the  result  is  a  ready  acquaintance  with 
all  parts  of  Scripture,  which  is  of  the  utmost  service 
in  establishing  Christian  people  in  the  faith.  I 
have  tried  this  system  now  and  again  with  good 
results,  but  somehow  it  does  not  well  suit  my 
idiosyncrasy.  I  admire  the  custom  and  advocate 
it  for  others,  and  if  I  were  beginning  again  I  think 
I  would  endeavour  to  make  this  a  facile  habit  of 
my  pulpit.  It  certainly  is  my  custom  in  Bible 
readings,  but  in  preaching  I  find  that  the  constant 
turning  of  the  pages  of  the  Bible  checks  me  in  the 
flow  of  my  thought  and  the  cumulative  effect  of 
my  address. 

Perhaps  some  of  us  can  secure  the  same  result 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  69 

by  saturating  our  sermons  with  the  spirit  of  Scrip- 
ture, and  by  quoting  from  memory  certain  apposite 
passages.  This  is  a  special  characteristic  of  Dr. 
M'Laren,  most  of  the  telling  points  of  whose 
sermons  are  clinched  by  so  apt  a  quotation  of 
Scripture  as  to  flood  it  with  a  ray  of  illuminating 
glory.  I  would  specially  urge  young  preachers  to 
fill  their  sermons  with  the  Word  of  God,  which  is 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  Let  the  Spirit  have  some- 
thing in  your  discourses  on  which  He  may  lay  hold. 
It  is  interesting  to  read  the  sermons  of  James 
Parsons,  some  of  which  seem  to  be  little  else  than 
a  mosaic  of  Scripture  texts;  and  probably  in  his 
generation  there  was  no  one  more  eminently  used 
than  he  was  to  the  conversion  of  men.  You  may 
be  sure  that,  since  all  Scripture  is  profitable  for 
teaching,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  and  for  in- 
struction, the  more  there  is  of  it  in  your  sermons 
the  better. 

2.  Glancing  down  this  sermon  one  notices  also 
the  apostle's  reference  to  events  and  objects  which 
were  within  the  knowledge  of  his  audience.  Notice 
specially  the  22nd  verse,  "Wonders  and  signs 
which  God  did  by  Him  in  the  midst  of  you,  even  as 
ye  yourselves  know,"  and  29th  verse,  "His  tomb  is 
with  us  unto  this  day."  In  too  many  sermons 
there  is  an  aloofness  from  the  ordinary  thought  and 
life  of  our  people  which  is  very  prejudicial  to  our 


70  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

success.  We  have  been  in  our  studies  and  amongst 
our  books,  whilst  they  have  been  immersed  in 
business  care  and  anxiety,  and  if  we  want  to  arrest 
and  hold  them,  we  must  learn  the  sacred  art  of 
leading  them  from  the  things  with  which  they  are 
most  familiar  to  the  unseen  and  eternal;  and  the 
transition  should  be  as  easy  and  natural  as  possible. 
In  the  works  of  Charles  Dickens  one  is  per- 
petually arrested  by  his  habit  of  leading  the  atten- 
tion forward  by  almost  insensible  degrees.  If  he  is 
describing  a  house,  he  conducts  you  from  the  road 
where  you  are  standing  to  the  gate,  describes  the 
gate,  and  the  little  path  that  leads  to  the  door, 
whether  paved  with  bricks  or  chips.  He  tells  you 
whether  the  door  is  open  or  shut,  and  what  creeper 
has  climbed  along  the  trellis-work.  In  this  way 
you  are  conducted  into  the  midst  of  scenes  trans- 
acting within  the  house,  of  which  you  need  to 
know.  And  you  may  be  sure  that  he  will  be  the 
successful  preacher,  whether  to  children  or  adults, 
who  can  enchain  their  interest,  and  lead  from  the 
familiar  to  the  less  familiar,  and  from  the  seen  to 
the  unseen.  Do  not  scruple,  then,  to  allude  to  "  the 
tomb  of  David,"  which  is  within  the  knowledge  of 
all  your  people ;  and  remember  how  our  Lord  spoke 
of  the  commonest,  simplest  incidents  by  which  His 
daily  life  was  surrounded,  showing  the  close  con- 
nection between  the  natural  and  the  supernatural 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  71 

3.  The  apostle  constantly  appeals   to    personal 
experience.      Verse     32,    "Whereof    we    all    are 
witnesses."     The    personal    element    entered   very 
largely   into    the    sermons    in    the    Acts    of    the 
Apostles.      Please  turn  to  them  for  the    further 
corrohoration  of    this  remark.      There  is  a  great 
difference  between, the  egotistic  reference  to  oneself 
and  the  simple  testimony  of  witness-bearing  which 
has  for  its  aim  the  exaltation  of  the  Lord.     There 
are  times  in  the  history  of  every  preacher  when  he 
has  a  right  to  exclaim  with  the   beloved  apostle, 
"Things  which  I  have  tasted,  seen,  and  handled, 
concerning  the  Word  of  Life,  I  announce." 

4.  Again,   there   was   great   directness   in   this 
sermon.     Preached  as  it  was  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy   Spirit,   and   burning   throughout   with   His 
sacred  fire,  it  was  evidently  a  message  from  God, 
but  it  was  equally  a  message  to  men.     Verse  22, 
"  Ye  men  of  Israel"     "  Ye  yourselves."     Verse  23, 
"Ye  .  .  .  did   crucify."     Verse    36,  "This   Jesus 
whom  ye  crucified."     Oh  for  the  power  to  charge 
home  men's  sins  upon  their  hearts !     There  must  be 
a  directness  in  our  addresses.     Each  sermon  must 
say  in  the  words  of  Nathan,  "  Thou  art  the  man." 
We  must  cultivate  the  habit  of  particular  preaching. 
We  must  prepare  and  preach  our  sermons  with 
reference  to  distinct  types  of  character  and  experi- 
ence.    What  is  aimed  at  nothing  can  hit  nothing. 


72  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

Have  a  purpose,  an  objective,  a  personal  reference 
in  your  heart  when  you  stand  up  to  preach,  and  if 
you  are  conscious  of  having  one  hand  in  the  grip  of 
Christ,  do  not  scruple  with  the  other  hand  to  strike 
directly  at  the  heart  of  man. 

5.  Lastly,  there  was  much  prayer  before  the 
sermon;  in  this  case  ten  days.  The  fleece  must 
lie  out  in  the  dark  night  before  it  can  be  saturated 
with  dew ;  and  unless  it  is  so  drenched,  it  will  be 
impossible  to  wring  out  from  it  a  bowl  of  water. 
I  like  the  story  of  the  poor  local  preacher,  suddenly 
called  upon  to  preach  in  a  big  chapeL  He  kept 
saying,  "  I  dursen't  do  it."  Presently  he  was  forced 
into  the  pulpit,  and  the  door  shut  on  him ;  and  he 
fell  on  his  knees,  with  bowed  head.  Presently  he 
was  heard  to  say,  "Aye,  Maister,  I've  seen  Thee; 
I  can  manage  it  now." 


XI 

MY  OWN  METHOD 

THE  question  has  often  been  put  to  me,  "  What  ia 
your  own  method  of  sermon-making?"  I  shrink 
a  little  from  complying  with  the  request  to  tell, 
because  it  might  suggest  that  I  was  a  sermon- 
maker  of  so  notable  a  kind  that  it  would  be  well 
worth  the  while  of  others  to  copy  my  example, 
whereas  I  am  very  conscious  of  not  having  attained 
"  to  the  first  three."  I  am  a  servant  to  whom  the 
Lord  gave  two  talents — the  lad  with  five  barley 
loaves  and  two  small  fish.  Besides  this,  it  is  a 
mistake  for  men  at  the  beginning  of  their  minis- 
terial preaching  career  to  imitate  the  methods  of  a 
man  who,  for  thirty-five  years,  has  been  preaching 
never  less  than  three,  and  often  as  many  as  eight 
or  nine,  sermons  a  week.  Necessarily  one's  method 
has  greatly  altered,  as  practice  and  experience  have 
given  one  facilities  which  were  not  possible  in  the 
earlier  days. 

I  fear  my  style  was  but  a  ragged  one  when 
in    1869—70    I   settled   as   assistant   minister  at 

73 


74  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

Pembroke  Chapel,  Liverpool.  There  I  came  in 
contact  with  the  chaste  and  exquisite  style  of  the 
Bev.  G.  M.  Birrell,  who  was  accustomed  to  write 
and  commit  to  memory  every  sermon;  and  in 
imitation  of  him,  which  was  the  sincerest  flattery, 
I,  too,  set  to  work  to  write  and  learn  every  word. 
This  practice  I  continued  for  about  fifteen  years. 

As  for  the  writing,  I  may  fairly  say  that  I  owe 
to  this  habit  more  advantage  than  I  can  possibly 
express.  It  had  two  results.  First,  it  compelled 
me  to  think  carefully  through  the  subject.  My 
pen  was  the  bond  that  kept  my  thoughts  steadily 
concentrated  upon  the  theme  with  which  I  was 
dealing,  and  in  due  time  it  became  possible  for  me 
to  fix  my  mind  with  all  the  power  of  which  it  was 
capable  in  prosecuting  in  various  directions  one 
subject  of  sacred  meditation.  This  habit  has  been 
invaluable  to  me  in  the  somewhat  broken  life 
which  I  have  been  compelled  to  follow  in  sub- 
sequent years,  and  at  almost  any  moment,  when  it 
is  necessary,  I  can  concentrate  my  mind  upon  some 
subject,  undisturbed  by  the  rush  of  the  railway 
train,  the  tumult  of  a  station,  or  the  incidents  of  a 
tramway  ride  through  the  crowded  streets  of  the 
metropolis.  Secondly,  I  ascribe  to  this  habit  any 
lucidity  or  transparency  of  style  of  which  my  pen 
is  possessed. 

In  writing  my  sermons  during  these  years,  I  was 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  75 

in  the  habit  of  mercilessly  tearing  up  page  after 
page  if  I  was  not  satisfied.  Often  I  would  spend 
three  or  four  hours  in  writing  my  introduction.  It 
appeared  as  if  I  was  possessed  by  the  spirit  of 
fastidiousness,  and  unless  my  expressions  seemed 
exactly  suitable  and  adequate,  I  was  not  content  to 
let  them  pass,  and  instead  of  merely  erasing  them 
and  substituting  others,  I  was  not  satisfied  unless 
the  page  on  which  I  wrote  was  clear  and  clean.  I 
had  little  idea  of  what  was  being  secured  by  these 
wasted  sheets  of  closely  written  paper.  In  those 
days  I  had  not  as  yet  written  a  page  for  printing. 
I  had  no  idea  that  people  would  care  to  read  what 
I  wrote.  I  was  preserved  from  the  temptation  to 
expend  myself  unduly  in  the  service  of  the  reading- 
public.  Enclosed  within  the  walls  of  my  study, 
uninvaded  in  those  days  by  a  constant  succession 
of  visitors,  like  a  coral  island  within  its  reef,  I  was 
able  to  grow  flowers  and  fruit  which,  without  doubt, 
have  enriched  my  style  and  teaching  in  all  after 
days.  I  am  quite  sure  that  I  could  never  have 
stood  the  subsequent  constant  drain  upon  my 
resources  had  it  not  been  for  those  blessed,  placid, 
pellucid  years  of  quiet  work. 

In  later  years,  during  my  ministry  in  London,  I 
have  not  been  able  to  write,  but  the  habits  of  con- 
secutive thinking  and  clear  expression,  which  were 
formed  at  York  and  Leicester,  have  stood  me  in 


76  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

good  stead.  It  is  now  my  ideal  to  select  my  text 
fairly  early  in  the  week,  and  allow  it  to  lie  in  my 
thought.  Then,  on  Friday  or  Saturday,  I  will  give 
three  or  four  hours  to  its  quiet  consideration,  jotting 
down  thoughts  which  occur  to  me  on  sheets  of  note- 
paper,  and  reading  whatever  materials  I  may  have 
in  my  library  that  will  help  me.  I  greatly  enjoy 
this  accumulation  of  my  materials.  After  a  while 
the  main  message  of  the  sermon  becomes  apparent. 
One  feels  that  this  is  the  burden  of  the  Lord  for 
the  coming  service.  The  argument,  the  illustra- 
tions, the  application,  all  stand  out,  and  it  is  com- 
paratively easy  in  an  hour  or  less  to  crystallise  the 
whole  preparation  into  the  outline  of  the  sermon. 
I  have  known  cases  in  which  that  outline  did  not 
appear  clearly  until  within  an  hour  or  two  of 
preaching,  but  when  that  is  the  case,  it  does  not 
greatly  concern  me.  One  comes  to  trust  a  species 
of  automatic  process  by  which  the  mind  will 
ultimately  evolve  the  message  and  its  ordering. 
Often  during  those  hours  of  preparation,  whilst 
engaged  with  the  accumulation  of  material  or  in  its 
orderly  arrangement,  the  heart  is  lifted  up  for  the 
enlightenment  of  God's  Spirit,  on  which  one  may 
surely  count,  if  one  has  no  object  other  than  to  be 
the  message-bearer  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts. 

I  notice  that  many  ministers  spend  a  great  deal 
of  time  in  finding  striking  headings  for  the  divisions 


FOR. LAY  PREACHERS  77 

of  their  subject.  I  think  too  much  can  be  made 
of  these.  I  have  sometimes  noticed  that  the 
appetising  names  on  a  French  menu  or  bill  of  fare 
have  been  disappointing,  because  the  viands  have 
not  been  equal  to  the  expectations  excited ;  and  in 
some  sermons  I  have  felt  that  the  divisions  and 
the  headings  promised  more  than  the  subsequent 
paragraphs  supplied.  By  all  means  get  good  and 
striking  headings  for  your  subdivisions,  but  do  not 
be  content  with  these;  let  them  be  subsidiary  to 
the  mam  body  of  your  teaching.  Get  the  subject 
matter  of  your  paragraphs  first,  and  label  them 
afterwards. 

Above  all  things,  spare  neither  time  nor  pains  in 
obtaining  an  orderly  arrangement  of  your  subject, 
so  that  you  may  not  repeat  yourself,  or  introduce 
into  one  part  of  your  sermon  matter  extraneous  to 
its  main  drift.  But  of  this  we  will  treat  with  more 
care  presently. 

Meanwhile,  repeat  often  to  yourself  those  words 
of  Coventry  Patmore,  of  the  man  after  God's  own 
heart — 

"  Nor  can  he  quail 

In  faith,  nor  flush,  nor  pale 
When  all  the  other  idiot  people  spell 
How  this  or  that  new  prophet's  word  belies 

Their  last  high  oracle ; 

But  constantly  his  soul 

Points  to  its  pole 
E'en  as  the  needle  points,  and  knows  not  why," 


XII 

ON   THE   USE  OF    OTHEE   MEN'S 
THOUGHTS 

THERE  is  a  regular  and  systematic  use  of  other 
men's  thoughts,  which  should  always  he  going  on, 
and  without  which  our  own  mind  will  soon  become 
barren  and  unproductive.  In  his  Ascent  of  Man, 
Professor  Drummond  quotes  an  interesting  observa- 
tion from  the  pages  of  Herodotus.  When  he  was 
in  Egypt,  this  close  observer  of  men  and  manners 
noticed  that  at  a  certain  season  of  the  year  the 
Egyptians  went  into  the  desert,  cut  off  branches 
from  the  wild  palms,  and  bringing  them  back  to 
their  gardens,  waved  them  over  the  flowers  of  the 
date  palm.  Why  they  performed  this  ceremony 
they  did  not  know,  but  they  knew  that  if  they 
neglected  it  the  date  crop  would  be  poor  or  wholly 
lost.  The  true  reason  is  now  explained.  The 
garden  plants  which  bore  the  dates  were  the 
feminine,  whilst  the  desert  palms  were  masculine, 
and  the  waving  of  the  wild  branches  meant  the 
transference  of  the  pollen  dust  from  one  to  the 

78 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  79 

other.  Similarly  we  need  the  infusion  of  the 
thoughts  of  others  to  make  our  minds  productive. 
It  is  not  that  we  are  to  give  them  forth  as  we 
receive  them,  but  that  they  shall  stir  our  own 
minds  to  independent  action,  the  joint  product 
being  different  to  what  either  mind  would  have 
elaborated  from  itself. 

This  is  the  true  method  of  using  other  men's 
thoughts.  AlwajTs  have  in  reading  one  or  more 
thoughtful  and  thought-breeding  books.  If  they 
are  of  a  different  school  of  thinking  or  order  of 
mind  from  your  own,  so  much  the  better.  Eead 
slowly;  consider,  ponder,  criticise,  and  even  an- 
tagonise what  you  read ;  have  your  notebook 
ready  to  jot  down  your  first  fresh  impressions.  I 
fear  I  have,  comparatively  speaking,  read  but  few 
books,  but  a  really  strong  book  occupies  me  for  so 
long  from  my  habit  of  mind  in  reflecting  a  good 
deal  on  what  I  read. 

If  you  are  going  to  preach  to  the  same  people 
for  a  succession  of  years — perhaps  we  might  also 
say  of  months — you  must  enrich  the  soil  of  your 
mind  and  heart  by  taking  in  the  suggestions  and 
conclusions  of  other  thinkers.  The  farmer  will  tell 
you  that  if  he  doesn't  put  into  his  land  as  much  as 
he  takes  out,  it  will  soon  become  unproductive. 
The  method  of  agriculture  just  now  in  vogue  is 
specially  insistant  on  the  incessant  and  scientific 


8o  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

enrichment  of   the  soil.     And   the   same   law   is 

V 

operant  with  all  who  are  perpetually  raising  crops 
of  holy  and  helpful  sermons,  addresses,  and  books. 

Beware  of  always  reading  theological  works. 
They  may  be  the  easiest  to  master  and  assimilate, 
but  they  will  not  stir  your  mind  so  much  as  those 
which,  because  they  lie  somewhat  outside  your 
province,  will  arouse  and  task  you  more.  Besides, 
you  should  be  ever  on  the  alert  to  get"  new  view- 
points for  the  subjects  you  wish  to  unfold,  new 
methods  of  approach  to  your  hearers,  and  new 
illustrations;  these  you  are  much  more  likely  to 
obtain  in  works  on  philosophy,  mental  science,  and 
physical  research.  I  never  can  forget  the  mental 
stimulus  which  I  obtained  from  Mill's  two  volumes 
on  Logic  and  the  Laws  of  Thought,  never  knowing 
which  to  admire  more,  the  lucidity  of  his  thought, 
his  mastery  over  its  expression,  or  the  appropriate 
illustrations  with  which  he  made  his  meaning 
perfectly  clear. 

Volumes  of  history,  travel,  exploration,  and  bio- 
graphy will  yield  handfuls  of  illustrations,  which 
should  be  carefully  garnered,  transferred  to  the 
pages  of  the  commonplace  book,  and  indexed  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  be  easily  recalled  when  their 
appropriate  subject  comes  next  to  be  considered. 
There  is  nothing  more  important  than  to  know  how 
to  be  able  to  lay  one's  hands  on  one's  materials. 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  81 

* 

We  may  have  piles  of  suitable  illustrations, 
incidents,  and  poetry,  but  if  we  cannot  recall 
them  when  we  need,  of  what  use  are  they  ?  One 
of  the  best  methods  I  know,  when  the  books  you 
have  been  reading  belong  to  you,  is  to  note  in  the 
margin  of  a  Bible  kept  for  the  purpose  the  place 
where  you  may  find  some  suitable  illustration  or 
remark,  or  do  the  same  on  a  page  of  your  note- 
book. This  habit  continued  over  a  course  of  years 
will  give  you  a  clue  to  the  elucidation  and  lighting- 
up  of  many  hundreds  of  passages. 

Whatever  you  do,  don't  be  always  reading  other 
men's  sermons.  These  most  easily  and  insensibly 
lead  us  on  to  plagiarism.  Suppose  one,  for 
instance,  should  read  that  glorious  sermon  of 
Phillips  Brooks  on  "The  Egyptians  dead  upon 
the  Seashore"  or  that  sublime  sermon  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon  on  "Deep  calling  to  deep" — it  would 
be  impossible  not  to  wish  to  preach  on  the  same 
text,  but  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  do  so 
without  falling  into  their  lines  of  thought.  On  the 
whole,  it  is  better  to  read  the  books  out  of  which 
sermons  can  be  made  and  are  being  made. 

It  does  not  seem  to  me  necessary  to  load  your 
address  with  the  names  of  your  authors,  except  you 
give  their  exact  words.  The  practice,  doubtless, 
gives  your  hearers  an  impression  of  your  wide  read- 
ing and  research ;  but  since  you  do  not  go  to  the 
6 


82  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

pulpit  to  magnify  yourself,  the  less  there  is  of  this 
the  better.  It  is  not  necessary,  either,  to  explain 
all  the  steps  that  have  led  you  to  certain  con- 
clusions. Give  your  people  bread  of  winnowed 
corn ;  they  will  appreciate  and  thank  you  for  it ;  but 
it  is  not  needful  to  explain  the  processes  through 
which  it  has  passed,  or  the  markets  from  which  you 
procured  it. 

The  one  point  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  insist 
too  much  is  that  you  thoroughly  assimilate  what 
other  men  have  supplied.  As  the  digestion  of  the 
mother  assimilates  every  variety  of  food  and  passes 
it  on  in  the  form  of  pure,  rich  milk  to  the  hungry 
lips  of  her  child,  so  should  we  take  into  ourselves 
that  which  afterwards  we  are  to  impart  to  others. 
Too  often  in  his  quotations  the  preacher  flings  at 
his  audience  undigested  material  which  is  not  of 
the  same  substance  as  the  remainder  of  his  dis- 
course, and  therefore  rather  hinders  than  helps  the 
entire  effect. 

I  find  that  it  is  almost  imperative  to  allow  some 
time  to  elapse  between  the  accumulation  of  material 
and  the  actual  preparation  of  the  sermon,  that  the 
process  of  mental  digestion  may  be  allowed  to  do 
the  work.  A  day  or  two  days  are  not  too  much, 
and  by  all  means  include  a  night.  I  greatly 
believe  in  unconscious  cerebration,  which  is  another 
name  for  mental  digestion.  At  night  I  have  found 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  83 

most  wonderful  results  achieved  whilst  I  slept.  If 
your  material  is  in  an  undigested,  disorderly  shape 
when  you  retire  to  rest,  you  will  on  awaking,  as 
likely  as  not,  find  that  the  tangled  skein  will  run 
as  smooth  as  if  it  had  been  touched  by  a  fairy 
wand. 

Whatever  you  do,  don't  be  a  plagiarist.  "  Thou 
shalt  not  steal ".  applies  to  sermons  as  well  as  to 
coins  of  money.  Eemember  that  the  habit  will 
grow  on  you,  so  that  soon  you  will  have  lost  all 
faculty  for  original  production.  In  any  case,  when 
you  are  giving  another  man's  sermon,  hold  up  two 
fingers  of  your  right  hand  as  you  begin  and  two 
fingers  of  your  left  as  you  close,  showing  that  all 
between  is  in  quotation  marks  ! 

When  we  begin  to  pilfer  others'  thoughts,  and 

transfer  them  as  they  stand  into  the  fabric  of  our 

sermons,  we   are    sewing    new    cloth    on    an    old 

garment ;    most  people  can  see  the  joining,   and 

,  there  will  be  some  tearing  sooner  or  later. 


xin 

ON  YOUE  DELIVEKY 

THE  best  matter  in  the  world  will  be  ineffective 
if  the  method  of  delivery  is  poor  and  halting; 
and  it  seems  wise,  therefore,  to  give  a  few  hints  as 
to  the  best  way  of  giving  utterance  to  your  message, 
so  that  your  manner  may  not  hinder  the  thoughtful 
and  reverent  reception  of  your  matter. 

Stand  naturally  before  the  people.  Do  not  stand 
on  one  foot,  but  on  both.  Do  not  loll  or  lean  on 
the  pulpit  or  desk,  but  stand  quietly  in  front  of  it. 
Do  not  run,  walk,  or  move  from  side  to  side ;  and 
if  you  step  back  for  a  moment,  return  as  soon  as 
possible  to  your  former  position.  Some  preachers 
remind  one  of  caged  animals,  who  are  always  pacing 
to  and  fro,  contending  with  the  bars  of  their  cage, 
and  producing  in  the  spectators  the  weary  sense  of 
restlessness,  This  is  not  well,  and  should  be  altered. 
Who,  that  ever  heard,  John  Bright,  Mr.  Gladstone, 
or  Mr,  Spurgeon,  can  remember  any  such  excessive 
activity  ?  This  habit  distracts  the  attention  of  the 
audience,  and  has  nothing  to  commend  it 

84 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  85 

Look  at  your  hearers.    The  eye  possesses  a  wonder- 
ful power  of  fascination.     It  speaks;  it  fixes  the 
attention  of  your  congregation ;  it  interprets  to  the 
speaker,  instinctively  and  immediately,  the  emotions 
which  his  words  are  exciting.     Open  eye  meets  eye ; 
and  by  the  glance  the  thought  is  kindled,  and  kindles 
the  soul.     Don't  look  up,  as  though  to  look  where 
angels  are  must  necessarily  give  you  an  angelic 
expression.     Don't  look  down,  as  though  you  were 
ashamed.     Don't  look  into  far-away  space,  or  your 
features  will  become  expressionless.     Look  at  your 
people   honestly,  manfully,  straightforwardly,   and 
glance  from  one  to  another  naturally.     I  am  not  at 
all  sure  that  I  admire  that  far-away  look  in  the 
eyes,  in  which  I  am  told  that  some  ministers  excel. 

Speak  naturally.  You  can  fill  the  largest  building, 
with  a  very  thin  voice,  if  you  observe  these  three 
conditions — speak  deliberately,  articulate  distinctly, 
especially  the  final  consonants,  and  let  your  voice 
come  as  far  as  possible  from  the  chest.  A  little 
practice  will  enable  you  to  bring  your  voice  down 
from  the  throat  to  the  chest3  and  the  notes  which 
the  chest  gives  are  much  deeper,  more  reverberant, 
and  more  touching  than  any  others. 

Whatever  you  do,  don't  cultivate  a  pulpit  voice, 
which  is  wholly  detestable;  don't  imitate  another 
preacher,  however  famous;  and  don't  play  always 
on  one  poor  note.  How  well  I  remember  Mr. 


86  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

Spurgeon  speaking  to  us  students,  years  ago,  on 
this  bad  practice  and  parodying  a  hymn — 

"  Strange  that  a  harp  of  a  thousand  strings 
Should  play  one  note  so  long." 

Who  ever  heard  of  a  lawyer  suffering  from  a  lawyer's 
throat,  or  a  barrister  from  a  barrister's  throat? 
Men  in  other  professions  are  perpetually  using  their 
voices  as  continuously  as  ministers  and  preachers 
do,  but  no  ill  effects  follow.  And  they  would  not 
follow  in  our  own  case  if  we  spoke  naturally,  using  the 
entire  range  of  our  voice,  and  allowing  our  hearers 
the  infinite  relief  of  variety.  I  have  often  noticed 
the  quiet  which  has  fallen  upon  my  audience  when 
I  have  suddenly  awoke  to  realise  that  I  had  been 
speaking  too  much  in  one  key,  and  have  suddenly 
fallen  or  risen  to  another.  Their  ears,  nerves,  and 
brains  have  blessed  me. 

Do  not  shout  or  bawl ;  it  is  most  objectionable, 
and  absolutely  unnecessary.  Perspiration  is  not 
inspiration.  God  was  not  in  the  thunder,  but  in 
the  still,  small  voice.  When  Jesus  taught  the 
people,  He  opened  His  mouth  and  breathed  to 
the  bottom  of  His  lungs  the  good  fresh  air,  but 
He  would  speak  in  the  soft,  sweet  tones  that 
befitted  His  enumeration  of  Beatitudes  and  His 
call  to  rest.  On  the  other  hand,  don't  whisper  or 
drop  your  voice,  or  begin  so  low  that  people  must 
strain  to  hear  you.  These  are  mannerisms  and 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  87 

affectations  which   will   greatly   detract   from   the 
effect  of  your  preaching. 

Guard  against  eccentricity.  Whatever  attracts 
the  attention  of  your  hearers  from  your  message 
to  yourself  is  a  mistake.  Don't  run  your  hand 
through  your  hair,  though  I  helieve  geniuses  have 
been  known  to  do  it.  Don't  shake  or  nod  your 
head,  though  it  gives  the  impression  of  sententious- 
ness.  Don't  play  with  a  button  of  your  waistcoat, 
or  put  your  hands  in  your  pockets.  Don't  flash 
a  gold  ring  in  the  light.  Be  ashamed  of  yourself 
and  confess  your  sin  if  you  strike  the  attitude  that 
best  sets  off  your  figure.  Get  your  wife  to  imitate 
your  peculiarities  of  delivery  when  you  get  home, 
especially  when  you  feel  that  you  have  preached 
well.  You  will  be  shocked  at  what  you  have  done ; 
or,  if  you  haven't  a  wife,  get  some  fatherly  old 
deacon  to  hold  a  mirror  up  to  nature,  so  that  you 
may  see  yourself  as  others  see  you.  Ah,  how  I 
have  suffered  from  these  loving  hints,  and  how  they 
have  cauterised  my  soul ! — but  I  would  not  have  been 
without  them  for  a  good  deal. 

Avoid  excessive  gesticulation.  By  all  means  let 
there  be  some  movement  of  the  hands  and  face, 
and  of  the  position  of  the  body.  But  these  should 
not  be  excessive.  It  is  a  mistake  to  lift  the  hands 
above  the  head  or  far  above  the  level  of  the  shoulder. 
It  is  equally  a  mistake  to  swing  them  round  like 


88  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

the  sails  of  a  windmill,  or  fling  them  backwards  and 
forwards  like  a  flail.  They  may  hang  by  your  side, 
or  rest  on  the  book-board  or  rail,  or  be  extended  in 
entreaty,  or  raised  in  warning,  or  one  of  them  may 
be  used  to  strengthen  the  point  you  are  enforcing, 
with  a  confirmatory  gesture.  .  But  don't  pound  at 
the  Bible,  or  strike  the  balustrade  or  railing,  or  wring 
your  hands  in  agony,  or  perform  with  them  the  act 
which  you  are  describing.  Power  will  be  ours  if  we 
wait  quietly  in  the  presence  of  God  until  we  have  been 
endued  with  power  from  on  high.  "  Not  by  might, 
nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord." 

I  have  often  thought  of  the  old  rhyme  which  has 
come  down  through  two  or  three  generations  of 
preachers — 

"Begin  low,  proceed  slow  ; 

Rise  higher,  take  fire ; 
When  most  impressed,  be  self-possessed." 

Some  men  have  naturally  an  easy,  unaffected  address, 
others  suffer  from  a  diffidence,  which  creates  man- 
nerism and  awkwardness.  It  is,  of  course,  best  to 
think  as  little  as  possible  about  our  peculiarities, 
lest  we  lessen  the  simplicity  and  directness  of  our 
message.  At  the  same  time,  we  should  endeavour  to 
prune  away  eccentricities  and  remove  blemishes,  that 
we  may  become  as  panes  of  clear  glass  through  which 
the  light  of  the  gospel  may,  as  easily  as  possible,  visit 
those  that  sit  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death. 


XIV 
THE   USE  OF  ILLUSTEATIOtf 

OTHER  things  being  equal,  the  preacher  who  uses 
illustrations  will  be  surest  of  an  audience  and  of 
the  intelligent  appreciation  of  his  hearers ;  for  the 
effort  to  employ  them  indicates  a  desire  on  his  part 
to  accommodate  himself  to  the  capacity  of  the 
people,  and  to  translate  divine  truth  into  human 
experience  and  life. 

No  man  ever  spake  as  our  Lord  did,  because  none 
has  been  so  prolific  as  He  in  the  use  of  illustration. 
.Sometimes  it  must  have  seemed  that  His  discourses 
were  a  tesselated  work  of  parables  and  metaphors. 
He  was  constantly  introducing  the  most  exquisite 
vignettes  of  human  life  with  the  words  "The  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  like."  And  a  careful  study  of  His 
method  would  greatly  enrich  and  enhance  our  power 
of  presenting  truth  to  the  minds  of  men. 

To  some  the  readiness  to  trace  spiritual  laws  and 
analogies  in  the  natural  world,  and  to  find  "  sermons 
in  stones,  and  books  in  the  running  brooks,"  is  more 
easy  than  with  others ;  but  with  all,  the  habit  is 

89 


go  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

capable  of  cultivation  and  training.  And  a  few 
suggestions  may  be  made  which  will  be  of  service  in 
the  formation  and  education  of  this  most  necessary 
branch  of  the  preacher's  art. 

1.  We  should  l>e  always  on  the  alert  iff  note  facts 
which  give  promise  of  serving  as  illustrations.  The 
wider  your  range  of  study  and  observation,  the 
more  fertile  and  prolific  will  be  your  opportunity  of 
gathering  illustrations.  There  are,  first,  the  illustra- 
tions borrowed  from  the  incidents  of  domestic'  and 
ordinary  life — the  child  asking  bread  of  its  father, 
the  patching  of  old  garments,  the  use  of  old  bottle- 
skins,  the  careful  hen  gathering  the  chicks  under 
her  wing,  the  lamp  put  on  the  lampstand,  the  leaven 
buried  in  the  flour,  the  birds  that  have  neither  store- 
house nor  barn,  the  foxes  that  creep  to  their  holes, 
the  flowers  that  neither  toil  nor  spin. 

Next,  there  are  the  illustrations  afforded  by  the 
closer  study  of  nature.  For  these  we  should  either 
adopt  some  branch  of  natural  investigation  as  our 
hobby,  or  should  study  some  weekly  paper,  like 
Nature,  which  is  devoted  to  natural  research.  A 
Eussian  friend  of  mine,  who  is  an  enthusiastic 
student  of  nature,  is  constantly  writing  articles 
which  obtain  a  vast  circulation  among  persons  of 
widely  differing  theological  and  ecclesiastical  views, 
because  she  uses  the  most  recent  discoveries  as  the 
vehicle  of  elucidating  and  enforcing  the  lessons  of 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  91 

the  divine  life  in  the  soul.  Dr.  Hugh  MacMillan 
lias  laid  us  all  under  obligation  for  his  work  on 
similar  lines. 

Beside  these,  there  are  the  illustrations  borrowed 
from  the  arts,  from  processes  of  manufacture,  and 
from  scientific  discovery — as  the  figure  of  Laocoon 
and  his  sons  encircled  by  the  serpent  folds,  to 
illustrate  the  clinging  power  of  evil ;  as  the  manu- 
facture of  steel,  to  illustrate  the  varying  discipline 
to  which  God  exposes  His  saints;  as  the  uplifted 
hand  of  the  electric  car  grasping  the  overhead  wire, 
to  illustrate  the  abiding  of  the  believer  in  union 
with  the  power  of  God ;  as  the  invention  of  wireless 
telegraphy,  to  illustrate  the  power  of  prayer. 

No  man  who  desires  a  fund  of  fresh  and  vivid 
illustration  can  afford  to  dispense  with  the  daily 
newspaper,  reflecting  as  it  does  the  life  of  the  world 
around.  What  forcible  and  apt  illustrations  Mr. 
Moody  used  to  draw  from  the  American  War ;  arid 
of  late  the  descriptions  sent  home  from  the  field  of 
war  have  furnished  us  with  a  vast  store  of  words 
and  incidents  which  have  served  us  well,  because 
they  were  already  in  our  hearers'  minds.  I  believe 
it  was  said  of  the  late  Dr.  Brock  that  he  regarded 
his  morning  study  of  the  Times  as  a  sacred  duty, 
that  his  preaching  might  keep  in  touch  with  the 
life  around  him. 

Besides  these  sources,  there  is  the  almost  infinite 


ga  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

storehouse  of  literature.  A  thorough  knowledge  of 
Shakespeare,  of  Charles  Dickens,  and  of  Walter 
Scott  will  amply  repay  the  preacher,  replete  as  they 
are  with  types  of  character,  with  graphic  and  pathetic 
incidents,  and  with  touches  of  natural  beauty.  I 
mention  these  as  specimens  of  many  others — such 
as  the  works  of  Stevenson,  Barrie,  Ian  Maclaren, 
Shorthouse,  etc. 

But  from  whatever  source  you  seek  these  goodly 
pearls,  you  must  be  careful  to  have  your  notebook 
always  in  hand  to  fix  the  fact,  and  the  lesson  it 
suggests,  on  the  spot.  The  thought,  the  analogy, 
the  comparison,  flashes  before  the  mind  for  a  moment, 
brief  as  the  rush  of  the  meteor ;  you  see  and  appre- 
ciate it ;  you  say  to  yourself,  "  I  shall  certainly  not 
fail  to  recall  that  idea  when  I  need  it " ;  but  it  is  a 
hundred  chances  to  one  that  it  will  elude  you,  and 
mock  all  your  efforts  at  recovery.  The  only  method 
of  retaining  these  fugitive  impressions  is  to  note 
them  down  by  one  or  two  characteristic  phrases 
which  will  summon  the  whole  scene  to  your  mind 
when  you  presently  sit  down  to  elaborate  the  illustra- 
tion under  the  appropriate  heading  of  your  common- 
place book.  This  bears  the  same  relation  to  the 
pocket  notebook  as  the  ledger  does  to  the  day-book. 

The  illustrations  must  "be  fairly  familiar.  It  is  a 
mistake  to  use  those  which  are  wholly  foreign  to 
the  life  of  the  people  whom  you  address.  There 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  93 

was  a  touch  of  nature  in  the  advice  of  Mr.  Spurgeon 
that  we  should  not  employ  images  which  savour  of 
the  special  calling  of  the  people  whom  we  are 
addressing,  lest  they  discover  some  minor  inaccuracy 
in  our  metaphor,  and  therefore  justify  themselves  in 
refusing  the  truth  which  was  wrapt  up  in  it.  He 
said  that  it  was  not  wise  for  the  average  preacher  to 
talk  to  fisherfolk  about  fishing,  or  to  husbandmen 
about  agriculture ;  but  to  change  about  and  use  the 
talk  of  the  fields  for  the  fishers,  and  the  talk  of  the 
fish  for  the  peasants.  But,  for  all  that,  we  are  wise, 
on  the  whole,  to  draw  our  illustrations  from  the 
familiar  environment  of  our  hearers. 

Nothing  can  be  more  foreign  to  your  purpose  than 
to  use  illustrations  which  need  as  much  explanation 
as  the  truth  you  are  inculcating ;  for  you  divert  the 
minds  of  your  hearers  from  the  truth  to  an  honest 
attempt  to  understand  your  analogy.  This  is  as 
disappointing  as  the  story  of  the  good  soul  who  said 
that  she  understood  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress, 
and  was  hoping  in  due  time  to  understand  the 
explanatory  notes  also. 

The  object  in  using  illustrations  is  to  bring  the 
unseen  and  eternal  within  the  range  of  ordinary 
minds,  and  to  express  the  things  of  the  spiritual 
world  in  the  language  of  the  senses  and  the  soul 
It  is  easier  for  ordinary  people  to  think  of  the  con- 
crete than  of  the  abstract,  of  the  image  than  the 


94  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

spiritual  counterpart,  of  the  sign  than  the  thing 
signified ;  therefore  we  use  illustrations  as  the  ladder 
by  which  they  may  climb;  but  the  foot  of  the 
ladder  must  be  on  the  spot  of  ground  on  which  they 
happen  to  have  lighted. 

The  illustrations  must  really  add  to  the  growing 
effect  of  the  argument.  Preachers  sometimes  intro- 
duce most  picturesque  descriptions  with  no  other 
object,  so  far  as  one  can  see,  than  to  attract  attention 
to  their  delicacy  and  beauty.  Such  illustrations 
resemble  the  pictures  hung  on  the  walls  of  your 
chamber,  rather  than  the  windows  through  which 
light  enters.  The  result  is  that  the  fancy  is< 
entranced  with  the  chaste  beauty  which  lights  up 
the  discourse,  but  the  mind  returns  with  an  effort 
to  the  main  current  of  thought.  The  streamlet  we 
explored  was  very  lovely,  but  we  find  that  we  have 
wasted  strength  in  exploring  it  which  might  have 
been  better  expended  on  the  navigation  of  the  main 
channel. 

This  always  seemed  to  me  to  be  the  defect 
of  the  late  Dr.  Guthrie's  sermons.  They  abound 
with  word-pictures  of  extraordinary  brilliance  and 
eloquence.  One  feels  that  he  must  have  expended 
superabundant  toil  and  pains  on  elaborating  them, 
but  somehow  they  do  not  add  to  the  strength  of  his 
sermons.  One  lingers  to  gaze  on  them  with  such 
interest  as  to  forget  that  they  were  intended  to 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  95 

teach  or  enforce.  To  borrow  the  phrase  which  Dr. 
William  Taylor  quotes  from  a  cabinetmaker,  we  may 
ornament  construction,  but  have  no  right  to  con- 
struct ornament. 

Illustrations  should  follow,  and  not  precede,  the 
thoughtful  presentation  of  truth.  If  we  always 
hasten  to  present  a  striking  illustration  to  our 
hearers,  we  shall  do  them  the  permanent  injury  of 
weakening  their  powers  of  reasoning  and  appre- 
hension. Our  people  should  be  trained  to  think, 
to  base  their  beliefs  on  scriptural  authority,  to 
apprehend  statements  of  truth  in  their  unadorned 
•beauty  and  simplicity.  But  when  this  has  been 
done,  it  is  highly  beneficial  to  employ  illustrations 
to  confirm  and  clinch  the  impression,  to  elucidate  it 
for  those  to  whom  it  may  not  be  quite  clear,  and  to 
call  in  the  -aid  of  the  imagination  to  assist  the 
memory  in  her  office. 

Nothing  is  more  befitting  than  to  argue  your  way 
up  some  steep  and  difficult  ascent,  suiting  your  pace 
to  that  of  your  hearers,  and  assured  that  they  are 
accompanying  you,  till  you  bring  them  to  an  angle 
on  the  steep  mountain  path  from  which,  in  an 
instant,  the  whole  panorama  towards  which  you 
have  been  making  your  way  bursts  on  their  view 
in  an  apt  illustration. 

When  the  preacher  has  but  one  aim  in  view,  viz. 
to  glorify  the  Lord  Jesus  by  the  enunciation  of 


96  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

His  truth,  it  is  wonderful  to  find  how  the  whole 
mind  is  aroused  and  enriched.  When  the  eye  is 
single,  the  whole  body  is  full  of  light.  Thoughts, 
arguments,  proof -texts,  illustrations,  and  metaphors 
come  readily  at  our  call ;  and  it  is  as  though  the 
promise  were  being  fulfilled:  "Seek  ye  first  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you."  If  you  preach  your  sermons  simply  to 
dazzle  and  interest  people  by  the  introduction  of 
gleams  of  imagination  and  bits  of  word-painting,  you 
will  find  them  fail  you.  But  if  you  have  only  one 
desire  and  purpose — the  glory  of  your  King — the 
Holy  Spirit  will  marvellously  quicken  the  action  of 
your  mind,  and  will  endow  you  with  a  surprising 
fertility  of  apposite  and  striking  illustration. 

"  There  is  a  shrine  whose  golden  gate 

Was  opened  by  the  hand  of  God ; 
It  stands  serene,  inviolate, 

Though  millions  have  its  pavement  trod  j 
As  fresh  as  when  the  first  sunrise 
Awoke  the  lark  in  Paradise." 

Let  us  live  there,  and  it  will  not  be  hard  to  find 

illustrations ! 


XV 

THE  DEVOTIONAL  SERVICE 

IT  seems  fitting  to  say  a  few  words  under  this 
heading,  because  the  preacher  has  not  only  to 
deliver  a  sermon,  but  to  conduct  the  preparatory 
worship,  and  the  latter  is  perhaps  of  greater  im- 
portance than  the  former.  It  is  a  loftier  service 
to  the  people  gathered  in  your  congregation  to 
conduct  them  into  the  presence  of  God,  than 
even  to  deliver  the  message  of  God  to  their  souls. 
It  perhaps  requires  more  spirituality,  more  anoint- 
ing of  the  Holy  Spirit,  more  preparation  of  heart, 
to  induce  the  devotional  frame,  than  it  does  to 
interest  people  in  your  theme  or  produce  a  definite 
impression  for  good  on  their  hearts  and  lives. 

1.  There  are  some  who  lay  great  stress  upon  the 
unity  of  a  service.  If  the  theme  of  their  sermon 
is  a  joyous  one,  they  feel  that  they  are  bound  to 
select  passages  of  Scripture  and  hymns  of  a  joyous, 
hopeful  character.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
desire  in  their  sermon  to  comfort  the  sorrowful 

and  distressed,  the  idea  of  comfort  pervades  all  the 
*  vrz 


98  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

previous  service.  I  was  once  as  great  an  admirer 
of  this  manner  of  proceeding  as  anyone  whom  I 
may  be  addressing,  but  of  late  years  I  have  seriously 
changed  my  mind,  and  it  seems  to  me  a  mistake  to 
allow  the  entire  service,  from  beginning  to  end,  to 
repeat  one  refrain. 

It  may  be  that  into  your  congregation,  when 
your  heart  is  full  of  joy,  there  has  strayed  some 
weary  soul  needing  the  tender  tones  of  consolation, 
or  some  perplexed  child  of  God  not  knowing  which 
way  to  take ;  or  someone  misunderstood  and  per- 
secuted who  needs  direction.  Is  it  not  desirable  to 
meet  the  case  of  such,  which  would  not  be  touched 
by  .your  subsequent  exhortations,  by  affording  in 
the  hymn,  prayer,  or  Scripture  some  appropriate 
help  ?  The  very  fact  that  your  keynote  is  joy,  for 
instance,  ought  to  make  you  think  of  those  whose 
hearts  are  stricken  and  sorrowful,  and  you  should 
provide  for  them  in  either  hymn  or  Scripture.  I 
am  sure  that  every  service  ought  to  touch,  as  much 
as  possible,  the  entire  range  of  human  need,  and  all 
the  experience  which  may  be  represented  by  the 
faces  before  you. 

By  all  means  let  the  last  hymn  be  carefully 
selected  to  bear  out  the  impression  of  your  sermon. 
You  should  always  select  this  for  yourself.  As  for 
the  rest,  I  often  leave  the  choice  of  hymns  to  others, 
that  my  people  may  be  saved  from  perpetually 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  99 

singing  those  of  my  choosing,  and  may  be  led  into 
other  paths  of  our  hymnology  not  so  often  trodden 
by  my  own  feet.  I  quite  admit  that  the  dominant 
note  of  a  service  may  be  clearly  accentuated,  and 
may  reappear  again  and  again  throughout  its  course, 
but  I  do  urge  that  you  will  probably  gather  more 
force  in  the  enunciation  of  your  one  lesson  if  there 
is  variation,  change,  and  modulation  throughout 
your  devotional  service. 

2.  It  is  very  desirable  to  be  fairly  deliberate  in 
the  introductory  service.     I  do  not  mean  that  the 
prayers  should  be  prolix,  the  Scripture  lessons  too 
long,  or  that  anything  should  savour  of  tedium  or 
weariness,  but  I  have  sometimes  felt  that  there  was 
an  undue  rush  and  haste.      No  sooner  was  the 
prayer  over  than  the  minister  was  giving  out  the 
hymn,  and  the  people  were  hardly  sitting  down 
from  singing  before  he  had  announced  the  Scrip- 
ture.    It  seems  to  me  that  the  soul  needs  time  to 
turn  from  one  act  of  devotion  to  another.    A  slight 
pause  now  and  again,  a  deliberation  in  the  approach 
to  God,  an  interval  during  which  the  worshipper 
may  take  off  the  shoes  from  his  feet  because  he 
stands  on  holy  ground,  give  a  sense  of  calm  and 
peace  which  are  an  agreeable  contrast  to  the  rush 
and  speed  of  ordinary  life. 

3.  The  liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England  gives 
the  true  method  of  public  worship.     It  begins  with 


ioo  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

confession  and  the  aspiration  to  stand  before  God 
accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Then  it  bursts  into  praise 
with  its  psalms  and  ancient  hymns,  and  finally 
passes  into  litanies  of  intercession  and  supplication. 
These  notes  should  never  be  wanting  in  our  worship. 
We  must  always  begin  as  those  whose  feet  need 
washing,  whose  consciences  need  purification,  whose 
robes  must  be  fresh  cleansed  in  the  precious  blood, 
and  purged  from  all  sin.  The  heart  must  be  assured 
of  pardon  before  it  can  plead  with  God  for  itself 
and  others.  There  must  be  a  conscious  application 
on  the  part  of  the  minister  and  people  for  the  blood 
of  cleansing.  There  must  be  bursts  of  praise  and 
adoring  love ;  there  must  be  ladders  up  which  the 
soul  can  climb  to  join  with  angels  and  archangels 
and  all  the  company  of  heaven  in  praising  and 
blessing  God ;  and  there  must  be  opportunities  for 
intercession  and  prayer  on  behalf  of  all  sorts  and 
conditions  of  men. 

4.  In  reading  the  Scripture  you  must  be  very 
careful  to  study  it  beforehand,  that  you  may  know 
where  to  lay  the  emphasis,  and  how  best  to  bring 
out  the  meaning  by  the  inflections  of  your  voice. 
How  many  texts  in  the  Bible  are  almost  nonsense 
read  as  they  are  ordinarily  read!  What  a  means 
of  grace  it  is  to  hear  an  intelligent  student  of  the 
Scriptures  read  well  known  and  familiar  passages ; 
at  every  step  new  beauties  flash  into  light. 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  101 

You  can  stop  and  comment  upon  what  you  read 
if  you  will,  but  it  needs  consummate  wisdom  to  do 
this  well,  else  the  Bible  becomes  diluted  and  watered 
down  by  human  additions.  For  the  most  part,  I 
think  it  is  better  to  let  God  speak  for  Himself. 
Let  there  be  an  opportunity  in  your  service  for 
God  the  Lord  to  utter  His  voice  through  your  lips ; 
and  be  sure  to  read  reverently,  clearly,  emphati- 
cally, and  devoutly,  that  the  people  may  understand 
the  proclamation  of  the  Great  King. 

It- would  well  repay  some  of  us  to  take  lessons 
in  elocution.  I  have  taken  more  than  one  course, 
and  wish  that  I  had  profited  more  by  my  oppor- 
tunities. I  remember,  for  instance,  one  of  my 
masters  telling  me  how  necessary  it  was  to  use 
more  of  the  rising  inflection  as  I  came  to  the 
termination  of  my  sentences,  because  the  falling 
inflection  was  apt  to  depress  a  congregation — a 
remark  which  I  have  never  forgotten,  and  which 
has  been  of  great  service  in  the  reading  of  God's 
Word.  There  are  few  things  more  uncommon  than 
to  hear  the  Bible  well  and  properly  read.  It  is 
the  most  difficult  book  in  the  world  to  read,  because 
the  verses  break  up  the  paragraphs,  and  the  clauses, 
especially  in  St.  Paul's  writings,  are  linked  together 
in  such  a  close  ascending  series  that  only  the  very 
best  elocutionists  are  able  to  carry  the  mind  of  the 
hearer  from  the  beginning  of  the  sentence,  in  un- 


102  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

broken  sequence,  to  the  end.  We  ought  to  pray 
that  God  would  help  us  to  make  the  reading  of  the 
Scriptures  a  means  of  grace  to  our  hearers.  It 
would  be  well  for  some  of  us,  on  Saturday  after- 
noons, to  go  into  the  place  of  worship  where  we  are 
to  preach  on  Sunday,  and  read  the  lessons  from  the 
desk,  with  some  kind  and  wise  listener  who  could 
criticise  our  style.  By  all  means  seek  that  the 
reading  of  the  Bible  should  magnify  the  book  in 
the  estimation  of  your  hearers. 

The  matter  of  public  prayer  is  so  important  that 
I  must  reserve  it  for  a  separate  paper.  Probably 
there  is  no  part  of  the  service  that  needs  more 
of  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  more  of  the 
unction  of  the  Holy  One,  more  devout  preparation 
of  the  heart  We  do  not  pray  instead  of  our 
people,  like  the  Thibetan  praying-mills,  but  we 
need  to  pray  in  such  a  way  as  to  stir  the  slumber- 
ing embers  of  their  devotion  to  break  into  a  flame. 

Looked  at  under  these  lights,  ours  is  a  high  office. 
We  are  not  priests,  we  do  not  stand  between  God 
and  man,  but  we  may  take  our  brother  man  by  the 
hand,  and  lead  him  into  courts  not  made  with 
hands,  through  worshipping  throngs  of  holy  beings, 
and  stand  side  by  side  with  them,  uttering  in  unison 
words  that  move  the  heart  of  God. 


XVI 

PUBLIC  PBAYER 

THEEB  is  no  part  of  the  public  service,  especially 
among  our  Free  Churches,  more  important,  and 
demanding  more  careful  thought  and  preparation 
beforehand,  than  the  holy  service  we  are  called 
upon  to  render  to  the  congregation  in  the  expres- 
sion of  their  prayers  and  desires  before  God.  It  is 
really  easier  to  preach  than  to  pray  aright,  easier 
to  speak  to  man  than  take  up  the  sorrow,  care,  and 
sin  of  a  great  congregation,  in  speaking  with  them 
to  God.  But  what  minister  is  there  who  will  not 
confess  that  what  the  prayer  is,  the  sermon  is  apt 
to  be — that  the  prayer  gives  the  keynote  to  the 
whole  service?  If  it  be  inspiring,  heaven-born, 
and  heaven-ascending,  it  will  lift  the  entire  audience 
into  the  very  presence  of  the  King;  whilst,  if  in 
prayer,  we  are  desultory,  wandering,  and  lacking  in 
fervour,  the  whole  service  is  likely  to  be  impaired. 

It  is  customary  at  this  point  for  those  who 
discuss  the  subject  of  public  prayer  to  determine 
on  the  respective  merits  of  a  liturgy  and  of  free 

103 


104  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

prayer.  For  myself,  during  the  last  ten  years  of 
my  life,  I  have  felt  it  very  helpful  and  refreshing 
to  join  in  the  prayer  of  the  magnificent  liturgy  of 
the  English  Church,  with  certain  alterations  and 
omissions.  It  has  been  a  great  comfort  to  me  to 
know  that  the  needs  of  the  people  were  heing  so 
fitly  and  fully  expressed,  that  there  was  nothing  to 
be  desired ;  whilst  the  free  prayer  before  the 
sermon  enabled  me  to  add  anything  of  a  specific 
or  personal  nature  which  the  circumstances  of  the 
congregation  or  the  nation  might  seem  to  demand. 
But  this  question  hardly  demands  our  attention 
here,  for  the  immense  majority  of  those  to  whom 
I  am  speaking,  by  the  very  nature  of  the  case, 
have  no  option  than  to  lead  their  congregations 
into  the  presence  of  God,  their  own  words  consti- 
tuting the  stairway  of  approach. 

Let  there  le  dignity  m  your  public  prayer.  Do 
not  speak  to  God  as  though  He  were  your  next- 
door  neighbour.  There  may  be  the  familiarity  of  a 
child,  but  you  must  remember  that  your  Father  is 
a  great  King.  There  is  an  abundance  of  becoming 
phrases  in  the  Psalms  and  the  prophets,  which 
provide  noble  and  spirit-moving  conceptions  of  the 
greatness  of  God,  whilst  the  enumeration  of  His 
attributes,  the  glory  of  His  nature,  the  wonder  of 
His  handiwork  in  creation,  and  the  wisdom  of  His 
providence  are  all  so  many  arguments  on  which 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  105 

we  may  rest  the  superstructure  of  supplication. 
It  is  a  happy  art  to  combine  the  freedom  of  a 
child  in  speaking  to  the  Father  with  the  rever- 
ence and  decorum  which  hecome  His  presence 
whose  greatness  is  unsearchable.  One  very  much 
shrinks  from  the  constant  repetition  of  the  name 
of  Jesus  apart  from  the  befitting  title  of  Lord; 
and  anything  approaching  endearing  terms,  which 
we  may  use  to  our  Saviour  in  the  moments  of 
private  devotion,  is  to  be  carefully  guarded.  Only 
now  and  again,  when  our  hearts  have  reached  high- 
water  mark,  may  we  venture  to  address  Him  in 
such  words  as  St.  Bernard  or  Rutherford  might 
have  used. 

Be  comprehensive  in  your  petitions.  The  aged 
and  little  children,  the  sick  and  the  dying,  the 
tempted  and  the  lonely,  sailors  that  go  down  to 
the  sea  in  ships,  and  soldiers  who  may  be  fighting 
on  the  battlefield,  public  servants — as  postmen  and 
policemen — Christian  workers  of  all  grades  should 
from  time  to  time  be  remembered.  It  is  not  well, 
perhaps,  to  enumerate  all  of  these  in  one  prayer, 
lest  it  become  prolix,  and  the  mind  of  the  wor- 
shippers be  so  weighted  with  the  diversity  of 
petition  as  to  be  unable  to  fix  itself  on  any ;  but  in 
the  course  of  a  month  all  these  and  many  more 
conditions  of  human  need  should  pass,  in  well- 
considered  words,  before  the  thought  of  the  people. 


io6  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

It  is  well  sometimes  to  run  over  the  Litany  of  the 
Church,  to  note  if  any  cases  are  mentioned  there 
which  are  habitually  absent  from  your  own  petitions ; 
and  to  this  venerable  and  beautiful  enumeration  of 
the  circumstances  of  human  need  it  is  well  from 
time  to  time  to  add  the  suggestions  of  other  litanies 
and  prayers,  so  that  there  may  be  a  constant 
novelty  and  freshness  in  the  subjects  which  you 
lay  before  God.  You  hardly  realise  how  glad 
parents  and  relatives  are  to  hear  some  specific 
petition  which  recalls  the  absent  son  and  brother. 
The  chalice  of  your  prayer  is  at  once  filled  with 
the  wine  of  their  love.  Be  sure  to  mention  little 
children,  who  will  in  this  way  have  their  attention 
kept  awake  until  their  presence  is  acknowledged, 
and  the  parents  will  gladly  recognise  that  the 
whole  congregation  is  helping  them  to  bear  the 
burden  which  is  never  very  far  away  from  their 
thought. 

It  is  good  to  keep  a  sheet  of  paper  on  the 
mantelpiece  of  your  room,  where  during  the  week 
you  may  jot  down  any  special  subject  for  prayer 
which  may  be  suggested  by  the  newspaper  or  the 
current  life  around.  To  glance  down  this  list 
before  entering  the  pulpit  is  eminently  suggestiva 
At  the  same  time  it  is  necessary  to  avoid  making 
the  public  prayer  a  kind  of  notice  board,  from 
which  all  the  gossips  of  the  congregation  may 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  107 

obtain  items  for  discussion.  You  must  take  care 
to  guard  against  starting  people's  minds  on  a  series 
of  questions  as  to  what  family  or  individual  may 
have  been  referred  to.  This  will  bring  down  the 
temperature  of  the  entire  church,  for  everyone 
becomes  aware  when  those  around  have  ceased  to 
pray. 

Be  wise  in  ordering  the  length  of  prayer.    I  was 
taking  the  morning  service  at  one  of  the  largest  of 
our  churches  in  England  on  a  recent  Sunday,  and 
was  asked  in  the  vestry  by  the  assistant  minister  if 
I  would  umdertake  the  long  prayer.    I  said  I  would 
be  very  happy,  only  J  was  afraid  J  could  not  pray 
long  enough.    I  have  been  told  that  the  prayers  in 
some  of   our   churches  will  extend  to  fifteen  or 
twenty  minutes.     Against  such  undue  prolixity  I 
enter  my  protest.     There  are  very  few  minds  that 
can  sustain  such  an  intense  act  for  so  long,  for  in 
prayer  the  understanding,  the  emotions,  the  sense 
of  the  Unseen  and  Eternal,  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
transient,  must  be  kept  at  high  pressure,  and  it  is 
simply  impossible  to  expect  so  much  of  a  great 
congregation,   containing   many   of    infirm   minds, 
many  who  are  weary  and  tired  with  the  work  of 
the  week,  many  boys  and  girls,  who  become  more 
and  more  restless. 

In  my  judgment  a  brief  dedicatory  prayer  at  the 
beginning  of  the  service,  a  prayer  of  confession  and 


io8  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

personal  supplication,  and  a  third  prayer  of  inter- 
cession, are  infinitely  preferable  to  one  long  prayer, 
and  I  urge  this  division  upon  my  brethren.  I  am 
met  by  the  reply  of  some  that  they  cannot  arouse 
themselves  to  intense  supplication  unless  they  have 
time  for  the  brain  to  acquire  momentum;  but  I 
think  this  applies  probably  more  to  private  than  to 
public  prayer,  and  that  it  is  more  profitable  on  the 
whole  to  have  the  variety  which  I  have  suggested 
as  a  stimulus  to  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  con- 
gregation. 

We,  must  guard  against  anything  which  diverts 
the  thoughts  of  our  people  from  God  to  ourselves,  our 
language,  or  our  thought.  We  have  all  heard  the 
story  of  the  man  who  offered  the  finest  prayer  ever 
presented  to  a  Boston  audience,  and  we  have  often 
been  tempted  to  remember  the  story  when  we  have 
heard  some  magniloquent  address  to  the  Almighty, 
accompanied  by  discussions  on  doctrine  and  exposi- 
tions of  truth  which  were  as  far  from  the  true 
conception  of  prayer  as  the  east  is  from  the  west. 
We  have  no  right  to  call  attention  in  public  prayer 
to  our  diction,  our  views  of  doctrine,  our  cleverness 
or  ingenuity.  We  have  no  right  to  air  our  views 
on  political  matters,  or  to  take  some  mean  revenge 
upon  those  with  whom  we  differ.  Our  words 
should  be  as  transparent  as  the  ether  itself.  Just 
as  on  the  Mediterranean  coast  or  in  Syria  the 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  109 

light  is  so  intense  that  all  colour  seems  to  stand 
out  in  unrivalled  pieturesqueness  and  distinctness, 
so  our  words,  without  attracting  attention  to  them- 
selves, should  set  forth  simply  and  clearly  our 
desires  towards  God,  dealing  with  Him  as  so  very 
near  that  the  congregation  finds  itself  transported 
into  His  presence,,  and  the  heavenly  horizons  are  as 
clearly  defined  as  those  by  which  individual  lives 
are  daily  limited. 

There  ought  to  "be  some  order  in  public  prayer. 
Praise  should  mingle  with  supplication,  confession  of 
sins  with  yearnings  after  holiness.  Supplications 
for  the  individual,  the  home,  the  Church,  and  the 
nation  should  not  he  wanting.  Prayer  for  mis- 
sionaries and  native  converts  should  always  have  a 
place.  Sometimes  one  order  may  be  adopted,  and 
at  other  times  another,  but  on  the  whole  there 
must  always  be  first  the  confession  of  sin,  and  then 
the  outburst  of  thanksgiving  and  intercession. 

Does  the  task  of  public  prayer  appal  you  ?  Do 
you  feel  as  though  the  ideal  suggested  is  too  high 
for  you  to  attain  ?  Are  you  tempted  to  exclaim, 
"Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?"  Then  re- 
member that  the  Spirit  helpeth  your  infirmities, 
and  that  the  great  High  Priest  waits  to  mingle 
His  intercession  with  yours,  and  to  present  them 
ordered  and  perfected  in  the  presence  of  the  Father. 
We  can  never  forget  the  vision  given  of  Him  by 


no  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

the  apostle,  who  tells  us  that  He  stands  before  the 
altar  having  a  golden  censer,  and  that  there  is 
given  unto  Him  much  incense,  that  He  may  add  it 
unto  the  prayers  of  all  the  saints  upon  the  golden 
altar  which  is  before  the  throne  (Rev.  viii.  3,  4). 

Do  not  let  people  speak  to  you  of  many  things 
before  you  enter  the  pulpit.  Let  there  be  a  look 
on  your  face  which  shall  compel  silence  and 
reverence  in  the  vestry,  because  there  is  a  great 
awe  on  your  heart.  You  are  going  to  speak  to 
God  for  men,  and  to  men  for  God.  Have,  if 
possible,  a  little  audible  prayer  before  going  forth 
on  this  great  errand. 


XVII 
FAULTS  TO  GUAKD  AGAINST 

EVERY  calling  in  life  has  its  own  peculiar  pitfalls 
and  snares,  and  those  which  beset  the  life  of  the 
minister  are  very  insidious  and  persistent.  Never 
until  the  end  of  life  are  we  free  from  our  liability 
to  any  one  of  the  weaknesses  and  failings  which 
are  mentioned  in  the  following  paragraphs.  We 
may  never  put  off  our  armour,  never  throw  our- 
selves on  the  sward  to  rest,  never  allow  ourselves 
to  suppose  that  the  enemy  has  finally  retired  from 
the  field.  The  test  which  Gideon  employed  was  a 
perfectly  just  one,  when  he  insisted  that  the  men 
who  cast  themselves  upon  the  bank  to  drink, 
though  the  foe  might  be  anywhere  within  a  mile 
or  two,  were  not  the  men  who  should  deliver  Israel. 
Those  who  stood  alert  upon  the  river  bank,  catching 
up  the  water  in  the  hollow  of  their  hand,  ready  to 
meet  the  foe  at  any  moment,  proved  themselves  to 
be  men  of  the  true  temper  for  his  great  purpose. 
The  first  failing  to  guard  against  is  an  undue 

and    wanton   familiarity  with   holy   things.     Our 

111 


ii2  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

hearers  sometimes  look  up  at  us  and  think  that,  as 
we  are  perpetually  having  intercourse  with  sacred 
subjects,  we  must  necessarily  be  ourselves  as  imbued 
and  saturated  with  the  divine  truth  as  the  materials 
that  lie  asoak  in  the  mixture  of  the  dyer's  vat. 
They  say  to  themselves :  "  We,  too,  could  be  good, 
if  we  were  perpetually  in  contact  with  God  and 
heaven,  if  the  Bible  were  perpetually  in  our  hands, 
and  the  materials  of  holy  thought  lay  all  around." 
Ah!  they  do  not  know  the  fatal  snare  upon  the 
other  side.  It  is  just  because  we  are  always  deal- 
ing with  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  that  we  are  apt 
to  lose  that  fine  sense  of  reverence  which  we  felt 
when  first  we  entered  the  pulpit,  first  addressed  an 
audience  in  the  name  of  God,  and  first  pointed 
an  inquirer,  impressed  with  our  words,  to  the 
Redeemer. 

To  some  of  us  the  opportunity  comes  of  preach- 
ing at  least  once  or  twice  on  Sunday,  and  in  some 
cases  of  standing  up  for  God  ten  or  twelve  times  in 
a  week.  It  is  inevitable  that  we  should  be  tempted 
to  presume  upon  our  familiarity  with  pulpit  themes. 
The  spirit  of  mere  professionalism  peeps  over  our 
shoulder,  and  an  air  of  self-confident  assurance 
settles  down  on  our  face  and  bearing.  We  find 
no  difficulty  in  offering  public  prayer,  for  we  have 
only  to  repeat  the  well-worn  sentences  which  haye 
so  often  passed  our  lips.  We  do  not  tremble  as 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  113 

* 

we  stand  up  with  the  awful  message  of  the  grace 
or  terror  of  God,  because  we  are  so  sure  that  as 
we  have  never  broken  down  we  shall  never  break 
down ;  because  we  have  always  secured  a  moderate 
meed  of  success,  therefore  we  may  count  pretty 
certainly  upon  passing  muster  with  the  majority  of 
the  people.  Too  often  there  is  a  kind  of  jauntiness 
which  is  very  offensive.  While  we  are  in  the 
pulpit  we  may  appear  dignified  and  solemn,  but 
there  was  a  lightness  in  manner  and  speech  before 
we  entered  it  which  will  be  resumed  when  we 
again  reach  the  vestry.  Our  habitual  use  and 
wont  have  blunted  the  edge  of  the  razor  and 
taken  off  the  fine  bloom  from  the  fruit. 

I  do  not  know  how  this  can  be  guarded  against, 
except  by  receiving  each  sermon  as  a  definite 
message  from  God,  and  engaging  in  devout  and 
earnest  intercession  before  we  deliver  it.  A  few 
words  of  prayer  uttered  in  the  vestry  before  we 
leave  it  are  better  than  nothing,  but  they  ought 
not  to  take  the  place  of  very  definite  waiting  upon 
God,  of  very  deep  and  profound  entreaty  that  the 
soul  may  be  anointed  with  fresh  oil,  and  of  very 
intense  sympathy  with  the  awful  state  of  souls 
that  may  be  in  that  congregation — slipping  back 
into  sin,  standing  on  the  brink  of  temptation,  or 
absolutely  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  There  must  be 

fresh  ammunition  and  fresh  power  for  every  service. 
8 


ii4  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

The  second  of  these  failings  is  the  absence  of  passion 
in  OUT  soul.  I  was  struck  with  the  leading  article 
in  a  daily  paper  which  I  came  across  the  other  day. 
The  burden  of  it  was  as  follows : — 

The  greatest  oratory  is  not  only  without  decora- 
tions, but  it  is  that  kind  of  speaking  which,  without 
being  of  the  highest  merit,  is  at  anyrate  downright 
in  earnest.  Ornamental  oratory  is  poor  oratory, 
and  for  the  purpose  of  persuading  and  inspiring,  it 
is  weak  and  ineffective.  The  true  note  of  powerful 
speaking  is  passion,  and  passion  rushes  along  the 
shortest  and  simplest  line  to  its  goal.  In  the 
speeches  which  Milton  puts  into  the  mouths  of 
the  speakers  in  the  debate  in  Pandemonium  there 
is  not  a  single  formal  metaphor.  The  diction  is 
that  of  severe  prose,  and  the  verses  are  as  compact 
as  diamonds,  and  as  bright ;  not  a  word  is  wasted, 
the  meaning  is  clear,  and  the  arguments  tell  for 
all  they  are  worth.  Demosthenes'  oration  on  the 
Crown  contains  scarcely  a  single  ornamental  jewel. 
So  in  Shakespeare,  who  looked  at  life  through  the 
golden  haze  of  romance — the  more  earnest  the 
speakers  become,  the  plainer  and  simpler  their 
orations,  as,  for  instance,  those  of  Brutus  and 
Anthony  after  the  murder  of  Caesar.  They  are 
winged  words,  but  the  pinions  do  not  come  from 
metaphor,  but  from  intense  passion.  And  so  it 
always,  or  nearly  always,  is:  where  deep  passion 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  115 

exists,  where  there  is  an  intense,  or  even  a  strong 
conviction,  a  sense  of  the  gravity  of  the  crisis,  a 
burning  desire  to  arouse,  to  persuade,  to  sway,  to 
guide,  the  speaking  will  throb  with  power,  its 
argument  will  come  like  cannon  balls,  and  its 
passion  will  scathe  like  lightning. 

Perhaps  few  men  can  rise  to  this  height,  and  yet 
for  want  of  it  our  preaching  becomes  colourless  and 
uninfluentiaL  A  man  may  not  speak  with  gram- 
matical accuracy,  or  a  wide  choice  of  words,  but  if 
he  speak  with  the  passion  of  intense  feeling  he  is  a 
great  speaker,  and  men  will  be  compelled  to  listen 
to  him.  The  fire  that  burns  in  his  heart  will  be 
contagious,  and  will  make  all  hearts  glow.  Whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  a  man  may  use  perfectly  turned 
and  exquisitely  balanced  sentences,  gems  may  sparkle 
in  every  paragraph,  the  argument  may  be  effectively 
presented,  but  if,  with  all  this,  .there  is  no  passion, 
no  intensity,  no  fire,  the  people  go  away  unmoved, 
the  conscience  is  not  gripped,  the  heart  is  hardly 
touched. 

It  was  this  power  of  passion  which  must  have 
given  to  Dr.  Chalmers  the  marvellous  gift  which 
he  exercised  in  his  ministry,  when  the  Glasgow 
merchants  waited  in  the  reading-rooms  not  far 
from  the  Tron  Church,  that  they  might  rush  out  at 
the  first  tinkle  of  the  kirk  bell,  and  secure  a  place 
for  the  great  weekly  sermon,  at  the  height  of  the 


n6  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

working  day ;  when  the  students  claimed  remission 
of  the  fine  for  non-attendance  at  their  classes  on  the 
ground  that  they  had  gone  to  hear  Dr.  Chalmers ; 
when  the  busy  people  of  every  condition  snatched 
an  hour  at  noon  from  their  labours  to  hear  the 
great  voice  in  their  midst ;  when  every  man's 
breathing  was  suspended  as  the  mighty  sentences 
rolled  forth,  not  in  the  necessary  service  of  Sunday, 
but  in  the  middle  of  the  week,  in  an  hour  which 
was  worth  money  to  the  energetic  and  money- 
making  community.  Then  for  an  hour  every  breath 
was  held,  every  cough  suppressed,  while  each  hearer 
restrained  himself  under  the  spell  of  the  impassioned 
and  entrancing  eloquence;  and  a  great  sigh  burst 
from  the  overcharged  bosoms  of  the  multitude  when 
the  oration  came  to  an  end.  What  a  record  that  is 
that  he  makes  in  a  jotting  of  his  diary :  "  Preached 
in  the  Gorbals  in  the  afternoon,  and  exceeded  in  the 
pulpit." 

It  is  not  to  be  inferred  that  I  am  advocating 
here  anything  of  mere  declamation,  or  excitement, 
or  vehement  gesture,  but  intensity, — that  the  whole 
nature  may  be  gathered  up  into  one  supreme  act  in 
the  deliverance  of  the  divine  message,  upon  which 
the  eternal  destiny  of  souls  may  be  depending. 
May  God  Himself  infuse  into  our  hearts  a 
passion  for  His  glory,  a  passion  for  the  souls  of 
men,  a  passion  for  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer's 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  117 

kingdom,    that    our    words    may    glow    and    burn 
like  coals. 

The  third  failure  or  weakness  against  which  we 
must  be  on  our  guard  is  the  habit  of  superficiality. 
We  are  all  tempted  to  be  lazy.  It  is  possible  to 
spend  two  or  three  hours  in  the  study,  surrounded 
by  books,  flitting  like  a  butterfly  from  one  to  an- . 
other,  but  girding  ourselves  to  no  great  effort  of 
thought.  It  is  here  that  the  pen  comes  in  to  test 
us.  We  have  often  found  that  it  is  possible  to 
read  listlessly  one  book  after  another,  absorbing  the 
thoughts  of  others,  without  bringing  one's  mind  into 
distinct  and  living  contact  with  the  truths  which 
they  may  be  discussing.  It  is  so  easy  to  allow  one- 
self to  feed  on  milk,  which  is  food  that  has  passed 
through  the  digestion  of  another,  without  exerting 
oneself  to  wrestle  with  the  angel  of  truth  in  the 
dark  until  we  extort  his  secret. 

It  is  always  better  to  give  a  little  truth  which 
we  have  personally  discovered  and  hammered  out 
in  our  own  workshop,  like  the  beaten  work  of  the 
cherubim  of  old,  than  to  give  much  of  the  results  of 
other  men's  researches.  Use  the  pen,  write  as  you 
think.  Even  if  there  is  no  prospect  of  using  what 
you  write  in  the  written  form  in  public,  yet  the 
very  habit  of  writing  will  compel  you  to  think,  and 
crystallise  the  results  of  your  reading. 

It  is  in  this  way  that  we  discover  whether  we 


n8  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

are  merely  glancing  over  the  surface  of  things  or 
dealing  with  their  heart.  All  public  speakers  are 
tempted  to  be  superficial,  to  talk  to  their  people 
generally,  to  sketch  out  great  continents  of  truth 
without  staying  to  fill  in  countries,  mountains,  or 
rivers ;  to  suggest  rather  than  to  inform ;  to  give 
an  appearance  of  wide  information  without  the  less 
attractive  work  of  subsoil  ploughing.  It  is  not 
so  difficult  to  talk  for  an  hour  about  some  Bible 
character  if  we  have  had  the  opportunity  of  scanning 
slightly  two  or  three  articles  from  various  biblical 
encyclopaedias  and  commentaries;  but  there  may  be 
no  vigorous  thinking,  no  grappling  with  the  pro- 
blems of  life,  no  effort  of  our  own  to  portray  the 
figure  on  the  canvas  in  the  aspect  in  which  he 
presents  himself  to  the  peculiar  standpoint  of  our 
thought. 

The  fourth  weakness  against  which  we  must 
guard  is  the  tendency  always  to  make  use  of  old 
materials.  Of  course  there  is  no  reason  why  we 
should  not  preach  an  old  sermon  if  we  preach  with 
a  fresh  anointing,  a  fresh  perception  of  God,  a  fresh 
contact  with  the  truth  it  presents.  But  it  is  a 
solemn  thing  for  a  man  to  be  always  preaching  his 
old  sermons.  Nothing  will  more  certainly  indicate 
his  degeneracy.  That  a  growing  child  should  be 
able  to  wear,  year  after  year,  the  same  clothes,  is 
a  sign  that  his  health  is  seriously  declining.  In 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  119 

mature  life,  of  course,  we  wear  clothes  made  from 
the  same  tailor's  measurements ;  there  is  no  need  to 
alter  from  year  to  year;  but  in  the  moral  and 
spiritual  realm  we  never  reach  our  maturity — we 
are  always  children  growing  from  less  to  more.  To 
be  always  preaching  the  same  sermons  is  to  indicate 
that  we  have  ceased  to  develop,  and  to  cease  to  grow 
is  practically  to  die. 

The  temptation  to  preach  an  old  sermon  is  not  so 
imminent  to  those  of  us  who  have  settled  pulpits, 
for  our  people  are  quick  enough  to  remember  any 
sermon   which    has  already   arrested   them   (even 
though  we  should  choose  another  text !)     But  the 
temptation  presses  upon  those  who  are  perpetually 
moving  about,  and  who  have  only  to  turn  their 
bundle  of  sermons  upside  down,  and  start  again  to 
preach  through  the  entire  pack.     It  may  thus  befall 
that  one  or  two  hundred  discourses  or  less  will,  by 
repeated  use,  be  made  to  spread  over  the  preaching 
opportunities  of  an  entire  life.     It  is  important  that 
we  should  produce  one  new  sermon  for  every  five 
occasions  of  an  intinerant  ministry,  in  order  to  keep 
our  perceptive  and  inventive  faculties  from  perishing 
through  disuse.     It  is  good  to  wait  before  God  in 
the  morning  of  any  day  in  which  we  are  to  be 
called  to  minister  to  the  people,  to  ask  of  Him 
what  message  He  wishes  to  be  delivered,  and  then 
deliver  it  fresh  and  hot,  like  the  show-bread  which 


120  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

every  week  was  laid  upon  the  golden  table  of  the 
sanctuary. 

The  last  weakness  and  temptation  against  which 
we  must  guard  is  that  of  a  fancied  superiority  over 
others.  The  temptation  of  the  pulpit  is  to  make  a 
man  autocratic,  and  impatient  of  the  criticism  and 
discussion  through  which  the  words  of  every  man 
must  necessarily  pass  before  they  can  be  received  as 
the  current  coin  of  the  world.  In  the  pulpit,  there 
is  no  one  to  dispute  what  we  say.  When  the 
sermon  is  over,  those  who  disagree  with  us  vent 
their  grumblings  on  their  wives  and  friends,  out  of 
our  hearing,  whilst  only  those  who  adore  us  are 
admitted  to  the  inner  shrine,  to  stand  around  with 
their  flattering  speech.  We  judge  ourselves  by 
what  those  who  love  us  say ;  we  look  at  ourselves 
through  their  eyes.  Those  who  take  an  independent 
position,  and  offer  the  slightest  criticism,  are  not 
welcomed  into  the  sacred  circle  of  our  court.  Those 
who  differ  from  us  are  made  to  feel  the  wintry  side 
of  the  street.  We  wrap  ourselves  up  in  our  most 
warmly  lined  coats  when  the  cold  blast  of  adverse 
criticism  approaches  us.  All  this  generates  a  habit 
of  proud  self-opinionativeness  which  is  extremely 
harmful.  It  would  be  good  for  us,  if,  like  some  of 
our  English  kings,  we  could  disguise  ourselves  as 
ordinary  people  and  mix  in  the  affairs  of  men.  It 
would  be  good  if  we  joined  debating  societies,  where 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  121 

our  opinions  would  be  ruthlessly  convassed  and  our 
oracular  speeches  mercilessly  torn  to  shreds.  We 
might  have  to  hear  things  which  would  be  hard 
of  digestion,  but  most  salutary,  and  through  the 
knowing  of  which  we  might  rise  up  into  a  truer 
appreciation  of  the  divine  word  on  the  one  hand,  and 
of  human  need  on  the  other. 

Do  let  us  guard  against  being  little  popes,  against 
an  autocratic  insistence  on  our  ways  of  thinking  or 
stating  the  truth,  and  against  an  oracular  announce- 
ment of  our  opinion  on  all  matters  in  heaven  and 
on  earth.  Humility,  teachableness,  converse  with 
our  fellows,  the  reading  of  the  daily  press,  and, 
above  all,  fellowship  with  God,  are  the  superlative 
correctives  for  any  tendency  to  think  of  ourselves 
more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think.  Let  us  re- 
member the  Master's  words,  "He  that  would  be 
first,  let  him  be  least  of  all,  and  servant  of  alL" 

"  There  is  a  secret  place  of  rest 

God's  saints  alone  may  know ; 
Thou  shalt  not  find  it  east  nor  west, 

Though  seeking  to  and  fro. 
A  cell  where  Jesus  is  the  door, 

His  love  the  only  key ; 
Who  enter  will  go  out  no  more, 

But  there  with  Jesus  be." 


XVIII 
YOUE  CHARGE  OF  YOUESELF 

WE  are  often  told  of  a  minister's  charge  of  his 
congregation,  but  the  greatest  charge  of  all  is  his 
own  character.  This  arises  from  the  fact  that  what 
we  are  so  largely  affects  what  we  say.  If  our 
people  have  any  suspicion  that  there  is  a  rift,  how- 
ever slight,  between  our  teaching  and  our  daily 
living,  between  our  religious  phraseology  and  our 
practical  morality,  we  may  speak  with  the  tongues 
of  angels,  but  they  refuse  to  be  captivated.  It  is 
not  so  much  what  we  say,  but  what  we  are,  that 
weighs  with  our  people.  They  will  be  only  too 
apt  to  discount  our  sermons  if  they  are  conscious 
that  there  is  any  laxity  in  our  personal  or  domestic 
habit.  "  Take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  thy  doctrine," 
said  the  apostle,  "  for  thus  thou  shalt  save  thyself 
and  them  that  hear  thee." 

The  character  of  the  minister  largely  affects  that 
of  his  people.  It  is  not  without  profound  signifi- 
cance that  the  letters  to  the  seven  churches  are 

inscribed  to  their  respective  angels,  a  title  which 

122 


JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS  1*3 

probably  designates  their  chief  teacher  and  spiritual 
guide.  In  addressing  the  minister,  the  great  Head 
of  the  Church  knew  that  He  was  touching  on  the 
salient  features  of  the  life  of  the  people  committed 
to  his  care.  It  is  impossible  that  people  should 
concentrate  their  attention  on  their  minister  for  so 
many  hours  each  week  without  insensibly  taking 
an  impression  of  his  character  as  well  as  of  his 
instructions. 

In  addition  to  all  this,  we  must  remember  that 
God  does  not  undertake  to  use  instruments  which 
have  become  contaminated  by  wilfully  committed 
sin.  He  will  not  put  His  throne-water  into 
polluted  vessels.  He  may  hide  His  heavenly 
treasures  in  earthen  vessels,  but  not  in  unclean 
ones.  He  is  prepared  to  walk  in  fellowship  with 
those  who  are  far  from  perfect,  so  long  as  they  are 
perpetually  applying  for  cleansing  in  the  blood  of 
Christ,  but  He  refuses  to  work  with  those  whose 
hands  and  hearts  are  persistently  soiled  by  abomin- 
able things  which  He  hates.  Surely  the  fact  that 
He  calls  us  to  work  with  Him  should  induce  in 
ourselves  a  reverent  habit  of  life,  that  we  should 
always  work  out,  with  fear  and  trembling,  that 
which  He  works  in,  and  that  we  should  regard 
with  profound  reverence  the  nature  which  He 
designs  to  make  a  vehicle  for  His  communications 
with  His  children. 


124  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

There  is  a  profoundly  interesting  narrative  in 
the  Book  of  Leviticus  which  illustrates  the  neces- 
sity of  personal  holiness.  It  was  only  a  week  since 
Aaron  and  his  four  sons  had  been  consecrated  to 
the  priestly  office.  Sin  offerings  and  burnt  offer- 
ings had  inaugurated  their  entrance  on  their  sacred 
work.  The  blood  and  oil  had  touched  various  parts 
of  their  bodies,  in  token  of  their  consecration  to 
the  service  of  the  sanctuary,  and  specific  injunc- 
tions had  been  laid  upon  them.  The  father  and 
sons  had  just  entered  upon  their  official  functions 
when  an  awful  catastrophe  took  place,  and  Nadab 
and  Abihu  were  stretched  out  in  death,  suddenly 
smitten  by  the  hand  of  God.  And  what  was  the 
reason?  It  may  be,  as  the  ninth  verse  suggests, 
that  they  had  taken  stimulants  to  nerve  them  for 
the  august  duties  to  which  they  were  summoned ; 
or,  it  may  be  that  they  were  wilfully  and  pre- 
sumptuously negligent  of  the  precision  of  the 
divine  commandment.  But,  in  any  case,  they  had 
offered  strange  fire  upon  the  altar  in  defiance  of 
the  divinely  prescribed  method.  "  Then  Moses  said 
unto  Aaron,  This  is  it  that  the  Lord  spake,  saying, 
I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  Me, 
and  before  all  the  people  I  will  be  glorified." 

Instead  of  taking  the  fire  needed  for  their  censers 
from  the  brazen  altar,  they  seem  to  have  made  use 
of  common  fire,  and  thus  committed  an  act  which, 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  125 

considering  the  descent  of  the  miraculous  fire  they 
had  so  recently  witnessed,  and  the  solemn  obligation 
laid  upon  them  to  make  use  of  the  heaven-sent 
flame  in  the  service  of  the  altar,  hetrayed  a  care- 
lessness, irreverence,  and  want  of  faith  which  could 
not  but  have  a  prejudicial  effect  upon  the  whole 
nation,  needing  to  be  taught  the  first  elementary 
law  of  literal  obedience. 

How  often  have  we  been  guilty  of  the  same  sin  ? 
There  is  but  one  fire — that  of  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit — that  should  burn  upon  the  altar  of 
our  heart,  and  spread  from  us  to  others.  The 
absence  of  that  sacred  fire  cannot  be  concealed, 
and  its  presence  may  not  be  simulated.  Yet  how 
often  we  have  made  use  of  the  strange  fire  of 
human  excitement,  of  fervid  manner,  of  vehement 
gesticulation,  of  mere  emotional  address!  Some- 
times, when  we  have  been  most  conscious  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  been  wanting  in  our  ministrations, 
we  have  tried  to  atone  for  the  lack  of  His  gracious 
influence  by  some  abnormal  manifestation  of  merely 
human  activities.  Strange  fire  has  been  kindled  in 
our  censers,  and  strange  fire  has  been  communicated 
to  our  people. 

We  cannot  be  too  careful  of  ourselves,  for  it  is 
only  as  we  are  separated  from  known  sin,  that  Grod 
will  call  us  into  the  mountain  to  speak  with  us  face 
to  face.  This  charge  of  our  own  souls,  this  care  of 


126  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

our  own  vineyard,  this  tillage  of  our  own  field, 
demands,  and  must  have,  soul  leisure,  quietness, 
calm,  and  concentration  of  spirit.  Earth's  voices 
must  be  silenced  that  we  may  be  able  to  hear  God's 
still,  small  voice,  warning,  convincing,  condemning, 
admonishing.  He  is  waiting  for  those  who  have 
leisure  to  draw  near  to  TTim,  and  it  is  becoming  on 
our  part  to  give  Him  the  opportunity  of  opening 
His  secret  thoughts  and  counsels  with  respect  to  us, 
lest  we  become  like  the  foolish  prophets  described 
by  Ezekiel,  "  who  follow  their  own  spirit,  and  have 
seen  nothing"  (Ezek.  xiil  2—17). 

There  are  three  traits  of  which  we  must  be 
specially  careful. 

(1)  Humility.  Beware  of  a  pseudo-humility 
which  is  of  the  lips  rather  than  of  the  heart, 
which  bemoans,  in  loud  tones,  its  wretchedness 
and  helplessness,  and  takes  the  opportunity  of 
attracting  notice  by  its  very  expressions  of  lowli- 
ness and  unworthiness.  You  will  not  find  these 
things  in  a  truly  humble  person.  As  another  has 
said,  "A  man  or  woman  upon  whom  God  has 
bestowed  the  true  grace  of  humility  sometimes 
appears  to  have  an  amount  of  self-reliance  and 
confidence,  the  source  of  which  is  not  evident,  but 
which  is  simply  the  result  of  entire  and  absolute 
dependence  upon  God."  Such  a  person  is  as  ready 
to  do  the  smallest  thing,  unknown  and  unnoticed 


FOR  LAY  PREACHERS  127 

of  men,  as  to  undertake  some  difficult,  and,  to  the 
world,  apparently  ambitious  enterprise,  for  the 
cause  of  the  Master  and  for  the  service  of  man. 
He  is  not  at  all  apt  to  talk  about  his  own  weak- 
ness, or  to  proclaim  and  bewail  his  own  unfitness. 
He  is  too  humble  to  think  about  these  things  :  he 
lives  absolutely  in  the  dust  in  the  presence  of  Him 
whose  instrument  he  is,  and  who  chooses  things 
which  are  not  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are. 
Let  us  cultivate  this  spirit  that  lies  low  before  God, 
accountable  to  Him  alone,  conscious  of  being  able 
to  do,  and  effect,  nothing  of  ourselves,  but  asking 
Him  to  work  in  us  and  through  us.  Let  us  seek 
the  honour  that  cometh  from  God  only,  that  our 
mind  and  heart  be  occupied  exclusively  with 


(2)  Purity.  There  is  no  grace  which  so  abso- 
lutely captivates  and  holds  the  admiration  of  men 
as  habitual  self-restraint,  that  the  whole  being  shall 
be  kept  well  in  hand,  not  because  it  is  wanting  in 
the  elements  of  human  feeling,  but  because  every 
thought  and  emotion  is  brought  into  captivity  to 
Jesus  Christ.  It  must  never  be  forgotten  that 
often  those  who  are  most  susceptible  towards  God 
are  most  easily  overcome  by  the  sins  of  the  flesh. 
In  proportion,  therefore,  as  we  are  conscious  of 
being  able  to  mount  into  the  heights  of  holy 
fellowship  and  service,  we  must  beware  of  the 


128  JOTTINGS  AND  HINTS 

other  possibility,  of  being  hurled  into  the  darkest 
abyss  of  pollution. 

(3)  Prayerfulness.  Here  is  the  weapon  by  which 
we  are  able  to  conquer  in  the  lonely  inner  fight, 
through  which  each  of  us  must  pass.  Joshua  went 
forth  alone  to  meditate  by  Jericho,  and  there  en- 
countered the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host.  We, 
too,  must  go  forth  to  stand  by  ourselves  in  the 
midst  of  the  conflict 'which  is  ever  raging  between 
light  and  darkness,  Christ  and  Antichrist. 

It  is  then  we  shall  be  conscious  that  Emanuel, 
our  Captain,  is  leading  the  hosts  of  God.  We  shall 
also  be  conscious  of  the  hostility  of  the  principalities 
and  powers  of  darkness.  Then  it  is  we  must  pray. 
In  prayer  we  take  sides;  in  prayer  we  cast  the 
whole  weight  of  ourselves  for  good  against  evil, 
for  purity  against  impurity,  for  Christ  against  the 
devil.  We  must  learn  to  pour  out  our  souls  before 
God.  We  must  see  to  it  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  able  to  intercede  within  us  with  groanings  that 
cannot  be  uttered,  not  for  our  flock  only,  but  that 
in  our  lonely  watch  we  may  be  preserved  from 
the  lion  and  the  bear,  and  enabled  so  to  live  that 
we  may  meet  the  Chief  Shepherd  at  His  coming 
without  shame. 


V 

v>, 


v 


