ru 
o 


ESEMTED 


jiORCH  OF  ENGLAND  BOOK  SOCIETY 


PRESENTED 

BY    THE 

CHURCH    OF    ENGLAND 
BOOK  SOCIETY, 

11,    ADAM    STREET,    LONDON. 


iTrfasiircr: 
FRANK  A.   BEVAN,  ESQ. 

-Srrrrtaru: 
JOHN   SHRIMPTON,  ESQ. 


T^^f      ^ 


KNOTS    UNTIED. 


BEING 

PLAIN  STATEMENTS  ON  DISPUTED  POINTS  IN  RELIGION, 

FROM  THE 

STANDPOINT  OF  AN  EVANGELICAL  CHURCHMAN. 


BY 

JOHN    CHAELES    KYLE,    D.D., 

LORD  BISHOP  OF  LIVERPOOL. 

Author  of  "  Expository  Thoughts  on  the  Gost 


(Solution. 

(SPECIAL  ISSUE.) 


LONDON: 

WILLIAM     HUNT     AND     COMPANY, 
12  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

1885. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  TENTH  EDITION. 

0 

IN  sending  forth  a  tenth  edition  of  this  volume,  I  do  not  think 
it  necessary  to  add  anything  to  the  original  preface  which  I 
drew  up  when  it  first  appeared. 

The  general  principles  which  I  asserted  and  maintained 
when  I  was  much  younger  than  I  am  now,  I  firmly  assert 
and  maintain  in  1885.  I  find  nothing  to  retract,  cancel,  or 
withdraw  in  the  nineteen  papers  which  compose  the  volume. 

I  frankly  admit,  after  careful  examination  of  "  Knots 
Untied,"  that  I  observe  in _its_pages  occasional  sharp  and 
strong  expressions  which  perhaps  I  should  not  use  if  I  wrote 
the  book  over  again  in  the  present  year.  But  I  think  it 
better  to  make  no  change,  and  to  leave  the  original  language 
alone.  I  wish  my  readers  to  understand  that  the  views 
which  I  hold  as  a  presbyter  I  still  hold  as  a  bishop;  and  I 
fear  that  any  alteration  might  lead  to  misconstruction  and 
misrepresentation . 

That  God  may  continue  to  bless  the  book  and  make  it 
useful  is  my  earnest  prayer. 

J.  C.  LIVERPOOL. 

PALACE,  LIVERPOOL, 

February  9,  1885. 


SPECIAL  ISSUE  OF  "KNOTS  UNTIED." 

THIS  special  edition  unabridged  has  been  prepared  at  the  request  f » 
of  many  of  the  clergy  and  laity,  who  are  anxious  to  promote  the  f  f 
circulation  of  this  valuable  work  among  university  and  other  if 
students.  Application  for  terms  to  be  made  to  the  publishers,!' 
by  whom  this  edition  will  be  sent  direct. 


PREFACE. 


THE  volume  now  in  the  reader's  hands  requires  a  few  words  of 
explanation.  It  consists  of  nineteen  papers  on  subjects  which 
are  matters  of  dispute  among  English  Churchmen  in  the  present 
day,  systematically  arranged.  A  moment's  glance  at  the  table 
of  contents  will  show  that  there  is  hardly  any  point  of  theo 
logical  controversy  belonging  to  this  era,  which  is  not  discussed, 
with  more  or  less  fulness,  in  these  papers. 

The  doctrinal  tone  of  the  volume  will  be  found  distinctly  and 
decidedly  "  Evangelical."  I  avow  that,  without  hesitation,  at 
the  outset.  The  opinions  expressed  and  advocated  about  the 
matters  discussed,  are  those  of  an  Evangelical  Churchman. 
What  THAT  means  every  intelligent  Englishman  knows,  and  it 
is  mere  affectation  to  profess  ignorance  about  the  point.  They 
are  not  popular  opinions,  I  am  aware,  and  arc  only  held, 
perhaps,  by  a  minority  of  the  English  clergy.  But  they  are  the 
only  opinions  which  I  can  find  in  Holy  Scripture,  in  the  Thirty  - 

iv 


PREFACE.  V 

nine  Articles,  in  the  Prayer-book  fairly  interpreted,  in  the  works 
of  the  Reformers,  or  in  the  writings  of  the  pre-Caroline  divines. 
In  the  faith  of  these  opinions  I  have  lived  for  thirty-five  years, 
and  have  seen  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  them,  however  rudely 
they  may  have  been  assailed. 

The  object  of  sending  forth  this  volume  is  to  meet  the  wants 
of  those  who  may  wish  to  see  theological  questions  fully  dis 
cussed  and  examined  from  an  "  Evangelical "  standpoint,  and 
complain  that  they  cannot  find  a  book  that  does  this.  There 
are  hundreds  of  English  Churchmen  who  will  never  look  at  a 
tract  (though  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  when  first  sent  forth,  were  only 
tracts),  but  are  willing  to  read  a  volume.  To  them  I  offer  this 
volume,  and  respectfully  invite  their  attention  to  its  contents. 
If  it  does  nothing  else,  I  hope  it  may  convince  some  readers  that 
in  the  controversies  of  this  day  the  reasonings  and  arguments 
are  not  all  on  one  side. 

The  friendly  readers  of  the  many  popular  tracts  which  God 
has  enabled  me  to  write  in  the  last  twenty-five  years,  will  not 
find  in  this  volume  much  that  is  new  to  them.  They  will  find 
some  of  their  old  acquaintances,  though  altered,  remodelled, 
recast,  and  partially  divested  of  their  direct  and  familiar  style. 
But  they  will  find  the  same  argument  the  same  matter,  and  the 
same  substance,  though  presented  in  a  new  form,  and  adapted 


VI  PKEFACE. 

to  the  tastes  of  a  different  order  of  minds.  I  am  sure  they  will 
agree  with  me,  that  it  is  well  to  use  every  means  of  doing  good, 
and,  if  possible,  to  meet  the  wants  of  every  class  of  readers. 

Whether  the  volume  will  do  any  good  remains  to  be  seen. 
At  any  rate  it  is  an  honest  effort  to  untie  sonic  theological 
knots,  and  to  supply  some  clear  statements  of  truth  from  the 
standpoint  of  an  Evangelical  Churchman.  That  God  may  bless 
the  effort,  and  make  it  useful  to  the  cause  of  Christ  and  to  the 
Church  of  England,  is  my  earnest  prayer. 

J.  C.  RYLE. 

STKADBROKE  VICARAGE. 
1877. 


CONTENTS. 


NO. 


PAfJK 


I.  EVANGELICAL    RELIGION,      .....  1 

II.  ONLY  ONE   WAY   OF   SALVATION,        ....  26 

III.  PRIVATE   JUDGMENT,  ...                                 .44 

IV.  THE  THIRTY-NINE   ARTICLES,            .  ...  62 
V.  BAPTISM,        .......  87 

VI.  REGENERATION,          .....  110 

VII.  PRAYER-BOOK    STATEMENTS   ABOUT    REGENERATION,               .  130 

viii.  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER,  .  .  .  .  .163 

IX.    THE   REAL   PRESENCE,  .  .  .  .  .190 

X.    THE   CHURCH,               .                .                 .                 .                 .  212 

XI.    THE   PRIEST,                   ......  242 

XII.    CONFESSION,                  ......  260 

XIII.  WORSHIP,      ....  277 

XIV.  THE   SABBATH,            .*....  298 
XV.    PHARISEES   AND   SADDUCEES,               ....  825 

XVI.  DIVERS   AND   STRANGE  DOCTRINES,  .  .  .  347 

XVII.  THE  FALLIBILITY  OF   MINISTERS,    ....  363 

XVIII.  APOSTOLIC   FEARS,    ......  385 

XIX.  IDOLATRY,     .  .  400 


KNOTS     UNTIED, 
i. 

EVANGELICAL  RELIGION. 

IT  may  be  Laid  down  as  a  rule,  with  tolerable  confidence,  that 
the  absence  of  accurate  definitions  is  the  very  life  of  religious 
controversy.  If  men  would  only  define  with  precision  the 
theological  terms  which  they  use,  many  disputes  would  die. 
Scores  of  excited  disputants  would  discover  that  they  do  not 
really  differ,  and  that  their  disputes  have  arisen  from  their 
own  neglect  of  the  great  duty  of  explaining  the  meaning  of 
words. 

In  opening  the  subject  of  this  paper,  I  desire  to  remember 
carefully  this  important  rule.  "Without  further  preface,  I  shall 
begin  by  explaining  what  I  mean  when  I  speak  of  "  Evangelical 
Religion." 

By  "Evangelical  Religion,"  I  do  not  mean  Christianity  as 
compared  with  Heathenism,  or  Protestantism  as  compared  with 
Romanism,  or  Trinitarianism  as  compared  with  Socinianism  or 
Deism.  I  do  not  propose  to  argue  with  the  Sceptic  or  the 
Neologian,  with  the  Papist  or  the  Jew.  What  I  do  want  to 
consider  is  the  religion  which  is  peculiar  to  that  party  in  the 
Church  of  England  which  is  commonly  called  "  Evangelical." 
To  that  point  I  shall  confine  myself,  and  to  that  alone. 

I  will  not  waste  time  by  proving  the  existence  of  such  a 
party  as  "the  Evangelical  party."  It  is  a  fact  as  patent  as  the 
sun  in  heaven.  When  it  began  first  to  be  called  by  this  name, 
and  why  it  was  so  called,  are  points  into  which  it  is  not  worth 
while  now  to  inquire.  It  is  a  simple  fact  that  it  exists. 

A 


2  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Whether  -we  like  it  or  not,  whether  it  be  right  or  wrong,  the 
well-known  tripartite  division  is  correct  and  may  be  assumed  as 
true.  There  are  three  great  schools  of  thought  in  the  Church 
of  England,— High  Church,  Broad  Church,  and  Evangelical  ;— 
and  the  man  who  cannot  see  them  is  in  a  very  curious  state  of 
mind.*  Now  what  are  the  distinctive  peculiarities  of  the 
religion  of  the  Evangelical  school  1  That  it  has  some  leading 
tenets  or  principles  is  unmistakable  and  undeniable.  What  are 
those  principles  which  distinguish  it  from  other  schools  ?  This 
in  plain  words  is  my  subject, — Has  Evangelical  Religion  any 
distinctive  principles?  I  answer,  it  has. — Are  they  worth 
contending  for  ?  I  answer,  they  are. 

I  approach  the  subject  with  a  deep  sense  of  its  difficulty.  It 
cannot  be  handled  without  touching  points  of  extreme  nicety, 
and  treading  on  very  delicate  ground.  It  necessitates  com 
parison  between  section  and  section  of  our  Church;  and  all 
comparisons  are  odious.  It  lays  a  writer  open  to  the  charge  of 
being  "party-spirited,  narrow-minded,  combative,  pugnacious," 
and  what  not.  But  there  are  times  when  comparisons  are  a 
positive  duty.  It  is  an  apostolic  command  to  "  try  things  that 
differ."  (Phil.  i.  10.)  The  existence  of  parties  in  the  Church  of 
England  is  a  fact  that  cannot  be  ignored.  To  pretend  that  we 
do  not  see  them  is  absurd.  Everybody  else  can  see  them,  talk 
about  them,  and  criticise  them.  To  attempt  to  deny  their 
existence  is  mere  squeamishness  and  affectation.  Whether 
we  like  it  or  not,  there  they  are,  and  the  world  around  us 
knows  it. 

But  while  I  have  a  deep  sense  of  the  difficulty  of  the  subject, 
I  have  a  deeper  sense  of  its  importance.  The  clouds  are 
gathering  round  the  Church  of  England ;  her  very  existence  is 
in  peril.  Conflicting  opinions  bid  fair  to  rend  her  in  twain. 
A  strife  has  arisen  within  her  pale  in  the  last  thirty  or  forty 
years,  not  about  the  trappings  and  vestments  of  religion,  but 
about  the  very  foundations  of  the  Gospel.  It  remains  to  be  seen 
whether  our  beloved  Church  will  survive  the  struggle.  Surely 

*  Beneath  this  tripartite  division  there  are,  no  doubt,  many  sub-divisions, 
and  subordinate  shades  of  difference.  There  is  certainly  a  very  distinct  line 
of  demarcation  between  the  old  High  Church  party  and  the  modern 
Ritualistic  section  of  the  Church  of  England.  The  famous  pamphlet  entitled 
"  Quousque  "  is  a  striking  proof  of  this. 


EVANGELICAL  KELIGION.  3 

it  is  high  time  for  Evangelical  clergymen  and  laymen  to  review 
calmly  their  position,  and  to  consider  seriously  what  it  is  they 
have  got  to  maintain  and  defend.  Let  us  walk  round  our 
lines.  Let  us  mark  well  our  bulwarks.  Let  us  clearly  see  the 
Malakhoffs  and  Redans  that  we  have  to  man.  Let  us  distinctly 
understand  the  principles  which  are  characteristic  of  our  body. 
It  must  do  us  good ;  it  can  do  us  no  harm. 

In  defining  what  Evangelical  Religion  is,  I  admit  at  the 
outset  that  I  have  no  written  creed,  no  formal  declaration  of 
principles,  to  refer  to.  The  reader  will  do  me  the  justice  to 
believe  that  I  feel  that  want  very  keenly.  I  can  only  bring- 
forward  the  results  of  such  reading,  study,  and  observation,  as 
are  within  the  reach  of  all  ordinary  men.  But  for  many 
years  I  have  examined  carefully  the  published  works  of  most 
of  the  Fathers  of  the  Evangelical  school,  and  especially  of  the 
men  of  the  last  century,  and  I  have  formed  decided  opinions 
about  their  peculiar  principles.  I  may  be  wrong  in  my  estimate 
of  their  merits ;  but  I  can  honestly  say  that  I  have  not  arrived 
at  my  conclusions  without  prayer,  thought,  and  pains.* 

There  are  three  questions  which  I  wish  to  bring  under  the 
notice  of  the  readers  of  this  paper. 

I.  What  Evangelical  Religion  is. 
II.  What  it  is  not. 
III.  What  makes  much  religion  not  Evangelical. 

Each  of  these  questions  I  shall  attempt  to  touch  very  briefly. 

I.  To  the  question  "wJiat  Evangelical  Religion  is?"  the 
simplest  answer  I  can  give  is  to  point  out  what  appear  to  be  its 
leading  features.  These  I  consider  to  be  five  in  number. 

(a)  The  first  leading  feature  in  Evangelical  Religion  is  the 
absolute  supremacy  it  assigns  to  Holy  Scripture,  as  the  only  rule 
of  faith  and  practice,  the  only  test  of  truth,  the  only  judge  of 
controversy. 

*  Of  course  my  readers  will  understand  that,  throughout  this  paper,  I  am 
only  expressing  my  own  individual  opinion.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  pretend 
to  be  a  mouthpiece  of  the  Evangelical  party,  or  to  speak  for  anybody  but 
myself.  Indeed  I  am  not  sure  that  all  who  are  called  Evangelical  will  agree 
with  all  that  this  paper  contains.  I  am  only  describing  what  I,  personally, 
believe  to  be  the  leading  sentiments  of  most  Evangelical  Churchmen,  arid  my 
description  must  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth. 


4  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Its  theory  is  that  man  is  required  to  believe  nothing,  as 
necessary  to  salvation,  which  is  not  read  in  God's  Word  written, 
or  can  be  proved  thereby.  It  totally  denies  that  there  is  any 
other  guide  for  man's  soul,  co-equal  or  co-ordinate  with  the 
Bible.  It  refuses  to  listen  to  such  arguments  as  "the  Church 
says  so," — "the  Fathers  say  so," — "primitive  antiquity  says 
so," — "Catholic  tradition  says  so," — "the  Councils  say  so," — 
"the  ancient  liturgies  say  so," — "the  Prayer-book  says  so," — 
"the  universal  conscience  of  mankind  says  so," — "  the  verifying 
light  within  says  so," — unless  it  can  be  shown  that  what  is  said 
is  in  harmony  with  Scripture. 

The  supreme  authority  of  the  Bible,  in  one  word,  is  one  of 
the  corner-stones  of  our  system.  Show  us  anything  plainly 
written  in  that  Book,  and,  however  trying  to  flesh  and  blood, 
we  will  receive  it,  believe  it,  and  submit  to  it.  Show  us  any 
thing,  as  religion,  which  is  contrary  to  that  Book,  and,  however 
specious,  plausible,  beautiful,  and  apparently  desirable,  we  will 
not  have  it  at  any  price.  It  may  come  before  us  endorsed  by 
Fathers,  schoolmen,  and  catholic  writers; — it  may  be  commended 
by  reason,  philosophy,  science,  the  inner  light,  the  verifying 
faculty,  the  universal  conscience  of  mankind.  It  signifies 
nothing.  Give  us  rather  a  few  plain  texts.  If  the  thing  is 
not  in  the  Bible,  deducible  from  the  Bible,  or  in  manifest 
harmony  with  the  Bible,  we  will  have  none  of  it.  Like  the 
forbidden  fruit,  we  dare  not  touch  it,  lest  we  die.  Our  faith 
can  find  no  resting-place  except  in  the  Bible,  or  in  Bible 
arguments.  Here  is  rock  :  all  else  is  sand. 

(b)  The  second  leading  feature  in  Evangelical  Religion  is  the 
depth  and  prominence  it  assigns  to  the  doctrine  of  human  sinful- 
ness  and  corruption. 

Its  theory  is  that  in  consequence  of  Adam's  fall,  all  men  are 
as  far  as  possible  gone  from  original  righteousness,  and  are  of 
their  own  natures  inclined  to  evil.  They  are  not  only  in  a 
miserable,  pitiable,  and  bankrupt  condition,  but  in  a  state  of 
uilt,  imminent  danger,  and  condemnation  before  God.  They 
are  not  only  at  enmity  with  their  Maker,  and  have  no  title  to 
heaven,  but  they  have  no  will  to  serve  their  Maker,  no  love  to 
their  Maker,  and  no  meetness  for  heaven. 

We  hold  that  a  mighty  spiritual  disease  like  this  requires  a 
mighty  spiritual  medicine  for  its  cure.  We  dread  giving  the 


D 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  5 

slightest  countenance  to  any  religious  system  of  dealing  with 
man's  soul,  which  even  seems  to  encourage  the  notion  that  his 
deadly  wound  can  be  easily  healed.  We  dread  fostering  man's 
favourite  notion  that  a  little  church-going  and  sacrament-receiv 
ing, — a  little  patching,  and  mending,  and  whitewashing,  and 
gilding,  and  polishing,  and  varnishing,  and  painting  the  out 
side, — is  all  that  his  case  requires.  Hence  we  protest  with  all 
our  heart  against  formalism,  sacramentalism,  and  every  species 
of  mere  external  or  vicarious  Christianity.  We  maintain  that 
all  such  religion  is  founded  on  an  inadequate  view  of  man's 
spiritual  need.  It  requires  far  more  than  this  to  save,  or  satisfy, 
or  sanctify,  a  soul.  It  requires  nothing  less  than  the  blood  of 
God  the  Son  applied  to  the  conscience,  and  the  grace  of  God 
the  Holy  Ghost  entirely  renewing  the  heart.  Man  is  radically 
diseased,  and  man  needs  a  radical  cure.  I  believe  that  igno 
rance  of  the  extent  of  the  fall,  and  of  the  whole  doctrine  of 
original  sin,  is  one  grand  reason  why  many  can  neither  under 
stand,  appreciate,  nor  receive  Evangelical  Religion.  Next  to 
the  Bible,  as  its  foundation,  it  is  based  on  a  clear  view  of 
original  sin. 

(c)  The  third  leading  feature  of  Evangelical  Religion  is  the 
paramount  importance  it  attaches  to  the  work  and  office  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  the  nature  of  the  salvation  which  He 
has  wrought  out  for  man. 

Its  theory  is  that  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  Jesus  Christ,  has 
by  His  life,  death,  and  resurrection,  as  our  Representative  and 
Substitute,  obtained  a  complete  salvation  for  sinners,  and  a 
redemption  from  the  guilt,  power,  and  consequences  of  sin,  and 
that  all  who  believe  on  Him  are,  even  while  they  live,  com 
pletely  forgiven  and  justified  from  all  things, — are  reckoned 
completely  righteous  before  God, — are  interested  in  Christ  and 
all  His  benefits. 

We  hold  that  nothing  whatever  is  needed  between  the  soul 
of  man  the  sinner  and  Christ  the  Saviour,  but  simple,  childlike 
faith,  and  that  all  means,  helps,  ministers,  and  ordinances  are 
useful  just  so  far  as  they  help  this  faith,  but  no  further ; — but 
that  rested  in  and  relied  on  as  ends  and  not  as  means,  they 
become  downright  poison  to  the  soul. 

We  hold  that  an  experimental  knowledge  of  Christ  crucified 
and  interceding,  is  the  very  essence  of  Christianity,  and  that  in 


6  K2COTS  UNTIED, 

teaching  men  the  Christian  religion  we  can  never  dwell  too 
much  on  Christ  Himself,  and  can  never  speak  too  strongly  of 
the  fulness,  freeness,  presentness,  and  simplicity  of  the  salva 
tion  there  is  in  Him  for  every  one  that  "believes. 

Not  least,  we  hold  most  firmly  that  the  true  doctrine  about 
Christ  is  precisely  that  which  the  natural  heart  most  dislikes. 
The  religion  which  man  craves  after  is  one  of  sight  and  sense, 
and  not  of  faith.  An  external  religion,  of  which  the  essence  is 
"doing  something," — and  not  an  inward  and  spiritual  one,  of 
which  the  essence  is  "  believing,"  this  is  the  religion  that  man 
naturally  loves.  Hence  we  maintain  that  people  ought  to  be 
continually  warned  not  to  make  a  Christ  of  the  Church,  or  of 
the  ministry,  or  of  the  forms  of  worship,  or  of  baptism,  or  of 
the  Lord's  Supper.  We  say  that  life  eternal  is  to  know  Christ, 
believe  in  Christ,  abide  in  Christ,  have  daily  heart  communion 
with  Christ,  by  simple  personal  faith, — and  that  everything  in 
religion  is  useful  so  far  as  it  helps  forward  that  life  of  faith,  but 
no  further. 

(d)  The  fourth  leading  feature  in  Evangelical  Eeligion  is  the 
high  place  which  it  assigns  to  the  inward  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  heart  of  man. 

Its  theory  is  that  the  root  and  foundation  of  all  vital  Chris 
tianity  in  any  one,  is  a  work  of  grace  in  the  heart,  and  that 
until  there  is  real  experimental  business  within  a  man,  his 
religion  is  a  mere  husk,  and  shell,  and  name,  and  form,  and  can 
neither  comfort  nor  save.  We  maintain  that  the  things  which 
need  most  to  be  pressed  on  men's  attention  are  those  mighty 
works  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  inward  repentance,  inward  faith, 
inward  hope,  inward  hatred  of  sin,  and  inward  love  to  God's 
law.  And  we  say  that  to  tell  men  to  take  comfort  in  their 
baptism  or  Church-membership,  when  these  all-important  graces 
are  unknown,  is  not  merely  a  mistake,  but  positive  cruelty. 

We  hold  that,  as  an  inward  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
a  necessary  thing  to  a  man's  salvation,  so  also  it  is  a  thing 
that  must  be  inwardly  felt.  We  admit  that  feelings  are 
often  deceptive,  and  that  a  man  may  feel  much,  or  weep 
much,  or  rejoice  much,  and  yet  remain  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins.  But  we  maintain  firmly  that  there  can  be  no  real  conver 
sion  to  God,  no  new  creation  in  Christ,  no  new  birth  of  the 
Spirit,  where  there  is  nothing  felt  and  experienced  within.  We 


EVANGELICAL  EELIGIOX.  7 

hold  that  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  however  much  it  may  be 
abused,  is  a  real,  true  thing.  We  deem  it  a  solemn  duty  to  be 
no  less  jealous  about  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  its  place 
and  degree,  than  we  are  about  the  work  of  Christ.  And  we 
insist  that  where  there  is  nothing  felt  within  the  heart  of  a  man, 
there  is  nothing  really  possessed. 

(e)  The  fifth  and  last  leading  feature  in  Evangelical  Keligion 
is  the  importance  which  it  attaches  to  the  outward  and  visible  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  life  of  man. 

Its  theory  is  that  the  true  grace  of  God  is  a  thing  that  will 
always  make  itself  manifest  in  the  conduct,  behaviour,  tastes, 
ways,  choices,  and  habits  of  him  who  has  it.  It  is  not  a  dormant 
thing,  that  can  be  within  a  man  and  not  show  itself  without. 
The  heavenly  seed  is  "  not  corruptible,  but  incorruptible."  It 
is  a  seed  which  is  distinctly  said  to  "  remain  "  in  every  one  that 
is  born  of  God.  (1  Peter  i.  23 ;  1  John  iii.  9.)  Where  the 
Spirit  is,  He  will  always  make  His  presence  known. 

We  hold  that  it  is  wrong  to  tell  men  that  they  are  "  children 
of  God,  and  members  of  Christ,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  unless  they  really  overcome  the  world,  the  flesh,  and 
the  devil.  We  maintain  that  to  tell  a  man  he  is  "  born  of  God," 
or  regenerated,  while  he  is  living  in  carelessness  or  sin,  is  a 
dangerous  delusion,  and  calculated  to  do  infinite  mischief  to  his 
soul.  We  affirm  confidently  that  "  fruit "  is  the  only  certain 
evidence  of  a  man's  spiritual  condition ;  that  if  we  would  know 
whose  he  is  and  whom  he  serves,  we  must  look  first  at  his  life. 
Where  there  is  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  there  will  be  always  more 
or  less  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  Grace  that  cannot  be  seen  is  no  grace 
at  all,  and  nothing  better  than  Antinomianism.  In  short,  we 
believe  that  where  there  is  nothing  seen,  there  is  nothing  pos 
sessed. 

Such  are  the  leading  features  of  Evangelical  Eeligion.  Such 
are  the  main  principles  whicli  characterize  the  teaching  of  the 
Evangelical  school  in  the  Church  of  England.  To  my  eyes  they 
seem  to  stand  out  in  the  theological  horizon  like  Tabor  and 
Hermon  among  the  mountains,  and  to  tower  upward  like 
cathedral  spires  in  our  English  plains.  It  will  readily  be  per 
ceived  that  I  have  only  sketched  them  in  outline.  I  have 
purposely  avoided  much  that  might  have  been  said  in  the  way 
of  amplification  and  demonstration.  I  have  omitted  many 


8  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

things  which  might  have  been  handled  as  parts  and  portions  of 
our  system,  not  because  they  are  not  important,  but  because 
they  are  comparatively  of  secondary  importance.  But  enough 
has  probably  been  said  to  serve  my  present  purpose.  I  have 
pointed  out  what  I  conscientiously  believe  are  the  five  dis 
tinctive  doctrinal  marks  by  which  the  members  of  the  Evangel 
ical  body  Lmay  be  discerned.  Rightly  or  wrongly,  I  have  laid 
them  down  plainly.  I  venture  to  think  that  my  statement  will 
hold  water  and  stand  the  fire. 

I  do  not  for  a  moment  deny,  be  it  remembered,  that  many 
Churchmen  who  are  outside  the  Evangelical  body,  are  sound  in 
the  main  about  the  five  points  I  have  named,  if  you  take  them 
one  by  one.  Propound  them  separately,  as  points  to  be  believed, 
and  they  would  admit  them  every  one.  But  they  do  not  give 
them  the  prominence,  position,  rank,  degree,  priority,  dignity, 
and  precedence  Avhich  we  do.  And  this  I  hold  to  be  a  most 
important  difference  between  us  and  them.  It  is  HIQ  position 
which  we  assign  to  these  points,  which  is  one  of  the  grand 
characteristics  of  Evangelical  theology.  "We  say  boldly  that 
they  are  first,  foremost,  chief,  and  principal  things  in  Christian 
ity,  and  that  want  of  attention  to  their  position  mars  and  spoils 
the  teaching  of  many  well-meaning  Churchmen. 

To  show  all  the  foundations  on  which  Evangelical  Religion  is 
based,  would  be  clearly  impossible  in  a  paper  like  this.  We 
appeal  boldly  to  the  Holy  KScriptures,  and  challenge  any  one  to 
examine  our  system  by  the  light  of  the  New  Testament. — We 
appeal  boldly  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  our  own  Church, 
and  assert  unhesitatingly  that  they  are  on  our  side. — We  appeal 
boldly  to  the  writings  of  our  leading  Divines,  from  the  Reforma 
tion  down  to  the  time  of  Archbishop  Laud,  and  invite  any  man 
to  compare  our  teaching  with  theirs. — We  repudiate  with  scorn 
the  vulgar  charge  of  novelty,  and  tell  the  man  who  makes  it 
that  he  only  exposes  his  own  ignorance.  We  ask  him  to  turn 
again  to  his  New  Testament,  to  study  afresh  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles,  to  take  down  and  read  once  more  the  English  theology 
of  the  pro-Caroline  age.  We  court  the  fullest,  strictest  investiga 
tion  into  our  case,  and  shall  abide  the  result  without  fear.  Of 
ourselves  and  our  imperfections  we  may  well  be  ashamed ;  but 
of  what  is  called  "  Evangelical  Religion  "  we  have  no  cause  to 
be  ashamed  at  all.  Let  men  say  what  they  please.  Nothing 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  9 

is  easier  than  to  call  names,  affix  odious  epithets,  and  frighten 
ignorant  people,  by  raising  the  cry  of  "  Calvinism  "  or  "  Puritan 
ism  "  against  the  Evangelical  school.  "  The  curse  causeless  shall 
not  come."  (Prov.  xxvi.  2.)  I  believe  firmly  that  impartial 
inquiry  will  always  show  that  Evangelical  Religion  is  the 
religion  of  Scripture  and  of  the  Church  of  England. 

II.  I  turn  now  to  the  negative  side  of  my  subject.  Having 
shown  what  Evangelical  Religion  is,  it  becomes  my  duty  next 
to  show  what  it  is  not. 

I  am  almost  ashamed  to  take  up  time  by  saying  anything 
on  this  point.  But  slanders  and  false  reports  about  Evangelical 
Religion  are  so  sadly  numerous,  and  shameless  misrepresentations 
of  its  nature  are  so  widely  current,  that  I  can  hardly  pass  over 
this  branch  of  my  subject.  We  are  not  perfect,  we  know  to 
our  sorrow.  We  have  many  faults  and  defects,  we  humbly 
confess.  But  to  many  charges  brought  against  us  we  plead 
"  ISTot  guilty."  We  say  they  are  not  true. 

(1)  I  begin  then  by  saying  that  Evangelical  Religion  does 
not  despise  learning,  research,  or  the  wisdom  of  days  gone  by. 
It  is  not  true  to  say  that  we  do.  In  thorough  appreciation 
of  anything  that  throws  light  on  God's  Word,  we  give  place  to 
none.  Let  any  one  look  over  the  lists  of  those  who  in  days 
gone  by  have  been  eminent  for  theological  scholarship  in  this 
country,  and  I  am  bold  to  say  he  will  find  some  of  the  most 
eminent  are  Evangelical  men.  Ridley,  Jewell,  Usher,  Light- 
foot,  Davenant,  Hall,  Whittaker,  Willett,  Reynolds,  Leighton, 
Owen,  Baxter,  Manton,  are  names  that  for  profound  learning- 
stand  second  to  none.  To  what  school  do  they  belong,  I  should 
like  to  know,  if  not  to  the  Evangelical  1  What  school,  I  ask 
confidently,  has  done  more  for  the  exposition  and  interpreta 
tion  of  Scripture  than  the  Evangelical  school  1  What  school 
has  given  to  the  world  more  Commentaries?  Poole's  Synopsis 
and  Owen  on  Hebrews  are  alone  sufficient  to  show  that  Evan 
gelical  men  do  read  and  can  think.  Even  in  the  Egyptian 
darkness  of  last  century,  there  were  few  English  divines  who 
showed  more  real  learning  than  Hervey,  Romaine,  and  Toplady. 

Turn  even  to  our  own  day,  and  I  say,  unhesitatingly,  that 
we  have  no  cause  to  be  ashamed.  To  name  divines  of  our 
own  generation  is  somewhat  invidious.  Yet  I  do  not  shrink 


10  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

from  saying  that  the  three  great  books  of  Dean  Goode  on 
Scripture,  Baptism,  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  remain  to  the 
present  day  unanswered  by  the  opponents  of  the  Evangelical 
school  Coarse  sneers  about  ignorance  and  shallowness  may 
be  safely  disregarded,  while  books  like  these  are  unrefuted. 

But  while  we  do  not  despise  learning,  we  steadily  refuse  to 
place  any  uninspired  writings  on  a  level  with  revelation.  "Wo 
refuse  to  call  any  man  "  father  "  or  "  master,"  however  learned 
or  intellectual  he  may  be.  "We  will  follow  no  guide  but 
Scripture.  We  own  no  master  over  conscience  in  religious 
matters,  except  the  Bible.  We  leave  it  to  others  to  talk  of 
"primitive  antiquity  "  and  "Catholic  truth."  To  us  there  is 
but  one  test  of  truth  :  "  What  is  written  in  the  Scripture  1 
What  saith  the  Lord?" 

(2)  I  go  on  to  say  that  Evangelical  Religion  does  not  under 
value  the  CJmrch,  or  think  lightly  of  its  privileges.  It  is  not 
true  to  say  that  we  do.  In  sincere  and  loyal  attachment  to 
the  Church  of  England  we  give  place  to  none.  We  value  its 
form  of  government,  its  Confession  of  Faith,  its  mode  of  wor 
ship,  as  much  as  any  within  its  pale.  We  have  stuck  by  it 
through  evil  report  and  good  report,  while  many  who  once 
talked  more  loudly  about  their  Churchmanship  have  seceded 
and  gone  over  to  Rome.  We  stick  by  it  still,  and  will  resist 
all  attempts  to  Romanize  it  to  the  very  death  !  We  know  its 
value,  and  would  hand  it  down  unimpaired  to  our  children's 
children. 

But  we  steadily  refuse  to  exalt  the  Church  above  Christ,  or 
to  teach  our  people  that  membership  of  the  Church  is  ident 
ical  with  membership  of  Christ.  We  refuse  to  assign  it  an 
authority  for  which  we  find  no  warrant  either  in  Scripture  or 
the  Articles.  We  protest  against  the  modern  practice  of  first 
personifying  the  Church,  then  deifying  it,  and  finally  idolizing 
it.  We  hold  that  Church  councils,  Church  synods,  and  Church 
convocations,  may  err,  and  that  "  things  ordained  by  them  as 
necessary  to  salvation  have  neither  strength  nor  authority, 
unless  it  may  be  declared  that  they  be  taken  out  of  Holy 
Scripture."  We  can  find  no  proof  in  the  Bible  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ever  meant  a  body  of  erring  mortals,  whether 
ordained  or  not  ordained,  to  be  treated  as  infallible.  We  con 
sequently  hold  that  a  vast  quantity  of  language  in  this  day 


EVANGELICAL  HELIGION.  11 

about  "  the  Church  "  and  the  "  voice  of  the  Church "  is  mere 
unmeaning  verbiage.  It  is  "  the  talk  of  the  lips,  which  tendeth 
only  to  penury."  (Prov.  xiv.  23.) 

(3)  I  go  on  to  say  that  Evangelical  Religion  does  not  under 
value  the  Christian  ministry.     It  is  not  true  to  say  that  we 
do.     We  regard  it  as  an  honourable  office  instituted  by  Christ 
Himself,  and  of  general  necessity  for  carrying  on  the  work  of 
the  Gospel.      We  look    on    ministers    as    preachers   of    God's 
Word,  God's  ambassadors,   God's  messengers,   God's    servants, 
God's  shepherds,  God's  stewards,  God's  overseers,  and  labourers 
in  God's  vineyard. 

But  we  steadily  refuse  to  admit  that  Christian  ministers  are 
in  any  sense  sacrificing  priests,  mediators  between  God  and 
man,  lords  of  men's  consciences,  or  private  confessors.  We 
refuse  it,  not  only  because  we  cannot  see  it  in  the  Bible,  but 
also  because  we  have  read  the  lessons  of  Church  history.  We 
find  that  Sacerdotalism,  or  priestcraft,  has  frequently  been  the 
curse  of  Christianity,  and  the  ruin  of  true  religion.  And  we 
say  boldly  that  the  exaltation  of  the  ministerial  office  to  an 
unscriptural  place  and  extravagant  dignity  in  the  Church  of 
England  in  the  present  day,  is  likely  to  alienate  the  affections 
of  the  laity,  to  ruin  the  Church,  and  to  be  the  source  of  every 
kind  of  error  and  superstition. 

(4)  I  go  on  to  say  that  Evangelical  Religion  (Toes  not  under 
value  the  Sacraments  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Surjper.     It 
is  not  true   to    say  that  we  do.      We   honour  them   as  holy 
ordinances  appointed  by  Christ  Himself,  and  as  blessed  means 
of  grace,   which  in  all  who   use   them  rightly,   worthily,  and 
with  faith,  "  have  a  wholesome  effect  or  operation." 

But  we  steadily  refuse  to  admit  that  Christ's  Sacraments 
convey  grace  ex  opere  operato,  and  that  in  every  case  where 
they  are  administered,  good  must  of  necessity  be  done.  We 
refuse  to  admit  that  they  are  the  grand  media  between  Christ 
and  the  soul, — above  faith,  above  preaching,  and  above  prayer. 
We  protest  against  the  idea  that  in  baptism  the  use  of  water, 
in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,  is  invariably  and  necessarily 
accompanied  by  regeneration.  We  protest  against  the  practice 
of  encouraging  any  one  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Table  unless  he 
repents  truly  of  sin,  has  a  lively  faith  in  Christ,  and  is  in 
charity  with  all  men.  We  protest  against  the  theory  that  the 


12  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Lord's  Supper  is  a  sacrifice,  as  a  theory  alike  contrary  to  the 
Bible,  Articles,  and  Prayer-book.  And  above  all,  we  protest 
against  the  notion  of  any  corporal  presence  of  Christ's  flesh 
and  blood  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  under  the  forms  of  bread 
and  wine,  as  an  "idolatry  to  be  abhorred  of  all  faithful 
Christians." 

(5)  I  go  on  to  say  that  Evangelical  Religion  does  not  under 
value  the  English  Prayer-book.     It  is  not  true  to  say  that  we 
do.     We  honour  that  excellent  book  as  a  matchless  form  of 
public  worship,  and  one  most  admirably  adapted  to  the  wants 
of  human  nature.      We   use   it  witli   pleasure    in    our  public 
ministrations,  and  should  grieve  to  see  the  day  when  its  use  is 
forbidden. 

But  we  do  not  presume  to  say  there  can  be  no  acceptable 
worship  of  God  without  the  Prayer-book.  It  does  not  possess 
the  same  authority  as  the  Bible.  We  steadily  refuse  to  give 
to  the  Prayer-book  the  honour  which  is  only  due  to  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  or  to  regard  it  as  forming,  together  with  the  Bible, 
the  rule  of  faith  for  the  Church  of  England.  We  deny  that 
it  contains  one  single  truth  of  religion,  besides,  over  and  above 
what  is  contained  in  God's  Word.  And  we  hold  that  to  say 
the  Bible  and  Prayer-book  together  are  "  the  Church's  Creed," 
is  foolish  and  absurd. 

(6)  I  go  on  to  say  that  Evangelical  Religion  does  not  under 
value  Episcopacy.      It  is  not  true  to    say  that  we   do.      We 
give  to    our   Bishops    as    much    honour    and   respect   as   any 
section  of  the  Church  of  England  docs,  and  in  reality  a  great 
deal  more.     We  thoroughly  believe  that  Episcopal  government, 
rightly  administered,  is  the  best  form  of  Church  government 
that  can  be  had  in  this  evil  world. 

But  we  steadily  refuse  to  believe  that  Bishops  are  in 
fallible,  or  that  their  words  are  to  be  believed  when  they  are 
not  in  harmony  with  the  Scriptures, — or  that  Episcopacy  is 
the  first  test  of  a  Church  being  a  true  Church,  —  or  that 
Presbyterian  orders  are  not  valid  orders,  or  that  non-Episcopal 
Christians  are  to  be  handed  over  to  the  uncovenanted 
mercies  of  God.  We  hold  as  firmly  as  any  that  "  from  the 
beginning  there  have  been  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons." 
But  we  refuse  to  join  in  the  bigoted  cry,  "Xo  Bishop,  no 
Church." 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  13 

I  repeat  that  in  due  respect  to  the  Episcopal  office  we  yield 
to  none.  But  we  never  will  admit  that  the  acts  and  doings 
and  deliverances  of  any  Bishops,  however  numerous,  and  by 
whatever  name  they  are  called,  whether  a  Pan- Anglican  Synod 
or  not,  are  to  be  received  as  infallible,  and  not  to  be  submitted 
to  free  criticism.  We  cannot  forget  that  erring  Bishops  ruined 
the  Church  of  England  in  the  days  of  Charles  the  First, — almost 
ruined  it  again  in  1662,  when  they  cast  out  the  Puritans, — and 
nearly  ruined  it  once  more  in  the  last  century,  when  they  shut 
out  the  Methodists.  No !  we  have  read  history,  and  we  have 
not  forgotten  that  while  we  have  had  a  Cranmer  and  a  Parker, 
we  have  also  had  a  Sheldon  and  a  Laud ;  and  that  while  we 
have  had  stars  in  our  ecclesiastical  firmament  like  Hooper, 
Kidley,  and  Jewell,  we  have  also  had  men  who  were  a  disgrace 
to  their  office,  like  the  semi-papists,  Cheyney  and  Montague, 
and  the  subtle  politician,  Atterbury. 

(7)  I  go  on  to  say  that  Evangelical  Religion  does  not  object 
to  handsome  churches,   good  ecclesiastical  architecture,  a  well- 
ordered  ceremonial,   and  a   well-conducted  service.     It  is  not 
true  to   say  that  we  do.     We   like   handsome,   well-arranged 
places  of  worship,  when  we  can  get  them.     We  abhor  slovenli 
ness  and   disorder   in   God's   service,    as   much   as   any.     We 
would  have  all  things  done  "decently  and  in  order."     (1  Cor. 
xiv.  40.) 

But  we  steadily  maintain  that  simplicity  should  be  the  grand 
characteristic  of  Christian  worship.  We  hold  that  human 
nature  is  so  easily  led  astray,  and  so  thoroughly  inclined  to 
idolatry,  that  ornament  in  Christian  worship  should  be  used 
with  a  very  sparing  hand.  We  firmly  believe  that  the  tendency 
of  excessive  ornament,  and  a  theatrical  ceremonial,  is  to  defeat 
the  primary  end  for  which  worship  was  established,  to  draw 
away  men's  minds  from  Christ,  and  to  make  them  walk  by 
sight  and  not  by  faith.  We  hold  above  all  that  the  inward  and 
spiritual  character  of  the  congregation  is  of  far  more  importance 
than  the  architecture  and  adornments  of  the  church.  We  dare 
not  forget  the  great  principle  of  Scripture,  that  "man  looketh 
on  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart." 
(1  Sam.  xvi.  7.) 

(8)  I  go  on  to  say  that  Evangelical  religion  does  not  under 
value  unity.     It  is  not  true  to  say  that  we  do.     We  love  har- 


14  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

mony  and  peace  as  much  as  any  Christians  in  the  world.  We 
long  for  that  day  when  there  shall  be  no  more  controversy,  strife, 
and  division ;  when  Ephraim  shall  no  longer  vex  Judah,  nor 
Judah  Ephraim. 

But  we  firmly  maintain  that  there  can  be  no  real  unity 
without  oneness  in  the  faith.  We  protest  against  the  idea  of 
unity  based  on  a  common  Episcopacy,  and  not  on  a  common 
belief  of  Christ's  Gospel.  As  for  the  theories  of  those  who 
make  advances  to  Rome,  and  hold  out  the  hand  to  the  Church 
of  Bonner  and  Gardiner,  while  they  turn  their  backs  on  the 
Church  of  Knox  and  Rutherford,  Chalmers  and  M'Cheyne, 
we  repudiate  them  with  indignation  as  unworthy  of  English 
Churchmen.  We  abhor  the  very  idea  of  reunion  with  Rome, 
unless  Rome  first  purges  herself  from  her  many  false  doctrines 
and  superstitions. 

(9)  Last,  but  not  least,  I  say  that  Evangelical  Religion  does 
not  undervalue  Christian  holiness  and  self-denial.  It  is  not  true 
to  say  that  we  do.  We  desire  as  much  as  any  to  promote 
habitual  spirituality  of  heart  and  life  in  Christians.  We  give 
place  to  none  in  exalting  humility,  charity,  meekness,  gentle 
ness,  temperance,  purity,  self-denial,  good  works,  and  separation 
from  the  world.  With  all  our  defects,  we  are  second  to  no 
section  of  Christ's  Church  in  attaching  the  utmost  importance 
to  private  prayer,  private  Bible-reading,  and  private  communion 
with  God. 

But  we  steadily  deny  that  true  holiness  consists  in  calling 
everything  "  holy  "  in  religion,  and  thrusting  forward  the  word 
"holy"  with  sickening  frequency  at  every  turn.  We  will  not 
allow  that  it  is  really  promoted  by  an  ostentatious  observance 
of  Lent,  by  keeping  Ecclesiastical  fasts  and  saints'  days,  by 
frequent  communion,  by  joining  Houses  of  mercy,  by  doing 
penance,  by  going  to  confession,  by  wearing  peculiar  dresses, 
by  decorating  our  persons  with  enormous  crosses,  by  frequent 
gestures,  and  postures  expressive  of  humility,  in  public  worship, 
by  walking  in  procession  and  the  like.  We  believe,  on  the 
contrary,  that  such  holiness  (so-called)  too  often  begins  from 
the  outside,  and  is  a  complete  delusion.  It  has  a  "show  of 
wisdom,"  and  may  satisfy  silly  young  women  and  brainless 
young  men,  who  like  to  compound  for  races  and  balls  one  part 
of  their  week,  by  asceticism  and  will-worship  at  another.  But 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  15 

we  utterly  deny  that  it  is  the  holiness  recommended  by  St.  Paul 
and  St.  Peter,  St.  James  and  St.  John.* 

I  leave  my  list  of  negatives  here.  I  have  not  time  to  dwell 
on  them  further.  The  sum  of  the  whole  matter  is  this  : — we 
give  all  lawful  honour  to  learning,  the  Church,  the  ministry, 
the  Sacrament,  Episcopacy,  the  Prayer-book,  Church  ornament, 
unity,  and  holiness ;  but  we  firmly  decline  to  give  them  more 
honour  than  we  find  given  to  them  in  God's  Word. 

We  dare  not  take  up  any  other  position,  because  of  the  plain 
teaching  of  the  Scriptures.  We  read  there  how  the  ark  itself 
was  utterly  useless  to  Israel  when  trusted  in  as  a  saviour,  and 
exalted  into  the  place  of  God. — We  read  there  how  God 
Himself  has  said,  that  the  sacrifices  and  feasts  which  He 
Himself  had  appointed,  were  "abominations"  and  a  "weari 
ness  "  to  Him,  when  rested  on  as  ends  and  not  as  means. — We 
read  there  how  the  very  temple  itself,  with  all  its  divinely 
ordained  services,  was  denounced  as  a  "den  of  thieves," 
by  Christ  Himself.  (1  Sam.  iv.  1-11;  Isa.  1.  11-15;  Luke 
xix.  46.) 

And  what  do  we  learn  from  all  this?  We  learn  that  we 
must  be  very  careful  how  we  give  primary  honour  to  things 
invented  by  man,  or  even  to  things  which,  though  ordained  by 
God,  are  secondary  things  in  religion.  We  learn,  above  all, 
that  those  who  accuse  us  of  undervaluing  the  things  I  have 
mentioned,  because  we  refuse  to  make  them  idols,  are  only 

*  I  am  aware  that  this  paragraph  is  likely  to  be  misinterpreted,  and  may 
give  offence.  A  captious  reader  may  say  that  I  consider  keeping  Lent  and 
saints'  days  and  fasts  is  wrong.  I  beg  to  remind  him  that  I  say  nothing  of 
the  kind.  I  only  say  that  these  things  do  not  constitute  Christian  holiness. 
I  will  go  even  further.  I  will  say  that  the  history  of  the  last  three  hundred 
years  in  England  does  not  incline  me  to  think  that  these  things,  however 
well  meant,  are  conducive  to  real  holiness. 

I  am  quite  sure  that  the  substance  of  this  paragraph  is  imperatively 
demanded  by  the  times.  Things  have  come  to  this  pass  in  England  that 
thousands  of  Churchmen  are  making  the  whole  of  religion  to  consist  in 
externals.  Against  such  a  religion,  as  long  as  I  live,  I  desire  to  protest.  It 
may  suit  an  Italian  bandit,  who  oscillates  between  Lent  and  Carnival,  between 
fasting  and  robbing.  It  ought  never  to  satisfy  a  Bible-reading  Christian. 
It  is  the  religion  that  the  natural  heart  likes,  but  it  is  not  the  religion  of 
God. 

When  I  speak  of  an  "  ostentatious  "  observance  of  Lent,  I  do  it  with  a 
reason.  There  are  hundreds  of  people  who  "  scruple "  at  weddings  and 
dinner  parties  in  Lent,  but  rush  to  balls,  theatres,  and  races  as  soon  as  Lent 
is  over  !  If  this  is  Christian  holiness,  we  may  throw  our  Bibles  to  the  winds. 


16  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

exposing  their  own  ignorance  of  Scripture.  They  know  not 
what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm.  We  may  listen  to 
their  slanderous  charges  and  misrepresentations  with  calm  in 
difference,  Let  them  show  us  that  we  do  not  estimate  learning, 
the  Church,  the  Ministry,  the  Sacraments,  the  Prayer-book, 
Episcopacy,  unity,  and  holiness,  with  the  estimate  of  Scripture, 
and  we  will  confess  that  we  have  erred.  But  till  they  can  do 
that,  we  shall  firmly  maintain  that  we  are  right  and  they  are 


III.  It  only  remains  for  me  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  last 
question  I  propose  to  consider : — "  What  is  it  that  makes  much 
religion  appear  to  us  not  Evangelical  ?  " 

This  is  no  doubt  a  delicate  point,  but  a  very  serious  and 
important  one.  I  repeat  here  what  I  have  remarked  before. 
We  do  not  say  that  men  who  are  not  professedly  Evangelical 
ignore  and  disbelieve  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Evangelical 
creed.  We  say  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  we  do  say  con 
fidently,  that  there  are  many  ways  in  which  the  faith  of  Christ 
may  be  marred  and  spoiled,  without  being  positively  denied. 
And  here  we  venture  to  think  is  the  very  reason  that  so  much 
religion  called  Christian,  is  not  truly  Evangelical.  The  Gospel 
in  fact  is  a  most  curiously  and  delicately  compounded  medicine, 
and  a  medicine  that  is  very  easily  spoiled. 

You  may  spoil  the  Gospel  by  substitution.  You  have  only  to 
withdraw  from  the  eyes  of  the  sinner  the  grand  object  which 
the  Bible  proposes  to  faith, — Jesus  Christ ;  and  to  substitute 
another  object  in  His  place, — the  Church,  the  Ministry,  the 
Confessional,  Baptism,  or  the  Lord's  Supper, — and  the  mischief 
is  done.  Substitute  anything  for  Christ,  and  the  Gospel  is 
totally  spoiled !  Do  this,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  and 
your  religion  ceases  to  be  Evangelical. 

You  may  spoil  the  Gospel  by  addition.  You  have  only  to 
add  to  Christ,  the  grand  object  of  faith,  some  other  objects  as 
equally  worthy  of  honour,  and  the  mischief  is  done.  Add  any 
thing  to  Christ,  and  the  Gospel  ceases  to  be  a  pure  Gospel ! 
Do  this,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  and  your  religion  ceases  to 
be  Evangelical. 

You  may  spoil  the  Gospel  by  interposition.  You  have  only 
to  push  something  between  Christ  and  the  eye  of  the  soul,  to 


EVANGELICAL  EELIGION,  17 

draw  away  the  sinner's  attention  from  the  Saviour,  and  the 
mischief  is  done.  Interpose  anything  between  man  and  Christ, 
and  man  will  neglect  Christ  for  the  thing  interposed  !  Do  this, 
either  directly  or  indirectly,  and  your  religion  ceases  to  be 
Evangelical. 

You  may  spoil  the  Gospel  by  disproportion.  You  have  only 
to  attach  an  exaggerated  importance  to  the  secondary  things  of 
Christianity,  and  a  diminished  importance  to  the  first  things, 
and  the  mischief  is  done.  Once  alter  the  proportion  of  the 
parts  of  truth,  and  truth  soon  becomes  downright  error !  Do 
this,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  and  your  religion  ceases  to  be 
Evangelical. 

Lastly,  but  not  least,  you  may  completely  spoil  the  Gospel 
by  confused  and  contradictory  directions.  Complicated  and 
obscure  statements  about  faith,  baptism,  Church  privileges, 
and  the  benefits  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  all  jumbled  together,  and 
thrown  down  without  order  before  hearers,  make  the  Gospel 
no  Gospel  at  all !  Confused  and  disorderly  statements  of 
Christianity  are  almost  as  bad  as  no  statement  at  all !  Religion 
of  this  sort  is  not  Evangelical. 

I  know  not  whether  I  succeed  in  making  my  meaning  clear. 
I  am  very  anxious  to  do  so.  Myriads  of  our  fellow-countrymen 
are  utterly  unable  to  see  any  difference  between  one  thing 
and  another  in  religion,  and  are  hence  continually  led  astray. 
Thousands  can  see  no  distinct  difference  between  sermons  and 
sermons,  and  preachers  and  preachers,  and  have  only  a  vague 
idea  that  "sometimes  all  is  not  right."  I  will  endeavour, 
therefore,  to  illustrate  my  subject  by  two  familiar  illustrations. 

A  doctor's  prescription  of  a  medicine  often  contains  five  or 
six  diiferent  ingredients.  There  is  so  much  of  one  drug  and  so 
much  of  another ;  a  little  of  this,  and  a  good  deal  of  that. 
K"ow  what  man  of  common  sense  can  fail  to  see  that  the  whole 
value  of  the  prescription  depends  on  a  faithful  and  honest  use 
of  it  ?  Take  away  one  ingredient,  and  substitute  another  ;  leave 
out  one  ingredient  altogether ;  add  a  little  to  the  quantity  of 
one  drug  ;  take  away  a  little  from  the  quantity  of  another.  Do 
this,  I  say,  to  the  prescription,  my  good  friend,  and  it  is  a 
thousand  chances  to  one  that  you  spoil  it  altogether.  The  thing 
that  was  meant  for  your  health,  you  have  converted  into 
downright  poison. 

B 


1 8  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Apply  this  little  simple  parable  to  the  Gospel.  Regard  it  as 
a  medicine  sent  down  from  heaven,  for  the  curing  of  man's 
spiritual  disease,  by  a  Physician  of  infinite  skill  and  power ;  a 
medicine  of  singular  efficacy,  which  man  with  all  his  wisdom 
could  never  have  devised.  Tell  me  now,  as  one  of  common 
sense,  does  it  not  stand  to  reason  that  this  medicine  should  be 
used  without  the  slightest  alteration,  and  precisely  in  the 
manner  and  proportion  that  the  great  Physician  intended? 
Tell  me  whether  you  have  the  least  right  to  expect  good  from 
it,  if  you  have  tampered  with  it  in  the  smallest  degree  1  You 
know  what  the  answer  to  these  questions  must  be :  your 
conscience  will  give  the  reply.  Spoil  the  proportions  of  your 
doctor's  prescription,  and  you  will  spoil  its  usefulness,  even 
though  you  may  call  it  medicine.  Spoil  the  proportions  of 
Christ's  Gospel,  and  you  spoil  its  efficacy.  You  may  call  it 
religion  if  you  like ;  but  you  must  not  call  it  Evangelical.  The 
several  doctrines  may  be  there,  but  they  are  useless  if  you  have 
not  observed  the  proportions. 

The  brazen  serpent  supplies  another  valuable  illustration  of 
my  meaning.  The  whole  efficacy  of  that  miraculous  remedy, 
we  must  remember,  depended  on  using  it  precisely  in  the  way 
that  God  directed. — It  was  the  serpent  of  brass,  and  nothing 
else,  that  brought  health  to  him  that  looked  at  it.  The  man 
who  thought  it  wise  to  look  at  the  brazen  altar,  or  at  the  pole 
on  which  the  serpent  hung,  would  have  died  of  his  wounds. — It 
was  the  serpent  looked  at,  and  only  looked  at,  that  cured  the 
poor  bitten  Israelite.  The  man  who  fancied  it  would  be  better 
to  touch  the  serpent,  or  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  it,  would  have  got 
no  benefit. — It  was  the  serpent  looked  at  by  each  sufferer  with 
his  own  eyes,  and  not  with  the  eyes  of  another,  that  healed. 
The  man  who  bade  another  look  for  him,  would  have  found  a 
vicarious  look  useless. — Looking,  looking,  only  looking,  was  the 
prescription. — The  sufferer,  and  only  the  sufferer,  must  look  for 
himself  with  his  own  eyes. — The  serpent,  the  brazen  serpent, 
and  nothing  but  the  serpent,  was  the  object  for  the  eye. 

Let  us  apply  that  marvellous  and  most  deeply  typical  history 
to  the  Gospel.  We  have  no  warrant  for  expecting  the  slightest 
benefit  for  our  souls  from  Christ's  salvation,  unless  we  use  it 
precisely  in  the  way  that  Christ  appointed.  If  we  add  anything 
to  it,  take  anything  away  from  it,  try  to  improve  the  terms, 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  19 

depart  in  the  slightest  degree  from  the  path  which  the  Bible 
marks  out  for  us,  we  have  no  right  whatever  to  look  for  any 
good  being  done.  God's  plan  of  salvation  cannot  possibly  be 
mended  or  improved.  He  who  tries  to  amend  or  improve  it, 
will  find  that  he  spoils  it  altogether. 

In  one  word  I  wind  up  this  last  part  of  my  subject  by  saying, 
that  a  religion  to  be  really  "Evangelical"  and  really  good,  must 
be  the^Gospel,  the  whole  Gospel,  and  nothing  but  the  Gospel, 
as  Christ  prescribed  it  and  expounded  it  to  the  Apostles ; — the 
truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth  ;— the  terms, 
the  whole  terms,  and  nothing  but  the  terms, — in  all  their 
fulness,  all  their  freeness,  all  their  simplicity,  all  their  present- 
ness^  Here,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  a  vast  quantity  of  so-called 
religion  in  the  present  day  appears  to  me  to  break  down.  It 
does  not  come  up  to  the  standard  I  have  just  given.  Things 
are  added  to  it,  or  things  are  taken  away,  or  things  are  put  in 
their  wrong  places,  or  things  are  set  forth  in  their  wrong  pro 
portions.  And  hence,  painful  as  it  is,  I  cannot  avoid  the 
conclusion  that  much  of  the  religion  of  our  own  times  does  not 
deserve  to  be  called  Evangelical.  I  do  not  charge  all  clergymen 
who  are  not  "  Evangelical "  with  not  being  "  Christians."  I  do 
not  say  that  the  religion  they  teach  is  not  Christianity.  I 
trust  I  am  not  so  uncharitable  as  to  say  anything  of  this  'kind. 
But  I  do  say  that,  for  the  reasons  already  assigned,  they  appear 
to  me  to  teach  that  which  is  not  Christ's  whole  truth.  In  a 
word,  they  do  not  give  full  weight,  full  measure,  and  the  pre 
scription  of  the  Gospel  accurately  made  up.  The  parts  are 
there,  but  not  the  proportions. 

I  cannot  bring  my  paper  to  a  conclusion  without  offering  some 
practical  suggestions  about  the  present  duties  of  the  Evangelical 
body.  We  have  been  considering  what  Evangelical  religion  is  and 
is  not.  A  few  pages  devoted  to  our  immediate  duties,  in  the  present 
position  of  the  Church,  can  hardly  be  thought  misapplied. 

The  times  no  doubt  are  very  critical,  full  of  danger  to  our 
beloved  Church,  full  of  danger  to  the  nation.  ]STever  has  there 
been  such  an  unblushing  avowal  of  Popish  opinions  among 
Churchmen,  and  such  shameless  additions  to  the  faith  as  defined 
in  our  Articles.  The  grand  question  is,  whether  our  Protestant 
ism  shall  die  or  live  ?  Now  I  believe  much  depends  on  the 


20  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

attitude  and  line  of  conduct  taken  up  by  the  Evangelical  body. 
If  they  know  the  times  and  do  their  duty,  there  is  hope  for  the 
Church.  If  they  are  timid,  supine,  compromising,  vacillating, 
and  indolent,  there  is  no  hope  at  all. 

(1)  I  suggest,  for  one  thing,  that  we  ought  to  exercise  a 
special  jealousy  over  our  own  personal  religion.     Let  us  take 
heed  that  it  is  thoroughly  and  entirely  Evangelical.     The  times 
we  live  in  are  desperately  unfavourable  to  a  sharply-cut,  decided, 
distinct,  doctrinal  Christianity.     A  fog  of  vague  liberalism  over 
spreads  the  ecclesiastical  horizon.     A  settled  determination  to 
think  everybody  is  right,  and  nobody  is  wrong,  everything  is 
true,  and  nothing  is  false,  meets  us  at  every  turn.     The  world 
is  possessed  with  a  devil  of  false  charity  about  religion.     Men 
try  to  persuade  us,  like    Gallic,  that   the   alleged   differences 
between  creeds  and  schools  of  thought  are  only  about  "words 
and  names,"  and  that  it  is  "  all  the  same  thing."     In  times  like 
these,  let  us  be  on  our  guard,  and  take  heed  to  our  souls.— 
"  Watch  ye  :  stand  fast  in  the  faith.     Quit  you  like  men  :  be 
strong."     (1  Cor.  xvi.  13.)     Let  us  steadfastly  resolve  to  stand 
fast  in  the  old  paths,  the  good  way  of  our  Protestant  Reformers. 
Narrow,  old-fashioned,  obsolete,  as  some  may  be  pleased  to  call 
that  way,  they  will  never  show  us  a  better.     The  nearer  we 
draw  to  the  great  realities  of  death,  judgment,  and  eternity,  the 
more  excellent  will  that  way  appear.     When  I  go  down  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and  my  feet  touch  the  cold 
waters,  I   want   something   better   than   vague,  high-sounding 
words,  or  the  painted  playthings  and  gilded  trifles  of  man-made 
ceremonials.     Give  me  110  stone  altars  and  would-be  confessors. 
Give  me  no  surpliced  priests  or  pretended  sacrifice  in  my  bed 
room.     Put  no  man  or  form  between  me  and  Christ.     Give  me 
a  real  staff  for  my  hand  such  as  David  had,  and  real  meat  and 
drink  for  my  soul  such  as  aged  Paul  felt  within  him,  and  feeling 
cried,  "I  am  not  ashamed."     (2  Tim.  i.  12.)     I  must  know 
distinctly  whom  I  believe,  what  I  believe,  and  why  I  believe, 
and  in  what  manner  I  believe.     Nothing,  nothing  will  answer 
these  questions  satisfactorily,  but  thorough,  downright  Evan 
gelical  Keligion.     Let  us  make  sure  that  this  religion  is  our 

(2*)  I  suggest,  secondly,  that  ministers  who  call  themselves 
Evangelical,  ought  to  be  specially  careful  that  they  do  not  com- 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  21 

promise  their  jwinciples,  and  damage  their  testimony,  by  vain 
attempts  to  conciliate  the  world. 

This  is  a  great  danger  in  these  days.  It  is  a  sunken  rock,  on 
which  I  fear  many  are  striking,  and  doing  themselves  immense 
harm.  The  plausible  pretext  of  making  our  services  more 
attractive,  and  cutting  the  ground  from  under  the  feet  of 
Ritualists,  too  often  induces  Evangelical  ministers  to  do  things 
which  they  had  far  better  let  alone.  New  church  decorations, 
new  church  music,  and  a  semi-histrionic  mode  of  going  through 
church  worship,  are  things  which  I  suggest  that  we  must  watch 
most  narrowly,  and  keep  at  arm's  length.  They  are  points  on 
which  we  must  take  heed  that  we  do  not  let  in  the  Pope  and 
the  devil. 

Tampering  with  these  things,  we  may  be  sure,  does  no  real 
good.  It  may  seem  to  please  the  world,  and  have  a  "  show  of 
wisdom,"  but  it  never  converts  the  world,  and  makes  the  world 
believe.  We  had  far  better  leave  it  alone.  Some  Evangelical 
clergymen,  I  suspect,  have  begun  flirting  and  trilling  with  these 
things  with  the  best  intentions,  and  have  ended  by  losing  their 
own  characters,  disgusting  their  true  believing  hearers,  making 
themselves  miserable,  and  going  out  of  the  world  under  a  cloud. 

Oh,  no  !  we  cannot  be  too  jealous  in  these  days  about  the 
slightest  departure  from  the  "  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints," 
and  from  the  worship  handed  down  to  us  by  the  Reformers. 
We  cannot  be  too  careful  to  add  nothing  to,  and  take  nothing 
away  from,  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  do  nothing  in 
our  worship,  which  seems  to  cast  the  slightest  reflection  on 
Evangelical  principles. — "  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole 
lump." — "  Take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees."  (Gal.  v.  9  ;  Matt.  xvi.  6.) 

Let  us  mark  the  testimony  of  Scripture  on  this  subject.  The 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians  is  the  inspired  handbook  for  these 
times.  Mark  how  in  that  Epistle  St.  Paul  declares,  "  Though 
we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  Gospel  unto  you 
than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be 
accursed." — Mark  how  he  repeats  it:  "As  we  said  before,  so 
we  say  again,  If  any  man  preach  any  other  Gospel  than  that  ye 
have  received,  let  him  be  accursed." — Mark  how  he  tells  us 
that  "when  he  came  to  Antioch  he  withstood  Peter  to  the  face, 
because  he  was  to  be  blamed." — Mark  how  he  says  to  the 


22  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Galatians,  "Ye  observe  days,  and  months,  and  times,  and 
years."  And  then  conies  the  solemn  and  weighty  remark  which 
ought  to  ring  in  the  ears  of  many:  "I  am  afraid  of  you." 
(Gal.  i.  9;  ii.  11;  iv.  10,  11.) 

Let  us  carefully  observe  how  little  good  they  do  who  attempt 
to  mix  up  Evangelical  preaching  and  a  Ritual  ceremonial. 
Little,  did  I  say  ? — they  do  no  good  at  all !  The  world  is  never 
won  by  trimming,  and  compromising,  by  facing  both  ways,  and 
trying  to  please  all.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  never  made  more 
acceptable  by  sawing  off  its  corners,  or  by  polishing,  varnishing, 
and  adorning  it.  Processions,  and  banners,  and  flowers,  and 
crosses,  and  excessive  quantity  of  music,  and  elaborate  services, 
and  beautiful  vestments,  may  please  children  and  weak-minded 
people.  But  they  never  helped  forward  heart-conversion  and 
heart-sanctification,  and  they  never  will.  Scores  of  English 
clergymen,  I  strongly  suspect,  have  found  out  too  late  that  St. 
Paul's  words  are  deeply  true,  when  he  says,  "  It  is  a  good  thing 
that  the  heart  be  established  with  grace ;  not  with  meats,  which 
have  not  profited  them  that  have  been  occupied  therein." 
(Heb.  xiii.  9.) 

I  grant  freely  that  we  have  need  of  much  patience  in  these  times. 
No  doubt  it  is  very  provoking  to  be  twitted  with  the  naked 
ness,  poverty,  and  meagreness  (so  called)  of  Evangelical  worship. 
It  is  very  annoying  to  see  our  younger  members  slipping  away  to 
churches  where  there  are  processions,  banners,  flowers,  incense, 
and  a  thoroughly  histrionic  and  gorgeous  ceremonial.  It  is 
vexing  to  hear  them  say,  that  "  they  feel  so  much  better  after 
these  services."  But  none  of  these  things  must  move  us.  "  He 
that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  (Isaiah  xxviii.  16.)  The 
end  will  never  justify  illicit  means.  Let  us  never  leave  the 
high  ground  of  principle  under  any  false  pressure,  from  whatever 
side  it  may  come.  Let  us  hold  on  our  own  way,  and  be  jeal 
ously  sensitive  of  any  departure  from  simplicity.  Popularity 
obtained  by  pandering  to  the  senses  or  the  sentiment  of  our 
hearers  is  not  worth  anything.  Worshippers  who  are  not 
content  with  the  Bible,  the  cross  of  Christ,  simple  prayers  and 
simple  praise,  are  worshippers  of  little  value.  It  is  useless  to 
try  to  please  them,  because  their  spiritual  taste  is  diseased. 

Let  us  remember,  not  least,  the  enormous  injury  which  we 
may  do  to  souls,  if  we  once  allow  ourselves  to  depart  in  the 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  23. 

least  degree  from  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel  either  in  our 
doctrine  or  in  our  worship.  "Who  can  estimate  the  shipwrecks 
that  might  occur  in  a  single  night,  and  the  lives  that  might  be 
lost,  if  a  light-house  keeper  dared  to  alter  but  a  little  the  colour 
of  his  light? — Who  can  estimate  the  deaths  that  might  take 
place  in  a  town,  if  the  chemist  took  on  himself  to  depart  but  a 
Little  from  the  doctor's  prescriptions  1 — Who  can  estimate  the 
wholesale  misery  that  might  be  caused  in  a  war,  by  maps  a 
little  wrong  and  charts  a  little  incorrect  1 — Who  can  estimate 
these  things  1 — Then  perhaps  you  may  have  some  idea  of  the 
spiritual  harm  that  ministers  may  do  by  departing  in  the 
slightest  degree  from  the  Scriptural  proportions  of  the  Gospel, 
or  by  trying  to  catch  the  world  by  dressing  simple  old  Evangel 
ical  Religion  in  new  clothes. 

(3)  I  suggest,  finally,  that  we  must  not  allow  Evangelical  Religion 
to  be  thrust  out  of  the  Church  of  England  without  a  struggle. 

It  is  a  religion  which  is  worth  a  struggle ;  for  it  can  point  to 
works  which  no  other  school  in  the  Church  of  England  has 
ever  equalled.  In  this  matter  we  fear  no  comparison,  if  honestly 
and  fairly  made.  We  confess  with  sorrow  that  we  have  done 
but  little  compared  to  what  we  ought  to  have  done  ;  and  yet  we 
say  boldly,  that  both  abroad  and  at  home  no  Churchmen  have 
done  so  much  good  to  souls  as  those  who  are  called  Evangelical. 
What  Sierra  Leone  can  the  extreme  Ritualists  place  before  us 
as  the  result  of  their  system  ?  What  Tinnevelly  bears  testimony 
to  the  truth  of  their  school  1  What  manufacturing  towns  have 
they  rescued  from  semi-heathenism1?  What  mining  districts 
have  they  Christianized  1  What  teeming  populations  of  poor 
in  our  large  cities  can  they  point  to,  as  evangelized  by  their 
agencies  1  We  boldly  challenge  a  reply.  Let  them  come 
forward  and  name  them.  In  the  day  when  Evangelical  Religion 
is  cast  out  of  the  Church  of  England,  the  usefulness  of  the 
Church  will  be  ended  and  gone.  Nothing  gives  the  Church  of 
England  such  power  and  influence  as  genuine,  well- worked, 
well-administered  Evangelical  Religion. 

But  it  is  a  religion  that  can  only  be  preserved  amongst  us 
just  now  by  a  great  effort,  and  a  mighty  struggle.  For  our 
nation's  sake,  for  our  children's  sake,  for  the  world's  sake,  for 
the  honour  and  glory  of  our  God,  let  us  gird  up  the  loins  of  our 
minds,  and  resolve  that  the  struggle  shall  be  made. 


24  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

It  is  a  struggle,  we  can  honestly  call  the  world  to  witness, 
which  is  not  one  of  our  seeking.  The  controversy  is  thrust 
upon  us,  whether  we  like  it  or  not.  We  are  driven  to  a  painful 
dilemma.  We  must  either  sit  by  in  silence,  like  sneaks  and 
cowards,  and  let  the  Church  of  England  be  unprotestantized  and 
re-united  with  Koine ; — or  else  we  must  basely  desert  the  dear 
old  Church  and  let  traitors  work  their  will ; — or  else  we  must 
look  the  danger  manfully  in  the  face,  and  fight ! — Our  fight,  of 
course,  is  to  be  carried  on  with  the  same  Word  that  Cranmer, 
Latimer,  and  Kidley  fought  with,  and  not  with  carnal  weapons. 
But  as  they  did,  so  must  we  do  :  we  must  stand  up  and  fight. 
Yes  !  even  if  a  secession  of  our  antagonists  is  the  consequence, 
we  must  not  shrink  from  fighting.  Let  every  man  go  to  the 
place  that  suits  him  best.  Let  Papists  join  the  Pope,  and 
Romanists  retire  to  Rome.*  But  if  we  want  our  Church  to 
continue  Protestant  and  Evangelical,  we  must  not  be  afraid  to 
fight.  There  are  times  when  there  is  a  mine  of  deep  meaning 
in  our  Lord's  words, — "  He  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his 

*  I  trust  that  no  one  will  misunderstand  me  here.  If  any  one  supposes 
that  I  want  to  narrow  the  pale  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  make  it  the 
Church  of  one  particular  party,  he  is  totally  mistaken.  I  am  quite  aware 
that  my  Church  is  eminently  liberal,  truly  comprehensive,  and  tolerant  of 
wide  differences  of  opinion.  But  I  deny  that  the  Church  ever  meant  its 
members  to  be  downright  Papists. 

The  Church  has  always  found  room  in  its  ranks  for  men  of  very  different 
schools  of  thought.  There  has  been  room  for  Ridley,  and  room  for  Hooper, 
— room  for  Jewell,  and  room  for  Hooker, — room  for  Whitgift,  and  room  for 
Tillotson, — room  for  Usher,  and  room  for  Jeremy  Taylor, — room  for  Davenant, 
and  room  for  Andrews, — room  for  Waterland,  and  room  for  Beveridge, — room 
for  Chillingworth,  and  room  for  Bull, — room  for  Whitby,  and  room  for  Scott, 
— room  for  Toplady,  and  room  for  Fletcher.  Where  is  the  Churchman  who 
would  like  any  one  of  these  men  to  have  been  shut  out  of  the  Church  of 
England  ?  If  there  is  such  an  one,  I  do  not  agree  with  him. 

But  if  any  man  wants  me  to  believe  that  our  Church  ever  meant  to  allow 
its  clergy  to  teach  the  Rornish  doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence,  the  sacrifice  of 
the  Mass,  and  the  practice  of  auricular  confession,  without  let  or  hindrance, 
I  tell  him  plainly  that  I  cannot  believe  it.  My  common  sense  revolts  against 
it.  I  would  as  soon  believe  that  black  is  white,  or  that  two  and  two  make 
five. 

Between  the  old  High  Churchman  and  the  Ritualists  I  draw  a  broad  line 
of  distinction.  "With  all  his  faults  and  mistakes,  in  my  judgment,  the  old 
High  Churchman  is  a  true  Churchman,  and  is  thoroughly  and  heartily 
opposed  to  Popery.  The  Ritualists,  on  the  other  hand,  scorn  the  very  name 
of  Protestant ;  and,  if  words  mean  anything,  are  so  like  Roman  Catholics, 
that  a  plain  man  can  see  no  difference  between  their  tenets  and  those  of 
Home. 


EVANGELICAL  RELIGION.  25 

garment,  and  buy  one."  (Luke  xxii.  36.)  To  such  times  we 
have  come. 

Does  any  one  ask  me  what  is  to  be  done  1  I  answer  that  the 
path  of  duty,  to  my  mind,  is  clear,  plain,  and  unmistakable. 
Union  and  organization  of  all  Protestant  and  Evangelical 
Churchmen, — untiring  exposure  of  the  Popish  dealings  of  our 
antagonists,  by  the  pulpit,  the  platform,  and  the  press, — law 
suits  whenever  there  is  a  reasonable  hope  of  success, — appeals 
to  Parliament  for  declarative  statutes,  and  the  reform  of  our 
Ecclesiastical  courts, — bold,  decided,  prompt  action,  the  moment 
any  necessity  requires, — these  are  the  weapons  of  our  warfare. 
They  are  weapons  which,  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the 
other,  we  ought  to  wield,  boldly,  untiringly,  unflinchingly,  be 
the  sacrifice  and  cost  what  it  may.  But  I  say,  "  No  surrender  ! 
No  desertion  !  No  compromise  !  No  disgraceful  peace  !  " 

Let  us  then  resolve  to  "contend  earnestly  for  the  faith."  By 
preaching  and  by  praying,  by  pulpit  and  by  platform,  by  pen 
and  by  tongue,  by  printing  and  by  speaking,  let  us  labour  to 
maintain  Evangelical  Religion  within  the  Church  of  England, 
and  to  resist  the  enemies  which  we  see  around  us. — We  are  not 
weak  if  we  stand  together  and  act  together.  The  middle  classes 
and  the  poor  are  yet  sound  at  heart.  They  do  not  love  Popery. 
God  Himself  has  not  forsaken  us,  and  truth  is  on  our  side. — 
But,  be  the  issue  of  the  conflict  what  it  may,  let  us  nail  our 
colours  to  the  mast ;  and,  if  need  be,  go  down  with  our  colours 
flying.  Let  us  only  settle  it  deeply  in  our  minds,  that /without 
Protestant  and  Evangelical  principles,  a  Church  is  as  useless 
as  a  well  without  water.  In  one  word,  when  the  Church  of 
England  becomes  Popish  once  more,  it  will  be  a  Church  not 
worth  preserving. 


II. 

ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION. 

Is  there  more  than  one  road  to  heaven  ?  Is  there  more  than 
one  way  in  which  the  soul  of  man  can  be  saved  1  This  is  the 
question  which  I  propose  to  consider  in  this  paper,  and  I  shall 
begin  the  consideration  by  quoting  a  text  of  Scripture  :  "  Neither 
is  there  salvation  in  any  other :  for  there  is  none  other  name 
under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved." 
(Acts  iv.  12.) 

These  words  are  striking  in  themselves;  but  they  are  much  more 
striking  if  we  observe  when  and  by  whom  they  were  spoken. 

They  were  spoken  by  a  poor  and  friendless  Christian,  in  the 
midst  of  a  persecuting  Jewish  Council.  It  was  a  grand  con 
fession  of  Christ. 

They  were  spoken  by  the  lips  of  the  Apostle  Peter.  This  is 
the  man  who  a  few  weeks  before  forsook  Jesus  and  fled :  this  is 
the  very  man  who  three  times  over  denied  his  Lord.  There 
is  another  spirit  in  him  now !  He  stands  up  boldly  before 
priests  and  Sadducees,  and  tells  them  the  truth  to  their  face  : 
"This  is  the  stone  that  was  set  at  naught  of  you  builders, 
which  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner.  Neither  is  there 
salvation  in  any  other  :  for  there  is  none  other  name  under 
heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved." 

Now,  I  need  hardly  tell  a  well-informed  reader  that  this  text 
is  one  of  the  principal  foundations  on  which  the  Eighteenth 
Article  of  the  Church  of  England  is  built. 

That  article  runs  as  follows :  "  They  also  are  to  be  had 
accursed  that  presume  to  say  that  every  man  shall  be  saved  by 
the  law  or  sect  he  professeth,  so  that  he  be  diligent  to  frame  his 
life  according  to  that  law  and  the  light  of  nature.  Eor  Holy 
Scripture  doth  set  out  unto  us  only  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
whereby  men  must  be  saved." 

There  are  few  stronger  assertions  than  this  throughout  the 


ONLY  ONE  WAY.  OF  SALVATION.  2  7 

whole  Thirty-nine  Articles.  It  is  the  only  anathema  pro 
nounced  by  our  Church  from  one  end  of  her  great  Confession 
of  faith  to  the  other.  The  Council  of  Trent  in  her  decrees 
anathematizes  continually.  The  Church  of  England  uses  an 
anathema  or  curse  once,  and  once  only ;  and  that  she  does  it  on 
good  grounds  I  propose  to  show,  by  an  examination  of  the 
Apostle  Peter's  words. 

-In  considering  this  solemn  subject,  there  are  three  things  I 
wish  to  do. 

I.  First,  I  wish  to  explain  the  doctrine  here  laid  down  by 

the  Apostle. 

II.  Secondly,  I  wish  to  supply  some  reasons  why  this  doc 
trine  must  be  true. 

III.    Thirdly,    I   wish   to    show   some   consequences   which 
naturally  flow  from  the  doctrine. 

I.  First,  let  me  explain  the  doctrine  laid  down  ly  St.  Peter. 

Let  us  make  sure  that  we  rightly  understand  what  the 
Apostle  means.  He  says  of  Christ,  "  Neither  is  there  salvation 
in  any  other."  Now,  what  does  this  mean?  On  our  clearly 
seeing  this  very  much  depends. 

He  means  that  no  one  can  be  saved  from  sin, — its  guilt,  its 
power,  and  its  consequences, — excepting  by  Jesus  Christ. 

He  means  that  no  one  can  have  peace  with  God  the  Father, 
— obtain  pardon  in  this  world,  and  escape  wrath  to  come  in  the 
next, — excepting  through  the  atonement  and  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

In  Christ  alone  God's  rich  provision  of  salvation  for  sinners 
is  treasured  up :  by  Christ  alone  God's  abundant  mercies  come 
down  from  heaven  to  earth.  Christ's  blood  alone  can  cleanse 
us;  Christ's  righteousness  alone  can  clothe  us;  Christ's  merit 
alone  can  give  us  a  title  to  heaven.  Jews  and  Gentiles,  learned 
and  unlearned,  kings  and  poor  men, — all  alike  must  either  be 
saved  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  or  lost  for  ever. 

And  the  Apostle  adds  emphatically,  "There  is  none  other 
name  under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be 
saved."  There  is  no  other  person  commissioned,  sealed,  and 
appointed  by  God  the  Father  to  be  the  Saviour  of  sinners 
excepting  Christ.  The  keys  of  Life  and  Death  are  committed 
to  His  hand,  and  all  who  would  be  saved  must  go  to  Him. 


28  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

There  was  but  one  place  of  safety  in  the  day  when  the  flood 
canie  upon  the  earth :  that  place  was  Noah's  ark.  All  other 
places  and  devices, — mountains,  towers,  trees,  rafts,  boats, — 
all  were  alike  useless.  So  also  there  is  but  one  hiding-place 
for  the  sinner  who  would  escape  the  storm  of  God's  anger ;  he 
must  venture  his  soul  on  Christ. 

There  was  but  one  man  to  whom  the  Egyptians  could  go  in 
the  time  of  famine,  when  they  wanted  food.  They  must  go  to 
Joseph  :  it  was  a  waste  of  time  to  go  to  any  one  else.  So  also 
there  is  but  One  to  whom  hungering  souls  must  go,  if  they 
would  not  perish  for  ever  :  they  must  go-to  Christ. 

There  was  but  one  word  that  could  save  the  lives  of  the 
Ephraimites  in  the  day  when  the  Gileadites  contended  with 
them,  and  took  the  fords  of  Jordan  (Judges  xi.) :  they  must 
say  "  Shibboleth,"  or  die.  Just  so  there  is  but  one  name  that 
will  avail  us  when  we  stand  at  the  gate  of  heaven :  we  must 
name  the  name  of  Jesus  as  our  only  hope,  or  be  cast  away 
everlastingly. 

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  text.  "No  salvation  but  by 
Jesus  Christ; — in  Him  plenty  of  salvation, — salvation  to  the 
uttermost,  salvation  for  the  very  chief  of  sinners ; — out  of  Him 
no  salvation  at  all."  It  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  our  Lord's 
own  words  in  St.  John's  Gospel, —  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth, 
and  the  life :  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  "Me." 
(John  xiv.  6.)  It  is  the  same  thing  that  Paul  tells  the  Corin 
thians, — "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid, 
which  is  Jesus  Christ."  (1  Cor.  iii.  11.)  And  it  is  the  same 
that  St.  John  tells  us  in  his  first  Epistle, — "  God  hath  given  to 
us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son.  He  that  hath  the 
Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hatli  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not 
life."  (1  John  v.  12.)  All  these  texts  come  to  one  and  the 
same  point, — no  salvation  but  by  Jesus  Christ. 

Let  us  make  sure  that  we  understand  this  before  we  pass  on. 
Men  are  apt  to  think,  "This  is  all  old  news ; — these  are  ancient 
things  :  who  knoweth  not  such  truths  as  these  ?  Of  course  we 
believe  there  is  no  salvation  but  by  Christ."  But  I  ask  my 
readers  to  mark  well  what  I  say.  Make  sure  that  you  under 
stand  this  doctrine,  or  else  by  and  by  you  will  stumble,  and  be 
offended  at  the  statements  I  have  yet  to  make  in  this  paper. 

We  are  to  venture  the  whole  salvation  of  our  souls  on  Christ, 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  Of  SALVATION.  29 

and  on  Christ  only.  Wo  are  to  cast  loose  completely  and 
entirely  from  all  other  hopes  and  trusts.  We  are  not  to  rest 
partly  on  Christ, — partly  on  doing  all  we  can, — partly  on  keeping 
our  church, — partly  on  receiving  the  sacrament.  In  the  matter 
of  our  justification  Christ  is  to  be  all.  This  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  text. 

Heaven  is  before  us,  and  Christ  the  only  door  into  it ;  hell 
beneath  us,  and  Christ  alone  able  to  deliver  from  it ;  the  devil 
behind  us,  and  Christ  the  only  refuge  from  his  wrath  and  accu 
sations  ;  the  law  against  us,  and  Christ  alone  able  to  redeem  us ; 
sin  weighing  us  down,  and  Christ  alone  able  to  put  it  away. 
This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  text. 

JSTow  do  we  see  it  1  I  hope  we  do.  But  I  fear  many  think 
so  who  may  find,  before  laying  down  this  paper,  that  they  do 
not. 

II.  Let  me,  in  the  second  place,  supply  some  reasons  irliy  the. 
doctrine  of  the  text  must  be  true. 

I  might  cut  short  this  part  of  the  subject  by  one  simple 
argument:  "God  says  so."  "One  plain  text,"  said  an  old 
divine,  "  is  as  good  as  a  thousand  reasons." 

But  I  will  not  do  this.  I  wish  to  meet  the  objections  that 
are  ready  to  rise  in  many  hearts  against  this  doctrine,  by  point 
ing  out  the  strong  foundations  on  which  it  stands. 

(1)  Let  me  then  say,  for  one  thing,  the  doctrine  of  the  text 
must  be  true,  because  man  is  what  man  is. 

Xow,  what  is  man  1  There  is  one  broad,  sweeping  answer, 
which  takes  in  the  whole  human  race  :  man  is  a  sinful  being. 
All  children  of  Adam  bom  into  the  world,  whatever  be  their 
name  or  nation,  are  corrupt,  wicked,  and  defiled  in  the  sight  of 
God.  Their  thoughts,  words,  ways,  and  actions  are  all,  more 
or  less,  defective  and  imperfect. 

Is  there  no  country  011  the  face  of  the  globe  where  sin  does 
not  reign1?  Is  there  no  happy  valley,  no  secluded  island, 
where  innocence  is  to  be  found  1  Is  there  no  tribe  on  earth, 
where,  far  away  from  civilization,  and  commerce,  and  money, 
and  gunpowder,  and  luxury,  and  books,  morality  and  purity 
nourish  1  No  !  there  is  none.  Look  over  all  the  voyages  and 
travels  you  can  lay  your  hand  on,  from  Columbus  down  to 
Cook,  and  from  Cook  to  Livingstone,  and  you  will  see  the 


30  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

truth  of  what  I  am  asserting.  The  most  solitary  islands  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean, — islands  cut  off  from  all  the  rest  of  the  world,— 
islands  where  people  were  alike  ignorant  of  Eome  and  Paris, 
London  and  Jerusalem, — these  islands,  when  first  discovered, 
have  been  found  full  of  impurity,  cruelty,  and  idolatry.  The 
footprints  of  the  devil  have  been  traced  on  every  shore.  The 
veracity  of  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis  has  everywhere  been 
established.  Whatever  else  savages  have  been  found  ignorant 
of,  they  have  never  been  found  ignorant  of  sin. 

But  are  there  no  men  and  women  in  the  world  who  are  free 
from  this  corruption  of  nature  ?  Have  there  not  been  high- 
minded  and  exalted  beings  who  have  every  now  and  then 
lived  faultless  lives  ?  Have  there  not  been  some,  if  it  be  only 
a  few,  who  have  done  all  that  God  requires,  and  thus  proved 
that  sinless  perfection  is  a  possibility  1  No  !  there  have  been 
none.  Look  over  all  the  biographies  and  lives  of  the  holiest 
Christians  ;  mark  how  the  brightest  and  best  of  Christ's  people 
have  always  had  the  deepest  sense  of  their  own  defectiveness 
and  corruption.  They  groan,  they  mourn,  they  sigh,  they 
weep  over  their  own  shortcomings  :  it  is  one  of  the  common 
grounds  on  which  they  meet.  Patriarchs  and  Apostles,  Fathers 
and  Keformers,  Episcopalians  and  Presbyterians,  Luther  and 
Calvin,  Knox  and  Bradford,  Rutherford  and  Bishop  Hall, 
Wesley  and  Whitefield,  Martyn  and  M'Cheyne, — all  are 
alike  agreed  in  feeling  their  own  sinfulness.  The  more  light 
they  have,  the  more  humble  and  self-abased  they  seem  to  be ; 
the  more  holy  they  are,  the  more  they  seem  to  feel  their  own 
unworthiness. 

]S"ow  what  does  all  this  seem  to  prove  1  To  my  eyes  it 
seems  to  prove  that  human  nature  is  so  tainted  and  corrupt 
that,  left  to  himself,  no  man  could  be  saved.  Man's  case 
appears  to  be  a  hopeless  one  without  a  Saviour, — and  that  a 
mighty  Saviour  too.  There  must  be  a  Mediator,  an  Atone 
ment,  an  Advocate,  to  make  such  poor  sinful  beings  accept 
able  with  God ;  and  I  find  this  nowhere,  excepting  in  Jesus 
Christ.  Heaven  for  man  without  an  almighty  Redeemer,  peace 
with  God  for  man  without  a  divine  Intercessor,  eternal  life  for 
man  without  an  eternal  Saviour, — in  one  word,  salvation  with 
out  Christ, — all  alike,  in  the  face  of  the  plain  facts  about  human 
nature,  appear  utter  impossibilities. 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  31 

I  lay  these  things  before  thinking  men,  and  I  ask  them  to 
consider  them.  I  know  it  is  one  of  the  hardest  things  in  the 
world  to  realize  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  To  say  we  are  all  sinners 
is  one  thing ;  to  have  an  idea  what  sin  must  be  in  the  sight  of 
God  is  quite  another.  Sin  is  too  much  part  of  ourselves  to 
allow  us  to  see  it  as  it  is  :  we  do  not  feel  our  own  moral 
deformity.  We  arc  like  those  animals  in  creation  which  are 
vile  and  loathsome  to  our  senses,  but  are  not  so  to  themselves, 
nor  yet  to  one  another  :  their  loathsomeness  is  their  nature,  and 
they  do  not  perceive  it.  Just  in  the  same  way  our  corruption 
is  part  and  parcel  of  ourselves,  and  at  our  best  we  have  but  a 
feeble  comprehension  of  its  intensity. 

But  this  we  may  be  sure  of, — if  we  could  see  our  own  lives 
with  the  eyes  of  the  angels  who  never  fell,  we  should  never 
doubt  this  point  for  a  moment.  In  a  word,  no  one  can  really 
know  what  man  is,  and  not  see  that  the  doctrine  of  our  text 
must  be  true.  We  are  shut  up  to  the  Apostle  Peter's  con 
clusion.  There  can  be  no  salvation  except  by  Christ. 

(2)  Let  me  say  another  thing.  The  doctrine  of  our  text 
must  be  true,  'because  God  is  u-liat  God  is. 

Now  what  is  God  1  That  is  a  deep  question  indeed.  We 
know  something  of  His  attributes  :  He  has  not  left  Himself 
without  witness  in  creation;  He  has  mercifully  revealed  to.  us 
many  things  about  Himself  in  His  Word.  We  know  that  God 
is  a  Spirit, — eternal,  invisible,  almighty, — the  Maker  of  all 
things,  the  Preserver  of  all  things, — holy,  just,  all-seeing,  all- 
knowing,  all-remembering, — infinite  in  mercy,  in  wisdom,  in 
purity. 

But,  alas,  after  all,  how  low  and  grovelling  are  our  highest 
ideas,  when  we  come  to  put  down  on  paper  what  we  believe 
God  to  be  !  How  many  words  and  expressions  we  use  whose 
full  meaning  we  cannot  fathom !  How  many  things  our 
tongues  say  of  Him  which  our  minds  are  utterly  unable  to 
conceive  ! 

How  small  a  part  of  Him  do  we  see !  How  little  of  Him 
can  we  possibly  know  !  How  mean  and  paltry  are  any  words 
of  ours  to  convey  any  idea  of  Him  who  made  this  mighty 
world  out  of  nothing,  and  with  Whom  one  day  is  as  a  thousand 
years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day !  How  weak  and 
inadequate  are  our  poor  feeble  intellects  to  form  any  conception 


32  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

of  Him  Who  is  perfect  in  all  His  works,— perfect  in  the  greatest 
as  well  as  perfect  in  the  smallest, — perfect  in  appointing  the 
days  and  hours,  and  minutes  and  seconds  in  which  Jupiter, 
with  all  his  satellites,  shall  travel  round  the  sun, — perfect  in 
forming  the  smallest  insect  that  creeps  over  a  few  feet  of  our 
little  globe  !  How  little  can  our  busy  helplessness  comprehend 
a  Being  who  is  ever  ordering  all  things,  in  heaven  and  earth, 
by  universal  providence  :  ordering  the  rise  and  fall  of  nations 
and  dynasties,  like  Nineveh  and  Carthage ;  ordering  the  exact 
length  to  which  men  like  Alexander  and  Tamerlane  and 
Napoleon,  shall  extend  their  conquests ;  ordering  the  least 
step  in  the  life  of  the  humblest  believer  among  His  people : 
all  at  the  same  time,  all  unceasingly,  all  perfectly, — all  for  His 
own  glory. 

The  blind  man  is  no  judge  of  the  paintings  of  Rubens  or 
Titian  ;  the  deaf  man  is  insensible  to  the  beauty  of  Handel's 
music ;  the  Greenlander  can  have  but  a  faint,  notion  of  the 
climate  of  the  tropics  ;  the  South  Sea  islander  can  form  but  a 
remote  conception  of  a  locomotive  engine,  however  well  you 
may  describe  it.  There  is  no  faculty  in  their  minds  which  can 
take  in  these  things ;  they  have  no  set  of  thoughts  which  can 
comprehend  them  ;  they  have  no  mental  fingers  to  grasp  them. 
And  just  in  the  same  way,  the  best  and  brightest  ideas  that 
man  can  form  of  God,  compared  to  the  reality  which  we  shall 
one  day  see,  are  weak  and  faint  indeed. 

But  one  thing,  I  think,  is  very  clear  :  and  that  is  this.  Tin; 
more  any  man  considers  calmly  what  God  really  is,  the  more  he 
must  feel  the  immeasurable  distance  between  God  and  himself  ; 
the  more  he  meditates,  the  more  he  must  see  that  there  is  a 
great  gulf  between  him  and  God.  His  conscience,  I  think,  will 
tell  him,  if  he  will  let  it  speak,  that  God  is  perfect,  and  he  im 
perfect  ;  that  God  is  very  high,  and  he  very  low ;  that  God  is 
glorious  majesty,  and  he  a  poor  worm ;  and  that  if  ever  he  is 
to  stand  before  Him  in  judgment  with  comfort,  he  must  have 
some  mighty  Helper,  or  he  will  not  be  saved. 

And  what  is  all  this  but  the  very  doctrine  of  the  text  with 
which  I  began  this  paper  ?  What  is  all  this  but  coming  round 
to  the  conclusion  I  am  urging  upon  my  readers  ?  With  such  an 
one  as  God  to  give  account  to,  we  must  have  a  mighty  Saviour. 
To  give  us  peace  with  such  a  glorious  being  as  God,  we  must 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  33 

have  an  almighty  Mediator,  a  Friend  and  Advocate  on  our  side, 
— an  Advocate  who  can  answer  every  charge  that  can  be  laid 
against  us,  and  plead  our  cause  with  God  on  equal  terms.  We 
want  this,  and  nothing  less  than  this.  Vague  notions  of  mercy 
will  never  give  true  peace.  And  such  a  Saviour,  such  a  Friend, 
such  an  Advocate  is  nowhere  to  be  found  excepting  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ. 

I  lay  this  reason  also  before  thinking  men.  I  know  well  that 
people  may  have  false  notions  of  God  as  well  as  everything 
else,  and  shut  their  eyes  against  truth.  But  I  say  boldly  and 
confidently,  No  man  can  have  really  high  and  honourable  views 
of  what  God  is,  and  escape  the  conclusion  that  the  doctrine  of 
our  text  must  be  true.  We  are  shut  up  to  the  truth  of  St. 
Peter's  declaration.  There  can  be  no  possible  salvation  but  by 
Jesus  Christ. 

(3)  Let  me  say,  in  the  third  place,  this  doctrine  must  be  true, 
because  the  Bible  is  wlmi  the  Bible  is.  If  we  do  not  believe  the 
doctrine,  we  must  give  up  the  Bible  as  the  only  rule  of  faith. 

All  through  the  Bible,  from  Genesis  down  to  Eevelation, 
there  is  only  one  simple  account  of  the  way  in  which  man  must 
be  saved.  It  is  always  the  same  :  only  for  the  sake  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ, — through  faith;  not  for  our  own  works  and 
deservings. 

We  see  it  dimly  revealed  at  first :  it  looms  through  the  mist 
of  a  few  promises ;  but  there  it  is. 

We  have  it  more  plainly  afterwards  :  it  is  taught  by  the 
pictures  and  emblems  of  the  law  of  Moses,  the  schoolmaster  dis 
pensation. 

We  have  it  still  more  clearly  by  and  by  :  the  Prophets  saw 
in  vision  many  particulars  about  the  Redeemer  yet  to  come. 

We  have  it  fully  at  last,  in  the  sunshine  of  New  Testament 
history  :  Christ  incarnate,  —  Christ  crucified,  —  Christ  rising 
again, — Christ  preached  to  the  world. 

But  one  golden  chain  runs  through  the  whole  volume :  no 
salvation  excepting  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  bruising  of  the 
serpent's  head  foretold  in  the  day  of  the  fall ;  the  clothing  of 
our  first  parents  with  skins  ;  the  sacrifices  of  Noah,  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob ;  the  passover,  and  all  the  particulars  of  the 
Jewish  law, — the  high  priest,  the  altar,  the  daily  offering  of  the 
lamb,  the  holy  of  holies  entered  only  by  blood,  the  scape-goat, 


34  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

the  cities  of  refuge ; — all  are  so  many  witnesses  to  the  truth  set 
forth  in  the  text.  All  preach  with  one  voice,  salvation  only  by 
Jesus  Christ. 

In  fact,  this  truth  appears  to  be  the  grand  object  of  the 
Bible,  and  all  the  different  parts  and  portions  of  the  book  are 
meant  to  pour  light  upon  it.  I  can  gather  from  it  no  ideas  of 
pardon  and  peace  with  God  excepting  in  connection  with  this 
truth.  If  I  could  read  of  one  soul  in  it  who  was  saved  without 
faith  in  a  Saviour,  I  might  perhaps  not  speak  so  confidently. 
But  when  I  see  that  faith  in  Christ, — whether  a  coming  Christ 
or  a  crucified  Christ, — was  the  prominent  feature  in  the  religion 
of  all  who  went  to  heaven ; — when  I  see  Abel  owning  Christ  in 
his  "  better  sacrifice  "  at  one  end  of  the  Bible,  and  the  saints  in 
glory  in  John's  vision  rejoicing  in  Christ  at  the  other  end  of  the 
Bible;— when  I  see  a  man  like  Cornelius,  who  was  devout,  and 
feared  God,  and  gave  alms  and  prayed,  not  told  that  he  had 
done  all,  and  would  of  course  be  saved,  but  ordered  to  send  for 
Peter,  and  hear  of  Christ; — when  I  see  all  these  things,  I  say, 
I  feel  bound  to  believe  that  the  doctrine  of  the  text  is  the 
doctrine  of  the  whole  Bible.  The  Word  of  God,  fairly  examined 
and  interpreted,  shuts  me  up  to  the  truth  laid  down  by  St. 
Peter.  No  salvation,  no  way  to  heaven,  excepting  by  Jesus 
Christ. 

Such  are  the  reasons  which,  seem  to  me  to  confirm  the  truth 
which  forms  the  subject  of  this  paper.  What  man  is, — what 
God  is, — what  the  Bible  is, — all  appear  to  me  to  lead  on  to  the 
same  great  conclusion  :  no  possible  salvation  without  Christ. 
I  leave  them  here,  and  pass  on. 

III.  And  now,  in  the  third  and  last  place,  let  me  show  some 
consequences  ivhich  flow  naturally  out  of  the  doctrine  declared  by 
St.  Peter. 

There  are  few  parts  of  the  subject  which  seem  to  me  more 
important  than  this.  The  truth  I  have  been  trying  to  set 
before  my  readers  bears  so  strongly  on  the  condition  of  a  great 
proportion  of  mankind,  that  I  consider  it  would  be  mere  affecta 
tion  on  my  part  not  to  say  something  about  it.  If  Christ  is  the 
only  way  of  salvation,  what  are  we  to  feel  about  many  people  in 
the  world  ?  This  is  the  point  I  am  now  going  to  take  up. 

I  believe  that  many  persons  would  go  with  me  so  far  as  I 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  35 

have  gone,  and  would  go  no  further.  They  will  allow  my 
premises  :  they  will  have  nothing  to  say  to  my  conclusions. 
They  think  it  uncharitable  to  say  anything  which  appears  to 
condemn  others.  For  my  part  I  cannot  understand  such 
charity.  It  seems  to  me  the  kind  of  charity  which  would  see  a 
neighbour  drinking  slow  poison,  but  never  interfere  to  stop  him ; 
— which  would  allow  emigrants  to  embark  in  a  leaky,  ill-found 
vessel,  and  not  interfere  to  prevent  them ; — which  would  see  a 
blind  man  walking  near  a  precipice,  and  think  it  wrong  to  cry 
out,  and  tell  him  there  was  danger. 

The  greatest  charity  is  to  tell  the  greatest  quantity  of  truth. 
It  is  no  charity  to  hide  the  legitimate  consequences  of  such  a 
saying  of  St.  Peter  as  we  are  now  considering,  or  to  shut  our 
eyes  against  them.  And  I  solemnly  call  on  every  one  who 
really  believes  there  is  no  salvation  in  any  but  Christ, — and 
none  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  we  must  be 
saved, — I  solemnly  call  on  that  person  to  give  me  his  attention, 
while  I  set  before  him  some  of  the  tremendous  consequences 
which  the  doctrine  we  are  considering  involves. 

I  am  not  going  to  speak  of  the  heathen  who  have  never 
heard  the  Gospel.  Their  final  state  is  a  great  depth,  which 
the  mightiest  minds  have  been  unable  to  fathom :  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  leaving  it  alone.  One  thing  only  I  will  say.  If 
any  of  the  heathen,  who  die  heathen,  are  saved,  I  believe  they 
will  owe  their  salvation,  however  little  they  may  know  it  on 
this  side  of  the  grave,  to  the  work  and  atonement  of  Christ. 
Just  as  infants  and  idiots  among  ourselves  will  find  at  the  last 
day  they  owed  all  to  Christ,  though  they  never  knew  Him,  so  I 
believe  it  will  be  with  the  heathen,  if  any  of  them  are  saved, 
whether  many  or  few.  This  at  any  rate  I  am  sure  of — there  is 
no  such  thing  as  creature  merit.  My  own  private  opinion  is 
that  the  highest  Archangel  (though,  of  course,  in  a  very 
different  way  and  degree  from  us)  will  be  found  in  some  way  to 
owe  his  standing  to  Christ ;  and  that  things  in  heaven,  as  well 
as  things  on  earth,  will  be  found  ultimately  all  indebted  to  the 
name  of  Jesus.  But  I  leave  the  case  of  the  heathen  to  others, 
and  will  speak  of  matters  nearer  home. 

(a)  One  mighty  consequence  then  which  seems  to  be  learned 
from  the  text  which  forms  the  keynote  of  this  paper,  is  the  utter 
uselessness  of  any  religion  without  Christ. 


36  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

There  are  many  to  be  found  in  Christendom  at  this  day  who 
have  a  religion  of  this  kind.  They  would  not  like  to  be  called 
Deists,  but  Deists  they  are.  That  there  is  a  God,  that  there  is 
what  they  are  pleased  to  call  Providence,  that  God  is  merciful, 
that  there  will  be  a  state  after  death, — this  is  about  the  sum 
and  substance  of  their  creed  ;  and  as  to  the  distinguishing  tenets 
of  Christianity,  they  do  not  seem  to  recognize  them  at  all. 
Now  I  denounce  such  a  system  as  a  baseless  fabric, — its  seeming- 
foundation  man's  fancy, — its  hopes  an  utter  delusion.  The  god 
of  such  people  is  an  idol  of  their  own  invention,  and  not  the 
glorious  God  of  the  Scriptures, — a  miserably  imperfect  being, 
even  on  their  own  showing, — without  holiness,  without  justice, 
without  any  attribute  but  that  of  vague,  indiscriminate  mercy. 
Such  a  religion  may  possibly  do  as  a  toy  to  live  with :  it  is  far 
too  unreal  to  die  with.  It  utterly  fails  to  meet  the  wants  of 
man's  conscience  :  it  offers  no  remedy  ;  it  affords  no  rest  for  the 
soles  of  our  feet ;  it  cannot  comfort,  for  it  cannot  save.  Let  us 
beware  of  it,  if  we  love  life.  Let  us  beiuare  of  a  religion  without 
Christ. 

(b)  Another  consequence  to  be  learned  from  the  text  is,  the 
folly  of  any  religion  in  which  Christ  has  not  the  first  place. 

I  need  not  remind  my  readers  how  many  hold  a  system  of 
this  kind.  The  Socinian  tells  us  that  Christ  was  a  mere  man ; 
that  His  blood  had  no  more  efficacy  than  that  of  another ;  that 
His  death  on  the  cross  was  not  a  real  atonement  and  propitiation 
of  man's  sins ;  and  that,  after  all,  doing  is  the  way  to  heaven, 
and  not  believing.  I  solemnly  declare  that  I  believe  such  a 
system  is  ruinous  to  men's  souls.  It  seems  to  me  to  strike  at 
the  root  of  the  whole  plan  of  salvation  which  God  has  revealed 
in  the  Bible,  and  practically  to  nullify  the  greater  part  of  the 
Scriptures.  It  overthrows  the  priesthood  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
strips  Him  of  His  office.  It  converts  the  whole  system  of  the 
law  of  Moses,  touching  sacrifices  and  ordinances,  into  a  meaning 
less  form.  It  seems  to  say  that  the  sacrifice  of  Cain  was  just 
as  good  as  the  sacrifice  of  Abel.  It  turns  man  adrift  on  a  sea 
of  uncertainty,  by  plucking  from  under  him  the  finished  work 
of  a  divine  Mediator.  Let  us  beware  of  it,  no  less  than  of 
Deism,  if  we  love  life.  Let  us  beware  of  the  least  attempt  to 
depreciate  and  undervalue  Christ's  person,  offices,  or  work.  The 
name  whereby  alone  we  can  be  saved,  is  a  name  above  every 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  3*7 

name,  and  the  slightest  contempt  poured  upon  it  is  an  insult  to 
the  King  of  kings.  The  salvation  of  our  souls  has  been  laid  by 
God  the  Father  on  Christ,  and  no  other.  If  He  were  not  very 
God  of  very  God,  He  never  could  accomplish  it,  and  there  could 
be  no  salvation  at  all. 

(c)  Another  consequence  to  be  learned  from  our  text,  is  the 
great  error  committed  by  those  who  add  anything  to  Christy  as 
necessary  to  salvation. 

It  is  an  easy  thing  to  profess  belief  in  the  Trinity,  and  rever 
ence  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  yet  to  make  some  addition 
to  Christ  as  the  ground  of  hope,  and  so  to  overthrow  the  doctrine 
of  the  text  as  really  and  completely  as  by  denying  it  altogether. 

The  Church  of  Rome  does  this  systematically.  She  adds 
things  to  Christianity  over  and  above  the  requirements  of  the 
Gospel,  of  her  own  invention.  She  speaks  as  if  Christ's  finished 
work  was  not  a  sufficient  foundation  for  a  sinner's  soul,  and  as 
if  it  were  not  enough  to  say,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  She  sends  men  to  priests  and  con 
fessors,  to  penances  and  absolution,  to  masses  and  extreme 
unction,  to  fasting  and  bodily  mortification,  to  the  Virgin  Mary 
and  the  saints, — as  if  these  things  could  add  to  the  safety  there 
is  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  in  doing  this  she  sins  against  the 
doctrine  of  God's  Word  with  a  high  hand.  Let  us  beware  of 
any  Romish  hankering  after  additions  to  the  simple  way  of  the 
Gospel,  from  whatever  quarter  it  may  come. 

But  I  fear  the  Church  of  Rome  does  not  stand  alone  in  this 
matter.  I  fear  there  are  thousands  of  professing  Protestants 
who  are  often  erring  in  the  same  direction,  although,  of  course, 
in  a  very  different  degree.  They  get  into  a  way  of  adding, 
perhaps  insensibly,  other  things  to  the  name  of  Christ,  or 
attaching  an  importance  to  them  which  they  never  ought  to 
receive.  The  ultra  Churchman  in  England,  who  thinks  God's 
covenanted  mercies  are  tied  to  Episcopacy, — the  ultra  Presby 
terian  in  Scotland,  who  cannot  reconcile  prelacy  with  an  intelligent 
knowledge  of  the  Gospel, — the  ultra  Free-kirk  man  by  his  side, 
who  seems  to  think  lay  patronage  and  vital  Christianity  almost 
incompatible, — the  ultra  Dissenter,  who  traces  every  evil  in 
the  Church  to  its  connection  with  the  State,  and  can  talk  of 
nothing  but  the  voluntary  system, — the  ultra  Baptist,  who 
shuts  out  from  the  Lord's  table  every  one  who  has  not  received 


38  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

his  peculiar  views  of  adult  baptism, — the  ultra  Plymouth 
Brother,  who  believes  all  knowledge  to  reside  with  his  own 
body,  and  condemns  every  one  outside  as  a  poor  wreak  babe  ; — 
all  these,  I  say,  however  unwittingly,  exhibit  a  most  uncom 
fortable  tendency  to  add  to  the  doctrine  of  our  text.  All  seem 
to  me  to  be  practically  declaring  that  salvation  is  not  to  be  found 
simply  and  solely  in  Christ.  All  seem  to  me  to  be  practically 
adding  another  name  to  the  name  of  Jesus,  whereby  men  must 
be  saved, — even  the  name  of  their  own  party  and  sect.  All 
seem  to  me  to  be  practically  replying  to  the  question,  "  What 
shall  I  do  to  be  saved  1 "  not  merely,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  but  also  "  Come  and  join  us." 

Xow  I  call  upon  every  true  Christian  to  beware  of  such 
ultraism,  in  whatever  form  he  may  be  inclined  to  it.  In  saying 
this  I  would  not  be  misunderstood.  I  like  every  one  to  be 
decided  in  his  views  of  ecclesiastical  matters,  and  to  be  fully 
persuaded  of  their  correctness.  All  I  ask  is,  that  men  will  not 
put  these  things  in  the  place  of  Christ,  or  place  them  anywhere 
near  Him,  or  speak  of  them  as  if  they  thought  them  needful  to 
salvation.  However  dear  to  us  our  own  peculiar  views  may  be, 
let  us  beware  of  thrusting  them  in  between  the  sinner  and  the 
Saviour.  In  the  things  of  God's  Word,  be  it  remembered, 
addition,  as  well  as  subtraction,  is  a  great  sin. 

(d)  The  last  consequence  which  seems  to  me  to  be  learned  from 
our  text  is,  tlie  utter  absurdity  of  supposing  that  we  ought  to  be 
satisfied  with  a  man's  state  of  soul,  if  he  is  only  earnest  and 
sincere. 

This  is  a  very  common  heresy  indeed,  and  one  against  which 
we  all  need  to  be  on  our  guard.  There  are  thousands  who  say 
in  the  present  day,  "  We  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  opinions 
of  others.  They  may  perhaps  be  mistaken,  though  it  is  possible 
they  are  right  and  we  wrong :  but,  if  they  are  sincere  and 
earnest,  we  hope  they  will  be  saved  even  as  we."  And  all  this 
sounds  liberal  and  charitable,  and  people  like  to  fancy  their 
own  views  are  so  !  To  such  an  extreme  length  has  this  erron 
eous  idea  run,  that  many  are  content  to  describe  a  Christian 
as  "an  earnest  man,"  and  seem  to  think  this  vague  definition 
is  quite  sufficient ! 

Now  I  believe  such  notions  are  entirely  contradictory  to  the 
Bible,  whatever  else  they  may  be.  I  cannot  find  in  Scripture 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  39 

that  any  one  ever  got  to  heaven  merely  by  sincerity,  or  was 
accepted  with  God  if  he  was  only  earnest  in  maintaining  his  own 
views.  The  priests  of  Baal  were  earnest  and  sincere  when  they 
cut  themselves  with  knives  and  lancets  till  the  blood  gushed 
out ;  but  that  did  not  prevent  Elijah  from  commanding  them 
to  be  treated  as  wicked  idolaters. — Manasseh,  King  of  Judah, 
was  doubtless  earnest  and  sincere  when  he  burned  his  children 
in  the  fire  to  Moloch ;  but  who  does  not  know  that  he  brought 
on  himself  great  guilt  by  so  doing  1 — The  Apostle  Paul,  when  a 
Pharisee,  was  earnest  and  sincere  while  he  made  havoc  of  the 
Church,  but  when  his  eyes  were  opened  he  mourned  over  this 
as  a  special  wickedness.  Let  us  beware  of  allowing  for  a 
moment  that  sincerity  is  everything,  and  that  we  have  no  right 
to  speak  ill  of  a  man's  spiritual  state  because  of  the  opinions  he 
holds,  if  he  is  only  earnest  in  holding  them.  On  such  prin 
ciples,  the  Druidical  sacrifices,  the  car  of  Juggernaut,  the  Indian 
suttees,  the  systematic  murders  of  the  Thugs,  the  fires  of  Smith- 
field,  might  each  and  all  be  defended.  It  will  not  stand  :  it  will 
not  bear  the  test  of  Scripture.  Once  allow  such  notions  to  be 
true,  and  we  may  as  well  throw  our  Bibles  aside  altogether. 
Sincerity  is  not  Christ,  and  therefore  sincerity  cannot  put  away 
sin. 

I  dare  be  sure  these  consequences  sound  very  unpleasant  to 
the  minds  of  some  who  may  read  them.  But  I  say,  calmly  and 
advisedly,  that  a  religion  without  Christ,  a  religion  that  takes 
away  from  Christ,  a  religion  that  adds  anything  to  Christ,  a 
religion  that  puts  sincerity  in  the  place  of  Christ, — all  are 
dangerous :  all  arc  to  be  avoided,  because  all  are  alike  contrary 
to  the  doctrine  of  Scripture. 

Some  readers  may  not  like  this.  I  am  sorry  for  it.  They 
think  me  uncharitable,  illiberal,  narrow-minded,  bigoted,  and  so 
forth.  Be  it  so.  But  they  will  not  tell  me  my  doctrine  is  not 
that  of  the  Word  of  God  and  of  the  Church  of  England,  whose 
minister  I  am.  That  doctrine  is,  salvation  in  Christ  to  the  very 
uttermost, — but  out  of  Christ  no  salvation  at  all. 

I  feel  it  a  duty  to  bear  my  solemn  testimony  against  the  spirit 
of  the  day  we  live  in ;  to  warn  men  against  its  infection.  It  is 
not  Atheism  I  fear  so  much,  in  the  present  times,  as  Pantheism. 
It  is  not  the  system  which  says  nothing  is  true,  so  much  as  the 
system  which  says  everything  is  true.  It  is  not  the  system 


40  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

which  says  there  is  no  Saviour,  so  much  as  the  system  which 
says  there  are  many  saviours,  and  many  ways  to  peace  ! — It  is 
the  system  which  is  so  liberal,  that  it  dares  not  say  anything  is 
false.  It  is  the  system  which  is  so  charitable,  that  it  will  allow 
everything  to  be  true.  It  is  the  system  which  seems  ready  to 
honour  others  as  well  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  class  them 
all  together,  and  to  think  well  of  all.  Confucius  and  Zoroaster, 
Socrates  and  Mahomet,  the  Indian  Brahmins  and  the  African 
devil-worshippers,  Arius  and  Pelagius,  Ignatius  Loyola  and 
Socinus, — all  are  to  be  treated  respectfully :  none  are  to  be 
condemned.  It  is  the  system  which  bids  us  smile  complacently 
on  all  creeds  and  systems  of  religion.  The  Bible  and  the  Koran, 
the  Hindoo  Vedas  and  the  Persian  Zendavesta,  the  old  wives' 
fables  of  Rabbinical  writers  and  the  rubbish  of  Patristic  tradi 
tions,  the  Racovian  Catechism  and  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  the 
revelations  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg  and  the  book  of  Mormon 
of  Joseph  Smith, — all,  all  are  to  be  listened  to  :  none  are  to  be 
denounced  as  lies.  It  is  the  system  which  is  so  scrupulous 
about  the  feelings  of  others,  that  we  are  never  to  say  they  are 
wrong.  It  is  the  system  which  is  so  liberal  that  it  calls  a  man 
a  bigot  if  he  dares  to  say,  "  I  know  my  views  are  right."  This 
is  the  system,  this  is  the  tone  of  feeling  which  I  fear  in  this 
day,  and  this  is  the  system  which  I  desire  emphatically  to 
testify  against  and  denounce. 

What  is  it  all  but  a  bowing  down  before  a  great  idol,  speci 
ously  called  liberality  1  What  is  it  all  but  a  sacrificing  of  truth 
upon  the  altar  of  a  caricature  of  charity  ?  What  is  it  all  but 
the  worship  of  a  shadow,  a  phantom,  and  an  unreality  ?  What 
can  be  more  absurd  than  to  profess  ourselves  content  with 
"  earnestness,"  when  we  do  not  know  what  we  are  earnest  about  ? 
Let  us  take  heed  lest  we  are  carried  away  by  the  delusion.  Has 
the  Lord  God  spoken  to  us  in  the  Bible,  or  has  He  not  1  Has 
He  shown  us  the  way  of  salvation  plainly  and  distinctly  in  that 
Bible,  or  has  He  not  ?  Has  He  declared  to  us  the  dangerous 
state  of  all  out  of  that  way,  or  has  He  not  ?  Let  us  gird  up  the 
loins  of  our  minds,  and  look  these  questions  fairly  in  the  face, 
and  give  them  an  honest  answer.  Tell  us  that  there  is  some 
other  inspired  book  beside  the  Bible,  and  then  we  shall  know 
what  you  mean.  Tell  us  that  the  whole  Bible  is  not  inspired, 
and  then  we  shall  know  where  to  meet  you.  But  grant  for  a 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  41 

moment  that  the  Bible,  the  whole  Bible,  and  nothing  but  the 
Bible  is  God's  truth,  and  then  I  know  not  in  what  way  we  can 
escape  the  doctrine  of  the  text.  From  the  liberality  which  says 
everybody  is  right,  from  the  charity  which  forbids  us  to  say 
anybody  is  wrong,  from  the  peace  which  is  bought  at  the  expense 
of  truth, — may  the  good  Lord  deliver  us  ! 

For  my  own  part,  I  frankly  confess,  I  find  no  resting-place 
between  downright  distinct  Evangelical  Christianity  and  down 
right  infidelity,  whatever  others  may  find.  I  see  no  half-way 
house  between  them  ;  or  else  I  see  houses  that  are  roofless  and 
cannot  shelter  my  weary  soul.  I  can  see  consistency  in  an 
infidel,  however  much  I  may  pity  him.  I  can  see  consistency 
in  the  full  maintenance  of  Evangelical  truth.  But  as  to  a 
middle  course  between  the  two, — I  cannot  see  it ;  and  I  say  so 
plainly.  Let  it  be  called  illiberal  and  uncharitable.  I  can  hear 
God's  voice  nowhere  except  in  the  Bible,  and  I  can  see 
no  salvation  for  sinners  in  the  Bible  excepting  through  Jesus 
Christ.  In  Him  I  see  abundance :  out  of  Him  I  see  none. 
And  as  for  those  who  hold  religions  in  which  Christ  is  not 
all,  whoever  they  may  be,  I  have  a  most  uncomfortable  feel 
ing  about  their  safety.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  say  that 
none  of  them  will  be  saved ;  but  I  say  that  those  who  are  saved 
will  be  saved  by  their  disagreement  with  their  own  principles, 
and  in  spite  of  their  own  systems.  The  man  who  wrote  the 
famous  line, 

"He  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the  right," 
was  a  great  poet  undoubtedly,  but  he  was  a  wretched  divine. 

Let  me  conclude  this  paper  with  a  few  words  by  way  of  appli 
cation. 

(1)  First  of  all,  if  there  is  no  salvation  excepting  in  Christ, 
let  us  make  sure  that  we  have  an  interest  in  that  salvation  our 
selves.  Let  us  not  be  content  with  hearing,  and  approving,  and 
assenting  to  the  truth,  and  going  no  further.  Let  us  seek  to  have 
a  personal  interest  in  this  salvation.  Let  us  not  rest  till  we  know 
and  feel  that  we  have  got  actual  possession  of  that  peace  with 
God  which  Jesus  offers,  and  that  Christ  is  ours,  and  we  are 
Christ's.  If  there  were  two,  or  three,  or  more  ways  of  getting 
to  heaven,  there  would  be  no  necessity  for  pressing  this  matter. 


42  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

But  if  there  is  only  one  way,  who  can  wonder  that  I  say,  "Make 
sure  that  you  are  in  it." 

(2)  Secondly,  if  there  is  no  salvation  excepting  in  Christ,  let  us 
try  to  do  good  to  the  souls  of  all  who  do  not  know  Him  as  a 
Saviour.    There  are  millions  in  this  miserable  condition, — millions 
in  foreign  lands,  millions  in  our  own  country,  millions  who  are  not 
trusting  in  Christ.     We  ought  to  feel  for  them  if  we  are  true 
Christians ;  we  ought  to  pray  for  them ;  we  ought  to  work  for 
them,  while  there  is  yet  time.     Do  we  really  believe  that  Christ 
is  the  only  way  to  heaven  ?    Then  let  us  live  as  if  we  believed  it. 

Let  us  look  round  the  circle  of  our  own  relatives  and  friends, 
count  them  up  one  by  one,  and  think  how  many  of  them  are 
not  yet  in  Christ.  Let  us  try  to  do  good  to  them  in  some  way 
or  other,  and  act  as  a  man  should  act  who  believes  his  friends 
to  be  in  danger.  Let  us  not  be  content  with  their  being  kind 
and  amiable,  gentle  and  good-tempered,  moral  and  courteous. 
Let  us  rather  be  miserable  about  them  till  they  come  to  Christ, 
and  trust  in  Him.  I  know  all  this  may  sound  like  enthusiasm 
and  fanaticism.  I  wish  there  was  more  of  it  in  the  world. 
Anything,  I  am  sure,  is  better  than  a  quiet  indifference  about 
the  souls  of  others,  as  if  everybody  was  in  the  way  to  heaven. 
Nothing,  to  my  mind,  so  proves  our  little  faith,  as  our  little 
feeling  about  the  spiritual  condition  of  those  around  us. 

(3)  Thirdly ',  if  there  is  no  salvation  excepting  in  Christ,  let  us 
love  all  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity,  arid  exalt  Him  as 
their  Saviour,  whoever  they  may  be.     Let  us  not  draw  back 
and  look  shy  on  others,  because  they  do  not  see  eye  to  eye  with 
ourselves  in  everything.     Whether  a  man  be  a  Free-kirk  man 
or  an  Independent,  a  Wesleyan  or  a  Baptist,  let  us  love  him  if 
he  loves  Christ,  and  gives  Christ  His  rightful  place.     We  are 
all  ftist  travelling  toward  a  place  where  names  and  forms  and 
Church-government   will  be   nothing,  and   Christ  will  be  all. 
Let  us  get  ready  for  that  place  betimes,  by  loving  all  who  are 
in  the  way  that  leads  to  it. 

This  is  the  true  charity,  to  believe  all  things  and  hope  all 
things,  so  long  as  we  see  Bible  doctrines  maintained  and  Christ 
exalted.  Christ  must  be  the  single  standard  by  which  all 
opinions  must  be  measured.  Let  us  honour  all  who  honour 
Him :  but  let  us  never  forget  that  the  same  Apostle  Paul  who 
wrote  about  charity,  says  also,  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord 


ONLY  ONE  WAY  OF  SALVATION.  43 

Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema."  If  our  charity  and 
liberality  are  wider  than  that  of  the  Bible,  they  are  worth 
nothing  at  all.  Indiscriminate  love  is  no  love  at  all,  and  indis 
criminate  approbation  of  all  religious  opinions,  is  only  a  new 
name  for  infidelity.  Let  us  hold  out  the  right  hand  to  all  who 
love  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  let  us  beware  how  we  go  beyond  this. 

(4)  Lastly,  if  there  is  no  salvation  excepting  by  Christ,  we  must 
not  be  surprised  if  ministers  of  the  Gospel  preach  much  about 
Him.  They  cannot  tell  us  too  much  about  the  name  which 
is  above  every  name.  We  cannot  hear  of  Him  too  often. 
We  may  hear  too  much  about  controversy  in  sermons, — we  may 
hear  too  much  of  works  and  duties,  of  forms,  of  ceremonies,  of 
sacraments  and  ordinances, — but  there  is  "one  subject  which  we 
never  hear  too  much  of  :  we  can  never  hear  too  much  of  Christ. 

When  ministers  are  wearied  of  preaching  Him,  they  are  false 
ministers :  when  people  are  wearied  of  hearing  of  Him,  their 
souls  are  in  an  unhealthy  state.  When  ministers  have  preached 
Him  all  their  lives,  the  half  of  His  excellence  will  remain 
untold.  When  hearers  see  Him  face  to  face  in  the  day  of  His 
appearing,  they  will  find  there  was  more  in  Him  than  their 
hearts  ever  conceived. 

Let  me  conclude  this  paper  with  the  words  of  an  old  writer, 
to  which  I  desire  humbly  to  subscribe.  "I  know  no  true 
religion  but  Christianity  ;  no  true  Christianity  but  the  doctrine 
of  Christ ;  the  doctrine  of  His  divine  person,  of  His  divine 
office,  of  His  divine  righteousness,  and  of  His  divine  Spirit, 
which  all  that  are  His  receive.  I  know  no  true  ministers  of 
Christ  but  such  as  make  it  their  business,  in  their  calling, 
to  commend  Jesus  Christ,  in  His  saving  fulness  of  grace  and 
glory,  to  the  faith  and  love  of  men ;  no  true  Christian  but  one 
united  to  Christ  by  faith  and  love,  unto  the  glorifying  of  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  beauty  of  Gospel  holiness. 
Ministers  and  Christians  of  this  spirit  have  been  for  many 
years  my  brethren  and  companions,  and  I  hope  shall  ever  be, 
whithersoever  the  hand  of  God  shall  lead  me." 

—(ROBERT  TRAILL.) 


III. 

PRIVATE  JUDGMENT. 

"  Prove  all  things  ;  holdfast  that  which  is  good." — 1  THESS.  v.  21. 

THERE  were  three  great  doctrines  or  principles  which  won  the 
battle  of  the  Protestant  Reformation.  These  three  were  :  (1) 
the  sufficiency  and  supremacy  of  Holy  Scripture,  (2)  the  right 
of  private  judgment,  and  (3)  justification  by  faith  only,  without 
the  deeds  of  the  law. 

These  three  principles  were  the  keys  of  the  whole  controversy 
between  the  Reformers  and  the  Church  of  Rome.  If  we  keep 
firm  hold  of  them  when  we  argue  with  a  Roman  Catholic,  our 
position  is  unassailable  :  no  weapon  that  the  Church  of  Rome 
can  forge  against  us  will  prosper.  If  we  give  up  any  one  of 
them,  our  cause  is  lost.  Like  Samson,  with  his  hair  shorn,  our 
strength  is  gone.  Like  the  Spartans,  betrayed  at  Thermopylae, 
we  are  out-flanked  and  surrounded.  We  cannot  maintain  our 
ground.  Resistance  is  useless.  Sooner  or  later  we  shall  have 
to  lay  down  our  arms,  and  surrender  at  discretion. 

Let  us  carefully  remember  this.  The  Roman  Catholic  con 
troversy  is  upon  us  once  more.  We  must  put  on  the  old  armour, 
if  we  would  not  have  our  faith  overthrown.  The  sufficiency  of 
Holy  Scripture, — the  right  of  private  judgment, — justification 
by  faith  only, — these  are  the  three  great  principles  to  which  we 
must  always  cling.  Let  us  grasp  them  firmly,  and  never  let 
them  go. 

One  of  the  three  great  principles  to  which  I  have  referred 
appears  to  me  to  stand  forth  in  the  verse  of  Scripture  which 
heads  this  paper.  I  mean  the  right  of  private  judgment.  I 
wish  to  say  something  about  that  principle. 

The  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  mouth  of  St.  Paul,  says  to  us, 
"  Prove  all  things  ;  hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  In  these 
words  we  have  two  great  truths. 

44 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  45 

I.  The   right,    duty,   and   necessity   of    private    judgment: 

"Prove  all  things." 

II.  The  duty  and  necessity  of  keeping  firm  hold  upon  truth  : 
"  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good." 

In  this  paper  I  propose  to  dwell  a  little  on  both  these  points. 

I.  Let  me  speak  first,  of  the  right,  duty,  and  necessity  of 
private  judgment. 

"When  I  say  the  right  of  private  judgment,  I  mean  that  every 
individual  Christian  has  a  right  to  judge  for  himself  by  the 
"Word  of  God,  whether  that  which  is  put  before  him  as  religious 
truth  is  God's  truth,  or  is  not. 

When  I  say  the  duty  of  private  judgment,  I  mean  that  God 
requires  every  Christian  man  to  use  the  right  of  which  I  have 
just  spoken ; — to  compare  man's  words  and  man's  writings  with 
God's  revelation,  and  to  make  sure  that  he  is  not  deluded  and 
taken  in  by  false  teaching. 

And  when  I  say  the  necessity  of  private  judgment,  I  mean 
this, — that  it  is  absolutely  needful  for  every  Christian  who 
loves  his  soul  and  would  not  be  deceived,  to  exercise  the  right, 
and  discharge  the  duty  to  which  I  have  referred ;  seeing  that 
experience  shows  that  the  neglect  of  private  judgment  has 
always  been  the  cause  of  immense  evils  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 

Now  the  Apostle  Paul  urges  all  these  three  points  upon  our 
notice  when  he  uses  those  remarkable  words,  "  Prove  all  things." 
I  ask  particular  attention  to  that  expression.  In  every  point  of 
view  it  is  most  weighty  and  instructive. 

Here,  we  must  remember,  the  Apostle  Paul  is  writing  to  the 
Thessalonians, — to  a  Church  which  he  himself  had  founded. 
Here  is  an  inspired  Apostle  writing  to  young  inexperienced 
Christians, — writing  to  the  whole  professing  Church  in  a  certain 
city,  ^ containing  laity  as  well  as  clergy, — writing,  too,  with 
especial  reference  to  matters  of  doctrine  and  preaching,  as  we 
know  by  the  verse  preceding  the  text :  "  Despise  not  pro 
phesy  ings."  And  yet  mark  what  he  says,  —  "Prove  all 
things." 

He  does  not  say,  "  Whatsoever  Apostles,  —  whatsoever 
evangelists,  pastors,  and  teachers, — whatsoever  your  Bishops,— 
whatsoever  your  ministers  tell  you  is  truth,  that  you  are  to 


46  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

believe."  Xo  !  he  says,  "  Prove  all  things."  He  does  not  say, 
"  Whatsoever  the  universal  Church  pronounces  true,  that  you 
are  to  hold."  No  !  he  says,  "  Prove  all  things." 

The  principle  laid  down  is  this :  "  Prove  all  things  by  the 
Word  of  God ; — all  ministers,  all  teaching,  all  preaching,  all 
doctrines,  all  sermons,  all  writings,  all  opinions,  all  practices,— 
prove  all  by  the  Word  of  God.  Measure  all  by  the  measure  of 
the  Bible. — Compare  all  with  the  standard  of  the  Bible.— 
Weigh  all  in  the  balances  of  the  Bible. — Examine  all  by  the 
light  of  the  Bible. — Test  all  in  the  crucible  of  the  Bible.  That 
which  can  abide  the  fire  of  the  Bible,  receive,  hold,  believe,  and 
obey.  That  which  cannot  abide  the  fire  of  the  Bible,  reject, 
refuse,  repudiate,  and  cast  away." 

This  is  private  judgment.  This  is  the  right  we  are  to 
exercise  if  we  love  our  souls.  We  are  not  to  believe  things  in 
religion  merely  because  they  are  said  by  Popes  or  Cardinals,— 
by  Bishops  or  Priests, — by  Presbyters  or  Deacons, — by  Churches, 
Councils,  or  Synods, — by  Fathers,  Puritans,  or  Reformers.  We 
are  not  to  argue,  "  Such  and  such  things  must  be  true,  because 
these  men  say  so."  We  are  not  to  do  so.  We  are  to  prove  all 
things  by  the  Word  of  God. 

Now  I  know  such  doctrine  sounds  startling  in  some  men's 
ears.  But  I  write  it  down  advisedly,  and  believe  it  cannot  be 
disproved.  I  should  be  sorry  to  encourage  any  man  in  ignorant 
presumption  or  ignorant  contempt.  I  praise  not  the  man  who 
seldom  reads  his  Bible,  and  yet  sets  himself  up  to  pick  holes  in 
his  minister's  sermons.  I  praise  not  the  man  who  knows  nothing 
but  a  few  texts  in  the  New  Testament,  and  yet  undertakes  to 
settle  questions  in  divinity  which  have  puzzled  God's  wisest 
children.  But  still  I  hold  with  Bishop  Bilson  (A.D.  1575),  that 
"  all  hearers  have  both  liberty  to  discern  and  a  charge  to  beware 
of  seducers ;  and  woe  to  them  that  do  it  not."  And  I  say  with 
Bishop  Davenant  (A.D.  1627),  "We  are  not  to  believe  all  who 
undertake  to  teach  in  the  Church,  but  must  take  care  and  weigh 
with  serious  examination,  whether  their  doctrine  be  sound  or 
not."  * 

*  The  people  of  God  are  called  to  try  the  truth,  to  judge  between  good 
and  ill,  between  light  and  darkness.  God  hath  made  them  the  promise  of 
His  Spirit,  and  hath  left  unto  them  His  Word.  They  of  Berea,  when  they 
heard  the  preaching  of  Paul,  earched  the  Scriptures  daily,  whether  those 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  4*7 

Some  men  I  know,  refuse  to  believe  this  doctrine  of  private 
judgment ;  but  I  assert  confidently  that  it  is  continually  taught 
in  the  Word  of  God. 

This  is  the  principle  laid  down  by  the  prophet  Isaiah.  (Isa. 
viii.  19.)  His  words  were  written,  we  should  remember,  at  a 
time  when  God  was  more  immediately  King  over  His  Church, 
and  had  more  direct  communication  with  it  than  He  has  now. 
They  were  written  at  a  time  when  there  were  men  upon  earth 
who  had  express  revelations  from  God.  Yet  what  does  Isaiah 
say? — "When  they  shall  say  unto  you,  Seek  unto  them  that 
have  familiar  spirits,  and  unto  wizards  that  peep,  and  that 
mutter  :  should  not  a  people  seek  unto  their  God  1  for  the  living 
to  the  dead  ?  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  :  if  they  speak 
not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in 
them."  If  this  be  not  private  judgment,  what  is  *? 

This,  again,  is  the  principle  laid  down  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  The  Head  of  the  Church 
says  there  : — "Beware  of  false  prophets  which  come  to  you  in 
sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves.  Ye 
shall  know  them  by  their  fruit."  (Matt.  vii.  15.)  How  is  it 
possible  that  men  shall  know  these  false  prophets,  except  they 
exercise  their  private  judgment  as  to  what  their  fruits  are  1 

This  is  the  practice  we  find  commended  in  the  Bereans,  in 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  They  did  not  take  the  Apostle  Paul's 
word  for  granted,  when  he  come  to  preach  to  them.  We  are 
told,  that  they  "  searched  the  Scriptures  daily,  whether  those 
things  were  so,"  and  "  therefore,"  it  is  said,  "  many  of  them 
believed."  (Acts  xvii.  11,12.)  What  was  this  again  but  private 
judgment  ? 

This  is  the  spirit  of  the  advice  given  in  1  Cor.  x.  15, — "  I 
speak  as  unto  wise  men ;  judge  ye  what  I  say : "  and  in  Col. 
ii.  18, — "Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you  through  philosophy 
and  vain  deceit ; "  and  in  1  John  iv.  1, — "  Beloved,  believe  not 
every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God ; " 
and  in  2  John  10, — "If  there  come  any  unto  you,  and  bring 

things  were  so  as  he  taught  them,  and  many  of  them  believed.  So  do  you  : 
give  heed  to  instruction,  and  yet  receive  not  all  things  without  proof  and 
trial  that  they  are  not  contrary  to  the  wholesome  doctrine  of  the  Word  of 
God."— Bishop  Jewell,  author  of  the  "Apology  of  the  Church  of  England.' 
1583. 


48  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

not  this  doctrine,  receive  him  not  into  your  house."  If  these 
passages  do  not  recommend  the  use  of  private  judgment,  I  do 
not  know  what  words  mean.  To  my  mind  they  seem  to  say  to 
every  individual  Christian,  "  Prove  all  things." 

Whatever  men  may  say  against  private  judgment,  we  may  be 
sure  it  cannot  be  neglected  without  immense  danger  to  the  soul. 
We  may  not  like  it ;  but  we  never  know  what  we  may  come  to 
if  we  refuse  to  use  it.  No  man  can  say  into  what  depths  of 
false  doctrine  we  may  be  drawn  if  we  will  not  do  what  God 
requires  of  us,  and  "  prove  all  things." 

Suppose  that,  in  fear  of  private  judgment,  we  resolve  to 
believe  whatever  the  Church  believes.  Where  is  our  security 
against  error  (l  The  Church  is  not  infallible.  There  was  a  time 
when  almost  the  whole  of  Christendom  embraced  the  Arian 
heresy,  and  did  not  acknowledge  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be 
equal  with  the  Father  in  all  things.  There  was  a  time,  before 
the  Eeformation,  when  the  darkness  over  the  face  of  Europe 
was  a  darkness  that  might  be  felt. — The  General  Councils  of  the 
Church  are  not  infallible.  When  the  whole  Church  is  gathered 
together  in  a  General  Council,  what  says  our  Twenty-first 
Article  ?  "  They  may  err,  and  sometimes  have  erred,  even  in 
things  pertaining  unto  God.  Wherefore  things  ordained  by 
them  as  necessary  to  salvation,  have  neither  strength  nor  author 
ity,  unless  it  may  be  declared  that  they  be  taken  out  of  Holy 
Scripture." — The  particular  branches  of  the  Church  are  not 
infallible.  Any  one  of  them  may  err.  Many  of  them  have 
fallen  foully,  or  have  been  swept  away.  Where  is  the  Church 
of  Ephesus  at  this  day  1  Where  is  the  Church  of  Sardis  at  the 
present  time1?  Where  is  Augustine's  Church  of  Hippo  in 
Africa  ?  Where  is  Cyprian's  Church  of  Carthage  1  They  are 
all  gone  !  Not  a  vestige  of  any  of  them  is  left !  Shall  we  then 
be  content  to  err  merely  because  the  Church  errs  ^  Will  our 
company  be  any  excuse  for  our  error  ?  Will  our  erring  in  com 
pany  with  the  Church  remove  our  responsibility  for  our  own 
souls  ?  Surely  it  is  a  thousand  times  better  for  a  man  to  stand 
alone  and  be  saved,  than  to  err  in  company  with  the  Church,  and 
be  losU  It  is  better  to  "prove  all  things"  and  go  to  heaven, 
than  to  say,  "  I  dare  not  think  for  myself,"  and  go  to  hell. 

But  suppose  that,  to  cut  matters  short,  we  resolve  to  believe 
whatever  our  minister  believes.  Once  more  I  ask, — Where  is 


PEIVATE  JUDGMENT.  49 

our  security  against  error?  Ministers  are  not  infallible,  any 
more  than  Churches.  All  of  them  have  not  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  very  best  of  them  are  only  men.  Call  them  Bishops, 
Priests,  Deacons,  or  whatever  names  you  please,  they  are  all 
earthen  vessels.  I  speak  not  merely  of  Popes,  who  have  pro 
mulgated  awful  superstitions,  and  led  abominable  lives.  I 
would  rather  point  to  the  very  best  of  Protestants,  and  say, 
"  Beware  of  looking  upon  them  as  infallible, — beware  of  think 
ing  of  any  man  (whoever  that  man  may  be)  that  he  cannot  err." 
Luther  held  consubstantiation ; — that  was  a  mighty  error. 
Calvin,  the  Geneva  Reformer,  advised  the  burning  of  Servetus  ; 
— that  was  a  mighty  error.  Cranmer  and  Ridley  urged  the 
putting  of  Hooper  into  prison  because  of  some  trifling  dispute 
about  vestments ; — that  was  a  mighty  error.  Whitgift  perse 
cuted  the  Puritans ; — that  was  a  mighty  error.  Wesley  and 
Toplady  in  the  last  century  quarrelled  fiercely  about  Calvinism ; 
— that  was  a  mighty  error.  All  these  things  are  warnings,  if 
we  will  only  take  them.  All  say,  "Cease  ye  from  man."  All 
show  us  that  if  a  man's  religion  hangs  on  ministers,  whoever 
they  may  be,  and  not  on  the  Word  of  God,  it  hangs  on  a  broken 
reed.  Let  us  never  make  ministers  Popes.  Let  us  follow 
them  so  far  as  they  follow  Christ,  but  not  a  hair's  breadth 
further.  Let  us  believe  whatever  they  can  show  us  out  of  the 
Bible,  but  not  a  single  word  more.  If  we  neglect  the  duty  of 
private  judgment,  we  may  find,  to  our  cost,  the  truth  of  what 
Whitby  says  :  "  The  best  of  overseers  do  sometimes  make  over 
sights."  We  may  live  to  experience  the  truth  of  what  the  Lord 
said  about  the  Pharisees :  "  If  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  both 
shall  fall  into  the  ditch."  (Matt.  xv.  14.)  We  may  be  very 
sure  no  man  is  safe  against  error,  unless  he  acts  on  St.  Paul's 
injunction, — unless  he  "  proves  all  things  "  by  the  Word  of 
God. 

I  have  said  that  it  is  impossible  to  overrate  the  evils  that  may 
arise  from  neglecting  to  exercise  private  judgment.  I  will  go 
further,  and  say  that  it  is  impossible  to  overrate  the  blessings 
which  private  judgment  has  conferred  both  on  the  world  and 
on  the  Church. 

I  ask  my  readers,  then,  to  remember  that  the  greatest  dis 
coveries  in  science  and  in  philosophy,  beyond  all  controversy, 
have  arisen  from  the  use  of  private  judgment.  To  this  we  owe 

D 


50  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

the  discovery  of  Galileo,  that  the  earth  went  round  the  sun, 
and  not  the  sun  round  the  earth. — To  this  we  owe  Columbus' 
discovery  of  the  continent  of  America. — To  this  we  owe  Harvey's 
discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood. — To  this  we  owe 
Jcnncr's  discovery  of  vaccination. — To  this  we  owe  the  printing 
press,  the  steam  engine,  the  powerloom,  the  electric  telegraph, 
railways,  and  gas.  For  all  these  discoveries  we  are  indebted  to 
men  who  dared  to  "think  for  themselves."  They  were  not 
content  with  the  beaten  path  of  those  who  had  gone  before. 
They  were  not  satisfied  with  taking  for  granted  that  what  their 
fathers  believed  must  be  true.  They  made  experiments  for 
themselves.  They  brought  old-established  theories  to  the  proof, 
and  found  that  they  were  worthless.  They  proclaimed  new 
systems,  and  invited  men  to  examine  them,  and  test  their  truth. 
They  bore  storms  of  obloquy  and  ridicule  unmoved.  They 
heard  the  clamour  of  prejudiced  lovers  of  old  traditions  without 
flinching.  And  they  prospered  and  succeeded  in  what  they  did. 
We  see  it  now.  And  we  who  live  in  the  nineteenth  century 
are  reaping  the  fruit  of  their  use  of  private  judgment. 

And  as  it  has  been  in  science,  so  also  it  has  been  in  the 
history  of  the  Christian  religion.  The  martyrs  who  stood  alone 
in  their  day,  and  shed  that  blood  which  has  been  the  seed  of 
Christ's  Gospel  throughout  the  world, — the  Reformers,  who, 
one  after  another,  rose  up  in  their  might  to  enter  the  lists  with 
the  Church  of  Koine, — all  did  what  they  did,  suffered  what  they 
suffered,  proclaimed  what  they  proclaimed,  simply  because  they 
exercised  their  private  judgment  about  what  was  Christ's  truth. 
— Private  judgment  made  the  Vallenses,  the  Albigenses,  and 
the  Lollards,  count  not  their  lives  dear  to  them,  rather  than 
believe  the  doctrines  of  the  Church  of  Rome. — Private  judgment 
made  "Wickliffe  search  the  Bible  in  our  own  land,  denounce  the 
Romish  friars,  and  all  their  impostures,  translate  the  Scriptures 
into  the  vulgar  tongue,  and  become  "  the  morning  star  "  of  the 
Reformation. — Private  judgment  made  Luther  examine  Tetzel's 
abominable  system  of  indulgences  by  the  light  of  the  Word. — 
Private  judgment  led  him  on,  step  by  step,  from  one  thing  to 
another,  guided  by  the  same  light,  till  at  length  the  gulf 
between  him  and  Rome  was  a  gulf  that  could  not  be  passed, 
and  the  Pope's  power  in  Germany  was  completely  broken. — 
Private  judgment  made  our  own  English  Reformers  examine 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  51 

for  themselves,  and  inquire  for  themselves,  as  to  the  true  nature 
of  that  corrupt  system  under  which  they  had  been  born  and 
brought  up. — Private  judgment  made  them  cast  off  the  abomina 
tions  of  Popery,  and  circulate  the  Bible  among  the  laity. — 
Private  judgment  made  them  draw  from  the  Bible  our  Articles, 
compile  our  Prayer-book,  and  constitute  the  Church  of  England  as 
it  is.  They  broke  the  fetters  of  tradition,  and  dared  to  think  for 
themselves.  They  refused  to  take  for  granted  Rome's  preten 
sions  and  assertions.  They  examined  them  all  by  the  Bible,  and 
because  they  would  not  abide  the  examination,  they  broke  with 
Rome  altogether.  All  the  blessings  of  Protestantism  in  England, 
all  that  we  are  enjoying  at  this  very  day,  we  owe  to  the  right 
exercise  of  private  judgment.  Surely  if  we  do  not  honour 
private  judgment,  we  are  thankless  and  ungrateful  indeed  ! 

Let  us  not  be  moved  by  the  common  argument,  that  the  right 
of  private  judgment  is  liable  to  be  abused, — that  private  judg 
ment  has  done  great  harm,  and  should  be  avoided  as  a  dangerous 
thing.  Never  was  there  a  more  miserable  argument !  Never 
was  there  one  which,  when  thrashed,  proves  so  full  of  chaff ! 

Private  judgment  lias  been  abused!  I  would  like  the  objector 
to  tell  me  what  good  gift  of  God  has  not  been  abused  ?  What 
high  principle  can  be  named  that  has  not  been  employed  for 
the  very  worst  of  purposes'?  Strength  may  become  tyranny, 
when  it  is  employed  by  the  stronger  to  coerce  the  weaker ;  yet 
strength  is  a  blessing  when  properly  employed.  Liberty  may 
become  licentiousness,  when  every  man  does  that  which  is  right 
in  his  own  eyes,  without  regarding  the  rights  and  feelings  of 
others ;  yet  liberty,  rightly  used,  is  a  mighty  blessing.  Because 
many  things  may  be  used  improperly,  are  we  therefore  to  give 
them  up.  altogether?  Because  opium  is  used  improperly  by 
some,  is  it  not  to  be  used  as  a  medicine  on  any  occasion  at  all  ? 
Because  money  may  be  used  improperly,  is  all  money  to  be  cast 
into  the  sea  ?  You  cannot  have  good  in  this  world  without  evil. 
You  cannot  have  private  judgment  without  some  abusing  it, 
and  turning  it  to  bad  account. 

But  private  judgment,  people  say,  lias  done  more  harm  titan 
good  !  What  harm  has  private  judgment  done,  I  would  like  to 
know,  in  matters  of  religion,  compared  to  the  harm  that  has 
been  done  by  the  neglect  of  it  1  Some  are  fond  of  telling  us 
that  among  Protestants  who  allow  private  judgment,  there  are 


52  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

divisions,  and  that  in  the  Church  of  Eomc,  where  private 
judgment  is  forbidden,  there  are  no  divisions.  I  might  easily 
show  such  objectors  that  Romish  unity  is  far  more  seeming  than 
real.  Bishop  Hall,  in  his  book  called  The  Peace  of  Rome, 
numbers  up  no  less  than  three  hundred  differences  of  opinion 
existing  in  the  Romish  Church.  I  might  easily  show  that  the 
divisions  of  Protestants  are  exceedingly  exaggerated,  and  that 
most  of  them  are  upon  points  of  minor  importance.  I  might 
show  that,  with  all  the  "varieties  of  Protestantism,"  as  men 
call  them,  there  is  still  a  vast  amount  of  fundamental  unity  and 
substantial  agreement  among  Protestants.  ]N"o  man  can  read 
the  Harmony  of  Protestant  Confessions  without  seeing  that. 

But  grant  for  a  moment  that  private  judgment  has  led  to 
divisions,  and  brought  about  varieties.  I  say  that  these 
divisions  and  varieties  are  but  a  drop  of  water  when  compared 
with  the  torrent  of  abominations  that  have  arisen  from  the 
Church  of  Rome's  practice  of  disallowing  private  judgment 
altogether.  Place  the  evils  in  two  scales, — the  evils  that  have 
arisen  from  private  judgment,  and  those  that  have  arisen  from 
no  man  being  allowed  to  think  for  himself.  Weigh  the  evils 
one  against  another,  and  I  have  no  doubt  as  to  which  will  be 
the  greatest.  Give  me  Protestant  divisions,  certainly,  rather 
than  Popish  unity,  with  the  fruit  that  it  brings  forth.  Give 
me  Protestant  variations,  whatever  a  man  like  Bossuet  may  say 
about  them,  rather  than  Romish  ignorance,  Romish  superstition, 
Romish  darkness,  and  Romish  idolatry.  Give  me  the  Pro 
testant  diversities  of  England  and  Scotland,  with  all  their  dis 
advantages,  rather  than  the  dead  level,  both  intellectual  and 
spiritual,  of  the  Italian  peninsula.  Let  the  two  systems  be 
tried  by  their  fruits, — the  system  that  says,  "Prove  all  things," 
and  the  system  that  says,  "  Dare  to  have  no  opinion  of  your 
own ; " — let  them  be  tried  by  their  fruits  in  the  hearts,  in  the 
intellects,  in  the  lives,  in  all  the  ways  of  men,  and  I  have  no 
doubt  as  to  the  result. 

In  any  case  let  us  not  be  moved  by  the  specious  argument, 
that  it  is  humility  to  disallow  private  judgment,  and  to  have  no 
opinion  of  our  own,  that  it  is  the  part  of  a  true  Christian  not 
to  think  for  himself  ! 

I  tell  men  boldly  that  such  humility  is  a  false  humility,  a 
humility  that  does  not  deserve  that  blessed  name.  Call  it 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  53 

rather  laziness,  idleness,  and  sloth.  It  makes  a  man  strip  liim- 
self  of  all  his  responsibility,  and  throw  the  whole  burden  of  his 
soul  into  the  hands  of  the  minister  and  the  Church.  It  gives  a 
man  a  mere  vicarious  religion,  a  religion  by  which  he  places  his 
conscience  and  all  his  spiritual  concerns  under  the  care  of  others. 
He  need  not  trouble  himself !  He  need  no  longer  think  for 
himself !  He  has  embarked  in  a  safe  ship,  and  placed  his  soul 
under  a  safe  pilot,  and  will  get  to  heaven !  Oh,  let  us  beware 
of  supposing  that  this  deserves  the  name  of  humility  !  It  is 
refusing  to  exercise  the  gift  that  God  has  given  us.  It  is' 
refusing  to  employ  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  which  God  has 
forged  for  the  use  of  our  hand.  Blessed  be  God,  our  forefathers 
did  not  act  upon  such  principles  !  Had  they  done  so,  we  should 
never  have  had  the  Reformation.  Had  they  done  so,  we  might 
have  been  bowing  down  to  the  image  of  the  Virgin  Mary  at 
this  moment,  or  praying  to  the  spirits  of  departed  saints,  or 
having  a  service  performed  in  Latin.  From  such  humility  may 
the  good  Lord  ever  deliver  us  ! 

As  long  as  we  live,  let  us  resolve  that  we  will  read  for  our 
selves,  think  for  ourselves,  judge  of  the  Bible  for  ourselves,  in 
the  great  matters  of  our  souls.  Let  us  dare  to  have  an  opinion 
of  our  own.  Let  us  never  be  ashamed  of  saying,  "  I  think  that 
this  is  right,  because  I  find  it  in  the  Bible  ; "  and  "  I  think  that 
this  is  wrong,  because  I  do  not  find  it  in  the  Bible."  "  Let  us 
prove  all  things,"  and  prove  them  by  the  Word  of  God. 

As  long  as  we  live,  let  us  beware  of  the  blindfold  system, 
which  many  commend  in  the  present  day, — the  system  of 
following  a  leader,  and  having  no  opinion  of  our  own, — the 
system  which  practically  says,  "Only  keep  your  Church,  only 
receive  the  Sacraments,  only  believe  what  the  ordained  ministers 
who  are  set  over  you  tell  you,  and  then  all  shall  be  well."  I 
warn  men  that  this  will  not  do.  If  we  are  content  with  this 
kind  of  religion,  we  are  perilling  our  immortal  souls.  Let  the 
Bible,  and  not  any  Church  upon  earth,  or  any  minister  upon 
earth,  be  our  rule  of  faith.  "Prove  all  things"  by  the  Word 
of  God. 

Above  all,  as  long  as  we  live,  let  us  habitually  look  forward 
to  the  great  day  of  judgment.  Let  us  think  of  the  solemn 
account  which  every  one  of  us  will  have  to  give  in  that  day 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  We  shall  not  be  judged 


54  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

by  Churches.  We  shall  not  be  judged  by  whole  congregations. 
We  shall  be  judged  individually,  each  by  himself.  What  shall 
it  profit  us  in  that  day  to  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,  I  believed  every 
thing  the  Church  told  me.  I  received  and  believed  everything 
ordained  ministers  set  before  me.  I  thought  that  whatever  the 
Church  and  the  ministers  said  must  be  right "  ?  What  shall  it 
profit  us  to  say  this,  if  we  have  held  some  deadly  error  1  Surely, 
the  voice  of  Him  that  sits  upon  the  throne  will  reply,  "  You 
had  the  Scriptures.  You  had  a  book,  plain  and  easy  to  him 
that  will  read  it  and  search  it  in  a  child-like  spirit.  Why  did 
you  not  use  the  Word  of  God  when  it  was  given  to  you  ?  You 
had  a  reasonable  soul  given  you  to  understand  that  Bible.  Why 
did  you  not  '  Prove  all  things,'  and  thus  keep  clear  of  error  ? " 
If  we  refuse  to  exercise  our  private  judgment,  let  us  think  of 
that  awful  day,  and  beware. 

II.  And  now  let  me  speak  of  the  duty  and  necessity  of 
keeping  firm  hold  upon  God's  truth. 

The  words  of  the  Apostle  on  this  subject  are  pithy  and 
forcible.  " Hold  fast,"  he  says,  "that  which  is  good."  It  is 
as  if  he  said  to  us,  "When  you  have  found  the  truth  for  your 
self,  and  when  you  are  satisfied  that  it  is  Christ's  truth, — that 
truth  which  the  Scriptures  set  forth, — then  get  a  firm  hold  upon 
it,  grasp  it,  keep  it  in  your  heart,  never  let  it  go." 

St.  Paul  speaks  as  one  who  knew  what  the  hearts  of  all 
Christians  are.  He  knew  that  our  grasp  of  the  Gospel,  at  our 
best,  is  very  cold, — that  our  love  soon  waxes  feeble, — that  our 
faith  soon  wavers, — that  our  zeal  soon  flags, — that  familiarity 
with  Christ's  truth  often  brings  with  it  a  species  of  contempt, 
— that,  like  Israel,  we  are  apt  to  be  discouraged  by  the  length 
of  our  journey, — and,  like  Peter,  ready  to  sleep  one  moment 
and  fight  the  next, — but,  like  Peter,  not  ready  to  "  watch  and 
pray."  All  this  St.  Paul  remembered,  and,  like  a  faithful 
watchman,  he  cries,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  Hold  fast  that  which 
is  good." 

He  speaks  as  if  he  foresaw  by  the  Spirit  that  the  good 
tidings  of  the  Gospel  would  soon  be  corrupted,  spoiled,  and 
plucked  away  from  the  Church  at  Thessalonica.  He  speaks  as 
one  who  foresaw  that  Satan  and  all  his  agents  would  labour 
hard  to  cast  down  Christ's  truth.  He  writes  as  though  he 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  55 

would  forewarn  men  of  this  danger,  and  he  cries,  "Hold  fast 
that  which  is  good." 

The  advice  is  always  needed, —  needed  as  long  as  the  world 
stands.  There  is  a  tendency  to  decay  in  the  very  best  of 
human  institutions.  The  best  visible  Church  of  Christ  is  not 
free  from  a  liability  to  degenerate.  It  is  made  up  of  fallible 
men.  There  is  always  in  it  a  tendency  to  leave  its  first  love. 
We  see  the  leaven  of  evil  creeping  into  many  a  Church,  even 
in  the  Apostle's  time.  There  were  evils  in  the  Corinthian 
Church,  evils  in  the  Ephesian  Church,  evils  in  the  Galatian 
Church.  All  these  things  are  meant  to  be  beacons  in  these 
latter  times.  All  show  the  great  necessity  laid  upon  the 
Church  to  remember  the  Apostle's  words :  "  Hold  fast  that 
which  is  good." 

Many  Churches  of  Christ  since  then  have  fallen  away  for 
the  want  of  remembering  this  principle.  Their  ministers  and 
members  forgot  that  Satan,  is  always  labouring  to  bring  in  false 
doctrine.  They  forgot  that  he  can  transform  himself  into  an 
angel  of  light, — that  he  can  make  darkness  appear  light,  and 
light  darkness,  truth  appear  falsehood,  and  falsehood  truth. 
If  he  cannot  destroy  Christianity,  he  ever  tries  to  spoil  it. 
If  he  cannot  prevent  the  form  of  godliness,  he  endeavours 
to  rob  Churches  of  the  power.  No  Church  is  ever  safe  that 
forgets  these  things,  and  does  not  bear  in  mind  the  Apostle's 
injunction  :  "  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good." 

If  ever  there  was  a  time  in  the  world  when  Churches  were 
put  upon  their  trial,  whether  they  would  hold  fast  the  truth 
or  not,  that  time  is  the  present  time,  and  those  Churches  are 
the  Protestant  Churches  of  our  own  land.  Popery,  that  old 
enemy  of  our  nation,  is  coming  in  upon  us  in  this  day  like  a 
flood.  We  are  assaulted  by  open  enemies  without,  and 
betrayed  continually  by  false  friends  within.  The  number  of 
Roman  Catholic  churches,  and  chapels,  and  schools,  and  con 
ventual  and  monastic  establishments,  is  continually  increasing 
around  us.  Month  after  month  brings  tidings  of  some  new 
defection  from  the  ranks  of  the  Church  of  England  to  the 
ranks  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Already  the  clergy  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  are  using  great  swelling  words  about  things 
to  come,  and  boasting  that,  sooner  or  later,  England  shall  once 
more  be  brought  back  to  the  orbit  from  whence  she  fell,  and 


56  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

take  her  place  in  the  Catholic  system.  Already  the  Pope  has 
parcelled  out  our  country  into  bishoprics,  and  speaks  like  one 
who  fancies  that  by  and  by  he  shall  divide  the  spoil. 
Already  he  seems  to  foresee  a  time  when  England  shall  be  as 
the  patrimony  of  St.  Peter's,  when  London  shall  be  as  Koine, 
when  St.  Paul's  shall  be  as  St.  Peter's,  and  Lambeth  Palace 
shall  be  as  the  Vatican  itself.  Surely  now  or  never,  we  ought 
all  of  us  to  awake,  and  "  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good." 

Perhaps  we  supposed,  some  of  us,  in  our  blindness,  that  the 
power  of  the  Church  of  Rome  was  ended.  We  dreamed,  in 
our  folly,  that  the  Reformation  had  ended  the  Popish  contro 
versy,  and  that  if  Romanism  did  survive,  Romanism  was 
altogether  changed.  If  we  did  think  so,  we  have  lived  to 
learn  that  we  made  a  most  grievous  mistake.  Rome  never 
changes.  It  is  her  boast  that  she  is  always  the  same.  The 
snake  is  not  killed.  He  was  scotched  at  the  time  of  the 
Reformation,  but  was  not  destroyed.  The  Romish  Antichrist 
is  not  dead.  He  was  cast  down  for  a  little  season,  like  the 
fabled  giant  buried  under  /Etna,  but  his  deadly  wound  is 
healed,  the  grave  is  opening  once  more,  and  Antichrist  is  com 
ing  forth.  The  unclean  spirit  of  Popery  is  not  laid  in  his  own 
place.  Rather  he  seems  to  say,  "  My  house  in  England  is  now 
swept  and  garnished  for  me ;  let  me  return  to  the  place  from 
whence  I  came  forth." 

And  the  question  is  now,  whether  we  are  going  to  abide 
quietly,  sit  still,  and  fold  our  hands,  and  do  nothing  to  resist 
the  assault.  Are  we  really  men  of  understanding  of  the  times  1 
Do  we  know  the  day  of  our  visitation  1  Surely  this  is  a  crisis 
in  the  history  of  our  Churches  and  of  our  land.  It  is  a  time 
which  will  soon  prove  whether  we  know  the  value  of  our  privi 
leges,  or  whether,  like  Amalek,  "the  first  of  the  nations,"  our 
"latter  end  shall  be  that  we  perish  for  ever."  It  is  a  time 
which  will  soon  prove  whether  we  intend  to  allow  our  candle 
stick  to  be  removed,  or  to  repent,  and  do  our  first  works,  lest 
any  man  should  take  our  crown.  If  we  love  the  open  Bible, 
— if  we  love  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel, — if  we  love  the 
privilege  of  reading  that  Bible,  no  man  letting  or  hindering 
us,  and  the  opportunity  of  hearing  that  Gospel,  no  man 
forbidding  us, — if  we  love  civil  liberty, — if  we  love  religious 
liberty,  —  if  these  things  are  precious  to  our  souls,  we 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  57 

must  make  up  our  minds  to  "  hold  fast,"  lost  by  and  by  we 
lose  all. 

If  we  mean  to  "hold  fast,"  every  parish,  every  congrega 
tion,  every  Christian  man,  and  every  Christian  woman,  must 
do  their  part  in  contending  for  the  truth.  Each  one  of  us 
should  work,  and  pray,  and  labour  as  if  the  preservation  of 
the  pure  Gospel  depended  upon  himself  or  herself,  and  upon 
no  one  else  at  all.  The  Bishops  must  not  leave  the  matter  to 
the  priests,  nor  the  priests  leave  the  matter  to  the  Bishops. 
The  clergy  must  not  leave  the  matter  to  the  laity,  nor  the 
laity  to  the  clergy.  The  Parliament  must  not  leave  the  matter 
to  the  country,  nor  the  country  to  the  Parliament.  The  rich 
must  not  leave  the  matter  to  the  poor,  nor  the  poor  to  the 
rich.  We  must  all  work.  Every  living  soul  has  a  sphere  of 
influence.  Let  him  see  to  it  that  he  fills  it.  Every  living  soul 
can  throw  some  weight  into  the  scale  of  the  Gospel.  Let  him 
see  to  it  that  he  casts  it  in.  Let  every  one  know  his  own 
individual  responsibility  in  this  matter ;  and  all,  by  God's  help, 
will  be  well. 

If  we  would  "hold  fast"  that  which  is  good,  we  must  never 
tolerate  or  countenance  any  doctrine  which  is  not  the  pure 
doctrine  of  Christ's  Gospel.  There  is  a  hatred  which  is  down 
right  charity,  —  that  is,  the  hatred  of  erroneous  doctrine. 
There  is  an  intolerance  which  is  downright  praiseworthy, — 
that  is,  the  intolerance  of  false  teaching  in  the  pulpit.  Who 
would  ever  think  of  tolerating  a  little  poison  given  to  him 
day  by  day  ?  If  men  come  among  us  who  do  not  preach  "  all 
the  counsel  of  God,"  who  do  not  preach  of  Christ,  and  sin,  and 
holiness,  of  ruin,  and  redemption,  and  regeneration,  and  do  not 
preach  of  these  things  in  a  Scriptural  way,  we  ought  to  cease 
to  hear  them.  We  ought  to  act  upon  the  injunction  given  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Old  Testament:  "Cease,  my  son,  to 
hear  the  instruction  which  causes  to  err  from  the  words  of 
knowledge."  (Prov.  xix.  27.)  We  ought  to  carry  out  the  spirit 
shown  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  in  Gal.  i.  8  :  "  Though  we,  or  an 
angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  doctrine  unto  you  than 
that  which  we  have  preached,  let  him  be  accursed."  If  we 
can  bear  to  hear  Christ's  truth  mangled  or  adulterated, — and  can 
see  no  harm  in  listening  to  that  which  is  another  Gospel,— 
and  can  sit  at  ease  while  sham  Christianity  is  poured  into  our 


58  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

ears, — and  can  go  home  comfortably  afterwards,  and  not  burn 
with  holy  indignation,  —  if  this  be  the  case,  there  is  little 
chance  of  our  ever  doing  much  to  resist  Rome.  If  we  are 
content  to  hear  Jesus  Christ  not  put  in  His  rightful  place,  we 
are  not  men  and  women  who  are  likely  to  do  Christ  much 
service,  or  fight  a  good  fight  on  His  side.  He  that  is  not 
zealous  against  error,  is  not  likely  to  be  zealous  for  truth. 

If  we  would  hold  fast  the  truth,  we  must  be  ready  to  unite 
with  all  who  hold  the  truth,  and  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  sincerity.  We  must  be  ready  to  lay  aside  all  minor  ques 
tions  as  things  of  subordinate  importance.  Establishment  or 
no  Establishment,  Liturgy  or  no  Liturgy,  surplice  or  no  sur 
plice,  Bishops  or  Presbyters,  —  all  these  points  of  difference, 
however  important  they  may  be  in  their  place  and  in  their 
proportion, — all  ought  to  be  regarded  as  subordinate  questions. 
I  ask  no  man  to  give  up  his  private  opinions  about  them.  I 
wish  no  man  to  do  violence  to  his  conscience.  All  I  say  is, 
that  these  questions  are  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,  when  the  very 
foundations  of  the  faith  are  in  danger.  The  Philistines  are 
upon  us.  Can  we  make  common  cause  against  them,  or  can  we 
not  ?  This  is  the  one  point  for  our  consideration.  Surely  it 
is  not  right  to  say  that  we  expect  to  spend  eternity  with 
men  in  heaven,  and  yet  cannot  work  for  a  few  years  with 
them  in  this  world.  It  is  nonsense  to  talk  of  alliance  and 
union,  if  there  is  to  be  no  co  -  operation.  The  presence 
of  a  common  foe  ought  to  sink  minor  differences.  We 
must  hold  together,  if  we  mean  to  "hold  fast  that  which  is 
good." 

Some  men  may  say,  "  This  is  very  troublesome."  Some 
may  say,  "  Why  not  sit  still  and  be  quiet  1 "  Some  may  say, 
"Oh,  that  horrid  controversy!  What  need  is  there  for  all 
this  trouble?  Why  should  we  care  so  much  about  these 
points  of  difference  1 "  I  ask,  what  good  thing  was  ever  got, 
or  ever  kept,  without  trouble  1  Gold  does  not  lie  in  English 
corn  -  fields,  but  at  the  bottom  of  Calif  oruian  rivers,  and 
Australian  quartz  reefs.  Pearls  do  not  grow  on  English  hedges, 
but  deep  down  in  Indian  seas.  Difficulties  are  never  over 
come  without  struggles.  Mountains  are  seldom  climbed  with 
out  fatigue.  Oceans  are  not  crossed  without  tossings  on  the 
waves.  Peace  is  seldom  obtained  without  war.  And  Christ's 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  59 

truth  is  seldom  made  a  nation's  property,  and  kept  a  nation's 
property,  without  pains,  without  struggles,  and  without  trouble. 
Let  the  man  who  talks  of  "  trouble  "  tell  us  where  we  should 
be  at  this  day,  if  our  forefathers  had  not  taken  some  trouble  1 
Where  would  be  the  Gospel  in  England,  if  martyrs  had  not 
given  their  bodies  to  be  burned  ?  "Who  shall  estimate  our 
debt  to  Cranmer,  Latimer,  Hooper,  Ridley,  and  Taylor,  and 
their  brethren?  They  "held  fast  that  which  is  good."  They 
would  not  give  up  one  jot  of  Christ's  truth.  They  counted 
not  their  lives  dear  for  the  Gospel's  sake.  They  laboured  and 
travailed,  and  we  have  entered  into  their  labours.  Shame 
upon  us,  if  we  will  not  take  a  little  trouble  to  keep  with  us 
what  they  so  nobly  won  !  Trouble  or  no  trouble, — pains  or  no 
pains, — controversy  or  no  controversy, — one  thing  is  very  sure, 
that  nothing  but  Christ's  Gospel  will  ever  do  good  to  our  own 
souls.  Nothing  else  will  maintain  our  Churches.  Xothing 
else  will  ever  bring  down  God's  blessing  upon  our  land.  If, 
therefore,  we  love  our  own  souls,  or  if  we  love  our  country's 
prosperity,  or  if  we  love  to  keep  our  Churches  standing,  we 
must  remember  the  Apostle's  words,  and  "  hold  fast"  firmly  the 
Gospel,  and  refuse  to  let  it  go. 

I  have  set  forth  in  plain  language  two  things.  One  is  the 
right,  the  duty,  and  necessity  of  private  judgment.  The  other  is 
the  duty  and  necessity  of  keeping  firm  hold  upon  truth. — It  only 
remains  to  apply  these  things  to  the  individual  consciences  of 
my  readers,  by  a  few  concluding  words. 

(1)  For  one  thing,  if  it  be  our  duty  to  "prove  all  things," 
let  me  beseech  and  exhort  all  English  Churchmen  to  arm  them 
selves  with  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  written  Word  of  God. 
Let  us  read  our  Bibles  regularly,  and  become  familiar  with  their 
contents.  Let  us  prove  all  religious  teaching,  when  it  is  brought 
before  us,  by  the  Bible.  A  little  knowledge  of  the  Bible  will 
not  suffice.  A  man  must  know  his  Bible  well,  if  he  is  to  prove 
religion  by  it ;  and  he  must  read  it  regularly,  if  he  would  know 
it  well.  There  is  no  royal  road  to  a  knowledge  of  the  Bible. 
There  must  be  patient,  daily,  systematic  reading  of  the  Book, 
or  the  Book  will  not  be  known.  As  one  said  quaintly,  but 
most  truly,  "  Justification  may  be  by  faith,  but  a  knowledge  of 
the  Bible  comes  only  by  works."  The  devil  can  quote  Scripture. 


60  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

He  could  go  to  our  Lord  and  quote  a  text  when  he  wished  to 
tempt  Him.  A  man  must  be  able  to  say,  when  he  hears  Scrip 
ture  falsely  quoted,  perverted,  and  misapplied,  "It  is  written 
again,"  lest  he  be  deceived.  Let  a  man  neglect  his  Bible,  and 
I  see  nothing  to  prevent  his  becoming  a  Roman  Catholic, 
an  Arian,  a  Socinian,  a  Jew,  or  a  Turk,  if  a  plausible  advocate 
of  any  of  these  false  systems  shall  happen  to  meet  him. 

(2)  For  another  thing,  if  it  be  right  to   "prove   all  things," 
let  us  take  special  care  to  try  every  Roman  Catholic  doctrine, 
by  whomsoever  put  forward,   by  the  written  Word  of  God. 
Let  us  believe  nothing,  however  speciously  advanced, — believe 
nothing,  with  whatever  weight  of  authority  brought  forward, — 
believe  nothing,  though  supported  by  all  the  Fathers, — believe 
nothing,  except  it  can  be  proved  to  us   out  of  the  Scripture. 
The  Bible  alone  is  infallible.     That  alone  is  light.     That  alone  is 
God's  measure  of  truth  and  falsehood.     "  Let  God  be  true,  and 
every  man  a  liar."     The  Xew  Zealander's  answer  to  the  Romish 
priests  when  they  first  went  among  them,  was  an  answer  never 
to  be  forgotten.     They  heard  these  priests  urge  upon  them  the 
worship  of  the  Virgin  Mary.     They  heard  them  recommend 
prayer  to  the  dead  saints,  the  use  of  images,  the  mass  and  the 
confessional.     They  heard  them  speak   of  the  authority  of  the 
Church  of  Rome,  the  supremacy  of  the  Pope,  the  antiquity  of 
the  Romish  Communion.     They  knew  the  Bible,  and  heard  all 
this  calmly,  and  gave  one  simple  but  memorable  answer :  "  It 
cannot  be  true,  because  it  is  not  in  the  Book"     All  the  learning 
in  the  world  could  never  have  supplied  a  better  answer  than 
that.     Latimer,  or  Knox,  or  Owen,  could  never  have  made  a 
more  crushing  reply.    Let  this  be  our  rule  when  we  are  attacked 
by  Romanists,  or  semi-Romanists ;  let  us  hold  fast  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit;  and  say,  in  reply  to  all  their  arguments,  •"  It  cannot 
be  true,  because  it  is  not  in  the  Book" 

(3)  Last  of  all,  if  it  be  right  to   "hold  fast  that  which  is 
good,"  let  us  make  sure  that  we  have  each  laid  hold  personally 
upon  Christ's  truth  for  ourselves.     It  will  not  save  us  to  know 
all  controversies,  and  to  be  able  to  detect  everything  which  is 
false.      Head  knowledge  will  never  bring  us  to  heaven.     It 
will  not  save  us  to  be  able  to  argue  and  reason  with  Roman 
Catholics,  or  to  detect  the  errors  of  Popes'  Bulls,  or  Pastoral 
Letters.    Let  us  see  that  we  each  lay  hold  upon  Jesus  Christ  for 


PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  61 

ourselves,  by  our  own  personal  faith.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we 
each  flee  for  refuge,  and  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  us 
in  His  glorious  Gospel.  Let  us  do  this,  and  all  shall  be  well 
with  us,  whatever  else  may  go  ill.  Let  us  do  this,  and  then 
all  things  are  ours.  The  Church  may  fail.  The  State  may  go 
to  ruin.  The  foundations  of  all  establishments  may  be  shaken. 
The  enemies  of  truth  may  for  a  season  prevail.  But  as  for  us, 
all  shall  be  well.  We  shall  have  in  this  world  peace,  and  in 
the  world  which  is  to  come,  life  everlasting ;  for  we  shall  have 
Christ,  and  having  Him,  we  have  all.  This  is  real  "  good,"  lasting 
good,  good  in  sickness,  good  in  health,  good  in  life,  good  in 
death,  good  in  time,  and  good  in  eternity.  All  other  things 
are  but  uncertain.  They  all  wear  out.  They  fade.  They 
droop.  They  wither.  They  decay.  The  longer  we  have  them 
the  more  worthless  we  find  them,  and  the  more  satisfied  we 
become,  that  everything  here  below  is  "  vanity  and  vexation  of 
spirit."  But  as  for  hope  in  Christ,  that  is  always  good.  The 
longer  we  use  it  the  better  it  seems.  The  more  we  wear  it  in 
our  hearts  the  brighter  it  will  look.  It  is  good  when  we  first 
have  it.  It  is  better  far  when  we  grow  older.  It  is  better 
still  in  the  day  of  trial,  and  the  hour  of  death.  And  it  will 
prove  best  of  all  in  the  day  of  judgment. 


IV. 
THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES. 

I  MUST  begin  this  paper  with  an  apology.  My  subject  may 
seem  at  first  sight  dry,  dull,  and  uninteresting.  But  I  ask  my 
readers  to  believe  that  it  is  not  so  in  reality.  There  are  few 
points  about  which  it  is  so  important  for  English  Churchmen 
to  have  clear  and  correct  views,  as  about  the  nature,  position, 
and  authority  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles. 

Marriage  settlements  and  wills  are  not  very  lively  reading. 
Like  all  carefully-drawn  legal  documents,  they  are  extremely 
unattractive  to  general  readers.  The  language  seems  cramped 
and  old-fashioned ;  the  amount  of  verbiage  and  circumlocution 
in  them  appears  positively  astounding  :  yet  none  but  a  child  or 
fool  would  ever  dare  to  say  that  wills  and  marriage  settlements  are 
of  no  use.  The  happiness  of  whole  families  often  turns  upon  the 
meaning  of  their  contents.  It  is  even  so  with  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles.  Dry,  and  dull,  and  uninteresting  as  they  may  appear 
to  some,  they  are  in  one  sense  the  backbone  of  the  Church  of 
England.  Surely  some  knowledge  of  them  ought  to  be  sought 
after  by  every  sensible  and  intelligent  member  of  our  Com 
munion. 

Who  is  the  "  true  Churchman  "  ?  That  is  a  question  which 
is  shaking  the  Established  Church  of  England  to  the  very  centre, 
and  will  shake  it  a  good  deal  more,  I  suspect,  before  the  end 
of  the  world  comes.  It  is  becoming  a  very  large  and  serious 
question,  and  one  which  imperatively  demands  an  answer. 

It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  everybody  who  goes  to  church  is 
a  "  true  Churchman."  That  reply,  I  think,  will  content  nobody. 
There  are  scores  of  people  occupying  our  pews  and  benches  every 
Sunday,  who  know  nothing  whatever  about  religion.  They 
could  not  tell  you,  if  life  depended  on  it,  what  they  believe  or 
don't  believe,  hold  or  don't  hold,  think  or  don't  think,  about 
any  doctrine  of  Christianity.  They  are  totally  in  the  dark 

62 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  63 

about  the  whole  subject.  Politics  they  know,  and  business 
they  know,  and  science  perhaps  they  know,  and  possibly  they 
know  something  about  the  amusements  of  this  world.  But  as 
to  the  composition  of  a  "true  Churchman's"  creed,  they  can 
tell  you  nothing  whatever.  They  "go  to  church"  on  Sundays; 
and  that  is  all.  Surely  this  will  never  do !  Ignorance,  com 
plete  ignorance,  can  never  be  the  qualification  of  a  true  Church- 


But  perhaps  it  is  enough  to  say  that  everybody  who  goes  to 
church,  and  is  zealous  and  earnest  in  his  religion,  is  a  "true 
Churchman  "  ?  That  is  a  very  wide  question,  and  opens  up  an 
entirely  new  line  of  thought.  But  I  fear  it  will  not  land  us  in 
any  satisfactory  conclusion.  "  Earnestness  "  is  the  attribute  of 
men  of  the  most  opposite  and  contradictory  creeds.  "  Earnest 
ness  is  the  character  of  religionists  who  are  as  wide  apart  as 
black  and  white,  light  and  darkness,  bitter  and  sweet,  hot  and 
cold. — You  see  it  outside  the  Church  of  England.  The 
Mohametans  who  overran  the  rotten  Churches  of  Africa  and 
Western  Asia,  crying,  "  the  Koran  or  the  sword," — the  Hindoo 
Fakir  who  stands  on  one  leg  for  twenty  years,  or  throws  himself 
under  the  car  of  Juggernaut, — the  Jesuit,  who  saps  and  mines, 
and  compasses  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte,  —  the 
Mormonite,  who  crosses  half  the  globe  to  die  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  calls  Joe  Smith  a  prophet, — all  these  undeniably 
were  and  are  earnest  men. — You  sec  it  inside  the  Church  of 
England  at  this  very  day.  The  Eitualist,  the  Rationalist,  the 
Evangelical, — all  are  in  earnest.  Mr.  Mackonochie  and  Dr. 
M'Neile,  —  Dean  Stanley  and  Archdeacon  Denison,  —  Mr. 
Bennett,  of  Frome,  and  Mr.  Daniel  Wilson,  in  London, — all 
are,  or  were  during  their  lives,  unquestionably  earnest  men. 
Yet  every  one  knows  that  their  differences  are  grave,  wide,  deep, 
and  irreconcilable.  Surely  this  will  never  do.  Earnestness 
alone  is  no  proof  that  a  man  is  a  true  Churchman.  The  devil 
is  in  earnest.  Infidels  are  in  earnest.  Deists  arc  in  earnest. 
Socinians  are  in  earnest.  Papists  are  in  earnest.  Pharisees 
were  in  earnest.  Sadducees  were  in  earnest.  Earnestness 
alone  proves  nothing  more  than  this,  —  that  a  man  has  a 
good  deal  of  steam  and  energy  and  "  go  "  about  him,  and  will 
not  go  to  sleep.  But  it  certainly  does  not  prove  that  a  man 
is  a  "true  Churchman."  What  is  the  man  earnest  about? 


64  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

This  is  the  question  that  ought  to  be  asked,  and  deserves  to  be 
answered. 

Once  for  all,  I  must  protest  against  the  modern  notion,  that 
it  does  not  matter  the  least  what  religious  opinions  a  man  holds, 
so  long  as  he  is  in  "  earnest "  about  them, — that  one  creed  is 
just  as  good  as  another, —  and  that  all  "  earnest "  men  will  some 
how  or  other  at  last  find  themselves  in  heaven.  I  cannot  hold 
such  an  opinion,  so  long  as  I  believe  that  the  Bible  is  a  revela 
tion  from  God.  I  would  extend  to  every  one  the  widest  liberty 
and  toleration.  I  abhor  the  idea  of  persecuting  any  one  for 
his  opinions.  I  would  "  think  and  let  think."  But  so  long  as 
I  have  breath  in  my  body,  I  shall  always  contend  that  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  revealed  truth, — that  men  may  find  out  what 
truth  is  if  they  will  honestly  seek  for  it, — and  that  mere 
earnestness  and  zeal,  without  Scriptural  knowledge,  will  never 
give  any  one  comfort  in  life,  peace  in  death,  or  boldness  in  the 
day  of  judgment. 

But  how  are  we  to  find  out  who  is  the  "  true  Churchman  "  ? 
some  one  will  ask  me.  Men  complain  with  good  reason  that 
they  feel  puzzled,  perplexed,  embarrassed,  bewildered,  posed, 
and  mystified  by  the  question.  Rationalists,  Ritualists,  and 
Evangelicals,  all  call  themselves  "  Churchmen."  Who  is  right  ? 
— The  name  "Churchman"  is  bandied  about  from  side  to  side, 
like  a  shuttlecock,  and  men  lay  claim  to  it  who  on  many 
points  are  diametrically  opposed  to  one  another.  Xow  how 
are  we  to  settle  the  question?  What  are  we  to  believe? 
What  are  we  to  think  ?  How  shall  we  distinguish  the  good  coin 
from  the  bad  ?  In  one  word,  is  there  any  test,  any  legal,  author 
ized  test  of  a  true  Churchman  1 

My  answer  to  all  these  inquiries  is  short,  plain,  and  most 
decided.  I  assert  confidently  that  the  Church  of  England  has 
provided  a  test  of  true  Churchmanship,  and  one  that  is  recog 
nized  by  the  law  of  the  land.  This  test  is  to  be  found  in  "  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  of  Religion."  I  say,  furthermore,  that 
the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  Religion  form  a  test  which  any 
plain  man  can  easily  understand,  if  he  will  only  give  his  mind 
to  a  study  of  them.  An  honest  examination  of  these  Articles 
will  show  any  one  at  this  day  who  is  the  best,  the  truest,  the  most 
genuine  style  of  Churchman.  To  exhibit  the  authority,  nature, 
and  characteristics  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  is  the  simple 


THE  THIRTY-XINE  ARTICLES.  65 

object  for  which  I  send  forth  the  paper  which  is  now  in  the 
reader's  hands. 

I.  Now,  first  of  all,  what  are  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  ?  This 
is  a  question  which  many  will  be  ready  to  ask,  and  one  to 
which  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  return  an  answer.  It  is  a 
melancholy  fact,  explain  it  as  we  may,  that  for  the  last  200 
years  the  Articles  have  fallen  into  great  and  undeserved  neglect. 
Thousands  and  myriads  of  Churchmen,  I  am  fully  persuaded, 
have  never  read  them,  never  even  looked  at  them,  and  of  course 
know  nothing  whatever  of  their  contents.  I  make  no  apology 
therefore  for  beginning  with  that  which  every  Churchman 
ought  to  know.  I  will  briefly  state  what  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles  are. 

The  Thirty-nine  Articles  are  a  brief  and  condensed  statement, 
under  thirty -nine  heads  or  propositions,  of  what  the  Church  of 
England  regards  as  the  chief  doctrines  which  her  chief  members 
ought  to  hold  and  believe.  They  were,  most  of  them,  gathered 
by  our  Reformers  out  of  Holy  Scripture.  They  were  carefully 
packed  up  and  summarized  in  the  most  accurate  and  precise 
language,  of  which  every  word  was  delicately  weighed,  and  had 
a  special  meaning.  Some  of  the  Articles  are  positive,  and 
declare  directly  what  the  Church  of  England  regards  as  Bible 
truth  and  worthy  of  belief.  Some  of  them  are  negative,  and 
declare  what  the  Church  of  England  considers  erroneous  and 
unworthy  of  credence.  Some  few  of  them  are  simple  state 
ments  of  the  Church's  judgment  on  points  which  were  somewhat 
controverted,  even  among  Protestants,  300  hundred  years  ago, 
and  on  which  Churchmen  might  need  an  expression  of  opinion. 
Such  is  the  document  commonly  called  the  Thirty-nine  Articles ; 
and  all  who  wish  to  read  it  will  find  it  at  the  end  of  every 
properly  printed  Prayer-book.  At  all  events,  any  Prayer-book 
which  does  not  contain  the  Articles  is  a  most  imperfect, 
mutilated,  and  barely  honest  copy  of  the  Liturgy. 

"When  and  by  whom  were  these  Articles  first  drawn  up  ? 
They  were  first  composed  by  our  Reformers  in  the  days  of  that 
admirable  young  King,  Edward  the  Sixth.  Who  had  the  chief 
hand  in  the  work,  history  does  not  reveal ;  but  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe  that  Cranmer  and  Ridley  our  two  most  learned 
martyrs,  had  more  to  do  with  it  than  any.  When  first  sent 


66  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

forth,  they  were  forty-two  in  number.  Afterwards,  when 
Queen  Elizabeth  came  to  the  throne,  they  were  reduced  by 
Archbishop  Parker  and  his  helpers,  of  whom  Bishop  Jewell  was 
probably  the  chief,  to  their  present  number,  with  a  few  unim 
portant  alterations.  They  were  finally  confirmed  and  ratified 
by  Crown,  Convocation,  and  Parliament,  in  the  year  1571, 
and  from  1571  down  to  this  day  not  a  single  word  in  them  has 
been  altered. 

The  object  for  which  the  Articles  were  drawn  up  is  clearly 
stated  in  the  title  of  them,  which  any  one  will  find  in  a  proper 
Prayer-book.  They  are  called  "Articles  agreed  upon  by  the 
Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  both  provinces,  and  the  whole 
clergy,  in  the  Convocation  holden  at  London  in  the  year  1562, 
for  avoiding  of  diversities  of  opinion,  and  for  the  establishment 
of  consent  touching  true  religion."  About  the  real,  plain,  honest 
meaning  of  this  title,  I  think  there  ought  to  be  no  doubt.  It 
proves  that  the  Thirty- nine  Articles  are  intended  to  be  "  the 
Church  of  England's  Confession  of  faith."  Every  well-organized 
Church  throughout  Christendom  has  its  Confession  of  faith : 
that  is,  it  has  a  carefully  composed  statement  of  the  main 
things  in  religion  which  it  considers  its  members  ought  to 
believe.  Every  reading  man  knows  this.  The  Augsburg  Con 
fession,  the  Creed  of  Pope  Pius  IV.,  the  Decrees  of  the  Council 
of  Trent,  the  Westminster  Confession,  are  documents  with 
which  every  student  of  ecclesiastical  history  is  familiar.  Com- 
•mon  sense  shows  the  necessity  and  convenience  of  such  Confes 
sions.  In  a  fallen  world  like  this  the  terms  of  membership  in 
any  ecclesiastical  corporation  must  be  written  down  in  black 
and  white,  or  else  the  whole  body  is  liable  to  fall  into  disorder 
and  confusion.  Every  member  of  a  Church  ought  to  be  able  to 
render  a  reason  of  his  membership,  and  to  say  what  are  the 
great  principles  of  his  Church.  To  do  this  his  Church  supplies 
him  with  a  short  creed,  manual,  or  Confession,  to  which  at  any 
time  he  may  refer  inquirers.  This  was  the  object  of  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England.  They  were 
intended  to  be  "the  Churchman's  Confession  of  his  faith." 

The  substance  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  is  a  point  on  which 
I  shall  say  but  little  at  present,  because  I  propose  to  dwell  on 
it  by  and  by.  Let  it  suffice  to  say  that  they  contain  most 
admirable,  terse,  clear  statements  of  Scriptural  truth,  according 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  67 

to  the  judgment  of  our  Reformers,  on  almost  every  point  in  the 
The  titles  speak  for  themselves  : — 


Christian  religion. 


A  Table  of  the  Articles. 


1.  Of  Faith  in  the  Holy  Trinity. 

2.  Of  Christ  the  Son  of  God. 

3.  Of  His  going  down  into  Hell. 

4.  Of  His  resurrection. 

5.  Of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

0.  Of  the  Sufficiency  of  the  Scrip 
ture. 

7.  Of  the  Old  Testament. 

8.  Of  the  Three  Creeds. 

0.  Of  Original  or  Birth-sin. 

10.  Of  Free-will. 

11.  Of  Justification. 

12.  Of  Good  Works. 

13.  Of  Works  before  Justification. 

14.  Of  Works  of  Supererogation. 

15.  Of  Christ  alone  without  Sin. 
10.  Of  Sin  after  Baptism. 

17.  Of  Predestination  and  Election. 

18.  Of  obtaining  Salvation  by  Christ. 

19.  Of  the  Church. 

20.  Of  the  Authority  of  the  Church. 

21.  Of    the    Authority  of    General 

Councils. 


22.  Of  Purgatory. 

23.  Of  Ministering  in   the   Congre 

gation. 

24.  Of   Speaking  in   the   Congrega 

tion. 

25.  Of  the  Sacraments. 

20.  Of  the  Unworthiness  of  Minis 
ters. 

27.  Of  Baptism. 

28.  Of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

29.  Of  the  Wicked  which  eat  not  the 

Body  of  Christ. 

30.  Of  both  kinds. 

31.  Of  Christ's  one  Oblation. 

32.  Of  the  Marriage  of  Priests. 

33.  Of  Excommunicate  Persons. 

34.  Of  the  Traditions  of  the  Church. 

35.  Of  Homilies. 

30.  Of  Consecrating  of  Ministers. 

37.  Of  Civil  Magistrates. 

38.  Of  Christian  Men's  Goods. 

39.  Of  a  Christian  Man's  Oath. 


Some  of  these  points  are  handled  in  a  more  firm,  strong,  and 
decided  manner  than  others,  and  the  curiously  different  tone  of 
the  Articles,  according  to  their  subject-matter,  is  a  matter  on 
which  I  shall  have  more  to  say  by  and  by.  But  taking  them  for 
all  in  all,  as  a  Church's  statement  of  things  to  be  believed,  I  think 
that  no  Church  on  earth  has  a  better  "  Confession  of  faith " 
than  the  Church  of  England.  I  have  no  wish  to  find  fault  with 
other  Churches.  God  forbid !  We  have  faults  and  defects 
enough  to  keep  us  humble  within  the  Anglican  Communion. 
But  after  carefully  examining  other  Confessions  of  faith,  I  find 
none  which  seem  comparable  to  our  own.  Some  Confessions 
are  too  long.  Some  go  into  particulars  too  much.  Some  define 
what  had  better  be  left  undefined,  and  shut  up  sharply  what 
had  better  be  left  a  little  open.  For  a  combination  of  fulness, 
boldness,  clearness,  brevity,  moderation,  and  wisdom,  I  find  no 
Confession  which  comes  near  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  the 
Church  of  England.* 


":The  famous  historian  Bingham,  in  his  curious  book  on  the  French  Pro* 
testant  Church,  quotes  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the  Articles  from  the 


68  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

So  much  for  what  we  mean  when  we  talk  of  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles.  For  dwelling  so  much  on  the  point,  I  shall  make 
little  apology.  The  intrinsic  importance  of  it,  and  the  singular 
ignorance  of  most  Churchmen  about  it,  are  my  best  excuse. 
The  times  we  live  in  make  it  imperatively  necessary  to  look  up 
and  ventilate  these  old  questions.  The  perilous  position  of  the 
Church  of  England  requires  all  her  sons  to  spread  light  and 
information.  He  that  would  know  what  a  true  Churchman  is, 
must  be  content  to  begin  by  finding  out  what  is  meant  by  "  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles." 

II.  I  must  now  take  up  a  question  which  is  of  great  and 
serious  importance.  To  prevent  mistakes  I  shall  state  it  as 
clearly  and  logically  as  I  can.  "  What  is  the  precise  ranJt, 
authority,  and  position  of  the  TJiirty-wine  Articles  ?  Are  they, 
or  are  they  not,  the  chief,  foremost,  primary,  and  principal  test 
of  true  Churchmanship  ? " 

My  reasons  for  going  into  this  point  are  as  follows.  Some 
clergymen  and  laymen  in  the  present  day  are  fond  of  saying 
that  the  Prayer-book,  and  not  the  Articles,  is  the  real  measure 
and  gauge  of  a  Churchman.  "  The  Prayer-book  !  the  Prayer- 
book!"  is  the  incessant  cry  of  these  people.  "We  want  no 
other  standard  of  doctrine  but  the  Prayer-book." — Is  it  a  con 
troverted  point  about  the  Church  ?  "What  says  the  Prayer- 
book? — Is  it  a  doctrine  that  is  disputed?  What  says  the 
Prayer-book  ? — Is  it  the  effect  of  baptism,  or  the  nature  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  that  is  under  discussion  1  "What  says  the  Prayer- 
book  ? — To  the  Articles  these  gentlemen  seem  to  have  a  peculiar 
dislike,  an  hydrophobia  aversion.  They  seldom  refer  to  them, 
unless  perhaps  to  sneer  at  them  as  the  "  forty  stripes  save  one." 
They  never  quote  them,  never  bring  them  forward  if  they  can 
possibly  help  it.  "What  intelligent  observer  of  religious  questions 
among  Churchmen  does  not  know  perfectly  well  the  class  of 
men  whom  I  have  in  view  ?  They  are  to  be  found  all  over 
England.  "We  meet  them  in  newspapers  and  books.  We  hear 
them  in  pulpits  and  on  platforms.  They  are  ever  thrusting  on 

French  divine  Le  Moyne,  a  man  of  great  note  in  his  day  : — "  No  Confession 
can  be  contrived  more  wisely  than  the  English  is,  and  the  xirticles  of  Faith 
were  never  collected  with  a  more  just  and  reasonable  discretion." — ' 
Works,  Oxf.  Edit.,  vol.  x.,  p.  95. 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  69 

the  public  their  favourite  "Diana  of  the  Ephesians," — their 
darling  notion  that  the  Prayer-book,  and  not  the  Articles,  is  the 
test  of  a  Churchman.* 

ISTow,  with  all  respect  to  these  worthy  people,  I  venture  to 
say  that  their  favourite  notion  is  as  real  an  idol  as  the  Ephesian 
"  Diana "  was  of  old.  I  shall  try  to  show  the  reader  that  in 
exalting  the  Prayer-book  above  the  Articles,  they  have  taken  up 
a  position  that  cannot  possibly  be  maintained.  I  shall  try  to 
show,  by  evidence  that  cannot  be  gainsayed,  that  the  true  state 
of  the  case  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  what  they  are  so  fond  of 
proclaiming.  I  am  not  going  to  say  anything  against  the 
Prayer-book.  It  is  a  matchless  book  of  devotion.  But  I  am 
going  to  say,  and  to  prove,  that  the  Articles,  and  not  the  Prayer- 
book,  are  the  first,  foremost,  and  principal  test  of  a  true 
Churchman. 

I  shall  dismiss  briefly  four  points  that  I  might  dwell  upon  at 
length,  if  it  were  worth  while. 

(a)  I  pass  over  the  obvious  suspiciousness  of  any  Churchman 
ignoring  the  Articles,  giving  them  the  cold  shoulder,  and  talk 
ing  only  about  the  Prayer-book,  when  he  is  speaking  of  the 
tests  of  a  Churchman's  religion.  That  many  do  so  it  is  quite 
needless  to  say.  Yet  the  fifth  Canon,  of  1604,  contains  the 
following  words :  "  Whosoever  shall  hereafter  affirm  that  any 
of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  agreed  upon  by  the  Archbishops  and 
Bishops  of  both  provinces,  in  the  Convocation  holden  at  London 
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  God  1562,  for  avoiding  diversities  of 
opinion,  and  establishing  of  consent  touching  true  religion,  are  in 
any  part  superstitious,  or  erroneous,  or  such  as  he  may  not  with 
a  good  conscience  subscribe  unto,  let  him  be  excommunicated 
ipsofado,  and  not  restored  but  only  by  the  Archbishops,  after 
his  repentance  and  public  revocation  of  such  his  wicked  errors." 
Plain  language  that !  Certain  Churchmen  who  are  fond  of 

*  In  a  volume  recently  published,  entitled  "  Studies  in  Modern  Problems," 
edited  by  Mr.  Orby  Shipley,  a  prominent  place  is  assigned  to  a  paper  bearing 
the  ominous  title,  "Abolition  of  the  Articles."  In  the  forty-eight  pages  of 
this  paper  much  is  said  about  the  origin  of  the  Articles,  and  the  Continental 
Reformers  are  not  spoken  of  in  favourable  terms.  But  I  cannot  discover  in 
the  paper  the  slightest  proof  that  the  Articles  are  not  the  true  test  of  a 
Churchman's  soundness  in  the  faith.  Nor  can  I  discern  any  reason  for  the 
writer's  wish  to  have  subscription  to  the  Articles  abolished,  except  his  dislike 
to  Protestant  doctrine. 


70  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

pelting  Evangelical  Churchmen  with  Canons  would  do  well  to 
remember  that  Canon. 

(b)  I  pass  over  the  implied  insinuation  that  there  is  any  con 
tradiction  between  the  Articles  and  the  Prayer-book.    Many  talk 
and  write  as  if  there  was.     It  is  a  notion  unworthy  of  any  one  of 
common  sense.    The  man  who  supposes  that  divines  of  such  grace 
and  learning  as  the  Elizabethan  Reformers  would  ever  with  the 
same  hands  draw  up  Articles  and  a  Prayer-book  containing  two 
different  doctrines,  must  be  in  a  strange  state  of  mind  ?    Reason 
itself  points  out  that  the  Prayer-book  and  Articles  were  meant 
to  teach  the  same  doctrines,  and  that  no  interpretation  which 
makes  them  jar  and   contradict  one  another   can  be  correct. 
Lord  Chatham's  famous  dictum,  that  the  Church  of  England 
has  a  Popish  Liturgy,  an  Arminian  clergy,  and  a  Calvinistic  set 
of  Articles,  was  doubtless  very  smart,  but  it  was  not  true. 

(c)  I  pass  over  the  unreasonableness  of  setting  up  a  book  of 
devotion,  like  the  Liturgy,  as  a  better  test  of  Churchmanship 
than  a  Confession  of  faith  like  the  Articles.     Prayers,  in  the 
very  nature  of  things,  are  compositions  which  are  not  so  pre 
cisely  framed  and  worded  as  cold,  dry,  dogmatic  statements  of 
doctrine.     They  are  what  the  rhetorical  speech  of  the  advocate 
is,  compared  to  the  cautiously-balanced  decision  of  the  judge. 
"In  the  Prayer-book,"  says  Dean  Goode,  "we  have  a  collection 
of  national  formularies  of  devotion,  written  at  a  time  when  a 
large  proportion  of  the  people  were  inclined  to  Romanism,  and 
at   the   same   time   compelled   to   attend  the    services  of  the 
national  Churches, — and  consequently  carefully  drawn  up,  so  as 
to  give  as  little  offence  as  possible  to  Romish  prejudices.     Is 
such  a  book  calculated  to  serve  the  purposes  of  a  standard  of 
faith?" — "In  the  Articles,"  he  adds,  on  the  other  hand,  "we 
have  a  precise  Confession  of  faith  on  all  the  great  points  of 
Christian  doctrine,  drawn  up  in  dogmatic  propositions,  as  a  test 
of   doctrinal  soundness  for  the   clergy."      The  Liturgy  is  an 
excellent  book.     But  to  say  that  in  the  nature  of  things  it  can 
serve  the  purpose  of  a  standard  of  faith  so  well  as  the  Articles, 
is  absurd. 

(d)  I  pass  over  the  glaring  foolishness  of  the  common  remark, 
that  those  who  are  fond  of  maintaining  the  primary  authority 
of  the  Articles  cast  discredit  upon  the  Creeds.     The  authors  of 
this  notable  charge  must  surely  have  forgotten  that  one  whole 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  71 

Article — the  eighth — is  devoted  to  the  three  Creeds  !  So  far 
from  the  admirers  of  the  Articles  dishonouring  and  disparaging 
the  Creeds,  they  are  specially  bound  to  honour,  reverence,  and 
defend  them.  Such  vague  argumentation  goes  far  to  show  that 
many  who  speak  slightly  of  the  Articles  do  not  even  know 
what  the  Articles  contain  !  They  "  speak  evil  of  things  which 
they  know  not."  (Jude  10.) 

But  I  pass  over  all  these  points.  I  desire  to  go  straight  to 
the  mark,  and  to  give  direct  proofs  of  the  position  that  I  take 
up.  What  I  deliberately  assert  is,  that  the  Thirty-nine  Articles 
were  always  intended  to  be,  and  are  at  this  day,  the  first,  fore 
most,  chief,  and  principal  test  of  a  Churchman,  and  that  in 
this  point  of  view  there  is  nothing  else  that  stands  on  a  level 
with  them.  In  proof  of  this  assertion  I  shall  now  bring  for 
ward  a  few  witnesses. 

(1)  My  first  witness  shall  be  a  very  simple  one.  I  mean  the 
title  of  the  Articles,  which  is  prefixed  to  them  in  every  com 
plete  and  unmutilated  Prayer-book.  They  are  called,  "  Articles 
agreed  upon  for  the  avoiding  of  Diversities  of  Opinion,  and  for 
the  stabli  siring  of  Consent  touching  true  Religion."  This  title 
was  first  given  to  them  by  Thomas  Cranmer,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  in  the  reign  of  Edward  VI.,  1552 ;  and  afterwards 
given  a  second  time  by  Matthew  Parker,  Archbishop  of  Canter 
bury,  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  reign,  in  1562.  I  want  no  plainer 
language  than  the  words  of  this  title.  The  man  who  tries  to 
get  away  from  it  and  evade  it  is  like  a  viper  biting  a  file.* 


*  Archbishop  Parker's  Correspondence,  published  in  the  Parker  Society's 
series,  supplies  remarkable  evidence  of  the  importance  attached  to  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  by  the  Elizabethan  Reformers.  This  evidence  will  be 
found  in  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Queen,  by  the  Archbishop  and  thirteen 
other  Bishops,  in  which  they  pray  her  to  facilitate  the  passing  of  a  Bill 
through  Parliament  for  the  confirmation  of  the  Articles.  The  reason  why 
the  Queen  interposed  any  delay  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  dislike  to 
the  Articles,  but  her  characteristic  Tudor  jealousy  of  anything  being  done  in 
Church  or  State  which  did  not  originate  from  herself.  In  short,  she  affected 
to  consider  the  initiation  of  a  Bill  affecting  religion  by  the  Commons,  was  an 
infringement  of  her  ecclesiastical  supremacy  ! 

The  reasons  against  delay  which  the  Archbishop  and  Bishops  pressed  on 
the  Queen's  attention  deserve  special  notice.  They  say  : — "  First,  the  matter 
itself  tendeth  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  advancement  of  true  religion,  and  the 
salvation  of  Christian  souls,  and  therefore  ought  principally,  chiefly,  and 
before  all  other  things  to  be  sought. 

"  Secondly,  in  the  book  which  is  now  desired  to  be  confirmed  are  contained 


72  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

(2)  My  second  witness  shall  be  the  statute  law  of  the  realm. 
I  refer  to  two  Acts  of  Parliament.  One  is  called  the  13th  of 
Elizabeth,  cap.  12,  and  entitled  "An  Act  for  Ministers  of  the 
Church  to  be  of  sound  religion"  The  other  Act  is  called  the 
28th  and  29th  Victoria,  cap.  122,  and  is  entitled  "An  Act  to 
Amend  the  Law  as  to  the  declarations  and  subscriptions  to  be 
made,  and  Oaths  to  be  taken  by  the  Clergy,"  and  was  passed  in 
the  year  1865. 

The  Act  of  Elizabeth,  in  the  second  section  declares,  that  "if 
any  person  ecclesiastical,  or  which  shall  have  any  ecclesiastical 
living,  shall  advisedly  maintain  or  affirm  any  doctrine  directly 
contrary  or  repugnant  to  any  of  the  said  Thirty-nine  Articles  ;  and 
being  convicted  before  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese,  or  the  Ordi 
nary,  or  before  the  Queen's  Commissioner  in  causes  ecclesiast 
ical,  shall  persist  therein,  or  not  revoke  his  error,  or  after  such 
revocation  affirm  such  untrue  doctrine,  such  maintaining,  or 
affirming,  or  persisting  shall  be  just  cause  to  deprive  such  per 
son  of  his  ecclesiastical  functions;  and  it  shall  be  lawful  for 
the  Bishop  of  the  diocese,  or  Ordinary,  or  such  Commissioner, 
to  deprive  such  person." 

Comment  on  the  evidence  of  this  witness  is  needless. 
There  is  no  way  of  honestly  evading  the  edge  and  point  of  this 
yet  unrepealed  Act  of  Parliament.  In  a  decision  of  all  the 

the  principal  Articles  of  Christian  religion  most  agreeable  to  God's  Word, 
publicly,  since  the  beginning  of  your  Majesty's  reign,  professed,  and  by  your 
Highness'  authority  set  forth  and  maintained. 

"Thirdly,  divers  and  sundry  errors,  and  namely,  such  as  have  been  in  the 
realm  wickedly  and  obstinately  by  the  adversaries  of  the  Gospel  defended, 
are  by  the  same  Articles  condemned. 

"  Fourthly,  the  approbation  of  these  Articles  by  your  Majesty  shall  be  a 
very  good  mean  to  establish  and  confirm  all  your  Majesty's  subjects  in  one 
consent  and  unity  of  true  doctrine,  to  the  great  quiet  and  safety  of  your 
Majesty  and  this  free  realm  ;  whereas  now,  for  want  of  plain  certainty  of 
Articles  of  doctrine  by  law  to  be  declared,  great  distraction  and  dissension  of 
minds  is  at  this  present  among  your  subjects."  —  Parker  Correspondence, 
Parker  Society,  p.  293. 

Notwithstanding  this  letter,  the  prayer  of  the  Bishops  appears  not  to  have 
been  granted  until  the  year  1571.  It  is  only  one  among  many  illustrations 
of  the  immense  difficulties  which  the  Elizabethan  Reformers  had  to  contend 
with,  in  consequence  of  the  arbitrary  and  self-willed  character  of  their 
Sovereign.  I  venture  the  opinion  that  few  English  Monarchs  have  been  so 
much  over-praised  and  misunderstood  as  Elizabeth.  I  suspect  the  English 
Reformation  would  have  been  a  far  more  perfect  and  complete  work  if  the 
Queen  had  allowed  the  Reformers  to  do  all  that  they  wanted  to  do. 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  73 

judges,  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  Elizabeth,  it  was  declared  that 
the  Act  of  13th  Elizabeth  was  made  for  avoiding  a  diversity  of 
opinion,  and  that  the  "  prevention  of  such  diversity  was  the  scope 
of  the  statute."  (Coke's  Imtitut.  1865.)  The  provisions  of  this 
Act  of  Elizabeth  are  in  full  force  at  this  very  day,  and  form  the 
basis  of  any  proceedings  against  a  clergyman  in  matters  of  religion. 

The  Act  of  the  28th  and  29th  of  Victoria  is  even  more 
remarkable  than  the  13th  of  Elizabeth.  The  seventh  section 
requires  every  person  instituted  to  any  living,  on  the  first  Lord's 
Day  in  wliich  he  officiates  in  his  church,  "publicly  and  openly 
in  the  presence  of  his  congregation,  to  read  the  whole  Thirty- 
nine  Articles  of  Religion,  and  immediately  after  reading  to 
make  the  declaration  of  assent  to  them." 

Up  to  the  year  1865,  we  must  remember,  a  clergyman  was 
required  to  read  over  the  whole  Morning  and  Evening  Service 
as  well  as  the  Articles,  and  then  declare  his  assent  and  consent 
to  the  use  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  This  was  dispensed 
with  by  the  Act  of  Victoria.  But  therequirementto  read  theThirty- 
nine  Articles  icas  carefully  retained  !  The  result  is,  that  every 
beneficed  clergyman  in  the  Church  of  England  has  not  only  de 
clared  his  assent  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  but  has  done  it  in  the 
most  public  way,  after  reading  them  over  before  his  congregation. 

(3)  My  third  witness  shall  be  the  Royal  Declaration  prefixed 
to  the  Articles  in  1628,  by  King  Charles  I.  It  is  a  document 
which  will  be  found  at  length  in  every  complete  and  unmuti- 
lated  Prayer-book.  It  contains  the  following  passage:  "We 
hold  it  most  agreeable  to  this  our  Kingly  office,  and  our  own 
religious  zeal,  to  conserve  and  maintain  the  Church  committed 
to  our  charge,  in  unity  of  true  religion,  and  in  the  bond  of 
peace  ;  and  not  to  suffer  unnecessary  disputations,  altercations, 
or  questions  to  be  raised,  which  may  nourish  faction  both  in 
the  Church  and  Commonwealth.  We  have  therefore,  upon 
mature  deliberation,  and  with  the  advice  of  so  many  of  our 
Bishops  as  might  conveniently  be  called  together,  thought  fit  to 
make  this  declaration  following  : — 

"  That  the  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England  (which  have 
been  allowed  and  authorized  heretofore,  and  which  our  clergy 
generally  have  subscribed  unto)  do  contain  the  true  doctrine 
of  the  Church  of  England  agreeable  to  God's  Word  :  wliich  we 
do  therefore  ratify  and  confirm,  requiring  all  our  loving  subjects 


74  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

to  continue  in  the  uniform  profession  thereof,  and  prohibiting  the 
least  difference  from  the  said  Articles."  Admirable  words  these  ! 
Well  would  it  have  been  if  the  unhappy  Monarch  who  put  forth 
this  declaration,  had  afterwards  adhered  more  decidedly  to  the 
doctrine  of  the  Articles,  and  not  ruined  himself  and  the  Church 
by  patronizing  and  supporting  such  men  as  Archbishop  Laud. 

(4)  My  fourth    witness   shall   be    a    remarkable    letter    or 
circular  issued  by  the  Crown  in  1721,  entitled    "Directions 
to  our  Archbishops  and  Bishops  for  the  preservation  of  unity 
in   the    Church    and   the  purity  of   the    Christian    faith,  par 
ticularly  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Trinity."      The   charge 
given  to  the  Bishops  in  these  directions  is  as  follows  :  "  You 
shall,   without    delay,    signify   to    the   clergy  of   your  several 
dioceses  this  our  Eoyal  command,  which  we  require  you  to  see 
duly  published  and  decreed  :  viz.,  that  no  preacher  whatsoever 
in  his  sermons  or  lectures  do  presume  to  deliver  any  other 
doctrines  concerning  the  great  and  fundamental  truths  of  our 
most   holy   religion,    and   particularly  concerning   the   blessed 
Trinity,  than  what  are  contained  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and 
are  agreeable  to  the  three  Creeds  and  the  Thirty-nine  Articles 
of  religion."     The  circular  proceeds  to  direct  the  Bishops  to 
put  in  force  the  famous  statute  of  Elizabeth  already  quoted. 
But  not  one  word  do   we   find  about  the  Prayer-book,   from 
beginning  to    end.       Of   course    these    "  directions "   have   no 
binding  force  now,  but  as  evidence  of  what  men  thought  the 
test  of  Church  religion  in  1721,  they  are  remarkable. 

(5)  My  fifth  witness  shall   be  Thomas  Eogers,  chaplain  to 
Archbishop  Bancroft,  who  published  in  1607,  the  first  Exposi 
tion  of  the  Articles  which  ever  appeared.     This  book,  we  must 
remember,  was  written  within  forty  years  of  the  time  when  the 
Articles  were  finally  ratified.     It  was  a  work  of  great  authority 
at  the  time,  and  was  dedicated  to  the  Archbishop.     In  the 
preface  to  this  work  Rogers  says  : — 

"The  purpose  of  our  Church  is  best  known  by  the  doctrine 
which  she  does  profess :  the  doctrine  by  the  Thirty  -  nine 
Articles  established  by  Act  of  Parliament ;  the  Articles  by 
the  words  whereby  they  are  expressed :  and  other  doctrine 
than  in  the  said  Articles  is  contained,  our  Church  neither 
hath  nor  holdeth,  and  other  sense  they  cannot  yield  than  their 
words  do  import," 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  *75 

Strong  language  that  from  an  Archbishop's  chaplain  !  I 
heartily  wish  we  had  a  few  more  chaplains  like  him. 

(6)  My  sixth  and  last  evidence,  for  "brevity's  sake,  I  will 
give  you  all  at  once,  in  the  words  of  five  well-known  Bishops 
of  the  Church,  who  have  long  passed  away.  They  were  men 
very  unlike  one  another,  and  belonged  to  very  different  schools 
of  thought.  But  their  testimonies  to  the  value  and  rightful 
position  of  the  Articles  are  so  curiously  harmonious,  that  it  is 
interesting  to  have  them  brought  together. 

(a)  Let  us  hear  then  what  great  and  good  Bishop  Hall  says, 
in  his  work  on  "  The  Old  Religion :"  "  The  Church  of  Eng 
land,  in  whose  motherhood  we  have  all  come  to  pride  ourselves, 
hath  in  much  wisdom  and  piety  delivered  her  judgment  con 
cerning  all  necessary  points  of  religion,  in  so  complete  a  body 
of  divinity  as  all  hearts  may  rest  in.  These  we  read,  these  we 
write  under,  as  professing  not  their  truth  only,  but  their  suffi 
ciency  also.  The  voice  of  God  our  Father,  in  His  Scriptures, 
and,  out  of  them,  the  voice  of  the  Church  our  mother,  in  her 
Articles,  is  that  which  must  both  guide  and  settle  our  resolutions. 
Whatsoever  is  beside  these,  is  either  private,  or  unnecessary,  or 
uncertain." — Hall's  Works.  Oxford  Edition.  Vol.  ix.,  p.  308. 

(1))  Let  us  hear  next  what  Bishop  Stillingfleet  says  in  his 
Unreasonableness  of  Separation:  "This  we  all  say,  that  the 
doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England  is  contained  in  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles ;  and  whatever  the  opinions  of  private  persons 
may  be,  this  is  the  standard  by  which  the  sense  of  our  Church 
is  to  be  taken." — London,  4to  edition,  p.  95.  1631. 

(c)  Let  us  hear  next  what  Bishop  Burnet  says:  "  The  Thirty- 
nine  Articles  are  the  sum  of  our  doctrines,  and  the  confession  of 
our  faith. — Burnet  on  Articles,  pref . ,  p.  1 .  Oxford  E  dition.  1831. 

(cl)  Let  us  hear  next  what  Bishop  Beveridge  says,  in  the 
preface  to  his  great  work  on  the  Articles  :  "  The  Bishops  and 
clergy  of  both  provinces  of  this  nation,  in  a  Council  held  at 
London,  1562,  agreed  upon  certain  Articles  of  Eeligion,  to  the 
number  of  thirty-nine,  which  to  this  day  remain  the  constant 
and  settled  doctrine  of  our  Church  ;  which,  by  an  Act  of  Parlia 
ment  of  the  13th  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  1571,  all  that  are  entrusted 
with  any  ecclesiastical  preferments,  are  bound  to  subscribe  to." 
— Beveridye  on  Articles,  vol.  i.,  p.  9.  Oxford  Edition.  1840. 

(e}  Let  us  hear,  lastly,  what  Bishop  Tomline  says  :  "  The 


76.  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Thirty-nine  Articles  are  the  criterion  of  the  faith  of  the  members 
of  the  Church  of  England." — Elements  of  TheoL,  vol.  ii.,  p.  34. 
1799. 

Such  are  the  testimonies  which  I  offer  to  the  attention  of 
my  readers,  in  proof  of  my  assertion  that  the  Articles,  much 
more  than  the  Prayer-book,  are  the  true  test  of  Churchmanship. 
The  title  prefixed  to  the  Articles  by  Cranmer  and  Parker ; — 
the  famous  statutes  of  the  13th  Elizabeth  and  28th  and  29th 
Victoria; — the  Royal  Declaration  of  Charles  I.,  in  1628  ; — the 
Royal  Circular  to  the  Bishops  in  1721  ; — the  express  opinion  of 
Rogers,  Archbishop  Bancroft's  private  chaplain; — the  deliber 
ately  expressed  judgment  of  five  such  men  as  Hall,  Stillingneet, 
Burnet,  Beveridge,  and  Tomline, — all  these  witnesses,  taken 
together,  supply  a  mass  of  evidence  which  to  my  eyes  seem 
perfectly  unanswerable.  In  the  face  of  such  evidence  I  dare 
not,  as  an  honest  man,  refuse  the  conclusion,  that  the  truest 
Churchman  is  the  man  who  most  truly  agrees  with  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles. 

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  witnesses,  and  to  overload  the 
subject  with  evidence.  But  in  these  matters  enough  is  as  good 
as  a  feast.  Enough,  probably,  has  been  said  to  satisfy  any 
candid  and  impartial  mind  that  the  ground  I  have  taken  up 
about  the  Articles  has  not  been  taken  up  in  vain.  He  that 
desires  to  go  more  deeply  into  the  subject  would  do  well  to  con 
sult  Dean  Goode's  writings  about  it,  in  a  controversy  which  he 
held  with  the  late  Bishop  of  Exeter.  In  that  remarkable  con 
troversy,  I  am  bold  to  say,  the  Dean  proved  himself  more  than 
a  match  for  the  Bishop.  (Goode's  Defence  of  Thirty-nine 
Articles,  and  Vindication  of  Defence.  Hatchard.  1848.) 

One  remark  I  must  make,  in  self-defence,  before  leaving  this 
branch  of  my  subject.  I  particularly  request  that  no  reader 
will  misunderstand  the  grounds  I  have  been  taking  up.  Let  no 
one  suppose  that  I  think  lightly  of  the  Prayer-book,  because  I 
do  not  regard  it  as  the  Church  of  England's  standard  and  test  of 
truth.  Nothing  could  be  more  erroneous  than  such  an  idea. 
In  loyal  love  to  the  Prayer-book,  and  deep  admiration  of  its 
contents,  I  give  place  to  no  man.  Taken  for  all  in  all,  as  an 
uninspired  work,  it  is  an  incomparable  book  of  devotion  for  the 
use  of  a  Christian  congregation.  This  is  a  position  I  would 
defend  anywhere  and  everywhere.  But  the  Church  of  England's 


THE  THIRTY-XIXE  ARTICLES.  77 

]>ook  of  Common  Prayer  was  never  intended  to  be  the  Church's 
standard  of  doctrine  in  the  same  way  that  the  Articles  were. 
This  was  not  meant  to  be  its  office ;  this  was  not  the  purpose 
for  which  it  was  compiled.  It  is  a  manual  of  public  devotion  : 
it  is  not  a  Confession  of  faith.  Let  us  love  it,  honour  it,  prize 
it,  reverence  it,  admire  it,  use  it.  But  let  us  not  exalt  it  to  the 
place  which  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  alone  can  fill,  and  which 
common  sense,  statute  law,  and  the  express  opinions  of  eminent 
divines  unanimously  agree  in  assigning  to  them.  The  Articles, 
far  more  than  the  Prayer-book,  are  the  Church's  standard  of 
sound  doctrine,  and  the  real  test  of  true  Churchmanship.* 

III.  One  more  point  now  remains  to  be  considered,  which  is 
of  so  much  importance  that  I  dare  not  pass  it  by  unnoticed. 
What  the  Articles  are  we  have  seen.  What  their  position  and 
authority  is  in  the  Church  of  England  we  have  also  seen. 
Ought  wo  not  now  to  see  what  are  the  great  leading  cha 
racteristics  of  the  Articles  ?  I  think  we  ought,  unless  we  mean  to 
leave  our  subject  unfinished.  There  are  certain  grand  features 
in  them,  without  descending  into  particulars,  which  stand  out 
prominently,  like  mountains  in  a  landscape.  What  those 
features  are  we  ought  to  know.  I  shall  therefore  proceed  to 
point  them  out  to  the  reader,  and  try  to  impress  them  on  his 
attention.  If  those  who  are  induced  to  read  them  with 
attention,  in  consequence  of  this  paper,  are  not  struck  with  the 
singular  distinctness  and  prominence  of  these  leading  features  in 
the  Articles,  I  shall  be  greatly  mistaken.  To  my  eyes  they 
stand  out  in  bold,  clear,  and  sharply-cut  relief.  I  ask  the  reader 

*  If  any  reader  supposes  that  there  is  anything  peculiar  or  extravagant  in 
the  position  I  take  up  about  the  authority  of  the  Articles,  as  compared  to  the 
Prayer-book,  I  ask  him  to  remember  that  Lord  Hatherley,  in  his  recent 
judgment  in  the  famous  "  Voysey  "  case,  takes  up  precisely  the  same  ground. 
These  are  his  words,  as  reported  in  the  Guardian:  "  We  have  not,  in  this  our 
decision,  referred  to  any  of  the  formularies  of  the  Chui'ch,  other  than  the 
Articles  of  Religion.  We  have  been  mindful  of  the  authorities  which  have 
held  that  pious  expressions  of  devotion  are  not  to  be  taken  as  binding  declara 
tions  of  doctrine  " 

In  commenting  on  this  judgment,  the  Solicitor 's  Journal ',  which  certainly 
is  not  the  organ  of  any  theological  party,  uses  the  following  remarkable 
language :  "  The  Judicial  Committee  have  adhered  to  the  principles  of 
previous  decisions  in  their  recent  judgment.  The  Articles  of  Religion,  and 
these  alone,  are  to  be  considered  as  the  code  of  doctrine  of  the  Church  of 
England. 


78  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

to  give  me  his  attention  for  a  very  few  minutes,  and  I  will  show 
him  what  I  mean. 

(1)  Let  us  mark,  then,  for  one  thing,  as  we  read  the  Articles, 
the  strong  and  decided  language  which  they  use  in  speaking  of 
things  which  are  essential  to  salvation. 

Concerning  the  nature  of  God  and  the  Holy  Trinity, — con 
cerning  the  sufficiency  and  authority  of  Scripture, — concerning 
the  sinfulness  and  helplessness  of  natural  man, — concerning 
justification  by  faith  alone, — concerning  the  place  and  value  of 
good  works, — concerning  salvation  only  by  the  name  of  Christ ; 
concerning  all  these  grand  foundations  of  the  Christian  religion, 
it  is  hard  to  conceive  language  more  decided,  clear,  distinct, 
ringing,  and  trumpet-toned  than  that  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles. 
There  is  no  doubtfulness,  or  hesitancy,  or  faltering,  or  timidity, 
or  uncertainty,  or  compromise  about  their  statements.  There  is 
no  attempt  to  gratify  undecided  theologians  by  saying,  "It  is 
probably  so," — or,  "Perhaps  it  may  be  so," — or,  "There  are 
some  grounds  for  thinking  so," — and  all  that  sort  of  language 
which  is  so  pleasing  to  what  are  called  "broad"  Christians. 
Xothing  of  the  kind  !  On  all  the  points  I  have  named  the 
Articles  speak  out  boldly,  roundly,  frankly,  and  honestly,  in  a 
most  unmistakable  tone.  "  This  is  the  Church  of  England's 
judgment,"  they  seem  to  say ;  and  "  these  are  the  views  which 
every  Churchman  ought  to  hold." 

I  ask  special  attention  to  this  point.  We  live  in  days  when 
many  loudly  declare  that  it  is  not  right  to  be  positive  about 
anything  in  religion.  The  clergyman  who  dares  to  say  of  any 
theological  question,  "  This  is  true,  and  that  is  false, — this  is 
right,  and  that  is  wrong," — is  pretty  sure  to  be  denounced  as  a 
narrow-minded,  illiberal,  uncharitable  man.  Nothing  delights 
many  Churchmen  so  much  as  to  proclaim  that  they  "  belong  to 
no  party," — that  they  are  "  moderate  men," — that  they  "  hold 
no  extreme  views."  Well !  I  only  ask  these  Churchmen  to 
settle  matters  with  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  I  want  no  clergy 
man  to  go  a  bit  beyond  the  authoritative  statements  of  his  own 
Church  ;  but  I  do  want  every  clergyman  not  to  fall  below  them. 
And  I  shall  always  maintain,  publicly  or  privately,  that  to  call 
any  one  an  "  extreme  "  man,  or  a  "  party "  man,  because  his 
doctrinal  views  are  in  harmony  with  the  bold,  decided  state 
ments  of  the  Articles,  is  neither  just,  nor  fair,  nor  reasonable, 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  *79 

nor  consistent  with  common  sense.  Give  me  the  clergyman  who, 
after  reading  the  Articles  to  his  congregation,  and  solemnly 
promising  to  abide  by  them,  acts  up  to  his  promise,  and  speaks 
out  boldly,  decidedly,  and  unhesitatingly,  like  a  man,  about  all 
the  leading  doctrines  of  Christianity.  As  for  the  clergyman 
who,  after  declaring  his  assent  to  the  Articles,  flinches  from 
their  doctrinal  distinctness,  and  preaches  hesitatingly,  as  if  he 
hardly  knew  what  he  believed,  I  am  sorry  for  him.  He  may  be 
a  charitable,  a  liberal,  and  a  learned  man,  but  he  is  not  in  the 
right  place  in  the  pulpit  of  the  Church  of  England. 

(2)  Let  us  mark,  in. the  next  place,  as  we  read  the  Articles, 
their  studied  moderation  about  things  non-essential  to  salvation, 
and  things  about  which  good  Christian  men  may  differ. 

About  sin  after  baptism, — about  predestination  and  election, 
— about  the  definition  of  the  Church, — about  the  ministry, — 
about  the  ceremonies  and  rights  of  every  particular  or  national 
Church, — about  all  these  points  it  is  most  striking  to  observe 
the  calm,  gentle,  tender,  conciliatory  tone  which  runs  throughout 
the  Articles ;  a  tone  the  more  remarkable  when  contrasted  with 
the  firm  and  decided  language  on  essential  points,  to  which  I 
have  just  been  referring. 

It  is  clear  as  daylight  to  my  mind,  that  the  authors  of  the1 
Articles  intended  to  admit  the  possibility  of  difference  on  the 
points  which  I  have  just  been  enumerating.  They  saw  the 
possibility  of  men  differing  about  predestination  and  election, 
as  Fletcher  and  Toplady  did.  How  cautious  are  their  state 
ments,  and  how  carefully  guarded  and  fenced  ! — They  believed 
that  there  might  be  Churches  differently  organized  to  our  own, 
that  there  might  be  many  good  Christian  ministers  who  were 
not  Episcopalians,  and  many  useful  rites  and  ceremonies  of 
worship  unlike  those  of  the  Church  of  England.  They  take 
care  to  say  nothing  which  could  possibly  give  offence. — They 
scrupulously  avoid  condemning  and  denouncing  other  Churches 
and  other  Christians.  In  short,  their  maxim  seems  to  have 
been,  "in  necessariis  unitas,  in  non-necessariis  libertas,  in  omnibus 
•cantos." 

I  greatly  admire  this  moderation  in  non-essentials.  I  heartily 
wish  that  the  spirit  of  it  had  been  more  acted  upon  in  days 
gone  by,  by  the  rulers  of  the  Church  of  England.  To  the  blind 
intolerance  and  fanaticism  of  days  gone  by,  to  the  insane  and 


80  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

senseless  wish  to  cram  Episcopacy  and  Liturgy  down  the  throats 
of  every  man  by  force,  and  excommunicate  him  if  he  would  not 
swallow  them, — to  this  we  owe  an  immense  proportion  of  our 
English  Dissent.  And  the  root  of  all  this  has  been  departure 
from  the  spirit  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles. 

I  frankly  own  that  I  belong  to  a  school  in  the  Church  of 
England,  which  is  incorrectly  and  unfairly  called  "low."  And 
why  are  we  called  so  ?  Simply  because  we  will  not  condemn 
every  Church  which  is  not  governed  by  Bishops ;  simply  because 
we  will  not  denounce  every  one  as  greatly  in  error  who  worships 
without  a  surplice  and  a  Prayer-book !  But  I  venture  to  tell 
our  accusers  that  their  charges  fall  very  lightly  on  us.  When 
they  can  prove  that  our  standard  is  not  the  standard  of  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles, — when  they  can  show  that  we  take  lower 
ground  than  our  own  Church  takes  in  her  authorized  Confession 
of  faith, — then  we  will  allow  there  is  something  in  what  they 
say  against  us.  But  till  they  can  do  that,  and  they  have  not 
done  it  yet,  I  tell  them  thai  we  shall  remain  unmoved.  We 
may  be  called  "low"  Churchmen,  but  we  are  "true." 

(3)  Let  us  mark,  in  the  next  place,  as  we  read  the  Articles, 
their  wise,  discreet,  and  well-balanced  statements  about  the  Sacra 
ments.  They  declare  plainly  the  divine  authority  of  Baptism 
and  the  Lord's  Supper.  They  use  high  and  reverent  language 
about  them  both,  as  means  of  grace,  "by  the  which  God  doth 
work  invisibly  in  us,  and  doth  not  only  quicken,  but  strengthen 
and  confirm  our  faith  in  Him." 

But  after  saying  all  this,  it  is  most  instructive  to  observe 
how  carefully  the  Articles  repudiate  the  Romish  doctrine  of 
grace  being  imparted  by  the  Sacraments  "ex  opere  operato." 
"The  Sacraments,"  says  the  Twenty-fifth  Article,  "were  not 
ordained  of  Christ  to  be  gazed  upon,  or  to  be  carried  about,  but 
that  we  should  duly  use  them.  And  in  such  only  as  worthily 
receive  the  same  they  have  a  wholesome  effect  or  operation." 

Now  if  there  is  any  one  thing  that  is  laid  to  the  charge  of 
us  Evangelical  clergy,  it  is  this, — that  we  deny  sacramental 
grace.  "  Excellent,  worthy,  hard-working  men,"  we  are  some 
times  called;  "but  unhappily  they  do  not  hold  right  Church 
views  about  the  Sacraments." — Men  who  talk  in  this  manner 
are  talking  rashly,  and  saying  what  they  cannot  prove.  Evan 
gelical  clergymen  yield  to  none  in  willingness  to  give  rightful 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  81 

honour  to  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  All  we  say  is,  that 
grace  is  not  tied  to  the  Sacraments,  and  that  a  man  may  receive 
them,  and  be  none  the  better  for  it.  And  what  is  all  this  but 
the  doctrine  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  ? 

(4)  Let  us  mark,  in  the  fourth  place,  as  we  read  the  Articles, 
the  thorouc/lily  Protestant  spirit  which  runs  throughout  them, 
and  the  boldness  of  their  language  about  Romish  error. 

What  says  the  Nineteenth  Article?  "The  Church  of  Rome 
hath  erred,  not  only  in  living  and  manner  of  ceremonies,  but 
also  in  matters  of  faith." 

What  says  the  Twenty  -  second  Article?  "The  Romish 
doctrine  concerning  purgatory,  pardons,  worshipping  and  adora 
tion,  as  well  of  images  as  of  reliques,  and  also  of  invocation  of 
saints,  is  a  fond  thing  vainly  invented,  and  grounded  upon  no 
warranty  of  Scripture,  but  rather  repugnant  to  the  Word  of 
God." 

Wliat  says  the  Twenty  -  fourth  Article?  It  forbids  the 
Romish  custom  of  having  public  prayers  and  ministering  the 
Sacraments  in  Latin. 

^  What  says  the  Twenty-fifth  Article  ?  It  declares  that  the 
five  Romish  sacraments  of  confirmation,  penance,  orders,  matri 
mony,  and  extreme  unction,  are  not  to  be  accounted  sacraments 
of  the  Gospel. 

What  says  ^  the  Twenty- eighth  Article?  It  declares  that 
"  transubstantiation,  or  the  change  of  the  substance  of  bread 
and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  cannot  be  proved  by  Holy  Writ, 
is  repugnant  to  the  plain  words  of  Scripture,  overthroweth  the 
nature  of  a  sacrament,  and  hath  given  occasion  to  many  super 
stitions."  It  also  declares  that  "the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  was  not  by  Christ's  ordinance  reserved,  carried  about, 
lifted  up,  or  worshipped." 

What  says  the  Thirtieth  Article  ?  "  The  cup  of  the  Lord  is 
not  to  be  denied  to  the  lay-people." 

What  saith  the  Thirty -first  Article?  "The  sacrifices  of 
masses,  in  which  it  was  commonly  said  the  priest  did  offer 
Christ  for  the  quick  and  dead,  to  have  remission  of  pain  and 
guilt,  were  blasphemous  fables  and  dangerous  deceit." 

What  says  the  Thirty-second  Article?  "Bishops,  priests, 
and^ deacons  are  not  commanded  by  God's  law  to  vow  the  estate 
of  single  life,  or  to  abstain  from  marriage." 


82  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

What  says  the  Thirty-seventh  Article]  "The  Bishop  of 
Rome  hath  no  jurisdiction  in  this  realm  of  England." 

Now  what  shall  we  say  to  all  this  1  Nine  times  over  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  condemn,  in  plain  and  unmistakable  language, 
the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  declare  in 
favour  of  what  must  be  called  Protestant  views.  And  yet  men 
dare  to  tell  us  that  we  Evangelical  clergymen  have  no  right  to 
denounce  Popery, — that  it  is  very  wrong  and  very  uncharitable 
to  be  so  hot  in  favour  of  Protestantism, — that  Romanism  is 
a  pretty  good  sort  of  thing, — and  that  by  making  such  a  piece 
of  work  about  Popery,  and  Protestantism,  and  Ritualism,  and 
semi-Popery,  we  are  only  troubling  the  country  and  doing  more 
harm  than  good.  Well !  I  am  content  to  point  to  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles.  There  is  my  apology !  There  is  my  defence  ! 
I  will  take  up  no  other  ground  at  present.  I  will  not  say,  as  I 
might  do,  that  Popery  is  an  unscriptural  system,  which  every 
free  nation  ought  to  dread,  and  every  Bible-reading  Christian 
of  any  nation  ought  to  oppose.  I  simply  point  to  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles.  I  ask  any  one  to  explain  how  any  English 
clergyman  can  be  acting  consistently,  if  he  does  not  oppose, 
denounce,  expose,  and  resist  Popery  in  every  shape,  either 
within  the  Church  or  without.  Other  Christians  may  do  as 
they  please,  and  countenance  Popery  if  they  like.  But  so  long 
as  the  Articles  stand  unrepealed  and  unaltered,  it  is  the  bounden 
duty  of  every  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England  to  oppose 
Popery. 

(5)  Let  us  mark,  in  the  last  place,  as  we  read  the  Articles, 
the  unvarying  reverence  with  which  they  always  speak  of  Holy 
Scripture.  The  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  no  doubt,  is  never 
distinctly  asserted.  It  is  evidently  taken  for  granted  as  a  first 
principle,  which  need  not  be  proved.  But  if  constant  refer 
ences  to  Scripture,  and  constant  appeals  to  the  authority  of 
Scripture,  as  God's  Word,  are  allowed  to  prove  anything,  in  no 
document  does  the  Bible  receive  more  honour  than  in  the 
Articles. 

The  Sixth  Article  declares  that  "Holy  Scripture  contains  all 
things  necessary  to  salvation,  and  that  whatsoever  is  not  read 
therein,  nor  may  be  proved  thereby,  is  not  to  be  required  of  any 
man,  that  it  should  be  believed  as  an  article  of  faith,  or  be 
thought  requisite  and  necessary  to  salvation." 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  83 

The  Eighth  Article  says  that  "the  three  Creeds  ought 
thoroughly  to  be  believed  and  received,  for  they  may  be  proved 
by  most  certain  warranty  of  Holy  Scripture." 

The  Twentieth  Article  says,  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  the  Church 
to  ordain  anything  that  is  contrary  to  God's  Word  written, 
neither  may  it  so  expound  one  place  of  Scripture  that  it  be 
repugnant  to  another." 

^  The  Twenty-first  Article  says  that  "things  ordained  by 
General  Councils  as  necessary  to  salvation,  have  neither  strength 
nor  authority,  unless  it  be  declared  that  they  be  taken  from 
Holy  Scripture." 

The  Twenty-second  Article  condemns  certain  Romish  functions, 
"because  they  are  grounded  on  no  warranty  of  Scripture,  but 
are  rather  repugnant  to  the  Word  of  God." 

The  Twenty  -  eighth  Article  condemns  Transubstantiation, 
"  because  it  cannot  be  proved  by  Holy  Writ,  but  is  repugnant 
to  the  plain  words  of  Scripture." 

The  Thirty-fourth  Article  says  that  "  traditions  and  ceremonies 
of  the  Church  may  be  changed,  so  long  as  nothing  is  ordained 
against  God's  Word." 

Now  I  see  in  all  this  abundant  proof  that  the  Bible  is  the 
rule  of  faith  in  the  Church  of  England,  and  that  no  doctrine  is 
u  Church  doctrine"  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  God's 
Word.  I  see  a  complete  answer  to  those  who  tell  us  that  we 
make  an  idol  of  the  Bible,  and  that  we  ought  to  go  to  the  voice 
of  the  Church  and  to  the  Prayer-book  for  direction.  I  see  that 
any  sense  placed  on  any  part  of  the  Prayer-book  which  is  not 
reconcilable  with  Scripture,  must  be  a  mistake,  and  ought  not  to  be 
received.  I  see,  above  all,  that  all  who  pour  contempt  on  the  Bible, 
as  an  uninspired,  imperfect,  defective  Book,  which  ought  not  to  be 
believed,  if  it  contradicts  "  modern  thought,"  are  taking  up  ground 
which  is  at  variance  with  the  Church's  own  Confession  of  faith. 
They  may  be  clever,  liberal,  scientific,  and  confident;  but  they  are 
contradicting  the  Articles,  and  they  are  not  sound  Churchmen. 

Such  are  the  leading  features,  in  my  judgment,  of  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles.  I  commend  them  to  the  attention  of  my  readers, 
and  ask  that  they  may  be  carefully  weighed.  No  doubt  men 
may  say  that  the  Articles  admit  of  more  than  one  interpretation, 
and  that  my  interpretation  is  not  the  correct  one.  My  reply  to 


84  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

all  tliis  is  short  and  simple.  I  ask  in  what  sense  the  Reformers 
who  drew  up  the  Articles  meant  them  to  be  interpreted  1  Let 
men  answer  that.  It  is  an  acknowledged  axiom  in  interpreting 
all  public  documents,  such  as  treaties,  covenants,  wills,  articles  of 
faith,  and  religious  formularies,  that  in  any  case  of  doubt  or 
dispute  the  true  sense  is  the  sense  of  those  who  drew  them  up 
and  imposed  them.  Waterland  and  Sanderson  have  abundantly 
shown  that.  Upon  this  principle  I  take  my  stand.  I  only 
want  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  to  be  interpreted  in  the  sense  in 
which  the  Reformers  first  imposed  them,  and  I  believe  it 
impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion  you  arrive  at.  That  con 
clusion  is,  that  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  are  in  general  tone, 
temper,  spirit,  intention,  and  meaning,  eminently  Protestant 
and  eminently  Evangelical. 

And  now  I  draw  my  subject  to  a  conclusion.  I  have  shown  the 
reader,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  what  the  Articles  are, — what 
is  the  position  and  authority  which  they  hold  in  the  Church 
of  England, — and  what  are  the  leading  features  of  their  contents. 
It  only  remains  for  me  to  point  out  a  few  practical  conclusions, 
which  I  venture  to  think  are  peculiarly  suited  to  the  times. 

(1)  In  the  first  place,  I  ask  every  Churchman  who  reads  this 
paper  to  read  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  regularly  at  least  once  every 
year,  and  to  make  himself  thoroughly  familiar  with  their  contents. 

It  is  not  a  reading  age,  I  fear.  Newspapers,  and  periodicals, 
and  shilling  novels  absorb  the  greater  part  of  the  time  given  to 
reading.  I  am  sorry  for  it.  If  I  could  only  reach  the  ear  of  all 
thinking  lay  Churchmen,  I  should  like  to  say,  "Do  read  your 
Articles."  As  for  clergymen,  if  I  had  my  own  way  I  would 
require  them  to  read  the  Articles  publicly  in  church  once  every  year. 

Ignorance,  I  am  compelled  to  say,  is  one  of  the  grand  dangers 
of  members  of  the  Church  of  England.  The  bulk  of  her  people 
neither  know,  nor  understand,  nor  seem  to  care  about  the  inside 
of  any  of  the  great  religious  questions  of  the  day.  Presbyterians 
know  their  system.  Baptists,  Independents,  and  Methodists 
know  theirs.  Papists  are  all  trained  controversialists.  Church 
men  alone,  as  a  body,  are  generally  very  ignorant  of  their  own 
Church,  and  all  its  privileges,  doctrines,  and  history.  Not  one 
in  twenty  could  tell  you  why  he  is  a  Churchman. 

Let  us  cast  aside  this  reproach.  Let  all  Churchmen  awake 
and  rub  their  eyes,  and  begin  to  read  up  their  own  Church  and 


THE  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES.  85 

its  doctrines.     And  if  any  man  wants  to  know  where  to  begin, 
I  advise  him  to  begin  with  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.* 

(2)  In  the  second  place,  I  ask  all  who  read  this  paper  to  teach  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  to  all  young  people  who  are  yet  of  an  age  to 
be  taught.    It  is  a  burning  shame  that  the  Articles  are  not  made 
an  essential  part  of  the  system  of  every  school  connected  with 
the  Church  of  England,  whether  for  high  or  low,  for  rich  or  poor. 

I  do  not  say  this  without  reason.  It  is  a  simple  fact,  that 
the  beginning  of  any  clear  doctrinal  views  I  have  ever  attained 
myself,  was  reading  up  the  Articles  at  Eton,  for  the  Newcastle 
Scholarship,  and  attending  a  lecture,  at  Christ  Church,  Oxford, 
on  the  Articles,  by  a  college  tutor.  I  shall  always  thank  God 
for  what  I  learned  then.  Before  that  time  I  really  knew  nothing 
systematically  of  Christianity.  I  knew  not  what  came  first  or 
what  last.  I  had  a  religion  without  order  in  my  head.  What 
I  found  good  myself  I  commend  to  others.  If  you  love  young 
people's  souls,  and  would  ground  them,  and  stablish  them,  and 
arm  them  against  error  betimes,  take  care  that  you  teach  them 
not  only  the  Catechism,  but  also  the  Articles. 

(3)  In  the  third  place,  I  advise  all  who  read  this  paper  to 
test  all  Churclimanship  by  the  test  of  the  Articles.     Be  not  carried 
away  by  those  who  talk  of  "nice  Church  views,"   "Catholic 
ceremonies,"  "holy,  earnest,  parish  priests,"  and  the  like.     Try 
all  that  is  preached  and  taught  by  one  simple  measure, — does  it  or 
does  it  not  agree  with  the  Articles  1    You  have  an  undoubted  right 
to  do  this,  and  no  English  clergyman  has  any  right  to  object 
to  your  doing  it.     Say  to  him,  if  he  does  object,  "  You  publicly 
read  and  subscribed  to  the  Articles  when  you  accepted  your  cure 
of  souls.     Do  you  or  do  you  not  abide  by  your  subscription  ? " 

This  is  the  simple  ground  we  take  up  in  the  various  societies 
which,  amidst  much  abuse,  obloquy,  and  opposition,  are  labour 
ing  to  maintain  the  Protestant  character  of  the  Church  of 
England.  They  are  not  intolerant,  whatever  some  may  please 
to  say.  They  do  not  want  to  narrow  the  limits  of  our  Church. 
But  we  do  say  that  any  one  who  holds  preferment  in  the  Church 
of  England  ought  to  be  bound  by  the  laws  of  the  Church  of 

*  The  best  book  for  any  one  to  study  who  wants  to  go  thoroughly  into  the 
subject  of  the  Articles,  is  a  volume  by  the  late  Dr.  Boultbee.  Head  of  St. 
John's  Hall,  Highbury,  entitled  The  Theology  of  the  Church  of  England. 
(Longmans.) 


86  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

England,  so  long  as  those  laws  are  unrepealed.  Repeal  the  Act  of 
Parliament  called  the  13th  of  Elizabeth,  and  cast  out  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles,  and  we  will  cease  to  oppose  Ritualism,  and  will 
concede  that  a  Churchman  may  be  anything,  or  everything,  in 
opinion.  But  so  long  as  things  are  as  they  are,  we  say  we  have 
a  right  to  demand  that  respect  should  be  paid  to  the  Articles. 

(4)  Finally,  let  me  advise  every  Churchman  who  values  his 
soul  never  to  be  ashamed  of  the  great  leading  doctrines  which  are 
so  nobly  set  forth  in  the  Articles. 

Never  mind  if  people  call  you  extreme,  party-spirited,  going 
too  far,  Puritanical,  ultra-Methodist,  and  the  like. — Ask  them  if 
they  have  ever  read  the  first  nineteen  Articles  of  their  own 
Church.  Tell  them,  so  long  as  you  are  a  Churchman,  you  will 
never  be  ashamed  of  holding  Church  doctrine,  and  that  you 
know  what  Church  doctrine  is,  if  they  do  not. 

Remember,  above  all,  that  nothing  but  clear,  distinct  views 
of  doctrine,  such  views  as  you  will  find  in  the  Articles,  will 
ever  give  you  peace  while  you  live,  and  comfort  when  you  die. 

"  Earnestness "  is  a  fine,  vague,  high-sounding  term,  and  is 
very  beautiful  to  look  at  and  talk  about,  when  we  are  well,  and 
happy,  and  prosperous.  But  when  the  stern  realities  of  life 
break  in  upon  us,  and  we  are  in  trouble, — when  the  valley  of 
death  looms  in  sight,  and  the  cold  river  must  be  crossed, — in 
seasons  like  those,  we  want  something  better  than  mere 
"  earnestness "  to  support  our  souls.  Oh,  no !  it  is  cold 
comfort  then,  as  our  feet  touch  the  chill  waters,  to  be  told, 
"  Xever  mind  !  Be  in  earnest !  Take  comfort !  Only  be  in 
earnest !  " — It  will  never,  never  do  !  We  want  then  to  know 
if  God  is  our  God,  if  Christ  is  our  Christ,  if  we  have  the  Spirit 
within  us,  if  our  sins  are  pardoned,  if  our  souls  are  justified,  if 
our  hearts  are  changed,  if  our  faith  is  genuine  and  real. 
"Earnestness"  will  not  be  enough  then.  It  will  prove  a  mere 
fine-weather  religion.  Nothing,  in  short,  will  do  in  that  solemn 
hour  but  clear,  distinct  doctrine,  embraced  by  our  inward  man, 
and  made  our  own.  "  Earnestness  "  then  proves  nothing  but  a 
dream.  Doctrines  such  as  those  set  forth  in  the  Articles  are 
the  only  doctrines  which  are  life,  and  health,  and  strength,  and 
peace.  Let  us  never  be  ashamed  of  laying  hold  of  them,  main 
taining  them,  and  making  them  our  own.  Those  doctrines  are 
the  religion  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  Church  of  England ! 


V. 
BAPTISM. 

THERE  is  perhaps  no  subject  in  Christianity  about  which  such 
difference  of  opinion  exists  as  the  sacrament  of  baptism.  The 
very  name  recalls  to  one's  mind  an  endless  list  of  strifes, 
disputes,  heart-burnings,  controversies,  and  divisions. 

It  is  a  subject,  moreover,  on  which  even  eminent  Christians 
have  long  been  greatly  divided.  Praying,  Bible-reading,  holy 
men,  who  can  agree  on  all  other  points,  find  themselves  hope 
lessly  divided  about  baptism.  The  fall  of  man  has  affected  the 
understanding  as  well  as  the  will.  Fallen  indeed  must  human 
nature  be,  when  millions  who  agree  about  sin,  and  Christ,  and 
grace,  are  as  the  poles  asunder  about  baptism. 

I  propose  in  the  following  pages  to  offer  a  few  remarks  on 
this  disputed  subject.  I  am  not  vain  enough  to  suppose  that  I 
can  throw  any  light  on  a  controversy  which  so  many  great  and 
good  men  have  handled  in  vain.  But  I  know  that  every  addi 
tional  witness  is  useful  in  a  disputed  case.  I  wish  to  strengthen 
the  hands  of  those  I  agree  with,  and  to  show  them  that  we  have 
no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  our  opinions.  I  wish  to  suggest  a 
few  things  for  the  consideration  of  those  I  do  not  agree  with, 
and  to  show  them  that  the  Scriptural  argument  in  this  matter 
is  not,  as  some  suppose,  all  on  one  side. 

There  are  four  points  which  I  propose  to  examine  in 
considering  the  subject : — 

I.  What  baptism  is, — its  nature. 

II.  In  what  manner  baptism  should  be  administered, — its 
mode. 

III.  Whq  ought  to  be  baptized, — its  subjects. 

IV.  What  place  baptism  ought  to  occupy  in  religion, — its 

true  position. 
If  I  can  supply  a  satisfactory  answer  to  these  four  questions, 

87 


88  KSOTS  UNTIED. 

I  feel  that  I  shall  have  contributed  something  to  the  clearing 
of  many  minds. 

I.  Let  us  consider  first  the  nature  of  baptism, — what  is  it  ? 

(1)  Baptism  is  an   ordinance  appointed  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  for  the  continual  admission  of  fresh  members  into  His 
visible  Church.     In   the  army  every  new  soldier   is  formally 
added  to  the  muster-roll  of  his  regiment.    In  a  school  every  new 
scholar  is  formally  entered  on  the  books  of  the  school.     And 
every  Christian  [begins  his  Church-membership  by  being  baptized.* 

(2)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  of  great  simplicity.     The  out 
ward  part  or  sign  is  water,  administered  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
The  inward  part,  or  thing  signified,  is  that  washing  in  the  blood 
of  Christ,  and  inward  cleansing  of  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
without   which   no    one    can  be  saved.     The   Twenty-seventh 
Article  of  the  Church  of  England  says  rightly, — "  Baptism  is 
not  only  a  sign  of  profession  and  mark  of  difference,  whereby 
Christian  men  are  discerned  from  others  that  be  not  christened, 
but  it  is  also  a  sign  of  regeneration  or  new  birth." 

(3)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  on  which  we  may  confidently 
expect  the  highest  blessings,  when  it  is  rightly  used.     It   is 
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Great  Head  of 
•the  Church,  would  solemnly  appoint  an  ordinance  which  was  to 
b  3  as  useless  to  the  soul  as  a  mere  human  enrolment  or  an  act 
of  civil  registration.     The  sacrament  we  are  considering  is  not 
a  mere  man-made  appointment,  but  an  institution  appointed  by 
the  King  of  kings.     "When  faith  and  prayer  accompany  baptism, 
and  a  diligent  use  of  Scriptural  means  follows  it,  we  are  justified 
in  looking  for   much  spiritual    blessing.     Without   faith  and 
prayer  baptism  becomes  a  mere  form. 

*  This  is  a  point  which  ought  to  be  carefully  noticed.  Here  lies  the  one 
simple  reason  why  the  children  of  Baptists,  or  any  other  unbaptized  persons, 
cannot  have  the  Burial  Service  of  the  Prayer-book  read  over  them,  when 
they  are  buried.  It  is  a  service  expressly  intended  for  members  of  the 
professing  Church.  An  unbaptized  person  is  not  such  a  member.  There  is, 
therefore,  no  Service  that  we  can  read.  To  suppose  that  we  pronounce  any 
opinion  on  a  man's  state  of  soul  and  consider  him  lost,  because  we  read  no 
Service  over  him,  is  simply  absurd  !  We  pronounce  no  opinion  at  all.  He 
may  be  in  paradise  with  the  penitent  thief  for  anything  we  know.  His  soul 
after  death  is  not  affected  either  by  reading  a  Service  or  by  not  reading  one. 
The  plain  reason  is  ive  have  nothing  to  read  ! 


BAPTISM.  89 


(4)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which  is  expressly  named  in  the 
New  Testament  about  eighty  times.     Almost  the  last  words  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were  a  command  to  baptize  :  "  Go  ye,  and 
teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  •   (Matt,  xxviii.  19.)     We 
find  Peter  saying  on  the  •  day  of  Pentecost,; — "  Kepent,  and  be 
baptized  every  one  of  you  ; " — and  asking  in  the  house  of  Cor 
nelius, — "  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be 
baptized  ? "    (Acts  ii.  38  ;  x.  47.)     We  find  St.  Paul  was  not  only 
baptized  himself,  but  baptized  disciples  wherever  he  went.     To 
say,  as  some  do,  in  the  face  of  these  texts,  that  baptism  is  an 
institution  of  no  importance,  is  to  pour  contempt  on  the  Bible. 
To  say,  as  others  do,  that  baptism  is  only  a  thing  of  the  heart,* 
and  not  an  outward  ordinance  at  all,  is  to  say  that  which  seems 
flatly  contradictory  to  the  Bible. 

(5)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which,  according  to  Scripture,  a 
man  may  receive,  and  yet  get  no  good  from  it.     Can  any  one 
doubt  that  Judas  Iscariot,  Simon  Magus,  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 
Demas,  Hymenaeus,  Philetus,  and  Nicolas,   were  all  baptized 
people?     Yet   what   benefit   did   they  receive  from   baptism? 
Clearly,  for  anything  that  we  can  see,  none  at  all !     Their  hearts 
were  "not  right  in  the  sight  of  God."     (Acts  viii.  21.)     They 
remained  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  and  were  "dead  while 
they  lived."     (Ephes.  ii.  1  ;  1  Tim.  v.  6.) 

(6)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which  in  Apostolic  times  went 
together  with  the  first  beginnings  of  a  man's  religion.     In  the 
very  day  that  many  of  the  early  Christians  repented  and  believed, 
in  that  very  day  they  were  baptized.     Baptism  was  the  expres- 

*  I  am  quite  aware  that  the  whole  body  of  Christians  called  Friends,  or 
Quakers,  reject  water-baptism,  and  allow  of  no  baptism  except  the  inward 
baptism  of  the  heart.  To  their  own  Master  they  must  stand  or  fall.  I  am 
not  their  Judge.  The  grace,  faith,  and  holiness  of  many  Quakers  are  beyond 
all  question.  They  are  simple  matters  of  fact.  Christians  like  Mrs.  Fry  and 
J.  J.  Gurney  most  evidently  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  would  reflect 
honour  on  any  Church.  "Would  God  that  many  baptized  Christians  were  like 
them  !  But  the  best  people  are  fallible  at  their  best.  How  people,  so  sensible 
and  well  read  as  many  Quakers  have  been  and  are,  can  possibly  refuse  to  see 
water-baptism  in  Scripture,  as  an  ordinance  obligatory  on  all  professing 
Christians,  is  a  problem  which  I  cannot  pretend  to  solve.  It  passes  my 
understanding.  I  can  only  suppose  that  God  allows  the  Quakers  to  be  a 
perpetual  testimony  against  Romish  views  of  water-baptism,  and  a  standing 
witness  to  the  Churches  that  God  can,  in  some  cases,  give  grace  without  the 
use  of  any  sacraments  at  all ! 


90  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

sion  of  their  new-born  faith,  and  the  starting-point  in  their 
Christianity.  ISTo  wonder  that  in  such  cases  it  was  regarded  as 
the  vehicle  of  all  spiritual  blessings.  The  Scriptural  expressions, 
"buried  with  Christ  in  baptism" — "putting  on  Christ  in 
baptism" — "baptism  doth  also  save  us" — would  be  full  of  deep 
meaning  to  such  persons.  (Rom.  vi.  4  ;  Col.  ii.  12  ;  Gal.  iii.  27  ; 
1  Pet.  iii.  21.)  They  would  exactly  tally  with  their  experience. 
But  to  apply  such  expressions  indiscriminately  to  the  baptism 
of  infants  in  our  own  day  is,  in  my  judgment,  unreasonable  and 
unfair.  It  is  an  application  of  Scripture  which,  I  believe,  was 
never  intended. 

(7)  Baptism  is  an  ordinance  which  a  man  may  never  receive, 
and  yet  be  a  true  Christian  and  be  saved.  The  case  of  the 
penitent  thief  is  sufficient  to  prove  this.  Here  was  a  man  who 
repented,  believed,  was  converted,  and  gave  evidence  of  true 
grace,  if  any  one  ever  did.  We  read  of  no  one  else  to  whom 
such  marvellous  words  were  addressed  as  the  famous  sentence, 
"To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise."  (Luke  xxiii.  42.) 
And  yet  there  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  this  man  was  ever 
baptized  at  all !  Without  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  he 
received  the  highest  spiritual  blessings  while  he  lived,  and  was 
with  Christ  in  paradise  when  he  died  !  To  assert,  in  the  face 
of  such  a  case,  that  baptism  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation 
is  something  monstrous.  To  say  that  baptism  is  the  only  means 
of  regeneration,  and  that  all  who  die  unbaptized  are  lost  for 
ever,  is  to  say  that  which  cannot  be  proved  by  Scripture,  and  is 
revolting  to  common  sense. 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  here.  I  commend  the  seven 
propositions  which  I  have  laid  down  to  the  serious  attention  of 
all  who  wish  to  obtain  clear  views  about  baptism.  In  con 
sidering  the  two  sacraments  of  the  Christian  religion,  I  hold  it 
to  be  of  primary  importance  to  put  away  from  us  the  vagueness 
and  mysteriousness  with  which  too  many  surround  them.  Above 
all,  let  us  be  careful  that  we  believe  neither  more  nor  less  about 
them  than  we  can  prove  by  plain  texts  of  Scripture. 

There  is  a  baptism  which  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation, 
beyond  all  question.  There  is  a  baptism  without  which  no  one, 
whether  old  or  young,  has  ever  gone  to  heaven.  But  what 
baptism  is  this  1  It  is  not  the  baptism  of  water,  but  the  inward 
baptism  which  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  to  the  heart.  It  is  not  a 


BAPTISM.  91 

baptism  which  any  man  can  offer,  whether  ordained  or  unordained. 
It  is  the  baptism  which  it  is  the  special  privilege  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  give  to  all  His  mystical  members.  It  is  not  a 
baptism  which  man's  eye  can  see,  but  an  invisible  operation  on 
the  inward  nature.  "Baptism,"  says  St.  Peter,  "saves  us." 
But  what  baptism  does  he  tell  us  he  means  1  Not  the  washing 
of  water,  "  not  the  putting  away  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  (1  Peter 
iii.  21.)  "By  one  spirit  are  we  all  baptized  into  one  body." 
(1  Cor.  xii.  13.)  It  is  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
to  give  this  inward  and  spiritual  baptism.  "He  it  is,"  said 
John  the  Baptist,  "which  baptizetli  with  the  Holy  Ghost." 
(John  i.  33.) 

Let  us  take  heed  that  we  know  something  of  this  saving 
baptism,  the  inward  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Without  this 
it  signifies  little  what  we  think  about  the  baptism  of  water.  No 
man,  whether  High  Churchman  or  Low  Churchman,  Baptist  or 
Episcopalian,  no  man  was  ever  yet  saved  without  the  baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  a  weighty  and  true  saying  of  the 
Regius  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge,  in  the  reign  of 
Edward  VI.,  — "By  the  baptism  of  water  AVC  are  received  into 
the  outward  Church  of  God  :  by  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  into 
the  inward."  (JBucer,  on  John  i.  33.) 

II.  Let  us  now  consider  the  mode  of  Baptism.  In  ichat  way 
ought  it  to  be  administered  ? 

This  is  a  point  on  which  a  wide  difference  of  opinion  prevails. 
Some  Christians  maintain  strongly  that  complete  immersion  in 
water  is  absolutely  necessary  and  essential  to  make  a  valid 
baptism.  They  hold  that  no  person  is  really  baptized  unless  he 
is  entirely  "dipped,"  arid  covered  over  with  water.  Others,  on 
the  contrary,  maintain  with  equal  decision  that  immersion  is 
not  necessary  at  all,  and  that  sprinkling,  or  pouring  a  small 
quantity  of  water  on  the  person  baptized,  fulfils  all  the  require 
ments  of  Christ. 

My  own  opinion  is  distinct  and  decided,  that  Scripture 
leaves  the  point  an  open  question.  I  can  find  nothing  in  the 
Bible  to  warrant  the  assertion  that  either  dipping,  or  pouring, 
or  sprinkling,  is  essential  to  baptism.  I  believe  it  would  be 
impossible  to  prove  that  either  way  of  baptizing  is  exclusively 
right,  or  that  either  is  downright  wrong.  So  long  as  water  is 


92  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

used  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,  the  precise  mode  of  admin 
istering  the  ordinance  is  left  an  open  question. 

This  is  the  view  adopted  by  the  Church  of  England.  The 
Baptismal  Service  expressly  sanctions  "dipping"  in  the  most 
plain  terms.*  To  say,  as  many  Baptists  do,  that  the  Church 
of  England  is  opposed  to  baptism  by  immersion,  is  a  melan 
choly  proof  of  the  ignorance  in  which  many  Dissenters  live. 
Thousands,  I  am  afraid,  find  fault  with  the  Prayer-book  without 
having  ever  examined  its  contents !  If  any  one  wishes  to  be 
baptized  by  "  dipping "  in  the  Church  of  England,  let  him 
understand  that  the  parish  clergyman  is  just  as  ready  to  dip 
him  as  the  Baptist  minister,  and  that  he  may  be  baptized  by 
"immersion"  in  church  as  well  as  in  chapel. 

There  is  a  large  body  of  Christians,  however,  who  are  not 
satisfied  with  this  moderate  view  of  the  question.  They  will 
have  it  that  baptism  by  dipping  or  immersion  is  the  only  Scrip 
tural  baptism.  They  say  that  all  the  persons  whose  baptism 
we  read  of  in  the  Bible  were  "dipped."  They  hold,  in  short, 
that  where  there  is  no  immersion  there  is  no  baptism. 

I  fear  it  is  almost  waste  of  time  to  attempt  to  say  anything 
on  this  much-disputed  question.  So  much  has  been  written  on 
both  sides  without  effect,  during  the  last  two  hundred  years, 
that  I  cannot  hope  to  throw  any  new  light  on  the  subject. 
The  utmost  that  I  shall  try  to  do  is  to  suggest  a  few  con 
siderations  to  any  whose  minds  are  in  doubt.  I  only  ask 
them  to  remember  that  I  do  not  say  that  baptism  by 
"  dipping "  is  positively  wrong.  All  I  say  is,  that  it  is 
not  absolutely  necessary,  and  is  not  absolutely  commanded  in 
Scripture. 

I  ask,  then,  any  doubting  mind  to  consider  whether  it  is  in 
the  least  probable  that  all  the  cases  of  baptism  described  in 
Scripture  were  cases  of  complete  immersion  ?  The  three 
thousand  baptized  in  one  day  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost  (Acts 
ii.  41), — the  jailor  at  Philippi  suddenly  baptized  at  midnight 
in  prison  (Acts  xvi.  33) — is  it  at  all  likely  or  probable  that 
they  were  all  "dipped"?  To  my  own  mind,  trying  to  take  an 

*  The  rubric  of  the  Prayer-book  Service  for  the  Public  Baptism  of  Infante 
says, — "If  the  godfather  and  godmother  shall  certify  to  the  priest  that 
the  child  may  well  endure  it,  he  shall  dip  it  in  the  water  discreetly  and 
warily." 


BAPTISM.  9  3 

impartial  view,  it  seems  in  the  highest  degree  improbable.  Let 
those  believe  it  who  can. 

I  ask  any  one  to  consider,  furthermore,  whether  it  is  at  all 
probable  that  a  mode  of  baptism  would  have  been  enjoined  as 
necessary,  which  in  some  climates  is  impracticable?  At  the 
North  and  South  Poles,  for  example,  the  temperature,  for  many 
months,  is  many  degrees  below  freezing-point.  In  tropical 
countries,  on  the  other  hand,  water  is  often  so  extremely  scarce 
that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  find  enough  for  common  drinking 
purposes.  Now  will  any  maintain  that  in  such  climates  there 
can  be  no  baptism  without  "  immersion  "  ?  Will  any  one  tell 
us  that  in  such  climates  it  is  really  necessary  that  every  candi 
date  for  baptism  should  be  completely  "  dipped  "  1  Let  those 
believe  it  who  can. 

I  ask  any  one  to  consider,  further,  whether  it  is  at  all  pro 
bable  that  a  mode  of  baptism  would  have  been  enjoined  which, 
in  some  conditions  of  health,  is  simply  impossible.  There  are 
thousands  of  persons  whose  lungs  and  general  constitution  are 
in  so  delicate  a  state  that  total  immersion  in  water,  and  especially 
in  cold  water,  would  be  certain  death  to  them.  Now  will 
any  maintain  that  such  persons  ought  to  be  debarred  from 
baptism  unless  they  are  "  dipped "  1  Let  those  believe  it 
who  can. 

I  ask  any  one  to  consider,  further,  whether  it  is  probable 
that  a  mode  of  baptizing  would  be  enjoined,  which  in  many 
countries  would  practically  exclude  women  from  baptism.  The 
sensitiveness  and  strictness  of  Eastern  nations  about  the  treat 
ment  of  their  wives  and  daughters  are  notorious  facts.  There 
are  many  parts  of  the  world  in  which  women  are  so  completely 
separated  and  secluded  from  the  other  sex,  that  there  is  the 
greatest  difficulty  in  even  speaking  to  them  about  religion.  To 
talk  of  such  an  ordinance  as  baptizing  them  by  "  immersion  " 
would,  in  hundreds  of  cases,  be  perfectly  absurd.  The  feelings 
of  fathers,  husbands,  and  brothers,  however  personally  disposed 
to  Christian  teaching,  would  be  revolted  by  the  mention  of  it. 
And  will  any  one  maintain  that  such  women  are. to  be  left  un- 
baptized  altogether  because  they  cannot  be  "  dipped  "  ?  Let 
those  believe  it  who  can. 

I  believe  I  might  well  leave  the  subject  of  the  mode  of 
baptism  at  this  point.  But  there  are  two  favourite  arguments 


04  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

which   the   advocates   of   immersion    are    constantly    bringing 
forward,  about  which  I  think  it  right  to  say  something. 

(a)  One  of  these  favourite  arguments  is  based  on  the  meaning 
of  the  Greek  word  in  the  New  Testament,  which  we  translate 
"  to  baptize."     It  is  constantly  asserted   that  this  word  can 
mean  nothing  else  but  dipping,  or  complete  "  immersion."     The 
reply  to  this  argument  is  short  and  simple.     The  assertion  is 
utterly  destitute  of  foundation.     Those  who  are  best  acquainted 
with  New  Testament  Greek  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that  to 
baptize  means  "  to  wash  or  cleanse  with  water,"  but  whether 
by  immersion  or  not  must  be  entirely  decided  by  the  context. 
We  read  in  St.  Luke  (xi.  38)  that  when  our  Lord  dined  with  a 
certain  Pharisee,  "  the  Pharisee  marvelled  that  He  had  not  first 
washed  before  dinner."     It  may  surprise  some  readers,  perhaps, 
to  hear  that  these  words  would  have  been  rendered  more  liter 
ally,  "  that  He  had  not  first  been  baptized  before  dinner." — Yet 
it  is  evident  to  common  sense  that  the  Pharisee  could  not  have 
expected  our  Lord  to  immerse  or  dip  Himself  over  head  in 
water  before  dining !     It  simply  means  that  he  expected  Him 
to  perform  some  ablution,  or  to  pour  water  over  His  hands, 
before  the  meal.     But  if  this  is  so,  what  becomes  of  the  argu 
ment  that  to  baptize  always  means  complete  "  immersion  "  ?     It 
is  cut  from  under  the  feet  of  the  advocate  of  "  dipping,"  and  to 
reason  further  about  it  is  mere  waste  of  time, 

(b)  Another   favourite   argument  in  favour   of   baptism   by 
immersion  is  drawn  from  the  expression  "buried  with  Christ  in 
baptism,"  which  St.  Paul  uses  on  two  occasions.     (Rom.  vi.  4 ; 
Col.  ii.  12.)     It  is  asserted  that  going  down  into  the  water  of 
baptism,  and  being  completely  "  dipped  "  under  it,  is  an  exact 
figure  of  Christ's  burial  and  coming  up  out  of  the  grave,  and 
represents  our  union  with  Christ  and  participation  in   all  the 
benefits  of  His  death  and  resurrection.     But  unfortunately  for 
this  argument  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  Christ's  burial 
was  a  going  down  into  a  hole  dug  in  the  ground.     On  the  con 
trary,  it  is  far  more  probable  that  His  grave  was  a  cave  cut  out 
of  the  side  of  a  rock,  like  that  of  Lazarus,  and  on  a  level  with 
the  surrounding  ground.     Such,  at  least,  was  the  common  mode 
of  burying  round  Jerusalem.   At  this  rate  there  is  no  resemblance; 
whatever  between  going  down  into  a  bath,  or  baptistry,  and  the 
burial  of  our  Lord.     The  actions  are  not  like  one  another. 


BAPTISM.  9  5 

That  by  profession  of  a  lively  faith  in  Christ  at  baptism  a 
believer  declares  his  union  with  Christ,  both  in  His  death  and 
resurrection,  is  undoubtedly  true.  But  to  say  that  in  "  going 
down  into  the  water"  he  is  burying  his  body  just  as  His 
Master's  body  was  buried  in  the  grave,  is  to  say  what  cannot  be 
proved. 

In  saying  all  this  I  should  be  very  sorry  to  be  mistaken. 
God  forbid  that  I  should  wound  the  feelings  of  any  brother 
who  has  conscientious  scruples  on  this  subject,  and  prefers 
baptism  by  dipping  to  baptism  by  sprinkling.  I  condemn  him 
not.  To  his  own  Master  he  stands  or  falls.  He  that  conscien 
tiously  prefers  dipping  may  be  dipped  in  the  Church  of  England, 
and  have  all  his  children  dipped  if  he  pleases.  What  I  contend 
for  is  liberty.  I  find  no  certain  law  laid  down  as  to  the  mode 
in  which  baptism  is  to  be  administered,  so  long  as  water  is  used 
in  the  name  of  the  Trinity.  Let  every  man  be  persuaded  in 
his  own  mind.  He  that  sprinkles  or  simply  pours  water  in 
baptism  has  no  right  to  excommunicate  him  that  dips ; — and  he 
that  dips  has  no  right  to  excommunicate  him  that  sprinkles  or 
pours  water.  Neither  of  them  can  possibly  prove  that  the  other 
is  entirely  wrong. 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  here.  Whatever  some  may 
think,  I  am  content  to  regard  the  precise  mode  of  baptizing  as 
a  thing  indifferent,  as  a  thing  on  which  every  one  may  use  his 
liberty.  I  firmly  believe  that  this  liberty  was  intended  of 
God.  It  is  in  keeping  with  many  other  things  in  the  Christian 
dispensation.  I  find  nothing  precise  laid  down  in  the  New 
Testament  about  ceremonies,  or  vestments,  or  liturgies,  or 
church  music,  or  the  shape  of  churches,  or  the  hours  of  service, 
or  the  quantity  of  bread  and  wine  to  be  used  at  the  Lord's 
Supper,  or  the  position  and  attitude  of  communicants.  On  all 
these  points  I  see  a  liberal  discretion  allowed  to  the  Church  of 
Christ.  So  long  as  things  are  "  done  to  edifying,"  the  principle 
of  the  New  Testament  is  to  allow  a  wide  liberty. 

I  hold  firmly,  myself,  that  the  validity  and  benefit  of  baptism 
do  not  depend  on  the  quantity  of  water  employed,  but  on  the 
state  of  heart  in  which  the  sacrament  is  used.  Those  who 
insist  on  every  grown-up  person  being  plunged  over  head  in  a 
baptistry,  and  those  who  insist  on  splashing  an  immense  handful 
of  water  in  the  face  of  every  tender  infant  they  receive  into  the 


96  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Church  at  the  font,  are  both  alike,  in  my  judgment,  greatly 
mistaken.  Both  are  attaching  far  more  importance  to  the 
quantity  of  water  used  than  I  can  find  warranted  in  Scripture. 
It  has  been  well  said  by  a  great  divine, — "A  little  drop  of 
water  may  serve  to  seal  the  fulness  of  divine  grace  in  baptizing 
as  well  as  a  small  piece  of  bread  and  the  least  tasting  of  wine 
in  the  Holy  Supper."  (Witsius,  Econ.  Fed  1.  4,  ch.  xvi.  30.) 
To  that  opinion  I  entirely  subscribe. 

III.  Let  us  next  consider  the  subjects  of  baptism.  To  whom 
ought  baptism  to  be  administered  ? 

It  is  impossible  to  handle  this  branch  of  the  question  without 
coming  into  direct  collision  with  the  opinions  of  others.  But 
I  hope  it  is  possible  to  handle  it  in  a  kindly  and  temperate 
spirit.  At  any  rate  it  is  no  use  to  avoid  discussion  for  fear  of 
offending  Baptists.  Disputed  points  in  theology  are  never 
likely  to  be  settled  unless  men  on  both  sides  will  say  out 
plainly  what  they  think,  and  give  their  reasons  for  their 
opinions.  To  avoid  the  subject,  because  it  is  a  controversial 
one,  is  neither  honest  nor  wise.  A  clergyman  has  no  right  to 
complain  that  his  parishioners  become  Baptists,  if  he  never 
instructs  them  about  infant  baptism. 

I  begin  by  laying  it  down  as  a  point  almost  undisputed,  that 
all  grown-up  converts  at  missionary  stations  among  the  heathen 
ought  to  be  baptized.  As  soon  as  they  embrace  the  Gospel  and 
make  a  credible  profession  of  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ, 
they  ought  at  once  to  receive  baptism.  This  is  the  doctrine 
and  practice  of  Episcopal,  Presbyterian,  Wesleyan,  and  Inde 
pendent  missionaries,  just  as  much  as  it  is  the  doctrine  of 
Baptists.  Let  there  be  no  mistake  on  this  point.  To  talk,  as 
some  Baptists  do,  of  "  believer's  baptism,"  as  if  it  was  a  kind 
of  baptism  peculiar  to  their  own  body,  is  simply  nonsense  ! 
Believer's  baptism  is  known  and  practised  in  every  successful 
Protestant  mission  throughout  the  world. 

But  I  now  go  a  step  further.  I  lay  it  down  as  a  Christian 
truth  that  the  children  of  all  professing  Christians  have  a  right 
to  baptism,  if  their  parents  require  it,  as  well  as  their  parents. 
Of  course  the  children  of  professed  unbelievers  and  heathen 
have  no  title  to  baptism,  so  long  as  they  are  under  the  charge 
of  their  parents.  But  the  children  of  professing  Christians  are 


BAPTISM.  9  7 


in  an  entirely  different  position.  If  their  fathers  and  mothers 
offer  them  to  be  baptized,  the  Church  ought  to  receive  them  in 
baptism,  and  has  no  right  to  refuse  them. 

It  is  precisely  at  this  point  that  the  grave  division  of  opinion 
exists  between  the  body  of  Christians  called  Baptists  and  the 
greater  part  of  Christians  throughout  the  world.  The  Baptist 
asserts  that  no  one  ought  to  be  baptized  who  does  not  make  a 
personal  profession  of  repentance  and  faith,  and  that  as  children 
cannot  do  this  they  ought  not  to  be  baptized.  I  think  that  this 
assertion  is  not  borne  out  by  Scripture,  and  I  shall  proceed  to 
give  the  reasons  why  I  think  so.  I  believe  it  can  be  shown 
that  ^  the  children  of  professing  Christians  have  a  right  to 
baptism,  and  that  it  is  a  complete  mistake  not  to  baptize  them. 

Let  me  remind  the  reader  at  the  outset,  that  the  question 
under  consideration  is  not  the  Baptismal  Service  of  the  Church 
of  England.  Whether  that  service  is  right  or  wrong, — whether 
it  is  useful  to  have  godfathers  and  godmothers, — are  not  the 
points  in  dispute.  It  is  mere  waste  of  time  to  say  anything 
about  them.*  The  question  before  us  is  simply  whether  infant 
baptism  is  right  in  principle.  That  it  is  right  is  held  by 
Presbyterians,  Independents,  and  Methodists,  who  use  no 
Prayer-book,  just  as  stoutly  as  it  is  by  Churchmen.  To  the 
consideration  of  this  one  question  I  shall  strictly  confine  myself. 
There  is  not  the  slightest  necessary  connection  between  the 
Liturgy  and  infant  baptism.  I  heartily  wish  that  some  people 
would  remember  this.  To  insist  on  dragging  in  the  Liturgy, 
and  mixing  it  up  with  the  abstract  question  of  infant  baptism, 
is  not  a  sign  of  good  logic,  fairness,  or  common  sense. 

Let  me  clear  the  way,  furthermore,  by  observing  that  I  will 
not  be  drawn  away  from  the  real  point  at  issue  by  the  ludicrous 
descriptions  which  Baptists  often  give  of  the  abuse  of  infant 
baptism.  No  doubt  it  is  easy  for  popular  writers  and  preachers 
among  the  Baptists,  to  draw  a  vivid  picture  of  an  ignorant, 
prayerless  couple  of  peasants,  bringing  an  unconscious  infant  to 
be  sprinkled  at  the  font  by  a  careless  sporting  parson !  It  is 
easy  to  finish  off  the  picture  by  saying,  "  What  good  can  infant 

*  Readers  who  wish  to  examine  the  true  meaning  of  the  Baptismal  Service 
are  requested  to  read  the  paper  in  this  volume,  called  "Prayer-book  State 
ments  about  Regeneration. 


98  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

baptism  do  1 "  Such  pictures  are  very  amusing,  perhaps,  _but 
they  are  no  argument  against  the  principle  of  infant  baptism. 
The  abuse  of  a  thing  is  no  proof  that  it  ought  to  be  disused  and 
is  wrong.  Moreover,  those  who  live  in  glass-houses  had  better 
not  throw  stones.  Strange  pictures  might  be  drawn  of  what 
happens  sometimes  in  chapels  at  adult  baptisms !  But  I  for 
bear.  I  want  the  reader  to  look  not  at  pictures  but  at 
Scriptural  principles. 

Let  me  now  supply  a  few  simple  reasons  why  I  hold,  in 
common  with  all  Episcopalians,  Presbyterians,  Methodists,  and 
Independents  throughout  the  world,  that  infant  baptism  is  a 
right  thing,  and  that  in  denying  baptism  to  children  the 
Baptists  are  mistaken.  The  reasons  are  as  follows. 

(a)  Children  were  admitted  into  the  Old  Testament  Church 
by  a  formal  ordinance,  from  the  time  of  Abraham  downwards. 
That  ordinance  was  circumcision.  It  was  an  ordinance  which 
God  Himself  appointed,  and  the  neglect  of  which  was  denounced 
as  a  great  sin.  It  was  an  ordinance  about  which  the  highest 
language  is  used  in  the  New  Testament.  St.  Paul  calls  it  "a 
seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith."  (Rom.  ii.  4.)  Now,  if 
children  were  considered  to  be  capable  of  admission  into  the 
Church  by  an  ordinance  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  difficult  to 
see  why  they  cannot  be  admitted  in  the  New.  The  general 
tendency  of  the  Gospel  is  to  increase  men's  spiritual  privileges 
and  not  to  diminish  them.  Nothing,  I  believe,  would  astonish 
a  Jewish  convert  so  much  as  to  tell  him  his  children  could  not 
be  baptized!  "If  they  are  fit  to  receive  circumcision,"  he 
would  reply,  "  why  are  they  not  fit  to  receive  baptism  1 "  And 
my  own  firm  conviction  has  long  been  that  no  Baptist  could 
give  him  an  answer.  In  fact  I  never  heard  of  a  converted  Jew 
becoming  a  Baptist,  and  I  never  saw  an  argument  against 
infant  baptism  that  might  not  have  been  equally  directed 
against  infant  circumcision.  No  man,  I  suppose,  in  his  sober 
senses,  would  presume  to  say  that  infant  circumcision  was 
wrong. 

(b)  The  baptism  of  children  is  nowhere  forbidden  in  the  New 
Testament.  There  is  not  a  single  text,  from  Matthew  to  Eevela- 
tion,  which  either  directly  or  indirectly  hints  that  infants  should 
not  be  baptized.  Some,  perhaps,  may  see  little  in  this  silence. 
To  my  mind  it  is  a  silence  full  of  meaning  and  instruction. 


BAPTISM.  99 

The  first  Christians,  be  it  remembered,  were  many  of  them  by 
birth  Jews.  They,  had  been  accustomed  in  the  Jewish  Church, 
before  their  conversion,  to  have  their  children  admitted  into 
church-membership  by  a  solemn  ordinance,  as  a  matter  of  course. 
Without  a  distinct  prohibition  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  they 
would  naturally  go  on  with  the  same  system  of  proceeding,  and 
bring  their  children  to  be  baptized.  But  ice  find  no  such  pro 
hibition  !  That  absence  of  a  prohibition,  to  my  mind,  speaks 
volumes.  It  satisfies  me  that  no  change  was  intended  by  Christ 
about  children.  If  He  had  intended  a  change  He  would  have 
said  something  to  teach  it.  But  He  says  not  a  word !  That 
very  silence  is,  to  my  mind,  a  most  powerful  and  convincing 
argument.  As  God  commanded  Old  Testament  children  to  be 
circumcised,  so  God  intends  New  Testament  children  to  be 
baptized. 

(c)  The  baptism  of  households  is  specially  mentioned  in  the 
New  Testament.     We  read  in  the  Acts  that  Lydia  was  bap 
tized  uand  her  household,"  and  that  the  jailer  of  Philippi  "was 
baptized:  he  and  all  his."     (Acts  xvi.   15,  33.)     We  read  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  that  St.   Paul  baptized   "the 
household  of  Stephanas."     (1  Cor.  i.  16.)     Now  what  meaning 
would  any  one  attach  to  these  expressions,  if  he  had  no  theory 
to  maintain,  and  could  view  them  dispassionately  ?    Would  he  not 
explain  the  "  household  "  to  include  young  as  well  as  old, — chil 
dren  as  well  as  grown-up  people  1   Who  doubts  when  he  reads  the 
words  of  Joseph  in  Genesis, — "  take  food  for  the  famine  of 
your  households  "  (Gen.  xlii.  33) ;-— or,   "  take  your  father  and 
your  households  and  come  unto  me"  (Gen.  xlv.  18),  that  chil 
dren  are  included?     Who  can  possibly  deny  that  when  God 
said  to  Noah,  "  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark,"  He 
meant  Noah's  sons?     (Gen.  vii.  1.)     For  my  own  part  I  cannot 
see  how  these  questions  can  be  answered  without  establishing 
the  principle  of  infant  baptism.     Admitting  most  fully  that  it 
is  not  directly  said  that  St.  Paul  baptized  little  children,  it 
seems  to  my  mind  the  highest  probability  that  the   "house 
holds"  he  baptized  comprised  children   as  well   as   grown-up 
people. 

(d)  The  behamoiir  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  little  children, 
as  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  is  very  peculiar  and  full  of  meaning. 
The  well-known  passage  in  St.  Mark  is  an  instance  of  what  I 


100  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

mean.  "They  brought  young  children*  to  Him,  that  He 
should  touch  them :  and  His  disciples  rebuked  those  that 
brought  them.  But  when  Jesus  saw  it,  He  was  much  displeased, 
and  said  unto  them,  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto 
Me,  and  forbid  them  not :  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Yerily  I  say  unto  you,  "Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom 
of  God  as  a  little  child,  he  shall  not  enter  therein.  And  He 
took  them  up  in  His  arms,  put  His  hands  upon  them,  and 
blessed  them. "  (Mark  x.  1 3-1 6. ) 

Now  I  do  not  pretend  for  a  moment  to  say  that  this  passage 
is  a  direct  proof  of  infant  baptism.  It  is  nothing  of  the  kind. 
But  I  do  say  that  it  supplies  a  curious  answer  to  some  of  the 
arguments  in  common  use  among  those  who  object  to  infant 
baptism.  That  infants  are  capable  of  receiving  some  benefit 
from  our  Lord,  that  the  conduct  of  those  who  would  have  kept 
them  from  Him  was  wrong  in  our  Lord's  eyes,  that  He  was 
ready  and  willing  to  bless  them,  even  when  they  were  too  young 
to  understand  what  He  said  or  did, — all  these  things  stand  out 
as  clearly  as  if  written  with  a  sunbeam  !  A  direct  argument  in 
favour  of  infant  baptism  the  passage  certainly  is  not.  But  a 
stronger  indirect  testimony  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  conceive. 

I  might  easily  add  to  these  arguments.  I  might  strengthen 
the  position  I  have  taken  up  by  several  considerations  which 
seem  to  me  to  deserve  very  serious  attention. 

I  might  show,  from  the  writings  of  old  Dr.  Lightfoot,  that 
the  baptism  of  little  children  was  a  practice  with  which  the 
Jews  were  perfectly  familiar.  When  proselytes  were  received 
into  the  Jewish  Church  by  baptism,  before  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  came,  their  infants  were  received,  and  baptized  with 
them,  as  a  matter  of  course. 

I  might  show  that  infant  baptism  was  uniformly  practised 
by  all  the  early  Christians.  Every  Christian  writer  of  any 
repute  during  the  first  1500  years  after  Christ,  with  the  single 
exception  of  perhaps  Tertullian,  speaks  of  infant  baptism  as  a 
custom  which  the  Church  has  always  maintained. 

I  might  show  that  the  vast  majority  of  eminent  Christians 


*  In  the  parallel  passage  in  St.  Luke's  Gospel  the  word  "infants"  is  used, 
and  the  Greek  word  so  rendered  can  only  be  used  of  infants  too  young  to 
speak  or  be  called  intelligent 


BAPTISM. 

from  the  period  of  the  Protestant  Reformation  down  to  the 
present  day,  have  maintained  the  rights  of  infants  to  be  bap 
tized.  Luther,  Calvin,  Melanchthon,  and  all  the  Continental 
Reformers, — Cranmer,  Ridley,  Latimer,  and  all  the  English 
Reformers,  —  the  great  body  of  all  the  English  Puritans, — 
the  whole  of  the  Episcopal,  Presbyterian,  Independent,  and 
Methodist  Churches  of  the  present  day, — are  all  of  one  mind 
on  this  point.  They  all  hold  infant  baptism  ! 

But  I  will  not  weary  the  reader  by  going  over  this  ground.  I 
will  proceed  to  notice  two  arguments  which  are  commonly  used 
against  infant  baptism,  and  are  thought  by  some  to  be  unanswer 
able.  Whether  they  really  are  so  I  will  leave  the  reader  to  judge. 

(1)  The  first  favourite  argument  against  infant  baptism  is 
the  entire  absence  of  any  direct  text  or  precept  in  its  favour  in 
the  New  Testament.  "  Show  me  a  plain  text,"  says  many  a 
Baptist,  "  commanding  me  to  baptize  little  children.  Without 
a  plain  text  the  thing  ought  not  to  be  done." 

I  reply,  for  one  thing,  that  the  absence  of  any  text  about 
infant  baptism  is,  to  my  mind,  one  of  the  strongest  evidences 
in  its  favour.  That  infants  were  formally  admitted  into  the 
Church  by  an  outward  ordinance,  for  1800  years  before  Christ 
came,  is  a  fact  that  cannot  be  denied.  Now,  if  he  had  meant 
to  change  the  practice,  and  exclude  infants  from  baptism,  I 
should  expect  to  find  some  plain  text  about  it.  But  I  find  none, 
and  therefore  I  conclude  that  there  was  to  be  no  alteration  and 
no  change.  The  very  absence  of  any  direct  command,  on  which 
the  Baptists  lay  such  stress,  is,  in  reality,  one  of  the  strongest 
arguments  against  them  !  No  change  and  therefore  no  text ! 

But  I  reply,  for  another  thing,  that  the  absence  of  some 
plain  text  or  command  is  not  a  sufficient  argument  against 
infant  baptism.  There  are  not  a  few  things  which  can  be 
proved  and  inferred  from  Scripture,  though  they  are  not 
plainly  and  directly  taught.  Let  the  Baptist  show  us  a  single 
plain  text  which  directly  warrants  the  admission  of  women  to 
the  Lord's  Supper. — Let  him  show  us  one  which  directly  teaches 
the  keeping  of  the  Sabbath  011  the  first  day  of  the  week  instead 
of  the  seventh. — Let  him  show  us  one  which  directly  forbids 
gambling.  Any  well-instructed  Baptist  knows  that  it  cannot  be 
done.  But  surely,  if  this  is  the  case,  there  is  an  end  of  this  famous 
argument  against  infant  baptism  !  It  falls  to  the  ground. 


102  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

(2)  The  second  favourite  argument  against  infant  baptism  is 
the  inability  of  infants  to  repent  and  believe.  "  What  can  be 
more  monstrous,"  says  many  a  Baptist,  "  than  to  administer  an 
ordinance  to  an  unconscious  babe  1  It  cannot  possibly  know 
anything  of  repentance  and  faith,  and  therefore  it  ought  not  to 
be  baptized.  The  Scripture  says,  '  He  that  believeth  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved;'  and,  'Repent,  and  be  baptized.'" 
(Markxvi.  16;  Acts  ii.  38.) 

In  reply  to  this  argument,  I  ask  to  be  shown  a  single  text 
which  says  that  nobody  ought  to  be  baptized  until  he  repents 
and  believes.  I  shall  ask  in  vain.  The  texts  just  quoted  prove 
conclusively  that  grown-up  people  who  repent  and  believe  when 
missionaries  preach  the  Gospel  to  them,  ought  at  once  to  be 
baptized.  But  they  do  not  prove  that  their  children  ought  not 
to  be  baptized  together  with  them,  even  though  they  are  too 
young  to  believe.  I  find  St.  Paul  baptized  "the  household  of 
Stephanas  "  (1  Cor.  i.  16) ;  but  I  do  not  find  a  word  about  their 
believing  at  the  time  of  their  baptism.  The  truth  is  that  the 
often-quoted  texts,  "He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved,"— and  "Repent  ye,  and  be  baptized,"  will  never  carry 
the  weight  that  Baptists  lay  upon  them.  To  assert  that  they 
forbid  any  one  to  be  baptized  unless  he  repents  and  believes,  is 
to  put  a  meaning  on  the  words  which  they  were  never  meant  t<  > 
bear.  They  leave  the  whole  question  of  infants  entirely  out  of 
sight.  The  text  "nobody  shall  be  baptized  except  he  repents 
and  believes,"  would  no  doubt  have  been  a  very  conclusive  one. 
But  such  a  text  cannot  be  found  ! 

After  all,  will  any  one  tell  us  that  an  intelligent  profession  of 
repentance  and  faith  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation? 
Would  even  the  most  rigid  Baptist  say  that  because  infants 
cannot  believe,  all  infants  must  be  damned  1  Yet  our  Lord  said 
plainly,  "He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  (Mark 
xvi.  16.) — Will  any  man  pretend  to  say  that  infants  cannot 
receive  grace  and  the  Holy  Ghost  1  John  the  Baptist,  we  know, 
was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb.  (Luke 
i.  15.) — Will  any  one  dare  to  tell  us  that  infants  cannot  be  elect, 
— cannot  be  in  the  covenant, — cannot  be  members  of  Christ,— 
cannot  be  children  of  God, — cannot  have  new  hearts, — cannot 
be  bom  again, — cannot  go  to  heaven  when  they  die  1 — These 
are  solemn  and  serious  questions.  I  cannot  believe  that  any 


BAPTISM.  103 

well-informed  Baptist  would  give  them  any  but  one  answer. 
Yet  surely  those  who  may  be  members  of  the  glorious  Church 
above,  may  be  admitted  to  the  Church  below  !  Those  who  are 
washed  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  may  surely  be  washed  with 
the  water  of  baptism  !  Those  who  can  be  capable  of  being 
baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  may  surely  be  baptized  with 
water !  Let  these  things  be  calmly  weighed.  I  have  seen  many 
arguments  against  infant  baptism,  which,  traced  to  their  logical 
conclusion,  are  arguments  against  infant  salvation,  and  condemn 
all  infants  to  eternal  ruin  ! 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  here.  I  am  almost  ashamed 
of  having  said  so  much  about  it.  But  the  times  in  which  we 
live  are  my  plea  and  justification.  I  do  not  write  so  much  to 
convince  Baptists,  as  to  establish  and  confirm  Churchmen. 
I  have  often  been  surprised  to  see  how  ignorant  some  Church 
men  are  of  the  grounds  on  which  infant  baptism  may  be 
defended.  If  I  have  done  anything  to  show  Churchmen  the 
strength  of  their  own  position,  I  feel  that  I  shall  not  have 
written  in  vain. 

IV.  Let  us  now  consider,  in  the  last  place,  what  position 
baptism  ought  to  hold  in  our  religion. 

This  is  a  point  of  great  importance.  In  matters  of  opinion 
man  is  ever  liable  to  go  into  extremes.  In  nothing  does  this 
tendency  appear  so  strongly  as  in  the  matter  of  religion.  In 
no  part  of  religion  is  man  in  so  much  danger  of  erring,  either  on 
the  right  hand  or  the  left,  as  about  the  sacraments.  In  order 
to  arrive  at  a  settled  judgment  about  baptism,  we  must  beware 
both  of  the  error  of  defect,  and  of  the  error  of  excess. 

We  must  beware,  for  one  thing,  of  despising  baptism.  This 
is  the  error  of  defect.  Many  in  the  present  day  seem  to  regard 
it  with  perfect  indifference.  They  pass  it  by,  and  give  it  no 
place  or  position  in  their  religion.  Because,  in  many  cases,  it 
seems  to  confer  no  benefit,  they  appear  to  jump  to  the  con 
clusion  that  it  can  confer  none.  They  care  nothing  if  baptism 
is  never  named  in  the  sermon.  They  dislike  to  have  it  publicly 
administered  in  the  congregation.  In  short,  they  seem  to  regard 
the  whole  subject  of  baptism  as  a  troublesome  question,  which 
they  are  determined  to  let  alone.  They  are  neither  satisfied 
with  it,  nor  without  it. 


104  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Xow,  I  only  ask  such  persons  to  consider  gravely,  whether 
their  attitude  of  mind  is  justified  by  Scripture.  Let  them 
remember  our  Lord's  distinct  and  precise  command  to  "  baptize," 
when  He  left  His  disciples  alone  in  the  world.  Let  them 
remember  the  invariable  practice  of  the  Apostles,  wherever 
they  went  preaching  the  Gospel.  Let  them  mark  the  language 
used  about  baptism  in  several  places  in  the  Epistles.  Now,  is 
it  likely, — is  it  probable, — is  it  agreeable  to  reason  and  common 
sense, — that  baptism  can  be  safely  regarded  as  a  dropped  subject, 
and  quietly  laid  on  the  shelf  1  Surely,  I  think  these  questions 
can  only  receive  one  answer. 

It  is  simply  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  Great  Head  of 
the  Church  would  burden  His  people  in  all  ages  with  an  empty, 
powerless,  unprofitable  institution.  It  is  ridiculous  to  suppose  His 
Apostles  would  speak  as  they  do  about  baptism,  if,  in  no  case,  and 
under  no  circumstances,  could  it  be  of  any  use  or  help  to  man's 
soul.  Let  these  things  be  calmly  weighed.  Let  us  take  heed,  lest 
in  fleeing  from  blind  superstition,  we  are  found  equally  blind  in 
another  way,  and  pour  contempt  on  an  appointment  of  Christ. 

We  must  beware,  for  another  thing,  of  makiny  an  idol  of 
baptism.  This  is  the  error  of  excess.  Many  in  the  present 
day  exalt  baptism  to  a  position  which  nothing  in  Scripture  can 
possibly  justify.  If  they  hold  infant  baptism,  they  will  tell 
you  that  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  invariably  accompanies 
the  administration  of  the  ordinance, — that  in  every  case,  a  seed 
of  Divine  life  is  implanted  in  the  heart,  to  which  all  subsequent 
religious  movement  must  be  traced, — and  that  all  baptized 
children  are,  as  a  matter  of  course,  born  again,  and  made 
partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost !— If  they  do  not  hold  infant 
baptism,  they  will  tell  you  that  to  go  down  into  the  water  with 
a  profession  of  faith  and  repentance  is  the  very  turning-point  in 
a  man's  religion, — that  until  we  have  gone  down  into  the  water 
we  are  nothing, — and  that  when  we  have  gone  clown  into  the 
water,  we  have  taken  the  first  step  toward  heaven !  It  is 
notorious  that  many  High  Churchmen  and  Baptists  hold  these 
opinions,  though  not  all.  And  I  say  that,  although  they  may 
not  mean  it,  they  are  practically  making  an  idol  of  baptism. 

I  ask  all  persons  who  hold  these  exceedingly  high  and  lofty 
views  of  baptism,  to  consider  seriously  what  warrant  they  have 
in  the  Bible  for  their  opinions.  To  quote  texts  in  which  the 


BAPTISM.  105 

greatest  privileges  and  blessings  are  connected  with  baptism,  is 
not  enough.  What  we  want  are  plain  texts  which  show  that 
these  blessings  and  privileges  are  always  and  invariably  con 
ferred.  The  question  to  be  settled  is  not  whether  a  child  may 
be  born  again  and  receive  grace  in  baptism,  but  whether  all 
children  are  bom  again,  and  receive  grace  when  they  are 
baptized. — The  question  is  not  whether  an  adult  may  "put  on 
Christ "  when  he  goes  down  into  the  water,  but  whether  all  do 
as  a  matter  of  course.  Surely  these  things  demand  grave  and 
calm  consideration  ! — It  is  positively  wearisome  to  read  the 
sweeping  and  illogical  assertions  which  are  often  made  upon 
this  subject.  To  tell  us,  for  example,  that  our  Lord's  famous 
words  to  Nicodemus  (John  iii.  5),  teach  anything  more  than  the 
(jcneral  necessity  of  being  "  born  of  water  and  the  spirit,"  is  an 
insult  to  common  sense.  Whether  all  persons  baptized  are 
"  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit "  is  another  question  altogether, 
and  one  which  the  text  never  touches  at  all.  To  assert  that  it 
is  taught  in  the  text,  is  just  as  illogical  as  the  common  assertion 
of  the  Baptist,  when  he  tells  you  that  because  Jesus  said,  "  He 
that  belie veth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved," — therefore 
nobody  ought  to  be  baptized  until  he  believes  ! 

The  right  position  of  baptism  can  only  be  decided  by  a  careful 
observation  of  the  language  of  Scripture  about  it.  Let  a  man 
read  the  Kew  Testament  honestly  and  impartially  for  himself. 
Let  him  come  to  the  reading  of  it  with  an  unprejudiced,  fair, 
and  unbiassed  mind.  Let  him  not  bring  with  him  pre-conceived 
ideas,  and  a  blind  reverence  for  the  opinion  of  any  unin 
spired  writing,  of  any  man,  or  of  any  set  of  men.  Let  him 
simply  ask  the  question, — "  What  does  Scripture  teach  about 
baptism,  and  its  place  in  Christian  theology  ? " — and  I  have 
little  doubt  as  to  the  conclusion  he  will  come  to.  He  will 
neither  trample  baptism  under  his  feet,  nor  exalt  it  over  his  head. 

(a)  He  will  find  that  baptism  is  frequently  mentioned,  and 
yet  not  so  frequently  as  to  lead  us  to  think  that  it  is  the  very 
first,  chief,  and  foremost  thing  in  Christianity.  In  fourteen 
out  of  twenty-one  Epistles,  baptism  is  not  even  named.  In  five 
out  of  the  remaining  seven,  it  is  only  mentioned  once.  In  one 
of  the  remaining  two,  it  is  only  mentioned  twice.  In  the  two 
pastoral  Epistles  to  Timothy  it  is  not  mentioned  at  all.  There 
is,  in  short,  only  one  Epistle,  viz.,  the  first  to  the  Corinthians, 


106  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

in  which  baptism  is  even  named  on  more  than  two  occasions. 
And,  singularly  enough,  this  is  the  very  Epistle  in  which  St. 
Paul  says,  "  I  thank  God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you," — and 
"  Christ  sent  me  not  be  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  Gospel." 
(1  Cor.  i.  14,  17.) 

(b)  He  will  find  that  baptism  is  spoken  of  with  deep  rever 
ence,  and  in  close  connection  with  the  highest  privileges  and 
blessings.     Baptized  people  are  said  to  be  "  buried  with  Christ," 
—to  have  "  put  on  Christ," — to  have  "  risen  again," — and  even 
(by  straining  a  doubtful  text)  to  have  the  "washing  of  regenera 
tion."     But  he  will  also  find  that  Judas  Iscariot,  Ananias  and 
Sappliira,  Simon  Magus,  and    others,  were  baptized,  and  yet 
gave  no  evidence  of  having  been  born  again.    He  will  also  see  that 
in  the  first  Epistle  of  John,  people  "born  of  God"  are  said  to  have 
certain  marks  and   characteristics  which   myriads  of   baptized 
persons  never  possess  at  any  period  of  their  lives.     (1  John  ii.  29  \ 
iii.  9;  v.  1,  4,  18.)     And  not  least,  he  will  find  St.  Peter  declar 
ing  that  the  baptism  which  saves  is  "  not  the  putting  away  the 
filth  of   the    flesh,"  the  mere  washing  of  the  body,  but  the 
"  answer  of  a  good  conscience."     (1  Peter  iii.  21.) 

(c)  Finally,  he  will  discover  that  while  baptism  is  frequently 
spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament,  there  are  other  subjects  which 
are  spoken    of   much  more  frequently.     Faith,  hope,  charity, 
God's   grace,   Christ's   offices,   the   work    of   the    Holy  Ghost, 
redemption,  justification,  the  nature  of  Christian  holiness, — all 
these  arc  points  about  which  he  will  find  far  more  than  about 
baptism.     Above  all,  he  will  find,  if  he  marks  the  language  of 
Scripture  about  the  Old  Testament  sacrament  of  circumcision, 
that  the  value  of  God's  ordinances  depends  entirely  on  the  spirit 
in  which  they  are  received,  and  the  heart  of  the  receiver.     "  In 
Jesus   Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,   nor  un- 
circumcision  ;    but  faith  which  workcth  by  love, — but  a  new 
creature."     (Gal.  v.  6;  vi.  15.)     "He  is  not  a  Jew  which  is 
one    outwardly ;    neither   is  that    circumcision   which  is    out 
ward  in  the  flesh :  but  he  is  a  Jew  which  is  one  inwardly ;  and 
circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart, in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter; 
whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God."     (Rom.  ii.  28,  29.) 

Tt  only  remains  for  me  now  to  say  a  few  words  by  way  of 
practical  conclusion  to  the  whole  paper.  The  nature,  manner, 
subjects,  and  position  of  baptism  have  been  severally  considered. 


BAPTISM.  107 

Let  me  now  show  the  reader  the  special  lessons  to  which  I  think 
attention  ought  to  be  directed. 

(1)  For  one  thing,  I  wish  to  urge  on  all  who  study  the  much- 
disputed  subject  of  baptism,  the  importance  of  aiming  at  simple 
views  of  this  sacrament.     The  dim,  hazy,  swelling  words,  which 
are  often  used  by  writers  about  baptism,  have  been  fruitful 
sources  of  strange    and   unscriptural  views  of  the  ordinance. 
Poets,    and   hymn-composers,    and   Romish    theologians,    have 
flooded   the  world  with  so  much  high-flown  and  rhapsodical 
language  on  the  point,  that  the  minds  of  many  have   been 
thoroughly  swamped  and  confounded.    Thousands  have  imbibed 
notions  about  baptism  from  poetry,  without  knowing  it,  for 
which  they  can  show  no  warrant  in  God's  Word.     Milton's 
Paradise  Lost  is  the  sole  parent  of  many  a  current  view  of 
Satan's  agency ;  and  uninspired  poetry  is  the   sole  parent  of 
many  a  man's  views  of  baptism  in  the  present  day. 

Once  for  all,  let  me  entreat  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  hold 
no  doctrine  about  baptism  which  is  not  plainly  taught  in  God's 
Word.  Let  him  beware  of  maintaining  any  theory,  however 
plausible,  which  cannot  be  supported  by  Scripture.  In  religion, 
it  matters  nothing  who  says  a  thing,  or  how  beautifully  he  says 
it.  The  only  question  we  ought  to  ask  is  this, — "  Is  it  written 
in  the  Bible  ?  what  saith  the  Lord  1 " 

(2)  For  another  thing,  I  wish  to  urge  on  many  of  my  fellow 
Churchmen  the  dangerous  tendency  of  extravagantly  high  views 
of  the   efficacy  of  baptism.     I  have   no  wish  to  conceal  my 
meaning.    I  refer  to  those  Churchmen  who  maintain  that  grace  in 
variably  accompanies  baptism,  and  that  all  baptized  infants  are  in 
baptism  born  again.  I  ask  such  persons,  in  all  courtesy  and  brotherly 
kindness,  to  consider  seriously  the  dangerous  tendency  of  their 
views,  and  the  consequences  which  logically  result  from  them. 

They  seem  to  me,  and  to  many  others,  to  degrade  a  holy 
ordinance  appointed  by  Christ  into  a  mere  charm,  which  is  to 
act  mechanically,  like  a  medicine  acting  on  the  body,  without 
any  movement  of  a  man's  heart  or  soul.  Surely  this  is  dangerous  ! 

They  encourage  the  notion  that  it  matters  nothing  in.  what 
manner  of  spirit  people  bring  their  children  to  be  baptized.  It 
signifies  nothing  whether  they  come  with  faith,  and  prayer,  and 
solemn  feelings,  or  whether  they  come  careless,  prayerless, 
godless,  and  ignorant  as  heathens  !  The  effect,  we  are  told, 


108  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

is  always  the  same  in  all  cases  !  In  all  cases,  we  are  told,  the 
infant  is  born  again  the  moment  it  is  baptized,  although  it  has 
no  right  to  baptism  at  all,  except  as  the  child  of  Christian 
parents.  Surely  this  is  dangerous  ! 

They  help  forward  the  perilous  and  soul-ruining  delusion 
that  a  man  may  have  grace  in  his  heart,  while  it  cannot  be  seen 
in  his  life.  Multitudes  of  our  worshippers  have  not  a  spark  of 
religious  life  or  grace  about  them.  And  yet  we  are  told  that 
they  must  all  be  addressed  as  regenerate,  or  possessors  of  grace, 
because  they  have  been  baptized  !  Surely  this  is  dangerous  ! 

Now  I  firmly  believe  that  hundreds  of  excellent  Churchmen 
have  never  fully  considered  the  points  which  I  have  just  brought 
forward.  I  ask  them  to  do  so.  For  the  honour  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  for  the  honour  of  Christ's  holy  sacraments,  I  invite  them 
to  consider  seriously  the  tendency  of  their  views.  Sure  am  I 
that  there  is  only  one  safe  ground  to  take  up  in  stating  the 
effects  of  baptism,  and  that  is  the  old  ground  stated  by  our 
Lord  :  "  Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit."  (Luke  vi.  44.) 
When  baptism  is  used  profanely  and  carelessly,  we  have  110 
right  to  expect  a  blessing  to  follow  it,  any  more  than  we  expect 
it  for  a  careless  recipient  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  When  no 
grace  can  be  seen  in  a  man's  life,  we  have  no  right  to  say  that 
he  is  regenerate  and  received  grace  in  baptism. 

(3)  For  another  thing,  I  wish  to  urge  on  all  Baptists  who 
may  happen  to  read  this  paper,  the  duty  of  moderation  in 
stating  their  views  of  baptism,  and  of  those  who  disagree  with 
them.  I  say  this  with  sorrow.  I  respect  many  members  of 
the  Baptist  community,  and  I  believe  they  are  men  and  women 
whom  I  shall  meet  in  heaven.  But  when  I  mark  the  extravag 
antly  violent  language  which  some  Baptists  use  against  infant 
baptism,  I  cannot  help  feeling  that  they  may  be  justly  requested 
to  judge  more  moderately  of  those  with  whom  they  disagree. 

Does  the  Baptist  mean  to  say  that  his  peculiar  views  of 
baptism  are  needful  to  salvation,  and  that  nobody  will  be  saved 
who  holds  that  infants  ought  to  be  baptized  1  I  cannot  think 
that  any  intelligent  Baptist  in  his  senses  would  assert  this.  At 
this  rate  he  would  shut  out  of  heaven  the  whole  Church  of 
England,  all  the  Methodists,  all  the  Presbyterians,  and  all  the 
Independents  !  At  this  rate,  Cranmer,  Ridley,  Latimer,  Luther, 
Calvin,  Knox,  Baxter,  Owen,  Wesley,  Whitfield,  and  Chalmers, 


BAPTISM.  109 

are  all  lost !  They  all  firmly  maintained  infant  baptism,  and 
therefore  they  are  all  in  hell!  I  cannot  believe  that  any 
Baptist  would  say  anything  so  monstrous  and  absurd. 

Does  the  Baptist  mean  to  say  that  his  peculiar  views  of 
baptism  are  necessary  to  a  high  degree  of  grace  and  holiness  ? 
Will  he  undertake  to  assert  that  Baptists  have  always  been 
the  most  eminent  Christians  in  the  world,  and  are  so  at  this 
day  ?  If  he  does  make  this  assertion,  he  may  be  fairly  asked 
to  give  some  proof  of  it.  But  he  cannot  do  so.  He  may  show 
us,  no  doubt,  many  Baptists  who  are  excellent  Christians.  But 
he  will  find  it  hard  to  prove  that  they  are  one  bit  better  than 
some  of  the  Episcopalians,  Presbyterians,  Independents,  and 
Methodists,  who  all  hold  that  infants  ought  to  be  baptized. 

Now,  surely,  if  the  peculiar  opinions  of  the  Baptists  are 
neither  necessary  to  salvation  nor  to  eminent  holiness,  we 
may  fairly  ask  Baptists  to  be  moderate  in  their  language 
about  those  who  disagree  with  them.  Let  them,  by  all 
means,  maintain  their  own  peculiar  views,  if  they  think  they  have 
discovered  a  "  more  excellent  way."  Let  them  use  their  liberty 
and  be  fully  persuaded  in  their  own  minds.  The  narrow  way 
to  heaven  is  wide  enough  for  believers  of  every  name  and  denomi 
nation.  But  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  charity,  let  me  entreat 
Baptists  to  exercise  moderation  in  their  judgment  of  others. 

(4)  In  the  last  place,  I  wish  to  urge  on  all  Christians  the 
immense  importance  of  giving  to  each  part  of  Christianity  its 
proper  proportion  and  value,  but  nothing  more.  Let  us  beware 
of  wresting  things  from  their  right  places,  and  putting  that 
which  is  second  first,  and  that  which  is  first  second.  Let  us 
give  all  due  honour  to  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  as 
sacraments  ordained  by  Christ  Himself.  But  let  us  never  for 
get  that,  like  every  outward  ordinance,  their  benefit  depends 
entirely  on  the  manner  in  which  they  are  received.  Above  all, 
let  us  never  forget  that  while  a  man  may  be  baptized,  like 
Judas,  and  yet  never  be  saved,  so  also  a  man  may  never  be 
baptized,  like  the  penitent  thief,  and  yet  may  be  saved. — The 
things  needful  to  salvation  are  an  interest  in  Christ's  atoning 
blood,  and  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart  and 
life.  He  that  is  wrong  on  these  two  points  will  get  no  benefit 
from  his  baptism,  whether  he  is  baptized  as  an  infant  or  grown 
up.  He  will  find  at  the  last  day  that  he  is  wrong  for  evermore. 


VI. 

REGENERATION. 

THE  subject  of  Regeneration  is  a  most  important  one  at  any 
time.  Those  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  Nicodemus 
are  very  solemn  :  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  again,  lie  cannot  see 
the  kingdom  of  God."  (John  iii.  3.)  The  world  has  gone 
through  many  changes  since  those  words  were  spoken.  Eighteen 
hundred  years  have  passed  away.  Empires  and  kingdoms  have 
risen  and  fallen.  Great  men  and  wise  men  have  lived,  laboured, 
written,  and  died.  But  there  stands  the  rule  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
unaltered  and  unchanged.  And  there  it  will  stand,  till  heaven 
and  earth  will  pass  away :  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he 
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God." 

But  the  subject  is  one  which  is  peculiarly  important  to  mem 
bers  of  the  Church  of  England  in  the  present  day.  Things  have 
happened  of  late  years  which  have  drawn  special  attention  to 
it.  Men's  minds  are  full  of  it,  and  men's  eyes  are  fixed  on  it. 
Regeneration  has  been  discussed  in  newspapers.  Regeneration 
has  been  talked  of  in  private  society.  Regeneration  has  been 
argued  about  in  courts  of  law.  Surely  it  is  a  time  when  every  true 
Churchman  should  examine  himself  upon  the  subject,  and  make 
sure  that  his  views  are  sound.  It  is  a  time  when  we  should 
not  halt  between  two  opinions.  We  should  try  to  know  what 
we  hold.  We  should  be  ready  to  give  a  reason  for  our  belief. 
When  truth  is  assailed,  those  who  love  truth  should  grasp  it 
more  firmly  than  ever. 

I  propose  in  this  paper  to  attempt  three  things  : — 

I.  First,  to  explain  what  Regeneration,  or  being  born  again, 

means. 

II.  Secondly,  to  show  the  necessity  of  Regeneration. 
III.  Thirdly,  to  point  out  the  marks  and  evidences  of  Re 
generation. 

no 


REGENERATION.  Ill 

If  I  can  make  these  three  points  clear,  I  believe  I  shall  have 
done  my  readers  a  great  service. 

I.  Let  me  then,  first  of  all,  explain  icliat  Regeneration  or+ 
being  born  again  means. 

Kegeneration  means,  that  change  of  heart  and  nature  which* 
a  man  goes  through  when  he  becomes  a  true  Christian. 

I  think  ^k?^  Kan-be  no  question  that  there  is  an  immense 
difference  among  those  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Chris 
tians.  Beyond  all  dispute  there  are  always  two  classes  in  the 
outward  Church :  the  class  of  those  who  are  Christians  in  name 
and  form  only,  and  the  class  of  those  who  are  Christians  in 
deed  and  in  truth.  All  were  not  Israel  who  were  called  Israel, 
and  all  are  not  Christians  who  are  called  Christians.  "  In  the 
visible  Church,"  says  an  Article  of  the  Church  of  England, 
"  the  evil  be  ever  mingled  with  the  good." 

Some,  as  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  say,  are  "  wicked  and  void  of 
a  lively  faith  ;  "  others,  as  another  Article  says,  "  are  made  like 
the  image  of  God's  only-begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  walk 
religiously  in  good  works.  Some  worship  God  as  a  mere  form, 
and  some  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  Some  give  their  hearts  to 
God,  and  some  give  them  to  the  world.  Some  believe  the  Bible, 
and  live  as  if  they  believed  it  :  others  do  not.  Some  feel  their 
sins  and  mourn  over  them  :  others  do  not.  Some  love  Christ, 
trust  in  Him,  and  serve  Him :  others  do  not.  In  short,  as 
Scripture  says,  some  walk  in  the  narrowT  way,  some  in  the 
broad;  some  are  the  good  fish  of  the  Gospel  net,  some  are 
the  bad ;  some  are  the  wheat  in  Christ's  field,  and  some  are  the 
tares.* 

I  think  no  man  with  his  eyes  open  can  fail  to  see  all  this, 
both  in  the  Bible,  and  in  the  world  around  him.  Whatever  he 
may  think  about  the  subject  I  am  writing  of,  he  cannot  possibly 
deny  that  this  difference  exists. 

Now  what  is  the  explanation  of  the  difference1?  I  answer 
unhesitatingly,  .Regeneration','  or  being  born  again.  I  answer 
that  true"Christians  arc  what  they  are,  becaugrthey  are  regene- 

*  "There  be  two  manner  of  men.  Some  there  be  that  be  not  justified, 
nor  regenerated,  nor  yet  in  the  state  of  salvation  ;  that  is  to  say,  not  God's 
servants.  They  lack  the  renovation  or  regeneration  ;  they  be  not  come  yet 
to  Christ." — Bishop  Latimer's  Sermons.  1552. 


112  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

(rate,  and  formal  Christians  are  what  they  ^  are,  because  they  are 
not  regenerate!  The  heart  of  the  Christian  in  deed  has  been 
changed.  The  heart  of  the  Christian  in  name  only,  has  not 
been  changed.  The  change  of  heart  makes  the  whole  dif 
ference.* 

This  change  of  heart  is  spoken  of  continually  in  the  Bible, 
under  various  emblems  and  figures. 

Ezekiel  calls  it  "  a  taking  away  the  stony  heart,  and  giving 
an  heart  of  flesh;"  —  "a  giving  a  new  heart,  and  putting 
within  us  a  new  spirit."  (Ezek.  xi.  19 ;  xxxvi.  26.) 

The  Apostle  John  sometimes  calls  it  being  "  born  of  God,"- 
sometimes  being  "born  again,"  —  sometimes  being  "born    of 
the  Spirit."     (John  i.  13;  iii.  3,  6.) 

The  Apostle  Peter,  in  the  Acts,  calls  it  "repenting  and 
being  converted."  (Acts  iii.  19.) 

The  Epistle  to  the  Romans  speaks  of  it  as  a  "  being  alive 
from  the  dead."  (Eom.  vi.  13.) 

The  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  calls  it  "  being  a  new 
creature :  old  things  have  passed  away,  and  all  things  become 
new."  (2  Cor.  v.  17.) 

The  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  speaks  of  it  as  a  resurrection 
together  with  Christ :  "  You  hath  He  quickened,  who  were  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins"  (Eph.  ii.  1);  as  "a  putting  off  the  old 
man,  which  is  corrupt, — being  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our 
mind, — and  putting  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created 
in  righteousness  and  true  holiness."  (Eph.  iv.  22,  24.) 

The  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  calls  it  "  a  putting  off  the  old 
man  with  his  deeds ;  and  putting  on  the  new  man,  which  is 
renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him  that  created 
him."  (Col.  iii.  9,  10.) 

The  Epistle  to  Titus  calls  it  "  the  washing  of  regeneration, 
and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  (Titus  iii.  5.) 

The  first  Epistle  of  Peter  speaks  of  it  as  "a  being  called 
out  of  darkness  into  God's  marvellous  light."  (1  Peter  ii.  9.) 

*  The  reader  must  not  suppose  there  is  anything  new  or  modern  in  this 
statement.  It  would  be  an  endless  work  to  quote  passages  from  standard 
divines  of  the  Church  of  England,  in  which  the  words  "regenerate"  and 
"  unref enerate "  are  used  to  describe  the  difference  which  I  have  been 
speaking  of.  The  pious  and  godly  members  of  the  Church  are  called  "  the 
regenerate,"— the  worldly  and  ungodly  are  called  "the  unregenerate."  I 
think  no  one,  well  read  in  English  divinity,  can  question  this  for  a  moment. 


REGENERATION.  113 

And  the  second  Epistle,   as  "being   made   partakers   of   the 
Divine  nature."     (2  Peter  i.  4.) 

The  First  Epistle  of  John  calls  it  "a  passing  from  death  to 
life."  (1  John  iii.  14.) 

All  these  expressions  come  to  the  same  thing  in  the  end. 
They  are  all  the  same  truth,  only  viewed  from  different  sides. 
And  all  have  one  and  the  same  meaning.  They  describe  a 
great  radical  change  of  heart  and  nature,  —  a  thorough  altera 
tion  and  transformation  of  the  whole  inner  man,  —  a  participa 
tion  in  the  resurrection  life  of  Christ  ;  or,  to  borrow  the  words 
of  the  Church  of  England  Catechism,  "  A  death  unto  sin,  and 
a  new  birth  unto  righteousness."  * 

This  change  of  heart  in  a  true   Christian  is  thorough  and 

complete,   so  complete,   that   no  word  could  be  chosen  more 

fitting    to    express    it    than    the    word    "  Regeneration,"    or 

"  new  birth."     Doubtless  it  is  no  outward,  bodily  alteration, 

but  undoubtedly  it  is  an  entire  alteration  of  the  inner  man. 

/  It  adds  no  new  faculties  to  a  man's  mind,  but  it  certainly  gives 

|  an  entirely  new  bent  and  bias  to  all  his  old  ones.     His  will  is 

Sso  new,   his  tastes  so  new,   his  opinions  so  new,  his  views  of 

I  sin,  the  world,  the  Bible,  and  Christ  so  new,  that  he  is  to  all 

i  intents  and  purposes  a  new  man.     The  change  seems  to  bring 

la  new  being  into  existence.    It  may  well  be  called  being  "  born 

I  again." 

This  change  is  not  always    <jic<'n,    to    /».'///'  >vrx  nl   ////•    s**** 


time  in  their  lives.     Some  are  born  again  when  they  ;uv  infants, 
/and  seem,  like  Jeremiah  and  John  the  Baptist,  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  even  from  their  mothers  womb.     Some  few  are 
born  again  in  old  age.     The  great  majority  of  true  Christians  ' 
probably  are  born  again  after  they  grow  up.     A  vast  multitude 
of  persons,  it  is  to  be  feared,  go  down  to  the  grave  without  ) 
|  having  been  born  again  at  all. 

This  change  of  heart  docs  not  always  begin  in  the  same  waif 
in  those  who  go  through  it  after  they  have  grown  up.  With 
some,  like  the  Apostle  Paul  and  the  jailer  at  Philippi,  it  is  a 
sudden  and  a  violent  change,  attended  with  much  distress  of 


*  "All  these  expressions  set  forth  the  same  work  of  grace  upon  the  heart, 
though  they  may  be  understood  under  different  notions,"— Bishop  Hopkins, 
1070. 

H 


114 


KNOTS  UNTIED. 


W^'H 


mind.  With  others,  like  Lydia  of  Thyatira,  it  is  more  gentle 
and  gradual :  their  winter  becomes  spring  almost  without 
their  knowing  how.  With  some  the  change  is  brought  about 
by  the  Spirit  working  through  afflictions,  or  providential  visita 
tions.  With  others,  and  probably  the  greater  number  of  true 
Christians,  the  Word  of  God  preached  or  written,  is  the  means 
of  effecting  it.* 

This  change  is  one  which  can  only  be  known  and  discerned 
by  its  effects.  Its  beginnings  are  a  hidden  and  secret  thing. 
We  cannot  see  them.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  tells  us  this 
most  plainly  :  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou 
nearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh 
or  whither  it  goeth;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit." 
(John  iii.  8.)  Would  we  know  if  wo  are  regenerate?  We 
I  must  try  the  question,  by  examining  what  we  know  of  the 
effects  of  Regeneration.  Those  effects  are  always  the  same. 
The  ways  by  which  true  Christians  are  led,  in  passing  through 
their  great  change,  are  certainly  various.  But  the  state  of 
heart  and  soul  into  which  they  are  brought  at  last,  is  always 
the  same.  Ask  them  what  they  think  of  sin,  Christ,  holiness, 
the  world,  the  Bible,  and  prayer,  and  you  will  find  them  all  of 
one  mind. 

Tl^js  change  is  onejohich  no  man  can  give  to  himself*  nor  iieti 
to  anther.  It  would  be  as  reasonable  to  expect  the  dead  to 
raise  themselves,  or  to  require  an  artist  to  give  a  marble  statue 
jjfej  The  sons  of  God  are  born  "not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will 
of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  (John  i.  13.) 
Sometimes  the  change  is  ascribed  to  God  the  Father:  "The 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  begotten  us 


*  "  The   preaching   of  the  Word  is  the   great   means   which    God   hath 

appointed  for  Regeneration:  'Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the 

Word  of  God.'     (Rom.  x.  17.)     When  God  first  created  man,  it  is  said  that 

'  He  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath   of    life,'   but    when   God   new 

creates  man,  He  breathes  into  his  ears.     This  is  the  Word  that  raiseth  the 

dead,  calling  them  out  of  the  grave  ;  this  is  that  Word  that  opens  the  eyes 

of  the  blind,  that  turns  the  hearts  of  the  disobedient  and  rebellious.     And 

,  though  wicked  and  profane  men  scoff  at  preaching,  and  count  all  ministers' 

*  words,  and  God's  words  too,  but  so  much  wind,  yet  they  are  such  wind, 

believe  it,   as  is  able  to  tear  rocks  and  rend  mountains ;  such  wind   as,  if 

ever  they  are  saved,  must  shake  and  overturn  the  foundations  of  all  their 

1 1  carnal  confidence  and  presumption.      Be   exhorted  therefore  more  to  prize 

and  more  to  frequent  the  preaching  of  the  Word." — Bishop  Hopkins.     1670. 


REGENERATION.  115 

again  unto  a  lively  hope."     (1    Peter  i.  3.)     Sometimes  it  is 
ascribed   to    God  the   Son  :  "  The  Son  quickeneth  whom  He 
will."     (John  iii.  21.)     "If  ye  know  that  He  is  righteous,  ye  I 
know  that  every  one  that  cloeth  righteousness  is  born  of  Him.") 
(1  John  ii.  29.)     Sometimes  it  is  ascribed  to  the  Spirit,— and 
He  in  fact  is  the  great  agent  by  whom  it  is  always  effected  : 
"That  which  is  born  of  the   Spirit  is  Spirit."     (John  iii.  6.) 
Ijut  man  Jias  no  power  to  work  the  change.     It_J8  something 
far,  far  beyond  His  rcacli.  '  ^  The  condition  of  man  after  the/ 
™M    o±J   Adam,"   says   the    Tenth    Article    of   the    Church    of* 
England,    "is  such  that  he  cannot  turn  and  prepare  himself, 
by  his  own  natural  strength  and  good  works,  to  faith  and  call 
ing  upon  God."     Xo  minister,  on  earth  can  convey  grace  to 
any  one  of  his  congregation  at  his  discretion.     He  may  preach 
as  truly  and  faithfully ^  as  Paul  or  A^ollos  :  but   God   must 
' 'give  the  increase."     (1  Cor,  iii.   6.^     He  mayHbaptize  with 
water  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity ;  but  unless  the  Holy  Ghost 
accompanies  and  blesses  the  ordinance,  there  is  no  deatlTunto 
sin,  and  no  new  birth  unto  righteousness.      Jesus  alone, "the | 
great  liead  of  the  Onurch,   can  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  I 
Blessed  and  happy  are  they,  who  have  the  inward  baptism,  as| 
well  as  the  outward.* 

I  believe  the  foregoing  account  of  Regeneration  to  be  Scrip 
tural  and  correct.  It  is  that  change  of  heart  which  is  the 
distinguishing  mark  of  a  true  Christian  man,  the  invariable 
companion  of  a  justifying  faith  in  Christ,  the  inseparable  con 
sequence  of  vital  union  with  Him,  and  the  root  and  beginning 
of  inward  sanctitication.  I  ask  my  readers  to  ponder  it  well 

"  The  Scripture  carries  it,  that  no  more  than  a  child  can  beget  itself,  or  gj 
a  dead  man  quicken  himself,  or  a  nonentity  create  itself  ;  no  more  can  any  II 
carnal  man  regenerate  himself,  or  work  true  saving  grace  in  his  own  soul."" 
— Bishop  Hopkins.  1670. 

'  There are  twojdnds .of  baptism,  and  both  necessary;  the  one  interior,  jj 
which  is  the  cleansing  of  tfce  neart,  tne~drawmg  of  "the  J&iher,  lh£  opera-  W 
tion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  and  this  baptism  is  in  man  when  he  believeth  and  ft 
trusteth  that  Christ  is  the  only  method  of  his  salvation."— Bishop  Hooper.  f\ 
Io47' 

"It  is  on  all  parts  gladly  confessed,  that  there  may  be,  in  divers  cases,  J 
life  by  virtue  of  inward  baptism,  where  outward  is  not  found."— Richard* 

Hooker. 

"  There  is  a  baptism  of  the  Spirit  as  of  water."— Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor.  It 


116 


KNOTS  UNTIED. 


before  they  go  any  further.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that 
our  views  should  be  clear  upon  this  point,  —  What  Regeneration 
really  is. 

I  know  well  that  many  will  not  allow  that  Eegeneration  is 
what  I  have  described  it  to  be.     They  will  think  the  statement 
I  have  made,  by  way  of  definition,  much  too  strong.     Some 
hold  that  Kegeneration  only  means  admission  into  a  state  of 
ecclesiastical  privileges,  by  being  made  a  member  of  the  Church, 
but  does  not  mean  a  change  of  heart.     Some  tell  us  that  a 
regenerate  man  has  a  certain  power  within  him  which  enables 
him  to  repent  and  believe  if  he  thinks  fit,  but  that  he  still  needs 
a  further  change  in  order  to  make  him  a  true  Christian.     Some  I 
say  there  is  a  difference  between  Regeneration  and  being  bornl 
again*     Others  say  there  is  a  difference  between  being  born  J 
again  and  con  version. 

To  all  this  I  have  one  simple  reply,  and  that  is,  /  can  find  no 
such  Eegeneration  spoken  of  anywhere  in  the  Bible.  A  Regenera 
tion  which  only  means  admission  into  a  state  of  ecclesiast 
ical  privilege  may  be  ancient  and  primitive  for  anything  I 
know.  But  something  more  than  this  is  wanted.  A  few  plain 
texts  of  Scripture  are  needed  ;  and  these  texts  have  yet  to  be 
found. 

Such  a  notion  of  Regeneration  is  utterly  inconsistent  with 
that  which  St.  John  gives  us  in  his  first  Epistle.  It  renders  It 
necessary  to  invent  the  awkward  theory  that  there  arc  two 
Regenerations,  and  is  thus  eminently  calculated  to  confuse  the 
minds  of  unlearned  people,  and  introduce  false  doctrine.  It  is 
a  notion  which  seems  not  to  answer  to  the  solemnity  with  which 
our  Lord  introduces  the  subject  to  Nicodemus.  When  He 
said,  "  Verily,  verily,  except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God,"  did  He  only  mean  except  a  man  be 
admitted  to  a  state  of  ecclesiastical  privilege  1  Surely  He 
meant  more  than  this,  jjuch  a  Regeneration  a  man  might  have. 
like  Simon  Magus,  and  yet  never  be  saved.  Such  a  Regenera 
tion  he  might  never  have,  like  the  penitent  thief,  and  yet  see 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Surely  He  must  have  meant  a  change  of 
heart.  As  to  the  notion  that  there  is  any  distinction  between* 
l)eim>'  reenerate  and  being  born  again,  it  is  one  which  will  no 


examination      It  is 


the  general  opinion  of  all  who  knowvA^ 
^sions  mean  one  and  the  same  thino-.    A 


Greek,  that  the  two  expressions  mean  one  and  the  same  thing. 


REGENERATION. 

To  me,  indeed,  there  seems  to  be  much  confusion  of  ideas,  and  / 
indistinctness  of  apprehension  in  men's  minds  on  this  simple  I 
point, — what  Regeneration  really  is, — and  all  arising  from  not} 
simply  adhering  to  the  Word  of  God.     That  a  man  is  admitted 
into  a  state  of  great  privilege  when  he  is  made  a  member  of  a 
*  pure  Church  of  Christ,  I  do  not  for  an  instant  deny.     That  he 
is  in  a  far  better  and  more  advantageous  position  for  his  soul, 
than  if  he  did  not  belong  to  the  Church,  I  make  no  question. 
That  a  wide  door  is  set  open  before  his  soul,  which  is  not  set 
before  the  poor  heathen,  I  can  most  clearly  see.     But  I  do  not 
see  that  the  Bible  eve)'  calls  this  Regeneration.     And  I  cannot 
find  a  single  text  in  Scripture  which  warrants  the  assumption 
that  it  is  so.     It  is  very  important  in  theology  to  distinguish 
things  that  differ!     Church  privileges  are  one  thing ;  Regenera 
tion  is  another.     I,  for  one,  dare  not  confound  them.* 

I  am  quite  aware  that  great  and  good  men  have  clung  to  that    - 
low  view  of  Regeneration,  to  which  I  have  adverted,  t     But 
when  a  doctrine  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  is  at  stake,  I  can  call 
no  man  master.     The  words  of  the  old  philosopher  are  never 
to  be  forgotten  :  "  I  love  Plato,  I  love  Socrates,  but  I  love  truth 
better  than  either."     I  say  unhesitatingly,  that  those  who  hold 
the  view  that  there  are  two  Regenerations,  can  bring  forward 
no  plain  text  in  proof  of  it.     I  firmly  believe  that  no  plain 
reader  of  the  Bible  only  would  ever  find  this  view  there  for 
himself ;  and  that  goes  very  far  to  make  me  suspect  it  is  an 
idea  of  man's  invention.     The  only  Regeneration  that  I  can  seei/ 
//| in  Scripture  is,  not  a  change  of  state,  but  a  change  of  heart. l\ 
That  is  the  view,  I  once  more  assert,  which  the  Church  Cate 
chism  takes  when  it  speaks  of  the  "  death  unto  sin,  and  new 
birth  unto  righteousness,"  and  on  that  view  I  take  my  stand. 

The  doctrine  before  us  is  one  of  vital  importance.     This  is  no 

*  "  The  mixture  of  those  things  by  speech,  which  by  nature  are  divided,  is 
the  mother  of  all  error."— Hooker.     1595. 

f  For  instance,  Bishop  Davenant  and  Bishop  Hopkins  frequently  speak  of 

a    "  Sacramental    Regeneration,"  when   they  are   handling  the  subject  of 

baptism,  as  a  thing  entirely  distinct  from  Spiritual  Regeneration.   The  general 

^tenor  of  their  writings  is  to  speak  of  the  godly  as  the  regenerate,  and  the 

^ingodly  as  the  unregenerate.     But  with  every  feeling  of  respect  for  two  such 

>good  men,  the  question  yet  remains, — What  Scripture  warrant  have  we  for 
saying  there  are  two  Regenerations?  I  answer  unhesitatingly, — We  have 
none  at  all. 


118  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

matter  of  names,  and  words,  and  forms,  about  which  I  am 
writing.  It  is  a  thing  that  we  must  feel  and  know  by  experi 
ence,  each  for  himself,  if  we  are  to  be  saved.  Let  us  try  to 
become  acquainted  with  it.  Let  not  the  din  and  smoke  of 
controversy  draw  off  our  attention  from  our  own  hearts.  Are 
our  hearts  changed  ?  Alas,  it  is  poor  work  to  wrangle,  and 
argue,  and  dispute  about  Regeneration,  if  after  all  we  know 
nothing  about  it  within. 

II.  Let  me  show,  in  the  second  place,  the  necessity  there  is  for 
our  being  regenerate,  or  born  again. 

That  there  is  such  a  necessity  is  most  plain  from  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ's  words  in  the  third  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel. 
Xothing  can  be  more  clear  and  positive  than  His  language  to  >* 
Xicodemus :  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the    \ 
kingdom  of  God."     "  Marvel  not  that  I  say  unto  thee,  Ye  must    w 
be  born  again."     (John  iii.  3,  7.) 

The  reason  of  this  necessity  is  the  exceeding  sinfulness  and «  <r 
corruption  of  our  natural  hearts.     The  words  of  St.  Paul  to  the   v 
Corinthians  are  literally  accurate  :  "  The  natural  man  receiveth    J 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  J 
unto  him."     (1  Cor.  ii.   14.)     Just  as  rivers  flow  downward,   «$ 
and  sparks  fly  upward,  and  stones  fall  to  the  ground,  so  does  a    ^ 
man's  heart  naturally  incline  to  what  is  evil.      We  love  our 
soul's  enemies, — we  dislike  our  soul's  friends.     We  call  good 
evil,  and  we  call  evil  good.     We  take  pleasure  in  ungodliness, 
we  take  no  pleasure  in  Christ.     We  not  only  commit  sin,  but 
we  also  love  sin.     We  not  only  need  to  be  cleansed  from  the 
guilt  of  sin,  but  we  also  need  to  be  delivered  from  its  power. 
The  natural  tone,  bias,  and  current  of  our  minds  must  be  com 
pletely  altered.     The  image  of  God,  which  sin  has  blotted  out, 
must  be  restored.     The  disorder  and  confusion  which  reigns 
within  us  must  be  put  down.     The  first  things  must  no  longer 
be  last,  and  the  last  first.     The  Spirit  must  let  in  the  light  on 
our  hearts,   put  everything  in  its  right  place,   and   create   all 
things  new. 

It  ought  always  to  be  remembered  that  there  are  two  distinct 
things  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  does  for  every  sinner  whom 
He  undertakes  to  save.  He  washes  him  from  his  sins  in  His 
own  blood,  and  gives  him  a  free  pardon  : — this  is  his  justifica- 


REGENERATION.  119 

tion.     He  puts  the  Holy  Spirit  into  his  heart,  and  makes  him)| 
an  entirely  new  man  : — this  is  his  Regeneration. 

The  two  things  are  both  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation. 
The  change^  of  heart  is  as  neoessary  as  the  pardon ;  and^the 
pardon  is  as  necessary  as  the  change.  Without  the  pardon  we 
have  no  right  or  title  to  heaven.  Without  the  change  we 
should  not  be  meet  and  ready  to  enjoy  heaven,  even  if  we  got 
there. 

The  two  things  are  never  separate.     They  are  never  found 
apart.     Every  justified  man  is  also  a  regenerate  man,  and  every 
IregPRerate  man  is  also  a  justified  man.     When  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  gives  a  man  remission  of  .sins,  lie  also  gives  him  repent 
ance.     When  He  grants  peace  with  Cod,  He  also  grants  "  power 
to  become  a  son  of  God."    There  are  two  great  standing  maxims 
of  the  glorious  Gospel,  which  ought  never  to  be  forgotten.    One 
is  :  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."     (Mark  xvi.  16.) 
The  other  is  :  "If  any  man  hath  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is 
Aione  of  His."     (Kom.  viii.  9.) 

The  man  who  denies  the  universal  necessity  of  Regeneration 
can  know  very  little  of  the  heart's  corruption.  He  is  blind 
indeed  who  fancies  that  pardon  is  all  we  want  in  order  to  get  to 
heaven,  and  does  not  see  that  pardon  without  a  change  of  heart 
would  fe  a  useless  gift.  Blessed  be  God  that  both  are  freely 
offered  to  us  in  Christ's  Gospel,  and  that  Jesus  is  able  and  will 
ing  to  give  the  one  as  well  as  the  other ! 

Surely  we  must  be  aware  that  the  vast  majority  of  people  in 
the  world  see  nothing,  feel  nothing,  and  know  nothing  in  religion 
as  they  ought.  How  and  why  is  this,  is  not  the  present  ques 
tion.  I  only  put  it  to  the  conscience  of  every  reader  of  this 
volume, — Is  it  not  the  fact  1 

Tell  them  of  the  sinfulness  of  many  things  which  they  are 
doing  continually;  and  what  is  generally  the  reply?— "They 
see  no  harm," 

Tell  them  of  the  awful  peril  in  which  their  souls  are, — of 
the  shortness  of  time, — the  nearness  of  eternity, — the  uncer 
tainty  of  life, — the  reality  of  judgment.  They  feel  no  danger. 

Tell  them  of  their  need  of  a  Saviour,— mighty,  loving,  and 
Divine,  and  of  the  impossibility  of  being  saved  from  hell, 
except  by  faith  in  Him.  It  all  falls  flat  and  dead  on  their  ears. 
They  see  no  such  great  barrier  between  themselves  and  heaven. 


120  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

i  Tell  them  of  holiness,  and  the  high  standard  of  living  which 
I  the  Bible  requires.  They  cannot  comprehend  the  need  of  such 
Istrictness.  They  see  no  use  in  being  so  very  good. 
1  There  are  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  such  people  on 
every  side  of  us.  They  will  hear  these  things  all  their  lives. 
They  will  even  attend  the  ministry  of  the  most  striking 
preachers,  and  listen  to  the  most  powerful  appeals  to  their 
consciences.  And  yet  when  you  come  to  visit  them  on  their 
death-beds,  they  are  like  men  and  women  who  never  heard 
these  things  at  all.  They  know  nothing  of  the  leading  doc 
trines  of  the  Gospel  by  experience.  They  can  render  no  reason 
whatever  of  their  own  hope. 

And-whv;  ai\d  wherefore  is  all  this  1  What  is  the  explana 
tion  ? — What  is  the  cause  of  such  a  state  of  things  ?  It  all 
comes  from  this, — that  man  naturally  has  no  sense  of  spiritual 
things.  In  vain  the  sun  of  righteousness  shines  before  him : 
J)he  eyes  of  his  soul  are  blind,  and  cannot  see.  In  vain  the 
music  of  Christ's  invitations  sound  around  him  :  the  ears  of  his 
soul  are  deaf,  and  cannot  hear  it.  In  vain  the  wrath  of  God 
against  sin  is  set  forth  :  the  perceptions  of  his  soul  are  stopped 
up ; — like  the  sleeping  traveller,  he  does  not  perceive  the  com 
ing  storm.  In  vain  the  bread  and  water  of  life  are  offered  to 
him  :  his  soul  is  neither  hungry  for  the  one,  nor  thirsty  for  the 
other.  In  vain  he  is  advised  to  flee  to  the  Great  Physician : 
his  soul  is  unconscious  of  its  disease ; — why  should  he  go  1  In 
vain  you  put  a  price  into  his  hand  to  buy  wisdom :  the  mind 
of  his  soul  wanders, — he  is  like  the  lunatic,  who  calls  straws  a 
crown,  and  dust  diamonds;  he  says,  "I  am  rich,  and  increased 
with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing."  Alas,  there  is  nothing 
so  sad  as  the  utter  corruption  of  our  nature  !  There  is  nothing 
J30  •painful  as  the  anatomy  of  a  dead  soul. 

I     Now  what  does  such  a  man  neecH     He  needs  to  be 
again,  and  made  a  new  creature.     He  needs  a  complete  putting 
f   off  the  old  man,  and  a  complete  putting  on  the  new.     We  do 
not  live  our  natural  life  till  we  are  born  into  the  world,  and 
M\-J^ do  not  live  our  spiritual  life  till  we  are  born  of  the  Spirit. 
\V^»       -But  we  must  furthermore  be  aware  that  the  vast  majority  of 

(people  are  utterly  unfit  to  enjoy  heaven  in  their  present  state. 
I  state  it  as  a  great  fact.     Is  it  not  so  ? 

Look  at  the  masses  of  men  and  women  gathered  together  in 


BEGENERATION.  121 

our  cities  and  towns,  and  observe  them  well.  They  are  all 
dying  creatures, — all  immortal  beings, — all  going  to  the  judg 
ment-seat  of  Christ, — all  certain  to  live  for  ever  in  heaven  or  in 
hell.  But  where  is  the  slightest  evidence  that  most  of  them 
are  in  the  least  degree  meet  and  ready  for  heaven  1 

Look  at  the  greater  part  of  those  who  are  called  Christians, 
in  every  part  throughout  the  land.  Take  any  parish  you  please 
in  town  or  country.  Take  that  which  you  know  best.  What 
are  the  tastes  and  pleasures  of  the  majority  of  the  people  who 
live  there  ?  What  do  they  like  best,  when  they  have  a  choice  1 
What  do  they  enjoy  most,  when  they  can  have  their  own  way  ? 
Observe  the  manner  in  which  they  spend  their  Sundays.  Mark 
how  little  delight  they  seem  to  feel  in  the  Bible  and  prayer. 
Take  notice  of  the  low  and  earthly  notions  of  pleasure  and 
happiness  which  everywhere  prevail,  among  young  and  old, — 
among  rich  and  poor.  Mark  well  these  things, — and  then 
think  quietly  over  this  question :  "  What  would  these  people 
do  in  heaven  ? " 

You  and  I,  it  may  be  said,  know  little  about  heaven.  Our 
notions  of  heaven  may  be  very  dim  and  indistinct.  But  at  all 
events,  I  suppose  \ve  are  agreed  in  thinking  that  heaven  is  a 
very  holy  place, — that  God  is  there, — and  Christ  is  there, — and 
saints  and  angels  are  there, — that  sin  is  not  there  in  any  shape, 
— and  that  nothing  is  said,  thought,  or  done,  which  God  does 
not  like.  Only  let  this  be  granted,  and  then  I  think  there  can 
be  no  doubt  the  great  majority  of  people  around  us  are  as  little 
fit  for  heaven  as  a  bird  for  swimming  beneath  the  sea,  or  a  fish 
for  living  upon  dry  land.* 

what  is  it  that  they  need  in  order  to  make  them  fit  to  / 


*  "  Tell  me,  thou  that  in  holy  duties  grudgest  at  every  word  that  is  spoken  ; 
»^iat  thinkest  every  summons  to  the  public  worship  as  unpleasant  as  the 
sound  of  thy  passing  bell ;  that  sayest,  '  When  will  the  Sabbath  be  gone, 
and  the  ordinances  be  over  ? '  What  wilt  thou  do  in  heaven  !  What  shall 
such  an  unholy  heart  do  there,  where  a  Sabbath  shall  be  as  long  as  eternity 
^itself  ;  where  there  shall  be  nothing  but  holy  duties  ;  and  where  there  shall 
not  be  a  spare  minute,  so  much  as  for  a  vain  thought,  or  an  idle  word? 
What  wilt  thou  dp  in  heaven,  where  whatsoever  thou  shalt  hear,  see,  or 
converse  with,  all  is  holy?  And  by  how  much  more  perfect  the  holiness  of 
heaven  is  than  that  of  the  saints  on  earth,  by  so  much  the  more  irksome 
and  intolerable  would  it  be  to  wicked  men, — for  if  they  cannot  endure  the 
weak  light  of  a  star,  how  will  they  be  able  to  endure  the  dazzling  light  of 
the  sun  itself?" — Bishop  Hopkins. 


122  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

enjoy  heaven  ?  They  need  to  be  regenerated  and  born  again. 
It  is  not  a  little  changing  and  outward  amendment  that  they 
require.  It  is  not  merely  the  putting  a  restraint  on  raging 
passions  and  the  quieting  of  unruly  affections.  All  this  is  not 
enough.  Old  age, — the  want  of  opportunity  for  indulgence,  the 
fear  of  man,  may  produce  all  this.  The  tiger  is  still  a  tiger, 
even  when  he  is  chained,  and  the  serpent  is  still  a  serpent,  even 
when  he  lies  motionless  and  coiled  up.  The  alteration  needed 
is  far  greater  and  deeper.  Every  one  must  have  a  new  nature 
put  within  him ;  every  one  must  be  made  a  new  creature ;  the 
fountain-head  must  be  purified ;  the  root  must  be  set  right ; 
each  one  wants  a  new  heart  and  a  new  will.  The  change 
required  is  not  that  of  the  snake  when  he  casts  his  skin  and  yet 
remains  a  reptile  still :  it  is  the  change  of  the  caterpillar  when 
he  dies,  and  his  crawling  life  ceases ;  but  from  his  body  rises 
jthe  butterfly, — a  new  animal,  with  a  new  nature. 

All  this,  and  nothing  less,  is  required.  Well  says  the  Homily 
of  Good  Works  :  "  They  be  as  much  dead  to  God  that  lack  faith 
as  those  are  to  the  world  that  lack  souls." 

The  plain  truth  is3  the  vast  proportion  of  professing  Christians 
in  the  world  jiave_no_tlnng_whatever_of_Christianity  excepf  the 
name.  ~The  reality  of  Christianity,  the  graces,  the  experience, 
the  faith,  the  hopes,  the  life,  the  conflict,  the  tastes,  the  hunger 
ing  and  thirsting  after  righteousness, — all  these  are  things  of 
which  they  know  nothing  at  all.  They  need  to  be  converted 
as  truly  as  any  among  the  Gentiles  to  whom  Paul  preached,  and 
to  be  turned  from  idols,  and  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds 
as  really,  if  not  as  literally.  And  one  main  part  of  the  message 
which  should  be  continually  delivered  to  the  greater  portion  of 
every  congregation  on  earth  is  this  :  "Ye  must  be  born  again." 
I  write  this  down  deliberately.  I  know  it  will  sound  dreadful 
and  uncharitable  in  many  ears.*  But  I  ask  any  o'ne  to  tSklTthe 
New  Testament  in  his  hand,  and  see  what  it  says  is  Christianity, 
and  compare  that  with  the  ways  of  professing  Christians,  and 
then  deny  the  truth  of  what  I  have  written,  if  he  can. 

And  now  let  every  one  who  reads  these  pages  remember  this 
grand  principle  of  Scriptural  religion:   "No  salvation  without  I 
Regeneration, — no    spiritual    life    without    a   new   birth, — no) 
heaven  without  a  new  heart." 

Let  us  not  think  for  a  moment  that  the  subject  of  this  paper 


REGENERATION.  123 

is  a  mere  matter  of  controversy, — an  empty  question  for  learned 
men  to  argue  about,  but  not  one  that  concerns  us.  It  concerns 
us  deeply ;  it  touches  our  own  eternal  interests,  it  is  a  thing 
that  we  must  know  for  ourselves,  feel  for  ourselves,  and  experi 
ence  for  ourselves,  if  we  would  ever  be  saved.  !N"o  soul  of  man, 
woman,  or  child,  will  ever  enter  heaven  without  having  been 
born  again.* 

Andjgtns  notjhink^for  a  moment  that  this  Regrenerationjs 
a  change  which  people  may  go  through  after  they  are  dead, 
though  they' never went^h"reugh  it  while  they  wereajiye.  Such 
a  notion  is  absurd.  Now  or  never  is  the  only  time  to  be  saved. 
Xow,  in  this  world  of  toil  and  labour,  and  money-getting,  and 
business, — now  we  must  be  prepared  for  heaven,  if  we  are  ever 
to  be  prepared  at  all.  Now  is  the  only  time  to  be  justified, 
now  the  only  time  to  be  sanctified,  and  now  the  only  time  to  be 
"  born  again."  So  sure  as  the  Bible  is  true^the  man  who  dies 
without  these  three  things^  will  only  nsejgain  at  the  last  day 
to  be  lost  f or  eve£ 

We'  may  be  'saved  and  reach  heaven  without  many  things 
which  men  reckon  of  great  importance, — without  riches,  without 
learning,  without  books,  without  worldly  comforts,  without 

I  health,  without  house,  without  lands,  without  friends; — but 
i without  Regeneration  we  shall  neuerjbe  saved  at  all.  Without 
our  "natural  birth  we  should  neverTiave  lived  and  moved  and 
read  these  pages  on  earth  :  without  a  new  birth  we  shall  never 
live  and  move  in  heaven.  I  bless  God  that  the  saints  in  glory 
will  be  a  multitude  that  no  man  can  number.  I  comfort  myself 
with  the  thought  that  after  all  there  will  be  "  much  people  "  in 
heaven.  But  this  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  of  irom  God's 

(Word,  that  of  aH  who  reach  heaven  there  will  not  be  one  single 
individuaTwfe  Sas^BLQ^been  jip.rji  apiijvf 

*  "  Make  sure  to  yourselves  this  great  change.  It  is  no  notion  that  I  have 
now  preached  unto  you.  Your  nature  and  your  lives  must  be  changed,  or, 
believe  it,  you  will  be  found  at  the  last  day  under  the  wrath  of  God.  For 
God  will  not  change  or  alter  the  word  that  is  gone  out  of  His  mouth.  He 
hath  said  it :  Christ,  who  is  the  truth  and  word  of  God,  hath  pronounced  it, 
— that  without  the  new  birth,  or  regeneration,  no  man  shall  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  God." — Bishop  Hopkins.  1670. 

ji  f  "  Regeneration,  or  the  new  birth,  is  of  absolute  necessity  unto  eternal  I ' 
Hlife.  There  is  no  other  change  simply  necessary,  but  only  this.  If  thou  art  Jl 
((poor,  thou  mayest  so  continue,  and  yet  be  saved.  If  thou  art  despised,  thoujl 


124  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

III.  Let  me,  in  the  third  place,  point  out  the  marks  of  being 
regenerate,  or  born  again. 

0L   It  is  a  most  important  thing  to  have  clear  and  distinct  views 

^on  this  part  of  the  subject  we  are  considering.     We  have  seen 

*  what  Regeneration  is,  and  why  it  is   necessary  to  salvation. 

The  next  step  is  to  find  out  the  signs  and  evidences  by  which 

'  a  man  may  know  whether  he  is  born  again  or  not, — whether 

his  heart  has  been  changed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  whether  his 

change  is  yet  to  come. 

Xow  these  signs  and  evidences  are  laid  down  plainly  for  us 
in  Scripture.  God  has  not  left  us  in  ignorance  on  this  point. 
He  foresaw  how  some  would  torture  themselves  with  doubts  and 
questionings,  and  would  never  believe  it  was  well  with  their 
souls.  He  foresaw  how  others  would  take  it  for  granted  they 
were  "  regenerate,"  who  had  no  right  to  do  so  at  all.  He  has 
therefore  mercifully  provided  us  with  a  test  and  gauge  of  our 
spiritual  condition,  in  the  First  Epistle  general  of  St.  John. 
There  he  has  written  for  our  learning  what  the  regenerate  man 
is,  and  what  the  regenerate  man  does, — his  ways,  his  habits,  his 
manner  of  life,  his  faith,  his  experience.  Every  one  who 
wishes  to  possess  the  key  to  a  right  understanding  of  this 
subject  should  thoroughly  study  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John. 

I  invite  the  reader's  particular  attention  to  these  marks  and  \ 
evidences  of  Regeneration,  while  I  try  to  set  them  forth  in  A 
IDrder.     I  might  easily  mention  other  evidences  besides  those  I  • 
am  about  to  mention.     But  I  will  not  do  so.     I  would  rather 
^confine  myself  to  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John,  because  of  the  * 
peculiar  explicitness  of  its  statements  about  the  man  that  is 
Tborn  of  God.     He   that  hath  an  ear  let  him  hear  what  the  * 
Moved  Apostle  says  about  the  marks  of  Regeneration. 
•    (1)  First  of  all,  St.  John  says,  "Whosoever  is  born  of  God 
doth  not  commit  sin ; "  and  again,  "  Whosoever  is  born  of  God 
feinneth  not."     (1  John  iii.  9  ;  v.  18.) 

A  regenerate  man  doe^  not  commit  sin  as  a  habit.  He  no 
longer  sins  with  his  heart  and  will,  and  whole  inclination,  as 
~~  '  *  ~ 

mayest  so  continue,  and  yet  be  saved.  If  thou  art  unlearned,  thou  mayest 
so  continue,  and  yet  be  saved.  Only  one  change  is  necessary.  If  thou  art 
wicked  and  ungodly,  and  continuest  so,  Christ,  Who  hath  the  keys  of  heaven, 
Who  shutteth  and  no  man  openeth,  hath  Himself  doomed  thee,  that  thou 
shalt  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."— Bishop  Hopkins.  1670. 


REGENERATION.  125 

an  unrcgcnerato  man  does.  There  was  probably  a  time  when 
he  did  not  think  whether  his  actions  were  sinful  or  not,  and 
never  felt  grieved  after  doing  evil.  There  was  no  quarrel 
between  him  and  sin ; — they  were  friends.  ISTow  he  hates  sin, 
flees  from  it,  fights  against  it,  counts  it  his  greatest  plague, 
gi-oans  under  the  burden  of  its  presence,  mourns  when  he  falls 
under  its  influence,  and  longs  to  be  delivered  from  it  altogether. 
In  one  word,  sin  no  longer  pleases  him,  nor  is  even  a  matter  of 
indifference :  it  has  become  the  abominable  thing  which  he 
hates.  He  cannot  prevent  it  dwelling  within  him.  "  If  he 
said  he  had  no  sin,  there  would  be  no  truth  in  him"  (1  John 
i.  8) ;  but  he  can  say  that  he  cordially  abhors  it,  and  the  great 
desire  of  his  soul  is  not  to  commit  sin  at  all.  He  cannot 
prevent  bad  thoughts  arising  within  him,  and  short-comings, 
omissions,  and  defects  appearing  both  in  his  words  and  actions. 
He  knows,  as  St.  James  says,  that  "in  many  things  we  offend 
all."  (James  iii.  2.)  But  he  ean  say  truly,  and  as  in  the  sight 
of  God,  that  these  things  are  a  daily  grief  and  sorrow  to  him, 
and  that  his  whole  nature  does  not  consent  unto  them,  as  that 
of  the  unregenerate  man  does. 

(2)  Secondly,    St.    John   says,    "  whosoever   believeth    that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  born  of  God."     (1  John  v.  1.) 

L     A   regenerate   man    believes   that   Jesus    Christ   is   the   only 
Saviour  by  whom  his  soul  can  be  pardoned  and  justified,  that 

^He  is  the  Divine  Person  appointed  and  anointed  by  God 
Father  for  this  very  purpose,  and  that  beside  Him  there  is 

*  Saviour  at  all.     In  himself  he  sees  nothing  but  un worthiness, 
but  in  Christ  he  sees  ground  for  the  fullest  confidence,  and^ 

^  trusting  in  Him  he  believes  that  his  sins  are  all  forgiven,  and 

jthis  iniquities  all  put  away.     He  believes  that  for  the  sake  of^ 
Christ's  finished  work  and  death  upon  the  cross  he  is  reckoned 
righteous  in  God's  sight,  and  may  look  forward  to  death  and^ 

^judgment  without  alarm.     He  may  have  his  fears  and  doubts. 
He  may  sometimes  tell  you  he  feels  as  if  he  had  no  faith  at  all. 

<  But  ask  him  whether  he  is  Avilling  to  trust  in  anything  instead,* 
of  Christ,  and  see  what  he  will  say.      Ask  him  whether  he  will 
rest  his  hopes  of  eternal  life  on  his  own  goodness,    his  own 

/C  amendments,  his  prayers,  his  minister,  his  doings  in  church  and/{ 
out  of  church,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  and  see  what  he  will 

jneply.     Ask  him  whether  he  will  give  up  Christ,  and  place 


126  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

^confidence  in  any  other  way  of  salvation.  Depend  upon  it,  he 
fctvould  say,  that  though  he  does  feel  weak  and  bad,  he  would 
not  give  up  Christ  for  all  the  world.  Depend  upon  it,  he  would 
say  he  found  a  preciousness  in  Christ,  a  suitableness  to  his  own 
soul  in  Christ,  that  he  found  nowhere  else,  and  that  he  must 
cling  to  Him. 

(3)  Thirdly,  St.  John  says,  "  Every  one  that  doeth  righteous 
ness  is  born  of  God."     (1  John  ii.  29.) 

fU     The  regenerate  man  is  a  holy  man.     He  endeavours  to  live 

Jh  according  to'  God's  will,  to  do  the  things  that  please  God,  to 

^  avoid  the  things  that  God  hates.     His  aim  and  desire  is  to  love 

'  God  with  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength,  and  to  Jove 

^his  neighbour  as  himself.     His  wish  is  to  be  continually  looking 

/to  Christ  as  his  example  as  well  as  his  Saviour,  and  to  show 

Miimself  Christ's  friend  by  doing  whatsoever  Christ  commands. 

i  No  doubt  he  is  not  perfect.     None  will  tell  you  that  sooner 

^than   himself.      He  groans   under   the   burden    of   indwelling 

corruption  cleaving  to  him.      He  finds  an  evil  principle  within 

him  constantly  warring  against  grace,  and  trying  to  draw  him 

away  from  God.     But  he  does  not  consent  to  it,   though  he 

cannot  prevent  its  presence.     In  spite  of  all  short-comings,  the 

average  bent  and  bias  of  his  way  is  holy, — his  doings  holy, — 

his    tastes   holy, — and   his   habits   holy.     In   spite   of  all  his 

swerving  and  turning  aside,  like  a  ship  beating  up  against  a 

contrary  wind,  the  general  course  of  his  life  is  in  one  direction, 

toward  God  and  for  God.      And  though  he  may  sometimes  feel 

so  low  that  he  questions  whether  he  is  a  Christian  at  all,  in  his 

calmer  moments  he  will  generally  be  able  to  say  with  old  John 

Newton,  "  I  am  not  what  I  ought  to  be  ;  I  am  not  what  I  wantj 

to  be  ;  I  am  not  what  I  hope  to  be  in  another  world ;  but  still] 

I  am  not  what  I  once  used  to  be,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am) 

what  I  am."  * 

(4)  Fourthly,  St.  John  says,  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."     (1  John 
iii.  14.) 

A  regenerate  man  has  a  special  love  foralj^t^e  dgsciplgs  of\ 

*  "  Let  none  conclude  that  they  have  no  grace  because  they  have  many 
imperfections  in  their  obedience.  Thy  grace  may  be  very  weak  and  imperfect, 
and  yet  thou  mayest  be  truly  born  again  to  God,  and  be  a  genuine  son  and 
heir  of  heaven,"— Bishop  Hopkins.  1670. 


REGENEKATION.  127 

.  Christ.  Like  his  Father  in  heaven,  he  loves  all  men  with  a4 
[great  general  love,  but  he  has  a  special  love  f orj/hem  who  are  ofe 
lone  mind  with  himself.  Like  his  Lord  and  Saviour,  he  loves 
the  worst  of  sinners,  and  could  weep  over  them ;  but  he  has  a 
peculiar  love  for  those  who  are  believers.  He  is  never  so  much 
at  home  as  when  he  is  in  their  company :  he  is  never  so  happy 
as  when  he  is  among  the  saints  and  the  excellent  of  the  earth. 
Others  may  value  learning,  or  cleverness,  or  agreeableness,  or 
riches,  or  rank,  in  the  society  they  choose.  The  regenerate  man 
values  grace.  Those  who  have  most  grace,  and  are  most  like 
Christ,  are  those  he  most  loves.  He  feels  that  they  are  members 
of  the  same  family  with  himself, — his  brethren,  his  sisters, 
children  of  the  same  Father.  He  feels  that  they  are  fellow- 
soldiers,  lighting  under  the  same  captain,  warring  against  the 
same  enemy.  He  feels  that  they  are  his  fellow-travellers, 
journeying  along  the  same  road,  tried  by  the  same  difficulties, 
and  soon  about  to  rest  with  him  in  the  same  eternal  home.  He 
understands  them,  and  they  understand  him.  There  is  a  kind 
of  spiritual  freemasonry  between  them.  He  and  they  may  be 
very  different  in  many  ways, — in  rank,  in  station,  in  wealth. 
What  matter  1  They  are  Jesus  Christ's  people :  they  are  His 
Father's  sons  and  daughters.  Then  he  cannot  help  loving 
them. 

(5)  Fifthly,    St.  John  says,  "  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God, 
overcome th  the  world."     (1  John  v.  4.) 

A  regenerate  man  does  not  make  the  world's  opinion  his  rulr, 
of  right  and  wrong.  He  does  not  mind  going  against  the  stream 
of  the  world's  ways,  notions,  and  customs.  "  What  will  men 
say  ?  "  is  no  longer  a  turning  point  with  him.  He  overcomes 
the  love  of  the  world.  He  finds  no  pleasure  in  things  which 
most  around  him  call  happiness.  He  cannot  enjoy  their 
enjoyments, — they  weary  him, — they  appear  to  him  vain, 
unprofitable,  and  unworthy  of  an  immortal  being. — He  over 
comes  the  fear  of  the  world.  He  is  content  to  do  many  things 
which  all  around  him  think  unnecessary,  to  say  the  least. 
(;They  blame  him  :  it  does  not  move  him.  They  ridicule  him  : 
he  does  not  give  way.  He  loves  the  praise  of  God  more  than 
the  praise  of  man.  He  fears  offending  Him  more  than  giving 
offence  to  man.  He  has  counted  the  cost.  He  has  taken  his 
stand.  It  is  a  small  thing  with  him  now,  whether  he  is  blamed 


128  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

or  praised.  His  eye  is  upon  Him  that  is  invisible.  Him  he  is 
resolved  to  follow  whithersoever  He  goeth.  It  may  be  necessary 
in  this  following  to  come  out  from  the  world  and  be  separate. 
The  regenerate  man  will  not  shrink  from  doing  so.  Tell  him 
that  he  is  unlike  other  people,  that  his  views  are  not  the  views 
of  society  .generally,  and  that  he  is  making  himself  singular  and 
peculiar.  You  will  not  shake  him.  He  is  no  longer  the 
servant  of  fashion  and  custom.  To  please  the  world  is  quite  a 
secondary  consideration  with  him.  His  first  aim  is  to  please 
God. 

(6)  Sixthly,  St.  John  says,  "He  that  is  begotten  of  God 
keepeth  himself."  (1  John  v.  18.) 

A  regenerate  man  is  very  careful  of  his  own  soul.  He 
endeavours  not  only  to  keep  clear  of  sin,  but  also  to  keep  clear 
of  everything  which  may  lead  to  it.  He  is  careful  about  the 
company  he  keeps.  He  feels  that  evil  communications  corrupt 
the  heart,  and  that  evil  is  far  more  catching  than  good,  just  as 
disease  is  more  infectious  than  health.  He  is  careful  about  the 
employment  of  his  time  :  his  chief  desire  about  it  is  to  spend  it 
profitably.  He  is  careful  about  the  books  he  reads :  he  fears 
getting  his  mind  poisoned  by  mischievous  writings.  He  is 
careful  about  the  friendships  he  forms  :  it  is  not  enough  for 
him  that  people  are  kind  and  amiable  and  good-natured, — all 
this  is  very  well ;  but  will  they  do  good  to  his  soul  1  He  is 
careful  over  his  own  daily  habits  and  behaviour :  he  tries  to 
recollect  that  his  own  heart  is  deceitful,  that  the  world  is  full  of 
wickedness,  that  the  devil  is  always  labouring  to  do  him  harm, 
and  therefore  he  would  fain  be  always  on  his  guard.  He 
desires  to  live  like  a  soldier  in  an  enemy's  country,  to  wear  his 
armour  continually,  and  to  be  prepared  for  temptation.  He 
hnds  by  experience  that  his  soul  is  ever  among  enemies,  and  he 
studies  to  be  a  watchful,  humble,  prayerful  man. 

Such  are  the  six  great  marks  of  Regeneration,  which  God 
has  given  for  our  learning.  Let  every  one  who  has  gone  so  far 
with  me,  read  them  over  with  attention,  and  lay  them  to  heart. 
I  believe  they  were  written  with  a  view  to  settle  the  great 
question  of  the  present  day,  and  intended  to  prevent  disputes. 
Once  more,  then,  I  ask  the  reader  to  mark  and  consider  them. 

I  know  there  is  a  vast  difference  in  the  depth  and  distinct- 


REGENERATION.  129 

ness  of  these  marks  among  those  who  are  "regenerate."  In 
some  people  they  are  faint,  dim,  feeble,  and  hardly  to  be  dis 
cerned.  Yon  almost  need  a  microscope  to  make  them  out.  In 
others  they  are  bold,  sharp,  clear,  plain,  and  unmistakable,  so 
that  he  who  runs  may  read  them.  Some  of  these  marks  are 
more  visible  in  some  people,  and  others  are  more  visible  in 
others.  It  seldom  happens  that  all  are  equally  manifest  in 
one  and  the  same  soul.  All  this  I  am  quite  ready  to  allow. 

But  still,  after  every  allowance,  here  we  find  boldly  painted 
the  six  marks  of  being  bom  of  God.  Here  are  certain  positive 
things  laid  down  by  St.  John  as  parts  of  the  regenerate  man's 
character,  as  plainly  and  distinctly  as  the  features  of  a  man's 
face.  Here  is  an  inspired  Apostle  writing  one  of  the  last 
general  Epistles  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  telling  us  that  a  man 
born  of  God  does  not  commit  sin, — believes  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ, — doeth  righteousness, — loves  the  brethren, — overcomes 
the  world,  and  keepeth  himself.  And  more  than  once  in  the 
very  same  Epistle,  when  these  marks  are  mentioned,  the 
Apostle  tells  us  that  he  who  has  not  this  or  that  mark  is  "  not 
of  God."  I  ask  the  reader  to  observe  all  this. 

Now  what  shall  we  say  to  these  things  ?  What  they  can 
say  who  "hold  that  Regeneration  is  only  an  admission  to  outward 
Church  privileges,  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know.  For  myself,  I  say 
boldly,  I  can  only  come  to  one  conclusion.  That  conclusion  is, 
that  those  persons  only  are  "  regenerate  "  who  have  these  six 
marks  about  them,  and  that  all  men  and  women  who  have  not 
these  marks  are  not  "regenerate,"  are  not  born  again.  And  I 
firmly  believe  that  this  is  the  conclusion  to  which  the  Apostle 
wished  us  to  come. 

I  commend  what  I  have  been  saying  to  the  serious  considera 
tion  of  all  my  readers.  I  believe  that  I  have  said  nothing  but 
what  is  God's  truth.  We  live  in  a  day  of  gross  darkness  on 
the  subject  of  Regeneration.  Thousands  are  darkening  God's 
counsel  by  confounding  baptism  and  Regeneration.  Let  us 
beware  of  this.  Let  us  keep  the  two  subjects  separate  in  our 
mind.  Let  us  get  clear  views  about  Regeneration  first  of  all, 
and  then  we  are  not  likely  to  fall  into  mistakes  about  baptism. 
And  when  we  have  got  clear  views  let  us  hold  them  fast,  and 
never  let  them  go. 


VII. 

PEAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  ABOUT 
REGENERATION. 

"Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he    cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God." 
— JOHN  iii.  3. 

"  This  child  is  regenerate."  —  Baptismal   Service  of  the  Church  of 

England. 

IN  this  paper  I  have  one  simple  object  in  view.  I  wish  to 
throw  light  on  certain  expressions  about  "  Regeneration  "  in  the 
Baptismal  Service  of  the  Church  of  England. 

The  subject  is  one  of  no  slight  importance.  The  minds  of 
many  true  Christians  in  the  Church  of  England  are  troubled 
about  it.  They  do  not  see  the  real  meaning  of  our  excellent 
Reformers  in  putting  such  language  in  a  Prayer-book  Service. 
They  are  perplexed  and  confounded  by  the  bold  and  reckless 
assertions  made  by  opponents  of  Evangelical  Religion  within  the 
Church,  and  of  Dissenters  outside  the  Church,  and,  though  not 
convinced,  they  find  nothing  to  reply. 

I  propose  in  this  paper  to  supply  an  answer  to  the  common 
arguments  in  favour  of  "  Baptismal  Regeneration,"  which  are 
based  on  the  Baptismal  Service  of  the  Prayer-book.  I  wish 
to  show  that  in  this,  as  in  many  other  questions,  the  truth  is  not 
so  entirely  on  one  side,  as  many  seem  to  suppose.  Above  all,  I 
wish  to  show  that  it  is  possible  to  be  a  consistent,  honest,  thought 
ful  member  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  yet  not  to  hold  the 
doctrine  of  Baptismal  Regeneration. 

In  considering  this  subject,  I  shall  strictly  confine  myself  to 
the  one  point  at  issue.  I  purposely  avoid  entering  into  the 
general  question  of  the  nature  of  Regeneration  and  the  Scriptural 
warrant  for  infant  baptism.  I  shall  only  make  a  few  pre 
liminary  remarks  by  way  of  explanation,  and  to  prevent  mis 
takes  about  the  meaning  of  words. 

130 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         131 

(1)  My  first  remark  is   this :    I  believe  that,  according   to 
Scripture,    Regeneration    is   that   great   change   of   heart   and 
character    which    is    absolutely    needful   to    man's   salvation, 
"  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of 
God."     (John  iii.   3.)     Sometimes   it   is  called   conversion, — 
sometimes  being  made  alive  from  the  dead, — sometimes  putting 
off  the  old  man,  and  putting  on  the  new, — sometimes  a  new 
creation, — sometimes   being  renewed, — sometimes  being  made 
partaker  of  the  Divine  nature.     All  these  expressions  of  the 
Bible  come  to  the  same  thing.     They  are  all  the  same  truth, 
only   viewed    from   different   points.     They   all   describe   that 
mighty,  radical  change  of  nature,  which  it  is  the  special  office 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  give, — and  without  which  no  one  can  be 
saved. 

I  am  aware  that  many  do  not  allow  "  Regeneration "  to  be 
what  I  have  here  described  it.  They  regard  it  as  nothing  more 
than  an  admission  to  Church  privileges, — a  change  of  state,  and 
not  a  change  of  heart.  But  what  plain  text  of  Scripture  can 
they  show  us  in  support  of  this  view  ?  I  answer  boldly, — "  Not 
one."  * 

(2)  My  second  remark  is  this.     I  believe  there  is  only  one 
sure  evidence,  according  to  Scripture,  of  any  one  being  a  re 
generate  person.     That  evidence  is  the  fruit  that  he  brings  fortli 
in  his  heart  and  in  his  life.     "  Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own 
fruit."     Those  fruits  are  laid  down  clearly  and  plainly  in  the 
New  Testament.     The  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  the  latter  part 
of  most  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  contain  unmistakable  descrip 
tions  of  the  man  who  is  born  of  the  Spirit.     But  nowhere  shall 
we  find  the  marks  of  Regeneration  so  fully  given  as  in  the  first 
Epistle  of  St.  John.     "Whosoever  is   born   of  God   sinneth 
not."  f     "  Whosoever  belie veth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born 


*  I  willingly  concede  that  this  low  view  of  Regeneration  is  held  by  many 
holy  and  good  men,  like  Bishop  Davenant  and  Bishop  Hopkins,  whose  doc 
trinal  views  are  in  all  other  respects  Scriptural  and  sound.  But  I  can  call 
no  man  master.  Warrant  of  Scripture  for  drawing  a  distinction  between 
baptismal  and  spiritual  Regeneration,  I  can  nowhere  find. 

f  "The  interpretation  of  this  place  that  I  judge  to  be  the  most  natural 
and  unforced  is  this  :  '  He  that  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin  ; '  that 
is,  he  doth  not  sin  in  that  malignant  manner  in  which  the  children  of  the 
devil  do ;  he  doth  not  make  a  trade  of  sin,  nor  live  in  the  constant  and 
allowed  practice  of  it.  There  is  a  great  difference  betwixt  regenerate  and 


132  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

of  God."  "Every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is  born  of 
Him."  "Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world." 
"He  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself."  "In  this  the 
children  of  God  are  manifest,  and  the  children  of  the  devil : 
whosoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God,  neither  he 
that  loveth  not  his  brother."  (1  John  v.  18  ;  1  John  v.  1 ; 
1  John  ii.  29  ;  1  John  v.  4 ;  1  John  v.  18 ;  1  John  iii.  10.) 

Of  course  I  am  aware  that  many  divines  maintain  that  we 
may  call  people  "  regenerate,"  in  whom  none  of  the  marks  just 
described  are  seen,  or  ever  were  seen  since  they  were  born. 
They  tell  us,  in  short,  that  people  may  possess  the  gift  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  grace  of  Regeneration,  when  neither  the  gift  nor 
the  grace  can  be  seen.  Such  a  doctrine  appears  to  me  dangerous 
in  the  highest  degree.  It  seems  to  my  mind  little  better  than 
Antinomianism. 

(3)  My  third  remark  is  this.  I  believe  that  Regeneration 
and  baptism,  according  to  Scripture,  do  not  necessarily  go 
together.  J  see  that  people  may  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  have  new  hearts,  without  baptism,  like  John  the  Baptist 
and  the  penitent  thief.  I  see  also  that  people  may  be  baptized, 
and  yet  remain  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  bond  of  iniquity, 
like  Simon  Magus.  Above  all,  I  find  St.  Peter  telling  us 
expressly,  that  the  baptism  which  "  saves,"  and  whereby  we  are 
buried  with  Christ,  and  put  on  Christ,  is  not  water-baptism 
only,  whether  infant  or  adult.  It  is  "  not  "  the  putting  away 
of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  "  answer  of  a  good  conscience." 
l^Peter  iii.  21.) 

it  is  well  known  that  many  people  hold  that  baptism  and 
Regeneration   are  inseparable ;  but  there  is  a  fatal  absence  of 
texts  in  support  of  this  view.     Sixteen  times,  at  least,  the  new 
is  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament.*     "  Regeneration  "  is 
a  worj iise^  twice.  buJL  only  once  in  the  sense  of  a  change  of 
jhearik     "  Born  again," — "  born  of  God," — "  born  of  the  Spirit," 
— "  begotten  of  God,"  are  expressions  used  frequently.     Once 

unregenerate  persons  in  the  very  sins  that  they  commit.  All  indeed  sin ; 
but  a  child  of  God  cannot  sin, — that  is,  though  he  doth  sin,  yet  he  cannot  sin 
after  such  a  manner  as  wicked  and  unregenerate  men  do." — Bishop  Hopkins. 
1670. 

I*  John  i.  13.  John  iii.  3.  John  iii.  5.  John  iii.  7.  John  iii.  8.  Titus  / 
iii.  5.  1  Peter  i.  3.  1  Peter  i.  23.  James  i.  18.  1  John  ii.  29.  1  John  iii.  J 
9.  1  John  iv.  7.  1  John  v.  1.  1  John  v.  4.  1  John  v.  18. 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         133 

the  word  "water"  is  joined  with  the  words  "born  of  the 
Spirit ; "  once  the  word  "  washing "  is  joined  with  the  word 
"  Regeneration ; "  twice  believers  are  said  to  be  born  of  the 
"  Word  of  God,"  the  "  Word  of  truth."  But  it  is  a  striking  fact 
that  there  is  not  one  text  in  Scripture  which  save  distinctly  and 


expressly  that  we  are  bom  again  in  baptism^  and  that  every 
hantized  person  is  necessarily  regenerate  ! 


(4)  My  fourth  and  last  remark  is  this.  I  believe  that  accord 
ing  to  Scripture,  baptism  has  no  more  power  to  confer  Regenera 
tion  on  infants,  ex  opere  operato,  than  it  has  upon  grown-up  people. 
That  infants  ought  to  be  solemnly  and  formally  admitted  into 
the  Church  under  the  New  Testament,  as  well  as  under  the  Old, 
I  make  no  question.  The  promise  to  the  children  of  believers,  and 
the  behaviour  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  children,  oug 


t encourage  all  believing  parents  to  expect  the  greatest  bleasrpga  in 
bringing their  infants  to  be  baptized.  But  beyond  this  I  cannot  go. 
I  am  aware  that  many  people  think  that  infants  must  be 
regenerated  in  baptism,  as  a  matter  of  course,  because  they  put 
no  bar  in  the  way  of  grace,  and  must  therefore  receive  the 
sacrament  worthily.  Once  more  I  am  obliged  to  say,  there  is  a 
fatal  absence  of  Scripture  in  defence  of  this  view.  The  right 
of  Christian  infants  to  baptism  is  only  through  their  parents. 


The  precise  effect  of  baptism  on  infants  is  never  once  stated 
in  the  New  Testament.     There  ia  no  description  of  a 


ti  the  New  rCEfttftTnenk  There  is  no  description  of  a  child 
laptism ;  and  to  say  that  childrenT  bom  in  sin,  as  all  are,  are^ 
hemselves  worihv  to  receive  grace,  appears  to  me  a  ne: 


themselves   worthy   to   receive    grace,    appears   to   me   a   near 
approach  to  the  old  heresy  of  Pelagianism.* 

I  now  come  to  the  point  which  forms  the  chief  subject  of 
this  paper.  That  point  is  the  true  interpretation  of  some 
expressions  in  the  Baptismal  Service  of  the  Church  of  England, 
which  appear  at  first  sight  to  contradict  the  view  which  I  have 
been  endeavouring  to  set  forth  on  the  subject  of  Regeneration. 

*  If  infants  are  in  themselves  worthy  to  receive  grace,  because  they  put  no 
bar  in  its  way,  let  this  question  be  answered: — "  Why  do  not  missionaries 
to  the  heathen  baptize  all  the  heathen  infants  whom  they  can  find,  without 
waiting  for  the  will  of  their  parents?"  No  Protestant  missionary  at  any 
rate  thinks  of  doing  so. 

If  the  children  of  believing  and  unbelieving  parents  are  sure  to  receive 
exactly  the  same  amount  of  grace  in  baptism,  by  virtue  of  the  baptismal 
water,  in  whatever  state  of  mind  their  parents  bring  them  to  the  font,  the 
whole  sacrament  becomes  nothing  but  a  form. 


134  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

It  is  asserted  that  the  Prayer-book  decidedly  teaches  the  doctrine 
of  Baptismal  Regeneration  in  the  Baptismal  Service. — It  is  said 
that  the  words  of  that  service,  "Seeing  now  that  this  child  is 
regenerate,"  —  "We  yield  Thee  hearty  thanks,  that  it  hath 
pleased  Thee  to  regenerate  this  child  with  Thy  Holy  Spirit," 
admit  of  only  one  meaning. — They  are  used,  it  is  said,  over 
every  child  that  is  baptized. — They  prove,  it  is  said,  beyond  all 
question,  that  the  Church  of  England  maintains  the  doctrine  of 
Baptismal  Regeneration. — They  settle  the  point,  it  is  said,  and 
leave  no  room  to  doubt.  These  are  the  statements  I  now  propose 
to  examine.  Can  they  be  proved,  or  can  they  not  1  I  say 
unhesitatingly  that  they  cannot^  and  I  will  proceed  to  give  my 
reasons  for  saying  so,  if  the  reader  will  give  me  his  patient 
attention. 

I  desire  to  approach  the  whole  subject  in  dispute  with  a 
sorrowful  recollection  of  the  sad  difference  of  opinion  which  has 
long  prevailed  in  my  own  Church  upon  the  subject  which  it 
involves.  I  am  quite  aware  of  the  positive  assertions  so  fre 
quently  made,  that  the  views  of  Regeneration  I  have  tried  to 
set  forth  are  not  "  Church  views,"  and  so  forth.  Such  assertions 
go  for  very  little  with  me.  I  have  read  Bishop  Jewel's  Apology, 
and  I  do  not  forget  what  he  says  there  about  those  "  wjio  impose 
upon  silly  men  by  vain  and  useless  shows,  and  seek  to  over 
whelm  us  with  the  mere  name  of  the  Church,"  I  am  thoroughly 
persuaded  that  the  views  of  Regeneration  I  maintain  are  the 
views  of  the  Prayer-book,  Articles,  and  Homilies  of  the  Church 

England,  and  I  will  endeavour  to  satisfy  the  reader  that  I 
have  good  reasons  for  saying  so.  The  more  I  have  searched 
the  subject,  the  more  thoroughly  convinced  have  I  felt  in 
my  own  mind  that  those  who  say  the  views  I  advocate  are  not 
"  Church  views"  are  asserting  what  they  cannot  prove. 

And  now  let  me  proceed  to  reply  to  the  objection  that  the 
invariable  Regeneration  of  all  infants  in  baptism  is  proved  to 
be  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England  by  the  language  of 
her  Baptismal  Service. 

I.  I  answer  then,  first  of  all,  that  the  mere  quotation  of  two 
isolated  expressions  in  one  particular  service  in  our  Liturgy  is 
not  of  itself  sufficient.  It  must  be  proved  that  the  sense  in 
which  the  objector  takes  these  expressions  is  the  correct  one. 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         135 

It  must  also  be  shown  that  this  sense  will  bear  comparison  with 
the  other  Services  and  formularies  of  the  Church,  and  does  not 
involve  any  contradiction.  If  this  last  point  cannot  be  shown 
and  proved,  it  is  clear  that  the  objector  has  put  a  wrong  inter 
pretation  on  the  Baptismal  Service,  and  does  not  understand  the 
great  principle  on  which  all  the  Services  of  our  Church  are 

drawn  up. 

It  is  a  most  unsound  method  of  reasoning  to  take  one  <   •  two( 
expressions  out  of  a  book  which  has  been  written  as  one  great 
whole,  to  place  a  certain  meaning  on  these  expressions,  and 
then  refuse  to  inquire  whether  that  meaning  can  be  reconcile, 
with  the  general  spirit  of  the  rest  of  the  book.     The  beginning 
of  every  heresy  and  erroneous  tenet  in  religion  may  be  trace( 
up  to  this  kind  of  reasoning,  and  to  unfair  and  partial  quota 
tions.  , 

This  is  precisely  the  Roman  Catholic's  argument  when  lie 
wants  to  prove  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  "I  read," 
he  says,  "these  plain  words, 'This  is  My  body— this  is  My 
blood.'  I  want  no  more,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  your 
explanations  and  quotations  from  other  parts  of  the  Bible. 
Here  is  quite  enough  for  me.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says, 
<  This  is  My  body.'  This  settles  the  question." 

This  again  is  precisely  the  Arian's  argument,  when  he  wants 
to  prove  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  inferior  to  the  lather. 
"  I  read,"  he  says,  "  these  plain  words,  <  My  Father  is  greater 
than  I ' "  It  is  in  vain  you  tell  him  that  there  are  other  texts 
which  show  the  Son  to  be  equal  with  the  Father,  and  give  a 
different  meaning  to  the  one  he  has  quoted.  It  matters  not. 
He  rests  on  the  one  single  text  that  he  has  chosen  to  rest  on, 
and  he  will  hear  nothing  further. 

This  also  is  precisely  the  Socinian's  argument,  when  he  wants 
to  prove  that  Jesus  Christ  is  only  a  man,  and  not  God. 
read,"  he  tells  us,  "these  plain  words,  'The  man,  Christ  Jesus. 
—Do  not  talk  to  me  about  other  passages  which  contradict  my 
view.  All  I  know  is,  here  are  words  which  cannot  be  mistaken, 
— '  The  man,  Christ  Jesus.' " 

Now    without  desiring  to  give  offence,  I  must  frankly  say 
that  I  observe  this  kind  of  argument  continually  used  in  dis 
cussing  the  Church  of  England's  doctrine  about  Regeneration. 
People  quote  the  words  of  our  Baptismal  Service,  " 


136  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

that  this  child  is  regenerate,"  etc.,  as  an  unanswerable  proof  that 
the  Church  considers  all  baptized  infants  to  be  born  again. 
They  will  not  listen  to  anything  else  that  is  brought  forward 
from  other  Services  and  formularies  of  the  Church.  They  tell 
you  they  take  their  stand  on  the  simple  expression,  "  This  child 
is  regenerate."  The  words  are  plain,  they  inform  us !  They 
settle  the  question  incontrovertibly  !  They  seem  to  doubt 
your  honesty  and  good  sense,  if  you  are  not  at  once  convinced. 
And  all  this  time  they  do  not  see  that  they  are  taking  their 
stand  on  very  dangerous  ground,  and  putting  a  sword  into  the 
hand  of  the  next  Socinian,  Arian,  or  Roman  Catholic  who 
happens  to  dispute  with  them. 

I  warn  such  people,  if  this  paper  falls  in  their  hands,  that 
this  favourite  argument  will  not  do.  A  single  quotation 
dragged  out  of  a  Service  will  not  suffice.  They  must  prove 
that  the  meaning  they  attach  to  it  is  consistent  with  the  rest  of 
the  Prayer-book,  and  with  the  Articles  and  Homilies.  They 
must  not  expound  one  place  of  the  Prayer-book,  any  more  than 
of  tl^e  pibleT  so  as  to  make  it  repugnant  to  another.  And 
this,  whether  they  mean  it  or  not,  I  firmly  believe  they  are  doing. 

II.  I  answer,  in  the  next  place,  that  to  say  all  baptized 
infants  are  regenerate,  because  of  the  expressions  in  the 
Baptismal  Service,  is  to  contradict  the  great  principle  on  ivhich 
the  whole  Prayer-book  is  drawn  up. 

The  principle  of  the  Prayer-book  is  to  suppose  all  members 
of  the  Church  to  be  in  reality  what  they  are  in  profession, — to 
be  true  believers  in  Christ,  to  be  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  Prayer-book  takes  the  highest  standard  of  what  a  Christian 
ought  to  be,  and  is  all  through  worded  accordingly.  The 
minister  addresses  those  who  assemble  together  for  public 
worship  as  believers.  The  people  who  use  the  words  the  Liturgy 
puts  into  their  mouths,  are  supposed  to  be  believers.  But  those 
who  drew  up  the  Prayer-book  never  meant  to  assert  that  all 
who  were. members  of  the  Church  of  England  were  -actually  and 
really  true  Christians.  On  the  contrary,  they  tell  us  expressly 
in  the  Articles,  that  "in  the  visible  Church  the  evil  be  ever 
mingled  writh  the  good."  But  they  held  that  if  forms  of  de 
votion  were  drawn  up  at  all,  they  must  be  drawn  up  on  the 
supposition  that  those  who  used  them  were  real  Christians,  and 


\ 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         137 

not  false  ones.  And  in  so  doing  I  think  they  were  quite  right. 
A  Liturgy  for  unbelievers  and  unconverted  men  would  be  absurd, 
and  practically  useless  !  The  part  of  the  congregation  for  whom 
it  was  meant  would  care  little  or  nothing  for  any  Liturgy  at  all. 
The  holy  and  believing  part  of  the  congregation  would  find 
its  language  entirely  unsuited  to  them. 

Now  this  general  principle  of  the  Prayer-book  is  the  prin 
ciple  on  which  the  Baptismal  Service  is  drawn  up.  It  supposes 
those  who  bring  their  children  to  be  baptized,  to  bring  them  as 
believers.  As  the  seed  of  godly  parents  and  children  of  be 
lievers,  their  infants  are  baptized.  As  believers,  the  sponsors 
and  parents  are  exhorted  to  pray  that  the  child  may  be  born 
again,  and  encouraged  to  lay  hold  on  the  promises.  And  as  the 
child  of  believers  the  infant  when  baptized  is  pronounced  "  re 
generate,"  and  thanks  are  given  for  it. 

The  principle  which  the  Church  lays  down  as  an  abstract 
principle  is  this, — that  baptism  when  rightly  and  worthily  re 
ceived,  is  a  means  whereby  we  may  receive  inward  and  spiritual 
grace,  even  a  death  unto  sin  and  a  new  birth  unto  righteous 
ness.*  That  an  infant  may  receive  baptism  "rightly"  the 
Church  of  England  unquestionably  holds,  though  the  way  and 
manner  of  it  may  be  a  hidden  thing  to  us ;  for  as  good  Arch 
bishop  Usher  beautifully  remarks,  "He  that  hath  said  of  infants, 
to  them  belongs  the  kingdom  of  God,  knows  how  to  settle 
upon  them  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Her  ministers  cannot 
see  the  book  of  God's  election.  They  cannot  see  the  hidden 
workings  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  cannot  read  the  hearts  of 
parents  and  sponsors.  They  can  never  say  of  any  individual 
child,  "This  child  is  certainly  receiving  baptism  unworthily." 
And  this  being  the  case,  the  Church  most  wisely  leans  to  the 
side  of  charity,  assumes  hopefully  of  each  child  that  it  receives 
baptism  worthily,  and  uses  language  accordingly. 

The  men  who  drew  up  our  Baptismal  Service,  held  that  there 
was  a  connection  between  baptism  and  spiritual  KegeJ^eration, 


It  may  be  well  to  remark  that  this  is  also  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland.        The  efficacy  of  baptism  is  not  tied  to  that  moment  of  time 
wherein  it  is  administered  ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  by  the  right  use  of  this 
ordinance,  the  grace  promised  is  not  only  offered,  but  really' exhibited  and  ( 
\conferred  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  such  (whether  of  age  or  infants)  as  that 
-jrace  belongeth  unto,  according  to  the   counsel  of  God's  own  will,  in  His  | 
ippomted  time."— Scotch  Confession  of  Faith,  chap.  28. 


138  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

.and  they  were  right*  The^knew  that  there  was  nothing  too 
high  in  the  way  of  Messing^to  expect  for  the  child  ofjijeliever. 
They  knew  that  GrodT  might  of  bis  sovereign  mercyjam£race 
to,  any  child  Trafpre,  or^in.  orlit,  or  by  the  act  of  baptism.  At 

all  events  jhey  dared  notjundertake  the  responsibility  of  deny 
ing  it  In 'tEe  case^prany'particufar  infant  and  they  therefore 
took  the",  safer  course,  to  express  a  charitable  hope  of  all. — They 

I  could  not  draw  up  two   Services  of  baptism,  one  of  a  high 
standard  of  privilege,  the  other  of  a  low  one.     They  could  not 
j  leave  it  to  the  option  of  a  minister  to  decide  when  one  should 
(be  used,  and  when  the  other.     It  would  have  made  a  minister's 
position  at  the  baptismal  font  a  most  invidious  one  ; — it  would 
have  exposed  him  to  the  risk  of  making  painful  mistakes  ; — it 

(would  have  required  him  to  decide  points  which  none  but  God 
can  decide.  They  leaned  to  the  side  of  charity.  _They  drew 
up  a  form  containing  the  highest  standard  of  privilege  and 
blessing,  and  required  that  in  every  case  of  infant  baptism  that 
form,  and  that  only,  should  be  used.  And  in  so  doing  they 
acted  in  the  spirit  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  remarkable  words 
to  the  seventy  disciples,  "  Into  whatsoever  house  ye  enter,  first 
say,  Peace  be  to  this  house.  And  if  the  son  of  peace  be  there, 
your  peace  shall  rest  upon  it :  if  not,  it  shall  turn  to  you  again." 
(Luke  x.  5,  6.) 

But  as  for  maintaining  that  the  ministerial  act  of  baptizing 
child  did  always  necessarily  convey  Regeneration,  and  that 
every  infant  baptized  was  invariably  born  again,  I  believe  it 
never  entered  into  the  thoughts  of  those  who  drew  up  the 
Prayer-book.  In  the  judgment  of  charity  and  hope  they  sup 
posed  all  to  be  regenerated  in  baptism,  and  used  language, 
accordingly.  Whether  any  particular  child  was  actually  am} 
really  regenerated  they  left  to  be  decided  by  its  life  and  ways 
when  it  grew  up.  To  say  that  the  assertions  of  the  Prayer-! 
book  Baptismal  Service  are  to  be  taken  for  more  than  a  charitA 
able  supposition,  will  be  found,  on  close  examination,  to  throw! 
the  whole  Prayer-book  into  confusion,  f 

*  "There  is  in  every  sacrament  a  spiritual  relation,  or  sacramental  union  I 
between  the  sign  and  the  thing  signified  ;  whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  I 
names  and  effects  of  the  one  are  attributed  to  the  other. "—Scotch  Confession) 

f  "  What  £y  you  of  infants  baptized  that  are  born  in  the  Church  ?    Doth  II 
the  inward  grace  in  their  baptism  always  attend  upon  the  outward  sign  .'  M 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.          139 

This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  many  of  the  Collects  can 
be  reasonably  explained.  The  Collect  for  the  Epiphany  says, 
"  Grant  that  we  who  know  Thee  now  by  faith,  may  after  this 
life  have  the  fruition  of  Thy  glorious  God-head." — Will  any 
one  tell  us  that  the  compilers  of  the  Prayer-book  meant  to 
teach,  that  all  who  use  the  Prayer-book  do  know  God  by  faith  1 
Surely  not. — The  Collect  for  Sexagesima  Sunday  says,  "  0, 
Lord  God,  Who  seest  that  we  put  not  our  trust  in  anything 
that  we  do,"  etc.  Will  any  dare  to  say  that  these  words  could 
ever  be  literally  true  of  all  members  of  the  Church  of  England  ? 
Are  they  not  manifestly  a  charitable  supposition  ? — The  Collect 
for  the  Third  Sunday  after  Trinity  says,  "  We,  to  whom  Thou 
hast  given  a  hearty  desire  to  pray,"  etc.  Who  can  have  a 
doubt  that  this  is  a  form  of  words,  which  is  used  by  many  of 
whom  it  could  not  strictly  and  truly  be  said  for  one  minute  1 
Who  can  fail  to  see  in  all  these  instances  one  uniform  principle, 

Surely,  no.  The  sacrament  of  baptism  is  effectual  in  infants  only  to  those 
and  to  all  those  who  belong  unto  the  election  of  grace.  Which  thing, 
though  we  in  the  judgment  of  charity  do  judge  of  every  particular  infant, 
yet  we  have  no  ground  to  judge  so  of  all  in  general :  or  if  we  should  judge  so, 
yet  is  it  not  any  judgment  of  certainty.  We  may  be  mistaken." — Archbishop 
Usher.  1620. 

"  All  that  receive  baptism  are  called  children  of  God,  regenerate,  justified  : 
for  to  us  they  must  be  taken  for  such  in  charity,  until  they  show  themselves 
other.  But  the  author  (Bishop  Montague,  a  friend  of  Archbishop  Laud) 
affirmeth  that  this  is  not  left  to  men's  charity,  as  you,  saith  he,  do  inform 
the  world,  because  we  are  taught  in  the  service  book  of  our  Church  earnestly 
to  believe  that  Christ  hath  favourably  received  these  infants  that  are  baptized, 
that  He  hath  embraced  them  with  the  arms  of  His  mercy,  that  He  hath 
given  them  the  blessing  of  everlasting  life  ;  and  out  of  that  belief  and  per 
suasion  we  are  to  give  thanks  faithfully  and  devoutly  for  it.  All  this  we 
receive  and  make  no  doubt  of  it :  but  when  we  have  said  all  we  must  come 
to  this, — that  all  this  is  the  charity  of  the  Church,  and  what  more  can  you 
make  of  it  ?  "—George  Carleton,  Bishop  of  Chichester.  1619 

"We  are  to  distinguish  between  the  judgment  of  charity  and  the  judg 
ment  of  certainty.  For  although  in  the  general  we  know  that  not  every 
one  that  is  baptized  is  justified  or  shall  be  saved,  yet  when  we  come  to 
particulars,  we  are  to  judge  of  them  that  are  baptized  that  they  are 
regenerated  and  justified,  and  shall  be  saved,  until  they  shall  discover 
themselves  not  to  be  such.  And  so  our  book  of  Common  Prayer  speaketh 
of  them."— George  Downame,  Bishop  of  Derry.  1620. 

"The  office  for  baptizing  infants  carries  on  the  supposition  of  an  internal 
Regeneration."— Bishop  Barnct.  1689. 

There  is  justification  for  that  prayer  in  our  public  liturgy,  when  the  con 
gregation  gives  thanks  to  God  for  the  child  baptized,  that  it  hath  pleased  Him 
to  regenerate  this  infant  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  etc.  For  it  cannot  be  denied 


140  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

the  principle  of  charitably  assuming  that  members  of  a  Church 
are  what  they  profess  to  be  1  The  Church  puts  in  the  mouth 
of  her  worshipping  people  the  sentiments  and  language  they 
ought  to  use,  and  if  they  do  not  come  up  to  her  high  standard, 
the  fault  is  theirs,  not  hers.  But  to  say  that  by  adopting  such 
expressions  she  stamps  and  accredits  all  her  members  as  real 
and  true  Christians  in  the  sight  of  God,  would  be  manifestly 
absurd. 

This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  the  Service  for  the  Church 
ing  of  Women  can  be  interpreted.  Every  woman  for  whom 
that  Service  is  used,  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  Lord's  servant,"  and 
is  required  to  answer  that  she  "puts  her  trust  in  the  Lord." 
Yet  who  in  his  senses  can  doubt  that  such  words  are  utterly 
inapplicable  in  the  case  of  a  great  proportion  of  those  who  come 
to  be  churched  ?  They  are  not  "  servants  "  of  the  Lord  !  They 
do  not  in  any  sense  "  put  their  trust "  in  Him !  And  who 
would  dare  to  argue  that  the  compilers  of  the  Liturgy  con- 
but  that  the  holy  ordinance  of  baptism,  the  seal  of  our  sanctification,  doth 
take  effect  many  times  immediately  in  the  infusion  of  present  grace  into  the 
infant's  soul,  though  many  times  also  it  hath  not  its  effect  till  many  years 
after.  But  seeing  it  is  questionably  true  in  many,  we  may  and  must  charit 
ably  suppose  it  in  every  one,  for  when  we  come  to  particulars  whom  dare  we 
exclude?  And  this  we  may  do  without  tying  the  grace  of  Regeneration 
necessarily  to  baptism,  as  some  complain  that  we  do." — William  Pemblc, 
Magdalen  Hall,  Oxford.  1635. 

"  The  Apostles  always,  when  they  descend  to  particular  men  or  Churches, 
PRESUME  every  Christian  to  be  elect,  sanctified,  justified,  and  in  the  way  of 
being  glorified,  until  he  himself  shall  have  proved  himself  to  be  wicked,  or 
an  apostate." — Bishop  Davenant.  1627. 

"  As  to  what  he  says,  that  no  one  can  be  a  minister  of  the  Church  of  Eng 
land,  who  is  not  certainly  persuaded  of  the  Regeneration  of  every  infant 
baptized,  neither  also  is  that  true.  The  minister  truly  gives  God  thanks 
after  each  infant  has  been  baptized,  that  it  has  pleased  God  to  regenerate 
him  with  His  Holy  Spirit.  But  it  does  not  then  follow  that  he  ought  to  be 
certain  of  the  Regeneration  of  every  infant  baptized.  For  it  is  sufficient  if 
he  is  persuaded  of  the  Regeneration  of  some  only, — for  instance,  of  "elect 
infants,  or  if  you  like,  even  of  some  only  of  their  number,  that  on  that 
account  he  may  be  able,  nay  ought,  to  give  God  thanks  for  each  and  all 
baptized.  Since  who  is  elect  he  knows  not :  and  it  is  but  just  that  he  should 
bit  the  judgment  of  charity  presume,  that  as  many  as  he  baptizes  are  elect, — 
and  if  any  are  regenerated  in  baptism  (which  none  but  a  Socinian  or  other 
Catabaptist  will  deny)  regenerated." — Dr.  Durel,  Dean  of  Windsor,  and 
Chaplain  to  the  King.  1677. 

"  Though  the  work  of  grace  be  not  perfectly  wrought,  yet  when  the  means 
are  used,  without  something  appearing  to  the  contrary,  we  ought  to  presume 
of  the  good  effect." — Bishop  Pearson.  1680. 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         141 

sidered  that  all  women  who  were  churched  did  really  trust  in 
the  Lord,  merely  because  they  used  this  language  1  The  simple 
explanation  is,  that  they  drew  up  the  Service  on  the  same 
great  principle  which  runs  through  the  whole  Prayer-book, 
the  principle  of  charitable  supposition. 

This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  the  Service  of  Baptism 
for  grown-up  people  can  be  interpreted.  In  that  Service  the 
minister  first  prays  that  the  person  about  to  be  baptized  may 
have  the  Holy  Spirit  given  to  him  and  be  born  again.  The 
Church  cannot  take  upon  herself  to  pronounce  decidedly  that 
he  is  born  again,  until  he  has  witnessed  a  good  confession,  and 
shown  his  readiness  to  receive  the  seal  of  baptism.  Then, 
after  that  prayer,  he  is  called  upon  openly  to  profess  repent 
ance  and  faith  before  the  minister  and  congregation,  and  that 
being  done  he  is  baptized.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  comes  the 
declaration  that  the  person  baptized  is  "  regenerate,"  and  he  is 
born  again  and  made  an  heir  of  everlasting  salvation.  But  can 
these  words  be  strictly  and  literally  true  if  the  person  baptized 
is  a  hypocrite,  and  has  all  along  professed  that  which  he  does 
not  feel  1  Are  not  the  words  manifestly  used  on  the  charitable 
supposition  that  he  has  repented  and  does  believe,  and  in  no 
other  sense  at  all  ?  And  is  it  not  plain  to  every  one  that  in 
the  absence  of  this  repentance  and  faith,  the  words  used  are  a 
mere  form, — used,  because  the  Church  cannot  draw  up  two 
forms,  but  not  for  a  moment  implying  that  inward  and  spiritual 
grace  necessarily  accompanies  the  outward  sign,  or  that  a  "death 
unto  sin  and  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness  "  is  necessarily  con 
veyed  to  the  soul  ?  In  short,  the  person  baptized  is  pronounced 
regenerate  upon  the  broad  principle  of  the  Prayer-book,  that, 
in  the  Church-services  people  are  charitably  supposed  to  be 
what  they  profess  to  be. 

This  is  the  only  intelligible  principle  on  which  the  Burial 
Service  can  be  interpreted.  In  that  Service  the  person  buried 
is  spoken  of  as  a  "dear  brother  or  sister."  It  is  said  that  it 
hath  "  pleased  God  of  His  great  mercy  to  take  to  Himself  his 
soul."  It  is  said,  "We  give  Thee  hearty  thanks  that  it  hath 
pleased  Thee  to  deliver  this  our  brother  out  of  the  miseries  of 
this  sinful  world."  It  is  said  that  "our  hope  is,  this  our 
brother  rests  in  Christ."  Now  what  does  all  this  mean  ?  Did 
the  compilers  of  the  Prayer-book  wish  us  to  believe  that  all 


142  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

this  was  strictly  and  literally  applicable  to  every  individual 
member  of  the  Church  over  whose  body  these  words  were  read  1 
Will  any  one  look  the  Service  honestly  in  the  face  and  dare  to 
say  so  1  I  cannot  think  it.  The  simple  explanation  of  the 
Service  is,  that  it  was  drawn  up,  like  the  rest,  on  the  pre 
sumption  that  all  members  of  a  Church  were  what  they 
professed  to  be.  The  key  to  the  interpretation  of  it  is  the 
same  great  principle,  the  principle  of  charitable  supposition. 

This  is  the  only  principle  on  which  the  Catechism  can  be 
interpreted.  In  it  every  child  is  taught  to  say,  "  In  baptism  I 
was  made  a  member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ; "  and  a  little  further  on,  "  I  learn  to 
believe  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost  who  sanctifieth  me  and  all  the 
elect  people  of  God."  Now  what  does  this  mean  1  Did  the 
Prayer-book  writers  intend  to  lay  it  down  as  an  abstract  prin 
ciple  that  all  baptized  children  are  "  sanctified  "  and  all  "  elect "  ? 
Will  any  one  in  the  present  day  stand  forth  and  tell  us  that  all 
the  children  in  his  parish  are  actually  sanctified  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  ?  If  he  can,  I  can  only  say,  that  his  parish  is  an  exception, 
or  else  Bible  words  have  no  meaning.  But  I  cannot  yet  believe 
that  any  one  would  say  so.  I  believe  there  is  but  one  explanation 
of  all  these  expressions  in  the  Catechism.  They  are  the  words 
of  charitable  supposition^  and  in  no  other  sense  can  they  be  taken. 

I  lay  these  things  before  any  one  who  fancies  that  all  children 
are  regenerated  in  baptism,  because  of  the  expressions  in  the 
Prayer-book  service,  and  I  ask  him  to  weigh  them  well.  I  am 
not  to  be  moved  from  my  ground  by  hard  names,  and  bitter 
epithets,  and  insinuations  that  I  am  not  a  real  Churchman.  I 
am  not  to  be  shaken  by  scraps  and  sentences  torn  from  their 
places,  and  thrust  isolated  and  alone  upon  our  notice.  What  I 
say  is,  that  in  interpreting  the  Baptismal  Service  of  the  Church 
we  must  be  consistent. 

Men  say  that  the  view  of  the  Service  I  maintain  is  "  non- 
natural  and  dishonest."  I  deny  the  charge  altogether.  I  might 
retort  it  on  many  of  those  who  make  it.  Whose  view  is  most 
unnatural,  I  ask  ?  Is  it  the  view  of  the  man  who  expounds  the 
Baptismal  Service  on  one  principle,  and  the  Burial  Service  on 
another  ? — or  is  it  my  view,  which  interprets  all  on  one  uniform 
and  the  same  system  1 

We  must  be  consistent  I  repeat.     I  refuse  to  interpret  one 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.          143 

part  of  the  Prayer-book  on  one  principle,  and  another  part  on 
another.  The  expressions  to  which  I  have  been  calling  atten 
tion  are  either  abstract  dogmatic  declarations,  or  charitable 
assumptions  and  suppositions.  They  cannot  be  both.  And  I 
now  call  upon  those  who  hold  all  children  to  be  invariably 
regenerated,  because  of  strong  expressions  in  the  Baptismal 
Service,  to  carry  out  their  principles  honestly,  fairly,  fully,  and 
consistently,  if  they  can. 

If  all  children  are  actually  regenerated  in  baptism,  because 
the  Service  says,  "This  child  is  regenerate,"  then  by  parity  of 
reasoning  it  follows  that  all  people  who  use  the  Collect  have 
faith,  and  a  hearty  desire  to  pray! — all  women  who  are  churched 
put  their  trust  in  the  Lord ! — all  members  of  the  Church  who 
are  buried  are  dear  brethren,  and  we  hope  rest  in  Christ ! — and 
all  children  who  say  the  Catechism  are  sanctified  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  are  elect ! — Consistency  demands  it.  Fair  interpre 
tation  of  words  demands  it.  There  is  not  a  jot  of  evidence  to 
show  that  those  are  not  really  sanctified  and  elect  who  say  the 
Catechism,  if  you  once  maintain  that  those  are  all  actually 
"  regenerated  "  over  whom  the  words  of  the  Baptismal  Service 
have  been  used. 

But  if  I  am  to  be  told  that  the  children  who  use  the  Cate 
chism  are  not  necessarily  all  elect  and  sanctified,  and  that  the 
people  buried  are  not  necessarily  all  resting  in  Christ,  and  that 
the  language  in  both  cases  is  that  of  charitable  supposition,  then 
I  reply,  in  common  fairness  let  us  be  allowed  to  take  the 
language  of  the  Baptismal  Service  in  the  same  sense. — I  see  one 
uniform  principle  running  through  all  the  Prayer-book,  through 
all  the  Offices,  through  all  the  devotional  Formularies  of  the 
Church.  That  principle  is  the  principle  of  charitable  supposi 
tion.  Following  that  principle,  I  can  make  good  sense  and 
good  divinity  of  every  Service  in  the  book.  Without  that 
principle  I  cannot.  On  that  principle  therefore  I  take  my 
stand.  If  I  say  all  baptized  children  are  really,  literally,  and 
actually  "regenerate,"  because  of  certain  words  in  the  Baptismal 
Service,  I  contradict  that  principle.  I  believe  our  Services 
were  meant  to  be  consistent  one  with  another,  and  not  contra 
dictory.  I  therefore  cannot  say  so. 

III.  My  next  answer  to  those  who  say  all  baptized  persons 


144  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

are  regenerate,  because  of  the  Baptismal  Service,  is  this, — that 
such  a  view  would  not  agree  witli  the  Thirty-nine  Articles. 

Now  I  am  aware  that  many  have  a  very  low  opinion  of  the 
Articles.  Many  seem  to  know  little  about  them,  and  to  attach 
little  weight  to  any  quotation  from  them.  "  The  Prayer-book  ! 
the  Prayer-book  !  "  is  the  watch-word  of  these  people ; — "  all  we 
have  to  do  with  is,  what  does  the  Prayer-book  say  ? " — I  disagree 
with  such  persons  entirely.  I  look  upon  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles  as  the  Church  of  England's  Confession  of  faith.  I 
believe  the  words  of  the  declaration  which  prefaces  them  are 
strictly  true,  "  That  the  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England  do 
contain  the  true  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England,"  and  that 
any  doctrine  which  does  not  entirely  harmonize  with  those 
Articles  is  not  the  doctrine  of  the  Church.  I  honour  and  love 
the  book  of  Common  Prayer,  but  I  do  not  call  it  the  Church's 
Confession  of  faith.  I  delight  in  it  as  an  incomparable  manual 
of  public  worship,  but  if  I  want  to  ascertain  the  deliberate 
judgment  of  the  Church  upon  any  point  of  doctrine,  I  turn  first 
to  the  Articles.  What  would  a  Lutheran  or  Scotch  Presby 
terian  say  of  me,  if  I  judged  his  Church  by  his  minister's 
prayers,  and  did  not  judge  it  by  the  Augsburg  or  Westminster 
Confessions?  I  do  not  say  this  in  order  to  disparage  the 
Prayer-book,  but  to  point  out  calmly  what  it  really  is.  I  want 
to  place  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  in  their  proper  position  before 
the  reader's  mind,  and  so  to  make  him  see  the  real  value  of 
what  they  say.  It  is  a  circumstance  deeply  to  be  regretted  that 
the  Articles  are  not  more  read  and  studied  by  members  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

I  will  now  ask  the  reader  of  this  paper  to  observe  the  striking 
prominence  which  the  Articles  everywhere  give  to  the  Bible  as 
the  only  rule  of  faith.  The  Sixth  Article  says,  that  "  What 
soever  is  not  read  in  Holy  Scripture,  nor  may  be  proved  thereby, 
is  not  to  be  required  of  any  man  that  it  should  be  believed  as 
an  article  of  the  faith,  or  be  thought  requisite  and  necessary  to 
salvation."— The  Eighth  says,  that  the  "Three  Creeds  ought 
thoroughly  to  be  believed  and  received,  for  they  may  be  proved 
by  most  certain  warrant  of  Holy  Scripture." — The  Twentieth 
says,  that  "It  is  not  lawful  for  the  Church  to  ordain  anything 
that  is  contrary  to  God's  Word  written,  neither  may  it  so 
expound  one  place  of  Scripture  that  it  be  repugnant  to  another." 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.          145 

—The  Twenty-first  says,  that  "things  ordained  by  General 
Councils  as  necessary  to  salvation  have  neither  strength  nor 
authority,  unless  it  may  be  declared  that  they  be  taken  out  of 
Holy  Scripture." — The  Twenty-second  condemns  certain  Romish 
doctrines,  because  they  "are  grounded  upon  no  warranty  of 

Scripture,  but  are  rather  repugnant  to  the  Word  of  God." The 

Twenty-eighth  condemns  transubstantiation,  because  it  "  cannot 
bo  proved  by  Holy  Writ,  but  is  repugnant  to  the  plain  words 
of  Scripture."  — The  Thirty-fourth  says,  that  traditions  and 
ceremonies  of  the  Church  may  be  changed,  so  long  as  "  nothing 
be  ordained  against  God's  Word." 

All  these  quotations  make  it  perfectly  certain  that  the  Bible 
is  the  sole  rule  of  faith  in  the  Church  of  England,  and  that 
nothing  is  a  doctrine  of  the  Church  which  cannot  be  entirely 
reconciled  with  the  Word  of  God.  And  I  see  here  a  complete 
answer  to  those  who  say  we  make  an  idol  of  the  Bible,  and 
tell  us  we  ought  to  go  first  to  the  Prayer-book,  or  to  the  opinion 
of  the  primitive  Church  !  I  see  also  that  any  meaning  placed 
upon  any  part  of  the  Prayer-book  which  at  all  disagrees  with 
the  Bible,  and  cannot  be  proved  by  the  Bible,  must  be  an 
incorrect  meaning.  I  am  not  to  listen  to  any  interpretation  of 
any  Service  in  the  Liturgy,  which  cannot  be  thoroughly  recon 
ciled  with  Scripture.  It  may  sound  very  plausible.  It  may 
be  defended  very  speciously.  But  does  it  in  any  way  jar  with 
plain  texts  in  the  Bible  ?  If  it  does,  there  is  a  mistake  some 
where.  There  is  a  flaw  in  the  interpretation.  On  the  very  face 
of  it,  it  is  incorrect.  It  is  utterly  absurd  to  suppose  that  the 
founders  of  our  Church  would  assert  the  supremacy  of  Scripture 
seven  or  eight  times  over,  and  then  draw  up  a  service  in  the 
Prayer-book  at  all  inconsistent  with  Scripture !  And  unless 
the  doctrine  that  all  children  baptized  are  necessarily  regenerated 
in  baptism,  can  first  be  shown  to  be  in  the  Bible,  it  is  a  mere 
waste  of  time  to  begin  any  discussion  of  the  subject  by  talkino- 
of  the  Prayer-book. 

I  ask  the  reader,  in  the  next  place,  to  observe  what  the 
Twenty-fifth  and  Twenty-sixth  Articles  say.  The  Twenty-fifth 
speaks  generally  of  sacraments ;  and  it  says  of  them,— both  of 
baptism  and  of  the  Lord's  Supper,— "In  such  only  as  worthily 
receive  the  same  they  have  a  wholesome  effect  or  operation." 
The  Twenty-sixth  speaks  of  the  unworthiness  of  ministers  not 


146  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

hindering  the  effect  of  the  sacraments.  It  says,  "  Neither  is  the 
effect  of  Christ's  ordinance  taken  away  by  their  wickedness,  or 
the  grace  of  God's  gifts  diminished,  from  such  as  by  faith  and 
rightly  do  receive  the  sacraments."  Here  we  have  a  broad 
general  principle  twice  asserted.  The  benefit  of  either  sacra 
ment  is  clearly  confined  to  such  as  rightly,  worthily,  and  with 
faith  receive  it.  The  Romish  notion  of  all  alike  getting  good 
from  it,  ex  opere  operato,  is  with  equal  clearness  pointed  at 
and  rejected.  Now  can  this  be  reconciled  with  the  doctrine 
that  all  who  are  baptized  are  at  once  invariably  regenerated  ? 
I  say  decidedly  that  it  cannot. 

I  ask  the  reader,  in  the  next  place,  to  observe  the  language  of 
the  Article  about  baptism,  the  Twenty-seventh.  It  says, 
"  Baptism  is  not  only  a  sign  of  profession  and  mark  of  differ 
ence,  whereby  Christian  men  are  discerned  from  others  that  are 
not  christened,  but  it  is  also  a  sign  of  Regeneration  or  new 
birth,  whereby,  as  by  an  instrument,  they  that  receive  baptism 
rigidly  are  grafted  into  the  Church ;  the  promises  of  forgiveness 
of  sin  and  of  our  adoption  to  be  the  sons  of  God  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  are  visibly  signed  and  sealed ;  faith  is  confirmed  and 
grace  increased  by  virtue  of  prayer  unto  God.  The  baptism  of 
young  children  is  in  any  wise  to  be  retained  in  the  Church  as 
most  agreeable  with  the  institution  of  Christ."  Nothing  can  be 
more  striking  than  the  wise  caution  of  all  this  language,  when 
contrasted  with  the  statements  about  baptism  with  which  our 
ears  are  continually  assailed  in  this  day.  There  is  not  a  word 
said  which  might  lead  us  to  suppose  that  a  different  principle  is 
to  be  applied  to  the  baptism  of  infants,  from  that  which  has 
been  already  laid  down  about  all  sacraments,  in  the  Twenty-fifth 
Article.  We  are  left  to  the  inevitable  conclusion  that  in  all 
cases  worthy  reception  is  essential  to  the  full  efficacy  of  the 
sacrament.  There  is  not  a  word  said  about  a  great  inward 
and  spiritual  blessing  invariably  and  necessarily  attending  the 
baptism  of  an  infant.  There  is  a  perfect  silence  on  that  head, 
and  a  most  speaking  silence  too.  Surely  a  doctrine  involving 
such  immense  and  important  consequences  as  the  universal 
spiritual  regeneration  of  all  infants  in  baptism,  would  never  have 
been  passed  over  in  entire  silence,  if  it  had  been  the  doctrine  of 
the  Church.  The  authors  of  the  Articles  unquestionably  knew 
the  importance  of  the  document  they  were  drawing  up.  Un- 


PKAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.          147 

questionably  they  weighed  well  every  word  and  every  statement 
they  put  down  on  paper.  And  yet  they  are  perfectly  silent  on 
the  subject !  That  silence  is  like  the  occasional  silence  of 
Scripture,  a  great  fact,  and  one  which  can  never  be  got  over. 

I  ask  the  reader,  in  the  next  place,  to  observe  what  the 
Thirteenth  Article  says.  It  tells  us  that  "  Works  done  before 
the  grace  of  Christ  and  the  inspiration  of  His  Spirit  are  not 
pleasant  to  God,"  etc.  Here  we  are  plainly  taught  that  works 
may  be  done  by  men  before  grace  and  the  Spirit  are  given  to 
them,  and  this  too  by  baptized  members  of  the  Church,  for  it  is 
for  them  tli.it  the  Articles  are  drawn  up  !  But  how  can  this  be 
reconciled  with  the  notion  that  all  baptized  persons  are  neces 
sarily  regenerated  ?  How  can  any  person  be  regenerated  without 
having  the  "grace  of  Christ  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit"? 
There  is  only  one  view  on  which  the  Article  can  be  reasonably 
explained.  That  view  is  the  simple  one,  that  many  baptized 
people  are  not  regenerate,  have  no  grace  and  no  indwelling  of 
the  Spirit,  and  that  it  is  their  case  before  they  are  born  again 
and  converted,  which  is  here  described. 

The  last  Article  I  will  ask  the  reader  to  observe  is  the  Seven 
teenth.  The  subject  of  that  Article  is  Predestination  and 
Election.  It  is  a  subject  which  many  people  dislike  exceedingly, 
and  are  ready  to  stop  their  ears  whenever  it  is  mentioned.  I 
acknowledge  freely  that  it  is  a  deep  subject.  But  there  stands 
the  Article !  It  cannot  be  denied  that  it  forms  part  of  our 
Church's  Confession  of  faith.  Whether  men  like  it  or  not,  they 
must  not  talk  as  if  it  did  not  exist,  in  discussing  the  subject  of 
the  Church's  doctrines.  The  Article  begins  with  laying  down 
the  great  truth  that  God  "hath  constantly  decreed  by  His 
counsel  secret  to  us,  to  deliver  from  curse  and  damnation  those 
whom  He  hath  chosen  in  Christ  out  of  mankind,  and  to  bring 
them  by  Christ  to  everlasting  salvation."  It  then  proceeds  to 
describe  the  calling  of  these  persons  by  God's  Spirit,  and  the 
consequences  of  that  calling ;—"  They  through  grace  obey  the 
calling :  they  be  justified  freely  :  they  be  made  sons  of  God  l>/ 
adoption :  they  be  made  like  the  image  of  His  only-begotten 
Son,  Jesus  Christ ;  they  walk  religiously  in  good  works,  and  at 
length  by  God's  mercy  they  attain  to  everlasting  felicity."  ]STow 
all  I  ask  the  reader  to  consider  is  this,  did  the  writers  of  the 
Articles  mean  to  say  that  these  persons  were  a  separate  and 


148  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

distinct  class  from  those  who  were  "  regenerated,"  or  not  ?  We 
must  think  so,  if  we  consider  baptism  is  always  accompanied  by 
Regeneration.  The  things  spoken  of  in  this  description  are 
things  of  which  multitudes  of  baptized  persons  know  nothing  at 
all.  I  do  not,  however,  believe  that  such  an  idea  ever  entered 
into  the  minds  of  those  who  wrote  the  Articles.  I  believe  that 
they  looked  on  Election,  Justification,  Adoption,  and  Regenera 
tion,  as  the  peculiar  privileges  of  a  certain  number,  but  not  of 
all  members  of  the  visible  Church ;  and  that  just  as  all  baptized 
people  are  not  elect,  justified,  and  sanctified,  so  also  all  baptized 
people  are  not  regenerated.  Very  striking  is  the  difference 
between  the  language  of  the  Article  which  treats  of  baptism, 
and  the  Article  which  treats  of  election.  In  the  former  we  find 
the  cautious  general  statement,  that  in  baptism  "  the  promises 
of  our  adoption  to  be  the  sons  of  God  are  visibly  signed  and 
sealed"  In  the  latter  we  find  the  broad  assertion  that  the  elect 
"  be  made  the  sons  of  God  by  adoption." 

Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Articles.  If  Regeneration  be 
what  the  Catechism  describes  it,  "a  death  unto  sin  and  a  new 
birth  unto  righteousness,"  I  cannot  find  the  slightest  ground 
in  the  Articles  for  the  notion  that  all  baptized  persons  are 
necessarily  regenerate.  There  is  an  absence  of  any  direct  asser 
tion  of  such  a  doctrine.  There  are  several  passages  which 
appear  completely  inconsistent  with  it.  I  cannot  suppose  that 
the  Articles  and  Liturgy  were  meant  to  be  contrary  one  to  the 
other.  The  men  who  drew  up  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  in 
1562,  were  the  men  who  compiled  the  Prayer-book  in  1549. 
They  drew  up  the  Articles  with  a  certain  and  distinct  know 
ledge  of  the  contents  of  the  Prayer-book.  Yet  the  interpreta 
tion  of  the  Baptismal  Service  I  am  contending  against  would 
make  the  one  formulary  contradictory  to  the  other.  The  con 
clusion  I  come  to  is  clear  and  decided, — such  an  interpretation 
cannot  be  correct. 

IV.  My  last  answer  to  those  who  say  that  all  baptized  per 
sons  are  necessarily  regenerated,  because  of  the  wording  of  the 
Baptismal  Service,  is  this, — such  a  doctrine  would  make  the 
Prayer-look  disagree  with  the  Homilies  of  the  Church  of  England. 

The  Homilies  are  not  liked  by  some  persons  any  more  than 
the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  No  doubt  they  are  human  composi- 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         149 

tions,  and  therefore  not  perfect;  no  doubt  they  contain  words  and 
expressions  here  and  there  which  might  be  amended;  but,  after 
all,  the  members  of  the  Church  of  England  are  bound  to  recollect 
that  the  Thirty-fifth  Article  expressly  asserts  that  the  Homilies 
contain  "  a  godly  and  wholesome  doctrine."  Whatever  their 
deficiencies  may  be,  the  general  tone  of  their  doctrine  is  clear 
and  unmistakable.  And  any  interpretation  of  the  Prayer-book 
Services  which  makes  those  Services  inconsistent  with  the  Homi 
lies  must,  on  the  very  face  of  it,  be  an  incorrect  interpretation. 

Let  me  then  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  following- 
passages  in  the  Homilies  : — 

In  the  Homily  of  Charity  there  are  the  following  passages : 
"What  thing  can  we  wish  so  good  for  us  as  the  heavenly 
Father  to  reckon  and  take  us  for  His  children  ?  And  this 
shall  we  be  sure  of,  saith  Christ,  if  we  love  every  man  with 
out  exception.  And  if  we  do  otherwise,  saith  He,  we  be  no 
better  than  the  Pharisees,  publicans,  and  heathens,  and  shall 
have  our  reward  with  them,  that  is  to  be  shut  out  from  the 
number  of  God's  chosen  children,  and  from  His  everlasting 
inheritance  in  heaven." — And  again  :  "  He  that  beareth  a  good 
heart  and  mind,  and  useth  well  his  tongue  and  deeds  unto 
every  man,  friend  or  foe,  he  may  know  thereby  that  he  hath 
charity.  And  then  he  is  sure  also  that  Almighty  God  taketh 
him  for  His  dearly-beloved  son;  as  Saint  John  saith,  hereby 
manifestly  are  known  the  children  of  God  from  the  children 
of  the  devil ;  for  whosoever  doth  not  love  his  brother  belongeth 
not  unto  God." 

In  the  Homily  of  Almsdeeds  there  is  this  passage  :  "  God 
of  His  mercy  and  special  favour  towards  them  whom  He  hath 
appointed  to  everlasting  salvation,  hath  so  offered  His  grace 
especially,  and  they  have  so  received  it  faithfully,  that, 
although  by  reason  of  their  sinful  living  outwardly  they  seemed 
before  to  have  been  the  children  of  wrath  and  perdition, — yet 
now,  the  Spirit  of  God  working  mightily  in  them,  unto  obedi 
ence  to  God's  will  and  commandments,  they  declare  by  their 
outward  deeds  and  life,  in  the  showing  of  mercy  and  charity 
—  which  cannot  come  but  of  the  Spirit  of  God  and  His 
especial  grace — that  they  are  the  undoubted  children  of  God, 
appointed  to  everlasting  life.  And  so,  as  by  their  wickedness 
and  ungodly  living  they  showed  themselves,  according  to  the 


150  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

judgment  of  men,  which  follow  the  outward  appearance,  to  be 
reprobates  and  castaways,  so  now  by  their  obedience  unto 
God's  holy  will,  and  by  their  mercifulness  and  tender  pity, — 
wherein  they  show  themselves  to  be  like  unto  God,  who  is  the 
Fountain  and  Spring  of  all  mercy, — they  declare  openly  and 
manifestly  unto  the  sight  of  men  that  they  are  the  sons  of  God, 
and  elect  of  Him  unto  salvation." 

In  the  Homily  for  Whit-Sunday,  I  read  the  following  pas 
sages :  "It  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  no  other  thing,  that  doth 
quicken  the  minds  of  men,  stirring  up  good  and  godly  motions 
in  their  hearts,  which  are  agreeable  to  the  will  and  command 
ment  of  God,  such  as  otherwise  of  their  own  crooked  and 
perverse  nature  they  should  never  have.  That  which  is  born 
of  the  flesh,  saith  Christ,  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is  born  of 
the  Spirit  is  spirit.  As  who  should  say,  man  of  his  own 
nature  is  fleshly  and  carnal,  corrupt  and  naught,  sinful  and 
disobedient  to  God,  without  any  spark  of  goodness  in  him, 
without  any  virtuous  or  godly  notion,  only  given  to  evil 
thoughts  and  wicked  deeds.  As  for  the  works  of  the  Spirit, 
the  fruits  of  faith,  charitable  and  godly  motions, — if  he  have 
any  at  all  in  him, — they  proceed  only  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
is  the  only  worker  of  our  sanctification,  and  maketh  us  new 
men  in  Christ  Jesus.  Did  not  God's  Holy  Spirit  work  in  the 
child  David,  when  from  a  poor  shepherd  he  became  a  princely 
prophet1?  Did  not  God's  Holy  Spirit  miraculously  work  in 
Matthew,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom,  when  of  a  proud 
publican  he  became  a  humble  and  lowly  evangelist  1  And  who 
can  choose  but  marvel  to  consider  that  Peter  should  become, 
of  a  simple  fisher,  a  chief  and  mighty  Apostle1?  Paul  of  a 
cruel  and  bloody  persecutor,  to  teach  the  Gentiles  1  Such  is 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  regenerate  men,  and,  as  it  were, 
to  bring  them  forth  anew,  so  that  they  shall  be  nothing  like 
the  men  that  they  were  before.  Neither  doth  He  think  it  suffi 
cient  inwardly  to  work  the  spiritual  and  new  birth  of  man 
unless  He  do  also  dwell  and  abide  in  him. — Oh,  what  comfort 
is  this  to  the  heart  of  a  true  Christian,  to  think  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  dwelleth  within  him  ! " 

And  then  comes  the  following  passage,  which  I  request  the 
reader  specially  to  observe  :  "  How  shall  I  know  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  within  me  1  some  men  perchance  will  say :  Forsooth, 


PKAYEK-BOOK  STATEMENTS  I    KEGENEKATION.          151 

as  the  tree  is  known  by  his  fruit,  so  is  also  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  fruits  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  according  to  the  mind  of  St. 
Paul,  are  these  :    love,  joy,   peace,   long  -  suffering,  gentleness, 
goodness,   faithfulness,   meekness,  temperance,   etc.      Contrari 
wise  the  deeds  of  the  flesh  are  these :    adultery,   fornication, 
uncleanness,   wantonness,   idolatry,   witchcraft,  hatred,   debate, 
emulation,   wrath,   contention,   sedition,  heresy,  envy,  murder, 
drunkenness,  gluttony,  and  such  like.     Here  is  now  that  glass 
wherein  thou  must  behold  thyself,  and  discern  whether  thou 
have  the  Holy  Ghost  within  thee  or  the   spirit  of  the  flesh. 
If  thou  see  that  thy  works  be  virtuous  and  good,  consonant  to 
the  prescribed  rule  of  God's  Word,  savouring  and  tasting  not 
of  the  flesh,   but  of  the  Spirit,  then  assure  thyself  that  thou 
art  endued  with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  otherwise,  in  thinking  well  of 
thyself,  thou  dost  nothing  but  deceive  thyself." — Once  more  : 
"  To  conclude  and  make  an  end,  ye  shall  briefly  take  this  short 
lesson  :  wheresoever  ye  find  the  spirit  of  arrogance  and  pride, 
the  spirit  of  envy,  hatred,   contention,  cruelty,  murder,  extor 
tion,  witchcraft,  necromancy,  etc.,  assure  yourselves  that  there 
is  the  spirit  of  the  devil,  and  not  of  God,  albeit  they  pretend 
outwardly  to  the  world  never  so  much  holiness.     For  as  the 
Gospel  teacheth  us,  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  is  a  good  spirit,  an  holy 
spirit,  a  sweet  spirit,  a  lowly  spirit,   a  merciful  spirit,  full  of 
charity  and  love,   full  of  forgiveness  and  pity,  not  rendering- 
evil  for  evil,  extremity  for  extremity,  but  overcoming  evil  with 
good,  and  remitting  all  offence  even  from  the  heart.     According 
to  which  rule,  if  any  man  live  uprightly,  of  him  it  may  safely 
be  pronounced   that   he  hath   the    Holy    Ghost  within   him : 
if  not,  then  it  is  a  plain  token  that  he  doth  usurp  the  name  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  vain" 

I  lay  these  passages  before  the  reader  in  their  naked  simplicity. 
I  will  not  weary  him  with  long  comments  upon  them.  In  fact 
none  are  needed.  Two  things,  I  think,  are  abundantly  evident. 
One  is,  that  in  the  judgment  of  the  Homilies,  no  men  are  the 
"undoubted  children  of  God"  and  "sons  of  God,"  and  elect 
unto  salvation,  unless  it  is  proved  by  their  charity  and  good 
works.  The  other  is,  that  no  man  has  the  Holy  Ghost  within 
him,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Homilies,  except  he  brings  forth 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  his  life.  But  all  this  is  flatly  contra 
dictory  to  the  doctrine  of  those  who  say  that  all  baptized 


152  KXOTS  UNTIED. 

persons  are  necessarily  regenerate.  They  tell  us  that  all  people 
are  made  the  children  of  God  by  virtue  of  their  baptism,  what 
ever  be  their  manner  of  living,  and  must  be  addressed  as  such 
all  their  lives ; — and  that  all  people  have  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  within  them  by  virtue  of  their  baptism,  and  must  be 
considered  "regenerate,"  whatever  fruits  they  may  be  bringing 
forth  in  their  daily  habits  and  conversation.  According  to  this, 
the  Homilies  say  one  thing  and  the  Prayer-book  says  another ! 
I  leave  the  reader  to  judge  whether  it  is  in  the  least  degree 
probable  this  can  be  the  case.  These  Homilies  were  put  forth 
by  authority,  in  the  year  1562,  and  appointed  to  be  read  in 
churches  in  order  to  supply  the  deficiency  of  good  preaching, 
and  when  they  had  been  once  read,  they  were  to  be  "repeated 
and  read  again."  And  yet  according  to  the  interpretation  of 
the  Baptismal  Service  I  am  contending  against,  these  Homilies 
contradict  the  Prayer-book  !  Surely  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the 
conclusion  which  I  most  unhesitatingly  come  to  myself,  that  a 
system  of  interpreting  the  Baptismal  Service  which  sets  the 
Prayer-book  at  variance  with  the  Homilies,  as  well  as  with  the 
Articles,  must  be  incorrect. 

I  leave  the  subject  of  the  Church  of  England's  views  about 
Regeneration  here.  I  wish  I  could  have  spoken  of  it  more 
shortly.  But  I  have  been  anxious  to  meet  the  objections  drawn 
from  the  Baptismal  Service  fully,  openly,  and  face  to  face.  I 
have  not  a  doubt  in  my  own  mind  as  to  the  true  doctrine  of 
the  Church  in  the  question.  But  many,  I  know,  have  been 
troubled  and  perplexed  about  it,  and  few  appear  to  me  to  see 
the  matter  as  clearly  as  they  might.  And  it  is  to  supply  such 
persons  with  information,  as  well  as  to  meet  the  arguments  of 
adversaries,  that  I  have  gone  into  the  question  so  fully  as  I  have. 

Other  points  might  easily  be  dwelt  upon,  which  would  serve 
to  throw  even  more  light  on  the  subject,  and  seem  still  further 
to  bear  out  the  views  that  I  maintain,  as  to  the  real  doctrine  of 
the  Church  of  England  about  Regeneration. 

Is  it  not  notorious,  for  instance,  that  the  Article  about 
baptism  in  our  Confession  of  faith  was  entirely  altered,  and 
brought  into  its  present  form,  when  Edward  the  Sixth  came  to 
the  throne?  Our  Reformers  found  an  Article  drawn  up  in 
1536,  in  which  the  doctrine  of  grace  always  accompanying  the 
baptism  of  infants  was  plainly  and  unmistakably  asserted. 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         153 

The  Articles  of  1536  say,  "By  the  sacrament  of  baptism, 
infants,  innocents,  and  children,  do  also  obtain  remission  of 
their  sins,  the  grace  and  favour  of  God,  and  be  made  thereby 
the  very  sons  and  children  of  God."  The  Reformers  of  our 
Church,  in  drawing  up  the  Articles  of  1552,  entirely  abstained 
from  making  any  such  assertion.  They  framed  our  present 
Article  on  baptism,  in  which  no  such  unqualified  statement  can 
be  found.  Now,  why  did  they  do  sol  Why  did  they  not 
adopt  the  language  of  the  old  Article,  if  they  really  believed  its 
doctrine?  Let  any  one  answer  these  questions. — Did  it  not 

j  plainly  mean  that  they  did  not  approve  of  the  doctrine  of  the 

[  invariable  Regeneration  of  infants  in  baptism  1 

Again,  is  it  not  notorious  that  the  Irish  Articles  of  1615  have 
never  been  repealed  or  disannulled  by  the  Church  of  Ireland  1 
Subscription  to  these  Articles  is  undoubtedly  not  required  at 
Irish  ordinations.  Subscription  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  only 
is  held  sufficient.  But  it  was  distinctly  understood,  when  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  were  received  by  the  Irish  Church,  in 
1634,  that  their  reception  did  not  imply  any  slur  on  the  Irish 
Articles,  and  only  testified  the  agreement  of  the  Church  of 
Ireland  with  that  of  England,  both  in  doctrine  and  discipline. 
Now  these  Irish  Articles  most  plainly  declare  that  the 
"  regenerate  "  are  the  elect,  the  justified,  the  believers,  the  true 
Christians,  who  persevere  unto  the  end ;  and  no  less  plainly 
imply  that  those  who  are  not  true  believers  are  not  "regenerate!" 
There  can  be  no  mistake  about  this.  No  man,  I  think,  can 
read  these  Articles  and  not  see  it.  And  yet  there  is  the  closest 
union  between  the  Church  of  England  and  the  Church  of 
Ireland,  and  always  has  been.  How  could  this  be,  if  the 
Church  of  Ireland's  view  about  the  "  regenerate  "  had  always 
been  considered  false  and  heretical  ?  Why  were  the  Irish 
Articles  not  rejected  as  unsound,  when,  for  uniformity's  sake, 
the  Irish  Articles  were  received  ?  How  was  it,  that  for  many 
years  after  1634,  the  Irish  Bishops  always  required  subscription 
to  both  Irish  and  English  Articles  at  their  ordinations  ?  Let 
these  questions  also  be  answered.  Did  it  not  show  plainly  that 
the  two  Churches  were  not  thought  to  be  at  variance  upon  the 
subject  of  Regeneration  1  * 

*  It  was  Archbishop  Usher  himself  who  proposed,  in  1G34,  that  the  English 
Articles  should  be  received  by  the  Irish  Church.  Yet  he  was  the  principal 


154  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Again,  is  it  not  notorious  that  almost  all  the  Bishops  and 
leading  divines  who  took  part  in  the  Keformation  of  our  Church, 
were  men  who  held  opinions  which,  rightly  or  wrongly,  are 
called  Calvinistic,  and  in  the  main  were  thoroughly  agreed  with 
those  clergy  who  are  termed  Evangelical  in  the  present  day  1 
There  is  no  room  for  doubt  on  this  point.     It  has  been  allowed 
by  many  who  do  not  approve  of  Evangelical  opinions  themselves. 
They  were  in  frequent  communication  with  the  leading  Swiss 
Reformers.     They  procured  the  help  of  men  like  Peter  Martyr 
and  Bucer  to  assist  them  in  carrying  on  the  work  of  Reforma 
tion.     And  yet  we  are  asked   to   believe  that  our  Reformers 
deliberately  framed  a  Baptismal  Service  containing  a  doctrine 
which  is  inconsistent  with  their  own  views  !     Is  it  likely,  is  it 
reasonable,  is  it  agreeable  to  common  sense,  to  suppose  they 
would  do  such  a  thing1?     And  is  it  not  an  acknowledged  axiom  J 
Jin  interpreting  all  public  documents,  such  as  oaths,  articles  of  I 
faith,   and  religious  formularies,   that  they  are  always  to  bel 
(interpreted  in  the  sense  of  those  who  drew  them  up  and  im-J 
I  posed  them  *?  * 

But  I  leave  all  these  points,  and  hasten  to  a  conclusion. 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  wind  up  all  I  have  said  with 
a  few  words  of  solemn  appeal  to  every  one  into  whose  hands 
this  paper  may  happen  to  fall. 

I  say  "solemn  appeal,"  and  I  say  it  advisedly.  I  feel 
strongly  the  immense  importance  of  sound  and  Scriptural  views 
of  the  whole  question  I  have  been  considering.  I  feel  it 
especially  as  respects  that  part  of  it  which  touches  the  doctrine 
of  the  Church  of  England.  Men  sometimes  say  it  makes  no 
difference  whether  we  think  all  baptized  persons  are  regenerate 
or  not.  They  tell  us  it  all  comes  to  the  same  thing  in  the  long 

author  of  the  Irish  Articles  of  1615.  His  biographer  says,  "  He  very  well 
understood  the  Articles  of  both  Churches,  and  did  then  know  that  they  were 
so  far  from  being  inconsistent  or  contradictory  to  each  other,  that  he  thought 
the  Irish  Articles  did  only  contain  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England 
more  fully." — Life  of  Archbishop  Usher,  l>y  Dr.  Parr,  his  chaplain.  1686. 

"  It  is  a  settled  rule  with  casuists,  that  oaths  are  always  to  be  taken  in* 
the  sense  of  the  imposers ;  the  same  is  the  case  of  solemn  leagues  or  I 
covenants.  Without  this  principle,  no  faith,  trust,  or  mutual  confidence  1 
could  be  kept  up  amongst  men." — Waterland  on  the  Arian  Subscriptions.  ' 
Works,  vol.  ii.,  chap.  iii. 

There  is  a  passage  in  Bishop  Sanderson's  Prelections,  on  the  Obligation  of 
an  Oath,  to  the  same  effect, 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         155 

run.  I  cannot  say  so.  To  my  humble  apprehension  it  seems  to 
make  an  immense  difference.  If  I  tell  a  man  that  he  has  grace  in 
his  heart,  and  only  needs  to  "  stir  up  a  gift,"  already  within  him, 
it  is  one  thing.  If  I  tell  him  that  he  is  dead  in  sins,  and  must 
he  "  horn  again,"  it  is  quite  another.  The  moral  effect  of  the 
two  messages  must,  on  the  very  face  of  it,  be  widely  different. 
The  one,  I  contend,  is  calculated  by  God's  blessing  to  awaken 
the  sinner.  The  other,  I  contend,  is  calculated  to  lull  him  to 
sleep.  The  one,  I  maintain,  is  likely  to  feed  sloth,  check  self- 
examination,  and  encourage  an  easy  self-satisfied  state  of  soul : 
he  has  got  some  grace  within  him  whenever  he  likes  to  use  it, 
—why  should  he  be  in  a  hurry,  why  be  afraid  ? — The  other,  I 
maintain,  is  likely  to  rouse  convictions,  drive  him  to  self -inquiry, 
and  frighten  him  out  of  his  dangerous  security  :  he  has  nothing 
within  him  to  rest  upon, — he  must  find  a  refuge  and  remedy, 
he  is  lost  and  perishing, — what  must  he  do  to  be  saved  ? — The  one 
message,  I  affirm,  is  likely  to  keep  men  natural  men,  the  other  to 
make  them  spiritual  men, — the  one  to  have  110  effect  upon  the 
conscience,  the  other  to  lead  to  Christ.  Let  men  say  what 
they  will,  I,  for  one,  dare  not  say  I  think  it  all  comes  to  the 
same  thing. 

I  see  fresh  reason  continually  for  dreading  the  doctrine  that 
all  baptized  persons  are  regenerate.  I  hear  of  laymen  who  once 
did  run  well,  losing  their  first  love,  and  appearing  to  make  ship 
wreck  of  their  faith.  I  hear  of  ministers,  who  once  bade  fair 
to  be  pillars  in  the  Church,  stumbling  at  this  stumbling-stone, 
and  marring  all  their  usefulness.  I  see  the  doctrine  leavening 
and  spoiling  the  religion  of  many  private  Christians,  and 
insensibly  paving  the  way  for  a  long  train  of  unscriptural 
notions.  I  see  it  interfering  with  every  leading  doctrine  of  the 
Gospel ; — it  encourages  men  to  believe  that  election,  adoption, 
justification,  and  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  are  all  conferred 
on  them  in  baptism ; — and  then,  to  avoid  the  difficulties  which 
such  a  system  entails,  the  fulness  of  all  these  mighty  truths  is 
pared  down,  mutilated,  and  explained  away ;  or  else  the  minds 
of  congregations  are  bewildered  with  contradictory  and  incon 
sistent  statements.  I  see  it  ultimately  producing  in  some  minds 
a  mere  sacramental  Christianity, — a  Christianity  in  which  there 
is  much  said  about  union  with  Christ,  but  it  is  a  union  begun 
only  by  baptism,  and  kept  up  only  by  the  Lord's  Supper, — a 


156  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Christianity  in  which  the  leading  doctrines  that  the  Apostle 
Paul  dwells  on  in  almost  all  his  Epistles,  have  nothing  but  a 
subordinate  position, — a  Christianity  in  which  Christ  has  not 
His  rightful  office,  and  faith  has  not  its  rightful  place.  I  see 
all  this,  and  mourn  over  it  unf eignedly.  I  cannot  think  that 
the  subject  I  am  urging  on  the  reader's  attention  is  one  of 
secondary  importance.  And  once  more  I  say,  I  cannot  leave 
him  without  a  solemn  appeal  to  his  conscience,  whoever  he  may 
be,  into  whose  hands  this  paper  may  fall. 

(a)  I  appeal  then  to  all  men  who  love  the  Bible,  and  make 
it  their  standard  of  truth  and  error;  and  in   saying  this,  I 
address  myself  especially  to  all   members   of   the    Church  of 
England.     I  ask  you  to  observe  the  manner  of  living  of  multi 
tudes  of  baptized  persons  on  every  side  of  you, — I  ask  you  to 
observe  how  their  hearts  are  entirely  set  on  this  world,  and 
buried  in  its  concerns.     And  I  then  ask  you,  Are  they  born  of 
God  1     If  you  say  Yes,  I  answer,  How  can  that  be,  when  your 
.Bible  expressly  says,  "  He  that  is  born  of  God  doeth  righteous- 
jness,  and  doth  not  commit  sin"?     (1  John  ii.  29  ;  iii.  9.)    Are 
(they  children  of  God?     If  you  say  Yes,  I  answer,  How  can 
that  be,  when  the  Bible  says  expressly,  "  In  this  the  children 

I  of  God  are  manifest  and  the  children  of  the  devil ;  whosoever 
doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God"?  (1  John  iii.  10.) 
Are  they  sons  of  God  ?  If  you  say  Yes,  I  answer,  How  can 
that  be,  when  the  Bible  says  expressly,  "  As  many  as  are  led 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God  "  ?  (Kom.  viii. 
14.)  What  will  you  say  to  these  things?  Surely  you  will  not 
turn  your  back  upon  the  Bible. 

(I)  I  appeal  next  to  all  who  love  the  good  old  rule  of  the 
Bible,  "Every  tree  is  known  by  its  own  fruit."  (Luke  vi.  44.) 
I  ask  you  to  try  the  great  bulk  of  professing  Christians  by  the 
fruits  they  bring  forth,  and  to  say  what  kind  of  fruits  they  are. 
Is  it  not  perfectly  true  that  many  baptized  persons  know  little 
or  nothing  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit, — and  much,  only  too 
much,  of  the  works  of  the  flesh  ?  Is  it  not  certain  that  they 
are  destitute  of  those  marks  of  being  born  of  God  which  the 
Bible  describes  ?  What  will  you  say  to  these  things  ?  Surely 
if  you  abide  by  your  old  principle  you  will  hardly  say  that  all 
baptized  people  have  within  them  the  Holy  Spirit. 

(c)  I  appeal  next  to  all  who  love  the  Church  Catechism,  and 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS:    REGENERATION.          157 

profess  to  be  guided  by  its  statements  about  the  sacraments. 
You  are  aware  that  the  inward  and  spiritual  grace  of  baptism  is 
there  said  to  be  "a  death  unto  sin  and  a  new  birth  into  right 
eousness."  I  ask  you,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  say  whether 
any  evidence  whatever  of  this  grace  can  be  seen  in  the  lives  of 
many  baptized  persons.  Where  is  their  deadness  to  sin  ?  They 
live  in  it.  It  is  their  element.  Where  is  their  new  birth  unto 
righteousness?  They  are  habitual  "servants  of  sin,  and  free 
from  righteousness."  (Rom.  vi.  20.)  Sin  reigns  and  rules  in 
their  mortal  bodies.  They  are  enemies  of  all  righteousness. 
What  will  you  say  to  these  things  ?  Surely  you  will  not  tell 
us  that  the  outward  and  visible  sign  is  always  attended  by  the 
inward  and  spiritual  grace.  If  so,  grace  and  no  grace  are  the 
same  thing ! 

(d)  I  appeal,  lastly,  to  all  who  dread  Antinomianism  and 
licentious  doctrine.  You  have  heard  of  those  wretched  persons 
who  profess  to  glory  in  Christ  and  free  grace,  and  yet  think  it 
no  shame  to  live  immoral  lives,  and  continue  in  wilful  sin. 
You  think  such  conduct  horrible,  an  insult  to  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  a  disgrace  to  Christianity.  And  you  are  right  to  think  so. 
But  what  will  you  say  to  the  doctrine,  that  a  man  may  have 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  yet  not  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ; 
— may  have  grace  in  his  heart,  and  yet  show  no  sign  of  it  in 
his  life  1  What  will  you  say  to  these  things  ?  Surely,  if  you 
are  consistent,  you  will  recoil  from  the  idea  of  dishonouring  the 
Third  Person  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  no  less  than  you  do  from 
dishonouring  the  Lord  Himself.  Surely  you  will  shrink  from 
saying  that  all  baptized  persons  have  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Once  for  all,  in  concluding  this  paper,  I  protest  against  the 
charge  that  I  am  no  true  Churchman  because  I  hold  the  opinions 
that  I  do.  In  the  matter  of  true  and  real  attachment  to  the 
Church  of  England,  I  will  not  give  place  by  subjection  to  those 
who  are  called  High  Churchmen,  for  one  moment.  Have  they 
signed  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  ex  animo  and  bond  fide  ?  So 
have  I. — Have  they  declared  their  full  assent  to  the  Liturgy 
and  all  things  contained  in  it  ?  So  have  I. — Have  they  pro 
mised  obedience  to  the  Bishops  ?  So  have  I. — Do  they  think 
Episcopacy  the  best  form  of  Church  government  ?  So  do  I. — 
Do  they  honour  the  sacraments  ?  So  do  I. — Do  they  think 
them  generally  necessary  to  salvation1?  So  do  I. — Do  they 


158  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

labour  for  the  prosperity  of  the  Church?  So  do  I. — Do  they 
urge  on  their  congregations  the  privileges  of  the  Church  of 
England  ?  So  do  I. — Do  they  deprecate  all  needless  secession 
and  separation  from  her  ranks  ?  So  do  I. — Do  they  oppose  the 
enemies  of  the  Church,  both  Romish  and  infidel  ?  So  do  I. — 
Do  they  love  the  Prayer-book  of  the  Church  of  England  1  So 
do  I.  I  repudiate  with  indignation  the  unworthy  imputation 
that  I  interpret  any  part  of  that  Prayer-book  in  a  dishonest  or 
unnatural  sense.  I  offer  no  opinion  as  to  the  wisdom  and 
prudence  of  the  Reformers  in  drawing  up  a  Service  in  such  a 
way  as  to  admit  of  its  language  being  misunderstood,  as  it 
unhappily  is.  But  I  believe  with  all  my  heart  that  the  view  I 
hold  of  the  meaning  of  the  Prayer-book  is  the  view  of  the  very 
men  by  whom  it  was  compiled. 

One  thing  I  cannot  see  to  be  essential  in  order  to  prove 
myself  a  true  Churchman.  I  cannot  see  that  I  ought  to  hold 
doctrines  which  make  the  Prayer-book  clash  and  jar  with  the 
Articles  and  Homilies.  I  cannot  see  that  I  must  hold  that  all 
baptized  persons  are  necessarily  and  invariably  born  again.  II 
protest  against  the  system  of  making  the  baptismal  register,  and! 
not  our  lives,  the  great  evidence  of  our  Regeneration.  I  recoil 
from  the  idea  that  a  man  may  have  grace,  and  yet  nobody  see 
it  in  his  behaviour, — may  have  a  new  heart,  and  yet  none  dis 
cover  it  in  his  conduct, — may  have  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  yet  no 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  appear  in  any  of  his  ways.  I  consider  that 
such  a  notion  affects  the  honour  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the 
cause  of  true  holiness,  and  I  dare  not  allow  it.  I  consider  it 
throws  confusion  over  the  whole  system  of  Christ's  Gospel,  and 
involves  the  necessity  of  calling  things  in  religion  by  wrong 
names,  and  I  dare  not  allow  it.  I  think  as  highly  of  "baptism 
as  any  one  when  rightly  received.  I  count  Churchmanship  a 
high  privilege;  but  I  think  Regeneration  a  higher  privilege 
still,  and  one  to  which,  unhappily,  many  Churchmen  never 
attain. 

I  deny  that  I  hold  any  new  doctrine  about  Regeneration  in 
saying  this.  I  appeal  to  the  Bible ;  I  appeal  to  the  Articles ;  I 
appeal  to  the  Prayer-book ;  I  appeal  to  the  Homilies.  In  all 
of  them,  I  say  unhesitatingly,  I  see  the  doctrine  I  maintain. 
I  appeal  to  the  writings  of  all  the  principal  Reformers  of  our 
Church;  I  appeal  to  the  works  of  some  of  the  best  and 


PRAYER-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         159 

worthiest  Bishops  who  have  ever  adorned  the  Bench.  I  assert 
confidently  that  it  has  been  preached  in  Church  of  England 
pulpits  ever  since  the  time  of  the  Reformation, — in  many  at 
some  periods,  in  some  at  all.  There  never  has  been  wanting  a 
succession  of  faithful  men,  who  have  constantly  said  to  the 
mass  of  their  congregation,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  There 
never  was  an  attempt  to  shut  the  door  against  a  minister  for 
preaching  such  doctrine,  before  the  case  of  Mr.  Gorham  in  our 
own  day.  In  short,  if  I  err,  I  feel  that  I  err  in  good  company. 
I  err  with  Bishop  Hooper  and  Bishop  Latimer,  those  faithful 
martyrs  of  Christ.  I  err  with  Jewel,  with  Leighton,  and  Usher, 
and  Hall,  and  Hopkins,  and  Carleton,  and  Davenant,  and  many 
others,  of  whom  I  have  not  time  to  speak  particularly.  And 
when  I  think  of  this,  I  am  not  disturbed  by  the  charge  that 
do  not  agree  with  Archbishop  Laud  and  the  Non-jurors,  or  even 
with  others  of  later  date  still. 

We  are  all  travelling  to  a  place  where  controversies  will  be 
forgotten,  and  nothing  but  eternal  realities  remain.  Would  we 
have  a  real  hope  in  that  day  ?  We  must  see  to  it  that  we  have 
a  real  Regeneration.  Nothing  else  will  do.  "Except  a  man 
be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  (John  iii.  3.) 

The,  following  quotations,  bearing  on  the  subject  discussed  in  this  paper, 
are  drawn  from  writers,  of  whom  some  are  the  greatest  and  moxt 
learned  divines  the  world  has  ever  seen.  They  are  specially  com 
mended  to  the  attention  of  members  of  the  Church  of  England. 

"  In  baptism  those  that  come  feignedly,  and  those  that  come  unfeignedly, 
both  be  washed  with  the  sacramental  water,  but  both  be  not  washed  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  clothed  with  Christ." 

"All  that  be  washed  with  water  be  not  washed  with  the  Holy  Spirit."- 
Archbishop  Cranmcr.  1553. 

"  Good  and  evil,  clean  and  unclean,  holy  and  profane,  must  needs  pass  by 
the  sacrament  of  baptism,  except  you  will  indeed  in  more  ample  and  large 
measure  tie  the  grace  of  God  unto  it  than  ever  did  the  Papists,  and  say  all 
that  be  baptized  be  also  saved." — Archbishop  Whitgift.  1583. 

"  Are  all  they  that  are  partakers  of  the  outward  washing  of  baptism,  par 
takers  also  of  the  inward  washing  of  the  Spirit  ?  Doth  this  sacrament  seal 
up  their  spiritual  ingrafting  into  Christ  to  all  who  externally  receive  it. 
Surely  no  !  Though  God  hath  ordained  these  outward  means  for  the  convey 
ance  of  grace  to  our  souls,  yet  there  is  no  necessity  that  we  should  tie  the 
Avorking  of  God's  Spirit  to  the  sacraments  more  than  to  the  "\Vord." — Arch 
bishop  Usher.  1024. 

"  In  baptism,  as  the  one  part  of  that  holy  mystery  is  Christ's  blood,  so  is 
the  other  part  the  material  water.  Neither  are  these  parts  joined  together 


160  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

in  place,  but  in  mystery  ;  and  therefore  they  be  oftentimes  severed,  and  the 
one  is  received  without  the  other." — Bishop  Jewel.  1559. 

"  Christ  said,  'Except  a  man  be  born  again  from  above,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God,'  Ye  must  have  a  Regeneration  :  and  what  is  this  Regenera 
tion  ?  _It  is  not  to  be  christened  in  water  as  these  fire-brands  (the  Roman 
Catholics)  expound  it,  and  nothing  else.'''— Bishop  Latimcr.  1540. 

"All  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  which  receive  the  sacraments  of  His 
grace."— Richard  Hooker.  1597. 

"Not  all  are  regenerated  who  are  washed  with  the  baptismal  water." — Dr. 
Whittakcr,  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge.  1590. 

"  Grace  sometimes  precedes  the  sacrament,  sometimes  follows  it,  and  some 
times  does  not  even  follow  it." — Theodoret.  450  A.D. 

"All  did  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink,  but  not  with  all  was  God  well 
pleased,  and  when  the  sacraments  were  all  common,  the  grace  was  not 
common  to  all,  which  constitutes  the  virtue  of  the  sacraments.  So  also  now, 
when  faith  is  revealed  which  was  then  veiled,  the  laver  of  Regeneration  is 
common  to  all  who  are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  the  grace  itself  of  which  they  are  sacraments, 
and  by_  which  the  members  of  the  body  of  Christ  are  regenerated  with  their 
Head,  is  not  common  to  all." — Augustine  on  the  77th  Psalm.  390  A.D. 

"Outward  baptism  may  be  administered,  where  inward  conversion  of  the 
heart  is  wanting  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  inward  conversion  of  the  heart 
may  exist,  where  outward  baptism  has  never  been  received."— Augustine's 
Treatise  on  Baptism.  390  A.D. 

"  Some  have  the  outward  sign,  and  not  the  inward  grace.  Some  have  the 
inward  grace,  and  not  the  outward  sign.  We  must  not  commit  idolatry  by 
deifying  the  outward  element."— A rchbishop  Usher.  1624. 

"We  must  not  glory  because  we  are  made  partakers  of  the  external  sacra 
ment,  unless  we  obtain  besides  the  internal  and  quickening  work  of  Christ. 
For  if  this  be  wanting,  as  was  said  heretofore  to  Jews,  '  O  ye  uncircumcised 
in  heart,'  so  it  may  be  justly  said  to  us,  'O  ye  unbaptized  in  heart.'"— 
Bishop  Davenant.  1627. 

"  If  outward  baptism  were  a  cause  in  itself  possessed  of  that  power,  either 
natural  or  supernatural,  without  the  present  operation  whereof  no  such  effect 
could  possibly  grow,  it  must  then  follow  that,  seeing  effects  do  never  precede 
the  necessary  causes  out  of  which  they  spring,  no  man  could  ever  receive 
grace  before  baptism,  which  is  apparently  both  known  and  confessed  to  be 
otherwise  in  many  particulars."— Richard  Hooker.  1597. 

"  The  sacrament  hath  no  grace  included  in  it ;  but  to  those  that  receive  it 
well  it  is  turned  to  grace.  After  that  manner  the  water  in  baptism  hath 
grace  promised,  and  by  that  grace  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  ;  not  that  grace  is 
included  in  water,  but  that  grace  cometh  by  water."— Bishop  Ridley.  1547. 

"What  is  so  common  as  water? — what  is  so  common  as  bread  and  wine? 
Yet  Christ  promiseth  it  to  be  found  there,  when  He  is  sought  with  a  faithful 
heart."— Bishop  Latimcr.  1540. 

"That  baptism  hath  a  power,  is  clear,  in  that  it  is  so  expressly  said,  'it 
doth  save  us.'  What  kind  of  power  is  equally  clear  from  the  way  it  is  here 
expressed ;— not  by  a  natural  power  of  the  element ;— though  adapted  and 
sacramentally  used,  it  only  can  wash  away  the  filth  of  the  body  ;— its 
physical  efficacy  or  power  reached  no  further  :  but  it  is  in  the  hand  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  as  other  sacraments  are,  and  as  the  Word  itself  is,  to  purify  the 


PRAYEK-BOOK  STATEMENTS  :    REGENERATION.         161 

conscience,  and  convey  grace  and  salvation  to  the  soul,  by  the  reference  it 
hath  to,  and  union  with  that  which  it  represents.  Sacraments  are  neither 
empty  signs  to  them  who  believe,  nor  effectual  causes  of  grace  to  them  that 
believe  not.  Sacraments  do  not  save  all  who  partake  of  them,  yet  they  do 
really  and  effectually  save  believers,  for  whose  salvation  they  are  means,  as 
the  other  external  ordinances  of  God  do.  Though  they  have  not  that  grace 
which  is  peculiar  to  the  author  of  them,  yet  a  power  they  have  such  as  befits 
their  nature,  and  by  reason  of  which  they  are  truly  said  to  sanctify  and 
justify,  and  so  to  save,  as  the  Apostle  here  avers  of  baptism." — Archbishop 
Leighton.  1680. 

"  Is  Christ  and  the  cleansing  power  of  His  blood  only  barely  signified  in  the 
sacrament  of  baptism  ?  Nay,  more.  The  inward  things  are  really  exhibited 
to  the  believer  as  well  as  the  outward.  There  is  that  sacramental  union 
between  them  that  the  one  is  conveyed  and  sealed  up  by  the  other.  Hence 
are  those  phrases  of  being  '  born  again  of  water  and  the  Holy  Ghost,'  etc.,  etc. 
The  sacraments  being  rightly  received  do  effect  that  which  they  do  repre 
sent."—  Archbishop  Usher.  1624. 

"  What  is  the  advantage  or  benefit  of  baptism  to  the  common  Christian  ? 
The  same  as  was  the  benefit  of  circumcision  to  the  Jew,  outward.  (Rom. 
ii.  28.)  There  is  a  general  grace  of  baptism  which  all  the  baptized  partake  of 
as  a  common  favour  ;  and  that  is  their  admission  into  the  visible  body  of  the 
Church ;  their  matriculation  and  outward  incorporation  into  the  number  of 
the  worshippers  of  God  by  external  communion.  And  so  as  circumcision  was 
not  only  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith,  but  as  an  overplus, 
God  appointed  it  to  be  a  wall  of  separation  between  Jew  and  Gentile  :  so  is 
baptism  a  badge  of  an  outward  member  of  the  Church,  a  distinction  from  the 
common  sort  of  the  brethren.  And  God  thereby  seals  a  right  upon  the  party 
baptized  to  His  ordinances,  that  He  may  use  them  as  His  privileges,  and 
wait  for  an  inward  blessing  by  them.  Yet  this  is  but  the  porch,  the  shell, 
and  outside.  All  that  are  outwardly  received  into  the  visible  Church,  are 
not  spiritually  ingrafted  into  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  Baptism  is 
attended  upon  always  by  that  general  grace,  but  not  always  by  that  special." 
—Archbishop  Usher.  1624. 

"  Let  us  learn  not  to  confide  with  Papists  in  the  opus  operatum,  but  in 
quire  whether  we  possess  all  the  other  things,  without  which  the  inward 
effects  of  baptism  are  not  secured." — Bishop  Davenant.  1627. 

"Many  ignorant  people  among  us,  for  want  of  better  teaching,  harbour  in 
their  minds  such  Popish  conceits,  especially  that  baptism  doth  confer  grace  upon 
all  by  the  work  done,  for  they  commonly  look  no  higher  :  and  they  conceive 
a  kind  of  inherent  virtue  and  Christendom,  as  they  call  it,  necessarily  in 
fused  into  children,  by  having  the  water  cast  upon  their  faces." — Archbish<p 
Usher.  1624. 

"  It  is  a  pitiful  thing  to  see  the  ignorance  of  the  most  professing  Chris- 
tianity,  and  partaking  of  the  outward  seals  of  it,  yet  not  knowing  what  they 
mean  ;  not  appreciating  the  spiritual  dignity  and  virtue  of  them.  A  confused 
fancy  they  have  of  some  good  in  them,  and  this  rising  to  the  other  extreme 
to  a  superstitious  confidence  in  this  simple  performance  and  participation  of 
them,  as  if  that  carried  some  inseparable  virtue  with  it,  which  none  could 
miss  of  who  are  sprinkled  with  the  water  of  baptism  and  share  in  the  element 
of  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper." — Archbishop  Leiyhton.  1680. 

"  Wicked  is  that  Popish  doctrine,  that  original  sin  is  forgiven  by  baptism  ; 
and  for  all  actual  offences  after  baptism,  partly  by  Christ's  blood,  and  partly 


162  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

by  our  own  satisfaction,  we  attain  and  get  pardon  of  them." — Bishop  Babinfj- 
ton,  Bishop  of  Exeter.     1594. 

"  Let  us  consider  how  corruptly  the  Church  of  Rome  teacheth  us  touching 
this  sacrament  (baptism),  and  how  horribly  they  have  abused  it.  First,  they 
teach  that  baptism  doth  confer  grace  and  wash  away  our  sins  ex  opcrc 
operato ;  that  is,  even  by  the  very  washing  only  of  the  water,  though  there 
be  no  good  motion  of  faith  or  belief  in  the  heart  of  him  that  is  baptized.  "— 
Bishop  Cooper.  1570. 

"The  Papists  maintain  that  grace  is  conferred  upon  little  children  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  New  Testament,  without  faith  or  any  good  motive.  This  is 
to  attribute  a  power  to  sacraments  of  themselves,  and  by  a  virtue  of  their 
own,  in  the  case  of  little  children  :  which  we  say  is  false.  For  we  assert  that 
grace  is  not  conferred  by  the  sacraments  even  upon  little  children  from  the 
work  wrought,  so  that  all  necessarily  have  grace  that  receive  the  sacraments." 
— Dr.  Whittaker.  1580. 

"If  there  be  that  cure  that  they  speak  of  in  the  baptized,  how  is  it  that 
there  is  so  little  effect  or  token  thereof  ?  How  is  it  that  after  baptism  there 
remaineth  so  great  crookedness  and  perverseness  of  nature,  which  we  find 
to  be  no  less  than  men  from  the  beginning  have  complained  of?  How  is  it 
that  it  is  so  rare  and  hard  a  matter  to  be  trained  to  goodness,  and  so  easy 
and  ready  a  matter  to  become  nought?  " — Bishop  Robert  Abbot.  1615. 

"From  those  who  are  baptized  in  infancy  subsequent  faith  is  required; 
which  if  they  exhibit  not  afterward,  they  retain  only  the  outward  sanctifica- 
tion  of  baptism,  the  inward  effect  of  sanctification  they  have  not." — Bishop 
Davenant.  1627. 

"The  true  way  of  judging  whether  the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  us,  is  to  con 
sider  our  own  deeds.  Righteousness  and  holiness  are  the  only  certain  marks 
of  regeneration." — Bishop  Sherlock.  1740. 

"As  for  those  who  are  visibly  reclaimed  from  a  notorious  wicked  course, 
in  them  we  likewise  frequently  see  this  change  gradually  made  by  strong  im 
pressions  made  upon  their  minds,  most  frequently  by  the  Word  of  God, 
sometimes  by  His  providence,— till  at  length,  by  the  grace  of  God,  they 
come  to  a  fixed  purpose  and  resolution  of  forsaking  their  sins  and  turning  to 
God  ;  and  after  many  strugglings  and  conflicts  with  their  lusts,  and  the 
strong  bias  of  their  evil  habits,  this  resolution,  assisted  by  the  grace  of  God, 
doth  effectually  prevail,  and  make  a  real  change  both  in  the  temper  of  their 
minds,  and  course  of  their  lives  ;  and  when  this  is  done,  and  not  before,  they 
are  said  to  be  regenerate." — Archbishop  Tillotson.  1691. 

"The  only  certain  proof  of  Regeneration  is  victory." — Bishop  Wilson. 
1697. 


VIII. 
THE  LORD'S  SUPPER. 

THE  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  point  in  the  Christian 
religion  which  requires  very  careful  handling.  I  approach  it 
with  reverence,  fear,  and  trembling.  I  cannot  forget  that  I 
tread  on  very  delicate  ground.  There  is  much  connected 
with  the  subject  which  is  alike  painful,  humbling,  and  difficult. 

It  is  painful  to  think  that  an  ordinance  appointed  by  Christ 
for  our  benefit  should  have  been  denied  by  the  din  and  smoke 
of  theological  controversy.  It  is  undeniable  that  no  ordinance 
has  called  forth  so  much  passion  and  strife,  and  has  become 
such  a  bone  of  contention  among  polemical  divines.  Such  is 
the  corruption  of  fallen  man  that  the  thing  which  was 
"  ordained  for  our  peace"  has  become  "  an  occasion  of  falling." 

It  is  humbling  to  remember  that  men  of  opposite  opinions 
have  written  folios  about  the  Lord's  Supper  without  producing 
the  slightest  effect  on  the  minds  of  their  adversaries.  Cart 
loads  of  books  about  it  have  been  published  during  the  last 
three  centuries,  and  poured  into  the  open  gulf  between  the 
disputants  in  vain.  Like  the  "  Slough  of  Despond "  in 
Pilgrim's  Proyress,  it  is  a  yawning  gulf  still.  I  ask  no 
stronger  proof  that  the  fall  of  Adam  has  affected  the  under 
standing  as  well  as  the  will  of  man,  than  the  present  divided 
state  of  Christendom  about  the  Lord's  Supper. 

It  is  difficult  to  know  how  to  handle  such  a  subject  without 
exhausting  the  patience  of  readers.  It  is  difficult  to  know 
what  to  say,  and  what  to  leave  unsaid.  The  field  has  been 
so  thoroughly  exhausted  by  the  labours  of  many  masters  in 
Israel,  that  it  is  literally  impossible  to  bring  forward  anything 
that  is  new.  The  utmost  that  I  can  hope  to  attain  is  the  con 
densation  of  old  arguments.  If  I  can  only  bring  together  a 
few  ancient  things,  and  present  them  to  my  readers  in  a  portable 
and  compact  form,  I  shall  be  content. 

163 


164  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

In  the  present  paper  I  shall  content  myself  with  two  points, 
and  two  only. 

I.  /  will  show  the  original  intention  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
II.  /  will  show  the  position  which  the   Lord's  Supper   was 
meant  to  occupy. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  clear  to  my  mind :  it  is  im 
possible  to  overrate  the  importance  of  the  subject.  I  own  to  a 
strong  and  growing  conviction  that  error  about  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  one  of  the  commonest  and  most  dangerous  errors  of 
the  present  day.  I  suspect  we  have  little  idea  of  the  extent  to 
which  unsound  views  of  this  sacrament  prevail,  both  among 
clergy  and  laity.  They  are  the  hidden  root  of  nine-tenths  of 
the  extravagant  Kitualism  which,  like  a  fog,  is  overspreading 
our  Church.  Here,  if  anywhere,  all  Christian  ministers  have 
need  to  be  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts.  Our  witness 
must  be  clear,  distinct,  and  unmistakable.  Our  trumpets  must 
give  no  uncertain  sound.  The  Philistines  are  upon  us.  The 
ark  of  God  is  in  danger.  If  we  love  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
if  we  love  the  Church  of  England,  we  must  contend  earnestly 
for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  in  the  matter  of  the 
Lord's  Supper. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  what  ivas  the  original  intention  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  ? 

This  question  can  never  receive  a  better  general  answer  than 
that  of  our  well-known  Church  Catechism.  Wanting  in  sim 
plicity,  as  that  famous  formulary  certainly  is,  and  sadly  too  full 
of  hard  words  and  scholastic  metaphysical  terms,  it  is  worthy  of 
all  honour  for  its  statements  about  the  sacraments.  Our  Sunday- 
school  teachers  may  fail  to  understand  the  Catechism,  and 
complain  justly  that  it  needs  another  Catechism  to  explain  it. 
But,  after  all,  there  is  a  logical  preciseness  and  theological  accuracy 
about  its  definitions,  which  every  well-read  divine  must  acknow 
ledge  and  appreciate.  Rightly  used,  I  hold  the  Church  Catechism 
to  be  a  most  powerful  weapon  against  semi-Romanism.  Fairly 
interpreted,  it  is  utterly  subversive  of  the  "  Ritualistic  "  system. 

The  very  first  question  of  the  Catechism  about  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  as  follows:  "Why  was  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  ordained1?"  The  answer  supplied  is  this:  "For  the 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPEI;.  165 

continual  remembrance  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Christ, 
and  of  the  benefits  which  we  receive  thereby."  This  is  sound 
speech  that  cannot  be  condemned.  Founded  on  plain  language 
of  Holy  Scripture,  it  contains  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and 
nothing  but  the  truth.  (Luke  xxii.  19  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  24.) 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  intended  the  Lord's  Supper  to  be  a 
continual  remembrance*  to  the  Church  of  His  atoning  death  on 
the  Cross.  The  bread,  broken,  given,  and  eaten,  was  intended 
to  remind  Christians  of  His  body  given  for  our  sins.  The  wine, 
poured  out  and  drunk,  was  intended  to  remind  Christians  of  His 
blood  shed  for  our  sins. 

The  Lord  Jesus  knew  what  was  in  man.  He  knew  full  well 
the  darkness,  slowness,  coldness,  hardness,  stupidity,  pride,  self- 
conceit,  self-righteousness,  slothfulness,  of  human  nature  in 
spiritual  things.  Therefore  He  took  care  that  His  death  for 
sinners  should  not  merely  be  written  in  the  Bible, — for  then  it 
might  have  been  locked  up  in  libraries ; — or  left  to  the  ministry 
to  proclaim  in  the  pulpit, — for  then  it  might  soon  have  been 
kept  back  by  false  teachers ; — but  that  it  should  be  exhibited  in 
visible  signs  and  emblems,  even  in  bread  and  wine  at  a  special 
ordinance.  The  Lord's  Supper  was  a  standing  provision  against 
man's  forgetfulness.  So  long  as  the  world  stands  in  its  present 
order,  the  thing  which  is  done  at  the  Lord's  Table  shows  forth 
the  Lord's  death  till  He  comes.  (1  Cor.  xi.  26.) 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  knew  full  well  the  unspeakable  import- 
ante  of  His  own  death  for  sin  as  the  great  corner-stone  of  Scrip 
tural  religion.  He  knew  that  His  own  satisfaction  for  sin  as  our 
Substitute, — His  suffering  for  sin,  the  Just  for  the  unjust, — 
His  payment  of  our  mighty  debt  in  His  own  Person, — His 
complete  redemption  of  us  by  His  blood, — He  knew  that  this 


*  The  doctrine  of  the  Communion  Service,  let  me  remind  the  reader,  is  in 
precise  harmony  with  that  of  the  Catechism.  Let  us  mark  the  following 
expressions  : — 

"To  the  end  that  we  should  always  remember  the  exceeding  great  love  of 
our  Master  and  only  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  thus  dying  for  us,  and  the  in 
numerable  benefits  which  by  His  blood-shedding  He  hath  obtained  to  us  :  He 
hath  instituted  and  ordained  holy  mysteries  as  pledges  of  His  love,  and  for 
a  continual  remembrance  of  His  death,  to  our  great  and  endless  comfort."— 
"He  did  institute,  and  in  His  holy  Gospel  command  us  to  continue,  a  per 
petual  memory  of  that  His  precious  death  until  His  coming  again."--  "  Take 
and  eat  this  in  remembrance  that  Christ  died  for  thee." — "Drink  this  in 
remembrance  that  Christ's  blood  was  shed  for  thee." 


166  KflOTS  UNTIED. 

was  the  very  root  of  soul-saving  and  soul-satisfying  Christianity- 
Without  this  He  knew  His  incarnation,  miracles,  teaching, 
example,  and  ascension  could  do  no  good  to  man;  without  this 
He  knew  there  could  be  no  justification,  no  reconciliation,  no 
hope,  no  peace  between  God  and  man.  Knowing  all  this,  He 
took  care  that  His  death,  at  any  rate,  should  never  be  forgotten. 
He  carefully  appointed  an  ordinance,  in  which,  by  lively  figures, 
His  sacrifice  on  the  Cross  should  be  kept  in  perpetual  remem 
brance. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  well  knew  the  weakness  and  infirmity 
even  of  the  holiest  believers.  He  knew  the  absolute  necessity 
of  keeping  them  in  intimate  communion  with  His  own  vicarious 
sacrifice,  as  the  Fountain  of  their  inward  and  spiritual  life. 
Therefore,  He  did  not  merely  leave  them  promises  on  which 
their  memories  might  feed,  arid  words  which  they  might  call  to 
mind ;  He  mercifully  provided  an  ordinance  in  which  true  faith 
might  be  quickened  by  seeing  lively  emblems  of  His  body  and 
blood,  and  in  the  use  of  which  believers  might  be  strengthened 
and  refreshed.  The  strengthening  of  the  faith  of  God's  elect  in 
Christ's  atonement  was  one  great  purpose  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

I  turn  from  the  positive  to  the  negative  side  of  the  subject 
with  real  pain  and  reluctance.  But  it  is  plain  duty  to  do  so. 
Ministers,  like  physicians,  must  study  disease  as  well  as  health, 
and  exhibit  error  as  well  as  truth.  Let  me  then  try  to  show 
what  are  not  the  intentions  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 

(1)  It  was  never  meant  to  be  regarded  as  a  sacrifice.  We 
were  not  intended  to  believe  that  there  is  any  change  in  the 
elements  of  bread  and  wine,  or  any  corporal  presence  of  Christ 
in  the  sacrament.  These  things  can  never  be  honestly  and  fairly 
got  out  of  Scripture.  Let  the  three  accounts  of  the  "institution, 
in  the  Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  and  the  one  given 
by  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians,  be  weighed  and  examined 
impartially,  and  I  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  result.  They  teach 
that  there  is  no  sacrifice,  no  altar,  no  change  in  the  substance 
of  the  elements  :  that  the  bread  after  consecration  is  still  literally 
and  truly  bread, — and  the  wine  after  consecration  is  literally 
and  truly  wine.  In  no  part  of  the  New  Testament  do  we  find 
the  Christian  minister  called  a  priest ;  and  in  no  part  do  we  find 
any  mention  of  a  sacrifice,  except  that  of  prayer,  and  praise,  and 
good  works.  The  last  literal  sacrifice,  we  are  repeatedly  told  in 


THE  LOWS  SUPPER. 


167 


the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  is  the  once  for  all  finished  sacrifice 
of  Christ  on  the  Cross. 

No  doubt  it   may  satisfy  such  controversialists  as  the  late 
Cardinal  Wiseman  to  adduce  such  texts  as  "This  is  My  body," 
and  "  This  is  My  blood,"  as  proofs  that  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a 
sacrifice.     But  a  man  must  be   easily  satisfied  if   such  texts 
content  him.     The  quotation  of   a  single  isolated  phrase  is  a 
mode  of  arguing  that  would  establish  Arianism  or  Socinianism. 
The  context  of  these  famous  expressions  shows  clearly  that  those 
who  heard  the  words  used,  understood  them  to  mean,  "This 
represents  My  body,"  and  "This  represents  My  blood."     The 
analogy  of  other  places  proves  that  "  is  "  and  "  are  "  frequently 
mean  "represent"  in  Scripture.     St.  Paul,  in  writing  on  the 
sacrament,  expressly  calls  the  consecrated  bread,   "  bread,"  and 
not  the  body  of  Christ,  no  less  than  three  times.     (1  Cor.  xi.  26, 
27,  28.)     Above  all,  there  remains  the  unanswerable  argument, 
that  if  our  Lord    \yas  actually  holding  His  own  body  in  His 
hands,  when  He  said  of  the  bread,  "  This  is  My  body,"  His  body 
must  have  been  a  diiferent  body  to  that  of  ordinary  men.     Of 
course  if  His  body  was  not  a  body  like  ours,  His  real  and  proper 
humanity  is  at  an  end.     At  this  rate  the  blessed  and  comfort 
able  doctrine  of  Christ's  entire  sympathy  with  His  people,  as  very 
man,  would  be  completely  overthrown,  and  fall  to  the  ground.* 
Again,  it  may  please  some  to  regard  the  sixth  chapter  of  St. 
John,  where  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  eating  His  flesh  and  drinking 
His  blood,"  as  a  proof  that  there  is  a  literal  bodily  presence  of 
Christ  in  the  bread  and  wine  at  the  Lord's  Supper.     But  there 
is  an  utter  absence  of  conclusive  proof  that  this  chapter  refers  to 
the  Lord's  Supper  at  all.     The  man  who  maintains  that  it  does 
refer  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  will  find  himself  involved  in  very 
awkward  consequences.     He  sentences  to  everlasting  death  all 
who  do  not  receive  the  Lord's  Supper.     He  raises  to  everlasting 
life  all  who  do  receive  it.     Enough  to  say  that  the  great  majority 
of  Protestant  commentators  altogether   deny  that  the  chapter 
refers  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  that  even  some  Romish  com 
mentators  on  this  point  agree  with  them.t 

*  That  our  Lord's  body  was  not  a  real  body  like  our  own,  was  the  favourite 
doctrine  of  the  ancient  heretics  called  "  Apollinarians,"  in  the  early  Church. 

f  On  this  point  I  venture  to  refer  my  readers  to  my  own  Expository 
Thow/hts  on  St  John's  Gospel,  where  they  will  find  a  condensed  summary 
of  opinions,  in  my  notes  on  the  sixth  chapter. 


168  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

(2)  I  pass  on  to  another  negative  view  of  the  subject.     The 
Lord's   Supper   was   never   meant  to   confer   benefit   on   com 
municants    ex   opere  operate,  or    by   virtue  of   a  mere  formal 
reception  of  the  ordinance.*      We  were  not  intended  to  believe 
that  it  does  good  to  any  but  those  who  receive  it  with  faith  and 
knowledge.     It  is  not  a  medicine  or  a   charm   which  works 
mechanically,  irrespectively  of  the  state  of  mind  in  which  it  is 
received.     It  cannot  of  itself  confer  grace,  where  grace  does  not 
already  exist.     It  does  not  convert,  justify,  or  convey  blessings 
to  the  heart  of  an  unbeliever.      It  is  an  ordinance  not  for  the 
dead  but   for   the   living, — not  for  the  faithless  but  for  the 
believing, — not  for  the  unconverted  but  the  converted, — not  for 
the  impenitent  sinner  but  for  the  saint.      I  am  almost  ashamed 
to  take  up  time  with  such  trite  and  well-known  statements  as 
these.     The  Word  of  God  testifies  distinctly  that  a  man  may  go 
to  the  Lord's  Table,  and  "  eat  and  drink  unworthily," — may 
"  eat  and  drink  damnation  to  himself."     (1  Cor.  xi.  27,  29.) 
To  such  testimony  I  shall  not  add  a  word. 

(3)  I  will  only  mention  one  more  point  on  the  negative  side 
of  the   subject.     The  Lord's  Supper  was  not  meant  to  be   a 
mere  social  feast,  indicating  the  love  that  should  exist  among 
believers.     We  were  never  intended  to  regard  it  in  this  cold 
and  tame    light.     The  notion    of   the   author   of  Ecce  Homo, 
that  "  the  Christian  communion  is  a  club  dinner,"  is  not  only  a 
degrading   one,    but  one  that    cannot  be   reconciled  with  the 
language  of  its  Founder  at  the  time  of  institution.      "  Feeding 
on  the  character  of  Christ "  (I  quote  this  notorious  book)  is  an 
idea  which  may  satisfy  a  Socinian,  or  any  one  who  rejects  the 
doctrine  of  the  atonement.     But  the  true  Christian  who  feeds 
especially  on  the  vicarious  death  of  Christ,  and  not  His  cha 
racter,  will  see  that  death  prominently  exhibited  in  the  Lord's 
Supper,  and  find  his  faith  in  that  death  quickened  by  the  use  of 
it.      It  was  meant  to  carry  his  mind  back  to  the  sacrifice  once 
made  on  Calvary,  and  not  merely  to  the  incarnation ;  and  no 
lower  view  will  ever  satisfy  a  true  Christian's  heart. 

I  have  now  stated  the  ground  that  I  believe  we  are  meant  to 
take  up  about  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.     Negatively, 


*  These  three  Latin  words,  be  it  remembered,  mean  simply,  "  out  of,"  or 
"  by  means  of,  the  work  done." 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  169 

it  was  not  intended  to  be  a  mere  social  meeting, — nor  yet  a 
sacrifice,  —  nor  yet  an  ordinance  conferring  grace  ex  opere 
operato.  Positively,  it  was  intended  to  be  a  "  continual  remem 
brance  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ's  death,"  and  a  strengthener  and 
refresher  of  true  believers.  This  ground  may  seem  to  some  very 
simple,  so  simple  that  it  is  below  the  truth.  Be  it  so  :  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  it.  Whether  men  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  for 
bear,  I  am  convinced  that  this  is  the  only  view  that  is  in  harmony 
with  Scripture  and  the  formularies  of  the  Church  of  England. 

I  grant  most  freely  that  a  large  and  increasing  school  within 
our  own  Church  entirely  disagree  with  the  view  I  have  given  of 
the  Lord's  Supper.  Hundreds  of  clergy,  both  in  high  places  and 
low,  consider  that  there  is  not  only  a  real  presence  of  Christ 
in  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  I  hold  as  strongly  as  they  do, 
but  that  there  is  also  a  real  presence  of  Christ  in  the  elements 
of  bread  and  wine  after  consecration,*  which  I  entirely  deny. 

Let  us  hear  how  Archdeacon  Denison,  no  mean  authority, 
states  this  view.  He  says,  "  Christ's  body  and  blood  are  really 
present  in  the  holy  Eucharist,  under  the  form  of  bread  and 
wine,  i.e.  present  things, — though  they  be  present  after  a 
manner  ineffable,  incomprehensible  by  man,  and  not  cognizable 
by  the  senses.  The  real  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharist  is 
therefore  not,  as  I  believe  it  is  very  generally  supposed  to  be, 
the  presence  of  an  influence  emanating  from  a  thing  absent,  but 
the  invisible  and  supernatural  presence  of  a  thing  present ;  of 
His  body  and  His  blood  present  under  the  forms  of  bread  and 
wine."  t  (Sermon  IL,  p.  80.)  Let  us  hear  him  again.  "  Wor- 

*  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  make  some  people  see  the  immense  importance 
of  strict  accuracy  in  stating  terms,  in  this  unhappy  controversy  about  the 
Lord's  Supper.  The  point  in  dispute  is  not  whether  there  is  a  "real 
presence  "  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  This  we  all  hold.— The  point  is  not 
whether  Christ's  presence  is  a  spiritual  presence.  Even  Harding,  the  well- 
known  antagonist  of  Jewel,  admits  that  Christ's  body  is  present,  "  not  after  a 
corporal,  or  carnal,  or  natural  wise,  but  invisibly,  unspeakably,  miraculously, 
supernaturally,  spiritually,  divinely,  and  in  a  manner  by  Him  known.  "- 
Harding s^Rqply  to  Jewel.—  The  true  point  is,  whether  Christ's  real  body  and 
blood  are  really  present  in  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine,  as  soon  as  they 
are  consecrated  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  independently  of  the  faith  of  him 
who  receives  it.  Romanists  and  semi-Romanists  say  that  they  are  so  present. 
We  say  that  they  are  not. 

f  The  antagonism  between  these  sentences  of  Archdeacon  Denison  and 
Bishop  Ridley's  views  of  the  same  subject,  is  so  singularly  strong,  that  I  ask 
the  reader  not  to  pass  on  without  noticing  it.  Bishop  Ridley,  in  his  Dis- 


170  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

ship  is  due  to  the  real,  though  invisible  and  supernatural, 
presence  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in  the  holy  Eucharist, 
under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine."  (Sermon  n.,  p.  81.)  Let 
us  hear  him  again.  "  The  act  of  consecration  makes  the  real 
presence.  Oh,  priests  of  the  Church  of  God  !  to  us  it  is  given 
to  be  the  channels  and  agents,  whereby  the  Holy  Ghost  doth 
there  make  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  to  be  really,  though 
invisibly  and  supernaturally,  present,  under  the  form  of  bread 
and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper ;  to  iis  it  is  given  to  give  His 
body  and  His  blood  unto  His  people.  Oh,  priests  and  people  of 
the  Church  of  God  !  to  us  it  is  given  to  take  and  eat,  under  the 
form  of  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ."  (Sermon  n.,  p.  107.) 

Now  I  shall  not  multiply  quotations  of  this  kind.  It  would 
be  easy  to  show  you  that  the  doctrine  laid  down  by  Archdeacon 
Denison  is  the  doctrine  of  a  large  and  growing  section  of  the 
Church  of  England.*  It  would  be  no  less  easy  to  show  that  the 


putation  at  Oxford,  says  of  the  Romish  doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence  :  "  It 
destroyeth  and  taketh  away  the  Institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  was 
commanded  only  to  be  used  and  continued  until  the  Lord  Himself  should 
come.  If,  therefore,  He  be  now  really  present  in  the  body  of  His  flesh,  then 
must  the  Supper  cease  :  for  a  remembrance  is  not  of  a  thing  present,  but  of  a 
tiling  past  and  absent.  And,  as  one  of  the  fathers  saith, — '  A  figure  is  vain 
where  the  thing  figured  is  present.'  "—See  Foxe's  Martyrs,  in  loco. 

*  In  a  devotional  work  lately  published  by  the  Church  Press  Company, 
entitled  "  The  Little  Prayer-book,  intended  for  Beginners  in  Devotion, 
revised  and  corrected  by  three  Priests,"  the  following  passages  will  be  found  : 

"  When  you  enter  the  church,  before  you  go  to  your  place,  bow  reverently 
to  the  holy  altar,  for  it  is  the  throne  of  Christ,  and  the  most  sacred  part  of 
the  church." — "  Bow  reverently  to  the  altar,  before  you  leave  the  altar."— 
"At  the  words  '  this  is  My  body,  this  is  My  blood,'  you  must  believe  that  the 
bread  and  wine  become  the  real  body  and  blood  with  the  Soul  and  God-head 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Bew  down  your  heart  and  body  in  deepest  adoration  when 
the  priest  says  those  awful  words,  and  worship  your  Saviour,  there,  verily,  and 
indeed  present  on  His  altar." 

In  a  "  Catechism  on  the  Office  of  the  Holy  Communion,  edited  by  a  Com 
mittee  of  Clergymen,"  will  be  found  the  following  statement : — "  The  Holy 
Communion  is  a  sacrifice,  an  offering  made  on  an  altar  to  God." — "  We  offer 
bread  and  wine  ;  these  afterwards  become  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ."— 
"  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  as  our  High  Priest,  and  the  Priests  of  His 
Church  whom  He  hath  appointed  here  on  earth,  alone  have  power  to  offer  this 
sacrifice."— "  The  sacrifice  is  the  true  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  is  presented  as  a  sin-offering  to  obtain  pardon  for  our  offences." 
— The  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  really  and  truly  present 
on  the  altar  under  the  forms  of  the  bread  and  wine,  and  the  priest  offers  the 
sacrifice  to  God  the  Father."—  "  We  should  worship  our  Lord,  present  in  His 
sacrament,  as  we  should  do  if  we  could  see  Him  bodily." 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER. 

doctrine  is  substantially  one  and  the  same  with  that  of  the 
Romish  Church,  and  that  for  refusing  this  very  doctrine  our 
martyred  Reformers  laid  down  their  lives.  But  time  would  not 
allow  me  to  do  this.  I  shall  content  myself  with  trying  to  show 
that  the  doctrine  of  Archdeacon  Denison  and  his  school  cannot 
be  reconciled  with  the  authorized  formularies  of  the  Church  of 
England,  and  that  the  simpler  and,  as  some  falsely  call  it,  lower 
view  of  the  intention  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  is  in  entire  harmony 
with  those  formularies. 

Let  me  turn  first  to  the  Thirty -nine  Articles.  We  have  no 
right  to  appeal  to  any  formulary  before  this.  The  Church's 
Confession  of  faith  is  the  Church's  first  standard  of  doctrine. 
The  Twenty-eighth  Article  says  as  follows : — 

"The  Supper  of  the  Lord  is  not  only  a  sign  of  the  love  that 
Christians  ought  to  have  among  themselves  one  to  another,  but 
rather  is  a  Sacrament  of  our  Redemption  by  Christ's  death  ; 
insomuch  that  to  such  as  rightly,  worthily,  and  with  faith, 
receive  the  same,  the  Bread  which  we  break  is  a  partaking  of 
the  Body  of  Christ ;  and  likewise  the  Cup  of  Blessing  is  a  par 
taking  of  the  Blood  of  Christ. 

"  Transubstantiation  (or  the  change  of  the  substance  of  bread 
and  wine)  in  the  Supper  of  the  Lord,  cannot  be  proved  by  holy 
Writ ;  but  is  repugnant  to  the  plain  words  of  Scripture,  over- 
throweth  the  nature  of  a  Sacrament,  and  hath  given  occasion  to 
many  superstitions. 

"The  Body  of  Christ  is  given,  taken,  and  eaten,  in  the 
Supper,  only  after  an  heavenly  and  spiritual  manner.  And  the 
mean  whereby  the  Body  of  Christ  is  received  and  eaten  in  the 
Supper  is  Faith. 

"  The  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  not  by  Christ's 
ordinance  received,  carried  about,  lifted  up,  or  worshipped." 

I  shall  make  no  remark  on  these  words.  I  only  ask  plain 
Churchmen  to  put  them  side  by  side  with  High  Church  state 
ments  about  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  to  observe  the  utter  con 
trariety  that  exists  between  them.  I  appeal  to  the  common 
sense  of  all  impartial  and  unprejudiced  Englishmen.  Let  them 
be  the  judges.  If  one  view  is  right,  the  other  is  wrong.  If  the 
language  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Article  can  be  reconciled  with 
the  doctrine  of  Archdeacon  Denison  and  his  school,  I  can  only 
say  that  words  have  no  meaning  at  all.  I  shall  content  myself 


172  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

with  quoting  the  comment  of  Bishop  Beveridge  on  this  Twenty- 
eighth  Article,  and  pass  on. 

He  says, — "  If  the  bread  be  not  really  changed  into  the  body 
of  Christ,  then  the  body  of  Christ  is  not  really  there  present ; 
and  if  it  be  not  really  there  present,  it  is  impossible  that  it 
should  be  really  taken  and  received  into  our  bodies,  as  bread  is." 

Again,  he  says, — "  I  cannot  see  how  it  can  possibly  be  denied, 
that  Christ  ate  of  the  bread  whereof  He  said,  '  This  is  My  body ; ' 
and  if  He  ate  it,  and  ate  it  corporally  (that  is,  ate  His  body  as 
we  eat  bread),  then  He  ate  Himself,  and  made  one  body  two, 
and  then  crowded  them  into  one  again,  putting  His  body  into 
His  body,  even  His  whole  body  into  part  of  His  body,  His 
stomach.  And  so  He  must  be  thought  not  only  to  have  two 
bodies,  but  two  bodies  one  within  another ;  yea,  so  as  to  be 
one  devoured  by  another  :  the  absurdity  of  which,  and  of  like 
assertions,  he  that  hath  but  half  an  eye  may  easily  discover. 
So  that  it  must  needs  be  granted  to  be  in  a  spiritual  manner 
that  the  Sacrament  was  instituted,  and  by  consequence  that  it 
is  in  a  spiritual  manner  the  sacrament  must  be  received. "- 
Beveridge  on  the  Articles.  Ed.  Oxford,  1846.  Pp.  482-486. 

The  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England  on  this  subject  is 
entirely  in  accordance  with  the  Articles.  The  word  "  altar  " 
is  not  to  be  found  once  in  our  Prayer-book.  The  idea  of  a 
"sacrifice"  is  most  carefully  excluded  from  our  Communion 
( )ffice.  However  much  men  may  twist  and  distort  the  words  of 
the  Baptismal  Service,  they  cannot  make  anything  out  of  the 
Communion  Service,  to  prove  Romish  views.  Even  the  famous 
Non-juror,  Dr.  Brett,  was  obliged  to  confess  that  he  "knew 
not  how  to  reconcile  the  Consecration  Prayer  in  the  present 
established  Liturgy  with  the  real  presence ;  for,"  says  he,  "  it 
makes  a  plain  distinction  betwixt  the  bread  and  wine  and  our 
Saviour's  body  and  blood,  when  it  says, — '  Grant  that  we  receiv 
ing  these  Thy  creatures  of  bread  and  wine,  may  be  partakers  of 
Christ's  body  and  blood.'  Which  manifestly  implies  the  bread 
and  wine  to  be  distinct  and  different  things  from  the  body  and 
blood." — Bretfs  Discourse  on  discerning  the  Lord's  Body  in  the 
Communion.  London,  1720.  Pref.,  pp.  19-21. 

But  the  rubric  at  the  end  of  the  Communion  Service  makes 
it  mere  waste  of  time  to  say  anything  more  on  the  subject  of 
the  Prayer-book's  view  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  That  rubric  says, 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  173 

—  "Whereas  it  is  ordained  in  this  Office  for  the  Administration 
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  the  communicants  should  receive  the 
same  kneeling  (which  order  is  well  meant,  for  a  signification  of 
our  humble  and  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  benefits  of 
Christ  therein  given  to  all  worthy  receivers ;  and  for  the  avoid 
ing  of  such  profanation  and  disorder  in  the  Holy  Communion, 
as  might  otherwise  ensue) ;  yet,  lest  the  same  kneeling  should 
by  any  persons,  either  out  of  ignorance  and  infirmity,  or  out  of 
malice  and  obstinacy,  be  misconstrued  and  depraved, — It  is 
thereby  declared,  That  thereby  no  adoration  is  intended,  or 
ought  to  be  done,  either  unto  the  sacramental  bread  or  wine 
there  bodily  received,  or  unto  any  Corporal  Presence  of  Christ's 
natural  flesh  and  blood.  For  the  sacramental  bread  and  wine 
remain  still  in  their  very  natural  substances,  and  therefore  may 
not  be  adored  (for  that  were  idolatry,  to  be  abhorred  of  all 
faithful  Christians) ;  and  the  natural  body  and  blood  of  our 
Saviour  Christ  are  in  heaven,  and  not  here ;  it  being  against 
the  truth  of  Christ's  natural  body  to  be  at  one  time  in  more 
places  than  one."  If  that  rubric  does  not  flatly  condemn  the 
teaching  of  Archdeacon  Denison  and  his  school,  about  the 
presence  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament,  under  the  forms  of  bread 
and  wine,  I  am  very  certain  that  words  have  no  meaning  at  all.* 
The  Catechism  of  the  Church  of  England  is  in  direct  accord 
ance  with  the  Articles  and  Liturgy.  Though  it  states  distinctly 
that  "Christ's  body  and  blood  are  verily  and  indeed  taken  and 
received  by  the  faithful  in  the  Lord's  Supper,"  it  carefully 
avoids  saying  one  word  to  sanction  the  idea  that  the  body  and 
blood  are  locally  present  in  the  consecrated  elements  of  bread 
and  wine.  In  fact,  a  spiritual  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's 
Supper  to  every  faithful  communicant,  but  no  local  corporal 


*  The  rubric  at  the  end  of  the  Communion  of  the  Sick  is  another  strong 
evidence  of  the  views  of  those  who  drew  up  our  Prayer-book  in  its  present 
form.  It  says,  "  If  a  man  by  reason  of  extremity  of  sickness,  or  for  want  of 
warning  in  due  time  to  the  curate,  or  for  lack  of  company  to  receive  with 
him,  or  by  any  other  just  impediment,  do  not  receive  the  sacrament  of 
Christ's  body  and  blood,  the  curate  shall  instruct  him,  that  if  he  do  truly 
repent  him  of  his  sins,  and  steadfastly  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  hath  suffered 
death  on  the  Cross  for  him,  and  shed  His  blood  for  his  redemption,  earnestly 
remembering  the  benefits  he  hath  thereby,  and  giving  him  hearty  thanks 
therefor,  he  doth  eat  and  drink  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ 
profitably  to  his  soul's  health,  although  he  do  not  receive  the  sacrament  with 
his  mouth." 


174  KNOTS 'UNTIED. 

presence  in  the  bread  and  wine  to  any  communicant,  is  evidently 
the  uniform  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England. 

But  I  will  not  pass  on  without  quoting  Water-land's  interpret 
ation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Catechism.  He  says, — "  The  words 
verily  and  indeed  taken  and  received  by  the  faithful,  are  rightly 
interpreted  of  a  real  participation  of  the  benefits  purchased  by 
Christ's  death.  The  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  taken  and 
received  by  the  faithful,  not  corporally,  not  internally,  but 
verily  and  indeed,  that  is  effectually.  The  sacred  symbols  are 
no  bare  signs,  no  untrue  figures  of  a  thing  absent ;  but  the  force, 
the  grace,  the  virtue,  and  benefit  of  Christ's  body  broken  and 
blood  shed,  that  is  of  His  passion,  are  really  and  effectually 
present  with  all  them  that  receive  worthily.  This  is  all  the 
real  presence  that  our  Church  teaches." — Wat&rland's  Works 
Oxford,  1843.  Vol.  vi.,  p.  42. 

Once  more  I  say  that  if  Waterland's  view  of  the  Catechism 
can  be  reconciled  with  that  of  Archdeacon  Denison  and  his 
school,  words  have  no  meaning  at  all. 

The  Homily  of  the  Church  of  England  about  the  sacrament 
is  in  complete  harmony  with  the  Articles,  Liturgy,  and  Cate 
chism.     It  says,   "Before  all  things  this  we  must  be  sure  of 
especially,  that  this  Supper  be  in  such  wise  done  and  ministered 
as  our  Lord  and  Saviour  did,  and  commanded  to  be  done  •  as 
His  holy  Apostles  used  it ;  and  the  good  Fathers  in  the  Church 
frequented  it.     For,  as  that  worthy  man  St.  Ambrose  saith,  he 
is  unworthy  of  the  Lord  that  doth  celebrate  this  mystery  other 
wise  than  it  was  delivered  by  Him.     Neither  can  he  be  devout 
that  doth  presume  otherwise  than  it  was  given  by  the  Author. 
We  ^must  then  take  heed,  lest  of  the  memory  it  be  made  a 
sacrifice,  lest  of  a  communion  it  be  made  a  private  eating ;  lest 
of  two  parts  we  have  but  one ;  lest,  applying  it  for  the  dead, 
we  lose  the  fruit  that  be  alive." — Again,  it  says,  after  pressing 
the  necessity  of  knowledge  and  faith  in  communicants  :  "  This 
is  to  stick  fast  to  Christ's  promise  made  in  His  institution :  to 
make  Christ  thine  own,  and  to  apply  His  merits  unto  thyself. 
Herein  thou  needest  no  other  man's  help,  no  other  sacrifice  or 
oblation,  no  sacrificing  priest,  no  mass,  no  means  established  by 
man's  invention." — Again,  it  says  :  "It  is  well  known  that  the 
meat  we  seek  for  in  this  Supper  is  spiritual  food,  the  nourish 
ment  of  our  soul,   a  heavenly  refection   and  not  earthly,  an 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPEK.  1*7  5 

invisible  meat  and  not  bodily,  a  ghostly  substance  and  not 
carnal.  So  that  to  think  that  without  faith  we  really  enjoy  the 
eating  and  drinking  thereof,  or  that  that  is  the  fruition  of  it,  is 
but  to  dream  a  gross  carnal  feeling,  basely  objecting  and  binding 
ourselves  to  the  elements  and  creatures.  Whereas  by  the  order 
of  the  Council  of  Nicene,  we  ought  to  lift  up  our  minds  by 
faith,  and  leaving  these  inferior  and  earthly  things,  there  seek 
it  where  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  ever  shineth.  Take  then 
this  lesson,  0  thou  that  art  desirous  of  this  table,  of  Emissenus, 
a  godly  Father, —that  when  thou  goest  up  to  the  reverend  com 
munion  to  be  satisfied  with  spiritual  meat,  thou  look  up  with 
faith  upon  the  holy  body  and  blood  of  thy  God,  thou  marvel 
with  reverence,  thou  touch  it  with  thy  mind,  thou  receive  it 
with  the  hand  of  thy  heart,  and  thou  take  it  fully  with  thy 
inward  man." 

Now  it  would  be  easy  to  multiply  quotations  in  support  of 
the  view  of  the  Lord's  Supper  which  I  advocate,  from  leading 
divines  of  the  Church  of  England.  But  I  forbear.  Time  is 
precious  in  these  latter  days  of  hurry,  bustle,  and  excitement. 
Quotations  are  wearisome,  and  too  often  are  not  read.  Those 
who  wish  to  follow  up  the  subject  should  study  Dean  Goode's 
unanswerable,  but  much  neglected,  book  on  the  Eucharist. 

Two  quotations  only  I  will  give,  from  two  men  of  no  mean 
authority,  though  differing  widely  on  some  points. 

The  first  is  the  well-known  Jeremy  Taylor.  In  his  book  on 
The  Real  Presence  (Edit.  1654,  pp.  13-15)  he  says  :  "We  say 
that  Christ's  body  is  in  the  sacrament  really,  but  spiritually. 
The  Roman  Catholics  say  that  it  is  there  really,  but  spiritually. 
For  so  Eellarmine  is  bold  to  say  that  the  word  may  be  allowed 
in  this  question.  Where  now  is  the  difference?  Here  by 
spiritually,  they  mean  spiritual  after  the  manner  of  a  spirit. 
We  by  spiritually,  mean  present  to  our  spirit  only.  They  say 
that  Christ's  body  is  truly  present  there  as  it  was  upon  the 
Cross,  but  not  after  the  manner  of  all  or  anybody,  but  after  that 
manner  of  being  as  an  angel  is  in  a  place.  That's  their  spiritu 
ally. — But  we  by  the  real  spiritual  presence  of  Christ  do  under 
stand  Christ  to  be  present,  as  the  Spirit  of  God  is  present,  in 
the  hearts  of  the  faithful  by  blessing  and  grace ;  and  this  is  all 
which  we  mean  beside  the  tropecal  and  figurative  presence." 

The  other  divine  whom  1  will  quote  is  one  who  was  a  very 


176  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

giant  in  theology,  and  as  remarkable  for  his  soundness  in  the 
faith  as  for  his  prodigious  learning.  I  mean  Archbishop  Usher. 
In  his  sermon  before  the  House  of  Commons,  he  says:  "In 
the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  bread  and  wine  are 
not  changed  in  substance  from  being  the  same  with  that  which 
is  served  at  ordinary  tables ;  but  in  respect  of  the  sacred  use 
whereunto  they  are  consecrated,  such  a  change  is  made  that 
now  they  differ  as  much  from  common  bread  and  wine  as  heaven 
from  earth.  Neither  are  they  to  be  accounted  barely  significat 
ive,  but  truly  exhibitive  also  of  those  heavenly  things  where 
unto  they  have  relation;  as  being  appointed  by  God  to  be  a 
means  of  conveying  the  same  to  us,  and  putting  us  in  actual 
possession  thereof.  So  that  in  the  use  of  this  holy  ordinance, 
as  verily  as  a  man  with  his  bodily  hand  and  mouth  receiveth 
the  earthly  creatures  of  bread  and  wine,  so  verily  with  his 
spiritual  hand  and  mouth,  if  lie  have  any,  doth  he  receive  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ.  And  this  is  that  real  and  substantial 
presence  which  we  affirm  to  be  in  the  inward  part  of  this  sacred 
action." 

I  cannot  leave  this  part  of  the  subject  without  entering  my 
indignant  protest  against  the  often-repeated  sneer  that  learning, 
reasoning,  and  research  are  not  to  be  found  among  the  sup 
porters  of  Evangelical  Eeligion  in  the  Church  of  England ! 
The  work  of  Dean  Goode,  on  the  nature  of  Christ's  presence  in 
the  Eucharist,  containing  986  pages  of  masterly  argument  in 
defence  of  sound  Protestant  views  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  has 
now  been  for  many  years  before  the  public.  It  stands  to 
this  day  unanswered  hitherto  and  unanswerable.  Where  is  the 
honesty,  where  the  fairness,  of  neglecting  to  refute  that  book 
if  it  can  be  refuted,  and  yet  clinging  obstinately  to  views  which 
it  triumphantly  subverts?  —  I  unhesitatingly  commend  that 
book  to  the  patient  and  diligent  study  of  all  my  younger 
brethren  in  the  ministry,  if  they  want  their  minds  established 
and  confirmed  about  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Let 
them  read  it  carefully,  and  I  think  they  will  find  it  impossible 
to  arrive  at  any  but  one  conclusion.  That  conclusion  is,  that 
the  Church  of  England  holds  that  there  is  no  sacrifice  in  the 
Lord's  Supper,  no  oblation,  no  altar,  no  corporal  presence  of 
Christ  in  the  bread  and  wine ;  and  that  the  true  intention  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  just  what  the  Catechism  states,  and  neither 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  177 

less  nor  more: — "It  was  ordained  for  the  continual  remem 
brance  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and  of  the  benefits 
that  we  receive  thereby." 

II.  The  second  point  which  I  propose  to  handle  in  this  paper 
is  so  completely  bound  up  with  the  first,  that  I  shall  not  dwell 
upon  it  at  length.  He  that  can  answer  the  question — "  What 
is  the  true  intention  "  of  the  Lord's  Supper  ? — will  find  no 
difficulty  in  discerning  "what  is  its  rightful  position  in  the 
Church  of  Christ" 

Like  the  ark  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament,  this  blessed 
sacrament  has  a  proper  position  and  rank  among  Christian 
ordinances,  and,  like  the  ark  of  God,  it  may  easily  be  put  in 
the  wrong  one.  The  history  of  that  ark  will  readily  recur  to 
our  minds.  Put  in  the  place  of  God,  and  treated  like  an  idol, 
it  did  the  Israelites  no  good  at  all.  In  the  days  of  Eli,  it  could 
not  save  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistine.  Their  armies 
were  defeated,  and  the  ark  itself  was  taken.  —  Defiled  and 
dishonoured  by  being  placed  in  an  idol's  temple,  it  was  the 
cause  of  God's  wrath  falling  on  a  whole  nation,  till  the  Philis 
tines  said  with  one  voice,  "  Send  it  away." — Treated  with 
carelessness  and  levity,  it  brought  down  God's  judgment  on  the 
men  of  Bethsheniesh,  and  on  Uzza. — Treated  with  reverence 
and  respect,  it  brought  a  blessing  on  Obed-edom  and  all  his 
house. — It  is  even  so  with  the  Lord's  Supper. — Placed  in  its 
right  position,  it  is  an  ordinance  full  of  blessing.  The  great 
question  to  be  settled  is, — What  is  that  position  1 

(1)  The  Lord's  Supper  is  not  in  its  right  place,  when  it  is 
made  the  first,  foremost,  principal,  and  most  important  thing  in 
Ctiristian  worship.  That  it  is  so  in  many  quarters,  we  all  must 
know.  The  well-known  "masses"  of  the  Romish  Church,  the 
increasing  importance  attached  to  "  Holy  Communion,"  as  it  is 
called,  by  many  in  our  own  Church,  are  plain  evidence  of  what 
I  mean.  The  sermon,  the  mode  of  conducting  prayer,  the 
reading  of  "holy  Scripture,"  in  many  churches  are  made  second 
to  this  one  thing, — the  administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper. — 
We  may  well  ask,  "  What  warrant  of  Scripture  is  there  for  this 
extravagant  honour  ? "  but  we  shall  get  no  answer.  There  are  at 
most  but  five  books  in  the  whole  canon  of  the  New  Testament  in 
which  the  Lord's  Supper  is  even  mentioned.  About  grace,  faith, 

if 


1*78  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

and  redemption;  about  the  work  of  Christ,  the  work  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  love  of  the  Father ;  about  man's  ruin,  weakness, 
and  spiritual  poverty  ;  about  justification,  sanctification,  and  holy 
living; — about  all  these  mighty  subjects  we  find  the  inspired 
writers  giving  us  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept. 
About  the  Lord's  Supper,  on  the  contrary,  we  may  observe  in 
the  great  bulk  of  the  JSTew  Testament  a  speaking  silence.  Even 
the  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus,  containing  much  instruction 
about  a  minister's  duties,  do  not  contain  a  word  about  it.  This 
fact  alone  surely  speaks  volumes  !  To  thrust  the  Lord's  Supper 
forward,  till  it  towers  over  and  overrides  everything  else  in 
religion,  is  giving  it  a  position  for  which  there  is  no  authority 
in  God's  Word.* 

(2)  Again,  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  in  its  right  place,  when  it 
is  administered  with  an  extravagant  degree  of  outward  ceremony 
and  veneration.  In  saying  this  I  should  be  sorry  to  be  mis 
understood.  God  forbid  that  I  should  countenance  anything 
like  carelessness  or  irreverence  in  the  use  of  any  ordinance  of 
Christ.  By  all  means  let  us  give  honour  where  honour  is  due. 
But  I  ask  all  who  read  this  paper,  whether  there  is  not  some 
thing  painfully  suspicious  about  the  enormous  amount  of  pomp 
and  bodily  reverence  with  which  the  Lord's  Supper  is  now 
administered  in  many  of  our  churches  1  The  ostentatious 
treatment  of  the  Communion  table  as  an  altar, — the  lights, 
ornaments,  flowers,  millinery,  gestures,  postures,  bowings,  cross 
ings,  incensing,  processions,  which  are  connected  with  the  so- 
called  altar, — the  mysterious  and  obsequious  veneration  with 
which  the  bread  and  wine  are  consecrated,  given,  taken,  and 
received, — what  does  it  all  mean  1 j  Where  is  there  in  all  this 


*  I  take  occasion  to  say  that  I  view  with  strong  dislike  the  modern  practice 
of  substituting  the  Lord's  Supper  for  a  sermon  at  Episcopal  and  Archidiaconal 
visitations.  No  doubt  it  saves  Bishops  and  Archdeacons  much  trouble.  It 
delivers  them  from  the  invidious  responsibility  of  selecting  a  preacher.  But 
the  thing  has  a  very  suspicious  and  unsatisfactory  appearance.  Preaching 
the  Word,  in  my  judgment,  is  a  far  more  important  ordinance  than  the 
Lord's  Supper.  The  subject  is  one  about  which  Evangelical  Churchmen 
would  do  well  to  awake  and  be  on  their  guard.  This  studied  attempt  to 
thrust  in  the  Lord's  Supper  on  all  occasions  has  a  most  unfortunate  tendency 
to  make  men  remember  the  Popish  mass. 

f  It  is  truly  lamentable  to  observe  how  many  young  men  and  women,  of 
whom  better  things  might  have  been  expected,  fall  away  into  semi-Komanism 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  170 

the  simplicity  of  the  first  institution,  as  we  find  it  recorded 
in  the  Bible  1  Where  is  the  simplicity  which  our  Protestant 
Reformers  both  preached  and  practised?  Where  is  the  sim 
plicity  which  any  plain  reader  of  the  English  Prayer-book  might 
justly  expect?  We  may  well  ask,  Where?  The  true  Lord's 
Supper  is  no  longer  there.  The  whole  thing  savours'  of 
Romanism.  A  plain  man  can  only  see  in  it  an  attempt  to 
introduce  into  our  worship  the  doctrine  of  sacrifice,  the 
"blasphemous  fable  and  dangerous  deceit"  of  the  mass,  the 
Popish  real  presence,  and  transubstantiation.  It  is  impossible  to 
avoid  feeling  that  a  deadly  heresy  underlies  this  pompous 
ceremonial,  and  that  we  have  not  to  do  merely  with  a  childish 
love  of  show  and  form,  but  with  a  deep-laid  design  to  bring 
back  Popery  into  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  subvert  the 
Gospel  of  Christ.  One  thing  at  any  rate  is  very  plain  to  my 
mind :  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  administered  as  it 
is  now  in  many  places,  is  not  in  its  rightful  position.  It  is  so 
disguised,  and  painted,  and  daubed,  and  overlaid,  and  bloated, 
and  swollen,  and  changed  by  this  new  treatment,  that  I  can 
hardly  see  in  it  any  Lord's  Supper  at  all. 

(3)  Again,  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  in  its  right  place,  when 
it  in  pressed  on  all  worshippers  indiscriminately,  as  a  means  of 
grace  which  all,  as  a  matter  of  course,  ought  to  use.  Once  more 
I  ask  that  no  one  will  misunderstand  me.  I  feel  as  strongly  as 
any  one,  that  to  go  to  church  as  a  worshipper,  and  yet  not  be  a 
communicant,  is  to  be  a  most  inconsistent  Christian,  and  that 
to  be  unfit  for  the  Lord's  Table  is  to  be  unfit  to  die.  But  it  is 
one  thing  to  teach  this,  and  quite  another  to  urge  all  men  to 
receive  the  sacrament  as  a  matter  of  course,  Avhether  they  are 
qualified  to  receive  it  or  not. — I  should  be  sorry  to  raise  a  false 


in  the  present  day,  under  the  attraction  of  a  highly  ornamental  and  sensuous 
ceremonial.  •  Flowers,  crucifixes,  processions,  banners,  incense,  gorgeous 
vestments,  and  the  like,  never  fail  to  draw  sucn  young  persons  together,  just 
as  honey  attracts  flies.  I  will  not  insult  the  common  sense  of  those  who  find 
these  things  attractive,  by  asking  them  whether  they  really  believe  they  get 
any  food  from  them  for  heart,  and  conscience,  and  soul.  But  I  should  like 
them  to  consider  sei-iously  what  these  things  mean.  Do  they  really  know 
that  the  doctrines  of  the  mass  and  transubstantiation  are  the  root  of  the 
whole  system?  Are  they  prepared  to  swallow  these  awful  heresies?  I 
suspect  many  are  playing  with  Ritualism  without  the  least  idea  what  it 
covers  over.  They  see  an  attractive  bait,  but  they  do  not  see  the  hook. 


180  KXOTS  UNTIED. 

accusation.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  suppose  that  any  High 
Church  clergyman  recommends,  in  naked  language,  wicked 
people  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper  that  they  may  be  made 
good.  But  I  cannot  forget  that  from  many  pulpits  people  are 
constantly  taught  that  they  are  born  again,  and  have  grace,  by 
virtue  of  their  baptism;  and  that  if  they  want  to  stir  up 
the  grace  within  them,  and  get  more  religion,  they  must 
use  all  means  of  grace,  and  specially  the  Lord's  Supper  !  And 
I  cannot  help  fearing  that  thousands  in  the  present  day  are 
practically  substituting  attendance  at  the  Lord's  Supper  for 
repentance,  faith,  and  vital  union  with  Christ,  and  flattering 
themselves  that  the  more  often  they  receive  the  Sacrament,  the 
more  they  are  justified,  and  the  more  fit  they  are  to  die.  My 
own  firm  conviction  is  that  the  Lord's  Supper  should  on  no 
account  be  placed  before  Christ,  and  that  men  should  always 
be  taught  to  come  to  Christ  by  faith  before  they  draw  near  to 
the  Lord's  Table.  I  believe  that  this  order  can  never  be 
inverted  without  bringing  in  gross  superstition,  and  doing 
immense  harm  to  men's  souls.  Those  parts  of  Christendom 
where  "  the  mass  "  is  made  everything,  and  the  Word  of  God 
hardly  ever  preached,  are  precisely  those  parts  where  there  is 
the  most  entire  absence  of  vital  Christianity.  I  wish  I  could 
say  there  was  no  fear  of  our  coming  to  this  state  of  things  in 
our  own  land.  But  when  we  hear  of  hundreds  crowding  the 
Lord's  Table  on  Sundays,  and  then  plunging  into  every  dissipa 
tion  on  week-days,  there  is  grave  reason  for  suspecting  that  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  pressed  on  many  congregations  in  a  manner 
utterly  unwarranted  by  Scripture. 

Does  any  one  ask  now  what  is  the  rightful  position  of  the 
Lord's  Supper?  I  answer  that  question  without  any  hesitation. 
I  believe  its  rightful  position,  like  that  of  holiness,  is  between 
grace  and  glory, — between  justification  and  heaven, — between 
faith  and  paradise, — between  conversion  and  the  final  rest, — 
between  the  wicket-gate  and  the  celestial  city.  It  is  not  Christ  \ 
it  is  not  conversion ;  it  is  not  a  passport  to  heaven.  It  is  for 
the  strengthening  and  refreshing  of  those  who  have  come  to 
Christ  already,  who  know  something  of  conversion,  who  are 
already  in  the  narrow  way,  and  have  fled  from  the  city  of 
destruction. 

We  cannot  read  hearts,  I  am  well  aware.     We  must  not  be 


jTHE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  181 

too  strict  and  exclusive  in  our  terms  of  communion,  and  make 
those  sad  whom  God  has  not  made 'sad.  But  we  must  never 
shrink  from  telling  the  unconverted  and  the  unbelieving  that, 
in  their  present  condition,  they  are  not  fit  to  come  to  the 
Lord's  Table.  A  faithful  clergyman,  at  any  rate,  need  never  be 
ashamed  of  taking  up  the  ground  marked  out  for  him  in  the 
Church  Catechism.  The  last  question  in  that  well-known  for 
mulary  is  as  follows  :  "  What  is  required  of  them  that  come  to 
the  Lord's  Supper  ? "  The  answer  to  that  question  is  weighty 
and  full  of  meaning.  Those  who  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper 
must  "  examine  themselves  whether  they  repent  them  truly  of 
their  former  sins,  steadfastly  purposing  to  lead  a  new  life, — 
have  a  lively  faith  in  God's  mercy  through  Christ,  and  a  thank 
ful  remembrance  of  His  death, — and  are  in  charity  with  all 
men."  Does  any  one  feel  these  things  in  his  own  heart?  Then 
we  may  boldly  tell  him  that  the  Lord's  Supper  is  placed  before 
him  by  a  merciful  Saviour,  to  help  him  in  running  the  race  set 
before  him. — Higher  than  this  we  must  not  place  the  ordin 
ance.  A  communicant  was  not  expected  to  be  an  angel,  but  a 
sinner  who  feels  his  sins,  and  trusts  in  his  Saviour. — Lower 
than  this  we  have  no  right  to  place  the  ordinance.  To  encour 
age  people  to  come  up  to  the  Table  without  knowledge,  faith, 
repentance,  or  grace,  is  to  do  them  positive  harm,  promote 
superstition,  and  displease  the  Master  of  the  feast.  He  desires 
to  see  at  His  Table  not  dead  guests,  but  living  ones, — not  the 
dead  service  of  formal  eating  and  drinking,  but  the  spiritual 
sacrifice  of  feeling  and  loving  hearts. 

I  pause  here.  I  trust  I  have  said  enough  to  make  clear  the 
views  I  hold  of  the  true  intention  and  rightful  position  of  the 
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  If,  in  expounding  these 
views,  I  have  said  anything  that  grates  on  the  feelings  of  any 
reader,  I  can  assure  him  that  I  am  unfeignedly  sorry.  Xothing 
could  be  further  from  my  desire  than  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  a 
brother. 

But  it  is  my  firm  conviction  that  the  state  of  the  Church  of 
England  requires  great  plainness  of  speech  and  distinctness 
of  statement  about  the  sacraments.  There  is  nothing,  I  am 
persuaded,  which  the  times  so  imperatively  demand  of  Evan 
gelical  Churchmen,  as  a  bold,  manly,  and  explicit  assertion  of 
the  great  principles  held  by  our  forefathers,  and  specially  about 


182  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  If  we  would  "strengthen 
the  things  that  remain  which  are  ready  to  die,"  we  must 
resolutely  go  back  to  the  old  paths,  and  maintain  old  truths 
in  the  old  way.  We  must  give  up  the  vain  idea  that  we  can 
ever  make  the  Cross  of  Christ  acceptable  by  polishing,  and 
varnishing,  and  painting,  and  gilding  it,  and  sawing  off  its 
corners.  We  must  cease  to  suppose  that  we  can  ever  lure  men 
into  being  Evangelical  by  a  trimming,  temporizing,  half-and- 
half,  milk-and-water  mode  of  exhibiting  the  doctrines  of  the 
Gospel, — or  by  wearing  borrowed  plumes,  and  dabbling  with 
High  Churchism,— or  by  loudly  proclaiming  that  we  are  not 
"party-men," — or  by  laying  aside  plain  Scriptural  phrases,  and 
praising  up  "  earnestness," — or  by  adroitly  keeping  back  truths 
that  are  likely  to  give  offence.  The  plan  is  an  utter  delusion. 
It  wins  no  enemy  :  it  disgusts  many  a  true  friend.  It  makes 
the  worldly  bystander  sneer,  and  fills  him  with  scorn.  We 
may  rest  assured  that  the  right  line  and  the  wisest  course  for 
the  Evangelical  body  to  pursue,  is  to  adhere  steadily  to  the  old 
plan  of  maintaining  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing 
imt  the  truth,  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  specially  the  truth  about 
the  two  sacraments  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  Let 
us  be  courteous,  amiable,  charitable,  affable,  considerate  for  the 
feelings  of  others,  by  all  means,  but  let  no  consideration  make 
us  keep  back  any  part  of  God's  truth. 

Let  me  close  this  paper  with  a  few  practical  suggestions. 
Assuming,  for  a  moment,  that  we  have  made  up  our  minds, 
what  is  the  intention  and  rightful  position  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  let  us  just  consider  what  the  times  demand  at  our 
1  lands. 

(1)  For  one  thing  let  us  cultivate  a  godly  simplicity  in  all 
our  statements  about  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  a  godly  jealousy 
in  all  our  practices  about  it. 

If  we  are  ministers,  let  us  often  remind  our  people  that 
there  is  no  sacrifice  in  the  Lord's  Supper, — no  real  presence 
of  Christ's  body  and  blood  in  the  bread  and  wine, — no  change 
of  the  elements,  —  no  grace  conferred  ex  opere  opcrato,  —  no 
altar  at  the  east  end  of  our  churches,  —  no  sacrificing  priest 
hood  in  the  Church  of  England.  Let  us  tell  them  these  things 
again,  and  again,  and  again,  till  our  congregations  have  them 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPEK.  183 

ingrained  into  their  very  minds  and  memories  and  souls,  and 
let  us  charge  them,  as  they  love  life,  not  to  forget  them. 

Whether  we  are  clergymen  or  laymen,  let  us  beware  of 
countenancing  or  tolerating  any  practices  in  connection  with 
the  Lord's  Supper  which  either  exceed  or  contradict  the  rubrics 
of  our  Prayer-book,  and  imply  any  belief  in  a  Romish  view 
of  this  sacrament.  Let  us  protest  in  every  possible  way  against 
any  extravagant  veneration  of  the  Communion  Table  and  the 
bread  and  wine,  as  if  Christ's  body  and  blood  were  in  these 
elements,  or  on  the  Table ;  and  let  us  never  forget  what  the 
Prayer-book  says  about  "  idolatry  to  be  abhorred  of  all  faithful 
Christians." 

We  cannot  be  too  particular  on  these  points.  The  times 
are  changed.  Things  that  we  might  have  borne  with  in  past 
years  as  matters  of  indifference,  and  comparative  trifles  in 
ceremonial,  ought  not  to  be  borne  with  any  longer.  A  few 
years  ago  I  would  have  turned  to  the  east  in  repeating  the 
Creed  in  any  parish  church,  rather  than  offend  a  neighbour's 
feelings.  I  can  do  so  no  longer,  for  I  see  great  principles  at 
stake.  Let  our  protest  on  all  these  matters  be  firm,  unflinch 
ing,  and  universal  all  over  the  country,  and  we  may  do  much 
good. 

(2)  For  another  thing,  let  us  not  be  shaken  or  troubled  by 
the  common  charge  that  we  are  not  Churchmen,  because  we 
do  not  agree  with  many  of  our  brethren  on  the  subject  of  the 
sacraments.  Such  charges  are  easily  made,  but  not  so  easily 
established.  I  trust  my  younger  brethren  especially  will  treat 
them  with  perfect  indifference  and  unconcern.  I  know  not 
which  to  admire  most,  the  impudence  or  the  ignorance  of  those 
who  make  them. 

Do  those  who  coolly  say  that  Evangelical  Churchmen  are  not 
true  Churchmen,  suppose  that  we  cannot  read1?  Do  they 
fancy  we  cannot  understand  the  meaning  of  plain  English  ? 
Do  they  think  to  persuade  us  that  our  doctrinal  views  are 
not  to  be  found  in  the  Articles,  the  Liturgy,  and  the  Homilies, 
and  in  the  writings  of  all  the  leading  divines  of  our  Church, 
up  to  the  days  of  Charles  the  First1?— 'Do  they  fancy,  for 
example,  that  we  do  not  know  that  the  Communion  Table  was 
seldom  to  b'e  found  at  the  east  end  of  the  Church,  till  the 
time  of  Laud,  but  generally  stood  in  the  chancel,  like  a  table, 


184  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

and  that  Kidley  specially  called  it  "  the  Lord's  Board  "  1  *  Alas, 
I  fear  they  presume  on  the  non-reading  propensities  of  the 
day.  They  know  too  well  that  the  reading  of  many  Evan 
gelical  people  is  seldom  carried  beyond  newspapers  and 
magazines. 

I  am  bold  to  say  that  in  the  matter  of  true,  honest,  conscien 
tious  membership  of  the  Church  of  England,  the  Evangelical 
body  need  fear  no  comparison  with  any  other  section  within  the 
Church's  pale.  We  may  safely  challenge  any  amount  of  fair 
investigation  and  inquiry.  Have  others  signed  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles  "  ex  animo  et  bond  fide  "  ?  so  have  we.  Have  others 
declared  their  full  assent  to  the  Liturgy?  so  have  we.  Do 
others  use  the  Liturgy,  adding  nothing  and  omitting  nothing, 
reverently,  solemnly,  and  audibly?  so  do  we.  Are  others 
obedient  to  Bishops  1  so  are  we.  Do  others  labour  for  the 
prosperity  of  the  Church  of  England?  so  do  we.  Do  others 
value  the  privileges  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  deprecate 
needless  separation  ?  so  do  we.  Do  others  honour  the  Lord's 
Supper,  and  press  it  on  the  attention  of  all  believing  hearers  ? 
so  do  we.  But  we  will  not  concede  that  a  man  must  follow 
Archbishop  Laud,  and  be  half  a  Romanist,  in  order  to  be  a 
Churchman.  We  .are  true  High  Churchmen  and  not  Romish 
High  Churchmen.  And  the  best  proof  of  our  Cliurchmanship 
is  the  fact  that  for  every  one  of  our  body  who  has  left  the 
Church  of  England  and  gone  over  to  Dissent,  we  can  point  to 


*  It  is  a  fact  that  the  Communion  Table  in  Gloucester  Cathedral  was 
first  placed  altar-wise  against  the  east  end  of  the  chancel  by  Laud  himself, 
when  he  was  Dean  of  Gloucester,  in  the  year  1016.  It  is  also  a  fact  that 
Bishop  Miles  Smith,  then  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  was  so  pained  and  annoyed 
by  this  change,  that  he  declared  he  would  not  enter  the  Cathedral  again 
till  the  table  was  brought  back  to  its  former  position.  He  kept  his  word, 
and  never  went  within  the  walls  of  the  Cathedral,  till  he  was  buried  there 
in  1624. 

Let  us  observe  the  language  used  by  Bishop  Kidley  in  his  injunctions  to 
the  clergy  of  the  See  of  London.  Assigning  reasons  for  the  removal  of 
altars  and  the  substitution  of  tables,  he  says:  "The  use  of  an  altar  is  to 
sacrifice  upon  ;  the  use  of  a  table  is  to  serve  men  to  eat  iipon.  Now  when 
we  come  to  the  Lord's  Board,  what  do  we  come  for?  To  sacrifice  Christ 
again,  and  to  crucify  Him  again,  or  to  feed  upon  Him  that  was  once  only 
crucified  and  offered  up  for  us  ?  If  we  come  to  feed  upon  Him,  spiritually 
to  eat  His  body,  and  spiritually  to  drink  His  blood,  which  is  the  true  use  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,  then  no  man  can  deny  that  the  form  of  a  table  is  more 
meet  than  the  form  of  an  altar." — See  Foxc's  Acts  and  Mon.  Vol.  vi. 
Seeley's  Edition,  p.  6. 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  185 

ten  High  Churchmen  who  have  left  the  Church  of  England  and 
gone  over  to  Rome. 

No  I  Evangelical  Churchmen  never  need  be  moved  by  the 
charge  that  they  are  not  true  Churchmen.  Ignorant  and  im 
pudent  men  may  make  such  charges,  but  none  except  shallow 
and  ill-read  men  will  ever  believe  them.  When  those  who 
make  them  have  answered  Dean  Goode's  work  on  the  Eucharist, 
as  well  as  his  other  works  on  Baptism  and  the  Rule  of  Faith, 
it  will  be  time  for  us  to  pay  attention  to  what  they  say.  But 
till  then  we  may  safely  act  on  the  advice  given  to  the  Jews  by 
Hezekiah  about  Rabshakeh's  railing  accusations, — "  Answer 
them  not." 

(3)  In  the  last  place,  let  me  express  an  earnest  hope  that  no 
one  who  reads  this  paper  will  ever  let  himself  lie  driven  out  of 
the  Church  of  England  by  the  rise  of  the  present  tide  of 
extreme  Ritualism,  and  the  seeming  decay  of  the  Evangelical 
body.  I  lament  that  there  should  be  a  need  for  uttering  this 
warning,  but  I  am  sure  there  is  a  cause. 

I  can  well  understand  the  feelings  which  actuate  many  in 
this  day.  They  live  perhaps  in  a  parish  where  the  Gospel  is 
never  preached  at  all,  where  Romish  doctrines  and  practices 
about  the  Lord's  Supper  carry  all  before  them, — where,  in  fact, 
they  stand  alone.  Week  after  week,  and  month  after  month, 
and  year  after  year,  they  hear  nothing  but  the  same  dreary 
round  of  phrases  about  "holy  Church,  holy  baptism,  holy 
communion,  holy  priests,  holy  altars,  holy  sacrifice,"  until  they 
are  almost  sick  of  the  word  "holy,"  and  Sunday  becomes  a 
positive  weariness  to  their  souls.  And  then  comes  up  the 
thought,  "Why  not  leave  the  Church  of  England  altogether? 
What  good  can  there  be  in  such  a  Church  as  this  1  Why  not 
become  a  Dissenter  or  a  Plymouth  Brother  ? " 

Now  I  desire  to  offer  an  affectionate  warning  to  all  who  are 
in  this  frame  of  mind.  I  ask  them  to  consider  well  what  they 
do,  and  to  take  the  advice  of  the  town-clerk  of  Ephesus, — "  To  do 
nothing  rashly."  I  entreat  them  to  call  faith  and  patience  into 
exercise,  and  at  any  rate  to  wait  long  before  they  secede,  to  pray 
much,  to  read  their  Bibles  much,  and  to  be  very  sure  that  they 
have  done  everything  that  can  be  done  to  amend  what  is  wrong. 

It  is  a  cheap  and  easy  remedy  to  secede  from  a  Church  when 
we  see  evils  round  us,  but  it  is  not  always  the  wisest  one.  To 


186  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

C"\  down  a  house  because  the  chimney  smokes,  to  chop  off  a 
d  because  we  have  cut  our  finger,  to  forsake  a  ship  because 
she  has  sprung  a  leak  and  makes  a  little  water, — all  this  we 
know  is  childish  impatience.  But  is  it  a  wise  man's  act  to 
forsake  a  Church  because  things  in  our  own  parish,  and  under 
our  own  minister  in  that  Church,  are  wrong  1  I  answer  decidedly 
and  unhesitatingly,  No ! 

It  is  not  so  sure  as  it  seems  that  we  mend  matters  by  leaving 
the  Church  of  England.  Every  man  knows  the  faults  of  his 
own  house,  but  he  never  knows  the  faults  of  another  till  he 
moves  into  it,  and  then  perhaps  he  finds  he  is  worse  off  than  he 
was  before  his  move.  There  are  often  smoky  chimneys,  and 
bad  drains,  and  draughts,  and  doors  that  will  not  shut,  and 
windows  that  will  not  open,  in  No.  2  as  well  as  in  No.  1.  All 
is  not  perfect  among  Dissenters  and  Plymouth  Brethren.  We 
may  find  to  our  cost,  if  we  join  them  in  disgust  with  the  Church 
of  England,  that  we  have  only  changed  one  sort  of  evil  for 
another,  and  that  the  chimney  smokes  in  chapel  as  well  as  in 
church. 

It  is  very  certain  that  a  sensible  and  well-instructed  layman 
can  do  an  immense  deal  of  good  to  the  Church  of  England, — 
can  check  much  evil  and  promote  Christ's  truth, — if  he  will  only 
hold  his  ground  and  use  all  lawful  means.  Public  opinion  is 
very  powerful.  Exposure  of  extreme  mal-practice  has  a  great 
effect.  Bishops  cannot  altogether  ignore  appeals  from  the  laity. 
By  much  importunity  even  the  most  cautious  occupants  of  the 
Episcopal  bench  may  be  roused  to  action.  The  press  is  open  to 
every  man.  In  short,  there  is  much  to  be  done,  though,  like 
anything  else  that  is  good,  it  may  give  much  trouble.  And  as 
for  a  man's  own  soul,  he  must  be  in  a  strange  position  if  he 
cannot  hear  the  Gospel  in  some  Church  near  him.  At  the 
worst  he  has  the  Bible,  the  throne  of  grace,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  always  near  him  at  his  own  home. 

I  say  these  things  as  one  who  is  called  a  Low  Churchman, 
and  as  one  who  feels  a  righteous  indignation  at  the  Romanizing 
proceedings  of  many  clergymen  in  our  own  day.  I  mourn  over 
the  danger  done  to  the  Church  of  England  by  the  Ritualism  of 
this  day.  I  mourn  over  the  many  driven  in  disgust  out  of  the 
pale  of  our  Zion.  But  Low  Churchman  as  I  am  called,  I  am 
a  Churchman,  and  I  am  anxious  that  no  cme  should  be  goaded 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  187 

into  doing  rash  and  hasty  things  by  the  proceedings  to  which  I 
have  alluded.  So  long  as  we  have  truth,  liberty,  and  an  un 
altered  Confession  of  faith  in  the  Church  of  England,  so  long 
I  am  convinced  that  the  way  of  patience  is  much  better  than 
the  way  of  secession. 

When  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  are  altered, — when  the  Prayer- 
book  is  revised  on  Romish  principles  and  filled  with  Popery, — 
when  the  Bible  is  withdrawn  from  the  reading  desk, — when  the 
pulpit  is  shut  against  the  Gospel, — when  the  mass  is  formally 
restored  in  every  parish  church  by  Act  of  Parliament, — when, 
in  fact,  our  present  order  of  things  in  the  Church  of  England  is 
altered  by  statute,  and  Queen,  Lords,  and  Commons  command 
that  our  parish  churches  shall  be  given  over  to  processions, 
incense,  crosses,  images,  banners,  flowers,  gorgeous  vestments, 
idolatrous  veneration  of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
mumbled  prayers,  gabbled-over  apocryphal  lessons,  short,  dry, 
sapless  sermons,  histrionic  gestures  and  postures,  bowings, 
crossings,  and  the  like, — when  these  things  come  to  pass  by  law 
and  rule,  then  it  will  be  time  for  us  all  to  leave  the  Church 
of  England.  Then  we  may  arise  and  say  with  one  voice,  "  Let 
us  depart,  for  God  is  not  here." 

But  till  that  time, — and  God  forbid  it  should  ever  come :  till 
that  time, — and  when  it  does  come,  there  will  be  a  good  many 
seceders  :  till  that  time  let  us  stand  fast,  and  fight  for  the  truth. 
Let  us  not  desert  our  post  to  save  trouble,  and  move  out  to 
please  our  adversaries,  and  spike  our  guns  to  avoid  a  battle. 
Xo  !  in  the  name  of  God,  let  us  fight  on,  even  if  we  are  like  the 
300  at  Thermopylae, — few  with  us,  many  against  us,  and  traitors 
on  every  side.  Let  us  fight  on,  and  contend  earnestly  for  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 

The  good  ship  of  the  Church  of  England  may  have  some 
rotten  planks  about  her.  The  crew  may,  many  of  them,  be 
useless  and  mutinous,  and  not  trustworthy.  But  there  are  still 
some  faithful  ones  among  them.  There  is  still  hope  for  the 
good  old  craft.  The  Great  Pilot  has  not  yet  left  her.  Let  us 
therefore  stick  by  the  ship. 

The  following  quotations  may  be  interesting  to  some  readers. 
(1)  Archbishop   Cranmer,    in   the   Preface    to    his  Answer   to    Gardiner, 
says : — 


188  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

'•They  (the  Romanists)  say  that  Christ  is  corporally  under  or  in  the  form 
of  bread  and  wine  ;  we  say  that  Christ  is  not  there,  neither  corporally  nor 
spiritually.  But  in  them  that  worthily  eat  and  drink  the  bread  and  wine 
He  is  spiritually,  and  corporally  He  is  in  heaven.— I  mean  not  that  Christ  is 
spiritually,  either  in  the  table,  or  in  the  bread  and  wine  that  be  set  on  the 
table,  but  I  mean  that  He  is  present  in  the  ministration  and  receiving  of  that 
Holy  Supper,  according  to  His  own  institution  and  ordinance.''— See  Goodc 
on  the  Eucharist,  vol.  ii.,  p.  772. 

(2)  Bishop  Ridley,  in  his  Disputation  at  Oxford,  says  :— 

"The  circumstances  of  the  Scripture,  the  analogy  and  proportion  of  the 
sacraments,  and  the  testimony  of  the  faithful  Fathers,  ought  to  rule  us  in 
taking  the  meaning  of  the  Holy  Scripture  touching  the  sacraments. 

But  the  words  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  circumstances  of  the  Scripture 
the  analogy  of  the  sacraments,  and  the  sayings  of  the  Fathers,  do  most 
effectually  and  plainly  prove  a  figurative  speech  in  the  words  of  the  Lord's 
Supper. 

"Therefore  a  figurative  sense  and  meaning  is  specially  to  be  received  in 
these  words,  'This  is  My  body.'"— See  Goode  on  the  Eucharist,  vol.  ii.,  p.  76<>. 

(3)  Bishop   Hooper,  in  his  Brief  and  Clear  Confession  of  the  Christ iun 
Faith,  says  : — 

"  I  believe  that  all  this  sacrament  consisteth  in  the  use  thereof'  so  that 
without  the  right  use  the  bread  and  wine  in  nothing  differ  from  other  common 
bread  and  wine  that  is  commonly  used  :  and,  therefore,  I  do  not  believe  that 
the  body  of  Christ  can  be  contained,  hid,  or  inclosed  in  the  bread  under  the 
bread,  or  with  the  bread,— neither  the  blood  in  the  wine,  under  the  wine  or 
with  the  wine.  But  I  believe  and  confess  the  only  body  of  Christ  to  be  in 
heaven,  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father ;  and  that  always,  and  as  often  as 
we  use  this  bread  and  wine  according  to  this  ordinance  and  institution  of 
Christ,  we  do  verily  and  indeed  receive  His  body  and  blood  "—Hoonfr^ 
Works.  Parker  Society's  Edition,  vol.  ii.,  p.  48. 

(4)  Bishop  Jewel  says  : — 

"Let  us  examine  what  difference  there  is  between  the  body  of  Christ  and 
the  sacrament  of  His  body. 

"The  difference  is  this:  a  sacrament  is  a  figure  or  token;  the  body  of 
Christ  is  figured  or  tokened.  The  sacramental  bread  is  bread,  it  is  not  the 
body  of  Christ ;  the  body  of  Christ  is  flesh,  it  is  not  bread.  The  bread  is 
beneath ;  the  body  is  above.  The  bread  is  on  the  table ;  the  body  is  in 
heaven.  The  bread  is  m  the  mouth  ;  the  body  is  in  the  heart.  The  bread 
fcedeth  the  body ;  the  body  feedeth  the  soul.  The  bread  shall  come  to 
nothing  ;  the  body  is  immortal,  and  shall  not  perish.  The  bread  is  vile  •  the 
body  of  Christ  is  glorious.  Such  a  difference  is  there  between  the  bread 
which  is  a  sacrament  of  the  body,  and  the  body  of  Christ  itself  The  sacra 
ment  is  eaten  as  well  of  the  wicked  as  of  the  faithful.  The* body  is  only 
eaten  of  the  faithful.  The  sacrament  may  be  eaten  unto  judgment  •  the 
body  cannot  be  eaten  but  unto  salvation.  Without  the  sacrament  we  may 
be  saved;  but  without  the  body  of  Christ  we  have  no  salvation  :  we  cannot 
e  saved.  —Jewel  on  the  Sacrament.  Parker  Society's  Edition,  vol.  iv.,  p.  1121. 

(5)  Richard  Hooker,  in  his  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  says  :— 

"The  real  presence  of  Christ's  most  blessed  body  and  blood  is  not  to  be 
sought  for  in  the  sacrament,  but  in  the  worthy  receiver  of  the  sacrament. 

And  with  this  the  very  order  of  our  Saviour's  words  aoreeth      First 
take  and  eat;'  then,  'this  is  My  body  which  is  broken  for  you  '     First' 


THE  LORDS  SUITEK.  189 

'  drink  ye  all  of  this  ; '  then  followeth,  '  this  is  My  blood  of  the  New  Testa 
ment,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins.'  I  see  not  which  way 
it  should  be  gathered  by  the  words  of  Christ,— when  and  where  the  bread  is 
His  body,  or  the  wine  His  blood,  but  only  in  the  very  heart  and  soul  of  him 
which  receiveth  them.  As  for  the  sacraments,  they  really  exhibit,  but  for 
aught  we  can  gather  out  of  that  which  is  written  of  them,  they  are  not  really 
nor  do  really  contain  in  themselves  that  grace  which  with  them  or  by  them 
it  pleaseth  God  to  bestow. "—Hooker,  Eccl.  Pol.,  book  v.,  p.  (37. 

(6)  Waterland  says  :— 

"The  Fathers^ well  understood  that  to  make  Christ's  natural  body  the  real 
sacrifice  of  the  Eucharist,  would  not  only  be  absurd  in  reason  but  highly  pre 
sumptuous  and  profane  :  and  that  to  make  the  outward  symbols  a  proper 
sacrifice,  a  material  sacrifice,  would  be  entirely  contrary  to  Gospel  principles, 
degrading  the  Christian  sacrifice  into  a  Jewish  one,  yea,  and  making  it  much 
lower  and  meaner  than  the  Jewish  one,  both  in  value  and  dignity.  The  right 
way,  therefore,  was  to  make  the  sacrifice  spiritual,  and  it  could  be  no  other 
upon  Gospel  principles." — Works,  vol.  iv.,  p.  762. 

"  No  one  has  any  authority  or  right  to  offer  Christ  as  a  sacrifice,  whether 
really  or  symbolically,  but  Christ  Himself  ;  such  a  sacrifice  is  His  sacrifice, 
not  ours,— offered  for  us,  not  by  us,  to  God  the  Father. "—  Works,  vol  iv  ' 
p.  753. 


IX. 
THE  KEAL  PRESENCE. 

"  If  Thy  presence  yo  not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hence."- 
EXOD.  xxxiii.  15. 

THERE  is  a  word  in  the  text  that  heads  this  page  which 
demands  the  attention  of  all  English  Christians  in  this  day. 
That  word  is  "presence."  There  is  a  religious  subject  bound 
up  with  that  word,  on  which  it  is  most  important  to  have  clear, 
distinct,  and  Scriptural  views.  That  subject  is  the  "presence 
of  God,"  and  specially  the  "  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ " 
with  Christian  people.  What  is  that  presence  1  Where  is  that 
presence  ?  What  is  the  nature  of  that  presence  1  To  these 
questions  I  propose  to  supply  answers. 

I.  I   shall   consider, "first,  the   general   doctrine  of   God's 

presence  in  the  world. 
II.  I  shall  consider,  secondly,  the  special  doctrine  of  Christ's 

real  spiritual  presence. 

III.  I  shall  consider,  thirdly,  the  special  doctrine  of  Christ's 
real  bodi/y  presence. 

The  whole  subject  deserves  serious  thought.  If  we  suppose 
that  this  is  a  mere  question  of  controversy,  which  only  concerns 
theological  partisans,  we  have  yet  much  to  learn.  It  is  a 
subject  which  lies  at  the  very  roots  of  saving  religion.  It  is  a 
subject  which  is  inseparably  tied  up  with  one  of  the  most 
precious  articles  of  the  Christian  faith.  It  is  a  subject  about 
which  it  is  most  dangerous  to  be  wrong.  An  error  here  may 
first  lead  a  man  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  then  land  him 
finally  in  the  gulf  of  infidelity.  Surely  it  is  worth  while  to 
examine  carefully  the  doctrine  of  the  "  presence  "  of  God  and  of 
His  Christ, 

190 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  191 

I.  The  first  subject  we  have  to  consider,  is  the  general 
doctrine  of  God's  presence  in  the  world. 

The  teaching  of  the  Bible  on.  this  point  is  clear,  plain,  and 
unmistakable.  God  is  everywhere.  There  is  no  place  in 
heaven  or  earth  where  He  is  not.  There  is  no  place  in  air  or 
land  or  sea,  no  place  above  ground  or  under  ground,  no  place  in 
town  or  country,  no  place  in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  or  America, 
where  God  is  not  always  present.  Enter  into  your  closet  and 
lock  the  door :  God  is  there.  Climb  to  the  top  of  the  highest 
mountain,  where  not  even  an  insect  moves:  God  is  there.  Sail 
to  the  most  remote  island  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  where  the  foot 
of  man  never  trod :  God  is  there.  He  is  always  near  us, — 
seeing,  hearing,  observing,  knowing  every  action,  and  deed,  and 
word,  and  whisper,  and  look,  and  thought,  and  motive,  and 
secret  of  every  one  of  us,  and  everywhere. 

What  saith  the  Scripture  1  It  is  written  in  Job,  "  His  eyes 
are  upon  the  ways  of  man,  and  He  seeth  all  his  goings.  There 
is  no  darkness,  nor  shadow  of  death,  where  the  workers  of 
iniquity  may  hide  themselves."  (Job  xxxiv.  21.)  It  is  written 
in  Proverbs,  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  behold 
ing  the  evil  and  the  good."  (Prov.  xv.  3.)  It  is  written  in 
Jeremiah,  "  Thine  eyes  are  open  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  sons 
of  men  :  to  give  every  one  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings.' 
(Jer.  xxxii.  19.)  It  is  written  in  the  Psalms,  "Thou  knowest 
my  down-sitting  and  mine  up-rising  :  Thou  understandest  my 
thought  afar  off.  Thou  compassest  my  path,  and  my  lying 
down,  and  art  acquainted  with  all  my  ways.  For  there  is  not  a 
word  in  my  tongue,  but,  lo,  0  Lord,  Thou  knowest  it  altogether. 
Whither  shall  I  go  from  Thy  Spirit?  or  whither  shall  I  flee 
from  Thy  presence?  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,  Thou  art 
there  :  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,  Thou  art  there.  If  I 
take  the  wings  of  the  morning,  and  dwell  in  .the  uttermost  parts 
of  the  sea ;  even  there  shall  Thy  hand  lead  me,  and  Thy  right 
hand  shall  hold  me.  If  I  say,  Surely  the  darkness  shall  cover 
me ;  even  the  night  shall  be  light  about  me.  Yea,  the  dark 
ness  hideth  not  from  Thee ;  but  the  night  shineth  as  the  day  : 
the  darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike  to  Thee."  (Psalm 
cxxxix.  2-12.) 

Such  language  as  this  confounds  and  overwhelms  us.  The 
doctrine  before  us  is  one  which  we  cannot  fully  understand. 


192  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Precisely  so.  David  said  the  same  thing  about  it  almost  three 
thousand  years  ago.  "  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for 
me  :  it  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  (Psalni  cxxxix.  6.) 
But  it  does  not  follow  that  the  doctrine  is  not  true,  because  we 
cannot  understand  it.  It  is  the  weakness  of  our  poor  minds 
and  intellects  that  we  must  blame,  and  not  the  doctrine. 

There  are  scores  of  things  in  the  world  around  us,  which  few 
can  understand  or.  explain,  yet  no  sensible  man  refuses  to  believe. 
How  this  earth  is  ever  rolling  round  the  sun  with  enormous 
swiftness,  while  we  feel  no  motion, — how  the  moon  affects  the 
tides,  and  makes  them  rise  and  fall  twice  every  twenty-four 
hours, — how  millions  of  perfectly  organized  living  creatures 
exist  in  every  pint  of  pond-water,  which  our  naked  eye  cannot 
see, — all  these  are  things  well  known  to  men  of  science,  while 
most  of  us  could  not  explain  them  for  our  lives.  And  shall  we, 
in  the  face  of  such  facts,  presume  to  doubt  that  God  is  every 
where  present,  for  no  better  reason  than  this,  that  we  cannot 
understand  it  1  Let  us  never  dare  to  say  so  again. 

How  many  things  there  are  about  God  Himself  which  we 
cannot  possibly  understand,  and  yet  we  must  believe  them, 
unless  so  senseless  as  to  be  atheists !  Who  can  explain  the 
eternity  of  God,  the  infinite  power  and  wisdom  of  God,  or  the 
works  of  God  in  creation  and  providence  ?  Who  can  compre 
hend  a  Being  who  is  a  Spirit,  without  body,  parts,  or  passions  1 
How  can  a  material  creature,  who  can  only  be  in  one  place  at 
one  time,  take  in  the  idea  of  an  immaterial  Being,  who  existed 
before  creation,  who  formed  this  world  by  His  word  out  of 
.nothing,  and  who  can  be  everywhere  and  see  everything  at  one 
and  the  same  time  1  Where,  in  a  word,  is  there  a  single 
attribute  of  God  that  mortal  man  can  thoroughly  comprehend  ? 
Where,  then,  is  the  common  sense  or  wisdom  of  refusing  to 
believe  the  doctrine  of  God  being  present  everywhere,  merely 
because  our  minds  cannot  take  it  in  ?  Well  says  the  Book  of 
Job,  "Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God?  canst  thou  find 
out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  1  It  is  high  as  heaven ;  what 
canst  thou  do  ?  deeper  than  hell ;  what  canst  thou  know  ? " 
(Job  xi.  7,  8.) 

Let  us  have  high  and  honourable  thoughts  of  the  God  with 
whom  we  have  to  do  while  we  live,  and  before  whose  bar  we 
must  stand  when  we  die.  Let  us  seek  to  have  just  notions  of 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  193 

His  power,  His  wisdom,  His  eternity,  His  holiness,  His  perfect 
knowledge,  His  "  presence "  everywhere.  One  half  the  sin 
committed  by  mankind  arises  from  wrong  views  of  their  Maker 
and  Judge.  Men  are  reckless  and  wicked,  because  they  do  not 
think  that  God  sees  them.  They  do  things  they  would  never 
do  if  they  really  believed  they  were  under  the  eyes  of  the 
Almighty.  It  is  written,  "  Thou  thoughtest  that  I  was  altogether 
such  an  one  as  thyself."  (Psalm  1.  21.)  It  is  written  again, 
"They  say  the  Lord  shall  not  see,  neither  shall  the  God  of 
Jacob  regard  it.  Understand,  ye  brutish  among  the  people : 
and  ye  fools,  when  will  ye  be  wise  1  He  that  planted  the  ear, 
shall  He  not  hear?  He  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  He -not 
see?"  (Psalm  xciv.  7-9.)  ISTo  wonder  that  holy  Job  said  in 
his  best  moments,  "When  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  Him." 
(Job  xxiii.  15.) 

"  What  is  your  God  like  1 "  said  a  sneering  infidel  one  day  to 
a  poor  Christian.  "  What  is  this  God  of  yours  like  :  this  God 
about  whom  you  make  such  ado  ?  Is  He  great  or  is  He  small  ?" 
"  My  God,"  was  the  wise  reply,  "  is  a  great  and  a  small  God  at 
the  same  time :  so  great  that  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  Him,  and  yet  so  small  that  He  can  dwell  in  the  heart 
of  a  poor  sinner  like  me." — "Where  is  your  God,  my  boy?" 
said  another  infidel  to  a  child  whom  he  saw  coming  out  of  a 
school  where  the  Bible  was  taught.  "  Where  is  your  God 
about  whom  you  have  been  reading  ?  Show  Him  to  me,  and  I 
will  give  you  an  orange."  "  Show  me  where  He  is  not,"  was 
the  answer,  "  and  I  will  give  you  two.  My  God  is  everywhere." 
—Well  is  it  said  in  a  certain  place,  "  God  hath  chosen  the 
weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  that  are 
mighty."  "Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings  Thou 
hast  perfected  praise,"  (2  Cor.  i.  27  ;  Matt.  xxi.  16.) 

However  hard  to  understand  this  doctrine  may  be,  it  is  one 
which  is  most  useful  and  wholesome  for  our  souls.  To  keep 
continually  in  mind  that  God  is  always  present  with  us,  to  live 
always  as  in  God's  sight,  to  act  and  speak  and  think  as  under 
His  eye, — all  this  is  eminently  calculated  to  have  a  good  effect 
upon  our  souls.  Wide,  and  deep,  and  searching,  and  piercing 
is  the  influence  of  that  one  thought,  "  Thou  God  seest  me." 

(a)  The  thought  of  God's  presence  is  a  loud  call  to  humility. 
How  much  that  is  evil  and  defective  must  the  All-seeing  eye  see 

N 


194  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

in  every  one  of  us !  How  small  a  part  of  our  character  is 
really  known  by  man  !  "Man  looketh  on  the  outward  appear 
ance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7.) 
Man  does  not  always  see  us,  but  the  Lord  is  always  looking 
at  us,  morning,  noon,  and  night.  "Who  has  not  need  to  say, 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  "  1 

(b)  The  thought  of  God's  presence  is  a  crushing  proof  of  our 
need  of  Jesus  Christ.     What  hope  of  salvation  could  we  have 
if  there  was  not  a  Mediator  between  God  and  man  ?     Before 
the  eye  of  an  ever-present  God,  our  best  righteousness  is  filthy 
rags,   and  our  best  doings  are  full  of  imperfection.      Where 
should  we  be  if  there  was  not  a  Fountain  open  for  all  sin,  even 
the  blood  of  Christ  ?     Without  Christ,  the  prospect  of  death, 
judgment,  and  eternity  would  drive  us  to  despair. 

(c)  The  thought  of  God's  presence  teaches  the  folly  of  hypocrisy 
in  religion.     What  can  be  more  silly  and  childish  than  to  wear 
a  mere  cloak  of  Christianity  while  we  inwardly  cleave  to  sin, 
when  God   is  ever  looking  at   us   and   sees   us   through  and 
through?      It  is    easy  to    deceive  ministers  and  fellow-Chris 
tians,  because    they  often  see  us  only  upon    Sundays.      But 
God    sees    us    morning,    noon,    and    night,    and    cannot    be 
deceived.      Oh,  whatever  we  are  in  religion,  let   us   be   real 
and  true ! 

(d)  The  thought  of  God's  presence  is  a  check  and  curb  on  the 
inclination  to  sin.     The  recollection  that  there  is  One  always 
near  us  and  observing  us,  who  will  one  day  have  a  reckoning 
with  all  mankind,  may  well  keep  us  back  from  evil.     Happy 
are  those  sons  and  daughters  who,  when  they  leave  the  family 
home,  and  launch   forth  into   the  world,  carry  with  them  the 
abiding  remembrance  of  God's  eye.     "  My  father  and  mother 
do   not  see  me,    but   God   does."     This   was  the  feeling  that 
preserved  Joseph    when  tempted  in    a   foreign    land:    "How 
can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against  God  1 "    (Gen. 
xxxix.  9.) 

(e)  The  thought  of  God's  presence  is  a  spur  to  the  pursuit  of 
true   holiness.      The   highest  standard  of  sanctincation  is  to 
"walk  with  God"  as  Enoch  did,  and  to  "walk  before  God" 
as  Abraham  did.     Where  is  the  man  who  would  not  strive  to 
live  so  as  to  please  God,  if  he  realized  that   God  was  always 
standing  at  his  right  hand  1     To  get  away  from   God  is  the 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE. 

secret  aim  of  the  sinner ;  to  get  nearer  to  God  is  the  longing 
desire  of  the  saint.  The  real  servants  of  the  Lord  are  "  a 
people  near  unto  Him."  (Psalm  cxlviii.  14.) 

(/)  The  thought  of  God's  presence  is  a  comfort  in  time  of  public 
trouble.  When  Avar  and  famine  and  pestilence  break  in  upon 
a  land,  when  the  nations  are  rent  and  torn  by  inward  divisions, 
and  all  order  seems  in  peril,  it  is  cheering  to  reflect  that  God 
sees  and  knows  and  is  close  at  hand, — that  the  King  of  kings 
is  near  and  not  asleep.  He  that  saw  the  Spanish  Armada  sail 
to  invade  England,  and  scattered  it  with  the  breath  of  His 
mouth, — He  that  looked  on  when  the  schemers  of  the  Gun 
powder  Plot  were  planning  the  destruction  of  Parliament, — this 
God  .is  not  changed. 

(g)  The  thought  of  God's  presence  is  a  strong  consolation 
in  private  trial.  We  may  be  driven  from  home  and  native 
land,  and  placed  at  the  other  side  of  the  world  ;  we  may  be 
bereaved  of  wife  and  children  and  friends,  and  left  alone  in  our 
family,  like  the  last  tree  in  a  forest :  but  we  can  never  go  to 
any  place  where  God  is  not,  and  under  no  circumstances  can  we 
be  left  entirely  alone. 

Such  thoughts  as  these  are  useful  and  profitable  for  us  all. 
That  man  must  be  in  a  poor  state  of  soul  who  does  not  feel 
them  to  be  so.  Let  it  be  a  settled  principle  in  our  religion 
never  to  forget  that  in  every  condition  and  place  we  are  under 
the  eye  of  God.  It  need  not  frighten  us  if  we  are  true 
believers.  The  sins  of  all  believers  are  cast  behind  God's 
back,  and  even  the  all-seeing  God  sees  no  spot  in  them.  It 
ought  to  cheer  us,  if  our  Christianity  is  genuine  and  sincere, 
We  can  then  appeal  to  God  with  confidence,  like  David,  and 
say,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart :  try  me,  and 
know  my  thoughts :  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me, 
and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting."  (Psalm  cxxxix.  23,  24.) 
Great  is  the  mystery  of  God's  presence  everywhere ;  but  the 
true  man  of  God  can  look  at  it  without  fear. 

II.  The  second  thing  which  I  propose  to  consider,  is  the  real 
spiritual  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

In  considering  this  branch  of  our  subject,  we  must  carefully 
remember  that  we  are  speaking  of  One  who  is  God  and  man 
in  one  Person.  We  are  speaking  of  One  who  in  infinite  love 


196  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

to  our  souls,  took  man's  nature,  and  was  born  of  the  Virgin 
Mary,  was  crucified,  dead,  and  buried,  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  sins, 
and  yet  never  ceased  for  a  moment  to  be  very  God.  The 
peculiar  "  presence "  of  this  blessed  Person,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  with  His  Church,  is  the  point  which  I  want  to  unfold 
in  this  part  of  my  paper.  I  want  to  show  that  He  is  really 
and  truly  present  with  His  believing  people,  spiritually  or  after 
the  manner  of  a  spirit,  and  that  His  presence  is  one  of  the  grand 
privileges  of  a  true  Christian.  What  then  is  the  real  spiritual 
"  presence  "  of  Christ,  and  wherein  does  it  consist  ?  Let  us  see. 

(a)  There  is  a  real  spiritual  presence  of  Christ  with  that 
Church  which  is  His  mystical  body, — the  blessed  company  of 
all  faithful  people.  This  is  the  meaning  of  that  parting  saying 
of  our  Lord  to  His  Apostles,  "  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world."  (Matt,  xxviii.  20.)  To  the  visible 
Church  of  Christ  that  saying  did  not  strictly  belong.  Rent  by 
divisions,  denied  by  heresies,  disgraced  by  superstitions  and 
corruptions,  the  visible  Church  has  often  given  mournful  proof 
that  Christ  does  not  always  dwell  in  it.  Many  of  its  branches 
in  the  course  of  years,  like  the  Churches  of  Asia,  have  decayed 
and  passed  away.  It  is  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  composed 
of  God's  elect,  the  Church  of  which  every  member  is  truly 
sanctified,  the  Church  of  believing  and  penitent  men  and 
women, — this  is  the  Church  to  which  alone,  strictly  speaking, 
the  promise  belongs.  This  is  the  Church  in  which  there  is 
always  a  real  spiritual  "  presence  "  of  Christ. 

There  is  not  a  visible  Church  on  earth,  however  ancient  and 
well  ordered,  which  is  secure  against  falling  away.  Scripture 
and  history  alike  testify  that,  like  the  Jewish  Church,  it  may 
become  corrupt,  and  depart  from  the  faith,  and  departing  from 
the  faith,  may  die.  And  why  is  this  3  Simply  because  Christ 
has  never  promised  to  any  visible  Church  that  He  will  be 
with  it  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  The  word 
that  He  inspired  St.  Paul  to  write  to  the  Roman  Church  is 
the  same  word  that  He  sends  to  every  visible  Church  through 
out  the  world,  whether  Episcopal,  Presbyterian,  or  Congrega 
tional  :  "  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear  : — continue  in  God's  good 
ness  :  otherwise  thou  also  slialt  be  cut  off."  *  (Rom.  xi.  20-22.) 

*  "  Whatsoever  we  read  in  Scripture  concerning  the  endless  love  and  the 
saving  mercy  which  God  showeth  towards  His  Church,  the  only  proper 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  197 

On  the  other  hand,  the  perpetual  presence  of  Christ  with 
that  Holy  Catholic  Church,  which  is  His  body,  is  the  great 
secret  of  its  continuance  and  security.  It  lives  on,  and  cannot 
die,  because  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  it.  It  is  a  ship 
tossed  with  storm  and  tempest;  but  it  cannot  sink,  because 
Christ  is  on  board.  Its  members  may  be  persecuted,  oppressed, 
imprisoned,  robbed,  beaten,  beheaded,  or  burned ;  but  His  true 
Church  is  never  extinguished.  It  lives  on  through  fire  and 
water.  When  crushed  in  one  land,  it  springs  up  in  another. 
The  Pharaohs,  the  Herods,  the  Neros,  the  Julians,  the  bloody 
Marys,  the  Charles  the  Ninths,  have  laboured  in  vain  to  destroy 
this  Church.  They  slay  their  thousands,  and  then  go  to  their 
own  place.  The  true  Church  outlives  them  all.  It  is  a  bush 
that  is  often  burning,  and  yet  is  never  consumed.  And  what 
is  the  reason  of  all  this  ?  It  is  the  perpetual  "  presence  "  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

(b)  There  is  a  real  spiritual  "presence"  of  Christ  in  the 
heart  of  every  true  believer.  This  is  what  St.  Paul  meant 
when  he  speaks  of  "Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart  by  faith." 
(Eph.  iii.  17.)  This  is  what  our  Lord  meant  when  He  says 
of  the  man  that  loves  Him  and  keeps  His  Word,  "  We  will 
come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him."  (John  xiv. 
23.)  In  every  believer,  whether  high  or  low,  or  rich  or  poor, 
or  young  or  old,  or  feeble  or  strong,  the  Lord  Jesus  dwells,  and 
keeps  up  His  work  of  grace  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
As  He  dwells  in  the  whole  Church,  which  is  His  body, — keep 
ing,  guarding,  preserving,  and  sanctifying  it, — so  does  He  con 
tinually  dwell  in  every  member  of  that  body,  in  the  least  as 
well  as  in  the  greatest.  This  "  presence  "  is  the  secret  of  all 
that  peace,  and  hope,  and  joy,  and  comfort,  which  believers 
feel.  All  spring  from  their  having  a  Divine  tenant  within 
their  hearts.  This  "  presence  "  is  the  secret  of  their  continuance 

subject  thereof  is  this  Church  which  is  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  Con 
cerning  this  flock  it  is  that  our  Lord  and  Saviour  hath  promised,  '  I  give 
unto  them  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck 
them  out  of  My  hand.'" — Hooker,  EccL  Polity,  book  iii.,  ch.  i.,  p.  2. 

These  are  wise  words,  and  words  that  all  Hooker's  professed  admirers 
would  do  well  to  ponder  and  digest.  Few  things  are  so  mischievous  as  the 
common  habit  of  applying  to  such  mixed  and  corrupt  bodies  as  visible 
Churches  those  blessed  promises  of  perpetuity  and  preservation  which  belong 
to  none  but  the  company  of  true  believers. 


198  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

in  the  faith,  and  perseverance  unto  the  end.  In  themselves 
they  are  weak  and  unstable  as  water.  But  they  have  within 
them  One  who  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,"  and  will  not 
allow  His  work  to  be  overthrown.  Not  one  bone  of  Christ's 
mystical  body  shall  ever  be  broken.  Not  one  lamb  of  Christ's 
flock  shall  ever  be  plucked  out  of  His  hand.  The  house  in 
which  Christ  is  pleased  to  dwell,  though  it  be  but  a  cottage, 
is  one  which  the  devil  shall  never  break  into  and  make  his 
own. 

(c)  There  is  a  real  spiritual   "  presence "  of  Christ  wherever 
His  believing  people  meet  together  in  His  name.     This  is  the 
plain  meaning  of  that  famous  saying,  "  Wherever  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  thejnidst  of 
them."      (Matt,   xviii.    20.)      The   smallest  gathering  of  true 
Christians  for  the  purposes  of  prayer  or  praise,  or  holy  confer 
ence,  or  reading  God's  Word,  is  sanctified  by  the  best  of  company. 
The  great  or  rich  or  noble  may  not  be  there,  but  the  King  of 
kings  Himself  is  present,  and  angels  look  on  with  reverence. 
The  grandest  buildings  that  men  have  reared  for  religious  uses 
are  often  no  better  than  whitened  sepulchres,  destitute  of  any 
holy  influence,  because  given  up  to  superstitious  ceremonies, 
and  rilled  to  no  purpose  with  crowds  of  formal  worshippers, 
who  come  unfeeling,  and  go  unfeeling  away.     No  worship  is  of 
any  use  to  souls  at  which  Christ  is  not  present.      Incense, 
banners,   pictures,  flowers,  crucifixes,   and  long  processions  of 
richly-dressed  ecclesiastics  are  a  poor  substitute  for  the  great 
High  Priest  Himself.     The  meanest  room  where  a  few  penitent 
believers  assemble  in  the  name  of  Jesus  is  a  consecrated  and 
most  holy  place  in  the  sight  of  God.     They  that  worship  God 
in  spirit  and  truth  never  draw  near  to  Him  in  vain.    Often  they 
go   home   from    such   meetings   warmed,    cheered,    stablished, 
strengthened,    comforted,    and   refreshed.       And   what   is   the 
secret  of  their  feelings  ?     They  have  had  with  them  the  great 
Master  of  assemblies,  even  Christ  Himself. 

(d)  There  is  a  real  spiritual  "  presence "  of  Christ  with  the 
hearts  of  all  true-hearted  communicants  in  the  Lord's  Supper. 
Rejecting  as  I  do,  with  all  my  heart,  the  baseless  notion  of  any 
bod ily  presence  of  Christ  on  the  Lord's  Table,  I  can  never  doubt 
that  the  great  ordinance  appointed  by  Christ  has  a  special  and 
peculiar  blessing  attached  to  it.     That  blessing,  I  believe,  con- 


THE  EEAL  PRESENCE.  199 

sists  in  a  special  and  peculiar  presence  of  Christ,  vouchsafed  to 
the  heart  of  every  believing  communicant.  That  truth  appears 
to  me  to  lie  under  those  wonderful  words  of  institution,  "  Take, 
eat:  this  is  My  body."  "Drink  ye  all  of  this:  this  is  My 
blood."  Those  words  were  never  meant  to  teach  that  the  bread 
in  the  Lord's  Supper  was  literally  Christ's  body,  or  the  Avine 
literally  Christ's  blood.  But  our  Lord  did  mean  to  teach  that 
every  right-hearted  believer,  who  ate  that  bread  and  drank  that 
wine  in  remembrance  of  Christ,  would  in  so  doing  find  a  special 
presence  of  Christ  in  his  heart,  and  a  special  revelation  of 
Christ's  sacrifice  of  His  own  body  and  blood  to  his  soul.  In  a 
word,  there  is  a  special  spiritual  "  presence "  of  Christ  in  the 
Lord's  Supper,  which  they  only  know  who  are  faithful  com 
municants,  and  which  they  who  are  not  communicants  miss 
altogether. 

After  all,  the  experience  of  all  the  best  servants  of  Christ  is 
the  best  proof  that  there  is  a  special  blessing  attached  to  the 
Lord's  Supper.  You  will  rarely  find  a  true  believer  who  will 
not  say  that  he  reckons  this  ordinance  one  of  his  greatest  helps 
and  highest  privileges.  He  will  tell  you  that  if  he  was  deprived 
of  it,  he  would  find  the  loss  of  it  a  great  drawback  to  his  soul. 
He  will  tell  you  that  in  eating  that  bread,  and  drinking  that 
cup,  he  realizes  something  of  Christ  dwelling  in  him  ;  and  finds 
his  repentance  deepened,  his  faith  increased,  his  knowledge  en 
larged,  his  graces  strengthened.  Eating  the  bread  with  faith, 
he  feels  closer  communion  with  the  body  of  Christ.  Drinking 
the  wine  with  faith,  he  feels  closer  communion  with  the  blood 
of  Christ.  He  sees  more  clearly  what  Christ  is  to  him,  and 
what  he  is  to  Christ.  He  understands  more  thoroughly  what 
it  is  to  be  one  with  Christ  and  Christ  with  him.  He  feels  the 
roots  of  his  spiritual  life  insensibly  watered,  and  the  work  of 
grace  within  him  insensibly  built  up  and  carried  forward.  He 
cannot  explain  or  define  it.  It  is  a  matter  of  experience,  which 
no  one  knows  but  he  who  feels  it.  And  the  true  explanation 
of  the  whole  matter  is  this, — there  is  a  special  and  spiritual 
"  presence "  of  Christ  in  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 
Jesus  meets  those  who  draw  near  to  His  Table  with  a  true 
heart,  in  a  special  and  peculiar  way. 

(?)  Last,  but  not  least,  there  is  a  real  spiritual  "  presence  " 
of  Christ  vouchsafed  to  believers  in  special  times  of  trouble  and 


200  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

difficulty.  This  is  the  presence  of  which  St.  Paul  received 
assurance  on  more  than  one  occasion.  At  Corinth,  for  instance, 
it  is  written,  "Then  spake  the  Lord  to  Paul  in  the  night  by  a 
vision,  Be  not  afraid,  but  speak,  and  hold  not  thy  peace :  for  I 
am  with  thee,  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee." 
(Acts  xviii.  9,  10.)  At  Jerusalem,  again,  when  the  apostle  was 
in  danger  of  his  life,  it  is  written,  "  The  night  following  the 
Lord  stood  by  him,  and  said,  Be  of  good  cheer,  Paul ;  for  as 
thou  hast  testified  of  Me  in  Jerusalem,  so  must  thou  bear 
witness  also  in  Rome."  (Acts  xxiii.  11.)  Again,  in  the  last 
Epistle  St.  Paul  wrote,  we  find  him  saying,  "At  my  first  answer 
no  man  stood  with  me,  but  all  men  forsook  me :  I  pray  God 
that  it  may  not  be  laid  to  their  charge.  Notwithstanding  the 
Lord  stood  with  me  and  strengthened  me."  (2  Tim.  iv.  16, 17.) 
This  is  the  account  of  the  singular  and  miraculous  courage 
which  many  of  God's  children  have  occasionally  shown  under 
circumstances  of  unusual  trial,  in  every  age  of  the  Church. 
When  the  three  children  were  cast  into  the  fiery  furnace, 
and  preferred  the  risk  of  death  to  idolatry,  we  are  told  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  exclaimed,  "  Lo,  I  see  four  men  loose,  walking 
in  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and  they  have  no  hurt ;  and  the  form  of 
the  fourth  is  like  the  Son  of  God."  (Dan.  iii.  25.)  When 
Stephen  was  beset  by  bloody-minded  enemies  on  the  very  point 
of  stoning  him,  we  read  that  he  said,  "  Behold,  I  see  heaven 
opened,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of 
God."  (Acts  vii.  56.)  Nor  ought  we  to  doubt  that  this  special 
presence  was  the  secret  of  the  fearlessness  with  which  many 
early  Christian  martyrs  met  their  deaths,  and  of  the  marvellous 
courage  which  the  Marian  martyrs,  such  as  Bradford,  Latimer, 
and  Rogers,  displayed  at  the  stake.  A  peculiar  sense  of  Christ 
being  with  them  is  the  right  explanation  of  all  these  cases. 
These  men  died  as  they  did  because  Christ  was  with  them. 
Nor  ought  any  believer  to  fear  that  the  same  helping  presence 
will  be  with  him,  whenever  his  own  time  of  special  need 
arrives.  Many  are  over-careful  about  what  they  shall  do  in 
their  last  sickness,  and  on  the  bed  of  death.  Many  disquiet 
themselves  with  anxious  thoughts  as  to  what  they  would  do  if 
husband  or  wife  died,  or  if  they  were  suddenly  turned  out  of 
house  and  home.  Let  us  believe  that  when  the  need  comes  the 
help  will  come  also.  Let  us  not  carry  our  crosses  before  they 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  201 

are  laid  upon  us.  He  that  said  to  Moses,  "  Certainly  I  will  be 
with  thee,"  will  never  fail  any  believer  who  cries  to  Him. 
When  the  hour  of  special  storm  comes,  the  Lord  who  walks 
upon  the  waters  will  come  and  say,  "  Peace  :  be  still."  There 
are  thousands  of  doubting  saints  continually  crossing  the  river, 
who  go  down  to  the  water  in  fear  and  trembling,  and  yet  are 
able  at  last  to  say  with  David,  "  Though  I  walk  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil ;  for  Thou  art 
with  me."  (Psa.  xxiii.  4.) 

This  branch  of  our  subject  deserves  to  be  pondered  well. 
This  spiritual  presence  of  Christ  is  a  real  and  true  thing,  though 
a  thing  which  the  children  of  this  world  neither  know  nor 
understand.  It  is  precisely  one  of  those  matters  of  which  St. 
Paul  writes,  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him."  (1  Cor. 
ii.  14.)  But  for  all  that,  I  repeat  emphatically,  the  spiritual 
presence  of  Christ, — His  presence  after  the  manner  of  a  Spirit 
with  the  spirits  of  His  own  people, — is  a  thing  real  and  true. 
Let  us  not  doubt  it.  Let  us  hold  it  fast.  Let  us  seek  to  feel 
it  more  and  more.  The  man  who  feels  nothing  whatever  of  it 
in  his  own  heart's  experience,  may  depend  on  it  that  he  is  not 
yet  in  a  right  state  of  soul. 

III.  The  last  point  which  I  propose  to  consider,  is  the  real 
bodily  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist.  Where  is  it  1  What 
ought  we  to  think  about  it  1  What  ought  we  to  reject,  and 
what  ought  we  to  hold  fast  ? 

This  is  a  branch  of  my  subject  on  which  it  is  most  important 
to  have  clear  and  well-defined  views.  There  are  rocks  around 
it  on  which  many  are  making  shipwreck.  No  doubt  there  are 
deep  things  and  difficulties  connected  with  it.  But  this  must 
not  prevent  our  examining  it  as  far  as  possible  by  the  light  of 
Scripture.  Whatever  the  Bible  teaches  plainly  about  Christ's 
bodily  presence,  it  is  our  duty  to  hold  and  believe.  To  shrink 
from  holding  it  because  we  cannot  reconcile  it  with  some  human 
tradition,  some  minister's  teaching,  or  some  early  prejudice 
imbibed  in  youth,  is  presumption,  and  not  humility.  To  the 
law  and  to  the  testimony  !  What  says  the  Scripture  about 
Christ's  bodily  presence  1  Let  us  examine  the  matter  step  by 
step. 


202  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

(a)  There  was  a  bodily  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
during  the  time  that  He  was  upon  earth  at  His  first 
advent.  For  thirty-three  years,  at  least,  between  His  birth  and 
His  ascension,  He  was  present  in  a  body  in  this  world.  In 
infinite  mercy  to  our  souls  the  eternal  Son  of  God  was  pleased 
to  take  our  nature  on  Him,  and  to  be  miraculously  born  of  a 
woman,  with  a  body  just  like  our  own.  He  was  made  like  unto 
us  in  all  things,  sin  only  excepted.  Like  us  He  grew  from 
infancy  to  boyhood,  and  from  boyhood  to  youth,  and  from  youth 
to  manhood.  Like  us  He  ate,  and  drank,  and  slept,  and 
hungered,  and  thirsted,  and  wept,  and  felt  fatigue  and  pain. 
He  had  a  body  which  was  subject  to  all  the  conditions  of  a 
material  body.  While,  as  God,  He  was  in  heaven  and  earth  at 
the  same  time ;  as  man,  His  body  was  only  in  one  place  at  one 
time.  When  He  was  in  Galilee  He  was  not  in  Judaea,  and 
when  He  was  in  Capernaum  He  was  not  in  Jerusalem.  In  a 
real,  true  human  body  He  lived  ;  in  a  real,  true  human  body 
He  kept  the  law,  and  fulfilled  all  righteousness ;  and  in  a  real, 
true  human  body  He  bore  our  sins  on  the  Cross,  and  made  satis 
faction  for  us  by  His  atoning  blood.  He  that  died  for  us  on 
Calvary  was  perfect  man,  while  at  the  same  time  He  was  perfect 
God.  This  was  the  first  real  bodily  presence  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  truth  before  us  is  full  of  unspeakable  comfort  to  all  who 
have  an  awakened  conscience,  and  know  the  value  of  their  souls. 
It  is  a  heart-cheering  thought  that  the  "One  Mediator  between 
God  and  man  is  the  man  Jesus  Christ  : "  real  Man,  and  so  able, 
to  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities ;  Almighty 
(rod,  and  so  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  to  the 
Father  by  Him.  The  Saviour  in  whom  the  labouring  and 
heavy-laden  are  invited  to  trust,  is  One  who  had  a  real  body 
when  He  was  working  out  our  redemption  on  earth.  It  was  no 
angel,  nor  spirit,  nor  ghost,  that  stood  in  our  place  and  became 
our  Substitute,  that  finished  the  work  of  redemption,  and  did 
what  Adam  failed  to  do.  Xo  :  it  was  One  who  was  real  man  ! 
"  By  man  came  death,  and  by  man  came  also  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead."  (1  Cor.  xv.  21.)  The  battle  was  fought  for  us,  and 
the  victory  was  won  by  the  eternal  Word  made  flesh, — by  the 
real  bodily  presence  among  us  of  Jesus  Christ.  For  ever  let  us 
praise  God  that  Christ  did  not  remain  in  heaven,  but  came  into 
the  world  and  was  made  flesh  to  save  sinners  ;  that  in  the  body, 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  203 

He  was  born  for  us,  lived  for  us,  died  for  us,  and  rose  again. 
Whether  men  know  it  or  not,  OUT  whole  hope  of  eternal  life 
hinges  on  the  simple  fact,  that  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  there 
was  a  real  bodily  presence  of  the  Son  of  God  for  us  on  the  earth. 

(b)  Let  us  now  go  a  step  further.  There  is  a  real  bodily 
presence  of  Jesus  Christ  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
This  is  a  deep  and  mysterious  subject,  beyond  question.  What 
God  the  Father  is,  and  where  He  dwells,  what  the  nature  of 
His  dwelling-place  who  is  a  Spirit, — these  are  high  things  which 
we  have  no  minds  to  take  in.  But  where  the  "Bible  speaks 
plainly  it  is  our  duty  and  our  wisdom  to  believe.  When  our 
Lord  rose  again  from  the  dead,  He  rose  with  a  real  human 
body, — a  body  which  could  not  be  in  two  places  at  once, — a 
body  of  which  the  angels  said,  "  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen." 
(Luke  xxiv.  6.)  In  that  body,  having  finished  His  redeeming 
work  on  earth,  He  ascended  visibly  into  heaven.  He  took  His 
body  with  Him,  and  did  not  leave  it  behind,  like  Elijah's 
mantle.  It  was  not  laid  in  the  grave  at  last,  and  did  not 
become  dust  and  ashes  in  some  Syrian  village,  like  the  bodies  of 
saints  and  martyrs.  The  same  body  Avhich  walked  in  the  streets 
of  Capernaum,  and  sat  in  the  house  of  Mary  and  Martha,  and 
was  crucified  on  Golgotha,  and  was  laid  in  Joseph's  tomb, — that 
same  body, — after  the  resurrection  glorified  undoubtedly,  but 
still  real  and  material, — was  taken  up  into  heaven,  and  is  there 
at  this  very  moment.  To  use  the  inspired  words  of  the  Acts, 
"  While  they  beheld,  He  was  taken  up,  and  a  cloud  received 
Him  out  of  their  sight."  (Acts  i.  11.)  To  use  the  words  of  St. 
Luke's  Gospel,  "  While  He  blessed  them,  He  was  parted  from 
them,  and  carried  up  into  heaven."  (Luke  xxiv.  51.)  To  use 
the  words  of  St.  Mark,  "  After  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  them, 
He  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of 
God."  (Mark  xvi.  19.)  The  Fourth  Article  of  the  Church  of 
England  states  the  whole  matter  fully  and  accurately  :  "  Christ 
did  truly  rise  again  from  death,  and  took  again  His  body,  with 
flesh,  bones,  and  all  things  appertaining  to  the  perfection  of 
man's  nature  :  wherewith  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and  there 
sitteth,  until  He  return  to  judge  all- men  at  the  last  day."  And 
thus,  to  come  round  to  the  point  with  which  we  started,  there  is 
in  heaven  a  real  bodily  presence  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  doctrine  before  us  is  singularly  rich  in  comfort  and  con- 


204  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

solation  to  all  true  Christians.  That  divine  Saviour  in  heaven, 
on  whom  the  Gospel  tells  us  to  cast  the  burden  of  our  sinful 
souls,  is  not  a  Being  who  is  Spirit  only,  but  a  Being  who  is 
man  as  well  as  God.  He  is  One  who  has  taken  up  to  heaven  a 
body  like  our  own ;  and  in  that  body  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  to  be  our  Priest  and  our  Advocate,  our  Representative 
and  our  Friend.  He  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
infirmities,  because  He  has  suffered  Himself  in  the  body  being 
tempted.  He  knows  by  experience  all  that  the  body  is  liable 
to  from  pain,  and  weariness,  and  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  work  ; 
and  has  taken  to  heaven  that  very  body  which  endured  the 
contradiction  of  sinners  and  was  nailed  to  the  tree.  Who  can 
doubt  that  that  body  in  heaven  is  a  continual  plea  for  believers, 
and  renders  them  ever  acceptable  in  the  Father's  sight  ?  It  is 
a  perpetual  remembrance  of  the  perfect  propitiation  made  for 
us  upon  the  Cross.  God  will  not  forget  that  our  debts  are  paid 
for,  so  long  as  the  body  which  paid  for  them  with  life-blood  is 
in  heaven  before  His  eyes.  Who  can  doubt  that  when  we  pour 
out  our  petitions  and  prayers  before  the  throne  of  grace,  we 
put  them  in  the  hand  of  One  whose  sympathy  passes  know 
ledge  1  None  can  feel  for  poor  believers  wrestling  here  in  the 
body,  like  Him  who  in  the  body  sits  pleading  for  them  in 
heaven.  For  ever  let  us  bless  God  that  there  is  a  real  bodily 
presence  of  Christ  in  heaven. 

(c)  Let  us  now  go  a  step  further.  There  is  no  real  bodily 
presence  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  or  in 
the  consecrated  elements  of  bread  and  wine. 

This  is  a  point  which  it  is  peculiarly  painful  to  discuss, 
because  it  has  long  divided  Christians  into  two  parties,  and 
defiled  a  very  solemn  subject  with  sharp  controversy.  Never 
theless,  it  is  one  which  cannot  possibly  be  avoided  in  handling 
the  question  we  are  considering.  Moreover,  it  is  a  point  of 
vast  importance,  and  demands  very  plain  speaking.  Those 
amiable  and  well-meaning  persons  who  imagine  that  it  signifies 
little  what  opinion  people  hold  about  Christ's  presence  in  the 
Lord's  Supper, — that  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference,  and  that 
it  all  comes  to  the  same  thing  at  last, — are  totally  and  entirely 
mistaken.  They  have  yet  to  learn  that  an  unscriptural  view  of 
the  subject  may  land  them  at  length  in  a  very  dangerous  heresy. 
Let  us  search  and  see. 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  205 

My  reason  for  saying  that  there  is  no  bodily  presence  of 
Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper  or  in  the  consecrated  bread  and 
wine,  is  simply  this  :  there  is  no  such  presence  taught  anywhere 
in  holy  Scripture.  It  is  a  presence  that  can  never  be  honestly 
and  fairly  got  out  of  the  Bible.  Let  the  three  accounts  of  the 
institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  the  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew, 
St.  Mark,  and  St.  Luke,  and  the  one  given  by  St.  Paul  to  the 
Corinthians,  be  weighed  and  examined  impartially,  and  I  have 
no  doubt  as  to  the  result.  They  teach  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  in 
the  same  night  that  He  was  betrayed,  took  bread  and  gave  it  to 
His  disciples,  saying,  "  Take,  eat :  this  is  My  body ; "  and  also 
took  the  cup  of  wine,  and  gave  it  to  them,  saying,  "  Drink  ye 
all  of  this:  this  is  My  blood."  But  there  is  nothing  in  the 
simple  narrative,  or  in  the  verses  which  follow  it,  which  shows 
that  the  disciples  thought  their  Master's  body  and  blood  were 
really  present  in  the  bread  and  wine  which  they  received. — 
There  is  not  a  word  in  the  Epistles  to  show  that  after  our 
Lord's  ascension  into  heaven  the  Christians  believed  that  His 
body  and  blood  were  present  in  an  ordinance  celebrated  on 
earth,  or  that  the  bread  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  after  consecration, 
was  not  truly  and  literally  bread,  and  the  wine  truly  and  liter 
ally  wine. 

Some  persons,  I  am  aware,  suppose  that  such  texts  as  "  This 
is  My  body,"  and  "This  is  My  blood,"  are  proofs  that  Christ's 
body  and  blood,  in  some  mysterious  manner,  are  locally  present 
in  the  bread  and  wine  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  after  their  conse 
cration.  But  a  man  must  be  easily  satisfied  if  such  texts  con 
tent  him.  The  quotation  of  a  single  isolated  phrase  is  a  mode 
of  arguing  which  would  establish  Arianism  or  Socinianism.  The 
context  of  these  famous  expressions  shows  clearly  that  those 
who  heard  the  words  used,  and  were  accustomed  to  our  Lord's 
mode  of  speaking,  understood  them  to  mean,  "This  represents 
My  body,"  and  "  This  represents  My  blood." 

The  comparison  of  other  places  proves  that  there  is  nothing 
unfair  in  this  interpretation.  It  is  certain  that  the  words  "  is  " 
and  "arc"  frequently  mean  "represent"  in  Scripture.  The 
disciples  no  doubt  remembered  their  Master  saying  such  things 
as  "  The  field  is  the  world, — the  good  seed  are  the  children  of 
the  kingdom."  (Matt.  xiii.  38.) — St.  Paul,  in  writing  on  the 
sacrament,  confirms  this  interpretation  by  expressly  calling  the 


206  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

consecrated  bread,  "  bread,"  and  not  the  body  of  Christ,  no  less 
than  three  times.  (1  Cor.  xi.  26-28.) 

Some  persons,  again,  regard  the  sixth  chapter  of  St.  John, 
where  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  eating  His  flesh  and  drinking  His 
blood,"  as  a  proof  that  there  is  a  literal  bodily  presence  of 
Christ  in  the  bread  and  wine  at  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  there 
is  an  utter  absence  of  conclusive  proof  that  this  chapter  refers 
to  the  Lord's  Supper  at  all !  The  Lord's  Supper  had  not  been 
instituted,  and  did  not  exist,  till  at  least  a  year  after  these 
words  were  spoken.  Enough  to  say  that  the  great  majority  of 
Protestant  commentators  altogether  deny  that  the  chapter  refers 
to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  that  even  some  Romish  commentators 
on  this  point  agree  with  them.  The  eating  and  drinking  here 
spoken  of  are  the  eating  and  drinking  of  faith,  and  not  a  bodily 
action. 

Some  people  fancy  that  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Corinthians, 
"  The  bread  that  we  eat,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body 
of  Christ?"  (1  Cor.  x.  16)  are  enough  to  prove  a  bodily  presence 
of  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  unfortunately  for  their 
argument,  St.  Paul  does  not  say,  "The  bread  is  the  body,"  but 
the  "  communion  of  the  body."  And  the  obvious  sense  of  the 
words  is  this, — "The  bread  that  a  worthy  communicant  eats  in 
the  Lord's  Supper,  is  a  means  whereby  his  soul  holds  com 
munion  with  the  body  of  Christ."  Xor  do  I  believe  that  more 
than  this  can  be  got  out  of  the  words. 

Above  all,  there  remains  the  unanswerable  argument  that  if 
our  Lord  was  actually  holding  His  own  body  in  His  hands, 
when  He  said  of  the  bread,  "This  is  My  body,"  His  body  must 
have  been  a  different  body  to  that  of  ordinary  men.  Of  course 
if  His  body  was  not  a  body  like  ours,  His  real  and  proper 
"humanity "  is  at  an  end.  At  this  rate  the  blessed  and  com 
fortable  doctrine  of  Christ's  entire  sympathy  with  His  people, 
arising  from  the  fact  that  He  is  really  and  truly  man,  would  be 
completely  overthrown  and  fall  to  the  ground. 

.Finally,  if  the  body  with  which  our  blessed  Lord  ascended 
up  into  heaven  can  be  in  heaven,  and  on  earth,  and  on  ten 
thousand  communion  tables  at  one  and  the  same  time,  it  cannot 
be  a  real  human  body  at  all.  Yet  that  He  did  ascend  with  a 
real  Human  body,  although  a  glorified  body,  is  one  of  the  prime 
articles  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  one  that  we  ought  never  to 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  207 

let  go !  Once  admit  that  a  body  can  be  present  in  two 
places  at  once,  and  you  cannot  prove  that  it  is  a  body  at 
all.  Once  admit  that  Christ's  body  can  be  present  at  God's 
right  hand  and  on  a  communion  table  at  the  same  moment, 
and  it  cannot  be  the  body  which  was  born  of  the  Virgin 
Mary  and  crucified  upon  the  Cross.  From  such  a  conclusion 
we  may  well  draw  back  with  horror  and  dismay.  Well 
says  the  Prayer-book  of  the  Church  of  England:  "The 
sacramental  bread  and  wine  remain  still  in  their  very  natural 
substances,  and  therefore  may  not  be  adored  (for  that  were 
idolatry,  to  be  abhorred  of  all  faithful  Christians) ;  and  the 
natural  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  are  in  heaven, 
and  not  here;  it  being  against  the  truth  of  Christ's  natural 
body  to  be  at  one  time  in  more  places  than  one."  This  is 
sound  speech  that  cannot  be  condemned.  Well  would  it  be 
for  the  Church  of  England  if  all  Churchmen  would  read,  mark, 
learn,  and  inwardly  digest  what  the  Prayer-book  teaches  about 
Christ's  presence  in  the  Lord's  Supper. 

If  we  love  our  souls  and  desire  their  prosperity,  let  us  be  very 
jealous  over  our  doctrine  about  the  Lord's  Supper.  Let  us 
stand  fast  on  the  simple  teaching  of  Scripture,  and  let  no  one 
drive  us  from  it  under  the  pretence  of  increased  reverence  for 
the  ordinance  of  Christ.  Let  us  take  heed,  lest  under  confused 
and  mystical  notions  of  some  inexplicable  presence  of  Christ's 
body  and  blood  under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine,  we  find 
ourselves  unawares  heretics  about  Christ's  human  nature.  Xext 
to  the  doctrine  that  Christ  is  not  God,  but  only  man,  there  is 
nothing  more  dangerous  than  the  doctrine  that  Christ  is  not 
man,  but  only  God.  If  we  would  not  fall  into  that  pit,  we 
must  hold  firmly  that  there  can  be  no  literal  presence  of  Christ's 
body  in  the  Lord's  Supper ;  because  His  body  is  in  heaven,  and 
not  011  earth,  though  as  God  He  is  everywhere.* 

(d)  Let  us  now  go  one  step  further,  and  bring  our  whole- 
subject  to  a  conclusion.  There  will  be  a  real  bodily  presence 

*  The  following  sentence  from  Hooker,  on  the  subject  of  Christ's  body, 
deserves  special  attention  : — 

"  It  behoveth  us  to  take  great  heed,  lest  while  we  go  about  to  maintain  the 
glorious  deity  of  Him  which  is  man,  we  leave  Him  not  the  true  bodily  sub 
stance  of  a  man.  According  to  Augustine's  opinion,  that  majestical  body 
which  we  make  to  be  everywhere  present,  doth  thereby  cease  to  have  the 
substance  of  a  true  body."— Hooker,  Eccles.  Polity,  book  v.,  ch.  55. 


208  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

of  Christ  when  He  comes  again  the  second  time  to  judge  the 
world.  This  is  a  point  about  which  the  Bible  speaks  so  plainly 
that  there  is  no  room  left  for  dispute  or  doubt.  When  our 
Lord  had  ascended  up  before  the  eyes  of  His  disciples,  the 
angels  said  to  them,  "  This  same  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from 
you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen 
Him  go  into  heaven."  (Acts  i.  11.)  There  can  be  no  mistake 
about  the  meaning  of  these  words.  Visibly  and  bodily  our 
Lord  left  the  world,  and  visibly  and  bodily  He  will  return  in 
the  day  which  is  emphatically  called  the  day  of  "  His  appear 
ing."  (1  Peter  i.  7.) 

The  world  has  not  yet  done  with  Christ.  Myriads  talk  and 
think  of  Him  as  of  One  who  did  His  work  in  the  world  and 
passed  on  to  His  own  place,  like  some  statesman  or  philosopher, 
leaving  nothing  but  His  memory  behind  Him.  The  world  will 
be  fearfully  undeceived  one  day.  That  same  Jesus  who  came 
eighteen  centuries  ago  in  lowliness  and  poverty,  to  be  despised 
and  crucified,  shall  come  again  one  day  in  power  and  glory,  to 
raise  the  dead  and  change  the  living,  and  to  reward  every  man 
according  to  his  works.  The  wicked  shall  see  that  Saviour 
whom  they  despised,  but  too  late,  and  shall  call  on  the  rocks  to 
fall  on  them  and  hide  them  from  the  face  of  the  Lamb.  Those 
solemn  words  which  Jesus  addressed  to  the  High  Priest  the 
night  before  His  crucifixion  shall  at  length  be  fulfilled :  "Ye 
shall  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power, 
and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  (Matt.  xxvi.  64.)  The 
godly  shall  see  the  Saviour  whom  they  have  read  of,  heard  of, 
and  believed,  and  find,  like  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  that  the  half 
of  His  goodness  had  not  been  known.  They  shall  find  that 
sight  is  far  better  than  faith,  and  that  in  Christ's  actual 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy. 

This  is  the  real  bodily  presence  of  Christ,  for  which  every 
true-hearted  Christian  ought  daily  to  long  and  pray.  Happy 
are  those  who  make  it  an  article  of  their  faith,  and  live  in  the 
constant  expectation  of  a  second  personal  advent  of  Christ. 
Then,  and  then  only,  will  the  devil  be  bound,  the  curse  be 
taken  off  the  earth,  the  world  be  restored  to  its  original  purity, 
sickness  and  death  be  taken  away,  tears  be  wiped  from  all 
eyes,  and  the  redemption  of  the  saint,  in  body  as  well  as  soul, 
be  completed.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ;  but 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  209 

we  know  that  when  He  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for 
we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  (1  John  iii.  2.)  The  highest 
style  of  Christian  is  the  man  who  desires  the  real  presence  of 
his  Master,  and  "  loves  His  appearing."  (2  Tim.  iv.  8.) 

I  have  now  unfolded,  as  far  as  I  can  in  a  short  paper,  the 
truth  about  the  presence  of  God  and  His  Christ.  I  have  shown 
(1)  the  general  doctrine  of  God's  presence  everywhere  ;  (2)  the 
Scriptural  doctrine  of  Christ's  real,  spiritual  presence ;  (3)  the 
Scriptural  doctrine  of  Christ's  real,  bodily  presence.  I  now 
leave  the  whole  subject  with  a  parting  word  of  application,  and 
commend  it  to  serious  attention.  In  an  age  of  hurry  and  bustle 
about  secular  things,  in  an  age  of  wretched  strife  and  con 
troversy  about  religion,  I  entreat  men  not  to  neglect  the  great 
truths  which  this  paper  contains. 

(1)  What  do  we  know  of  Christ  ourselves?     We  have  heard 
of  Him  thousands  of  times.     We  call  ourselves  Christians.     But 
what  do  we  know  of  Christ  experimentally,  as  our  own  per 
sonal  Saviour,  our  own  Priest,  our  own  Friend,  the  Healer  of 
our  conscience,  the  Comfort  of  our  heart,  the  Pardoner  of  our 
sins,  the  Foundation  of  our  hope,  the  Confidence  of  our  souls  1 
How  is  it  ? 

(2)  Let  us  not  rest  till  we  feel  Christ  "  present "  in  our  own 
hearts,  and  know  what  it  is  to  be  one  with  Christ  and  Christ 
with  us.     This  is  real  religion.     To  live  in  the  habit  of  looking 
backward  to   Christ  on  the  Cross,  upward  to  Christ  at  God's 
right  hand,  and  forward  to  Christ  coming  again, — this  is  the 
only  Christianity  which  gives  comfort  in  life  and  good  hope  in 
death.     Let  us  remember  this. 

(3)  Let  us  beware  of   holding   erroneous  views   about   the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  especially  about  the  real  nature  of  Christ's 
"  presence  "  in  it.    Let  us  not  so  mistake  that  blessed  ordinance, 
which  was  meant  to  be  our  soul's  meat,  as  to  turn  it  into  our 
soul's  poison.     There  is  no  sacrifice  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  no 
sacrificing  priest,  no  altar,  no  bodily  "presence"  of  Christ  in 
the  bread  and  wine.     These  things  are  not  in  the  Bible,  and 
are  dangerous  inventions  of  man,  leading  on  to  superstition. 
Let  us  take  care. 

(4)  Let  us  keep  continually  before  our  minds  the  second 
advent  of  Christ,   and  that  real   "  presence "  which  is  yet  to 


210  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

come.  Let  our  loins  be  girded,  and  our  lamps  burning,  and 
ourselves  like  men  daily  waiting  for  their  Master's  return. 
Then,  and  then  only,  shall  we  have  all  the  desires  of  our  souls 
satisfied.  Till  then  the  less  we  expect  from  this  world  the 
better.  Let  our  daily  cry  be,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus." 

NOTE. 

Controversy  about  the  Lord's  Supper  and  the  real  presence  of  Christ,  we 
all  know,  is  at  this  moment  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  division  and  dis 
turbance  in  the  Church  of  England.  At  such  a  crisis,  it  may  not  be  unin 
teresting  to  some  readers  to  hear  the  opinions  of  some  of  our  well-known 
English  divines  about  the  points  in  dispute,  in  addition  to  those  which  I  have 
already  given,  at  the  end  of  the  paper  on  the  "Lord's  Supper." 

I  will  give  four  quotations  from  four  men  of  no  mean  authority,  and  ask 
the  reader  to  consider  them. 

(1)  "VVaterland  says, — 

"  The  words  of  the  Church  Catechism,  verily  and  indeed  taken  and  received 
by  the  faithful,  are  rightly  interpreted  of  a  real  participation  of  the  benefits 
purchased  by  Christ's  death.  The  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  taken  and 
received  by  the  faithful,  not  corporally,  not  internally,  but  verily  and  indeed, 
that  is  effectually.  The  sacred  symbols  are  no  bai-e  signs,  no  untrue  figures  of  a 
thing  absent ;  but  the  force,  the  grace,  the  virtue,  and  benefit  of  Christ's 
body  broken  and  blood  shed,  that  is,  of  His  passion,  are  really  and  effectually 
present  with  all  them  that  receive  worthily.  This  is  all  the  real  presence  that 
our  Church  teaches."—  Waterland's  Works.  Oxford,  1843.  Vol.  vi.,  p.  42. 

(2)  Dean  Aldrich,  of  Christ  Church,  says, — 

"The  Church  of  England  has  wisely  forborne  to  use  the  term  of  'Real 
Presence  '  in  all  the  books  that  are  set  forth  by  her  authority.  We  neither 
find  it  recommended  in  the  Liturgy,  nor  the  Articles,  nor  the  Homilies,  nor 
the  Church's  Catechism,  nor  Nowell's.  For  although  it  be  seen  in  the 
Liturgy,  and  once  more  in  the  Articles  of  1552,  it  is  mentioned  in  both 
places  as  a  phrase  of  the  Papists,  and  rejected  for  the  abuse  of  it.  So  that  if 
any  Church  of  England  man  use  it,  he  does  more  than  the  Church  directs  him. 
If  any  reject  it,  he  has  the  Church's  example  to  warrant  him ;  and  it  would 
very  much  contribute  to  the  peace  of  Christendom  if  all  men  would  write  after 
so  excellent  a  copy." — Dean  Aldrich 's  Reply  to  Tivo  Discourses.  Oxford, 
1682.  4to,  pp.  13-18. 

(3)  Henry  Philpotts,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  in  his  letter  to  Charles  Butler, 
says,— 

"  The  Church  of  Rome  holds  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  pre 
sent  under  the  accidents  of  bread  and  wine  ;  the  Church  of  England  holds 
that  their  real  presence  is  in  the  soul  of  the  communicant  at  the  sacrament  of 
the  Lord's  Supper. 

"  She  holds,  that  after  the  consecration  of  the  bread  and  wine  they  are 
changed  not  in  their  nature  but  in  their  use  ;  that  instead  of  nourishing  our 
bodies  only,  they  now  are  instruments  by  which,  when  worthily  received, 
God  gives  to  our  souls  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  to  nourish  and  sustain 
them  :  that  this  is  not  a  fictitious,  or  imaginary  exhibition  of  our  crucified 
Redeemer  to  us,  but  a  real  though  spiritual  one,  more  real,  indeed,  because 


THE  REAL  PRESENCE.  211 

more  effectual,  than  the  carnal  exhibition  and  manclucation  of  Him  could  be 
(for  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing). 

"  In  the  same  manner,  then,  as  our  Lord  Himself  said,  '  I  am  the  true  bread 
that  came  down  from  heaven '  (not  meaning  thereby  that  He  was  a  lump  of 
baked  dough  or  manna,  but  the  true  means  of  sustaining  the  true  life  of  man, 
which  is  spiritual,  not  corporeal),  so  in  the  sacrament,  to  the  worthy  receiver 
of  the  consecrated  elements,  though  in  their  nature  mere  bread  and  wine,  are 
yet  given,  truly,  really,  and  effectively,  the  crucified  body  and  blood  of  Christ ; 
that  body  and  blood  which  were  the  instruments  of  man's  redemption,  and 
upon  which  our  spiritual  life  and  strength  solely  depend.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  the  crucified  Jesus  is  present  in  the  sacrament  of  His  Supper,  not  in, 
nor  with,  the  bread  and  wine,  nor  under  their  accidents,  but  in  the  souls  of 
communicants ;  not  carnally,  but  effectually  and  faithfully,  and  therefore 
most  really."— PhilpotCs  Letter  to  Butler.  8vo  Edition.  1825.  Pp.  235,  23G. 

(4)  Archbishop  Longley  says,  in  his  last  Charge,  printed  and  published  after 
his  death  in  1868  :— 

"  The  doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence  is,  in  one  sense,  the  doctrine  of  the 
Church  of  England.  She  asserts  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  'verily 
and  indeed  taken  and  received  by  the  faithful  in  the  Lord's  Supper. '  And 
she  asserts  equally  that  such  presence  is  not  material  or  corporal,  but  that 
Christ's  body  '  is  given,  taken,  and  eaten  in  the  Supper,  only  after  a  heavenly 
and  spiritual  manner.'  (Article  xxviii.)  Christ's  presence  is  effectual  for  all 
those  intents  and  purposes  for  which  His  body  was  broken  and  His  blood 
shed.  As  to  a  presence  elsewhere  than  in  the  heart  of  a  believer,  the  Church  of 
England  is  silent,  and  the  words  of  Hooker  therefore  represent  her  views : 
'  The  real  presence  of  Christ's  most  blessed  body  and  blood  is  not  to  be 
sought  in  the  sacrament,  but  in  the  worthy  receiver  of  the  sacrament.' " 

I  will  now  conclude  the  whole  subject  with  the  following  remarkable 
quotation,  which  I  commend  to  the  special  attention  of  all  my  readers.  It 
is  taken  from  the  recent  elaborate  judgment  delivered  by  the  Judicial  Com 
mittee  of  the  Privy  Council,  the  highest  Court  of  the  realm,  in  the  famous 
case  of  Sheppard  v.  Bennett : — 

"Any  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Holy  Communion,  which  is  not  a  a  presence 
to  the  soul  of  the  faithful  receiver,  the  Church  of  England  does  not  by  her 
Articles  and  Formularies  affirm,  or  require  her  ministers  to  accept."  This 
cannot  be  stated  too  plainly. 


X. 

THE  CHURCH. 

THERE  is  perhaps  no  subject  in  religion  which  is  so  much 
misunderstood  as  the  subject  of  the  "Church."  There  is 
certainly  no  misunderstanding  which  has  done  more  harm  to 
professing  Christians  than  the  misunderstanding  of  this  subject. 
There  are  few  words  in  the  New  Testament  which  are  used 
in  such  a  variety  of  meanings,  as  the  word  "  Church."  '  It  is 
a  word  which  we  hear  constantly,  and  yet  we  cannot  help 
observing  that  different  people  use  it  in  different  senses.  The 
English  politician  in  our  days  talks  of  "the  Church."  What 
does  he  mean  1  You  will  generally  find  he  means  the  Episcopal 
Church  established  in  his  own  country. — The  Roman  Catholic 
talks  of  "  the  Church."  What  does  he  mean  ?  He  means  the 
Church  of  Rome,  and  tells  you  that  there  is  no  other  Church  in 
the  world  except  his  own.  —  The  Dissenter  talks  of  "the 
Church."  What  does  he  mean  1  He  means  the  communicants 
of  that  chapel  of  which  he  is  a  member. — The  members  of  the 
Church  of  England  talk  of  "the  Church."  What  do  they 
mean?  One  means  the  building  in  which  he  worships  on  a 
Sunday.  Another  means  the  clergy, — and  when  any  one  is 
ordained,  tells  you  that  he  has  gone  into  the  Church  !  A  third 
has  some  vague  notions  about  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  apos 
tolical  succession,  and  hints  mysteriously  that  the  Church  is 
made  up  of  Christians  who  are  governed  by  Bishops,  and  of 
none  beside.  There  is  no  denying  these  things.  They  are  all 


*  There  seem  to  be  four  meanings  of  the  word  Church  in  the  New  Testa 
ment.  (1)  It  is  applied  to  the  whole  body  of  the  elect.  (Heb.  xii.  23.)  ?(2) 
It  is  applied  to  the  baptized  Christians  of  a  particular  place  or  district. 
(Acts  viii.  1.)  (3)  It  is  applied  to  a  small  number  of  professing  Christians,  in 
a  particular  family.  (Rom.  xvi.  5.)  (4)  It  is  applied  to  the  whole  body  of 
baptized  people  throughout  the  world,  both  good  and  bad.  (1  Cor.  xii.  28.) 
In  the  fourth  sense  the  word  is  used  very  seldom  indeed.  The  first  and 
second  senses  are  the  most  common. 

212 


THE  CHURCH.  213 

patent  and  notorious  facts.  And  they  all  help  to  explain  the 
assertion  with  which  I  started,— that  there  are  few  subjects  so 
much  misunderstood  as  that  of  the  "  Church." 

I  believe  that  to  have  clear  ideas  about  the  Church  is  of  the 
first  importance  in  the  present  day.  I  believe  that  mistakes  on 
this  point  are  one  grand  cause  of  the  religious  delusions  into 
which  so  many  fall.  I  wish  to  direct  attention  to  that  great 
primary  meaning  in  which  the  word  "  Church  "  is  used  in  the 
Xew  Testament,  and  to  clear  the  subject  of  that  misty  vague 
ness  by  which  it  is  surrounded  in  so  many  minds.  It  was  a 
most  true  saying  of  Bishop  Jewel  the  Reformer,  ^  There  never 
was  anything  yet  so  absurd  or  so  wicked,  but  it  might  seem  east/ 
to  be  covered  and  defended  by  the  naim  of  the  Church"* 
(Jewel's  ApoL,  sec.  xx.) 

I.  Let  me  then  show,  first  of  all,   what  is  that  one  true 

Church,  out  of  which  no  man  can  be  saved. 
II.  Let  me  explain,  in  the  second  place,  what  is  the  position 

and  value  of  all  visible  professing  Churches. 
III.  And  let  me,  in  the  third  place,  draw  from  the  subject 
some  practical  counsels  and  cautions  for  the  times  in 
which  we  live. 

I.  First  of  all,  let  me  show  that  one  true  Cliurch  out  of  which 
no  man  can  be  saved. 

There  is  a  Church  outside  of  which  there  is  no  salvation,— 
a  Church  to  which  a  man  must  belong,  or  be  lost  eternally.  I 
lay  this  down  without  hesitation  or  reserve.  I  say  it  as  strongly 
and  as  confidently  as  the  strongest  advocate  of  the  Church  of 
Rome.  But  what  is  this  Church?  Where  is  this  Church? 
What  are  the  marks  by  which  this  Church  may  be  known? 
This  is  the  grand  question. 

The  one  true  Church  is  well  described  in  the  Communion 
Service  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  "  the  mystical  body  of 
Christ,  which  is  the  blessed  company  of  all  faithful  people."  It 
is  composed  of  all  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus. — It  is  made  up 

*  "  The  adversaries  of  the  truth  clef  end.  many  a  false  error  under  the  name 
of  the  holy  Church. 

"Beware  of  deceit,  when  thou  henrest  the  name  of  the  Church.  The 
verity  is  then  assaulted.  They  call  the  Church  of  the  devil  the  holy  Church 
many  times."— Bishop  Hooper.  1547.  Parker  Edit.,  pp.  &>,  84. 


214  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

of  all  God's  elect, — of  all  converted  men  and  women, — of  all 
true  Christians.  In  whatsoever  we  can  discern  the  election  of 
God  the  Father,  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  God  the  Son, 
the  sanctifying  work  of  God  the  Spirit,  in  that  person  we  see  a 
member  of  Christ's  true  Church.* 

It  is  a  Church  of  which  all  the  members  have  the  same 
marks.  They  are  all  born  again  of  the  Spirit. — They  all  possess 
"repentance  towards  God,  faith  towards  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
and  holiness  of  life  and  conversation. — They  all  hate  sin,  and 
they  all  love  Christ. — They  worship  differently,  and  after 
various  fashions.  Some  worship  with  a  form  of  prayer,  and 
some  with  none.  Some  worship  kneeling,  and  some  standing. 
But  they  all  worship  with  one  heart. — They  are  all  led  by  one 
Spirit. — They  all  build  upon  one  foundation. — They  all  draw 

*  "  The  Church  is  the  body  of  Christ.— It  is  the  whole  number  and  society 
of  the  faithful,  whom  God  through  Christ  hath  before  the  beginning  of  time 
appointed  to  everlasting  life."  —  Dean  NoivelVs  Catechism,  sanctioned  by 
Convocation.  1572. 

"That  Church  which  is  Christ's  body,  and  of  which  Christ  is  the  head, 
standeth  only  of  living  stones,  and  true  Christians,  not  only  outwardly  in 
name  and  title,  but  inwardly  in  heart  and  in  truth." — Bishop  Ridley.  1556. 
Parker  Edit.,  p.  126. 

"Unto  this  Church  pertain  so  many  as  from  the  beginning  of  the  world 
until  this  time  have  unfeignedly  believed  in  Christ,  or  shall  believe  unto  the 
very  end  of  the  world.  Against  this  Church  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail." — Thomas  Becon,  chaplain  to  Archbishop  Cranmer,  1550.  Parker 
Edit.,  vol.  i.,  p.  294. 

"  The  Holy  Catholic  Church  is  nothing  else  but  a  company  of  saints.  To 
this  Church  pertain  all  they  that  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  have  been 
saved,  and  that  shall  be  saved  unto  the  end  thereof." — Bishop  Coverdale. 
1550.  Parker  Edit.,  p.  461. 

"The  Catholic  Church  which  is  called  the  body  of  Christ,  consists  of  such 
as  are  truly  sanctified  and  iinited  to  Christ  by  an  internal  alliance,  so  that  no 
wicked  person,  or  unbeliever,  is  a  member  of  this  body,  solely  by  the  external 
profession  of  faith  and  participation  of  the  sacraments." — Bishop  Davcnant 
on  Coloss.,  vol.  i.,  p.  18.  1627.  •  ">»i»  : 

"  They  who  are  indeed  holy  and  obedient  to  Christ's  laws  of  faith  and 
manners,  these  are  truly  and  perfectly  the  Church.  These  are  the  Church 
of  God  in  the  eyes  and  heart  of  God.  For  the  Church  of  God  is  the  body  of 
Christ.  But  the  mere  profession  of  Christianity  makes  no  man  a  member  of 
Christ,— nothing  but  a  new  creature,  nothing  but  a  faith  working  by  love, 
and  keeping  the  commandments  of  God."— Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor's  Dissuasive 
from  Popery,  part  ii.,  book  i.,  sec.  1.  1660. 

"  That  Church  which  is  Christ's  mystical  body  consisteth  of  none  but  only 
true  Israelites,  true  sons  of  Abraham,  true  servants  and  saints  of  God."— 
Hooker,  Eccles.  Polity,  book  in.,  sec.  1.  1600. 


THE  CHURCH.  215 

their  religion  from  one  single  book. — They  are  all  joined  to  one 
great  centre,  that  is  Jesus  Christ.  They  all,  even  now,  can  say 
with  one  heart,  "  Hallelujah  !  " — and  they  all  can  respond  with 
one  heart  and  voice,  "Amen  and  amen." 

It  is  a  Church  which  is  dependent  upon  no  ministers  upon 
earth,  however  much  it  values  those  who  preach  the  Gospel  to 
its  members.  The  life  of  its  members  does  not  hang  on  Church- 
membership  and  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  although  they 
highly  value  these  things,  when  they  are  to  be  had.  But  it 
has  only  one  Great  Head, — one  Shepherd, — one  chief  Bishop,— 
and  that  is  Jesus  Christ.  He  alone,  by  His  Spirit,  admits  the 
members  of  this  Church,  though  ministers  may  show  the  door. 
Till  He  opens  the  door,  no  man  on  earth  can  open  it, — neither 
bishops,  nor  presbyters,  nor  convocations,  nor  synods.  Once 
let  a  man  repent  and  believe  the  Gospel,  and  that  moment  he 
becomes  a  member  of  this  Church.  Like  the  penitent  thief,  he 
may  have  no  opportunity  of  being  baptized.  But  he  has  that 
which  is  far  better  than  any  water-baptism, — the  baptism  of 
the  Spirit.  He  may  not  be  able  to  receive  the  bread  and  wine 
in  the  Lord's  Supper, — but  he  eats  Christ's  body  and  drinks 
Christ's  blood  by  faith  every  day  he  lives,  and  no  minister 
on  earth  can  prevent  him.  He  may  be  excommunicated  by 
ordained  men,  and  cut  off  from  the  outward  ordinances  of  the 
professing  Church, — but  all  the  ordained  men  in  the  world 
cannot  shut  him  out  of  the  true  Church.* 

It  is  a  Church  whose  existence  does  not  depend  on  forms, 
ceremonies,  cathedrals,  churches,  chapels,  pulpits,  fonts,  vest 
ments,  organs,  endowments,  money,  kings,  governments,  magis 
trates,  or  any  favour  whatsoever  from  the  hand  of  man.  It 
has  often  lived  on  and  continued  when  all  these  things  have 
been  taken  from  it.  It  has  often  been  driven  into  the  wilder 
ness,  or  into  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  by  those  who  ought 
to  have  been  its  friends.  But  its  existence  depends  on  nothing 
but  the  presence  of  Christ  and  His  Spirit,  and  so  long  as  they 
are  with  it  the  Church  cannot  die. 

*  "  A  man  may  be  a  true  and  visible  member  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Clmrch, 
and  yet  be  no  actual  member  of  any  visible  Church." 

"Many  there  be,  or  maybe  in  most  ages,  which  are  no  members  of  the 
visible  Church,  and  yet  better  members  of  the  true  Church  than  the  members 
of  the  Church  visible  for  the  present  are." — Jackson  on  the  Church.  1070, 


216  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

This  is  the  Church  to  which  the  titles  of  present  honour  and 
privilege,  .and  the  promises  of  future  glory  especially  belong.* 
This  is  the  body  of  Christ. — This  is  the  bride. — This  is  the 
Lamb's  wife. — This  is  the  flock  of  Christ. — This  is  the  house 
hold  of  faith  and  family  of  God. — This  is  God's  building,  God's 
foundation,  and  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  the 
Church  of  the  first-born,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven. 
This  is  the  royal  priesthood,  the  chosen  generation,  the  peculiar 
people,  the  purchased  possession,  the  habitation  of  God,  the 
light  of  the  world,  the  salt  and  the  wheat  of  the  earth.  This 
is  the  "  holy  Catholic  Church  "  of  the  Apostles'  Creed. — This  is 
the  "  One  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church  "  of  the  Nicene  Creed. 
—This  is  that  Church  to  which  the  Lord  Jesus  promises  "the 
gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it,"  and  to  which  He  says, 
"  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world." 
(Matt.  xvi.  18 ;  xxviii.  20.) 

*  "  Whatsover  we  read  in  Scripture  concerning  the  endless  love  and  saving 
mercy  which  God  showeth  towards  His  Church,  the  only  proper  subject 
thereof  is  this  Church,  which  we  properly  term  the  mystical  body  of  Christ." 
—Hooker,  Ecdes.  Pol.,  book  iii.,  sec.  1.  1600. 

"  If  any  will  agree  to  call  the  universality  of  professors  by  the  title  of  the 
Church,  they  may  if  they  will.  Any  word  by  consent  may  signify  anything. 
But  if  by  a  Church  we  mean  that  society  which  is  really  joined  to  Christ, 
which  hath  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  heir  of  the  promises  and  of  the 
good  things  of  God,  which  is  the  body  of  which  Christ  is  the  head,  then  the 
invisible  part  of  the  visible  Church,  that  is  the  true  servants  of  Christ,  only 
are  the  Church."— Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor's  Dissuasive  from  Popery.  1660. 

"  The  Catholic  Church  in  the  prime  sense  consists  only  of  such  men  as  are 
actual  and  indissoluble  members  of  Christ's  mystical  body,  or  of  such  as  have 
the  Catholic  faith  not  only  sown  in  their  brains  and  understandings,  but 
thoroughly  rooted  in  their  hearts. — All  the  glorious  prerogatives,  titles,  or 
promises,  annexed  to  the  Church  in  Scripture,  are  in  the  first  place  and  prin 
cipally  meant  of  Christ's  live  and  mystical  body." — Jackson  on  the  Church. 
1670. 

"What  is  meant  in  the  Creed  by  the  Catholic  Church?  That  whole 
universal  company  of  the  elect,  that  ever  were,  are,  or  shall  be  gathered 
together  in  one  body,  knit  together  in  one  faith,  under  one  head,  Jesus 
Christ." — Archbishop  Usher.  1650. 

"In  the  Creed  we  do  believe  in  the  Church,  but  not  in  this  or  that  Church, 
but  the  Catholic  Church, — which  is  no  particular  assembly  of  men,  much  less 
the  Roman  synagogue,  tied  to  any  one  place,  but  the  body  of  the  elect  which 
hath  existed  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  shall  exist  unto  the  end." 
—  Whittaker's  Disputations.  1610.  Parker  Edit.  Vol.  i.,  p.  199. 

"The  Holy  Catholic  Church,  a  number  that  serve  God  here,  and  enjoy 
Him  in  eternity. — Universal,  diffused  through  the  various  ages,  places,  and 
nations  of  the  world.— Holy,  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  sanctified  by 
His  Spirit."—  Archbishop  Leiyhton  on  the  Creed.  1680. 


THE  CHURCH.  217 

This  is  the  only  Church  which  possesses  true  unity.  Its 
members  are  entirely  agreed  on  all  the  weightier  matters  of 
religion,  for  they  are  all  taught  by  one  Spirit.  About  God,  and 
Christ,  and  the  Spirit,  and  sin,  and  their  own  hearts,  and  faith, 
and  repentance,  and  the  necessity  of  holiness,  and  the  value  of 
the  Bible,  and  the  importance  of  prayer,  and  the  resurrection, 
and  judgment  to  come, — about  all  these  points  they  see  eye  to 
eye.  Take  three  or  four  of  them,  strangers  to  one  another, 
from  the  remotest  corners  of  the  earth.  Examine  them  separ 
ately  on  these  points.  You  will  find  them  all  of  one  mind.* 

This  is  the  only  Church  which  possesses  true  sanctity.  Its 
members  are  all  holy.  They  are  not  merely  holy  by  profession, 
holy  in  name,  and  holy  in  the  judgment  of  charity.  They  are 
all  holy  in  act,  and  deed,  and  reality,  and  life,  and  truth. 
They  are  all  more  or  less  conformed  to  the  image  of  Jesus 
Christ.  They  are  all  more  or  less  like  their  great  Head.  Ko 
unholy  man  belongs  to  this  Church,  f 

This  is  the  only  Church  which  is  truly  Catholic.  It  is  not 
the  Church  of  any  one  nation  or  people.  Its  members  are  to 
be  found  in  every  part  of  the  world  where  the  Gospel  is 
received  and  believed.  It  is  not  confined  within  the  limits  of 
any  one  country,  nor  pent  up  within  the  pale  of  any  particular 
forms  or  outward  government.  In  it  there  is  no  difference 
between  Jew  and  Greek,  black  man  and  white,  Episcopalian 
and  Presbyterian  ; — but  faith  in  Christ  is  all  Its  members 
will  be  gathered  from  north,  and  south,  and  east,  and  west,  in 
the  last  day;  and  will  be  of  every  name,  and  denomination, 
and  kindred,  and  people,  and  tongue,  but  all  one  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

This  is  the  only  Church  which  is  truly  Apostolic.  It  is  built 
on  the  foundation  laid  by  the  Apostles,  and  holds  the  doctrines 

*  "To  the  mystical  and  invisible  Church  belongs  peculiarly  that  unity 
which  is  often  attributed  unto  the  Church."— "  This  is  the  society  of  those 
for  whom  Christ  did  pray  that  they  might  be  one."— Barrow  on  the  Unitu  of 
the  Church.  1670. 

t  "  To  this  Holy  Catholic  Church,  which  forms  the  mystical  body  of  Christ, 
we  deny  that  the  ungodly,  hypocrites,  or  any  belong,  who  are  not  partakers 
of  spiritual  life,  and  are  void  of  inward  faith,  charity,  and  holiness.  The 
most  learned  Augustine  has  denied  it  as  well,  giving  it  as  his  opinion  that  all 
such  should  be  ranked  among  the  members  of  Antichrist."— Bishop  Dave- 
nanfs  Determinations.  1634.  Vol.  ii.,  p.  475. 


218  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

which  they  preached.  The  two  grand  objects  at  which  its 
members  aim,  are  apostolic  faith  and  apostolic  practice;  and 
they  consider  the  man  who  talks  of  following  the  Apostles 
without  possessing  these  two  things,  to  be  no  better  than  sound 
ing  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal.* 

This  is  the  only  Church  which  is  certain  to  endure  unto  the 
end.  Nothing  can  altogether  overthrow  and  destroy  it.  Its 
members  may  be  persecuted,  oppressed,  imprisoned,  beaten, 
beheaded,  burned. — But  the  true  Church  is  never  altogether 
extinguished.  It  rises  again  from  its  afflictions. — It  lives  on 
through  fire  and  water. — When  crushed  in  one  land,  it  springs 
up  in  another.  The  Pharaohs,  the  Herods,  the  Neros,  the 
Julians,  the  Diocletians,  the  bloody  Marys,  the  Charles  the 
Ninths  have  laboured  in  vain  to  put  down  this  Church.  They 
slay  their  thousands,  and  then  pass  away  and  go  to  their  own 
place.  The  true  Church  out-lives  them  all,  and  sees  them 
buried  each  in  his  turn.  It  is  an  anvil  that  has  broken  many 
a  hammer  in  this  world,  and  will  break  many  a  hammer  still. 
It  is  a  bush  which  is  often  burning,  and  yet  is  not  consumed.f 

This  is  the  only  Church  of  which  no  one  member  can  perish. 
Once  enrolled  in  the  lists  of  this  Church,  sinners  are  safe  for 
eternity. — They  are  never  cast  away.  The  election  of  God  the 
Father, — the  continual  intercession  of  God  the  Son, — the  daily 
renewing  and  sanctifying  power  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  surround 
and  fence  them  in  like  a  garden  enclosed.  Not  one  bone  of 
Christ's  mystical  body  shall  ever  be  broken.  Not  one  lamb  of 
Christ's  flock  shall  ever  be  plucked  out  of  His  hand.  J 

*  "They  are  the  successors  of  the  Apostles  that  succeed  in  virtue,  holiness, 
truth,  and  so  forth  ;  not  they  that  sit  upon  the  same  stool." — Bishop  Baking- 
ton.  1615.  Folio  edition,  p.  307. 

t  "  The  Holy  Catholic  Church  is  built  upon  a  rock,  so  that  not  even  the 
gates  of  hell  can  prevail  against  it.  This  is  the  privilege  of  the  elect  and 
believers.  All  the  ungodly  and  hypocrites  are  built  upon  the  sand,  are  over 
come  by  Satan,  and  are  sunk  at  last  into  hell.  How  then  can  they  form  a 
part  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  which  admits  not  condemned  members?" 
— Bishop  Davcnant's  Determinations.  1634.  Vol.  ii.,  p.  478. 

"  The  preservation  of  the  Church  is  a  continuing  miracle.  It  resembles 
Daniel's  safety  among  the  hungry  lions,  but  prolonged  from  one  age  to 
another.  The  ship  wherein  Christ  is  may  be  weather-beaten,  but  shall  not 
perish." — Archbishop  Leighton  on  the  Creed.  1680. 

J  "  Of  all  such  as  are  effectually  called,  or  authentically  admitted  into 
this  society,  none  will  revolt  again  to  the  Synagogue  of  Satan  or  to  the 
world."— Jackson  on  the  Church.  1670. 


THE  CHURCH.  219 

This  is  the  Church  which  does  the  work  of  Christ  upon  earth 
ts  members  arc  a  little  flock,  and  few  in  number  compared 
with  the  children  of  the  world: -one  or  two  here,  and  two  or 
three  there  —a  few  in  this  parish,  and  a  few  in  that.  But 
these  are  they  who  shake  the  universe.— These  are  they  who 
change  the  fortunes  of  kingdoms  by  their  prayers.— These 
are  they  who  are  the  active  workers  for  spreading  the  knowledge 
of  pure  religion  and  undefiled.— These  are  the  life-blood  of°a 
country,— the  shield,  the  defence,  the  stay  and  the  support  of 
any  nation  to  which  they  belong. 

This  is  the  Church  which  shall  be  truly  glorious  at  the  end 

h  S  fv n?'  y v6n  aU  Garthly  Sl°ry  is  passed  away,  then 
shall  this  Church  be  presented  without  spot,  before  God  the 
ather  s  throne.  Thrones,  principalities,  and  powers  upon 
earth  shall  come  to  nothing.— Dignities  and  offices  and  endow 
ments  shall  all  pass  away.— But  the  Church  of  the  first-born 
shall  shine  as  the  stars  at  the  last,  and  be  presented  with  iov 
before  the  leather's  throne,  in  the  day  of  Christ's  appearing. 
When  the  Lord  s  jewels  are  made  up,  and  the  manifestation  of 
the  sons  of  God  takes  place,  Episcopacy,  and  Presbyterianism, 
and  Congregationalism  will  not  be  mentioned.  One  Church 
only  will  be  named,  and  that  is  the  Church  of  the  elect 
™  J5 1S^he  Church  for  which  a  tme  minister  of  the  Lord  Jan* 
f  fill  ft  a™P**hi*fly  lab™™-  What  is  it  to  a  true  minister 
to  fill  the  building  in  which  he  preaches  ?  What  is  it  to  him  to 
see  communicants  come  up  more  and  more  to  his  table  ?  What 
is  it  to  him  to  see  his  party  grow  ?  It  is  all  nothing,  unless  he 
can  see  men  and  women  «  born  again,  "-unless  he  can  see  souls 
converted  and  brought  to  Christ,— unless  he  can  see  here  one 
and  there  another,  "coming  out  from  the  world,"  «  takino-  up 
the  cross  and  following  Christ,"  and  thus  increasing  the  mini 
bers  of  the  one  true  Church. 


This  is  the  Church  to  'which  a  man  must  belong,  if  he  would 
be  saved  Till  we  belong  to  this,  we  are  nothing  better  than 
lost  souls.  We  may  have  the  form,  the  husk,  the  skin,  and  the 
shell  of  religion,  but  we  have  not  got  the  substance  and  the 

llTO  V  £1Q      I  TTT/-V        n-i^r^-TT        1^  it 


-,-f         -V     i  -   ••-  >i/  ^ut  L  jstance  ana  me 

He.  Yes!  we  may  have  countless  outward  privileges —we 
may  enjoy  great  light  and  knowledge  and  opportunities --but 
if  we  do  not  belong  to  the  body  of  Christ,  our  light,  and  know 
ledge,  and  privileges,  and  opportunities,  will  not  save  our  souls 


220  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Alas,  for  the  ignorance  that  prevails  on  this  point !  Men  fancy 
if  they  join  this  Church  or  that  Church,  and  become  com 
municants,  and  go  through  certain  forms,  that  all  must  be  right 
with  their  souls.  It  is  an  utter  delusion  :  it  is  a  gross  mistake. 
All  were  not  Israel  who  were  called  Israel,  and  all  are  not 
members  of  Christ's  body  who  profess  themselves  Christians. 
Never  let  us  forget  that  we  may  be  staunch  Episcopalians,  or 
Presbyterians,  or  Independents,  or  Baptists,  or  Wesley  an  s,  or 
Plymouth  Brethren, — and  yet  not  belong  to  the  true  Church. 
And  if  we  do  not,  it  will  be  better  at  last  if  we  had  never  been 
born. * 

II.  Let  me  pass  on  now  to  the  second  point  I  proposed  to 
speak  of.  Let  me  explain  the  position  and  value  of  all  visible 
professing  Churches. 

No  careful  reader  of  the  Bible  can  fail  to  observe  that  many 
separate  Churches  are  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament.  At 
Corinth,  at  Ephesus,  at  Thessalonica,  at  Antioch,  at  Smyrna, 
at  Sardis,  at  Laodicea,  and  several  other  places ;  at  each  we  find 
a  distinct  body  of  professing  Christians, — a  body  of  people 
baptized  in  Christ's  name,  and  professing  the  faith  of  Christ's 
Gospel.  And  these  bodies  of  people  we  find  spoken  of  as  "  the 
Churches  "  of  the  places  which  are  named.  Thus  St.  Paul  says 
to  the  Corinthians,  "  But  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  the 
Churches  of  Christ."  (1  Cor.  xi.  16.)  So  also  we  read  of  the 
Churches  of  Judea,  the  Churches  of  Syria,  the  Churches  of 
Galatia,  the  Churches  of  Asia,  the  Churches  of  Macedonia.  In 
each  case  the  expression  means  the  bodies  of  baptized  Christians 
in  the  countries  mentioned. 

Now,  we  have  but  little  information  given  us  in  the  New 
Testament  about  these  Churches ; — but  that  little  is  very  clear 
and  plain,  so  far  as  it  goes. 

We  know,  for  one  thing,  that  these  Churches  were  all  mixed 
bodies.  They  consisted  not  only  of  converted  persons,  but  of 


*  "We  insist  that  Christians  do  certainly  become  members  of  particular 
Churches, — such  as  the  Roman,  Anglican,  or  Gallican,  by  outward  profession; 
yet  do  not  become  true  members  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  which  we 
believe,  unless  they  are  sanctified  by  the  inward  gift  of  grace,  and  are  united 
to  Christ  the  Head,  by  the  bond  of  the  spirit." — Bishop  Davenant's  Deter 
minations.  1034.  Vol.  ii.,  p.  474. 


THE  CHURCH.  221 

many  unconverted  persons  also.  They  contained  not  only 
believers,  but  members  who  fell  into  gross  errors  and  mistakes, 
both  of  faith  and  practice.  This  is  clear  from  the  account  we 
have  of  the  Churches  at  Corinth,  at  Ephesus,  and  at  Sardis. 
Of  Sardis  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  says,  that  there  were  "  a  few," 
a  few  only,  in  it,  who  had  not  "defiled  their  garments." 
(Rev.  iii.  4.) 

We  know,  moreover,  that  even  in  the  Apostles'  times 
Churches  received  plain  warnings,  that  they  might  perish  and 
pass  away  altogether.  To  the  Church  at  Rome  the  threat  was 
held  out  that  it  should  be  "  cut  off; "  to  the  Church  at  Ephesus, 
that  its  "  candlestick  should  be  taken  away;"  to  the  Church 
at  Laodicea,  that  it  should  be  utterly  rejected.  (Rom.  xi.  22  ; 
Rev.  ii.  5,  and  iii.  16.) 

We  know,  moreover,  that  in  all  these  Churches  there  was 
public  worship,  preaching,  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  prayer, 
praise,  discipline,  order,  government,  the  ministry,  and  the 
sacraments.  What  kind  of  governments  some  Churches  had  it 
is  impossible  to  say  positively.  We  read  of  officers  who  were 
called  angels,  of  bishops,  of  deacons,  of  elders,  of  pastors,  of 
teachers,  of  evangelists,  of  prophets,  of  helps,  of  governments. 
(1  Cor.  xii.  28;  Ephes.  iv.  11  ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iii. ;  Rev.  i. 
20.)  All  these  are  mentioned.  But  the  particulars  about  most 
of  these  officers  are  kept  from  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  As  to 
the  standard  of  doctrine  and  practice  in  the  Churches,  we  have 
the  fullest  and  most  distinct  information.  On  these  points  the 
language  of  the  New  Testament  is  clear  and  unmistakable.  But 
as  to  government  and  outward  ceremonies,  the  information 
given  to  us  is  strikingly  small.  The  contrast  between  the 
Church  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Churches  of  the  New, 
in  this  respect,  is  very  great.  In  the  one,  we  find  little,  com 
paratively,  about  doctrine,  but  much  about  forms  and  ordinances. 
In  the  other,  we  have  much  about  doctrine,  and  little  about 
forms.  In  the  Old  Testament  Church  the  minutest  directions 
were  given  for  the  performance  of  every  part  of  the  ceremonies 
of  religion.  In  the  New  Testament  Churches  we  find  the  cere 
monies  expressly  abolished,  as  no  longer  needed  after  Christ's 
death,  and  nothing  hardly,  except  a  few  general  principles, 
supplying  their  place.  The  New  Testament  Churches  have  got 
no  book  of  Leviticus.  Their  two  chief  principles  seem  to  be, 


222  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

"  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order; — Let  all  things 
be  done  unto  edification."  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26,  40.)  But  as  to  the 
application  of  these  general  principles,  it  seems  to  have  been 
left  to  each  particular  Church  to  decide.* 

We  know,  finally,  that  the  work  begun  by  the  missionary 
preaching  of  the  Apostles  was  carried  on  through  the  instru 
mentality  of  the  professing  Churches.  It  was  through  the 
means  of  grace  used  in  their  public  assemblies  that  God  added 
to  the  number  of  His  people,  converted  sinners,  and  built  up 
saints.  Mixed  and  imperfect  as  these  Churches  plainly  were, 
within  their  pale  were  to  be  found  nearly  all  the  existing 
believers  and  members  of  the  body  of  Christ.  Everything  in 
the  New  Testament  leads  us  to  suppose  that  there  could  have 
been  few  believers,  if  any,  who  were  not  members  of  some  one 
or  other  of  the  professing  Churches  scattered  up  and  down  the 
world. 

Such  is  about  the  whole  of  the  information  the  New  Testa 
ment  gives  us  concerning  visible  Churches  in  the  apostolic  times. 
How  shall  we  use  this  information  ?  What  shall  we  say  of  all 
the  visible  Churches  in  our  own  time  1  We  live  in  days 
when  there  are  many  Churches ; — the  Church  of  England,  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  the  Church  of  Ireland,  the  Church  of  Rome, 
the  Greek  Church,  the  Syrian  Church,  the  Armenian  Church, 
the  Lutheran  Church,  the  Genevan  Church,  and  many  others. 
We  have  Episcopalian  Churches.  We  have  Presbyterian 
Churches.  We  have  Independent  Churches.  In  what  manner 
shall  we  speak  of  them?  Let  me  put  down  a  few  general 
principles.")" 

*  "I  find  no  one  certain  and  perfect  kind  of  government  prescribed  or 
commanded  in  the  Scriptures  to  the  Church  of  Christ. 

"I  do  deny  that  the  Scriptures  do  express  particularly  everything  that  is 
to  be  done  in  the  Church,  or  that  it  doth  put  down  any  one  sort  of  form  and 
kind  of  government  of  the  Church  to  be  perpetual  for  all  times,  persons,  and 
places,  without  alteration."—  Archbishop  Whitgift.  1574.  Folio  edition, 
p.  84. 

"  I  for  my  part  do  confess  that,  in  revolving  the  Scriptures,  I  could  never 
find  but  that  God  hath  left  the  like  liberty  to  the  Church  government  as  He 
hath  done  to  the  Civil  government ; — to  be  varied  according  to  time,  place, 
and  accidents.  So  likewise  in  Church  matters,  the  substance  of  doctrine  is 
immutable,  and  so  are  the  general  rules  of  government.  But  for  rites  and 
ceremonies,  and  the  particular  hierarchies,  policies,  and  discipline  of  the 
Churches,  they  be  left  at  large." — Lord  Bacon's  Works,  vol.  vii.,  p.  68. 

f  For  convenience  sake  these  Churches  collectively  are  often  spoken  of  as 


THE  CHURCH.  223 

(a)  For  one  thing,  no  visible  Church  on  earth  has  a  right  to 
say,  "  We  are  the  true  Church,  and  except  men  belong  to  our 
communion  they  cannot  be  saved."  No  Church  whatever 
lias  a  right  to  say  that ;— whether  it  be  the  Church  of 

Konie,  the  Church  of  Scotland,  or  the  Church  of  England ; 

whether  it  be  an  Episcopalian  Church,  a  Presbyterian,  or 
an  Independent.  Where  is  the  text  in  the  Bible  that  ties 
admission  into  the  kingdom  of  God  to  the  membership  of  any 
one  particular  visible  Church  upon  earth? — I  say  confidently, 
not  one. 

(b)  Furthermore,  no  visible  Church  has  a  right  to  say,  "We  alone 
have  the  true  form  of  worship,  the  true  Church  government,  the 
true  way  of  administering  the  sacraments,  and  the  true  manner 
of  offering  up  united  prayer;  and  all  others  are  completely 
wrong."  No  Church,  I  repeat,  has  a  right  to  say  anything  of 
the  kind.  Where  can  such  assertions  be  proved  by  Scripture  ? 
What  one  plain,  positive  word  of  revelation  can  men  bring- 
forward  in  proof  of  any  such  affirmations  1  I  say  confidently, 
not  one.  There  is  not  a  text  in  the  Bible  which  expressly 
commands  Churches  to  have  one  special  form  of  government, 
and  expressly  forbids  any  other.  If  there  is,  let  men 
point  it  out.  There  is  not  a  text  which  expressly  confines 
Christians  to  the  use  of  a  Liturgy,  or  expressly  enjoins  them 
only  to  have  extempore  prayer.  If  there  is,  let  it  be  shown. 
And  yet  for  hundreds  of  years  Episcopalians  and  Presbyterians 
and  Independents  have  contended  with  each  other,  as  if  these 
things  had  been  settled  as  minutely  as  the  Levitical  ceremonies, 
and  as  if  everybody  who  did  not  see  with  their  eyes  was  almost 
guilty  of  a  deadly  sin !  It  seems  wonderful,  that  in  a  matter 
like  this,  men  should  not  be  satisfied  with  the  full  persuasion 
that  they  themselves  are  right,  but  must  also  go  on  to  condemn 
everybody  who  disagrees  with  them  as  utterly  wrong  !  And  yet 
this  groundless  theory,  that  God  has  laid  down  one  particular 
form  of  Church  government  and  ceremonies,  has  often 
divided  men  who  ought  to  have  known  better.  It  has  caused 
even  good  men  to  speak  and  write  very  unadvisedly.  It  has 

"  The  Church,"  in  contradistinction  to  the  Heathen  and  Mahometan  part  of 
mankind.  Only  let  us  remember,  that  this  is  a  very  mixed  Church,  and  one 
to  which  no  special  promises  belong. 


224  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

been  made  a  fountain  of  incessant  strife,  intolerance,  and 
bigotry  by  men  of  all  parties,  even  among  Protestants,  from 
the  times  of  Cartwright,  Travers,  and  Laud,  down  to  the 
present  day. 

(c)  Furthermore,  no  visible  Church  on  earth  has  a  right  to  say, 
"  We  shall  never  fall  away.     We  shall  last  for  ever."     There  is 
no  promise  in  the  Bible  to  guarantee  the  continuance  of  any 
professing  Church  upon  earth.     Many  have  fallen  completely, 
and  perished  already.     Where  are  the  Churches  of  Africa,  in 
which  Augustine  and  Cyprian  used  once  to  preach  ?    Where  are 
most  of  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor,  which  we  read  of  in  the 
Xew  Testament? — They  are  gone.    They  have  passed  away,  and 
left  hardly  a  wreck  behind.     Other  existing  Churches  are  so 
corrupt  that  it  is  a  plain  duty  to  leave  them,  lest  we  become 
partakers  of  their  sins,  and  share  in  their  plagues. 

(d)  Furthermore,  no  visible.  Church  is  in  a  sound  and  healthy 
state,  which  has  not  the  marks  we  see  in  all  the  New  Testament 
Churches.     A  Church  in  which  the  Bible  is  not  the  standard  of 
faith  and  practice, — a  Church  in  which  repentance,  faith,  and 
holiness,  are  not  prominently  put  forward  as  essential  to  salva 
tion, — a  Church  in  which  forms,  and  ceremonies,  and  ordinances 
not  commanded  in  the  Bible,  are  the  chief  things  urged  upon 
the  attention   of  the   members, — such  a   Church  is  in  a  very 
diseased  and  unsatisfactory  condition.      It  may  not   formally 
deny   any  article   of  the   Christian  faith.     It  may  have  been 
founded  originally  by  the  Apostles.     It  may  boast  that  it  is 
Catholic.     But  if  the  Apostles  were  to  rise  from  the  dead,  and 
visit  such  a  Church,  I  believe  they  would  command  it  to  repent, 
and  have  no  communion  with  it  till  it  did.     Would  St.  Peter 
be  seen  worshipping  at  the  Cathedral  of  St.  George's,  South  vvark? 
I  believe  firmly  that  he  would  not. 

(e)  Furthermore,  no  mere  membership  of  any  visible  Church 
will  avail  a  man  anything  "  in  the  hour  of  death  and  in  the  day  of 
judgment."    No  communion  with  a  visible  Church  will  stand  in 
the  place  of  direct  personal  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Xo  attendance  whatever  on  its  ordinances  is  a  substitute  for 
personal  faith  and  conversion.     It  will  be  no  consolation  when 
we  lay  our  heads  upon  a  dying  pillow,  if  we  can  say  no  more 
than  this, — that  we  have  belonged  to  a  pure  Church.    It  will  be 
no  answer  in  the  last  great  day,  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts 


THE  CHURCH.  225 

are  revealed,  if  we  can  only  say  that  we  worshipped  in  the 
Church  in  which  we  were  baptized,  and  used  its  forms. 

(/)  After  all,  what  is  the  great  use  and  purpose  for  which  God 
has  raised  up  and  maintained  visible  Churches  upon  earth  1  They 
are  useful  as  witnesses,  keepers,  and  librarians  of  Holy  Scripture. 
They  are  useful  as  maintainers  of  a  regular  succession  of  ministers 
to  preach  the  Gospel.  They  are  useful  as  preservers  of  order 
among  professing  Christians.  But  their  great  and  principal  use 
is  to  train  up,  to  rear,  to  nurse,  to  keep  together,  members  of 
that  one  true  Church  which  is  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ.  They 
are  intended  to  "edify  the  body  of  Christ."  (Ephes.  iv.  12.) 

Which  is  the  best  visible  Church  upon  earth  1  That  is  the 
best,  which  adds  most  members  to  the  one  true  Church,  which 
most  promotes  "repentance  towards  God,  faith  towards  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  good  works  among  its  members.  These 
are  the  true  tests  and  tokens  of  a  really  good  and  flourishing 
Church.  Give  me  that  Church  which  has  evidence  of  this 
kind  to  show. 

Which  is  the  worst  visible  Church  on  earth  ?  That  is  the 
worst  which  has  the  fewest  members  of  the  one  true  Church 
to  show  in  its  ranks.  Such  a  Church  may  possess  excellent 
forms,  pure  orders, — venerable  customs,  ancient  institutions. 
But  if  it  cannot  point  to  faith,  repentance,  and  holiness  of  heart 
and  life  among  its  members,  it  is  a  poor  Church  indeed.  "By 
their  fruits  "  the  Churches  upon  earth  must  be  judged,  as  well 
as  individual  Christians.* 

We  shall  do  well  to  remember  these  things.  On  the  one 
side,  a  visible  professing  Church  is  a  true  thing,  and  a  thing 
according  to  the  mind  of  God.  It  is  not,  as  some  would  tell  us 
in  these  days,  a  mere  human  device, — a  thing  which  God  does 
not  speak  of  in  the  Word.  It  is  amazing,  to  my  mind,  that 
any  one  can  read  the  New  Testament,  and  then  say  that  visible 
Churches  are  not  authorized  in  the  Bible. — On  the  other  side, 
something  more  is  needed  than  merely  belonging  to  this  Church, 

*  "  That  which  makes  every  visible  Church  to  be  more  or  less  the  true 
Church  of  God,  is  the  greater  or  less  efficacy  or  conformity  of  its  public 
doctrines  and  discipline  for  adapting  or  fashioning  the  visible  members  of  it, 
that  they  may  become  live  members  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  or  living 
stones  of  the  new  Jerusalem.  Every  true  visible  Church  is  as  an  inferior 
free  school  or  nursery  for  training  up  scholars,  that  they  may  be  fit  to  be 
admitted  into  the  celestial  academy." — Jackson  on  the  Church.  1670. 


226  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

or  that  Church,  to  take  a  man  to  heaven.  Are  we  bom  again  ? 
Have  we  repented  of  our  sins  ?  Have  we  laid  hold  of  Christ 
by  faith  ?  Are  we  holy  in  life  and  conversation  1 — These  are 
the  grand  points  that  a  man  must  seek  to  ascertain.  Without 
these  things,  the  highest,  the  strictest,  and  the  most  regular 
member  of  a  visible  Church,  will  be  a  lost  Churchman  in  the 
last  great  day. 

Let  us  look  upon  visible  Churches,  with  their  outward  forms 
and  ordinances,  as  being  to  the  one  true  Church  what  the  husk 
is  to  the  kernel  of  the  nut.  Both  grow  together, — both  husk 
and  kernel.  Yet  one  is  far  more  precious  than  the  other. 
Just  so  the  true  Church  is  far  more  precious  than  the  outward 
and  visible.— The  husk  is  useful  to  the  kernel.  It  preserves  it 
from  many  injuries,  and  enables  it  to  grow.  Just  so  the  out 
ward  Church  is  useful  to  the  body  of  Christ ;  it  is  within  the 
pale  of  its  ordinances  that  believers  are  generally  born  again, 
and  grow  up  in  faith,  hope,  and  charity. — The  husk  is  utterly 
worthless  without  the  kernel.  Just  so  the  outward  Church  is 
utterly  worthless  except  it  guards  and  covers  over  the  inward 
and  the  true. — The  husk  will  die,  but  the  kernel  has  a  prin 
ciple  of  life  in  it.  Just  so  the  forms  and  ordinances  of  the 
outward  Church  will  all  pass  away,  but  that  which  lives  and 
lasts  for  ever  is  the  true  Church  within. — To  expect  the  kernel 
without  the  husk,  is  expecting  that  which  is  contrary  to  the 
common  order  of  the  laws  of  nature.  To  expect  to  find  the 
true  Church,  and  members  of  the  true  Church,  without  having 
an  orderly  and  well-governed  and  visible  Church,  is  expecting 
that  which  God,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  does  not 
give.* 

Let  us  seek  a  right  understanding  upon  these  points.  To 
give  to  the  visible  Church  the  names,  attributes,  promises,  and 
privileges  which  belong  to  the  one  true  Church, — the  body  of 
Christ  \  to  confound  the  two  things,  the  visible  and  the  inward 
Church, — the  Church  professing  and  the  Church  of  the  elect, — 
is  an  immense  delusion.  It  is  a  trap  into  which  only  too  many 
fall.  It  is  a  great  rock,  on  which  many,  in  these  days,  un 
happily  make  shipwreck. 

*  "  The  invisible  Church  is  ordinarily  and  regularly  part  of  the  visible,  but 
yet  that  only  part  that  is  the  true  one. "— Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor.  1670. 


THE  CHURCH.  227 

Once  confound  the  body  of  Christ  with  the  outward  pro 
fessing  Church,  and  there  is  no  amount  of  error  into  which  you 
may  not  at  last  fall.  Nearly  all  perverts  to  Romanism  begin 
with  getting  wrong  here.* 

Once  get  hold  of  the  idea  that  Church  government  is  of  more 
importance  than  sound  doctrine,  and  that  a  Church  with 
bishops  teaching  falsehood  is  better  than  a  Church  without 
bishops  teaching  truth,  and  none  can  say  what  we  may  come  to 
in  religion. 

III.  Let  me  now  pass  on  to  the  third  and  last  thing  I  pro 
posed  to  do.  Let  me  draw  from  the  subject  some  practical 
counsels  and  cautions  for  the  times  in  which  we  live. 

I  feel  deeply  that  I  should  neglect  a  duty  if  I  did  not  do 
this.  The  errors  and  mistakes  connected  with  the  subject  of 
the  Church  are  so  many  and  so  serious,  that  they  need  to  be 
plainly  denounced,  and  men  need  to  be  plainly  put  upon  their 
guard  against  them.  I  have  laid  down  some  general  principles 
about  the  one  true  Church,  and  about  the  visible  professing 
Churches.  Now  let  me  go  on  to  make  some  particular  appli 
cation  of  these  general  principles  to  the  times  in  which  we 
live. 

(1)  First  of  all,  let  no  reader  suppose,  because  I  have  said  that  no 
membership  of  a  visible  Church  can  be  the  saving  of  a  sold,  that 
it  does  not  signify  to  what  visible  CJiurch  a  man  belongs.  It  does 
signify  to  what  visible  Church  a  man  belongs ; — and  it  signifies 
very  much.  There  are  Churches  in  which  the  Bible  is  practic 
ally  lost  sight  of  altogether.  There  are  Churches  in  which 
Jesus  Christ's  Gospel  is  buried,  and  lies  completely  hidden. 
There  are  Churches  in  which  a  man  may  hear  God's  service 
performed  in  an  unknown  tongue,  and  never  hear  of  "  repent 
ance  towards  God,  faith  towards  Christ,"  and  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  from  one  end  of  the  year  to  the  other.  Such  are 
the  Armenian  and  Greek  Churches,  and  such,  above  all  others 
in  corruption,  is  the  Church  of  Rome.  To  belong  to  such 
Churches  brings  tremendous  peril  upon  anybody's  soul.  They 

*  "  For  lack  of  diligent  observing  the  difference  first  between  the  Church 
of  God,  mystical  and  visible, — then  between  the  visible  sound  and  the  visible 
corrupted, — the  oversights  are  neither  few  nor  light  that  have  been  com 
mitted.  "—Hooker,  Eccles.  Pol,  book  iii.  1600. 


228  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

do  not  help  men  to  the  one  true  Church.  They  are  far  more 
likely  to  keep  men  out,  and  put  barriers  in  their  way  for  ever. 
A  wise  man  should  beware  of  ever  being  tempted  to  belong  to 
such  Churches  himself,  or  of  ever  thinking  lightly  of  the  con 
duct  of  those  who  join  such  Churches,  as  if  they  had  only  com 
mitted  a  little  sin.* 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  let  us  not  be  moved  by  tlie  argument  of  the 
Roman  Catholic,  when  he  says,  "  There  is  only  one  true  Church  and 
that  one  true  CJiurch  is  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  you  must  join  us  if 
you  mean  to  be  saved"  Let  no  reader  be  entrapped  by  such  miser 
able  sophistry  as  this.  A  more  preposterous  and  unwarrantable 
assertion  was  never  made,  if  the  question  is  simply  tried  by  the 
Bible.  It  is  a  wonderful  proof  of  the  fallen  condition  of  man's 
understanding  that  so  many  people  are  taken  in  by  it.  Tell  the 
man  who  uses  this  argument,  that  there  is  indeed  only  one  true 
Church,  but  it  is  not  the  Church  of  Kome,  or  the  Church  of 
England,  or  the  Church  of  any  other  nation  upon  earth.  Defy 
him  boldly  to  show  a  single  text  which  says  that  the  Church 
of  Kome  is  that  one  true  Church  to  which  men  must  belong. 
Tell  him  that  to  quote  texts  of  Scripture  which  merely  speak  of 
"the  Church,"  is  no  proof  on  his  side  at  all,  and  that  such 
texts  might  just  as  well  refer  to  the  Church  of  Jerusalem,  or 
to  the  Church  of  Antioch,  as  to  Rome.  Point  out  to  him  the 
eleventh  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  which  foretells 
Romish  arrogance,  and  Romish  presumption,  and  the  possi 
bility  of  Rome  itself  being  cut  off.  Tell  him  that  the  Church's 
proud  claim  to  be  the  one  true  Church  is  a  mere  baseless 
assumption, — a  house  built  upon  sand,  which  has  not  a  tittle 
of  Scripture  to  rest  upon.  Alas,  how  awful  it  is  to  think  that 
many  in  this  day  of  light  and  knowledge  should  be  completely 


*  "If  it  be  possible  to  be  there,  where  the  true  Church  is  not,  then  is  it  at 
Home." — Church  of  England  Homily  for  Whit-Sunday. 

"We  have  forsaken  a  Church  in  which  we  could  neither  hear  the  pure 
Word  of  God  nor  administer  the  sacraments,  nor  invoke  the  name  of  God  as 
we  ought, — and  in  which  there  was  nothing  to  retain  a  prudent  man  who 
thought  seriously  of  his  salvation." — Bishop  JeiveVs  Apology. 

"  Such  adherence  to  the  visible  or  representative  Church  of  Rome,  as 
Jesuits  and  others  now  challenge,  doth  induce  a  separation  from  the  Holy 
Catholic  Church,  and  is  more  deadly  to  the  soul  than  to  be  bedfellow  to 
one  sick  of  the  pestilence  is  to  the  body."— Jackson  on  the  Catholic  Church. 
1670. 


THE  CHURCH.  229 

carried  away  by  this  miserable  argument :  "There  must  be  one 
true  Church;  that  one  true  Church  must  be  a  visible,  pro 
fessing  Church  :  the  Church  of  Eome  is  that  one  true  Church ; 
— therefore  join  it,  or  you  will  not  be  saved  !  " 

(3)  In  the  next  place,  let  us  not  be  shaken  by  those  persons 
li-ho  talk  q/-  "  the  voice  of  the  Church,"  and  the  "  Catholic  Church," 
when  we  disagree  with  them,  as  if  the  very  mention  of  these  worth 
ought  to  silence  us.  There  are  many  in  these  days  of  theological 
warfare,  whose  favourite  weapon,  when  the  Bible  is  appealed  to, 
is  this  :  "  The  Church  says  it ; — the  Church  has  always  so  ruled 
it ; — the  voice  of  the  Church  has  always  so  pronounced  it." 
I  warn  my  readers  never  to  be  put  down  by  arguments  of  this 
kind.  Ask  men  what  they  mean  when  they  talk  in  this  vague 
way  about  "  the  Church."  If  they  mean  the  whole  professing 
Church  throughout  the  world,  cafi  upon  them  to  show  when 
and  where  the  whole  Church  has  met  to  decide  the  matter  about 
which  they  speak.  Or  ask  them,  if  the  Church  had  met,  what 
right  its  decision  would  have  to  be  listened  to,  except  it  could 
be  shown  to  be  founded  upon  the  Word  of  God  1  Or,  if  they 
mean  by  "  the  voice  of  the  Church,"  the  voice  of  the  Church  of 
England,  ask  them  to  show  you  in  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  the 
doctrine  which  they  want  you  to  receive,  and  are  pressing  upon 
you.  Point  out  to  them  that  the  Church  of  England  says 
in  those  Articles,  that  "nothing  is  to  be  required  of  men,  as 
necessary  for  salvation,  except  it  can  be  read  in,  or  proved  by, 
the  Holy  Scriptures."  Point  out  to  them  that  it  says  further 
more,  that  although  the  Church  has  power  to  decree  rites  and 
ceremonies,  and  authority  in  controversies  of  faith,  yet  "  it  is 
not  lawful  for  the  visible  Church  to  ordain  anything  contrary  to 
God's  Word  written,  or  so  to  expound  one  place  of  Scripture  as 
to  make  it  repugnant  to  another."  Show  them  also  what  the 
Church  of  England  says  when  it  speaks  of  the  three  creeds, — 
the  Apostles'  Creed,  the  Nicene  Creed,  and  the  Athanasian 
Creed.  It  does  not  say  they  are  to  be  received  and  believed 
because  the  Primitive  Church  put  them  forth, — but  because 
"  they  may  be  proved  by  most  certain  warrants  of  Holy  Scrip 
ture."  (Arts,  vi.,  xx.,  viii.) 

Tell  men,  when  they  talk  mysteriously  to  you  about  "hearing 
the  Church,"  that  our  Lord  was  not  speaking  of  matters  of  faith 
at  all  when  He  said,  "Hear  the  Church."  (Matt,  xviii.  17.) 


230  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Tell  them  that  your  rule  of  faith  and  practice  is  the  Bible  only, 
and  that  if  they  will  show  you  their  views  in  the  Bible,  you 
will  receive  them,  but  not  otherwise.  Tell  them  that  their 
favourite  arguments,  "the  voice  of  the  Church,"  and  the 
"  Catholic  Church,"  are  nothing  but  high-sounding  phrases, 
and  mere  meaningless  terms.  They  are  great  swelling  words, 
which  make  a  noise  in  the  distance,  but  in  reality  have  neither 
substance  nor  power. 

Alas,  that  it  should  be  needful  to  say  all  this.  But  I  fear 
there  are  only  too  many  to  whom  "  the  voice  of  the  Church  " 
has  been  like  the  fabled  Medusa's  head.  It  seems  to  have 
petrified  their  common  sense.* 

(4)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  warn  members  of  the  Church  of 
England  never  to  take  up  ground  on  behalf  of  their  CJmrch 
which  cannot  be  defended  from  the  Holy  Scriptures.  I  love  the 
Church  of  which  I  am  a  minister,  and  I  delight  to  take  up  high 
ground  on  its  behalf.  But  I  do  not  call  that  ground  really  high 
which  is  not  also  Scripturally  safe.  I  think  it  foolish  and 
wrong  to  take  up  ground  from  which  we  are  sure  to  be  driven 
when  we  come  to  argue  closely  with  those  who  differ  from  us. 

]X"ow  there  are  many  in  this  day  who  would  have  us  tell  all 
Presbyterians  and  Independents  that  the  only  true  Church  is 
always  an  Episcopal  Church, — that  to  this  belong  the  promises 
of  Christ,  and  to  no  other  kind  of  Church  at  all, — that  to  separate 
from  an  Episcopal  Church  is  to  leave  the  Catholic  Church,  to  be 
guilty  of  an  act  of  schism,  and  fearfully  to  peril  the  soul.  This 
is  the  argument  made  use  of  by  many.  Let  us  beware  of  ever 
taking  up  such  ground.  It  cannot  be  maintained.  It  cannot 
be  shown  to  be  tenable  by  plain,  unmistakable  texts  of  Scrip 
ture. 

When  the  Scripture  says,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he 


*  The  only  case  in  which  an  appeal  to  the  testimony  of  the  Church  seems 
allowable  is  where  it  is  made  in  order  to  establish  an  historical  fact.  For 
instance,  the  Sixth  Article  of  the  Church  of  England  says,  that  of  the 
"  Authority  of  the  Canonical  Books  of  the  New  Testament  there  never  was 
any  doubt  in  the  Church,"  that  is,  in  the  whole  body  of  professing  Churches. 
Only  let  it  be  remembered  that  receiving  the  testimony  of  the  Church  to  a 
fact  does  not  for  a  moment  imply  that  the  Church  has  any  authoritative 
power  to  interpret  doctrine  infallibly.  A  man  may  be  a  very  competent 
witness  to  the  fact  that  a  book  has  been  faithfully  printed,  and  yet  know  little 
or  nothing  about  the  meaning  of  its  contents. 


THE  CHURCH.  231 

cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God,"— when  the  Scripture  says, 
"Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish," — when  the 
Scripture  says,  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord," 

when  the  Scripture  says,  "  He  that  believeth  not  on  the  Lord 

Jesus  Christ  shall  be  damned ;  "—when  the  Scripture  so  speaks, 
such  doctrines  cannot  be  proclaimed  too  plainly  by  us.  But 
never  anywhere  does  Scripture  say,  from  Matthew  down  to 
Revelation,  "Except  a  man  belong  to  a  Church  governed  by 
bishops,  he  cannot  be  saved."  There  is  not  a  text  in  Scripture 
which  says  anything  of  the  kind,  from  first  to  last.  It  is  in 
vain  for  us  to  argue  as  if  Scripture  had  spoken  in  this  way. 
Once  begin  to  require  things  in  religion  which  are  not  required 
of  men  in  the  Bible,  and  where  are  we  to  stop  1  * 

Let  no  one  misunderstand  my  meaning  in  saying  this.  I  am 
deeply  convinced  of  the  excellency  of  my  own  Church, — I  would 
even  say,  if  it  were  not  a  proud  boast,— its  superiority  over  any 
other  Church  upon  earth.  I  see  more  for  Episcopacy  in  the 
Bible  than  I  do  for  any  other  form  of  Church  government.  I 
consider  the  historical  fact  that  there  were  bishops  in  most  of 
the  professing  Churches  at  the  beginning  of  Christianity,  deserves 
much  weight.  I  believe  it  is  far  wiser  to  have  a  regular,  settled 
Liturgy,  for  the  use  of  congregations,  than  to  make  a  congrega 
tion  dependent  upon  its  minister's  frames  and  feelings  for  the 
tone  of  its  regular  prayers.  I  think  that  endowments  settled 
and  established  by  law,  are  a  way  of  paying  ministers  far  prefer 
able  to  the  voluntary  system.  I  am  satisfied  that,  well  adminis 
tered,  the  Church  of  England  is  more  calculated  to  help  souls  to 

*  "  You  shall  not  find  in  all  the  Scripture  this  your  essential  point  of 
succession  of  bishops."— John  Bradford,  Reformer  and  Martyr,  Chaplain  to 
Bishop  Ridley. 

"I  conceive  that  the  power  of  ordination  was  restrained  to  bishops  rather 
by  Apostolical  practice,  and  the  perpetual  custom  and  Canons  of  the  Church, 
than  by  any  absolute  precept  that  either  Christ  or  His  Apostles  gave  concern 
ing  it.  Nor  can  I  yet  meet  with  any  convincing  argument  to  set  it  upon  a 
more  high  and  divine  institution." — Bishop  Cosin.  1660. 

"  We  have  found  neither  any  express  commandment,  nor  any  example, 
which  prescribes  as  universal  and  unchangeable  one  particular  system  for  the 
regulation  of  the  Church  and  its  ministers.  Our  argument  consists  only  of 
inferences. — The  conclusions  in  favour  of  Episcopacy  from  the  New  Testament 
are  intimations  rather  than  proofs.— We  can  produce  no  single  text  so  clear 
as  to  compel  us  to  conclude  that  the  Apostles  deemed  any  one  peculiar  form 
of  government  to  be  indispensable,  and  unalterable  in  the  Church." — Discourses 
by  the  Rev.  G.  Benson,  Master  of  the  Temple. 


232  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

heaven  than  any  Church  on  earth.  But  I  never  can  take  up 
the  ground  that  some  men  do  in  this  day,  who  say  that  the 
Episcopal  Church  is  the  only  true  Church  in  Great  Britain,  and 
that  all  outside  that  Church  are  guilty  schismatics.  I  cannot 
do  it,  because  I  am  sure  such  ground  as  this  never  can  be  main 
tained. 

No  doubt  the  opinions  I  am  expressing  on  this  point  are 
utterly  opposed  to  those  which  many  members  of  the  Church  of 
England  hold  in  the  present  day.  Such  men  will  say  that  I 
am  no  sound  Churchman, — that  I  am  ignorant  of  true  Church 
principles, — and  so  forth.  Such  charges  weigh  very  little  with  me. 
I  have  found  that  those  who  talk  loudest  about  the  Church  are 
not  always  its  most  faithful  friends,  and  often  end  with  leaving 
it  altogether.  I  am  not  to  be  put  down  by  such  vague  talk 
as  this.  I  should  like  men  who  tell  me  my  views  are  not 
"  Church"  views,  to  consider  calmly  what  authority  they  have 
for  such  an  assertion.  I  appeal  confidently  to  the  authorized 
Formularies  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  I  defy  them  to 
meet  me  on  that  ground.  What  do  these  Formularies  say  of 
the  visible  Church  ?  Hear  the  Nineteenth  Article  :  "  It  is  a 
congregation  of  faithful  men,  in  which  the  pure  Word  of  God 
is  preached,  and  the  sacraments  be  duly  ministered."  What 
do  they  say  of  the  ministry  1  Hear  the  Twenty-third  Article  : 
"  We  ought  to  judge  those  lawfully  called  and  sent,  which  be 
chosen  and  called  to  this  work  by  men  who  have  public 
authority  given  unto  them,  in  the  congregation,  to  call  and 
send  ministers  into  the  Lord's  vineyard."  What  do  they  say 
of  ceremonies?  Hear  the  Thirty-fourth  Article:  "They  may 
be  changed,  according  to  the  diversities  of  countries,  times,  and 
men's  manners,  so  that  nothing  be  ordained  against  God's 
Word."  What  do  they  say  of  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons  1 
Hear  the  Preface  to  the  Ordination  Service:  "It  is  evident 
unto  all  men  diligently  reading  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  ancient 
authors,  that  from  the  Apostles'  times  there  have  been  these 
orders  of  ministers  in  Christ's  Church:  bishops,  priests,  and 
deacons."  What  do  they  say  of  ministers  ordained  according 
to  this  service  ?  Hear  the  Thirty-sixth  Article  :  "  We  decree 
all  such  to  be  rightly,  orderly,  and  lawfully  consecrated  and 
ordered." 

Now  to  all  this  I  heartily  and  cordially  subscribe.      The 


THE  CHURCH.  233 

Church  of  England  calmly  asserts  that  its  own  ministers  are 
Scripturally  ordained.  But  this  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
saying  that  those  who  are  not  ordained  in  like  manner  are  not 
ordained  at  all. — It  calmly  asserts  that  there  always  have  been 
bishops,  priests,  and  deacons.  But  this  is  very  different  from 
saying  that  where  these  orders  are  not  there  is  no  true  Church. 
— It  calmly  asserts  that  a  man  must  be  lawfully  called  and 
sent,  in  order  to  be  a  minister.  But  it  nowhere  says  that  none 
but  bishops  have  power  to  call.* 

I  believe  the  Church  of  England  has  been  graciously  guided 
by  God's  mercy  to  adopt  the  language  of  true  Scriptural 
moderation.  It  is  a  moderation  strikingly  in  contrast  with 
the  bold,  decided  language  which  it  uses  when  speaking  in 
the  Doctrinal  Articles  about  things  essential  to  salvation.  But 
it  is  the  only  true  ground  which  can  ever  be  maintained.  It  is 
the  only  ground  on  which  we  ought  to  stand.  Let  us  be  satis 
fied  that  our  own  communion  is  Scriptural ;  but  let  us  never 
pretend  to  unchurch  all  other  communions  beside  our  own. 
For  my  own  part,  I  abhor  the  idea  of  saying  that  men  like 
Carey,  and  Rhenius,  and  Williams,  and  Campbell,  the  mis 
sionaries,  were  not  real  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  loathe  the 
idea  of  handing  over  the  communions  to  which  such  men 
as  Matthew  Henry,  and  Doddridge,  and  Robert  Hall,  and 
M'Cheyne,  and  Chalmers  belonged,  to  the  uncovenanted 
mercies  of  God,  or  saying  that  such  men  as  these  were  not 
really  and  truly  ordained.  Hard  language  is  sometimes  used 
about  them.  People  dare  to  talk  of  their  not  belonging  to  the 
"  Catholic  Church,"  and  of  their  being  guilty  of  schism  !  I  can 
not  for  a  moment  hold  such  views.  I  deeply  lament  that  any 
one  should  hold  them.  I  would  to  God  that  we  had  many 

*  "  It  might  have  been  expected  that  the  defenders  of  the  English 
Hierarchy  against  the  first  Puritans  should  take  the  highest  ground,  and 
challenge  for  the  bishops  the  same  unreserved  submission,  on  the  same 
plea  of  exclusive  Apostolical  prerogative,  which  their  adversaries  feared 
not  to  insist  on  for  their  elders  and  deacons.  It  is  notorious,  however,  that 
such  was  not  in  general  the  line  preferred  by  Jewel,  Whitgift,  Bishop 
Cooper,  and  others,  to  whom  the  management  of  that  controversy  was 
intrusted  during  the  early  part  of  Elizabeth's  reign. — It  is  enough  with 
them  to  show  that  the  government  by  archbishops  and  bishops  is  ancient 
and  allowable.  They  never  venture  to  urge  its  exclusive  claims,  or  to  con 
nect  the  succession  with  the  validity  of  the  sacraments. "—  Keble's  Preface 
to  Hooker's  Works,  page  59. 


234  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Episcopalians  like  the  men  I  have  named.  People  may  shut 
them  out  from  what  they  call  the  "  Catholic  Church,"  but  I  am 
firmly  persuaded  they  will  not  shut  them  out  from  the  kingdom 
of  God.  Surely  those  whom  God  hath  not  excluded,  we  should 
take  care  not  to  exclude. 

(5)  In  the  next  place,  let  us  not  set  down  men  as  no 
Cliristians,  because  they  do  not  agree  with  us  in  our  manner 
of  worshipping  God.  In  saying  this,  I  would  have  it  distinctly 
understood  that  I  am  not  speaking  now  of  those  who  deny  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  and  the  sufficiency  of  Scripture  to 
make  men  wise  unto  salvation.  I  speak  with  especial 
reference  to  the  great  body  of  Protestant  Dissenters  in 
England,  who  hold  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  as  set 
forth  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation.  I  wish  every  member 
of  the  Church  of  England  to  take  broad,  charitable,  and  Scrip 
tural  views  of  such  persons,  and  to  dismiss  from  his  mind 
the  wretched,  narrow-minded,  bigoted  prejudices  which  are  so 
unhappily  common  on  the  subject.  Are  they  members  of  the 
one  true  Church  1 — Do  they  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ? — 
Are  they  born  again  of  God's  Spirit? — Are  they  penitent, 
believing,  holy  people  1 — If  they  are,  they  will  get  to  heaven,  I 
firmly  believe,  as  certainly  as  any  Episcopalian  on  earth.  Men 
must  tolerate  them, — if  such  a  word  may  be  used, — men  must 
tolerate  them,  see  them,  and  love  them  too,  in  heaven  and  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  Surely  if  we  expect  to  meet  men  of 
different  denominations  from  our  own  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  to  spend  eternity  in  their  company,  we  ought 
not  to  look  coldly  on  them  upon  earth.  Surely  it  were  far 
better  to  begin  something  like  union  and  co-operation  with 
them,  and  to  cultivate  a  spirit  of  love  and  kind  feeling  towards 
them  while  we  can. 

We  may  think  our  Dissenting  brethren  mistaken  in  many  of 
their  views.  We  may  believe  they  miss  privileges  and  lose 
advantages  by  being  separated  from  our  own  Church.  We 
may  be  fully  satisfied  that  Episcopacy  is  that  form  of  govern 
ment  which  is  most  agreeable  to  God's  Word,  and  most  in 
harmony  with  what  we  read  of  in  the  history  of  the  early 
Church.  We  may  feel  persuaded  that,  taking  human  nature 
as  it  is,  it  is  far  better,  both  for  ministers  and  hearers,  to  have 
a  Liturgy,  or  settled  form  of  prayer,  and  endowments  guaranteed 


THE  CHURCH.  235 

by  the  State,  and  an  income  for  ministers  not  dependent  on 
pew-rents.  We  may  feel  persuaded,  from  observation  of  the 
working  of  the  voluntary  system,  and  of  the  state  of  religion 
among  Dissenters  generally,  that  the  way  of  the  Church  of 
England  is  the  "  more  excellent  way."  But,  after  all,  we  must 
not  speak  positively  where  the  Bible  does  not  speak  positively. 
Where,  in  all  the  compass  of  Scripture,  can  we  point  out 
that  text  which  says  that  Episcopacy  and  a  Liturgy  are  things 
absolutely  needful  to  salvation  ?  I  say,  without  fear  of  con 
tradiction,  nowhere  at  all. 

We  may  regret  the  divisions  among  professing  Christians  in 
our  own  country.  We  may  feel  that  they  weaken  the  holy 
cause  of  Christ's  Gospel.  We  may  feel  that  people  have  often, 
and  do  often,  become  Dissenters  in  England  from  very  insuffi 
cient  reasons,  and  from  motives  by  no  means  of  the  highest 
order.  But,  after  all,  we  must  not  forget  by  whom  the  greater 
part  of  these  divisions  were  primarily  occasioned.  Who  obliged 
the  bulk  of  English  Nonconformists  to  secede  ?  Who  drove 
them  out  of  the  fold  of  the  Church  of  England  1  We  of  the 
Church  of  England  did  it  ourselves,  by  not  properly  providing 
for  their  souls'  wants.  Who,  in  reality,  built  the  Dissenting 
chapels,  the  Bethels,  the  Bethesdas,  which  so  often  offend  the 
eyes  of  many  members  of  the  Church  of  England  in  these 
days  ?  We  did  ourselves  !  We  did  it  by  gross  neglect  of  the 
people's  souls, — by  the  grossly  unscriptural  kind  of  preaching 
which  prevailed  in  the  pulpits  of  our  churches  a  century  ago. 
I  believe  the  plain  truth  is,  that  the  vast  majority  of  Dissenters 
in  England  did  not  leave  the  Church  of  England  at  first  from 
any  abstract  dislike  to  the  principle  of  Episcopacy,  or  Liturgies, 
or  establishments. — But  they  did  dislike  the  moral  essays  and 
inconsistent  lives  of  the  clergy ;  and  we  must  confess,  with 
shame,  that  they  had  only  too  much  reason.  Some  may  think 
it  strange  that  they  did  not  see  the  beauties  of  our  Prayer-book 
and  Episcopacy  more  clearly.  But  there  was  one  thing  they 
saw  far  more  clearly, — and  that  was,  that  men  wholly  taken  up 
with  field  sports  and  the  world,  and  never  preaching  Christ, 
were  not  likely  to  teach  them  the  way  to  be  saved.  Surely 
when  these  things  are  so  we  have  no  right  to  speak  harshly 
about  Dissenters.  We  have  no  right  to  wonder  at  secession 
and  separations.  If  sheep  are  not  fed,  who  can  wonder  if  they 


236  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

stray  ?  If  men  found  out  that  the  Gospel  was  not  preached  by 
the  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England,  who  can  blame  them  if 
they  cared  more  for  the  Gospel  than  for  the  clergy,  and  went 
to  hear  that  Gospel  wherever  it  could  be  heard  1 

I  know  well  that  such  opinions  as  these  are  very  offensive  to 
many  people.  Many  will  think  I  am  taking  very  low  ground 
in  speaking  as  I  have  done  about  Dissenters.  It  is  easy  to 
think  so,  and  to  fancy  higher  ground  might  be  found.  It  is 
not  quite  so  easy  to  point  out  higher  ground  in  Scripture,  or  to 
justify  the  language  frequently  used  in  speaking  of  English 
Dissenters.  We  must  consider  calmly  the  conduct  of  the 
Church  of  England  for  the  last  two  hundred  years.  We  must 
not  forget  that  "he  is  the  schismatic  who  causes  the  schism." 
We  must  confess  that  the  Church  of  England  caused  most  of 
the  dissent  that  has  taken  place.  However  much  we  may  regret 
divisions,  we  must  take  the  greater  part  of  the  blame  to  our 
selves.  Surely  we  ought  to  feel  very  tenderly  towards  our 
separating  brethren.  We  should  never  forget  that  many  of 
them  hold  the  essence  of  Jesus  Christ's  Gospel.  Justice  and 
fairness  demand  that  we  should  treat  them  with  kindness. 
Whatever  their  mistakes  may  be,  we  of  the  Church  of  England 
made  the  vast  majority  of  them  what  they  are  at  the  present 
day.  Granting  for  a  moment  that  they  are  wrong,  we  are  not 
the  men  who  can,  with  any  face,  tell  them  so. 

(6)  Let  me  pass  on  now  to  another  warning  of  a  different 
kind.  Let  me  warn  men  not  to  fancy  that  divisions  and  schisms 
are  unimportant  things.  This  also  is  a  great  delusion,  and  one 
into  which  many  fall,  when  they  find  there  is  no  visible  Church 
which  can  be  called  the  only  true  Church  on  earth.  So  weak 
are  our  understandings,  that  if  we  do  not  fall  over  upon  the  one 
side,  we  are  disposed  at  once  to  fall  over  on  the  other.  Let  us 
settle  it  down  then  in  our  minds  that  all  divisions  among  Chris 
tians  are  an  immense  evil.  All  divisions  strengthen  the  hands 
of  infidels,  and  help  the  devil. — The  great  maxim  of  Satan  is, 
"Divide  and  conquer."  If  he  can  set  professing  Christians  by 
the  ears,  and  make  them  spend  their  strength  in  contending  one 
with  another,  our  spiritual  enemy  has  gained  a  great  point.  We 
may  be  very  sure  that  union  is  strength,  and  we  may  be  no  less 
sure  that  discipline  and  uniformity  are  one  great  aid  to  union. 
Order  is  a  vast  help  to  efficient  working  in  Christ's  cause  as  well 


THE  CHURCH.  23 7 

as  in  other  things,  and  "  God  is  not  the  Author  of  confusion,  but 
of  peace,  as  in  all  Churches  of  the  saints."  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33.) 

I  would  not  be  misunderstood  in  saying  this.  I  fully  admit 
that  separation  is  justifiable  under  some  circumstances,  beyond 
a  question.  But  it  is  absurd  to  say  on  that  account  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  schism.  I  for  one  cannot  say  so.  Men 
ought  to  tolerate  much, — I  say  it  confidently, — men  ought  to 
tolerate  and  put  up  with  much,  before  they  think  of  separating 
and  dividing,  and  leaving  one  Church  for  another.  It  is  a  step 
which  nothing  but  the  deliberate  teaching  of  false  doctrine  can 
really  justify.  It  is  a  step  that  should  never  be  taken  without 
much  consideration,  much  waiting,  and  much  prayer.  It  is  a 
step  that  seems  to  me  more  than  questionable,  except  it  can  be 
clearly  proved  that  the  salvation  of  the  soul  is  really  at  stake. 
It  is  a  step  that  in  England  is  often  taken  far  too  lightly, 
and  with  an  evident  want  of  thought  as  to  its  serious  nature 
and  tendency.  It  is  a  common  opinion  of  ignorant  people,  "  It 
is  no  matter  where  we  go.  It  is  no  matter  if  we  first  join  one 
denomination  and  then  join  another;  first  worship  with  this 
people  and  then  with  that.  It  is  all  the  same  where  we  go,  if 
we  do  but  go  to  some  place  of  worship."  I  say  this  common 
opinion  is  an  enormous  evil,  and  ought  to  be  denounced  by  all 
true-hearted  Christians.  This  Athenian  kind  of  spirit,  which 
ever  wants  something  new,  —  which  must  have  something 
different  in  religion  from  what  it  had  a  little  time  ago, — is  a 
spirit  which  I  cannot  praise.  I  believe  it  to  be  the  mark  of  a 
very  diseased  and  unhealthy  state  of  soul. 

(7)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  warn  men  not  to  be  shaken  by 
those  who  say  that  all  visible  Churches  are  necessarily  corrupt, 
and  that  no  man  can  belong  to  them  without  peril  to  his  soul. 
There  never  have  been  wanting  men  of  this  kind,  men  who 
have  forgotten  that  everything  must  be  imperfect  which  is 
carried  on  by  human  agency,  and  have  spent  their  lives  in  a 
vain  search  after  a  perfectly  pure  Church.  Members  of  all 
Churches  must  be  prepared  to  meet  such  men,  and  especially 
members  of  the  Church  of  England.  Fault-finding  is  the 
easiest  of  all  tasks.  There  never  was  a  system  upon  earth,  in 
which  man  had  anything  to  do,  in  which  faults,  and  many  faults, 
too,  might  not  soon  be  found.  We  must  expect  to  find  imper 
fections  in  every  visible  Church  upon  earth.  There  always 


238  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

were  such  in  the  New  Testament  Churches.  There  always 
will  be  such  now.  There  is  only  one  Church  without  spot  or 
blemish.  That  is  the  one  true  Church,  the  body  of  Christ, 
which  Christ  shall  present  to  His  Father  in  the  last  great  day. 

With  regard  to  the  Church  of  England,  I  will  only  remark 
that  men  ought  not  to  confound  the  bad  working  of  a  system 
with  the  system  itself.  It  may  be  quite  true  that  many  of  its 
ministers  are  not  what  they  ought  to  be.  It  may  be  true  that 
some  of  its  revenues  are  misapplied,  and  not  properly  spent. 
This  does  not  prove  that  the  whole  machinery  of  the  Church 
of  England  is  rotten  and  corrupt,  and  the  whole  Church  an 
institution  which  ought  to  be  cast  down.  Surely  there  is 
many  a  good  machine  on  earth  at  this  moment  which  works 
badly,  simply  because  it  is  in  hands  that  know  not  in  what  way 
it  ought  to  be  worked. 

I  will  only  ask  those  who  advise  men  to  leave  the  Church 
of  England,  what  they  have  got  better  to  show  us  ? — Where  is 
the  visible  Church, — where  is  the  denomination  of  Christians 
upon  earth, — which  is  perfect,  without  spot,  and  without  blemish  ? 
None,  I  say  confidently, — none  is  to  be  found  at  all.  Many 
people  of  scrupulous  consciences,  I  firmly  believe,  have  found 
this  to  their  cost  already. — They  left  the  Church  of  England 
because  of  alleged  imperfections.  They  thought  they  could 
better  their  condition.  What  do  they  think  now  ?  If  the  truth 
were  really  told,  I  believe  they  would  confess  that  in  getting 
rid  of  one  kind  of  imperfection,  they  have  met  with  another ; 
and  that  in  healing  one  sore,  they  have  opened  two  more,  far 
worse  than  the  first. 

I  advise  the  members  of  the  Church  of  England  not  to  leave 
that  Church  lightly,  and  without  good  reason.  Numerous  forms 
and  ceremonies  may  be  attended  with  evil  consequences,  but 
there  are  also  evils  in  the  absence  of  them.  Episcopacy  may 
have  its  disadvantages,  but  Presbyterianism  and  Congrega 
tionalism  have  their  disadvantages  too.  A  Liturgy  may  possibly 
cramp  and  confine  some  highly  gifted  ministers,  but  the  want  of 
one  sadly  cramps  and  confines  the  public  devotions  of  many 
congregations.  The  Church  of  England  Prayer-book  may  not 
be  perfect,  and  may  be  capable  of  many  improvements.  It 
would  be  strange  if  this  was  not  the  case,  when  we  remember 
that  its  compilers  were  not  inspired  men.  Still,  after  all,  the 


THE  CHURCH.  239 

Prayer-book's  imperfections  are  few,  compared  to  its  excellencies. 
The  testimony  of  Kobert  Hall,  the  famous  Baptist,  on  this 
subject  is  very  striking.  He  says, — "  The  evangelical  purity  of 
its  sentiments,  the  chastened  fervour  of  its  devotion,  and  the 
majestic  simplicity  of  its  language,  have  combined  to  place  it  in 
the  very  first  rank  of  uninspired  compositions." 

(8)  In  the  last  place,  let  me  advise  men  to  try  to  understand 
thoroughly  the  principles  and  constitution  of  the  Church  of 
England.  I  say  that  advisedly.  I  say  it  to  Churchmen  and 
Dissenters  alike.  The  ignorance  which  prevails  in  our  country 
about  the  Church  of  England  is  great  and  deplorable.  There 
are  thousands  of  members  of  that  Church  who  never  studied  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  of  Religion, — who  hardly  know  of  their 
existence, — and  who  have  often  found  fault  with  the  very 
doctrines  that  these  Articles  contain,  and  especially  the  Seven 
teenth.  Yet  those  Articles  are  the  Church's  Confession  of 
faith.  They  show  what  is  the  Church's  view  of  doctrine.  No 
man,  I  say,  is  a  true  member  of  the  Church  of  England  who 
does  not  thoroughly  agree,  in  heart  and  in  truth,  with  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  of  his  own  Church. 

So  also  there  are  thousands  who  have  never  read  the  Homilies 
which  the  Church  of  England  has  provided.  Many  have  never 
heard  of  them,  much  less  read  them.  Yet  those  Homilies  are 
declared  by  the  Thirty-fifth  Article  to  contain  "godly  and 
wholesome  doctrine,"  and  they  condemn  thousands  of  so-called 
Churchmen  in  this  day. 

So  also  there  are  hundreds  of  thousands  who  do  not  know 
that  the  laity  might  prevent  many  improper  ministers  from 
being  ordained  in  the  Established  Church.  No  man  can  be 
ordained  a  deacon  in  the  Church  of  England,  without  notice 
being  read  in  the  parish  church  to  which  he  belongs,  and  with 
out  people  being  invited  to  tell  the  bishop  if  they  know  of  any 
just  cause  or  impediment  why  he  should  not  be  ordained.  But 
the  laity  hardly  ever  raise  any  impediment  against  the  ordination 
of  a  young  man. — Surely  when  this  is  the  case,  if  men  utterly 
unfit  for  the  ministerial  office  get  into  the  ministry  of  the  Church 
of  England,  the  blame  ought  not  to  be  borne  only  by  the  bishops 
who  ordain  them,  but  to  be  shared  by  the  laity  who  never 
objected  to  their  being  ordained. 

If  we  belong  to  the  Church  of  England,  let  us  wipe  off  this 


240  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

reproach.  Let  us  try  to  understand  our  own  Church. — Let  us 
study  the  Articles  of  Religion  regularly,  and  make  ourselves 
master  of  them. — Let  us  read  the  Homilies  with  care,  and  see  in 
them  what  the  Reformers  taught  as  true.  Surely  I  may  well  come 
round  to  the  point  with  which  I  started.  I  may  well  say  that 
ignorance  covers  the  whole  subject  as  with  a  cloud.  As  to  the 
true  Church, — as  to  the  visible  professing  Churches, — as  to  the 
real  doctrines  and  constitution  of  the  Established  Church  of 
England, — as  to  all  these  subjects,  it  is  painful  to  see  the 
ignorance  which  prevails.  Surely  it  ought  not  to  be  so. 

And  now,  let  me  conclude  this  paper  by  saying  a  few  words 
of  practical  application  to  the  conscience  of  every  one  who 
reads  it. 

(a)  First  of  all,  let  me  advise  every  reader  to  ask  himself, 
solemnly  and  seriously,  whether  he  belongs  to  that  one  true 
Church  of  Christ  which  I  began  by  describing. 

Oh,  that  men  would  but  see  that  salvation  turns  upon  this 
question !  Oh,  that  men  would  but  see  that  it  shall  profit 
nothing  to  say,  "  I  have  always  gone  to  my  Church,"  or  "  always 
gone  to  Meeting,"  if  they  have  not  gone  to  Christ  by  faith,  and 
been  born  again,  and  been  made  one  with  Christ,  and  Christ 
with  them  !  Oh,  that  men  would  understand  that  "  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost," — that  true  religion  does  not  turn  on 
Episcopacy,  or  Presbyterianism, — on  churches  or  chapels, — on 
liturgies  or  extempore  prayer, — but  on  justification  and  sancti- 
fication,  on  saving  faith,  and  new  hearts  !  *  Oh,  that  men  would 
set  their  minds  more  upon  these  points,  and  leave  off  their 
miserable  squabbling  about  unprofitable  controversies,  and  settle 
down  to  this  one  great  question, — Have  I  come  to  Christ  and 
laid  hold  of  Him,  and  been  born  again  1 

(b)  Last  of  all,  if  we  can  say  that  we  belong  to  the  one  true 


*  "  I  cannot  be  so  narrow  in  my  principles  of  Church  communion  as  many 
are, — that  are  so  much  for  a  Liturgy,  or  so  much  against  it, — so  much  for 
ceremonies,  or  so  much  against  them,  that  they  can  hold  communion  with  no 
Church  that  is  not  of  their  mind  and  way. 

"I  cannot  be  of  their  mind  who  think  God  will  not  accept  him  tlint 
prayeth  by  the  Common  Prayer-book;  and  that  such  forms  are  a  self- 
invented  worship  which  God  rejecteth  ;  nor  yet  can  I  be  of  their  mind  that 
say  the  like  of  extempore  prayers." — Baxter,  in  Orme's  Life,  page  385. 


THE  CHURCH.  241 

Church,  wo  may  rejoice.  Our  Church  shall  never  fall. — Our 
Church  shall  never  come  to  an  end.  The  world  and  all  its 
greatness  will  pass  away.  The  works  of  statesmen  shall  vanish 
and  come  to  nothing.  The  cathedrals  and  churches  of  man's 
erecting  shall  all  crumble  into  dust.  But  the  one  true  Church 
shall  never  perish. — It  is  built  upon  a  rock. — It  shall  stand  for 
ever. — It  shall  never  fall. — It  shall  wax  brighter  and  brighter  to 
the  end,  and  never  be  so  bright  as  when  the  wicked  shall  be 
separated  from  it,  and  it  shall  stand  alone. 

If  we  belong  to  the  true  Church,  let  us  not  waste  our  time  in 
controversies  about  outward  things.  Let  us  say  to  them  all, 
"  Get  ye  behind  me."  Let  us  care  for  nothing  so  much  as  the 
heart  and  marrow  of  Christianity.  Let  the  grand  point  to  which 
we  give  our  attention  be  the  essence  of  true  religion, — the 
foundations  of  the  one  true  Church. 

If  we  belong  to  the  true  Church,  let  us  see  that  we  love  all 
its  members.  Let  our  principle  be,  "  Grace  be  with  all  that 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity."  (Ephes.  vi.  24.) 
Wherever  we  find  a  man  that  has  grace  and  faith,  let  us  hold 
out  our  right  hand  to  him.  Let  us  not  stop  to  ask  him  where 
he  was  baptized,  and  what  place  of  worship  he  attends  ? — Has 
he  been  with  Jesus  1 — Is  he  born  again  ? — Then  let  us  say  to 
ourselves,  "This  is  a  brother.  We  are  to  be  with  him  in 
heaven  by-and-by  for  ever.  Let  us  love  him  upon  earth.  If 
we  are  to  be  in  the  same  home,  let  us  love  each  other  even  now 
upon  the  road."* 

Finally,  if  we  belong  to  the  true  Church,  let  us  try  to  increase 
the  number  of  members  of  that  Church.  Let  us  not  work 
merely  for  a  party,  or  labour  only  to  get  proselytes  to  our  own 
professing  visible  Church.  Let  our  first  care  be  to  pluck  brands 
from  the  fire, — to  awaken  sleeping  souls — to  rouse  those  who 
{ire  in  darkness  and  ignorance,  and  to  make  them  acquainted 
with  Him  who  is  "the  light  of  the  world,"  and  "Whom  to 
know  is  life  eternal."  Never  let  us  forget,  that  he  who  has 
helped  to  turn  one  sinner  from  his  sins  and  make  him  a  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  has  done  a  far  more  glorious  and  lasting 
work  than  if  he  had  built  York  Minster,  or  St.  Peter's  at  Rome. 


*  "  Wherever  my  Lord  has  a  true  believer,  I  have  a  brother, — Bishop 
M'Uvaine. 


XL 

THE  PKIEST. 
"  We  have  a  great  High  Priest." — HEB.  iv.  14. 

HE  that  wishes  to  have  any  comfort  in  religion  must  have  a 
priest.  A  religion  without  a  priest  is  a  poor,  unhappy,  useless 
thing.  Now  what  is  our  religion  1  Have  we  a  Priest  ? 

We  are  all  such  sinful,  corrupt  creatures,  that  we  are  unfit, 
by  ourselves,  to  have  anything  to  do  with  God.  God  is  so  holy 
a  Being  that  He  cannot  bear  that  which  is  evil,  and  so  high  a 
Being  that  His  majesty  makes  us  afraid.  We  are  so  fallen, 
and  defective,  and  guilty,  that  we  naturally  shrink  from  God, 
and  dare  not  speak  to  Him  or  look  Him  in  the  face.  We  need 
an  almighty  Friend  between  us.  We  need  a  Mediator  and 
Advocate,  able,  willing,  loving,  commissioned,  tried,  proved, 
and  ready  to  help  us.  Have  we  found  this  out  1  Have  we  got 
a  Friend  "\  Have  we  a  Priest  ? 

The  Christian  religion  provides  the  very  thing  that  man's 
soul  and  conscience  require.  It  is  the  glory  of  God's  Word 
that  it  reveals  to  man  the  very  Friend  and  Mediator  that  he 
needs,— the  God-man  Christ  Jesus.  It  tells  us  of  the  very 
Priest  that  meets  our  wants, — even  Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  It 
sets  Him  fully  before  us,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  as  the 
very  Person  that  our  longing  hearts  could  desire.  To  open  up 
this  great  subject  is  the  simple  purpose  of  this  paper. 

I  think  it  will  clear  our  way,  and  throw  broad  light  on  the 
matter  in  hand,  if  I  state  three  plain  questions,  and  try  to 
supply  answers  to  them. 

I.   Where  is  Jesus  Clirist  now  ? 
II.    What  is  Jesus  Christ  doing  now  ? 

III.    What  is  Jesus  Christ  going  to  do  before  the  end  of  the 
world  ? 

242 


THE  PKIEST.  243 

When  we  have  considered  these  three  questions,  we  shall 
perhaps  be  better  able  to  answer  the  inquiry,  Have  we  a  Priest  1 

r  {I.  In  the  first  place,  Where  is  Jesus  Christ  now  ? 

Let  us  take  care  that  we  understand  the  drift  of  this  inquiry. 
He  about  whom  we  are  now  asking  is  no  common  person.  He 
is  God  as  well  as  man,  and  man  as  well  as  God.  The  words  of 
the  Creed  ought  to  be  carefully  remembered.  Jesus  Christ  is — 
"God  of  the  substance  of  the  Father,  begotten  before  the 
worlds ;  and  Man  of  the  substance  of  His  mother,  born  in  the 
world :  perfect  God  and  perfect  Man,  of  a  reasonable  soul  and 
human  flesh  subsisting." — This,  at  any  rate,  is  sound  speech 
that  cannot  be  condemned.  This  is  one  of  the  foundation  doc 
trines  of  Christianity. 

Where  is  Jesus  Christ,  as  God  ?  That  is  not  the  question  I 
want  to  consider.  As  God  He  is  everywhere.  He  fills  heaven 
and  earth.  There  is  no  secret  corner,  there  is  no  height  above 
or  depth  beneath  where  He  is  not.  Wherever  two  or  three 
are  met  together  on  earth  in  His  name,  there  is  He  in  the  midst 
of  them. — "  Show  me  where  your  God  is,"  said  an  infidel  to  a 
Christian.  "  Show  me  where  your  God  is,  and  I  will  give  you 
a  penny." — "Show  me  where  He  is  not,"  was  the  crushing 
reply.  I  am  not  asking  where  Christ  is  as  God. 

But  where  is  Christ,  as  Man  ?  That  is  the  point.  Where  is 
the  body  that  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary?  Where  is  the 
head  that  was  crowned  with  thorns?  Where  are  the  hands 
that  were  nailed  to  the  cross,  and  the  feet  that  walked  by  the 
sea  of  Galilee  1  Where  are  the  eyes  that  wept  tears  at  the 
grave  of  Lazarus  ?  Where  is  the  side  that  was  pierced  with  a 
spear  1  Where  is  the  "  visage  that  was  marred  more  than  any 
man,  and  the  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men?"  (Isa.  lii.  14.) 
Where,  in  a  word,  is  the  Man  Christ  Jesus?  That  is  the 
question. 

I  answer  in  the  words  of  Scripture,  that  "Christ  is  passed 
into  the  heavens," — that  He  "has  entered  into  the  holy  place," 
— that  "  He  has  entered  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in 
the  presence  of  God  for  us," — and  that  "the  heavens  must 
receive  Him  until  the  time  of  restitution  of  all  things."  (Heb. 
iv.  14;  ix.  12-24;  Acts  iii.  21.) 

Let  us  mark  this  well.     Christ,  as  Man,  is  in  heaven,  and  not 


244  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

in  the  grave.  The  Jews  pretended  to  deny  that  He  rose  from 
the  dead.  The  infidels  of  modern  times  profess  to  believe  that 
the  ashes  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  are  still  lying,  like  the  remains 
of  any  other  man,  in  some  Syrian  town.  What  is  this  but 
kicking  against  the  pricks  ?  If  ever  there  was  a  fact  proved  by 
unanswerable  evidence  in  this  world,  it  is  the  fact  that  Jesus 
rose  from  the  dead ! — That  He  died  on  a  Friday,  is  certain. 
That  He  was  buried  in  a  sepulchre  hewn  out  of  rock  that  night, 
is  certain.  That  the  stone  over  the  place  was  sealed,  and  a 
guard  of  soldiers  set  around  it,  is  certain.  That  the  grave  was 
opened  and  the  body  gone  on  Sunday  morning,  is  certain. 
That  the  soldiers  could  give  no  account  of  it,  is  certain.  That 
the  disciples  themselves  could  hardly  believe  that  their  Master 
had  risen,  is  certain.  That  after  seeing  Him  several  times  for 
forty  days,  they  at  last  were  convinced,  is  certain.  That,  once 
convinced,  they  never  ceased  to  teach  and  hold,  even  to  death, 
that  their  Master  had  risen,  is  certain.  That  the  unbelieving 
Jews  could  neither  shake  the  disciples  out  of  their  belief,  nor 
show  Christ's  dead  body,  nor  give  any  satisfactory  account  of 
what  had  become  of  it,  is  equally  certain.  All  this  is  certain, 
certain,  certain !  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  great,  unan 
swerable,  undeniable  fact.  There  are  none  so  blind  as  those 
that  will  not  see. 

Once  more  let  us  mark  this  point.  Christ,  as  man,  is  in 
heaven  and  not  on  the  Communion  Table,  at  the  celebration  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.  He  is  not  present  at  that  holy  sacrament  under 
the  form  of  bread  and  wine,  as  the  Eoman  Catholics,  and  some 
Anglicans,  say.  The  consecrated  bread  is  not  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  the  consecrated  wine  is  not  the  blood  of  Christ. 
Those  sacred  elements  are  the  emblem  of  something  absent,  and 
not  of  something  present.  The  words  of  the  Prayer-book  state 
this  fact  with  unmistakable  clearness  :  "  The  sacramental  bread 
and  wine  remain  still  in  their  very  natural  substance,  and  there 
fore  may  not  be  adored  (for  that  were  idolatry  to  be  abhorred 
of  all  faithful  Christians) ;  and  the  natural  body  and  blood  of 
our  Saviour  Christ  are  in  heaven  and  not  here,  it  being  against 
the  truth  of  Christ's  natural  body  to  be  at  one  time  in  more 
places  than  one." — Rubric  at  the  end  of  the  Communion  Service. 

Let  these  things  sink  down  into  our  hearts.  It  is  a  point  of 
vast  importance  in  this  day,  to  see  clearly  where  Christ's  natural 


THE  PRIEST.  245 

body  and  blood  are.     Right  knowledge  of  this  point  may  save 
our  souls  from  many  ruinous  errors. 

Let  us  not  be  moved,  for  a  moment,  by  the  infidel,  when  he 
sneers  at  miracles,  and  tries  to  persuade  us  that  a  religion  based 
011  miracles  cannot  be  true.  Tell  him  not  to  waste  his  time 
in  talking  about  the  flood,  or  the  sun  standing  still,  or  Balaam's 
ass  speaking,  or  the  whale  swallowing  Jonah,  or  the  ravens 
feeding  Elijah.  Ask  him  to  grapple,  like  a  man,  with  the 
greatest  miracle  of  all, — the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the 
dead.  Ask  him  to  explain  away  the  evidence  of  that  miracle, 
if  he  can.  Remind  him  that,  long  before  He  died,  Jesus  Christ 
staked  the  truth  of  His  Messiahship  on  His  resurrection,  and 
told  the  Jews  not  to  believe  Him  if  He  did  not  rise  from  the 
dead.  Remind  him  that  the  Jews  remembered  this,  and  did  all 
they  could  to  prevent  any  removal  of  our  Lord's  body,  but  in 
vain.  Tell  him,  finally,  that  when  he  has  overthrown  the 
evidence  of  Christ's  resurrection,  it  will  be  time  to  listen  to  his 
argument  against  miracles  in  general,  but  not  till  then.  The; 
Man  Christ  Jesus  is  in  heaven,  and  not  on  earth.  The  mere 
fact  that  His  natural  body  and  blood  are  in  heaven,  is  one 
among  many  proofs  of  the  truth  of  Christianity. 

Let  us  not  be  moved  by  the  Roman  Catholic,  any  more  than 
by  the  infidel.  Let  us  not  listen  to  his  favourite  doctrine  of 
Christ's  body  and  blood  being  "  really  present "  in  the  elements 
of  bread  and  wine  at  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  is  his  common 
argument  that  we  should  believe  the  doctrine,  though  we  cannot 
understand  it;  and  that  it  is  a  pleasant,  comfortable,  and 
reverent  thought,  that  Christ's  natural  body  and  blood  are  in 
the  bread  and  wine  in  some  mysterious  way,  though  we  know 
not  how.  Let  us  beware  of  the  argument.  It  is  not  only  with 
out  foundation  of  Scripture,  but  full  of  dangerous  heresy.  Let  us 
stand  fast  on  the  old  doctrine,  that  Christ's  natural  body  and 
blood  "  cannot  be  in  more  places  than  one  at  one  time."  Let 
us  maintain  firmly  that  Christ's  human  nature  is  like  our  own, 
sin  only  excepted,  and  cannot  therefore  be  at  once  in  heaven 
and  on  the  Communion  Table.  He  that  overthrows  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  real,  true,  and  proper  humanity,  is  no  friend  to  the 
Gospel,  any  more  than  he  that  denies  His  divinity.  Tell  me 
that  my  Lord  is  not  really  Man,  and  you  rob  me  of  one  half  of 
my  soul's  comfort.  Tell  me  that  His  body  can  be  on  earth  and 


246  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

yet  in  heaven  at  the  same  time,  and  you  tell  me  that  He  is  not 
Man.  Let  us  resist  this  mischievous  doctrine.  Christ,  as  Man, 
is  in  heaven,  and  in  heaven  alone. 

So  much  for  the  first  question  which  I  proposed  to  answer. 
Christ  is  in  heaven,  and  not  in  the  grave.  Miserable  indeed  is 
that  religion  which  is  content  to  honour  Him  as  nothing  more 
than  a  moral  teacher,  who  died  like  Plato  or  Socrates,  and  saw 
corruption. — Christ  is  in  heaven,  and  not  in  the  bread  and  wine 
at  the  Lord's  Supper.  They  do  Him  little  real  honour  who  in 
fancied  reverence  try  to  persuade  us  that  His  body  is  a  body 
unlike  that  of  man. — Christ  is  in  heaven,  alive,  and  not  dead. 
For  ever  let  us  glory  in  His  atoning  death,  and  the  life-blood 
that  He  shed  for  us  on  the  cross.  But  never  let  us  forget  that 
He  was  "raised  again  for  our  justification."  His  life  is  as 
important  to  us  as  His  death.  What  saith  the  Scripture  1  "  If, 
when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death 
of  His  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by 
His  life."  (Rom.  v.  10.) 

II.  Let  us  next  consider  the  second  question  which  I  propose 
to  examine  :  What  is  Jesus  Christ  doing  now  ? 

That  He  is  doing  some  great  thing  for  man  wre  need  not 
doubt  for  a  moment.  The  Bible  account  of  all  His  dealings 
with  man  makes  it  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  other  conclusion. 
In  abounding  mercy  and  grace  He  has  always  been  taking 
thought  for  our  poor  fallen  race,  and  caring  for  our  best  interests. 
He  has  been  ever  caring  and  working  for  our  souls.  And  "  His 
mercy  endure th  for  ever."  He  never  changes. 

Do  we  not  read  that  Christ  was  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world?"  (Rev.  xiii.  18.)  Do  we  not  hear 
Him  saying,  "  When  the  Lord  gave  to  the  sea  His  decree, 
that  the  wraters  should  not  pass  His  commandment :  when  He 
appointed  the  foundations  of  the  earth  :  then  I  was  by  Him,  as 
one  brought  up  with  Him  :  and  I  was  daily  His  delight,  rejoicing 
always  before  Him  ;  rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part  of  the  earth ; 
and  my  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men."  (Prov.  viii. 
29-31.)  Are  we  not  taught  everywhere  in  Scripture  that  for 
4000  years  He  was  trusted  for  salvation  by  all  saved  souls, 
though  seen  dimly  and  afar  off  through  figures  and  sacrifices  ? — 
Do  we  not  learn  that  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  was  the  only 


THE  PRIEST.  247 

hope  of  Abel,  and  Enoch,  and  Noah,  and  Abraham,  and  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  and  Moses,  and  Samuel,  and  David,  though  they 
only  saw  "  through  a  glass  darkly  "  what  we  see  face  to  face "? 
— Do  we  not  know  that  in  the  fulness  of  time  Christ  came  into 
the  world  born  of  a  woman,  lived  for  us,  suffered  for  us, 
wrought  righteousness  for  us,  made  satisfaction  for  us,  died  for 
us,  rose  again  for  us,  and  purchased  eternal  redemption  for 
sinners  at  the  cost  of  His  own  blood  ? — And  can  we  doubt  for  a 
moment  that  Christ  is  still  doing  great  things  for  us?  No, 
indeed !  He  said  Himself  in  a  certain  place,  "  My  Father 
worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  (John  v.  17.)  We  may  take 
up  the  expression,  *  and  say,  "Christ  has  worked  for  us,  and 
Christ  is  working  for  us  at  this  very  day." 

But  what  is  that  special  thing  that  Christ  is  doing  now  1 
The  question  demands  our  best  attention.  This  is  no  light  and 
speculative  matter.  It  lies  near  the  foundation  of  all  comfort 
able  Christianity.  Let  us  see. 

Christ  is  now  carrying  on  in  heaven  the  work  of  a  Priest, 
which  He  began  upon  earth.  He  took  our  nature  on  Him  in 
the  fulness  of  time,  and  became  a  man,  that  He  might  be 
perfectly  fitted  to  be  the  Priest  that  our  case  required.  As  a 
Priest,  He  offered  up  His  body  and  soul  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin 
upon  the  cross,  and  made  a  complete  atonement  for  us  with  His 
own  blood.  As  a  Priest,  He  ascended  up  on  high,  passed 
within  the  veil,  and  entered  into  the  presence  of  God.  As  a 
Priest,  He  is  now  sitting  on  our  behalf  at  the  right  hand  of 
God ;  and  what  He  began  actively  on  earth  He  is  carrying  on 
actively  in  heaven.  This  is  what  Christ  is  doing. 

How  and  in  what  manner  does  Christ  exercise  His  priestly 
office  ?  This  is  a  deep  subject,  and  one  about  which  it  is  easy  to 
make  rash  statements.  The  action  of  one  of  the  Persons  of  the 
blessed  Trinity  in  heaven  is  a  high  thing,  and  passes  man's 
understanding.  The  place  whereon  we  stand  is  holy  ground. 
The  thing  we  are  handling  must  be  touched  with  reverence,  like 
the  ark  of  God.  Nevertheless,  there  are  some  things  about 
Christ's  priestly  office  which  even  our  weak  eyes  may  boldly 
look  at ;  and  God  has  caused  them  to  be  written  plainly  for  our 
learning.  "  The  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God  : 
but  those  things  which  are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to  our 
children."  (Dent.  xxix.  29.)  Let  us  see. 


248  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

(1)  We  need  not  doubt  that  Christ,  as  our  Priest,   is  ever 
presenting   the  merits  of  His  sacrifice  for  us  before   God.     Of 
course  He  has  no  need  to  repeat  that  sacrifice.      "  By  one  offer 
ing  He  has  perfected  for  ever  those  that  are  sanctified."      (Heb. 
x.    14.)     But   in  some  ineffable  manner  He  is  ever  in  God's 
presence  as  the  Bearer  of  the  sins  of  His  people.    The  atonement 
made  on  the  cross  for  us  is  kept  continually  in  remembrance  by 
the  appearance  of  Him  who  made  it.      Twenty-seven  times  the 
visions  of  heaven  in  Revelation  describe  Christ  as  the  "  Lamb." 
Twice  they  call  Him  "  the  Lamb  slain."      Twice  they  speak  of 
His  "  blood."      The  Priest  who  offered  the  sacrifice  is  always  in 
heaven  :  the  sacrifice  is  never  forgotten  in  heaven  :  and  so  they 
that  trust  in  it  are  always  acceptable  in  heaven.     This  is  one 
thing. 

(2)  Again :  we  need  not  doubt  that  Christ,  as  our  Priest,  is 
ever  interceding  for  us  in  heaven.     It  is  written,  "  He  is  able  to 
save  them  to  the  uttermost  who  come  unto  God  by  Him,  because 
He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."      (Heb.  vii.  25.) 
It  is  asked  by  St.  Paul,  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ? "  and  one 
reason  he  gives  why  there  is  no  condemnation  for  believers,  is 
the   fact   that    "  Christ  maketh   intercession   for   us."     (Rom. 
viii.  34.)     Of  the  manner  of  that  intercession  we  cannot  of 
course   speak   particularly  :  we   may   not  intrude   into   things 
unseen.     But  it   may   suffice  us  to  remember  how  our  Lord 
prayed  for  His  people  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  John,  and 
how  He  told  Peter  He  prayed  for  him,  that  his  faith  might  not 
fail     (Luke  xxii.  32.)     Our  great  High  Priest  knows  how  to 
intercede.     This  is  another  thing. 

(3)  Again  :    we  need  not  doubt  that  Christ,  as  our  Priest, 
pi'esents  the  names  of  His  people  continually  before  His  Father. 
The  Jewish  high  priest  had  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel 
engraved  on  the  ornaments  he  wore  upon  his  head  and  shoulders. 
That  this  was  the  figure  of  something  which  Christ  is  ever  doing 
for  Christians  in  heaven,  is  clear  and  plain  as  the  day.     He 
"  appears  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us."      (Heb.  ix.  24.)      He 
acts  as  the  Representative  of  His  people.     Through  Him  they 
are  known  and  thought  for  in  heavenly  places,  long  before  they 
go  there.     The  interests  and  safety  of  the  body  are  secured  and 
provided  for,  because  the  Head  is  already  in  heaven.     This  is 
another  tliinu:. 


THE  PEIEST.  249 

(4)  Again :  we  need  not  doubt  that  Christ,   as  our  Priest, 
presents  the  prayers  and  services  of  His  people  before  God,  and 
obtains   for  them  hearing,  acceptance,  and  favour.     Like  the 
Jewish  Priest,   He  offers   incense  within   the   veil   (Lev.  xvi. 
12,  13),  and  that  incense  is  mingled  with  the  prayers  of  His 
saints.      (Rev.  viii.  3.)      This  is  a  great  mystery,  no  doubt,  but 
one  full  of  consolation.      It  is  hard  at  any  time  to  understand 
how  any  word  or  deed  of  sinful  creatures  like  us  can  ever  come 
into  the  presence  of  God,  and  do  us  any  good.      But  the  Priest 
hood  of  Christ  explains  all.     Placed  in  His  hands  and  endorsed 
by  Him,  our  petitions,  like  bank-notes  duly  signed,  obtain  a 
value  which  they  have  not  in  themselves.      A  young  Christian 
once  said  to  an  old  one,  "  My  prayers  are  so  poor  and  weak,  that 
I  cannot  think  they  are  of  any  use."     The  old  Christian  replied, 
with  deep  wisdom,  "  Only  place  them  in  Christ's  hands,  and  He 
makes  them  look  so  different  in  heaven  that  you  would  hardly 
know  them  again." — Prayers  that  are  worth  nothing  in  them 
selves  are  effectual,  when  offered  "  through  Christ, — for  the  sake 
of  Christ, — through  the  mediation  of  Christ."     Expressions  like 
these  are  so  common,  that  few  duly  weigh  their  meaning.     But 
rightly  considered,  they  are  full  of   deep  doctrine,   even  the 
doctrine  of  the  priestly  office  of  Jesus.     This  is  another  thing. 

(5)  Again :  we  need  not  doubt  that  Christ,  as  our  Priest  in 
heaven,  is  ever  doing  the  ivork  of  a  Friend,  a  Protector,  a  Coun 
sellor,  and  Advocate,  on  behalf  of  His  people.     It  is  not  for 
nothing  that  we  are  told  that  He  is    "at  God's  right  hand" 
(Bom.  viii.   34),  and  that  He  "sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
God."     (Coloss.  iii.  1 ;   1  Peter  iii.  22.)     These  words  have  a 
deep  meaning.     They  teach  that  Christ  is  ever  watching  over 
the  interests  of  His  people,  and  providing  a  continual  supply  of 
all  that  they  need. — "  He  that  keepeth  Israel  neither  slumbers 
nor  sleeps."     "  We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father, — Jesus 
Christ,  the  righteous."    (Psalm  cxxi.  4  ;  1  John  ii.  1.) — To  hear 
the  daily  confessions  of  His  saints,  and  grant  them  daily  absolu 
tion  ;  to  sympathize  with  them  in  all  their  troubles,  guide  them 
in  their  perplexities,  strengthen  them  for  their  duties,  preserve 
them  in  their  temptations, — all  this  is  part  of  Christ's  priestly 
office.     What  else  can  be  the  meaning  of  St.   Paul's  words, 
when  he  says  to  the  Hebrews,   "Let  us  come  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy  and  find  grace  to 


250  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

help  in  time  of  need  "  1  (Heb.  iv.  16.)  The  Priesthood  of  Jesus 
is  the  very  hinge  and  pivot  on  which  that  whole  exhortation 
turns.  This  is  another  thing. 

(6)  Finally,  we  need  not  doubt  that  Christ  as  a  Priest  in 
heaven  is  continually  doing  the  work  of  a  Receiver  of  sinners, 
and  a  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  The  priest  was  the 
person  to  whom  the  Israelite  was  bidden  to  go,  when  he  was 
ceremonially  unclean  and  wanted  forgiveness.  The  command 
was  distinct :  "  Go  to  the  priest."  The  Heavenly  Priest  is  the 
person  to  whom  labouring  and  heavy-laden  souls  ought  always 
to  be  directed  when  they  want  pardon  and  rest.  He  that  feels 
the  burden  of  sin  on  his  conscience  and  wants  it  taken  away, 
ought  to  be  told  that  there  is  One  appointed  by  the  Father  for 
the  very  purpose  of  taking  it  away,  and  that  the  first  step  he 
must  take  is  to  go  to  Him.  When  the  frightened  jailer  of 
Philippi  cried  out  in  agony  of  spirit,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  1 "  he  got,  to  all  appearance,  a  very  simple  answer : 
"  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 
(Acts  xvi.  30,  31.)  Yet  simple  as  that  answer  seems,  it  con 
tains  the  whole  doctrine  of  Christ's  priestly  office.  It  was  as 
good  as  saying,  "There  is  a  Priest  ready  to  receive,  confess,  and 
absolve  you  :  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.  Go  and  put  your  soul  into 
His  hands,  and  you  shall  have  full  pardon." — The  power  of 
absolving  every  sinner  that  comes  to  Him  is  one  grand  part  of 
Christ's  priestly  office.  "  Thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all 
flesh,  that  He  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  Thou  hast 
given  Him."  (John  xvii.  3.)  "Jesus  whom  ye  slew  and 
hanged  on  a  tree,  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  His  right  hand 
to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel, 
and  forgiveness  of  sins."  (Acts  v.  31.)  This  is  another  thing. 

Such  is  the  manner  in  which  Christ  exercises  the  work  of  a 
Priest  in  heaven.  It  is  a  vast  and  wide  subject.  I  feel  deeply 
that  I  have  only  touched  the  surface  of  it,  and  the  half  of  it  is 
left  untold.  Who  can  describe  fully  the  singular  fitness  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  Priest  of  man  ? — His  possession  of 
all  power  in  heaven  and  earth,  so  that  He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  and  no  case  is  too  hard  for  Him,  and  no  sinner  too 
bad  to  be  saved, — His  tenderness  and  sympathy,  so  that  He  can 
be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities, — His  long-suffering 
and  patience,  so  that  He  can  bear  with  our  weaknesses  and  pity 


THE  PRIEST.  251 

our  mistakes, — His  wisdom,  His  faithfulness,  His  readiness  to 
nidj — who  can  describe  or  number  up  these  things?  None 
know  them  but  those  who  know  them  by  experience  :  and  even 
they  know  very  little  of  their  extent.  Of  all  the  offices  that 
Christ  exercises  on  behalf  of  His  people,  none  will  so  richly 
repay  thought  and  study  as  that  of  His  Priesthood. 

Let  us  thank  God  daily  that  Christ  is  doing  the  work  of  a 
Priest  for  us  in  heaven.  Let  us  glory  in  His  death,  but  let  us 
not  glory  less  in  His  life.  Let  us  praise  God  daily  that  Jesus 
"  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures ; "  but  let  us  never 
forget  to  praise  Him  that  He  "rose  again  for  us,  and  sat  down  at 
the  right  hand  of  God."  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ ;  but  let  us  not  be  less  thankful  for  His  precious 
intercession. 

Christ's  Priesthood  is  the  great  secret  of  daily  comfort  in 
Christianity.  It  is  hard  to  do  our  duty  in  that  place  of  life 
which  God  has  appointed  us,  and  not  to  become  absorbed  in  it. 
We  are  such  poor  weak  creatures  that  we  cannot  do  two  things 
at  once.  The  cares,  and  business,  and  occupations  of  life, 
however  innocent  and  sinless,  often  seem  to  drink  up  all  our 
thoughts,  and  swallow  up  all  our  attention.  But,  oh,  what  an 
unspeakable  comfort  it  is  to  remember  that  we  have  an  High 
Priest  in  heaven,  who  never  forgets  us  night  or  day,  and  is 
continually  interceding  for  us,  and  providing  for  our  safety. 
Happy  is  that  man  who  knows  how  to  begin  and  end  each  day 
with  his  Priest !  This  is,  indeed,  to  live  the  life  of  faith. 

Christ's  Priesthood  is  the  great  secret  of  a  saint's  perseverance 
to  the  end.  Left  to  ourselves  there  would  be  little  likelihood  of 
our  getting  safe  home.  We  might  begin  well  and  end  ill.  So 
weak  are  our  hearts,  so  busy  the  devil,  so  many  the  temptations 
of  the  world,  that  nothing  could  prevent  our  making  shipwreck. 
But,  thanks  be  to  God,  the  Priesthood  of  Christ  secures  our 
safety. — He  who  never  slumbers  and  never  sleeps  is  continually 
watching  over  our  interests,  and  providing  for  our  need.  While 
Satan  pours  water  on  the  fire  of  grace,  and  strives  to  quench  it, 
Christ  pours  on  oil,  and  makes  it  bum  more  brightly.  Start  us 
in  the  narrow  way  of  life,  with  pardon,  grace,  and  a  new  heart,  and 
leave  us  to  ourselves,  and  we  should  soon  fall  away.  But  grant  us 
the  continual  intercession  of  an  Almighty  Priest  in  heaven, — 
God  as  well  as  Man,  and  Man  as  well  as  God, — and  we  shall 


252  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

never  be  lost.     "Because  I  live,"  says  our  Lord,  "ye  shall  live 
also."     (John  xiv.  19.) 

Let  tis  ever  beware  of  any  doctrine  which  interferes  with  the 
Priesthood  of  Christ.  Any  system  of  religion  which  teaches 
that  we  need  other  mediators  besides  Jesus,  —  other  priests 
besides  Jesus, — other  intercessors  besides  Jesus, — is  unscrip- 
tural  and  dangerous  to  men's  souls.  What  greater  folly  can  be 
conceived  than  to  flee  to  the  Virgin  Mary  or  the  saints,  or  to 
put  our  souls  in  the  hands  of  clergymen  and  ministers,  when 
we  have  such  a  Priest  as  Jesus  Christ  in  heaven  1  What  can  a 
woman,  who  herself  needed  a  "  Saviour,"  do  for  the  souls  of 
others  1  (Luke  i.  47.)  What  has  she  done  to  prove  her  love  to 
sinners,  compared  to  the  Great  High  Priest, — Christ  the  Lord  1 
What  single  example  have  we  in  all  the  ]STew  Testament  of  any 
one  using  a  minister  as  a  priest,  even  in  the  days  of  Peter  and 
Paul  1  This  modern  system,  which  is  not  satisfied  with  Christ's 
Priesthood,  but  must  have  mortal  men  as  priests  besides,  bears 
the  mark  of  its  origin  on  its  face.  It  is  from  beneath,  and  not 
from  above.  "  There  is  no  office  of  Christ,"  said  John  Owen, 
"  that  Satan  labours  so  hard  to  obscure  and  overthrow  as  His 
priestly  one."  Satan  cares  little,  comparatively,  for  Christ  the 
Prophet,  and  Christ  the  King,  so  long  as  he  can  persuade  man 
to  forget  Christ  the  Priest.  For  ever  let  us  stand  fast  on  this 
point.  That  Christ  is  carrying  on  the  office  of  a  Priest  in 
heaven,  is  the  crown  and  glory  of  Christian  theology. 

III.  Last  of  all,  let  us  consider  the  third  question  which  I 
propose  to  examine  :  What  is  Jesus  Christ  going  to  do  before  the 
end  of  the  world  ? 

I  will  answer  that  inquiry  in  the  words  of  Scripture.  In 
speaking  of  things  to  come,  the  safest  plan  is  to  go  to  the  Book. 
Let  us  hear  what  St.  Paul  says  to  the  Hebrews  :  "  Christ  was 
once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many ;  and  unto  them  that  look 
for  Him  shall  He  appear  the  second  time,  without  sin,  unto 
salvation."  (Heb.  ix.  28.)  Let  us  hear  what  the  angel  said  to 
the  Apostles  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  in  the  day  of  the  ascension  : 
"Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven? 
This  same  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall 
so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven." 
(Acts  i.  11.)  Let  us  hear  what  St.  Peter  preached  to  the  Jews 


THE  PRIEST.  253 

;it  Jerusalem:  "Times  of  refreshing  shall  come  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord ;  and  He  shall  send  Jesus  Christ,  which 
before  was  preached  unto  you  :  whom  the  heavens  must  receive 
until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things."  (Acts  iii.  19-21.) 
Let  us  hear  what  St.  Paul  writes  to  the  Thessalonians  :  "  The 
Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the 
voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God :  and  the 
dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first."  (1  Thess.  iv.  16.)  Let  us 
hear  what  Enoch  prophesied  5000  years  ago:  "Behold,  the 
Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousands  of  His  saints."  (Jude  14.) 

The  world  has  not  done  with  Jesus  Christ  yet.  The  wicked, 
and  worldly,  and  unbelieving,  and  sceptical,  who  flatter  them 
selves  that  Christianity,  as  a  system,  is  worn  out  and  dying 
away,  will  find  themselves  fearfully  mistaken  one  day.  The 
philosophers  and  admirers  of  science,  falsely  so  called,  who 
talk  of  "  modern  progress  "  and  "  free  thought,"  and  sneer  at "  old 
world  creeds,"  as  they  term  them,  will  have  their  eyes  rudely 
opened  by  and  by.  That  same  Jesus  of  Nazareth  of  whom 
they  speak  so  lightly  now,  will  appear  to  their  confusion,  and 
set  up  a  kingdom  over  all  the  earth.  He  shall  rise  up  from 
that  seat  at  God's  right  hand,  which  He  now  occupies  as 
Priest,  and  come  down  to  this  sin-burdened  world  to  rule  over 
it  as  King.  Every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  every  knee  shall 
bow  before  Him,  and  every  tongue  which  has  spoken  against 
Him  shall  be  silenced  for  ever.  The  great  High  Priest  shall 
come  forth  from  within  the  veil,  and  sit  upon  His  throne  as  a 
King.  This  is  what  Christ  is  going  to  do  before  the  end  of  the 
world. 

How  will  Jesus  come  the  second  time1?  Not  spiritually 
and  figuratively,  as  some  say  ;  but  really,  literally,  truly,  and  in 
the  body,  as  He  came  the  first  time.  He  came  with  a  real 
material  body,  when  He  came  the  first  time  to  surfer  and  be 
crucified.  He  will  come  back  with  a  real  material  body,  when 
He  returns  to  be  glorified  and  to  reign.  There  will  be  a  "real 
presence  "  at  length  on  earth  of  that  holy  body  which  was  born 
of  the  Virgin  Mary  and  crucified  under  Pontius  Pilate.  But  it 
will  be  a  very  different  "presence"  from  that  which  is  now 
ignorantly  talked  of  by  the  Church  and  the  world  ! 

In  what  fashion  will  Jesus  Christ  return  the  second  time  ? 
Not  as  He  came  the  first  time,  in  weakness  and  humiliation. 


254  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

He  shall  come,  as  He  told  Caiaphas  in  the  judgment-hall,  "  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven,"  with  power  and  great  glory.  He  shall 
come  attended  by  thousands  of  ministering  angels,  with  all  the 
pomp  and  majesty  that  becomes  the  King  of  kings.  Before 
His  face  the  frame  of  this  world  shall  be  shaken  to  the  very 
centre.  It  was  shaken  when  the  law  was  given  on  Mount 
Sinai.  It  was  shaken  again  when  Christ  offered  Himself  for 
our  sins  on  the  cross.  How  much  more  shall  it  be  shaken 
when  the  throne  of  mercy  shall  be  taken  down,  and  the  great 
High  Priest  shall  return  in  power  to  reign !  The  earth  quaked, 
and  the  rocks  were  rent,  and  the  sun  was  darkened,  when  the 
great  High  Priest  of  our  profession  shed  His  atoning  blood  for 
us  on  Calvary.  Much  more  then  may  we  expect  signs  and 
wonders  when  He  "appears  the  second  time,  without  sin,  unto 
salvation."  (Heb.  ix.  28.) 

For  what  purpose  is  Christ  coming  the  second  time  1  He  is 
coming  to  set  up  His  throne  of  judgment,  and  to  wind  up  the 
affairs  of  this  sin-laden  and  bankrupt  world.  He  is  coming  to 
raise  the  dead,  and  change  the  living ;  to  gather  all  mankind 
before  His  bar,  and  to  hold  a  last  assize.  He  is  coming  to 
reckon  with  His  professing  Churches,  and  to  punish  with  ever 
lasting  destruction  the  impenitent,  the  unbelieving,  and  the 
ungodly.  They  will  find  to  their  cost  that  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb."  He  is  coming  to  bless  and 
reward  His  own  believing  people,  to  gather  them  into  one 
happy  home,  to  wipe  away  all  their  tears,  and  to  give  them  a 
crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away.  (Rev.  vi.  16.) 

When  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  coming  the  second  time  ? 
We  do  not  know  the  precise  season.  "  Of  that  day  and  hour 
knoweth  no  man  :  no,  not  the  angels  in  heaven."  (Matt.  xxiv. 
36.)  The  time  is  wisely  withheld  from  us  in  order  that  we 
may  be  kept  in  a  watchful  frame  of  mind.  We  know  the  fact, 
but  we  do  not  know  the  date.  When  the  iniquity  of  Christ's 
enemies  is  full, — when  the  number  of  His  elect  is  complete,— 
when  the  last  sinner  in  the  mystical  company  of  His  people  has 
been  brought  to  repentance, — then,  and  not  till  then,  the  Lord 
will  return.  He  will  not  send  the  plough  of  judgment  into  the 
field  till  the  last  sheaf  has  been  gathered  into  the  barn.  Come 
when  He  may,  His  advent  will  be  a  very  sudden  and  unexpected 
one.  It  will  take  a  sleeping  world  by  surprise,  like  a  thief  in 


THE  PRIEST.  255 

the  night.  It  will  startle  a  drowsy  Church  from  its  slumber, 
and  make  myriads  cry,  "  Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for  our  lamps  are 
gone  out."  (Matt.  xxv.  8.)  As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah,  so 
shall  it  be  at  the  second  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Blessed, 
indeed,  is  that  servant  whom  the  Lord,  when  He  cometh,  shall 
find  watching ! 

Great  indeed  are  the  things  which  our  great  High  Priest  shall 
do  at  His  second  coming.  He  did  great  things  when  He  came  the 
first  time,  and  spoiled  principalities  and  powers  by  His  sacrifice 
on  the  cross.  He  is  doing  great  things  now,  by  carrying 
believers  from  grace  to  glory,  by  His  almighty  intercession. 
But  He  will  put  the  crown  on  all  His  doings  for  His  Church, 
when  He  comes  forth  from  within  the  veil  the  second  time,  to 
confound  His  enemies  and  reward  His  friends.  Never  will  our 
great  High  Priest  appear  so  glorious  as  when  He  presents  His 
people  before  the  Father's  throne,  saying,  for  the  last  time,  "  Of 
them  whom  thou  gavest  Me,  have  I  lost  none."  (John  xviii.  9.) 
He  did  thoroughly  the  work  He  came  to  do,  when  He  made 
His  soul  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  died  upon  the  cross  as  our 
substitute.  He  is  doing  thoroughly  the  work  He  undertook 
when  He  ascended  up  to  heaven,  and  sat  down  on  the  right 
hand  of  God  to  be  the  Priest  and  Advocate  of  His  people.  He 
will  yet  do  thoroughly  His  last  great  work,  when  He  shall  come 
again  to  complete  our  salvation,  and  to  present  us  "without 
spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,"  before  His  Father's  throne. 
(Eph.  v.  27.) 

Let  us  lean  back  our  souls,  if  we  know  anything  of  saving 
religion,  on  Christ's  coming  again,  as  well  as  Christ  dying  and 
Christ  interceding.  Let  the  comfortable  thought  of  our  Lord's 
return  sustain  us  in  public  troubles,  and  cheer  us  in  private 
trials.  When  the  governments  of  the  world  are  reeling  and 
tottering, — when  the  air  is  filled  with  rumours  of  wars  and 
revolutions, — when  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  heaving  up  and 
down  and  ill  at  ease, — when  faith  is  faint  and  love  is  waxing 
cold,  and  the  best  of  Churches  seem  running  to  seed  and  decay, 
— when  men's  hearts  are  failing  for  fear  and  looking  after  the 
things  coming  on  the  earth, — in  times  like  these  let  us  fix  our 
eyes  steadily  on  the  second  advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
That  great  High  Priest  who  died  for  us  and  intercedes  for  us, 
will  never  forget  His  people,  or  allow  one  lamb  of  His  flock  to 


256  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

perish.  The  disciples  on  the  sea  of  Galilee,  when  tossed  by 
storm  and  worn  with  toil,  were  ready  perhaps  to  think  their 
Lord  had  forgotten  them.  Yet,  just  when  it  was  the  darkest 
hour  of  the  night,  Jesus  came  to  them  "  walking  on  the  water," 
and  they  heard  His  welcome  voice,  saying,  "It  is  I :  be  not 
afraid."  Let  us  not  cast  away  our  confidence,  however  dark  the 
horizon  may  seem  around  us.  Let  us  look  bade  to  the  cross. 
Let  us  look  upward  to  the  right  hand  of  God.  Let  us  look 
forward  to  the  day  of  the  promised  return.  Let  experience  of 
the  past  give  lessons  for  the  future.  The  merciful  and  faithful 
High  Priest  who  began  a  work  for  us  on  the  cross,  will  bring- 
that  work  to  a  triumphant  conclusion.  He  will  never  forsake 
the  work  of  His  own  hands.  "  Yet  a  little  while,  and  He  that 
shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry."  (Heb.  x.  37.) 

It  only  remains  to  wind  up  the  whole  subject  with  a  few 
words  of  practical  application.  Living  in  a  world  full  of  un 
certainty,  I  commend  the  following  words  to  the  attention  of  all 
who  may  read  these  pages. 

(1)  First  of  all,  have  we  a  Priest  in  our  religion?     Is  there 
any  one  whom  we  employ  as  our  Mediator  and  Advocate  with 
God?     Is  the  person  we  employ  the  one  true  appointed  and 
anointed  Priest,  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord  1     Can  we  lay  our  hand 
on  our  heart  and  say,  "  Christ  is  mine  and  I  am  His  ?     I  have 
come  to  Him,  poured  out  my  heart  to  Him,  received  absolution 
from  Him,  cast  all  my  burden  on  Him,  placed  my  soul  in  His 
hands."     We  may  be  sure,   if   we  have  a  religion  without  a 
Priest,  or  any  Priest  except  Christ,  we  are  in  awful  danger  :  we 
are  yet  unpardoned,  unforgiven,  unfit  to  die,  unprepared  to  meet 
God.     If  we  die  without  Christ  as  our  Priest,  we  shall  awake 
to  find  we  had  better  never  have  been  born.     It  is  not  enough 
to  talk  of  "God,"  and  "mercy,"  and  "providence,"  and  "trying 
all  we  can,"  and  "  saying  our  prayers,"  and  "going  to  church  or 
chapel,"  and  being  "a  member"  here  and  there.     It  will  not  do. 
This  will  not  save  us.     We  need  far  more  than  this.     We  must 
lay  hold  on  Christ  as  our  Mediator  and  Advocate,  or  else  we 
shall  never  be  saved.     Have  we  done  this?     Is    Christ   our 
Priest  ? 

(2)  In  the  second  place,  if  Christ  is  really  the  Priest  of  our 
souls,  let  us  use  Him  regularly,  and  keep  back  nothing  from 


THE  PRIEST.  257 

Him.  It  is  a  sorrowful  fact  that  many  believers  enjoy  the 
Gospel  far  less  than  they  ought  to  do,  for  lack  of  boldness  in 
using  the  priestly  office  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  go  mourning 
and  weeping  along  the  way  to  heaven,  perplexing  themselves 
by  poring  over  their  infirmities  and  sins,  and  carrying  ten  times 
as  much  weight  on  their  backs  as  Christ  ever  meant  them  to 
bear.  Ignorance,  sad  ignorance,  is  too  often  the  simple  account 
of  the  condition  of  these  people.  They  think  only  of  the  death 
of  Christ,  and  not  of  the  life  of  Christ.  They  think  of  His 
finished  work  on  the  cross,  but  forget  His  priestly  intercession. 
If  this  be  our  case,  let  us  turn  over  a  new  leaf,  and  change  our 
plan  this  very  day.  Let  us  think  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  loving 
Friend,  to  whom  we  may  go  morning,  noon,  and  night,  and  get 
relief  from  Him  every  day.  "  Cast  thy  burden  on  the  Lord, 
and  He  will  sustain  thee."  (Psalm  Iv.  22.)  Let  us  live  the 
life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  and  hold  communion  with  Him 
continually.  Let  us  use  Him  every  morning  as  a  Fountain  of 
grace  and  help,  and  drink  freely  of  that  Fountain.  Let  us  use 
Him  every  evening  as  a  Fountain  of  absolution  and  refreshment, 
and  draw  out  of  Him  living  water.  He  that  tries  this  plan  will 
find  it  for  the  health  of  his  soul. 

(3)  In  the  third  place,  if  Christ  is  the  Priest  of  our  souls,  let 
us  beware  of  ever  giving  His  office  to  another.  Let  no  man 
delude  us  into  supposing  that  we  need  any  clergyman,  or 
minister,  or  priest  of  any  Church  on  earth,  to  be  our  spiritual 
director  and  soul's  confessor. 

I  am  sure  this  warning  is  greatly  needed  in  this  day.  One 
of  the  most  mischievous  delusions  of  this  age,  I  firmly  believe, 
is  the  attempt  that  is  widely  made  to  teach  the  benefit  of 
habitual  private  confession  to  a  clergyman.  Occasional  private 
conference  with  a  minister  is  one  thing;  habitual  confession 
of  sin,  with  habitual  absolution,  is  quite  another.  The  first 
practice,  under  proper  restriction, "  may  do  good ;  the  last  is  a 
practice  fraught  with  danger,  dishonouring  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  calculated  to  do  infinite  harm  to  souls. 

(a)  Where  is  the  warrant  of  Scripture  for  habitual  private 
confession  and  private  absolution  ?  I  answer,  Nowhere  at  all. 
Not  a  single  case  can  be  shown  in  the  New  Testament  where 
any  one  confessed  sin  in  private  to  a  minister,  or  was  privately 
absolved.  Not  a  single  word  did  Paul  say  in  the  Epistles 


258  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

which  he  wrote  to  his  two  young  friends  in  the  ministry, 
Timothy  and  Titus,  to  justify  habitual  private  confession  and 
absolution. 

(b)  Where  is  the  man  upon  earth  who  is  really  fit  to  be  an 
habitual  hearer  of  confessions?     He  only  is  fit  for  such  an 
office  who  has  perfect  knowledge,  and  knows  that  the  person 
confessing  is  telling  all  the   truth. — He   only   is  fit  who   will 
receive  no  damage  himself  by  hearing  others  constantly  confess 
and  unbosom  their  secret  sins. — He  only  is  fit  who  is  sure 
to  use  the  knowledge  He  possesses  of  others'  sins  rightly,  and 
can  always  feel  rightly  for  those  who  confess. — He  only  is  fit 
who  has  full  power  to  pardon  the  sins  he  hears  confessed,  and 
to  set  the  conscience  of  the  confessing  entirely  free. — Where 
shall  we   find   such   a   man   upon   earth?      I   answer   boldly, 
Nowhere  at  all!     There  is  but  one  Person  fit  to  be  our  Con 
fessor,  and  that  one  is  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord. 

(c)  Where  is  the  wisdom  of  ignoring  the  lessons  of  history  and 
experience  1     If  there  is  any  fact  in  Church  history  which  is 
clearly  established,  it  is  the  fact  that  the  confessional  has  led  to 
a  flood  of  wickedness  and  immorality.     I  challenge  any  well- 
informed  reader  of  history  to  deny  this,  if  he  can.     He  that 
desires  to  re-introduce  the  practice  of  private  confession  into  the 
Church  of  England  may  be  a  devout  and  well-meaning  man, 
but  he  is  ignorantly  seeking  to  bring  back  among  us  a  fountain 
of  the  worst  kind  of  sins. 

(d)  Where  is  the  sense  or  reason  of  going  to  an  earthly  confessor, 
so  long  as  we  can  have  the  best  of  all  Priests, — the  commis 
sioned  and  appointed  Priest,  the  perfect  Mediator  between  God 
and  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus !     When  His  ear  is  deaf,  and 
His  heart  is  cold, — when  His  hand  is  feeble,  and  His  power  to 
heal  is  exhausted, — when  the  treasure-house  of  His  sympathy  is 
empty,  and  His  love  and  goodwill  have  become  cold, — then, 
and  not  till  then,  it  will  be  time  to  turn  to  earthly  priests  and 
earthly  confessionals.     Thank  God,  that  time  is  not  yet  come ! 

Let  us  stand  fast  in  the  old  paths.  Let  no  man  deceive  us 
with  vain  words.  Away  with  the  plausible  idea  that  habitual 
private  confession  tends  to  "deepen  spiritual  life."  We  may 
be  sure  it  does  nothing  of  the  kind.  Nothing  really  "  deepens 
spiritual  life  "  which  interposes  anything  between  our  souls  and 
Christ.  Ministers  are  useful  just  so  far  as  they  promote  private 


THE  PKIEST.  259 

communion  between  Jesus  Christ  and  our  souls.  But  the 
moment  a  minister  begins  to  stand  between  our  soul  and  Christ, 
even  in  the  slightest  degree,  he  becomes  an  enemy  and  not  a 
friend  to  our  peace. 

Once  more  I  repeat  my  warning.  No  priest  but  Christ ! 
]STo  confessor  but  Christ !  No  absolver  but  Christ !  No 
habitual  private  submission  or  bowing  down  in  religion  to  any 
one  but  Christ !  No  spiritual  director  but  Christ !  No  putting 
of  our  conscience  in  the  power  of  any  one  but  Christ !  If  we 
love  peace  and  wish  to  honour  Christ,  let  us  beware  of  the 
confessional,  or  the  slightest  approach  to  it.  I  declare  I  had 
almost  rather  hear  my  sons  and  daughters  had  gone  to  the 
grave,  than  hear  they  had  adopted  the  habit  of  going  to  a 
confessional. 

(4)  In  the  last  place,  if  Christ  is  the  Priest  of  our  souls,  let 
us  live  always  like  men  who  look  for  His  second  coining.  Let 
us  live  like  men  who  long  to  see  face  to  face  the  Saviour  in 
whom  they  believe.  Let  us  live  like  men  who  would  be  found 
ready  at  any  moment, — like  good  servants  prepared  for  their 
master.  Happy  is  the  Christian  who  lives  the  life  of  faith  in 
Christ's  dying,  interceding,  and  coming  again !  There  is  a 
crown  laid  up  for  "  all  that  love  His  appearing."  (2  Tim.  iv. 
8.)  Let  us  give  diligence  that  this  crown  may  be  ours  ! 


XII. 
CONFESSION. 

"  If  ive  confer  our  sins,  He  is  faithful  and  just  toforyive  us  our  sins,  and 
to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness.'" — 1  Joiix  i.  9. 

THERE  arc  occasions  when  circumstances  give  a  peculiar  im 
portance  to  particular  doctrines  in  religion.  The  assaults  of 
enemies  sometimes  make  it  needful  to  exhibit  some  special 
truth  with  special  distinctness.  The  plausible  assertion  of  some 
error  sometimes  requires  to  be  met  by  more  than  ordinary 
carefulness  in  showing  "  the  thing  as  it  is  "  in  the  Word.  A 
doctrine  may  perhaps  be  in  the  rear  rank  to-day,  and  to-morrow 
may  be  thrust  forward  by  the  force  of  events  into  the  very 
front  of  the  battle.  This  is  the  case  at  the  present  time  with 
the  subject  of  "  Confession."  Many  years  have  passed  away 
since  men  thought  and  talked  so  much  as  they  do  now  about 
"the  confession  of  sins." 

I  desire  in  this  paper  to  lay  down  a  few  plain  Scriptural 
principles  about  "  Confession  of  sin."  The  subject  is  one  of 
primary  importance.  Let  us  beware,  in  the  din  of  controversy 
and  discussion,  that  we  do  not  lose  sight  of  the  mind  of  Holy 
Scripture,  and  injure  our  own  souls. — There  is  a  confession 
which  is  needful  to  salvation,  and  there  is  a  confession  which 
is  not  needful  at  all. — There  is  a  confessional  to  which  all  men 
and  women  ought  to  go,  and  there  is  a  confessional  which  ought 
to  be  denounced,  avoided,  and  abhorred.  Let  us  endeavour  to 
separate  the  wheat  from  the  chaff,  and  the  precious  from  the  vile. 

I.  In  the  first  place, — Who  are  they  who  ought  to  confess  sin  ? 
II.  In  the  second  place, — To  wliom  ought  confession  of  sin  to 
be  made? 

Once  let  a  man  have  clear  views  on  these  two  points,  and  he 
will  never  go  far  wrong  on  the  subject  of  confession. 

260 


CONFESSION.  261 

I.  In  the  first  place, — Who  are  they  that  ought  to  confess  sins? 

I  answer  this  question  in  one  plain  sentence.  All  men  and 
women  in  the  world !  All  are  born  in  sin  and  children  of 
wrath.  All  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God. 
Before  God  all  are  guilty.  There  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth 
that  doeth  good  and  sinneth  not.  There  is  not  a  child  of  Adam 
that  ought  not  to  confess  sin.  (Eph.  ii.  3;  Rom.  iii.  23,  19; 
Eccles.  vii.  20.) 

There  is  no  exception  to  this  rule.  It  does  not  apply  only  to 
murderers,  and  felons,  and  the  inmates  of  prisons  :  it  applies  to 
all  ranks,  and  classes,  and  orders  of  mankind.  The  highest  are 
not  too  high  to  need  confession ;  the  lowest  are  not  too  low  to 
be  reached  by  God's  requirement  in  this  matter.  Kings  in 
their  palaces  and  poor  men  in  their  cottages, — preachers  and 
hearers, — teachers  and  scholars, — landlords  and  tenants, — masters 
and  servants, — all,  all  are  alike  summoned  in  the  Bible  to  con 
fession.  None  are  so  moral  and  respectable  that  they  need  not 
confess  that  they  have  sinned.  All  are  sinners  in  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  and  all  are  commanded  to  acknowledge  their 
transgressions.  Every  knee  ought  to  bow,  and  every  tongue 
ought  to  confess  to  God.  "Behold,"  saith  the  Lord,  "I  will 
plead  with  thee  because  thou  sayest,  I  have  not  sinned."  (Jer. 
ii.  35.)  "If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves, 
and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  (1  John  i.  8.) 

Without  confession  there  is  no  salvation.  The  love  of  God 
towards  sinners  is  infinite.  The  readiness  of  Christ  to  receive 
sinners  is  unbounded.  The  blood  of  Christ  can  cleanse  away 
all  sin.  But  we  must  "  plead  guilty,"  before  God  can  declare 
us  innocent.  We  must  acknowledge  that  we  surrender  at  dis 
cretion,  before  we  can  be  pardoned  and  let  go  free.  Sins  that 
are  known  and  not  confessed,  are  sins  that  are  not  forgiven : 
they  are  yet  upon  us,  and  daily  sinking  us  nearer  to  hell.  "He 
that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper :  but  whoso  confesseth 
and  forsaketh  them  shall  find  mercy."  (Prov.  xxviii.  13.) 

Without  confession  there  is  no  inward  peace.  Conscience 
will  never  be  at  rest,  so  long  as  it  feels  the  burden  of  unacknow 
ledged  transgression.  It  is  a  load  of  which  man  must  get  rid 
if  he  means  to  be  really  happy.  It  is  a  worm  at  the  root  of  all 
comfort.  It  is  a  blight  on  joy  and  mirth.  The  heart  of  the 
little  child  is  not  easy,  when  he  stands  in  his  parents'  presence 


262  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

and  knows  that  he  has  been  doing  something  wrong.  He  is 
never  easy  till  he  has  confessed. — The  heart  of  the  grown-up 
man  is  never  really  easy,  until  he  has  unburdened  himself 
before  God  and  obtained  pardon  and  absolution.  "  When  I 
kept  silence,"  says  David,  "my  bones  waxed  old  through  my 
roaring  all  the  day  long.  For  day  and  night  Thy  hand  was 
heavy  upon  me  :  my  moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought  of 
summer.  I  acknowledged  my  sin  unto  Thee,  and  mine  iniquity 
have  I  not  hid.  I  said,  I  will  confess  my  transgression  unto 
the  Lord ;  and  Thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin."  (Psalm 
xxxii.  3-5.) 

There  is  no  gainsaying  these  things.  They  stand  out  plainly 
on  the  face  of  Scripture,  as  if  they  were  written  with  a  sun 
beam  :  they  are  so  clear  that  he  who  runs  may  read.  Confes 
sion  of  sin  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation :  it  is  a  habit 
which  is  an  essential  part  of  repentance  unto  life.  Without  it 
there  is  no  entrance  into  heaven.  Without  it  we  have  no  part 
or  lot  in  Christ.  Without  it  we  shall  certainly  go  to  hell.  All 
this  is  undoubtedly  true.  And  yet  in  the  face  of  all  this,  it  is 
a  melancholy  and  appalling  fact  that  few  people  confess  their 
sins ! 

Some  people  have  no  thought  or  feeling  about  their  sins  :  the 
subject  is  one  which  hardly  crosses  their  minds.  They  rise  in 
the  morning  and  go  to  bed  at  night ;  they  eat,  and  drink,  and 
sleep,  and  work,  and  get  money,  and  spend  money,  as  if  they 
had  no  souls  at  all.  They  live  on  as  if  this  world  was  the 
only  thing  worth  thinking  of.  They  leave  religion  to  parsons, 
and  old  men  and  women.  Their  consciences  seem  asleep,  if  not 
dead.  Of  course  they  never  confess  ! 

Some  people  are  too  proud  to  acknowledge  themselves  sinners. 
Like  the  Pharisee  of  old,  they  natter  themselves  they  are  "not 
as  other  men."  They  do  not  get  drunk  like  some,  or  swear 
like  others,  or  live  profligate  lives  like  others.  They  are  moral 
and  respectable  !  They  perform  the  duties  of  their  station  ! 
They  attend  church  regularly  !  They  are  kind  to  the  poor  ! 
What  more  would  you  have  ?  If  they  are  not  good  people 
and  going  to  heaven,  who  can  be  saved  ? — But  as  to  habitual 
confession  of  sin,  they  do  not  see  that  they  need  it.  It  is  all 
very  well  for  wicked  people,  but  not  for  them.  Of  course, 
when  sin  is  not  really  felt,  sin  will  never  be  confessed  ! 


CONFESSION.  263 

Some  people  are  too  indolent  and  slothful  to  take  any  step  in 
religion  so  decided  as  confession.  Their  Christianity  consists 
in  meaning,  and  hoping,  and  intending,  and  resolving.  They 
do  not  positively  object  to  anything  that  they  hear  upon  spiritual 
subjects.  They  can  even  approve  of  the  Gospel.  They  hope 
one  day  to  repent,  and  believe,  and  be  converted,  and  become 
thorough  Christians,  and  go  to  heaven  after  death.  But  they 
never  get  beyond  "hoping."  They  never  come  to  the  point  of 
making  a  business  of  religion.  Of  course  they  never  confess  sin. 

In  one  or  other  of  these  ways  thousands  of  persons  on  every 
side  are  ruining  their  souls.  In  one  point  they  are  all  agreed. 
They  may  sometimes  call  themselves  "sinners,"  in  a  vague, 
general  way,  and  cry  out,  "I  have  sinned,"  like  Pharaoh,  and 
Balaam,  and  Achan,  and  Saul,  and  Judas  Iscariot  (Exod.  ix.  27; 
Xum.  xxii.  34 ;  Josh.  vii.  20 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  4) ;  but  they  have 
no  real  sense,  or  sight,  or  understanding  of  sin.  Its  guilt,  and 
vileness,  and  wickedness,  and  consequences,  are  utterly  hid 
from  their  eyes.  And  the  result,  in  each  case,  is  one  and  the 
same.  They  know  nothing  practically  of  confession  of  sins. 

Shall  I  say  what  seems  to  me  the  clearest  proof  that  man  is 
a  fallen  and  corrupt  creature  1  It  is  not  open  vice  or  unblushing 
profligacy.  It  is  not  the  crowded  public-house,  or  the  murderer's 
cell  in  a  jail.  It  is  not  avowed  infidelity,  or  gross  and  foul 
idolatry.  All  these  are  proofs,  and  convincing  proofs  indeed, 
that  man  is  fallen ; — but  there  is  to  my  mind  a  stronger  proof 
still  That  proof  is  the  wide-spread  "spirit  of  slumber"  in 
which  most  men  lie  chained  and  bound  about  their  souls. 
When  I  see  that  multitudes  of  sensible  men,  and  intelligent 
men,  and  decent-living  men,  can  travel  quietly  towards  the 
grave,  and  feel  no  concern  about  their  sins,  I  want  no  more 
convincing  evidence  that  man  is  "bom  in  sin,"  and  that  his 
heart  is  alienated  from  God.  There  is  no  avoiding  the  con 
clusion.  Man  is  naturally  asleep,  and  must  be  awakened.  He 
is  blind,  and  must  be  made  to  see.  He  is  dead,  and  must  be 
made  alive.  If  this  was  not  the  case  there  would  be  no  need 
for  our  pressing  the  duty  of  confession.  Scripture  commands 
it.  Reason  assents  to  it.  Conscience,  in  its  best  moments, 
approves  of  it.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  the  vast  majority 
of  men  have  no  practical  acquaintance  with  confession  of 
sin  | — No  disease  of  body  is  so  desperate  as  mortification. 


264  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

No   heart  is   in  so  bad  a  state  as  the   heart   that   does  not 
feel  sin. 

Shall  I  say  what  is  my  first  and  foremost  wish  for  men's 
souls,  if  they  are  yet  unconverted  1  I  can  wish  them  nothing- 
better  than  thorough  self-knoivledye.  Ignorance  of  self  and  sin 
is  the  root  of  all  mischief  to  the  soul.  There  is  hardly  a  re 
ligious  error  or  a  false  doctrine  that  may  not  be  traced  up  to  it. 
Light  was  the  first  thing  called  into  being.  When  God  created 
the  world,  He  said,  "Let  there  be  light"  (Gen.  i.  3.)  Light 
is  the  first  thing  that  the  Holy  Ghost  creates  in  a  man's  heart, 
when  He  awakens,  converts,  and  makes  him  a  true  Christian. 
(2  Cor.  iv.  6.)  For  want  of  seeing  sin  men  do  not  value  salva 
tion.  Once  let  a  man  get  a  sight  of  his  own  heart,  and  he  will 
begin  to  cry,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

If  a  man  has  learned  to  feel  and  acknowledge  his  sinfulness, 
he  has  great  reason  to  thank  God.  It  is  a  real  symptom  of 
health  in  the  inward  man.  It  is  a  mighty  token  for  good.  To 
know  our  spiritual  disease  is  one  step  towards  a  cure.  To  feel 
bad  and  wicked  and  hell-deserving,  is  the  first  beginning  of 
being  really  good. 

What  though  we  feel  ashamed  and  confounded  at  the  sight 
of  our  own  transgressions !  What  though  we  are  humbled  to 
the  dust,  and  cry,  "  Lord,  I  am  vile.  Lord,  I  am  the  very  chief 
of  sinners  ! "  It  is  better  a  thousand  times  to  have  these  feelings 
and  be  miserable  under  them,  than  to  have  no  feelings  at  all. 
Anything  is  better  than  a  dead  conscience,  and  a  cold  heart, 
and  a  prayerless  tongue  ! 

If  we  have  learned  to  feel  and  confess  sin,  we  may  well 
thank  God  and  take  courage.  Whence  came  those  feelings? 
Who  told  you  that  you  were  a  guilty  sinner  ?  What  moved  you 
to  begin  acknowledging  your  transgressions  ?  How  was  it  that 
you  first  found  sin  a  burden,  and  longed  to  be  set  free  from  it  1 
—These  feelings  do  not  come  from  man's  natural  heart.  The 
devil  does  _  not  teach  such  lessons.  The  schools  of  this  world 
have  no  power  to  impart  them.  These  feelings  came  down  from 
above.  They  are  the  precious  gifts  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  It 
is  His  special  office  to  convince  of  sin.  The  man  who  has 
really  learned  to  feel  and  confess  his  sins,  has  learned  that 
which  millions  never  learn,  and  for  want  of  which  millions  die 
in  their  sins,  and  are  lost  to  all  eternity. 


CONFESSION.  265 

II.  I  now  turn  to  the  second  branch  of  my  subject :  To  wliom 
ought  confession  of  sin  to  be  made  ? 

I  enter  on  this  branch  of  the  subject  with  sorrowful  feelings. 
I  approach  it  as  a  sailor  would  approach  some  rock  on  which 
many  gallant  ships  have  made  shipwreck.  I  cannot  forget  that 
I  have  arrived  at  a  point  on  which  millions  of  so-called  Chris 
tians  have  erred  greatly,  and  millions  are  erring  at  the  present 
day.  But  I  dare  not  keep  back  anything  that  is  Scriptural,  for 
fear  of  giving  offence.  The  errors  of  millions  must  not  prevent 
a  minister  of  the  Gospel  speaking  the  truth.  If  multitudes  are 
hewing  out  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water,  it  becomes 
the  more  needful  to  point  out  the  true  fountain.  If  countless 
souls  are  turning  aside  from  the  right  way,  it  becomes  the  more 
important  to  show  clearly  to  whom  confession  ought  to  be 
made. 

Sin,  to  speak  generally,  ought  to  be  confessed  to  God.  He 
it  is  whom  we  have  chiefly  offended :  His  are  the  laws  which 
we  have  broken.  To  Him  it  is  that  all  men  and  women  will 
one  day  give  account :  His  displeasure  is  that  which  sinners 
have  principally  to  fear.  This  is  what  David  felt:  "Against 
Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  Thy 
sight."  (Psalm  li.  4.)  This  is  what  David  practised  :  "  I  said 
I  will  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the  Lord."  (Psalm  xxxii. 
5.)  This  is  what  Joshua  advised  Achan  to  do  :  "My  son,  give 
glory  to  God,  and  make  confession  to  Him."  (Josh.  vii.  19.) 
The  Jews  were  right  when  they  said,  "  Who  can  forgive  sins 
but  God  only  ? "  (Mark  ii.  7.) 

But  must  we  leave  the  matter  here  ?  Can  vile  sinners  like 
us  ever  dare  to  confess  our  sins  to  a  holy  God  1  Will  not  the 
thought  of  His  infinite  purity  shut  our  mouths  and  make  us 
afraid?  Must  not  the  remembrance  of  His  holiness  make  us 
afraid  ?  Is  it  not  written  of  God,  that  He  is  "  of  purer  eyes 
than  to  behold  evil,  and  cannot  look  on  iniquity  "  1  (Hab.  i. 
13.)  Is  it  not  said,  that  He  "hates  all  workers  of  iniquity"? 
(Psalm  v.  5.)  Did  He  not  say  to  Moses,  "  There  shall  no  man 
see  My  face  and  live"?  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20.)  Did  not  Israel 
say  of  old,  "  Let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die  "  ?  (Exod. 
xx.  19.)  Did  not  Daniel  say,  "How  can  the  servant  of  my 
Lord  talk  with  this  my  Lord  "?  (Dan.  x.  17.)  Did  not  Job 
say,  "When  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  Him  "?  (Job  xxiii.  15.) 


266  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Did  not  Isaiah  say,  "  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am  undone  : — for  mine 
eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  ?  (Isa.  vi.  5.) 
Does  not  Elihu  say,  "  Shall  it  be  told  Him  that  I  speak  *?  If  a 
man  speak,  surely  he  shall  be  swallowed  up  "  ?  (Job  xxxvii.  20.) 

These  are  serious  questions.  They  are  questions  which  must 
and  will  occur  to  thoughtful  minds.  There  are  many  who 
know  what  Luther  meant,  when  he  said,  "  I  dare  not  have  any 
thing  to  do  with  an  absolute  God."  But  I  thank  God  they  are 
questions  to  which  the  Gospel  supplies  a  full  and  satisfactory 
answer.  The  Gospel  reveals  One  who  is  exactly  suited  to  the 
wants  of  souls  which  desire  to  confess  sin. 

I  say  then  that  sin  ought  to  be  confessed  to  God  in  Christ. — 
I  say  that  sin  ought  specially  to  be  confessed  to  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh, — to  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord, — to  that  Jesus  who 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners, — to  that  Jesus  who  died 
for  our  sins,  and  rose  again  for  our  justification,  and  now  lives  at 
the  right  hand  of  God  to  intercede  for  all  who  oome  to  God  by 
Him.  He  that  desires  to  confess  sin  should  apply  direct  to 
Christ. 

Christ  is  a  great  High  Priest.  Let  that  truth  sink  down  into 
our  hearts  and  never  be  forgotten.  He  is  sealed  and  appointed 
by  God  the  Father  for  that  very  purpose,  to  be  the  Priest  of 
Christians.  It  is  His  peculiar  office  to  receive,  and  hear,  and 
pardon,  and  absolve  sinners.  It  is  His  place  to  receive  con 
fessions,  and  to  grant  plenary  absolutions.  It  is  written  in 
Scripture,  "Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever." — "We  have  a  great 
High  Priest  that  is  passed  into  the  heavens." — "Having  an 
High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God,  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true 
heart,  in  full  assurance  of  faith."  (Heb.  iv.  14;  v.  6  ;  vi.  20; 
x.  21,  22.) 

(a)  Christ  is  a  High  Priest  of  Almighty  power.  There  is  no  sin 
that  He  cannot  pardon,  and  no  sinner  that  He  cannot  absolve. 
He  is  very  God  of  very  God.  He  is  "  over  all,  God  blessed  for 
ever."  He  says  Himself,  "I  and  my  Father  are  one."  He 
has  "  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth."  He  has  "  power  on  earth 
to  forgive  sins."  He  has  complete  authority  to  sayHo  the  chief 
of  sinners,  "Thy  sins  are  forgiven.  Go  in  peace."  He  has 
"the  keys  of  death  and  hell."  When  He  opens  no  one  can 
shut.  (Rom.  ix.  5  ;  John  x.  30  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18 ;  ix.  6  ; 
Luke  vii.  48-50  ;  Rev.  i.  18;  iii.  7.) 


CONFESSION.  267 

(b)  Christ  is  a  High  Priest  of  infinite  ivillingness  to  receive  con 
fession  of  sin.  He  invites  all  who  feel  their  guilt  to  come  to 
Him  for  relief.  "  Come  unto  Me,"  He  says,  "  all  ye  that  labour 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." — "If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink." — When  the  penitent 
thief  cried  to  Him  on  the  cross,  He  at  once  absolved  him  fully, 
and  gave  him  an  answer  of  peace.  (Matt.  xi.  28 ;  John 
vii.  37.) 

(e)  Christ  is  a  High  Priest  of  perfect  knowledge.  He  knows 
exactly  the  whole  history  of  all  who  confess  to  Him  :  from  Him 
no  secrets  are  hid.  He  never  errs  in  judgment :  He  makes  no 
mistakes.  It  is  written  that  "  He  is  of  quick  understanding. 
He  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  His  eyes,  neither  reprove 
after  the  hearing  of  His  ears."  (Isa.  xi.  3.)  He  can  discern 
the  difference  between  the  hypocritical  professor  who  is  full  of 
words,  and  the  broken-hearted  sinner  who  can  scarce  stammer 
out  his  confession.  People  may  deceive  ministers  by  "good 
words  and  fair  speeches,"  but  they  will  never  deceive  Christ. 

(d)  Christ  is  a  High  Priest  of  matchless  tenderness.     He  will 
not  afflict  willingly,  or  grieve  any  soul  that  comes  to  Him.     He 
will  handle  delicately  every  wound  that  is  exposed  to  Him.     He 
will  deal  tenderly  even  with  the  vilest  sinners,  as  He  did  with 
the  Samaritan  woman.     Confidence  reposed  in  Him  is  never 
abused  :  secrets  confided  to  Him  are  completely  safe.     Of  Him 
it  is  written,  that  "He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor 
quench  the  smoking  flax."     He  is  one  that  "  despiseth  not  any." 
(Isaiah  xlii.  3 }  Job  xxxvi.  5.) 

(e)  Christ  is  a  High  Priest  who  can  sympathize  with  all  that 
confess  to  Him.     He  knows  the  heart  of  a  man  by  experience, 
for  He  had  a  body  like  our  own,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness 
of  man.     "We  have  not  a  High  Priest  who  cannot  be  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities ;  but  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."     (Heb.  iv.  15.)     To  Him  the 
words  can  most  truly  be  applied,  which  Elihu  applied  to  him 
self,  "  Behold,  I  am  according  to  thy  wish  in  God's  stead  :  I 
also  am  formed  out  of  the  clay.     Behold,  my  terror  shall  not 
make  thee  afraid,  neither  shall  my  hand  be  heavy  upon  thee. " 
(Job  xxxiii.  6,  7.) 

This  great  High  Priest  of  the  Gospel  is  the  person  whom  we 
ought  specially  to  employ  in  our  confession  of  sin.  It  is  only 


268  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

through  Him  and  by  Him  that  we  should  make  all  our 
approaches  to  God.  In  Him  we  may  draw  near  to  God  with 
boldness,  and  have  access  with  confidence.  (Ephes.  iii.  12.) 
Laying  our  hand  on  Him  and  His  atonement,  we  may  "  come 
boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy  and 
find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  (Heb.  iv.  16.)  We  need 
no  other  Mediator  or  Priest.  We  can  find  no  better  High 
Priest.  To  whom  should  the  sick  man  disclose  his  ailment,  but 
the  physician  1  To  whom  should  the  prisoner  tell  his  story, 
but  to  his  legal  advocate  ?  To  whom  should  the  sinner  open 
his  heart  and  confess  his  sins,  but  to  Him  who  is  the  "  Advocate 
with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous"?  (1  John  ii.  1.) 

Why  should  we  confess  our  sins  to  angels  and  dead  saints, 
while  we  have  Christ  for  a  High  Priest  1  Why  should  we 
confess  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  Michael  the  Archangel,  John  the 
Baptist,  St.  Paul,  or  any  other  creature  in  the  unseen  world  ? 
The  Church  of  Rome  enjoins  such  confession  as  this  on  her 
millions  of  members,  and  many  members  of  the  Church  of 
England  seem  half-disposed  to  think  the  Church  of  Rome  is 
right !  But  when  we  ask  a  Scriptural  reason  for  the  practice, 
we  may  ask  long  without  getting  an  answer. 

There  is  no  need  for  such  a  confession.  Christ  has  not  given 
up  His  office,  and  ceased  to  be  a  Priest.  The  saints  and  angels 
cannot  possibly  do  more  for  us  than  Christ  can.  They  certainly 
have  not  more  pity  or  compassion,  or  more  good-will  towards 
our  souls. 

There  is  no  warrant  of  Scripture  for  such  a  confession.  There 
is  not  a  text  in  the  Bible  that  bids  us  confess  to  dead  saints 
and  angels.  There  is  not  an  instance  in  Scripture  of  any  living- 
believer  taking  his  sins  to  them. 

There  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  there  is  any  use  in  such 
a  confession.  We  do  not  even  know  that  the  saints  in  glory 
can  hear  what  we  say ;  much  less  do  we  know  that  they  could 
help  us  if  they  heard.  They  were  all  sinners  saved  by  grace 
themselves  : — where  is  the  likelihood  that  they  could  do  any 
thing  to  aid  our  souls  1 

The  man  who  turns  away  from  Christ  to  confess  to  saints  and 
angels  is  a  deluded  robber  of  his  own  soul.  He  is  following  a 
shadow,  and  forsaking  the  substance.  He  is  rejecting  the 
bread  of  life,  and  trying  to  satisfy  his  spiritual  hunger  with  sand. 


CONFESSION.  260 

But  why,  again,  should  we  confess  our  sins  to  living  priests 
or  ministers,  while  we  have  Christ  for  a  High  Priest?  The 
Church  of  Koine  commands  her  members  to  do  so.  A  party 
within  the  Church  of  England  approves  the  practice  as  useful, 
helpful,  and  almost  needful  to  the  soul.  But,  again,  when  we 
ask  for  Scripture  and  reason  in  support  of  the  practice,  we 
receive  no  satisfactory  answer.* 


*  The  only  passages  in  the  Prayer-book  of  the  Church  of  England,  which 
appear  at  first  sight  to  favour  the  Romish  view  of  confession  and  absolution, 
are  to  be  found  in  the  Exhortation  in  the  Communion  Service,  and  in  the 
Visitation  of  the  Sick. 

In  both  these  cases  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the  Reformers  never  intended 
to  give  any  countenance  to  the  Romish  doctrine,  and  that  the  true  and  honest 
interpretation  of  the  language  used  affords  no  help  to  those  who  hold  that 
doctrine. 

In  the  Exhortation  in  the  Communion  Service,  the  case  is  supposed  of  some 
person  who  "cannot  quiet  his  conscience."  The  advice  then  follows  :  "  Let 
him  come  to  me,  or  to  some  other  discreet  and  learned  minister  of  God's  holy 
Word,  and  open  his  grief ;  that  by  the  ministry  of  God's  holy  Word  he  may 
receive  the  benefit  of  absolution,  together  with  ghostly  counsel  and  advice." 

If  men  are  determined  to  twist  this  passage  into  a  sanction  of  the  Romish 
doctrine  of  habitual  confession  and  absolution,  it  is  iiseless  to  reason  with 
them.  To  my  own  eyes  the  exhortation  seems  nothing  more  than  advice  to 
people  who  are  troubled  with  some  special  difficulties,  to  go  and  speak  to  a 
minister  in  private  about  them,  and  to  get  them  cleared  up  by  texts  from  the 
Bible. 

But  I  can  see  nothing  in  the  passage  like  Romish  auricular  confession  and 
priestly  absolution. 

In  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick,  the  language  used  about  absolving  the  sick 
man,  "if  he  humbly  and  heartily  desire  it,"  is  undoubtedly  very  strong,  and 
the  direction  to  "  move  "  the  sick  person  to  "  make  a  special  confession  of  his 
sins,  if  he  feel  his  conscience  troubled  with  any  mighty  matter,"  is  unmis 
takable. 

Yet,  even  here,  it  is  hard  to  prove  that  this  confession  means  more  than 
any  faithful  minister  of  the  Gospel  would  press  on  any  sick  and  dying  person, 
if  he  saw  him  "troubled,"  or  distressed  about  "some  weighty  matter."  It 
is  only  in  this  case,  be  it  remembered,  that  he  is  to  be  "  moved  to  make  "  it. 

As  to  the  absolution,  the  most  that  can  be  made  of  it  is  that  it  is  declara 
tory.  It  is  a  very  strong  and  authoritative  declaration  of  the  forgiveness  of 
the  Gospel,  addressed  to  a  dying  person,  in  need  of  special  comfort.  It  is 
the  custom  of  the  Prayer-book  to  call  any  ministerial  declaration  of  God's 
willingness  to  pardon  those  who  repent  and  believe,  an  "absolution."  We 
see  this  very  plainly  in  the  beginning  of  the  morning  and  afternoon  service. 
After  the  general  confession,  the  minister  reads  what  is  called  "an 
absolution." 

The  language  of  the  absolution  in  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick  is  undoubtedly 
very  strong.  But  still  it  must  be  observed  that  it  only  declares  a  person 
absolved,  who  is  already  absolved  by  God.  The  very  form  itself  says  that 
the  Church's  absolution  is  to  be  given  to  "all  sinners  who  truly  repent  and 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ."  Now  all  such  are  of  course  pardoned  the  very 


2*70  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Is  there  any  need  for  confessing  to  priests  or  ministers? 
There  is  none.  There  is  nothing  they  can  do  for  a  sinner  that 
Christ  cannot  do  a  thousand  times  better.  When  Christ  has 
failed  the  soul  that  cried  to  Him,  it  may  be  time  to  turn  to 
ministers.  But  that  time  will  never  come. 

Is  there  any  Scriptural  warrant  for  confessing  to  priests  or 
ministers  1  There  is  none.  There  is  not  a  passage  in  the  New 
Testament  which  commands  it.  St.  Paul  writes  three  Epistles 
to  Timothy  and  Titus  about  ministerial  duty.  But  he  says 
nothing  about  receiving  confessions. — St.  James  bids  us  "  confess 
our  faults  to  one  another,"  but  he  says  nothing  about  confessing 
to  ministers. — Above  all,  there  is  not  a  single  example  in 
Scripture  of  any  one  confessing  to  a  minister  and  receiving- 
absolution.  We  see  the  Apostles  often  declaring  plainly  the 
way  of  forgiveness,  and  pointing  men  to  Christ.  But  we 
nowhere  find  them  telling  men  to  confess  to  them,  and  offering 
to  absolve  them  after  confession. 

Finally,  is  any  good  likely  to  result  from  confessing  to  priests 
or  ministers  1  I  answer  boldly,  There  is  none.  Ministers  can 
never  know  that  those  who  confess  to  them  are  telling  the 
truth.  Those  who  confess  to  them  will  never  feel  their 
consciences  really  satisfied,  and  will  never  feel  certain  that 
what  they  confess  will  not  be  improperly  used.  Above  all,  the 
experience  of  former  times  is  enough  to  condemn  "auricular 
confession  "  for  ever,  as  a  practice  of  most  vile  and  evil  tendency. 
Facts,  stubborn  facts,  abound  to  show  that  the  practice  of 
confessing  to  ministers  has  often  led  to  the  grossest  and  most 
disgusting  immorality.  A  living  writer  has  truly  said,  "  There 
is  no  better  school  of  wickedness  on  earth  than  the  confessional. 
History  testifies  that  for  every  offender  whom  the  confessional 
has  reclaimed  it  has  hardened  thousands ;  for  one  it  may  have 
saved  it  has  destroyed  millions." — Wylie  on  Popery,  p.  329.* 

moment  they  repent  and  believe.  When,  therefore,  the  minister  says,  "I 
absolve  thee,"  he  can  only  mean,  "  I  declare  thee  absolved." 

When  I  add  to  this  explanation  the  striking  fact  that  the  Homily  of 
Repentance  contains  a  long  passage  most  strongly  condemning  auricular 
confession,  I  can  see  no  fair  ground  for  the  charge  that  the  Church  of  England 
sanctions  auricular  confession,  as  a  practice  of  general  utility  to  the  soul. 
At  the  same  time  I  deeply  regret  that  the  formularies  of  the  Church  contain 
any  expressions  which  are  capable  of  being  twisted  into  an  argument  in 
defence  of  the  doctrine,  and  I  should  rejoice  to  see  them  removed. 

*  Those  who  wish  for  more  information  on  this  painful  subject  will  find  it 


CONFESSION.  271 

The  man  who  turns  away  from  Christ  to  confess  his  sins  to 
ministers,  is  like  a  man  who  chooses  to  live  in  prison  when  he 
may  walk  at  liberty,  or  to  starve  and  go  in  rags  in  the  midst  of 
riches  and  plenty,  or  to  cringe  for  favours  at  the  feet  of  a 
servant,  when  he  may  go  boldly  to  the  Master  and  ask  what  he 
will.  A  mighty  and  sinless  High  Priest  is  provided  for  him, 
and  yet  he  prefers  to  employ  the  aid  of  mere  fellow-sinners  like 
himself  !  He  is  trying  to  fill  his  purse  with  rubbish,  when  he 
may  have  fine  gold  for  the  asking.  He  is  insisting  on  lighting  a 
rush-light,  when  he  may  enjoy  the  noon-day  light  of  God's  sun  ! 

If  we  love  our  souls,  let  us  beware  of  giving  to  ministers  the 
honour  that  belongs  to  Christ  alone.  He  is  the  true  High 
Priest  of  the  Christian's  profession.  He  ever  lives  to  receive 
confessions,  and  to  absolve  sinners.  Why  should  we  turn  away 
from  Him  to  man?  Above  all,  let  us  beware  of  the  whole 
system  of  the  Romish  confessional.  Of  all  practices  that  were 
ever  devised  by  man  in  the  name  of  religion,  I  firmly  believe 
that  none  was  ever  devised  so  mischievous  and  objectionable 
as  the  confessional.  It  overthrows  Christ's  office,  and  places 
man  in  the  seat  which  should  only  be  occupied  by  the  Son  of 
God. — It  puts  two  sinners  in  a  thoroughly  wrong  position :  it 
exalts  the  confessor  far  too  high ;  it  places  those  who  confess 
far  too  low.  It  gives  the  confessor  a  place  which  it  is  not  safe 
for  any  child  of  Adam  to  occupy.  It  imposes  on  those  who 
confess  a  bondage  to  which  it  is  not  safe  for  any  child  of  Adam 
to  submit.  It  sinks  one  poor  sinner  into  the  degrading  attitude 
of  a  serf ;  it  raises  another  poor  sinner  into  a  dangerous  mastery 
over  his  brother's  soul.  It  makes  the  confessor  little  less  than 
a  god :  it  makes  those  who  confess  little  better  than  slaves. — 
If  we  love  Christian  liberty,  and  value  inward  peace,  let  us 
beware  of  the  slightest  approach  to  the  Romish  confessional ! 

Those  who  tell  us  that  Christian  ministers  were  intended  to 
receive  confessions,  and  that  Evangelical  teaching  makes  light 
of  the  ministerial  office,  and  strips  it  of  all  authority  and 
power,  are  making  assertions  which  they  cannot  prove.  We 

fully  supplied  in  Elliott's  Delineation  of  Romanism  (p.  210),  under  the 
head  "Confession."  Those  who  take  a  favourable  view  of  auricular  con 
fession,  and  wish  to  see  it  introduced  into  the  English  Church,  would  do  well 
to  study  Elliott's  account  of  the  Bull  of  Pope  Paul  IV.  against  those  Spanish 
confessors  who  were  called  "Solicitants."  If  then  they  are  not  convinced  of 
the  immoral  tendency  of  the  confessional,  I  shall  be  surprised. 


272  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

honour  the  minister's  office  highly,  but  we  refuse  to  give  it  a 
hair's  breadth  more  dignity  than  we  find  given  in  the  Word  of 
God.  We  honour  ministers  as  Christ's  ambassadors,  Christ's 
messengers,  Christ's  watchmen,  helpers  of  believers' joy,  preachers 
of  the  Word,  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God.  But  we  de 
cline  to  regard  them  as  priests,  mediators,  confessors,  and  rulers 
over  men's  faith,  both  for  the  sake  of  their  souls  and  of  our  own.* 

The  vulgar  notion  that  Evangelical  teaching  is  opposed  to 
the  exercise  of  soul-discipline,  or  heart-examination,  or  self- 
humiliation,  or  mortification  of  the  flesh,  or  true  contrition,  is 
a  mere  invention  of  man's.  Opposed  to  it !  There  never  was 
a  more  baseless  assertion.  We  are  entirely  favourable  to  it. 
This  only  we  require, — that  it  shall  be  carried  on  in  the  right 
way.  We  approve  of  a  confessional ;  but  it  must  be  the  only 
true  one, — the  throne  of  grace.  We  approve  of  going  to  a 
confessor ;  but  it  must  be  the  true  One, — Christ  the  Lord.  We 
approve  of  submitting  consciences  to  a  priest ;  but  it  must  be 
to  the  great  High  Priest, — Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  We  approve 
of  unbosoming  our  secret  sins,  and  seeking  absolution;  but  it 
must  be  at  the  feet  of  the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  and  not 
at  the  feet  of  one  of  His  weak  members.  We  approve  of 
kneeling  to  receive  ghostly  counsel ;  but  it  must  be  at  the  feet 
of  Christ,  and  not  at  the  feet  of  man. 

Let  us  beware  of  ever  losing  sight  of  Christ's  priestly  office. 
Let  us  glory  in  His  atoning  death,  honour  Him  as  our  Substi 
tute  and  Surety  on  the  cross,  follow  Him  as  our  Shepherd,  hear 
His  voice  as  our  Prophet,  obey  Him  as  our  King.  But  in  all 
our  thoughts  about  Christ,  let  it  be  often  before  our  minds  that 
He  alone  is  our  High  Priest,  and  that  He  has  deputed  His 
priestly  office  to  no  order  of  men  in  the  world,  j  This  is  the 


*  It  should  always  be  remembered  that  the  word  "  priest  "  in  the  Prayer- 
book,  was  not  intended  to  mean  a  sacrificing  priest,  like  the  Old  Testament 
priests.  It  signifies  the  same  as  presbyter  or  elder. 

f  The  passage,  "  "Whosesoever  sins  yo  remit  they  are  remitted  unto  them  ; 
and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain  they  are  retained  "  (John  xx.  23),  is  often 
quoted  in  defence  of  the  Romish  view  of  priestly  absolution,  but  I  am  firmly 
persuaded,  in  entire  contradiction  to  our  Lord's  intention. 

I  believe  that  in  these  words  our  Lord  conferred  on  His  apostles,  and  all 
those  disciples  who  were  present  with  them  at  the  same  time  (Luke  xxiv.  33), 
the  power  of  authoritatively  declaring  whose  sins  are  forgiven,  and  whose 
sins  are  not  forgiven,  but  nothing  more. — I  believe,  moreover,  that  from  their 
peculiar  gift  of  discerning  spirits,  the  Apostles  were  fitted  and  enabled  to 


CONFESSION.  273 

office  of  Christ,  which  Satan  lahours  above  all  to  obscure.  It 
is  the  neglect  of  this  office  which  leads  to  every  kind  of  error. 
It  is  the  remembrance  of  this  office  which  is  the  best  safe-guard 
against  the  plausible  teaching  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Once 
right  about  this  office  wo  shall  never  greatly  err  in  the  matter 
of  the  confession  of  sin.  We  shall  know  to  whom  confession 
ought  to  be  made ;  and  to  know  that  rightly  is  no  slight  thing. 

I  shall  conclude  this  paper  with  two  words  of  practical  appli 
cation,  (a)  We  have  seen  who  ought  to  confess  sin.  (b)  We 
have  seen  to  whom  confession  ought  to  be  made.  Let  us  try 
to  bring  the  subject  nearer  to  our  hearts  and  consciences.  Time 
flies  very  fast.  Writing  and  preaching, — reading  and  working, 
— doubting  and  speculating, — discussion  and  controversy, — all, 
all  will  soon  be  past  and  gone  for  ever.  Yet  a  little  while  and 
there  will  remain  nothing  but  certainties,  realities,  and  eternity. 

Let  us  then  ask  ourselves  honestly  and  conscientiously,  Do 
we  CONFESS  ? 

(1)  If  we  never  confessed  sin  before,  let  us  go  this  very  day 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  speak  to  the  great  High  Priest,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  about  our  souls.  Let  us  pour  out  our  hearts 
before  Him,  and  keep  nothing  back  from  Him.  Let  us  acknow 
ledge  our  iniquities  to  Him,  and  entreat  Him  to  cleanse  them 
away.  Let  us  say  to  Him,  in  David's  words,  "For  Thy  name's 
sake,  pardon  my  iniquity ;  for  it  is  great."  "  Hide  Thy  face 
from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all  my  iniquities."  Let  us  cry  to 
Him  as  the  publican  did  in  the  parable,  "  God  be  merciful  to 
me  a  sinner."  (Ps.  xxv.  11 ;  li.  9  ;  Luke  xviii.  13.) 

Are  we  afraid  to  do  this  1  Do  we  feel  unworthy  and  unfit  to 
begin?  Let  us  resist  such  feelings,  and  begin  without  delay. 
There  are  glorious  Bible  examples  to  encourage  us :  there  are 
rich  Bible  promises  to  lure  us  on.  In  all  the  volume  of  Scrip- 
exercise  this  power  of  declaring,  in  a  way  that  no  minister,  since  the  apostolic 
times,  ever  can  or  ever  did. 

But  that  the  Apostles  ever  took  on  themselves  to  "remit  or  retain  sins," 
in  the  way  that  the  Romish  Church  enjoins  on  her  priests  to  do,  is  not  to  be 
traced  out  in  any  passage  in  the  whole  New  Testament. 

The  reader  who  wishes  to  investigate  this  subject  further,  will  find  it  fully 
discussed  in  my  Expository  Thoughts  on  St.  John's  Gospel  (vol.  in.,  pp. 
444-453),  together  with  many  valuable  quotations  from  eminent  divines 
elucidating  the  whole  matter.  The  passage  is  too  long  for  insertion  in  this 
place. 


274  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

ture  there  are  no  passages  so  encouraging  as  those  which  are 
about  confession  of  sin.  "If  we  confess  our  sins,  He  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all 
unrighteousness."  (1  John  i.  8.)  "If  any  say,  I  have  sinned, 
and  perverted  that  which  is  right,  and  it  profited  me  not ;  He 
will  deliver  his  soul  from  going  into  the  pit,  and  his  life  shall 
see  the  light."  (Job  xxxiii.  27.)  "Father,"  said  the  prodigal 
son,  "  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  in  thy  sight,  and  am 
no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son.  But  the  father  said  to 
his  servant,  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,  and 
put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet ;  and  bring  hither 
the  fatted  calf  and  kill  it,  and  let  us  eat  and  be  merry."  (Luke 
xv.  21-23.)  If  Christ  had  never  died  for  sinners,  there  might 
be  some  excuse  for  doubting.  But  Christ  having  suffered  for 
sin,  there  is  nothing  that  need  keep  us  back. 

(2)  If  we  have  been  taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  confess 
our  sins,  and  know  the  subject  of  this  paper  by  inward  ex 
perience,  let  us  keep  up  the  habit  of  confession  to  the  last  day 
of  our  lives. 

We  shall  never  cease  to  be  sinners  as  long  as  we  are  in  the 
body.  Every  day  we  shall  find  something  to  deplore  in  our 
thoughts,  or  motives,  or  words,  or  deeds.  Every  day  we  shall 
find  that  we  need  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  the  intercession 
of  Christ.  Then  let  us  keep  up  daily  transactions  with  the 
throne  of  grace.  Let  us  daily  confess  our  infirmities  at  the  feet 
of  our  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest,  and  seek  fresh  absolu 
tion.  Let  us  daily  cast  ourselves  under  the  shadow  of  His 
wings,  and  cry,  "  Surely  in  me  dwelleth  no  good  thing :  Thou 
art  my  hiding-place,  0  Lamb  of  God  !  " 

May  every  day  find  us  more  humble  and  yet  more  hopeful, — 
more  sensible  of  our  own  un worthiness,  and  yet  more  ready  to 
rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh  ! — 
May  our  prayers  become  every  day  more  fervent,  and  our  con 
fessions  of  sin  more  real ; — our  eye  more  single,  and  our  walk 
with  God  more  close ; — our  knowledge  of  Jesus  more  clear, 
and  our  love  to  Jesus  more  deep ; — our  citizenship  in  heaven 
more  manifest,  and  our  separation  from  the  world  more 
distinct ! 

So  living,  we  shall  cross  the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world 
with  comfort,  and  have  an  abundant  entrance  into  God's 


CONFESSION.  275 

kingdom.  So  living,  wo  shall  find  that  our  light  affliction, 
which  is  but  for  a  moment,  works  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  Yet  a  few  more  years,  and  our 
prayers  and  confessions  shall  cease  for  ever.  We  shall  begin 
an  endless  life  of  praise.  We  shall  exchange  our  daily  con 
fessions  for  eternal  thanksgivings.* 


*  The  attention  of  all  members  of  the  Church  of  England  is  particularly 
requested  to  the  following  passages  from  the  "  HOMILY  OF  REPENTANCE"  :— 

"Whereas  the  adversaries  [Roman  Catholics]  wrest  this  place  [in  St. 
James — (James  v.) — ],  for  to  maintain  their  auricular  confession  withal,  they 
are  greatly  deceived  themselves  and  do  shamefully  deceive  others ;  for  if 
this  text  ought  to  be  understood  of  auricular  confession,  then  the  priests 
are  as  much  bound  to  confess  themselves  unto  the  lay-people,  as  the  lay- 
people  are  bound  tu  confess  themselves  to  them.  And  if  to  pray  is  to 
absolve,  then  the  laity  by  this  place  hath  as  great  authority  to  absolve  the 
priests,  as  the  priests  have  to  absolve  the  laity. 

"  And  where  that  they  do  allege  this  saying  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 
unto  the  leper,  to  prove  auricular  confession  to  stand  on  God's  Word,  ' Go  tin) 
way,  and  show  thyself  unto  the  priest'  (Matt,  viii.),  do  they  not  see  that  the 
leper  was  cleansed  from  his  leprosy  before  he  was  by  Christ  sent  unto  the 
priest,  for  to  show  himself  unto  him?  By  the  same  reason  we  must  be 
cleansed  from  our  spiritual  leprosy,  I  mean  our  sins  must  be  forgiven  us, 
before  that  we  come  to  confession.  What  need  we  then  to  tell  fortli  our 
sins  into  the  ear  of  the  priest,  sith  that  they  be  already  taken  away  !  There 
fore  holy  Ambrose,  in  his  second  sermon  upon  the  hundred-and-nineteenth 
Psalm,  doth  say  full  well,  '  Go,  shoio  thyself  unto  the  priest.'  Who  is  the  true 
priest,  but  He  which  is  the  Priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec? 
Whereby  this  holy  Father  doth  understand  that,  both  the  priesthood  and 
the  law  being  changed,  we  ought  to  acknowledge  none  other  Priest  for 
deliverance  from  our  sins  but  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ :  who  being  Sovereign 
Bishop,  doth  with  the  sacrifice  of  His  body  and  blood,  offered  once  for  ever 
upon  the  altar  of  the  cross,  most  effectually  cleanse  the  spiritual  leprosy, 
and  wash  away  the  sins  of  all  those  that  with  true  confession  of  the  same 
do  flee  unto  Him. 

"It  is  most  evident  and  plain  that  this  auricular  confession  hath  not  the 
warrant  of  God's  Word,  else  it  had  not  been  lawful  for  Nectarius,  Bishop 
of  Constantinople,  upon  a  just  occasion  to  have  put  it  down.  (Nectarius 
Sozomcn  Ecdes.  Hist.,  lib.  vii.  cap.  10.)  For  when  anything  ordained  of  God 
is  by  the  lewdness  of  men  abused,  the  abuse  ought  to  be  taken  away,  and 
the  thing  itself  suffered  to  remain.  Moreover,  these  are  St.  Augustine's 
words  (Confession urn,  lib.  x.,  cap.  3) :— '  What  have  I  to  do  with  men,  that 
they  should  hear  my  confession,  as  though  they  were  able  to  heal  my 
diseases?  A  curious  sort  of  men  to  know  another  man's  life,  and  slothful 
to  correct  and  amend  their  own.  Why  do  they  seek  to  hear  of  me  what  I 
am,  which  will  not  hear  of  Thee  what  they  are?  And  how  can  they  tell, 
when  they  hear  by  me  of  myself,  whether  I  tell  the  truth,  or  not ;  sith  no 
mortal  man  knoweth  what  is  in  man,  but  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him '( ' 
Augustine  would  not  have  written  thus  if  auricular  confession  had  been  used 
in  his  time. 

"Being,  therefore,  not  led  with  the  conscience  thereof,  let  us  with  fear 


2*76  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

and  trembling,  and  with  a  true  contrite  heart,  use  that  kind  of  confession 
that  God  doth  command  in  His  Word  ;  and  then  doubtless,  as  He  is  faithful 
and  righteous,  He  will  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  make  us  clean  from  all 
wickedness.  I  do  not  say  but  that,  if  any  do  find  themselves  troubled  in 
conscience,  they  may  repair  to  their  learned  evirate  or  pastor,  or  to  some 
other  godly  learned  man,  and  show  the  trouble  and  doubt  of  their  conscience 
to  them,  that  they  may  receive  at  their  hand  the  comfortable  salve  of  God's 
AVord ;  but  it  is  against  the  true  Christian  liberty  that  any  man  should  be 
bound  to  the  numbering  of  his  sins,  as  it  hath  been  used  heretofore  in  the 
time  of  blindness  and  ignorance." 


XIII. 
WORSHIP. 

"  God  ?.s  a  Spirit:   and  they  that  worship  Him  mutt  worship  Him  in 

spirit  and  in  truth." — JOHN  iv.  24. 
"  We  are  the,   circumcision,  which  worship  God  in   the.   spirit." — PHIL. 

iii.  3. 

' '  In  vain  they  do  worship  Me. " — MATT,  x v.  9. 
"A  show  of  wisdom  in  will-worship." — COL.  ii.  23. 

WE  live  in  times  when  there  is  a  vast  quantity  of  public 
religious  worship.  Most  English  people  who  have  any  respect 
for  appearances  go  to  some  church  or  chapel  on  Sundays.  To 
attend  no  place  of  worship  in  this  country,  whatever  may  be 
the  case  abroad,  is  at  present  the  exception  and  not  the  rule. 
But  we  all  know  that  quantity  is  of  little  value  without  quality. 
It  is  not  enough  that  we  worship  sometimes.  There  remains 
behind  a  mighty  question  to  be  answered,  — "  How  do  we 
worship  1 " 

Not  all  religious  worship  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  I 
think  this  is  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noon-day  to  any  honest 
reader  of  the  Bible.  The  Bible  speaks  of  worship  which  is 
''in  vain,"  as  well  as  worship  which  is  true, — and  of  "will- 
worship,"  as  well  as  spiritual  worship.  To  suppose,  as  some 
thoughtless  persons  do,  that  it  signifies  nothing  where  we  go  on 
Sundays,  and  matters  nothing  how  the  thing  is  done,  provided 
it  is  done,  is  mere  childish  folly.  Merchants  and  tradesmen  do 
not  carry  on  their  business  in  this  fashion.  They  look  at  the 
way  their  work  is  done,  and  are  not  content  with  work  done 
anyhow.  Let  us  not  be  deceived.  God  is  not  mocked.  The 
question,  "How  do  we  worship?"  is  a  very  serious  one. 

I  propose  to  unfold  the  subject  of  worship,  and  to  lay  down 
some  Scriptural  principles  about  it.  In  a  day  of  profound 
ignorance  in  some  quarters,  and  of  systematic  false  teaching  in 
others,  I  hold  it  to  be  of  primary  importance  to  have  clear  ideas 


278  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

about  all  disputed  points  in  religion.  I  fear  that  thousands  of 
English  men  and  women  can  render  no  reason  of  their  faith 
and  practice.  They  do  not  know  why  they  believe,  or  what 
they  believe,  or  why  they  do  what  they  do.  Like  children, 
they  are  tossed  to  and  fro  by  every  wind  of  doctrine,  and  are 
liable  to  be  led  astray  by  the  first  clever  heretic  who  meets  them. 
In  a  day  like  this  let  us  try  to  get  hold  of  some  distinct  notions 
about  Christian  worship. 

I.  /  will  show  the  general  importance  of  public  worship, 
II.  I  will  show  the  leading  principles  of  public  warship. 

III.  I  will  show  the  essential  parts  of  complete  public  worship. 

IV.  /  will  show  the  things  to  be  avoided  in  public  worship. 
V.  /  will  show  the  tests  by  which  our  public  worship  should 

be  tried. 

I  purposely  confine  my  attention  to  public  worship.  I  pur 
posely  pass  over  all  private  religious  habits,  such  as  praying, 
Bible-reading,  self-examination,  and  meditation.  No  doubt 
they  lie  at  the  very  root  of  personal  Christianity,  and  with 
out  them  all  public  religion  is  utterly  in  vain.  But  they  are 
not  the  subject  I  want  to  handle  to-day. 

I.  I  have  first  to  show  the  general  importance  of  public  worship. 

I  trust  I  need  not  dwell  long  on  this  part  of  my  subject. 
This  paper  is  not  likely  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  any  who  do  not 
at  least  call  themselves  Christians.  There  are  few,  except 
downright  infidels,  who  will  dare  to  say  that  we  ought  not  to 
make  some  public  profession  of  religion.  Most  people,  what 
ever  their  own  practice  may  be,  will  admit  that  we  ought  to 
meet  other  Christians  at  stated  times  and  in  stated  places,  and 
unitedly  and  together  to  worship  God.* 

*  "  To  deny  God  a  worship  is  as  great  a  folly  as  to  deny  His  being.  He 
that  renounceth  all  homage  to  his  Creator,  envies  Him  the  being  of  which 
he  cannot  deprive  Him.  The  natural  inclination  to  worship  is  as  universal 
as  the  notion  of  a  God  ;  else  idolatry  had  never  gained  a  footing  in  the  world. 
The  existence  of  God  was  never  owned  in  any  nation  without  a  worship  of 
God  being  appointed  ;  and  many  people  who  have  turned  their  backs  upon 
some  other  parts  of  the  law  of  nature,  have  paid  a  continual  homage  to  some 
superior  and  invisible  Being.  The  Jews  gave  a  reason  why  man  was  created 
in  the  evening  of  the  Sabbath,  because  he  should  begin  his  being  with  the 
worship  of  his  Maker.  As  soon  as  ever  he  found  himself  to  be  a  creature, 
his  first  solemn  act  should  be  a  particular  respect  to  his  Creator.  To  fear 


WORSHIP.  279 

Public  worship,  I  am  bold  to  say,  has  .always  been  one  mark 
of  God's  servants.  Man,  as  a  general  rule,  is  a  social  being, 
and  does  not  like  to  live  separate  from  his  fellows.  In  every 
age  God  has  made  use  of  that  mighty  principle,  and  has  taught 
His  people  to  worship  Him  publicly  as  well  as  privately, 
together  as  well  as  alone.  I  believe  the  last  day  will  show 
that  wherever  God  has  had  a  people  He  has  always  had  a 
congregation.  His  servants,  however  few  in  number,  have 
always  assembled  themselves  together,  and  approached  their 
Heavenly  Father  in  company.  They  have  been  taught  to  do 
it  for  many  wise  reasons, — partly  to  bear  a  public  testimony  to 
the  world, — partly  to  strengthen,  cheer,  help,  encourage,  and 
comfort  one  another, — and  above  all,  to  train  and  prepare  them 
for  the  general  assembly  in  heaven.  "  As  iron  sharpeneth  iron, 
so  doth  the  countenance  of  a  man  his  friend."  That  man  can 
know  little  of  human  nature  who  does  not  know  that  to  see 
others  doing  and  professing  the  same  things  that  we  do  in 
religion,  is  an  immense  help  and  encouragement  to  our  souls. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  Bible  down  to  the  end,  you  may 
trace  out  a  line  of  public  worship  in  the  history  of  all  God's 
saints.  You  see  it  in  the  very  first  family  that  lived  on  earth. 
The  familiar  story  of  Cain  and  Abel  hinges  entirely  on  acts  of 
public  worship. — You  see  it  in  the  history  of  Noah.  The  very 
first  thing  recorded  about  Noah  and  his  family,  when  they 
came  forth  from  the  ark,  was  a  solemn  act  of  public  worship. 
—You  see  it  in  the  history  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 
Wherever  the  patriarchs  had  a  tent  they  always  had  an  altar. 
They  not  only  prayed  in  private,  but  worshipped  in  public. — 
You  see  it  throughout  the  whole  Mosaic  economy,  from  Sinai 
downward,  till  our  Lord  appeared.  The  Jew  who  was  not  a 
public  worshipper  in  the  tabernacle  or  the  temple,  would  have 
been  cut  off  from  the  congregation  of  Israel. — You  see  it 
throughout  the  whole  New  Testament.  The  Lord  Jesus  Him 
self  gives  a  special  promise  of  His  presence  wherever  two  or 
three  are  assembled  in  His  name.  The  Apostles,  in  every 


God  and  keep  His  commandment,  is  the  whole  of  man  (Eccles.  xii.  13),  or  is 
'  whole  man  : '  he  is  not  a  man,  but  a  beast,  without  observance  of  God. 
Religion  is  as  requisite  as  reason  to  complete  a  man.  He  were  not  reason 
able,  if  he  were  not  religious,  because  by  neglecting  religion  he  neglects  the 
chiefest  dictate  of  reason."—  Char  nock's  Works.  Nichol's  Edition.  Vol.  i.,p.!82. 


280  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Church  they  founded,  made  the  duty  of  assembling  together  a 
first  principle  in  their  list  of  duties.  Their  universal  rule  was, 
"  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  yourselves  together."  (Heb. 
x.  25.)  These  are  ancient  things,  I  know  ;  but  it  is  well  to  be 
reminded  of  them.  Just  as  you  may  lay  it  down,  as  a  certainty, 
that  where  there  is  no  private  prayer  there  is  no  grace  in  a 
man's  heart,  so  you  may  lay  it  down,  as  the  highest  probability, 
that  where  there  is  no  public  worship  there  is  no  Church  of 
God,  and  no  profession  of  Christianity.* 

Turn  now  from  the  Word  of  God  to  the  pages  of  Church 
history,  and  what  will  you  find  ?  You  will  find  that  from  the 
days  of  the  Apostles  down  to  this  hour,  public  worship  has 
always  been  one  of  God's  great  instruments  in  doing  good  to 
souls.  Where  is  it  that  sleeping  souls  are  generally  awakened, 
dark  souls  enlightened,  dead  souls  quickened,  doubting  souls 
brought  to  decision,  mourning  souls  cheered,  heavy-laden  souls 
relieved  1  Where,  as  a  general  rule,  but  in  the  public  assembly 
of  Christian  worshippers,  and  during  the  preaching  of  God's 
Word  ?  Take  away  public  worship  from  a  land,  shut  up  the 
churches  and  chapels,  forbid  people  to  meet  together  for 
religious  services,  prohibit  any  kind  of  religion  except  that 
which  is  private, — do  this,  and  see  what  the  result  would  be. 
You  would  inflict  the  greatest  spiritual  injury  on  the  country 
which  was  so  treated.  You  could  do  nothing  so  likely  to  help 
the  devil  and  stop  the  progress  of  Christ's  cause,  except  the 
taking  away  of  the  Bible.  Next  to  the  Word  of  God  there  is 
nothing  which  does  so  much  good  to  mankind  as  public  worship. 
"Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  (Rom.  x.  7.)  There  is  a  special 
presence  of  Christ  in  religious  assemblies. 

I  grant  freely  that  public  worship  may  become  a  mere  act 
of  formality.  Thousands  of  so-called  Christians,  no  doubt,  arc 
continually  going  to  churches  and  chapels,  and  getting  no 
benefit  from  their  attendance.  Like  Pharaoh's  lean  kinc, 
they  are  nothing  bettered,  but  rather  worse,  more  impenitent, 
and  more  hardened.  ]STo  wonder  that  the  ignorant  Sabbath- 


*  The  reader  will  of  course  understand  that  I  fully  admit  the  impossibility 
of  public  worship  being  kept  up  in  times  of  persecution.  "When  the  lioman 
PJmperors  persecuted  the  early  Church,  and  all  Christians  were  proscribed, 
there  could  of  necessity  have  been  no  public  worship.  But  these  are  evi 
dently  exceptional  cases. 


WORSHIP.  281 

breaker  defends  himself  by  saying, — "  For  anything  I  can  see, 
those  who  go  nowhere  on  Sundays  are  just  as  good  people  as 
church-goers  and  chapel-goers."  But  we  must  never  forget 
that  the  misuse  of  a  good  thing  is  no  argument  against  the  use 
of  it.  Once  begin  to  refuse  everything  that  is  misused  in  this 
sinful  world,  and  there  is  hardly  anything  left  for  you  that  is 
good.  Take  a  broader  view  of  the  question  before  you.  Look 
at  any  district  you  like  in  England,  and  divide  people  into  two 
great  parties, — worshippers  and  non-worshippers.  I  will  engage 
you  will  find  'that  there  is  far  more  good  among  those  that 
worship  than  among  those  that  do  not.  It  does  make  a  differ 
ence,  whatever  men  may  say.  It  is  not  true  that  worshippers 
and  non-worshippers  are  all  alike. 

We  ought  never  to  forget  the  solemn  words  of  St.  Paul  : 
"  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  yourselves  together,  as  the 
manner  of  some  is ;  but  exhort  one  another."  (Heb.  x.  25.) 
Let  us  act  upon  that  exhortation,  as  long  as  we  live,  and  through 
evil  report  and  good  report  continue  regular  attendants  at  public 
worship.  Let  us  not  care  for  the  bad  example  of  many  around 
us  who  rob  God  of  His  Bay,  and  never  go  up  to  His  House  from 
one  end  of  the  year  to  the  other.  Let  us  go  on  worshipping  in 
spite  of  every  discouragement,  and  let  us  not  doubt  that  in  the 
long  run  of  life  it  does  us  good.  Let  us  prove  our  own  meet- 
ness  for  heaven  by  our  feelings  toward  the  earthly  assemblies  of 
God's  people.  Happy  is  that  man  who  can  say  with  David,  "  I 
was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of 
the  Lord  ; " — "  I  had  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  my 
God,  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness."  (Psalm  cxxii.  1  ; 
Ixxxiv.  10.) 

II.  I  proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to  show  the  leading 
principles  of  pull ic  worship. 

These  leading  principles  are  so  plain  and  obvious  to  any 
thoughtful  reader  of  the  Bible,  that  I  need  not  dwell  on  them 
at  any  length.  But  for  the  sake  of  some  who  may  not  hitherto 
have  given  much  attention  to  the  subject,  I  feel  it  best  to  state 
them  in  order. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be  directed  to  the 
right  object.  It  is  written  plainly,  both  in  the  Old  and  K"ew 
Testament :  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  Him 


282  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

only  shalt  thou  serve."  (Deut.  vi.  13 ;  Matt.  iv.  10.)  All 
adoration  and  prayers  addressed  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  saints 
and  angels,  is  utterly  useless,  and  unwarranted  by  Scripture. 
It  is  worship  that  is  mere  waste  of  time.  There  is  not  the 
slightest  proof  that  the  departed  saints  or  the  angels  can  hear 
our  worship,  or  that  if  they  did  hear  it  they  could  do  anything 
for  us.  It  is  worship  that  is  most  offensive  to  God.  He  is  a 
jealous  God,  and  has  declared  that  He  will  not  give  His  glory 
to  another.  Of  all  His  Ten  Commandments  there  is  none  more 
stringent  and  sweeping  than  the  Second.  It  forbids  us  not  only 
to  worship,  but  even  to  "  bow  down  "  to  anything  beside  God. 

(b)  For  another  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be  directed 
to  God  through  the  mediation  of  CJirist.     It  is  written  plainly, 
"  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life  :  no  man  cometh  unto 
the    Father,  but  by  Me."     (John    xiv.   6.)     It  is  written  of 
Christians,  that  they  are  a    people  who  "  come  unto  God  by 
Christ."     (Heb.  vii.  25.)     The  mighty  Being  with  whom  we 
have   to   do,  without   controversy,  is  a  God  of  infinite   love, 
kindness,  mercy,  and  compassion.     "God  is  love."     But  it  is 
no  less  true  that  He  is  a  Being  of  infinite  justice,  purity,  and 
holiness,  that  He  has  an  infinite  hatred  of  sin,  and  cannot  bear 
that  which  is  evil.     He  is  the  same  God  that  cast  down  the 
angels  from  heaven,  drowned  the  world  with  a  flood,  and  burned 
up  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.     He  who  carelessly  presumes  to  draw 
near  to  Him  without  an  atonement  and  a  mediator,  or  by  any 
other  mediator  than  the  one  Mediator  whom  He  has  appointed, 
will  find  that  he  worships  in  vain.     "  Our  God  is  a  consuming 
fire."     (Heb.  xii.  29.) 

(c)  For  another  thing,  true  public  worship  must  be  either 
directly  Scriptural,  or  deducible  from  Scripture,  or  in  harmony 
with  Scripture.     It  is  written  plainly  concerning  the  Jews  of 
our  Lord's  time,  "  In  vain  do  they  worship  Me,  teaching  for 
doctrines  the   commandments  of   men."     (Matt.   xv.   9.)     No 
doubt  there  is  a  conspicuous  absence  of  particular  injunctions 
about  New  Testament  worship.     No  doubt  there  is  a  reasonable 
liberty  allowed  to  Churches  and  congregations  in  their  arrange 
ments  about  worship.     But  still  the  rule  must  never  be  for 
gotten  :   "  Nothing  must  be  required  of  men  contrary  to  God's 
Word."     Well  says  the  Twentieth  Article  of  the  Church  of 
England :  "  The  Church  hath  power  to  decree  rites  and  cere- 


WORSHIP.  283 

monies,  and  authority  in  controversies  of  faith.  And  yet  it  is 
not  lawful  for  the  Church  to  ordain  anything  that  is  contrary  to 
God's  Word  written."  Well  says  the  Thirty-fourth  Article: 
"  Ceremonies  at  all  times  have  been  divers,  and  may  be  changed 
according  to  the  diversities  of  countries,  times,  and  men's 
manners,  so  that  nothing  be  ordained  against  God's  Word."  I 
say  therefore  that  any  man  who  tells  us  that  there  are  seven 
sacraments,  when  the  Bible  only  mentions  two, — or  that  any 
man-made  ordinance  is  as  binding  on  our  consciences  and  as 
needful  to  salvation  as  an  ordinance  appointed  by  Christ,  is 
telling  us  what  he  has  no  right  to  tell.  We  must  not  listen  to 
him.  He  is  committing  not  only  a  mistake,  but  a  sin.  St. 
Paul  distinctly  tells  us  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  "will- 
worship,"  which  has  a  "show  of  wisdom,"  but  is  in  reality 
useless,  because  it  only  "satisfies  the  flesh."  (Col.  ii.  23.) 

(d)  For   another   thing,    true   public    worship   must   be    an 
intelligent  worship.     I  mean  by  that  expression  that  worshippers 
must  know  what  they  are  doing.     It  is  written  plainly  as  a 
charge  against  the  Samaritans,  "  Ye  worship  ye  know  not  what : 
we  know  what  we  worship."     (John  iv.  22.)     It  is  written  of 
the  heathen  Athenians,  that    they  ignorantly  worshipped  an 
"unknown   god."     It   is   utterly  false  that   ignorance    is   the 
mother  of  devotion.     The  poor  Italian  Papists,  unable  to  read, 
and  not  knowing  a  chapter  in  the  Bible,  may  appear  extremely 
devout  and  sincere,  as  they  kneel  in  crowds  before  the  image  of 
the  Virgin  Mary,  or  hear  Latin  prayers  which  they  do  not 
understand.     But  it   is    utterly  preposterous  to   suppose  that 
their  worship  is  acceptable  to  God.     He  who  made  man  at  the 
beginning  made  him  an  intelligent  being,  with  mind  as  well  as 
body.     A  worship  in  which  the  mind  takes  no  part  is  useless 
and  unprofitable.     It  might  suit  a  beast  as  well  as  a  man. 

(e)  For   another   thing,    true    public  worship   must    be   the 
worship  of  the  heart.     I  mean  by  this,  that  the  affections  must 
be  employed  as  well  as  our  intellect,  and  our  inward  man  must 
serve  God  as  well  as  our  body.     It  is  written  plainly  in  the  Old 
Testament,  and  the  saying  is  quoted  by  Jesus  Christ  Himself : 
"  This  people   draweth    nigh    to    Me  with    their   mouth,   and 
honoureth  Me  with  their  lips ;  but  their  heart  is  far  from  Me. 
But  in  vain  do  they  worship  Me."     (Isa.  xxix  13  ;  Matt.  xv.  8.) 
It  is  written  of  the  Jews  in  Ezekiel's  time  :  "  They  come  unto 


284  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

thee  as  the  people  cometh,  and  they  sit  before  thee  as  My  people, 
and  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do  them  :  for  with 
their  mouth  they  show  much  love,  but  their  heart  goeth  after 
their  covetousness."  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31.)  The  heart  is  the 
principal  thing  that  God  asks  man  to  bring  in  all  his  approaches 
to  Him,  whether  public  or  private.  A  church  may  be  full  of 
Worshippers  who  may  give  God  an  immense  amount  of  bodily 
service.  There  may  be  abundance  of  gestures,  and  postures, 
and  turnings  to  the  East,  and  bowings,  and  crossings,  and 
prostrations,  and  grave  countenances,  and  upturned  eyes,  and 
yet  the  hearts  of  the  worshippers  may  be  at  the  end  of  the  earth. 
One  may  be  thinking  only  of  coming  or  past  pleasures,  another 
of  coming  or  past  business,  and  another  of  coming  or  past  sins. 
Such  worship,  we  may  be  very  sure,  is  utterly  worthless  in  God's 
sight.  It  is  even  worse  than  worthless :  it  is  abominable 
hypocrisy.  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  He  cares  nothing  for  man's 
bodily  service  without  man's  heart.  Bodily  service  profiteth 
little.  "Man  looketh  on  the  outward  appearance;  but  the 
Lord  looketh  011  the  heart."  The  broken  and  contrite  heart  is 
the  true  sacrifice,  the  sacrifice  which  "  God  will  not  despise."  * 
(1  Sam.  xvi.  7  ;  Psalm  li.  17.) 

(/)  In  the  last  place,  true  public  worship  must  be  a  reverent 
worship.  It  is  written,  "Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the 
house  of  God,  and  be  more  ready  to  hear  than  to  give  the 

*  "  Men  may  attend  on  worship  all  their  days  with  a  juiceless  heart  and 
unquickened  frame,  and  think  to  compensate  the  neglect  of  the  manner,  with 
the  abundance  of  the  matter  of  the  service.  Outward  expressions  are  only 
the  badges  and  liveries  of  service,  not  the  service  itself.  As  the  strength  of 
sin  lies  in  the  inward  frame  of  the  heart,  so  the  strength  of  worship  lies  in 
the  inward  complexion  and  temper  of  the  soul.  What  do  a  thousand  services 
avail,  without  cutting  the  throat  of  carnal  affections?  What  are  loud 
prayers,  but  as  sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbals,  without  divine  charity  ? 
A  Pharisaical  diligence  in  outward  forms  had  no  better  title  vouchsafed  by 
our  Saviour  than  that  of  hypocrisy.  God  desires  not  sacrifices  nor  delights 
in  burnt-offerings.  Shadows  are  not  to  be  offered  instead  of  substance.  God 
required  the  heart  of  man  for  itself,  but  commanded  outward  ceremonies,  as 
subservient  to  inward  worship,  and  goads  and  spurs  unto  it.  They  were 
never  appointed  as  the  substance  of  religion,  but  as  auxiliaries  to  it. 

"  Could  the  Israelites  have  been  called  worshippers  of  God  according  to 
His  order,  if  they  had  brought  Him  a  thousand  lambs  that  had  died  in  a 
ditch  or  been  killed  at  home  ?  They  were  to  be  brought  to  the  altar  living, 
and  the  blood  shed  at  the  foot  of  it.  A  thousand  sacrifices  killed  without 
had  not  been  so  valuable  as  one  brought  alive  to  the  place  of  offering.  "- 
Charnock,  vol.  i.,  p.  323, 


WORSHIP.  285 

sacrifice  of  fools:  for  they  consider  not  that  they  do  evil." 
(Eccles.  v.  1.)  It  is  recorded  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  began 
and  ended  His  ministry  with  two  practical  protests  against 
irreverent  worship.  On  two  distinct  occasions  He  cast  out  of 
the  temple  the  buyers  and  sellers  who  were  profaning  its  courts 
by  their  traffic,  and  justified  His  act  by  the  weighty  words,  "  It 
is  written,  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer,  but  ye 
have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves."  (Matt.  xxi.  13.)  People  who 
call  themselves  Christians,  and  go  to  churches  and  chapels  to 
stare  about,  whisper,  fidget,  yawn,  or  sleep,  but  not  to  pray,  or 
praise,  or  listen,  are  not  a  whit  better  than  the  wicked  Jews. 
They  do  not  consider  that  God  detests  profaneness  and  careless 
ness  in  His  presence,  and  that  to  behave  before  God  as  they 
would  not  dare  to  behave  before  their  sovereign  at  a  levee  or 
a  drawing-room,  is  a  very  grave  offence  indeed.  We  must 
beware  that  we  do  not  rush  from  one  extreme  into  another.  It 
does  not  follow,  because  "  bodily  service  "  alone  is  useless,  that 
it  does  not  matter  how  we  behave  ourselves  in  the  congregation. 
Surely  even  nature,  reason,  and  common  sense  should  teach  us 
that  there  is  a  manner  and  demeanour  suitable  to  mortal  man, 
when  he  draws  nigh  to  his  Almighty  Maker.  It  is  not  for 
nothing  that  it  is  written,  "  God  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the 
assembly  of  the  saints,  and  to  be  had  in  reverence  of  all  them 
that  are" about  Him."  (Psalm  Ixxxix.  7.)  If  it  is  worth  while 
to  attend  public  worship  at  all,  it  is  worth  while  to  do  it  care 
fully  and  well.  God  is  in  heaven,  and  we  are  on  earth.  Let 
us  not  be  rash  and  hasty.  Let  us  mind  what  we  are  about. 
"  Let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably 
with  reverence  and  godly  fear."  (Heb.  xii.  28,  29.) 

I  ask  the  reader's  special  attention  to  the  five  leading 
principles  which  I  have  just  laid  down.  I  fear  they  strike  at 
the  root  of  the  worship  of  myriads  in  our  own  land,  to  say  nothing 
of  Papists,  Mahometans,  and  heathens  abroad.  Thousands  of 
English  people,  I  fear,  are  regularly  spending  their  Sundays  in 
a  worship  which  is  utterly  useless.  It  is  a  worship  without 
Scripture,  without  Christ,  without  the  Holy  Spirit,  without 
knowledge,  without  heart,  and  without  the  slightest  benefit  to 
the  worshippers.  For  any  good  they  get  from  it,  they  might 
just  as  well  be  sitting  at  home,  and  not  worship  at  all.  Let  us 
take  heed  that  this  is  not  our  condition.  Let  us  remember,  as 


286  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

long  as  we  live,  that  it  is  not  the  quantity  of  worship,  but  the 
quality  that  God  regards.  The  inward  and  spiritual  character 
of  the  congregation  is  of  far  more  importance  in  His  sight  than 
the  number  of  the  worshippers,  or  the  outward  and  visible  signs 
of  devotion  which  they  exhibit.  Children  and  fools,  who 
admire  poppies  more  than  corn,  may  think  all  is  right  when 
there  is  a  great  external  show  of  religion.  But  it  is  not  so  with 
God.  His  all-seeing  eye  looks  at  the  inner  man. 

III.  I  proceed,  in  the  third  place,  to  show  the  essential  parts 
of  Christian  public  worship. 

I  will  suppose  the  case  of  a  man  who  has  never  given  the 
subject  of  religion  any  sincere  attention,  and  has  never  gone 
regularly  to  any  place  of  worship  at  all.  I  will  suppose  such 
a  man  to  be  awakened  to  a  sense  of  the  value  of  his  soul,  and  to 
be  desirous  of  information  about  things  in  religion.  He  is 
puzzled  by  finding  that  all  Christians  do  not  worship  God  in 
the  same  way,  and  that  one  neighbour  worships  God  in  one 
fashion,  and  another  in  another.  He  hears  one  man  saying 
that  there  is  no  road  to  heaven  excepting  through  his  Church, 
and  another  replying  that  all  will  go  to  hell  who  do  not  join  his 
ChapeL  Now  what  is  he  to  think  1  Are  there  not  certain 
things  which  are  essential  parts  of  Christian  worship?  I  answer 
without  hesitation  that  there  are.  It  shall  be  my  next  business 
to  exhibit  them  in  order. 

I  freely  grant  that  there  is  little  said  on  the  nature  of  public 
worship  in  the  New  Testament.  There  is  a  wide  difference  in 
this  respect  between  the  law  of  Moses  and  the  law  of  Christ. 
The  Jew's  religion  was  full  of  strict  and  minute  directions  about 
worship  :  the  Christian's  contains  very  few  directions,  and  those 
of  the  simplest  and  most  general  description.  The  Jew's  religion 
was  full  of  types,  emblems,  and  figures :  the  Christian's  only 
contains  two,— viz.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  Jew's 
religion  approached  the  worshipper  chiefly  through  the  eye : 
the  New  Testament  religion  appeals  directly  to  the  heart  and 
conscience.  The  Jew's  religion  was  confined  to  one  particular 
nation :  the  Christian's  was  meant  for  the  whole  world.  The 
Jew  could  turn  to  the  writings  of  Moses,  and  see  at  a  glance 
every  item  of  his  worship  :  the  Christian  can  only  point  to  a 
few  isolat  d  texts  and  passages,  which  are  to  be  applied  by 


WORSHIP.  287 

every  Church  according  to  circumstances.  In  a  word,  there  is 
nothing  answering  to  Exodus  or  Leviticus  in  the  New  Testa 
ment.  Yet  a  careful  reader  of  the  Christian  Scriptures  can 
hardly  fail  to  pick  out  of  them  the  essential  parts  and  principles 
of  Christian  worship.  Where  these  essential  parts  are  present, 
there  is  Christian  worship.  Where  they  are  absent,  the  worship 
is,  to  say  the  least,  defective,  imperfect,  and  incomplete. 

(a)  In  complete  public  worship  the  Sabbath  should  always 
be  honoured.     That  blessed  day  was  appointed  for  this  very 
purpose,  among  others,  to  give  men  an  opportunity  of  meeting 
together  in  God's  service.    A  Sabbath  was  given  to  man  even  in 
Paradise.     The  observance  of  a  Sabbath  was  made  part  of  the 
Ten  Commandments.     The  worship  of  God  on  the  Sabbath  was 
observed  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself.     To  meet  together 
on  one  day  in  the  week  at  least  was  a  practice  of  the  early 
Christians,  though  they  met   on   the  first  day  instead  of   the 
seventh.     (Acts  xx.  7 ;   1  Cor.  xvi.  2.)     To  assemble  in  God's 
house  on  the  Christian  Sabbath  has  been  the  custom  of  all 
professing   Christians  for  eighteen  hundred  years.     The  best 
and  holiest  of  God's  saints  have  always  pressed  on  others  most 
strongly  the  value  of  Sabbath  worship,  and  borne  witness  to  its 
usefulness.     It  sounds  very  fine  and  spiritual,  no  doubt,  to  say 
that  every  day  should  be  a  Sabbath  to  a  Christian,  and  that 
one  day  should  not  be  kept  more  holy  than  another.     But  facts 
are  stronger  than  theories.      Experience   proves  that   human 
nature  requires  such  helps  as  fixed  days,  and  hours,  and  seasons 
for  carrying  on  spiritual  business,  and  that  public  worship  never 
prospers  unless  we  observe  God's  order.     "The  Sabbath  was 
made  for  man "  by  Him  who  made  man  at  the  beginning,  and 
knew  what  flesh  and  blood  is.    As  a  general  rule,  it  will  always  be 
found  that  where  there  is  no  Sabbath  there  is  no  public  worship. 

(b)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  a  ministry.     I 
do  not  for  a  moment  say  that  it  is  of  absolute  necessity  that  it 
must  be  an  Episcopal  ministry.     I  am  not  so  narrow-minded 
and  uncharitable  as  to  deny  the  validity  of  Presbyterian  or  Con 
gregational  orders.     I  only  maintain  that  it  is  the  mind  of  God 
that   ministers   of  some  kind  should  conduct  the  worship  of 
Christian  congregations,  and  be  responsible  for  its  decent  and 
orderly  conduct  in  approaching  God.      I  am  at  a  loss  to  under 
stand  how  any  one  can  read  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  the 


288  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  Ephesians,  Timothy,  and  Titus,  and 
deny  that  the  ministry  is  an  appointment  of  God.  I  say  this 
with  every  feeling  of  respect  for  the  Quakers  and  Plymouth 
Brethren,  who  have  no  ordained  ministers  :  I  simply  say  that  I 
cannot  understand  their  views  on  this  subject.  Reason  itself 
appears  to  me  to  tell  us  that  business  which  is  left  to  nobody  in 
particular  to  attend  to,  is  a  business  which  is  soon  entirely 
neglected.  Order  is  said  to  be  heaven's  first  law.  Once  let  a 
people  begin  with  no  Sabbath  and  no  ministry,  and  it  would 
never  surprise  me  if  they  ended  with  no  public  worship,  no 
religion,  and  no  God. 

(c)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  the  preaching 
of  God's  Word.     I  can  find  no  record  of  Church  assemblies  in 
the  New  Testament  in  which  preaching   and  teaching  orally 
does  not  occupy  a  most  prominent  position.     It  appears  to  me 
to  be  the  chief  instrument  by  which  the  Holy  Ghost  not  only 
awakens  sinners,  but  also  leads  on  and  establishes  saints.     I 
observe    that  in  the  very  last  words  that  St.   Paul  wrote  to 
Timothy,  as  a  young  minister,  he  especially  enjoins  on  him  to 
"preach   the  Word."      (2    Tim.  iv.    2.)     I  cannot,  therefore, 
believe  that  any  system  of  worship  in  which  the  sermon  is  made 
little  of,  or  thrust  into  a  corner,  can  be  a  Scriptural  system,  or 
one  likely  to  have  the  blessing  of   God.     I  have  no  faith  in  the 
general  utility  of  services  composed  entirely  of  prayer-reading, 
hymn-singing,  sacrament-receiving,  and  walking  in  procession. 
I  hold  firmly  with  Bishop  Latimer,  that  it  is  one  of  Satan's 
great  aims  to  exalt  ceremonies  and  put  down  preaching.     There 
is  a  deep  meaning  in  the  words,  "  Despise  not  prophesying." 
(1  Thess.  v.  20.)     A  contempt  for  sermons  is  a  pretty  sure  mark 
of  a  decline  in  spiritual  religion. 

(d)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  united  public 
prayer.     I  can  find  no  account  of  religious  assemblies  in  the 
New  Testament  in  which  prayer  and  supplication  do  not  form  a 
principal  business.     I  find  St.  Paul  telling  Timothy,  "  I  exhort, 
first  of  all,  that  supplications,  prayers,  intercessions,  and  giving 
of  thanks,  be  made  for  all  men."     (1  Tim.  ii.  1.)     Such  prayers 
should  be  plain  and  intelligible,  that  all  the  worshippers  may 
know  what  is  going  on,  and  be  able  to  go  along  with  him  who 
prays.     They  should  as  far  as  possible  be  the  joint  act  of  all  the 
assembly  and  not  the  act  of  one  man's  mind  alone.     A  con- 


WORSHIP.  289 

gregation  of  professing  Christians  which  only  meets  to  hear  a 
grand  sermon,  and  takes  no  part  or  interest  in  the  prayers,  seems 
to  me  to  fall  far  short  of  the  standard  of  the  New  Testament. 
Public  worship  does  not  consist  only  of  hearing.* 

(e)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  the  public 
reading  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  This  was  evidently  a  part  of  the 
service  of  the  Jewish  synagogue,  as  we  may  learn  from  what 
happened  at  Nazareth,  and  at  Antioch  in  Pisidia.  (Luke  iv.  16  ; 
Acts  xiii.  15.)  We  cannot  doubt  that  the  Christian  Church 
was  intended  to  honour  the  Bible  as  much  as  the  Jewish.  To 
my  eye  St.  Paul  points  to  this  when  he  says  to  Timothy,  "  Till 
I  come  give  attention  to  reading."  (1  Tim.  iv.  13.)  I  do  not 
believe  that  "reading"  in  that  text  means  "private  study." 
Reason  and  common  sense  alike  teach  the  usefulness  of  the 
practice  of  publicly  reading  the  Scriptures.  A  visible  Church 
will  always  contain  many  professing  members  who  either  cannot 
read,  or  have  no  will  or  time  to  read  at  home.  What  safer  plan 
can  be  devised  for  the  instruction  of  such  people  than  the 
regular  reading  of  God's  Word  ?  A  congregation  which  hears 
but  little  of  the  Bible  is  always  in  danger  of  becoming  entirely 
dependent  on  its  minister.  God  should  always  speak  in  the 
assembly  of  His  people  as  well  as  man.  j 

*  The  reader  is  requested  to  observe  that  I  purposely  abstain  from  saying 
anything  about  the  vexed  question,  whether  public  prayers  in  the  congrega 
tion  should  be  liturgical  and  pre-composed,  or  extemporaneous.  I  say  nothing, 
because  nothing  is  said  about  it  in  Scripture.  Neither  liturgies  nor  extem 
poraneous  prayers  are  expressly  sanctioned,  or  expressly  prohibited,  in'God's 
Word.  A  large  liberty  is  mercifully  given  to  the  Churches.  I  think  the 
Christian  (so  called)  who  anathematises  and  abuses  his  brother  because  he 
uses  a  liturgy,  is  an  ignorant,  narrow-minded  bigot  on  one  side.  I  think  the 
Christian  (so-called)  who  anathematises  and  excommunicates  his  brother 
because  he  does  not  use  a  liturgy,  is  a  narrow-minded,  ignorant  bigot  on  the 
other  side.  Both  are  wrong. 

My  own  mind  has  been  long  made  up.  If  all  ministers  prayed  extempore 
always,  as  some  ministers  pray  sometimes,  I  should  be  against  a  liturgy.  But 
considering  what  human  nature  is,  I  decidedly  think  it  better  both  for 
minister  and  people,  in  the  regular,  habitual,  and  stated  assemblies  of  the 
Church  to  have  a  liturgy.  With  all  its  imperfections  I  am  very  thankful  for 
the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  It  may  have  defects,  because  it  was  not  com 
piled  by  inspiration.  But  for  all  that,  it  is  an  admirable  and  matchless 
manual  of  public  devotion.  I  would  not  impose  the  use  of  it  on  a  brother's 
conscience  for  a  thousand  worlds.  But  I  claim  the  right  to  use  it  myself  un 
disturbed. 

f  There  is  nothing  in  the  public  worship  of  the  Church  of  England  which  I 
admire  so  much  as  the  large  quantity  of  Scripture  which  it  orders  to  be  read 


290  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

(/)  In  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  united  public 
praise.  That  this  was  the  custom  among  the  first  Christians,  is 
evident  from  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians, 
in  which  he  commended  the  use  of  "  psalms  and  hymns  and 
spiritual  songs."  (Ephes.  v.  19  ;  Coloss.  iii.  16.)  That  it  was 
a  custom  so  widely  prevalent  as  to  be  a  mark  of  the  earliest 
Christians,  is  simply  matter  of  history.  Pliny  records  that 
when  they  met  they  "  used  to  sing  a  hymn  to  Christ  as  God." 
!N"o  one  indeed  can  read  the  Old  Testament  and  not  discover  the 
extremely  prominent  place  which  praise  occupied  in  the  temple 
service.  What  man  in  his  senses  can  doubt  that  the  "  service 
of  song"  was  meant  to  be  highly  esteemed  under  the  New 
Testament?  Praise  has  been  truly  called  the  flower  of  all 
devotion.  It  is  the  only  part  of  our  worship  which  will  never 
die.  Preaching  and  praying  and  reading  shall  one  day  be  no 
longer  needed.  But  praise  shall  go  on  for  ever.  A  congrega 
tion  which  takes  no  part  in  praise,  or  leaves  it  all  to  be  done  by 
deputy  through  a  choir,  can  be  hardly  thought  in  a  satisfactory 
state. 

(g)  Finally,  in  complete  public  worship  there  should  be  the 
regular  use  of  the  two  sacraments  which  Christ  appointed  in  His 
Church.  By  baptism  new  members  should  be  continually  added 
to  the  congregation,  and  publicly  enrolled  in  the  list  of  profess 
ing  Christians.  By  the  Lord's  Supper  believers  should  be  con 
tinually  offered  an  opportunity  of  confessing  their  Master,  and 
continually  strengthened  and  refreshed,  and  put  in  remembrance 
of  His  sacrifice  on  the  cross.  I  believe,  with  every  feeling  of 
respect  for  Quakers  and  Plymouth  Brethren,  that  no  one  who 
neglected  these  two  sacraments  would  have  been  regarded  as  a 
Christian  by  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter,  St.  James  and  St.  John. 
Xo  doubt,  like  every  other  good  thing,  they  may  be  painfully 
misused  and  profaned  by  some,  and  superstitiously  idolized  by 
others.  But  after  all  there  is  no  getting  over  the  fact  that 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  were  ordained  by  Christ  Himself 
as  means  of  grace,  and  we  cannot  doubt  He  meant  them  to  be 
reverently  and  duly  used.  A  man  who  preferred  to  worship 

aloud  to  its  members.  Every  Churchman  who  goes  to  church  twice  on 
Sunday  hears  two  chapters  of  the  Old  Testament  and  two  of  the  New,  beside 
the  Psalms,  the  Epistle,  and  the  Gospel. :  I  doubt  if  the  members  of  any  other 
Church  in  Christendom  hear  anything  like  the  same  proportion  of  God's  Word. 


WORSHIP.  291 

God  for  many  years  without  ever  receiving  the  sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  is  a  man,  I  am  firmly  persuaded,  that  would  not 
have  been  thought  in  a  right  state  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles. 

I  commend  these  seven  points  to  the  serious  attention  of  my 
readers,  and  invite  them  to  consider  them  well.  I  can  easily 
believe  that  I  may  have  said  things  about  them  with  which 
some  Christians  may  not  agree.  I  am  not  their  judge.  To 
their  own  Master  they  must  stand  or  fall.  I  can  only  tell  my 
readers,  as  an  honest  man,  what  appears  to  me  the  teaching  of 
Holy  Scripture.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  say  that  no  man  will 
be  saved  who  does  not  see  public  worship  precisely  with  my 
eyes.  I  say  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  I  do  say  that  any 
regular  system  of  public  worship  which  does  not  give  a  place 
to  the  Sabbath,  the  ministry,  preaching,  prayers,  Scripture- 
reading,  praise,  and  the  two  sacraments,  appears  to  me  deficient 
and  incomplete.  If  we  attend  a  place  of  worship  where  any  of 
these  seven  points  is  neglected,  I  think  we  suffer  loss  and 
damage.  We  may  be  doing  well;  but  I  think  we  might  be 
doing  better.  To  my  mind  these  seven  parts  of  public  worship 
appear  to  stand  out  plainly  on  the  face  of  the  New  Testament ; 
and  I  plainly  say  so. 

IV.  I  proceed,  in  the  fourth  place,  to  show  some  things 
which  ought  to  be  avoided  in  public  worship. 

I  am  well  aware  that  there  is  no  perfection  in  this  world. 
There  is  no  visible  Church,  I  am  sure,  in  whose  public  worship 
it  would  not  be  easy  to  show  faults,  defects,  and  shortcomings. 
The  best  service  in  the  best  visible  Church  on  earth  will  always 
be  infinitely  below  the  standard  of  the  glorified  Church  in 
heaven.  I  admit  with  sorrow  and  humiliation,  that  the  faith, 
and  hope,  and  life,  and  worship  of  God's  people  are  all  alike 
full  of  imperfections.  To  be  continually  separating  and  seced 
ing  from  Churches,  because  we  detect  blemishes  in  their  admin 
istration,  is  not  the  act  of  a  wise  man.  It  is  to  forget  the 
parable  of  the  wheat  and  tares. 

But  I  cannot  forget,  for  all  this,  that  we  have  fallen  on 
dangerous  times  in  the  matter  of  worship.  There  are  things 
going  on  in  many  English  churches  and  chapels  in  the  present 
day  so  highly  objectionable,  that  I  feel  it  a  plain  duty  to  offer 
some  cautions  about  them.  Plain  speaking  about  them  is 


292  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

imperatively  demanded  at  a  minister's  hands.  If  the  watchmen 
hold  their  peace,  how  shall  the  city  take  alarm?  "If  the 
trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepare  himself  for 
the  battler5  (1  Cor.  xiv.  8.) 

There  are  three  great  and  growing  evils  in  public  worship, 
which  require  special  watching  in  the  present  day.  I  feel  it  a 
positive  duty  to  direct  attention  to  them.  We  have  need  to 
stand  on  our  guard  about  these  evils,  and  to  take  heed  that 
they  do  not  infect  and  damage  our  souls. 

(a)  Let  us  beware,  for  one  thing,  of  any  worship  in  which  a 
disproportionate  honour  is  given  to  any  one  ordinance  of  Christ, 
to  the  neglect  of  another.  There  are  Churches  at  this  moment, 
in  which  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  like  Aaron's  rod, 
swallow  up  everything  else  in  religion.  Nothing  beside  receives 
much  attention.  The  honour  done  to  the  font  and  the  Lord's 
Table  meet  you  at  every  turn.  All  else,  in  comparison,  is 
jostled  out  of  its  place,  overshadowed,  dwarfed,  and  driven  into 
a  corner.  Worship  of  this  sort,  I  hesitate  not  to  say,  is  useless 
to  man's  soul.  Once  alter  the  proportions  of  a  doctor's  prescrip 
tion,  and  you  may  turn  his  medicine  into  a  poison.  Once  bury 
the  whole  of  Christianity  under  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper, 
and  the  real  idea  of  Christian  worship  is  completely  destroyed. 

(I)  Let  us  beware,  for  another  thing,  of  any  worship  in  which 
an  excessive  quantity  of  decoration  and  ornament  is  used.  There 
are  many  Churches  at  this  moment,  in  which  Divine  service  is 
carried  on  with  such  an  amount  of  gaudy  dressing,  candle- 
lighting,  and  theatrical  ceremonial,  that  it  defeats  the  very 
purpose  of  worship.  Simplicity  should  be  the  grand  character 
istic  of  New  Testament  worship.  Ornament  at  any  time  should 
be  employed  with  a  very  sparing  hand.  Neither  in  the  Gospels 
nor  in  the  Epistles  shall  we  find  the  slightest  warrant  for  a 
gorgeous  and  decorated  ceremonial,  or  for  any  symbols  except 
water,  bread,  and  wine.  Above  all,  the  inherent  wickedness  of 
human  nature  is  such  that  our  minds  are  only  too  ready  to  turn 
away  from  spiritual  things  to  visible  things.  Whether  men 
like  it  or  not,  what  the  heart  of  man  needs  teaching,  is  the  use- 
lessness  of  outward  ornaments  without  inward  grace.* 

*  "Pompous  rites  have  been  the  great  engine  whereby  the  devil  hath 
deceived  the  souls  of  men,  and  wrought  them  to  a  nauseating  simplicity  of 
Divine  worship  as  if  unworthy  the  majesty  and  excellency  of  God.  (2  Cor. 


WORSHIP.  293 

(G)  Let  us  beware,  above  all  things,  of  any  worship  in  which 
ministers  wear  the  dress,  or  act  in  the  manner,  of  sacrificing 
Ijriests.  There  are  hundreds  of  English  Churches  at  this  moment 
in  which  the  Lord's  Supper  is  administered  as  a  sacrifice  and 
not  as  a  sacrament,  and  the  clergy  are  practically  acting  as 
mediators  between  God  and  man.  The  real  presence  of  our 
Lord's  body  and  blood  under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine  is 
openly  taught.  The  Lord's  Table  is  called  an  altar.  The  con 
secrated  elements  are  treated  with  an  idolatrous  reverence,  as 
if  God  Himself  was  in  them,  under  the  form  of  bread  and 
wine.  The  habit  of  private  confession  to  clergymen,  is  encour 
aged  and  urged  on  the  people.  I  find  it  impossible  to  believe 
that  such  worship  as  this  can  be  anything  but  offensive  to  God. 
He  is  a  jealous  God,  and  will  not  give  His  honour  to  another. 
The  sacrifice  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  once  offered, 
can  in  no  sense  or  way  ever  be  repeated.  His  mediatorial  and 
priestly  office  He  has  never  deputed  to  any  man,  or  any  order 
of  men.  There  is  not  a  word  in  the  Acts  or  Epistles  to  show 
that  the  Apostles  ever  pretended  to  be  sacrificing  priests,  or  to 
make  any  oblation  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  or  to  hear  private 
confessions,  and  confer  judicial  absolutions.  Surely  that  simple 
fact  ought  to  make  men  think.  Let  us  beware  of  Sacrincialism, 
the  Mass,  and  the  Confessional ! 

xi.  3.)  But  the  Jews  would  not  understand  the  glory  of  the  second  temple 
in  the  presence  of  the  Messiah,  because  it  had  not  the  pompous  grandeur  of 
the  temple  erected  by  Solomon. 

"Hence  in  all  ages  men  have  been  forward  to  disfigure  God's  models  and 
to  dress  up  a  brat  of  their  own  ;  as  though  God  had  been  defective  in  provid 
ing  for  His  own  honour  in  His  institutions  without  the  assistance  of  His 
creature.  This  hath  always  been  in  the  world  ;  the  old  world  had  their 
imaginations,  and  the  new  world  hath  continued  them.  The  Israelites,  in  the 
midst  of  miracles  and  under  the  memory  of  a  famous  deliverance,  would 
erect  a  calf.  The  Pharisees  who  sat  in  Moses'  chair,  would  coin  new  tradi 
tions,  and  enjoin  them  to  be  as  current  as  the  law  of  God.  Papists  will  be 
blending  Christian  appointments  with  Pagan  ceremonies,  to  please  the  carnal 
fancies  of  the  common  people. 

"How  often  hath  the  practice  of  the  Primitive  Church,  the  custom 
wherein  we  are  bred,  the  sentiments  of  our  ancestors,  been  owned  as  a  more 
authentic  rule,  in  matters  of  worship,  than  the  mind  of  God  delivered  in  His 
Word.  It  is  natural  by  creation  to  worship  God ;  and  it  is  as  natural  by 
corruption  for  man  to  worship  Him  in  a  human  way,  and  not  in  a  divine.  Is 
not  this  to  impose  laws  upon  God  ? — to  reckon  ourselves  wiser  than  He  ?  To 
think  Him  negligent  of  His  own  services,  and  that  our  feeble  brains  can  find 
out  ways  to  accommodate  His  honour  better  than  Himself  hath  done."- 
Charnock,  vol.  i.,  p.  222. 


294  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Against  the  three  evils  of  which  I  have  just  been  speaking, 
I  desire  to  lift  up  a  warning  voice.  Such  worship  is  not  accept 
able  in  God's  sight.  It  may  be  pressed  upon  us  most  plausibly 
by  clever  men.  It  may  be  very  attractive  to  the  eye,  and  ear, 
and  the  sensual  part  of  our  nature.  But  it  has  one  fatal  defect 
about  it :  it  cannot  be  defended  and  maintained  by  plain  texts 
of  Scripture.  Sacramentalism,  Ceremonialism,  Sacrificialism, 
will  never  be  found  in  Bibles  fairly  read  and  honestly  interpreted. 

We  should  search  the  pages  of  English  history,  if  nothing 
else  will  open  our  eyes,  and  see  what  those  pages  tell  us.  Of 
worship  in  which  Sacraments,  Ceremonies,  Sacerdotalism,  and 
the  Mass  made  the  principal  part, — of  such  worship  England 
has  surely  had  enough.  Such  worship  was  tried  by  the  Church 
of  Rome  in  the  days  of  our  forefathers,  for  centuries  before  the 
Protestant  Reformation,  and  utterly  failed.  It  filled  the  land 
with  superstition,  ignorance,  formalism,  and  immorality.  It 
comforted  no  one,  sanctified  no  one,  elevated  no  one,  helped  no 
one  toward  heaven.  It  made  the  priests  overbearing  tyrants, 
and  the  people  cringing  slaves.  And  shall  we  go  back  to  it  1  God 
forbid  !  Shall  we  once  more  be  content  with  services  in  which 
baptism,  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  power  of  the  priesthood,  the 
real  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharist,  the  necessity  of  sym 
bolical  decorations,  the  value  of  processions,  banners,  pictures, 
altar  lights,  are  incessantly  pressed  on  our  minds  1  Once  more 
I  say,  God  forbid  !  Let  every  one  that  loves  his  soul  come  out 
from  such  worship  and  be  separate.  Let  him  avoid  it  and  turn 
away  from  it,  as  he  would  from  poison. 

V.  I  proceed,  in  the  last  place,  to  show  some  tests  l)ij  which 
OUT  public  worship  should  be  tried. 

This  is  a  point  of  vast  importance,  and  one  which  every 
professing  Christian  should  look  fairly  in  the  face.  Too  many 
are  apt  to  cut  the  knot  of  all  difficulties  about  the  subject  before 
us,  by  referring  to  their  own  feelings.  They  will  tell  us  that 
they  are  not  theologians,  that  they  do  not  pretend  to  understand 
the  difference  between  one  school  of  divinity  and  another.  But 
they  do  know  that  the  worship  in  which  they  take  part  makes 
them  feel  so  much  better,  that  they  cannot  doubt  it  is  all  right. 

I  am  not  disposed  to  let  such  people  turn  away  from  the 
subject  of  this  paper  quite  so  easily.  I  cannot  forget  that 


WOKSHIP.  295 

religious  feelings  are  very  deceitful  things.  There  is  a  sort  of 
gentle  animal  excitement  produced  in  some  minds  by  hearing 
religious  music  and  seeing  religious  spectacles,  which  is  not 
true  devotion  at  all.  While  it  lasts,  such  excitement  is  very 
strong  and  very  contagious ;  but  it  soon  comes  and  soon  goes, 
and  leaves  no  permanent  impression  behind  it.  It  is  a  mere 
sensuous  animal  influence,  which  even  a  Komanist  may  feel  at 
seasons,  and  yet  remain  a  Komanist  both  in  doctrine  and  practice. 

(a)  True  spiritual  worship  will  affect  a  man's  heart  and  con 
science.     It  will  make  him  feel  more  keenly  the  sinfulness  of 
sin,  and  his  own  particular  personal  corruption.     It  will  deepen 
his  humility.     It  will  render  him  more  jealously  careful  over 
his  inward  life.     False  public  worship,  like  dram-drinking  and 
opium-eating,    will   every   year    produce   weaker    impressions. 
True   spiritual  worship,  like  wholesome  food,  will  strengthen 
him  who  uses  it,  and  make  him  grow  inwardly  every  year. 

(b)  True  spiritual  worship  will  draw  a  man  into  close  com 
munion  with  Jesus  Christ  Himself.     It  will  lift  him  far  above 
Churches,  and  ordinances,  and  ministers.      It  will  make  him 
hunger  and  thirst  after  a  sight  of  the  King.     The  more  he 
hears,  and  reads,  and  prays,  and  praises,  the  more  he  will  feel 
that  nothing  but  Christ  Himself  will  feed  the  life  of  his  soul, 
and  that  heart  communion  with  Him  is   "meat  indeed  and 
drink  indeed."     The  false  worshipper  in  the  time  of  need  will 
turn  to  external  helps,  to  ministers,  ordinances,  and  sacraments. 
The  true  worshipper  will  turn  instinctively  to  Christ  by  simple 
faith,  just  as  the  compass-needle  turns  to  the  pole. 

(c)  True  spiritual  worship  will  continually  extend  a  man's 
spiritual  knoicledye.    It  will  annually  give  bone,  and  sinew,  and 
muscle,  and  firmness  to  his  religion.     A  true  worshipper  will 
every  year  know  more  of  self,  and  God,  and  heaven,  and  duty, 
and  doctrine,  and  practice,  and  experience.     His  religion  is  a 
living  thing,  and  will  grow.     A  false  worshipper  will  never 
get  beyond  the  old  carnal  principles  and  elements  of  his  theology. 
He  will  annually  go  round  and  round  like  a  horse  in  a  mill,  and 
though  labouring  much  will  never  get  forward.     His  religion  is 
a  dead  thing,  and  cannot  increase  and  multiply. 

(d)  True    spiritual   worship   will    continually    increase    the 
holiness  of  a  man's  life.     It  will  make  him  every  year  more 
watchful  over  tongue,  and  temper,  and  time,  and  behaviour  in 


296  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

every  relation  of  life.  The  true  worshipper's  conscience  becomes 
annually  more  tender.  The  false  worshipper's  becomes  annually 
more  seared  and  more  hard. 

Give  me  the  worship  that  will  stand  the  test  of  our  Lord's 
great  principle,  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  Give 
me  the  worship  that  sanctifies  the  life, — that  makes  a  man  walk 
with  God  and  delight  in  God's  law, — that  lifts  him  above  the 
fear  of  the  world  and  the  love  of  the  world, — that  enables  him 
to  exhibit  something  of  God's  image  and  God's  likeness  before 
his  fellow-men, — that  makes  him  just,  loving,  pure,  gentle,  good- 
tempered,  patient,  humble,  unselfish,  temperate.  This  is  the 
worship  that  comes  down  from  heaven,  and  has  the  stamp  and 
seal  and  superscription  of  God. 

Whatever  men  may  please  to  say,  the  grand  test  of  the  value 
of  any  kind  of  worship  is  the  effect  it  produces  on  the  lives  of 
the  worshippers.  A  man  may  tell  us  that  what  is  called 
Ritualism  now-a-days  is  the  best  and  most  perfect  mode  of 
worshipping  God.  He  may  despise  the  simple  and  unadorned 
ceremonial  of  Evangelical  congregations.  He  may  exalt  to  the 
skies  the  excellence  of  ornament,  decoration,  and  pageantry  in 
our  service  of  God.  But  I  take  leave  to  tell  him  that  Christian 
men  will  try  his  favourite  system  by  its  results.  So  long  as 
Ritualistic  worshippers  can  turn  from  matins  and  early  com 
munions  to  races  and  operas,  and  can  oscillate  between  the 
confessional  and  the  ball-room,  so  long  the  advocates  of  Ritualism 
must  not  be  surprised  if  we  think  little^  of  the  value  of  Ritual 
istic  worship. 

Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  The  best 
public  worship  is  that  which  produces  the  best  private  Chris 
tianity.  The  best  Church  Services  for  the  congregation  are 
those  which  make  its  individual  members  most  holy  at  home 
and  alone.  If  we  want  to  know  whether  our  own  public 
worship  is  doing  us  good,  let  us  try  it  by  these  tests.  Does  it 
quicken  our  conscience  ?  Does  it  send  us  to  Christ  ?  Does  it 
add  to  our  knowledge  1  Does  it  sanctify  our  life  1  If  it  does, 
we  may  depend  011  it,  it  is  worship  of  which  we  have  no  cause 
to  be  ashamed. 

The  day  is  coming  when  there  shall  be  a  congregation  that 
shall  never  break  up,  and  a  Sabbath  that  shall  never  end,  a 
song  of  praise  that  shall  never  cease,  and  an  assembly  that  shall 


WORSHIP.  297 

never  be  dispersed.  In  that  assembly  shall  be  found  all  who 
have  "  worshipped  God  in  spirit "  upon  earth.  If  we  are  such, 
we  shall  be  there. 

Here  we  often  worship  God  with  a  deep  sense  of  weakness, 
corruption,  and  infirmity.  There,  at  last,  we  shall  be  able, 
with  a  renewed  body,  to  serve  Him  without  weariness,  and  to 
attend  on  Him  without  distraction. 

Here,  at  our  very  best,  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  and 
know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  most  imperfectly.  It  is  our  grief  that 
we  do  not  know  Him  better  and  love  Him  more.  There,  freed 
from  all  the  dross  and  defilement  of  indwelling  sin,  we  shall 
see  Jesus  as  we  have  been  seen,  and  know  as  we  have  been 
known.  Surely,  if  faith  has  been  sweet  and  peace-giving,  sight 
will  be  far  better. 

Here  we  have  often  found  it  hard  to  worship  God  joyfully, 
by  reason  of  the  sorrows  and  cares  of  this  world.  Tears  over 
the  graves  of  those  we  loved  have  often  made  it  hard  to  sing 
praise.  Crushed  hopes  and  family  sorrows  have  sometimes 
made  us  hang  our  harps  on  the  willows.  There  every  tear 
shall  be  dried,  every  saint  who  has  fallen  asleep  in  Christ  shall 
meet  us  once  more,  and  every  hard  thing  in  our  life-journey 
shall  be  made  clear  and  plain  as  the  sun  at  noon-day. 

Here  we  have  often  felt  that  we  stand  comparatively  alone, 
and  that  even  in  God's  house  the  real  spiritual  worshippers  are 
comparatively  few.  There  we  shall  at  length  see  a  multitude 
of  brethren  and  sisters  that  no  man  can  number,  all  of  one 
heart  and  one  mind,  all  free  from  blemishes,  weaknesses,  and 
infirmities,  all  rejoicing  in  one  Saviour,  and  all  prepared  to 
spend  an  eternity  in  His  praise.  We  shall  have  worshipping 
companions  enough  in  heaven. 

Armed  with  such  hopes  as  these,  let  us  lift  up  our  hearts  and 
look  forward !  The  time  is  very  short.  The  night  is  far  spent. 
The  day  is  at  hand.  Let  us  worship  on,  pray  on,  praise  on, 
and  read  on.  Let  us  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once 
delivered  to  the  saints,  and  resist  manfully  every  effort  to  spoil 
Scriptural  worship.  Let  us  strive  earnestly  to  hand  down  the 
light  of  Gospel  worship  to  our  children's  children.  Yet  a  little 
time  and  He  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry. 
Blessed  in  that  day  will  be  those,  and  those  only,  who  are 
found  true  worshippers,  "  worshippers  in  spirit  and  truth  ! " 


XIV. 
THE  SABBATH. 

"Remember  the  Sabbath  Day,  to  keep  it  holy." — EXODUS  xx.  8. 

THERE  is  a  subject  in  the  present  day  which  demands  the 
serious  attention  of  all  professing  Christians  in  Great  Britain. 
That  subject  is  the  Christian  Sabbath,  or  Lord's  Day. 

It  is  a  subject  which  is  forced  upon  our  notice,  whether  we 
like  it  or  not.  The  minds  of  Englishmen  are  agitated  by 
questions  arising  out  of  it.  "Is  the  observance  of  a  Sabbath 
binding  on  Christians  ?  Have  we  any  right  to  tell  a  man  that 
to  do  his  business  or  seek  his  pleasure  on  a  Sunday  is  a  sin  1 
Is  it  desirable  to  open  places  of  public  amusement  on  the  Lord's 
Day  ? "  All  these  are  questions  which  are  continually  asked. 
They  are  questions  to  which  we  ought  to  be  able  to  give  a 
decided  answer. 

The  subject  is  one  on  which  "divers  and  strange  doctrines" 
abound.  Statements  are  continually  made  about  Sunday,  both 
by  speakers  and  writers,  which  plain  unsophisticated  readers  of 
the  Bible  find  it  impossible  to  reconcile  with  the  Word  of  God. 
If  these  statements  proceeded  only  from  the  ignorant  and 
irreligious  part  of  the  world,  the  defenders  of  the  Sabbath 
would  have  no  reason  to  be  surprised.  But  they  may  well 
wonder  when  they  find  educated  and  religious  persons  among 
their  adversaries.  It  is  a  melancholy  truth  that  in  some 
quarters  the  Sabbath  is  wounded  by  those  who  ought  to  be  its 
best  friends. 

The  subject  is  one  which  is  of  immense  importance.  It  is 
not  too  much  to  say  that  the  prosperity  or  decay  of  English 
Christianity  depends  on  the  maintenance  of  the  Christian 
Sabbath.  Break  down  the  fence  which  now  surrounds  the 
Sunday,  and  our  Sunday  schools  will  soon  come  to  an  end. 


THE  SABBATH.  299 

Let  in  the  flood  of  worldliness  and  dissipation  on  the  Lord's 
Day,  without  check  or  hindrance,  and  our  congregations  will 
soon  dwindle  away.  There  is  not  too  much  religion  in  the 
land  now.  Destroy  the  sanctity  of  the  Sabbath,  and  there 
would  spon  be  far  less.  Nothing,  in  short,  I  believe,  would 
so  thoroughly  advance  the  kingdom  of  Satan  in  England,  as 
to  withdraw  legal  protection  from  the  Lord's  Day.  It  would 
be  a  joy  to  the  infidel ;  but  it  would  be  an  insult  and  offence 
to  God. 

I  ask  the  attention  of  all  professing  Christians,  while  I  try  to 
say  a  few  plain  words  on  the  subject  of  the  Sabbath.  I  have 
no  new  argument  to  advance.  I  can  say  nothing  that  has  not 
been  said,  and  said  better  too,  a  hundred  times  before.  But 
at  a  time  like  this  it  becomes  every  Christian  writer  to  cast  in 
his  mite  into  the  treasury  of  truth.  As  a  minister  of  Christ, 
a  father  of  a  family,  and  a  lover  of  my  country,  I  feel  bound  to 
plead  in  behalf  of  the  old  English  Sunday.  My  sentence  is 
emphatically  expressed  in  the  words  of  Scripture, — let  us  "keep 
it  holy."  My  advice  to  all  Christians  is  to  contend  earnestly 
for  the  whole  day  against  all  enemies,  both  without  and  within. 
It  is  worth  a  struggle.  Let  our  united  cry  be,  "  We  do  not 
want  the  Sabbath  law  of  England  to  be  changed." 

There  are  four  points  in  connection  with  the  Sabbath  which 
require  examination.  On  each  of  these  I  wish  to  offer  a  few 
remarks. 

I.  The  authority  on  which  the  Sabbath  stands. 

II.  The  purpose  for  which  the  Sabbath  was  appointed. 

III.  The  manner  in  which  the  Sabbath  ought  to  be  kept. 

IV.  Tlie  ways  in  which  the  Sabbath  may  be  profaned. 

I.  Let  me,  in  the  first  place,  consider  the  authority  on  which 
the  Sabbath  stands. 

I  hold  it  to  be  of  primary  importance  to  have  this  point 
clearly  settled  in  our  minds.  Here  is  the  very  rock  on  which 
many  of  the  enemies  of  the  Sabbath  make  shipwreck.  They 
tell  us  that  the  day  is  "  a  mere  Jewish  ordinance,"  and  that 
we  are  no  more  bound  to  keep  it  holy  than  to  offer  sacrifice. 
They  proclaim  to  the  world  that  the  observance  of  the  Lord's 
Day  rests  upon  nothing  but  Church  authority,  and  cannot  be 
proved  by  the  Word  of  God. 


300  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Now  I  believe  that  those  who  say  such  things  are  entirely 
mistaken.  Amiable  and  respectable  as  many  of  them  are,  I 
regard  them  in  this  matter  as  being  thoroughly  in  error.  Names 
go  for  nothing  with  me  in  such  a  case.  It  is  not  the  assertion 
of  a  hundred  divines,  whether  living  or  dead,  that  will  make 
me  believe  black  is  white,  or  reject  the  evidence  of  plain  texts 
of  Scripture.  I  care  little  to  be  told  what  Jeremy  Taylor,  or 
Paley,  or  Arnold  have  thought.  The  grand  question  is,  "  Were 
their  thoughts  worth  credit  ? — were  they  right  or  wrong  ? " 

My  own  firm  conviction  is,  that  the  observance  of  a  Sabbath 
Day  is  part  of  the  eternal  law  of  God.  It  is  not  a  mere  tem 
porary  Jewish  ordinance.  It  is  not  a  man-made  institution  of 
priestcraft.  It  is  not  an  unauthorized  imposition  of  the  Church. 
It  is  one  of  the  everlasting  rules  which  God  has  revealed  for 
the  guidance  of  all  mankind.  It  is  a  rule  that  many  nations 
without  the  Bible  have  lost  sight  of,  and  buried,  like  other 
rules,  under  the  rubbish  of  superstition  and  heathenism.  But 
it  was  a  rule  intended  to  be  binding  on  all  the  children  of  Adam. 
What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  This  is  the  grand  point  after  all. 
What  public  opinion  says,  or  newspaper  writers  think,  matters 
nothing.  We  are  not  going  to  stand  at  the  bar  of  man  when 
we  die.  He  that  judgeth  us  is  the  Lord  God  of  the  Bible. 
What  saith  the  Lord? 

(a)  I  turn  to  the  history  of  creation.     I  there  read  that  "  God 
blessed  the  seventh  day  and  sanctified  it."     (Gen.  ii.  3.)     I 
find    the    Sabbath    mentioned    in    the  very  beginning    of    all 
things.     There  are  five  things  which  were  given  to  the  father 
of  the  human  race,  in  the  day  that  he  was  made.     God  gave 
him  a  dwelling-place,   a  work  to  do,  a  command  to    observe, 
a  help-meet  to  be  his  companion,  and  a  Sabbath  Day  to  keep. 
I  am  utterly  unable  to  believe  that  it  was  in  the  mind  of  God 
that  there  ever  should  be  a  time  when  Adam's  children  should 
keep  no  Sabbath.* 

(b)  I  turn  to  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Mount  Sinai.     I  there 
read  one  whole  commandment  out  of  ten  devoted  to  the   Sab- 

*  "The  text  (Gen.  ii.  3)  is  so  clear  for  the  ancient  institution  of  the  Sab 
bath,  that  I  see  no  reason  on  earth  why  any  man  should  make  doubt  thereof ; 
especially  considering  that  the  very  Gentiles,  both  civil  and  barbarous,  both 
ancient  and  of  late  days,  as  it  were  by  an  universal  kind  of  tradition,  re 
tained  the  distinction  of  the  seven  days  of  the  week." — Letter  to  Tivissby 
Archbishop  Usher.  1650. 


THE  SABBATH.  301 

bath  Day,  and  that  the  longest,  fullest,  and  most  minute  of  all. 
(Exod.  xx.  8-11.)  I  see  a  broad,  plain  distinction  between 
these  Ten  Commandments  and  any  other  part  of  the  Law  of 
Moses.  It  was  the  only  part  spoken  in  the  hearing  of  all  the 
people,  and  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  it,  the  Book  of  Deuter 
onomy  expressly  says,  "He  added  no  more."  (Dent.  v.  22.) 
It  was  delivered  under  circumstances  of  singular  solemnity, 
and  accompanied  by  thunder,  lightning,  and  an  earthquake.  It 
was  the  only  part  written  on  tables  of  stone  by  God  Himself. 
It  was  the  only  part  put  inside  the  ark.  I  find  the  law  of  the 
Sabbath  side  by  side  with  the  law  about  idolatry,  murder, 
adultery,  theft,  and  the  like.  I  am  utterly  unable  to  believe 
that  it  was  meant  to  be  only  of  temporary  obligation.* 

(c)  I  turn  to  the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament  Prophets.     I 
find  them  repeatedly  speaking  of  the  breach  of  the   Sabbath 
side  by  side  with  the  most  heinous  transgressions  of  the  moral 
law.     (Ezek.  xx.  13,  16,  24;  xxii.  8,  26.)     I  find  them  speak 
ing  of  it  as  one  of  the  great  sins  which  brought  judgments 
on  Israel  and  carried  the  Jews  into   captivity.     (Nehem.  xiii. 
18 ;  Jer.  xvii.  19-27.)     It  seems  clear  to  me  that  the  Sabbath, 
in  their  judgment,  is  something  far  higher  than  the  washings 
and  cleansings  of  the  ceremonial  law.     I  am  utterly  unable  to 
believe,  when  I  read  their  language,  that  the  Fourth  Command 
ment  was  one  of  the  things  one  day  to  pass  away. 

(d)  I  turn  to  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  He 
was  upon  earth.    I  cannot  discover  that  our  Saviour  ever  let  fall 
a  word  in  discredit  of  any  one  of  the  Ten  Commandments. 
On  the  contrary,  I  find  Him  declaring  at  the   outset  of  His 
ministry,  "  that  He  came  not  to  destroy  the  law  but  to  fulfil," 
and  the  context  of  the  passage   where  He  uses  these  words, 
satisfies  me  that  He  was  not  speaking  of  the  ceremonial  law, 
but  the  moral.     (Matt.  v.  17.)     I  find  Him  speaking  of  the 
Ten  Commandments  as  a  recognized  standard  of  moral  right 
and  wrong  :  "Thou  knowest  the  Commandments."     (Mark  x. 

*  The  learned  Bishop  Andrews  wisely  remarks  that  it  is  a  dangerous 
thing  to  make  the  Fourth  Commandment  ceremonial,  and  of  mere  temporary 
obligation  :  "The  Papists  will  then  have  the  Second  Commandment  also  to  be 
ceremonial ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  there  may  not  be  as  well  three  as 
two,  and  so  four  and  five,  and  so  all."— "We  hold  that  nil  ceremonies  are 
ended  and  abrogated  by  Christ's  death:  but  the  Sabbath  is  not."— Bishop 
Andrews  on  the  Moral  Laiv.  1642. 


302  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

19.)  I  find  Him  speaking  eleven  times  on  the  subject  of  the 
Sabbath,  but  it  is  always  to  correct  the  superstitious  additions 
which  the  Pharisees  had  made  to  the  Law  of  Moses  about 
observing  it,  and  never  to  deny  the  holiness  of  the  day.* 
He  no  more  abolishes  the  Sabbath,  than  a  man  destroys  a 
house  when  he  cleans  off  the  moss  or  weeds  from  its  roof. 
Above  all,  I  find  our  Saviour  taking  for  granted  the  continu 
ance  of  the  Sabbath,  when  He  foretells  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  "Pray  ye,"  He  says  to  the  disciples,  "that  your 
flight  be  not  on  the  Sabbath  Day."  (Matt.  xxiv.  20.)  I  am 
utterly  unable  to  believe,  when  I  see  all  this,  that  our  Lord 
did  not  mean  the  Fourth  Commandment  to  be  as  binding  on 
Christians  as  the  other  nine. 

(e)  I  turn  to  the  writings  of  the  Apostles.  I  there  find  plain 
speaking  about  the  temporary  nature  of  the  ceremonial  law  and 
its  sacrifices  and  ordinances.  I  see  them  called  "  carnal  "  and 
"  weak."  I  am  told  they  are  a  "  shadow  of  good  things  to 
come," — "  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ,"  and  "  or 
dained  till  the  time  of  reformation."  But  I  cannot  find  a 
syllable  in  their  writings  which  teaches  that  any  one  of  the 
Ten  Commandments  is  done  away.  On  the  contrary,  I  see 
St.  Paul  speaking  of  the  moral  law  in  the  most  respectful 
manner,  though  he  teaches  strongly  that  it  cannot  justify  us 
before  God.  When  he  teaches  the  Ephesians  the  duty  of 
children  to  parents,  he  simply  quotes  the  Fifth  Command 
ment  :  "  Honour  thy  father  and  mother,  which  is  the  first 
commandment  with  promise."  (Rom.  vii.  12;  xiii.  8;  Eph. 
vi.  2 ;  1  Tim.  i.  8.)  I  see  St.  James  and  St.  John  recognizing 
the  moral  law,  as  a  rule  acknowledged  and  accredited  among 
those  to  whom  they  wrote.  (James  ii.  10;  1  John  iii.  4.) 
Again  I  say  that  I  am  utterly  unable  to  believe  that  when  the 
Apostles  spoke  of  the  law,  they  only  meant  nine  command 
ments,  and  not  ten.f 

*  See  Bishop  Daniel  "Wilson  of  Calcutta's  Seven  Sermons  on  the  Lord's 
Day,  pp.  60,  61. 

f  It  is  only  fair  to  mention  that  many  great  and  learned  divines  have 
held  that  the  text  (Heb.  iv.  9)  distinctly  teaches  the  authority  of  the  Chris 
tian  Sabbath.  The  marginal  reading  is,  "there  remaineth  the  keeping  of 
a  Sabbath."  I  offer  no  opinion  on  the  point.  I  only  remark  that  Owen, 
Edwards,  and  Dwight  all  held  this  view. — See  Bishop  of  Calcutta's  Sermons 
on  the  Lord's  Day,  pp.  92,  93. 


THE  SABBATH.  303 

(/)  I  turn  to  the  practice  of  the  Apostles,  when  they  were 
engaged  in  planting  the  Church  of  Christ.  I  find  distinct 
mention  of  their  keeping  one  day  of  the  week  as  a  holy  day. 
(Acts  xx.  7 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2.)  I  find  the  day  spoken  of  by 
one  of  them  as  "the  Lord's  Day."  (Rev.  i.  10.)  Undoubtedly 
the  day  was  changed : — it  was  made  the  first  day  of  the  week 
in  memory  of  our  Lord's  resurrection,  instead  of  the  seventh  : — 
but  I  believe  the  Apostles  were  divinely  inspired  to  make  that 
change,  and  at  the  same  time  wisely  directed  to  make  no  public 
decree  about  it.  The  decree  would  only  have  raised  a  ferment 
in  the  Jewish  mind,  and  caused  needless  offence :  the  change 
was  one  which  it  was  better  to  effect  gradually,  and  not  to 
force  on  the  consciences  of  weak  brethren.  The  spirit  of  the 
Fourth  Commandment  was  not  interfered  with  by  the  change 
in  the  smallest  degree :  the  Lord's  Day,  on  the  first  day  of  the 
week,  was  just  as  much  a  day  of  rest  after  six  days'  labour,  as 
the  seventh-day  Sabbath  had  been.  But  why  we  are  told  so 
pointedly  about  the  "  first  day  of  the  week  "  and  the  "  Lord's 
Day,"  if  the  Apostles  kept  no  one  day  more  holy  than  another, 
is  to  my  mind  wholly  inexplicable. 

(g)  I  turn,  in  the  last  place,  to  the  pages  of  unfulfilled  Prophecy. 
I  find  there  a  plain  prediction  that  in  the  last  days,  when  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth,  there  shall  still 
be  a  Sabbath.  "  From  one  Sabbath  to  another  shall  all  flesh 
come  to  worship  before  Me,  saith  the  Lord."  (Isa.  Ixvi.  23.) 
The  subject  of  this  prophecy  no  doubt  is  deep.  I  do  not  pre 
tend  to  say  that  I  can  fathom  all  its  parts :  but  one  thing  is 
very  certain  to  me, — and  that  is  that  in  the  glorious  days  to 
come  on  the  earth  there  is  to  be  a  Sabbath,  and  a  Sabbath  not 
for  the  Jews  only,  but  for  "all  flesh."  And  when  I  see  this  I  am 
utterly  unable  to  believe  that  God  meant  the  Sabbath  to  cease 
between  the  first  coming  of  Christ  and  the  second.  I  believe 
He  meant  it  to  be  an  everlasting  ordinance  in  His  Church. 

I  ask  serious  attention  to  these  arguments  from  Scripture. 
To  my  own  mind  it  appears  very  plain  that  wherever  God 
has  had  a  Church,  in  Bible  times,  God  has  also  had  a  Sabbath 
Day.  My  own  firm  conviction  is,  that  a  Church  without  a 
Sabbath  would  not  be  a  Church  on  the  model  of  Scripture.* 

*  The  following  quotations  from  Baxter,  Lightfoot,  Horsley,  and  "Wells, 
need  no  apology.  They  speak  for  themselves.  In  a  day  like  the  present, 


304  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Let  me  close  this  part  of  the  subject  by  offering  two  cautions, 
which  I  consider  are  eminently  required  by  the  temper  of  the 
times. 

For  one  thing,  let  us  beware  of  under-valuing  the  Old  Testa 
ment.  There  has  arisen  of  late  years  a  most  unhappy  ten 
dency  to  slight  and  despise  any  religious  argument  which  is 
drawn  from  an  Old  Testament  source,  and  to  regard  the  man 
who  uses  it  as  a  dark,  benighted,  and  old-fashioned  person.  We 
shall  do  well  to  remember  that  the  Old  Testament  is  just  as 
much  inspired  as  the  New,  and  that  the  religion  of  both 
Testaments  is  in  the  main,  and  at  the  root,  one  and  the  same. 
The  Old  Testament  is  the  Gospel  in  the  bud :  the  New  Testa 
ment  is  the  Gospel  in  full  flower.  The  Old  Testament  is  the 
Gospel  in  the  blade  :  the  New  Testament  is  the  Gospel  in  full 
ear.  The  Old  Testament  saints  saw  many  things  through  a 
glass  darkly :  but  they  looked  to  the  same  Christ  by  faith,  and 
were  led  by  the  same  Spirit  as  ourselves.  Let  us,  therefore, 
never  listen  to  those  who  sneer  at  Old  Testament  arguments. 


when  we  are  so  often  told  that  learned  divines  deny  the  Divine  authority 
of  the  Lord's  Day,  it  may  be  well  to  show  the  reader  that  there  are 
other  divines,  and  some  eminently  learned,  who  take  an  entirely  different 
view. 

Let  us  hear  what  Baxter  says  :  "  It  hath  been  the  constant  practice  of  all 
Christ's  Churches  in  the  whole  world  ever  since  the  days  of  the  Apostles 
to  this  day,  to  assemble  for  public  worship  on  the  Lord's  Day,  as  a  day  set 
apart  thereto  by  the  Apostles.  Yea,  so  universal  was  this  judgment  and 
practice,  that  there  is  no  one  Church,  no  one  writer,  or  one  heretic  that  I 
remember  to  have  read  of,  that  can  be  proved  even  to  have  dissented  or  gain 
said  it  till  of  late  times." 

"  If  any  will  presume  to  say  that  men  properly  endued  with  the  Spirit  for 
the  work  of  His  commission,  did  notwithstanding  do  such  a  great  thing  as 
to  appoint  the  Lord's  Day  for  Christian  worship,  without  the  conduct  of 
the  Spirit,  they  may  by  the  same  way  of  proceeding,  pretend  it  to  be  as  un 
certain  of  every  particular  book  and  chapter  in  the  New  Testament,  whether 
or  no  they  wrote  it  by  the  Spirit."—  Baxter  on  the  Divine  Appointment  of  the 
Lord's  Day.  1680. 

Let  us  next  hear  Lightfoot :  "  The  first  day  of  the  week  was  everywhere 
celebrated  for  the  Christian  Sabbath,  and  which  is  not  to  be  passed  over 
without  observing,  as  far  as  appears  from  Scripture,  there  is  nowhere  any 
dispute  about  the  matter.  There  was  controversy  concerning  circumcision, 
and  other  points  of  the  Jewish  religion,  whether  they  were  to  be  retained 
or  not,  but  nowhere  do  we  read  concerning  the  changing  of  the  Sabbath. 
There  were  indeed  some  Jews  converted  to  the  Gospel,  who  as  in  some 
other  things  they  retained  a  smack  of  their  old  Judaism,  so  they  did  in  the 
observance  of  days  (Rom.  xiv.  5;  Gal.  iv.  10),  but  yet  not  rejecting  or 
neglecting  the  Lord's  Day.  They  celebrated  it  and  made  no  manner  of 
scruple,  it  appears,  concerning  it ;  but  they  would  have  their  old  festival 


THE  SABBATH.  305 

Much  infidelity  begins  with  an  ignorant  contempt  of  the  Old 
Testament. 

For  another  thing,  let  us  beware  of  coming  the  law  of  the  Ten 
Commandments.  I  grieve  to  observe  how  exceedingly  loose  and 
unsound  the  opinions  of  many  men  are  upon  this  subject.  I 
have  been  astonished  at  the  coolness  with  which  even  clergy 
men  sometimes  speak  of  them  as  a  part  of  Judaism,  which  may 
be  classed  with  sacrifices  and  circumcision.  I  wonder  how 
such  men  can  read  them  to  their  congregations  every  week  ! 
For  my  own  part,  I  believe  that  the  coming  of  Christ's  Gospel 
did  not  alter  the  position  of  the  Ten  Commandments  one  hair's 
breadth.  If  anything,  it  rather  exalted  and  raised  their 
authority.  I  believe,  that  in  due  place  and  proportion,  it  is 
just  as  important  to  expound  and  enforce  them,  as  to  preach 
Christ  crucified.  By  them  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  By  them 
the  Spirit  teaches  men  their  need  of  a  Saviour.  By  them  the 
Lord  Jesus  teaches  His  people  how  to  walk  and  please  God.  I 
suspect  it  would  be  well  for  the  Church  if  the  Ten  Command 
ments  were  more  frequently  expounded  in  the  pulpit  than  they 

(Lays  too ;  and  they  disputed  not  at  all,  whether  the  Lord's  Day  were  to  be 
celebrated,  but  whether  the  Jewish  Sabbath  ought  not  to  be  celebrated  also." 
— Lightfoot's  Works,  vol.  xii.,  p.  556.  1670. 

Let  us  next  hear  Bishop  Horsley :  "  The  Sabbath  Days  of  which  St. 
Paul  speaks  to  the  Colossians  (Col.  ii.  16)  were  not  the  Sundays  of  the 
Christians,  but  the  Saturdays  and  other  Sabbaths  of  the  Jewish  calendar. 
The  Judaizing  heretics,  with  whom  St.  Paul  was  all  his  life  engaged,  were 
strenuous  advocates  for  the  observation  of  the  Jewish  festivals  in  the 
Christian  Church,  and  St.  Paul's  admonition  to  the  Colossians  is  that  they 
should  not  be  disturbed  by  the  censure  of  those  who  reproached  them  for 
neglecting  to  observe  the  Jewish  Sabbaths  with  Jewish  ceremonies.  It 
appears  from  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  that  the  Sunday  was 
observed  in  the  Church  of  Corinth  with  St.  Paul's  own  approbation.  It 
nppears  from  the  Apocalypse  that  it  was  generally  observed  in  the  time 
when  that  book  was  written  by  St.  John  ;  and  it  is  mentioned  by  the  earliest 
apologists  of  the  Christian  faith  as  a  necessary  part  of  Christian  worship." — 
Bishop  Harslets  Sermons. 

Let  us  hear  Wells:  "Darkness  and  division  there  hath  been  enough  in 
the  Church  to  quarrel  with  institutions  and  appointments  of  former  times. 
But  the  perpetual  silence  of  the  Church  on  this  particular  infallibly  shows 
the  Divine  right  of  the  Lord's  Day.  And  the  Churches  are  so  silent, 
because  they  dare  not  attempt  such  an  enterprise  as  to  raze  the  foundations 
of  a  Divine  institution." — Well's  Practical  Sabbatarian,  p.  587. 

The  whole  subject  of  the  change  from  the  seventh-day  Sabbath  to  the 
Lord's  Day  is  one  which  the  reader  will  find  admirably  handled  in  the  Ser 
mons  of  Daniel  Wilson,  Bishop  of  Calcutta,  on  the  Lord's  Day.  Those 
sermons,  and  Willison  on  the  Lord's  Day,  are  by  far  the  two  best  works  on 
the  Sabbath  question. 

U 


306  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

are.  At  all  events,  I  fear  that  much  of  the  present  ignorance 
on  the  Sabbath  question  is  attributable  to  erroneous  views 
about  the  Fourth  Commandment. 

II.  The  second  point  I  propose  to  examine,  is  the  purpose 
for  which  the  Sabbath  was  appointed. 

I  feel  it  imperatively  necessary  to  say  something  on  this 
point.  There  is  no  part  of  the  Sabbath  question  about  which 
there  are  so  many  ridiculous  misstatements  put  forward.  Many 
are  raising  a  cry  in  the  present  day,  as  if  we  were  inflicting  a 
positive  injury  on  them  in  calling  on  them  to  keep  the  Sabbath 
holy.  They  talk  as  if  the  observance  of  the  day  were  a  heavy 
yoke,  like  circumcision  and  the  washings  and  purifications  of 
the  ceremonial  law.  They  rail  at  ministers  of  religion  for 
defending  the  Sabbath,  as  if  they  only  wanted  it  kept  for  their 
own  selfish  ends.  They  insinuate  that  our  motives  are  not 
pure,  and  that  we  feel  "our  craft  in  danger."  And  all  this 
sounds  very  plausible  in  the  ears  of  ignorant  persons. 

Once  for  all,  let  us  understand  that  all  such  statements  are 
founded  in  entire  misconception,  and  are  rank  delusions.  The 
Sabbath  is  God's  merciful  appointment  for  the  common  benefit 
of  all  mankind.  It  was  "made  for  man."  (Mark  ii.  27.)  It 
was  given  for  the  good  of  all  classes,  for  the  laity  quite  as  much 
as  for  the  clergy.  It  is  not  a  yoke,  but  a  blessing.  It  is  not  a 
burden,  but  a  mercy.  It  is  not  a  hard  wearisome  requirement, 
but  a  mighty  public  benefit.  It  is  not  an  ordinance  which  man 
is  bid  to  use  in  faith,  without  knowing  why  he  uses  it.  It  is 
one  which  carries  with  it  its  own  reward.  It  is  good  for  man's 
body  and  mind.  It  is  good  for  nations.  Above  all,  it  is  good 
for  souls. 

(a)  The  Sabbath  is  good  for  inaiUs  body.  We  all  need  a  day  of 
rest.  On  this  point,  at  any  rate,  all  medical  men  are  agreed. 
Curiously  and  wonderfully  made  as  the  human  frame  is,  it  will 
not  stand  incessant  work  without  regular  intervals  of  repose. 
The  first  gold-diggers  of  California  soon  found  out  that !  Keck- 
less  and  ungodly  as  many  of  them  probably  were, — urged  on  as 
they  were,  no  doubt,  by  the  mighty  influence  of  the  hope  of  gain, 
— they  still  found  out  that  a  seventh  day's  rest  was  absolutely 
needful  to  keep  themselves  alive.  Without  it  they  discovered 
that  in  digging  for  gold  they  were  only  digging  their  own  graves. 


THE  SABBATH.  307 

I  firmly  believe  that  one  reason  why  the  health  of  working 
clergymen  so  frequently  fails,  is  the  great  difficulty  they  find  in 
getting  a  day  of  rest.  I  am  sure  if  the  body  could  tell  us  its 
wants,  it  would  cry  loudly,  "Remember  the  Sabbath  Day."* 

(b)  The  Sabbath  is  good  for  man's  mind.     The  mind  needs  rest 
quite  as  much  as  the  body :   it  cannot  bear  an  uninterrupted 
strain  on  its  powers ;  it  must  have  its  intervals  to  unbend  and 
recover  its  force.     Without  them  it  will   either   prematurely 
wear  out,  or  fail  suddenly,  like  a  broken  bow.     The  testimony 
of  the  famous  philanthropist,  Mr.  Wilberforce,  on  this  point  is 
very  striking.     He  declared  that  he  could  only  attribute  his 
own   power   of   endurance   to   his   regular   observance    of   the 
Sabbath  Day.     He  remembered  that  he  had  observed  some  of 
the  mightiest  intellects  among  his  contemporaries  fail  suddenly 
at  last,  and  their  possessors  come  to  melancholy  ends ;  and  he 
was  satisfied  that  in  every  such  case  of  mental  shipwreck  the 
true  cause  was  neglect  of  the  Fourth  Commandment. 

(c)  The  Sabbath  is  good  for  nations.    It  has  an  enormous  effect 
both  on  the  character  and  temporal  prosperity  of  a  people.     I 
firmly  believe  that  a  people  which  regularly  rests  one  day  in 
seven  will  do  more  work,  and  better  work,  in  a  year,  than  a 
people  which  never  rest  at  all.     Their  hands  will  be  stronger ; 
their  minds  will  be  clearer ;  their  power  of  attention,  applica 
tion,  and  steady  perseverance  will  be  far  greater.     What  two 
nations  on  earth  are  so  prosperous  at  this  day  as  Great  Britain 
and  the  United  States  of  America  ?     Where  shall  we  find  on 
the  globe  so  much  energy,  so  much  steadiness,  so  much  success, 
so  much  public  confidence,  so  much  morality,  and  so  much  good 
government,  as  in  those  two  countries  1     Let  others  account  for 
all  this  as  they  please.     I  say  without  hesitation  that  one  grand 
secret  of  it  all  has  been  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath.     Great 
Britain  and  the  United  States,  with  all  their  sins,  are  the  two 
most  Sabbath-keeping  nations  on  earth.     They  have  given  up 

*  "During  the  excesses  of  the  first  French  Revolution,  at  the  close  of  last 
century,  Christianity  and  the  Sabbath  were  abolished  in  France,  but  the 
mere  necessities  of  man's  nature  compelled  the  Atheistical  government  to 
institute  a  day  of  rest  of  their  own,  which  they  called  a  decade,  occurring 
every  tenth  day.  What  a  confession  of  the  reasonableness  of  the  Divine 
command  !  " — Bishop  of  Calcutta's  Sermons,  p.  163. 

There  is  an  admirable  tract  on  this  subject,  by  that  eminent  man,  the  late 
Professor  Miller,  of  Edinburgh,  entitled  Physiology  in  Harmony  ivith  the 
Bible. 


308  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

seven  years  of  good  working -days  in  the  last  fifty  years  to 
keeping  the  Lord's  Day  holy.  But  have  they  lost  anything  by 
it  1  No !  indeed.  The  two  Sabbath-keeping  nations  are  the 
most  prosperous  nations  in  the  world.* 

(d)  Last,  but  not  least,  the  Sabbath  is  an  unmixed  good  for 
man's  soul.  The  soul  has  its  wants  just  as  much  as  the  mind 
and  body.  It  is  in  the  midst  of  a  hurrying,  bustling  world,  in 
which  its  interests  are  constantly  in  danger  of  being  jostled  out 
of  sight.  To  have  those  interests  properly  attended  to,  there 
must  be  a  special  day  set  apart;  there  must  be  a  regularly 
recurring  time  for  examining  the  state  of  our  souls ;  there  must 
be  a  day  to  test  and  prove  us,  whether  we  are  prepared  for  an 
eternal  heaven.  Take  away  a  man's  Sabbath,  and  his  religion 
soon  comes  to  nothing.  As  a  general  rule,  there  is  a  regular 
flight  of  steps  from  "no  Sabbath"  to  "  no  God." 

I  know  well  that  many  say  that  "religion  does  not  consist  in 
keeping  days  and  seasons.'"  I  agree  with  them.  I  am  quite 
aware  'that  it  needs  something  more  than  Sabbath  observance  to 
save  our  souls.  But  I  would  like  such  persons  to  tell  us  plainly 
what  kind  of  religion  that  is  which  teaches  people  to  keep  no 
days  holy  at  all.  It  may  be  the  religion  of  poor  corrupt  human 
nature,  but  I  am  sure  it  is  not  the  religion  of  revelation :  it  is 
not  the  religion  which  tells  us  that  we  "must  be  bom  again," 
and  believe  in  Christ,  and  live  holy  lives.  Eevealcd  religion 
teaches  me  that  it  is  not  quite  so  cheap  and  easy  a  thing  to  go 
to  heaven,  as  many  now-a-days  seem  to  fancy,  and  that  it  is 
essential  to  our  soul's  prosperity  that  in  every  week  we  give 
God  a  day. 

I  know  well  that  there  are  some  good  people  who  contend 
that  "  every  day  ought  to  be  holy  "  to  a  true  Christian,  and  on 
this  ground  deprecate  the  special  sanctification  of  the  first  day 
of  the  week.  I  respect  the  conscientious  convictions  of  such 
people.  I  would  go  as  far  as  any  one  in  contending  for  an 
"  every  day  religion,"  and  protesting  against  a  mere  Sabbath 
Christianity ;  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the  theory  is  unsound  and 
unscriptural.  I  am  convinced  that,  taking  human  nature  as  it 
is,  the  attempt  to  regard  every  day  as  a  Lord's  Day  would  result 

*  See  extracts  from  Lord  Macaulay's  Speeches,  and  Blackstone's  Com 
mentaries,  at  the  end  of  this  paper. 


THE  SABBATH.  309 

in  having  no  Lord's  Day  at  all.  None  but  a  thorough  fanatic,  I 
presume,  would  say  that  it  is  wrong  to  have  stated  seasons 
for  private  prayer,  on  the  ground  that  we  ought  to  "pray 
always ; "  and  few,  I  am  persuaded,  who  look  at  the  world  with 
the  eyes  of  common  sense,  will  fail  to  see,  that  to  bring  religion 
to  bear  on  men  with  full  effect,  there  must  be  one  day  in  the 
week  set  apart  for  its  business. 

ISTow  I  believe  I  have  advanced  nothing  that  can  be  fairly 
gainsaid.  I  believe  that  if  every  church  and  chapel  were  pulled 
down,  and  every  minister  of  religion  banished  from  this  kingdom, 
it  would  still  be  an  unmixed  benefit  for  the  nation  to  preserve 
untouched  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath,  and  an  act  of  suicidal 
folly  to  part  with  it.  Whether  Englishmen  know  it  or  not, 
their  Sabbath  is  one  of  their  richest  possessions,  and  the  grand 
secret  of  their  position  in  the  world.  It  is  good  for  their  bodies, 
minds,  and  souls.  Of  it  the  famous  words  may  be  truly  used, 
that  "  it  is  the  cheap  defence  of  a  nation." 

III.  I  propose,  in  the  third  place,  to  show  the  manner  in  wJiicli 
the  Sabbath  oufjlit  to  be  kept. 

This  is  a  branch  of  the  subject  on  which  great  difference  of 
opinion  exists :  it  is  one  on  which  even  the  friends  of  the  Sabbath 
are  not  thoroughly  agreed.  Many,  I  believe,  would  contend  as 
strongly  as  I  do  for  a  Sabbath,  but  not  for  the  Sabbath  for  which 
I  contend.  In  a  matter  like  this  I  can  call  no  man  master.  My 
desire  is  simply  to  state  what  appears  to  be  the  mind  of  God  as 
revealed  in  Holy  Scripture. 

Once  for  all,  I  must  plainly  say,  that  I  cannot  entirely  agree 
with  those  who  tell  us  that  they  do  not  want  a  Jewish  Sabbath, 
but  a  Christian  one.  I  doubt  whether  such  persons  clearly 
know  what  they  mean.  If  they  object  to  a  Pharisaic  Sabbath, 
I  agree  with  them ;  if  they  object  to  a  Mosaic  Sabbath,  I  would 
have  them  consider  well  what  they  say.  I  can  find  no  clear 
evidence  that  the  Old  Testament  Sabbath  was  intended  by 
Moses  to  be  more  strictly  kept  than  the  Christian  Sunday.  The 
case  of  the  man  stoned  for  gathering  sticks  on  the  Sabbath,  is 
clearly  not  a  case  in  point :  it  was  a  special  offence,  committed 
under  specially  heinous  aggravations,  in  the  very  face  of  Mount 
Horeb,  and  just  after  the  giving  of  the  law.  It  is  no  more  a 
precedent  than  the  striking  dead  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  in 


310  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

the  Acts,  for  lying ;  and  there  is  no  proof  that  such  a  punishment 
was  ever  after  repeated.  My  own  belief  is,  that  the  explana 
tions  of  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  given  by  our  Lord  are  the  very 
explanations  which  Moses  himself  would  have  given.  I  have  a 
strong  suspicion  that,  allowing  for  the  difference  of  the  two 
dispensations,  David,  and  Samuel,  and  Isaiah  would  not  have  kept 
their  Sabbath  very  differently  from  St.  John  and  St.  Paul. 

What  then  appears  to  be  the  will  of  God  about  the  manner 
of  observing  the  Sabbath  Day?  There  are  two  general  rules 
laid  down  for  our  guidance  in  the  Fourth  Commandment,  and  by 
them  all  questions  must  be  decided. 

One  plain  rule  about  the  Sabbath  is,  that  it  must  be  kept  as  a 
day  of  rest.  All  work  of  every  kind  ought  to  cease  as  far  as 
possible,  both  of  body  and  mind.  "Thou  shalt  not  do  any 
work,  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy  man-servant  nor 
thy  maid-servant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger  that  is  within 
thy  gates."  Works  of  necessity  and  mercy  may  be  done.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  teaches  us  this,  and  teaches  also  that  all  such 
works  were  allowable  in  the  Old  Testament  times.  "  Have  ye 
not  read,"  He  says,  "what  David  did?" — "Have  ye  not  read 
that  the  priests  in  the  temple  profane  the  Sabbath,  and  are 
blameless?"  (Matt.  xii.  5.)  Whatever,  in  short,  is  necessary  to 
preserve  and  maintain  life,  whether  of  ourselves,  or  of  the 
creatures,  or  to  do  good  to  the  souls  of  men,  may  be  done  on 
the  Sabbath  Day  without  sin.* 

The  other  great  rule  about  the  Sabbath  is,  that  it  must  l>e  kept 
holy.  Our  rest  is  not  to  be  the  rest  of  a  beast,  like  that  of  the 
ox  and  the  ass,  which  have  neither  mind  nor  soul.  It  is  not  to 

*  Works  needful  for  the  comfortable  passing  of  the  Sabbath,  as  dressing  of 
moderate  food  and  the  like,  may  be  done  on  the  Sabbath  Day.  For,  seeing 
Christ  allows  us  to  lead  an  ox  to  water,  and  requireth  not  to  fetch  in  water 
for  him  over  night,  He  alloweth  us  to  dress  meats,  and  requireth  not  to  dress 
it  over  night.  For  the  order  in  the  law  of  not  kindling  a  fire  pertained  alone 
to  the  business  of  the  tabernacle,  and  that  order  of  dressing  what  they  would 
dress  on  the  sixth  day  pertained  alone  to  the  matter  of  manna." — Leigh's  Body 
of  Divinity.  1654. 

"  Not  only  those  works  which  are  of  absolute  necessity,  but  those  which  are 
of  great  conveniency,  may  lawfully  be  done  on  the  Lord's  Day :  such  are 
kindling  of  fire,  preparing  of  meat,  and  many  other  particulars  too  numerous 
to  be  mentioned. — Only  let  us  take  this  caution,  that  we  neglect  not  the  doing 
of  those  things  till  the  Lord's  Day,  which  might  be  well  done  before,  and  then 
plead  necessity  or  convenience  for  it."—  Bishop  Hopkins  on  the  Fourth  Com 
mandment.  1690. 


THE  SABBATH.  311 

be  a  carnal,  sensual  rest,  like  that  of  the  worshippers  of  the 
golden  calf,  who  "  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink  and  rose  up  to 
play."  (Exod.  xxxii.  6.)  It  is  to  be  emphatically  a  holy  rest. 
It  is  to  be  a  rest  in  which,  as  far  as  possible,  the  affairs  of  the 
soul  may  be  attended  to,  the  business  of  another  world  minded, 
and  communion  with  God  and  Christ  kept  up.  In  short,  it 
ought  never  to  be  forgotten  that  it  is  "  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord 
our  God."  (Exod.  xx.  10.) 

I  ask  attention  to  these  two  general  rules.  I  believe  that  by 
them  all  Sabbath  questions  may  be  safely  tested.  I  believe  that 
within  the  bounds  of  these  rules  every  lawful  and  reasonable 
want  of  human  nature  is  fully  met,  and  that  whatsoever  trans 
gresses  these  bounds  is  sin. 

I  am  no  Pharisee.  Let  no  hard-working  man,  who  has  been 
confined  to  a  close  room  for  six  weary  days,  suppose  that  I  object 
to  his  taking  any  lawful  relaxation  for  his  body  on  the  Sunday. 
I  see  no  harm  in  a  quiet  walk  on  a  Sunday,  provided  always 
that  it  does  not  take  the  place  of  going  to  public  worship,  and 
is  really  quiet,  and  like  that  of  Isaac.*  (Gen.  xxiv.  63.)  I  read 
of  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  walking  through  the  corn-fields  on 
the  Sabbath  Day.  All  I  say  is,  beware  that  you  do  not  turn 
liberty  into  licence, — beware  that  you  do  not  injure  the  souls  of 
others  in  seeking  relaxation  for  yourself, — and  beware  that  you 
never  forget  you  have  a  soul  as  well  as  a  body.t 

I  am  no  enthusiast.  I  want  no  tired  labourer  to  misunder 
stand  my  meaning,  when  I  bid  him  to  keep  the  Sabbath  holy. 
I  do  not  tell  any  one  that  he  ought  to  pray  all  day,  or  read  his 
Bible  all  day,  or  go  to  church  all  day,  or  meditate  all  day, 

*  "  If  you  walk  abroad  this  day,  choose  to  do  it  alone  as  much  as  possible,  for 
people  going  in  troops  to  the  fields  occasion  idleness,  vain  talking,  sporting, 
and  misspending  precious  Sabbath  time." — Wilson  on  the  Lord's  Day.  (An 
admirable  book.) 

f  "  I  cannot  see  that  the  employment  of  horses  to  take  us  to  church  on  the 
Sabbath  is  wrong,  where  it  is  a  case  of  plain  necessity  and  without  the  use 
of  them  the  Gospel  cannot  be  heard.  But  in  such  cases  people  should  use 
their  own  horses  if  they  have  them. — The  following  cpaotation  deserves  notice. 
'  When  the  Shunammite  came  to  her  husband  for  the  ass,  he  saith  to  her, 
Why  should  you  go  to  him  to-day  ?  it  is  neither  Sabbath  Day,  nor  new 
moon.'  The  meaning  is  that  the  Shunammite  was  wont  to  go  out  to  hear 
the  Prophet,  and  because  she  had  got  means  would  ride.  Therefore  when  the 
means  of  sanctification  are  wanting,  a  man  may  take  a  Sabbath  Day's  journey. 
He  may  go  where  they  are  used  to  be  gotten." — Bishop  Andrews  on  the  Moral 
Law.  1G42. 


312  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

without  let  or  cessation,  on  a  Sunday.  All  I  say  is,  that  the 
Sunday  rest  should  be  a  holy  rest.  God  ought  to  be  kept  in 
view ;  God's  Word  ought  to  be  studied ;  God's  House  ought  to 
be  attended ;  the  soul's  business  ought  to  be  specially  considered ; 
and  I  say  that  everything  which  prevents  the  day  being  kept 
holy  in  this  way,  ought  as  far  as  possible  to  be  avoided. 

I  am  no  admirer  of  a  gloomy  religion.  Let  no  one  suppose 
that  I  want  Sunday  to  be  a  day  of  sadness  and  unhappiness.  I 
want  every  Christian  to  be  a  happy  man  :  I  wish  him  to  have 
"joy  and  peace  in  believing,"  and  to  "rejoice  in  hope  of  the 
glory  of  God."  I  want  every  one  to  regard  Sunday  as  the 
brightest,  cheerfulest  day  of  all  the  seven ;  and  I  tell  every  one 
who  finds  such  a  Sunday  as  I  advocate,  a  wearisome  day,  that 
there  is  something  sadly  wrong  in  the  state  of  his  heart.  I  tell 
him  plainly  that  if  he  cannot  enjoy  a  "  holy  "  Sunday,  the  fault 
is  not  in  the  day,  but  in  his  own  soul. 

I  can  well  believe  that  many  will  think  that  I  am  setting  the 
standard  of  Sabbath  observance  far  too  high.  The  thoughtless 
and  worldly,  the  lovers  of  money  and  lovers  of  pleasure,  will 
all  exclaim  that  I  am  requiring  what  is  impossible.  It  is  easy 
to  make  such  assertions.  The  only  question  for  a  Christian 
oughUo  be,  "  What  does  the  Bible  teach  1 "  God's  measure  of 
what  is  right  must  surely  not  be  brought  down  to  the  measure 
of  man:  man's  measure  should  rather  be  brought  up  to  the 
measure  of  God. 

I  want  no  other  standard  of  Sabbath  observance  than  th.it 
which  is  laid  down  in  the  Fourth  Commandment.  I  want 
neither  more  nor  less.  It  is  a  rule  which  has  been  sanctioned 
by  the  Prayer-book  of  the  Church  of  England,  the  writings  of 
all  the  leading  Puritans,  and  the  Scotch  Confession  of  Faith. 
No  English  Churchman,  no  Scotch  Presbyterian,  no  Noncon 
formist  who  walks  in  the  steps  of  his  forefathers,  has  any  just 
right  to  find  fault  with  it. 

I  maintain  no  other  standard  of  Sabbath  observance  than 
that  which  all  the  best  and  holiest  Christians,  of  every  Church 
and  nation,  have  maintained  almost  without  exception.  It  is 
extraordinary  to  mark  the  harmony  there  is  among  them  on 
this  point.  They  have  differed  widely  on  other  subjects  in 
religion  : — they  have  even  disagreed  as  to  the  grounds  on  which 
they  defend  Sabbath  sanctification  : — but  as  soon  as  you  come 


THE  SABBATH.  313 

to  the  practical  question,  "how  the  Lord's  Day  ought  to  be 
observed,"  the  unity  among  them  is  truly  surprising. 

Last,  but  not  least,  I  want  no  other  standard  of  Sabbath 
observance  than  that  to  which  a  calm,  rational  reflection  on 
things  yet  to  come,  will  lead  every  sober-minded  person.  Are 
we  really  going  to  die  one  day  and  leave  this  world  ?  Are  we 
about  to  appear  before  God  in  another  state  of  existence  ? 
Have  we  any  hope  that  we  are  about  to  spend  an  endless  eternity 
in  God's  immediate  presence  ?  Are  these  things  so,  or  are  they 
not  ?  Surely,  if  they  are,  it  is  not  too  much  to  ask  men  to 
give  one  day  in  seven  to  God ;  it  is  not  too  much  to  require 
them  to  test  their  own  meetness  for  another  world,  by  spending 
the  Sabbath  in  special  preparation  for  it.  Common  sense, 
reason,  conscience,  will  combine,  I  think,  to  say,  that  if  we 
cannot  spare  God  one  day  in  a  week,  we  cannot  be  living  as 
those  ought  to  live  who  are  going  to  die. 

IV.  The  last  thing  I  propose  to  do,  is  to  expose  some  of  the 
tcays  in  which  the  Sabbath  is  profaned. 

This  is  a  painful  and  melancholy  part  of  the  subject ;  but  it 
is  one  that  must  not  be  avoided.  The  Sabbath,  no  doubt,  is  far 
better  kept  than  it  was  a  hundred  years  ago.  Nevertheless, 
after  all  that  has  been  done,  there  remains  amongst  us  a  vast 
amount  of  Sabbath  profanation,  which  is  every  week  crying 
against  England  in  the  ears  of  God.  The  census  of  1851 
revealed  the  fearful  fact  that  five  millions  of  our  fellow-country 
men  go  to  no  place  of  worship  at  all  on  a  Sunday  !  It  is  a  fact 
that  should  make  our  ears  tingle.  What  an  enormous  quantity 
of  weekly  sin  against  God  this  single  fact  brings  to  light ! 

There  are  two  kinds  of  Sabbath  desecration  which  require  to 
be  noticed.  One  is  that  more  private  kind  of  which  thousands 
are  continually  guilty,  and  which  can  only  be  checked  by 
awakening  men's  consciences.  The  other  is  that  more  public 
kind,  which  can  only  be  remedied  by  the  pressure  of  public 
opinion,  and  the  strong  arm  of  the  law. 

When  I  speak  of  private  Sabbath  desecration,  I  mean  that 
reckless,  thoughtless,  secular  way  of  spending  Sunday,  which 
every  one  who  looks  round  him  must  know  is  common.  How 
many  make  the  Lord's  Day  a  day  for  visiting  their  friends  and 
giving  dinner  parties, — a  day  for  looking  over  their  accounts 


314  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

and  making  up  their  books,  —  a  day  for  going  journeys  and 
quietly  transacting  worldly  business,  —  a  day  for  reading  news 
papers  or  new  novels,  —  a  day  for  writing  letters,  or  talking 
politics  and  idle  gossip,  —  a  day,  in  short,  for  anything  rather  than 
the  things  of  God.  * 

Now  all  this  sort  of  thing  is  wrong,  decidedly  wrong.  Thou 
sands,  I  firmly  believe,  never  give  the  subject  a  thought  :  they 
sin  from  ignorance  and  inconsideration.  They  only  do  as 
others  ;  they  only  spend  Sunday  as  their  fathers  and  grand 
fathers  did  before  them  :  but  this  does  not  alter  the  case.  It 
is  utterly  impossible  to  say,  that  to  spend  Sunday  as  I  have 
described  is  to  "  keep  the  day  holy  :  "  it  is  a  plain  breach  of  the 
Fourth  Commandment,  both  in  the  letter  and  in  the  spirit.  It 
is  impossible  to  plead  necessity  or  mercy  in  one  instance  of  a 
thousand.  And  small  and  trifling  as  these  breaches  of  the 
Sabbath  may  seem  to  be,  they  are  exactly  the  sort  of  things 
that  prevent  men  communing  with  God  and  getting  good  from 
His  Day. 

When  I  speak  of  public  desecration  of  the  Sabbath,  I  mean 
those  many  open,  unblushing  practices,  which  meet  the  eye  on 
Sundays  in  the  neighbourhood  of  large  towns.  I  refer  to  the 
practice  of  keeping  shops  open,  and  buying  and  selling  on 
Sundays.  I  refer  especially  to  Sunday  trains  on  railways, 
Sunday  steamboats,  and  excursions  to  tea  gardens  and  places  of 
public  amusement  ;  and  especially  I  refer  to  the  daring  efforts 
which  many  are  making  in  the  present  day,  to  throw  open  such 
places  as  the  British  Museum,  the  National  Gallery,  and  the 
Crystal  Palace  on  Sundays,  and  to  have  bands  playing  in  the 
public  parks. 

On  all  these  points  I  feel  not  the  smallest  doubt  in  my  own 
mind.  These  ways  of  spending  the  Sabbath  are  all  wrong, 
decidedly  wrong.  So  long  as  the  Bible  is  the  Bible,  and  the 
Fourth  Commandment  the  Fourth'  Commandment,  I  dare  not 
come  to  any  other  conclusion.  They  are  all  wrong. 

These  ways   of   spending  Sunday  are  none   of  them 


*  The  Sunday  post  is  one  of  the  greatest  injuries  to  the  cause  of  Sabbath 
observance  in  the  present  day.  It  is  astonishing  how  much  harm  is  done  by 
receiving  letters  and  newspapers  on  a  Sunday,  by  answering  the  one  and 
reading  the  other.  It  distracts  the  minds  of  people,  and  prevents  their 
receiving  benefit  from  what  they  hear  in  church. 


THE  SABBATH.  315 

of  necessity  or  works  of  mercy.  There  is  not  the  slightest  like 
ness  between  them  and  any  of  the  things  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
explains  to  bo  lawful  on  the  Sabbath  Day.  To  heal  a  sick 
person,  or  pull  an  ox  or  an  ass  out  of  a  pit,  is  one  thing :  to 
travel  in  an  excursion  train,  or  visit  picture  galleries,  is  quite 
another.  The  difference  is  as  great  as  between  light  and 
darkness. 

These  ways  of  spending  Sunday  are  none  of  them  of  a  holy 
tendency,  or  calculated  to  do  any  good  to  souls.  What  soul  was 
ever  converted  by  tearing  down  to  Brighton,  or  dashing  down 
to  Gravesend  ?  What  heart  was  ever  softened  or  brought  to 
repentance  by  gazing  at  Titians  and  Vandykes  1  What  sinner 
was  ever  led  to  Christ  by  looking  at  the  Nineveh  Bull  or  the 
Pompeian  Court  ?  What  worldly  man  was  ever  turned  to  God 
by  listening  to  polkas,  waltzes,  or  opera  music  1  No,  indeed  ! 
all  experience  teaches  that  it  needs  something  more  than  the 
beauties  of  art  and  nature  to  teach  man  the  way  to  heaven. 

These  ways  of  spending  Sunday  have  never  yet  conferred 
moral  or  spiritual  good  in  any  place  where  they  have  been  tried. 
They  have  been  tried  for  hundreds  of  years  in  Italy,  in  Germany, 
and  in  France.  Sunday  music  has  been  long  tried  in  Continental 
cities.  The  people  of  Paris  have  had  their  Sunday  visits  to  the 
fountains  and  statues  at  Versailles.  The  Italians  and  Germans 
have  had  their  splendid  works  of  art  thrown  open  to  the  public 
on  Sundays.  But  what  benefit  have  they  derived  that  we 
should  wish  to  imitate  them?  What  advantages  have  we  to 
gain  by  making  a  London  Sunday  like  a  Sunday  at  Paris,  or 
Vienna,  or  Koine1?  I  say  decidedly  we  have  nothing  to  gain. 
It  would  be  a  change  for  the  worse,  and  not  for  the  better. 

Last,  but  not  least,  these  ways  of  spending  Sunday  inflict  a 
cruel  injury  on  the  souls  of  multitudes  of  people.  Railway  trains 
and  steamboats  cannot  be  run  on  Sundays  without  employing 
hundreds  of  persons.  Clerks,  porters,  ticket-takers,  policemen, 
guards,  engine-drivers,  stokers,  omnibus-drivers,  must  all  work 
on  the  Sabbath  Day,  if  people  will  make  Sunday  a  day  for 
travelling  and  excursions.  Museums,  exhibitions,  and  galleries 
of  pictures,  cannot  be  opened  on  Sundays  without  servants  and 
attendants  to  take  care  of  them  and  wait  on  those  who  visit 
them.  And  have  not  all  these  unfortunate  persons  immortal 
souls  <\  Beyond  doubt  they  have.  Do  they  not  all  need  a  day 


316  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

of  rest  as  much  as  any  one  else  ?  Beyond  doubt  they  do.  But 
Sunday  is  no  Sunday  to  them,  so  long  as  these  public  desecra 
tions  of  the  Sabbath  are  permitted.  Their  life  becomes  a  long 
unbroken  chain  of  work,  work,  unceasing  work :  in  short,  what 
is  play  to  others  becomes  death  to  them.  Away  with  the  idea 
that  a  pleasure-seeking,  exhibition-visiting,  Continental  Sabbath 
is  mercy  to  any  one  !  It  is  nothing  less  than  an  enormous 
fallacy  to  call  it  so.  Such  a  Sabbath  is  real  mercy  to  nobody, 
and  is  positive  sacrifice  to  some. 

I  write  these  things  with  sorrow.  I  know  well  to  how  many 
myriads  of  my  fellow-countrymen  they  apply.  I  have  spent 
many  a  Sunday  in  large  towns.  I  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes 
how  the  Day  of  the  Lord  is  made  by  multitudes  a  day  of  worldli- 
ness,  a  day  of  ungodliness,  a  day  of  carnal  mirth,  and  too  often 
a  day  of  sin.  But  the  extent  of  the  disease  must  not  prevent  us 
exposing  it :  the  truth  must  be  told. 

There  is  one  general  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  conduct 
of  those  who  publicly  desecrate  the  Sabbath  in  the  way  I  have 
described.  They  show  plainly  that  they  are  at  present  "with 
out  God  "  in  the  world.  They  are  like  those  of  old  who  said, 
"When  will  the  Sabbath  be  gone?" — "What  a  weariness  is 
it!"  (Amos  viii.  5;  MaL  i.  13.)  It  is  an  awful  conclusion, 
but  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  it.  Scripture,  history,  and  ex 
perience  all  combine  to  teach  us,  that  delight  in  the  Lord's 
Word,  the  Lord's  service,  the  Lord's  people,  and  the  Lord's  Day, 
will  always  go  together.  Sunday  railway  excursionists  and 
Sunday  pleasure-seekers  are  their  own  witnesses.  They  are 
every  week  practically  declaring,  "  We  do  not  like  God — we  do 
not  icant  Him  to  reign  over  us" 

It  is  not  the  slightest  argument,  in  reply  to  what  I  have  said, 
that  many  great  and  learned  men  see  no  harm  in  travelling  on 
Sundays  and  visiting  exhibitions.  It  matters  nothing  in  religious 
questions,  "  who  does  a  thing  : "  the  only  point  to  be  ascertained 
is,  "  whether  it  be  right."  Let  God  be  true  and  every  man  a 
liar.  We  must  never  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil. 

The  public  ways  of  profaning  the  Sabbath  I  have  referred  to 
are  likely  to  be  often  thrust  on  our  notice,  if  we  live  many 
years  in  England.  Let  us  remember  that  they  are  an  open 
breach  of  God's  commandment.  Let  us  have  nothing  to  do 
with  them  ourselves,  and  let  us  use  every  lawful  means  in  our 


THE  SABBATH.  317 

power,  both  publicly  and  privately,  to  prevent  others  having 
anything  to  do  with  them.  Let  us  not  mind  the  epithets  of 
Puritans,  Pharisees,  Methodists,  bigoted  and  narrow-minded,  or 
be  moved  by  the  specious  arguments  of  newspaper  writers.  If 
they  only  studied  their  Bibles  as  much  as  politics,  they  would 
not  write  as  they  do.  Let  us  fall  back  on  that  old  Book  which 
has  stood  the  test  of  eighteen  hundred  years,  and  of  which  every 
word  is  true.  Let  us  take  our  stand  on  the  Bible,  and  hold 
fast  its  teaching.  Whatever  others  may  think  lawful,  let  our 
sentence  ever  be  that  one  day  in  seven,  and  one  whole  day, 
ought  to  be  kept  holy  to  God. 

And  now,  in  concluding  this  paper,  I  wish  to  address  a  parting 
word  to  several  classes  of  persons  into  whose  hands  it  may  fall. 
I  write  as  a  friend  to  men's  souls.  I  have  no  interest  at  heart 
but  that  of  true  religion.  I  ask  for  a  fair  and  patient  hearing. 

(1)  I  appeal  first  to  all  readers  of  this  paper  ivho  are  in  the 
habit  of  breaking  the  Sabbath.  Whether  you  break  it  in  public 
or  private,  whether  you  break  it  in  company  or  alone,  I  have 
somewhat  to  say  to  you.  Do  not  refuse  to  read  it.  Give  me  a 
hearing. 

I  ask  you  to  consider  seriously,  how  you  will  answer  for  your 
present  conduct  in  the  day  of  judgment.  I  put  it  solemnly  to 
your  conscience.  I  ask  you  to  think  quietly  and  calmly,  how 
utterly  unfit  you  are  to  appear  before  God.  You  cannot  live 
always :  you  must  one  day  lie  down  and  die.  You  cannot 
escape  the  great  assize  in  the  world  to  come :  you  must  stand 
before  the  great  white  throne,  and  give  account  of  all  your 
works.  You  have  before  you  but  two  alternatives, — an  eternal 
heaven,  or  an  eternal  hell.  These  are  great  realities,  and  you 
know  they  are  true.  I  repeat  it  deliberately :  unless  you  are 
prepared  to  take  up  some  silly  fable  of  man's  invention,  and  to 
be  that  poor  credulous  creature,  a  sceptic,  you  know  these  things 
are  true. 

I^ow  where  is  your  fitness  for  the  solemn  change  which  is  yet 
before  you  ?  Where  is  your  preparedness  for  meeting  the  God 
of  the  Bible,  and  reckoning  with  Him  1  Where  is  your  readi 
ness  for  an  eternity  in  His  company,  and  the  society  of  saints 
and  angels  1  Where  is  your  nieetness  for  a  heaven,  which  is 
nothing  but  an  eternal  Sabbath,  an  everlasting  Sunday,  a  Lord's 


318  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Day  without  end  1  Yes  !  I  may  well  ask,  Where  ?  You  cannot 
give  an  answer.  You  cannot  give  God  one  single  day  in  seven  ! 
It  wearies  you  to  spend  one-seventh  part  of  your  time  in 
attempting  to  know  anything  about  Him,  before  whose  bar  you 
are  going  one  day  to  stand  !  His  Bible  wearies  you !  His 
ministers  weary  you !  His  house  wearies  you  !  His  praises 
weary  you  !  The  excursion  train  is  better  !  The  newspaper  is 
better  !  The  merry  dinner-party  is  better  !  Anything,  in  short, 
anything  is  better  than  God  !  Alas,  what  an  awful  state  this 
is  to  be  in  !  But,  alas,  how  common  ! 

Oh,  Sabbath-breaker,  unhappy  Sabbath-breaker,  consider  your 
ways,  and  be  wise  !  What  harm  has  Sunday  done  the  world, 
that  you  should  hate  it  so  much  1  What  harm  has  God  done 
you,  that  you  should  so  obstinately  turn  your  back  on  His  laws? 
What  injury  has  religion  done  to  mankind,  that  you  should  be 
so  afraid  of  having  too  much1?  Look  at  that  body  of  yours,  and 
think  how  soon  it  will  be  dust  and  ashes.  Look  at  that  earth 
on  which  you  walk,  and  think  how  soon  you  will  be  six  feet 
beneath  its  surface.  Look  on  the  heavens  above  you,  and  think 
of  the  mighty  Being,  who  is  the  eternal  God.  Look  into  your 
own  heart,  and  think  how  much  better  it  would  be  to  be  God's 
friend  than  God's  enemy.  As  ever  you  would  lie  down  on  your 
dying-bed  with  comfort, — as  ever  you  would  leave  this  world 
with  a  good  hope, — break  off  from  your  Sabbath  desecration, 
and  sin  no  more.  Let  the  time  past  suffice  you  to  have 
robbed  God  of  His  Day.  For  the  time  to  come  give  God  His 
own. 

The  very  next  Sunday  after  you  read  this  paper,  go  to  the 
house  of  God,  and  hear  the  Gospel  preached.  Confess  your 
past  sin  at  the  throne  of  grace,  and  ask  pardon  through  that 
blood  which  "cleanses  from  all  sin."  Arrange  your  time  on 
Sunday  so  that  you  may  have  leisure  for  quiet,  sober  meditation 
on  eternal  things.  Avoid  the  company  that  would  lead  you  to 
talk  only  of  this  world.  Take  down  your  long-neglected  Bible, 
and  study  its  pages.  Murder  no  man's  soul  by  obliging  him  to 
work  on  Sunday  in  order  that  you  may  play.  Do  it,  do  it,  do 
it,  without  a  iveek's  delay  !  It  may  be  hard  at  first,  but  it  is 
worth  a  struggle.  Do  it,  and  it  will  be  well  for  you  both  in 
time  and  eternity. 

(2)  I  appeal,  in  the  next  place,  to  all  readers  of  this  paper, 


THE  SABBATH.  319 

* 

who  either  belong  to  the  working-classes,  or  profess  to  take  an 
interest  in  their  condition.  Give  me  a  hearing. 

I  ask  you,  then,  never  to  be  taken  in  and  deluded  by  those 
who  want  the  sanctity  of  the  Lord's  Day  to  be  more  publicly 
invaded  than  it  is,  and  yet  tell  you  they  are  "the  friends  of 
the  working-classes."  Believe  me,  however  well-meaning  and 
fair-spoken  such  persons  may  be,  they  are  not  their  real 
friends.  They  are  in  reality  their  worst  enemies :  they  are 
taking  the  surest  course  to  add  to  their  burdens.  They  do 
not  mean  it,  very  likely,  but  in  reality  they  are  doing  them 
a  cruel  injury. 

Be  assured  that  if  English  Sundays  are  ever  turned  into  a 
day  of  play  and  amusement,  they  will  soon  become  a  day  of 
labour  and  work.  It  is  vain  to  suppose  that  it  can  be  avoided  : 
it  never  has  been  in  other  countries  ;  it  never  would  be  in  our 
own  land.  Once  establish  the  principle  that  galleries  and 
museums  and  crystal  palaces  are  to  be  thrown  open  on 
Sundays,  and  you  let  in  the  thin  edge  of  the  wedge.  The 
enemy  would  have  got  inside  the  walls ;  the  sacredness  of  the 
day  of  rest  would  be  entirely  gone.  Soon,  very  soon,  shops 
would  be  opened ;  farmers  would  insist  on  cultivating  the 
land ;  factories  would  go  on  working ;  contractors  would  press 
forward  their  operations.  The  working-classes  would  have 
lost  their  Sabbath,  and  with  it  they  would  have  lost  their 
best  friend. 

If  men  want  to  secure  the  working-classes  a  little  more  time 
for  rest  and  relaxation,  they  should  not  try  to  take  that  time 
out  of  Sunday.  Let  them  take  a  little  piece  out  of  one  of  the 
six  working-days,  if  possible,  but  not  a  bit  out  of  the  Day  of 
God. — As  the  world  has  got  six  days  for  its  business,  and  God 
has  only  left  Himself  one  for  His,  it  is  only  fair  and  right  that 
the  world  should  give  up  some  of  its  time,  before  we  begin 
robbing  God  of  His, 

I  do  trust  that  the  working  -  classes  in  England  will 
not  be  deceived  about  this  Sabbath  question.  Of  all  people 
on  earth  they  are  the  most  interested  in  it.  None  have  so 
much  to  lose  in  this  matter  as  they,  and  none  have  so  little  to 
gain. 

(3)  I  appeal,  in  the  next  place,  to  all  readers  of  this  paper 
icho  profess  to  reverence  the  Sabbath,  and  have  no  wish  to  see 


320  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

its  character  changed.     I  have  only  one  thing  to  say  to  you, 
but  it  deserves  serious  attention. 

I  ask  you,  then,  to  consider  whether  you  may  not  be  more 
strict  in  keeping  the  Sabbath  Day  holy  than  you  have  been 
hitherto.  I  am  sadly  afraid  there  is  much  laxity  in  many 
quarters  on  this  point.  I  fear  that  many  who  have  no  thought 
of  infringing  the  Fourth  Commandment,  are  culpably  incon 
siderate  and  careless  as  to  the  way  in  which  they  obey  its 
precepts.  I  fear  that  the  world  gets  into  the  Sundays  of  many 
a  respectable  church-going  family  far  more  than  it  ought  to  do. 
I  fear  that  many  keep  the  Sabbath  themselves,  but  never  give 
their  servants  a  chance  of  keeping  it  holy.  I  fear  that  many 
who  keep  the  Lord's  Day  with  much  outward  propriety  when 
they  are  at  home,  arc  often  grievous  Sabbath-breakers  when 
they  go  abroad.  I  fear  that  hundreds  of  English  travellers  do 
things  on  Sundays  on  the  Continent,  which  they  would  never 
do  in  their  own  land. 

This  is  a  sore  evil.  It  weakens  the  hands  of  all  who  defend 
the  cause  of  the  Sabbath,  to  an  enormous  extent :  it  supplies 
the  enemies  of  the  Lord's  Day  with  an  argument  which  they 
know  too  well  how  to  use.  Let  us  all  remember  this.  If  we 
really  love  the  Lord's  Day,  let  us  prove  our  love  by  our  manner 
of  using  it.  Wherever  we  are,  whether  at  home  or  abroad, — 
whether  in  Protestant  or  Roman  Catholic  countries,— let  our  con 
duct  on  Sunday  be  such  as  becomes  the  day.  Let  us  never  forget 
that  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  and  that  the  Fourth 
Commandment  is  just  as  binding  on  us  in  Italy,  Switzerland, 
Germany,  or  France,  as  it  is  in  our  own  country.  Last,  but  not 
least,  let  us  remember  that  the  Fourth  Commandment  speaks  of 
our  "  man-servant  and  maid-servant,"  as  well  as  ourselves. 

(4)  I  appeal,  in  the  last  place,  to  all  who  lore  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  sincerity,  and  are  zealous  in  His  cause.  I  have  one 
thing  to  say  to  you  in  connection  with  the  Sabbath  question, 
which  I  commend  to  your  most  serious  attention. 

I  ask  you,  then,  to  consider  whether  it  does  not  become  the 
solemn  duty  of  all  true  Christians  to  take  far  more  effectual 
measures  than  we  have  done  hitherto,  to  preserve  the  holiness 
of  the  Lord's  Day  ?  For  my  own  part  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is 
our  duty,  and  that  we  must  go  to  work  in  a  very  different  way 
from  that  hitherto  adopted. 


THE  SABBATH.  321 

We  all  complain  of  Sabbath  desecration  in  large  towns  :  we 
sorrow  over  the  crowds  who  every  Sunday  spend  their  time  in 
places  of  sensual  amusement,  or  fill  the  steamboats  and  railway 
trains.  They  are  all  evidently  in  a  deplorable  state  of  spiritual 
ignorance ;  they  are  a  growing  evil,  which  threatens  mischief  : 
but  are  we  taking  the  right  means  to  remedy  the  evil  1  I  say 
unhesitatingly  that  we  are  not. 

We  besiege  the  House  of  Commons  with  petitions  when  the 
advocates  of  these  Sabbath-breaking  crowds  demand  an  exten 
sion  of  their  present  licence  to  sin.  But  is  that  enough  ?  No  : 
it  is  not ! 

We  form  societies  to  defend  the  Lord's  Day,  and  propose 
measure  after  measure  in  Parliament  to  stop  Sunday  trading. 
But  is  that  enough  1  No  :  it  is  not ! 

The  truth  must  be  spoken : — we  must  begin  lower  down. 
We  cannot  make  people  religious  by  Acts  of  Parliament  alone. 
We  must  teach  right  as  well  as  forbid  wrong  :  we  must  try  to 
prevent  evil  as  well  as  repress  it.  We  must  strike  at  the  root 
of  the  evils  we  deplore.  We  must  endeavour  to  evangelize 
the  masses  of  men  and  women  who  now  break  their  Sabbaths 
every  week.  We  must  show  them  a  better  way.  We  must 
divert  this  fountain  of  Sabbath-breaking  into  different  channels, 
and  not  content  ourselves  with  damming  up  its  waters  when 
they  overflow. 

Are  there  not  many  parishes  in  our  large  towns  where  you 
may  now  find  12,000  or  15,000  people  under  one  clergyman, 
and  with  one  church  to  go  to  1  Have  we  any  right  to  wonder  if 
a  large  proportion  of  this  population  regularly  break  the  Sabbath 
every  week  ?  The  bulk  of  the  people  in  such  a  parish  know 
nothing  hardly  about  the  way  to  "keep  the  Sunday  holy." 
They  have  no  place  of  worship  to  go  to,  if  they  have  a  mind 
to  keep  it.  To  expect  such  a  population  to  keep  the  Sabbath 
holy,  is  preposterous  and  absurd  :  they  are  quite  as  much  to  be 
pitied  as  to  be  blamed.  We  have  surely  little  right  to  find 
fault  with  them  for  not  honouring  the  Lord's  Day,  while  we 
leave  them  in  utter  ignorance  of  its  meaning. 

What  then  ought  we  to  do  ?  We  ought  to  break  up  these 
large  overgrown  parishes  into  districts  of  a  manageable  size, 
containing  not  more  than  3,000  people  at  the  very  most.  We 
ought  at  once  to  put  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  and  two  lay 


322  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

agents  in  every  one  of  these  districts,  and  give  them  the 
spiritual  oversight  of  the  people.  We  must  not  wait  to  build 
a  fine  church.  We  must  send  a  man  who  is  able  to  preach 
anywhere, — in  a  garret,  a  coach-house,  an  alley,  or  even  in  the 
street, — and  give  him  abundant  liberty  to  work,  unfettered  by 
precedent  and  routine.  This  is  the  best  antidote  for  the  evils 
over  which  we  mourn.  The  preached  Gospel  applied  to  the 
conscience,  and  not  pains  and  penalties, — the  preached  Gospel, 
and  not  fines  and  imprisonment, — the  preached  Gospel  carried 
home  to  every  house  in  a  parish, — this  is  the  grand  remedy  for 
Sabbath-breaking. 

I  know  well  that  all  this  sounds  impracticable  and  Utopian  to 
many  ears.  Ecclesiastical  laws,  rectorial  rights,  the  want  of 
funds,  the  want  of  men, — all  these,  and  twenty  other  like  objec 
tions,  will  at  once  be  started. 

Be  it  so.  All  I  say  is  that  until  something  of  this  kind  is 
done,  we  shall  never  stop  the  Sabbath-breaking  of  great  towns. 
It  will  be  a  festering  sore  on  the  face  of  our  country,  which  will 
every  now  and  then  break  out  and  lead  to  enormous  mischief. 

For  my  own  part  I  see  nothing  in  the  proposal  I  have  made 
which  might  not  easily  be  attained,  if  the  subject  was  fairly 
grappled  with.  Laws  are  repealed  easily  enough  when  public 
opinion  demands  it,  and  if  they  are  bad  the  sooner  they 
are  repealed  the  better. — Rectorial  rights  must  never  stand  in 
competition  with  the  wants  of  immortal  souls :  they  have  suc 
cumbed  already  to  the  Burial  Acts  in  many  cases, — and  why 
not  again  1  They  have  had  to  give  way  when  it  was  needful 
to  provide  for  dead  bodies ;  we  may  surely  require  them  to  give 
way  when  we  want  to  provide  for  dead  souls. — Men,  I  believe, 
of  the  right  sort  are  to  be  found,  if  the  Bishops  will  only 
encourage  them  to  come  forward. — Money,  I  am  convinced,  will 
never  be  wanting  for  a  good  cause,  if  a  case  is  really  made  out. 
And  after  all  we  had  better  sacrifice  fifty  Canonries  than  leave 
our  great  town  parishes  in  their  present  condition. 

I  commend  these  things  to  the  attention  of  all  who  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  Let  London,  Manchester, 
Liverpool,  Glasgow,  and  other  large  towns  be  thoroughly 
evangelized,  and  you  will  strike  a  deadly  blow  at  the  root  of 
all  Sabbath-breaking.  Leave  them  alone,  or  go  on  at  the  rate 
we  go  at  present,  and  my  firm  conviction  is  that  we  shall  never 


THE  SABBATH.  323 

be  free  from  a  Sabbath  question  agitation.  It  will  return 
periodically,  like  an  ague  fit,  until  the  sources  which  now  supply 
it  are  dried  up. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  Sabbath-breaking  of  the  present 
day  is  one  among  many  proofs  of  the  low  state  of  vital  religion, 
and  the  awful  want  of  union  among  British  Christians.  We 
have  wasted  our  time  on  petty  internal  quarrels,  and  neglected 
the  mighty  work  of  converting  souls.  We  have  wrangled  and 
squabbled  about  matter  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin,  and  for 
gotten  our  Master's  business.  We  have  allowed  vast  town 
populations  to  grow  up  in  semi-heathen  ignorance,  and  are  now 
reaping  the  fruit  of  our  gross  neglect  in  their  Sabbath-breaking 
propensities.  In  short,  while  the  doctors  have  been  disputing, 
the  disease  has  been  spreading  and  the  patient  dying. 

I  pray  God  that  we  may  all  learn  wisdom,  and  amend  our 
ways  before  it  be  too  late.  We  want  less  party  spirit  and  sec 
tarianism,  and  more  work  for  Christ.  We  want  a  return  to  the 
old  paths  of  the  Apostles  in  every  branch  of  the  Church ;  we 
want  a  generation  of  ministers  whose  first  ambition  is  to  go  into 
every  room  in  their  parish,  and  tell  the  story  of  the  cross  of 
Christ. 

I  am  not  sanguine  in  my  expectations.  Routine  and  pre 
cedent  seem  to  bind  men  now-a-days  with  iron  chains.  But  I 
deliberately  repeat  once  more,  that  unless  our  large  towns  are 
more  thoroughly  evangelized,  we  shall  never  be  long  without  a 

struggle  TO  KEEP  THE  SABBATH  HOLY. 


NOTE. 

/  take  the  liberty  of  recommending  to  the  attention  of  my  brethren  in  the 
ministry,  the  following  extract  from  the  Charge  of  the  Venerable 
Bishop  of  Calcutta,  in  the  year  1838  : — 

"  Honour  especially  in  your  public  and  private  instructions  the  primaeval 
law  of  the  Sabbath ;  the  chief  vestige  of  our  Paradisaical  state  ;  the  one 
command  inscribed  on  the  order  of  creation  ;  the  grand  external  symbol  of 
revealed  religion  ;  a  prominent  branch  of  the  first  table  of  the  moral  law, 
and  standing  on  the  same  footing  as  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  ;  the 
theme  of  the  Prophets'  exhortations  in  their  descriptions  of  the  Evangelical 
age  :  vindicated  indeed  from  the  uncommanded  austerities  of  the  Pharisees, 
but  honoured  by  the  constant  practice  of  our  blessed  Saviour  ;  transferred 
by  the  Lord  and  His  Apostles,  after  the  resurrection,  to  that  great  day  of  the 
Church's  triumph,  but  remaining  the  same  in  its  apportionment  of  time,  its 
spiritual  character,  and  its  Divine  obligation  on  the  whole  human  race,  and 


324  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

handed  down  and  commended  by  the  constant  and  unvaried  usage  of  the 
Church  from  the  very  birth  of  Christianity  to  the  present  hour." 

The  following  extracts  from  a  speech  of  the  late  Lord  Macaiday  xptakfor 
themselves : — 

"  I  have  not  the  smallest  doubt  that,  if  we  and  our  ancestors  had,  during 
the  last  three  centuries,  worked  just  as  hard  on  the  Sundays  as  on  the  week 
days,  we  should  have  been  at  this  moment  a  poorer  people  and  a  less  civilized 
people  than  we  are ;  that  there  would  have  been  less  production  than  there 
has  been,  that  the  wages  of  the  labourer  would  have  been  lower  than  they 
are,  and  that  some  other  nation  would  have  been  now  making  cotton  stuffs 
and  woollen  stuffs  and  cutlery  for  the  whole  world.  Of  course  I  do  not 
mean  to  say  that  a  man  will  not  produce  more  in  a  week  by  working  seven 
days  than  by  working  six  days.  But  I  very  much  doubt  whether,  at  the  end 
of  a  year,  he  will  generally  have  produced  more  by  working  seven  days  a  week 
than  by  working  six  days  a  week  ;  and  I  firmly  believe  that,  at  the  end  of 
twenty  years,  he  will  have  produced  much  less  by  working  seven  days  a 
week  than  by  working  six  days  a  week. 

"We  are  not  poorer  in  England,  but  richer,  because  we  have,  through 
many  ages,  rested  from  our  labour  one  day  in  seven.  That  day  is  not  lost. 
While  industry  is  suspended,  while  the  plough  lies  in  the  furrow,  while  the 
Exchange  is  silent,  while  no  smoke  ascends  from  the  factory,  a  process  is 
going  on  quite  as  important  to  the  wealth  of  nations  as  any  process  which  is 
performed  on  more  busy  days.  Man,  the  machine  of  machinery,  the  machine 
compared  with  which  all  the  contrivances  of  the  Watts  and  Arkwrights  are 
worthless,  is  repairing  and  winding  up,  so  that  he  returns  to  his  labour  on 
the  Monday  with  clearer  intellect,  with  livelier  spirits,  with  renewed  corporal 
vigour."  —  Macaulay's  Speech  on  the  Ten  Hours  Bill.  Speeches,  pp.  450, 
433,  454. 

The  famous  Blackstone  says,  "The  keeping  one  day  in  seven  holy,  as  a 
time  of  relaxation  and  refreshment,  as  well  as  for  public  worship,  is  of  admir 
able  service  to  a  State,  considered  merely  as  a  civil  institution." — Slacfatone's 
Commentaries,  vol.  iv.,  p.  63. 


" 


XV. 

PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES. 

Then  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees  and  of  the  &wMwees.  "—  MATT.  xvi.  6. 


EVERY  word  spoken  by  the  Lord  Jesus  is  full  of  deep  instruction 
for  Christians.  It  is  the  voice  of  the  Chief  Shepherd.  It  is 
the  Great  Head  of  the  Church  speaking  to  all  its  members,  —  the 
King  of  kings  speaking  to  His  subjects,—  the  Master  of  the 
house  speaking  to  His  servants,  —  the  Captain  of  our  salvation 
speaking  to  His  soldiers.  Above  all,  it  is  the  voice  of  Him  who 
said,  "  I  have  not  spoken  of  Myself  :  the  Father  which  sent  Me, 
He  gave  Me  a  commandment  what  I  should  say  and  what  I 
should  speak."  (John  xii.  49.)  The  heart  of  every  believer  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  ought  to  burn  within  him  when  he  hears  his 
Master's  words  :  he  ought  to  say,  "  This  is  the  voice  of  my 
beloved."  (Cant.  ii.  8.) 

And  every  kind  of  word  spoken  by  the  Lord  Jesus  is  of  the 
greatest  value.  Precious  as  gold  are  all  His  words  of  doctrine 
and  ^  precept  ;  precious  are  all  His  parables  and  prophecies  ; 
precious  are  all  His  words  of  comfort  and  of  consolation; 
precious,  not  least,  are  all  His  words  of  caution  and  of  warning. 
We  are  not  merely  to  hear  Him  when  He  says,  "  Come  unto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are  heavy  laden  ;  "  we  are  to  hear 
Him  also  when  He  says,  "  Take  heed  and  beware," 

I  am  going  to  direct  attention  to  one  of  the  most  solemn  and 
emphatic  warnings  which  the  Lord  Jesus  ever  delivered  :  "  Take 
heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the 
Sadducees."  Upon  this  text  I  wish  to  erect  a  beacon  for  all 
who  desire  to  be  saved,  and  to  preserve  some  souls,  if  possible, 
from  making  shipwreck.  The  times  caU  loudly  for  such 
beacons  :  the  spiritual  shipwrecks  of  the  last  twenty-five  years 

325 


326  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

have  been  deplorably  numerous.     The  watchmen  of  the  Church 
ought  to  speak  out  plainly  now,  or  for  ever  hold  their  peace. 

I.  First  of  all,  I  ask  my  readers  to  observe  icho  they  were  to 
whom  the  learning  of  the  text  ivas  addressed. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  not  speaking  to  men  who  were 
worldly,  ungodly,  and  unsanctified,  but  to  His  own  disciples, 
companions,  and  friends.  He  addressed  men  who,  with  the 
exception  of  the  apostate  Judas  Iscariot,  were  right-hearted  in 
the  sight  of  God.  He  spoke  to  the  twelve  Apostles,  the  first 
founders  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  the  first  ministers  of  the 
Word  of  salvation.  And  yet  even  to  them  He  addresses  the 
solemn  caution  of  our  text :  "  Take  heed  and  beware." 

There  is  something  very  remarkable  in  this  fact.  We  might 
have  thought  that  these  Apostles  needed  little  warning  of  this 
kind.  Had  they  not  given  up  all  for  Christ's  sake  ?  They  had. 
— Had  they  not  endured  hardship  for  Christ's  sake  1  They  had. 
— Had  they  not  believed  Jesus,  followed  Jesus,  loved  Jesus, 
when  almost  all  the  world  was  unbelieving  ?  All  these  things 
are  true  ;  and  yet  to  them  the  caution  was  addressed  :  "  Take 
heed  and  beware."  We  might  have  imagined  that  at  any  rate 
the  disciples  had  but  little  to  fear  from  the  "  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees."  They  were  poor  and  unlearned 
men,  most  of  them  fishermen  or  publicans ;  they  had  no  lean 
ings  in  favour  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees ;  they  were 
more  likely  to  be  prejudiced  against  them  than  to  feel  any  draw 
ing  towards  them.  All  this  is  perfectly  true ;  yet  even  to  them 
there  comes  the  solemn  warning  :  "Take  heed  and  beware." 

There  is  useful  counsel  here  for  all  who  profess  to  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  It  tells  us  loudly  that  the  most 
eminent  servants  of  Christ  are  not  beyond  the  need  of  warnings, 
and  ought  to  be  always  on  their  guard.  It  shows  us  plainly 
that  the  holiest  of  believers  ought  to  Avalk  humbly  with  his 
God,  and  to  watch  and  pray,  lest  he  fall  into  temptation,  and  be 
overtaken  in  a  fault.  Kone  is  so  holy,  but  that  he  may  fall, — 
not  finally,  not  hopelessly,  but  to  his  own  discomfort,  to  the 
scandal  of  the  Church,  and  to  the  triumph  of  the  world :  none 
is  so  strong  but  that  he  may  for  a  time  be  overcome.  Chosen 
as  believers  are  by  God  the  Father,  justified  as  they  are  by  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  sanctified  as  they  are 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  327 

by  the  Holy  Ghost, — believers  are  still  only  men  :  they  are  yet 
in  the  body,  and  yet  in  the  world.  They  are  ever  near  tempta 
tion  :  they  are  ever  liable  to  err,  both  in  doctrine  and  in 
practice.  Their  hearts,  though  renewed,  are  very  feeble ;  their 
understanding,  though  enlightened,  is  still  very  dim.  They 
ought  to  live  like  those  who  dwell  in  an  enemy's  land,  and 
every  day  to  put  on  the  armour  of  God.  The  devil  is  very 
busy  :  he  never  slumbers  or  sleeps.  Let  us  remember  the  falls 
of  Noah,  and  Abraham,  and  Lot,  and  Moses,  and  David,  and 
Peter ;  and  remembering  them,  be  humble,  and  take  heed  lest 
we  fall. 

I  may  be  allowed  to  say  that  none  need  warnings  so  much  as 
the  ministers  of  Christ's  Gospel.  Our  office  and  our  ordination 
are  no  security  against  errors  and  mistakes.  It  is,  alas,  too  true, 
that  the  greatest  heresies  have  crept  into  the  Church  of  Christ 
by  means  of  ordained  men.  Neither  Episcopal  ordination,  nor 
Presbyterian  ordination,  nor  any  other  ordination,  confers  any 
immunity  from  error  and  false  doctrine.  Our  very  familiarity 
with  the  Gospel  often  begets  in  us  a  hardened  state  of  mind. 
We  are  apt  to  read  the  Scriptures,  and  preach  the  Word,  and 
conduct  public  worship,  and  carry  011  the  service  of  God,  in  a 
dry,  hard,  formal,  callous  spirit.  Our  very  familiarity  with 
sacred  things,  except  we  watch  our  hearts,  is  likely  to  lead  us 
astray.  "  Nowhere,"  says  an  old  writer,  "is  a  man's  soul  in 
more  danger  than  in  a  priest's  office."  The  history  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  contains  many  melancholy  proofs  that  the 
most  distinguished  ministers  may  for  a  time  fall  away.  Who 
has  not  heard  of  Archbishop  Cranmer  recanting  and  going  back 
from  those  opinions  he  had  defended  so  stoutly,  though,  by 
God's  mercy,  raised  again  to  witness  a  glorious  confession  at 
last  1  Who  has  not  heard  of  Bishop  Jewel  signing  documents 
that  he  most  thoroughly  disapproved,  and  of  which  signature  he 
afterwards  bitterly  repented  1  Who  does  not  know  that  many 
others  might  be  named,  who,  at  one  time  or  another,  have  been 
overtaken  by  faults,  have  fallen  into  errors,  and  been  led  astray  ? 
And  who  does  not  know  the  mournful  fact  that  many  of  them 
never  came  back  to  the  truth,  but  died  in  hardness  of  heart,  and 
held  their  errors  to  the  last  1 

These  things  ought  to  make  us  humble  and  cautious.     They 
tell  us  to  distrust  our  own  hearts,  and  to  pray  to  be  kept  from 


328  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

falling.  In  these  days,  when  we  are  specially  called  upon  to 
cleave  firmly  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Protestant  Keformation,  let 
us  take  heed  that  our  zeal  for  Protestantism  does  not  puff  us  up, 
and  make  us  proud.  Let  us  never  say  in  our  self-conceit,  "I 
shall  never  fall  into  Popery  or  Neologianism  :  those  views  will 
never  suit  me."  Let  us  remember  that  many  have  begun  well 
and  run  well  for  a  season,  and  yet  afterwards  turned  aside  out 
of  the  right  way.  Let  us  take  heed  that  we  are  spiritual  men 
as  well  as  Protestants,  and  real  friends  of  Christ  as  well  as 
enemies  of  Antichrist.  Let  us  pray  that  we  may  be  kept  from 
error,  and  never  forget  that  the  twelve  Apostles  themselves 
were  the  men  to  whom  the  Great  Head  of  the  Church  addressed 
these  words  :  "  Take  heed  and  beware." 

II.  I  propose,  in  the  second  place,  to  explain  what  were 
those  dangers  against  which  our  Lord  warned  the  Apostles. 
"Take  heed,"  He  says,  "and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees." 

The  danger  against  which  He  warns  them  is  false  doctrine. 
He  says  nothing  about  the  sword  of  persecution,  or  the  open 
breach  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  or  the  love  of  money,  or  the 
love  of  pleasure.  All  these  things  no  doubt  were  perils  and 
snares  to  which  the  souls  of  the  Apostles  were  exposed ;  but 
against  these  things  our  Lord  raises  no  warning  voice  here. 
His  warning  is  confined  to  one  single  point :  "  The  leaven  of 
the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees." — We  are  not  left  to  con 
jecture  what  our  Lord  meant  by  the  word  "leaven."  The  Holy 
Ghost,  a  few  verses  after  the  very  text  on  which  I  am  now 
dwelling,  tells  us  plainly  that  by  leaven  was  meant  the 
"  doctrine  "  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees. 

Let  us  try  to  understand  what  we  mean  when  we  speak  of 
the  "  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees." 

(a)  The  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  may  be  summed  up  in 
three  words, — they  were  formalists,  tradition-worshippers,  and 
self-righteous.  They  attached  such  weight  to  the  traditions  of 
men,  that  they  practically  regarded  them  as  of  more  importance 
than  the  inspired  writings  of  the  Old  Testament.  They  valued 
themselves  upon  excessive  strictness  in  their  attention  to  all  the 
ceremonial  requirements  of  the  Mosaic  law.  They  thought 
much  of  being  descended  from  Abraham,  and  said  in  their 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  329 

hearts,  "We  have  Abraham  to  our  father."  They  fancied 
because  they  had  Abraham  for  their  father  that  they  were  not 
in  peril  of  hell  like  other  men,  and  that  their  descent  from  him 
was  a  kind  of  title  to  heaven.  They  attached  great  value  to 
washings  and  ceremonial  purifyings  of  the  body,  and  believed 
that  the  very  touching  of  the  dead  body  of  a  fly  or  gnat  would 
defile  them.  They  made  a  great  ado  about  the  outward  parts 
of  religion,  and  such  things  as  could  be  seen  of  men.  They 
made  broad  their  phylacteries,  and  enlarged  the  fringes  of  their 
garments.  They  prided  themselves  on  paying  great  honour  to 
dead  saints,  and  garnishing  the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous. 
They  were  very  zealous  to  make  proselytes.  They  thought 
much  of  having  power,  rank,  and  pre-eminence,  and  of  being 
called  by  men,  "  Rabbi,  Kabbi."  These  things,  and  many  such 
like  things,  the  Pharisees  did.  Every  well-informed  Christian 
can  find  these  things  in  the  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St. 
Mark.  (See  Matthew,  chaps,  xv.  and  xxiii. ;  Mark,  chap,  vii.) 

All  this  time,  be  it  remembered,  they  did  not  formally  deny 
any  part  of  the  Old  Testament  Scripture.  But  they  brought  in, 
over  and  above  it,  so  much  of  human  invention,  that  they 
virtually  put  Scripture  aside,  and  buried  it  under  their  owrn 
traditions.  This  is  the  sort  of  religion  of  which  our  Lord  says 
to  the  Apostles,  "  Take  heed  and  beware." 

(6)  The  doctrine  of  the  Sadducees,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
be  summed  up  in  three  words, — free-thinking,  scepticism,  and 
rationalism.  Their  creed  was  one  far  less  popular  than  that  of 
the  Pharisees,  and,  therefore,  we  find  them  less  often  mentioned 
in  the  New  Testament  Scriptures.  So  far  as  we  can  judge 
from  the  New  Testament,  they  appear  to  have  held  the  doctrine 
of  degrees  of  inspiration ;  at  all  events  they  attached  exceeding 
value  to  the  Pentateuch  above  the  other  parts  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment,  if  indeed  they  did  not  altogether  ignore  the  latter.  They 
believed  that  there  was  no  resurrection,  no  angel,  and  no  spirit, 
and  tried  to  laugh  men  out  of  their  belief  in  these  things,  by 
supposing  hard  cases,  and  bringing  forward  difficult  questions. 
We  have  an  instance  of  their  mode  of  argument  in  the  case 
which  they  propounded  to  our  Lord  of  the  woman  who  had 
had  seven  husbands,  when  they  asked,  "In  the  resurrection, 
whose  wife  shall  she  be  of  the  seven  ? "  And  in  this  way  they 
probably  hoped,  by  rendering  religion  absurd,  and  its  chief 


330  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

doctrines  ridiculous,  to  make  men  altogether  give  up  the  faith 
they  had  received  from  the  Scriptures. 

All  this  time,  be  it  remembered,  we  may  not  say  that  the 
Sadducees  were  downright  infidels :  this  they  were  not.  We 
may  not  say  they  denied  revelation  altogether  :  this  they  did 
not  do.  They  observed  the  law  of  Moses.  Many  of  them 
were  found  among  the  priests  in  the  times  described  in  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  Caiaphas  who  condemned  our  Lord  was  a 
Sadducee.  But  the  practical  effect  of  their  teaching  was  to 
shake  men's  faith  in  any  revelation,  and  to  throw  a  cloud  of 
doubt  over  men's  minds,  which  was  only  one  degree  better  than 
infidelity.  And  of  all  such  kind  of  doctrine, — free-thinking, 
scepticism,  rationalism,  —  our  Lord  says,  "  Take  heed  and 
beware." 

Now  the  question  arises,  Why  did  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
deliver  this  warning  ?  He  knew,  no  doubt,  that  within  forty 
years  the  schools  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees  would  be 
completely  overthrown.  He  that  knew  all  things  from  the 
beginning,  knew  perfectly  well  that  in  forty  years  Jerusalem, 
with  its  magnificent  temple,  would  be  destroyed,  and  the  Jews 
scattered  over  the  face  of  the  earth.  Why  then  do  we  find 
Him  giving  this  warning  about  "  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 
and  of  the  Sadducees  ? " 

I  believe  that  our  Lord  delivered  this  solemn  warning  for  the 
perpetual  benefit  of  that  Church  which  He  came  on  earth  to 
found.  He  spoke  with  a  prophetic  knowledge.  He  knew  well 
the  diseases  to  which  human  nature  is  always  liable.  He 
foresaw  that  the  two  great  plagues  of  His  Church  upon  earth 
would  always  be  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  doctrine 
of  the  Sadducees.  He  knew  that  these  would  be  the  upper  and 
nether  mill-stones,  between  which  His  truth  would  be  per 
petually  crushed  and  bruised  until  He  came  the  second  time. 
He  knew  that  there  always  would  be  Pharisees  in  spirit,  and 
Sadducees  in  spirit,  among  professing  Christians.  He  knew 
that  their  succession  would  never  fail,  and  their  generation 
never  become  extinct, — and  that  though  the  names  of  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees  were  no  more,  yet  their  principles  would  always 
exist.  He  knew  that  during  the  time  that  the  Church  existed, 
until  His  return,  there  would  always  be  some  that  would  add  to 
the  Word,  and  some  that  would  subtract  from  it, — some  that 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  331 

would  stifle  it,  by  adding  to  it  other  things,  and  some  that 
would  bleed  it  to  death,  by  subtracting  from  its  principal  truths. 
And  this  is  the  reason  why  we  find  Him  delivering  this  solemn 
warning :  "Take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of. the  Pharisees 
and  of  the  Sadducees." 

And  now  comes  the  question,  Had  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
good  reason  to  give  this  warning  ?  I  appeal  to  all  who  know 
anything  of  Church  history,  was  there  not  indeed  a  cause  1  I 
appeal  to  all  who  remember  what  took  place  soon  after  the 
Apostles  were  dead.  Do  we  not  read  that  in  the  primitive 
Church  of  Christ  there  rose  up  two  distinct  parties, — one  ever 
inclined  to  err,  like  the  Arians,  in  holding  less  than  the  truth, 
the  other  ever  inclined  to  err,  like  the  relic-worshippers  and 
saint-worshippers,  in  holding  more  than  the  truth,  as  it  is  in 
Jesus'? — Do  we  not  see  the  same  thing  coming  out  in  after 
times,  in  the  form  of  Romanism  on  the  one  side  and  Socinianism 
on  the  other? — Do  we  not  read  in  the  history  of  our  own 
Church  of  two  great  parties,  the  Non-jurors  on  the  one  side, 
and  the  Latitudinarians  on  the  other?  —  These  are  ancient 
things. — In  a  short  paper  like  this  it  is  impossible  for  me  to 
enter  more  fully  into  them.  They  are  things  well  known  to  all 
who  are  familiar  with  records  of  past  days.  There  always  have 
been  these  two  great  parties, — the  party  representing  the  prin 
ciples  of  the  Pharisee,  and  the  party  representing  the  principles 
of  the  Sadducee. — And  therefore  our  Lord  had  good  cause  to 
say  of  these  two  great  principles,  "  Take  heed  and  beware." 

But  I  desire  to  bring  the  subject  even  nearer  at  the  present 
moment.  I  ask  my  readers  to  consider  whether  warnings  like 
this  are  not  especially  needed  in  our  own  times.  We  have, 
undoubtedly,  much  to  be  thankful  for  in  England.  We  have 
made  great  advances  in  arts  and  sciences  in  the  last  three 
centuries,  and  have  much  of  the  form  and  show  of  morality  and 
religion.  But  I  ask  anybody  who  can  see  beyond  his  own 
door,  or  his  own  fireside,  whether  we  do  not  live  in  the  midst 
of  dangers  from  false  doctrine  ? 

We  have  amongst  us,  on  the  one  side,  a  school  of  men  who, 
wittingly  or  unwittingly,  are  paving  the  way  into  the  Church 
of  Rome, — a  school  that  professes  to  draw  its  principles  from 
primitive  tradition,  the  writings  of  the  Fathers,  and  the  voice 
of  the  Church, — a  school  that  talks  and  writes  so  much  about 


332  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

the  Church,  the  ministry,  and  the  sacraments,  that  it  makes 
them  like  Aaron's  rod,  swallow  up  everything  else  in  Chris 
tianity, — a  school  that  attaches  vast  importance  to  the  outward 
form  and  ceremonial  of  religion, — to  gestures,  postures,  bowings, 
crosses,  piscinas,  sedilia,  credence-tables,  rood-screens,  albs, 
tunicles,  copes,  chasubles,  altar-cloths,  incense,  images,  banners, 
processions,  floral  decorations,  and  many  other  like  things,  about 
which  not  a  word  is  to  be  found  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  as 
having  any  place  in  Christian  worship.  I  refer,  of  course,  to 
the  school  of  Churchmen  called  Kitualists.  When  we  examine 
the  proceedings  of  that  school,  there  can  be  but  one  conclusion 
concerning  them.  I  believe  whatever  be  the  meaning  and 
intention  of  its  teachers,  however  devoted,  zealous,  and  self- 
denying  many  of  them  are,  that  upon  them  has  fallen  tho 
mantle  of  the  Pharisees. 

We  have,  on  the  other  hand,  a  school  of  men  who,  wittingly 
or  unwittingly,  appear  to  pave  the  way  to  Socinianism, — a 
school  which  holds  strange  views  about  the  plenary  inspiration 
of  Holy  Scripture, — strange  views  about  the  doctrine  of  sacrifice, 
and  the  Atonement  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,— 
strange  views  about  the  eternity  of  punishment,  and  God's  love 
to  man, — a  school  strong  in  negatives,  but  very  weak  in 
positives, — skilful  in  raising  doubts,  but  impotent  in  laying 
them, — clever  in  unsettling  and  unscrewing  men's  faith,  but 
powerless  to  offer  any  firm  rest  for  the  sole  of  our  foot.  And, 
whether  the  leaders  of  this  school  mean  it  or  not,  I  believe  that 
on  them  has  fallen  the  mantle  of  the  Sadducees. 

These  things  sound  harsh.  It  saves  a  vast  deal  of  trouble  to 
shut  our  eyes,  and  say,  "  I  see  no  danger,"  and  because  it  is  not 
seen,  therefore  not  to  believe  it.  It  is  easy  to  stop  our  ears  and 
say,  "I  hear  nothing,"  and  because  we  hear  nothing,  therefore 
to  feel  no  alarm.  But  we  know  well  who  they  are  that  rejoice 
over  the  state  of  tilings  we  have  to  deplore  in  some  quarters  of 
our  own  Church.  We  know  what  the  Roman  Catholic  thinks ; 
we  know  what  the  Socinian  thinks.  The  Roman  Catholic 
rejoices  over  the  rise  of  the  Tractarian  party  ;  the  Socinian 
rejoices  over  the  rise  of  men  who  teach  such  views  as  those  set 
forth  in  modern  days  about  the  atonement  and  inspiration. 
They  would  not  rejoice  as  they  do  if  they  did  not  see  their 
work  being  done,  and  their  cause  being  helped  forward.  The 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  333 

danger,  I  believe,  is  far  greater  than  we  are  apt  to  suppose. 
The  books  that  are  read  in  many  quarters  are  most  mischievous, 
and  the  tone  of  thought  on  religious  subjects,  among  many 
classes,  and  especially  among  the  higher  ranks,  is  deeply 
unsatisfactory.  The  plague  is  abroad.  If  we  love  life,  we 
ought  to  search  our  own  hearts,  and  try  our  own  faith,  and 
make  sure  that  we  stand  on  the  right  foundation.  Above  all, 
we  ought  to  take  heed  that  we  ourselves  do  not  imbibe  the 
poison  of  false  doctrine,  and  go  back  from  our  first  love. 

I  feel  deeply  the  paiufulness  of  speaking  out  on  these  subjects. 
I  know  well  that  plain  speaking  about  false  doctrine  is  very 
unpopular,  and  that  the  speaker  must  be  content  to  find  himself 
thought  very  uncharitable,  very  troublesome,  and  very  narrow- 
minded.  Thousands  of  people  can  never  distinguish  differences 
in  religion.  To  the  bulk  of  men  a  clergyman  is  a  clergyman, 
and  a  sermon  is  a  sermon ;  and  as  to  any  difference  between  one 
minister  and  another,  or  one  doctrine  and  another,  they  are 
utterly  unable  to  understand  it.  I  cannot  expect  such  people 
to  approve  of  any  warning  against  false  doctrine.  I  must  make 
up  my  mind  to  meet  with  their  disapprobation,  and  must  bear 
it  as  I  best  can. 

But  I  will  ask  any  honest-minded,  unprejudiced  Bible  reader 
to  turn  to  the  New  Testament  and  see  what  he  will  find  there. 
He  will  find  many  plain  warnings  against  false  doctrine : 
"Beware  of  false  prophets," — "Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you 
through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit," — "  Be  not  carried  about 
with  divers  and  strange  doctrines," — "  Believe  not  every  spirit, 
but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God."  (Matt.  vii.  15  ; 
Col.  ii.  8  ;  Heb.  xiii.  9  ;  1  John  iv.  1.)  He  will  find  a  large 
part  of  several  inspired  Epistles  taken  up  with  elaborate  explana 
tions  of  true  doctrine  and  warnings  against  false  teaching.  I 
ask  whether  it  is  possible  for  a  minister  who  takes  the  Bible 
for  his  rule  of  faith  to  avoid  giving  warnings  against  doctrinal 
error  ? 

Finally,  I  ask  any  one  to  mark  what  is  going  on  in  England 
at  this  very  day  ?  I  ask  whether  it  is  not  true  that  hundreds 
have  left  the  Established  Church  and  joined  the  Church  of 
Rome  within  the  last  thirty  years  1  I  ask  whether  it  is  not 
true  that  hundreds  remain  within  our  pale,  who  in  heart  are 
little  better  than  Romanists,  and  who  ought,  if  they  were 


334  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

consistent,  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  Newman  and  Manning,  and 
go  to  their  own  place  1 — I  ask  again  whether  it  is  not  true  that 
scores  of  young  men,  both  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  are  spoiled 
and  ruined  by  the  withering  influence  of  scepticism,  and  have 
lost  all  positive  principles  in  religion  ?  Sneers  at  religious 
newspapers,  loud  declarations  of  dislike  to  "parties,"  high- 
sounding,  vague  phrases  about  "  deep  thinking,"  broad  views, 
new  light,  free  handling  of  Scripture,  and  the  effete  weakness 
of  certain  schools  of  theology,  make  up  the  whole  Christianity 
of  many  of  the  rising  generation. — And  yet,  in  the  face  of 
these  notorious  facts,  men  cry  out,  "Hold  your  peace  about 
false  doctrine.  Let  false  doctrine  alone  !  "  I  cannot  hold  my 
peace.  Faith  in  the  Word  of  God,  love  to  the  souls  of  men, 
the  vows  I  took  when  I  was  ordained,  alike  constrain  me  to 
bear  witness  against  the  errors  of  the  day.  And  I  believe  that 
the  saying  of  our  Lord  is  eminently  a  truth  for  the  times : 
"  Beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees." 

III.  The  third  thing  to  which  I  wish  to  call  attention  is  tltc 
peculiar  name  by  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  speaks  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees. 

The  words  which  our  Lord  used  were  always  the  wisest  and 
the  best  that  could  be  used.  He  might  have  said,  "  Take  heed 
and  beware  of  the  doctrine,  or  of  the  teaching,  or  of  the  opinions, 
of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees."  But  He  does  not  say 
so  :  He  uses  a  word  of  a  peculiar  nature. — He  says,  "  Take  heed 
and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees." 

Now  we  all  know  what  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  word 
"  leaven."  It  is  what  we  commonly  call  yeast, — the  yeast 
which  is  added  to  the  lump  of  dough  in  making  a  loaf  of  bread. 
This  yeast,  or  leaven,  bears  but  a  small  proportion  to  the  lump 
into  which  it  is  thrown ;  just  so,  our  Lord  would  have  us  know, 
the  first  beginning  of  false  doctrine  is  but  small  compared  to  the 
body  of  Christianity. — It  works  quietly  and  noiselessly ;  just 
so,  our  Lord  would  have  us  know,  false  doctrine  works  secretly 
in  the  heart  in  which  it  is  once  planted. — It  insensibly  changes 
the  character  of  the  whole  mass  with  which  it  is  mingled ;  just 
so,  our  Lord  would  have  us  know,  the  doctrines  of  the  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees  turn  everything  upside  down,  when  once  admitted 
into  a  Church  or  into  a  man's  heart. — Let  us  mark  these  points  : 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  335 

they  throw  light  on  many  things  that  we  see  in  the  present 
day.  It  is  of  vast  importance  to  receive  the  lessons  of  wisdom 
that  this  word  "leaven"  contains  in  itself. 

False  doctrine  does  not  meet  men  face  to  face,  and  proclaim 
that  it  is  false.  It  does  not  blow  a  trumpet  before  it,  and 
endeavour  openly  to  turn  us  away  from  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.  It  does  not  come  before  men  in  broad  day,  and  summon 
them  to  surrender.  It  approaches  us  secretly,  quietly,  insidiously, 
plausibly,  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  disarm  man's  suspicion,  and 
throw  him  off  his  guard.  It  is  the  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing,  and 
Satan  in  the  garb  of  an  angel  of  light,  who  have  always  proved 
the  most  dangerous  foes  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

I  believe  the  most  powerful  champion  of  the  Pharisees  is 
not  the  man  who  bids  you  openly  and  honestly  come  out  and 
join  the  Church  of  Rome  :  it  is  the  man  who  says  that  he  agrees 
on  all  points  with  you  in  doctrine.  He  would  not  take  any 
thing  away  from  those  Evangelical  views  that  you  hold ; — he 
would  not  have  you  make  any  change  at  all  \ — all  he  asks  you 
to  do  is  to  add  a  little  more  to  your  belief,  in  order  to  make 
your  Christianity  perfect.  "Believe  me,"  he  says,  "we  do  not 
want  you  to  give  up  anything.  We  only  want  you  to  hold  a 
few  more  clear  views  about  the  Church  and  the  sacraments. 
We  want  you  to  add  to  your  present  opinions  a  little  more 
about  the  office  of  the  ministry,  and  a  little  more  about  Epis 
copal  authority,  and  little  more  about  the  Prayer-book,  and  a 
little  more  about  the  necessity  of  order  and  of  discipline. — We 
only  want  you  to  add  a  little  more  of  these  things  to  your  system 
of  religion,  and  you  will  be  quite  right."  But  when  men  speak 
to  you  in  this  way,  then  is  the  time  to  remember  what  our 
Lord  said,  and  "  to  take  heed  and  beware."  This  is  the  leaven 
of  the  Pharisees,  against  which  we  are  to  stand  upon  our  guard. 

Why  do  I  say  this  ?  I  say  it  because  there  is  no  security 
against  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees,  unless  we  resist  its  prin 
ciples  in  their  beginnings.  Beginning  with  a  "  little  more 
about  the  Church,"  you  may  one  day  place  the  Churcli 
in  the  room  of  Christ.  —  Beginning  with  a  "  little  more 
about  the  ministry,"  you  may  one  day  regard  the  minister  as 
"the  mediator  between  God  and  man." — Beginning  with  a 
"little  more  about  the  sacraments,"  you  may  one  day  altogether 
give  up  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  without  the  deeds 


336  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

of  the  law. — Beginning  with  a  "little  more  reverence  for  the 
Prayer-book,"  you  may  one  day  place  it  above  the  holy  Word 
of  God  Himself. — Beginning  with  a  "little  more  honour  to 
bishops,"  you  may  at  last  refuse  salvation  to  every  one  who 
does  not  belong  to  an  Episcopal  Church. — I  only  tell  an  old 
story :  I  only  mark  out  roads  that  have  been  trodden  by  hun 
dreds  of  members  of  the  Church  of  England  in  the  last  few 
years.  They  began  by  carping  at  the  Reformers,  and  have 
ended  by  swallowing  the  decrees  of  the  Council  of  Trent.  They 
began  by  crying  up  Laud  and  the  Non-jurors,  and  have  ended 
by  going  far  beyond  them,  and  formally  joining  the  Church  of 
Rome.  I  believe  that  when  we  hear  men  asking  us  to  "  add  a 
little  more  "  to  our  good  old  plain  Evangelical  views,  we  should 
stand  upon  our  guard.  We  should  remember  our  Lord's  caution  : 
"  Of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  take  heed  and  beware." 

I  consider  the  most  dangerous  champion  of  the  Sadducee 
school  is  not  the  man  who  tells  you  openly  that  he  wants  you 
to  lay  aside  any  part  of  the  truth,  and  to  become  a  free-thinker 
and  a  sceptic.  It  is  the  man  who  begins  with  quietly  insinuat 
ing  doubts  as  to  the  position  that  we  ought  to  take  up  about 
religion, — doubts  whether  we  ought  to  be  so  positive  in  saying 
"  This  is  truth,  and  that  falsehood," — doubts  whether  we  ought 
to  think  men  wrong  who  differ  from  us  on  religious  opinions, 
since  they  may  after  all  be  as  much  right  as  we  are. — It  is  the 
man  who  tells  us  we  ought  not  to  condemn  anybody's  views, 
lest  we  err  on  the  side  of  want  of  charity. — It  is  the  man  who 
always  begins  talking  in  a  vague  way  about  God  being  a  God 
of  love,  and  hints  that  we  ought  to  believe  perhaps  that  all  men, 
whatever  doctrine  they  profess,  will  be  saved. — It  is  the  man  who 
is  ever  reminding  us  that  we  ought  to  take  care  how  we  think 
lightly  of  men  of  powerful  minds,  and  great  intellects  (though 
they  are  Deists  and  sceptics),  who  do  not  think  as  we  do,  and 
that,  after  all,  "great  minds  are  all  more  or  less  taught  of 
God  ! " — It  is  the  man  who  is  ever  harping  on  the  difficulties 
of  inspiration,  and  raising  questions  whether  all  men  may  not 
be  found  saved  in  the  end,  and  whether  all  may  not  be  right  in 
the  sight  of  God. — It  is  the  man  who  crowns  this  kind  of  talk 
by  a  few  calm  sneers  against  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  "  old- 
fashioned  views,"  and  "narrow-minded  theology,"  and  "bigotry," 
and  the  "  want  of  liberality  and  charity,"  in  the  present  day. 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  337 

But  when  men  begin  to  speak  to  us  in  this  kind  of  way,  then 
is  the  time  to  stand  upon  our  guard.  Then  is  the  time  to 
remember  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  "to  take 
heed  and  beware  of  leaven." 

Once  more,  why  do  I  say  this  *?  I  say  it  because  there  is  no 
security  against  Sadduceeism,  any  more  than  against  Pharisee- 
ism,  unless  we  resist  its  principles  in  the  bud.  Beginning  with 
a  little  vague  talk  about  "charity,"  you  may  end  in  the  doctrine 
of  universal  salvation,  fill  heaven  with  a  mixed  multitude  of 
wicked  as  well  as  good,  and  deny  the  existence  of  hell. — 
Beginning  with  a  few  high-sounding  phrases  about  intellect  and 
the  inner  light  in  man,  you  may  end  with  denying  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  maintaining  that  Homer  and  Shakespeare 
were  as  truly  inspired  as  St.  Paul,  and  thus  practically  casting 
aside  the  Bible. — Beginning  with  some  dreamy,  misty  idea 
about  "all  religions  containing  more  or  less  truth,"  you  may 
end  with  utterly  denying  the  necessity  of  missions,  and  main 
taining  that  the  best  plan  is  to  leave  everybody  alone. — Begin 
ning  with  dislike  to  "Evangelical  religion,"  as  old-fashioned, 
narrow,  and  exclusive,  you  may  end  by  rejecting  every  leading 
doctrine  of  Christianity, — the  atonement,  the  need  of  grace, 
and  the  divinity  of  Christ.  Again  I  repeat  that  I  only  tell  an 
old  story :  I  only  give  a  sketch  of  a  path  which  scores  have 
trodden  in  the  last  few  years.  They  were  once  satisfied  with 
such  divinity  as  that  of  Newton,  Scott,  Cecil,  and  Romaine ; 
they  are  now  fancying  they  have  found  a  more  excellent  way 
in  the  principles  which  have  been  propounded  by  theologians 
of  the  Broad  school !  I  believe  there  is  no  safety  for  a  man's 
soul  unless  he  remembers  the  lesson  involved  in  those  solemn 
words,  "Beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Sadducees." 

Let  us  beware  of  the  insidiousness  of  false  doctrine.  Like 
the  fruit  of  which  Eve  and  Adam  ate,  it  looks  at  first  sight 
pleasant  and  good,  and  a  thing  to  be  desired.  Poison  is  not 
written  upon  it,  and  so  people  are  not  afraid.  Like  counter 
feit  coin,  it  is  not  stamped  "bad:"  it  passes  current  from  the 
very  likeness  it  bears  to  the  truth. 

Let  us  beware  of  the  very  small  beginnings  of  false  doctrine. 
Every  heresy  began  at  one  time  with  some  little  departure  from 
the  truth.  There  is  only  a  little  seed  of  error  needed  to  create 
a  great  tree.  It  is  the  little  stones  that  make  up  the  mighty 


338  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

building.  It  was  the  little  timbers  that  made  the  great  ark 
that  carried  ISToah  and  his  family  over  a  deluged  world.  It  is 
the  little  leaven  that  leavens  the  whole  lump.  It  is  the  little 
flaw  in  one  link  of  the  chain  cable  that  wrecks  the  gallant  ship, 
and  drowns  the  crew.  It  is  the  omission  or  addition  of  one 
little  item  in  the  doctor's  prescription  that  spoils  the  whole 
medicine,  and  turns  it  into  poison.  We  do  not  tolerate  quietly 
a  little  dishonesty,  or  a  little  cheating,  or  a  little  lying :  just  so, 
let  us  never  allow  a  little  false  doctrine  to  ruin  us,  by  thinking- 
it  is  but  a  "little  one,"  and  can  do  no  harm.  The  Galatians 
seemed  to  be  doing  nothing  very  dangerous  when  they  "ob 
served  days  and  months,  and  times  and  years ; "  yet  St.  Paul 
says,  "I  am  afraid  of  you."  (GaL  iv.  10,  11.) 

Finally,  let  us  beware  of  supposing  that  we  at  any  rate  are 
not  in  danger.  "  Our  views  are  sound :  our  feet  stand  firm  : 
others  may  fall  aAvay,  but  we  are  safe ! "  Hundreds  have 
thought  the  same,  and  have  come  to  a  bad  end.  In  their  self- 
confidence  they  tampered  with  little  temptations  and  little 
forms  of  false  doctrine;  in  their  self-conceit  they  went  near 
the  brink  of  danger ;  and  now  they  seem  lost  for  ever.  They 
appear  given  over  to  a  strong  delusion,  so  as  to  believe  a  lie. 
Some  of  them  have  exchanged  the  Prayer-book  for  the  Breviary, 
and  are  praying  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  bowing  down  to 
images.  Others  of  them  are  casting  overboard  one  doctrine 
after  another,  and  bid  fair  to  strip  themselves  of  every  sort  of 
religion  but  a  few  scraps  of  Deism.  Very  striking  is  the  vision 
in  Pilgrim's  Progress,  which  describes  the  hill  Error  as  "  very 
steep  on  the  farthest  side  ; "  and  "  when  Christian  and  Hopeful 
looked  down  they  saw  at  the  bottom  several  men  dashed  all  to 
pieces  by  a  fall  they  had  from  the  top." — Never,  never  let  us 
forget  the  caution  to  beware  of  "leaven ;"  and  if  we  think  we 
stand,  let  us  "  take  heed  lest  we  fall." 

IV.  I  propose,  in  the  fourth  and  last  place,  to  suggest  some 
safe-guards  and  antidotes  against  the  dangers  of  the  present  day, 
— the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  leaven  of  the  Sadducees. 

I  feel  that  we  all  need  more  and  more  the  presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  our  hearts,  to  guide,  to  teach,  and  to  keep  us 
sound  in  the  faith.  "We  all  need  to  watch  more,  and  to  pray 
to  be  held  up,  and  preserved  from  falling  away.  But  still,  there 


PHABISEES  AND  SADPITCEES.  339 

are  certain  great  truths,  which,  in  a  day  like  this,  we  are  specially 
bound  to  keep  in  mind.  There  are  times  when  some  common 
epidemic  invades  a  land,-  when  medicines,  at  all  times  valuable, 
become  of  peculiar  value.  There  are  places  where  a  peculiar 
malaria  prevails,  in  which  remedies,  in  every  place  valuable,  are 
more  than  ever  valuable  in  consequence  of  it.  So  I  believe 
there  are  times  and  seasons  in  the  Church  of  Christ  when  we 
are  bound  to  tighten  our  hold  upon  certain  great  leading  truths, 
to  grasp  them"  with  more  than  ordinary  firmness  in  our  hands, 
to  press  them  to  our  hearts,  and  not  to  let  them  go.  Such 
doctrines  I  desire  to  set  forth  in  order,  as  the  great  antidotes  to 
the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees.  When  Saul 
and  Jonathan  were  slain  by  the  archers,  David  ordered  the 
children  of  Israel  to  be  taught  the  use  of  the  bow. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  if  we  would  be  kept  sound  in  the  faith, 
we  must  take  heed  to  our  doctrine  about  the  total  corruption  of 
human  nature.     The  corruption  of  human  nature  is  no  slight 
thing.     It  is  no  partial,  skin-deep  disease,  but  a  radical  and 
universal  corruption   of  man's  will,    intellect,    affections,    and 
conscience.     We  are  not  merely  poor  and  pitiable  sinners  in 
God's  sight:  we  are  guilty  sinners;  we  are  blameworthy  sinners; 
we   deserve  justly  God's   wrath  and  God's    condemnation.     I 
believe  there  are  very  few  errors  and  false  doctrines  of  which 
the  beginning  may  not  be  traced  up  to  unsound  views  about 
the  corruption   of  human  nature.     Wrong  views  of  a  disease 
will  always   bring  with   them   wrong   views   of   the   remedy. 
Wrong  views  of  the  corruption  of  human  nature  will  always 
carry  with  them  wrong  views  of  the  grand  antidote  and  cure  of 
that  corruption. 

(b)  For  another  thing,  we  must  take  heed  to  our  doctrine 
about  the  inspiration  and  authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.    Let 
us  boldly  maintain,  in  the  face  of  all  gainsayers,  that  the  whole 
of  the  Bible  is  given  by  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost, — that 
all  is  inspired  completely,  not  one  part  more  than  another, — and 
that  there  is  an  entire  gulf  between  the  Word  of  God  and  any 
other  book  in  the  world. — We  need  not  be  afraid  of  difficulties 
in  the  way  of  the  doctrine  of  plenary  inspiration.     There  may 
be  many  things  about  it  far  too  high  for  us  to  comprehend  :  it 
is  a  miracle,  and  all  miracles  are  necessarily  mysterious.     But 
if  we  are  not  to  believe  anything  until  we  can  entirely  explain 


340  KXOTS  UNTIED. 

it,  there  are  very  few  tilings  indeed  that  we  shall  believe. — We 
need  not  be  afraid  of  all  the  assaults  that  criticism  brings  to 
bear  upon  the  Bible.  From  the  days  of  the  Apostles  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  has  been  incessantly  "  tried,"  and  has  never  failed 
to  come  forth  as  gold,  uninjured,  and  unsullied. — We  need  not 
be  afraid  of  the  discoveries  of  science.  Astronomers  may  sweep 
the  heavens  with  telescopes,  and  geologists  may  dig  down  into 
the  heart  of  the  earth,  and  never  shake  the  authority  of  the 
Bible  :  "  The  voice  of  God  and  the  work  of  God's  hands  never 
will  be  found  to  contradict  one  another." — We  need  not  be 
afraid  of  the  researches  of  travellers.  They  will  never  discover 
anything  that  contradicts  God's  Bible.  I  believe  that  if  a 
Layard  were  to  go  over  all  the  earth  and  dig  up  a  hundred 
buried  Ninevehs,  there  would  not  be  found  a  single  inscription 
which  would  contradict  a  single  fact  in  the  Word  of  God. 

Furthermore,  we  must  boldly  maintain  that  this  Word  of 
God  is  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  of  practice, — that  whatsoever 
is  not  written  in  it  cannot  be  required  of  any  man  as  needful  to 
salvation, — and  that  however  plausibly  new  doctrines  may  be 
defended,  if  they  be  not  in  the  Word  of  God  they  cannot  be 
worth  our  attention.  It  matters  nothing  who  says  a  thing, 
whether  he  be  bishop,  archdeacon,  dean,  or  presbyter.  It 
matters  nothing  that  the  thing  is  well  said,  eloquently,  attract 
ively,  forcibly,  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  turn  the  laugh  against 
you.  We  are  not  to  believe  it  except  it  be  proved  to  us  by  Holy 
Scripture. 

Last,  but  not  least,  we  must  use  the  Bible  as  if  we  believed 
it  was  given  by  inspiration.  We  must  use  it  with  reverence, 
and  read  it  with  all  the  tenderness  with  which  we  would  read 
the  words  of  an  absent  father.  We  must  not  expect  to  find,  in 
a  book  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  no  mysteries.  We  must 
rather  remember  that  in  nature  there  are  many  things  we  cannot 
understand ;  and  that  as  it  is  in  the  book  of  nature,  so  it  will 
always  be  in  the  book  of  Revelation.  We  should  draw  near  to 
the  Word  of  God  in  that  spirit  of  piety  recommended  by  Lord 
Bacon  many  years  ago.  "  Remember,"  he  says,  speaking  of  the 
book  of  nature,  "  that  man  is  not  the  master  of  that  book,  but 
the  interpreter  of  that  book."  And  as  we  deal  with  the  book 
of  nature,  so  we  must  deal  with  the  book  of  God.  We 
must  draw  near  to  it,  not  to  teach,  but  to  learn, — not  like 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  341 

the  master  of  it,  but  like  a  humble  scholar,  seeking  to  under 
stand  it. 

(c)  For  another  thing,  we  must  take  heed  to  our  doctrine 
respecting  the  atonement  and  priestly  office  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  We  must  boldly  maintain  that  the  death 
of  our  Lord  upon  the  cross  was  no  common  death.  It  was  not 
the  death  of  one  who  only  died  like  Cranmer,  Ridley,  and 
Latimer,  as  a  martyr.  It  was  not  the  death  of  one  who  only 
died  to  give  us  a  mighty  example  of  self-sacrifice  and  self-denial. 
The  death  of  Christ  was  an  offering  up  unto  God  of  Christ's  own 
body  and  blood,  to  make  satisfaction  for  man's  sin  and  trans 
gression.  It  was  a  sacrifice  and  propitiation;  a  sacrifice  typified 
in  every  offering  of  the  Mosaic  law,  a  sacrifice  of  the  mightiest 
influence  upon  all  mankind.  Without  the  shedding  of  that 
blood  there  could  not  be — there  never  was  to  be^-any  remission 
of  sin. 

Furthermore,  we  must  boldly  maintain  that  this  crucified 
Saviour  ever  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  to  make  inter 
cession  for  all  that  come  to  God  by  Him;  that  He  there 
represents  and  pleads  for  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Him;  and 
that  He  has  deputed  His  office  of  Priest  and  Mediator  to  no 
man  or  set  of  men  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  We  need  none 
besides.  We  need  no  Virgin  Mary,  no  angels,  no  saint,  no 
priest,  no  person  ordained  or  unordained,  to  stand  between  us 
and  God,  but  the  one  Mediator,  Christ  Jesus. 

Furthermore,  we  must  boldly  maintain  that  peace  of  con 
science  is  not  to  be  bought  by  confession  to  a  priest,  and  by 
receiving  a  man's  absolution  from  sin.  It  is  to  be  had  only  by 
going  to  the  great  High  Priest,  Christ  Jesus ;  by  confession 
before  Him,  not  before  man  ;  and  by  absolution  from  Him  only, 
who  alone  can  say,  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee  :  go  in  peace." 

Last,  but  not  least,  we  must  boldly  maintain  that  peace  with 
God,  once  obtained  by  faith  in  Christ,  is  to  be  kept  up,  not  by 
mere  outward  ceremonial  acts  of  worship, — not  by  receiving  the 
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  every  day, — but  by  the  daily 
habit  of  looking  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  faith, — eating  by 
faith  His  body,  and  drinking  by  faith  His  blood ;  that  eating  and 
drinking  of  which  our  Lord  says  that  he  who  eats  and  drinks 
shall  find  His  "  body  meat  indeed,  and  His  blood  drink  indeed." 
Holy  John  Owen  declared,  long  ago,  that  if  there  was  any  one 


342  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

point  more  than  another  that  Satan  wished  to  overthrow,  it  was 
the  Priestly  office  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Satan 
knew  well,  he  said,  that  it  was  the  "  principal  foundation  of 
faith  and  consolation  of  the  Church."  Right  views  upon  that 
office  are  of  essential  importance  in  the  present  day,  if  men 
would  not  fall  into  error. 

(d)  One  more  remedy  I  must  mention.  We  must  take  heed 
to  our  doctrine  about  the  work  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Let  us 
settle  it  in  our  minds  that  His  work  is  no  uncertain  invisible 
operation  upon  the  heart :  and  that  where  He  is,  He  is  not 
hidden,  not  unfelt,  not  unobserved.  We  do  not  believe  that 
the  dew,  when  it  falls,  cannot  be  felt,  or  that  where  there  is  life 
in  a  man  it  cannot  be  seen  and  observed  by  his  breath.  So  is  it 
with  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  No  man  has  any  right 
to  lay  claim  to  it,  except  its  fruits — its  experimental  effects — 
can  be  seen  in  his  life.  Where  He  is,  there  will  ever  be  a  new 
creation,  and  a  new  man.  Where  He  is,  there  will  ever  be  new 
knowledge,  new  faith,  new  holiness,  new  fruits  in  the  life,  in 
the  family,  in  the  world,  in  the  Church.  And  where  these  new 
things  are  not  to  be  seen  we  may  well  say,  with  confidence, 
there  is  no  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  These  are  times  in  which 
we  all  need  to  be  upon  our  guard  about  the  doctrine  of  the 
work  of  the  Spirit.  Madame  Guyon  said,  long  ago,  that  the 
time  would  perhaps  come  when  men  might  have  to  be  martyrs 
for  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  time  seems  not  far 
distant.  At  any  rate,  if  there  is  one  truth  in  religion  that 
seems  to  have  more  contempt  showered  upon  it  than  another,  it 
is  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 

I  desire  to  impress  the  immense  importance  of  these  four 
points  upon  all  who  read  this  paper :  (a)  clear  views  of  the  sin- 
fulness  of  human  nature ;  (b)  clear  views  of  the  inspiration  of 
Scripture ;  (c)  clear  views  of  the  Atonement  and  Priestly  office 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  (d)  and  clear  views  of 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  believe  that  strange  doctrines 
about  the  Church,  the  ministry,  and  the  sacraments, — about 
the  love  of  God,  the  death  of  Christ,  and  the  eternity  of 
punishment, — will  find  no  foothold  in  the  heart  which  is 
sound  on  these  four  points.  I  believe  that  they  are  four  great 
safe-guards  against  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the 
Sadducees. 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  343 

I  will  now  conclude  this  paper  with  a  few  remarks  by  way  of 
practical  application.  My  desire  is  to  make  the  whole  subject 
useful  to  those  into  whose  hands  these  pages  may  fall,  and  to 
supply  an  answer  to  the  questions  which  may  possibly  arise  in 
some  hearts, — What  are  we  to  do  1  What  advice  have  you  got 
to  offer  for  the  times  ? 

(1)  In  the  first  place,  I  will  ask  every  reader  of  this  paper  to 
find  out  whether  he  has  saving  personal  religion  for  his  own  soul. 
This  is  the  principal  thing  after  all.     It  will  profit  no  man  to 
belong  to  a  sound  visible  Church,  if  he  does  not  himself  belong 
to  Christ.     It  will  avail  a  man  nothing  to  be  intellectually 
sound  in  the  faith,  and  to  approve  sound  doctrine,  if  he  is  not 
himself  sound  at  heart.     Is  this  the  case  with  you  1     Can  you 
say  that  your  heart  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ?     Is  it  renewed 
by  the  Holy  Ghost?     Does  Christ  dwell  in  it  by  faith?     0, 
rest  not,  rest  not,   till  you  can  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to 
these   questions !     The   man  who   dies   unconverted,    however 
sound  his  views,  is  as  truly  lost  for  ever  as  the  worst  Pharisee 
or  Sadducee  that  ever  lived. 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  beseech  every  reader  of  this 
paper  who  desires  to  be  sound  in  the  faith,  to  study  diligently 
the  Bible.     That  blessed  Book  is  given  to  be  a  light  to  our  feet, 
and  a  lantern  to  our  path.     No  man  who  reads  it  reverently, 
prayerfully,  humbly,  and  regularly,   shall  ever  be  allowed  to 
miss   the   way  to   heaven.     By   it   every   sermon,    and   every 
religious  book,  and  every  ministry,  ought  to  be  weighed  and 
proved.     Would  you  know  what  is  truth  1     Do  you  feel  con 
fused  and  puzzled  by  the  war  of  words  which  you  near  on  every 
side  about  religion  ?     Do  you  want  to  know  what  you  ought  to 
believe,  and  what  you  ought  to  be  and  do,  in  order  to  be  saved  ? 
Take  down  your  Bible,  and  cease  from  man.     Head  your  Bible 
with  earnest  prayer  for  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  read  it 
with  honest   determination  to  abide   by  its   lessons.      Do   so 
steadily  and  perseveringly,  and  you  shall  see  light :  you  shall 
be  kept  from  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  and 
be  guided  to  eternal  life.     The  way  to  do  a  thing  is  to  do  it. 
Act  upon  this  advice  without  delay. 

(3)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  advise  every  reader  of  this 
paper  who  has  reason  to  hope  that  he  is  sound  in  faith  and 
heart,  to  take  heed  to  the  proportion  of  truths.     I  mean  by  that 


344  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

to  impress  the  importance  of  giving  each  several  truth  of 
Christianity  the  same  place  and  position  in  our  hearts  which 
is  given  to  it  in  God's  Word.  The  first  things  must  not  be  put 
second,  and  the  second  things  must  not  be  put  first  in  our  religion. 
The  Church  must  not  be  put  above  Christ ;  the  sacraments 
must  not  be  put  above  faith  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Ministers  must  not  be  exalted  above  the  place  assigned  to  them 
by  Christ ;  means  of  grace  must  not  be  regarded  as  an  end 
instead  of  a  means.  Attention  to  this  point  is  of  great  moment : 
the  mistakes  which  arise  from  neglecting  it  are  neither  few  nor 
small.  Here  lies  the  immense  importance  of  studying  the  whole 
Word  of  God,  omitting  nothing,  and  avoiding  partiality  in 
reading  one  part  more  than  another.  Here  again  lies  the  value 
of  having  a  clear  system  of  Christianity  in  our  minds.  Well 
would  it  be  for  the  Church  of  England  if  all  its  members  read 
the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  marked  the  beautiful  order  in 
which  those  Articles  state  the  main  truths  which  men  ought  to 
believe. 

(4)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  entreat  every  true-hearted 
servant  of  Christ  not  to  be  deceived  by  the  specious  guise  under 
which  false  doctrines  often  approach  our  souls  in  the  present 
day.  Beware  of  supposing  that  a  teacher  of  religion  is  to  be 
trusted,  because,  although  he  holds  some  unsound  views,  he  yet 
"teaches  a  great  deal  of  truth."  Such  a  teacher  is  precisely  the 
man  to  do  you  harm  :  poison  is  always  most  dangerous  when  it 
is  given  in  small  doses  and  mixed  with  wholesome  food.  Beware 
of  being  taken  in  by  the  apparent  earnestness  of  many  of  the 
teachers  and  upholders  of  false  doctrine.  Kemember  that  zeal 
and  sincerity  and  fervour  are  no  proof  whatever  that  a  man  is 
working  for  Christ,  and  ought  to  be  believed.  Peter  no  doubt 
was  in  earnest  when  he  bade  our  Lord  spare  Himself,  and  not 
go  to  the  cross ;  yet  our  Lord  said  to  him,  "  Get  thee  behind 
Me,  Satan."  Saul  no  doubt  was  in  earnest  when  he  went  to 
and  fro  persecuting  Christians ;  yet  he  did  it  ignorantly,  and  his 
zeal  was  not  according  to  knowledge.  The  founders  of  the 
Spanish  Inquisition  no  doubt  were  in  earnest,  and  in  burning 
God's  saints  alive  thought  they  were  doing  God  service ;  yet 
they  were  actually  persecuting  Christ's  members  and  walking  in 
the  steps  of  Cain. — It  is  an  awful  fact  that  "  Satan  himself  is 
transformed  into  an  angel  of  light."  (2  Cor.  xi.  14.)  Of  all 


PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  345 

the  delusions  prevalent  in  these  latter  days,  there  is  none 
greater  than  the  common  notion  that  "  if  a  man  is  in  earnest 
about  his  religion  he  must  be  a  good  man  !  "  Beware  of  being 
carried  away  by  this  delusion  :  beware  of  being  led  astray  by 
"  earnest-minded  men  !  "  Earnestness  is  in  itself  an  excellent 
thing ;  but  it  must  be  earnestness  in  behalf  of  Christ  and  His 
whole  truth,  or  else  it  is  worth  nothing  at  all.  The  things  that 
are  highly  esteemed  among  men  are  often  abominable  in  the 
sight  of  God. 

(5)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  counsel  every  true  servant  of 
Christ  to  examine  his  own  heart  frequently  and  carefully  as  to 
his  state  before  God.     This  is  a  practice  which  is  useful  at  all 
times  :  it  is  specially  desirable  at  the  present  day.     When  the 
great  plague  of  London  was  at  its  height,  people  remarked  the 
least  symptoms  that  appeared  on  their  bodies  in  a  way  that  they 
never   remarked  them  before.     A  spot  here,  or  a  spot  there, 
which  in  time  of  health  men  thought  nothing  of,  received  close 
attention  when  the  plague  was  decimating  families,  and  striking 
down  one  after  another  !      So  ought  it  to  be  with  ourselves,  in 
the  times  in  which  we  live.    We  ought  to  watch  our  hearts  with 
double  watchfulness.     We  ought  to  give  more  time  to  medita 
tion,  self-examination,  and  reflection.     It  is  a  hurrying,  bustling 
age  :  if  we  would  be  kept  from  falling,  we  must  make  time  for 
being  frequently  alone  with  God. 

(6)  Last   of   all,  let  me   urge  all  true  believers  to  contend 
earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.     We  have  no 
cause  to  be  ashamed  of  that  faith.      I  am  firmly  persuaded  that 
there  is  no  system  so  life-giving,  so  calculated  to  awaken  the 
sleeping,  lead  on  the  inquiring,  and  build  up  the  saints,  as  that 
system  which  is  called  the  Evangelical  system  of  Christianity. 
Wherever  it  is  faithfully  preached,  and  efficiently  carried  out, 
and  consistently  adorned  by  the  lives  of  its  professors,  it  is  the 
power  of  God.     It  may  be  spoken  against  and  mocked  by  some  ; 
but  so  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles.     It  may  be  weakly 
set  forth  and  defended  by  many  of  its  advocates ;  but,  after  all, 
its  fruits  and  its  results  are  its  highest  praise.     No  other  system 
of  religion  can  point  to  such  fruits.     Nowhere  are   so  many 
souls  converted   to  God  as  in  those   congregations   where  the 
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  preached  in  all  its  fulness,  without 
any  admixture  of  the  Pharisee  or  Sadducee  doctrine.     We  are 


346  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

not  called  upon,  beyond  all  doubt,  to  be  nothing  but  con 
troversialists  ;  but  we  never  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  testify  to 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  to  stand  up  boldly  for  Evangelical 
religion.  We  have  the  trutli,  and  we  need  not  be  afraid  to  say 
so.  The  judgment-day  will  prove  who  is  right,  and  to  that  day 
we  may  boldly  appeal 


XVI. 
DIVERS  AND  STRANGE  DOCTRINES. 

"  Be  not  carried  about  with  divers  and  strange  doctrines.  For  it  is  a  good 
thing  that  the  heart  be  established  with  grace  ;  not  with  meats,  which 
have  not  profited  them  that  have  been  occupied  therein." — HEB.  xiii.  9. 

THE  text  which  heads  this  paper  is  an  Apostolic  caution  against 
false  doctrine.  It  forms  part  of  a  warning  which  St.  Paul 
addressed  to  Hebrew  Christians.  It  is  a  caution  just  as  much 
needed  now  as  it  was  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  Never,  I 
think,  was  it  so  important  for  Christian  ministers  to  cry  aloud 
continually,  "  Be  not  carried  about." 

That  old  enemy  of  mankind,  the  devil,  has  no  more  subtle 
device  for  ruining  souls  than  that  of  spreading  false  doctrine. 
"A  murderer  and  a  liar  from  the  beginning,"  he  never  ceases 
going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  "  seeking  whom  he  may  devour." 
— Outside  the  Church  he  is  ever  persuading  men  to  main 
tain  barbarous  customs  and  destructive  superstitions.  Human 
sacrifice  to  idols, — gross,  revolting,  cruel,  disgusting  worship  of 
abominable  false  deities, — persecution,  slavery,  cannibalism, 
child-murder,  devastating  religious  wars, — all  these  are  a  part  of 
Satan's  handiwork,  and  the  fruit  of  his  suggestions.  Like  a 
pirate,  his  object  is  to  "  sink,  burn,  and  destroy." — Inside  the 
Church  he  is  ever  labouring  to  sow  heresies,  to  propagate  errors, 
to  foster  departures  from  the  faith.  If  he  cannot  prevent  the 
waters  flowing  from  the  Fountain  of  Life,  he  tries  hard  to  poison 
them.  If  he  cannot  destroy  the  medicine  of  the  Gospel,  he 
strives  to  adulterate  and  corrupt  it.  No  wonder  that  he  is  called 
"  Apollyon,  the  destroyer." 

The  Divine  Comforter  of  the  Church,  the  Holy  Ghost,  has 
always  employed  one  great  agent  to  oppose  Satan's  devices. 
That  agent  is  the  Word  of  God.  The  Word  expounded  and 
unfolded,  the  Word  explained  and  opened  up,  the  Word  made 

347 


348  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

clear  to  the  head  and  applied  to  the  heart, — the  Word  is  the 
chosen  weapon  by  which  the  devil  must  be  confronted  and  con 
founded.  The  Word  was  the  sword  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
wielded  in  the  temptation.  To  every  assault  of  the  Tempter, 
He  replied,  "  It  is  written."  The  Word  is  the  sword  which  His 
ministers  must  use  in  the  present  day,  if  they  would  success 
fully  resist  the  devil.  The  Bible,  faithfully  and  freely  expounded, 
is  the  safe-guard  of  Christ's  Church. 

I  desire  to  remember  this  lesson,  and  to  invite  attention  to 
the  text  which  stands  at  the  head  of  this  paper.  We  live  in  an 
age  when  men  profess  to  dislike  dogmas  and  creeds,  and  are 
filled  with  a  morbid  dislike  to  controversial  theology.  He  who 
dares  to  say  of  one  doctrine  that  "it  is  true,"  and  of  another 
that  "  it  is  false,"  must  expect  to  be  called  narrow-minded  and 
uncharitable,  and  to  lose  the  praise  of  men.  Nevertheless,  the 
Scripture  was  not  written  in  vain.  Let  us  examine  the  mighty 
lessons  contained  in  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Hebrews.  They 
are  lessons  for  us  as  well  as  for  them. 

I.  First,  we  have  here  a  broad  warning :  "Be  not  carried 

about  with  divers  and  strange  doctrines." 

II.  Secondly,  we  have  here  a  valuable  prescription :  "It  is  good 

that  the  heart  be  established  with  grace,  not  with  meats." 

III.  Lastly,  we  have   \icreaiiinstructivefact:  Meats  "have 

not  profited  them  which  have  been  occupied  therein." 

On  each  of  these  points  I  have  somewhat  to  say.  If  we 
patiently  plough  up  this  field  of  truth,  we  shall  find  that  there 
is  precious  treasure  hidden  in  it. 

I.  First  comes  the  broad  warning:  "Be  not  carried  about 
with  divers  and  strange  doctrines." 

The  meaning  of  these  words  is  not  a  hard  thing  which  we 
cannot  understand.  "  Be  not  tossed  to  and  fro,"  the  Apostle 
seems  to  say,  "by  every  blast  of  false  teaching,  like  ships  with 
out  compass  or  rudder.  False  doctrines  will  arise  as  long  as  the 
world  lasts,  in  number  many,  in  minor  details  varying,  in  one 
point  alone  always  the  same, — strange,  new,  foreign,  and 
departing  from  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  They  do  exist  now.  They 
will  always  be  found  within  the  visible  Church.  Remember 
this,  and  be  not  carried  away."  Such  is  St.  Paul's  warning. 


DIVERS  AND  STRANGE  DOCTRINES.  349 

The  Apostle's  warning  does  not  stand  alone.  Even  in  the 
midst  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  there  fell  from  the  loving 
lips  of  our  Saviour  a  solemn  caution  :  "  Beware  of  false  prophets, 
which  come  unto  you  in  sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are 
ravening  wolves."  (Matt.  vii.  15.)  Even  in  St.  Paul's  last 
address  to  the  Ephesian  elders,  though  he  finds  no  time  to 
speak  about  the  sacraments,  he  does  find  time  to  warn  his 
friends  against  false  doctrine  :  "  Of  your  own  selves  shall  men 
arise,  speaking  perverse  things  to  draw  away  disciples  after 
them."  (Acts  xx.  30.)  What  says  the  Second  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  1  "I  fear,  lest  by  any  means,  as  the  serpent 
beguiled  Eve  through  his  subtilty,  so  your  minds  should  be 
corrupted  from  the  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ."  (2  Cor.  xi.  3.) 
What  says  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  ?  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are 
so  soon  removed  from  him  that  called  you  into  the  grace  of 
Christ  unto  another  Gospel." — "  Who  hath  bewitched  you  that 
ye  should  not  obey  the  truth  ?" — "  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit, 
are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh." — "  How  turn  ye  again 
to  weak  and  beggarly  elements?" — "Ye  observe  days,  and  months, 
and  times,  and  years.  I  am  afraid  of  you." — "  Stand  fast  in  the 
liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us  free,  and  be  not  entangled 
again  in  the  yoke  of  bondage."  (Gal.  i.  6  ;  iii.  1,3;  iv.  9,  10, 1 1 ; 
v.  1.)  What  says  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians?  "  Be  no  more 
children,  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  carried  about  with  every  wind 
of  doctrine."  (Eph.  iv.  14.)  What  says  the  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians  1  "  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you  through  philo 
sophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  men."  (Col.  ii.  8.) 
What  says  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  ?  "  The  Spirit  speaketh 
expressly,  that  in  the  latter  times  some  shall  depart  from  the 
faith."  (1  Tim.  iv.  1.)  What  says  the  Second  Epistle  of 
Peter?  "There  shall  be  false  teachers  among  you,  who  privily 
shall  bring  in  damnable  heresies."  (2  Peter  ii.  1.)  What  says 
the  First  Epistle  of  John  1  "  Believe  not  every  spirit.  Many 
false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world."  (1  John  iv.  1.) 
What  says  the  Epistle  of  Jude  ?  "  Contend  earnestly  for  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  For  there  are  certain  men 
crept  in  unawares."  (Jude  3,  4.)  Let  us  mark  well  these 
texts.  These  things  were  written  for  our  learning. 

What  shall  we  say  to  these  texts  ?  How  they  may  strike 
others  I  cannot  say.  I  only  know  how  they  strike  me.  To 


350  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

tell  us,  as  some  do,  in  the  face  of  these  texts,  that  the  early 
Churches  were  a  model  of  perfection  and  purity,  is  absurd. 
Even  in  Apostolic  days,  it  appears,  there  were  abundant  errors 
both  in  doctrine  and  practice. — To  tell  us,  as  others  do,  that 
clergymen  ought  never  to  handle  controversial  subjects,  and 
never  to  warn  their  people  against  erroneous  views,  is  senseless 
and  unreasonable.  At  this  rate  we  might  neglect  not  a  little 
of  the  New  Testament.  Surely  the  dumb  dog  and  the  sleeping- 
shepherd  are  the  best  allies  of  the  wolf,  the  thief,  and  the 
robber.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  St.  Paul  says,  "  If  thou  put 
the  brethren  in  remembrance  of  these  things,  thou  shalt  be  a 
good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ."  (  1  Tim.  iv.  5.) 

A  plain  warning  against  false  doctrine  is  specially  needed  in 
England  in  the  present  day.  The  school  of  the  Pharisees,  and 
the  school  of  the  Sadducees,  those  ancient  mothers  of  all 
mischief,  were  never  more  active  than  they  are  now.  Between 
men  adding  to  the  truth  on  one  side,  and  men  taking  away 
from  it  on  the  other, — between  those  who  bury  truth  under 
additions,  and  those  who  mutilate  it  by  subtractions, — between 
superstition  and  infidelity, — between  Romanism  and  Neology, — 
between  Ritualism  and  Rationalism, — between  these  upper  and 
nether  mill-stones  the  Gospel  is  well  nigh  crushed  to  death  ! 

Strange  views  are  continually  propounded  by  clergymen 
about  subjects  of  the  deepest  importance.  About  the  atone 
ment,  the  divinity  of  Christ,  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  the 
reality  of  miracles,  the  eternity  of  future  punishment, — about 
the  Church,  the  ministerial  office,  the  sacraments,  the  con 
fessional,  the  honour  due  to  the  Virgin,  prayers  for  the  dead, 

about  all  these  things  there  is  nothing  too  monstrous  to  be 
taught  by  some  English  ministers  in  these  latter  days.  By  the 
pen  and  by  the  tongue,  by  the  press  and  by  the  pulpit,  the 
country  is  incessantly  deluged  with  a  flood  of  erroneous  opinions. 
To  ignore  the  fact  is  mere  affectation.  Others  see  it,  if  we 
pretend  to  be  ignorant  of  it.  The  danger  is  real,  great,  and 
unmistakable.  Never  was  it  so  needful  to  say,  "  Be  not  carried 
about." 

Many  things  combine  to  make  the  present  inroad  of  false 
doctrine  peculiarly  dangerous.  There  is  an  undeniable  zeal  in 
some  of  the  teachers  of  error :  their  "  earnestness  "  (to  use  an 
unhappy  cant  phrase)  makes  many  think  they  must  be  right. 


DIVERS  AND  STKANGE  DOCTEINES.  351 

There  is  a  great  appearance  of  learning  and  theological  know 
ledge  :  many  fancy  that  such  clever  and  intellectual  men  must 
surely  be  safe  guides.  There  is  a  general  tendency  to  free- 
thought  and  free  inquiry  in  these  latter  days :  many  like  to 
prove  their  independence  of  judgment,  by  believing  novelties. 
There  is  a  wide-spread  desire  to  appear  charitable  and  liberal- 
minded  :  many  seem  half  ashamed  of  saying  that  anybody  can 
be  in  the  wrong.  There  is  a  quantity  of  half-truth  taught  by 
the  modern  false  teachers  :  they  are  incessantly  using  Scriptural 
terms  and  phrases  in  an  uuscriptural  sense.  There  is  a  morbid 
craving  in  the  public  mind  for  a  more  sensuous,  ceremonial, 
sensational,  showy  worship :  men  are  impatient  of  inward, 
invisible  heart-work.  There  is  a  silly  readiness  in  every  direc 
tion  to  believe  everybody  who  talks  cleverly,  lovingly,  and 
earnestly,  and  a  determination  to  forget  that  Satan  is  often 
"transformed  into  an  angel  of  light."  (2  Cor.  ii.  14.)  There 
is  a  wide-spread  "gullibility"  among  professing  Christians: 
every  heretic  who  tells  his  story  plausibly  is  sure  to  be  believed, 
and  everybody  who  doubts  him  is  called  a  persecutor  arid  a 
narrow-minded  man.  All  these  things  are  peculiar  symptoms 
of  our  times.  I  defy  any  observing  man  to  deny  them.  They 
tend  to  make  the  assaults  of  false  doctrine  in  our  day  peculiarly 
dangerous.  They  make  it  more  than  ever  needful  to  cry  aloud, 
"  Be  not  carried  about." 

Does  any  one  ask  me,  What  is  the  best  safe-guard  against 
false  doctrine  ? — I  answer  in  one  word,  "  The  Bible  :  the  Bible 
regularly  read,  regularly  prayed  over,  regularly  studied."  We 
must  go  back  to  the  old  prescription  of  our  Master  :  "  Search 
the  Scriptures."  (John  v.  39.)  If  we  want  a  weapon  to  wield 
against  the  devices  of  Satan,  there  is  nothing  like  "  the  sword 
of  the  Spirit,  the  Word  of  God."  But  to  wield  it  successfully, 
we  must  read  it  habitually,  diligently,  intelligently,  and  prayer 
fully.  This  is  a  point  on  which,  I  fear,  many  fail.  In  an  age 
of  hurry  and  bustle,  few  read  their  Bibles  as  much  as  they 
should.  More  books  perhaps  are  read  than  ever,  but  less  of  the 
one  Book  which  makes  man  wise  unto  salvation.  Rome  and 
Xeology  could  never  have  made  such  havoc  in  the  Church  in 
fhe  last  fifty  years,  if  there  had  not  been  a  most  superficial 
knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  throughout  the  land.  A  Bible- 
reading  laity  is  the  strength  of  a  Church. 


352  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

"  Search  the  Scriptures."  Mark  how  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
and  His  Apostles  continually  refer  to  the  Old  Testament,  as  a 
document  just  as  authoritative  as  the  New.  Mark  how  they 
quote  texts  from  the  Old  Testament,  as  the  voice  of  God,  as  if 
every  word  was  given  by  inspiration.  Mark  how  the  greatest 
miracles  in  the  Old  Testament  are  all  referred  to  in  the  New, 
as  unquestioned  and  unquestionable  facts.  Mark  how  all  the 
leading  events  in  the  Pentateuch  are  incessantly  named  as 
historical  events,  whose  reality  admits  of  no  dispute.  Mark 
how  the  atonement,  and  substitution,  and  sacrifice,  run  through 
the  whole  Bible  from  first  to  last,  as  essential  doctrines  of 
revelation.  Mark  how  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  greatest 
of  all  miracles,  is  proved  by  such  an  overwhelming  mass  of 
evidence,  that  he  who  disbelieves  it  may  as  well  say  he  will 
believe  110  evidence  at  all.  Mark  all  these  things,  and  you  will 
find  it  very  hard  to  be  a  Rationalist !  Great  are  the  difficulties 
of  infidelity  :  it  requires  more  credulity  to  be  an  infidel  than  a 
Christian.  But  greater  still  are  the  difficulties  of  Rationalism. 
Free  handling  of  Scripture, — results  of  modern  criticism, — 
broad  and  liberal  theology, — all  these  are  fine,  swelling,  high- 
sounding  phrases,  which  please  some  minds,  and  look  very 
grand  at  a  distance.  But  the  man  who  looks  below  the  surface 
of  things  will  soon  find  that  there  is  no  sure  standing-ground 
between  ultra-Rationalism  and  Atheism. 

"  Search  the  Scriptures."  Mark  what  a  conspicuous  absence 
there  is  in  the  New  Testament  of  what  may  be  called  the 
sacramental  system,  and  the  whole  circle  of  Ritualistic  theology. 
Mark  how  extremely  little  there  is  said  about  the  effects  of 
baptism.  Mark  how  very  seldom  the  Lord's  Supper  is  mentioned 
in  the  Epistles.  Find,  if  you  can,  a  single  text  in  which  New 
Testament  ministers  are  called  sacrificing  priests, — or  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  called  a  sacrifice, — or  private  confession  to  ministers 
is  recommended  and  practised. — Turn,  if  you  can,  to  one  single 
verse  in  which  sacrificial  vestments  are  named  as  desirable, — or 
in  which  lighted  candles  and  pots  of  flowers  on  the  Lord's 
Table, — or  processions,  and  incense,  and  flags,  and  banners, 
and  turning  to  the  east,  and  bowing  down  to  the  bread  and 
wine, — or  prayer  to  the  Virgin  Mary  and  the  angels, — arl 
sanctioned.  Mark  these  things  well,  and  you  will  find  it 
very  hard  to  be  a  Ritualist !  You  may  find  your  authority 


DIVERS  AND  STRANGE  DOCTRINES.  353 

for  Ritualism  in  garbled  quotations  from  the  Fathers, — in  long 
extracts  from  monkish,  mystical,  or  Popish  writers  ;  but  you 
certainly  will  not  find  it  in  the  Bible.  Between  the  plain 
Bible,  honestly  and  fairly  interpreted,  and  extreme  Ritualism, 
there  is  a  gulf  which  cannot  IDC  passed. 

If  we  would  not  be  carried  about  by  "  divers  and  strange 
doctrines,"  we  must  remember  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ :  "  Search  the  Scriptures."  Ignorance  of  the  Bible  is 
the  root  of  all  error.  Knowledge  of  the  Bible  is  the  best 
antidote  against  modern  heresies. 

II.  I  now  proceed  to  examine  St.  Paul's  valualle  pre 
scription:  "It  is  good  that  the  heart  be  established  with 
grace  ;  not  with  meats." 

There  are  two  words  in  this  prescription  which  require  a  little 
explanation.  A  right  understanding  of  them  is  absolutely 
essential  to  a  proper  use  of  the  Apostle's  advice.  One  of 
these  words  is  "  meats,"  and  the  other  is  "grace." 

To  see  the  full  force  of  the  word  "meats,"  we  must  remember 
the  immense  importance  attached  by  many  Jewish  Christians  to 
the  distinctions  of  the  ceremonial  law  about  food.  The  flesh 
of  some  animals  and  birds,  according  to  Leviticus,  might  be 
eaten,  and  that  of  others  might  not  be  eaten.  Some  meats 
were,  consequently,  called  "  clean,"  and  others  were  called 
"  unclean."  To  eat  certain  kinds  of  flesh  made  a  Jew 
ceremonially  unholy  before  God,  and  no  strict  Jew  would 
touch  and  eat  such  food  on  any  account. — Now  were  these 
distinctions  still  to  be  kept  up  after  Christ  ascended  into 
heaven,  or  were  they  done  away  by  the  Gospel1?  Were 
heathen  converts  under  any  obligation  to  attend  to  the 
ceremonial  of  the  Levitical  law  about  food1?  Were  Jewish 
Christians  obliged  to  be  as  strict  about  the  meats  they  ate 
as  they  were  before  Christ  died,  and  the  veil  of  the  temple 
was  rent  in  twain  ?  Was  the  ceremonial  law  about  meats 
entirely  done  away,  or  was  it  not  1  Was  the  conscience  of 
a  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  troubled  with  fear  lest 
his  food  should  defile  him  1 

Questions  like  these  appear  to  have  formed  one  of  the  great 
subjects  of  controversy  in  the  Apostolic  times.  As  is  often  the 
case,  they  assumed  a  place  entirely  out  of  proportion  to  their 


354  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

real  importance.  The  Apostle  Paul  found  it  needful  to  handle 
the  subject  in  no  less  than  three  of  his  Epistles  to  the  Churches. 
— "Meat,"  he  says,  "commends  us  not  to  God." — "The  king 
dom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink." — "  Let  no  man  judge  you 
in  meat  and  drink."  (1  Cor.  viii.  8;  Rom.  xiv.  17;  Col. 
ii.  16.)  Nothing  shows  the  fallen  nature  of  man  so  clearly  as 
the  readiness  of  morbid  and  scrupulous  consciences  to  turn 
trifles  into  serious  things.  At  last  the  controversy  seems  to 
have  spread  so  far  and  obtained  such  dimensions,  that  "meats" 
became  an  expression  to  denote  anything  ceremonial  added  to 
the  Gospel  as  a  thing  of  primary  importance,  any  Ritual  trifle 
thrust  out  of  its  lawful  place  and  magnified  into  an  essential  of 
religion.  In  this  sense,  I  believe,  the  word  must  be  taken  in 
the  text  now  before  us.  By  "  meats  "  St.  Paul  means  ceremonial 
observances,  either  wholly  invented  by  man,  or  else  built  on 
Mosaic  precepts  which  have  been  abrogated  and  superseded  by 
the  Gospel.  It  is  an  expression  which  was  well  understood  in 
the  Apostolic  days. 

The  word  "  grace,"  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  be  employed 
as  a  comprehensive  description  of  the  whole  Gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Of  that  glorious  Gospel,  grace  is  the  main  feature,— 
grace  in  the  original  scheme — grace  in  the  execution — grace  in 
the  application  to  man's  soul.  Grace  is  the  fountain  of  life 
from  which  our  salvation  flows.  Grace  is  the  agency  through 
which  our  spiritual  life  is  kept  up.  Are  we  justified  ?  it  is  by 
grace. — Are  we  called  1  it  is  by  grace. — Have  we  forgiveness  1 
it  is  through  the  riches  of  grace. — Have  we  good  hope  1  it  is 
through  grace. — Do  we  believe  ?  it  is  through  grace. — Are  we 
elect  ?  it  is  by  the  election  of  grace. — Are  we  saved  1  it  is  by 
grace. — "VVhy  should  I  say  more  ?  The  time  would  fail  me  to 
exhibit  fully  the  part  that  grace  does  in  the  whole  work  of 
redemption.  Xo  wonder  that  St.  Paul  says  to  the  Romans, 
"  We  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace  ;  "  and  tells  Titus, 
"  The  grace  of  God,  which  bringeth  salvation,  hath  appeared 
unto  all  men."  (Rom.  iii.  24;  Gal.  i.  15;  Ephes.  i.  7; 
2  Thess.  ii.  16 ;  Acts  xviii.  27  ;  Rom.  i.  5  ;  Ephes.  ii.  5  ;  Rom. 
vi.  15;  Titus  ii.  11.) 

Such  are  the  two  great  principles  which  St.  Paul  puts  in 
strong  contrast  in  the  prescription  we  are  now  considering. 
He  places  opposite  to  one  another  "meats"  and  "grace,"— 


DIVERS  AND  STRANGE  DOCTRINES.  355 

Ceremonialism  and  the  Gospel — Ritualism  and  the  free  love 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  then  he  lays  down  the  great 
principle  that  it  is  by  "  grace,"  and  "  not  meats,"  that  the  heart 
must  be  established. 

Now  "  establishment  of  heart "  is  one  of  the  great  wants  of 
many  professing  Christians.  Specially  is  it  longed  after  by 
those  whose  knowledge  is  imperfect,  and  whose  conscience  is 
half  enlightened.  Such  persons  often  feel  in  themselves  much 
indwelling  sin,  and  at  the  same  time  see  very  indistinctly 
God's  remedy  and  Christ's  fulness.  Their  faith  is  feeble, 
their  hope  dim,  and  their  consolations  small.  They  want  to 
realize  more  sensible  comfort.  They  fancy  they  ought  to  feel 
more  and  see  more.  They  are  not  at  ease.  They  cannot 
attain  to  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  Whither  shall  they 
turn  1  What  shall  set  their  consciences  at  rest  ?  Then  comes 
the  enemy  of  souls,  and  suggests  some  short-cut  road  to  estab 
lishment.  He  hints  at  the  value  of  some  addition  to  the  simple 
plan  of  the  Gospel,  some  man-made  device,  some  exaggeration 
of  a  truth,  some  flesh-satisfying  invention,  some  improvement 
on  the  old  path,  and  whispers,  "  Only  use  this,  and  you  shall 
be  established."  Plausible  offers  flow  in  at  the  same  time  from 
every  quarter,  like  quack  medicines.  Each  has  its  own  patrons 
and  advocates.  On  every  side  the  poor  unstable  soul  hears 
invitations  to  move  in  some  particular  direction,  and  then  shall 
come  perfect  establishment. 

"  Come  to  us,"  says  the  Roman  Catholic.  "  Join  the  Catholic 
Church,  the  Church  on  the  Rock,  the  one,  true,  holy  Church ;  the 
Church  that  cannot  err.  Come  to  her  bosom,  and  repose  your  soul 
on  her  protection.  Come  to  us,  and  you  will  find  establishment." 

"Come  to  us,"  says  the  extreme  Ritualist.  "You  need 
higher  and  fuller  views  of  the  priesthood  and  the  sacraments, 
of  the  Real  Presence  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  of  the  soothing 
influence  of  daily  service,  daily  masses,  auricular  confession,  and 
priestly  absolution.  Come  and  take  up  sound  Church  views, 
and  you  will  find  establishment." 

"Come  to  us,"  says  the  violent  Libcrationist.  "Cast  off  the 
trammels  and  fetters  of  established  Churches.  Come  out  from 
all  alliance  with  the  State.  Enjoy  religious  liberty.  Throw  away 
forms  and  Prayer-books.  Use  our  shibboleth.  Join  our  party. 
Cast  in  your  lot  with  us,  and  you  will  s^on  be  established." 


356  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

"  Come  to  us,"  say  the  Plymouth  Brethren.  "  Shake  off  all 
the  bondage  of  creeds  and  Churches  and  systems.  We  will 
soon  show  you  higher,  deeper,  more  exalting,  more  enlightened 
views  of  truth.  Join  the  Brethren,  and  you  will  soon  be 
established." 

"Come  to  us,"  says  the  Kationalist.  "Lay  aside  the  old 
worn-out  clothes  of  effete  schemes  of  Christianity.  Give  your 
reason  free  scope  and  play.  Begin  a  freer  mode  of  handling 
Scripture.  Be  no  more  a  slave  to  an  ancient  old-world  book. 
Break  your  chains,  and  you  shall  be  established." 

Every  experienced  Christian  knows  well  that  such  appeals 
are  constantly  made  to  unsettled  minds  in  the  present  day. 
Who  has  not  seen  that,  when  boldly  and  confidently  made,  they 
produce  a  painful  effect  on  some  people  ?  Who  has  not  observed 
that  they  often  beguile  unstable  souls,  and  lead  them  into 
misery  for  years  1 

"  What  saith  the  Scripture  ? "  This  is  the  only  sure  guide. 
Hear  what  St.  Paul  says.  Heart  establishment  is  not  to  be 
obtained  by  joining  this  party  or  that.  It  comes  "by  grace, 
and  not  by  meats."  Other  things  have  a  "show  of  wisdom," 
perhaps,  and  give  a  temporary  satisfaction  "to  the  flesh." 
(Col.  ii.  23.)  But  they  have  no  healing  power  about  them 
in  reality,  and  leave  the  unhappy  man  who  trusts  them  nothing 
bettered,  but  rather  worse. 

A  clearer  knowledge  of  the  Divine  scheme  of  grace,  its  eternal 
purposes,  its  application  to  man  by  Christ's  redeeming  work,— 
a  firmer  grasp  of  the  doctrine  of  grace,  of  God's  free  love  in 
Christ,  of  Christ's  full  and  complete  satisfaction  for  sin,  of 
justification  by  simple  faith, — a  more  intimate  acquaintance 
with  Christ  the  Giver  and  Fountain  of  grace,  His  offices,  His 
sympathy,  His  power, — a  more  thorough  experience  of  the 
inward  work  of  grace  in  the  heart, — this,  this,  this  is  the  grand 
secret  of  heart-establishment.  This  is  the  old  path  of  peace. 
This  is  the  true  panacea  for  restless  consciences.  It  may  seem 
at  first  too  simple,  too  easy,  too  cheap,  too  commonplace,  too 
plain.  But  all  the  wisdom  of  man  will  never  show  the  heavy- 
laden  a  better  road  to  heart-rest.  Secret  pride  and  self- 
righteousness,  I  fear,  are  too  often  the  reason  why  this  good 
old  road  is  not  used. 

I  believe  there  never  was  a  time  when  it  was  more  needful 


DIVERS  AND  STRANGE  DOCTRINES.  357 

to  uphold  the  old  Apostolic  prescription  than  it  is  in  the  present 
day.  Never  were  there  so  many  unestahlishecl  and  unsettled 
Christians  wandering  about,  and  tossed  to  and  fro,  from  want 
of  knowledge.  Never  was  it  so  important  for  faithful  ministers 
to  set  the  trumpet  to  their  mouths  and  proclaim  everywhere, 
"  Grace,  grace,  grace,  not  meats,  establishes  the  heart." 

From  the  days  of  the  Apostles  there  have  never  been  wanting 
quack  spiritual  doctors,  who  have  professed  to  heal  the  wounds 
of  conscience  with  man-made  remedies.  In  our  own  beloved 
Church  there  have  always  been  some  who  have  in  heart  turned 
back  to  Egypt,  and,  not  content  with  the  simplicity  of  our 
worship,  have  hankered  after  the  ceremonial  fleshpots  of  the 
Church  of  Kome.  Laud,  of  unhappy  memory,  did  a  little  in 
this  way ;  but  his  doings  were  nothing  compared  to  those  of 
some  clergymen  in  the  present  day.  To  hear  the  sacraments 
incessantly  exalted,  and  preaching  cried  down, — to  see  the 
Lord's  Supper  turned  into  an  idol  under  the  specious  pretext  of 
making  it  more  honourable, — to  find  plain  Prayer-book  worship 
overlaid  with  so  many  new-fangled  ornaments  and  ceremonies 
that  its  essentials  are  quite  buried, — how  common  is  all  this ! 
These  things  were  once  a  pestilence  that  walked  in  darkness. 
They  are  now  a  destruction  that  wastes  in  noonday.  They  are 
the  joy  of  our  enemies,  the  sorrow  of  the  Church's  best  children, 
the  damage  of  English  Christianity,  the  plague  of  our  times. 
And  to  what  may  they  all  be  traced  ?  To  neglect  or  forgetful- 
ness  of  St.  Paul's  simple  prescription:  ''Grace,  and  not  meats, 
establishes  the  heart." 

Let  us  take  heed  that  in  our  own  personal  religion,  grace  is 
alL  Let  us  have  clear  systematic  views  of  the  Gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God.  Nothing  else  will  do  good  in  the  hour  of  sick 
ness,  in  the  day  of  trial,  on  the  bed  of  death,  and  in  the 
swellings  of  Jordan.  Christ  dwelling  in  our  hearts  by  faith, 
Christ's  free  grace  the  only  foundation  under  the  soles  of  our 
feet, — this  alone  will  give  peace,  Once  let  in  self,  and  forms, 
and  man's  inventions,  as  a  necessary  part  of  our  religion,  and 
we  are  on  a  quicksand.  We  may  be  amused,  excited,  or  kept 
quiet  for  a  time,  like  children  with  toys,  by  a  religion  of 
"meats."  Such  a  religion  has  "a  show  of  wisdom."  But 
unless  our  religion  be  one  in  which  "grace"  is  all,  we  shall 
never  feel  established. 


358  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

III.  In  the  last  place,  I  proceed  to  examine  the  instructive 
fact  which  St.  Paul  records.  He  says,  "  Meats  have  not  profited 
them  that  have  been  occupied  therein." 

We  have  no  means  of  knowing  whether  the  Apostle,  in  using 
this  language,  referred  to  any  particular  Churches  or  individuals. 
Of  course  it  is  possible  that  he  had  in  view  the  Judaizing 
Christians  of  Antioch  and  Galatia, — or  the  Ephesians  of  whom 
he  speaks  to  Timothy  in  his  pastoral  Epistle, — or  the  Colossians 
who  caused  him  so  much  inward  conflict, — or  the  Hebrew 
believers  in  every  Church,  without  exception.  It  seems  to  me 
far  more  probable,  however,  that  he  had  no  particular  Church 
or  Churches  in  view.  I  rather  think  that  he  makes  a  broad, 
general,  sweeping  statement  about  all  who  in  any  place  had 
exalted  ceremonial  at  the  expense  of  the  doctrines  of  "grace." 
And  he  makes  a  wide  declaration  about  them  all.  They  have 
got  no  good  from  their  favourite  notions.  They  have  not  been 
more  inwardly  happy,  more  outwardly  holy,  or  more  generally 
useful.  Their  religion  has  been  most  unprofitable  to  them. 
Man-made  alterations  of  God's  precious  medicine  for  sinners, — 
man-made  additions  to  Christ's  glorious  Gospel,  —  however 
speciously  defended  and  plausibly  supported,  do  no  real  good 
to  those  that  adopt  them.  They  confer  no  increased  inward 
comfort ;  they  bring  no  growth  of  real  holiness ;  they  give  no 
enlarged  usefulness  to  the  Church  and  the  world.  Calmly, 
quietly,  and  mildly,  but  firmly,  decidedly,  and  unflinchingly, 
the  assertion  is  made,  "  Meats  have  not  profited  them  that  have 
been  occupied  therein." 

The  whole  stream  of  Church  history  abundantly  confirms  the 
truth  of  the  Apostle's  position.  Who  has  not  heard  of  the 
hermits  and  ascetics  of  the  early  centuries  ?  Who  has  not  heard 
of  the  monks  and  nuns  and  recluses  of  the  Romish  Church  in 
the  middle  ages  ?  Who  has  not  heard  of  the  burning  zeal,  the 
devoted  self-denial,  of  Romanists  like  Xavier  and  Ignatius 
Loyola?  The  earnestness,  the  fervour,  the  self-sacrifice  of  all 
these  classes,  are  matters  beyond  dispute.  But  none  who  read 
carefully  and  intelligently  the  records  of  their  lives,  yea,  some 
of  the  best  of  them,  can  fail  to  see  that  they  had  no  solid  peace 
or  inward  rest  of  soul.  Their  very  feverish  restlessness  is 
enough  to  show  that  their  consciences  were  not  at  ease.  None 
can  fail  to  see  that,  with  all  their  furious  zeal  and  self-denial, 


DIVERS  AND  STRANGE  DOCTRINES.  359 

they  never  did  much  good  to  the  world.  They  gathered  round 
themselves  admiring  partisans.  They  left  a  high  reputation  for 
self-denial  and  sincerity.  They  made  men  wonder  at  them 
while  they  lived,  and  sometimes  canonize  them  when  they  died. 
But  they  did  nothing  to  convert  souls.  And  what  is  the  reason 
of  this  1  They  attached  an  overweening  importance  to  man-made 
ritual  and  ceremonial,  and  made  less  than  they  ought  to  have 
done  of  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  Their  principle  was 
to  make  much  of  "  meats,"  and  little  of  "  grace."  Hence  they 
verified  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  "  Meats  do  not  profit  them  that 
are  occupied  therein." 

The  very  history  of  our  own  times  bears  a  striking  testimony 
to  the  truth  of  St.  Paul's  assertion.  In  the  last  twenty-five 
years  some  scores  of  clergymen  have  seceded  from  the  Church 
of  England,  and  joined  the  Church  of  Rome.  They  wanted 
more  of  what  they  called  Catholic  doctrine  and  Catholic 
ceremonial.  They  honestly  acted  up  to  their  principles,  and 
went  over  to  Rome.  They  were  not  all  weak,  and  illiterate, 
and  second-rate,  and  inferior  men ;  several  of  them  were  men  of 
commanding  talents,  whose  gifts  would  have  won  for  them  a 
high  position  in  any  profession.  Yet  what  have  they  gained 
by  the  step  they  have  taken "?  What  profit  have  they  found  in 
leaving  " grace "  for  "meats,"  in  exchanging  Protestantism  for 
Catholicism'?  Have  they  attained  a  higher  standard  of  holi 
ness  1  Have  they  procured  for  themselves  a  greater  degree  of 
usefulness? — Let  one  of  themselves  supply  an  answer.  Mr. 
Ffoulkes,  a  leading  man  in  the  party,  within  the  last  few  years 
has  openly  declared  that  the  preaching  of  some  of  his  fellow 
"  perverts  "  is  not  so  powerful  as  it  was  when  they  were  English 
Churchmen,  and  that  the  highest  degree  of  holy  living  he  has 
ever  seen  is  not  within  the  pale  of  Rome,  but  in  the  quiet 
parsonages  and  unpretending  family-life  of  godly  English  clergy 
men  !  Intentionally  or  not  intentionally,  wittingly  or  un 
wittingly,  meaning  it  or  not  meaning  it,  nothing  can  be  more 
striking  than  the  testimony  Mr.  Ffoulkes  bears  to  the  truth  of 
the  Apostle's  assertion  :  "Meats  do  not  profit "  even  those  who 
make  much  ado  about  them.  The  religious  system  which 
exalts  ceremonial  and  man-made  ritual  does  no  real  good  to 
its  adherents,  compared  to  the  simple  old  Gospel  of  the  grace 
of  God. 


360  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

Let  us  turn  now,  for  a  few  moments,  to  the  other  side  of  the 
picture,  and  see  what  "grace"  has  done.  Let  us  hear  how 
profitable  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  have  proved  to  those  who 
have  clung  firmly  to  them,  and  have  not  tried  to  mend  and 
improve  and  patch  them  up  by  adding,  as  essentials,  the 
"  meats  "  of  man-made  ceremonial. 

It  was  "  grace,  and  not  meats,"  that  made  Martin  Luther  do 
the  work  that  he  did  in  the  world.  The  key  to  all  his  success 
was  his  constant  declaration  of  justification  by  faith,  without 
the  deeds  of  the  law.  This  was  the  truth  which  enabled  him 
to  break  the  chains  of  Rome,  and  let  light  into  Europe. 

It  was  "  grace,  and  not  meats,"  that  made  our  English 
martyrs,  Latimer  and  Hooper,  exercise  so  mighty  an  influence 
in  life,  and  shine  so  brightly  in  death.  They  saw  clearly,  and 
taught  plainly,  the  true  priesthood  of  Christ,  and  salvation  only 
by  grace.  They  honoured  God's  grace,  and  God  put  honour  on 
them. 

It  was  "grace,  and  not  meats,"  that  made  Eomaine  and 
Venn,  and  their  companions,  turn  the  world  upside  down  in 
England,  one  hundred  years  ago.  In  themselves  they  were  not 
men  of  extraordinary  learning  or  intellectual  power.  But  they 
revived  and  brought  out  again  the  real  pure  doctrines  of  grace. 

It  was  "  grace,  and  not  meats,"  that  made  Simeon  and  Bishop 
Daniel  Wilson  and  Bickersteth  such  striking  instruments  of 
usefulness  in  the  first  half  of  the  present  century.  God's  free 
grace  was  the  great  truth  on  which  they  relied,  and  continually 
brought  forward.  For  so  doing  God  put  honour  on  them. 
They  made  much  of  God's  grace,  and  the  God  of  grace  made 
much  of  them. 

The  list  of  ministerial  biographies  tells  a  striking  tale.  Who 
are  ^  those  who  have  shaken  the  world,  and  left  their  mark  on 
their  generation,  and  aroused  consciences,  and  converted  sinners, 
and  edified  saints  1  Not  those  who  have  made  asceticism,  and 
ceremonials,  and  sacraments,  and  services,  and  ordinances  the 
main  thing ;  but  those  who  have  made  most  of  God's  free  grace  ! 
In  a  day  of  strife,  and  controversy,  and  doubt,  and  perplexity, 
men  forget  this.  Facts  are  stubborn  things.  Let  us  look 
calmly  at  them,  and  be  not  moved  by  those  who  tell  us  that 
daily  services,  frequent  communions,  processions,  incense,  bow 
ings,  crossings,  confessions,  absolutions,  and  the  like,  are  the 


DIVERS  AND  STRANGE  DOCTRINES.  361 

secret  of  a  prosperous  Christianity.  Let  us  look  at  plain  facts. 
Facts  in  old  history,  and  facts  in  modern  days,  facts  in  every 
part  of  England,  support  the  assertion  of  St.  Paul.  The 
religion  of  "meats  "does  "not  profit  those  that  are  occupied 
therein."  It  is  the  religion  of  grace  that  brings  inward  peace, 
outward  holiness,  and  general  usefulness. 

Let  me  wind  up  this  paper  with  a  few  words  of  practical 
application.  We  are  living  in  an  age  of  peculiar  religious 
danger.  I  am  quite  sure  that  the  advice  I  am  going  to  offer 
deserves  serious  attention. 

(1)  In  the  first  place,  let  us  not  be  surprised  at  the  rise  and 
progress   of  false  doctrine.     It   is  a  thing  as  old  as  the  old 
Apostles.     It  began  before    they  died.     They   predicted   that 
there  would  be  plenty  of  it  before  the  end  of  the  world.     It  is 
wisely  ordered  of  God  for  the  testing  of  our  grace,  and  to  prove 
who   has   real   faith.     If   there  were   no  such  thing  as  false 
doctrine  or  heresy  upon  earth,  I  should  begin  to  think  the  Bible 
was  not  true. 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  let  us  make  up  our  minds  to  resist 
false  doctrine,  and  not  to  be  carried  away  by  fashion  and  bad 
example.     Let  us  not  flinch  because  all  around  us,  high  and 
low,  rich  and  poor,  are  swept  away,  like  geese  in  a  flood,  before 
a  torrent  of  semi-Popery.    Let  us  be  firm  and  stand  our  ground. 

Let  us  resist  false  doctrine,  and  contend  earnestly  for  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  Let  us  not  be  ashamed  of 
showing  our  colours  and  standing  out  for  New  Testament  truth. 
Let  us  not  be  stopped  by  the  cuckoo  cry  of  "controversy."  The 
thief  likes  dogs  that  do  not  bark,  and  watchmen  that  give  no 
alarm.  The  devil  is  a  thief  and  a  robber.  If  we  hold  our 
peace,  and  do  not  resist  false  doctrine,  we  please  him  and 
displease  God. 

(3)  In  the  next  place,  let  us  try  to  preserve  the  Old  Protest 
ant  principles  of  the  Church  of  England,   and  to  hand  them 
down  uninjured  to  our  children's  children.     Let  us  not  listen 
to  those  faint-hearted  Churchmen  who  would  have  us  forsake 
the  ship,  and  desert  the  Church  of  England  in  her  time  of  need. 

The  Church  of  England  is  worth  fighting  for.  She  has  done 
good  service  in  days  gone  by,  and  she  may  yet  do  more,  if  we 
can  keep  her  free  from  Popery  and  infidelity.  Once  re-admit 


362  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

and  sanction  the  Popish  mass  and  auricular  confession,  and  the 
Church  of  England  will  be  ruined.  Then  let  us  fight  hard  for 
the  Church  of  England  being  kept  a  Protestant  Church.  Let 
us  read  our  Thirty-nine  Articles  every  year  with  attention,  and 
learn  from  these  Articles  what  are  real  Church  principles.  Let 
us  arm  our  memories  with  these  Articles,  and  be  able  to  quote 
them.  Before  the  edge  and  point  of  these  Articles,  fairly 
interpreted,  ultra-Ritualists  and  ultra-Rationalists  can  never 
stand. 

(4)  In  the  last  place,  let  us  make  sure  work  of  our  own  per 
sonal  salvation.  Let  us  seek  to  know  and  feel  that  we  ourselves 
are  "saved." 

The  day  of  controversy  is  always  a  day  of  spiritual  peril. 
Men  are  apt  to  confound  orthodoxy  with  conversion,  and  to 
fancy  that  they  must  go  to  heaven  if  they  know  how  to  answer 
Papists.  Yet  mere  earnestness  without  knowledge,  and  mere 
head-knowledge  of  Protestantism,  alike  save  none.  Let  us 
never  forget  this. 

Let  us  not  rest  till  we  feel  the  blood  of  Christ  sprinkled  on 
our  consciences,  and  have  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  within  us 
that  we  are  born  again.  This  is  reality.  This  is  true  religion. 
This  will  last.  This  will  never  fail  us.  It  is  the  possession  of 
grace  in  the  heart,  and  not  the  intellectual  knowledge  of  it,  that 
profits  and  saves  the  soul. 


XVII. 
THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS. 

"But  when  Peter  ivas  come  to  Antioch,  I  withstood  him  to  the  face, 

because  he  was  to  be  blamed. 
"For  before  that  certain  came  from  James,  he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles : 

but  ivhen  they  were  come,  he  withdrew  and  separated  himself,  fearing 

them  which  were  of  the  circumcision. 
"And  the  other  Jews  dissembled   likewise    with    him;    insomuch  that 

Barnabas  also  was  carried  away  with  their  dissimulation. 
"But  when  I  saw  that  they  walked  not  uprightly  according  to  the  truth  of 

the  Gospel,  I  said  unto  Peter  before  them  all,  If  thou,  being  a  Jew, 

livest  after  the  manner  of  Gentiles,  and  not  as  do  the  Jews,  why  com- 

pellest  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  do  the  Jews  ? 
"  We  who  are  Jews  by  nature,  and  not  sinners  of  the  Gentiles, 
"Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  the 

faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  ive  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we 

might  be  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the 

law:  for  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  Jlesh  be  justified. "- 

GALATIANSli.  11-16. 

HAVE  we  ever  considered  what  the  Apostle  Peter  once  did  at 
Antioch  1  It  is  a  question  that  deserves  serious  consideration. 

What  the  Apostle  Peter  did  at  Home  we  are  often  told, 
although  we  have  hardly  a  jot  of  authentic  information  about 
it.  Roman  Catholic  writers  furnish  us  with  many  stories  about 
this.  Legends,  traditions,  and  fables  abound  on  the  subject. 
But  unhappily  for  these  writers,  Scripture  is  utterly  silent  upon 
the  point.  There  is  nothing  in  Scripture  to  show  that  the 
Apostle  Peter  ever  was  at  Rome  at  all ! 

But  what  did  the  Apostle  Peter  do  at  Antioch?  This  is  the 
point  to  which  I  want  to  direct  attention.  This  is  the  subject 
of  the  passage  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  which  heads 
this  paper.  On  this  point,  at  any  rate,  the  Scripture  speaks 
clearly  and  unmistakably. 

363 


364  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

The  six  versos  of  the  passage  before  us  are  striking  on  many 
accounts.  They  are  striking,  if  we  consider  the  event  which 
they  describe :  here  is  one  Apostle  rebuking  another  ! — They 
are  striking,  when  we  consider  who  the  two  men  are  :  Paul,  the 
younger,  rebukes  Peter,  the  elder  ! — They  are  striking,  when  we 
remark  the  occasion :  this  was  no  glaring  fault,  no  flagrant  sin, 
at  first  sight,  that  Peter  had  committed  !  Yet  the  Apostle  Paul 
says,  "  I  withstood  him  to  the  face,  because  he  was  to  be  blamed." 
He  does  more  than  this : — he  reproves  Peter  publicly  for  his 
error  before  all  the  Church  at  Antioch.  He  goes  even  further  : 
— he  writes  an  account  of  the  matter,  which  is  now  read  in  two 
hundred  languages  all  over  the  world. 

It  is  my  firm  conviction  that  the  Holy  Ghost  means  us  to 
take  particular  notice  of  this  passage  of  Scripture.  If  Chris 
tianity  had  been  an  invention  of  man,  these  things  would  never 
have  been  recorded.  An  impostor,  like  Mahomet,  would  have 
hushed  up  the  difference  between  two  Apostles.  The  Spirit  of 
truth  has  caused  these  verses  to  be  written  for  our  learning,  and 
we  shall  do  well  to  take  heed  to  their  contents. 

There  are  three  great  lessons  from  Antioch,  which  I  think  we 
ought  to  learn  from  this  passage. 

I.  The  first  lesson  is,  that  great  ministers  may  make  great 

mistakes. 
II.  The  second  is,  that  to  keep  the  truth  of  Christ  in  Hi* 

CI lurch  is  even  more  important  than  to  keep  peace. 
III.  The  third  is,  that  there  is  no  doctrine  about  'which  ire 
ought  to  be  so  jealous  as  justification  by  faith  without 
the  deeds  of  the  law. 

I.  The  first  great  lesson  we  learn  from  Antioch  is,  that 
great  ministers  may  make  great  mistakes. 

What  clearer  proof  can  we  have  than  that  which  is  set  before 
us  in  this  place ;  Peter,  without  doubt,  was  one  of  the  greatest 
in  the  company  of  the  Apostles.  He  was  an  old  disciple.  Ho 
was  a  disciple  who  had  had  peculiar  advantages  and  privileges. 
He  had  been  a  constant  companion  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  had 
heard  the  Lord  preach,  seen  the  Lord  work  miracles,  enjoyed 
the  benefit  of  the  Lord's  private  teaching,  been  numbered  among 
the  Lord's  intimate  friends,  and  gone  out  and  come  in  with 
Him  all  the  time  He  ministered  upon  earth.  He  was  the 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  365 

Apostle  to  whom  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  were 
given,  and  by  whose  hand  those  keys  were  first  used.  He  was 
the  first  who  opened  the  door  of  faith  to  the  Jews,  by  preaching 
to  them  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  He  was  the  first  who  opened 
the  door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles,  by  going  to  the  house  of 
Cornelius,  and  receiving  him  into  the  Church.  He  was  the 
first  to  rise  up  in  the  Council  of  the  fifteenth  of  Acts,  and  say, 
"Why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the 
disciples,  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  bear  ? " 
And  yet  here  this  very  Peter,  this  same  Apostle,  plainly  falls 
into  a  great  mistake.  The  Apostle  Paul  tells  us,  "  I  withstood 
him  to  the  face."  He  tells  us  "that  he  was  to  be  blamed." 
He  says  "he  feared  them  of  the  circumcision."  He  says  of 
him  and  his  companions,  that  "  they  walked  not  uprightly 
according  to  the  truth  of  the  Gospel."  He  speaks  of  their 
"  dissimulation."  He  tells  us  that  by  this  dissimulation  even 
Barnabas,  his  old  companion  in  missionary  labours,  "was  carried 
away." 

What  a  striking  fact  this  is.  This  is  Simon  Peter !  This  is 
the  third  great  error  of  his,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  thought 
fit  to  record  !  Once  we  find  him  trying  to  keep  back  our  Lord, 
us  far  as  he  could,  from  the  great  work  of  the  cross,  and 
severely  rebuked.  Then  we  find  him  denying  the  Lord  three 
times,  and  with  an  oath.  Here  again  we  find  him  endangering 
the  leading  truth  of  Christ's  Gospel.  Surely  we  may  say, 
"Lord,  what  is  man?"  The  Church  of  Rome  boasts  that  the 
Apostle  Peter  is  her  founder  and  first  Bishop.  Be  it  so  :  grant 
it  for  a  moment.  Let  us  only  remember,  that  of  all  the 
Apostles  there  is  not  one,  excepting,  of  course,  Judas  Iscariot, 
of  whom  we  have  so  many  proofs  that  he  was  a  fallible  man. 
Upon  her  own  showing,  the  Church  of  Rome  was  founded  by 
the  most  fallible  of  the  Apostles.* 

*  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  shifts  to  which  some  writers  have  been  reduced 
in  order  to  explain  away  the  plain  meaning  of  the  verses  which  head  this 
paper.  Some  have  maintained  that  Paul  did  not  really  rebuke  Peter,  but 
only  feignedly,  for  show  and  appearance  sake  !  Others  have  maintained  that 
it  was  not  Peter  the  Apostle  who  was  rebuked,  but  another  Peter,  one  of  the 
seventy  !  Such  interpretations  need  no  remark.  They  are  simply  absurd. 
The  truth  is  that  the  plain  honest  meaning  of  the  verses  strikes  a  heavy  blow 
at  the  favourite  lloman  Catholic  doctrine  of  the  primacy  and  superiority  of 
Peter  over  the  rest  of  the  Apostles. 


366  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

But  it  is  all  meant  to  teach  us  that  even  the  Apostles  them 
selves,  when  not  writing  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  were  at  times  liable  to  err.  It  is  meant  to  teach  us  that 
the  best  men  are  weak  and  fallible  so  long  as  they  are  in  the 
body.  Unless  the  grace  of  God  holds  them  up,  any  one  of 
them  may  go  astray  at  any  time.  It  is  very  humbling,  but  it 
is  very  true.  True  Christians  are  converted,  justified,  and 
sanctified.  They  are  living  members  of  Christ,  beloved  children 
of  God,  and  heirs  of  eternal  life.  They  are  elect,  chosen,  called, 
and  kept  unto  salvation.  They  have  the  Spirit.  But  they  are 
not  infallible. 

Will  not  rank  and  dignity  confer  infallibility  ?  Xo :  they 
will  not !  It  matters  nothing  what  a  man  is  called.  He  may 
be  a  Czar,  an  Emperor,  a  King,  a  Prince.  He  may  be  a  Pope 
or  a  Cardinal,  an  Archbishop  or  a  Bishop,  a  Dean  or  an  Arch 
deacon,  a  Priest  or  a  Deacon.  He  is  still  a  fallible  man. 
Neither  the  crown,  nor  the  diadem,  nor  the  anointing  oil,  nor 
the  mitre,  nor  the  imposition  of  hands,  can  prevent  a  man 
making  mistakes. 

Will  not  numbers  confer  infallibility  1  Xo  :  they  will  not ! 
You  may  gather  together  princes  by  the  score,  and  bishops  by 
the  hundred ;  but,  when  gathered  together,  they  are  still  liable 
to  err.  You  may  call  them  a  council,  or  a  synod,  or  an  assembly, 
or  a  conference,  or  what  you  please.  It  matters  nothing. 
Their  conclusions  are  still  the  conclusions  of  fallible  mm.  Their 
collective  wisdom  is  still  capable  of  making  enormous  mistakes. 
Well  says  the  Twenty-first  Article  of  the  Church  of  England, 
"  General  councils  may  err,  and  sometimes  have  erred,  even  in 
things  pertaining  unto  God." 

The  example  of  the  Apostle  Peter  at  Antioch  is  one  that  does 
not  stand  alone.  It  is  only  a  parallel  of  many  a  case  that  we 
find  written  for  our  learning  in  Holy  Scripture.  Do  we  not 
remember  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful,  following  the 
advice  of  Sarah,  and  taking  Hagar  for  a  wife?  Do  we  not 
remember  Aaron,  the  first  high  priest,  listening  to  the  children 
of  Israel,  and  making  a  golden  calf  ?  Do  we  not  remember 
Nathan  the  prophet  telling  David  to  build  a  temple  ?  Do  we 
not  remember  Solomon,  the  wisest  of  men,  allowing  his  wives 
to  build  their  high  places  1  Do  we  not  remember  Asa,  the  good 
king  of  Judah,  seeking  not  to  the  Lord,  but  to  the  physicians  ? 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  367 

Do  we  not  remember  Jehoshaphat,  the  good  king,  going  down  to 
help  wicked  Ahab  ?  Do  we  not  remember  Hezekiah,  the  good 
king,  receiving  the  ambassadors  of  Babylon?  Do  we  not 
remember  Josiah,  the  last  of  Judah's  good  kings,  going  forth  to 
fight  with  Pharaoh?  Do  we  not  remember  James  and  John 
wanting  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  ?  These  things  deserve 
to  be  remembered.  They  were  not  written  without  cause.  They 
cry  aloud,  No  infallibility  1 

And  who  does  not  see,  when  he  reads  the  history  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  repeated  proofs  that  the  best  of  men  can  err  ? 
The  early  fathers  were  zealous  according  to  their  knowledge, 
and  ready  to  die  for  Christ.  But  many  of  them  countenanced 
monkery,  and  nearly  all  sowed  the  seeds  of  many  superstitions. 
— The  Reformers  were  honoured  instruments  in  the  hand  of 
God  for  reviving  the  cause  of  truth  on  earth.  Yet  hardly  one 
of  them  can  be  named  who  did  not  make  some  great  mistake. 
Martin  Luther  held  pertinaciously  the  doctrine  of  consubstan- 
tiation.  Melanchthon  was  often  timid  and  undecided.  Calvin 
permitted  Servetus  to  be  burned.  Cranmer  recanted  and  fell 
away  for  a  time  from  his  first  faith.  Jewel  subscribed 
to  Popish  doctrines  for  fear  of  death.  Hooper  disturbed  the 
Church  of  England  by  over-scrupulosity  about  vestments.  The 
Puritans,  in  after  times,  denounced  toleration  as  Abaddon  and 
Apollyon.  Wesley  and  Toplady,  last  century,  abused  each 
other  in  most  shameful  language.  Irving,  in  our  own  day,  gave 
way  to  the  delusion  of  speaking  in  unknown  tongues.  All 
these  things  speak  with  a  loud  voice.  They  all  lift  up  a  beacon 
to  the  Church  of  Christ.  They  all  say,  "  Cease  ye  from  man  ; " 
— "  Call  no  man  master ; " — "  Call  no  man  father  upon  earth ; " 
— "Let  no  man  glory  in  man;" — "He  that  glorieth,  let  him 
glory  in  the  Lord."  They  all  cry,  No  infallibility  ! 

The  lesson  is  one  that  we  all  need.  We  are  all  naturally 
inclined  to  lean  upon  man  whom  we  can  see,  rather  than  upon 
God  whom  we  cannot  see.  We  naturally  love  to  lean  upon  the 
ministers  of  the  visible  Church,  rather  than  upon  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  great  Shepherd,  and  Bishop,  and  High  Priest, 
who  is  invisible.  We  need  to  be  continually  warned  and  set 
upon  our  guard. 

I  see  this  tendency  to  lean  on  man  everywhere.  I  know  no 
branch  of  the  Protestant  Church  of  Christ  which  does  not 


368  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

require  to  be  cautioned  upon  the  point.  It  is  a  snare,  for 
example,  to  the  English  Episcopalian  to  make  idols  of  Bishop 
Pearson  and  the  "Judicious  Hooker."  It  is  a  snare  to  the 
Scotch  Presbyterian  to  pin  his  faith  on  John  Knox,  the  Cove 
nanters,  and  Dr.  Chalmers.  It  is  a  snare  to  the  Methodists  in 
our  day  to  worship  the  memory  of  John  Wesley.  It  is  a  snare 
to  the  Independent  to  see  no  fault  in  any  opinion  of  Owen  and 
Doddridge.  It  is  a  snare  to  the  Baptist  to  exaggerate  the 
wisdom  of  Gill,  and  Fuller,  and  Robert  Hall.  All  these  are 
snares,  and  into  these  snares  how  many  fall ! 

We  all  naturally  love  to  have  a  Pope  of  our  own.  We  are 
far  too  ready  to  think,  that  because  some  great  minister  or  some 
learned  man  says  a  thing, — or  because  our  own  minister,  whom  we 
love,  says  a  thing, — it  must  be  right,  without  examining  whether 
it  is  in  Scripture  or  not.  Most  men  dislike  the  trouble  of 
thinking  for  themselves.  They  like  following  a  leader.  They 
are  like  sheep, — when  one  goes  over  the  gap  all  the  rest 
follow.  Here  at  Antioch  even  Barnabas  was  carried  away. 
We  can  well  fancy  that  good  man  saying,  "  An  old  Apostle,  like 
Peter,  surely  cannot  be  wrong.  Following  him,  I  cannot  err." 

And  now  let  us  see  what  practical  lessons  we  may  learn  from 
this  part  of  our  subject. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  let  us  learn  not  to  put  implicit  confidence 
in  any  man's  opinion,  merely  because  he  lived  man]]  hundred 
years  ago.     Peter  was  a  man  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Christ 
Himself,  and  yet  he  could  err. 

There  are  many  who  talk  much  in  the  present  day  about 
"  the  voice  of  the  primitive  Church."  They  would  have  us 
believe  that  those  who  lived  nearest  the  time  of  the  Apostles, 
must  of  course  know  more  about  truth  than  we  can.  There  is 
no  foundation  for  any  such  opinion.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  most 
ancient  writers  in  the  Church  of  Christ  are  often  at  variance 
with  one  another.  It  is  a  fact  that  they  often  changed  their 
own  minds,  and  retracted  their  own  former  opinions.  It  is  a 
fact  that  they  often  wrote  foolish  and  weak  things,  and  often 
showed  great  ignorance  in  their  explanations  of  Scripture.  It 
is  vain  to  expect  to  find  them  free  from  mistakes.  Infallibility 
is  not  to  be  found  in  the  early  fathers,  but  in  the  Bible. 

(b)  For  another  thing,  let  us  learn  not  to  put  implicit  con 
fidence  in  any  man's  opinion,  merely  because  of  his  otfice  as  a 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  3G9 

minister.     Peter  was  one  of  the  very  chiefest  Apostles,  and  yet 
he  could  err. 

This  is  a  point  on  which  men  have  continually  gone  astray. 
It  is  the  rock  on  which  the  early  Church  struck.  Men  soon 
took  up  the  saying,  "  Do  nothing  contrary  to  the  mind  of  the 
Bishop  !  "  But  what  are  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons  1  What 
are  the  best  of  ministers  but  men, — dust,  ashes,  and  clay, — men 
of  like  passions  with  ourselves,  men  exposed  to  temptations,  men 
liable  to  weaknesses  and  infirmities  ?  What  saith  the  Scripture, 
"  Who  is  Paul  and  who  is  Apollos,  but  ministers  by  whom  ye 
believed,  even  as  the  Lord  gave  to  every  man'?"  (1  Cor.  iii.  5.) 
Bishops  have  often  driven  the  truth  into  the  wilderness,  and 
decreed  that  to  be  true  which  was  false.  The  greatest  errors  have 
been  begun  by  ministers.  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  the  sons  of 
the  High  Priest,  made  religion  to  be  abhorred  by  the  children 
of  Israel.  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  though  in  the  direct  line  of 
descent  from  Aaron,  crucified  the  Lord.  Arius,  that  great 
heresiarch,  was  a  minister.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that 
ordained  men  cannot  go  wrong.  We  should  follow  them  so  far 
as  they  teach  according  to  the  Bible,  but  no  further.  We 
should  believe  them  so  long  as  they  can  say,  "Thus  it  is 
written," — "  Thus  saith  the  Lord ; "  but  further  than  this  we 
are  not  to  go.  Infallibility  is  not  to  be  found  in  ordained  men, 
but  in  the  Bible. 

(c)  For  another  thing,  let  us  learn  not  to  place  implicit  con 
fidence  in  any  man's  opinion,  merely  because  of  his  learning. 
Peter  was  a  man  who  had  miraculous  gifts,  and  could  speak 
with  tongues,  and  yet  he  could  err. 

This  is  a  point,  again,  on  which  many  go  wrong.  This  is  the 
rock  on  which  men  struck  in  the  middle  ages.  Men  looked  on 
Thomas  Aquinas,  and  Duns  Scotus,  and  Peter  Lombard,  and 
many  of  their  companions,  as  almost  inspired.  They  gave 
epithets  to  some  of  them  in  token  of  their  admiration.  They 
talked  of  "the  irrefragable"  doctor,  "the  seraphic"  doctor, 
"  the  incomparable  "  doctor, — and  seemed  to  think  that  what 
ever  these  doctors  said  must  be  true  !  But  what  is  the  most 
learned  of  men,  if  he  be  not  taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost  1  What 
is  the  most  learned  of  all  divines  but  a  mere  fallible  child  of 
Adam  at  his  very  best  ]  Vast  knowledge  of  books  and  great 
ignorance  of  God's  truth  may  go  side  by  side.  They  have  done 

2  A 


KNOTS  UNTIED. 

so,  they  may  do  so,  and  they  will  do  so,  in  all  times.  I  will 
engage  to  say  that  the  two  volumes  of  Robert  M'Cheyne's 
Memoirs  and  Sermons  have  done  more  positive  good  to  the  souls 
of  men,  than  any  one  folio  that  Origen  or  Cyprian  ever  wrote. 
I  doubt  not  that  the  one  volume  of  Pile/rim's  Progress,  written 
by  a  man  who  knew  hardly  any  book  but  his  Bible,  and  was 
ignorant  of  Greek  and  Latin, — will  prove  in  the  last  day  to 
liave  done  more  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  than  all  the  works 
of  the  schoolmen  put  together.  Learning  is  a  gift  that  ought 
not  to  be  despised.  It  is  an  evil  day  when  books  are  not  valued 
in  the  Church.  But  it  is  amazing  to  observe  how  vast  a  man's 
intellectual  attainments  may  be,  and  yet  how  little  he  may 
know  of  the  grace  of  God.  I  have  no  doubt  the  authorities  of 
Oxford  in  the  last  century  knew  more  of  Hebrew,  Greek,  and 
Latin,  than  Wesley,  Whitefield,  Berridge,  or  Venn.  But  they 
knew  little  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Infallibility  is  not  to  be 
found  among  learned  men,  but  in  the  Bible. 

(d)  For  another  thing,  let  us  take  care  that  we  do  not  place 
implicit  confidence  on  our  own  minister's  opinion,  however  godly 
he  may  be,  Peter  was  a  man  of  mighty  grace,  and  yet  he 
could  err. 

Your  minister  may  be  a  man  of  God  indeed,  and  worthy  of 
all  honour  for  his  preaching  and  practice;  but  do  not  make  a 
Pope  of  him.  Do  not  place  his  word  side  by  side  with  the 
Word  of  God.  Do  not  spoil  him  by  flattery.  Do  not  let  him 
suppose  he  can  make  no  mistakes.  Do  not  lean  your  whole 
weight  on  his  opinion,  or  you  may  find  to  your  cost  that  he 
can  err. 

It  is  written  of  Joash,  King  of  Judah,  that  he  "  did  that 
which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of 
Jehoiada  the  priest."  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  2.)  Jehoiada  died,  and 
then  died  the  religion  of  Joash.  Just  so  your  minister  may  die, 
and  then  your  religion  may  die  too ; — may  change,  and  your 
religion  may  change ; — may  go  away,  and  your  religion  may  go. 
Oh,  be  not  satisfied  with  a  religion  built  upon  man !  Be  not 
content  with  saying,  "I  have  hope,  because  my  own  minister 
has  told  me  such  and  such  things."  Seek  to  be  able  to  say,  "  I 
have  hope,  because  I  find  it  thus  and  thus  written  in  the 
Word  of  God."  If  your  peace  is  to  be  solid,  you  must  go  your 
self  to  the  Fountain  of  all  Truth.  If  your  comforts  are  to  be 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  371 

lasting,  you  must  visit  the  well  of  life  yourself,  and  draw  fresh 
water  for  your  own  soul.  Ministers  may  depart  from  the  faith. 
The  visible  Church  may  be  broken  up.  But  he  who  has  the 
Word  of  God  written  in  his  heart  has  a  foundation  beneath  his 
feet  which  will  never  fail  him.  Honour  your  minister  as  a 
faithful  ambassador  of  Christ.  Esteem  him  very  highly  in  love 
for  his  work's  sake.  But  never  forget  that  infallibility  is  not  to 
be  found  in  godly  ministers,  but  in  the  Bible. 

The  things  I  have  mentioned  are  worth  remembering.  Let 
us  bear  them  in  mind,  and  we  shall  have  learned  one  lesson 
from  Antioch. 

II.  I  now  pass  on  to  the  second  lesson  that  we  learn  from 
Antioch.  That  lesson  is,  that  to  keep  Gospel  truth  in  tltc 
CJiurch  is  of  even  greater  importance  titan  to  keep  peace. 

I  suppose  no  man  knew  better  the  value  of  peace  and  unity 
than  the  Apostle  Paul.  He  was  the  Apostle  who  wrote  to  the 
Corinthians  about  charity.  He  Avas  the  Apostle  who  said,  "  Be 
of  the  same  mind  one  toward  another  ; " — "  Be  at  peace  among 
yourselves ; " — "  Mind  the  same  things  ; " — "  The  servant  of  God 
must  not  strive ; " — "  There  is  one  body  and  there  is  one  Spirit, 
even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling,  one  Lord,  one 
faith,  one  baptism."  He  was  the  Apostle  who  said,  "  I  become 
all  things  to  all  men,  that  by  all  means  I  may  save  some." 
(Rom.  xii.  16  ;  1  Thess.  v.  13  ;  Phil.  iii.  16  ;  Eph.  iv.  5  •  1  Cor. 
ix.  22.)  Yet  see  how  he  acts  here  !  He  withstands  Peter  to 
the  face.  He  publicly  rebukes  him.  He  runs  the  risk  of  all 
the  consequences  that  might  follow.  He  takes  the  chance  of 
everything  that  might  be  said  by  the  enemies  of  the  Church  at 
Antioch.  Above  all,  he  writes  it  down  for  a  perpetual  memorial, 
that  it  never  might  be  forgotten, — that,  wherever  the  Gospel  is 
preached  throughout  the  world,  this  public  rebuke  of  an  erring- 
Apostle  might  be  known  and  read  of  all  men. 

Now,  why  did  he  do  this1?  Because  he  dreaded  false  doctrine, 
— because  he  knew  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole 
lump, — because  he  would  teach  us  that  we  ought  to  contend 
for  the  truth  jealously,  and  to  fear  the  loss  of  truth  more  than 
the  loss  of  peace. 

St.  Paul's  example  is  one  we  shall  do  well  to  remember  in 
the  present  clay.  Many  people  will  put  up  with  anything  in 


372  KNOTS  UNTIED, 

religion,  if  they  may  only  have  a  quiet  life.  They  have  a 
morbid  dread  of  what  they  call  "  controversy."  They  are  filled 
with  a  morbid  fear  of  what  they  style,  in  a  vague  way,  "party 
spirit,"  though  they  /never  define  clearly  what  party  spirit  is. 
They  are  possessed  with  a  morbid  desire  to  keep  the  peace,  and 
make  all  things  smooth  and  pleasant,  even  though  it  be  at  the 
expense  of  truth.  So  long  as  they  have  outward  calm,  smooth 
ness,  stillness,  and  order,  they  seem  content  to  give  up  every 
thing  else.  I  believe  they  would  have  thought  with  Ahab  that 
Elijah  was  a  troubler  of  Israel,  and  would  have  helped  the 
princes  of  Judah  when  they  put  Jeremiah  in  prison,  to  stop  his 
mouth.  I  have  no  doubt  that  many  of  these  men  of  whom  I 
speak,  would  have  thought  that  Paul  at  Antioch  was  a  very 
imprudent  man,  and  that  he  went  too  far ! 

I  believe  this  is  all  wrong.  We  have  no  right  to  expect 
anything  but  the  pure  Gospel  of  Christ,  unmixed  and  un 
adulterated, — the  same  Gospel  that  was  taught  by  the  Apostles, 
— to  do  good  to  the  souls  of  men.  I  believe  that  to  maintain 
this  pure  truth  in  the  Church  men  should  be  ready  to  make  any 
sacrifice,  to  hazard  peace,  to  risk  dissension,  and  run  the  chance 
of  division.  Tliey  should  no  more  tolerate  false  doctrine  than 
they  would  tolerate  sin.  They  should  withstand  any  adding  to 
or  taking  away  from  the  simple  message  of  the  Gospel  of 
Christ. 

For  the  truth's  sake,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  denounced  the 
Pharisees,  though  they  sat  in  Moses'  seat,  and  were  the  appointed 
and  authorized  teachers  of  men.  "  Woe  unto  you,  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  hypocrites,"  He  says,  eight  times  over,  in  the  twenty- 
third  chapter  of  Matthew.  And  who  shall  dare  to  breathe  a 
suspicion  that  our  Lord  was  wrong  ? 

For  the  truth's  sake,  Paul  withstood  and  blamed  Peter, 
though  a  brother.  Where  was  the  use  of  unity  when  pure 
doctrine  was  gone  1  And  who  shall  dare  to  say  he  was 
wrong  1 

For  the  truth's  sake,  Athanasius  stood  out  against  the  world 
to  maintain  the  pure  doctrine  about  the  divinity  of  Christ,  and 
waged  a  controversy  with  the  great  majority  of  the  professing 
Church.  And  who  shall  dare  to  say  he  was  wrong  1 

For  the  truth's  sake,  Luther  broke  the  unity  of  the  Church 
in  which  he  was  born,  denounced  the  Pope  and  all  his  ways, 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  373 

and  laid  the  foundation  of  a  new  teaching.     And  who  shall 
dare  to  say  that  Luther  was  wrong  ? 

For  the  truth's  sake,  Cranmer,  Bidley,  and  Latimer,  the 
English  Reformers,  counselled  Henry  VIII.  and  Edward  VI. 
to  separate  from  Rome,  and  to  risk  the  consequences  of  division. 
And  who  shall  dare  to  say  that  they  were  wrong  1 

For  the  truth's  sake,  Whitefield  and  Wesley,  a  hundred  years 
ago,  denounced  the  mere  barren  moral  preaching  of  the  clergy 
of  their  day,  and  went  out  into  the  highways  and  byways  to 
save  souls,  knowing  well  that  they  would  be  cast  out  from  the 
Church's  communion.  And  who  shall  dare  to  say  that  they 
were  wrong  1 

Yes !  peace  without  truth  is  a  false  peace ;  it  is  the  very 
peace  of  the  devil.  Unity  without  the  Gospel  is  a  worthless 
unity ;  it  is  the  very  unity  of  hell.  Let  us  never  be  ensnared 
by  those  who  speak  kindly  of  it.  Let  us  remember  the  words 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  "  Think  not  that  I  came  to  send 
peace  upon  earth.  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword." 
(Matt.  x.  34.)  Let  us  remember  the  praise  He  gives  to  one  of 
the  Churches  in  the  Revelation :  "  Thou  canst  not  bear  them 
which  are  evil.  Thou  hast  tried  them  which  say  they  are 
Apostles,  and  are  not,  and  hast  found  them  liars."  (Rev.  ii.  2.) 
Let  us  remember  the  blame  He  casts  upon  another:  "Thou 
sufferest  that  woman  Jezebel  to  teach."  (Rev.  ii.  20.)  Never 
let  us  be  guilty  of  sacrificing  any  portion  of  truth  upon  the 
altar  of  peace.  Let  us  rather  be  like  the  Jews,  who,  if  they 
found  any  manuscript  copy  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures 
incorrect  in  a  single  letter,  burned  the  whole  copy,  rather  than 
run  the  risk  of  losing  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Let  us  be  content  with  nothing  short  of  the  whole  Gospel  of 
Christ. 

In  what  way  are  we  to  make  practical  use  of  the  general 
principles  which  I  have  just  laid  down  1  I  will  give  my  readers 
one  simple  piece  of  advice.  I  believe  it  is  advice  which  deserves 
serious  consideration. 

I  warn,  then,  every  one  who  loves  his  soul,  to  be  very  jealous  as 
to  the  preaching  he  regularly  hears,  and  the  place  of  worship  he 
regularly  attends.  He  who  deliberately  settles  down  under  any 
ministry  which  is  positively  unsound,  is  a  very  unwise  man.  I 
will  never  hesitate  to  speak  my  mind  on  this  point.  I  know 


3*74  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

well  that  many  think  it  a  shocking  thing  for  a  man  to  forsake 
his  parish  church.  I  cannot  see  with  the  eyes  of  such  people. 
I  draw  a  wide  distinction  between  teaching  which  is  defective 
and  teaching  which  is  thoroughly  false, — between  teaching 
which  errs  on  the  negative  side  and  teaching  which  is  positively 
unscriptural.  But  I  do  believe,  if  false  doctrine  is  unmistakably 
preached  in  a  parish  church,  a  parishioner  who  loves  his  soul  is 
quite  right  in  not  going  to  that  parish  church.  To  hear  un 
scriptural  teaching  fifty-two  Sundays  in  every  year  is  a  serious 
thing.  It  is  a  continual  dropping  of  slow  poison  into  the  mind. 
I  think  it  almost  impossible  for  a  man  wilfully  to  submit  him 
self  to  it,  and  not  take  harm.  I  see  in  the  iN"ew  Testament  we 
are  plainly  told  to  "  prove  all  things,"  and  "  hold  fast  that  which 
is  good."  (1  Thess.  v.  21.)  I  see  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs 
that  we  are  commanded  to  "  cease  to  hear  the  instruction  which 
causeth  to  err  from  the  paths  of  knowledge."  (Prov.  xix.  27.) 
If  these  words  do  not  justify  a  man  in  ceasing  to  worship  at  a 
church,  if  positively  false  doctrine  is  preached  in  it,  I  know  not 
what  words  can. 

Does  any  one  mean  to  tell  us  that  to  attend  the  parish  church 
is  absolutely  needful  to  an  Englishman's  salvation  1  If  there  is 
such  an  one,  let  him  speak  out,  and  give  us  his  name. — Does 
any  one  mean  to  tell  us  that  going  to  the  parish  church  will 
save  any  man's  soul,  if  he  dies  unconverted  and  ignorant  of 
Christ  1  If  there  is  such  an  one,  let  him  speak  out,  and  give  us 
his  name. — Does  any  one  mean  to  tell  us  that  going  to  the 
parish  church  will  teach  a  man  anything  about  Christ,  or  con 
version,  or  faith,  or  repentance,  if  these  subjects  are  hardly  ever 
named  in  the  parish  church,  and  never  properly  explained  ?  If 
there  is  such  an  one,  let  him  speak  out,  and  give  us  his  name. — 
Does  any  one  mean  to  say  that  a  man  who  repents,  believes  in 
Christ,  is  converted  and  holy,  will  lose  his  soul,  because  he  has 
forsaken  his  parish  church  and  learned  his  religion  elsewhere  ? 
If  there  is  such  an  one,  let  him  speak  out,  and  give  us  his 
name. — For  my  part  I  abhor  such  monstrous  and  extravagant 
ideas.  I  see  not  a  jot  of  foundation  for  them  in  the  Word  of 
God.  I  trust  that  the  number  of  those  who  deliberately  hold 
them  is  exceedingly  small. 

There  are  not  a  few  parishes  in  England  where  the  religious 
teaching  is  little  better  than  Popery.  Ought  the  laity  of  such 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  375 

parishes  to  sit  still,  be  content,  and  take  it  quietly?  They 
ought  not.  And  why  ?  Because,  like  St.  Paul,  they  ought  to 
prefer  truth  to  peace. 

There  are  not  a  few  parishes  in  England  where  the  religious 
teaching  is  little  better  than  morality.  The  distinctive  doctrines 
of  Christianity  are  never  clearly  proclaimed.  Plato,  or  Seneca, 
or  Confucius,  or-Socinus,  could  have  taught  almost  as  much. 
Ought  the  laity  in  such  parishes  to  sit  still,  be  content,  and  take 
it  quietly?  They  ought  not.  And  why?  Because,  like  St. 
Paul,  they  ought  to  prefer  truth  to  peace. 

I  am  using  strong  language  in  dealing  with  this  part  of  my 
subject :  I  know  it. — I  am  trenching  on  delicate  ground :  I 
know  it.  I  am  handling  matters  which  are  generally  let  alone, 
and  passed  over  in  silence  :  I  know  it. — I  say  what  I  say  from 
a  sense  of  duty  to  the  Church  of  which  I  am  a  minister.  I 
believe  the  state  of  the  times,  and  the  position  of  the  laity  in 
some  parts  of  England,  require  plain  speaking.  Souls  are 
perishing,  in  many  parishes,  in  ignorance.  Honest  members  of 
the  Church  of  England,  in  many  districts,  are  disgusted  and 
perplexed.  This  is  no  time  for  smooth  words.  I  am  not 
ignorant  of  those  magic  expressions,  "  the  parochial  system, 
order,  division,  schism,  unity,  controversy,"  and  the  like.  I 
know  the  cramping,  silencing  influence  which  they  seem  to 
exercise  on  some  minds.  I  too  have  considered  those  expres 
sions  calmly  and  deliberately,  and  on  each  of  them  I  am 
prepared  to  speak  my  mind. 

(a)  The  parochial  system  of  England  is  an  admirable  thing 
in  theory.  Let  it  only  be  well  administered,  and  worked  by 
truly  spiritual  ministers,  and  it  is  calculated  to  confer  the 
greatest  blessings  on  the  nation.  But  it  is  useless  to  expect 
attachment  to  the  parish  church,  when  the  minister  of  the 
parish  is  ignorant  of  the  Gospel  or  a  lover  of  the  world.  In 
such  a  case  we  must  never  be  surprised  if  men  forsake  their 
parish  church,  and  seek  truth  wherever  truth  is  to  be  found. 
If  the  parochial  minister  does  not  preach  the  Gospel  and  live 
the  Gospel,  the  conditions  on  which  he  claims  the  attention  of 
his  parishioners  are  virtually  violated,  and  his  claim  to  be  heard 
is  at  an  end.  It  is  absurd  to  expect  the  head  of  a  family  to 
endanger  the  souls  of  his  children,  as  well  as  his  own,  for  the 
sake  of  "  parochial  order."  There  is  no  mention  of  parishes  in 


376  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

the  Bible,  and  we  have  no  right  to  require  men  to  live  and  die 
in  ignorance,  in  order  that  they  may  be  able  to  say  at  last,  "  I 
always  attended  my  parish  church." 

(b)  Divisions  and  separations  are  most  objectionable  in 
religion.  They  weaken  the  cause  of  true  Christianity.  They 
give  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  all  godliness  to  blaspheme. 
But  before  we  blame  people  for  them,  we  must  be  careful  that 
we  lay  the  blame  where  it  is  deserved.  False  doctrine  and  heresy 
are  even  worse  than  schism.  If  people  separate  themselves 
from  teaching  which  is  positively  false  and  unscriptural,  they 
ought  to  be  praised  rather  than  reproved.  'In  such  cases 
separation  is  a  virtue  and  not  a  sin.  It  is  easy  to  make  sneering 
remarks  about  "  itching  ears,"  and  "  love  of  excitement ; "  but 
it  is  not  so  easy  to  convince  a  plain  reader  of  the  Bible  that  it 
is  his  duty  to  hear  false  doctrine  every  Sunday,  when  by  a  little 
exertion  he  can  hear  truth.  The  old  saying  must  never  be 
forgotten,  "  He  is  the  schismatic  who  causes  the  schism." 

(c)  Unity,  quiet,  and  wder  among  professing  Christians  are 
mighty  blessings.     They  give  strength,  beauty,  and  efficiency 
to  the  cause  of  Christ.     But  even  gold  may  be  bought  too  dear. 
Unity  which  is  obtained  by  the  sacrifice  of  truth  is  worth 
nothing.     It  is  not  the  unity  which  pleases  God.     The  Church 
of  Rome  boasts  loudly  of  a  unity  which  does  not  deserve  the 
name.     It  is  unity  which  is  obtained  by  taking  away  the  Bible 
from  the  people,  by  gagging  private  judgment,  by  encouraging 
ignorance,  by  forbidding  men  to  think  for  themselves.     Like 
the  exterminating  warriors  of  old,  the  Church  of  Borne  "  makes 
a  solitude  and  calls  it  peace."      There  is  quiet  and  stillness 
enough  in  the  grave,  but  it  is  not  the  quiet  of  health,  but  of 
death.     It  was  the  false  prophets  who  cried   "Peace,"  when 
there  was  no  peace. 

(d)  Controversy  in  religion  is  a  hateful  thing.     It  is  hard 
enough  to  fight  the  devil,  the  worjd,  and  the  flesh,  without 
private  differences  in  our  own  camp.     But  there  is  one  thing 
which  is  even  worse  than  controversy,  and  that  is  false  doctrine 
tolerated,  allowed,  and  permitted  without  protest  or  molestation. 
It  was  controversy  that  won  the  battle  of  Protestant  Reforma 
tion.     If  the  views  that  some  men  hold  were  correct,  it  is  plain 
we  never  ought  to  have  had  any  Reformation  at  all  I     For  the 
sake  of  peace,  we  ought  to  have   gone  on   worshipping   the 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  377 

Virgin,  and  bowing  down  to  images  and  relics  to  this  very  day ! 
Away  with  such  trifling !  There  are  times  when  controversy  is 
not  only  a  duty  but  a  benefit.  Give  me  the  mighty  thunder 
storm  rather  than  the  pestilential  malaria.  The  one  walks  in 
darkness  and  poisons  us  in  silence,  and  we  are  never  safe.  The 
other  frightens  and  alarms  for  a  little  season.  But  it  is  soon 
over,  and  it  clears  the  air.  It  is  a  plain  Scriptural  duty  to 
"  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints." 
(Jude  3.) 

I  am  quite  aware  that  the  things  I  have  said  are  exceedingly 
distasteful  to  many  minds.  I  believe  many  are  content  with 
teaching  which  is  not  the  whole  truth,  and  fancy  it  will  be  "all 
the  same  "  in  the  end.  I  am  sorry  for  them.  I  am  convinced 
that  nothing  but  the  -whole  truth  is  likely,  as  a  general  rule,  to  do 
good  to  souls.  I  am  satisfied  that  those  who  wilfully  put  up 
with  anything  short  of  the  whole  truth,  will  find  at  last  that 
their  souls  have  received  much  damage.  Three  things  there  are 
which  men  never  ought  to  trifle  with, — a  little  poison,  a  little 
false  doctrine,  and  a  little  sin. 

I  am  quite  aware  that  when  a  man  expresses  such  opinions  as 
those  I  have  just  brought  forward,  there  are  many  ready  to  say, 
"He  is  no  Churchman."  I  hear  such  accusations  unmoved. 
The  day  of  judgment  will  show  who  were  the  true  friends  of 
the  Church  of  England  and  who  were  not.  I  have  learned  in 
the  last  thirty-two  years  that  if  a  clergyman  leads  a  quiet  life, 
lets  alone  the  unconverted  part  of  the  world,  and  preaches  so  as 
to  offend  none  and  edify  none,  he  will  be  called  by  many  "  a 
good  Churchman."  And  I  have  also  learned  that  if  a  man 
studies  the  Articles  and  Homilies,  labours  continually  for  the 
conversion  of  souls,  adheres  closely  to  the  great  principles  of  the 
Reformation,  bears  a  faithful  testimony  against  Popery,  and 
preaches  as  Jewel  and  Latimer  used  to  preach,  he  will  probably 
be  thought  a  firebrand  and  "  troubler  of  Israel,"  and  called  no 
Churchman  at  all !  But  I  can  see  plainly  that  they  are  not  the 
best  Churchmen  who  talk  most  loudly  about  Churclmianship. 
I  remember  that  none  cried  "  Treason  "  so  loudly  as  Athaliah. 
(2  Kings  xi.  14.)  Yet  she  was  a  traitor  herself.  I  have  observed 
that  many  who  once  talked  most  about  Churchmanship  have 
ended  by  forsaking  the  Church  of  England,  and  going  over  to 
Rome.  Let  men  say  what  they  will.  They  are  the  truest 


378  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

friends  of  the   Church  of  England  who  labour   must  for   the 
preservation  of  truth. 

I  lay  these  things  before  the  readers  of  this  paper,  and  invite 
their  serious  attention  to  them.  I  charge  them  never  to  forget 
that  truth  is  of  more  importance  to  a  Church  than  peace.  I 
ask  them  to  be  ready  to  carry  out  the  principles  I  have  laid 
down,  and  to  contend  zealously,  if  needs  be,  for  the  truth.  If 
we  do  this,  wre  shall  have  learned  something  from  Antioch. 

III.  But  I  pass  on  to  the  third  lesson  from  Antioch.  That 
lesson  is,  that  there  is  no  doctrine  about  'which  we  ouyht  to 
be  so  jealous  as  justification  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the 
law. 

The  proof  of  this  lesson  stands  out  most  prominently  in  the 
passage  of  Scripture  which  heads  this  paper.  What  one  article 
of  the  faith  had  the  Apostle  Peter  denied  at  Antioch  ?  None. 
— What  doctrine  had  he  publicly  preached  which  was  false  1 
None. — What,  then,  had  he  done  1  He  had  done  this.  After 
once  keeping  company  with  the  believing  Gentiles  as  "  fellow- 
heirs  and  partakers  of  the  promise  of  Christ  in  the  Gospel " 
(Ephes.  iii.  6),  he  suddenly  became  shy  of  them  and  withdrew 
himself.  He  seemed  to  think  they  were  less  holy  and  accept 
able  to  God  than  the  circumcised  Jews.  He  seemed  to  imply 
that  the  believing  Gentiles  were  in  a  lower  state  than  they  who 
had  kept  the  ceremonies  of  the  law  of  Moses.  He  seemed,  in  a 
word,  to  add  something  to  simple  faith  as  needful  to  give  man 
an  interest  in  Jesus  Christ.  He  seemed  to  reply  to  the  ques 
tion,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  1 "  not  merely  "  Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  but  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  be  circumcised,  and  keep  the  ceremonies  of  the  law." 

Such  conduct  as  this  the  Apostle  Paul  would  not  endure  for 
a  moment.  Nothing  so  moved  him  as  the  idea  of  adding  any 
thing  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  "  I  withstood  him,"  he  says, 
"  to  the  face."  He  not  only  rebuked  him,  but  he  recorded  the 
whole  transaction  fully,  when  by  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  he 
wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians. 

I  invite  special  attention  to  this  point.  I  ask  men  to  observe 
the  remarkable  jealousy  which  the  Apostle  Paul  shows  about 
this  doctrine,  and  to  consider  the  point  about  which  such  a  stir 
was  made.  Let  us  mark  in  this  passage  of  Scripture  the 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  379 

immense  importance  of  justification  by  faith  without  the  deeds 
of  the  law.  Let  us  learn  here  what  mighty  reasons  the 
Reformers  of  the  Church  of  England  had  for  calling  it,  in  our 
Eleventh  Article,  "  a  most  wholesome  doctrine  and  very  full  of 
comfort." 

(a)  This  is  the  doctrine  which  is  essentially  necessary  to  our 
own  personal  comfort.     No  man  on  earth  is  a  real  child  of  God, 
and  a  saved  soul,  till  he  sees  and  receives  salvation  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus.     No  man  will  ever  have  solid  peace  and  true 
assurance,  until  he  embraces  with  all  his  heart  the  doctrine  that 
"  we  are  accounted  righteous  before  God  for  the  merit  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  faith,  and  not  for  our  own  works  and 
deservings."     One  reason,  I  believe,  why  so  many  professors  in 
this  day  are  tossed  to  and  fro,  enjoy  little  comfort,  and  feel 
little  peace,  is  their  ignorance  on  this  point.     They  do  not  see 
clearly  justification  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  law. 

(b)  This  is  the  doctrine  which  tlie  great  enemy  of  souls  hates, 
and  labours  to  overthrow.     He  knows  that  it  turned  the  world 
upside   down   at   the   first   beginning   of   the    Gospel,  in   the 
days   of   the   Apostles.     He  knows  that  it  turned  the  world 
upside  down  again  at   the  time  of  the  Reformation.     He  is 
therefore  always  tempting  men  to  reject  it.     He  is  always  trying 
to  seduce  Churches  and  ministers  to  deny  or  obscure  its  truth. 
No  wonder  that  the  Council  of  Trent  directed  its  chief  attack 
against  this  doctrine,  and  pronounced  it  accursed  and  heretical. 
No  wonder  that  many  who  think  themselves  learned  in  these 
days  denounce  the  doctrine  as  theological  jargon,  and  say  that 
all  "  earnest-minded  people  "  are  justified  by  Christ,  whether 
they  have  faith  or  not !     The  plain  truth  is  that  the  doctrine 
is  all  gall  and  wormwood  to  unconverted  hearts.     It  just  meets 
the  wants  of  the  awakened  soul.     But  the  proud  unhumbled 
man  who  knows  not  his  own  sin,  and  sees  not  his  own  weakness, 
cannot  receive  its  truth. 

(c)  This  is  the  doctrine,  the  absence  of  which  accounts  for 
half  the  errors  of  the  Roman  Catholic  CJmrch.  The  beginning 
of  half  the  unscriptural  doctrines  of  Popery  may  be  traced  up 
to  rejection  of  justification  by  faith.  No  Romish  teacher,  if  he 
is  faithful  to  his  Church,  can  say  to  an  anxious  sinner,  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  tliou  shalt  be  saved."  He  cannot 
do  it  without  additions  and  explanations,  which  completely 


380  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

destroy  the  good  news.  He  dare  not  give  the  Gospel  medicine, 
without  adding  something  which  destroys  its  efficacy,  and 
neutralizes  its  power.  Purgatory,  penance,  priestly  absolution, 
the  intercession  of  saints,  the  worship  of  the  Virgin,  and  many 
other  man-made  services  of  Popery,  all  spring  from  this  source. 
They  are  all  rotten  props  to  support  Aveary  consciences.  But 
they  are  rendered  necessary  by  the  denial  of  justification  by 
faith. 

(d)  This  is  the  doctrine  which  is  absolutely  essential  to  a 
minister's  success  among  his  people.     Obscurity  on  this  point 
spoils  all.     Absence  of  clear  statements  about  justification  will 
prevent  the  utmost  zeal  doing  good.     There  may  be  much  that 
is  pleasing  and  nice  in  a  minister's  sermons,  much  about  Christ 
and  sacramental  union  with  Him, — much  about  self-denial, — 
much  about  humility, — much  about  charity.     But  all  this  will 
profit  little,  if  his  trumpet    gives    an  uncertain  sound  about 
justification  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  law. 

(e)  This  is  the  doctrine  which  is  absolutely  essential  to  the 
prosperity  of  a  CJmrch.     No    Church  is  really  in  a  healthy 
state,  in  which  this  doctrine  is  not  prominently  brought  forward. 
A   Church   may   have    good    forms    and    regularly    ordained 
ministers,   and   the    sacraments   properly  administered,   but  a 
Church  will  not  see  conversion  of  souls  going  on  under  its 
pulpits,  when  this  doctrine  is  not  plainly  preached.     Its  schools 
may  be  found  in  every  parish.     Its  ecclesiastical  buildings  may 
strike  the  eye  all  over  the  land.     But  there  will  be  no  blessing 
from   God   on   that   Church,   unless  justification   by   faith   is 
proclaimed  from  its  pulpits.     Sooner  or  later  its  candlestick 
will  be  taken  away. 

Why  have  the  Churches  of  Africa  and  the  East  fallen  to 
their  present  state  ? — Had  they  not  bishops  ?  They  had. — Had 
they  not  forms  and  liturgies?  They  had. — Had  they  not 
synods  and  councils?  They  had. — But  they  cast  away  the 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  They  lost  sight  of  that 
mighty  truth,  and  so  they  fell. 

Why  did  our  own  Church  do  so  little  in  the  last  century,  and 
why  did  the  Independents,  and  Methodists,  and  Baptists  do  so 
much  more  ? — Was  it  that  their  system  was  better  than  ours  ? 
No. — Was  it  that  our  Church  was  not  so  well  adapted  to  meet 
the  wants  of  lost  souls?  No. — But  their  ministers  preached 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  381 

justification  by  faith,  and  our  ministers,  in  too  many  cases,  did 
not  preach  the  doctrine  at  all. 

Why  do  so  many  English  people  go  to  Dissenting  chapels  in 
the  present  day  1  Why  do  we  so  often  see  a  splendid  Gothic 
parish  church  as  empty  of  worshippers  as  a  barn  in  July,  and 
a  little  plain  brick  building,  called  a  meeting-house,  filled  to 
suffocation?  Is  it  that  people  in  general  have  an  abstract 
dislike  to  Episcopacy,  the  Prayer-book,  the  surplice,  and  the 
establishment  1  Not  at  all !  The  simple  reason  is,  in  the  vast 
majority  of  cases,  that  people  do  not  like  preaching  in  which 
justification  by  faith  is  not  fully  proclaimed.  When  they 
cannot  hear  it  in  the  parish  church  they  will  seek  it  elsewhere. 
Xo  doubt  there  are  exceptions.  No  doubt  there  are  places  where 
a  long  course  of  neglect  has  thoroughly  disgusted  people  with  the 
Church  of  England,  so  that  they  will  not  even  hear  truth  from 
its  ministers.  But  I  believe,  as  a  general  rule,  when  the  parish 
church  is  empty  and  the  meeting-house  full,  it  will  be  found  on 
inquiry  that  there  is  a  cause. 

If  these  things  be  so,  the  Apostle  Paul  might  well  be  jealous 
for  the  truth,  and  withstand  Peter  to  the  face.  He  might  well 
maintain  that  anything  ought  to  be  sacrificed,  rather  than 
endanger  the  doctrine  of  justification  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 
He  saw  with  a  prophetical  eye  coming  things.  He  left  us  all 
an  example  that  we  should  do  well  to  folloAV.  Whatever  we 
tolerate,  let  us  never  allow  any  injury  to  be  done  to  that  blessed 
doctrine, — that  we  are  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of 
the  law. 

Let  us  always  beware  of  any  teaching  which  either  directly 
or  indirectly  obscures  justification  by  faith.  All  religious 
systems  which  put  anything  between  the  heavy-laden  sinner 
and  Jesus  Christ  the  Saviour,  except  simple  faith,  are  dangerous 
and  unscriptural.  All  systems  which  make  out  faith  to  be  any 
thing  complicated,  anything  but  a  simple,  childlike  dependence, 
— the  hand  which  receives  the  soul's  medicine  from  the 
physician, — are  unsafe  and  poisonous  systems.  All  systems 
which  cast  discredit  on  the  simple  Protestant  doctrine  which 
broke  the  power  of  Borne,  carry  about  with  them  a  plague-spot, 
and  are  dangerous  to  souls. 

Baptism  is  a  sacrament  ordained  by  Christ  Himself,  and  to 
be  used  with  reverence  and  respect  by  all  professing  Christians. 


382  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

When  it  is  used  rightly,  worthily,  and  with  faith,  it  is  capable 
of  being  the  instrument  of  mighty  blessings  to  the  soul.  But 
when  people  are  taught  that  all  who  are  baptized  are  as  a 
matter  of  course  born  again,  and  that  all  baptized  persons  should 
be  addressed  as  "  children  of  God,"  I  believe  their  souls  are  in 
great  danger.  Such  teaching  about  baptism  appears  to  me  to 
overthrow  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  They  only  are 
children  of  God  who  have  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  all  men 
have  not  faith. 

The  Lord's  Supper  is  a  sacrament  ordained  by  Christ  Him 
self,  and  intended  for  the  edification  and  refreshment  of  true 
believers.  But  when  people  are  taught  that  all  persons  ought 
to  come  to  the  Lord's  Table,  whether  they  have  faith  or  not ; 
and  that  all  alike  receive  Christ's  body  and  blood  who  receive  the 
bread  and  wine,  I  believe  their  souls  are  in  great  danger.  Such 
teaching  appears  to  me  to  darken  the  doctrine  of  justification  by 
faith.  No  man  eats  Christ's  body  and  drinks  Christ's  blood  ex 
cept  the  justified  man.  And  none  are  justified  until  they  believe. 

Membership  of  the  Church  of  England  is  a  great  privilege. 
No  visible  Church  on  earth,  in  my  opinion,  offers  so  many 
advantages  to  its  members,  when  rightly  administered.  But 
when  people  are  taught  that  because  they  are  members  of  the 
Church,  they  are  as  a  matter  of  course  members  of  Christ,  I 
believe  their  souls  are  in  great  danger.  Such  teaching  appears  to 
me  to  overthrow  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  They  only 
are  joined  to  Christ  who  believe.  And  all  men  do  not  believe. 

Whenever  we  hear  teaching  which  obscures  or  contradicts 
justification  by  faith,  we  may  be  sure  there  is  a  screw  loose 
somewhere.  We  should  watch  against  such  teaching,  and  be 
upon  our  guard.  Once  let  a  man  get  wrong  about  justification, 
and  he  will  bid  a  long  farewell  to  comfort,  to  peace,  to  lively 
hope,  to  anything  like  assurance  in  Ids  Christianity.  An  error 
here  is  a  worm  at  the  root. 

(1)  In  conclusion,  let  me  first  of  all  ask  every  one  who  reads 
this  paper,  to  arm  himself  with  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the 
written  Word  of  God.  Unless  we  do  this  we  are  at  the  mercy 
of  any  false  teacher.  We  shall  not  see  through  the  mistakes  of 
an  erring  Peter.  We  shall  not  be  able  to  imitate  the  faithful 
ness  of  a  courageous  Paul.  An  ignorant  laity  will  always  be 


THE  FALLIBILITY  OF  MINISTERS.  383 

the  bane  of  a  Church.  A  Bible-reading  laity  may  save  a 
Church  from  ruin.  Let  us  read  the  Bible  regularly,  daily,  and 
with  fervent  prayer,  and  become  familiar  with  its  contents.  Let 
us  receive  nothing,  believe  nothing,  follow  nothing,  which  is  not 
in  the  Bible,  nor  can  be  proved  by  the  Bible.  Let  our  rule  of 
faith,  our  touch-stone  of  all  teaching,  be  the  written  Word  of  God. 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  recommend  every  member  of 
the  Church  of  England  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  of  his  own  Church.     They  are  to  be  found 
at  the  end  of  most  Prayer-books.     They  will  abundantly  repay 
an  attentive  reading.     They  are  the  true  standard  by  which 
Churchmanship  is  to  be  tried,  next  to  the  Bible.     They  are  the 
test  by  which  Churchmen  should  prove  the  teaching  of  their 
ministers,  if  they  want  to  know  whether  it  is  "  Church  teach 
ing"  or  not.     I  deeply  lament  the   ignorance   of   systematic 
Christianity  which  prevails  among  many  who  attend  the  services 
of  the  Church  of  England.     It  would  be  well  if  such  books  as 
Archbishop  Usher's  Body  of  Divinity  were  more  known  and 
studied  than  they  are.     If  Dean  Lowell's  Catechism  had  ever 
been  formally  accredited   as   a   formulary   of   the   Church   of 
England,  many  of  the  heresies  of  the  last  twenty  years  could 
never  have  lived  for  a  day.*     But   unhappily  many  persons 
really  know  no  more  about  the  true  doctrines  of  their  own 
communion,  than  the  heathen  or  Mahometans.     It  is  useless  to 
expect  the  laity  of  the  Church  of  England  to  be  zealous  for  the 
maintenance  of  true  doctrine,  unless  they  know  what  their  own 
Church  has  denned  true  doctrine  to  be. 

(3)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  entreat  all  who  read  this  paper 
to  be  always  ready  to  contend  for  the  faith  of  Christ,  if  needful. 
I  recommend  no  one  to  foster  a  controversial  spirit.     I  want  no 
man  to  be  like  Goliath,  going  up  and  down,  saying,  "  Give  me 
a  man  to  fight  with."     Always  feeding  upon  controversy  is  poor 
work  indeed.     It  is  like  feeding  upon  bones.     But  I  do  say 
that  no  love  of  false  peace  should  prevent  us  striving  jealously 
against  false  doctrine,  and  seeking  to  promote  true  doctrine 
wherever  we  possibly  can.     True  Gospel  in  the  pulpit,  true 
Gospel  in  every  religious  society  we  support,  true  Gospel  in 

*  Dean  Nowell  was  Prolocutor  of  the  Convocation  which  drew  up  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  in  the  form  in  which  we  now  have  them,  in  the  year 
1562.  His  Catechism  was  approved  and  allowed  by  Convocation. 


384  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

the  books  we  read,  true  Gospel  in  the  friends  we  keep  company 
with, — let  this  he  our  aim,  and  never  let  us  he  ashamed  to  let- 
men  see  that  it  is  so. 

(4)  In  the  next  place,  let  me  entreat  all  who  read  this  paper 
to  keej)  a  jcalom  watch  over  their  own  hearts  in  these  contro 
versial  times.     There  is  much  need  of  this  caution.     In  the 
heat  of  the  battle  we  are  apt  to  forget  our  own  inner  man. 
Victory  in  argument  is  not  always  victory  over  the  world  or 
victory  over  the  devil.     Let  the  meekness  of  St.  Peter  in  taking 
a  reproof,  be  as  much  our  example  as  the  boldness  of  St.  Paul 
in  reproving.     Happy  is  the  Christian  who  can  call  the  person 
who  rebukes  him  faithfully,  a  "beloved  brother."     (2  Peter  iii. 
15.)     Let  us  strive  to  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation, 
and  not  least  in  our  tempers.     Let  us  labour  to  maintain  an 
uninterrupted  communion  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son, 
and  to  keep  up  constant  habits  of  private  prayer  and  Bible- 
reading.     Thus  we  shall  be  armed  for  the  battle  of  life,  and 
have  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  well  fitted  to  our  hand  when  the 
day  of  temptation  comes. 

(5)  In   the   last  place,  let  me  entreat  all  members  of  the 
Church  of  England  who  know  what  real  praying  is,  to  pray 
daily  for  the  Church  to  which  they  belong.     Let  us  pray  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  poured  out  upon  it,  and  that. its  candle 
stick  may  not  be  taken  away.     Let  us  pray  for  those  parishes 
in  which  the  Gospel  is  now  not  preached,  that  the  darkness 
may  pass  away,  and  the  true  light  shine  in  them.     Let  us  pray 
for  those  ministers  who  now  neither  know  nor  preach  the  truth, 
that  God  may  take  away  the  veil  from  their  hearts,  and  show 
them   a  more   excellent  way.      Nothing  is   impossible.      The 
Apostle  Paul  was  once  a  persecuting   Pharisee ;  Luther  was 
once  an   unenlightened   monk ;  Bishop   Latimer   was   once   a 
bigoted  Papist ;  Thomas  Scott  was  once  thoroughly  opposed  to 
evangelical  truth.     Nothing,  I  repeat,  is  impossible.     The  Spirit 
can  make  clergymen  preach  that  Gospel  which  they  now  labour 
to  destroy.     Let  us  therefore  be  instant  in  prayer. 

I  commend  the  matters  contained  in  this  paper  to  serious 
attention.  Let  us  ponder  them  well  in  our  hearts.  Let  us 
carry  them  out  in  our  daily  practice.  Let  us  do  this,  and  we 
shall  have  learned  something  from  the  story  of  St.  Peter  at 
Antioch. 


XVIII. 
APOSTOLIC  FEARS. 

"  I  fear,  lest,  by  any  means,  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  by  his  subtilty, 
so  your  minds  should  be  corrupted  from  the  simplicity  that  is  in 
Christ."— 2  COR.  xi.  3. 

THE  text  which  heads  this  page,  contains  one  part  of  the  ex 
perience  of  a  very  famous  Christian.  Xo  servant  of  Christ 
perhaps  has  left  such  a  mark  for  good  on  the  world  as  the 
Apostle  St.  Paul.  When  he  was  born,  the  whole  Roman 
Empire,  excepting  one  little  corner,  was  sunk  in  the  darkest 
heathenism ;  when  he  died,  the  mighty  fabric  of  heathenism 
was  shaken  to  its  very  centre,  and  ready  to  fall.  And  none  of 
the  agents  whom  God  used  to  produce  this  marvellous  change 
did  more  than  Saul  of  Tarsus,  after  his  conversion.  Yet  even 
in  the  midst  of  his  successes  and  usefulness  we  find  him  crying- 
out,  "  I  fear." 

There  is  a  melancholy  ring  about  these  words  which  demands 
our  attention.  They  show  a  man  of  many  cares  and  anxieties. 
He  who  supposes  that  St.  Paul  lived  a  life  of  ease,  because  he 
was  a  chosen  Apostle,  wrought  miracles,  founded  Churches, 
and  wrote  inspired  Epistles,  has  yet  much  to  learn.  Nothing 
can  be  more  unlike  the  truth !  The  eleventh  chapter  of  the 
second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  tells  a  very  different  tale.  It 
is  a  chapter  which  deserves  attentive  study.  Partly  from  the 
opposition  of  the  heathen  philosophers  and  priests,  whose  craft 
was  in  danger, — partly  from  the  bitter  enmity  of  his  own  un 
believing  countrymen, — partly  from  false  or  weak  brethren,— 
partly  from  his  own  thorn  in  the  flesh, — the  great  Apostle  of 
the  Gentiles  was  like  his  Master, — "a  man  of  sorrows  and 
acquainted  with  grief."  (Isa.  liii.  3.) 

But  of  all  the  burdens  which  St.  Paul  had  to  carry,  none 
seems  to  have  weighed  him  down  so  much  as  that  to  which  he 


386  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

refers,  when  he  writes  to  the  Corinthians, — "the  care  of  all  the 
Churches."  (2  Cor.  xi.  28.)  The  scanty  knowledge  of  many 
primitive  Christians,  their  weak  faith, — their  shallow  experience, 
— their  dim  hope, — their  low  standard  of  holiness, — all  these 
things  made  them  peculiarly  liable  to  be  led  astray  by  false 
teachers,  and  to  depart  from  the  faith.  Like  little  children, 
hardly  able  to  walk,  they  required  to  be  treated  with  immense 
patience.  Like  exotics  in  a  hothouse,  they  had  to  be  watched 
with  incessant  care.  Can  we  doubt  that  they  kept  their 
Apostolic  founder  in  a  state  of  constant  tender  anxiety  ?  Can 
we  wonder  that  he  says  to  the  Colossians,  "  What  great  conflict 
I  have  for  you  "  ? — and  to  the  Galatians,  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are 
so  soon  removed  from  Him  who  called  you  into  the  grace  of 
Christ  unto  another  Gospel ; " — "  0  foolish  Galatians,  who 
hath  bewitched  you?"  (Col.  ii.  1;  Gal.  i.  6;  iii.  1.)  No 
attentive  reader  can  study  the  Epistles  without  seeing  this 
subject  repeatedly  cropping  up.  And  the  text  I  have  placed 
at  the  head  of  this  paper  is  a  sample  of  what  I  mean  : — "  I 
fear,  lest  by  any  means,  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  by  his 
subtilty,  so  your  minds  should  be  corrupted  from  the  simplicity 
that  is  in  Christ."  That  text  contains  three  important  lessons, 
which  I  wish  to  press  on  the  attention  of  all  my  readers.  I 
believe  in  my  conscience  they  are  lessons  for  the  times. 

I.  First,  the  text  shows  us  a  spiritual  disease  to  which  ice 
are  all  liable,  and  which  we  ought  to  fear.  That 
disease  is  corruption  of  our  minds  : — "  I  fear,  lest 
your  minds  be  corrupted." 

II.  Secondly,  the  text  shows  us  an  example  ivhich  we  ought 
to  remember,  as  a  beacon: — "The  serpent  beguiled 
Eve  by  his  subtilty." 

III.  Thirdly,  the  text  shows  us  a  point  about  which  we  ought 
specially  to  be  on  our  guard.  That  point  is  corruption 
"  from  the  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 

The  text  is  a  deep  mine,  and  is  not  without  difficulty.  But 
let  us  go  down  into  it  boldly,  and  we  shall  find  it  contains  much 
precious  metal. 

I.  First,  then,  there  is  a  spiritual  disease,  which  we  ought  to 
fear  :  "  Corruption  of  mind." 


APOSTOLIC  PEAKS.  387 

I  take  "  corruption  of  mind  "  to  mean  injury  of  our  minds 
by  the  reception  of  false  and  unscriptural  doctrines  in  religion. 
And  I  believe  the  sense  of  the  Apostle  to  be,  "I  fear  lest  your 
minds  should  imbibe  erroneous  and  unsound  views  of  Chris 
tianity.  I  fear  lest  you  should  take  up,  as  truths,  principles 
which  are  not  the  truth.  I  fear  lest  you  should  depart  from 
the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  and  embrace  views  which 
are  practically  destructive  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ. 

The  fear  expressed  by  the  Apostle  is  painfully  instructive, 
and  at  first  sight  may  create  surprise.  Who  would  have  thought 
that  under  the  very  eyes  of  Christ's  own  chosen  disciples, — 
while  the  blood  of  Calvary  was  hardly  yet  dry,  while  the  age  of 
miracles  had  not  yet  passed  away, — who  would  have  thought 
that  in  a  day  like  this  there  was  any  danger  of  Christians 
departing  from  the  faith  ?  Yet  nothing  is  more  certain  than 
that  "  the  mystery  of  iniquity  "  began  already  to  work  before 
the  Apostles  were  dead.  (2  Thess.  ii.  7.)  "  Even  now,"  says 
St.  John,  "There  are  many  Antichrists."  (1  John  ii.  18.) 
And  no  fact  in  Church  history  is  more  clearly  proved  than 
this, — that  false  doctrine  has  never  ceased  to  be  the  plague  of 
Christendom  for  the  last  eighteen  centuries.  Looking  forward 
with  the  eye  of  a  prophet,  St.  Paul  might  well  say,  "  I  fear  :  " 
— "I  fear  not  merely  the  corruption  of  your  morals,  but  of 
your  minds." 

The  plain  truth  is  that  false  doctrine  has  been  the  chosen 
engine  which  Satan  has  employed  in  every  age  to  stop  the 
progress  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Finding  himself  unable  to 
prevent  the  Fountain  of  Life  being  opened,  he  has  laboured 
incessantly  to  poison  the  streams  which  flow  from  it.  If  he 
could  not  destroy  it,  he  has  too  often  neutralized  its  usefulness 
by  addition,  subtraction,  or  substitution.  In  a  word,  he  has 
"  corrupted  men's  minds." 

(a)  False  doctrine  soon  overspread  the  Primitive  Church 
after  the  death  of  the  Apostles,  whatever  some  may  please  to 
say  of  primitive  purity.  Partly  by  strange  teaching  about  the 
Trinity  and  the  Person  of  Christ,  partly  by  an  absurd  multi 
plication  of  new-fangled  ceremonies,  partly  by  the  introduction 
of  monasticism  and  a  man-made  asceticism,  the  light  of  the 
Church  was  soon  dimmed  and  its  usefulness  destroyed.  Even 
in  Augustine's  time,  as  the  preface  to  the  English  Prayer-book 


388  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

tells  us,  "  Ceremonies  were  grown  to  such  a  number  that  the 
estate  of  Christian  people  was  in  worse  case  concerning  this 
matter  than  were  the  Jews. "  Here  was  the  corruption  of  men's 
minda. 

(b)  False  doctrine  in  the  middle  ages  so  completely  over 
spread  the  Church,  that  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  was  well  nigh 
buried  or  drowned.     During  the  last  three  centuries  before  the 
Keformation,  it  is  probable  that  very  few  Christians  in  Europe 
could  have  answered  the  question,  "What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ? "      Popes   and    Cardinals,    Abbots   and   Priors,    Arch 
bishops  and  Bishops,  Priests  and  Deacons,  Monks  and  Nuns, 
were,  with  a  few  rare  exceptions,   steeped  in  ignorance  and 
superstition.     They  were  sunk  into  a  deep  sleep,  from  which 
they  were  only  partially  roused  by  the  earthquake  of  the  Re 
formation.     Here,  again,  was  the  "  corruption  of  men's  minds." 

(c)  False  doctrine,  since   the  days  of  the   Reformation,  has 
continually  been  rising  up  again,  and  marring  the  work  which 
the    Reformers   began.       Neologianism   in    some    districts    of 
Europe,  Socinianism  in  others,   formalism  and   indifferentism 
in  others,  have  withered  blossoms  which  once  promised  to  bear 
good  fruit,  and  made  Protestantism  a  mere  barren  form.     Here, 
again,  has  been  the  "  corruption  of  the  mind." 

(d)  False  doctrine,  even  in  our  own  day  and  under  our  own 
eyes,  is  eating  out  the  heart  of  the  Church  of  England  and  peril 
ling  her  existence.    One  school  of  Churchmen  does  not  hesitate 
to  avow  its  dislike  to  the  principles  of  the  Reformation,  and  com 
passes  sea  and  land  to  Romanize  the  Establishment. — Another 
school,  with  equal  boldness,  speaks  lightly  of  inspiration,  sneers 
at  the  very  idea  of  a  supernatural  religion,  and  tries  hard  to 
cast  overboard  miracles  as  so  much  lumber. — Another  school 
proclaims  liberty  to  every  shade  and  form  of  religious  opinion, 
and  tells  us  that  all  teachers  are  equally  deserving  our  confid 
ence,  however  heterogeneous  and  contradictory  their  opinions, 
if  they  are  only  clever,  earnest,  and  sincere.     To  each  and  all 
the  same  remark  applies.     They  illustrate  the  "  corruption  of 
men's  minds." 

In  the  face  of  such  facts  as  these,  we  may  well  lay  to  heart 
the  words  of  the  Apostle  in  the  text  which  heads  the  paper. 
Like  him  we  have  abundant  cause  to  feel  afraid.  Never,  I 
think,  was  there  such  need  for  English  Christians  to  stand  on 


APOSTOLIC  FEARS.  389 

their  guard.  Never  was  there  such  need  for  faithful  ministers 
to  cry  aloud  and  spare  not.  "  If  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain 
sound,  who  shall  prepare  himself  for  the  battle?"  (1  Cor. 
xiv.  8.) 

I  charge  every  loyal  member  of  the  Church  of  England  to 
open  his  eyes  to  the  peril  in  which  his  own  Church  stands, 
and  to  beware  lest  it  takes  damage  through  apathy  and  a  morbid 
love  of  peace.  Controversy  is  an  odious  thing ;  but  there  are 
days  when  it  is  a  positive  duty.  Peace  is  an  excellent  thing ; 
but,  like  gold,  it  may  be  bought  too  dear.  Unity  is  a  mighty 
blessing ;  but  it  is  worthless  if  it  is  purchased  at  the  cost  of 
truth.  Once  more  I  say,  Open  your  eyes  and  be  on  your 
guard. 

The  nation  that  rests  satisfied  with  its  commercial  prosperity, 
and  neglects  its  national  defences,  because  they  are  troublesome 
or  expensive,  is  likely  to  become  a  prey  to  the  first  Alaric,  or 
Attila,  or  Tamerlane,  or  Napoleon,  who  chooses  to  attack  it. 
The  Church  which  is  "  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,"  may 
think  it  has  "  need  of  nothing,"  because  of  its  antiquity,  orders, 
and  endowments.  It  may  cry  "  Peace,  peace,"  and  natter  itself 
it  shall  see  no  evil.  But  if  it  is  not  careful  about  the  mainten 
ance  of  sound  doctrine  among  its  ministers  and  members,  it 
must  never  be  surprised  if  its  candlestick  is  taken  away. 

I  deprecate,  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  despondency  or 
cowardice  at  this  crisis.  All  I  say  is,  let  us  exercise  a  godly 
fear.  I  do  not  see  the  slightest  necessity  for  forsaking  the  old 
ship,  and  giving  it  up  for  lost.  Bad  as  things  look  inside  our 
ark,  they  are  not  a  whit  better  outside.  But  I  do  protest 
against  that  careless  spirit  of  slumber  which  seems  to  seal  the 
eyes  of  many  Churchmen,  and  to  blind  them  to  the  enormous 
peril  in  which  we  are  placed  by  the  rise  and  progress  of  false 
doctrine  in  these  days.  I  protest  against  the  common  notion 
so  often  proclaimed  by  men  in  high  places,  that  unity  is  of  more 
importance  than  sound  doctrine,  and  peace  more  valuable  than 
truth.  And  I  call  on  every  reader  who  really  loves  the  Church 
of  England  to  recognize  the  dangers  of  the  times,  and  to  do  his 
duty,  manfully  and  energetically,  in  resisting  them  by  united 
action  and  by  prayer.  It  was  not  for  nothing  that  our  Lord 
said,  "He  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his  garment  and  buy 
one."  (Luke  xxii.  36.)  Let  us  not  forget  St.  Paul's  words, 


390  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

"  Watch  ye  :  stand  fast  in  the  faith.  Quit  you  like  men  :  be 
strong."  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13.)  Our  noble  Reformers  bought  the 
truth  at  the  price  of  their  own  blood,  and  handed  it  down  to  us. 
Let  us  take  heed  that  we  do  not  basely  sell  it  for  a  mess  of 
pottage,  under  the  specious  names  of  unity  and  peace. 

II.  Secondly,  the  text  shows  us  an  example  ice  shall  do  well 
to  remember,  as  a  beacon :  "  The  serpent  beguiled  Eve  by  his 
subtilty." 

I  need  hardly  remind  my  readers  that  St.  Paul  in  this  place 
refers  to  the  story  of  the  fall  in  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis,  as 
a  simple  historical  fact.  He  does  not  afford  the  least  counten 
ance  to  the  modern  notion  that  the  book  of  Genesis  is  nothing 
more  than  a  pleasing  collection  of  myths  and  fables.  He  does 
not  hint  that  there  is  no  such  being  as  the  devil,  and  that  there 
was  not  any  literal  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  that  it 
was  not  really  in  this  way  that  sin  entered  into  the  world.  On 
the  contrary,  he  narrates  the  story  of  the  third  of  Genesis  as  a 
veracious  history  of  a  thing  that  really  took  place. 

You  should  remember,  moreover,  that  this  reference  does  not 
stand  alone.  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  several  of  the  most 
remarkable  histories  and  miracles  of  the  Pentateuch  are  expressly 
mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,  and  always  as  historical 
facts.  Cain  and  Abel,  Noah's  ark,  the  destruction  of  Sodom, 
Esau's  selling  his  birthright,  the  destruction  of  the  first-born  in 
Egypt,  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  the  brazen  serpent,  the 
manna,  the  water  flowing  from  the  rock,  Balaam's  ass  speaking, 
— all  these  things  are  named  by  the  writers  of  the  New  Testa 
ment,  and  named  as  matters  of  fact  and  not  as  fables.  Let 
that  never  be  forgotten.  Those  who  are  fond  of  pouring 
contempt  on  Old  Testament  miracles,  and  making  light  of  the 
authority  of  the  Pentateuch,  would  do  well  to  consider  whether 
they  know  better  than  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostles. 
To  my  mind,  to  talk  of  Genesis  as  a  collection  of  myths  and 
fables,  in  the  face  of  such  a  text  of  Scripture  as  we  have  before 
us  in  this  paper,  sounds  alike  unreasonable  and  profane.  Was 
St.  Paul  mistaken  or  not,  when  he  narrated  the  story  of  the 
temptation  and  the  fall?  If  he  was,  he  was  a  weak-minded, 
credulous  person,  and  may  have  been  mistaken  on  fifty  other 
subjects.  At  this  rate  there  is  an  end  of  all  his  authority  as  a 


APOSTOLIC  FEARS.  391 

writer !  From  such  a  monstrous  conclusion  we  may  well  tuin 
away  with  scorn.  But  it  is  well  to  remember  that  much 
infidelity  begins  with  irreverent  contempt  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment. 

The  point,  after  all,  which  the  Apostle  would  have  us  mark 
in  the  history  of  Eve's  fall,  is  the  "  subtilty "  with  which  the 
devil  led  her  into  sin.  He  did  not  tell  her  flatly  that  he 
wished  to  deceive  her  and  do  her  harm.  On  the  contrary,  he 
told  her  that  the  thing  forbidden  was  a  thing  that  was  "  good 
for  food,  and  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  to  be  desired  to  make  one 
wise."  (Gen.  iii.  6.)  He  did  not  scruple  to  assert  that  she 
might  eat  the  forbidden  fruit  and  yet  "  not  die."  He  blinded 
her  eyes  to  the  sinfulness  and  danger  of  transgression.  He 
persuaded  her  to  believe  that  to  depart  from  God's  plain  com 
mand  was  for  her  benefit  and  not  for  her  ruin.  In  short,  "  he 
beguiled  her  by  his  subtilty." 

Now  this  "subtilty,"  St.  Paul  tells  us,  is  precisely  what  we 
have  to  fear  in  false  doctrine.  We  are  not  to  expect  it  to 
approach  our  minds  in  the  garment  of  error,  but  in  the  form  of 
truth.  Bad  coin  would  never  obtain  currency  if  it  had  not 
some  likeness  to  good.  The  wolf  would  seldom  get  into  the 
fold  if  he  did  not  enter  it  in  sheep's  clothing.  Popery  and 
infidelity  would  do  little  harm  if  they  went  about  the  world 
under  their  true  names.  Satan  is  far  too  wise  a  general  to 
manage  a  campaign  in  such  a  fashion  as  this.  He  employs 
fine  words  and  high-sounding  phrases,  such  as  "Catholicity, 
Apostolicity,  Unity,  Church  order,  sound  Church  views,  free 
thought,  broad  sense,  kindly  judgment,  liberal  interpretation  of 
Scripture,"  and  the  like,  and  thus  effects  a  lodgment  in  unwary 
minds.  And  this  is  precisely  the  "subtilty"  which  St.  Paul 
refers  to  in  the  text.  We  need  not  doubt  that  he  had  read  his 
Master's  solemn  words  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount :  "  Beware 
of  false  prophets,  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing,  but 
inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves."  (Matt.  vii.  15.) 

I  ask  your  special  attention  to  this  point.  Such  is  the  sim 
plicity  and  innocence  of  many  Churchmen  in  this  day,  that  they 
actually  expect  false  doctrine  to  .look  false,  and  will  not  under 
stand  that  the  very  essence  of  its  mischievousness,  as  a  rule,  is 
its  resemblance  to  God's  truth.  A  young  Churchman,  for 
instance,  brought  up  from  his  cradle  to  hear  nothing  but  Evan- 


392  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

gelical  teaching,  is  suddenly  invited  some  day  to  hear  a  sermon 
preached  by  some  eminent  teacher  of  semi-Romish,  or  semi- 
sceptical  opinions.  He  goes  into  the  church,  expecting  in  his 
simplicity  to  hear  nothing  but  heresy  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end.  To  his  amazement  he  hears  a  clever,  eloquent  sermon, 
containing  a  vast  amount  of  truth,  and  only  a  few  homoeopathic 
drops  of  error.  Too  often  a  violent  reaction  takes  place  in  his 
simple,  innocent,  unsuspicious  mind.  He  begins  to  think  his 
former  teachers  were  illiberal,  narrow,  and  uncharitable,  and 
his  confidence  in  them  is  shaken,  perhaps  for  ever.  Too  often, 
alas  !  it  ends  with  his  entire  perversion,  and  at  last  he  is 
enrolled  in  the  ranks  of  the  Ritualists  or  the  Broad  Church 
men  !  And  what  is  the  history  of  the  whole  case  1  Why,  a 
foolish  forgetfulness  of  the  lesson  St.  Paul  puts  forward  in  this 
text.  "As  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  by  his  subtilty,"  so  Satan 
beguiles  unwary  souls  in  the  nineteenth  century  by  approach 
ing  them  under  the  garb  of  truth. 

I  beseech  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  remember  this  part  of 
my  subject,  and  to  stand  upon  his  guard.  What  more  common 
than  to  hear  it  said  of  some  false  teacher  in  this  day, — "  He  is 
so  good,  so  devoted,  so  kind,  so  zealous,  so  laborious,  so  humble, 
so  self-denying,  so  charitable,  so  earnest,  so  fervent,  so  clever, 
so  evidently  sincere,  there  can  be  no  danger  and  no  harm  in 
hearing  him.  Besides,  he  preaches  so  much  real  Gospel :  no 
one  can  preach  a  better  sermon  than  he  does  sometimes !  I 
never  can  and  never  will  believe  he  is  unsound." — Who  does 
not  hear  continually  such  talk  as  this  ?  What  discerning  eye 
can  fail  to  see  that  many  Churchmen  expect  unsound  teachers 
to  be  open  vendors  of  poison,  and  cannot  realize  that  they  often 
appear  as  "angels  of  light,"  and  are  far  too  wise  to  be  always 
saying  all  they  think,  and  showing  their  whole  hand  and  mind. 
But  so  it  is.  Never  was  it  so  needful  to  remember  the  words, 
"The  serpent  beguiled  Eve  by  his  subtilty." 

I  leave  this  part  of  my  subject  with  the  sorrowful  remark 
that  we  have  fallen  upon  times  when  siispicum  on  the  subject 
of  sound  doctrine  is  not  only  a  duty  but  a  virtue.  It  is  not 
the  avowed  Pharisee  and  Sadducee  that  we  have  to  fear,  but 
the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees.  It  is  the  "show  of 
wisdom "  with  which  Ritualism  is  invested  that  makes  it  so 
dangerous  to  many  minds.  (Col.  ii.  23.)  It  seems  so  good, 


APOSTOLIC  FEARS.  393 

and  fair,  and  zealous,  and  holy,  and  reverential,  and  devout,  and 
kind,  that  it  carries  away  many  well-meaning  people  like  a 
flood.  He  that  would  be  safe  must  cultivate  the  spirit  of  a 
sentinel  at  a  critical  post.  He  must  not  mind  being  laughed  at 
and  ridiculed,  as  one  who  "has  a  keen  nose  for  heresy."  In 
days  like  these  he  must  not  be  ashamed  to  suspect  danger.  And 
if  any  one  scoffs  at  him  for  so  doing,  he  may  well  be  content  to 
reply,  "The  serpent  beguiled  Eve  by  his  subtilty." 

III.  The  third  and  last  lesson  of  the  text  remains  yet  to  be 
considered.  It  shows  us  a  point  about  which  ice  ought  to  be 
especially  on  our  guard.  That  point  is  called  "  The  simplicity 
that  is  in  Christ." 

Now  the  expression  before  us  is  somewhat  remarkable,  and 
stands  alone  in  the  New  Testament.  One  thing  at  any  rate  is 
abundantly  clear :  the  word  simplicity  means  that  which  is 
single  and  unmixed,  in  contradistinction  to  that  which  is  mixed 
and  double.  Following  out  that  idea,  some  have  held  that  the 
expression  means  "singleness  of  affection  towards  Christ ;"- 
we  are  to  fear  lest  we  should  divide  our  affections  between 
Christ  and  any  other.  This  is  no  doubt  very  good  theology ; 
but  I  question  whether  it  is  the  true  sense  of  the  text. — 
I  prefer  the  opinion  that  the  expression  means  the  simple, 
unmixed,  unadulterated,  unaltered  doctrine  of  Christ, — the 
simple  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,"  on  all  points, — without  addi 
tion,  subtraction,  or  substitution.  Departure  from  the  simple 
genuine  prescription  of  the  Gospel,  either  by  leaving  out  any 
part  or  adding  any  part,  was  the  thing  St.  Paul  would  have  the 
Corinthians  specially  dread.  The  expression  is  full  of  meaning, 
and  seems  specially  written  for  our  learning  in  these  last  days. 
We  are  to  be  ever  jealously  on  our  guard,  lest  we  depart  from 
and  corrupt  the  simple  Gospel  which  Christ  once  delivered  to 
the  saints. 

The  expression  before  us  is  exceedingly  instructive.  The 
principle  it  contains  is  of  unspeakable  importance.  If  we  love 
our  souls  and  would  keep  them  in  a  healthy  state,  we  must 
endeavour  to  adhere  closely  to  the  simple  doctrine  of  Clirist,  in 
every  jot,  tittle,  and  particular.  Once  add  to  it  or  take  away 
anything  from  it,  and  you  risk  spoiling  the  Divine  medicine, 
and  may  even  turn  it  into  poison.  Let  your  ruling  principle 


394  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

be, — "  No  other  doctrine  but  that  of  Christ ;  nothing  less,  and 
nothing  more ! "  Lay  firm  hold  on  that  principle,  and  never 
let  it  go.  Write  it  on  the  table  of  your  heart,  and  never 
forget  it. 

(1)  Let  us  settle  it,  for  example,  firmly  in  our  minds,  that 
there  is  no  way  of  peace  but  the  simple  way  marked  out  by 
Christ.     True  rest  of  conscience  and  inward  peace  of  soul  will 
never  come  from  anything  but  direct  faith  in  Christ  Himself 
and   His   finished   work.      Peace  by   auricular   confession,    or 
bodily  asceticism,  or  incessant  attendance  at  Church  services,  or 
frequent  reception  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  is  a  delusion  and  a 
snare.     It  is  only  by  coming  straight  to  Jesus  Himself,  labour 
ing  and  heavy  laden,   and  by  believing,  trusting  communion 
with  Him,  that  souls  find  rest.     In  this  matter  let  iis  stand  fast 
in  "  the  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 

(2)  Let  us  settle  it  next  in  our  minds  that  there  is  no  other 
priest  who  can  be  in  any  way  a  Mediator  between  yourself  and 
God  but  Jesus  Christ.     He  Himself  has  said,  and  His  word 
shall  not  pass  away,   "No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but 
by  Me."     (John  xiv.  6.)     No  sinful  child  of  Adam,  whatever 
be  his  orders,  and  however  high  his  ecclesiastical  title,  can  ever 
occupy  Christ's  place,  or  do  what  Christ  alone  is  appointed  to 
do.     The  priesthood  is  Christ's  peculiar  office,  and  it  is  one 
which  He  has  never  deputed  to  another.     In  this  matter  also 
let  us  stand  fast  in  "the  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 

(3)  Let  us  settle  it  next  in  our  minds  that  there  is  no  sacri 
fice  for  sin  except  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ  upon  the  cross. 
Listen  not  for  a  moment  to  those  who  tell  you  that  there  is 
any  sacrifice  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  any  repetition  of  Christ's 
offering  on  the  cross,  or  any  oblation  of  His  body  and  blood, 
under  the  form  of  consecrated  bread  and  wine.     The  one  sacri 
fice  for  sins  which  Christ  offered  was  a  perfect  and  complete 
sacrifice,  and  it  is  nothing  short  of  blasphemy  to  attempt  to 
repeat  it.     "By  one  offering  He  has  perfected  for  ever  them 
that  are  sanctified."     (Heb.  x.  14.)     In  this  matter  also  let  us 
stand  fast  in  the  "simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 

(4)  Let  us  settle  it  next  in  our  minds  that  there  is  no  other 
rule  of  faith,  and  judge  of  controversies,  but  that  simple  one  to 
which  Christ  always  referred, — the  written  Word  of  God.     Let 
no  man  disturb  our  souls  by  such  vague  expressions  as  "  the 


APOSTOLIC  FEARS.  395 

voice  of  the  Church,  primitive  antiquity,  the  judgment  of  the 
early  Fathers,"  and  the  like  tall  talk.  Let  our  only  standard 
of  truth  be  the  Bible,  God's  Word  written.  "  What  saith  the 
Scripture?" — "What  is  written?" — "How  readest  thou?" — 
"To  the  law  and  the  testimony!" — "Search  the  Scriptures." 
(Rom.  iv.  3;  Luke  x.  26;  Isa.  viii.  20;  John  v.  39.)  In  this 
matter  also  let  us  stand  fast  in  the  "simplicity  that  is  in 
Christ." 

(5)  Let  us  settle  it  next  in  our  minds  that  there  are  no  other 
means  of  grace  in  the  Church  which  have  any  binding  authority, 
excepting  those  well-known  and  simple  ones  which  Christ  and 
the  Apostles  have  sanctioned.     Let  us  regard  with  a  jealous 
suspicion  all  ceremonies  and  forms  of  man's  invention,  when 
they  are  invested  with  such  exaggerated  importance  as  to  thrust 
into  the  background  God's  own  appointments.     It  is  the  in 
variable    tendency   of    man's    inventions   to    supersede    God's 
ordinances.     Let  us  beware  of  making  the  Word  of  God  of 
none  effect  by  human  devices.     In  this  matter  also  let  us  stand 
fast  in  the  "  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ. 

(6)  Let  us  settle  it  next  in  our  minds  that  no  teaching  about 
the  sacraments  is  sound  which  gives  them  a  power  of  which 
Christ  says  nothing.     Let  us  beware  of  admitting  that  either 
baptism   or   the   Lord's    Supper   can   confer  grace    "ex   opere 
operato" — that  is,  by  their  mere  outward  administration,  inde 
pendently  of  the  state  of  heart  of  those  who  receive  them.     Let 
us  remember  that  the  only  proof   that  baptized   people   and 
communicants  have  grace,  is  the  exhibition  of  grace  in  their 
lives.     The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  the  only  evidences  that  we 
are  born  of  the  Spirit  and  one  with  Christ,  and  not  the  mere 
reception  of  the  sacraments.     In  this  matter  also  let  us  stand 
fast  in  the  "simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 

(7)  Let  us  settle  it  next  in  our  minds  that  no  teaching  about 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  safe  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the 
simple  teaching  of  Christ.     They  are  not  to  be  heard  who  assert 
that  the   Holy  Ghost  actually  dwells  in  all  baptized  people, 
without  exception,  by  virtue  of  their  baptism,  and  that  this 
grace  within  such  people  only  needs  to  be  "stirred  up."     The 
simple  teaching  of  our  Lord  is,  that  He  dwells  only  in  those  who 
are  His  believing  disciples,  and  that  the  world  neither  knows, 
nor  sees,  nor  can  receive  the  Holy  Spirit.     (John  xiv.  17.) 


396  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

His  indwelling  is  the  special  privilege  of  Christ's  people,  and 
where  He  is  He  will  be  seen.  On  this  point  also  let  us  stand 
fast  in  the  "  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 

(8)  Finally,  let  us  settle  it  in  our  minds  that  no  teaching  can 
be  thoroughly  sound,  in  which  truth  is  not  set  forth  in  the 
proportion  of  Clirist  and  the  Apostles.  Let  us  beware  of  any 
teaching  in  which  the  main  thing  is  an  incessant  exaltation  of 
the  Church,  the  ministry,  or  the  sacraments,  while  such  grand 
verities  as  repentance,  faith,  conversion,  holiness,  are  comparat 
ively  left  in  a  subordinate  and  inferior  place.  Place  such 
teaching  side  by  side  with  the  teaching  of  the  Gospels,  Acts, 
and  Epistles.  Count  up  texts.  Make  a  calculation.  Mark 
how  little  comparatively  is  said  in  the  New  Testament  about 
baptism,  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  Church,  and  the  ministry ;  and 
then  judge  for  yourself  what  is  the  proportion  of  truth.  In  this 
matter  also,  I  say  once  more,  let  us  stand  fast  in  the  "  simplicity 
that  is  in  Christ." 

The  simple  doctrine  and  rule  of  Christ,  then — nothing  added, 
nothing  taken  away,  nothing  substituted — this  is  the  mark  at 
which  we  ought  to  aim.  This  is  the  point  from  which  depart 
ure  ought  to  be  dreaded.  Can  we  improve  on  His  teaching  1 
Are  we  wiser  than  He  1  Can  we  suppose  that  He  left  anything 
of  real  vital  importance  unwritten,  or  liable  to  the  vague  reports 
of  human  traditions  ?  Shall  we  take  on  ourselves  to  say  that 
we  can  mend  or  change  for  the  better  any  ordinance  of  His 
appointment  1  Can  we  doubt  that  in  matters  about  which  He 
is  silent  we  have  need  to  act  very  cautiously,  very  gently,  very 
moderately,  and  must  beware  of  pressing  them  on  those  who  do 
not  see  with  our  eyes'?  Above  all,  must  we  not  beware  of 
asserting  anything  to  be  needful  to  salvation  of  which  Christ 
has  said  nothing  at  all  1  I  only  see  one  answer  to  such  ques 
tions  as  these.  We  must  beware  of  anything  which  has  even  the 
appearance  of  departure  from  the  "  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 

The  plain  truth  is  that  we  cannot  sufficiently  exalt  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  and  Lord  of  all 
ordinances,  no  less  than  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  I  take  it  we 
all  fail  here.  We  do  not  realize  how  high  and  great  and  glorious 
a  King  the  Son  of  God  is,  and  what  undivided  loyalty  we  owe 
to  One  who  has  not  deputed  any  of  His  offices,  or  given  His 
glory  to  another.  The  solemn  words  which  John  Owen 


APOSTOLIC  FEARS.  30  7 

addressed  to  the  House  of  Commons,  in  a  sermon  on  the 
"Greatness  of  Christ,"  deserve  to  be  remembered.  I  fear  the 
House  of  Commons  hears  few  such  sermons  in  the  present  day. 
"  Christ  is  the  ivay :  men  without  Him  are  Cains,  wanderers, 
vagabonds.  He  is  the  truth :  men  without  Him  are  liars,  like 
the  devil  of  old.  He  is  the  life :  men  without  Him  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins.  He  is  the  lif/ht :  men  without  Him  are  in 
darkness,  and  go  they  know  not  whither.  He  is  the  vine :  men 
that  are  not  in  Him  are  withered  branches  prepared  for  the  fire. 
He  is  the  rock :  men  not  built  on  Him  are  carried  away  with  a 
flood.  He  is  the  Alpha  and  Oinn/a,  the  first  and  the  last,  the 
author  and  ender,  the  founder  and  finisher  of  our  salvation. 
He  that  hath  not  Him  hath  neither  beginning  of  good  nor  shall 
have  end  of  misery.  Oh,  blessed  Jesus,  how  much  better  were 
it  not  to  be  than  to  be  without  Thee !  never  to  be  born  than 
not  to  die  in  Thee  !  A  thousand  hells  come  short  of  this, 
eternally  to  want  Jesus  Christ."  This  witness  is  true.  If 
we  can  say  Amen  to  the  spirit  of  this  passage  it  will  be  well  with 
our  souls. 

And  now  let  me  conclude  this  paper  by  offering  a  few  part 
ing  words  of  counsel  to  any  one  into  whose  hands  it  may  fall. 
I  offer  them  not  as  one  who  has  any  authority,  but  one  who  is 
affectionately  desirous  to  do  good  to  his  brethren.  I  offer  them 
especially  to  all  who  are  members  of  the  Church  of  England, 
though  I  believe  they  will  be  found  useful  by  all  English 
Christians.  And  I  offer  them  as  counsels  which  I  find  helpful 
to  my  own  soul,  and  as  such  I  venture  to  think  they  will  be 
helpful  to  others. 

(1)  In  the  first  place,  if  we  would  be  kept  from  falling  away 
into  false  doctrine,  let  us  arm  our  minds  with  a  thorough  knoiv- 
ledya  of  God's  Word.  Let  us  read  our  Bibles  from  beginning 
to  end  with  daily  diligence,  and  constant  prayer  for  the  teaching 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  strive  to  become  thoroughly  familiar 
with  their  contents.  Ignorance  of  the  Bible  is  the  root  of  all 
error,  and  a  superficial  acquaintance  with  it  accounts  for  many 
of  the  sad  perversions  and  defections  of  the  present  day.  In 
a  hurrying  age  of  railways  and  telegraphs,  I  am  firmly  per 
suaded  that  many  Christians  do  not  give  time  enough  to  private 
reading  of  the  Scriptures.  I  doubt  seriously  whether  English 


398  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

people  did  not  know  their  Bibles  better  two  hundred  years  ago 
than  they  do  now.  The  consequence  is,  that  they  are  "tossed  to 
and  fro  by,  and  carried  about  with,  every  wind  of  doctrine,"  and 
fall  an  easy  prey  to  the  first  clever  teacher  of  error  who  tries  to 
influence  their  minds.  I  entreat  my  readers  to  remember  this 
counsel,  and  take  heed  to  their  ways.  It  is  as  true  now  as 
ever,  that  the  good  textuary  is  the  only  good  theologian,  and 
that  a  familiarity  with  great  leading  texts  is,  as  our  Lord  proved 
in  the  temptation,  one  of  the  best  safe-guards  against  error. 
Arm  yourself  then  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  let  your 
hand  become  used  to  it.  I  am  well  aware  that  there  is  no  royal 
road  to  Bible  knowledge.  Without  diligence  and  pains  no  one 
ever  becomes  "mighty  in  the  Scriptures."  "Justification," 
said  Charles  Simeon,  with  his  characteristic  quaintness,  "is  by 
faith,  but  knowledge  of  the  Bible  comes  by  works."  But  of 
one  thing  I  am  certain  :  there  is  no  labour  which  will  be  so 
richly  repaid  as  laborious  regular  daily  study  of  God's  Word. 

(2)  In  the  second  place,  if  we  would  keep  a  straight  path,  as 
Churchmen,  in  this  evil  day,  let  us  be  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England.  Those 
Articles,  I  am  bold  to  say,  are  the  authorized  Confession  of  the 
Church  of  England,  and  the  true  test  by  which  the  teaching  of 
every  clergyman  ought  to  be  tried.  The  "teaching  of  the 
Prayer-book"  is  a  common  phrase  in  many  mouths,  and  the 
Prayer-book  is  often  held  up  as  a  better  standard  of  Church- 
manship  than  the  Articles.  But  I  venture  to  assert  that  the 
Articles,  and  not  the  Prayer-book,  are  the  Church's  standard  of 
Church  doctrine.  Let  no  one  suppose  that  I  think  lightly  of 
the  Prayer-book,  because  I  say  this.  In  loyal  love  to  the 
Liturgy,  and  deep  admiration  of  its  contents,  I  give  place  to  no 
man.  Taken  for  all  in  all,  it  is  an  incomparable  book  of 
devotion  for  the  use  of  a  Christian  congregation.  But  the 
Church's  Prayer-book  was  never  meant  to  be  the  Church's  fixed 
standard  of  Bible  doctrine,  in  the  same  way  that  the  Articles 
are.  This  was  not  meant  to  be  its  office :  this  was  not  the 
purpose  for  which  it  was  compiled.  It  is  a  manual  of  devotion ; 
it  is  not  a  Confession  of  faith.  Let  us  value  it  highly ;  but  let 
us  not  exalt  it  to  the  place  which  the  Articles  alone  can  fill,  and 
which  common  sense,  statute  law,  and  the  express  opinion  of 
eminent  divines  agree  in  assigning  to  them. 


APOSTOLIC  FEARS.  399 

I  entreat  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  search  the  Articles,  and 
to  keep  up  familiar  acquaintance  with  them  by  reading  them 
carefully  at  least  once  a  year.  Settle  it  in  your  mind  that  no 
man  has  a  right  to  call  himself  a  sound  Churchman  who 
preaches,  teaches,  or  maintains  anything  contrary  to  the 
Church's  Confession  of  faith.  I  believe  the  Articles  in  this  day 
are  unduly  neglected.  I  think  it  would  be  well  if  in  all  middle- 
class  schools  connected  with  the  Church  of  England,  they 
formed  a  part  of  the  regular  system  of  religious  instruction. 
Like  the  famous  Westminster  Confession  in  Scotland,  they 
would  be  found  a  mighty  barrier  against  the  tendency  to  return 
to  Rome. 

(3)  The  third  and  last  counsel  which  1  venture  to  offer  is 
this  :  Let  us  make  ourselves  thoroughly  acquainted  icith  the 
history  of  the  English  Reformation.  My  reason  for  offering 
this  counsel  is  my  firm  conviction  that  this  highly  important 
part  of  English  history  has  of  late  years  been  undeservedly 
neglected.  Thousands  of  Churchmen  now-a-days  have  a  most 
inadequate  notion  of  the  amount  of  our  debt  to  our  martyred 
Reformers.  They  have  no  distinct  conception  of  the  state  of 
darkness  and  superstition  in  which  our  fathers  lived,  and  of  the 
light  and  liberty  which  the  Reformation  brought  in.  And  the 
consequence  is  that  they  see  no  great  harm  in  the  Romanizing 
movement  of  the  present  day,  and  have  very  indistinct  ideas 
of  the  real  nature  and  work  of  Popery.  It  is  high  time  that 
a  better  state  of  things  should  begin.  Of  one  thing  I  am 
thoroughly  convinced  :  a  vast  amount  of  the  prevailing  apathy 
about  the  Romanizing  movement  of  the  day  may  be  traced  up 
to  gross  ignorance,  both  of  the  true  nature  of  Popery  and  of  the 
Protestant  Reformation. 

Ignorance,  after  all,  is  one  of  the  best  friends  of  false 
doctrine.  More  light  is  one  of  the  great  wants  of  the  day,  even 
in  the  nineteenth  century.  Thousands  are  led  astray  by  Popery 
or  infidelity  from  sheer  want  of  reading  and  information.  Once 
more  I  repeat,  if  men  would  only  study  with  attention  the 
Bible,  the  Articles,  and  the  History  of  the  Reformation,  I 
should  have  little  fear  of  their  "  minds  being  corrupted  from 
the  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ."  They  might  not,  perhaps 
be  "converted"  to  God,  but  at  any  rate  they  would  not  be 
"  perverted  "  from  the  Church  of  England. 


XIX. 
IDOLATRY. 

"  Flee  from  idolatry '."— 1  COR.  x.  14. 

THE  text  which  heads  this  page  may  seem  at  first  sight  to  be 
hardly  needed  in  England.  In  an  age  of  education  and 
intelligence  like  this,  we  might  almost  fancy  it  is  waste  of 
time  to  tell  an  Englishman  to  "  flee  from  idolatry." 

I  am  bold  to  say  that  this  is  a  great  mistake.  I  believe  that 
we  have  come  to  a  time  when  the  subject  of  idolatry  demands 
a  thorough  and  searching  investigation.  I  believe  that  idolatry 
is  near  us,  and  about  us,  and  in  the  midst  of  us,  to  a  very 
fearful  extent.  The  Second  Commandment,  in  one  word,  is  in 
peril.  "The  plague  is  begun." 

Without  further  preface,  I  propose  in  this  paper  to  consider 
the  four  following  points  : — 

I.   The  definition  of  idolatry.     WHAT  is  IT  ? 
II.  The  cause  of  idolatry.     WHENCE  COMES  IT  ? 

III.  Tlie  form   idolatry   assumes   in  the   visible   Church   of 

Christ.     WHERE  is  IT? 

IV.  The  ultimate  abolition  of  idolatry.    WHAT  WILL  END  IT  ? 

I  feel  that  the  subject  is  encompassed  with  many  difficulties. 
Our  lot  is  cast  in  an  age  when  truth  is  constantly  in  danger  of 
being  sacrificed  to  toleration,  charity,  and  peace  falsely  so 
called.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot  forget,  as  a  clergyman,  that  the 
Church  of  England  is  a  Church  which  has  "given  no  uncertain 
sound"  on  the  subject  of  idolatry;  and,  unless  I  am  greatly 
mistaken,  truth  about  idolatry  is,  in  the  highest  sense,  truth  for 
the  times. 

I.  Let  me,  then,  first  of  all,  supply  a  definition  of  idolatry. 
Let  me  show  WHAT  IT  is. 

400 


IDOLATRY.  401 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  we  should  understand  this. 
Unless  I  make  this  clear,  I  can  do  nothing  with  the  subject. 
Vagueness  and  indistinctness  prevail  upon  this  point,  as  upon 
almost  every  other  in  religion.  The  Christian  who  would  not  be 
continually  running  aground  in  his  spiritual  voyage,  must  have  his 
channel  well  buoyed,  and  his  mind  well  stored  with  clear  definitions. 

I  say,  then,  that  "  idolatry  is  a  worship  in  which  the  honour 
due  to  God  in  Trinity,  and  to  Him  only,  is  given  to  some  of  His 
creatures,  or  to  some  invention  of  His  creatures"  It  may  vary 
exceedingly.  It  may  assume  exceedingly  different  forms, 
according  to  the  ignorance  or  the  knowledge,  the  civilization 
or  the  barbarism,  of  those  who  offer  it.  It  may  be  grossly 
absurd  and  ludicrous,  or  it  may  closely  border  on  truth,  and 
admit  of  being  most  speciously  defended.  But  whether  in  the 
adoration  of  the  idol  of  Juggernaut,  or  in  the  adoration  of  the 
Host  in  St.  Peter's  at  Kome,  the  principle  of  idolatry  is  in  reality 
the  same.  In  either  case  the  honour  due  to  God  is  turned 
aside  from  Him,  and  bestowed  on  that  which  is  not  God.  And 
whenever  this  is  done,  whether  in  heathen  temples  or  in 
professedly  Christian  churches,  there  is  an  act  of  idolatry. 

It  is  not  necessary  for  a  man  formally  to  deny  God  and 
Christ,  in  order  to  be  an  idolater.  Far  from  it.  Professed 
reverence  for  the  God  of  the  Bible,  and  actual  idolatry,  are 
perfectly  compatible.  They  have  often  gone  side  by  side,  and 
they  still  do  so.  The  children  of  Israel  never  thought  of 
renouncing  God  when  they  persuaded  Aaron  to  make  the  golden 
calf.  "These  be  thy  gods,"  they  said  (thy  Eloliim),  "which 
brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  And  the  feast  in 
honour  of  the  calf  was  kept  as  "  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  "  (Jehovah). 
(Exodus  xxxii.  4,  5.)  Jeroboam,  again,  never  pretended  to  ask 
the  ten  tribes  to  cast  off  their  allegiance  to  the  God  of  David  and 
Solomon.  When  he  set  up  the  calves  of  gold  in  Dan  and  Bethel, 
he  only  said,  "  It  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem: 
behold  thy  gods,  0  Israel  (thy  Eloliim),  which  brought  thee  up 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  (1  Kings  xii.  28.)  In  both 
instances,  we  should  observe,  the  idol  was  not  set  up  as 
a  rival  to  God,  but  under  the  pretence  of  being  a  help — a 
stepping-stone  to  His  service.  But,  in  both  instances,  a  great 
sin  was  committed.  The  honour  due  to  God  was  given  to  a 
visible  representation  of  Him.  The  majesty  of  Jehovah  was 

2  o 


.&02  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

oifencled.     The  second  commandment  was  broken.     There  was, 
in  the  eyes  of  God,  a  flagrant  act  of  idolatry. 

Let  us  mark  this  well.  It  is  high  time  to  dismiss  from  our 
minds  those  loose  ideas  about  idolatry,  which  are  common  in 
this  day.  We  must  not  think,  as  many  do,  that  there  are  only 
two  sorts  of  idolatry, — the  spiritual  idolatry  of  the  man  who 
loves  his  wife,  or  child,  or  money  more  than  God ;  and  the 
open,  gross  idolatry  of  the  man  who  bows  down  to  an  image  of 
wood,  or  metal,  or  stone,  because  he  knows  no  better.  We 
may  rest  assured  that  idolatry  is  a  sin  which  occupies  a  far 
wider  field  than  this.  It  is  not  merely  a  thing  in  Hindostan, 
that  we  may  hear  of  and  pity  at  missionary  meetings ;  nor  yet 
is  it  a  thing  confined  to  our  own  hearts,  that  we  may  confess 
before  the  Mercy-seat  upon  our  knees.  It  is  a  pestilence  that 
walks  in  the  Church  of  Christ  to  a  much  greater  extent  than 
many  suppose.  It  is  an  evil  that,  like  the  man  of  sin,  "  sits  in 
the  very  temple  of  God."  (2  Thess.  ii.  4.)  It  is  a  sin  that  we 
all  need  to  watch  and  pray  against  continually.  It  creeps  into  our 
religious  worship  insensibly,  and  is  upon  us  before  We  are  aware. 
Those  are  tremendous  words  which  Isaiah  spoke  to  the  formal 
Jew, — not  to  the  worshipper  of  Baal,  remember,  but  to  the  man 
who  actually  came  to  the  temple  (Isa.  Ixvi.  3) :  "  He  that  killeth 
an  ox  is  as  if  he  slew  a  man ;  he  that  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  as  if  he 
cut  off  a  dog's  neck ;  he  that  offereth  an  oblation,  as  if  he  offered 
swine's  blood;  he  that  burneth  incense,  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol." 

This  is  that  sin  which  God  has  especially  denounced  in  His 
Word.  One  commandment  out  of  ten  is  devoted  to  the  pro 
hibition  of  it.  Not  one  of  all  the  ten  contains  such  a  solemn 
declaration  of  God's  character,  and  of  His  judgments  against  the 
disobedient : — "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting 
the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and 
.  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  Me. "  (Exod.  xx.  5.)  ]Srot  one, 
perhaps,  of  all  the  ten  is  so  emphatically  repeated  and  amplified, 
and  especially  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  book  of  Deuteronomy. 

This  is  the  sin,  of  all  others,  to  which  the  Jews  seem  to  have 
been  most  inclined  before  the  destruction  of  Solomon's  temple. 
What  is  the  history  of  Israel  under  their  judges  and  kings  but 
a  melancholy  record  of  repeated  falling  away  into  idolatry  1 
Again  and  again  we  read  of  "high  places"  and  false  gods. 
Again  and  again  we  read  of  captivities  and  chastisements  on 


IDOLATRY.  403 

account  of  idolatry.  Again  and  again  we  read  of  a  return  to  the 
old  sin.  It  seems  as  if  the  love  of  idols  among  the  Jews  was 
naturally  bone  of  their  bone  and  flesh  of  their  flesh.  The 
besetting  sin  of  the  Old  Testament  Church,  in  one  word,  wa.s 
idolatry.  In  the  face  of  the  most  elaborate  ceremonial  ordinances 
that  God  ever  gave  to  His  people,  Israel  was  incessantly  turning 
aside  after  idols,  and  worshipping  the  work  of  men's  hands. 

This  is  the  sin,  of  all  others,  which  has  brought  down  the 
heaviest  judgments  on  the  visible  Church.  It  brought  on  Israel 
the  armies  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  and  Babylon.  It  scattered  the 
ten  tribes,  burned  up  Jerusalem,  and  carried  Judah  and  Benjamin 
into  captivity.  It  brought  on  the  Eastern  Churches,  in  later 
days,  the  overwhelming  flood  of  the  Saracenic  invasion,  and 
tnirned  many  a  spiritual  garden  into  a  wilderness.  The  desola 
tion  which  reigns  where  Cyprian  and  Augustine  once  preached, 
the  living  death  in  which  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor  and  Syria 
are  buried,  are  all  attributable  to  this  sin.  All  testify  to  the 
same  great  truth  which  the  Lord  proclaims  in  Isaiah  :  "  My  glory 
will  I  not  give  to  another."  (Isa.  xlii.  8.) 

Let  us  gather  up  these  things  in  our  minds,  and  ponder  them 
well.  Idolatry  is  a  subject  which,  in  every  Church  of  Christ 
that  would  keep  herself  pure,  should  be  thoroughly  examined, 
understood,  and  known.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  St.  Paul  lays 
down  the  stern  command,  "Flee  from  idolatry." 

II.  Let  me  show,  in  the  second  place,  the  cause  to  which 
idolatry  may  be  traced.  WHENCE  COMES  IT  1 

To  the  man  Avho  takes  an  extravagant  and  exalted  view  of 
human  intellect  and  reason,  idolatry  may  seem  absurd.  He  fancies 
it  too  irrational  for  any  but  weak  minds  to  be  endangered  by  it. 

To  a  mere  superficial  thinker  about  Christianity,  the  peril  of 
idolatry  may  seem  very  small.  Whatever  commandments  are 
broken,  such  a  man  will  tell  us,  professing  Christians  are  not 
very  likely  to  transgress  the  second. 

Now,  both  these  persons  betray  a  woful  ignorance  of  human 
nature.  They  do  not  see  that  there  are  secret  roots  of  idolatry 
within  us  all.  The  prevalence  of  idolatry  in  all  ages  among  the 
heathen  must  necessarily  puzzle  the  one, — the  warnings  of  Protest 
ant  ministers  against  idolatry  in  the  Church  must  necessarily 
appear  uncalled  for  to  the  other.  Both  are  alike  blind  to  its  cause. 


404  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

The  cause  of  all  idolatry  is  the  natural  corruption  of  man's 
heart.  That  great  family  disease,  with  which  all  the  children 
of  Adam  are  infected  from  their  birth,  shows  itself  in  this,  as  it 
does  in  a  thousand  other  ways.  Out  of  the  same  fountain  from 
which  "  proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications,  murders, 
thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit,"  and  the  like  (Mark  vii. 
21,  22), — out  of  that  same  fountain  arise  false  views  of  God, 
and  false  views  of  the  worship  due  to  Him;  and  therefore,  when  the 
Apostle  Paul  tells  the  Galatians  (Gal.  v.  20)  what  are  the  "works 
of  the  flesh,"  he  places  prominently  among  them  "idolatry." 

A  religion  of  some  kind  man  will  have.  God  has  not  left 
Himself  without  a  witness  in  us  all,  fallen  as  we  are.  Like  old 
inscriptions  hidden  under  mounds  of  rubbish, — like  the  almost 
obliterated  under-writing  of  Palimpsest  manuscripts,* — even  so 
there  is  a  dim  something  engraven  at  the  bottom  of  man's  heart, 
however  faint  and  half -erased, — a  something  which  makes  him 
feel  he  must  have  a  religion  and  a  worship  of  some  kind.  The 
proof  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  voyages  and  travels 
in  every  part  of  the  globe.  The  exceptions  to  the  rule  are  so 
few,  if  indeed  there  are  any,  that  they  only  confirm  its  truth. 
Man's  worship  in  some  dark  corner  of  the  earth  may  rise  no 
higher  than  a  vague  fear  of  an  evil  spirit,  and  a  desire  to  pro 
pitiate  him ;  but  a  worship  of  some  kind  man  will  have. 

But  then  comes  in  the  effect  of  the  fall.  Ignorance  of  God, 
carnal  and  low  conceptions  of  His  nature  and  attributes,  earthly 
and  sensual  notions  of  the  service  which  is  acceptable  to  Him, 
all  characterize  the  religion  of  the  natural  man.  There  is  a 
craving  in  his  mind  after  something  he  can  see,  and  feel,  and 
touch  in  his  Divinity.  He  would  fain  bring  his  God  down  to 
his  own  crawling  level.  He  would  make  his  religion  a  thing  of 
sense  and  sight.  He  has  no  idea  of  the  religion  of  heart,  and 
faith,  and  spirit.  In  short,  just  as  he  is  willing  to  live  on  God's 
earth,  but,  until  renewed  by  grace,  a  fallen  and  degraded  life, 
so  he  has  no  objection  to  worship  after  a  fashion,  but,  until 

*  "Palimpsest"  is  the  name  given  to  ancient  parchment  manuscripts  which 
have  been  twice  written  over,  that  is,  the  work  of  a  comparatively  modern 
writer  has  been  written  over  or  across  the  work  of  an  older  writer.  Before 
the  invention  of  cheap  paper,  the  practice  of  so  writing  over  an  old  manuscript 
was  not  uncommon.  The  object  of  the  practice,  of  course,  was  to  save 
expense.  The  misfortune  was  that  the  second  writing  was  often  far  less 
valuable  than  the  first. 


IDOLATRY.  405 

renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  always  with  a  fallen  worship. 
In  one  word,  idolatry  is  a  natural  product  of  man's  heart.  It  is 
a  weed  which,  like  the  earth  uncultivated,  the  heart  is  always 
ready  to  bring  forth. 

And  now  does  it  surprise  us,  when  we  read  of  the  constantly 
recurring  idolatries  of  the  Old  Testament  Church, — of  Poor,  and 
Baal,  and  Moloch,  and  Chemosh,  and  Ashtaroth, — of  high  places 
and  hill  altars,  and  groves  and  images, — and  this  in  the  full 
light  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  1  Let  us  cease  to  be  surprised. 
It  can  be  accounted  for.  There  is  a  cause. 

Does  it  surprise  us  when  we  read  in  history  how  idolatry 
crept  in  by  degrees  into  the  Church  of  Christ, — how  little  by 
little  it  thrust  out  Gospel  truth,  until,  in  Canterbury,  men  offered 
more  at  the  shrine  of  Thomas  a  Becket  than  they  did  at  that 
of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  more  at  that  of  the  Virgin  Mary  than 
at  that  of  Christ1?  Let  us  cease  to  be  surprised.  It  is  all 
intelligible.  There  is  a  cause. 

Does  it  surprise  us  when  we  hear  of  men  going  over  from 
Protestant  Churches  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  in  the  present  day  ? 
Do  we  think  it  unaccountable,  and  feel  as  if  we  ourselves  could 
never  forsake  a  pure  form  of  worship  for  one  like  that  of  the 
Pope  ?  Let  us  cease  to  be  surprised.  There  is  a  solution  for 
the  problem.  There  is  a  cause. 

That  cause  is  nothing  else  but  the  deep  corruption  of  man's 
heart.  There  is  a  natural  proneness  and  tendency  in  us  all  to 
give  God  a  sensual,  carnal  worship,  and  not  that  which  is  com 
manded  in  His  Word.  We  are  ever  ready,  by  reason  of  our 
sloth  and  unbelief,  to  devise  visible  helps  and  stepping-stones  in 
our  approaches  to  Him,  and  ultimately  to  give  these  inventions 
of  our  own  the  honour  due  to  Him.  In  fact,  idolatry  is  all 
natural,  down-hill,  easy,  like  the  broad  way.  Spiritual  worship 
is  all  of  grace,  all  uphill,  and  all  against  the  grain.  Any  worship 
whatsoever  is  more  pleasing  to  the  natural  heart,  than  worship 
ping  God  in  the  way  which  our  Lord  Christ  describes,  "in  spirit 
and  in  truth."  (John  iv.  23.) 

I,  for  one,  am  not  surprised  at  the  quantity  of  idolatry  exist 
ing,  both  in  the  world  and  in  the  visible  Church.  I  believe  it 
perfectly  possible  that  we  may  yet  live  to  see  far  more  of  it  than 
some  have  ever  dreamed  of.  It  would  never  surprise  me  if  some 
mighty  personal  Antichrist  were  to  arise  before  the  end, — mighty 


406  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

in  intellect,  mighty  in  talents  for  government,  aye,  and  mighty, 
perhaps,  in  miraculous  gifts  too.  It  would  never  surprise  me  to 
see  such  an  one  as  him  setting  up  himself  in  opposition  to 
Christ,  and  forming  an  infidel  conspiracy  and  combination 
against  the  Gospel.  I  believe  that  many  would  rejoice  to  do 
him  honour,  who  now  glory  in  saying,  "  We  will  not  have  this 
Christ  to  reign  over  us."  I  believe  that  many  would  make  a 
god  of  him,  and  reverence  him  as  an  incarnation  of  truth,  and 
concentrate  their  idea  of  hero-worship  on  his  person.  I  advance 
it  as  a  possibility,  and  no  more.  But  of  this  at  least  I  am 
certain, — that  no  man  is  less  safe  from  danger  of  idolatry  than 
the  man  who  now  sneers  at  every  form  of  religion ;  and  that  from 
infidelity  to  credulity,  from  atheism  to  the  grossest  idolatry, 
there  is  but  a  single  step.  Let  us  not  think,  at  all  events,  that 
idolatry  is  an  old-fashioned  sin,  into  which  we  are  never  likely 
to  fall.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he 
fall."  We  shall  do  well  to  look  into  our  own  hearts  :  the  seeds 
of  idolatry  are  all  there.  We  should  remember  the  words  of  St. 
Paul :  "  Flee  from  idolatry." 

III.  Let  me  show,  in  the  third  place,  the  forms  ivhich  idolatry 
has  assumed,  and  does  assume,  in  the  visible  Church,  WHERE 
is  IT? 

I  believe  there  never  was  a  more  baseless  fabric  than  the 
theory  which  obtains  favour  with  many, — that  the  promises  of 
perpetuity  and  preservation  from  apostacy,  belong  to  the  visible 
Church  of  Christ.  It  is  a  theory  supported  neither  by  Scrip 
ture  nor  by  facts.  The  Church  against  which  "the  gates  of 
hell  shall  never  prevail,"  is  not  the  visible  Church,  but  the 
whole  body  of  the  elect,  the  company  of  true  believers  out 
of  every  nation  and  people.  The  greater  part  of  the  visible 
Church  has  frequently  maintained  gross  heresies.  The  particular 
branches  of  it  are  never  secure  against  deadly  error,  both  of 
faith  and  practice.  A  departure  from  the  faith, — a  falling  away, 
— a  leaving  of  first  love  in  any  branch  of  the  visible  Church, — 
need  never  surprise  a  careful  reader  of  the  New  Testament. 

That  idolatry  would  arise,  seems  to  have  been  the  expecta 
tion  of  the  Apostles,  even  before  the  canon  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  was  closed.  It  is  remarkable  to  observe  how  St.  Paul 
dwells  on  this  subject  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  If 


IDOLATRY.  407 

any  Corinthian  called  a  brother  was  an  idolator,  with  such  an 
one  the  members  of  the  Church  "  were  not  to  eat."  (1  Cor.  v. 
11.)  "Neither  be  ye  idolators,  as  were  some  of  our  fathers." 
(1  Cor.  x.  7.)  He  says  again,  in  the  text  which  heads  this 
paper,  "My  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  idolatry."  (1  Cor.  x.  14.) 
When  he  writes  to  the  Colossians,  he  warns  them  against 
"  worshipping  of  angels."  (Col.  ii.  18.)  And  St.  John  closes 
his  first  Epistle  with  the  solemn  injunction,  "  Little  children, 
keep  yourselves  from  idols."  (1  John  v.  21.)  It  is  impossible  not 
to  feel  that  all  these  passages  imply  an  expectation  that  idolatry 
would  arise,  and  that  soon,  among  professing  Christians. 

The  famous  prophecy  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  first 
Epistle  to  Timothy  contains  a  passage  which  is  even  more 
directly  to  the  point :  "  The  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in 
the  latter  times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to 
seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils."  (1  Tim.  iv.  1.)  I 
will  not  detain  my  readers  with  any  lengthy  discussion  of  that 
remarkable  expression,  "doctrines  of  devils."  It  may  be 
sufficient  to  say  that  our  excellent  translators  of  the  Bible  are 
considered  for  once  to  have  missed  the  full  meaning  of  the 
Apostle,  in  their  rendering  of  the  word  translated  as  "  devils  " 
in  our  version,  and  that  the  true  meaning  of  the  expression  is, 
"  doctrines  about  departed  spirits."  And  in  this  view,  which, 
I  may  as  well  say,  is  maintained  by  all  those  who  have  the  best 
right  to  be  heard  on  such  a  question,  the  passage  becomes  a 
direct  prediction  of  the  rise  of  that  most  specious  form  of 
idolatry,  the  worship  of  dead  saints.  (See  Mode's  Works.) 

The  last  passage  I  will  call  attention  to,  is  the  conclusion 
of  the  ninth  chapter  of  Revelation.  We  there  read,  at  the 
twentieth  verse  :  "  The  rest  of  the  men  which  were  not  killed  - 
by  these  plagues,  yet  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  hands, 
that  they  should  not  worship  devils  "  (this  is  the  same  word, 
we  should  observe,  as  that  in  the  Epistle  to  Timothy  just 
quoted),  "and  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass,  and  stone, 
and  wood  :  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk."  Xow, 
I  am  not  going  to  offer  any  comment  on  the  chapter  in  which 
this  verse  occurs.  I  know  well  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion 
as  to  the  true  interpretation  of  the  plagues  predicted  in  it.  I 
only  venture  to  assert  that  it  is  the  highest  probability  these 
plagues  are  to  fall  upon  the  visible  Church  of  Christ ;  and  the 


408  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

highest  improbability  that  St.  John  was  here  prophesying  about 
the  heathen,  who  never  heard  the  Gospel.  And  this  once 
conceded,  the  fact  that  idolatry  is  a  predicted  sin  of  the 
visible  Church,  does  seem  most  conclusively  and  for  ever 
established. 

And  now,  if  we  turn  from  the  Bible  to  facts,  what  do  we 
see  1  I  reply  unhesitatingly,  that  there  is  unmistakable  proof 
that  Scripture  warnings  and  predictions  were  not  spoken  with 
out  cause,  and  that  idolatry  has  actually  arisen  in  the  visible 
Church  of  Christ,  and  does  still  exist. 

The  rise  and  progress  of  the  evil  in  former  days,  we  shall 
find  well  summed  up  in  the  Homily  of  the  Church  of  England 
on  "  Peril  of  Idolatry."   To  that  Homily  I  beg  to  refer  all  Church 
men,  reminding  them  once  for  all,  that  in  the  judgment  of  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles,  the  Book  of  Homilies  "  contains  a  godly 
and  wholesome  doctrine,  and  necessary  for  these  times." — There 
we  read,  how,  even  in  the  FOURTH  CENTURY,  Jerome  complains 
"that  the  errors  of  images  have  come  in,  and  passed  to  the 
Christians  from  the  Gentiles ; "  and  Eusebius  says,  "We  do  see 
that  images  of  Peter  and  Paul,  and  of  our  Saviour  Himself,  be 
made,   and  tables  be  painted,  which  I    think  to   have   been 
derived  and  kept  indifferently  by  an  heathenish    custom." — 
There  we  may  read  how  "  Pontius  Paulinus,  Bishop  of  Nola, 
in  the  fifth  centwy,   caused  the  walls  of  the  temples  to  be 
painted  with  stories  taken  out  of  the  Old  Testament ;  that  the 
people   beholding  and  considering  these  pictures,    might   the 
better  abstain  from  too  much  surfeiting  and  riot.     But  from 
learning   by   painted  stories,   it    came   by  little  and  little  to 
idolatry." — There  we  may  read  how  Gregory  the  First,  Bishop 
of  Eome,  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century,  did  allow  the 
free  having  of  images  in  churches. — There  we  may  read  how 
Irene,  mother  of  Constantino  the  Sixth,  in  the  eighth  century, 
assembled  a  Council  at  Mcsea,  and  procured   a   decree   that 
"images  should  be  put  up  in  all  the  churches  of  Greece,  and 
that  honour  and  worship  should  be  given  to  the  said  images." 
And  there  we  may  read  the  conclusion  with  which  the  Homily 
winds   up   its   historical  summary,  —  "that  laity   and   clergy, 
learned  and  unlearned,   all  ages,  sorts,   and   degrees  of   men, 
women,  and  children  of  whole  Christendom,  have  been  at  once 
drowned  in  abominable  idolatry,  of  all  other  vices  most  detested 


IDOLATRY.  409 

of  God,  and  most  damnable  to  man,  and  that  by  the  space  of 
800  years  and  more." 

This  is  a  mournful  account,  but  it  is  only  too  true.     There 
can  be  little  doubt  the  evil  began  even  before  the  time  just 
mentioned  by  the  Homily  writers.     No  man,  I  think,   need 
wonder  at  the  rise  of  idolatry  in  the  Primitive  Church,  who 
considers  calmly  the  excessive  reverence  which  it  paid,  from  the 
very  first,  to  the  visible  parts  of  religion.     I  believe  that  no 
impartial  man  can  read  the  language  used  by  nearly  all  the 
Fathers  about  the  Church,  the  bishops,  the  ministry,  baptism, 
the  Lord's  Supper,  the  martyrs,  the  dead  saints  generally, — no 
man  can  read  it  without  being  struck  with  the  wide  difference 
between  their  language  and  the  language  of  Scripture  on  such 
subjects.     You  seem  at  once  to  be  in  a  new  atmosphere.     You 
feel  that  you  are  no  longer  treading  on  holy  ground.     You  find 
that  things  which  in  the  Bible  are  evidently  of  second-rate 
importance,  are  here  made  of  first-rate  importance.     You  find 
the  things  of  sense  and  sight  exalted  to  a  position  in  which 
Paul,  and  Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  speaking  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  never  for  a  moment  placed  them.     It  is  not  merely  the 
weakness  of  uninspired  writings  that  you  have  to  complain  of ; 
it  is  something  worse :  it  is  a  new  system.     And  what  is  the 
explanation  of  all  this  1     It  is,  in  one  word,  that  you  have  got 
into  a  region  where  the  malaria  of  idolatry  has  begun  to  arise. 
You  perceive  the  first  workings  of  the  mystery  of  iniquity.    You 
detect  the  buds  of  that  huge  system  of  idolatry  which,  as  the 
Homily  describes,  was  afterwards  formally  acknowledged,  and 
ultimately  blossomed  so  luxuriantly  in  every  part  of  Christen 
dom. 

But  let  us  now  turn  from  the  past  to  the  present.  Let  us 
examine  the  question  which  most  concerns  ourselves.  Let  us 
consider  in  what  form  idolatry  presents  itself  to  us  as  a  sin  of 
the  visible  Church  of  Christ  in  our  own  time. 

I  find  no  difficulty  in  answering  this  question.  I  feel  no 
hesitation  in  affirming  that  idolatry  never  yet  assumed  a  more 
glaring  form  than  it  does  in  the  Clmrcli  of  Rome  at  this  present 
day. 

And  here  I  come  to  a  subject  on  which  it  is  hard  to  speak, 
because  of  the  times  we  live  in.  But  the  whole  truth  ought  to 
be  spoken  by  ministers  of  Christ,  without  respect  of  times  and 


410  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

prejudices.  And  I  should  not  lie  down  in  peace,  after  writing 
on  idolatry,  if  I  did  not  declare  my  solemn  conviction  that 
idolatry  is  one  of  the  crying  sins  of  which  the  Church  of  Koine 
is  guilty.  I  say  this  in  all  sadness.  I  say  it,  acknowledging 
fully  that  we  have  our  faults  in  the  Protestant  Church ;  and 
practically,  perhaps,  in  some  quarters,  not  a  little  idolatry.  But 
from  formal,  recognized,  systematic  idolatry,  I  believe  we  are 
almost  entirely  free.  While,  as  for  the  Church  of  Rome,  if 
there  is  not  in  her  worship  an  enormous  quantity  of  systematic, 
organized  idolatry,  I  frankly  confess  I  do  not  know  what 
idolatry  is. 

(a)  To  my  mind,  it  is  idolatry  to  have  images  and  pictures 
of  saints  in  churches,  and  to  give  them  a  reverence  for  which 
there  is  no  warrant  or  precedent  in  Scripture.     And  if  this  be 
so,  I  say  there  is  idolatry  in  the  Church  of  Rome. 

(b)  To  my  mind,  it  is  idolatry  to  invoke  the  Virgin  Mary 
and  the  saints  in  glory,  and  to  address  them  in  language  never 
addressed  in   Scripture  except  to  the  Holy  Trinity.     And  if 
this  be  so,  I  say  there  is  idolatry  in  the  Church  of  Rome. 

(c)  To  my  mind,  it  is  idolatry  to  bow  down  to  mere  material 
things,  and  attribute  to  them  a  power  and  sanctity  far  exceeding 
that  attached  to  the  ark  or  altar  of  the  Old  Testament  dispen 
sation  ;  and  a  power  and  sanctity,  too,  for  which  there  is  not  a 
tittle  of  foundation  in  the  Word  of  God.     And  if  this  be  so 
with  the  holy  coat  of  Treves,  and  the  wonderfully-multiplied 
wood  of  the  true  cross,  and  a  thousand  other  so-called  relics  in 
my  mind's  eye,  I  say  there  is  idolatry  in  the  Church  of  Home. 

(d)  To  my  mind,  it  is  idolatry  to  worship  that  which  man's 
hands  have  made, — to  call  it  God,  and  adore  it  when  lifted  up 
before  our  eyes.     And  if  this  be  so,  with  the  notorious  doctrine 
of  transubstantiation,  and  the  elevation  of  the  Host  in  my  recol 
lection,  I  say  there  is  idolatry  in  the  CJiurcli  of  Rome. 

(e)  To  my  mind,  it  is  idolatry  to  make  ordained  men  mediators 
between  ourselves  and  God,  robbing,  as  it  were,  our  Lord  Christ 
of  His  office,  and  giving  them  an  honour  which  even  Apostles 
and  angels  in  Scripture  flatly  repudiate.     And  if  this  be  so, 
with  the  honour  paid  to  Popes  and  Priests  before  my  eyes,  I 
say  there  is  idolatry  in  the  Church  of  Rome. 

I  know  well  that  language  like  this  jars  the  minds  of  many. 
Men  love  to  shut  their  eyes  against  evils  which  it  is  disagreeable 


IDOLATKY.  411 

to  allow.  They  will  not  see  things  which  involve  unpleasant 
consequences.  That  the  Church  of  Rome  is  an  erring  Church, 
they  will  acknowledge.  That  she  is  idolatrous,  they  will  deny.' 

They  tell  us  that  the  reverence  which  the  Romish  Church 
gives  to  saints  and  images  does  not  amount  to  idolatry.  They 
inform  us  that  there  are  distinctions  between  the  worship  of 
"latria"  and  "dulia,"  between  a  mediation  of  redemption,  and 
a  mediation  of  intercession,  which  clear  her  of  the  charge.  My 
answer  is,  that  the  Bible  knows  nothing  of  such  distinctions ; 
and  that,  in  the  actual  practice  of  the  great  bulk  of  Roman 
Catholics,  they  have  no  existence  at  all.* 

They  tell  us,  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  Roman 
Catholics  really  worship  the  images  and  pictures  before  which 
they  perform  acts  of  adoration;  that  they  only  use  them  as 
helps  to  devotion,  and  in  reality  look  far  beyond  them.  My 
answer  is,  that  many  a  heathen  could  say  just  as  much  for  his 
idolatry; — that  it  is  notorious,  in  former  days,  that  they  did 
say  so ; — and  that  in  Hindostan  many  idol-worshippers  do  say  so 
at  the  present  day.  But  the  apology  does  not  avail.  The  terms 
of  the  second  commandment  are  too  stringent.  It  prohibits 
lowing  down,  as  well  as  worshipping.  And  the  very  anxiety 
which  the  Church  of  Rome  has  often  displayed  to  exclude  that 
second  commandment  from  her  catechisms,  is  of  itself  a  great 
fact  which  speaks  volumes  to  a  candid  observer. 

They  tell  us  that  we  have  no  evidence  for  the  assertions  we 
make  on  this  subject ;  that  we  found  our  charges  on  the  abuses 
which  prevail  among  the  ignorant  members  of  the  Romish 
communion ;  and  that  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  a  Church  con 
taining  so  many  wise  and  learned  men,  is  guilty  of  idolatry. 
My  answer  is,  that  the  devotional  books  in  common  use  among 
Roman  Catholics  supply  us  with  unmistakable  evidence.  Let  any 
one  examine  that  notorious  book,  The  Garden  of  the  Soul,  if  he 
doubts  my  assertion,  and  read  the  language  there  addressed  to 
the  Virgin  Mary.  Let  him  remember  that  this  language  is 
addressed  to  a  woman  who,  though  highly  favoured,  and  the 
mother  of  our  Lord,  was  yet  one  of  our  fellow-sinners, — to  a 

"Latria"  and  "  dulia"  are  two  Greek  words,  both  meaning  "  worship  " 
or  "service,"  but  the  former  being  a  much  stronger  word  than  the  latter. 
The  Roman  Catholic  admits  that  the  worship  of  "  latria"  may  not  be  given 
to  saints,  but  maintains  that  "  dulia"  may  be  given. 


412  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

woman  who  actually  confesses  her  need  of  a  Savour  for  herself. 
She  says,  "My  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour." 
(Luke  i.  47.)  Let  him  examine  this  language  in  the  light  of 
the  New  Testament,  and  then  let  him  tell  us  fairly  whether 
the  charge  of  idolatry  is  not  fully  made  out. — But  I  answer, 
beside  this,  that  we  want  no  better  evidence  than  that  which 
is  supplied  in  the  city  of  Eome  itself.  What  do  men  and 
women  do  under  the  light  of  the  Pope's  own  countenance? 
What  is  the  religion  that  prevails  around  St.  Peter's  and  under 
the  walls  of  the  Vatican1?  What  is  Eomanism  at  Rome, 
unfettered,  unshackled,  and  free  to  develope  itself  in  full  per 
fection  1  Let  a  man  honestly  answer  these  questions,  and  I  ask 
no  more.  Let  him  read  such  a  book  as  Seymour's  Pilgrimage 
to  Home,  or  Alford's  Letters,  and  ask  any  visitor  to  Kome 
if  the  picture  is  too  highly  coloured.  Let  him  do  this,  I  say, 
and  I  believe  he  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that  Romanism 
in  perfection  is  a  gigantic  system  of  Church-worship,  sacrament- 
worship,  Mary-worship,  saint-worship,  image -worship,  relic- 
worship,  and  priest-worship, — that  it  is,  in  one  word,  a  huge 
organized  idolatry. 

I  know  how  painful  these  things  sound  to  many  ears.  To 
me  it  is  no  pleasure  to  dwell  on  the  shortcomings  of  any  who 
profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  I  can  say  truly  that  I 
have  said  what  I  have  said  with  pain  and  sorrow. 

I  draw  a  wide  distinction  between  the  accredited  dogmas  of 
the  Church  of  Rome  and  the  private  opinions  of  many  of  her 
members.  I  believe  and  hope  that  many  a  Roman  Catholic  is 
in  heart  inconsistent  with  his  profession,  and  is  better  than  the 
Church  to  which  he  belongs.  I  cannot  forget  the  Jansenists, 
and  Quesnel,  and  Martin  Boos.  I  believe  that  many  a  poor 
Italian  at  this  day  is  worshipping  with  an  idolatrous  worship, 
simply  because  he  knows  no  better.  He  has  no  Bible  to  instruct 
him.  He  has  no  faithful  minister  to  teach  him.  He  has  the 
fear  of  the  priest  before  his  eyes,  if  he  dares  to  think  for  him 
self.  He  has  no  money  to  enable  him  to  get  away  from  the 
bondage  he  lives  under,  even  if  he  feels  a  desire.  I  remember 
all  this;  and  I  say  that  the  Italian  eminently  deserves  our 
sympathy  and  compassion.  But  all  this  must  not  prevent  my 
saying  that  the  Church  of  Rome  is  an  idolatrous  Church. 

I  should  not  be  faithful  if  I  said  less.     The  Church  of  which 


IDOLATRY.  413 

I  am  a  minister  lias  spoken  out  most  strongly  on  the  subject. 
The  Homily  on  "Peril  of  Idolatry,"  and  the  solemn  protest 
following  the  Kubrics  at  the  end  of  our  Prayer-book  Communion 
Service,  which  denounces  the  adoration  of  the  sacramental 
bread  and  wine  as  "idolatry  to  be  abhorred  of  all  faithful 
Christians,"  are  plain  evidence  that  I  have  said  no  more  than 
the  mind  of  my  own  Church.  And  in  a  day  like  this, — when 
some  are  disposed  to  secede  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  many 
are  shutting  their  eyes  to  her  real  character,  and  wanting  us  to 
be  reunited  to  her, — in  a  day  like  this,  my  own  conscience 
would  rebuke  me  if  I  did  not  warn  men  plainly  that  the  Church 
of  Rome  is  an  idolatrous  Church,  and  that  if  they  will  join  her 
they  are  "joining  themselves  to  idols." 

But  I  may  not  dwell  longer  on  this  part  of  my  subject. 
The  main  point  I  wish  to  impress  on  men's  minds  is  this, — that 
idolatry  has  decidedly  manifested  itself  in  the  visible  Church 
of  Christ,  and  nowhere  so  decidedly  as  in  the  Church  of  Rome. 

IV.  And  now  let  me  show,  in  the  last  place,  the  ultimate 
abolition  of  all  idolatry.  WHAT  WILL  END  IT  1 

I  consider  that  man's  soul  must  be  in  an  unhealthy  state 
who  does  not  long  for  the  time  when  idolatry  shall  be  no  more. 
That  heart  can  hardly  be  right  with  God  which  can  think  of  the 
millions  who  are  sunk  in  heathenism,  or  honour  the  false 
prophet  Mahomet,  or  daily  offer  up  prayers  to  the  Virgin  Mary, 
and  not  cry,  "0  my  God,  what  shall  be  the  end  of  these 
things  ?  How  long,  0  Lord,  how  long  1 " 

Here,  as  in  other  subjects,  the  sure  word  of  prophecy  comes 
in  to  our  aid.  The  end  of  all  idolatry  shall  one  day  come.  Its 
doom  is  fixed.  Its  overthrow  is  certain.  Whether  in  heathen 
temples,  or  in  so-called  Christian  churches,  idolatry  shall  be 
destroyed  at  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Then  shall  be  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  "  The  idols 
He  shall  utterly  abolish."  (Isa.  ii.  18.)— Then  shall  be  fulfilled 
the  words  of  Micah  (v.  13) :  "  Their  graven  images  also  will  I 
cut  off,  and  their  standing  images  out  of  the  midst  of  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  no  more  worship  the  work  of  thine  hands." — Then 
shall  be  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Zephaniah  (ii.  11):  "The 
Lord  will  be  terrible  unto  them  :  for  He  will  famish  all  the 
gods  of  the  earth ;  and  men  shall  worship  Him,  every  one  from 


414  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

his  place,  even  all  the  isles  of  the  heathen." — Then  shall  be 
fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah  (xiii.  2)  :  "It  shall  come  to 
pass  at  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  I  will  cut  off  the 
names  of  the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be 
remembered." — In  a  word,  the  ninety-seventh  Psalm  shall  then 
receive  its  full  accomplishment :  "The  Lordreigneth :  let  the  earth 
rejoice  \  let  the  multitude  of  isles  be  glad  thereof.  Clouds  and 
darkness  are  round  about  Him  :  righteousness  and  judgment  are 
the  habitation  of  His  throne.  A  fire  goeth  before  Him,  and 
burneth  up  His  enemies  round  about.  His  lightnings  enlightened 
the  world  :  the  earth  saw,  and  trembled.  The  hills  melted  like 
wax  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord  of 
the  whole  earth.  The  heavens  declare  His  righteousness,  and 
all  the  people  see  His  glory.  Confounded  be  all  they  that  serve 
graven  images,  that  boast  themselves  of  idols  :  worship  Him,  all 
ye  gods." 

The  second  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  that  blessed 
hope  which  should  ever  comfort  the  children  of  God  under  the 
present  dispensation.  It  is  the  pole-star  by  which  we  must 
journey.  It  is  the  one  point  on  which  all  our  expectations 
should  be  concentrated.  "  Yet  a  little  while,  and  He  that  shall 
come  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry."  (Heb.  x.  37.)  Our  David 
shall  no  longer  dwell  in  Adullam,  followed  by  a  despised  few, 
and  rejected  by  the  many.  He  shall  take  to  Himself  His  great 
power,  and  reign,  and  cause  every  knee  to  bow  before  Him. 

Till  then  our  redemption  is  not  perfectly  enjoyed ;  as  Paul 
tells  the  Ephesians,  "  We  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption." 
(Eph.  iv.  30.)  Till  then  our  salvation  is  not  completed;  as 
Peter  says,  "We  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith 
unto  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  (1  Peter 
i.  5.)  Till  then  our  knowledge  is  still  defective ;  as  Paul  tells 
the  Corinthians :  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly ;  but 
then  face  to  face  :  now  I  know  in  part ;  then  shall  I  know  even 
also  as  I  am  known."  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12.)  In  short,  our  best 
things  are  yet  to  come. 

But  in  the  day  of  our  Lord's  return  every  desire  shall  receive 
its  full  accomplishment.  We  shall  no  more  be  pressed  down 
and  worn  out  with  the  sense  of  constant  failure,  feebleness,  and 
disappointment.  In  His  presence  we  shall  find  there  is  a  fulness 
of  joy,  if  nowhere  else  ;  and  when  we  awake  up  after  His  like- 


IDOLATRY.  415 

ness  we  shall  be  satisfied,  if  we  never  were  before.    (Psalm  xvi. 
11;  xvii.  15.) 

There  are  many  abominations  now  in  the  visible  Church, 
over  which  we  can  only  sigh  and  cry,  like  the  faithful  in 
Ezekiel's  day.  (Ezek.  ix.  4.)  We  cannot  remove  them.  The 
wheat  and  the  tares  will  grow  together  until  the  harvest.  But 
a  day  comes  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  once  more  purify  His 
temple,  and  cast  forth  everything  that  denies.  He  shall  do 
that  work  of  which  the  doings  of  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  were  a 
faint  type  long  ago.  He  shall  cast  forth  the  images,  and  purge 
out  idolatry  in  every  shape. 

Who  is  there  now  that  longs  for  the  conversion  of  the  heathen 
world?  You  will  not  see  it  in  its  fulness  until  the  Lord's 
appearing.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  will  that  often-misapplied 
text  be  fulfilled  :  "A  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his 
idols  of  gold,  which  they  made  each  one  for  himself  to  worship, 
to  the  moles  and  to  the  bats."  (Isa.  ii.  20.) 

Who  is  there  now  that  longs  for  the  redemption  of  Israel  1 
You  will  never  see  it  in  its  perfection  till  the  Redeemer  comes 
to  Zion.  Idolatry  in  the  professing  Church  of  Christ  has  been 
one  of  the  mightiest  stumbling-blocks  in  the  Jew's  way.  When 
it  begins  to  fall,  the  veil  over  the  heart  of  Israel  shall  begin  to 
be  taken  away.  (Psalm  cii.  16.) 

Who  is  there  now  that  longs  for  the  fall  of  Antichrist,  and 
the  purification  of  the  Church  of  Rome  ?  I  believe  that  will 
never  be  until  the  winding  up  of  this  dispensation.  That  vast 
system  of  idolatry  may  be  consumed  and  wasted  by  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord's  mouth,  but  it  shall  never  be  destroyed  excepting 
by  the  brightness  of  His  coming.  (2  Thess.  ii.  8.) 

Who  is  there  now  that  longs  for  a  perfect  Church — a  Church 
in  which  there  shall  not  be  the  slightest  taint  of  idolatry  1  You 
must  wait  for  the  Lord's  return.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  shall 
we  see  a  perfect  Church, — a  Church  having  neither  spot  nor 
wrinkle,  nor  any  such  thing  (Eph.  v.  27), — a  Church  of  which 
all  the  members  shall  be  regenerate,  and  every  one  a  child 
of  God. 

If  these  things  be  so,  men  need  not  wonder  that  we  urge  on 
them  the  study  of  prophecy,  and  that  we  charge  them  above  all 
to  grasp  firmly  the  glorious  doctrine  of  Christ's  second  appearing 
and  kingdom.  This  is  the  "light  shining  in  a  dark  place,"  to 


416  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

which  we  shall  do  well  to  take  heed.  Let  others  indulge  their 
fancy  if  they  will,  with  the  vision  of  an  imaginary  "  Church  of 
the  future."  Let  the  children  of  this  world  dream  of  some 
"  coming  man,"  who  is  to  understand  everything,  and  set  every 
thing  right.  They  are  only  sowing  to  themselves  bitter  disap 
pointment.  They  will  awake  to  find  their  visions  baseless  and 
empty  as  a  dream.  It  is  to  such  as  these  that  the  Prophet's 
words  may  be  well  applied  :  "  Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire, 
that  compass  yourselves  about  with  sparks  :  walk  in  the  light  of 
your  fire,  and  in  the  sparks  that  ye  have  kindled.  This  shall 
ye  have  of  Mine  hand ;  ye  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow." 
(Isa.  1.  11.) 

But  let  our  eyes  look  right  onward  to  the  day  of  Christ's 
second  advent.  That  is  the  only  day  when  every  abuse  shall 
be  rectified,  and  every  corruption  and  source  of  sorrow  com 
pletely  purged  away.  Waiting  for  that  day,  let  us  each  work 
on  and  serve  our  generation ;  not  idle,  as  if  nothing  could  be 
done  to  check  evil,  but  not  disheartened  because  we  see  not  yet 
all  things  put  under  our  Lord.  After  all,  the  night  is  far  spent, 
and  the  day  is  at  hand.  Let  us  wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord. 

If  these  things  be  so,  men  need  not  wonder  that  we  warn 
them  to  beware  of  all  leanings  towards  the  Church  of  Rome. 
Surely,  when  the  mind  of  God  about  idolatry  is  so  plainly 
revealed  to  us  in  His  Word,  it  seems  the  height  of  infatuation 
in  any  one  to  join  a  Church  so  steeped  in  idolatries  as  the 
Church  of  Rome.  To  enter  into  communion  with  her,  when 
God  is  saying,  "  Come  out  of  her,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of 
her  sins,  and  receive  not  of  her  plagues  "  (Rev.  xviii.  4), — to 
seek  her  when  the  Lord  is  warning  us  to  leave  her, — to  become 
her  subjects  when  the  Lord's  voice  is  crying,  "  Escape  for  thy 
life,  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  ;  " — all  this  is  mental  blindness 
indeed, — a  blindness  like  that  of  him  who,  though  fore-warned, 
embarks  in  a  sinking  ship, — a  blindness  which  would  be  almost 
incredible,  if  our  own  eyes  did  not  see  examples  of  it  con 
tinually. 

We  must  all  be  on  our  guard.  We  must  take  nothing  for 
granted.  We  must  not  hastily  suppose  that  we  are  too  wise  to 
be  ensnared,  and  say,  like  Hazael,  "  Is  Thy  servant  a  dog,  that 
he  should  do  this  thing  ? "  Those  who  preach  must  cry  aloud 
and  spare  not,  and  allow  no  false  tenderness  to  make  them  hold 


IDOLATRY.  417 

their  peace  about  the  heresies  of  the  day.  Those  who  hear  must 
have  their  loins  girt  about  with  truth,  and  their  minds  stored 
with  clear  prophetical  views  of  the  end  to  which  all  idol- 
worshippers  must  come.  Let  us  all  try  to  realize  that  the  latter 
ends  of  the  world  are  upon  us,  and  that  the  abolition  of  all 
idolatry  is  hastening  on.  Is  this  a  time  for  a  man  to  draw 
nearer  to  Eome  ?  Is  it  not  rather  a  time  to  draw  further  back 
and  stand  clear,  lest  we  be  involved  in  her  downfall  ?  Is  this  a 
time  to  extenuate  and  palliate  Rome's  manifold  corruptions,  and 
refuse  to  see  the  reality  of  her  sins  1  Surely  we  ought  rather  to 
be  doubly  jealous  of  everything  of  a  Romish  tendency  in 
religion, — doubly  careful  that  we  do  not  connive  at  any  treason 
against  our  Lord  Christ,— and  doubly  ready  to  protest  against 
unscriptural  worship  of  every  description.  Once  more,  then,  I 
say,  let  us  remember  that  the  destruction  of  all  idolatry 'is 
certain,  and  remembering  that,  beware  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 

The  subject  I  now  touch  upon  is  of  deep  and  pressing  im 
portance,  and  demands  the  serious  attention  of  all  Protestant 
Churchmen.  It  is  vain  to  deny  that  a  large  party  of  English 
clergy  and  laity  in  the  present  day  are  moving  heaven  and  earth 
to  reunite  the  Church  of  England  with  the  idolatrous  Church  of 
Rome.  The  publication  of  that  monstrous  book,  Dr.  Pusey's 
Eirenicon,  and  the  formation  of  a  "  Society  for  Promoting  the 
Union  of  Christendom,"  are  plain  evidence  of  what  I  mean. 
He  that  runs  may  read. 

The  existence  of  such  a  movement  as  this  will  not  surprise 
any  one  who  has  carefully  watched  the  history  of  the  Church 
of  England  during  the  last  forty  years,  the  tendency  of 
Tractarianism  and  Ritualism  has  been  steadily  towards  Rome. 
Hundreds  of  men  and  women  have  fairly  and  honestly  left  our 
ranks,  and  become  downright  Papists.  But  many  hundreds 
more  have  stayed  behind,  and  are  yet  nominal  Churchmen 
within  our  pale.  The  pompous  semi-Romish  ceremonial  which 
has  been  introduced  into  many  churches,  has  prepared  men's 
minds  for  changes.  An  extravagantly  theatrical  and  idolatrous 
mode  of  celebrating  the  Lord's  Supper  has  paved  the  way  for 
transubstantiation.  A  regular  process  of  unprotestantizing  has 
been  long  and  successfully  at  work.  The  poor  old  Church  of 
England  stands  on  an  inclined  plane.  Her  very  existence  as  a 
Protestant  Church,  is  in  peril. 

2  D 


418  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

I  hold,  for  one,  that  this  Romish  movement  ought  to  be 
steadily  and  firmly  resisted.  Notwithstanding  the  rank,  the 
learning,  and  the  devotedness  of  some  of  its  advocates,  I  regard 
it  as  a  most  mischievous,  soul-ruining,  and  unscriptural  move 
ment.  To  say  that  re-union  with  Rome  would  be  an  insult  to 
our  martyred  Reformers,  is  a  very  light  thing ;  it  is  far  more 
than  this :  it  would  be  a  sin  and  an  offence  against  God  ! 
Rather  than  be  re-united  with  the  idolatrous  Church  of  Rome,  I 
would  willingly  see  my  own  beloved  Church  perish  and  go  to 
pieces.  Rather  than  become  Popish  once  more,  she  had  better  die ! 

Unity  in  the  abstract  is  no  doubt  an  excellent  thing :  but 
unity  without  truth  is  useless.  Peace  and  uniformity  are 
beautiful  and  valuable  :  but  peace  without  the  Gospel, — peace 
based  on  a  common  Episcopacy,  and  not  on  a  common  faith, — 
is  a  worthless  peace,  not  deserving  of  the  name.  When  Rome 
has  repealed  the  decrees  of  Trent,  and  her  additions  to  the 
Creed, — when  Rome  has  recanted  her  false  and  unscriptural 
doctrines, — when  Rome  has  formally  renounced  image-worship, 
Mary-worship,  and  transubstantiation, — then,  and  not  till  then, 
it  will  be  time  to  talk  of  re-union  with  her.  Till  then  there  is 
a  gulf  between  us  which  cannot  be  honestly  bridged.  Till  then 
I  call  on  all  Churchmen  to  resist  to  the  death  this  idea  of 
reunion  with  Rome.  Till  then  let  our  watchwords  be,  "  No 
peace  with  Rome  !  No  communion  with  idolaters  ! "  Well 
says  the  admirable  Bishop  Jewel,  in  his  Apology,  "  We  do  not 
decline  concord  and  peace  with  men ;  but  we  will  not  continue 
in  a  state  of  war  with  God  that  we  might  have  peace  with  men  ! 
— If  the  Pope  does  indeed  desire  we  should  be  reconciled  to 
him,  he  ought  first  to  reconcile  himself  to  God."  This  witness 
is  true  !  Well  would  it  be  for  the  Church  of  England,  if  all  her 
bishops  had  been  like  Jewel  ! 

I  write  these  things  with  sorrow.  But  the  circumstances  of 
the  times  make  it  absolutely  necessary  to  speak  out.  To  what 
ever  quarter  of  the  horizon  I  turn,  I  see  grave  reason  for  alarm. 
For  the  true  Church  of  Christ  I  have  no  fears  at  all.  But  for 
the  Established  Church  of  England,  and  for  all  the  Protestant 
Churches  of  Great  Britain,  I  have  very  grave  fears  indeed.  The 
tide  of  events  seems  running  strongly  against  Protestantism  and 
in  favour  of  Rome.  It  looks  as  if  God  had  a  controversy  with 
us,  as  a  nation,  and  was  about  to  punish  us  for  our  sins. 


IDOLATRY.  419 

I  am  no  prophet.  1  know  not  where  we  are  drifting.  But 
at  the  rate  we  are  going,  I  think  it  quite  within  the  verge  of 
possibility  that  in  a  few  years  the  Church  of  England  may  be 
re-united  to  the  Church  of  Rome.  The  Crown  of  England  may 
be  once  more  on  the  head  of  a  Papist.  Protestantism  may  be 
formally  repudiated.  A  Romish  Archbishop  may  once  more 
preside  at  Lambeth  Palace.  Mass  may  be  once  more  said  at 
Westminster  Abbey  and  St.  Paul's.  And  one  result  will  be, 
that  all  Bible-reading  Christians  must  either  leave  the  Church  of 
England,  or  else  sanction  idol-worship  and  become  idolaters ! 
God  grant  we  may  never  come  to  this  state  of  things  !  But  at 
the  rate  we  are  going,  it  seems  to  me  quite  possible. 

And  now  it  only  remains  for  me  to  conclude  what  I  have 
been  saying,  by  mentioning  some  safe-guards  for  the  souls  of  all 
who  read  this  paper.  We  live  in  a  time  when  the  Church  of 
Rome  is  walking  amongst  us  with  renewed  strength,  and  loudly 
boasting  that  she  will  soon  win  back  the  ground  that  she  has 
lost.  Ealse  doctrines  of  every  kind  are  continually  set  before  us 
in  the  most  subtle  and  specious  forms.  It  cannot  be  thought 
unseasonable  if  I  offer  some  practical  safe-guards  against  idolatry. 
What  it*  is,  whence  it  comes,  where  it  is,  what  will  end  it, — all 
this  we  have  seen.  Let  me  point  out  how  we  may  be  safe  from 
it,  and  I  will  say  no  more. 

(1)  Let  us  arm  ourselves,  then,  for  one  thing,  with  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  the  Word  of  God.  Let  us  read  our  Bibles  more 
diligently  than  ever,  and  become  familiar  with  every  part  of 
them.  Let  the  Word  dwell  in  us  richly.  Let  us  beware  of 
anything  which  would  make  us  give  less  time,  and  less  heart,  to 
the  perusal  of  its  sacred  pages.  The  Bible  is  the  sword  of  tho 
Spirit ; — let  it  never  be  laid  aside.  The  Bible  is  the  true 
lantern  for  a  dark  and  cloudy  time  ; — let  us  beware  of  travelling 
without  its  light.  I  strongly  suspect, — if  we  did  but  know  the 
secret  history  of  the  numerous  secessions  from  our  Church  to 
that  of  Rome,  which  we  deplore, — I  strongly  suspect  that  in 
almost  every  case  one  of  the  most  important  steps  in  the  down 
ward  road  would  be  found  to  have  been  a  neglected  Bible, — 
more  attention  to  forms,  sacraments,  daily  services,  primitive 
Christianity,  and  so  forth,  and  diminished  attention  to  the 
written  Word  of  God.  The  Bible  is  the  King's  highway.  If 


420  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

we  once  leave  that  for  any  by-path,  however  beautiful,  and  old, 
and  frequented  it  may  seem,  we  must  never  be  surprised  if  we 
end  with  worshipping  images  and  relics,  and  going  regularly  to 
a  confessional. 

(2)  Let  us  arm  ourselves,  in  the  second  place,  with  a  godly 
iealousy  about  the  least  portion  of  the  Gospel.     Let  us  beware 
of  sanctioning  the  slightest  attempt  to  keep  back  any  jot  or 
tittle  of  it,  or  to  throw  any  part  of  it  into  the  shade  by  exalting 
subordinate  matters  in  religion.     When  Peter  withdrew  himself 
from  eating  with  the  Gentiles,  it  seemed  but  a  little  thing ;  yet 
Paul  tells  the  Galatians,  "  I  withstood  him  to  the  face,  because 
he  was  to  be  blamed."     (Gal.  ii.  11.)     Let  us  count  nothing 
little  that  concerns  our  souls.     Let  us  be  very  particular  whom 
we  hear,  where  we  go,  and  what  we  do,  in  all  the  matters  of  our 
own  particular  worship ;  and  let  us  care  nothing  for  the  imputa 
tion  of  squeamishness  and  excessive  scrupulosity.     We  live  in 
days  when  great  principles  are  involved  in  little  acts,  and  things 
in  religion,  which  fifty  years  ago  were  utterly  indifferent,  are 
now  by  circumstances  rendered  indifferent  no  longer.     Let  us 
beware  of  tampering  with  anything  of  a  Romanizing  tendency. 
It  is  foolishness  to  play  with  fire.     I  believe  that  many  of  our 
perverts  and  seceders  began  with  thinking  there  coultl  be  no 
mighty  harm  in  attaching  a  little  more  importance  to  certain 
outward  things  than  they  once  did.     But  once  launched  on  the 
downward  course,   they  went  on  from  one  thing  to  another. 
They  provoked  God,  and  He  left  them  to  themselves !     They 
were  given  over  to  strong  delusion,  and  allowed  to  believe  a  lie. 
(2   Thess.   ii.    11.)     They  tempted  the  devil,  and  he  came  to 
them  !     They  started  with  trifles,  as  many  foolishly  call  them. 
They  have  ended  with  downright  idolatry. 

(3)  Let  us  arm  ourselves,  last  of  all,  with  clear  sound  views  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  salvation  that  is  in  Him. 
He  is  the  "  image  of  the  invisible  God," — the  express  "  image 
of  His  person," — and  the  true  preservative  against  all  idolatry, 
when  truly  known.     Let  us  build  ourselves  deep  down  on  the 
strong  foundation  of  His  finished  work  upon  the  cross.     Let  us 
settle  it  firmly  in  our  minds,  that  Christ  Jesus  has  done  every 
thing  needful  in  order  to  present  us  without  spot  before  the 
throne  of  God,  and  that  simple,  childlike  faith  on  our  part  is  the 
only  thing  required  to  give  us  an  entire  interest  in  the  work  of 


IDOLATRY.  421 

Christ.  Lot  us  not  doubt  that,  having  this  faith,  we  arc  com 
pletely  justified  in  the  sight  of  God, — will  never  be  more 
justified  if  we  live  to  the  age  of  Methuselah  and  do  the  works 
of  the  Apostle  Paul, — and  CAN  add  nothing  to  that  complete 
justification  by  any  acts,  deeds,  words,  performances,  fastings, 
prayers,  almsdeeds,  attendance  on  ordinances,  or  anything  else 
of  our  own. 

Above  all,  let  us  keep  up  continual  communion  with  the 
person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  !  Let  us  abide  in  Him  daily,  feed 
on  Him  daily,  look  to  Him  daily,  lean  on  Him  daily,  live  upon 
Him  daily,  draw  from  His  fulness  daily.  Let  us  realize  this, 
and  the  idea  of  other  mediators,  other  comforters,  other  inter 
cessors,  will  seem  utterly  absurd.  "  What  need  is  there  ?"  we 
shall  reply  :  "  I  have  Christ,  and  in  Him  I  have  all.  What 
have  I  to  do  with  idols  ?  I  have  Jesus  in  my  heart,  Jesus  in 
the  Bible,  and  Jesus  in  heaven,  and  I  want  nothing  more !  " 

Once  let  the  Lord  Christ  have  His  rightful  place  in  our  hearts, 
and  all  other  things  in  our  religion  will  soon  fall  into  their  right 
places. — Church,  ministers,  sacraments,  ordinances,  all  will  go 
down,  and  take  the  second  place. 

Except  Christ  sits  as  Priest  and  King  upon  the  throne  of  our 
hearts,  that  little  kingdom  within  will  be  in  perpetual  confusion. 
But  only  let  Him  be  "all  in  all"  there,  and  all  will  be  well. 
Before  Him  every  idol,  every  Dagon  shall  fall  down.  CHRIST 

RIGHTLY  KNOWN,  CHRIST  TRULY  BELIEVED,  AND  CHRIST  HEARTILY 
LOVED,  IS  THE  TRUE  PRESERVATIVE  AGAINST  RlTUALISM,  ROMANISM 
AND  EVERY  FORM  OF  IDOLATRY. 


NOTE. 

I  ask  every  reader  of  this  paper  to  read,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest 
the  language  of  the  following  declaration.  It  is  the  declaration  which, 
under  the  "  Act  of  Settlement  "  and  by  the  law  of  England,  every  Sovereign 
of  this  country,  at  his  or  her  coronation,  must  "  make,  subscribe,  and  audibly 
repeat."  It  is  the  declai-ation,  be  it  remembered,  which  was  made,  sub 
scribed,  and  repeated  by  Her  Gracious  Majesty,  Queen  Victoria. 

"  I,  Victoria,  do  solemnly  and  sincerely,  in  the  presence  of  God, 
profess,  testify,  and  declare  that  I  do  believe  that  in  the  sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  there  is  not  any  transubstantiation  of  the  elements  of  bread  and 
wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  at  or  after  the  consecration  thereof, 
by  any  person  whatsoever;  and  that  the  invocation  or  adoration  of  the 
Virgin  Mary  or  any  other  Saint,  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  as  they  are 
now  used  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  are  superstitious,  and  idolatrous.  And  I 


422  KNOTS  UNTIED. 

do  solemnly,  in  the  presence  of  God,  profess,  testify,  and  declare,  that  I  do 
make,  this  declaration,  and  every  part  thereof,  in  the  plain  and  ordinary 
sense  of  the  words  read  unto  me,  as  they  are  commonly  understood  by 
English  Protestants,  without  any  evasion,  equivocation,  or  mental  reserva 
tion,  and  without  any  dispensation  already  granted  me  for  this  purpose  by 
the  Pope  or  any  other  authority  or  person  whatsoever,  or  without  any  hope 
of  any  such  dispensation  from  any  person  or  authority  whatsoever,  or  with 
out  thinking  that  I  am  or  can  be  acquitted  before  God  or  man,  or 
absolved  of  this  declaration  or  any  part  thereof,  although  the  Pope,  or  any 
other  person  or  persons  or  power  whatsoever,  shall  dispense  with  or  annul 
the  same,  or  declare  that  it  was  null  and  void  from  the  beginning." 

Mny  the  day  never  come  when  British  Sovereigns  shall  cease  to  make  the 
above  declaration  ! 


LONDON  :    WILLIAM   HUNT   AND  COMPANY, 
12   PATERNOSTER   ROW. 


Ryle 

Knots  untied 


BX 

5131 

R85 


