at 
ie 
3 DAG 


x iy 
we 
ey 


Seaver pres tw! . Pe 
eat ¥ APA a maa 
Gi . totes 
: as sSNh 

TAN) 


go 
Roy 


aire y TYALS 
vsepeek 


pearey 
ay, 


age. 
cae] 


ath, 


’ 


Pe! 


La wey ae 
i : 


Lion 


GM, ELUIOTT LinRary 
CINCINNAT ELD SEVINARES 
hie ienWay 

P.O, BOX 04320 
SINCINNATI, OHIO. 45204-3209 


KNOTS UNTIED 


= Wily 3 ¢ ae 
BO LAY Adak hd 


KNOTS | UNTIED 


BEING 


PLAIN STATEMENTS 
ON DISPUTED POINTS IN RELIGION 


FROM 
AN EVANGELICAL STANDPOINT 


be 
> 
f 


BY 


JOHN CHARLES RYLE, D.D. 


First Bishop of Liverpool, 1880-1900 


TWENTY-NINTH EDITION 


Condensed and Revised by 
Rev. C. SYDNEY CARTER, M.A., Litt.D. 


Author of ‘‘ The English Church and the Reformation” 
“ The Anglican Via Media” etc. 


Foreword by 
F. J. CHAVASSE, D.D. 


Bishop of Liverpool, 1900-1923 


GEORGE MAQK ELLIOTT LIBRAR 
The Cincinnati Bible Serainary 


LONDON 
CHAS. J. THYNNE & JARVIS, LTD. 
WHITEFRIARS STREET, FLEET STREET, E.C.4 


MAY, 1927 


ASO: 3B4¢axh 
RIVER 


Made and Printed in Great Britain by 
M. F. Robinson & Co., Lid., at The Library Press, Lowestoft 


~* 
1 pie on oe 


Foreword 


The republication of the late Bishop J. C. Ryle’s Knots 
Untied is timely. It will help to answer the difficulties of 
many Church people at the present moment. Dr. Carter 
has pointed out the force of its reasoning, and the terseness 
and clarity of its style. Dr. Ryle died twenty-seven years 
ago, and is but a name to this generation. May I record 
two facts which shew that he was not a mere controversial 
writer, but a keen winner of souls, and a true follower of 
Christ on the path of self-sacrifice. 


During the twenty-three years that I worked in Liverpool 
as Dr. Ryle’s successor, I was in constant receipt of letters 
from people in all parts of the world, who had read some book 
or tract of his, and had been led by his words to yield their 
hearts to their Saviour. Not having heard of his death, they 
wrote to the then Bishop of Liverpool, expressing their pro- 
found gratitude for the help they had received, and acclaiming 
him as their true Father in God. Being dead he yet spoke.’ 
It will never be known how great is the harvest of souls which 
God has used him to gather in long after he has been called 
away to his rest. 


The other incident is even more striking. In the early 
part of his ministry, the Bank of which his father had been 
the proprietor, failed, and a number of poor country people 
lost all their savings. For many years Mr. Ryle, as he then 
was, worked hard with his pen to earn money to meet part 
of their losses. He lived a life of great frugality, and wore 
his clothes till they were green to meet liabilities for which 

Vv B 


Vi : FOREWORD 


he was in no way responsible. His kindly heart and sensitive 
conscience allowed him no rest until he had done his very 
best to relieve the needs of those who had suffered through 
the misfortune rather than the fault of one whom he loved. 


The words of such a man acquire a new force as we read 
them. He lived near to God, and God spoke through him. 


F=j~CHAVASSE? 
Oxford, Bp. 


April 25th, 1927. 


Editor’s Preface 


In these days, when most episcopal utterances are usually 
composed of pious hopes and ideals expressed in choice 
language, but with an ambiguous phraseology which too 
often carefully and cleverly avoids giving a definite lead on 
any particular point at issue, it is refreshing to turn to Bishop | 
Ryle’s Plain Statements on Disputed Points of Religion. They 
at least have no “ uncertain sound,” for they are expressed 
in terse, vigorous and unequivocal language which will, 
I believe, always make a strong appeal to ordinary practical 
English Church-people. It is a healthy sign that after the 
lapse of oversixty years, since its first publication, a new edition 
of Knots Untied should be called for, since the guidance and ~ 
instruction which it gives on important doctrinal questions 
are not only most helpful but also most clear, definite and 
unmistakable. ‘ 

One cannot but be struck when reading this volume, — 
which originally appeared as a series of popular papers on 
burning Church questions, how extraordinarily appropriate 
it is in view of the controversy which is so acute now over 
the Revision of the Prayer Book. We almost feel that if 
Bishop Ryle were alive to-day he would scarcely have to 
alter anything in it in order to make his remarks fully applicable 
to the serious issues confronting English Churchmen at the 
present moment. The language used, the warnings uttered 
in many places, at least two generations ago are truly 
prophetic of existing conditions and developments in Church 
teaching and practice. 

We cannot help also sadly reflecting that if only we had 
to-day bishops like John Charles Ryle, who would whole- 
heartedly take their stand and make their appeal to the 


vil 


Viii EDITOR’S PREFACE 


primitive, Apostolic and Reformation standard of the suprem- 
acy, sufficiency and plenary inspiration of Holy Scripture, 
the dangerous, doubtful and unscriptural proposals for a 
revised form of worship now before us would have had short 
shrift. 

It was with considerable misgiving that I consented to 
revise and condense a work which has had such a wide 
circulation, and has been so wonderfully used in establishing 
the faith of so many during the past two generations. But 
with the lapse of time there were certain expressions and 
allusions which are now almost meaningless or out of date ; 
while a certain prolixity and repetition in places made the 
book less suitable and acceptable to the ordinary reader in 
a busy and distracted age which seems able to afford less and 
less time for any serious or solid reading. I have felt it almost 
sacrilege to change or alter the language of such a widely 
honoured and greatly revered Evangelical leader, and I have 
been scrupulously careful in my omissions, and small altera- 
tions not to impair in any way the Bishop’s main message and 
appeal. There is no question that this is as pertinent and 
as much needed to-day as when it was first written. 

If only our Church-people would accept and follow the 
clear Scriptural teaching contained in these pages, we should 
have no fear that superstitious practices or erroneous teaching 
would ever make any serious headway in our Reformed Church. 


CLIFTON. 
Lent, 1927. 


Biographical Sketch 


JOHN CHARLES RYLE, First Bishop of Liverpool, 
1880-1900, was the eldest son of Mr. John Ryle, Banker, 
Macclesfield and Manchester, and for some time M.P. for the 
Cheshire town. 

He was born in May, 1816, at Park House near Macclesfield. 
His early education was received in his native town, after 
which he proceeded to Eton, where he won a good name for 
himself both at athletics—for he was a tall, handsome young 
fellow—and in his studies. 

He then became an undergraduate of Christ Church, 
Oxford, his ambition being to follow in his father’s foot- 
steps. 

With that frank nature which always characterized him, 
he says of this important period : 

“My life has been a curious one. The last thing I should 
have expected up to the time I was twenty-five was that 
I should ever be a clergyman. My father was wealthy: he 
was a landed proprietor and a banker. I was the eldest son, 
and looked forward to inheriting a large fortune. I was on 
the point of entering Parliament; but it then pleased God 
to alter my prospects through my father’s bankruptcy. The 
change was a very crushing one for me . . . and for many 
years I could hardly lift up my head.” 

John Charles Ryle then decided to enter the Church of 
England Ministry, his subsequent career evincing in its 
conscientiousness, its untiring devotion for the salvation. of 
souls, its steadfast adhesion to Protestant principles, that his 
choice was made after seeking Divine guidance for the best 


way in which to dedicate his life to the service of God. 
ix 


xe BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 


He was ordained deacon by Dr. Sumner, Bishop of 
Winchester, and licensed to the curacy of Exbury, Hants. 
In 1842, he was admitted to Presbyter’s orders by the same 
Bishop, and a year later became Rector of St. Thomas’s, 
Winchester, for a brief period. In 1844 he accepted the 
Rectorship of Helmingham, Suffolk, and remained in East 
Anglia until he became Bishop of Liverpool, in 1880. In 
1861 he became Rector of Stradbroke, Suffolk, where he 
remained for nineteen years. In 1872 he was appointed 
Hon. Canon of Norwich ; the following year he was selected 
preacher at Cambridge, and also at Oxford in 1874-6, and 
again in 1879-80. 

In March, 1880, Lord Beaconsfield offered him the Deanery 
of Salisbury, but before he had been installed, Queen Victoria, 
acting on the advice of the same Prime Minister, gave him 
the Bishopric of the newly created Diocese of Liverpool. 

His words at the outset of his episcopal career, in speaking 
to the Bishopric Committee, were : ““ You know what are my 
opinions! I have nothing to withdraw or retract from them. 
. . . [come among you a Protestant and Evangelical Bishop. 
I come with a desire to hold out the right hand to all loyal 
Churchmen.” 

His episcopate was a wise and vigorous one. In addition 
to the great work of organizing a new diocese, the work 
and scope of the Diocesan Sustentation Fund was increased 
and a Diocesan Pension Fund was established. During his 
episcopate, 42 new churches were built and nearly 50 new 
Mission Halls, and all branches of Christian work sustained 
and increased. 

The case of the Rev. J. Bell -Cox, who defiantly continued 
his “ Anglo-Catholic’ ritual and practices, gave his Bishop 
much trouble, and led to protracted legal proceedings. Bishop 
Ryle, unlike many of his fellow bishops, declined to veto 
an action at law. He wrote, ‘I believe it has ever been a 
first principle of our country’s constitution that every British 
subject who has a complaint to make against any person, 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH x1 


whether clerical or lay, has a right to bring his complaint 
before those who administer the laws.’ He then quoted the 
words of Lord Chief Justice Coleridge : ‘‘ I am very clearly 
of opinion that the active interference of the Bishops to prevent 
the law of the land being enforced against those who have 
deliberately broken it is indefensible.” 

In August, 1898, the Bishop issued a Pastoral on the 
“lawlessness” in the Church, in which he requested his 
clergy to loyally abstain from using incense, lighted candles, 
sacrificial vestments, prayers for the dead, habitual auricular 
confession, the Reserved Sacrament. 

In February, 1900, at the great age of eighty-three, he 
wrote his farewell letter to his diocese, and a few weeks later 
came his home call, his mortal remains being interred in 
Childwall Churchyard. - 

As a tract writer his fame was world-wide. His tracts,— 
he wrote some 300 of them—their issue has reached a 
total of more than twelve millions—and many of them have 
been translated into foreign languages. His larger works 
consist of Expository Thoughts on the Gospels, Holiness, 
Practical Religion, Old Paths, Principles for Churchmen 
and last, but by no means his least, Knots Untied, which 
in its revised form is as appropriate to-day as when it was 
first written and contains a Scriptural, scholarly and clear 
exposition of Evangelical principles. 

Truly a great man, through the abounding grace of God ; 
“* sreat in stature ; great in mental power ; great in spirituality; 
great as a preacher and expositor ; great in winning souls to 
God ”’ : great as a noble defender of the Reformation principles 
of the Church of England. As we review his strenuous and 
self-denying career we feel that his successor at Liverpool 
only paid him a just tribute in describing him as a ‘“‘man 
of granite with the heart of a little child.” 


Contents 
CHAPTER 

FOREWORD BY BISHOP CHAVASSE 
EDITOR’S PREFACE 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH . 

I EVANGELICAL RELIGION 

II ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 

III PRIVATE JUDGMENT 

IV THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 

V BAPTISM ; 

VI REGENERATION 


34 
48 
70 
88 


VII PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 104 


VIII THE LORD’S SUPPER 

IX THE REAL PRESENCE 

Xx THE CHURCH 

Al THE PRIEST 

XII WORSHIP 
XIN. THE SABBATH “ . 
XIV PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 

XV THE FALLIBILITY ‘OF MINISTERS ~: 
XVI APOSTOLIC FEARS 
XVII IDOLATRY 


xii 


. 


130. 
154 
175 
197 
212 


KNOTS UNTIED 


I 
EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


It may be laid down as a rule, with tolerable confidence, 
that the absence of accurate definitions is the very life of 
religious controversy. If men would only define with precision 
the theological terms which they use, many disputes would die. 

In opening this subject, I desire to remember carefully 
this important rule. Without further preface, I shall begin 
by explaining what I mean when I speak of ‘“ Evangelical 
Religion.” 

That is, I want to consider the religion which is peculiar 
to that party in the Church of England which is commonly 
called “‘ Evangelical.’”” To that point I shall confine myself, 
and to that alone. 

Now what are the distinctive peculiarities of the religion 
of the Evangelical school. That it has some leading tenets 
or principles is unmistakable and undeniable. What are 
those principles which distinguish it from other schools ? 
This in plain words is my subject,—Has Evangelical Reli- 
gion any distinctive principles? I answer, it has.—Are 
they worth contending for ? I answer, they are. 

I approach the subject with a deep sense of its difficulty. 

It cannot be handled without touching points of extreme 
nicety, and treading on very delicate ground. It necessitates 
comparison between section and section of our Church ; and 


Z 
B 


KNOTS UNTIED 


all comparisons are odious. But there are times when com- 
parisons are a positive duty. It is an apostolic command to 
“try things that differ’? (Phil.i. 10). The existence of 
parties in the Church of England is a fact that cannot be 
ignored. To pretend that we do not see them is absurd. 
Whether we like it or not, there they are, and the world around 
us knows it. 

But while I have a deep sense of the difficulty of the 
subject, I have a deeper sense of its importance. The clouds 
are gathering round the Church of England; her very 
existence is in peril. Conflicting opinions bid fair to rend 
her in twain. A strife has arisen within her pale since 1830, 
not about the trappings and vestments of religion, but about 
the very foundations of the Gospel. It remains to be seen 
whether our beloved Church will survive the struggle. 
Surely it is high time for Evangelical clergymen and laymen 
to review calmly their position, and to consider seriously what 
it is they have got to maintain and defend. 

There are three questions which I wish to bring under the 
notice of my readers. 


I. What Evangelical Religion is. 
II. What it is not. 
III. What makes much religion not Evangelical. 


Each of these questions I shall attempt to touch very 
briefly. 


I. WHAT EVANGELICAL RELIGION IS 


To this question the simplest answer I can give is to 
point out what appear to be its leading features. These 
I consider to be five in number. 

(a) The first leading feature in Evangelical Religion is 
the absolute supremacy it assigns to Holy Scripture, as the 
only rule of faith and practice, the only test of truth, the 
only judge of controversy. 


2 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


Its theory is that man is required to believe nothing, as 
necessary to salvation, which is not read in God’s Word written 
or can be proved thereby. It totally denies that there is any 
other guide for man’s soul, co-equal or co-ordinate with the 
Bible. It refuses to listen to such arguments as ‘“‘ the Church” 


says so,’’—“‘ the Fathers say so,’’—“‘ primitive antiquity says 
so,’’—“ Catholic tradition says so,”—‘‘ the Councils say so,” 
—‘“the ancient liturgies say so,”—‘‘ the Prayer-book says 
so,’’—‘‘ the universal conscience of mankind says so,’’—‘‘ the 


verifying light within says so,’’—unless it can be shown that 
what is said is in harmony with Scripture. 

The supreme authority of the Bible, in one word, is one of 
the corner-stones of our system. Show us anything plainly 
written in that Book, and, however trying to flesh and blood, 
we will receive it, believe it, and submit to it. Show us any- 
thing, as religion, which is contrary to that Book, and, however 
specious, plausible, beautiful, and apparently desirable, we 
will not have it at any price. Our faith can find no resting- 
place except in the Bible, or in Bible arguments. Here is rock : 
all else is sand. 

(6) The second leading feature in Evangelical Religion 
is the depth and prominence it assigns to the doctrine of 
human sinfulness and corruption. 

Its theory is that in consequence of Adam’s fall, all men are 
as far as possible gone from original righteousness, and are 
of their own natures inclined to evil. They are not only ina 
miserable, pitiable, and bankrupt condition, but in a state of 
guilt, imminent danger, and condemnation before God. They 
are not only at enmity with their Maker, and have no title to 
heaven, but they have no will to serve their Maker, no love to 
their Maker, and no meetness for heaven. 

We hold that a mighty spiritual disease like this requires 
a mighty spiritual medicine for its cure. We dread giving the 
slightest countenance to any religious system of dealing with 
man’s soul, which even seems to encourage the notion that his 
deadly wound can be easily healed. We dread fostering man’s 


3 


KNOTS UNTIED 


favourite notion that a little church-going and sacrament- 
receiving,—a little patching, and mending, and whitewashing, 
-and gilding, and polishing, and varnishing, and painting the 
outside,—is all that his case requires. Hence we protest with 
all our heart against formalism, sacramentalism, and every 
species of mere external or vicarious Christianity. We main- 
tain that all such religion is founded on an inadequate view 
of man’s spiritual need. It requires far more than this to 
save, or satisfy, or sanctify a soul. Jt requires nothing less than 
the blood of God the Son applied to the conscience, and the grace of 
God the Holy Ghost entirely renewing the heart. Manis radically 
diseased, and man needs a radical cure. I believe that igno- 
rance of the extent of the fall, and of the whole doctrine of 
original sin, is one grand reason why many can neither under- 
stand, appreciate, nor receive Evangelical Religion. Next to 
the Bible, as its foundation, it is based on a clear view of 
original sin. 

(ec) The third leading feature of Evanglical Religion is the 
paramount importance it attaches to the work and office of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the nature of the salvation which 
He has wrought out for man. 

Its theory is that the eternal Son of God, Jesus Christ, has 
by His life, death, and resurrection, as our Representative and 
Substitute, obtained a complete salvation for sinners, and a 
redemption from the guilt, power, and consequences of sin, and 
that all who believe on Him are, even while they live, com- 
pletely forgiven and justified from all things,—are reckoned 
completely righteous before God,—are interested in Christ and 
all His benefits. 

We hold that nothing whatever is needed between the soul 
of man the sinner and Christ the Saviour, but simple, childlike 
faith, and that all means, helps, ministers, and ordinances 
are useful just so far as they help this faith, but no further ;— 
but that rested in and relied on as ends and not as means, they 
become harmful to the soul. 

We hold that an experimental knowledge of Christ 


4 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


crucified and interceding, is the very essence of Christian- 
ity, and that in teaching men the Christian religion we 
can never dwell too much on Christ Himself, and can 
never speak too strongly of the fulness, freeness, and 
simplicity of the salvation there is in Him for every one 
that believes. 

Hence we maintain that people ought to be continually 
warned not to make a Christ of the Church, or of the ministry, 
or of the forms of worship, or of baptism, or of the Lord’s 
Supper. We say that life eternal is to know Christ, believe 
in Christ, abide in Christ, have daily heart communion with 
Christ, by simple personal faith,—and that everything in 
religion is useful so far as it helps forward that life of faith, 
but no further. 

(d) The fourth leading feature in Evangelical Religion is 
the high place which it assigns to the inward work of the Holy 
Spirit in the heart of man. 

Its theory is that the root and foundation of all vital Chris- 
tianity in any one, is a work of grace in the heart, and that 
until there is real experimental business within a man, his 
religion is a mere husk, and shell, and can neither comfort 
nor save. We maintain that the things which need most to 
be pressed on men’s attention are those mighty works of the 
Holy Spirit, inward repentance, inward faith, inward hope, 
inward hatred of sin, and inward love to God’s law. And we 
say that to tell men to take comfort in their baptism or 
Church-membership, when these all-important graces are 
unknown, is delusive and dangerous. 

We maintain firmly that there can be no real conversion 
to God, no new creation in Christ, no new birth of the Spirit, 
where there is nothing felt and experienced within. We 
hold that the witness of the Spirit, however much it may be 
abused, is a real true thing. 

(e) The fifth and last leading feature in Evangélical 
Religion is the importance which it attaches to the outward and 
visible work of the Holy Ghost in the life of man. 


5 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Its theory is that the true grace of God is a thing that 
will always make itself manifest in the conduct, behaviour, 
ways and habits of him who has it. It is not a dormant 
thing, that can be within a man and not show itself 
without. The heavenly seed is “ not corruptible, but incor- 
ruptible.’’ It is a seed which is distinctly said to “ remain ” 
in every one that is born of God (x Peter i. 23; 1 Johnili. 9). 
Where the Spirit is, He will always make His presence known. 

We hold that it is wrong to tell men that they are “ children 
of God and members of Christ, and heirs of the kingdom of 
heaven,” unless they really overcome the world, the flesh, and 
the devil. We maintain that to tell a man he is “ born of 
God,” or regenerated, while he is living in carelessness or sin, 
is a dangerous delusion, and calculated to do infinite mischief 
to his soul. We affirm confidently that “‘ fruit’ is the only 
certain evidence of a man’s spiritual condition; that if we 
would know whose he is and whom he serves, we must look 
first at his life. 

Such are the leading features of Evangelical Religion. 
Such are the main principles which characterize the teaching 
of the Evangelical school in the Church of England. 

I do not for a moment deny that many Churchmen who 
are outside the Evangelical body, are sound in the main 
about the five points I have named, if you take them one 
by one. But they do not give them the prominence, position, 
degree, priority, dignity, and precedence which we do. And 
this I hold to be a most important difference between us and 
them. It is the position which we assign to these points, which 
ts one of the grand characteristics of Evangelical theology. We 
say that they are the principal things in Christianity. 

To show all the foundations on which Evangelical Religion 
is based, would be clearly impossible in a short compass. 
We appeal to the Holy Scriptures, and challenge any one 
to examine our system by the light of the New Testament.— 
We appeal to the Thirty-nine Articles of our own Church, 
and assert unhesitatingly that they are on our side.— 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


We appeal to the writings of our leading Divines, from 
the Reformation down to the time of Archbishop Laud, 
and invite any man to compare our teaching with theirs.— 
Of ourselves and our imperfections we may well be ashamed ; 
but of what is called “ Evangelical Religion” we have no 
cause to be ashamed at all. Let men say what they please. 
Nothing is easier than to call names, affix odious epithets, 
and frighten ignorant people, by raising the cry of “ Calvinism’’ 
or “ Puritanism’ against the Evangelical school. I believe 
firmly that impartial inquiry will always show that Evan- 
gelical Religion is the religion of Scripture and of the Church 
of England. 


II. WHAT EVANGELICAL RELIGION IS NOT 


I turn now to the negative side of my subject. Having 
shown what Evangelical Religion is, it becomes my duty 
next to show what it is not. 

(1) Evangelical Religion does not despise learning, research, 
or the wisdom of days gone by. It is not true to say that we 
do. In thorough appreciation of anything that throws light 
on God’s Word, we give place to none. Let any one look over 
the lists of those who in days gone by have been eminent for 
theological scholarship in this country, and I am bold to say 
he will find some of the most eminent are Evangelical men. 
Ridley, Jewell, Usher, Lightfoot, Davenant, Hall, Whittaker, 
Willett, Reynolds, Leighton, Owen, Baxter, Manton, are names 
that for profound learning stand second to none. To what 
school do they belong, if not to the Evangelical ? What school, 
I ask confidently, has done more for the exposition and inter- 
pretation of Scripture than the Evangelical school? What 
school has given to the world more Commentaries ? Even 
in the Egyptian darkness of last century, there were few 
English divines who showed more real learning than Hervey, 
Romaine, and Toplady. 

Turn even to our own day, and I say, unhesitatingly, that 
we have no cause to be ashamed. To name divines of the 


7 


KNOTS UNTIED 


last generation. I do not shrink from saying that the three 
great books of Dean Goode on Scripture, Baptism, and the 
Lord’s Supper, remain to the present day unanswered by the 
opponents of the Evangelical school. Sneers about ignorance 
and shallowness may be safely disregarded, while books like 
these are unrefuted. 

But while we do not despise learning, we steadily refuse to 
place any uninspired writings on a level with revelation. We 
refuse to call any man “father” or “ master,” however 
learned or intellectual he may be. We own no master over 
conscience in religious matters, except the Bible. To us 
there is but one test of truth: ‘“‘ What is written in the 
Scripture ? What saith the Lord ?” 

(2) Evangelical Religion does not under-value the Church, 
or think lightly of its privileges. In sincere and loyal 
attachment to the Church of England we give place to 
none. We value its form of government, its Confession 
of Faith, its mode of worship, as much as any within its pale. 
We have stuck by it through evil report and good report, 
while many who once talked more loudly about their Church- 
manship have seceded and gone over to Rome. We stand by 
it still, and will resist all attempts to Romanize it to the very 
death! We know its value, and would hand it down unim- 
paired to our children’s children. 

But we steadily refuse to exalt the Church above Christ, 
or to teach our people that membership of the Church is 
identical with membership of Christ. We can find no proof 
in the Bible that the Lord Jesus Christ ever meant a body 
of erring mortals, whether ordained or not ordained, to be 
treated as infallible. We consequently hold that a vast 
quantity of language in this day about “ the Church”’ and 
the “‘ voice of the Church” is mere unmeaning verbiage. 

(3) Evangelical Religion does not under-value the Christian 
ministry. We regard it as an honourable office instituted by 
Christ Himself, and of general necessity for carrying on the 
work of the Gospel. We look on ministers as preachers 


8 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


of God’s Word, His ambassadors, messengers, servants, 
shepherds, and stewards. 

But we steadily refuse to admit that Christian ministers 
are in any sense sacrificing priests, mediators between God 
and man, lords of men’s consciences, or private confessors. We 
refuse it, not only because we cannot see it in the Bible, but 
also because we have read the lessons of Church history. We 
find that Sacerdotalism, or priestcraft, has frequently been the 
curse of Christianity, and the ruin of true religion. And we 
say boldly that the exaltation of the ministerial office to an 
unscriptural place and extravagant dignity in the Church of 
England in the present day, is likely to alienate the affections 
of the laity, to ruin the Church, and to be the source of every 
kind of error and superstition. 

(4) Evangelical Religion does not under-value the Sacra- 
ments of Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. We honour them as 
holy ordinances appointed by Christ Himself, and as blessed 
means of grace, which in all who use them rightly, worthily, 
and with faith, ““ have a wholesome effect or operation.” 

But we steadily refuse to admit that Christ’s Sacraments 
convey grace ex opere operato, and that in every case where 
they are administered, good must of necessity be done. We 
refuse to admit that they are the grand media between Christ 
and the soul,—above faith, above preaching, and above 
prayer. We protest against the idea that in baptism the use 
of water, in the name of the Trinity, is invariably and neces- 
sarily accompanied by regeneration. We protest against 
the practice of encouraging any one to come to the Lord’s 
Table unless he repents truly of sin, has a lively faith in 
Christ, and is in charity with all men. We protest against 
the theory that the Lord’s Supper is a sacrifice, as alike 
contrary to the Bible, Articles, and Prayer-book. And above 
all, we protest against the notion of any corporal presence 
of Christ’s flesh and blood in the Lord’s Supper, under the 
forms of broad and wine, as an “‘ idolatry to be abhorred of 
all faithful Christians.” 


9 


KNOTS UNTIED 


(5) Evangelical Religion does not under-value the English 
Prayer-book. We honour that excellent book as a matchless 
form of public worship, most admirably adapted to the wants 
of human nature. 

But we do not presume to say there can be no acceptable 
worship of God without the Prayer-book. It does not possess 
the same authority as the Bible. 

(6) Evangelical Religion does not under-value Episcopacy. 
We give to our Bishops as much honour and respect as any 
section of the Church of England does, and in reality a great 
deal more. We thoroughly believe that Episcopal govern- 
ment, rightly administered, is the best form of Church 
government that can be had in this evil world. 

But we steadily refuse to believe that Bishops are infallible, 
or that their words are to be believed when they are not in har- 
mony with the Scriptures,—or that Episcopacy is the first 
test of a Church being a true Church,—or that Presbyterian 
orders are not valid orders, or that non-Episcopal Christians 
are to be handed over to the uncovenanted mercies of God. 

We never will admit that the acts and doings and deliver- 
ances of any Bishops, however numerous, and by whatever 
name they are called, whether a Pan-Anglican Synod or not, 
are to be received as infallible, and not to be submitted to 
free criticism. We cannot forget that erring Bishops ruined 
the Church of England in the days of Charles the First,—almost 
ruined it again in 1662, when they cast out the Puritans,— 
and nearly ruined it once more in the eighteenth century, 
when they shut out the Methodists. 

(7) Evangelical Religion does not object to handsome 
churches, good ecclesiastical architecture, a well-ordered cere- 
monial, and a well-conducted service. We like beautiful 
well-arranged places of worship, when we can get them. 
We abhor slovenliness and disorder in God’s service, as 
much as any. We would have all things done “ decently 
and in order ” (x Cor. xiv. 40). : 

But we steadily maintain that simplicity should be the 

10 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


grand characteristic of Christian worship. We hold that human 
nature is so easily led astray, and so thoroughly inclined to 
idolatry, that ornament in Christian worship should be used 
with a very sparing hand. We firmly believe that the ten- 
dency of excessive ornament, and a theatrical ceremonial, 
is to defeat the primary end for which worship was estab- 
lished, to draw away men’s minds from Christ, and to make 
them walk by sight and not by faith. We dare not forget 
the great principle of Scripture, that “‘ man looketh on the 
outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart” 
(1 Sam. xvi. 7). 

(8) Evangelical religion does not under-value unity. We love 
harmony and peace as much as any Christians in the world. 

But we firmly maintain that there can be no real unity with- 
without oneness in the faith. We protest against the idea of 
unity based on a common Episcopacy, and not on a common 
belief of Christ’s Gospel. We abhor the very idea of reunion 
with Rome, unless Rome first purges herself from her many 
false doctrines and superstitions. 

(9) Last, but not least, Evangelical Religion does 
not under-value Christian holiness and self-denial. We give 
place to none in exalting humility, charity, meekness, gentle- 
ness, temperance, purity, self-denial, good works, and separa- 
tion from the world. With all our defects, we are second to 
no section of Christ’s Church in attaching the utmost impor- 
tance to private prayer, private Bible-reading, and private 
communion with God. 

But we steadily deny that true holiness consists in calling 
everything ‘“‘holy’”’ in religion, and thrusting forward the 
word “‘holy”’ at every turn. We will not allow that true 
holiness is really promoted by an ostentatious observance 
of Lent, by keeping Ecclesiastical fasts and saints’ days, by 
frequent communion, by frequent gestures, and postures 
expressive of humility, in public worship. We believe, on 
the contrary, that such holiness (so-called) too often begins 
from the outside, and is a complete delusion. 

II 


KNOTS UNTIED 


The sum of the whole matter is this :—we give all lawful 
honour to learning, the Church, the ministry, the Sacrament, 
Episcopacy, the Prayer-book, Church ornament, unity, and 
holiness ; but we firmly decline to give them more honour 
than we find given to them in God’s Word. 

And what do we learn from all this? We learn that we 
must be very careful how we give primary honour to things 
invented by man, or even to things which, though ordained by 
God, are secondary things in religion. We learn, above all, 
that those who accuse us of undervaluing the things I have 
mentioned, because we refuse to make them idols, are only 
exposing their own ignorance of Scripture. 


III. WHAT MAKES MUCH RELIGION NOT 


EVANGELICAL ; 
It only remains for me to say a few words on the last 
question I propose to consider :—‘‘ What is it that makes 


much religion appear to us not Evangelical ? ” 

We do not say that men who are not professedly Evan- 
gelical ignore and disbelieve the leading doctrines of the 
Evangelical creed. But we do say confidently, that there 
are many ways’ in which the faith of Christ may be marred 
and spoiled, without being positively denied. 

You may spoil the Gospel by substitution. You have only to 
withdraw from the eyes of the sinner the grand object which 
the Bible proposes to faith,—Jesus Christ ; and to substitute 
another object in His place,—the Church, the Ministry, the 
Confessional, Baptism, or the Lord’s Supper,—and the mis- 
chief is done. Substitute anything for Christ, and the Gospel 
is totally spoiled! Do this, either directly or indirectly, and 
your religion ceases to be Evangelical. 

You may spoil the Gospel by interposition. You have 
only to push something between Christ and the sinner to 
draw away his attention from the Saviour, and the mischief 
is done. Interpose anything between man and Christ, and 
man will neglect Christ for the thing interposed ! 

I2 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


You may spoil the Gospel by disproportion. You have only 
to attach an exaggerated importance to the secondary things of 
Christianity, and a diminished importance to the first things, 
and the mischief is done. Once alter the proportion of the parts 
of truth, and truth soon becomes downright error! Do this, either 
directly or indirectly, and your religion ceases to be Evangelical. 

Lastly, but not least, you may completely spoil the Gospel 
by confused and contradictory directions. Complicated and 
obscure statements about faith, baptism, Church privileges 
and the benefits of the Lord’s Supper, make the Gospel no 
Gospel at all. 

We have no warrant for expecting the slightest benefit for 
our souls from Christ’s salvation, unless we use it precisely in 
the way that Christ appointed. If we add anything to it, 
take anything away from it, try to improve the terms, depart 
in the slightest degree from the path which the Bible marks 
out for us, we have no right whatever to look for any good 
being done. God’s plan of salvation cannot possibly be 
mended or improved. He who tries to amend or improve it, 
will find that he spoils it altogether. 

Religion to be really ‘‘ Evangelical ’’ and really good, must 
be the Gospel, the whole Gospel, and nothing but the Gospel, 
as Christ prescribed it and expounded it to the Apostles. 
Much of the religion of our own times does not deserve 
to be called Evangelical. I do not charge all clergymen who 
are not ‘“‘ Evangelical’? with not being “ Christians.’ I do 
not say that the religion they teach is not Christianity. But 
I do say that they appear to me to teach that which is not 
Christ’s whole truth. In a word, they do not give full weight, 
full measure, and the prescription of the Gospel accurately 
made up. The parts are there, but not the proportions. 

I cannot leave this subject without offering some practical 
suggestions about the present duties of Evangelicals. We 
have been considering what Evangelical religion is and is not. 
A few pages devoted to our immediate duties, in the present 
position of the Church, can hardly be thought out of place, 


13 


KNOTS UNTIED 


The times no doubt are very critical, full of danger to our 
beloved Church, full of danger to the nation. Never has there 
been such an unblushing avowal of Popish opinions among 
Churchpeople, and such shameless additions to the faith as 
defined in our Articles. The grand question is, whether our scrip- 
tural Protestantism shall DIE OR LIVE ? Much depends on the 
attitude and line of conduct taken up by the Evangelical body. 
If they know the times and do their duty, there is hope for 
the Church. Jf they are timid, compromising, vacillating, and 
indolent, there is no hope at all. 

(1) I suggest, for one thing, that we ought to exercise 
a special jealousy over our own personal religion. Let 
us take heed that it is thoroughly Evangelical. The 
times we live in are desperately unfavourable to a sharply- 
cut, decided, doctrinal Christianity. A fog of vague 
liberalism over-spreads the ecclesiastical horizon. A settled 
determination to think everybody is right, and nobody is 
wrong, everything is true, and nothing is false, meets us at 
every turn. The world is possessed with a spirit of false 
charity about religion. Men try to persuade us, like Gallio, 
that the alleged differences between creeds and schools of 
thought are only about “ words and names,” and that it is 
“all the same thing.” In times like these, let us be on our 
guard. ‘‘WATCH YE : STAND FASTIN THE FAITH. QUIT 
YOU LIKE MEN: BE STRONG” (1 Cor. xvi. 13). Let us 
steadfastly resolve to stand fast in the old paths, the good 
way of our Protestant Reformers. The nearer we draw to 
the great realities of death, judgment, and eternity, the 
more excellent will that way appear. When I go down 
the valley of the shadow of death, and my feet 
touch the cold waters, put no man or form between 
me and Christ. Give me a real staff for my hand such 
as David had, and real meat and drink for my soul such as 
aged Paul felt within him, and feeling cried, “I am not 
ashamed” (2 Tim. i. 12). I must know distinctly whom I 
believe, what I believe, and why I believe, and in what manner 


14 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


I believe. Nothing, nothing will answer these questions satis- 
factorily, but thorough, downright Evangelical Religion. 
Let us make sure that this religion is our own. 

(2) Isuggest, secondly, that ministers who call themselves 
Evangelical, ought to be specially careful that they do not 
compromise their principles, and damage their testimony, by 
vain attempts to conciliate the world. 

This is a great danger in these days. It isa sunken rock, on 
which I fear many are striking, and doing themselves immense 
harm. The plausible pretext of making our services more 
attractive, and cutting the ground from under the feet of 
Ritualists, too often induces Evangelical ministers to do 
things which they had far better let alone. New church decora- 
tions, new church music, and a semi-histrionic mode of going 
through church worship, are things which we must watch 
most narrowly. 

WE CANNOT BE TOO JEALOUS IN THESE DAYS 
ABOUT THE SLIGHTEST DEPARTURE FROM THE 
“FAITH ONCE DELIVERED TO THE SAINTS.” We cannot 
be too careful to add nothing to, and take nothing away 
from, the simplicity of the Gospel, and to do nothing in our 
worship, which seems to cast the slightest reflection on 
Evangelical principles. 

Let us mark the testimony of Scripture on this subject. 
The Epistle to the Galatians is the inspired handbook for these 
times. Mark how in that Epistle St. Paul declares, “‘ Though 
WE, or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you 
than that which WE have preached unto you, let himbe accursed ”” 
(Gal. i. 8 and g). Mark how he repeats it: ‘ As we said 
before, so we say again, If any man preach any other Gospel 
than that ye have received, let him be accursed.” —Mark how 
he says to the Galatians, ‘‘ Ye observe days, and months, and 
times, and years.”’ And then comes the solemn and weighty 
remark which ought to ring in the ears of many : “ I am afraid 
of you (Gal. i.g; iv. 10, 11). 

The world is never won by trimming, and compromising, 

15 


KNOTS UNTIED 


by facing both ways, and trying to please all. The cross of 
Christ is never made more acceptable by sawing off its corners, 
or by polishing, varnishing, and adorning it. Processions, and 
banners, and elaborate services, and beautiful vestments, 
may please some people. But they never helped forward 
heart-conversion and heart-sanctification, and they never 
will. 

I grant freely that we have need of much patience in these 
times. No doubt it is very provoking to be twitted with the 
nakedness, poverty, and meagreness (so called) of Evangelical 
worship. It is very annoying to see our younger members 
slipping away to churches where there are processions, 
banners, incense, and a thoroughly histrionic and gorgeous 
ceremonial. It is vexing to hear them say, that “ they feel 
so much better after these services.” But none of these 
things must move us. “ He that believeth shall not make 
haste’ (Isa. xxviii. 16). Let us never leave the high ground 
of principle under any false pressure, from whatever side it 
may come. Let us hold on our own way, and be jealously 
sensitive of any departure from simplicity. Popularity 
obtained by pandering to the senses or the sentiment of our 
hearers is not worth anything. Worshippers who are not con- 
tent with the Bible, the cross of Christ, simple prayers and 
simple praise, are worshippers of little value. It is useless to 
try to please them, because their spiritual taste is diseased. 

(3) I SUGGEST, FINALLY, THAT WE MUST NOT 
ALLOW EVANGELICAL RELIGION TO BE THRUST OUT 
OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND WITHOUT A STRUGGLE. . 

It is a religion which is worth a struggle ; for it can point 
to works which no other school in the Church of England has 
ever equalled. In this matter we fear no comparison, if 
honestly and fairly made. We confess with sorrow that we 
have done but little compared to what we ought to have 
done ; and yet we say boldly, that both abroad and at home 
no Churchmen have done so much good to souls as those who 
are called Evangelical. 


16 


EVANGELICAL RELIGION 


BUT IT IS A RELIGION THAT CAN ONLY BE PRE- 
SERVED AMONGST US JUST NOW BY A GREAT 
EFFORT, AND A MIGHTY STRUGGLE. For our nation’s 
sake, for our children’s sake, for the world’s sake, for the 
honour and glory of our God, let us gird up the loins of our 
minds, and resolve that the struggle shall be made. 

It is a struggle, which is not one of our seeking. The 
controversy is thrust upon us, whether we like it or not. We 
are driven to a painful dilemma. We must either sit by in 
silence possibly, and let the Church of England be unprotestan- 
ized and re-united with Rome ;—or else we must desert the dear 
old Church and let traitors work their will ;—or else we must 
look the danger manfully in the face, and fight |—Our fight, of 
course, is to be carried on with the same Word that Cranmer, 
Latimer- and Ridley fought with,and not with carnal weapons. 
But as they did, so must we do : we must stand up and fight. 
If we want our Church to continue Protestant and Evangelical, 
we must not be afraid to fight. 

Does any one ask me what is to be done ? I answer that the 


1] trust no one will misunderstand me here. If any one supposes 
that I want to narrow the pale of the Church of England, and to make it 
the Church of one particular party, he is totally mistaken. I am quite 
aware that my Church is eminently liberal, truly comprehensive, and 
tolerant of wide differences of opinion. But I deny that the Church 
ever meant its members to be downright Papists. 

The Church has always found room in its ranks for men of very 
different schools of thought. There has been room for Ridley, and room 
for Hooper—room for Jewell, and room for Hooker—room for Whitgift, 
and room for Tillotson,—room for Usher, and room for Jeremy Taylor, 
—room for Davenant, and room for Andrews,—room for Waterland, 
room for Beveridge,—room for Chillingworth, and room for Bull,— 
room for Whitby, and room for Scott,—room for Toplady, and room 
for Fletcher. Where is the Churchman who would like any one of these 
men to have been shut out of the Church of England ? If there is such 
an one, I do not agree with him. 

But if any man wants me to believe that our Church ever meant 
to allow its clergy to teach the Romish doctrine of the Real Presence, 
the sacrifice of the Mass, and the practice of auricular confession, with- 
out let or hindrance, I tell him: plainly that I cannot believe it. My 
common sense revolts against it. I would as soon believe that black 
is white, or that two and two make five. 


17 c 


KNOTS UNTIED 


path of duty, to my mind, is clear, plain, and unmistakable. 
Union and organization of all Protestant and Evangelical 
Churchmen,—untiring exposure of the Popish dealings of our 
antagonists, by the pulpit, the platform, and the press, bold, 
decided, prompt action, the moment any necessity requires,— 
these are the weapons of our warfare. 

Let us then resolve to “ contend earnestly for the faith.” 
By preaching and by praying, by pulpit and by platform, by 
pen and by tongue, by printing and by speaking, let us labour 
to maintain Evangelical Religion within the Church of England, 
and to resist the enemies which we see around us.—We are 
not weak if we stand together and act together. The middle 
classes and the poor are yet sound at heart. They do not 
love Popery. God Himself has not forsaken us, and truth 
is on our side.—Let us only settle it deeply in our minds, that 
without Protestant and Evangelical principles, a Church is 
as useless as a well without water. INONE WORD, SHOULD 
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND BECOME POPISH ONCE 
MORE, IT WILL BE A CHURCH NOT WORTH PRE- 
SERVING. 


18 


{I 
ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


Is there more than one road to heaven ? Is there more than 
one way in which the soul of man can be saved ? This is the 
question which I propose to consider in this paper, and I shall 
begin the consideration by quoting a text of Scripture: 
“ Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none 
other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must 
be saved ”’ (Acts iv. 12). 

These words are striking in themselves ; but they are much 
more striking if we observe when and by whom they were 
spoken. 

They were spoken by a poor and friendless Christian, in 
the midst of a persecuting Jewish Council. It was a grand 
confession of Christ. 

They were spoken by the lips of the Apostle Peter. This is 
the man who a few weeks before forsook Jesus and fled: this 
is the very man who three times over denied his Lord. There 
is another spirit in him now! He stands up boldly before 
priests and Sadducees, and tells them the truth to their face : 
“This is the stone that was set at naught of you builders, 
which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there 
salvation in any other: for there is none other name under 
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.” 

Accordingly, the Eighteenth Article of the Church of 
England declares: ‘‘ Holy Scripture doth set out unto us 
only the name of Jesus Christ whereby men must be saved.” 


19 


KNOTS UNTIED 


I. THE DOCTRINE LAID DOWN BY ST. PETER 


Let us make sure that we rightly understand what the 
Apostle means. He says of Christ, ‘‘ Neither is there salvation 
in any other.’’ Now, whatdoes this mean? On our clearly 
seeing this very much depends. 

He means that no one can be saved from sin,—its guilt, 
its power, and its consequences,—excepting by Jesus Christ. 

He means that no one can have peace with God the Father 
—obtain pardon in this world, and escape wrath to come in 
the next,—excepting through the atonement and mediation 
of Jesus Christ. 

In Christ alone God’s rich provision of salvation for 
sinners is treasured up; Christ’s blood alone can cleanse 
us ; Christ’s righteousness alone can clothe us ; Christ’s merit 
alone can give us a title to heaven. Jews and Gentiles, learned 
and unlearned, kings and poor men,—all alike can only be 
saved by the Lord Jesus. 

And the Apostle adds emphatically, ‘‘ There is none other 
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be 
saved.’ There is no other person commissioned, sealed, and 
appointed by God the Father to be the Saviour of sinners 
excepting Christ. The keys of Life and Death are committed 
to His hand, and all who would be saved must go to Him. 

There was but one place of safety in the day when the 
flood came upon the earth: that place was Noah’s ark. All 
other places and devices,—mountains, towers, trees, rafts, 
boats,—all were alike useless. So also there is but one hiding- 
place for the sinner who would escape the storm of God’s 
anger ; he must venture his soul on Christ. 

There is but one name that will avail us when we stand 
at the gate of heaven: we must name the name of Jesus 
as our only hope, or be cast away. 

Such is the doctrine of the text. ‘‘ No salvation but by 
Jesus Christ ;—in Him,—salvation to the uttermost, salvation 
for the very chief of sinners ;—out of Him no salvation at 

20 


ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


all.” It is in perfect harmony with our Lord’s own words in 
St. John’s Gospel,—‘I am the way, the truth, and the 
life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by Me ” (John xiv. 
6). It is the same thing that Paul tells the Corinthians,— 
“Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is 
Christ Jesus’’ (1 Cor. iii. 11). Andit is the same that St. John 
tells us in his first Epistle-—‘‘ God hath given to us eternal 
life, and this life is in His Son. He that hath the Son hath 
life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life ”’ 
(x John v. 12). All these texts come to one and the same 
point,—no salvation but by Jesus Christ. 

We are to venture the whole salvation of our souls on 
Christ, and on Christ only. We are to cast loose completely 
and entirely from all other hopes and trusts. We are not 
to rest partly on Christ,—partly on doing all we can: In 
the matter of our justification Christ is to be all. This is the 
doctrine of the text. 

Heaven is before us, and Christ the only door into it ; hell 
beneath us, and Christ alone able to deliver from it; the law 
against us, and Christ alone able to redeem us; __ sin weighing 
us down, and Christ alone able to put it away. This is the 
doctrine of the text. 


Il. WHY THE DOCTRINE OF THE TEXT MUST 
“2 BEY TRUE 


I wish to meet the objections that are ready to rise in 
many hearts against this doctrine, by pointing out the strong 
foundations on which it stands. 

(1) The doctrine of the text must be true, because man 
is what man ts. 

Now, what is man? There is one broad, sweeping answer, 
which takes in the whole human race: man is a sinful being. 
All children of Adam born into the world, whatever be their 
name or nation, are corrupt, wicked, and defiled in the sight 
of God. Their thoughts, words, ways, and actions are all, 
more or less, defective and imperfect. 

aI 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Is there no country on the face of the globe where sin does 
not reign? Is there no happy valley, no secluded island, 
where innocence is to be found? Is there no tribe on earth, 
where, far away from civilization, and commerce, and money, 
and gunpowder, and luxury, and books, morality and purity 
flourish? No! there is none. The most solitary islands of 
the Pacific Ocean,—islands cut off from all the rest of the 
world,—when first discovered, have been found full of 
impurity, cruelty, and idolatry. The footprints of the devil 
have been traced on every shore. The veracity of the third 
chapter of Genesis has everywhere been established. What- 
ever else savages have been found ignorant of, they have 
never been found ignorant of sin. 

Look over all the biographies and lives of the holiest 
Christians ; mark how the brightest and best of Christ’s people 
have always had the deepest sense of their own defectiveness 
and corruption. Patriarchs and Apostles, Fathers and 
Reformers, Episcopalians and Presbyterians, Luther and 
Calvin, Knox and Bradford, Rutherford and Bishop Hall, 
Wesley and Whitefield, Martyn and M‘Cheyne,—all are alike 
agreed in feeling their own sinfulness. The more light they 
have, the more humble and self-abased they seem to be; 
the more holy they are, the more they seem to feel their own 
unworthiness. 

Now what does all this seem to prove? Tomy eyes it 
seems to prove that human nature is so tainted and corrupt 
that, left to himself, no man could be saved. Man’s case 
appears to be a hopeless one without a Saviour,—and that a 
mighty Saviour too. There must be a Mediator, an Atone- 
ment, an Advocate, to make such poor sinful beings accept- 
able with God; and I find this nowhere, excepting in Jesus 
Christ. 

I lay these things before thinking men, and I ask them to 
consider them. I know it is one of the hardest things in the 
world to realize the sinfulness of sin. To say we are all sinners 
is one thing ; to have an idea what sin must be in the sight of 

22 


ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


God is quite another. Sin is too much part of ourselves to 
allow us to see it as it is: we do not feel our own moral 
deformity. 

But this we may be sure of,—if we could see our own lives 
with the eyes of the angels who never fell, we should never 
doubt this point fora moment. In a word, no one can really 
know what man is, and not see that the doctrine of our text 
must be true. We are shut up to the Apostle Peter’s con- 
clusion. There can be no salvation except by Christ. 

(2) The doctrine of our text must be true, because God 
is what God is. 

Now what is God? That is a deep question indeed. We 
know something of His attributes: He has not left Himself 
without witness in creation; He has mercifully revealed to 
us many things about Himself in His Word. We know that 
God is a Spirit,—eternal, invisible, almighty—the Maker of 
all things, the Preserver of all things,—holy, just, all-seeing 
all-knowing, all-remembering,—infinite in mercy, in wisdom, 
in purity. 

But, alas, after all, how low and grovelling are our highest 
ideas, when we come to put down on paper what we believe 
God to be! How many words and expressions we use whose 
full meaning we cannot fathom ! 

How weak and inadequate are our poor feeble intellects 
to form any conception of Him Who is perfect in all His 
works.—How little can our busy helplessness comprehend a 
Being who is ever ordering all things, in heaven and earth, 
by universal providence: ordering the least step in the life 
of the humblest believer among His people: all for His 
own glory. 

Tae blind man is no judge of the paintings of Rubens or 
Titian ; the deaf man is insensible to the beauty of Handel’s 
music; the Greenlander can have but a faint notion of the 
climate of the tropics; there is no faculty in their minds 
which can take in these things; they have no set of thoughts 
whic can comprehend them; they have no mental fingers 


23 


KNOTS UNTIED 


to grasp them. And just in the same way, the best and 
brightest ideas that man can form of God, compared to the 
reality which we shall one day see, are weak and faint indeed. 

But one thing, I think, is very clear: the more any man 
considers calmly what God really is, the more he must feel 
the immeasurable distance between God and himself; His 
conscience, I think, will tell him, if he will let it speak, that 
God is perfect, and he imperfect; that God is very high, 
and he very low; that God is glorious majesty, and he a poor 
worm ; and that if ever he is to stand before Him in judgment 
with comfort, he must have some mighty Helper, or he will 
not be saved. 

And what is all this but the very doctrine of the text 
with which I began? With such an one as God to 
give account to, we must have a mighty Saviour. To give 
us peace with such a glorious being as God, we must have 
an almighty Mediator, a Friend and Advocate on our side, 
—an Advocate who can answer every charge that can be laid 
against us, and plead our cause with God on equal terms. We 
want this, and nothing less than this. Vague notions of 
mercy will never give true peace. And such a Saviour, such 
a Friend, such an Advocate is nowhere to be found excepting 
in the person of Jesus Christ. 

(3) This doctrine must be true, because the Bible is what 
the Bible is. If we do not believe the doctrine, we must give 
up the Bible as the only rule of faith. 

All through the Bible, from Genesis down to Revelation, 
there is only one simple account of the way in which man must 
be saved. It is always the same: only for the sake of our 
Lord Jesus Christ,—through faith; not for our own works 
and deservings. 

We see it dimly revealed at first: it looms through the 
mist of a few promises ; but there it is. | 

We have it more plainly afterwards: it is taught by the 
pictures and emblems of the law of Moses, the schoolmaster 
dispensation. | 


24 


ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


We have it still more clearly by and by : the Prophets saw 
in vision many particulars about the Redeemer yet to come. 

We have it fully at last, in the sunshine of New Testament 
history: Christ incarnate,—Christ crucified,—Christ rising 
again,—Christ preached to the world. 

But one golden chain runs through the whole volume: no 
salvation excepting by Jesus Christ. The bruising of the 
serpent’s head foretold in the day of the fall; the clothing of 
our first parents with skins ; the sacrifices of Noah, Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob ; the passover, and all the particulars of the 
Jewish law,—the high priest, the altar, the daily offering of 
the lamb, the holy of holies entered only by blood, the scape- 
goat, the cities of refuge ;—all are so many witnesses to 
the truth set forth in the text. All preach with one Grplee, 
salvation only by Jesus Christ. 

In fact, this truth appears to be the grand object of the 
Bible, and all the different parts and portions of the book are 
meant to pour light upon it. I can gather from it no ideas of 
pardon and peace with God excepting in connection with 
this truth. If I could read of one soul in it who was saved 
without faith in a Saviour, I might perhaps not speak so 
confidently. But when I see that faith in Christ,—whether 
a coming Christ or a crucified Christ,—was the prominent 
feature in the religion of all who went to heaven ;—when 
I see Abel owning Christ in his “ better sacrifice ’’ at one 
end of the Bible, and the saints in glory in John’s vision 
rejoicing in Christ at the other end of the Bible ;—when 
I see a man like Cornelius, who was devout, and feared God, 
and gave alms and prayed, not told that he had done all, 
and would of course be saved, but ordered to send for Peter, 
and hear of Christ ;—when I see all these things, I say, I feel 
bound to believe that the doctrine of the text is the doctrine 
of the whole Bible. The Word of God, fairly examined 
and interpreted, shuts me up to the truth laid down by St. 
Peter. No salvation, no way to heaven, excepting by Jesus 
Christ. 

y 25 


KNOTS UNTIED 


What man is,—what God is,—what the Bible is,—all 
appear to me to lead on to the same great conclusion: no 
possible salvation without Christ. 


III. CONSEQUENCES WHICH FLOW NATURALLY 
OUT OF THIS DOCTRINE 


There are few parts of the subject which seem to me more 
important than this. If Christ is the only way of salvation, 
what are we to feel about many people in the world ? 

I believe that many persons would go with me so far as 
I have gone, and would go no further. They think it uncharit- 
able to say anything which appears to condemn others. For 
my part I cannot understand such charity. It seems to me 
the kind of charity which would see a neighbour drinking 
slow poison, but never interfere to stop him ;—which 
would see a blind man walking near a precipice, and think 
it wrong to cry out, and tell him there was danger. 

The greatest charity is to tell the greatest quantity of truth. 
It is no charity to hide the legitimate consequences of such a 
saying of St. Peter as we are now considering, or to shut our 
eyes against them. And I solemnly call on every one who 
really believes there is no salvation in any but Christ,—and 
none other name given under heaven whereby we must be 
saved,—I solemnly call on that person to give me his attention, 
while I set before him some of the tremendous consequences 
which the doctrine we are considering involves. 

(a) One mighty consequence then which seems to be 
learned from this text, is the utter uselessness of any religion 
without Christ. 

There are many to be found in Christendom at this day 
who have a religion of this kind. They would not like to be 
called Deists, but Deists they are. That there is a God, that 
there is what they are pleased to call Providence, that God 
is merciful, that there will be a state after death,—this is 
about the sum and substance of their creed; and as to the 
distinguishing tenets of Christianity, they do not seem to 

‘ 26 


ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


recognize them at all. Such a system is a baseless fabric,— 
its seeming foundation man’s fancy,—its hopes an utter 
delusion. The god of such people is an idol of their own 
invention, and not the glorious God of the Scriptures.—Let 
us beware of a religion without Christ. 

(6) Another consequence to be learned from the text 
is the folly of any religion in which Christ has not the first place. 

I need not remind my readers how many hold a system 
of this kind. The Socinian tells us that Christ was a mere 
man; that His blood had no more efficacy than that of 
another ; that His death on the cross was not a real atone- 
ment and propitiation of man’s sins; and that, after all, 
doing is the way to heaven, and not believing. I solemnly 
declare that I believe such a system is ruinous to men’s 
souls. It seems to me to strike at the root of the wholé plan 
of salvation which God has revealed in the Bible, and 
practically to nullify the greater part of the Scriptures. 
It overthrows the priesthood of the Lord Jesus, and strips 
Him of His office. It converts the whole system of the law 
of Moses, touching sacrifices and ordinances, into a meaning- 
less form. It seems to say that the sacrifice of Cain was just 
as good as the sacrifice of Abel. It turns man adrift on a sea 
of uncertainty, by plucking from under him the finished 
work of a divine Mediator. Let us beware of the least attempt 
to depreciate and undervalue Christ’s person, offices, or 
work. The name whereby alone we can be saved, is a name 
above every name, and the slightest contempt poured upon it 
is an insult to the King of kings. The salvation of our souls 
has been laid by God the Father on Christ, and no other. 
If He were not very God of very God, He never could accom- 
plish it, and there could be no salvation at all. 

(c) Another consequence to be learned from our text, is 
the great error committed by those who add anything to Christ, 
as necessary to salvation. 

It is an easy thing to profess belief in the Trinity, and 
reverence for our Lord Jesus Christ, and yet to make some 


27 


KNOTS UNTIED 


addition to Christ as the ground of hope, which will overthrow 
the doctrine of the text as really and completely as by denying 
it altogether. 

The Church of Rome does this systematically. She adds 
things to Christianity over and above the requirements of 
the Gospel, of her own invention. She speaks as if Christ’s 
finished work was not a sufficient foundation for a sinner’s 
soul, and as if it were not enough to say, “ Believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.’’ She sends 
men to priests and confessors, to penances and absolution, 
to masses and extreme unction, to fasting and bodily mortifica- 
tion, to the Virgin Mary and the saints,—as if these things 
could add to the safety there is in Christ Jesus. And in 
doing this she sins against the doctrine of God’s Word with 
a high hand. Let us beware of any hankering after additions 
to the simple way of the Gospel, from whatever quarter it 
may come. 

But I fear the Church of Rome does not stand alone in 
this matter. I fear there are thousands of professing Protes- 
tants who are often erring in the same direction, although, 
of course, in a very different degree. They get into a way 
of adding, perhaps insensibly, other things to the name 
of Christ, or attaching an importance to them which they 
never ought to receive. The ultra Churchman in England, 
who thinks God’s covenanted mercies are tied to Episcopacy, 
—the ultra Presbyterian in Scotland, who cannot reconcile 
prelacy with an intelligent knowledge of the Gospel,—the 
ultra Freekirk man by his side, who seems to think lay 
patronage and vital Christianity almost incompatible,—the 
ultra Dissenter, who traces every evil in the Church to its 
connection with the State, and can talk of nothing but the 
voluntary system,—the ultra Baptist, who shuts out from 
the Lord’s table every one who has not received his peculiar 
views of adult baptism,—the ultra Plymouth Brother, who 
believes all knowledge to reside with his own body, and 
condemns every one outside as a poor weak babe ;—all these, 

28 


ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


I say, however unwittingly, exhibit a most uncomfortable 
tendency to add to the doctrine of our text. All seem to me 
to be practically declaring that salvation is not to be found 
simply and solely in Christ. All seem to me to be practically 
adding another name to the name of Jesus, whereby men 
must be saved,—even the name of their own party and 
sect. All seem to me to be practically replying to the question, 
“What shall I do to be saved?” not merely, ‘‘ Believe on 
the Lord Jesus Christ,’’ but also “ Come and join us.” 

Now I call upon every true Christian to beware of such 
ultraism, in whatever form he may be inclined to it. However 
dear to us our own peculiar views may be, let us beware 
of thrusting them in between the sinner and the Saviour. In 
the things of God’s Word, be it remembered, addition, as well 
as subtraction, is a great sin. 

(d) The last consequence which seems to me to be learned 
from our text is, the utter absurdity of supposing that all is 
well if a man is only earnest and sincere. 

This is a very common heresy indeed, and one against 
which we all need to be on our guard. There are thousands 
who say in the present day, ““ We have nothing to do with 
the opinions of others. They may perhaps be mistaken, 
though it is possible they are right and we are wrong : but, if 
they are sincere and earnest, we hope they will be saved 
even as we.’ And all this sounds liberal and charitable, 
and people like to fancy their own views are so! To such 
an extreme length has this erroneous idea run, that many are 
content to describe a Christian as “an earnest man,’ and 
seem to think this vague definition is quite sufficient ! 

Now I believe such notions are entirely contradictory to 
the Bible, whatever else they may be. I cannot find in 
Scripture that any one ever got to heaven merely by sincerity, 
or was accepted with God if he was only earnest in main- 
taining his own views. The priests of Baal were -earnest 
and sincere when they cut themselves with knives and lancets 
till the blood gushed out; but that did not prevent Elijah 


29 


KNOTS UNTIED 


from commanding them to be treated as wicked idolaters.— 
The Apostle Paul, when a Pharisee, was earnest and sincere 
while he made havoc of the Church, but when his eyes 
were opened he mourned over this as a special wickedness. 
Let us beware of allowing for a moment that sincerity is 
everything. Once allow such notions to be true, and we 
may as well throw our Bibles aside altogether. 

A religion without Christ, a religion that takes away 
from Christ, a religion that adds anything to Christ, a religion 
that puts sincerity in the place of Christ,—all are dangerous : 
all are to be avoided, because all are alike contrary to the 
doctrine of Scripture. 

Some readers may not like this. They think me un- 
charitable, illiberal, narrow-minded, bigoted, and so forth. 
Be it so. But they will not tell me my doctrine is not that 
of the Word of God and of the Church of England, whose 
minister I am. That. doctrine is, salvation in Christ to the 
very uttermost,—but out of Christ no salvation at all. 

I feel it a duty to bear my solemn testimony against the 
spirit of the day we live in ; to warn men against its infection. 
It is not Atheism I fear so much, in the present times, as 
Pantheism. It is the system which is so charitable, that 
it will allow everything to be true. It is the system which 
seems ready to honour others as well as our Lord Jesus 
Christ, to class them all together, and to think well of all. 
Confucius and Zoroaster, Socrates and Mahomet, the Indian 
Brahmins and the African devil-worshippers, Arius and 
Pelagius, Ignatius Loyola and Socinus,—all are to be treated 
respectfully : none are to be condemned. It is the system 
which bids us smile complacently on all creeds and systems 
of religion. 

What is it all but a bowing down before a great idol, 
speciously called liberality ? What is it all but a sacrificing 
of truth upon the altar of a caricature of charity? Has the 
Lord God spoken to us in the Bible, or has He not? Has 
He shown us the way of salvation plainly and distinctly 


30 


ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


in that Bible, or has He not? WHas He declared to us the 
dangerous state of all out of that way, or has He not? Let 
us look these questions fairly in the face, and give them an 
honest answer. Tell us that there is some other inspired 
book beside the Bible, and then we shall know what you 
mean. Tell us that the whole Bible is not inspired, and 
then we shall know where to meet you. But grant for a 
moment that the Bible is God’s truth, and then I know not 
in what way we can escape the doctrine of the text. From 
the liberality which says everybody is right, from the charity 
which forbids us to say anybody is wrong, from the peace 
which is bought at the expense of truth,—may God deliver 
us ! 


I CAN SEE NO SALVATION FOR SINNERS IN THE 
BIBLE EXCEPTING THROUGH JESUS CHRIST, OUR LORD 
AND SAVIOUR. 


Let me conclude with a few words by way of 
application. 

If there is no salvation excepting in Christ, let us try 
to do good to the souls of all who do not know Him as a 
Saviour. There are millions in this miserable condition,— 
millions in foreign lands, millions in our own country, millions 
who are not trusting in Christ. We ought to feel for them 
if we are true Christians; we ought to pray for them; we 
ought to work for them, while there is yet time. Do we really 
believe that Christ is the only way to heaven? Then let us 
live as if we believed it. 

Let us look round the circle of our own relatives and 
friends, count them up one by one, and think how many of 
them are not yet in Christ. Let us try to do good to them 
in some way or other, and act as a man should act who believes 
his friends to be in danger. Let us not be content with their 
being kind and amiable, gentle and good-tempered, moral 
and courteous. Let us rather be miserable about them till 
they come to Christ, and trust in Him. I know all this may 


31 


KNOTS UNTIED 


sound like enthusiasm and fanaticism. I wish there was more 
of it in the world. Anything, I am sure, is better than a 
quiet indifference about the souls of others, as if everybody 
was in the way to heaven. Nothing, to my mind, so proves 
our little faith, as our little feeling about the spiritual condition 
of those around us. 

Again, if there is no salvation excepting in Christ, let us 
love all who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and exalt Him as 
their Saviour, whoever they may be. Let us not draw back 
and look shy on others, because they do not see eye to eye with 
ourselves in everything. Whether a man be a Freekirk man 
or an Independent, a Wesleyan or a Baptist, let us love 
him if he loves Christ, and gives Christ His rightful place. 
We are all fast travelling toward a place where names and 
forms and Church-government will be nothing, and Christ 
will be all. Let us get ready for that place betimes, by loving 
all who are in the way that leads to it. 

This is the true charity, to believe all things and hope 
all things, so long as we see Bible doctrines maintained and 
Christ exalted. Christ must be the single standard by which 
all. opinions must be measured. Let us honour all who 
honour Him: but let us never forget that the same Apostle 
Paul who wrote about charity, says also, “ If any man love 
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema.” If our 
charity and liberality are wider than that of the Bible, they 
are worth nothing at all. Indiscriminate love is no love at all, 
and indiscriminate approbation of all religious opinions, is 
only a new name for infidelity. Let us hold out the right 
hand to all who love the Lord Jesus, but let us beware how 
we go beyond this. 

But, if there is no salvation excepting by Christ, we 
must not be surprised if ministers of the Gospel preach 
much about Him. They cannot tell us too much about the 
Name which is above every name; we can never hear too 
much of Christ. 

When ministers are wearied of preaching Him, they are 


32 


ONLY ONE WAY OF SALVATION 


false ministers : when people are wearied of hearing of Him, 
their souls are in an unhealthy state. 

Let me close with the words of an old writer, to 
which I desire humbly to subscribe. “I know no true 
religion but Christianity; no true Christianity but the 
doctrine of Christ ; the doctrine of His divine person, of His 
divine office, of His divine righteousness, and of His divine 
Spirit, which all that are His receive. I know no true ministers 
of Christ but such as make it their business, in their calling, 
to commend Jesus Christ, in His saving fulness of grace and 
glory, to the faith and love of men ; no true Christian but one 
united to Christ by faith and love, unto the glorifying of the 
name of Jesus Christ, in the beauty of Gospel holiness. 
Ministers and Christians of this spirit have been for many 
years my brethren and companions, and I hope shall ever 
be, whithersoever the hand of God shall lead me.” 

—(ROBERT TRAILL.) 


33 D 


Ill 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 
“« Pyove all things | hold fast that which is good.”’—1 THESS. v. 21. 


There were three great doctrines or principles which won 
the battle of the Protestant Reformation. These three were : 
(1) the sufficiency and supremacy of Holy Scripture, (2) the 
right of private judgment, and (3) justification by faith only, 
without the deeds of the law. 

These three principles were the keys of the whole contro- 
versy between the Reformers and the Church of Rome. 
If we keep firm hold of them when we argue with a Roman 
Catholic, our position is unassailable: no weapon that the 
Church of Rome can forge against us will prosper. If we 
give up any one of them, our cause is lost. 

Let us carefully remember this. The Roman controversy 
is upon us once more. We must put on the old armour, if 
we would not have our faith overthrown. The sufficiency of 
Holy Scripture,—the right of private judgment,—justification . 
by faith only,—these are the three great principles to which 
we must always cling. Let us grasp them firmly, and never 
let them go. 

One of the three great principles to which I have referred 
appears to me to stand forth in the verse of Scripture which 
the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of St. Paul, says to us, 
“Prove all things ; hold fast that which is good,’’ In these 
words we have two great truths. 


34 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 


I. The right, duty, and necessity of private judgment: 
“ Prove all things.” 


II. The duty and necessity of keeping firm hold upon truth : 
“ Hold fast that which is good.” 


THE RIGHT, DUTY, AND NECESSITY OF PRIVATE 
JUDGMENT 


When I say the right of private judgment, I mean that 
every individual Christian has a right to judge for himself 
by the Word of God, whether that which is put before him as 
religious truth is God’s truth, or is not. 

When I say the duty of private judgment, I mean that God 
requires every Christian man to use the right of which I have 
just spoken ;—tfo compare man’s words and man’s writings 
with God’s revelation, and to make sure that he is not deluded 
and taken in by false teaching. 

And when I say the necessity of private judgment, I mean 
that it is absolutely needful for every Christian who 
would not be deceived, to exercise the right, and discharge | 
the duty to which I have referred; seeing that experience 
shows that the neglect of private judgment has always been 
the cause of immense evils in the Church of Christ. 

Now the Apostle Paul urges all these three points upon 
our notice when he uses those remarkable words, “ Prove 
all things.” I ask particular attention to that expression. 

He does not say, “‘ Whatsoever Apostles,—whatsoever 
- evangelists, pastors, and teachers,—whatsoever your Bishops, 
—whatsoever your ministers tell you is truth, that you are to 
believe.”’ No! he says, ‘““ PROVE ALL THINGS.”’ He does not 
say ‘“‘ Whatsoever the universal Church pronounces true, that 
you are to hold.” No! he says, “ Prove all things.” 

The principle laid down is this: ‘‘ Prove all things by the 
Word of God ;—Measure all by the measure of the Bible.— 
Compare all with the standard of the Bible.—Test all in the 
crucible of the Bible. That which can abide the fire of the 


35 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Bible, receive, hold, believe, and obey. That which cannot 
abide the fire of the Bible, reject, refuse, repudiate, and cast 
away.” . 

This is private judgment. This is the right we are bound 
to exercise. We are not to believe things in religion merely 
because they are said by Popes or Cardinals,—by Bishops 
or Priests, —by Presbyters or Deacons,—by Churches, Councils, 
or Synods,—by Fathers, Puritans, or even Reformers. 
We are not to argue,‘‘ Such and such things must be true, because 
these men say so.’’ We are to prove all things by the Word of 
God. 

Now I know such doctrine sounds startling in some men’s 
ears, and I have no wish to encourage any man in ignorant 
presumption or ignorant contempt. I praise not the man 
who seldom reads his Bible, and yet sets himself up to find 
fault in his minister’s sermons. I praise not the man who 
knows nothing but a few texts in the New Testament, and 
yet undertakes to settle questions in divinity which have 
puzzled God’s wisest children. I say with Bishop Davenant 
(A.D. 1627), ‘‘ We are not to believe all who undertake to 
teach in the Church, but must take care and weigh with 
serious examination, whether their doctrine be sound or 
not.’ 

Some men I know, refuse to believe this doctrine of private 
judgment; but I assert confidently that it is continually 
taught in the Word of God. 

This, again, is the principle laid down by our Lord Jesus 
Christ in the Sermon on the Mount. The Head of the Church 
says there :—‘‘ Beware of false prophets which come to you in 

1The people of God are called to try the truth, to judge between 
good and ill, between light and darkness, God hath made them the 
promise of His Spirit, and hath left unto them His Word, They of 
Berea, when they heard the preaching of Paul, searched the Scriptures 
daily, whether those things were so as he taught them, and many of 
them believed. So do you: give heed to instruction, and yet receive 
not all things without proof and trial that they are not contrary to 


the wholesome doctrine of the Word of God.”—Bishop Jewell, author 
of the “ Apology of the Church of England,” 1583. 


36 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 


sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. 
Ye shall know them by their fruit ” (Matt. vii. 15). How is 
it possible that men shall know these false prophets, except 
they exercise their private judgment as to what their fruits 
are? 
This is the practice we find commended in the Bereans, in 
the Acts of the Apostles. They did not take the Apostle 
Paul’s word for granted, when he came to preach to them. 
We are told, that they “‘searched the Scriptures daily, whether 
those things were so,” and ‘“‘ therefore,’’ it is said, “‘ many of 
them believed’ (Acts xvii II, 12). What was this again 
but private judgment ? 

This also is the spirit of the advice given in I Cor. x. 15, 
—‘“I speak as unto wise men; judge ye what I say”: 
and in 1 John iv. 1,—‘‘ Beloved, believe not every spirit, 
but try the spirits, whether they are of God,” and in 2 John Io, 
—“If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, 
receive him not into you house.’ [See St. Paul’s very 
solemn warning: ‘‘ Though we or an angel from heaven 
preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we 
have preached to you let him be accursed.’’—Galatians i. 
8 and g.] These passages to my mind seem to say to every 
individual Christian, ‘‘ Prove all things.’’ 

Suppose that, in fear of private judgment, we resolve to 
believe whatever the Church believes. Where is our security 
against error ? The Church is not infallible. There was a time 
when almost the whole of Christendom embraced the Arian 
heresy, and did not acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ to be 
equal with the Father in all things. There was a time, before 
the Reformation, when the darkness over the face of Europe 
was a darkness that might be felt.—The General Councils of 
the Church are not infallible. When the whole Church is 
gathered together in a General Council, what says our Twenty- 
first Article? ‘‘ They may err, and sometimes have erred, 
even in things pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained 
by them as necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor 


37 


KNOTS UNTIED 


authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of 
Holy Scripture.” 

Suppose that we resolve to believe whatever our minister 
believes. Once more I ask,—Where is our security against 
error 2? Ministers are not infallible, any more than Churches. 
All of them have not the Spirit of God. The very best of 
them are only men. Call them Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or 
whatever names you please, they are all earthen vessels. I 
speak not merely of Popes, who have promulgated awful 
superstitions, and led abominable lives. I would rather point 
to the very best of Protestants, and say, ‘‘ Beware of looking 
upon them as infallible,—beware of thinking of any man (who- 
ever that man may be) that he cannot err.” Let us never make 
ministers Popes. Let us follow them so far as they follow Christ, 
but not a hair’s breadth further. Let us believe whatever 
they can show us out of the Bible, but not a single word 
more. 

I have said that it is impossible to overrate the evils that may 
arise from neglecting to exercise private judgment. 1 will go 
further, and say that it is impossible to overrate the blessings 
which private judgment has conferred both on the world and 
on the Church. 

I ask my readers, then, to remember that the greatest 
discoveries in science and in philosophy, beyond all contro- 
versy, have arisen from the use of private judgment. To 
this we owe the discovery of Galileo, that the earth went 
round the sun, and not the sun round the earth.—To this 
we owe Columbus’ discovery of the continent of America.— 
To this we owe Harvey’s discovery of the circulation of the 
blood.—To this we owe Jenner’s discovery of vaccination.— 
To this we owe the printing press, the steam engine, the power- 
loom, the electric telegraph, railways, and gas. For all these 
discoveries we are indebted to men who dared to “‘ think for 
themselves.”” They were not content with the beaten path 
of those who had gone before. They made experiments for 
themselves. They brought old-established theories to the 


38 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 


proof, and found that they were worthless. They proclaimed 
new systems, and invited men to examine them, and test 
their truth. They bore storms of obloquy and ridicule un- 
moved. And they prospered and succeeded in what they did. 
And we who live in the present century are reaping the fruit 
of their use of private judgment. 

And as it has been in science, so also it has been in the 
history of the Christian religion. The martyrs who stood alone 
in their day, and shed that blood which has been the seed of 
Christ’s Gospel throughout the world,—the Reformers, who, 
one after another, rose up in their might to enter the lists 
with the Church of Rome,—all did what they did, suffered 
what they suffered, proclaimed what they proclaimed, simply 
because they exercised their private judgment about what was 
Christ’s truth.—Private judgment made the Vallenses; the 
Albigenses, and the Lollards, count not their lives dear to them, 
rather than believe the doctrines of the Church of Rome.— 
Private judgment made Wickliffe search the Bible in our own 
land, denounce the Romish friars, and all their impostures, 
translate the Scriptures into the vulgar tongue, and become 
“the morning star’”’ of the Reformation.—Private judgment 
made Luther examine Tetzel’s evil system of indulgences by 
the light of the Word.—Private judgment led him on, step by 
step, from one thing to another, guided by the same light, 
till at length the gulf between him and Rome was a gulf that 
could not be passed, and the Pope’s power in Germany was 
broken.—Private judgment made our own English Reformers 
examine for themselves, and inquire for themselves, as to the 
true nature of that corrupt system under which they had been 
born and brought up.—Private judgment made them cast off 
the evils of Popery, and circulate the Bible among the laity.— 
Private judgment made them draw from the Bible our Articles, 
compile our Prayer-book, and constitute the Church of England 
as itis. They broke the fetters of tradition, and dared to think 
for themselves. They refused to take for granted Rome’s 
pretensions and assertions.. They examined them all by the 


59 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Bible, and because they would not abide the examination, 
they broke with Rome altogether. All the blessings of Protest- 
antism in England, all that we are enjoying at this very day, 
we owe to the right exercise of private judgment. Surely if 
we do not honour private judgment, we are thankless and 
ungrateful indeed ! 

Let us not be moved by the common argument, that the 
right of private judgment is liable to be abused. 

Private judgment has been abused! What good gift of God 
had not been abused ? What high principle can be named that 
has not been employed for the very worst of purposes ? 
Strength may become tyranny, when it is employed by the 
stronger to coerce the weaker; yet strength is a blessing 
when properly employed. Because many things may be 
used improperly, are we therefore to give them up 
altogether ? Because opium is used improperly by some, is 
it not to be used as a medicine on any occasion at all ? 
Because money may be used improperly, is all money to be 
cast into the sea ? You cannot have good in this world without 
evil. You cannot have private judgment without some abus- 
ing it, and turning it to bad account. 

But private judgment, people say, has done more harm than 
good! What harm has private judgment done, in matters 
of religion, to be compared to the harm that has been done by 
the neglect of it? Some are fond of telling us that among 
Protestants who allow private judgment, there are divisions, 
and that in the Church of Rome, where private judgment is 
forbidden, there are no divisions. I might easily show such 
objectors that Romish unity is far more seeming than real. 
I might easily show that the divisions of Protestants are 
exceedingly exaggerated, and that most of them are upon 
points of minor importance. I might show that, with all the 
“varieties of Protestantism,” as men call them, there is still 
a vast amount of fundamental unity and substantial agree- 
ment among Protestants. No man can read the Harmony of 
Protestant Confessions without seeing that. 


40 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 


But grant for a moment that private judgment has led to 
divisions, and brought about varieties. I say that these 
divisions and varieties are but a drop of water when compared 
with the torrent of evils that have arisen from the Church of 
Rome’s practice of disallowing private judgment altogether. 
Weigh the evils one against another, and I have no doubt as 
to which will be the greatest. Give me Protestant divisions, 
certainly, rather than Popish unity, with the fruit that it 
brings forth. Give me Protestant variations, rather than 
Romish ignorance, superstition, darkness, and idolatry. Give 
me the Protestant diversities of England and Scotland, with 
all their disadvantages, rather than the dead level, both 
intellectual and spiritual of the Italian peninsula. 

In any case let us not be moved by the specious argument, 
that it is humility to disallow private judgment, and to have no 
opinion of our own, that it is the part of a true Christian not 
to think for himself ! 

Such humility is a false humility, a humility that does 
not deserve that blessed name. Call it rather laziness, idleness, 
and sloth. It makes aman strip himself of all his responsibility, 
and throw the whole burden of his soul into the hands of the 
minister and the Church. It gives a man a mere vicarious 
religion, a religion by which he places his conscience and all 
his spiritual concerns under the care of others. He need not 
trouble himself ! He need no longer think for himself! Let 
us beware of supposing that this deserves the name of humility. 
It is refusing to exercise the gift that God has given us. It is 
refusing to employ the sword of the Spirit which God has forged 
for the use of our hand. Blessed be God, our forefathers did 
not act upon such principles! Had they done so, we should 
never have had the Reformation. From such humility may 
God ever deliver us ! 

As long as we live, let us resolve that we will read for our- 
selves, think for ourselves, judge of the Bible for ourselves, in 
the great matters of our souls. Let us dare to have an opinion 
of our own. Let us never be ashamed of saying, ‘‘ I think that 


4I 


KNOTS UNTIED 


this is right, because I find it in the Bible ; ’’ and “ I think that 
this is wrong, because I do not find it in the Bible.” “‘ Let us 
prove all things,” -and prove them by the Word of God. 

Let us think of the solemn account which every one of us, 
individually, will have to give in that day before the judgment 
seat of Christ. We shall not be judged by whole congrega- 
tions. We shall be judged individually, each by himself. 

II. And now let me speak of the duty and necessity of 
keeping firm hold upon God’s truth. 

The words of the Apostle on this subject are pithy and 
forcible. ‘‘ Hold fast,’’ he says, “ that which is good.’’ It is 
as if he said to us, ‘‘ When you have found the truth for your- 
self, and when you are satisfied that it is Christ’s truth,—that 
truth which the Scriptures set forth—then get a firm hold upon 
it, grasp it, keep it in your heart, never let it go.” 

St. Paul speaks as one who knew what the hearts of all 
Christians are. He knew that our grasp of the Gospel, at our 
best, is very cold,—that our love soon waxes feeble,—that our 
faith soon wavers. 

He speaks as if he foresaw by the Spirit that the good 
tidings of the Gospel would soon be corrupted, spoiled, and 
plucked away from the Church at Thessalonica. He speaks 
as one who foresaw that Satan and all his agents would labour 
hard to cast down Christ’s truth. He writes as though he 
would forewarn men of this danger, and he cries, ‘“‘ Hold fast 
that which is good.” 

The advice is always needed.—There is a tendency to 
decay in the very best of human institutions. The best visible 
Church of Christ is not free from a liability to degenerate. 
It is made up of fallible men. There is always in it a ten- 
dency to leave its first love. We see the leaven of evil 
creeping into many a Church, even in the Apostle’s time. All 
these things are meant to be beacons in these latter times. 
All show the great necessity laid upon the Church to remem- 
ber the Apostle’s words: “ Hold fast that which is good.” 

Many Churches of Christ since then have fallen away for 


42 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 


the want of remembering this principle. Their ministers and 
members forgot that Satan is always labouring to bring in 
false doctrine, and that no Church is ever safe that forgets 
these things, and does not bear in mind the Apostle’ S 
injunction: “ Hold fast that which is good.” 

If ever there was a time in the world when Churches were 
put upon their trial, whether they would hold fast the truth 
or not, that time is the present time, and those Churches are 
the Protestant Churches of our own land. Popery, that old 
enemy of our nation, is coming in opon us in this day like a 
flood. We are assaulted by open enemies without, and 
betrayed continually by false friends within. The number of 
Roman Catholic churches, and chapels, and schools, and con- 
ventual and monastic establishments, is continually increasing 
around us. Month after month brings tidings of some new 
defection from the ranks of the Church of England to the 
ranks of the Church of Rome. Surely now or never, we ought 
all of us to awake, and “‘ Hold fast that which is good.” 

Perhaps we supposed, some of us, in our blindness, that the 
power of the Church of Rome was ended. We dreamed, in 
our folly, that the Reformation had ended the Popish contro- 
versy, and that if Romanism did survive, Romanism was 
altogether changed. If we did think so, we have lived to 
learn that we made a most grievous mistake. Rome never 
changes. It is her boast that she is always the same. 

And the question is now, whether we are going to abide 
quietly, sit still, and fold our hands, and do nothing to resist 
the assault. Surely this is a crisis in the history of our Churches 
and of our land. It is a time which will soon prove whether 
we know the value of our privileges. It is a time which will 
soon prove whether we intend to allow our candlestick to be 
removed, or to repent, and do our first works, lest any man 
- should take our crown. If we love the open Bible,—if we love 
the preaching of the Gospel,—if we love the privilege of read- 
ing that Bible, and the opportunity of hearing that Gospel, 


43 


KNOTS: UNTIED 


if we love religious liberty,—we must make up our minds to 
‘* hold fast,” lest by and by we lose all. 


CONTENDING FOR THE TRUTH—A DUTY 


IF WE MEAN TO “HOLD FAST,’’ EVERY PARISH, 
EVERY CONGREGATION, EVERY CHRISTIAN MAN, AND 
EVERY CHRISTIAN WOMAN, MUST DO THEIR PART IN 
CONTENDING FOR THE TRUTH. EACH ONE OF US 
SHOULD WORK, AND PRAY, AND LABOUR AS IF THE 
PRESERVATION OF THE PURE GOSPEL DEPENDED 
UPON HIMSELF OR HERSELF, AND UPON NO ONE 
ELSE AT ALL. The clergy must not leave the matter 
to the laity, nor the laity to the clergy. The rich must not 
leave the matter to the poor, nor the poor to the rich. We 
must all work. Every living soul has a sphere of influence. 
Every living soul can throw some weight into the scale of 
the Gospel. Let him see to it that he casts it in. 

If we would “ hold fast’ that which is good, we must 
never countenance any doctrine which is not the pure doctrine 
of Christ’s Gospel. There is a hatred which is downright charity, 
that is, the hatred of erroneous doctrine. There is an intolerance 
which is downright praiseworthy,—that is, the intolerance of 
false teaching in the pulpit. Who would ever think of tolerating 
a little poison given to him day by day? If men come among 
us who do not preach “ all the counsel of God,’’ who do not 
preach of Christ, and sin, and holiness, of ruin, and redemption, 
and regeneration, and do not preach of these things in a 
Scriptural way, we ought to cease to hear them. We ought 
to act upon the injunction given by the Holy Ghost in the 
Old Testament: ‘‘ Cease, my son, to hear the instruction 
which causes to err from the words of knowledge.’”’ (Prov. 
xix. 27.) If we are content to hear Jesus Christ not put in 
His rightful place, we are not men and women who are likely 
to do Christ much service, or fight a good fight on His side. 
He that is not zealous against error, is not likely to be 
zealous for truth. 


44 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 


If we would hold fast the truth, we must be ready to unite 
with all who hold the truth, and love the Lord Jesus Christ 
in sincerity. We must be ready to lay aside all minor questions 
as things of subordinate importance. Establishment or no 
Establishment, Liturgy or no Liturgy, Bishops or Presbyters,— 
all these points of difference, however important they may be 
in their place and in their proportion,—all ought to be regarded 
as subordinate questions. I ask no man to give up his private 
opinions about them. 

Some may say, “This is very troublesome.’’ Some 
may say, ““ Why not sit still and be quiet ?”’ What need is 
there for all this trouble ? Why should we care so much about 
these points of difference >”? What good thing was ever got, 
or ever kept, without trouble ? And Christ’s truth is seldom 
made a nation’s property, and kept a nation’s property, with- 
out pains, without struggles, and without trouble. 

Let the man who talks of ‘‘trouble’’ tell us where we should 
be at this day, if our forefathers had not taken some trouble ? 
Where would be the Gospel in England, if martyrs had not 
given their bodies to be burned? They counted not their 
lives dear for the Gospels sake. They laboured and travailed, 
and we have entered into their labours. One thing is very sure, 
that nothing but Christ’s Gospel will ever do us good. Nothing 
else will maintain our Churches. Nothing else will ever bring 
down God’s blessing upon our land. 


PROVE ALL THINGS 


I have set forth in plain language two things. One is the 
right, the duty, and necessity of private judgment. The other 
is the duty and necessity of keeping firm hold upon truth.— 
It only remains to apply these things to the individual con- 
sciences of my readers, by a few concluding words. 

(rt) For one thing, if it be our duty to “ prove all things,” 
let me beseech and exhort all English Churchmen to arm 
themselves with a thorough knowledge of the written Word of 
God. Let us read our Bibles regularly, and become familiar 


45 


KNOTS UNTIED 


with their contents. Let us prove all religious teaching, when 
it is brought before us, by the Bible. A little knowledge of 
the Bible will not suffice. A man must know his Biblé well, 
if he is to prove religion by it ; and he must read it regularly, 
if he would know it well. There is no royal road to a know- 
ledge of the Bible. There must be patient, daily, systematic 
reading of the Book, or the Book will not be known. 

(2) For another thing, if it be right to “ prove all things,” 
let us take special care to try every Roman Catholic doctrine, 
by whomsoever put forward, by the written Word of God. 
Let us believe nothing, however speciously advanced,—believe 
nothing, with whatever weight of authority brought forward,— 
believe nothing, though supported by all the Fathers,—believe 
nothing, except it can be proved to us out of the Scripture, The ~ 
Bible alone is infallible. That alone is light. That alone is 
God’s measure of truth and falsehood. ‘‘ Let God be true, and 
every man a liar.’ The New Zealander’s answer to 
the Romish priests when they first went among them 
was an answer never to be forgotten. They heard these priests 
urge upon them the worship of the Virgin Mary. They heard 
them recommend prayer to the dead saints,the use of images, 
the mass and the confessional. They heard them speak of 
the authority of the Church of Rome, the supremacy of the 
Pope, the antiquity of the Romish Communion. They knew 
the Bible, and heard all this calmly, and gave one simple but 
memorable answer: ‘‘ Jt cannot be true, because it is not in the 
Book.’’ Let this be our rule when we are attacked by Roman- 
ists, or semi-Romanists; let us hold fast the sword of the 
Spirit ; and say, in reply to all their arguments, “ Jt cannot be 
true, because it ts not in the Book.’’ 

(3) Last of all, if it be right to “ hold fast that which is 
good,”’ let us make sure that we have each laid hold personally 
upon Christ’s truth for ourselves. Let us see to it that we each 
flee for refuge, and lay hold upon the hope set before us in 
His glorious Gospel. Let us do this, and then, all things are 
ours. The Church may fail. The State may go toruin. The 


46 


PRIVATE JUDGMENT 


foundations of all establishments may be shaken. The enemies 
of truth may for a season prevail. But we shall have in this 
world peace, and in the world which is to come, life ever- 
lasting ; for we shall have Christ, and having Him, we have 
all. 


47 


IV 
THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


WHO IS THE “ TRUE CHURCHMAN ” e 


That is a question which is shaking the Established Church 
of England to the very centre. It is becoming a very large 
and serious question, and one which imperatively demands 
an answer. 

It is not enough to say that everybody who goes to church 
is a “true Churchman.” That reply, I think, will content 
nobody. There are scores of people occupying our pews and 
benches every Sunday, who know nothing whatever about 
religion. They could not tell you, if life depended on it, what 
they believe or don’t believe, hold or don’t hold, about any 
doctrine of Christianity. They are totally in the dark about 
the whole subject. Politics they know, and business they 
know, and science perhaps they know, and possibly they 
know something about the amusements of this world. But as 
to the composition of a “‘ true Churchman’s ”’ creed, they can 
tell you nothing whatever. They “ go to church ” on Sundays ; 
and that is all. But, complete ignorance, can never be the 
qualification of a true Churchman. 

But perhaps it is enough to say that everybody who goes 
to church, and is zealous and earnest in his religion, is a 
“true Churchman’? That is a very wide question, and 
opens up an entirely new line of thought. But I fear it will 
not land us in any satisfactory conclusion. “ Earnestness ”’ is 
the attribute of men of the most opposite and contradictory 


48 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


creeds.” It alone is no proof that a man is a true Churchman. 
The devil is in earnest. Infidels are in earnest. Deists are in 
earnest. Socinians are in earnest. Papists are in earnest. 
Pharisees were in earnest. Sadducees were in earnest. Earnest- 
ness alone proves nothing more than this,—that a man has a 
good deal of energy and “‘ go’ about him, and will not go to 
sleep. But it certainly does not prove that a man is a “ true 
Churchman.” What is the man earnest about ? This is the 
question that ought to be asked, and deserves to be answered. 


ONE CREED AS GOOD AS ANOTHER 


Once for all, I must protest against the modern notion, that 
it does not matter the least what religious opinions a man holds, 
so long as he ts in “‘ earnest ’’ about them,—that one creed is 
just as good as another. I cannot hold such an opinion, so’long 
as I believe that the Bible is a revelation from God. I would 
extend to every one the widest liberty and toleration. I abhor 
the idea of persecuting any one for his opinions. I would 
“ think and let think.” But so long as I have breath in my 
body, I shall always contend that there is such a thing as 
revealed truth,—that men may find out what truth is if they 
will honestly seek for it,—and that mere earnestness and zeal, 
without Scriptural knowledge, will never give any one com- 
fort in life, or peace in death. 

But how are we to find out who is the “ true Churchman ”’ ? 
In one word, is there any test, any legal, authorized test of a 
true Churchman ? 

The answer to all these inquiries is short, plain, and most 
decided. The Church of England has provided a test of true 
Churchmanship, and one that is recognized by the law of the 
land. This test is to be found in ‘“‘ the Thirty-nine Articles of 
Religion.”” I say, furthermore, that the Thirty-nine Articles 
of Religion form a test which any plain man can easily under- 
stand, if he will only give his mind to a study of them. An 
honest examination of these Articles will show any one at this 
day who is the best, the truest, the most -genuine’ style of 


49 ee E 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Churchman. To exhibit the authority, nature, and character- 
istics of the Thirty-nine Articles, is the object of the following 


pages. 
I. WHAT ARE THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES ? 


It is a melancholy fact, explain it as we may, that for 
the last two hundred years the Articles have fallen into great 
and undeserved neglect. Thousands and myriads of Church- 
men, I am fully persuaded, have never read them, never even 
looked at them, and of course know nothing whatever of their 
contents. 

The Thirty-nine Articles are a brief and condensed state- 
ment, under thirty-nine heads or propositions, of what the 
Church of England regards as the chief doctrines which her 
chief members ought to hold and believe. They were, most 
of them, gathered by our Reformers out of Holy Scripture. 
They were carefully packed up and summarized in the most 
accurate and precise language, of which every word was 
delicately weighed, and had a special meaning. Some of the 
Articles are positive, and declare directly what the Church of 
England regards as Bible truth and worthy of belief. Some 
of them are negative, and declare what the Church of England 
considers erroneous and unworthy of credence. Some few of 
them are simple statements of the Church’s judgment on points 
which were somewhat controverted, even among Protestants 
in the sixteenth century, and on which Churchmen might need 
an expression of opinion, Such is the document commonly 
called the Thirty-nine Articles; and all who wish to read it 
will find it at the end of every properly printed Prayer-book. 

When and by whom were these Articles first drawn up ? 
They were first composed by our Reformers in the days of 
Edward the Sixth. Who had the chief hand in the work, 
history does not reveal; but there is every reason to believe 
that Cranmer and Ridley, our two most learned martyrs, had 
more to do with it than any. When first sent forth, they were 
forty-two in number. Afterwards, when Queen Elizabeth 


50 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


caine to the throne, they were reduced by Archbishop Parker 
and his helpers, of whom Bishop Jewell was probably the 
chief, to their present number, with a few unimportant altera- 
tions. They were finally confirmed and ratified by Crown, 
Convocation, and Parliament, in the year 1571, and from 1571 
down to this day not a single word in them has been altered. 

The object for which the Articles were drawn up is clearly 
stated in the title of them, which any one will find in a proper 
Prayer-book. They are called “ Articles agreed upon by the 
Archbishops and Bishops of both provinces, and the whole 
clergy, in the Convocation holden at London in the year 1562, 
for avoiding of diversities of opinion, and for the establishment | 
of consent touching true religion.”” About the real, plain, 
honest meaning of this title, I think there ought to be no 
doubt. It proves that the Thirty-nine Articles are intended 
to be “ the Church of England’s Confession of faith.” Every 
well-organized Church throughout Christendom has its Con- 
fession of faith: that is, it has a carefully composed statement 
of the main things in religion which it considers its members 
ought to believe. The Augsburg Confession, the creed of 
Pope Pius IV, the Decrees of the Council of Trent, the West- 
minster Confession, are documents with which every student 
of ecclesiastical history is familiar. Common sense shows the 
necessity and convenience of such Confessions. Ina fallen 
world like this the terms of membership in any ecclesiastical 
corporation must be written down in black and white, or else 
the whole body is liable to fall into disorder and confusion. 
Every member of a Church ought to be able to render a reason 
of his membership, and to say what are the great principles 
of his Church. To do this his Church supphes him with a 
short creed, manual, or Confession, to which at any time he 
may refer inquirers. This was_the object of the Thirty-ni 
Articles of the Church of Englaid}} fh , Wee shidided To U8 ti he | IBL 
“the Churchman’s Confession of his faithi?? sah tenes 

The substance of the Thirty-fmie]\At ticles: ‘iy a DdiltRod | RY 
which I shall say but little at present, xy 0 tF aie ie to 

gen IN nga eee ene eee eee 


4 


Y 
t 
4 


GEORGE MARK buys 71% RARY 
The Cincinnati Bibie-Sey mary 


KNOTS UNTIED 


dwell on it by and by. They contain most admirable, terse, 
clear statements of Scriptural truth, according to the judgment 
of our Reformers, on almost every point in the Christian 
religion. The titles speak for themselves :— 


A Table of the Articles 


1. Of Faith in the Holy Trinity. 22. Of Purgatory. 
2. Of Christ the Son of God. 23. Of Ministering in the Congre- 
3. Of His going down into Hell. gation. 
4. Of His resurrection. 24. Of Speaking in the Congrega- 
5. Of the Holy Ghost. tion. 
6. Of the Sufficiency of the 25. Of the Sacraments. 
Scripture. 26. Of the Unworthiness of Minis- 
7, Of the Old Testament. ters. 
8. Of the Three Creeds. 27. Of Baptism. 
g. Of Original or Birth-sin. 28. Of the Lord’s Supper. 
to. Of Free-will. 2g. Of the Wicked which eat not 
ir. Of Justification, the Body of Christ. 
12. Of Good Works. 30. Of both kinds. 


ee) 
13. Of Works before Justification. 31. Of Christ’s one Oblation. 
14. Of Works of Supererogation. 32. Of the Marriage of Priests. 


15. Of Christ alone without Sin. 33. Of Excommunicate Persons. 

16. Of Sin after Baptism. 34. Of the Traditions of the Church 

17. Of Predestination and Election 35. Of Homilies. 

18, Of obtaining Salvation by 306. Of Consecrating of Ministers. 
Christ. 

1g. Of the Church. 37. Of Civil Magistrates. 


20, Of the Authority of the Church. 38, Of Christian Men’s Goods. 
21. Of the Authority of General 39. Of a Christian Man’s Oath. 
Councils, 


But taking the Thirty-nine Articles as a Church’s statement 
of things to be believed, I think that no Church on earth has 
a better ‘‘ Confession of faith’ than the Church of England. 
I have no wish to find fault with other Churches, but 
for a combination of fulness, boldness, clearness, brevity, 
moderation, and wisdom, I find no Confession which comes 
near the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England. 


1 The famous historian Bingham, in his curious book on the French 
Protestant Church, quotes a remarkable testimony to the Articles 
from the French divine Le Moyne, a man of great note in his day :— 
“No Confession can be contrived more wisely than the English is, and 
the Articles of Faith were never collected with a more just and reason- 
able discretion.’’—Bingham’s Works, Oxf. Edit., vol. x., p. 95. 


52 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


Il. THE AUTHORITY OF THE ARTICLES 


I must now take up a question which is of great and 
serious importance. To prevent mistakes I shall state it as 
clearly and logically as I can. ‘ What is the precise rank, 
authority, and position of the Thirty-nine Articles? Are they, 
or are they not, the chief, foremost, and principal test of true 
Churchmanship ? ” 

I am not going to say anything against the Prayer-book.1 
It is a matchless book of devotion. But I am going to say, 
and to prove, that the Articles, and not the Prayer-book, are 
the first, foremost, and principal test of a true Churchman. 

I shall dismiss briefly four points that I might dwell upon 
at length, if it were worth while. : 

(a) I pass over the obvious suspiciousness of any Church- 
man ignoring the Articles, giving them the cold shoulder, and 
talking only about the Prayer-book, when he is speaking of 
the tests of a Churchman’s religion. Yet the fifth Canon, of 
1604, contains the following words: ‘‘ Whosoever shall here- 
after affirm that any of the Thirty-nine Articles agreed upon 
by the Archbishops and Bishops of both provinces, in the 
Convocation holden at London in the year of our Lord God 
1562, for avoiding diversities of opinion, and establishing of 
consent touching true religion, are in any part superstitious, 
or erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience 
subscribe unto, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not 
restored but only by the Archbishops, after his repentance 
and public revocation of such his wicked errors.” Plain 
language that ! Certain Churchmen who are fond of pelting 


1Jn-a volume published, entitled ‘“‘ Studies in Modern Problems,” 
edited by the late Mr. Orby Shipley, a prominent place is assigned to 
a paper bearing the ominous title, ‘“‘ Abolition of the Articles.” In the 
forty-eight pages of this paper much is said about the origin of the 
Articles, and the Continental Reformers are not spoken of in favourable 
terms. But I cannot discover in the paper the slightest proof that the 
Articles are not the true test of a Churchman’s soundness in the faith. 
Nor can I discern any reason for the writer’s wish to have subscription 
to the Articles abolished, except his dislike to Protestant doctrine. 


53 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Evangelical Churchmen with Canons would do well to remem- 
ber that Canon. 

(6) I pass over the implied insinuation that there is any 
contradiction between the Articles and the Prayer-book. 
Many talk and write as if there was. It is a notion unworthy 
of any one of common sense. The man who supposes that 
divines of such grace and learning as the Elizabethan Reformers 
would ever with the same hands draw up Articles and a Prayer- 
book containing two different doctrines, must be in a strange 
state of mind! Reason itself points out that the Prayer-book 
and Articles were meant to teach the same doctrines, and 
that no interpretation which makes them jar and contradict 
one another can be correct. Lord Chatham’s famous dictum, 
that the Church of England has a Popish Liturgy, an 
Arminian clergy, and a Calvinistic set of Articles, was doubtless 
very smart, but it was not true. 

(c) I pass over the unreasonableness of setting up a book of 
devotion, like the Liturgy, as a better test of Churchmanship 
than a Confession of faith like the Articles. Prayers, in the 
very nature of things, are compositions which are not so pre- 
cisely framed and worded as cold, dry, dogmatic statements of 
doctrine. They are what the rhetorical speech of the advocate 
is, compared to the cautiously-balanced decision of the judge. 
‘« In the Prayer-book,’’ says Dean Goode, “‘ we have a collection 
of national formularies of devotion, written at a time when a 
large proportion of the people were inclined to Romanism, and 
at the same time compelled to attend the services of the national 
Churches—and consequently carefully drawn up, so as to give 
as little offence as possible to Romish prejudices. Is such a book 
calculated to serve the purposes of a standard of faith ? ’’—‘‘ In 
the Articles,” he adds, on the other hand, ‘‘ we have a precise 
Confession of faith on all the great points of Christian doctrine, 
drawn up in dogmatic propositions, as a test of doctrinal 
soundness for the clergy.” The Liturgy is an excellent book. 
But to say that in the nature of things it can serve the purpose 
of a standard of faith so well as the Articles, is incorrect. 


54 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


(d) I pass over the glaring foolishness of the common 
remark, that those who are fond of maintaining the primary 
authority of the Articles cast discredit upon the Creeds. The 
authors of this notable charge must surely have forgotten that 
one whole Article—the eighth—is devoted to the three 

reeds !_ So far from the admirers of the Articles dishonouring 
and disparaging the Creeds, they are especially bound to 
honour, reverence, and defend them. Such vague argumenta- 
tion goes far to show that many who speak lightly of the 
Articles do not even know what the Articles contain ! 


THE ARTICLES THE TRUE TEST OF 
CHURCHMANSHIP 


What I deliberately assert is, that the Thirty-nine Articles 
were always intended to be, and are at this day, the first, 
foremost, chief, and principal test of a Churchman, and that 
in this point of view there is nothing else that stands on a level 
with them. In proof of this assertion I shall now bring for- 
ward a few witnesses. 

(t) My first witness shall be a very simple one. I mean the 
title of the Articles, which is prefixed to them in every com- 
plete and unmutilated Prayer-book. They are called, ‘Articles 
agreed upon for the avoiding of Diversities of Opinion, and 
for the stablishing of Consent touching true Religion.”” This 
title was first given to them by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop 
of Canterbury, in the reign of Edward VI, 1552; and after- 
wards given a second time by Matthew Parker, Archbishop 
of Canterbury, in Queen Elizabeth’s reign, in 1562. I want 
no plainer language than the words of this title. 


1 Archbishop Parker’s Correspondence, published in the Parker 
Society’s series, supplies remarkable evidence of the importance 
attached to the Thirty-nine Articles by the Elizabethan Reformers. 
This evidence will be found in a letter addressed to the Queen, by the 
Archbishop and thirteen other Bishops, in which they pray her to 
facilitate the passing of a Bill through Parliament for the confirmation 
of the Articles. 

m5 


KNOTS UNTIED 


(2) My second witness shall be the statute law of the 
realm. I refer to two Acts of Parliament. One is called the 
13th of Elizabeth, cap. 12, and entitled “ An Act for Ministers 
of the Church to be of sound religion.’’ The other Act is called 
the 28th and 2oth Victoria, cap. 122, and is entitled “ An Act 
to Amend the Law as to the declarations and subscriptions to 
be made, and Oaths to be taken by the Clergy,’ and was 
passed in the year 1865. 

The Act of Elizabeth, in the second section declares, that 
‘if any person ecclesiastical, or which shall have any 
ecclesiastical living, shall advisedly maintain or affirm any 
doctrine directly contrary or repugnant to any of the said 
Thirty-nine Articles; and being convicted before the Bishop 
of the Diocese, or the Ordinary, or before the Queen’s Com- 
missioner in causes ecclesiastical, shall persist therein, or not 
revoke his error, or after such revocation affirm such untrue 


The reasons against delay which the Archbishop and Bishops 
pressed on the Queen’s attention deserve special notice. They say :— 
“ First, the matter itself tendeth to the glory of God, the advancement 
of true religion, and the salvation of Christian souls, and therefore 
ought principally, chiefly, and before all other things to be sought. 

“Secondly, in the book which is now desired to be confirmed are 
contained the principal Articles of Christian religion most agreeable 
to God’s Word, publicly, since the beginning of your Majesty’s reign, 
professed, and by your Highness’ authority set forth and maintained. 

“Thirdly, divers and sundry errors, and namely, such as have been 
in the realm wickedly and obstinately by the adversaries of the Gospel 
defended, are by the same Articles condemned. 

“ Fourthly, the approbation of these Articles by your Majesty shall 
be a very good mean to establish and confirm all your Majesty’s subjects 
in one consent and unity of true doctrine, to the great quiet and safety 
of your Majesty and this free realm; whereas now, for want of plain 
certainty of Articles of doctrine by law to be declared, great distraction 
and dissension of minds is at this present among your subjects.’”’— 
Parker Correspondence, Parker Society, p. 293. 

Notwithstanding this letter, the prayer of the Bishops appears not 
to have been granted until the year 1571. It is only one among many 
illustrations of the immense difficulties which the Elizabethan Re- 
formers had to contend with, in consequence of the arbitrary and self- 
willed character of their Sovereign. I suspect the English Reformation 
would have been a far more perfect and complete work if the Queen 
had allowed the Reformers to do all that they wanted to do. 


56 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


doctrine, such maintaining, or affirming, or persisting shall 
be just cause to deprive such person of his ecclesiastical 
functions ; and it shall be lawful for the Bishop of the diocese 
or Ordinary, or such Commissioner, to deprive such person.” 

Comment on the evidence of this witness is needless. 
_ There is no way of honestly evading the edge and point of 
this yet unrepealed Act of Parliament. In a decision of all 
the judges, in the twenty-third year of Elizabeth, it was 
declared that the Act of 13th Elizabeth was made for avoiding 
a diversity of opinion, and that the “ prevention of such 
diversity was the scope of the statute ’’ (Coke’s Institut. 1865). 
The provisions of this Act of Elizabeth are in full force at this 
very day, and form the basis of any proceedings against a 
clergyman in matters of religion. 

The Act of the 28th and 2gth of Victoria is even more 
remarkable than the 13th of Elizabeth. The seventh section 
requires every person instituted to any living, on the first 
Lord’s Day in which he officiates in his church, “ publicly 
and openly in the presence of his congregation, to read the 
whole Thirty-nine Articles of Religion, and immediately after 
reading to make the declaration of assent to them.” 

Up to the year 1865, we must remember, a clergyman was 
required to read over the whole Morning and Evening Service 
as well as the Articles, and then declare his assent and consent 
to the use of the Book of Common Prayer. This was dis- 
pensed with by the Act of Victoria. But the requirement to 
read the Thirty-nine Articles was carefully retained! The 
result is, that every beneficed clergyman in the Church of England 
has not only declared his assent to the Thirty-nine Articles, but 
has done it in the most public way, after reading them over before 
his congregation. 

(3) My third witness shall be the Royal Declaration pre- 
fixed to the Articles in 1628, by King Charles I. It is a 
document which will be found at length in every complete 
and unmutilated Prayer-book. It contains the following 
passage: “ We hold it most agreeable to this our Kingly 


57 


KNOTS UNTIED 


office, and our own religious zeal, to conserve and maintain 
the Church committed to our charge, in unity of true religion, 
and in the bond of peace ; and not to suffer unnecessary dis- 
putations, altercations, or questions to be raised, which may 
nourish faction both in the Church and Commonwealth. We 
have therefore, upon mature deliberation, and with the 
advice of so many of our Bishops as might conveniently be 
called together, thought fit to make this declaration 
following :— 

“ That the Articles of the Church of England (which have 
been allowed and authorized heretofore, and which our clergy 
generally have subscribed unto) do contain the true doctrine 
of the Church of England agreeable to God’s Word : which we 
do therefore ratify and confirm, requiring all our loving 
subjects to continue in the uniform profession thereof, and 
prohibiting the least difference from the said Articles.” 
Admirable words these! Well would it have been if the 
unhappy Monarch who put forth this declaration had after- 
wards adhered more decidedly to the doctrine of the Articles, 
and not ruined himself and the Church by patronizing and 
supporting such men as Archbishop Laud. 


CHARGES GIVEN TO BISHOPS IN 1721 


(4) My fourth witness shall be a remarkable letter or 
circular issued by the Crown in 1721, entitled ‘“‘ Directions 
to our Archbishops and Bishops for the preservation of unity 
in the Church and the purity of the Christian faith, par- 
ticularly in the doctrine of the Holy Trinity.” The charge 
given to the Bishops in these directions is as follows: “ You 
shall, without delay, signify to the clergy of your several 
dioceses this our Royal command, which we require you to see 
duly published and decreed : viz., that no preacher whatsoever 
in his sermons or lectures do presume to deliver any other 
doctrines concerning the great and fundamental truths of our 
most holy religion, and particularly concerning the blessed 
Trinity, than what are contained in the Holy Scriptures, and 


58 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES | 


are agreeable to the three Creeds and the Thirty-nine Articles 
of religion.” Of course these “ directions’ have no binding 
force now, but as evidence of what men thought the test of 
Church religion in 1721, they are remarkable. 

(5) My fifth witness shall be Thomas Rogers, chaplain to 
Archbishop Bancroft, who published in 1607, the first Exposi- 
tion of the Articles which ever appeared. This book, we must 
remember, was written within forty years of the time when the 
Articles were finally ratified. It was a work of great authority 
at the time, and was dedicated to the Archbishop. In the 
preface to this work Rogers says :— 

“The purpose of our Church is best known by the doctrine 
which she does profess: the doctrine by the Thirty-nine 
Articles established by Act of Parliament; the Articles by 
the words whereby they are expressed; and other doctrine 
than in the said Articles is contained, our Church neither 
hath nor holdeth, and other sense they cannot yield than their 
words do import.” 

Let us hear what Bishop Burnet says: ‘‘ The Thirty- 
nine Articles are the sum of our doctrines, and the confession of 
our faith.— Burnet on Articles pref., p. 1. Oxford Edition. 
1831. 

Let us hear, lastly, what Bishop Tomline says: ‘‘ The 
Thirty-nine Articles are the criterion of the faith of the 
members of the Church of England.”—Elements of Theol. 
vol. ii. p. 34, 1799. 

Such are the testimonies which I offer to the attention of 
my readers, in proof of my assertion that the Articles, much 
more than the Prayer-book, are the true test of Churchmanship. 
The title prefixed to the Articles by Cranmer and Parker ;— 
the famous statutes of the 13th Elizabeth and 28th and 29th 
Victoria ;—the Royal Declaration of Charles I, in 1628 ;—the 
Royal Circular to the Bishops in 1721 ;—the express opinion of 
Rogers, Archbishop Bancroft’s private chaplain ;—the deliber- 
ately expressed judgment of Burnet, and Tomline,—all these 
witnesses, taken together, supply a mass of evidence which 


39 


KNOTS UNTIED 


to my eyes seem perfectly unanswerable. In the face of such 
evidence I dare not refuse the conclusion, that the truest 
Churchman is the man who most truly agrees with the Thirty- 
nine Articles. 

The Book of Common Prayer was never intended to be 
the Church’s standard of doctrine in the same way that the 
Articles were. This was not meant to be its office; this was 
not the purpose for which it was compiled. It is a manual 
of public devotion: it is not a Confession of faith. Let us 
love it, honour it, prize it, reverence it, admire it, use it. But 
let us not exalt it to the place which the Thirty-nine Articles 
alone can fill, and which common sense, statute law, and the 
express opinions of eminent divines unanimously agree in 
assigning to them. The Articles, far more than the Prayer- 
book, are the Church’s standard of sound doctrine, and the 
real test of true Churchmanship.? 


Ili; CHARACTERISTICS OF THE: ARTICUES 


One more point now remains to be considered, viz., 
what are the great leading characteristics of the Articles ? There 
are certain grand features in them, which stand out pro- 
minently, like mountains in a landscape. What those features 
are we ought to know. To my eyes they stand out in bold, 
clear, and sharply-cut relief. I ask the reader to give me his 


1Jf any reader supposes that there is anything peculiar or ex- 
travagant in the position I take about the authority of the Articles, 
as compared to the Prayer-Book, I ask him to remember that Lord 
Hatherley, in his judgment in the famous ‘‘ Voysey ”’ case, took up 
precisely the same ground, These are his words, as reported in the 
Guardian ; ‘‘ We have not, in this our decision, referred to any of the 
formularies of the Church, other than the Articles of Religion. We 
have been mindful of the authorities which have held that pious ex- 
pressions of devotion are not to be taken as binding declarations of doctrine.’’ 

In commenting on this judgment, the Solicitor’s Journal, which 
certainly is not the organ of any theological party, uses the following 
remarkable language: ‘‘ The Judicial Committee have adhered to the 
principles of previous decisions in their recent judgment, The Articles 
of Religion, and these alone, are to be considered as the code of doctrine 
of the Church of England, 

60 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


attention for a very few minutes, and I will show him what 
I mean. 

(t) Let us mark, then, for one thing, as we read the 
Articles, the strong and decided language which they use in 
speaking of things which are essential to salvation. 

Concerning the nature of God and the Holy Trinity,—con- 
cerning the sufficiency and authority of Scripture,—concerning 
the sinfulness and helplessness of natural man,—concerning 
justification by faith alone,—concerning the place and value of 
good works,—concerning salvation only by the name of Christ ; 
concerning all these grand foundations of the Christian 
religion, it is hard to conceive language more decided, clear, 
distinct, than that of the Thirty-nine Articles. There is no 
doubtfulness, or hesitancy, or faltering, or timidity, or uncer- 
tainty, or compromise about their statements. ‘ 

I ask special attention to this point. We live in days when 
many loudly declare that it is not right to be positive about 
anything in religion. The clergyman who dares to say of any 
theological question, “ This is true, and that is false,— this is 
right, and that is wrong,’’—is pretty sure to be denounced as 
a narrow-minded, illiberal, uncharitable man. Nothing delights 
many Churchmen so much as to proclaim that they “ belong 
to no party,’—that they are “ moderate men,’—that they 
“hold no extreme views.’’ Well! I only ask these Church- 
men to settle matters with the Thirty-nine Articles. And 
I shall always maintain, publicly or privately, that to call 
any one an “‘ extreme’ man, or a “ party ”’ man, because his 
doctrinal views are in harmony with the bold, decided state- 
ments of the Articles, is neither just, nor fair, nor reasonable, 
nor consistent with common sense. Give me the clergyman 
who, after reading the Articles to his congregation, and 
solemnly promising to abide by them, acts up to his promise, 
and speaks out boldly, decidedly, and unhesitatingly, about 
all the leading doctrines of Christianity. 

(2) We notice, in the next place, as we read the Articles, 
their studied moderation about things non-essential to salvation, 

“61 


KNOTS UNTIED 


and things about which good Christian men may differ. 

About sin after baptism,—about predestination and elec- 
tion,—about the definition of the Church,—about the ministry, 
—about the ceremonies and rights of every particular or 
national Church,—about all these points it is most striking © 
to observe the calm, gentle, tender, conciliatory tone which 
runs throughout the Articles; a tone the more remarkable 
when contrasted with the firm and decided language on 
essential points, to which I have just been referring. 

It is clear as daylight to my mind, that the authors of the 
Articles intended to admit the possibility of difference on the 
points which I have just been enumerating. They saw the 
possibility of men differing about predestination and election, 
as Fletcher and Toplady did. They believed that there might 
be Churches differently organized to our own, that there 
might be many good Christian ministers who were not 
Episcopalians, and many useful rites and ceremonies of worship 
unlike those of the Church of England. They take care to 
say nothing which could possibly give offence.—They scrupu- 
lously avoid condemning and denouncing other Churches and 
other Christians. In short, their maxim seems to have been, 
“in necessartis uhitas, in non-necessariis libertas, in omnibus 
caritas.”’ 

I greatly admire this moderation in non-essentials. I 
heartily wish that the spirit of it had been more acted upon 
in days gone by, by the rulers of the Church of England. To 
the blind intolerance and fanaticism of days gone by, to the 
insane and senseless wish to cram Episcopacy and Liturgy 
down the throats of every man by force, and excommunicate 
him if he would not swallow them,—to this we owe an immense 
proportion of our English Dissent. And the root of all this has 
been departure from the spirit of the Thirty-nine Articles. 

I frankly own that I belong to a school in the Church of 
England, which is incorrectly and unfairly called “ low.”” And 
why are we called so? Simply because we will not condemn 
every Church which is not governed by Bishops; simply 

62 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


because we will not denounce every one as greatly in error 
who worships without a surplice and a Prayer-book! But 
I venture to tell our accusers that their charges fall very 
lightly on us. When they can prove that our standard is not 
the standard of the Thirty-nine Articles,—when they can 
show that we take lower ground than our own Church takes 
in her authorized Confession of faith,—then we will allow 
there is something in what they say against us. 

(3) Let us also notice, as we read the Articles, their 
wise, discreet, and well-balanced statements about the Sacraments. 
They declare plainly the divine authority of Baptism and the 
Lord’s Supper. They use high and reverent language about 
them both, as means of grace, “‘ by the which God doth work 
invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but strengthen and 
confirm our faith in Him.” 

But after saying all this, it is most instructive to observe 
how carefully the Articles repudiate the Romish doctrine of 
grace being imparted by the Sacraments ‘‘ ex opere operato.”’ 
“ The Sacraments,” says the Twenty-fifth Article, ‘‘ were not 
ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried about, 
but that we should duly use them. And in such only as 
worthily receive the same they have a wholesome effect or 
operation.”’ 

Now if there is any one thing that is laid to the charge of 
us Evangelical clergy, it is this,—that we deny sacramental 
grace. Men who talk in this manner are talking rashly, and 
saying what they cannot prove. Evangelical clergymen yield 
to none in willingness to give rightful honour to Baptism and 
the Lord’s Supper. All we say is, that grace is not tied to the 
Sacraments, and that a man may receive them, and be none 
the better for it. And what is all this but the doctrine of 
the Thirty-nine Articles ? 


THE PROTESTANT SPIRIT OF THE ARTICLES 


(4) Let us notice, in the fourth place, as we read the 
Articles, the thoroughly Protestant spirit which runs throughout 
63 


KNOTS UNTIED 


them, and the boldness of their language about Romish 
error. 

What says the Nineteenth Article ? “‘ The Church of Rome 
hath erred, not only in living and manner of ceremonies, but 
also in matters of faith.” 

What says the Twenty-second Article? ‘“‘ The Romish 
doctrine concerning purgatory, pardons, worshipping and 
adoration, as well of images as of reliques, and also of invo- 
cation of saints, is a fond thing vainly invented, and grounded 
upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the 
Word of God.” 

What says the Twenty-fourth Article? It forbids the 
Romish custom of having public prayers and ministering the 
Sacraments in Latin. 

What says the Twenty-fifth Article ? It declares that the 
five Romish sacraments of confirmation, penance, orders, 
matrimony, and extreme unction, are not to be accounted 
sacraments of the Gospel. 

What says the Twenty-eighth Article ? It declares that 
“ transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of bread 
and wine in the Lord’s Supper, cannot be proved by Holy 
Writ, is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, over- 
throweth the nature of a sacrament, and hath given occasion 
to many superstitions.”’ It also declares that “ the Sacrament 
of the Lord’s Supper was not by Christ’s ordinance reserved, 
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.”’ 

What says the Thirtieth Article ? “‘ The cup of the Lerd 
is not to be denied to the lay-people.”’ 

What saith the Thirty-first Article ? ‘‘ The sacrifices of 
masses, in which it was commonly said the priest did 
offer Christ for the quick and dead, to have remission of 
pain and guilt, were blasphemous fables and dangerous 
cleceit.”’ 

What says the Thirty-second Article ? “‘ Bishops, priests, 
and deacons are not commanded by God’s law to vow the 
estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage.” 


64 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


What says the Thirty-seventh Article >? ‘‘ The Bishop of 
Rome hath no jurisdiction in this realm of England.’ 

Nine times over the Thirty-nine Articles condemn, in plain 
and unmistakable language, the leading doctrines of the 
Church of Rome, and declare in favour of what must be called + 
Protestant views. And yet men dare to tell us that we Evan- 
gelical clergymen have no right to denounce Popery. I will 
not say, as I might do, that Popery is an unscriptural system, 
which every free nation ought to fear, and every Bible- 
reading Christian of any nation ought to oppose. I simply 
point to the Thirty-nine Articles. I ask any one to explain 
how any English clergyman can be acting consistently, if he 
does not oppose, and resist Popery in every shape, either 
within the Church or without. So long as the Articles stand 
unrepealed and unaltered, it is the bounden duty of every 
clergyman of the Church of England to oppose Popery. 


HOLY SCRIPTURE AND THE ARTICLES 


(5) Let us mark, in the last place, as we read the Articles, 
the unvarying reverence with which they always speak of Holy 
Scripture. The inspiration of the Bible, no doubt, is never 
distinctly asserted. It is evidently taken for granted as a first 
principle, which need not be proved. But if constant refer- 
ences to Scripture, and constant appeals to the authority of 
Scripture, as God’s Word, are allowed to prove anything, in 
no document does the Bible receive more honour than in the 
Articles. 

The Sixth Article declares that “‘ Holy Scripture contains 
all things necessary to salvation, and that whatsoever is not 
read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required 
of any man, that it should be believed as an article of faith, 
or be thought requisite and necessary to salvation.” 

The Eighth Article says that ‘“‘ the three Creeds ought 
thoroughly to be believed and received, for they may be proved 
by most certain warrants of Holy Scripture.” 


65 F 


KNOTS UNTIED 


The Twentieth Article says, “It is not lawful for the 
Church to ordain anything that is contrary to God’s Word 
written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture that 
it be repugnant to another.”’ 

The Twenty-first Article says that “ things ordained by 
General Councils as necessary to salvation, have neither 
strength nor authority, unless it be declared that they be taken 
from Holy Scripture.’’ 

The Twenty-second Article condemns certain Romish 
functions, “‘ because they are grounded on no warranty of 
Scripture, but are rather repugnant to the Word of God.” 

The Twenty-eighth Article condemns Transubstantiation, 
“ because it cannot be proved by Holy Writ, but is repugnant 
to the plain words of Scripture.” 

The Thirty-fourth Article says that “traditions and 
ceremonies of the Church may be changed, so long as nothing 
is ordained against God’s Word.’’ 

Now I see in all this abundant proof that the Bible is the 
rule of faith in the Church of England, and that no doctrine is 
“Church doctrine’? which cannot be reconciled with God’s 
Word. I see a complete answer to those who tell us that we 
make an idol of the Bible, and that we ought to go to the 
voice of the Church and to the Prayer-book for direction. 
I see, above all, that all who pour contempt on the Bible, as 
an uninspired, imperfect, defective Book, which ought not 
to be believed, if it contradicts “‘ modern thought,” are taking 
up ground which is at variance with the Church’s own Con- 
fession of faith. They may be clever, liberal, scientific, and 
confident ; but they are contradicting the Articles, and they 
are not sound Churchmen. 

Such are the leading features of the Thirty-nine Articles. 
I commend them to the attention of my readers, and ask that 
they may be carefully weighed. No doubt men may say 
that the Articles admit of more than one interpretation, and 
that my interpretation is not the correct one. My reply to 
all this is short and simple. I ask in what sense the Reformers 

66 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


who drew up the Articles meant them to be interpreted ? Let 
men answer that. It is an acknowledged axiom in inter- 
preting all public documents, such as treaties, covenants, wills, 
articles of faith, and religious formularies, that in any case of 
doubt or dispute the true sense is the sense of those who drew 
them up and imposed them. Waterland and Sanderson have 
abundantly shown that. Upon this principle I take my 
stand. I only want the Thirty-nine Articles to be interpreted 
in the sense in which the Reformers first imposed them, and 
then I believe it impossible to avoid the conclusion that the 
Thirty-nine Articles are in general tone, temper, spirit, 
intention, and meaning, eminently Protestant and eminently 
Evangelical. 

And now I have shown the reader what the Articles are, 
—what is the position and authority which they hold in the 
Church of England,—and what are the leading features of 
their contents. It only remains for me to point out a few 
practical conclusions, which I venture to think are peculiarly 
suited to the times. 

(t) In the first place, I ask every Churchman to read 
the Thirty-nine Articles regularly at least once every year, and 
to make himself thoroughly familiar with their contents. 

It is not a reading age, I fear. Newspapers, and periodicals, 
and novels absorb the greater part of the time given to reading. 
If I could only reach the ear of all thinking lay Churchmen, 
I should like to say, ‘Do read your Articles.” As for 
clergymen, if I had my own way I would require them to read 
the Articles publicly in church once every year. 

Ignorance, I am compelled to say, is one of the grand 
dangers of members of the Church of England. The bulk of 
her people neither know, nor understand, nor seem to care 
about the inside of any of the great religious questions of the 
day. Presbyterians know their system. Baptists, Indepen- 
dents, and Methodists know theirs. Papists are all trained 
controversialists. Churchmen alone, as a body, are generally 
very ignorant of their own Church, and all its privileges, 


67 


KNOTS UNTIED 


doctrines, and history. Not one in twenty could tell you why 
he is a Churchman. 

Let us cast aside this reproach. Let all Churchmen awake 
and begin to read up their own Church and its doctrines. And 
if any man wants to know where to begin, I advise him to 
begin with the Thirty-nine Articles. 

(2) In the second place, I ask all who read these pages 
to teach the Thirty-nine Articles to all young people who are 
yet of an age to be taught. It is a pity that the Articles are 
not made an essential part of the system of every school 
connected with the Church of England, whether for high or 
low, for rich or poor. 

I do not say this without reason. It is a simple fact, that 
the beginning of any clear doctrinal views I have ever attained 
myself, was reading up the Articles at Eton, for the Newcastle 
Scholarship, and attending a lecture, at Christ Church, 
Oxford, on the Articles, by acollege tutor. I shall always 
thank God for what I learned then, Before that time I really 
knew nothing systematically of Christianity. I knew not 
what came first or what last. I had a religion without order 
in my head. What I found good myself I earnestly commend 
to others. If you love young people’s souls, and would ground 
them, and stablish them, and arm them against error, take 
care that you teach them not only the Catechism, but also the 
Articles. 

(3) In the third place, I advise my readers to test all 
Churchmanship by the test of the Articles. Be not carried 
away by those who talk of “ Catholic ceremonies,’ “ holy, 
earnest, parish priests,” and the like. Try all that is preached 
and taught by one simple measure,—does it or does it not 
agree with the Articles ! 

This is the simple ground we take up in the various societies 
which, amidst much abuse, obloquy, and opposition, are 
labouring to maintain the Protestant character of the Church 
of England. They are not intolerant, whatever some may 
please to say. They do not want to narrow the limits of our 

68 


THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES 


Church. But we do say that any one who holds preferment 
in the Church of England ought to be bound by the laws of 
the Church of England, so long as those laws are unrepealed. 
As things are as they are, we say we have a righ? to demand 
that respect should be paid to the Articles. 

(4) Finally, let me advise every Churchman who values 
his soul never to be ashamed of the great leading doctrines which 
are so nobly set forth in the Articles. 

Doctrines such as those set forth in the Articles are the 
only doctrines which are life, and health, and strength, and 
peace. Let us never be ashamed of laying hold of them, main- 
taining them, and making them our own. Those doctrines 
are the religion of the Bible and of the Church of England ! 


69 


V 
BAPTISM 


There is perhaps no subject in Christianity about which 
such difference of opinion exists as the sacrament of baptism. 

It is a subject, moreover, on which even eminent Christians 
have long been greatly divided. Praying, Bible-reading, holy 
men, who can agree on all other points, find themselves hope- 
lessly divided about baptism. 

I propose in the following pages to offer a few remarks 
on this disputed subject. I know that every additional witness 
is useful in a disputed case. I wish to strengthen the hands of 
those I agree with, and to show them that we have no reason 
to be ashamed of our opinions. I wish to suggest a few things 
for the consideration of those I do not agree with, and to 
show them that the Scriptural argument in this matter is 
not, as some suppose, all on one side. 


THE NATURE OF BAPTISM—WHAT IS IT? 


(r) Baptism is an ordinance appointed by our Lord Jesus 
Christ, for the continual admission of fresh members into His 
visible Church. In the army every new soldier is formally 
added to the muster-roll of his regiment. And every Christian 
begins his Church-membership by being baptized. 

(2) Baptism is an ordinance of great simplicity. The 
outward part or sign is water, administered in the name of 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, or in the name of 
Christ. The inward part, or thing signified, is that washing 
in the blood of Christ, and inward cleansing of the heart by 


70 


BAPTISM 


the Holy Ghost, without which no one can be saved. The 
Twenty-seventh Article of the Church of England says rightly 
rr Baptism is not only a sign of profession and mark of 
difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from others 
that be not christened, but it is also a sign of regeneration 

or new birth.” 

(3) Baptism is an ordinance on which we may confidently 
expect the highest blessings, when it is rightly used. It is 
unreasonable to suppose that the Lord Jesus, the Great Head 
of the Church, would solemnly appoint an ordinance which 
was to be as useless to the soul as a mere human enrolment 
or an act of civil registration. The sacrament we are con- 
sidering is not a mere man-made appointment, but an 
institution appointed by the King of kings. When faith and 
prayer accompany baptism, and a diligent use of Scriptural 
means follows it, we are justified in looking for much spiritual 
blessing. Without faith and prayer baptism becomes a mere 
form. 

(4) Baptism is an ordinance which is expressly named 
in the New Testament about eighty times. Almost the last 
words of our Lord Jesus Christ were a command to baptize : 
“ Go ye, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost’ (Matt. 
xxviii. 19). We find Peter saying on the day of Pentecost, 
—‘“ Repent, and be baptized every one of you”’ ;—and asking 
in the house of Cornelius,—‘‘ Can any man forbid water, that 
these should not be baptized” (Acts ii. 38; x. 47). We find, 
St. Paul was not only baptized himself, but baptized disciples 
wherever he went. To say, as some do, in the face of these 
texts, that baptism is an institution of no importance, is to 
pour contempt on the Bible. To say, as others do, that 
baptism is only a thing of the heart, and not an outward 


1 J am quite aware that the whole body of Christians called Friends, 
or Quakers, reject water-baptism, and allow of no baptism except the 
inward baptism of the heart. To their own Master they must stand or 
fall, I am not their Judge. The grace, faith, and holiness of many 


71 


KNOTS! UNTIED 


ordinance at all, is to say that which seems flatly contradictory 
to the Bible. 

(5) Baptism is an ordinance which, according to Scripture, 
aman may receive, and yet get no good from it. Can any 
one doubt that Judas Iscariot, Simon Magus, Ananias and 
‘Sapphira, Demas, Hymenaeus, Philetus, and Nicolas, were all 
baptized people? Yet what benefit did they receive from 
baptism ? Clearly, for anything that we can see, none at all ! 
Their hearts were “ not right in the sight of God’”’(Acts_ viii. 
21). They remained “dead in trespasses and sins,’’ and 
were ‘‘ dead while they lived ”’ (Ephes. ii. r ; 1 Tim. v. 6). 

(6) Baptism is an ordinance which in Apostolic times 
went together with the first beginnings of a man’s religion. 
In the very day that many of the early Christians repented 
and believed, in that very day they were baptized. Baptism 
was the expression of their new-born faith, and the starting- 
point in their Christianity. No wonder that in such cases 
it was regarded as the vehicle of all spiritual blessings. The 
Scriptural expressions, “buried with Christ in baptism” 
—‘‘putting on Christ in baptism ’’—‘‘ baptism doth also 
save us ’’—would be full of deep meaning to such persons. 
(Bom.v1..4; Col. i. 72::; Gal. iii. 27 >) x) Pet. iii 2%). .chey 
would exactly tally with their experience. But to apply such 
expressions indiscriminately to the baptism of infants in 
our own day is, in my judgment, unreasonable and unfair. 
It is an application of Scripture which, I believe, was never 
intended. 


Quakers are beyond all question. They are simple matters of fact 
Christians like Mrs, Fry and J. J. Gurney most evidently had received 
the Holy Ghost, and would reflect honour on any Church. Would 
God that many baptized Christians were like them! But the best 
people are fallible at their best. How people, so sensible and well read 
as many Quakers have been and are, can possibly refuse to see water- 
baptism in Scripture, as an ordinance obligatory on all professing 
Christians, is a problem which I cannot pretend to solve. It passes 
my understanding. I can only suppose that God allows the Quakers 
to be a perpetual testimony against Romish views of water-baptism, 
and a standing witness to the Churches that God can, in some cases, 
give grace without the use of any sacraments at all ! 


72 


BAPTISM 


(7) Baptism is an ordinance which a man may never 
receive, and yet be a true Christian and be saved. The case 
of the penitent thief is sufficient to prove this. Here was a 
man who repented, believed, was converted, and gave evidence 
of true grace, if any one ever did. We read of no one else 
to whom such marvellous words were addressed as the famous 
sentence, “To-day shalt thou be with Me in paradise ”’ 
(Luke xxiii.42). And yet there is not the slightest proof that 
this man was ever baptized at all! Without baptism and the 
Lord’s Supper he received the highest spiritual blessings 
while he lived, and was with Christ in paradise when he 
died! To assert, in the face of such a case, that baptism is 
absolutely necessary to salvation is something monstrous. To 
say that baptism is the only means of regeneration, and_that 
all who die unbaptized are lost for ever, is to say that which 
cannot be proved by Scripture, and is revolting to common 
sense. 

There is a baptism which is absolutely necessary to 
salvation, beyond all question. There is a baptism without 
which no one, whether old or young, has ever gone to heaven. 
But what baptism is this? It is not the baptism of water, 
but the inward baptism which the Holy Ghost gives to the 
heart. It is not a baptism which any man can offer, whether 
ordained or unordained. It is the baptism which it is the 
special privilege of the Lord Jesus Christ to give to all His 
mystical members. It is not a baptism which man’s eye can 
see, but an invisible operation on the inward nature. 
“Baptism,” says St. Peter, “saves us.” But what baptism 
does he tell us he means? Not the washing of water, “ not 
the putting away the filth of the flesh’’ (x Peter iii, 27). 
“« By one spirit are we all baptized into one body ” (x Cor. xii. 
13). Itis the peculiar prerogative of the Lord Jesus to give this 
inward and spiritual baptism. “He it is,” said John the 
Baptist, ‘‘ which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost” (John i. 


33). 
Let us take heed that we know something of this saving 


73 


KNOTS fUNTIED 


baptism, the inward baptism of the Holy Ghost. Without 
this it signifies little what we think about the baptism of 
water. No man, whether High Churchman or Evangelical, 
Baptist or Episcopalian, no man was ever yet saved without 
the baptism of the Holy Ghost. It is a weighty and true 
saying of the Regius Professor of Divinity at Cambridge, in 
the reign of Edward VI.,—“ By the baptism of water we are 
received into the outward Church of God; by the baptism of 
the Spirit into the inward ” (Bucer, on John i. 33). 


II. THE MODE OF BAPTISM. IN WHAT WAY 
OUGHT IT TO BE ADMINISTERED ? 


This is a point on which a wide difference of opinion 
prevails. Some Christians maintain strongly that complete 
immersion in water is absolutely necessary and essential 
to make a valid baptism. They hold that no person is really 
baptized unless he is entirely ‘‘ dipped,’’ and covered over 
with water. Others, on the contrary, maintain with equal 
decision that immersion is not necessary at all, and that 
sprinkling, or pouring a small quantity of water on the person 
baptized, fulfils all the requirements of Christ. 

My own opinion is distinct and decided, that Scripture 
leaves the point an open question. I can find nothing in the 
Bible to warrant the assertion that either dipping, or pouring, 
or sprinkling, is essential to baptism. I believe it would be 
impossible to prove that either way of baptizing is exclusively 
right, or that either is downright wrong. 

But there is a large body of Christians, however, who are 
not satisfied with this moderate view of the question. They 
will have it that baptism by dipping or immersion is the only 
Scriptural baptism. They say that all the persons whose 
baptism we read of in the Bible were ‘ dipped.’ They hold, 


1 The rubric of the Prayer-book Service for the Public Baptism of 
Infants says—‘ If the godfather and godmother shall certify to the 
priest that the child may well endure it, he shall dip it in the water 
discreetly and warily.” 


74 


BAPTISM 


in short, that where there is no immersion there is no baptism. 

Task, is it in the least probable that all the cases of baptism 
described in Scripture were cases of complete immersion ? 
The three thousand baptized in one day at the feast of Pente- 
cost (Acts ii. 41),—the jailor at Philippi suddenly baptized 
at midnight in prison (Acts xvi. 33)—is it at all likely or 
probable that they were all “‘ dipped”’ >? To my own mind, 
trying to take an impartial view, it seems in the highest degree 
improbable. 

Again, is it at all probable that a mode of baptism would 
have been enjoined as necessary, which in some climates is 
impracticable ? At the North and South Poles, for example, 
the temperature, for many months, is many degrees below 
freezing-point. In tropical countries, on the other hand, 
water is often so extremely scarce that it is almost impossible 
to find enough for common drinking purposes. Now will 
any maintain that in such climates there can be no baptism 
without “immersion”? ? Will any one tell us that in such 
climates it is really necessary that every candidate for baptism 
should be completely “ dipped ”’ ? 

I ask also whether it is at all probable that a mode of 
baptism would have been enjoined which, in some conditions 
of health, is simply impossible. There are thousands of 
persons whose lungs and general constitution are in so delicate 
a state that total immersion in water, and especially in cold 
water, would be certain death to them. Now will any main- 
tain that such persons ought to be debarred from baptism 
unless they are “‘ dipped ”’ ? 

I ask farther, whether it is probable that a mode of 
baptizing would be enjoined, which in many countries would 
practically exclude women from baptism. The sensitiveness 
and strictness of Eastern nations about the treatment of 
their wives and daughters are notorious facts. There. are 
many parts of the world in which women are so completely 
separated and secluded from the other sex, that there is the 
greatest difficulty in even speaking to them about religion. 


79 


KNOTS UNTIED 


To talk of such an ordinance as baptizing them by “ im- 
mersion ’’ would, in hundreds of cases, be perfectly absurd. 
The feelings of fathers, husbands, and brothers, however 
personally disposed to Christian teaching, would be revolted 
by the mention of it. And will any one maintain that such 
women are to be left unbaptized altogether because they 
cannot be “ dipped ”’ ? 

I might leave the subject of the mode of baptism at this 
point. But there are two favourite arguments which the 
advocates of immersion are constantly bringing forward, 
about which I think it right to say something. ; 

(a) One of these favourite arguments is based on the 
meaning of the Greek word in the New Testament, which we 
translate “to baptize.’ It is constantly asserted that this 
word can mean nothing else but dipping, or complete “ im- 
mersion.’’ The reply to this argument is short and simple. 
The assertion is utterly destitute of foundation. Those who 
are best acquainted with New Testament Greek are decidedly 
of opinion that to baptize means “‘ to wash or cleanse with 
water,’ but whether by immersion or not must be entirely 
decided by the context. We read in St. Luke (xi. 38) that 
when our Lord dined with a certain Pharisee, ‘‘ the Pharisee 
marvelled that He had not first washed before dinner.” It 
may surprise some readers, perhaps, to hear that these words 
would have been rendered more literally, “ that He had not 
first been baptized before dinner.’’—Yet it is evident to common 
sense that the Pharisee could not have expected our Lord 
to immerse or dip Himself over head in water before dining ! 
It simply means that he expected Him to perform some 
ablution, or to pour water over His hands, before the meal. . 
But if this is so, what becomes of the argument that to baptize 
always means complete “‘ immersion ”’ ? 

(6) Another favourite argument in favour of baptism by 
immersion is drawn from the expression “‘ buried with Christ 
in baptism,”’ which St. Paul uses on two occasions (Rom. Vi. 
4; Col. ii. 12). It is asserted that going down into the water 

76 


BAPTISM 


of baptism, and being completely “ dipped” under it, is an 
exact figure of Christ’s burial and coming up out of the grave, 
and represents our union with Christ and participation in 
all the benefits of His death and resurrection. But there is 
no proof whatever that Christ’s burial was a going down into 
a hole dug in the ground. On the contrary, it is far more 
probable that His grave was a cave cut out of the side of a 
rock, like that of Lazarus, and on a level with the surrounding 
ground. Such, at least, was the common mode of burying 
round Jerusalem. At this rate there is no resemblance what- 
ever between going down into a bath, or baptistry, and the 
burial of our Lord. The actions are not like one another. 
That by profession of a lively faith in Christ at baptism a 
believer declares his union with Christ, both in His death and 
resurrection, is undoubtedly true. But to say that in “going 
down into the water “ he is burying his body just as His 
Master’s body was buried in the grave, is to say what cannot 
be proved. 

I find no certain law laid down as to the mode in which 
baptism is to be administered, so long as water is used in 
the name of the Trinity. Let every man be persuaded in 
his own mind. He that sprinkles or simply pours water in 
baptism has no right to excommunicate him that dips—and 
he that dips has no right to excommunicate him that sprinkles 
or pours water. Neither of them can possibly prove that 
the other is entirely wrong. 

I am content to regard the precise mode of baptizing as 
a thing indifferent, as a thing on which every one may use his 
liberty. I firmly believe that this liberty was intended of 
God. It is in keeping with many other things in the Christian 
dispensation. I find nothing precise laid down in the New 
Testament about ceremonies, or vestments, or liturgies, or 
church music, or the shape of churches, or the hours of service, 
or the quantity of bread and wine to be used at the Lord’s 
Supper, or the position and attitude of communicants. On all 
these points I see a liberal discretion allowed to the Church of 


77 * 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Christ. So long as things are “ done to edifying,” the principle 
of the New Testament is to allow a wide liberty. 

I hold firmly, that the validity and benefit of baptism 
do not depend on the quantity of water employed, but on the 
state of heart in which the sacrament is used. Those who 
insist on every grown-up person being plunged over head in a 
baptistry, and those who insist on splashing an immense 
handful of water in the face of every tender infant they 
receive into the Church at the font, are both alike, in my 
judgment, greatly mistaken. Both are attaching far more 
importance to the quantity of water used than I can find 
warranted in Scripture. It has been well said by a great 
divine,—‘ A little drop of water may serve to seal the fulness 
of divine grace in baptizing as well as a small piece of bread 
and the least tasting of wine in the Holy Supper ’’ ( Witsius, 
Econ. Fed. 1. 4, ch. xvi. 30). To that opinion I entirely 
subscribe. 


HI. TO: WHOM (QUGHT + BAPTISM?) 70) 35e 
ADMINISTERED? 


I begin by laying it down as a point almost undisputed, 
that all grown-up converts at missionary stations among the 
heathen ought to be baptized. As soon as they embrace the 
Gospel and make a credible profession of repentance and 
faith in Christ, they ought at once to receive baptism. This 
is the doctrine and practice of Episcopal, Presbyterian, 
Wesleyan, and Independent missionaries, just as much as it 
is the doctrine of Baptists. 

But I now go a step further. I lay it down as a Christian 
truth that the children of all professing Christians have a 
right to baptism, as well as their parents. Of course the 
children of professed unbelievers and heathen have no title 
to baptism, so long as they are under the charge of their 
parents. But the children of professing Christians are in an 
entirely different position. If their fathers and mothers 

78 


BAPTISM 


offer them to be baptized, the Church ought to receive them in 
baptism, and has no right to refuse them. 

It is precisely at this point that the grave division of 
opinion exists between the body of Christians called Baptists 
and the greater part of Christians throughout the world. 
The Baptist asserts that no one ought to be baptized who does 
not make a personal profession of repentance and faith, and 
that as children cannot do this they ought not to be baptized. 
I think that this assertion is not borne out by Scripture, and 
I shall proceed to give the reasons why I think so. I believe 
it can be shown that the children of professing Christians 
have a right to baptism, and that they should be baptized. 

Let me remind the reader at the outset, that the question 
under consideration is not the Baptismal Service of the 
Church of England. Whether that service is right or wrong, 
—whether it is useful to have godfathers and godmothers,— 
are not the points in dispute. It is mere waste of time to say 
anything about them. The question before us is simply 
whether infant baptism is right in principle. That it is right 
is held by Presbyterians, Independents, and Methodists, who 
use no Prayer-book, just as stoutly as it is by Churchmen. 
To the consideration of this one question I shall strictly con- 
fine myself. There is not the slightest necessary connection 
between the Liturgy and infant baptism. I heartily wish 
that some people would remember this. To insist on dragging 
in the Liturgy, and mixing it up with the abstract question 
of infant baptism, is not a sign of good logic, fairness, or 
common sense. 

Let me clear the way by observing that I will not be 
drawn away from the real point at issue by the ludicrous 
descriptions which Baptists often give of the abuse of infant 
baptism. No doubt it is easy for popular writers and preachers 
among the Baptists, to draw a vivid picture of an ignorant, 
prayerless couple of peasants, bringing an unconscious infant 
to be sprinkled at the font by a careless sporting parson ! 
It is easy to finish off the picture by saying, ‘“ What good can 


79 


KNOTS UNTIED 


infant baptism do?”’ Such pictures are very amusing, per- 
haps, but they are no argument against the principle of infant 
baptism. The abuse of a thing is no proof that it ought 
to be disused and is wrong. Moreover, those who live in 
glass-houses had better not throw stones. Strange pictures 
might be drawn of what happens sometimes in chapels at 
adult baptisms ! But I forbear. I want the reader to look not 
at pictures but at Scriptural principles. 

Let me now supply a few simple reasons why I hold, in 
common with all Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Methodists, 
and Independents throughout the world, that infant baptism 
is a right thing, and that in denying baptism to children the 
Baptists are mistaken. 

(a) Children were admitted into the Old Testament Church 
by a formal ordinance, from the time of Abraham downwards. 
That ordinance was circumcision. It was an ordinance which 
God Himself appointed, and the neglect of which was de- 
nounced as a great sin. It was an ordinance about which the 
highest language is used in the New Testament. St. Paul 
calls it ‘a seal of the righteousness of faith ’’ (Rom. ii. 4). 
Now, if children were considered to be capable of admission 
into the Church by an ordinance in the Old Testament, it is 
difficult to see why they cannot be admitted in the New. 
The general tendency of the Gospel is to increase men’s spiritual 
privileges and not to diminish them. Nothing, I believe, 
would astonish a Jewish convert so much as to tell him his 
children could not be baptized! ‘If they are fit to receive 
circumcision,”’ he would reply, “‘ why are they not fit to receive 
baptism ?”’ And my own firm conviction has long been 
that no Baptist could give him an answer. In fact I never 
heard of a converted Jew becoming a Baptist, and I never 
saw an argument against infant baptism that might not have 
been equally directed aganst infant circumcision. No man, 
I suppose, in his sober senses, would presume to say that 
infant circumcision was wrong. 

(6) The baptism of children is nowhere forbidden in the 

80 


BAPTISM 


New Testament. There is not a single text, from Matthew 
to Revelation, which either directly or indirectly hints that 
infants should not be baptized. Some, perhaps, may see little 
in this silence. To my mind it is a silence full of meaning and 
instruction. The first Christians, be it remembered, were 
many of them by birth Jews. They had been accustomed in 
the Jewish Church, before their conversion, to have their 
children admitted into church-membership by a solemn 
ordinance, as a matter of course. Without a distinct pro- 
hibition from our Lord Jesus Christ, they would naturally 
go on with the same system of proceeding, and bring their 
children to be baptized. But we find no such prohibition ! 
That absence of a prohibition, to my mind, speaks volumes. 
It satisfies me that no change was intended by Christ about 
children. If He had intended a change He would have said 
something to teach it. But He says not a word! That 
very silence is, to my mind, a most powerful and convincing 
argument. As God commanded Old Testament children to be 
circumcized, so God intends New Testament children to be 
baptized. 

(c) The baptism of households is specially mentioned in 
the New Testament. We read in the Acts that Lydia was 
baptized “ and her household,” and that the jailer of Philippi 
“was baptized: he and all his’’ (Acts xvi. 15, 33). We 
read in the Epistle to the Corinthians that St. Paul baptized 
“the household of Stephanas ” (x Cor. i. 16). . Now what 
meaning would any one attach to these expressions, if he had 
no theory to maintain, and could view them dispassionately ? 
Would he not explain the “household” to include young 
as well as old,—children as well as grown-up people ? Who 
doubts when he reads the words of Joseph in Genesis,— 
“take food for the famine of your households”’ (Gen. xlii. 
33) i— or, “‘ take your father and your households and come 
unto me” (Gen. xlv. 18), that children are included ? “Who 
can possibly deny that when God said to Noah, “‘ Come thou 
and all thy house into the ark,’’ He meant Noah’s sons? 

8I re 


KNOTS,,UNTIED 


(Gen. vii. 1). Admitting most fully that it is not directly said 
that St. Paul baptized little children, it seems to my mind 
the highest probability that the “‘ households’’ he baptized 
comprised children as well as grown-up people. 

(d) The behaviour of our Lord Jesus Christ to little children, 
as recorded in the Gospels, is very peculiar and full of meaning. 
The well-known passage in St. Mark is an instance of what I 
mean. ‘‘ They brought young children* to Him, that He 
should touch them: and His disciples rebuked those that 
brought them. But when Jesus saw it, He was much dis- 
pleased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come 
unto Me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of 
God. Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the 
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. 
And He took them up in His arms, put His hands upon them, 
and blessed them ’”’ (Mark. x. 13-16). 

Now I do not pretend for a moment to say that this 
passage is a direct proof of infant baptism. It is nothing. of 
the kind. ‘But Ido say that it supplies a curious answer to 
some of the arguments in common use among those who 
object to infant baptism. That infants are capable of receiv- 
ing some benefit from our Lord, that the conduct of those 
who would have kept them from Him was wrong in our Lord’s 
eyes, that He was ready and willing to bless them, even when 
they were too young to understand what He said or did,—all 
these things stand out as clearly as if written with a sunbeam ! 
A direct argument in favour of infant baptism the passage 
certainly is not. But a stronger indirect testimony it seems 
to me impossible to conceive. 

I might easily add to these arguments. 

I might show, from the writings of old Dr. Lightfoot, that 
the baptism of little children was a practice with which the 
Jews were perfectly familiar. When proselytes were received 


1Jn the parallel passage in St. Luke’s Gospel the word “infants ’”’ 
is used, and the Greek word so rendered can only be used of infants 
too young to speak or be called intelligent. 


82 


BAPTISM 


into the Jewish Church by baptism, before our Lord Jesus 
Christ came, their infants were received, and baptized with 
them, as a matter of course. 

I might show that infant baptism was uniformly practised 
by all the early Christians. Every Christian writer of any 
repute during the first 1500 years after Christ, with the single 
exception of perhaps Tertullian, speaks of infant baptism as a 
custom which the Church has always maintained. 

I might show that the vast majority of eminent Christians 
from the period of the Protestant Reformation down to the 
present day, have maintained the rights of infants to be bap- 
tized. Luther, Calvin, Melanchthon, and all the Continental 
Reformers,—Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and all the English 
Reformers,—the great body of all the English Puritans,— 
the whole of the Episcopal Presbyterian, Independent, and 
Methodist Churches of the present day,—are all of one mind 
on this point. They all hold infant baptism ! 

I do not write so much to convince Baptists, as to establish 
and confirm Churchmen. I have often been surprised to see 
how ignorant some Churchmen are of the grounds on which 
infant baptism may be defended. 


IV. THE POSITION BAPTISM OUGHT TO HOLD 
IN OUR RELIGION 


We must beware of despising baptism. Many in the present 
day seem to regard it with perfect indifference. They pass 
it by, and give it no place or position in their religion. Because, 
in many cases, it seems to confer no benefit, they appear to 
jump to the conclusion that it can confer none. They care 
nothing if baptism is never named in the sermon, They 
dislike to have it publicly administered in the congregation. 
In short, they seem to regard the whole subject of baptism 
as a troublesome question. 

Now, I ask such persons to consider gravely, whether 
their attitude of mind is justified by Scripture. Let them 
‘remember our Lord’s distinct and precise command to 


83 


KNOTS UNTIED 


“baptize,” when He left His disciples alone in the world. 
Let them remember the invariable practice of the Apostles, 
wherever they went preaching the Gospel. Let them mark 
the language used about baptism in several places in the 
Epistles. 

It is simply unreasonable to suppose that the Great Head 
of the Church would burden His people in all ages with an 
empty, powerless, unprofitable institution. It is ridiculous 
to suppose His Apostles would speak as they do about baptism, 
if, in no case, and under no circumstances, could it be of any 
use or help to man’s soul. Let us take heed, lest in fleeing 
from blind superstition, we pour contempt on an appointment 
of Christ. 

We must beware, for another thing, of making an idol of 
baptism. This is the error of excess. Many in the present 
day exalt baptism to a position which nothing in Scripture 
can possibly justify. If they hold infant baptism, they will 
tell you that the grace of the Holy Ghost invariably,accom- 
panies the administration of the ordinance,—that in every 
case, a seed of Divine life is implanted in the heart, to which 
all subsequent religious movement must be traced,—and 
that all baptized children are, as a matter of course, born 
again, and made partakers of the Holy Ghost !—If they do 
not hold infant baptism, they will tell you that to go down 
into the water with a profession of faith and repentance is 
the very turning-point in a man’s religion,—that until we 
have gone down into the water we are nothing,—and that 
when we have gone down into the water, we have taken the 
first step toward heaven! Many High Churchmen and 
Baptists hold these opinions. And although they may not 
mean it, they are practically making an idol of baptism. 

1 ask all persons who hold these exceedingly high and 
lofty views of baptism, to consider what warrant they have 
in the Bible for their opinions. To quote texts in which the 
greatest privileges and blessings are connected with baptism, 
is not enough. What we want are plain texts which show 


84 


, 


BAPTISM 


that these blessings and privileges are always and invariably 
conferred. The question to be settled is not whether a child 
may be born again and receive grace in baptism, but whether 
all children are born again, and receive grace when they are 
baptized.—The question is not whether an adult may “ put 
on Christ ’” when he goes down into the water, but whether all 
do as a matter of course. To tell us, for example, that our 
Lord’s famous words to Nicodemus (John iii. 5), teach any- 
thing more than the general necessity of being ‘“‘ born of water 
and the spirit,’ is an insult to common sense. Whether all 
persons baptized are “‘ born of water and the Spirit ”’ is another 
question altogether, and one which the text never touches at 
all. To assert that it is taught in the text, is just as illogical 
as the common assertion of the Baptist, when he tells you 
that because Jesus said, “‘ He that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved,’’—therefore nobody ought to be baptized 
until he believes ! 


HOLY SCRIPTURE AND BAPTISM 


The right position of baptism can only be decided by a 
careful observation of the language of Scripture about it. Let 
a man read the New Testament honestly and impartially for 
himself. Let him come to the reading of it with an un- 
prejudiced, fair, and unbiassed mind. Let him simply ask the 
question,—‘ what does Scripture teach about baptism, and 
its place in Christian theology ? ’’—and I have little doubt as 
to the conclusion he will come to. He will neither trample 
baptism under his feet, nor exalt it over his head. 

(a) He will find that baptism is frequently mentioned, 
and yet not so frequently as to lead us to think that it is the 
very first chief, and foremost thing in Christianity. In four- 
teen out of twenty-one Epistles, baptism is not even named. 
In five out of the remaining seven, it is only mentioned once. 
In one of the remaining two, it is only mentioned twice. ° In 
the two pastoral Epistles to Timothy it is not mentioned 
at all. There is, in short, only one Epistle, viz., the first to 


85 


KNOTS UNTIED 


the Corinthians, in which baptism is even named on more 
than two occasions. And, singularly enough, this is the very 
Epistle in which St. Paul says, “ I thank God that I baptized 
none of you,’—and “‘ Christ sent me not to baptize, but to 
preach the Gospel ”’ (x Cor. i. 14, 17). 

(6) He will find that baptism is spoken of with deep 
reverence, and in close connection with the highest privileges 
and blessings. Baptized people are said to be “ buried with 
Christ,’’—to have “‘ put on Christ,”—to have “ risen again,” 
—and even (by straining a doubtful text) to have the “‘ wash- 
ing of regeneration.’’ But he will also find that Judas Iscariot, 
Ananias and Sapphira, Simon Magus, and others, were baptized 
and yet gave no evidence of having been born again. He 
will also see that in the first Epistle of John, people ‘‘ born 
of God ” are said to have certain marks and characteristics 
which myriads of baptized persons never possess at any period 
of their lives (x John ii. 29; ili. g; v.1, 4,18). And not 
least, he will find St. Peter declaring that the baptism which 
saves is “‘ not the putting away the filth of the flesh,” the mere 
washing of the body, but the “‘ answer of a good conscience ” 
(x Peter iii. 21). 

(c) Finally, he will discover that while baptism is fre- 
quently spoken of in the New Testament, there are other 
subjects which are spoken of much more frequently. Faith, 
hope, charity, God’s grace, Christ’s offices, the work of the 
Holy Ghost, redemption, justification, the nature of Christian 
holiness. Above all, he will find, if he marks the language 
of Scripture about the Old Testament sacrament of circum- 
cision, that the value of God’s ordinances depends entirely 
on the spirit in which they are received, and the heart of the 


receiver. ‘‘In Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth 
anything, nor uncircumcision ; but faith which worketh by 
love,—but a new creature ” (Gal. v.6; vi.15). ‘“ He is not 


a Jew which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision 
which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one 
inwardly ; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, 


86 


BAPTISM 
and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of 
God ”’ (Rom. ii. 28, 29). 
In religion it matters nothing who says a thing, or how 
beautifully he says it. The only question we ought to ask is 
this,—‘‘ Is it written in the Bible? what saith the Lord?” 


87 


VI 
REGENERATION 


The subject of Regeneration is a most important one at 
any time. Those words of our Lord Jesus Christ to Nicodemus 
are very solemn: “ Except a man be born again, he cannot 
see the kingdom of God” (John iii. 3). The world has gone 
through many changes since those words were spoken. 

The subject is one which is peculiarly important to mem- 
bers of the Church of England. We should try to know what 
we hold. We should be ready to give a reason for our belief. 


I. WHAT DOES REGENERATION MEAN ? 


Regeneration means, that change of heart and nature 
which a man goes through when he becomes a true Christian. 

I think there can be no question that there is an immense 
difference among those who profess and call themselves 
Christians. Beyond all dispute there are always two classes 
in the outward Church : the class of those who are Christians 
in name and form only, and the class of those who are Chris- 
tians in deed and in truth. “In the visible Church,” says 
an Article of the Church of England, “ the evil be ever mingled 
with the good.” 

Some worship God as a mere form, and some in spirit and 
in truth. Some love Christ, trust in Him, and serve Him: 
others do not. 

Now what is the explanation of the difference > I answer 
unhesitatingly, Regeneration, or being born again. True 
Christians are what they are, because they are regenerate, 
and formal Christians are what they are, because they are 


88 


REGENERATION 


not regenerate. The heart of the Christian in deed has been 
changed. The heart of the Christian in name only has not 
been changed. The change of heart makes the whole difference. 

This change of heart is spoken of continually in the Bible, 
under various emblems and figures. 

Ezekiel calls it ‘a taking away the stony heart, and 
giving an heart of flesh;’’—-“‘a giving a new heart, and 
putting within us a new spirit ” (Ezek. xi. 19; xxxvi. 26). 

The Apostle John sometimes calls it being ‘‘ born of 
God,”—sometimes being “ born again,’’—sometimes being 
“born of the Spirit ”’ (John i. 13 ; iii. 3, 6). 

The Second Epistle to the Corinthians calls it ‘‘ being a 
new creature; old things have passed away, and all things 
become new ”’ (2 Cor. v. 17). 

The Epistle to the Colossians calls it “a putting off the 
old man with his deeds ; and putting on the new man, which 
is renewed in knowledge after the image. of Him that created 
him” (Col. iii. 9, 10). 

The Epistle to Titus calls it “ the washing of regeneration, 
and renewing of the Holy Ghost ”’ (Titus iii. 5). 

The first Epistle of Peter speaks of it as “a being called 
out of darkness into God’s marvellous light ”’ (r Peter ii. 9). 
And the second Epistle as ‘‘ being made partakers of the 
Divine nature” (2 Peter i. 4). 

The First Epistle of John calls it “a passing from death 
to life’ (x John iii. 14). 

All these expressions come to the same thing in the end. 
They are all the same truth, only viewed from different sides. 
And all have one and the same meaning. They describe a 
great radical change of heart and nature,—a thorough altera- 
tion and transformation of the whole inner man,—a participa- 
tion in the resurrection life of Christ ; or, to borrow the words 
of the Church of England Catechism, “ A death unto sin, 
and a new birth unto righteousness.” 

This change of heart in a true Christian is thorough and 
complete, so complete, that no word could be chosen more 


89 


KNOTS UNTIED 


fitting to express it than the word “ Regeneration,” or “‘ new 
birth.” It adds no new faculties to a man’s mind, but it 
certainly gives an entirely new bent and bias to all his old 
ones. His will is so new, his tastes so new, his opinions so 
new, his views of sin, the world, the Bible, and Christ so new, 
that he is to all intents and purposes a new man. The change 
seems to bring a new being into existence. It may well be 
called being “ born again.” 

This change is not always given to believers at the same 
time in their lives. Some are born again when they are infants, 
and seem, like Jeremiah and John the Baptist, filled with 
the Holy Ghost even from their mother’s womb. Some few 
are born again in old age. The great majority of true Chris- 
tians probably are born again after they grow up. A vast 
multitude of persons, it is to be feared, go down to the grave 
without having been born again at all. 

This change of heart does not always begin in the same way 
in those who go through it after they have grown up. With 
some, like the Apostle Paul and the jailer at Philippi, it is a 
sudden and a violent change, attended with much distress of 
mind. With others, like Lydia of Thyatira, it is more gentle 
and gradual. With some the change is brought about by the 
Spirit working through afflictions, or providential visitations. 
With others, and probably the greater number, the Word of 
God preached or written, is the means of effecting it. 

This change is one which can only be known and discerned 
by its effects. Its beginnings are a hidden and secret thing. 
We cannot see them. Our Lord Jesus Christ tells us this 
most plainly: ‘ The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou 
hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh 
or whither it goeth ; so is every one that is born of the Spirit ” 
(John iii. 8). Would we know’if we are regenerate? We 
must try the question, by examining what we know’ of the 
effects of Regeneration. Those effects are always the same. 
The ways by which true Christians are led, in passing through 
their great change, are certainly various. But the state of 


go 


REGENERATION * 


heart and soul into which they are brought at last, is always 
the same. Ask them what they think of sin, Christ, holiness, 
the world, the Bible, and prayer, and you will find them all 
of one mind. 

This change is one which no man can give to himself, nor 
yet to another. It would be as reasonable to expect the dead to 
raise themselves. The sons of God are born “ not of blood, 
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God”’ 
(John i. 13). The Holy Spirit is the great agent by whom 
it is always effected: ‘‘ That which is born of the Spirit is 
Spirit ’ (John iii. 6). But man has no power to work the 
change. It is something far, far beyond his reach. ‘‘ The 
condition of man after the fall of Adam,” says the Tenth 
Article of the Church of England, “is such that he cannot 
turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and 
good works, to faith and calling upon God.” Jesus alone, the 
great Head of the Church, can baptize with the Holy Ghost. 
Blessed and happy are they, who have the inward baptism, 
as well as the outward. 

I believe the foregoing account of Regeneration to be 
Scriptural. 

I know well that many will not allow that Regeneration 
is what I have described it to be. They will think the state- 
ment I have made, by way of definition, much too strong. 
Some hold that Regeneration only means admission into a 
state of ecclesiastical privileges, by being made a member 
of the Church, but does not mean a change of heart. Some 
tell us that a regenerate man has a certain power within 
him which enables him to repent and believe if he thinks 
fit, but that he still needs a further change in order to make 


1“ There are two kinds of baptism, and both necessary: the one 
interior, which is the cleansing of the heart, the drawing of the Father, 
the operation of the Holy Ghost; and this baptism is in man when he 
believeth and trusteth that Christ is the only method of his salva- 
tion.”’—Bishop Hooper, 1547. 

“Tt is on all parts gladly confessed, that there may be, in divers 
cases, life by virtue of inward baptism, where outward is not found.” 
—Richard Hooker. 

gt 


KNOTS UNTIED 


him a true Christian. Some say there is a difference between 
Regeneration and being born again. Others say there is a 
difference between being born again and conversion. 

To all this I have one simple reply, and that is, I can find 
no such Regeneration spoken of anywhere in the Bible. A 
Regeneration which only means admission into a state of 
ecclesiastical privilege may be ancient and primitive for 
anything I know. 

But such a notion of Regeneration i is utterly inconsistent 
with that which St. John gives us in his first Epistle. It 
renders it necessary to invent the awkward theory that there 
are two Regenerations, and is thus eminently calculated to 
confuse the minds of unlearned people, and introduce false 
doctrine. It is a notion which seems not to answer to the 
solemnity with which our Lord introduces the subject to 
Nicodemus. When He said, “ Verily, verily, except a man be 
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God,’ did He only 
mean except a man be admitted to a state of ecclesiastical 
privilege >? Surely He meant more than this. Such a Re- 
generation a man might have, like Simon Magus, and yet 
never be saved. Such a Regeneration he might never have 
like the penitent thief, and yet see the kingdom of God. Surely 
He must have meant a change of heart. As to the notion 
that there is any distinction between being regenerate and 
being born again, it is one which will not bear examination. 
It is the general opinion of all who know Greek, that the two 
expressions mean one and the same thing. 

To me, indeed, there seems to be much confusion of ideas, 
and indistinctness of apprehension in men’s minds on this 
simple point,—what Regeneration really is,—and all arising 
from not simply adhering to the Word of God. That a man is 
admitted into a state of great privilege when he is made a 
member of a pure Church of Christ, I do not for an instant 
deny. That he is in a far better and more advantageous 
position for his soul, than if he did not belong to the Church, 
I make no question. That a wide door is set open before his 


g2 


REGENERATION 


soul, which is not set before the poor heathen, I can most 
clearly see. But I do not see that the Bible ever calls this Re- 
generation. And I cannot find a single text in Scripture 
which warrants the assumption that it is so. It is very im- 
portant in theology to distinguish things that differ. Church 
privileges are one thing; Regeneration is another. 

The only Regeneration that I can see in Scripture is, not 
a change of state, but a change of heart. That is the view, 
I once more assert, which the Church Catechism takes when 
it speaks of the “ death unto sin, and new birth unto righteous- 
ness,’ and on that view I take my stand. 

The doctrine before us is one of vital importance. This 
is no matter of names, and words, and forms, about which 
I am writing. It is a thing that we must feel and know by 
experience, each for himself, if we are to be saved. Are our 
hearts changed ? Alas, it is poor work to wrangle, and argue, 
and dispute about Regeneration, if after all we know nothing 
about it within. 


Il. THE NECESSITY THERE IS FOR OUR BEING 
REGENERATE, OR BORN AGAIN 


That there is such a necessity is most plain from our Lord 
Jesus Christ’s words in the third chapter of St. John’s Gospel. 
Nothing can be more clear and positive than His language 
to Nicodemus: “‘ Except a man be born again, he cannot 
see the kingdom of God.”’ “ Marvel not that I say unto thee, 
Ye must be born again”’ (John iii. 3, 7). 

The reason of this necessity is the exceeding sinfulness 
and corruption of our natural hearts. The words of St. Paul 
to the Corinthians are literally accurate: ‘‘ The natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are 
foolishness unto him” (xz Cor. ii. 14). Just as rivers flow 
downward, and sparks fly upward, and stones fall to the 
ground, so does a man’s heart naturally incline to what is 
evil. We love our soul’s enemies,—we dislike our soul’s friends. 
We call good evil, and we call evil good. We take pleasure 


93 


KNOTS UNTIED 


in ungodliness, we take no pleasure in Christ. We not only 
commit sin, but we also love sin. We not only need to be 
cleansed from the guilt of sin, but we also need to be delivered 
from its power. The natural tone, bias, and current of our 
minds must be completely altered. The Spirit must let in 
the light on our hearts, and create all things new. 

It ought always to be remembered that there are two 
distinct things which the Lord Jesus Christ does for every 
sinner whom He undertakes to save. He washes him from his 
sins in His own blood, and gives him a free pardon :—this 
is his justification. He puts the Holy Spirit into his heart, 
and makes him an entirely new man :—thts is his Regeneration. 

The two things are both absolutely necessary to salvation. 
The change of heart is as necessary as the pardon; and the 
pardon is as necessary as the change. Without the pardon 
we have no right or title to heaven. Without the change we 
should not be meet and ready to enjoy heaven, even if we got 
there. 

The two things are never separate. They are never found 
apart. Every justified man is also a regenerate man, and 
every regenerate man is also a justified man. When the Lord 
Jesus Christ gives a man remission of sins, He also gives him 
repentance. When He grants peace with God, He also grants 
“power to become a son of God.” 

The man who denies the universal necessity of Regenera- 
tion can know very little of the heart’s corruption. He is 
blind indeed who fancies that pardon is all we want in order 
to get to heaven, and does not see that pardon without a 
change of heart would be a useless gift. Blessed be God that 
both are freely offered to us in Christ's Gospel, and that Jesus 
is able and willing to give the one as well as the other ! 

Surely we must be aware that the vast majority of people 
in the world see nothing, feel nothing, and know nothing in 
religion as they ought. How and why is this, is not the present 
question. I only put it to the conscience of every reader of 
this volume,—Is it not the fact ? 


94 


REGENERATION 


Tell them of the sinfulness of many things which they 
are doing continually ; and what is generally the reply }— 
“ They see no harm.” 

Tell them of the shortness of time,—the nearness of 
eternity,—the uncertainty of life,—the reality of judgment. 
They feel no danger. 

Tell them of their need of a Saviour,—mighty, loving, 
and Divine, and of the impossibility of being saved from hell, 
except by faith in Him. It all falls flat and dead on their ears. 
They see no such great barrier between themselves and 
heaven. 

Tell them of holiness, and the high standard of living which 
the Bible requires. They cannot comprehend the need of 
such strictness. They see no use in being so very good. 

There are thousands and tens of thousands of such people 

on every side of us. They will hear these things all their lives. 

They will listen to the most powerful appeals to their con- 
sciences. And yet when you come to visit them on their 
death-beds, they are like men and women who never heard 
these things at all. They know nothing of the leading doctrines 
of the Gospel by experience. They can render no reason 
whatever of their own hope. 

What is the explanation ?>—What is the cause of such a 
state of things ? It all comes from this,—that man naturally 
has no sense of spiritual things. In vain the sun of righteous- 
ness shines before him: the eyes of his soul are blind, and 
cannot see. In vain the music of Christ’s invitations sound 
around him: the ears of his soul are deaf, and cannot hear 
it. In vain the wrath of God against sin is set forth: the 
perceptions of his soul are stopped up. In vain the bread 
and water of life are offered to him : his soul is neither hungry 
for the one, nor thirsty for the other. In vain he is advised 
to flee to the Great Physician: his soul is unconscious of its 
disease. Alas, there is nothing so sad as the utter corruption 
of our nature! There is nothing so painful as the anatomy 
of a dead soul. 


95 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Now what does such a man need? He needs to be born 
again, and made a new creature. He needs a complete putting 
off the old man, and a complete putting on the new. We do 
not live our natural life till we are born into the world, and we 
do not live our spiritual life till we are born of the Spirit. 

But we must be aware that the majority of peopie are 
utterly unfit to enjoy heaven in their present state. 

Look at the masses of men and women gathered together 
in our cities and towns, and observe them well. They are 
all immortal beings,—all going to the judgment-seat of 
Christ. But where is the slightest evidence that most of them 
are in the least degree meet and ready for heaven ? 

Look at the greater part of those who are called Christians, 
in every part throughout the land. Take any parish you 
please in town or country. Take that which you know best. 
What are the tastes and pleasures of the majority of the 
people who live there ? 

You and I, it may be said, know little about heaven. Our 
notions of heaven may be very dim and indistinct. But at 
all events, I suppose we are agreed in thinking that heaven 
is a very holy place,—that God is there,—and Christ is there, 
—and saints and angels are there,—that sin is not there in 
any shape,—and that nothing is said, thought, or done, which 
God does not like. Only let this be granted, and then I think 
there can be no doubt the great majority of people around us 
are as little fit for heaven as a bird for swimming beneath 
the sea, or a fish for living upon dry land. 

And what is it that they need in order to make them fit to 
enjoy heaven? They need to be regenerated and born again. 
It is not a little changing and outward amendment that they 
require. It is not merely the putting a restraint on raging 
passions and the quieting of unruly affections. All this is 
not enough. Old age,—the want of opportunity for indulgence, 
the fear of man, may produce all this. The tiger is still a tiger, 
even when he is chained, and the serpent is still a serpent 
even when he lies motionless and coiled up. The alteration 


96 


REGENERATION 


needed is far greater and deeper. Every one must have a new 
nature put within him; every one must be made a new 
creature ; each one wants a new heart and a new will. 

The plain truth is, the vast proportion of professing 
Christians in the world have nothing whatever of Christianity 
except the name. The reality of Christianity, the graces, 
the experience, the faith, the hopes, the life, the conflict, 
the tastes, the hungering and thirsting after righteousness,— 
all these are things of which they know nothing at all. They 
need to be converted as truly as any among the Gentiles to 
whom Paul preached, and to be turned from idols, and re- 
newed in the spirit of their minds as really, if not as literally. 
And one main part of the message which should be continually 
delivered to the greater portion of every congregation on 
earth is this: “‘ Ye must be born again.’ I write this down 
deliberately. I know it will sound dreadful and uncharitable 
in many ears. But I ask any one to take the New Testament 
in his hand, and see what it says is Christianity, and compare 
that with the ways of professing Christians, and then deny 
the truth of what I have written, if he can. 

And now let every one who reads these pages remember 
this grand principle of Scriptural religion: ‘‘ No salvation 
without Regeneration,—no spiritual life without a new birth,— 
no heaven without a new heart.” 

Let us not think for a moment that this subject is a mere 
matter of controversy,—an empty question for learned men 
to argue about, but not one that concerns us. It concerns 
us deeply ; it touches our own eternal interests, it is a thing 
that we must know for ourselves, feel for ourselves, and ex- 
perience for ourselves, if we would ever be saved. No soul of 
man, woman, or child, will ever enter heaven without having 
been born again. 


Ill, THE MARKS OF BEING REGENERATE 


It is a most important thing to have clear and distinct 
views on this part of the subject we are considering. We 


97 H 


KNOTS UNTIED 


have seen what Regeneration is, and why it is necessary to 
salvation. The next step is to find out the signs and evidences 
by which a man may know whether he is born again or not,— 
whether his heart has been changed by the Holy Spirit, or 
whether his change is yet to come. 

Now these signs and evidences are laid down plainly for 
us in Scripture. God has not left us in ignorance on this point. 
He foresaw how some would torture themselves with doubts 
and questionings. He foresaw how others would take it for 
granted they were “ regenerate,” who had no right to do so 
at all. He has therefore mercifully provided us with a test 
and guage of our spiritual condition, in the First Epistle 
general of St. John. 

I invite the reader’s particular attention to these marks 
and evidences of Regeneration, while I try to set them forth 
in order. I might easily mention other evidences besides 
those I am about to mention. But I will not do so. I would 
rather confine myself to the First Epistle of St. John, because 
of the peculiar explicitness of its statements about the man 
that is born of God. 

(rt) First of all, St. John says, ““ Whosoever is born of 
God doth not commit sin ;”’ and again, ‘“ Whosoever is born 
of God sinneth not” (xz John iii. 9; v. 18). 

A regenerate man does not commit sin as a habit. He no 
longer sins with his heart and will, and whole inclination, as 
an unregenerate man does. There was probably a time when 
he did not think whether his actions were sinful or not, and 
never felt grieved after doing evil. There was no quarrel 
between him and sin ;—they were friends. Now he hates sin, 
flees from it, fights against it, counts it his greatest plague, 
groans under the burden of its presence, mourns when he falls 
under its influence, and longs to be delivered from it altogether. 
In one word, sin no longer pleases him, nor is even a matter of 
indifference: it has become the abominable thing which he 
hates. He cannot prevent it dwelling within him. ‘If he 
said he had no sin, there would be no truth in him” (r John 


98 


REGENERATION 


i. 8); but he can say that he cordially abhors it, and the 
great desire of his soul is not to commit sin at all. He cannot 
prevent bad thoughts arising within him, and short-comings, 
omissions, and defects appearing both in his words and actions, 
He knows, as St. James says, that “in many things we offend 
all’”’ (James iii. 2). But he can say truly, and as in the sight 
of God, that these things are a daily grief and sorrow to him, 
and that his whole nature does not consent unto them, as 
that of the unregenerate man does. 

(2) Secondly, St. John says, ‘ whosoever believeth that 
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God” (zr John v. 1). 

A regenerate man believes that Jesus Christ is the only 
Saviour by whom his soul can be pardoned and justified, that 
He is the Divine Person appointed and anointed by God the 
Father for this very purpose, and that beside Him there is 
no Saviour at all. In himself he sees nothing but unworthi- 
ness, but in Christ he sees ground for the fullest confidence, 
and trusting in Him he believes that his sins are all forgiven, 
and his iniquities all put away. He believes that for the sake 
of Christ’s finished work and death upon the cross he is 
reckoned righteous in God’s sight, and may look forward to 
death and judgment without fear. He may have his doubts. 
He may sometimes tell you he feels as if he had no faith at 
all. But ask him whether he is willing to trust in anything 
instead of Christ, and see what he will say. Ask him whether 
he will rest his hopes of eternal life on his own goodness, 
his own amendments, his prayers, and see what he will reply. 
Ask him whether he will give up Christ, and place his con- 
fidence in any other way of salvation. Depend upon it, he 
would say, that though he does feel weak and bad, he would 
not give up Christ for all the world. Depend upon it, he 
would say he found a preciousness in Christ, a suitableness 
to his own soul in Christ, that he found nowhere else, and that 
he must cling to Him. 

(3) Thirdly, St. John says, “Every one that doeth 
_ righteousness is born of God” (xz John ii. 29). 


99 


KNOTS UNTIED 


The regenerate man endeavours to live according to God’s 
will, to do the things that please God, to avoid the things that 
God hates. His aim and desire is to love God with heart, and 
soul, and mind, and strength, and to love his neighbour as 
himself. His wish is to be continually looking to Christ as his 
example as well as his Saviour, and to show himself Christ’s 
friend by doing whatsoever Christ commands. No doubt 
he is not perfect. None will tell you that sooner than himself. 
He finds an evil principle within him constantly warring 
against grace, and trying to draw him away from God. But 
he does not consent to it, though he cannot prevent its presence. 
In spite of all short-comings, the average bent and bias of 
his way is holy,—his doings holy,—his tastes holy,—and his 
habits holy. In spite of all his swerving and turning aside 
like a ship beating up against a contrary wind, the general 
course of his life is in one direction, toward God and for God. 
And though he may sometimes feel so low that he questions 
whether he is a Christian at all, in his calmer moments he 
will generally be able to say with old John Newton, “I am 
not what I ought to be; I am not what I want to be ; Iam 
not what I hope to be in another world; but still I am not 
what I once used to be, and by the grace of God I am what 
Iam.” 

(4) Fourthly, St. John says, ‘“ We know that we have 
passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren ”’ 
(x John iii, 14). 

A regenerate man has a special love for all true disciples of 
Christ. Like his Father in heaven, he loves all men with a 
great general love, but he has a special love for them who are 
of one mind with himself. Like his Lord and Saviour, he 
loves the worst of sinners, and could weep over them; but he 
has a peculiar love for those who are believers. He is never 
so much at home as when he is in their company. Others 
may value learning, or cleverness, or agreeableness, or riches, 
or rank, in the society they choose. The regenerate man 
values grace. Those who have most grace, and are most 


100 


\ 


REGENERATION 


like Christ, are those he most loves. He feels that they are 
members of the same family with himself,—his brethren, 
his sisters, children of the same Father. He feels that they 
are fellow-soldiers, fighting under the same captain, warring 
against the same enemy. He feels that they are his fellow- 
travellers, journeying along the same road, tried by the same 
difficulties, and soon about to rest with him in the same 
eternal home. He understands them, and they understand 
him. There is a kind of spiritual freemasonry between them. 
He and they may be very different in many ways,—in rank, 
in station, in wealth. What matter ? They are Jesus Christ’s 
people: they are His Father’s sons and daughters. Then 
he cannot help loving them. 

(5) Fifthly, St. John says, ‘‘ Whatsoever is born of God, 
overcometh the world” (xr John v. 4). } 

A regenerate man does not make the world’s opinion his rule 
of right and wrong. He does not mind going against the stream 
of the world’s ways, notions, and customs. “ What will men 
say ?”’ is no longer a turning point with him. He overcomes 
the love of the world. He finds no pleasure in things which 
most around him call happiness. He cannot enjoy their 
enjoyments—they weary him—they appear to him vain, 
unprofitable, and unworthy of an immortal being. He over- 
comes the fear of the world. He is content to do many things 
which all around him think unnecessary. They blame him: 
it does not move him. They ridicule him: he does not give 
way. He loves the praise of God more than the praise of man. 
He fears offending Him more than giving offence to man. 
He has counted the cost. He has taken his stand. It is a 
small thing with him now, whether he is blamed or praised. 
His eye is upon Him that is invisible. Him he is resolved 
to follow whithersoever He goeth. It may be necessary in 
this following to come out from the world and be separate. 
The regenerate man will not shrink from doing so. Tell him 
that he is unlike other people, that his views are not the views 
of society generally, and that he is making himself singular and 


Ior 


KNOTS UNTIED 


peculiar. You will not shake him. He is no longer the servant 
of fashion and custom. To please the world is quite a secon- 
dary consideration with him. His first aim is to ‘please 
God. 

(6) Sixthly, St. John says, “ He that is begotten of God 
keepeth himself ”’ (x John v. 18). 

A regenerate man endeavours not only to keep clear of sin, 
but also to keep clear of everything which may iead to it. He 
is careful about the employment of his time : his chief desire about 
it is to spend it profitably. He desires to live like a soldier in 
an enemy’s country, to wear his armour continually, and to 
be prepared for temptation. He finds by experience that his 
soul is ever among enemies, and he studies to be a watchful, 
humble, prayerful man. 

Such are the six great marks of Regeneration, which God 
has given for our learning. Let every one who has gone so far 
with me, read them over with attention, and lay them to heart. 

I know there is a vast difference in the depth and distinct- 
ness of these marks among those who are “ regenerate.’”’ In 
some people they are faint, dim, feeble, and hardly to be dis- 
cerned. You almost need a microscope to make them out. In 
others they are bold, sharp, clear, plain and unmistakable, so 
that he who runs may read them. Some of these marks are 
more visible in some people, and others are more visible in 
others. It seldom happens that all are equally manifest in 
one and the same soul. 

But still, after every allowance, here we find boldly painted 
the six marks of being born of God. Here are certain positive 
things laid down by St. John as parts of the regenerate man’s 
character, as plainly and distinctly as the features of a man’s 
face. Here is an inspired Apostle writing one of the last 
general Epistles to the Church of Christ, telling us that a man 
born of God does not commit sin—believes that Jesus is the 
Christ—doeth righteousness—loves the brethren—overcomes 
the world, and keepeth himself. And more than once in the 
very same Epistle, when these marks are mentioned, the 


102 


REGENERATION 


Apostle tells us that he who had not this or that mark is “ not 
of God.” 

Now what shall we say to these things ? What they can 
say who hold that Regeneration is only an admission to out- 
ward Church privileges, I am sure I do not know. For myself, 
I say boldly, I can only come to one conclusion. That con- 
clusion is, that those persons only are “ regenerate ’’ who have 
these six marks about them, and that all men and women 
who have not these marks are not “ regenerate,” are not born 
again. And | firmly believe that this is the conclusior to 
which the Apostle wished us to come. 

I commend what I have been saying to the serious con- 
sideration of all my readers. I believe that I have said nothing 
but what is God’s truth. We live in a day of gross darkness on 
the subject of Regeneration. Thousands are darkening God’s 
counsel by confounding baptism and Regeneration. Let us 
beware of this. Let us keep the two subjects separate in our 
mind. Let us get clear views about Regeneration first of all, 
and then we are not likely to fall into mistakes about baptism. 
And when we have got clear views let us hold them fast, and 
never let them go. 


103 


VII 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT 
REGENERATION 


“ Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” 
—John iii. 3. 


“ This child is regenerate.’’—Baptismal Service of the Church of 
England. 


In this paper I have one simple object in view. I wish to 
throw light on certain expressions about “ Regeneration ”’ 
in the Baptismal Service of the Church of England. 

The subject is one of no slight importance. The minds of 
many true Christians in the Church of England are troubled 
about it. They do not see the real meaning of our excellent 
Reformers in putting such language in a Prayer-book Service. 
They are perplexed and confounded by the bold and reckless 
assertions made by opponents of Evangelical Religion within 
the Church, and of Dissenters outside the Church, and, though 
not convinced, they find nothing to reply. 

I propose in this paper to supply an answer to the common 
arguments in favour of “‘ Baptismal Regeneration,” which 
are based on the Baptismal Service of the Prayer-book. I 
wish to show that in this, as in many other questions, the 
truth is not so entirely on one side, as many seem to suppose. 
Above all, I wish to show that it is possible to be a consistent, 
honest, thoughtful member of the Church of England, and 
yet not to hold the doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration. 

In considering this subject, I shall strictly confine myself 
to the one point at issue. I shall only make a few preliminary 

To4 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


remarks by way of explanation, and to prevent mistakes 
about the meaning of words. 


A CHANGE OF HEART 


My first remark is this: I believe that, according to 
Scripture, Regeneration is that great change of heart and 
character which is absolutely needful to man’s salvation. 
“Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom 
of God” (John iii. 3). 

I cannot regard it as nothing more than an admission to 
Church privileges,—a change of state, and not a change of 
heart. ; 

Again, I believe there is only one sure evidence, according 
to Scripture, of any one being a regenerate person. That 
evidence is the fruit that he brings forth in his heart and in 
his life. “‘ Every tree is known by his own fruit.” 

Of course I am aware that many divines maintain that 
we may call people “ regenerate,” in whom none of the marks 
just described are seen. They tell us, in short, that people 
may possess the gift of the Spirit, and the grace of Re- 
generation, when neither the gift nor the grace can be seen. 
Such a doctrine appears to me dangerous in the highest 
degree. It seems tomy mind little better than Antinomianism. 

Further let me again assert that Regeneration and baptism, 
according to Scripture, do not necessarily go together. I see 
that people may be filled with the Holy Ghost, and have new 
hearts, without baptism, like John the Baptist and the peni- 
tent thief. I see also that people may be baptized, and yet 
remain in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, like 
Simon Magus. 

It is well known that many people hold that baptism and 
Regeneration are inseparable; but there is a fatal absence 
of texts in support of this view. Sixteen times, at least, 
the new birth is mentioned in the New Testament. “ Re- 
generation ”’ is a word used twice, but only once in the sense 
of a change of heart. ‘‘ Born again,’—" born of God,’”— 

105 


KNOTS UNTIED 


“born of the Spirit,’’—‘‘ begotten of God,” are expressions 
used frequently. Once the word “ water’ is joined with the 
words ‘‘ born of the Spirit ;’’ once the word “ washing ’’ is 
joined with the word ‘“‘ Regeneration ;’’ twice believers are 
said to be born of the ‘‘ Word of God,” the ‘“‘ Word of truth.” 
But it is a striking fact that there is not one text in Scrip- 
ture which says distinctly and expressly that we are born 
again in baptism, and that every baptized person is necessarily 
regenerate ! 

My fourth and last remark is this. I believe that, accord- 
ing to Scripture, baptism has no more power to confer Re- 
generation on infants, ex opere operato, than it has upon 
grown-up people. That infants ought to be solemnly and 
formally admitted into the Church under the New Testa- 
ment, as well as under the Old, I make no question. The 
promise to the children of believers, and the behaviour of 
our Lord Jesus Christ to children, ought to encourage all 
believing parents to expect the greatest blessings in bringing 
their infants to be baptized. But beyond this I cannot go. 

I am aware that many people think that infants must be 
regenerated in baptism, as a matter of course, because they 
put no bar in the way of grace, and must therefore receive 
the sacrament worthily. Once more I am obliged to say, 
there is a fatal absence of Scripture in defence of this view. 
The right of Christian infants to baptism is only through their 
parents. 


THE BAPTISMAL SERVICE 


Let me now discuss the true interpretation of some ex- 
pressions in the Baptismal Service of the Church of England, 
which appear at first sight to contradict the view which I 
have been endeavouring to set forth on the subject of Re- 
generation. It is asserted that the Prayer-book decidedly 
teaches the doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration in the 
Baptismal Service.—It is said that the words of that service, 
“ Seeing now that this child is regenerate,’’—'‘ We yield Thee 


106 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


hearty thanks, that it hath pleased Thee to regenerate this 
child with Thy Holy Spirit,” admit of only one meaning.— 
They are used, it is said, over every child that is baptized. 
They prove, it is said, beyond all question, that the Church 
of England maintains the doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration. 
—They settle the point, it is said, and leave no room to doubt. 
These are the statements I now propose to examine. Can they 
be proved, or can they not ? I say unhesitatingly that they 
cannot, and I will proceed to give my reasons for saying so. 

I answer then, first of ail, that the mere quotation of 
two isoiated expressions in one particular service in our Liturgy 
is not of itself sufficient. It must be proved that the sense in 
which the objector takes these expressions is the correct one. 
It must also be shown that this sense will bear comparison 
with the other Services and formularies of the Church, and does 
not involve any contradiction. If this last point cannot be 
shown and proved, it is clear that the objector has put a wrong 
interpretation on the Baptismal Service, and does not under- 
stand the great principle on which all the Services of our 
Church are drawn up. 

It is a most unsound method of reasoning to take one or 
two expressions out of a book which has been written as one 
great whole, to place a certain meaning on these expressions, 
and then refuse to inquire whether that meaning can be 
reconciled with the general spirit of the rest of the book. 
The beginning of every heresy and erroneous tenet in religion 
may be traced up to this kind of reasoning, and to unfair and 
partial quotations. 

This is precisely the Roman Catholic’s argument when he 
wants to prove the doctrine of transubstantiation. “I read,” 
he says, ‘‘ these plain words, ‘ This is My body,—this is My 
blood.’ I want no more. I have nothing to do with your 
explanations and quotations from other parts of the Bible. 
Here is quite enough for me. The Lord Jesus Christ says, 
‘This is My body.’ This settles the question.” 

This again is precisely the Arian’s argument, when he wants 


107 


KNOTS UNTIED 


to prove that the Lord Jesus Christ is inferior to the Father. 
“T read,” he says, “ these plain words, ‘ My Father is greater 
than I.’”’ It is in vain you tell him that there are other texts 
which show the Son to be equal with the Father, and give a 
different meaning to the one he has quoted. It matters not. 

Now, I must frankly say that I observe this kind of argu- 
ment continually used in discussing the Church of England’s 
doctrine about Regeneration. People quote the words of our 
Baptismal Service, ‘‘ Seeing now that this child is regenerate,”’ 
etc., as an unanswerable proof that the Church considers all 
baptized infants to be born again. They will not listen to 
anything else that is brought forward from other Services 
and formularies of the Church. They tell you they take their 
stand on the simple expression, “‘ This child is regenerate.” 
The words are plain, they inform us! They settle the question 
incontrovertibly |! They seem to doubt your honesty and good 
sense, if you are not at once convinced. 

I warn such people that this favourite argument will not 
do. A single quotation dragged out of a Service will not 
suffice. They must prove that the meaning they attach to 
it is consistent with the rest of the Prayer-book, and with the 
Articles and Homilies. They must not expound one place 
of the Prayer-book, any more than of the Bible, so as to 
make it repugnant to another. 


II]. THE PRAYER-BOOK PRINCIPLE 


I answer, then, that to say all baptized infants are 
regenerate, because of the expressions in the Baptismal 
Service, is to contradict the great principle on which the whole 
Prayer-book is drawn up. 

The principle of the Prayer-book is to suppose all members 
of the Church to be in reality what they are in profession,— 
to be true believers in Christ, to be sanctified by the Holy 
Ghost. The Prayer-book takes the highest standard of what 
a Christian ought to be, and is all through worded accordingly. 
The minister addresses those who assemble together for public 


108 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


worship as believers. The people who use the words the 
Liturgy puts into their mouths, are supposed to be believers. 
But those who drew up the Prayer-book never meant to assert 
that all who were members of the Church of England were 
_ actually and really true Christians. On the contrary, they 
tell us expressly in the Articles, that “in the visible Church 
the evil be ever mingied with the good.’’ But they held that 
if forms of devotion were drawn up at all, they must be 
drawn up on the supposition that those who used them were 
real Christians, and not false ones. And in so doing I think 
they were quite right. A Liturgy for unbelievers and un- 
converted persons would be absurd, and practically useless ! 
The part of the congregation for whom it was meant would 
care little or nothing for any Liturgy at all. The holy and 
believing part of the congregation would find its language 
entirely unsuited to them. 

Now this general principle of the Prayer-book is the prin- 
ciple on which the Baptismal Service is drawn up. It supposes 
those who bring their children to be baptized, to bring them 
as believers. As the seed of godly parents and children of 
believers, their infants are baptized. As believers, the 
sponsors and parents are exhorted to pray that the child may 
be born again, and encouraged to lay hold on the promises. 
And as the child of believers the infant when baptized is pro- 
nounced “regenerate,” and thanks are given for it. 

The principle which the Church lays down as an abstract 
principle is this,—that baptism when rightly and worthily 
received, is a means whereby we may receive inward and 
spiritual grace, even a death unto sin and a new birth unto 
righteousness.1. That an infant may receive baptism 


1J¢ may be well to remark that this is also the doctrine of the 
Church of Scotland. ‘‘ The efficacy of baptism is not tied to that 
moment of time wherein it is administered; yet, notwithstanding, by 
the right use of this ordinance the grace promised is not only offered, 
but really exhibited and conferred by the Holy Ghost, to such (whether 
of age or infants) as that grace belongeth unto, ‘according to the 
counsel of God’s own will, in His appointed time. *__Scotch Eyes 


of Faith, chap. 28. 
109 


KNOTS UNTIED 


“ rightly’ the Church of England unquestionably holds, 
though the way and manner of it may be a hidden thing to 
us; for as good Archbishop Usher beautifully remarks, 
“ He that hath said of infants, to them belongs the kingdom 
of God, knows how to settle upon them the kingdom of 
heaven.’’ Her ministers cannot see the book of God’s elec- 
tion. They cannot see the hidden workings of the Holy 
Ghost. They cannot read the hearts of parents and sponsors. 
They can never say of any individual child, “ This child is 
certainly receiving baptism unworthily.” And this being 
the case, the Church most wisely leans to the side of charity, 
assumes hopefully of each child that it receives baptism 
worthily, and uses language accordingly. 

The men who drew up our Baptismal Service held that 
there was a connection between baptism and spiritual Re- 
generation, and they were right.1. They knew that there was 
nothing too high in the way of blessing to expect for the 
child of a believer. They knew that God might of His 
sovereign mercy give grace to any child before, or in, or at, 
or by the act of baptism. At all events they dared not under- 
take the responsibility of denying it in the case of any par- 
ticular infant, and they therefore took the safer course, to 
express a charitable hope of all.—They could not draw up two 
Services of baptism, one of a high standard of privilege, the 
other of a low one. They could not leave it to the option 
of a minister to decide when one should be used, and when 
the other. It would have made a minister’s position at the 
baptismal font a most invidious one ;—it would have: ex- 
posed him to the risk of making painful mistakes ;—it 
would have required him to decide points which none but 
God can decide. They leaned to the side of charity. They 
drew up a form containing the highest standard of privilege 


1 “ There is in every Sacrament a spiritual relation or sacramental 
union between the sign and the thing signified ; whence it comes to 
pass that the names and effects of the one are attributed to the other.” 
—Scotch Confession of Faith, chap. 27. 


IIO 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


and blessing, and required that in every case of infant baptism 
that form, and that only, should be used. And in so doing 
they acted in the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ’s remark- 
able words to the seventy disciples, “ Into whatsoever house 
ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son 
of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it 
shall turn to you again”’ (Luke x. 5, 6). 


CHARITABLE SUPPOSITION 


But as for maintaining that the ministerial act of baptiz- 
ing a child did always necessarily convey Regeneration, and 
that every infant baptized was invariably born again, I be- 
lieve it never entered into the thoughts of those who drew 
up the Prayer-book. In the judgment of charity and hope 
they supposed all to be regenerated in baptism, and used 
language accordingly. Whether any particular child ~was 
actually and really regenerated they left to be decided by 
its life and ways when it grew up. To say that the assertions 
of the Prayer-book Baptismal Service are to be taken for 
more than a charitable supposition, will be found, on close 
examination, to throw the whole Prayer-book into confusion. 


1“ What say you of infants baptized that are born in the Church ? 
Doth the inward grace in their baptism always attend upon the out- 
ward sign? Surelyno. The sacrament of baptism is effectual in infants 
only to those and to all those who belong unto the election of grace, 
Which thing, though we in the judgment of charity do judge of every 
particular infant, yet we have no ground to judge so of allin general : 
or if we should judge so, yet it is not any judgment of certainty. We 
may be mistaken.’’—Archbishop Usher. 1620. 


“ All that receive baptism are called children of God, regenerate, 
justified : for to us they must be taken for such in charity, until they 
show themselves other. But the author (Bishop Montague, a friend of 
Archbishop Laud) affirmeth that this is not left to men’s charity, as 
you, saith he, do inform the world, because we are taught in the service 
book of our Church earnestly to believe that Christ hath favourably 
received these infants that are baptized, that He hath embraced them 
with the arms of His mercy, that He hath given them the blessing of 
everlasting life; and out of that belief and persuasion we are to give 
thanks faithfully and devoutly for it. All this we receive and make 
no doubt of it; but when we have said all we must come to this,—that 


Tit 


KNOTS UNTIED 


This is the only principle on which many of the Collects 
can be reasonably explained. The Collect for the Epiphany 
says, “‘ Grant that we who know Thee now by faith, may 
after this life have the fruition of Thy glorious God-head.” 
—wWill anyone tell us that the compilers of the Prayer-book 
meant to teach, that all who use the Prayer-book do know 
God by faith? Surely not.—The Collect for Sexagesima 
Sunday says, “‘ O, Lord God, Who seest that we put not our 
trust in anything that we do,” etc. Will any dare to say 
that these words could ever be literally true of all members 
of the Church of England? Are they not manifestly a charit- 
able supposition ?>—The Collect for the Third Sunday after 
Trinity says, ““ We, to whom Thou hast given a hearty desire 
to pray,’ etc. Who can have a doubt that this is a form of 
words, which is used by many of whom it could not strictly 
be said for one minute? Who can fail to see in all these 
instances one uniform principle, the principle of charitably 
assuming that members of a Church are what they profess 
to be? The Church puts in the mouth of her worshipping 
people the sentiments and language they ought to use, and 
if they do not come up to her high standard, the fault is 
theirs, not hers. But to say that by adopting such ex- 
pressions she stamps and accredits all her members as real 
and true Christians in the sight of God, would be manifestly 
absurd. 

This is the only principle on which the Service for the 
Churching of Women can be interpreted. Every woman for 
whom that Service is used, is spoken of as ‘“‘ the Lord’s ser- 
vant,’”’ and is required to answer that she “ puts her trust 
all this is the charity of the Church, and what more can you make of it.” 
—George Carleton, Bishop of Chichester. 1619. 

“We are to distinguish between the judgment of charity and the 
judgment of certainty. For although in the general we know that not 
every one that is baptized is justified or shall be saved, yet when we 
come to particulars, we are to judge of them that are baptized that 
they are regenerated and justified, and shall be saved, until they shall 
discover themselves not to be such. And so our book of Common 
Prayer speaketh of them.’’—George Downame, Bishop of Derry. 1620, 

112 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


in the Lord.” Yet who in his senses can doubt that such 
words are utterly inapplicable in the case of a great pro- 
portion of those who come to be churched? They are not 
“servants” of the Lord! They do not in any sense “ put 
their trust’ in Him! And who would dare to argue that 
the compilers of the Liturgy considered that all women 
who were churched did really trust in the Lord, merely because 
they used this language? The simple explanation is, that 
they drew up the Service on the same great principle which 
runs through the whole Prayer-book, the principle of 
charitable supposition. 

This is the only principle on which the Service of Baptism 
for grown-up people can be interpreted. In that Service the 
minister first prays that the person about to be baptized 
may have the Holy Spirit given to him and be born again. 
Then, after that prayer, he is called upon openly to profess 
repentance and faith before the minister and congregation, 
and that being done he is baptized. Then, and not till then, 
comes the declaration that the person baptized is ‘regenerate,’ 
and he is born again and made an heir of everlasting salva- 
tion. But can these words be strictly and literally true if 
the person baptized is a hypocrite, and has all along pro- 
fessed that which he does not feel? Are not the words mani- 
festly used on the charitable supposition that he has repented 
and does believe, and in no other sense at all? And is it not 
plain to every one that in the absence of this repentance and 
faith, the words used are a mere form,—used, because the 
Church cannot draw up two forms, but not for a moment 
implying that inward and spiritual grace necessarily accom- 
panies the outward sign, or that a “‘ death unto sin and a new 
birth unto righteousness’’ is necessarily conveyed to the 
soul? In short, the person baptized is pronounced re- 
generate upon the broad principle of the Prayer-book, that, 
in the Church-services people are charitably supposed to be 
what they profess to be. 

This is the only intelligible principle on which the Burial 


113 r 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Service can be interpreted. In that Service the person buried 
is spoken of as a “ dear brother or sister.” It is said that 
it hath “ pleased God of His great mercy to take to Him- 
self his soul.” It is said, ‘‘ We give Thee hearty thanks that 
it hath pleased Thee to deliver this our brother out of the 
miseries of this sinful world.” It is said that “ our hope is, 
this our brother rests in Christ.’’ Now what does all this 
mean? Did the compilers of the Prayer-book wish us to 
believe that all this was strictly and literally applicable to 
every individual member of the Church over whose body 
these words were read? The simple explanation of the 
Service is, that it was drawn up, like the rest, on the pre- 
sumption that all members of a Church were what they pro- 
fessed to be. The key to the interpretation of it is the same 
great principle, the principle of charitable supposition. 

This is the only principle on which the Catechism can be 
interpreted. In it every child is taught to say, “ In baptism 
I was made a member of Christ, a child of God, and an in- 
heritor of the kingdom of heaven;”’ and a little further on, 
“T learn to believe in God the Holy Ghost who sanctifieth 
me and all the elect people of God.’ Now what does this 
mean ? Did the Prayer-book writers intend to lay it down as 
an abstract principle that all baptized children are 
“ sanctified” and all “elect’’? I believe there is but one 
explanation of all these expressions in the Catechism. They 
are the words of charitable supposition, and in no other sense 
can they be taken. 

I lay these things before any one who fancies that» all 
children are regenerated in baptism, because of the expressions 
in the Prayer-book service, and I ask him to weigh them 
well. 

Men say that the view of the Service I maintain is ‘‘ non- 
natural and dishonest.’ I deny the charge altogether. I 
might retort it on many of those who make it. Whose view 
is most unnatural, I ask? Is it the view of the man who 
expounds the Baptismal Service on one principle, and the 


II4 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


Burial Service on another ?—or is it my view, which inter- 
prets all on one uniform and the same system ? 

We must be consistent. I refuse to interpret one part 
of the Prayer-book on one principle, and another part on 
another. The expressions to which I have been calling atten- 
tion are either abstract dogmatic declarations, or charitable 
assumptions and suppositions. They cannot be both. And 
I now call upon those who hold all children to be invariably 
regenerated, because of strong expressions in the Baptismal 
Service, to carry out their principles honestly, fairly, fully, 
and consistently, if they can. 

If all children are actually regenerated in baptism, because 
the Service says, “‘ This child is regenerate,” then by parity 
of reasoning it follows that all people who use the Collect 
have faith, and a hearty desire to pray !—all women who are 
churched put their trust in the Lord !—all members of the 
Church who are buried are dear brethren, and we hope rest 
in Christ !—and all children who say the Catechism are 
sanctified by the Holy Ghost and are elect !—Consistency 
demands it. 

I see one uniform principle running through all the Prayer- 
book, through all the Offices, through all the devotiona 
Formularies of the Church. That principle is the principle 
of charitable supposition. Following that principle, I can | 
make good sense and good divinity of every Service in the book. 
Without that principle I cannot. On that principle there- 
fore I take my stand. If I say all baptized children are really 
literally and actually ‘‘ regenerate,’ because of certain words 
in the Baptismal Service, I contradict that principle. I 
believe our Services were meant to be consistent one with 
another, and not contradictory. I therefore cannot say so. 

Ill. My next answer to those who say all baptized persons 
are regenerate, because of the Baptismal Service, is this,— 
that such a view would not agree with the Thirty-nine Articles. 

I believe the words of the declaration which prefaces them 
are strictly true, “‘ That the Articles of the Church of England 


II5 


KNOTS UNTIED 


do contain the true doctrine of the Church of England,’’ and 
that any doctrine which does not entirely harmonize with 
those Articles is not the doctrine of the Church. I honour 
and love the book of Common Prayer, but if I want to ascertain 
the deliberate judgment of the Church upon any point of 
doctrine, I turn first to the Articles. 

I will now ask the reader to remember the striking 
prominence which the Articles everywhere give to the 
Bible as the only rule of faith, and their insistence that nothing 
is a doctrine of the Church which cannot be entirely reconciled 
with the Word of God. Consequently any;meaning placed 
upon any part of the Prayer-book which at all disagrees with 
the Bible, and cannot be proved by the Bible, must _be an 
incorrect meaning. I cannot accept,any,interpretation of 
any Service in the Liturgy, which cannot be thoroughly recon- 
ciled with Scripture. It may sound very plausible. It may 
be defended very speciously. But if it jars with plain texts 
in the Bible, there is a mistake somewhere. There is a flaw 
in the interpretation. On the very face of it, it is incorrect. 
It is utterly absurd to suppose that the founders of our Church 
would assert the supremacy of Scripture seven or eight times 
over, and then draw up a service in the Prayer-book at all 
inconsistent with Scripture! And unless the doctrine that 
all children baptized are necessarily regenerated in baptism 
‘can first be shown to be in the Bible, it is a mere waste of 
time to begin any discussion of the subject by talking of the 
Prayer-book. 


THE LANGUAGE OF THE ARTICLES 


I ask the reader, in the next place, to observe what the 
Twenty-fifth and Twenty-sixth Articles say. The Twenty- 
filth speaks generally of sacraments; and it says of them,— 
both of baptism and of the Lord’s Supper,—“ In such only 
as worthily receive the same they have a wholesome effect or 
operation.”’ The Twenty-sixth speaks of the unworthiness of 
ministers not hindering the effect of the sacraments. It says, 


I16 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


“Neither is the effect of Christ’s ordinance taken away by 
their wickedness, or the grace of God’s gifts diminished, from 
‘such as by faith and rightly do receive the sacraments.” Here 
we have a broad general principle twice asserted. The bene- 
fit of either sacrament is clearly confined to such as rightly, 
worthily, and with faith receive it. The Romish notion of all 
alike getting good from it, ex opere operato, is with equal 
clearness pointed at and rejected. Now can this be reconciled 
with the doctrine that all who are baptized are at once in- 
variably regenerated ? I say decidedly that it cannot. 

I ask the reader, in the next place, to observe the language 
of the Article about baptism, the Twenty-seventh. It says, 
“ Baptism is not only a sign of profession and mark of differ- 
ence, whereby Christian men are discerned from others that 
are not christened, but it is also a sign of Regeneration or new 
birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that receive baptism 
rightly are grafted into the Church; the promises of forgive- 
ness of sin and of our adoption to be the sons of God by the 
Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed ; faith is confirmed 
and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto’'God. The 
baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained in the 
Church as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.” 
Nothing can be more striking than the wise caution of all 
this language, when contrasted with the statements about 
baptism with which our ears are continually assailed in this 
day. There is not a word said which might lead us to suppose 
that a different principle is to be applied to the baptism of 
infants, from that which has been already laid down about 
all sacraments, in the Twenty-fifth Article. We are left to 
the inevitable conclusion that in all cases worthy reception 
is essential to the full efficacy of the sacrament. There is 
not a word said about a great inward and spiritual blessing 
invariably and necessarily attending the baptism of an infant. 
There is a perfect silence on that head, and a most speaking 
silence too. Surely a doctrine involving such immense and 
important consequences as the universal spiritual regeneration 

II7 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of all infants in baptism, would never have been passed 
over in entire silence, if it had been the doctrine of the Church. 
The authors of the Articles unquestionably knew the im- 
portance of the document they were drawing up. Un- 
questionably they weighed well every word and every state- 
ment they put down on paper. And yet they are perfectly 
silent on the subject! That silence is like the occasional 
silence of Scripture, a great fact, and one which can never 
be got over. 

I ask the reader, in the next place, to observe what the 
Thirteenth Article says. It tells us that “ Works done before 
the grace of Christ and the inspiration of His Spirit are not 
pleasant to God,” etc. Here we are plainly taught that works 
may be done by men before grace and the Spirit are given to 
them, and this too by baptized members of the Church, for 
it is for them that the Articles are drawn up! But how can 
this be reconciled with the notion that all baptized persons 
are necessarily regenerated ? How can any person be re- 
generated without having the “ grace of Christ and the in- 
spiration of the Spirit’’ ? There is only one view on which 
the Article can be reasonably explained. That view is the 
simple one, that many baptized people are not regenerate, 
have no grace and no indwelling of the Spirit, and that it is 
their case, which is here described. 

The last Article I will ask the reader to observe is the 
Seventeenth. The subject of that Article is Predestination 
and Election. It is a subject which many people dislike ex- 
ceedingly. I acknowledge freely that it is a deep subject. 
But there stands the Article! It cannot be denied that it 
forms part of our Church’s Confession of faith. The Article 
begins with laying down the great truth that God “hath 
constantly decreed by His counsel secret to us, to deliver 
from curse and damnation those whom He hath chosen in 
Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to ever- 
lasting salvation.” It then proceeds to describe the calling 
of these persons by God’s Spirit, and the consequences of 

118 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


that calling ;—‘‘ They through grace obey the calling: they 
be justified freely: they be made sons of God by adoption: 
they be made like the image of His only-begotten Son, Jesus 
Christ ; they walk religiously in good works, and at length 
by God’s mercy they attain to everlasting felicity.” Now 
all I ask the reader to consider is this, did the writers of the 
Articles mean to say that these persons were a separate and 
distinct class from those who were “‘ regenerated,” or not ? 
We must think so, if we consider baptism is always accom- 
panied by Regeneration. The things spoken of in this des- 
scription are things of which multitudes of baptized persons 
know nothing at all. I do not, however, believe that such 
an idea ever entered into the minds of those who wrote the 
Articles. I believe that they looked on Election, Justification, 
Adoption, and Regeneration, as the peculiar privileges of a 
certain number, but not of all members of the visible Church ; 
and that just as all baptized people are not elect, justified, and 
sanctified, so also all baptized people are not regenerated. 
Very striking is the difference between the language of the 
Article which treats of baptism, and the Article which treats 
of election. In the former we find the cautious general state- 
ment, that in baptism “ the promises of our adoption to be 
the sons of God are visibly signed and sealed.’’ In the latter 
we find the broad assertion that the elect “‘ be made the sons 
of God by adoption.” 

Such is the doctrine of the Articles. If Regeneration 
be what the Catechism describes it, “‘a death unto sin and 
a new birth unto righteousness,’ I cannot find the slightest 
ground in the Articles for the notion that all baptized persons 
are necessarily regenerate, There is an absence of any direct 
assertion of such a doctrine. There are several passages 
which appear completely inconsistent with it. I cannot 
suppose that the Articles and Liturgy were meant to be con- 
trary one to the other. The men who drew up the Thirty- 
nine Articles in 1562, were the men who compiled the Prayer- 
book in 1549. They drew up the Articles with a certain and 

119 


KNOTS UNTIED 


distinct knowledge of the contents of the Prayer-book. Yet 
the interpretation of the Baptismal Service J am contending © 
against would make the one formulary contradictory to the 
other. The conclusion I come to is clear and decided,—such 
an interpretation cannot be correct. 


IV. THE PRAYER BOOK AND HOMILIES 


My last answer to those who say that all baptized 
persons are necessarily regenerated, because of the wording 
of the Baptismal Service, is this,—such a doctrine would make 
the Prayer-book disagree with the Homilies of the Church of 
England. 

The Homilies no doubt contain words and expressions 
here and there which might be amended; but, members of 
the Church of England are bound to recollect that the Thirty- 
fifth Article expressly asserts that the Homilies contain 
“a godly and wholesome doctrine.’ Whatever their de- 
ficiencies may be, the general tone of their doctrine is clear 
and unmistakable. And any interpretation of the Prayer- 
book Services which makes those Services inconsistent with 
the Homilies must, on the very face of it, be an incorrect 
interpretation. 

Let me then call the reader’s attention to the following 
passages in the Homilies :— 

In the Homily of Almsdeeds we read: “‘ God of His mercy 
and special favour towards them whom He hath appointed 
to everlasting salvation, hath so offered His grace especially, 
and they have so received it faithfully, that, although by 
reason of their sinful living outwardly they seemed before 
to have been the children of wrath and perdition,—yet now, 
the Spirit of God working mightily in them, unto obedience 
to God’s will and commandments, they declare by their out- 
ward deeds and life, in the showing of mercy and charity— 
which cannot come but of the Spirit of God and His especial 
grace—that they are the undoubted children of God, appointed 
to everlasting life.”’ 

120 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


In the Homily for Whit-Sunday we find this de- 
finite question: “How shall I know that the Holy 
Ghost is within me? Some men perchance will say: 
Forsooth, as the tree is known by his fruit, so is also the Holy 
Ghost. The fruits of the Holy Ghost, according to the mind of 
St. Paul, are these: love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentle- 
ness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance, etc. 
Contrariwise the deeds of the flesh are these : adultery, forni- 
cation, uncleaness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, 
debate, emulation, wrath, contention, sedition, heresy, envy, 
murder, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like. Here is now 
that glass wherein thou must behold thyself, and discern 
whether thou have the Holy Ghost within thee or the spirit 
of the flesh.” 

Two things, I think, are abundantly evident from these 
passages. One is, that in the judgment of the Homilies, no 
men are the “ undoubted children of God” and “sons of 
God,” and elect unto salvation, unless it is proved by their 
charity and good works. The other is, that no man has the 
Holy Ghost within him, in the judgment of the Homilies, 
except he brings forth the fruits of the Spirit in his life. But 
all this is flatly contradictory to the doctrine of those who say 
that all baptized persons are necessarily regenerate. They 
tell us that all people are made the children of God by virtue 
of their baptism, whatever be their manner of living, and 
must be addressed as such all their lives :—and that all people 
have the grace of the Holy Ghost within them by virtue of 
their baptism, and must be considered “ regenerate,’ what- 
ever fruits they may be bringing forth in their daily habits 
and conversation. According to this, the Homilies say one 
thing and the Prayer-book says another! These Homilies 
were put forth by authority in the year 1562, and appointed 
to be read in churches in order to supply the deficiency of 
good preaching, and when they had been once read, they 
were to be “ repeated and read again.” And yet according 
to the interpretation of the Baptismal Service I am contending 

T21 


KNOTS UNTIED 


against, these Homilies contradict the Prayer-book! Surely 
it is difficult to avoid the conclusion, that a system of inter- 
preting the Baptismal Service which sets the Prayer-book at 
variance with the Homilies, as well as with the Articles, must 
be incorrect. 

I leave the subject of the Church of England’s views about 
Regeneration here. I wish I could have spoken of it more 
shortly. But I have been anxious to meet the objections 
drawn from the Baptismal Service fully, openly, and face to 
face. I have not a doubt in my own mind as to the true doc- 
trine of the Church in the question. But many, I know, have 
been troubled and perplexed about it, and few appear to me 
to see the matter as clearly as they might. And it is to supply 
such persons with information, as well as to meet the argu- 
ments of adversaries, that I have gone into the question so 
fully as I have. 

Other points might easily be dwelt upon, which would 
serve to throw even more light on the subject, and seem still 
further to bear out the views that I maintain, as to the real 
doctrine of the Church of England about Regeneration. 

Is it not notorious, for instance, that the Article about 
baptism in our Confession of faith was entirely altered, and 
brought into its present form, when Edward the Sixth came to 
the throne? Our Reformers found an Article drawn up in 
1536, in which the doctrine of grace always accompanying the 
baptism of infants was plainly and unmistakably asserted. 
The Articles of 1536 say, “ By the sacrament of baptism, 
infants, innocents, and children, do also obtain remission of 
their sins, the grace and favour of God, and be made thereby 
the very sons and children of God.” The Reformers of our 
Church, in drawing up the Articles of 1552, entirely abstained 
from making any such assertion. They framed our present 
Article on baptism, in which no such unqualified statement 
can be found. Now, why did they do so?) Why did they not 
adopt the language of the old Article, if they really believed 
its doctrine? Did it not plainly mean that they did not 

122 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


approve of the doctrine of the invariable Regeneration of 
- infants in baptism ? 

Again, is it not notorious that the Irish Articles of 1615 
have never been repealed or disannulled by the Church of 
Ireland ? Although subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles 
only is now held sufficient. But it was distinctly understood, 
when the Thirty-nine Articles were received by the Irish 
Church, in 1634, that their reception did not imply any slur 
on the Irish Articles, and only testified the agreement of the 
Church of Ireland with that of England, both in doctrine and 
discipline. Now these Irish Articles most plainly declare 
that the “regenerate” are the elect, the justified, the be- 
lievers, the true Christians, who persevere unto the end; 
and no less plainly imply that those who are not true believers 
are not “‘ regenerate !’’ There can be no mistake about this. 
No man, I think, can read these Articles and not see it. And 
yet there is the closest union between the Church of England 
and the Church of Ireland, and always has been. How could 
this be, if the Church of Ireland’s view about the “‘ regenerate ”’ 
had always been considered false and heretical ? Why were the 
Irish Articles not rejected as unsound, when, for uniformity’s 
sake, the Irish Articles were received ? How was it, that for 
many years after 1634, the Irish Bishops always required 
subscription to both Irish and English Articles at their ordina- 
tions ? Did it not show plainly that the two Churches were 
not thought to be at variance upon the subject of 
Regeneration ? 4 

Again, is it not notorious that almost all the Bishops and 


1 It was Archbishop Usher himself who proposed, in 1634, that the 
English Articles should be received by the Irish Church. Yet he was 
the principal author of the Irish Articles of 1615. His biographer says, 
‘“‘He very well understood the Articles of both Churches, and did then 
know that they were so far from being inconsistent or contradictory 
to each other, that he thought the Irish Articles did only contain 
the doctrine of the Church of England more fully.’’—Life of Archbishop 
Usher, by Dr. Parr, his chaplain, 1686, 


123 


KNOTS UNTIED 


leading divines who took part in the Reformation of our 
Church, were men who held opinions which, rightly or wrongly, 
are called Calvinistic, and in the main were thoroughly agreed 
with those clergy who are termed Evangelical in the present 
day ? There is no room for doubt on this point. It has been 
allowed by many who do not approve of Evangelical opinions 
themselves. They were in frequent communication with the 
leading Swiss Reformers. They procured the help of men 
like Peter Martyr and Bucer to assist them in carrying on the 
work of Reformation. And yet we are asked to believe that 
our Reformers deliberately framed a Baptismal Service con- 
taining a doctrine which is inconsistent with their own 
views ! Is it reasonable, is it agreeable to common sense, 
to suppose they would do such a thing? And is it not an 
acknowledged axiom in interpreting all public documents, 
such as oaths, articles of faith, and religious formularies, that 
they are always to be interpreted in the sense of those who 
drew them up and imposed them ?! 

It only remains for me now to finish what I have said 
with a few words of solemn appeal, and I say them advisedly. 
I feel strongly the immense importance of sound and Scrip- 
tural views of the whole question I have been considering. 
I feel it especially as respects that part of it which touches 
the doctrine of the Church of England. Men sometimes say 
it makes no difference whether we think all baptized persons 
are regenerate or not. They tell us it all comes to the same 
thing in the long run. I cannot say so. To my humble 
apprehension it seems to make an immense difference. If 
I tell a man that he has grace in his heart, and only needs to 
“stir up a gift,” already within him, itis one thing. If I tell 
him that he is dead in sins, and must be “ born again,’’ it 
is quite another. The moral effect of the two messages must, 

1“ Tt is a settled rule with casuists, that oaths are always to be 
taken in the sense of the imposers; the same is the case of solemn 
leagues or covenants. Without this principle, no faith, trust, or mutual 


confidence could be kept up amongst men.’’—Waterland on the Avian 
Subscriptions. Works, vol. ii., chap. iii. 


124 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


_ on the very face of it, be widely different. The one, I contend, 
is calculated by God’s blessing to awaken the sinner. The 
other, I contend, is calculated to lull him to sleep. The one, 
I maintain, is likely to feed sloth, check self-examination, 
and encourage an easy self-satisfied state of soul: he has got 
some grace within him whenever he likes to use it,—why 
should he be in a hurry, why be afraid ?>—The other, I maintain, 
is likely to rouse convictions, drive him to self-inquiry, and 
frighten him out of his dangerous security: he has nothing 
within him to rest upon,—he must find a refuge and remedy, 
he is lost and perishing,—what must he do to be saved ?— 
The one message, I affirm, is likely to keep men natural men, 
the other to make them spiritual men,—the one to have no 
effect upon the conscience, the other to lead to Christ. 

I see this doctrine leavening and spoiling the religion of 
many private Christians, and insensibly paving the way for 
a long train of unscriptural notions. I see it interfering with 
every leading doctrine of the Gospel ;—it encourages men 
to believe that election, adoption, justification, and the in- 
dwelling of the Spirit, are all conferred on them in baptism : 
—and then, to avoid the difficulties which such a system en- 
tails, the fulness of all these mighty truths is pared down, 
mutilated, and explained away ; or else the minds of congre- 
gations are bewildered with contradictory and inconsistent 
statements. I see it ultimately producing in some minds a 
mere sacramental Christianity,—a Christianity in which there 
is much said about union with Christ, but it is a union begun 
only by baptism, and kept up only by the Lord’s Supper,— 
a Christianity in which the leading doctrines that the Apostle 
Paul dwells on in almost all his Epistles, have nothing but a 
subordinate position,—a Christianity in which Christ has not 
His rightful office, and faith has not its rightful place. I 
cannot think that the subject I am urging on the reader's 
attention is one of secondary importance. 

(a) I appeal then to all men who love the Bible and make 
it their standard of truth and error; and in saying this, I 

125 


KNOTS UNTIED 


address myself especially to all members of the Church of 
England. I ask you to observe the manner of living of multi- 
tudes of baptized persons on every side of you,—I ask you 
to observe how their hearts are entirely set on this world, 
and buried in its concerns: And I then ask you, Are they 
born of God? If you say Yes, I answer, How can that be, 
when your Bible expressly says, ‘‘ He that is born of God 
doeth righteousness, and doth not commit sin?” (zi John 
ii. 29; iii. 9). Are they children of God? If you say Yes, 
I answer, How can that be, when the Bible says expressly, 
“In this the children of God are manifest and the children 
of the devil; whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of 
God”? (zx John iii. ro). Are they sons of God? If you 
say Yes, I answer, How can that be, when the Bible says 
expressly, “ As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they 
are the sons of God’? (Rom. viii. 14). 

(6) I appeal next to all who love the good old rule of the 
Bible, “‘ Every tree is known by its own fruit’? (Luke vi. 44). 
I ask you to try the great bulk of professing Christians by the 
fruits they bring forth, and to say what kind of fruits they are. 
Is it not perfectly true that many baptized persons know 
little or nothing of the fruits of the Spirit,—and much, only 
too much, of the works of the flesh? Is it not certain that 
they are destitute of those marks of being born of God which 
the Bible describes? Surely then if you abide by your old 
principle you will hardly say that all baptized people have 
within them the Holy Spirit. 

(c) I appeal next to all who love the Church Catechism, 
and profess to be guided by its statements about the sacra- 
ments. You are aware that the inward and spiritual grace 
of baptism is there said to be “ a death unto sin and a new birth 
into righteousness.’’ I ask you, as in the sight of God, to say 
whether any evidence whatever of this grace can be seen in 
the lives of many baptized persons. Where is their deadness 
to sin? They live in it. It is their element. Where is their 
new birth unto righteousness ? They are habitual “ servants 

120 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


of sin, and free from righteousness ”’ (Rom. vi. 20). Sin reigns 
and rules in their mortal bodies. They are enemies of all 
righteousness. What will you say to these things ? Surely 
you will not tell us that the outward and visible sign is always 
attended by the inward and spiritual grace. 

(d) I appeal, lastly, to all who dread Antinomianism and 
licentious doctrine. You have heard of those wretched 
persons who profess to glory in Christ and free grace, and yet 
think it no shame to live immoral lives, and continue in wilful 
sin. You think such conduct horrible, an insult to the Lord 
Jesus, and a disgrace to Christianity. And you are right to 
think so. But what will you say to the doctrine, that a man 
may have the Holy Spirit, and yet not bring forth the fruits 
of the Spirit ;—-may have grace in his heart, and yet show no 
sign of it in his life ? Surely, if you are consistent, you will 
recoil from the idea of dishonouring the Third Person of the 
blessed Trinity, no less than you do from dishonouring the Lord 
Himself. Surely you will shrink from saying that all baptized 
persons have the Holy Ghost. 

Once for all, I protest against the charge that I am no 
true Churchman because I hold these opinions. In the matter 
of true and real attachment to the Church of England, I| will 
not give place by subjection to those who are called High 
Churchmen, for one moment. Have they signed the Thirty- 
nine Articles ex animo and bond fide? So have I.—Have they 
declared their full assent to the Liturgy and all things con- 
tained in it? So have I.—Have they promised obedience to 
the Bishops ? So have I.—Do they think Episcopacy the best 
form of Church government ? So do I.—Do they honour 
the sacraments? So do I.—Do they think them generally 
necessary to salvation? So do I.—Do they labour for the 
prosperity of the Church ? So do I.—Do they urge on their 
congregations the privileges of the Church of England ? So 
do I.—Do they deprecate all needless secession and separa- 
tion from her ranks ? So do I.—Do they love the Prayer-book 
of the Church of England’? So do I. I offer no opinion as to 

127 


KNOTS UNTIED 


the wisdom and prudence of the Reformers in drawing up a 
Service in such a way as to admit of its language being mis- 
understood, as it unhappily is. But I believe with all my 
heart that the view I hold of the meaning of the Prayer-book 
is the view of the very men by whom it was compiled. 

I deny that I hoid any new doctine about Regeneration. 
I appeal to the Bible; I appeal to the Articles; I appeal to 
the Prayer-book ; I appeal to the Homilies. I appeal to the 
writings of all the principal Reformers of our Church; I 
appeal to the works of some of the best and worthiest Bishops 
who have ever adorned the Bench. I assert confidently that 
it has been preached in Church of England pulpits ever since 
the time of the Reformation,—in many at some periods, in 
some at all. There never has been wanting a succession of 
faithful men, who have constantly said to the mass of their 
congregation, ‘“ Ye must be born again.”” There never was 
an attempt to shut the door against a minister for preaching 
such doctrine, before the case of Mr. Gorham in 1847-51. In 
short, if I err, I feel that I doso if in goodcompany. I err with 
Bishop Hooper and Bishop Latimer, those faithful martyrs of © 
Christ. I err with Jewel, with Leighton and Usher, and Hall, 
and Hopkins, and Carleton, and Davenant, and many others, 
of whom I| have not time to speak particularly. 

We are all travelling to a place where controversies will be 
forgotten, and nothing but eternal realities remain. Would 
we have a real hope in that day ? We must see to it that we 
have a real Regeneration. Nothing else will do. “ Except 
a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.” 
(John iii. 3). 


The following quotations, bearing on the subject discussed in this paper 
ave drawn from writers, of whom some are the greatest and most 
leayned divines the world has evey seen. They ave specially com- 
mended to the attention of members of the Church of England. 


“In baptism those that come feignedly, and those that come 
unfeignedly, both be washed with the sacramental water, but both 
be not washed with the Holy Ghost, and clothed with Christ.” 


128 


” 


PRAYER-BOOK STATEMENTS ABOUT REGENERATION 


“All that be washed with water be not washed with the Holy 
Spirit.”—Archbishop Cranmer. 1553. 

“Good and evil, clean and unclean, holy and profane, must needs 
pass by the sacrament of baptism, except you will indeed in more ample 
and large measure tie the grace of God unto it than ever did the 
Papists, and say all that be baptized be also saved.”—Archbishop 
Whitgift. 1583. 

“ Are all they that are partakers of the outward washing of baptism, . 
partakers also of the inward washing of the Spirit ? Doth this sacra- 
ment seal up their spiritual ingrafting into Christ to all who externally 
receive it. Surely no! Though God hath ordained these outward 
means for the conveyance of grace to our souls, yet there is no necessity 
that we should tie the working of God’s Spirit to the sacraments more 
than to the Word.’’—Archbishop Usher. 1624. 

“ Christ said, ‘ Except a man be born again from above, he cannot 
see the kingdom of God. Ye must have a Regeneration : and what is 
this Regeneration ? It is not to be christened in water as these fire- 
brands (the Roman Catholics) expound it, and nothing else.” —Bishop 
Latimer, 1540. 

“All receive not the grace of God which receive the sacraments 
of His grace.’’—Richard Hooker. 1597. ; 

“Grace sometimes precedes the sacrament, sometimes follows it, 
and sometimes does not even follow it.”—Theodoret. 450 A.D. 

“ Outward baptism may be administered, where inward conversion 
of the heart is wanting ; and, on the other hand, inward conversion of 
the heart may exist, where outward baptism has never been received,”’ 
—Augustine’s Treatise on Baptism. 390 A.D. 

“Many ignorant people among us, for want of better teaching, 
harbour in their minds such Popish conceits, especially that baptism 
doth confer grace upon all by the work done, for they commonly look 
no higher: and they conceive a kind of inherent virtueand Christendom, 
as they call it, necessarily infused into children, by having the water 
cast upon their faces.’’—Archbishop Usher. 1624. 

“ Let us consider how corruptly the Church of Rome teacheth us 
touching this sacrament (baptism), and how horribly they have abused 
it. First, they teach that baptism doth confer grace and wash away 
our sins ex opere operato ; that is, even by the very washing only of the 
water, though there be no good motion of faith or belief in the heart 
of him that is baptized.’”—Bishop Cooper, 1570. 

“ The Papists maintain that grace is conferred upon little children 
in the sacrament of the New Testament, without faith or any good 
motive. This is to attribute a power to sacraments of themselves, and 
by a virtue of their own, in the case of little children : which we say is 
false. For we assert that grace is not conferred by the sacraments 
even upon little children from the work wrought, so that all necessarily 
have grace that receive the sacraments.”—Dr. Whittaker. 1580. 


129 K 


VIII 
THE LORD’S SUPPER | , 


The sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is a point in the 
Christian religion which requires very careful handling. I 
approach it with reverence, fear, and trembling. I cannot 
forget that I tread on very delicate grofind. There is much 
connected with the subject which is alike painful, humbling, 
and difficult. 

It is painful to think that an ordinance appointed by Christ 
for our benefit should have been defiled by the din and smoke 
of theological controversy. It is undeniable that no ordinance 
has called forth so much passion and strife, and has become 
such a bone of contention among polemical divines. Such is 
the corruption of fallen man that the thing which was “ or- 
dained for our peace ’’ has become “ an occasion of falling.”’ 

It is humbling to remember that men of opposite opinions 
have written folios about the Lord’s Supper without producing 
the slightest effect on the minds of their adversaries. 

It is difficult to know how to handle such a subject without 
exhausting the patience of readers. The field has been so 
thoroughly exhausted by the labours of many masters in 
Israel, that it is literally impossible to bring forward anything 
that is new. The utmost that I can hope to attain is the con- 
densation of old arguments. 

I shall, therefore, content myself with two points, and two 
only. 

I. J will show the original intention of the Lord’s Supper. 

Il. JI will show the position which the Lord’s Supper was 

meant to occupy. 

One thing, at any rate, is very clear to my mind: it is 

130 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


impossible to overrate the importance of the subject. I own 
- to astrong and growing conviction that error about the Lord’s 
Supper is one of the commonest and most dangerous errors 
of the present day. It is the hidden root of nine-tenths of 
the extravagant Ritualism which, like a fog, is overspreading 
our Church. [Jf we love the truth as it is in Jesus, if we love the 
Church of England, we must contend earnestly for the faith 
once delivered to the saints in the maiter of the Lord’s Supper. 


I; THE ORIGINAL INTENTION OF THE LORD’S 
SUPPER: 


This question can never receive a better general answer 
than that of our well-known Church Catechism. Rightly 
used, I hold the Church Catechism to be a most powerful 
weapon against semi-Romanism. Fairly interpreted, it is 
utterly subversive of the “‘ Anglo-Catholic ”’ system. 

The very first question of the Catechism about the Lord’s 
Supper is as follows: “‘ Why was the sacrament of the Lord’s 
Supper ordained ?”’ The answer supplied is this: “‘ For the 
continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, 
and of the benefits which we receive thereby.’’ This is sound 
speech that cannot be condemned. Founded on plain language 
of Holy Scripture, it contains the truth, the whole truth, and 
nothing but the truth. (Luke xxii. 19; 1 Cor. xi. 24). 

The Lord Jesus Christ intended the Lord’s Supper to be a 
continual remembrance’ to the Church of His atoning death on 


1The doctrine of the Communion Service, let me remind the 
reader, is in precise harmony with that of the Catechism. Let us 
mark the following expressions :— 

“To the end that we should always remember the exceeding great 
love of our Master and only Saviour Jesus Christ, thus dying for us, 
and the innumerable benefits which by His blood-shedding He hath 
obtained to us: He hath instituted and ordained holy mysteries as 
pledges of His love, and for a continual remembrance of His death, to 
our great and endless comfort.’’—‘‘ He did institute, and in His holy 
Gospel command us to continue, a perpetual memory of that. His 
precious death until His coming again.’”—‘ Take and eat this in 
vemembyance that Christ died for thee.”—‘‘ Drink this in remembrance 
that Christ’s blood was shed for thee.” 


131 


KNOTS UNTIED 


the Cross. The bread, broken, given, and eaten, was intended 
to remind Christians of His body given for our sins. The wine, 
poured out and drunk, was intended to remind Christians of 
His blood shed for our sins. 

The Lord Jesus knew full well the darkness, coldness, 
hardness, stupidity, pride, self-righteousness, and slothfulness, 
of human nature in spiritual things. Therefore He took care 
that His death for sinners should not merely be written in 
the Bible, or left to the ministry to proclaim in the pulpit, 
—for then it might soon have been kept back by false teachers ; 
—but that it should be exhibited in visible sings and emblems, 
even in bread and wine at a special ordinance. The Lord’s. 
Supper was a standing provision against man’s forgetfulness. 
So long as the world stands in its present order, the thing which 
is done at the Lord’s Table shows forth the Lord’s death 
till He comes. (I Cor. xi. 26). 

The Lord Jesus Christ knew full well the unspeakable 
importance of his own death for sin as the great corner-stone 
of Scriptural religion. He knew that His own satisfaction 
for sin as our Substitute,—His suffering for sin, the Just for 
the unjust,—His complete redemption of us by His blood,— 
He knew that this was the very root of soul-saving and soul- 
satisfying Christianity. Without this He knew His incarna- 
tion, miracles, teaching, example, and ascension could do no 
good to man; without this He knew there could be no justi- 
fication, no reconciliation, no hope, no peace between God 
and man. Knowing all this, He took care that His death, 
should never be forgotten. He carefully appointed an ordin- 
ance, in which, by lively figures, His sacrifice on the Cross 
should be kept in perpetual remembrance. 

The Lord Jesus Christ well knew the weakness and in- 
firmity even of the holiest believers. Therefore, He did not 
merely leave them promises on which their memories might 
feed, and words which they might call to mind; He merci- 
fully provided an ordinance in which true faith might be 
quickened by seeing lively emblems of his body and blood, 

132 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


and in the use of which believers might be strengthened and 
refreshed. The strengthening of the faith of God’s elect in 
Christ’s atonement was one great purpose of the Lord’s Supper. 

I turn from the positive to the negative side of the subject. 
Ministers, like physicians, must study disease as well as health, 
and exhibit error as well as truth. Let me then try to show 
what are not the intentions of the Lord’s Supper. 


THE LORD’S SUPPER NOT A SACRIFICE 


It was never meant to be regarded as a sacrifice. 
We were not intended to believe that there is any change in 
the elements of bread and wine, or any corporal presence of 
Christ in the sacrameng. These things can never be honestly 
and fairly got out of Scripture. Let the three accounts of 
the institution, in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, 
and the one given by St. Paul to the Corinthians, be weighed 
and examined impartially, and I have no doubt as to the 
- result. They teach that there is no sacrifice, no altar, no 
change in the substance of the elements: that the bread after 
consecration is still literally and truly bread,—and the wine 
after consecration is literally and truly wine. Jn no part of 
the New Testament do we find the Christian minister called 
a priest ; and in no part do we find any mention of a sacrt- 
fice, except that of prayer, and praise, and good works. The 
last literal sacrifice, we are repeatedly told in the Epistle to 
the Hebrews, is the once for all finished sacrifice of Christ 
on the Cross. 

No doubt it may satisfy such controversialists as the late 
Cardinal Wiseman to adduce such texts as “ This is My body.” 
and “‘ This is My blood,” as proofs that the Lord’s Supper 
is a sacrifice. But the quotation of a single isolated phrase isa 
mode of arguing that would establish Arianism or Socinianism, 
The context of these famous expressions shows clearly that 
those who heard the words used, understood them to mean, 
‘“‘ This represents My body,” and “ This represents My blood.” 
The analogy of other places proves that “is’’ and “are”’ 


133 


KNOTS UNTIED 


frequently mean “‘‘represent’’ in Scripture. St. Paul, in 
writing on the sacrament, expressly calls the consecrated bread, 
“ bread,” and not the body of Christ, no less than three times 
(x Cor. xi. 26, 27, 28). Above all, there remains the unanswer- 
able argument, that if our Lord was actually holding His 
own body in His hands, when He said of the bread, “‘ This 
is My body,” His body must have been a different body to 
that of ordinary men. Of course if His body was not a body 
like ours, His real and proper humanity is at an end. At 
this rate the blessed and comfortable doctrine of Christ’s 
entire sympathy with His people, as very man, would be 
completely overthrown, and fall to the ground.+ 

Again, it may please some to regard the sixth chapter of 
St. John, where our Lord speaks of “eating His flesh and 
drinking His blood,’ as a proof that there is a literal bodily 
presence of Christ in the bread and wine at the Lord’s Supper. 
But there is an utter absence of conclusive proof that this 
chapter refers to the Lord’s Supper at all. The man who 
maintains that it does refer to the Lord’s Supper, will find 
himself involved in very awkward consequences. He sentences 
to everlasting death all who do not receive the Lord’s Supper. 
He raises to everlasting life all who do receive it, the utterly 
unworthy as well as the worthy. Enough to say that the great 
majority of Protestant commentators altogether deny that 
the chapter refers to the Lord’s Supper, and that even some 
Romish commentators on this point agree with them.* 


THE “EX OPERE OPERATO” THEORY 


(2) I pass on to another negative view of the subject. 
The Lord’s Supper was never meant to confer benefit on com- 
municants ex opere operato, or by virtue of a mere formal 


1 That our Lord’s body was not a real body like our own, was the 
favourite doctrine of the ancient heretics called ‘‘ Appollinarians,”’ in 
the early Church. 

?On this point I venture to refer my readers to my own 
Expository Thoughts on St. John’s Gospel, where they will find a con- 
densed summary of opinions, in my notes on the sixth chapter. 


134 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


reception of the ordinance.1 We were not intended to believe 
that it does good to any but those who receive it with faith 
and knowledge. Jt is not a medicine or a charm which works 
mechanically, irrespectively of the state of mind in which it is 
received. It cannot of itself confer grace, where grace does not 
already exist. It does not convert, justify, or convey bless- 
ings to the heart of an unbeliever. It is an ordinance not for 
the dead but for the living,—not for the faithless, but for the 
believing,—not for the unconverted but the converted,—not 
for the impenitent sinner but*for the saint. I am almost 
ashamed to take up time with such trite and well-known 
statements as these. The Word of God testifies distinctly 
that a man may go to the Lord’s Table, and “eat and drink 
unworthily,’—may ‘eat and drink damnation to himself ’’ 
@ Cor. xi..27, 29). 

(3) I will only mention one more point on the negative 
side of the subject. The Lord’s Supper was not meant to be a 
mere social feast, indicating the love that should exist among 
believers. We were never intended to regard it in this light. 
The notion of the author of Ecce Horno, that “ the Christian 
communion is a club dinner,’ cannot be reconciled with the 
language of its Founder at the time of institution. ‘‘ Feeding 
on the character of Christ” (I quote this notorious book) is 
an idea which may satisfy a Socinian, or any one who rejects 
the doctrine of the atonement. But the true Christian who 
feeds by faith on the vicarious death of Christ, and not His 
character, will see that death prominently exhibited in the Lord’s 
Supper, and find his faith in that death quickened by the use of 
it. It was meant to carry his mind back to the sacrifice once 
made on Calvary, and not merely to the incarnation ; and no 
lower view will ever satisfy a true Christian’s heart. 

I have now stated the ground that I believe we are meant 
to take up about the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. 
Negatively, it was not intended to be a mere social meeting, 


1 These three Latin words, be it remembered, mean simply, “ out 
of,’ or ‘‘ by means of, the work done.” 


135 


KNOTS UNTIED 


—nor yet a sacrifice,—nor yet an ordinance conferring grace 
ex opere operato. Positively, it was intended to be a “ con- 
tinual remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ’s death,” and a 
strengthener and refresher of true believers. This ground 
may seem to some very simple, but I am convinced that this 
is the only view that is in harmony with Scripture and the 
formularies of the Church of England. 

I grant most freely that a large and increasing school 
within our own Church entirely disagree with the view I have 
given of the Lord’s Supper. Hundreds of clergy, both in high 
places and low, consider that there is not only a real presence 
of Christ in the Lord’s Supper, which I hold as strongly as 
they do, but that there is also a real presence of Christ in the 


elements of bread and wine after consecration,’ which | entirely 
deny. 


RITUALIST TEACHING 


Let us hear how (the late) Archdeacon Denison, no mean 
authority, states this view. He says, ‘‘ Christ’s body and blood 
are really present in the holy Eucharist, under the form of 
bread and wine, i.e. present things,—though they be present 
after a manner ineffable, incomprehensible by man, and not 
cognizable by the senses. The real presence of Christ in the 
Eucharist is therefore not, as I believe it is very generally 
supposed to be, the presence of an influence emanating from 
a thing absent, but the invisible and supernatural presence 
of a thing present ; of His body and His blood present under 


1 It is extremely difficult to make some people see the immense 
importance of strict accuracy in stating terms, in this unhappy con- 
troversy about the Lord’s Supper. The point in dispute is not whether 
there is a ‘‘ real presence ’’ of Christ in the Lord’s Supper. This we 
all hold. The true point s, whether Christ’s real body and blood 
are really present in the elements of bread and wine, as soon as they 
are consecrated in the Lord’s Supper, and independently of the faith 
of him who receives it. Romanists and semi-Romanists say that they 
are so present. We say that they are not. 


136 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


_ the forms of bread and wine.”1 (Sermon ii., p. 80). Let us 
hear him again. ‘ The act of consecration makes the real 
presence. Oh, priests of the Church of God ! to us it is given 
to be the channels and agents, whereby the Holy Ghost doth 
there make the body and blood of Christ to be really, though 
invisibly and supernaturally, present, under the form of bread 
and wine in the Lord’s Supper ; to us it is given to give His 
body and His blood unto his people.’ 

Now I shall not multiply quotations of this kind. It 
would be easy to show you that the doctrine laid down by 
Archdeacon Denison is the doctrine of a large and growing 
section of the Church of England.? It would be no less easy 
to show that the doctrine is substantially one and the same 
with that of the Romish Church, and that for refusing this 
very doctrine our martyred Reformers laid down their lives. 
I shall content myself with trying to show that the doctrine 
of Archdeacon Denison and his school cannot be reconciled 
with Scripture or the authorized formularies of the Church 


1 The antagonism between these sentences of Archdeacon Denison 
and Bishop Ridley’s views of the same subject, is so singularly strong, 
that lask the reader not to pass on without noticing it. Bishop Ridley 
in his Disputation at Oxford, says of the Romish doctrine of the Real 
Presence: ‘It destroyeth and taketh away the Institution of the 
Lord’s Supper, which was commanded only to be used and continued 
until the Lord Himself should come. If, therefore, He be now really 
present in the body of His flesh, then must the Supper cease: for a 
vemembrance is not of a thing present, but of a thing past and absent, 
And as one of the Fathers saith,—‘ A figure is vain where the thing 
figured is present.’’’—See Foxe’s Martyrs, in loco. 


2In a devotional work published by the Church Press Company, 
entitled “‘ The Little Prayer-book, intended for Beginners in Devotion, 
revised and corrected by three Priests,’”’ the following passages will be 
found :—“ When you enter the church, before you go to your place, bow 
reverently to the holy altar, for it is the throne of Christ, and the most 
sacred part of the church.”—‘‘ Bow reverently to the altar, before you 
leave the altar.”—‘‘ At the words ‘ this is My body, this is My blood ’ 
you must believe that the bread and wine become the real body and 
blood with the Soul and God-head of Jesus Christ. Bow down your 
heart and body in deepest adoration when the priest says those awful 
words, and worship your Saviour, there, verily, and indeed present on 
His altar.” 

137 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of England, and that the simpler view of the intention of the 
Lord’s Supper, is in entire harmony with those formularies 
to which, be it remembered, every ordained man has given 
his solemn consent. 


THE ARTICLES 


Let me turn first to the Thirty-nine Articles. We have no 
right to appeal to any formulary before this. The Church’s 
Confession of faith is the Church’s first standard of doctrine. 
The Twenty-eighth Article says : 

“The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love 
that Christians ought to have among themselves one to 
another, but rather is a Sacrament of our Redemption by 
Christ’s death ; insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, 
and with faith, receive the same, the Bread which we break 
is a partaking of the Body of Christ; and likewise the Cup 
of Blessing is a partaking of the Blood of Christ. 

“ Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of 
bread and wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved 
by holy Writ ; but is repugnant to the plain words of Scrip- 
ture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath 
given occasion to many superstitions. 

“The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten, in the 
Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual manner. And 
the mean whereby the Body of Christ is ‘received and eaten 
in the Supper is Faith. 

“The Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper was not by Christ’s 
ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.” 
I shall make no remark on these words: 

If the language of the Twenty-eighth Article can be 
reconciled with the doctrine of Archdeacon Denison and 
his school, I can only say that words have no meaning 
at all. I content myself with quoting the comment 
of BISHOP BEVERIDGE ON THE TWENTY-EIGHTH- 
ARTICLE, 

138 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


He says,—‘‘ lf the bread be not really changed into the 
body of Christ, then the body of Christ is not really there 
present ; and if it be not really there present, it is impossible 
that it should be really taken and received into our bodies, 
as bread is.”’ 

Again, he says,—‘‘ I cannot see how it can possibly be 
denied, that Christ ate of the bread whereof he said, ‘ This 
is My body ;’ and if He ate it, and ate it corporally (that is, 
ate His body as we eat bread), then He ate Himself, and made 
one body two, and then crowded them into one again, putting 
His body into His body, even His whole body into part of His 
body, His stomach. And so He must be thought not only to 
have two bodies, but two bodies one within another; yea, 
so as to be one devoured by another ; the absurdity of which, 
and of like assertions, he that hath but half an eye may easily 
discover. So that it must needs be granted to be in a spiritual 
manner that the Sacrament was instituted, and by consequence 
that it is in a spiritual manner the sacrament must be re- 
ceived.’’—Beveridge on the Articles. Ed. Oxford, 1846. 
Pp. 482-486. 


THE PRAYER BOOK 


The Liturgy of the Church of England on this subject is 
entirely in accordance with the Articles. The word “ altar” 
is not to be found once in our Prayer-book. The idea of a 
“ sacrifice ’’ is most carefully excluded from our Communion 
Office. However much men may twist and distort the words 
of the Baptismal Service, they cannot make anything out of 
the Communion Service, to prove Romish views. Even the 
famous Non-juror, Dr. Brett, was obliged to confess that 
he ‘‘ knew not how to reconcile the Consecration Prayer in 
the present established Liturgy with the real presence ; for,”’ 
says he, “it makes a;plain distinction betwixt the bread and 
wine and our Saviour’s body and blood, when it says,— 
“Grant that we receiving these Thy creatures of bread and 
wine, may be partakers of Christ’s body and blood.’ Which 


139 


KNOTS UNTIED 


manifestly implies the bread and wine to be distinct and differ- 
ent things from the body and blood.”’—Brett’s Discourse 
on discerning the Lord’s Body in the Communion. London, 
720. Pref., pp. 19-21. 


KNEELING DOES NOT IMPLY ADORATION 


The rubric at the, end of the Communion Service makes this 
distinction clear when it says absolutely that ‘‘ no adoration 
is intended, or ought to be done, either unto the sacramental bread 
or wine there bodily received, or unto any Corporal Presence of 
Christ's natural flesh and blood. For the sacramental bread 
and wine remain still in their very natural substances, and 
therefore may not be adored (for that were idolatry, to be 
abhorred of all faithful Christians); and the natural body 
and blood of our Saviour Christ are in heaven, and not here; 
it being against the truth of Christ’s natural body to be at 
one time in more places than one.” If that rubric does not 
flatly condemn the teaching of Archdeacon Denison and his 
school, about the presence of Christ in the sacrament, under 
the forms of bread and wine, I am very certain that words 
have no meaning at all.t 

The Catechism of the Church of England is in direct 
accordance with the Articles and Liturgy. Though it states 
distinctly that ‘‘ Christ’s body and blood are verily and in- 
deed taken and received by the faithful in the Lord’s Supper,”’ 
this can only mean after a heavenly and spiritual manner (Article 


1 The rubric at the end of the Communion of the Sick is another 
strong evidence of the views of those who drew up our Prayer-book 
in its present form. It says, ‘“ If a man by reason of extremity of 
sickness, or for want of warning in due time to the curate, or for lack 
of company to receive with him, or by any other just impediment do 
not receive the sacrament of Christ’s body and blood, the curate shall 
instruct him, that if he do truly repent him of his sins, and stead- 
fastly believe that Jesus Christ hath suffered death on the Cross for him 
and shed His blood for his redemption, earnestly remembering the 
benefits he hath thereby, and giving him hearty thanks therefore, he 
doth eat and drink the body and blood of our Saviour Christ profitably 


to his soul’s health, although he do not receive the sacrament with 
his mouth,” 


140 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


_ XXVIII) for it carefully avoids saying one word to sanc- 
tion the idea that the body and blood are locally present in 
the consecrated elements of bread and wine. In fact, a 
spiritual presence of Christ in the Lord’s Supper to every faith- 
ful communicant, but no local corporal presence in the bread 
and wine to any communicant, is evidently the uniform 
doctrine of the Church of England. 


WATERLAND ON THE CATECHISM 


But I will not pass on without quoting Waterland’s inter- 
pretation of the doctrine of the Catechism. He says,— 
“ The words verily and indeed taken and received by the faith- 
ful, are rightly interpreted of a real participation of the 
BENEFITS purchased by Christ’s death. The body and blood 
of Christ are taken and received by the faithful, not corporally, 
not internally, but verily and indeed, that is effectually.~ The 
sacred symbols are no bare signs, no untrue figures of a thing 
absent; but the force, the grace, the virtue, and benefit of 
Christ’s body broken and blood shed, that is of His passion, 
are really and effectually present with all them that receive 
worthily. This is all the real presence that our Church teaches.” 
Waterland’s Works. Oxford, 1843. Vol. vi., p. 42. 

THE HOMILY of the Church of England about thesacra- 
ment is in complete harmony with the Articles, Liturgy, and 
Catechism. It says, “‘ Before all things this we must be sure 
of especially, that this Supper be in such wise done and minis- 
tered as our Lord and Saviour did, and commanded to be done ; 
as His holy Apostles used it; and the good Fathers in the 
Church frequented it. For, as that worthy man St. Ambrose 
saith, he is unworthy of the Lord that doth celebrate this 
mystery otherwise than it was delivered by Him. Neither 
can he be devout that doth presume otherwise than it was 
given by the Author. We must then take heed, lest of the 
memory it be made a sacrifice, lest of a communion it be made 
a private eating; lest of two parts we have but one; lest, 
applying it for the dead, we lose the fruit that be alive.” — 

I4I 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Again, it says, after pressing the necessity of knowledge 
and faith in communicants: “ This is to stick fast to Christ’s 
promise made in His institution: to make Christ thine own, 
and to apply His merits unto thyself. Herein thou needest 
no other man’s help, no other sacrifice or oblation, no sacrific- 
ing priest, no mass, no means established by man’s invention.” 

Now it would be easy to multiply quotations in support 
of the view of the Lord’s Supper which I advocate, from 
leading divines of the Church of England. But I forbear. 
Quotations are wearisome, and too often are not read. Those 
who wish to follow up the subject should study Dean Goode’s 
unanswerable, but much neglected, book on the Eucharist. 

I will give only one quotation from the well-known 
JEREMY TAYLOR. In his book on The Real Presence (Edit. 
1654, pp. 13-15) he says: ‘‘ We say that Christ’s body is in 
the sacrament really, but spiritually. The Roman Catholics 
say that it is there really, but spiritually. For so Bellarmine 
is bold to say that the word may be allowed in this question. 
Where now is the difference ? Here by spiritually, they mean 
spiritual after the manner of a spirit. We by spiritually, 
mean present to our spirit only. They say that Christ’s body 
is truly present there as it was upon the Cross, but not after 
the manner of all or anybody, but after that manner of being 
asan angelisina place. That’s their spiritually.— But we by the 
real spiritual presence of Christ do understand Christ to be present — 
as the Spirit of God is present, in the hearts of the faithful by 
blessing and grace: and this is all which we mean beside the 
tropecal and figurative presence.” 

Il THE POSITION WHICH THE LORD’S SUPPER 

WAS MEANT TO OCCUPY. 

The second point which I propose to handle in this 
paper is so completely bound up with the first, that I shall 
not dwell upon it at length. He that can answer the question 
—‘“ What is the true intention” of the Lord’s Supper ?— 
will find no difficulty in discerning “ what is its rightful 
position in the Church of Christ.” 

142 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


Like the ark of God in the Old Testament, this blessed 
sacrament has a proper position and rank among Christian 
ordinances, and, like the ark of God, it may easily be put in 
the wrong one. The history of that ark will readily recur to 
our minds. Put in the place of God, and treated like an idol, 
it did the Israelites no good at all. In the days of Eli, it 
could not save them out of the hand of the Philistine. Their 
armies were defeated, and the ark itself was taken.—Defiled 
and dishonoured by being placed in an idol’s temple, it was 
the cause of God’s wrath falling on a whole nation, till the 
Philistines said with one voice, ‘‘ Send it away.” It is even 
so with the Lord’s Supper.—Placed in its right position, it 
is an ordinance full of blessing. The great question to be 
settled is,—What is that position ? 


THE PRINCIPAL SERVICE 


(x) The Lord’s Supper is not in its right place, when it is 
made the first, foremost, principal, and most important thing in 
Christian worship. That it is so in many quarters, we all 
must know. The sermon, the mode of conducting prayer, the 
reading of ‘“‘holy Scripture,’ in many churches are made 
second to this one thing,—the administration of the Lord’s 
Supper.—We may well ask, “ What warrant of Scripture is 
there for this extravagant honour?” but we shall get no 
answer. There are at most but five books in the whole canon 
of the New Testament in which the Lord’s Supper is even 
mentioned. About grace, faith, and redemption ; about the 
work of Christ, the work of the Spirit, and the love of the 
Father ; about man’s ruin, weakness, and spiritual poverty ; 
about justification, sanctification, and holy living ;—about all 
these mighty subjects we find the inspired writers giving us 
line upon line, and precept upon precept. About the Lord’s 
Supper, on the contrary, we may observe in the great bulk 
of the New Testament a speaking silence. Even the Epistles 
to Timothy and Titus, containing much instruction about a 
minister’s duties, do not contain a word about it. This fact 


143 


KNOTS UNTIED 


alone surely speaks volumes! To thrust the Lord’s Supper 
forward, till it towers over and overrides everything else in 
religion, is giving it a position for which there is no authority 
in God’s Word. 


EXTRAVAGANT CEREMONIAL. 


(2) Again, the Lord’s Supper is not in its right place, when 
it is administered with an extravagant degree of outward 
ceremony and veneration. God forbid that I should countenance 
anything like carelessness or irreverence in the use of any 
ordinance of Christ. By all means let us give honour where 
honour is due. But I ask whether there is not something 
unscriptural about the enormous amount of pomp and bodily 
reverence with which the Lord’s Supper is now administered 
in many of our churches? The ostentatious treatment of 
the Communion table as an altar,—the lights, ornaments, 
millinery, gestures, postures, bowings, crossings, incensing, 
processions, which are connected with the so-called altar,— 
the mysterious and obsequious veneration with which the 
bread and wine are consecrated, given, taken, and received, 
—what does it all mean? Where is there in all this the 
simplicity of the first institution, as we find it recorded in 
the Bible > Where is the simplicity which any plain reader 
of the English Prayer-book might justly expect? We. may 
may well ask, Where ? The true Lord’s Supper is no longer 
there. The whole thing savours of Romanism. A plain man 
can only see in it an attempt to introduce into our worship 
the doctrine of sacrifice, the “‘ blasphemous fable and dangerous 
deceit ’’ of the mass, the Popish real presence, and transub- 
stantiation. It is impossible to avoid feeling that a deadly 
heresy underlies this pompous ceremonial, and that we have not 
to do merely with a childish love of show and form, but with a 
deep-laid design to bring back Popery into the Church of England, 
and to subvert the Gospel of Christ. One thing at any rate is 
very plain: the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, administered 
as it is now in many places, is not in its rightful position. It 


144 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


is so disguised, and changed by this new treatment, that 
I can hardly see in it any Lord’s Supper at all. 

(3) Again, the Lord’s Supper is not in its right place, 
when it is pressed on all worshippers indiscriminately, as a 
means of grace which all, as a matter of course, ought to use. 
Once more I ask that no one will misunderstand me. I feel 
as strongly as any one, that to go to church as a worshipper, 
and yet not be a communicant, is to be a most inconsistent 
Christian, and that to be unfit for the Lord’s Table is to be 
unfit to die. But it is one thing to teach this, and quite 
another to urge all men to receive the sacrament as a matter 
of course, whether they are qualified to receive it or not.— 
I should be sorry to raise a false accusation. I do not for a 
moment suppose that any High Church clergyman recom- 
mends, in naked language, wicked people to come to the 
Lord’s Supper that they may be made good. But I cannot 
forget that from many pulpits people are constantly taught 
that they are born again, and have grace, by virtue of their 
baptism ; and that if they want to stir up the grace within 
them, and get more religion, they must use all means of grace, 
and specially the Lord’s Supper! And I cannot help fearing 
that thousands in the present day are practically substituting 
attendance at the Lord’s Supper for repentance, faith, and 
vital union with Christ, and flattering themselves that the 
more often they receive the Sacrament, the more they are 
justified, and the more fit they are to die. My own firm 
conviction is that the Lord’s Supper should on no account be 
placed before Christ, and that men should always be taught to 
come to Christ by faith before they draw near to the Lord’s 
Table. I believe that this order can never be inverted without 
bringing in gross superstition, and doing immense harm to 
men’s souls. Those parts of Christendom where “ the mass ”’ 
is made everything, and the Word of God hardly ever preached, 
are precisely those parts where there is the most entire absence 
of vital Christianity. I wish I could say there was no fear of 
our coming to this state of things in our own land. But when 


145 


KNOTS UNTIED 


we hear of hundreds crowding the Lord’s Table on Sundays, 
and then plunging into every dissipation on week-days, there 
is grave reason for suspecting that the Lord’s Supper is 
pressed on many congregations in a manner utterly un- 
warranted by Scripture. 

Does anyone ask now what is the rightful position of the 
Lord’s Supper? I answer that question without any hesita- 
tion. I believe its rightful position, like that of holiness, is 
between grace and glory,—between justification and heaven, 
—between faith and paradise,—between conversion and the 
final rest,—between the wicket-gate and the celestial city. 
It is not Christ ; it is not conversion ; it is not a passport to 
heaven. It is for the strengthening and refreshing of those who 
have come to Christ already, who know something of con- 
version, who are already in the narrow way, and have fled 
from the city of destruction. 

We cannot read hearts, I am well aware. We must not be 
too strict and exclusive in our terms of communion, and make 
those sad whom God has not made sad. But we must never 
shrink from telling the unconverted and the unbelieving that, 
in their present condition, they are not fit to come to the 
Lord’s Table. The last question in the CHURCH CATECHISM 
is as follows: “‘ What is required of them that come to the 
Lord’s Supper ?’”’ The answer to that question is weighty 
and full of meaning. Those who come to the Lord’s Supper 
must “‘ examine themselves whether they repent them truly 
of their former sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life,— 
have a lively faith in God’s mercy through Christ, and a 
thankful remembrance of His death,—and are in charity with 
all men.” Does any one feel these things in his own heart ? 
Then we may boldly tell him that the Lord’s Supper is placed 
before him by a merciful Saviour, to help him in running the 
race set before him.—Higher than this we must not place the 
ordinance. A communicant is not expected to be an angel, 
but a sinner who feels his sins, and trusts in his Saviour.— 
Lower than this we have no right to place the ordinance. To 


146 


THE LORD'S SUPPER 


encourage people to come up to the Table without knowledge, 
faith, or repentance, will do them positive harm, promote 
superstition, and displease the Master of the feast. He desires 
to see at His Table not dead guests, but living ones,—not the 
dead service of formal eating and drinking, but the spiritual 
sacrifice of feeling and loving hearts. 

I pause here. I trust I have said enough to make clear the 
views I hold of the true intention and rightful position of the 
sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. If, in expounding these 
views, I have said anything that grates on the feelings of any 
reader, I can assure him that I am unfeignedly sorry. Nothing 
could be further from my desire than to hurt the feelings of 
a brother. 


THE TRUTH AS TO THE SACRAMENTS 


It is my firm conviction that the state of the Church of 
England requires great plainness of speech and distinctness 
of statement about the sacraments. There is nothing, I am 
persuaded, which the times so imperatively demand of Evan- 
gelical Churchmen, as a bold, manly, and explicit assertion of 
the great principles held by our forefathers, and specially about 
baptism and the Lord’s Supper. If we would “ strengthen 
the things that remain which are ready to die,’ we must 
resolutely go back to the old paths, and maintain old truths 
in the old way. We must give up the vain idea that we can 
ever make the Cross of Christ acceptable by polishing, and 
varnishing, and painting, and gilding it, and sawing off its 
corners. We must cease to suppose that we can ever lure men 
into being Evangelical by a trimming, temporizing, mode of 
exhibiting the doctrines of the Gospel, or by loudly pro- 
claiming that we are not “‘ party-men,’’—-or by laying aside 
plain Scriptural phrases, and praising up ‘‘ earnestness,’’—or 
by adroitly keeping back truths that are likely to give offence. 
The plan is an utter delusion. It wins no enemy : it alienates 
many a true friend. It makes the worldly bystander sneer, 
and fills him with scorn. We may rest assured that the right 


147 


KNOTS UNTIED 


line and the wisest course for the Evangelical body to pursue, 
is to adhere steadily to the old plan of maintaining the truth, 
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, as it is in Jesus, 
and specially the truth about the two sacraments of baptism 
and the Lord’s Supper. Let us be courteous, amiable, charitable, 
affable, considerate for the feelings of others, by all means, but 
let no consideration make us keep back any part of God’s truth. 


A GODLY SIMPLICITY 


Let me close with a few practical suggestions, 

(rt) Let us cultivate a godly simplicity in all our statements 
about the Lord’s Supper, and a godly jealousy in all our 
practices about it. 

As faithful ministers, let us often remind our people that 
there is no sacrifice in the Lord’s Supper,—no real presence 
of Christ’s body and blood in the bread and wine,—no change 
of the elements,—no grace conferred ex opere operato,—no 
altar at the east end of our churches,—no sacrificing priest- 
hood in the Church of England. Let us tell them these things 
again, and again, and again, till our congregations have them 
ingrained into their very minds and memories and souls, and 
let us charge them, as they love life, not to forget them. 

Whether we are clergymen or laymen, let us beware of 
countenancing or tolerating any practices in connection with 
the Lord’s Supper which either exceed or contradict the rubrics 
of our Prayer-book, and imply any belief in a Romish view 
of this sacrament. Let us protest in every possible way 
against any extravagant veneration of the Communion Table 
and the bread and wine, as if Christ’s body and blood were in 
these elements, or on the Table ; and let us never forget what 
the Prayer-book says about “‘ idolatry to be abhorred of all 
faithful Christians.” 

We cannot be too particular on these points. The times 
are changed. Things that we might have borne with in past 
years as matters of indifference, and comparative trifles in 


148 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


ceremonial, ought not to be borne with any longer. A few 
years ago I would have turned to the east in repeating the 
Creed in any parish church, rather than offend a neighbour’s 
feelings. I can do so no longer, for I see great principles at 
stake. Let our protest on all these matters be firm, unflinch- 
ing, and universal all over the country, and we may do much 
good. 


THE EVANGELICAL POSITION 


(2) For another thing, let us not be shaken or troubled by 
the common charge that we are not Churchmen, because we 
do not agree with many of our brethren on the subject of the 
sacraments. Such charges are easily made, but not so easily 
established. I trust my younger brethren especially will treat 
them with perfect indifference and unconcern. 

Do those who coolly say that Evangelical Churchmen are 
not true Churchmen, suppose that we cannot read ? Do they 
fancy we cannot understand the meaning of plain English ? 
Do they think to persuade us that our doctrinal views are 
not to be found in the Articles, the Liturgy, and the Homilies, 
and in the writings of all the leading divines of our Church, 
up to the days of Charles the First >—Do they fancy, for 
example, that we do not know that the Communion Table was 
seldom to be found at the east end of the Church, till the time 
of Laud, but generally stood in the chancel, like a table, and 
that Ridley specially called it ‘‘the Lord’s Board’’?} Alas, 
I fear they presume on the non-reading propensities of the 


1 Let us observe the language used by Bishop Ridley in his injunc- 
tions to the clergy of the See of London. Assigning reasons for the 
removal of altars and the substitution of tables, he says: ‘“‘ The use of 
an altar is to sacrifice upon; the use of a table is to serve men to eat 
upon. Now when we come to the Lord’s Board, what do we come for ? 
To sacrifice Christ again, and to crucify Him again, or to feed upon Him 
that was once only crucified and offered up for us ? If we come to feed 
upon Him, spiritually to eat His body, and spiritually to drink His 
blood, which is the true use of the Lord’s Supper, then no man can 
deny that the form of a table is more meet than the form of an altar,’’— 
See Foxe’s Acts and Mon. Vol. vi. Seeley’s Edition, p. 6. 


149 


KNOTS UNTIED 


day. They know too well that the reading of many Evangelical 
people is seldom carried beyond newspapers and magazines. 

I am bold to say that in the matter of true, honest, con- 
scientious membership of the Church of England, the Evan- 
gelical body need fear no comparison with any other section 
within the Church’s pale. We may safely challenge any 
amount of fair investigation and inquiry. The best proof of 
our Churchmanship is the fact that for every one of our body 
who has left the Church of England and gone over to Dissent, 
we can point to ten Ritualists who have left the Church of 
England and gone over to Rome. 

No! Evangelical Churchmen never need be moved by 
the charge that they are not true Churchmen. Ignorant and 
impudent men may make such charges, but none except 
shallow and ill-read men will ever believe them. When those 
who make them have answered Dean Goode’s work on the 
Eucharist, as well as his other works on Baptism and the 
Rule of Faith, it will be time for us to pay attention to what 
they say. 


WHEN TO SECEDE. 


(3) Jn the last place, let me express an earnest hope that no 
one who reads this will ever let himself be driven out of 
the Church of England by the rise of the present tide of extreme 
Ritualism, and the seeming decay of the Evangelical body. 
I lament that there should be a need for uttering this warning, 
but I am sure there is a cause. 

Now I desire to offer AN AFFECTIONATE WARNING to 
all who are in this frame of mind. I ask them to consider well 
what they do. I entreat them to call faith and patience into 
exercise, and at any rate to wait long before they secede, to 
pray much, to read their Bibles much, and to be very sure 
that they have done everything that can be done to amend 
what is wrong. 

It is a cheap and easy remedy to secede from a Church when 
we see evils round us, but it is not always the wisest one. 

150 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


Is it a wise man’s act to forsake a Church because things 
in our own parish, and under our own minister in that 
Church, are wrong ? I answer decidedly and unhesitatingly, 
No! 

It is very certain that a sensible and well-instructed laity . 
can do an immense deal of good to the Church of England,— 
can check much evil and promote Christ’s truth,—if they will 
only hold their ground and use all lawful means. Public 
opinion is very powerful. Bishops cannot altogether ignore 
appeals from the laity. By much importunity even the 
most cautious occupants of the Episcopal bench may be roused 
to action. The press is open to every man. In short, there 
is much to be done, though, like anything else that is good, 
it may give much trouble. And as for a man’s own soul, he 
must be in a strange position if he cannot hear the Gospel in 
some Church near him. At the worst he has the Bible, the 
throne of grace, and the Lord Jesus Christ always near him 
at his own home. 

I say these things as one who feels a righteous indignation 
at the Romanizing proceedings of many clergymen in our 
own day. I mourn over the many driven in disgust out of 
the pale of our Zion. So long as we have truth, liberty, and an 
unaltered Confession of faith in the Church of England, so long 
I am convinced that the way of patience is much better than 
the way of secession. 

When the Thirty-nine Articles are altered,—when the 
Prayer-book is revised on Romish principles,—when the mass 
is formally restored in every parish church by Act of 
Parliament,—when incense, crosses, images, banners, vest- 
ments, idolatrous veneration of the sacrament of the Lord’s 
Supper, mumbled prayers, gabbled-over apocryphal lessons, 
short, dry, sapless sermons, histrionic gestures and postures, 
bowings, crossings, and the like,—when these things come to 
pass by law and rule, then it will be time for us all to leave 
the Church of England. Then we may arise and say with one 
voice, ‘‘ Let us depart, for God is not here.” 

I51 


KNOTS UNTIED 


But till that time, let us stand fast, and fight for the truth. 
Let us not desert our post to save trouble, and move out 
to please our adversaries, and spike our guns to avoid a battle. 
No ! in the name of God, let us fight on, even if we are like 
the 300 at Thermopyle,—few with us, many against us, and 
' traitors on every side. Let us fight on, and “ contend earnestly 
for the faith which was once delivered to the saints ”’ (Jude 3). 

The good ship of the Church of England may not be per- 
fect. The crew may, many of them, be useless and mutinous, 
and not trustworthy. But there are still some faithful ones 
among them. There is still hope for the good old craft. The 
Great Pilot has not yet left her. Let us therefore stick by 
the ship. 


The following quotations are most important. 


(1) Archbishop Cranmer, in the Preface to his Amswer to Gardiner, 
says :— 

“They (the Romanists) say that Christ is corporally under or in the 
form of bread and wine ; we say that Christ is not there, neither corporally 
nor spiritually. But in them that worthily eat and drink the bread and 
wine He is spiritually, and corporally He is in heaven.—I mean not that 
Christ is spiritually, either in the table, or in the bread and wine that 
be set on the table, but I mean that He is present in the ministration 
and receiving of that Holy Supper, according to His own institution 
and ordinance.”—See Goode on the Eucharist, vol. il., p. 772. 


(z) Bishop Ridley, in his Disputation at Oxford, says :— 

“The circumstances of the Scripture, the analogy and proportion 
of the sacraments, and the testimony of the faithful Fathers, ought 
to rule us in taking the meaning of the Holy Scripture touching the 
sacraments. 

“But the words of the Lord’s Supper, the circumstances of the 
Scripture, the analogy of the sacraments, and the sayings of the Fathers, 
do most effectually and plainly prove a figurative speech in the words 
of the Lord’s Supper. 

“Therefore, a figurative sense and meaning is specially to be received 
in these words, ‘This is My body.’’’—See Goode on the Eucharist, 
vol. ii., p. 766. 


(3) Bishop Hooper, in his Brief and Clear Confession of the Christian 
Faith, says :— 

“T’ believe that all this sacrament consisteth in the use thereof ; 
so that without the right use the bread and wine in nothing differ from 
other common bread and wine that is commonly used ; and, therefore, 


152 


THE LORD’S SUPPER 


I do not believe that the Body of Christ can be contained, hid, or inclosed 
in the bread, under the bread, or with the bread,—neither the blood 
in the wine, under the wine, or with the wine. But I believe and con- 
fess the only body of Christ to be in heaven, on the right hand of the 
Father; and that always, and as often as we use this bread and wine 
according to this ordinance and institution of Christ, we do verily and 
indeed receive His body and blood.’’—Hoopeyr’s Works. Parker Society’s 
Edition, vol. ii., p. 48. 


(4) Richard Hooker, in his Ecclesiastical Polity, says :— 

“The real presence of Christ’s most blessed body and blood is not 
to be sought for in the sacrament, but in the worthy receiver of the 
sacrament. 

“ And with this the very order of our Saviour’s words agreeth. First, 
“take and eat’; then, ‘this is My body which is broken for you.’ 
First, ‘ drink ye all of this;’ then followeth, ‘ this is My blood of the 
New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.’ 
I see not which way it should be gathered by the words of Christ,— 
when and where the bread is His body, or the wine His blood, but only 
in the very heart and soul of him which receiveth them. As for the 
sacraments, they really exhibit, but for aught we can gather out of 
that which is written of them, they ave not really nor do really contain in 
themselves that grace which with them or by them it pleaseth God 
to bestow.”—Hooker, Eccl. Pol., book v., p. 67. 


(5) Waterland says :— 

“The Fathers well understood that to make Christ’s natural body 
the real sacrifice of the Eucharist, would not only be absurd in reason 
but highly presumptuous and profane: and that to make the out- 
ward symbols a proper sacrifice, a material sacrifice, would be entirely 
contrary to Gospel principles, degrading the Christian sacrifice into a 
Jewish one, yea, and making it much lower and meaner than the 
Jewish one, both in value and dignity. The right way, therefore, was 
to make the sacrifice spiritual, and it could be no other upon Gospel 
principles.”—Works, vol. iv., p. 762. 

“No one has any authority or right to offer Christ as a sacrifice, 
whether veally or symbolically, but Christ Himself ;, such a sacrifice 
is His sacrifice, not ouvs,—offered for us, not by us, to God the Father,’’— 


Works, vol. iv., p. 753. 


153 


IX 
THE REAL PRESENCE 


“ Tf Thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.”— 
Exod. xxxili. 15. 


There is a word in the text that heads this page which 
demands the attention of all English Christians in this day. 
That word is “ presence.” There is a religious subject bound 
up with that word, on which it is most important to have 
clear, distinct, and Scriptural views. That subject is the 
“presence of God,” and specially the “‘ presence of our Lord 
Jesus Christ ’’ with Christian people. What is that presence ? 
Where is that presence ? What is the nature of that presence ? 
To these questions I propose to supply answers. 


I. I shall consider, first, the general doctrine of God’s 
presence in the world. 


The whole subject deserves serious thought. If we suppose 
that this is a mere question of controversy, which only 
concerns theological partisans, we have yet much to learn. 
It is a subject which lies at the very roots of saving religion. 
It is a subject which is inseparably tied up with one of the 
most precious articles of the Christian faith. It is a subject 
about which it is most dangerous to be wrong. An error here 


154 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


may first lead a man to the Church of Rome, and then land 
him finally in the gulf of infidelity. Surely it is worth while 
to examine carefully the doctrine of the “ presence” of God 
and of His Christ. 

I. The first subject we have to consider, is the general 
doctrine of GOD’S PRESENCE IN THE WORLD. 

The teaching of the Bible on this point is clear, plain, 
and unmistakable. God is everywhere. There is no place 
in heaven or earth where He is not. Enter into your chamber 
and shut the door: God is there. Climb to the top of the 
highest mountain, where not even an insect moves: God is 
there. Sail to the most remote island in the Pacific Ocean, 
where the foot of man never trod: God is there. He is always 
near us,—seeing, hearing, observing, knowing every action, 
and deed, and word, and whisper, and look, and thought, 
and motive, and secret of every one of us, and everywhere. 

What saith the Scripture? It is written in Job, “ His 
eyes are upon the ways of man, and He seeth all his goings. 
There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers 
of iniquity may hide themselves”’ (Job xxxiv. 21). It is 
written in Proverbs, “‘ The eyes of the Lord are in every place, 
beholding the evil and the good ”’ (Prov. xv. 3). It is written 
in the Psalms, “‘ Thou knowest my down-sitting and mine 
up-rising : Thou understandest my thought afar off. Thou 
compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted 
with all my ways. For there is not a word in my tongue, 
but, lo, O Lord, Thou knowest it altogether. Whither shall 
I go from Thy Spirit ? or whither shall I flee from Thy presence ? 
If I ascend up into heaven, Thou art there : if I make my bed in 
hell, behold Thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, 
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall 
Thy hand lead me, and Thy right hand shall hold me. If I 
say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night 
shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not from 
Thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and 
the light are both alike to Thee ’”’ (Psalm cxxxix. 2-12). 


T55 


KNOTS UNTIED 


The doctrine before us is one which we cannot fully under- 
stand. David said the same thing about it almost three 
thousand years ago. ‘‘ Such knowledge is too wonderful for 
me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it.’’ (Psalm cxxxix. 6). 
But it does not follow that the doctrine is not true, because 
we cannot understand it. It is the weakness of our poor 
minds and intellects that we must blame, and not the doctrine. 

There are scores of things in the world around us, which 
few can understand or explain, yet no sensible man refuses 
to believe. How this earth is ever rolling round the sun with 
enormous swiftness, while we feel no motion,—how the moon 
affects the tides, and makes them rise and fall twice every 
twenty-four hours,—these are things well known to men of 
science, while most of us could not explain them for our lives. 
And shall we, in the face of such facts, presume to doubt 
that God is everywhere present, for no better reason than this, 
that we cannot understand it ? 

There are many things about God himself which we can- 
not possibly understand. Who can explain the eternity of 
God, the infinite power and wisdom of God, or the works of 
God in creation and providence ? Who can comprehend a 
Being who is a Spirit, without body, parts, or passions ? 
Where is there a single attribute of God that mortal man can 
thoroughly comprehend? Where, then, is the common 
sense or wisdom of refusing to believe the doctrine of God 
being present everywhere, merely because our minds cannot 
take it in? Well says the Book of Job, “ Canst thou by 
searching find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty 
unto perfection ? It is high as heaven ; what canst thou do ? 
deeper than hell; what canst thou know ?”’ (Job xi. 7, 8). 

Let us seek to have just notions of God’s power, His 
wisdom, His eternity, His holiness, His perfect knowledge, 
His “ presence” everywhere. One half the sin committed 
by mankind arises from wrong views of their Maker and 
Judge. Men are reckless and wicked, because they do not 
think that God sees them. They do things they would never 

156 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


do if they really believed they were under the eyes of the 
Almighty. No wonder that holy Job said in his best moments, 
“When I consider, I am afraid of Him ”’ (Job xxiii. 15). 

“What is your God like >?” said a sneering infidel one day 
to a poor Christian. ‘‘ What is this God of yours like: this 
God about whom you make such ado? Is He great or is He 
small?” “ My God,” was the wise reply, “is a great and a 
small God at the same time: so great that the heaven of 
heavens cannot contain Him, and yet so small that He can 
dwell in the heart of a poor sinner like me.’’—“‘ Where is your 
God, my boy >” said another infidel to a child whom he saw 
coming out of a school where the Bible was taught. ‘‘ Where 
is your God about whom you have been reading ? Show Him 
to me, and I will give you an orange.”” ‘‘ Show me where He 
is not,”’ was the answer, “ and I will give you two. My God 
is everywhere.” { 

However hard to understand this doctrine may be, it is 
one which is most useful and wholesome for our souls. To 
keep continually in mind that God is always present with us, 
to live always as in God’s sight, to act and speak and think 
as under His eye,—all this is eminently calculated to have 
good effect upon our souls. 

(2) The thought of God’s presence is a loud call to 
humility. How much that is evil and defective must the All- 
seeing eye see in every one of us! How small a part of our 
character is really known by man! ‘“ Man looketh on the out- 
ward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart” (1 
Sam. xvi. 7). Who has not need to say, “ God be merciful 
to me a sinner ?”’ 

(6) The thought of God’s presence is a crushing proof 
of our need of Jesus Christ. What hope of salvation could we 
have if there was not a Mediator between God and man ? 
Before the eye of an ever-present God, our best righteousness 
is filthy rags, and our best doings are full of imperfection. 
Where should we be if there was not a Fountain open for all 
sin, even the blood of Christ ? Without Christ, the prospect 


157 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of death, judgment, and eternity would drive us to despair. 

(c) The thought of God’s presence teaches the folly of 
hypocrisy in religion. What can be more silly and childish 
than to wear a mere cloak of Christianity while we inwardly 
cleave to sin, when God is ever looking at us and sees us through 
and through? It is easy to deceive ministers and fellow- 
Christians, who are not always with us. But God sees us 
morning, noon, and night, and cannot be deceived. Oh, 
whatever we are in religion, let us be real and true ! 

(d) The thought of God’s presence is a check and curb 
on the inclination to sin. The recollection that there is One 
always near us and observing us, who will one day have a 
reckoning with all mankind, may well keep us back from evil. 
This was the feeling that preserved Joseph when tempted 
in a foreign land: ‘“‘ How can I do this great wickedness, 
and sin against God?” (Gen. xxxix. 9). 

(e) The thought of God’s presence is a spur to the pursuit 
of true holiness. The highest standard of sanctification is to 
“walk with God” as Enoch did, and to “‘ walk before God ”’ 
as Abraham did.. Where is the man who would not strive to 
live so as to please God, if he realized that God was always 
standing at his right hand? To get away from God is the 
secret aim of the sinner; to get nearer to God is the longing 
desire of the saint. The real servants of the Lord are “a 
people near unto Him” (Psalm cxlviii. 14). 

(f) The thought of God’s presence is a comfort in time 
of public trouble. When war and famine and pestilence break 
in upon a land, when the nations are rent and torn by inward 
divisions, and all order seems in peril, it is cheering to reflect 
that God sees and knows and is close at hand,—that the King 
of kings is near and not asleep. 

(g) THE THOUGHT OF GOD’S PRESENCE IS A 
STRONG CONSOLATION IN PRIVATE TRIAL. We may 
be driven from home and native land, and placed at the 
other side of the world; we may be bereaved of wife and 
children and friends, and left alone in our family, like the last 


158 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


tree in a forest: but we can never go to any place where God 
is not, and under no circumstances can we be left entirely 
alone. 

Such thoughts as these are useful and profitable for us all. 
Let it be a settled principle in our religion never to forget 
that in every condition and place we are under the eye of God. 
It ought to cheer us, if our Christianity is genuine and sincere. 
We can then appeal to God with confidence, like David, and 
say, “‘ Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and 
know my thoughts : and see if there be any wicked way in me, 
and lead me in the way everlasting ” (Psalm cxxxix. 23, 24). 
Great is the mystery of God’s presence everywhere ; but the 
true man of God can look at it without fear. 


II. The second thing which I propose to consider, is the 
real spiritual presence of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

In considering this branch of our subject, we must care- 
fully remember that we are speaking of One who is God and 
man in one Person. We are speaking of One who in infinite 
love to our souls, took man’s nature, and was born of the 
Virgin Mary, was crucified, dead, and buried, to be a sacrifice 
for sins, and yet never ceased for a moment to be very God. 
The peculiar “ presence’”’ of this blessed Person, our Lord 
Jesus Christ, with His church, is the point which I want 
now to unfold. I want to show that He is really and truly 
present with His believing people, spiritually or after the 
manner of a spirit, and that His presence is one of the grand 
privileges of a true Christian. What then is the real 
spiritual “ presence’ of Christ, and wherein does it consist ? 
et ts SEC. 


REAL-SPIRITUAL “ PRESENCE ” 


(a) There is a real spiritual presence of Christ with that 
Church which is His mystical body,—the blessed company of 
all faithful people. This is the meaning of that parting saying 
of our Lord to His Apostles, ‘““ I am with you alway, even unto 


159 


KNOTS UNTIED 


the end of the world” (Matt. xxviii. 20). The visible Church 
has often given mournful proof that Christ does not always 
dwell in it. It has been rent by divisions, defiled by heresies, 
disgraced by superstitions and corruptions, but it is the Holy 
Catholic Church, composed of God’s elect, the Church of which 
every member is truly sanctified, the Church of believing and 
penitent men and women,—this is the Church to which alone, 
strictly speaking, the promise belongs. This is the Church 
in which there is always a real spiritual “‘ presence of Christ.” 

There is not a visible Church on earth, however ancient 
and well ordered, which is secure against falling away. Scrip- 
ture and history alike testify that, like the Jewish Church, 
it may become corrupt, and depart from the faith, and depart- 
ing from the faith, may die. And why is this? Simply be- 
cause Christ has never promised to any visible Church that 
He will be with it always, even unto the end of the world. 
The word that He inspired St. Paul to write to the Roman 
Church is the same word that He sends to every visible 
Church throughout the world: ‘‘ Be not high-minded, but 
fear :—continue in God’s goodness: otherwise thou shalt be cut 
off’? + (Rom. xi. 20-22). 

On the other hand, the perpetual presence of Christ with 
that Holy Catholic Church, which is His body, is the great 
secret of its continuance and security. It lives on, and cannot 
die because Jesus Christ is in the midst of it. Its members 
may be persecuted, but His true Church is never extinguished. 


1“ Whatsoever we read in Scripture concerning the endless love 
and the saving mercy which God showeth towards His Church, the 
only proper subject thereof is this Church which is the mystical body 
of Christ. Concerning this flock it is that our Lord and Saviour hath 
promised, ‘I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, 
neither shall any pluck them out of My hand.’ ”—Hooker, Eccl. Polity, 
book iit, chia. pues 
. These are wise words, and words that all Hooker’s professed ad- 
mirers would do well to ponder and digest. Few things are so mis- 
chievous as the common habit of applying to such mixed and corrupt 
bodies as visible Churches those blessed promises of perpetuity and 
preservation which belong to none but the company of true believers. 


160 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


It lives on through fire and water. When crushed in one land: 
it springs up in another. The Pharaohs, the Herods, the 
Neros, the Julians, the Marys, the Charles the Ninths, have 
laboured in vain to destroy this Church. The true Church 
outlives them all. It is a bush that is often burning, and yet 
is never consumed. And what is the reason of all this? It is 
the perpetual “‘ presence’ of Jesus Christ. 


(b) THERE IS A REAL SPIRITUAL “PRESENCE” OF 
CHRIST IN THE HEART OF EVERY TRUE BELIEVER. 
This is what St. Paul meant when he speaks of “‘ Christ dwell- 
ing in the heart by faith”’ (Eph. iii. 17). This is what our 
Lord meant when He says of the man that loves Him and keeps 
His word, “‘ We will come into him, and make our abode with 
him” (John xiv. 23). In every believer, whether high or 
low, or rich or poor, or young or old, or feeble or strong, the 
Lord Jesus dwells, and keeps up His work of grace by the power 
of the Holy Ghost. As He dwells in the whole Church, which 
is His body,—keeping, guarding, preserving, and sanctify- 
ing it,—so does He continually dwell in every member of that 
body, in the least as well as in the greatest. This “ presence ”’ 
is the secret of all that peace, and hope, and joy, and comfort, 
which believers feel. All spring from their having a Divine 
tenant within their hearts. This “ presence” is the secret 
of their continuance in the faith, and perseverance unto the 
end. In themselves they are weak and unstable as water. 
But they have within them One who is “ able to save to the 
uttermost,” and will not allow His work to be overthrown. 
Not one bone of Christ’s mystical body shall ever be broken. 
Not one lamb of Christ’s flock shall ever be plucked out of 
His hand. The house in which Christ is pleased to dwell, 
though it be but a cottage, is one which the devil shall never 
break into and make his own. 

(c) There is a real spiritual “ presence” of Christ where- 
ever His believing people meet together in His name. This 
is the plain meaning of that famous saying, “ Wherever two 

161 M 


KNOTS UNTIED 


or three are gathered together in My name, there am I in the 
midst of them’’ (Matt. xviii. 20). The smallest gathering of 
true Christians for the purposes of prayer or praise, or holy 
conference, or reading God’s Word, is sanctified by the best 
of company. No worship is of any use to souls at which Christ 
is not present. Incense, banners, pictures, crucifixes, and long 
processions of richly-dressed ecclesiastics are a poor substitute 
for the great High Priest Himself. The meanest room where 
a few penitent believers assemble in the name of Jesus is a 
consecrated and most holy place in the sight of God. They 
that worship God in spirit and truth never draw near to Him 
in vain. Often they go home from such meetings warmed, 
cheered, stablished, strengthened, comforted, and refreshed. 
And what is the secret of their feelings? They have had with 
them the great Master of assemblies, even Christ Himself. 

(d) There is a real spiritual “ presence’”’ of Christ with 
the hearts of all true-hearted communicants in the Lord’s 
Supper. Rejecting as I do, with all my heart, the baseless 
notion of any bodily presence of Christ on the Lord’s Table, 
I can never doubt that the great ordinance appointed by 
Christ has a special and peculiar blessing attached to it. That 
blessing, I believe, consists in a special and peculiar presence 
of Christ, vouchsafed to the heart of every believing com- 
municant. That truth appears to me to lie under those wonder- 
ful words of institution, “ Take, eat: this is My body.” 
“ Drink ye all of this: this is My blood.” Those words were 
never meant to teach that the bread in the Lord’s Supper 
was literally Christ’s body, or the wine literally Christ’s blood. 
But our Lord did mean to teach that every right-hearted 
believer, who ate that bread and drank that wine in re- 
membrance of Christ, would in so doing find a special presence 
of Christ in his heart, and a special revelation of Christ’s 
sacrifice of His own body and blood to his soul. 

After all, the experience of all the best servants of Christ 
is the best proof that there is a special blessing attached to the 
Lord’s Supper. You will rarely find a true believer who will 

162 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


not say that he reckons this ordinance one of his greatest 
helps and highest privileges. 

(e) Last, but not least, there is a real spiritual “‘ presence” 
of Christ vouchsafed to believers in special times of trouble and 
difficulty. This is the presence of which St. Paul received 
assurance on more than one occasion. At Corinth, for instance, 
it is written, “‘ Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a 
vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: 
for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee ” 
(Acts xviii. 9, 10). At Jerusalem, again, when the apostle 
was in danger of his life, it is written, ‘‘ The night following 
the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul; 
for as thou hast testified of Me in Jerusalem, so must thou 
bear witness also in Rome” (Acts xxiii. rr). Again, in the 
last Epistle St. Paul wrote, we find him saying, ‘“‘ At my first 
answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: I 
pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. Notwith- 
standing the Lord stood with me and strengthened me” 
(selon, ty. 16, 17). 

This is the account of the singular and miraculous courage 
which many of God’s children have occasionally shown under 
circumstances of unusual trial, in every age of the Church. 
This special presence was the secret of the fearlessness with 
which many early Christian martyrs met their deaths, and of 
the marvellous courage which the Marian martyrs, such as 
Bradford, Latimer, and Rogers, displayed at the stake. 
These men died as they did because Christ was with them. 
Nor ought any believer to fear that the same helping presence 
will be with him, whenever his own time of special need 
arrives. Many are over-careful about what they shall do in 
their last sickness, and on the bed of death. Many disquiet 
themselves with anxious thoughts as to what they would do 
if husband or wife died, or if they were suddenly turned out 
of house and home. Let us believe that when the need comes 
the help will come also. Let us not carry our crosses before 
they are laid upon us. He that said to Moses, “ Certainly 

163 


KNOTS: UNTIED 


I will be with thee,” will never fail any believer who cries to 
Him. When the hour of special storm comes, the Lord who 
walks upon the waters will come and say, “‘ Peace: be still.” 

This branch of our subject deserves to be pondered well. 
This spiritual presence of Christ is a real and true thing, 
though a thing which the children of this world neither know 
nor understand. It is precisely one of those matters of which 
St. Paul writes, ‘‘ The natural man receiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him” 
(x Cor. ii. 14). But for all that, I repeat emphatically, the 
spiritual presence of Christ,—His presence after the manner 
of a Spirit with the spirits of His own people,—is a thing real 
and true. Let us not doubt it. Let us hold it fast. Let us 
seek to feel it more and more. The man who feels nothing 
whatever of it in his own heart’s experience, may depend on 
it that he is not yet in a right state of soul. 


III, THE REAL BODILY PRESENCE OF OUR LORD 
JESUS CHRIST. 


Where is it ?. What ought we to think about it ? What 
ought we to reject, and what ought we to hold fast ? 

This is a branch of my subject on which it is most impor- 
tant to have clear and well-defined views. There are rocks 
around it on which many are making shipwreck. No doubt 
there are deep things and difficulties connected with it. But 
this must not prevent our examining it as far as possible by 
the light of Scripture. Whatever the Bible teaches plainly 
about Christ’s bodily presence, it is our duty to hold and 
believe. 

(a) There was a bodily presence of our Lord Jesus Christ 
during the time that He was upon earth at His first advent. 
For thirty-three years, at least, between His birth and His 
ascension, He was present in a body in this world. In infinite 
mercy to our souls the eternal Son of God was pleased to take 
our nature on Him, and to be miraculously born of a woman, 
with a body just like our own. He was made like unto us in 


164 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


all things, sin only excepted. Like us He grew from infancy 
to boyhood, and from boyhood to youth, and from youth to 
manhood. Like us, He ate, and drank, and slept, and 
hungered, and thirsted, and wept, and felt fatigue and pain. 
He had a body which was subject to all the conditions of a 
material body. While, as God, He was in heaven and earth 
at the same time ; as man, His body was only in one place at 
one time. When He was in Galilee He was not in Judea, 
and when He was in Capernaum He was not in Jerusalem. 
In a real, true human body He lived; in a real, true human 
body He kept the law, and fulfilled all righteousness ; and in 
a real, true human body He bore our sins on the Cross and 
made satisfaction for us by His atoning blood. He that died 
for us on Calvary was perfect man, while at the same time He 
was perfect God. This was the first real bodily presence of 
Jesus Christ. 

The truth before us is full of unspeakable comfort to all 
who have an awakened conscience, and know the value of 
their souls. It is a heart-cheering thought that the “‘ One 
Mediator between God and man is the man Jesus Christ :”’ 
real Man, and so able to be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities ; Almighty God and so able to save to the uttermost 
all who come to the Father by Him. The Saviour in whom 
the labouring and heavy-laden are invited to trust, is One 
who had a real body when He was working out our redemption 
on earth. “ By man came death, and by man came also the 
resurrection of the dead” (1 Cor. xv. 21). The battle was 
fought for us, and the victory was won by the eternal Word 
made flesh,—by the real bodily presence among us of Jesus 
Christ. For ever let us praise God that Christ did not remain 
in heaven, but came into the world and was made flesh to 
save sinners. Whether men know it or not, our whole 
hope of eternal life hinges on the simple fact, that eighteen 
hundred years ago there was a real bodily presence of the Son 
of God for us on the earth. 

(6) Let us now goa step further. There is a real bodily 

165 


KNOTS UNTIED 


presence of Jesus Christ in heaven at the right hand of God. 
This is a deep and mysterious subject, beyond question. 
What God the Father is, and where He dwells, what the nature 
of His dwelling-place who is a Spirit,—these are high things 
which we have no minds to take in. But where the Bible 
speaks plainly it is our duty and our wisdom to believe. When 
our Lord rose again from the dead, He rose witha real human 
body,—a body which could not be in two places at once,— 
a body of which the angels said, “‘ He is not here, but is risen 
(Luke xxiv. 6). In that body, having finished His redeeming 
work on earth, He ascended visibly into heaven. He took His 
body with Him, and did not leave it behind, like Elijah’s 
mantle. It was not laid in the grave at last, and did not 
become dust and ashes in some Syrian village, like the bodies 
of saints and martyrs. The same body which walked in the 
streets of Capernaum, and sat in the house of Mary and 
Martha, and was crucified on Golgotha, and was laid in Joseph’s 
tomb—that same body,—after the resurrection glorified 
undoubtedly, but still real and miaterial,—was taken 
up into heaven, and is there at this very moment. To use 
the inspired words of the Acts, ‘“‘ While they beheld, He was 
taken up, and a cloud received Him out of their sight ”’ 
(Acts i. 1z). To use the words of St. Luke’s Gospel, “ While 
He blessed them, He was parted from them, and carried up 
into heaven’”’ (Luke xxiv. 51). To use the words of St. 
Mark, “ After the Lord had spoken to them, He was received 
up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God” (Mark 
xvi. 19). The fourth Article of the Church of England states 
the whole matter fully and accurately : “ Christ did truly rise 
again from death, and took again His body, with flesh, bones, 
and all things appertaining to the perfection of man’s nature : 
wherewith He ascended into heaven, and there sitteth, until 
He return to judge all men at the last day.” 

The doctrine before us is singularly rich in comfort and 
consolation to all true Christians. That divine Saviour in 
heaven, on whom the Gospel tells us to cast the burden of our 


166 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


sinful souls, is not a Being who is Spirit only, but a Being who 
is man as well as God. He is One who has taken up to heaven 
a body like our own ; and in that body sits at the right hand 
of God, to be our Priest and our Advocate, our Representative 
and our Friend. He can be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities, because He has suffered Himself in the body being 
tempted. He knows by experience all that the body is liable 
to from pain, and weariness, and hunger, and thirst, and 
work ; and has taken to heaven that very body which endured 
the contradiction of sinners and was nailed to the tree. Who 
can doubt that that body in heaven is a continual plea for 
believers, and renders them ever acceptable in the Father’s 
sight ? It is a perpetual remembrance of the perfect propitia- 
tion made for us upon the Cross. God will not forget that our 
debts are paid for, so long as the body which paid for them 
with life-blood is in heaven before His eyes. Who can doubt 
that when we pour out our petitions and prayers before the 
throne of grace, we put them in the hand of One whose 
sympathy passes knowledge? None can feel for poor be- 
lievers wrestling here in the body, like Him who in the body 
sits pleading for them in heaven. For ever let us bless God 
that there is a real bodily presence of Christ in heaven. 

(c) Let us now goa step further. There is no real bodily 
presence of Christ in the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper or 
in the consecrated elements of bread and wine. 

This is a point which it is peculiarly painful to discuss, 
because it has long divided Christians into two parties, and 
defiled a very solemn subject with sharp controversy. Never- 
theless, it is one which cannot possibly be avoided in handling 
the question we are considering. Moreover, it is a point of 
vast importance, and demands very plain speaking. Those 
amiable and well-meaning persons who imagine that it signiftes 
little what opinion people hold about Christ’s presence in the 
Lord’s Supper,—that it is a matter of indifference, and that 
it all comes to the same thing at last,—are totally and entirely 
mistaken. They have yet to learn that an unscriptural view 


167 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of the subject may land them at length in a very dangerous: 
heresy. Let us search and see... . 

My reason for saying that there is no bodily presence of 
Christ in the Lord’s Supper or in the consecrated bread and 
wine, is simply this: there is no such presence taught any- 
where in holy Scripture. Jt is a presence that can never be 
honestly and fairly got out of the Bible. Let the three accounts 
of the institution of the Lord’s Supper, in the gospels of St. 
Matthew, St. Mark, and St. Luke, and the one given by St. 
Paul to the Corinthians, be weighed and examined impartially, 
and I have no doubt as to the result. They teach that the 
Lord Jesus, in the same night that He was betrayed, took 
bread and gave it to His disciples, saying, ““ Take eat: this 
is My body;” and also took the cup of wine, and gave it 
to them, saying, ‘‘ Drink ye all of this: this is My blood.” 
But there is nothing in the simple narrative, or in the verses 
which follow it, which shows that the disciples thought their 
Master’s body and blood were really present in the bread and 
wine which they received.—There is not a word in the Epistles 
to show that after our Lord’s ascension into heaven the 
Christians believed that His body and blood were present in — 
an ordinance celebrated on earth, or that the bread in the Lord’s 
Supper, after consecration, was not.truly and literally bread, 
and the wine truly and literally wine. 

Some persons, I am aware, suppose that such texts as 
“ This is my body,” and “‘ This is My blood,” are proofs that 
Christ’s body and blood, in some mysterious manner, -are 
locally present in the bread and wine at the Lord’s Supper, 
after their consecration. The quotation of a single isolated 
phrase is a mode of arguing which would establish Arianism 
or Socinianism. The context of these famous expressions 
shows clearly that those who heard the words used, and were 
accustomed to our Lord’s mode of speaking, understood them 
to mean, “ This represents My body,” and “ This represents 
My blood.” 

The comparison of other places proves that there is nothing 

168 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


unfair in this interpretation. It is certain that the words 
“is” and “are” frequently mean “‘ represent” in Scrip- 
ture. The disciples no doubt remembered their Master say- 
ing such things as “‘ The field is the world,—the good seed 
are the children of the kingdom ” (Matt. xiii. 38).—St. Paul, 
in writing on the sacrament, confirms this interpretation by 
expressly calling the consecrated bread, ‘“ bread,” and not 
the body of Christ, no less than three times (x Cor. xi. 26-28). 

Some persons, again, regard the sixth chapter of St. John, 
where our Lord speaks of “ eating His flesh and drinking His 
blood,” as a proof that there is a literal bodily presence of 
Christ in the bread and wine at the Lord’s Supper. But there 
is an utter absence of conclusive proof that this chapter refers 
to the Lord’s Supper at all! The Lord’s Supper had not been 
instituted, and did not exist, till at least a year after these 
words were spoken. The eating and drinking here spoken 
of are the eating and drinking of faith, and not a bodily action. 

Some people fancy that St. Paul’s words to the Corinthians, 
“The bread that we eat, is it not the communion of the body 
of Christ ?’”’ (x Cor. x. 16) are enough to prove a bodily 
presence of Christ in the Lord’s Supper. But unfortunately 
for their argument, St. Paul does not say, “‘ The bread is the 
body,’’ but the “communion of the body.” 

And there remains the unanswerable argument that if 
our Lord was actually holding His own body in His hands, 
when He said of the bread, ‘‘ This is My body,’”’ His body must 
have been a different body to that of ordinary men. Of course 
if His body was not a body like ours, His real and proper 
“humanity” is at an end. At this rate the blessed and 
comfortable doctrine of Christ’s entire sympathy with His. 
people, arising from the fact that He is really and truly man, 
would be completely overthrown and fall to the ground. 

Finally, if the body with which our blessed Lord ascended 
up into heaven can be in heaven, and on earth, and on ten 
thousand communion tables at one and the same time, it 
cannot be a real human body at all. Yet that He did ascend 

169 


KNOTS UNTIED 


with a real Human body, although a glorified body, is one 
of the prime articles of the Christian faith, and one that we 
ought never to let go! Once admit that a body can be present 
in two places at once, and you cannot prove that it is a body at 
all. Once admit that Christ’s body can be present at God’s 
right hand and on a communion table at the same moment, 
and it cannot be the body which was born of the Virgin Mary 
and crucified upon the Cross. From such a conclusion we may 
well draw back with horror and dismay. Well says the Prayer- 
book of the Church of England: “ The sacramental bread and 
wine remain still in their very natural substances, and there- 
fore may not be adored (for that were idolatry, to be abhorred 
of all faithful Christians) ; and the natural body and blood 
of our Saviour Christ are in heaven, and not here; it being 
against the truth of Christ’s natural body to be at one time in 
more places than one.’’ This is sound speech that cannot 
be condemned. Well would it be for the Church of England 
if all Churchmen would read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest 
what the Prayer-book teaches about Christ’s presence in the 
Lord’s Supper. 

If we love the truth, let us be very jealous over our doctrine 
about the Lord’s Supper. Let us stand fast on the simple 
teaching of Scripture, and let no one drive us from it under 
the pretence of increased reverence for the ordinance of 
Christ. Let us take heed, lest under confused and mystical 
notions of some inexplicable presence of Christ’s body and 
blood under the form of bread and wine, we find ourselves 
unawares heretics about Christ’s human nature. Next 
to the doctrine that Christ is not God, but only man, there is 
nothing more dangerous than the doctrine that Christ is not 
man, but only God. If we would not fall into that pit, we 
must hold firmly that there can be no literal presence of Christ’s 
body in the Lord’s Supper; because His body is in heaven, 
and not on earth, though as God He is everywhere. 

(d) Let us now bring our whole subject to a conclusion. 
There will be a real bodily presence of Christ when He comes 

170 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


again the second time to judge the world. This is a point 
about which the Bible speaks so plainly that there is no room 
left for dispute or doubt. When our Lord had ascended up 
before the eyes of His disciples, the angels said to them, “‘ This 
same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so 
come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven ”’ 
(Acts i. 11). There can be no mistake about the meaning of 
these words. Visibly and bodily our Lord left the world, and 
visibly and bodily He will return in the day which is 
emphatically called the day of ‘‘ His appearing ”’ (1 Peter i. 7). 
The world has not yet done with Christ. Myriads talk 
and think of Him as of One who did His work in the world 
and passed on to His own place, like some statesman or 
philosopher, leaving nothing but His memory behind Him. 
The world will be fearfully undeceived one day. That same 
Jesus who came nineteen centuries ago in lowliness and 
poverty, to be despised and crucified, shall come again one 
day in power and glory, to raise the dead and change the 
living, and to reward every man according to his works. The 
wicked shall see that Saviour whom they despised, but too 
late, and shall call on the rocks to fall on them and hide them 
from the face of the Lamb. The godly shall see the Saviour 
whom they have read of, heard of, and believed, and they 
shall find that sight is far better than faith, and that in Christ’s 
actual presence is fulness of joy. 
. * This is the real bodily presence of Christ, for which every 
true-hearted Christian ought daily to long and pray. Happy 
are those who make it an article of their faith, and live in the 
constant expectation of a second personal advent of Christ. 
Then, and then only, will the devil be bound, the curse be 
taken off the earth, the world be restored to its original purity, 
sickness and death be taken away, tears be wiped from all 
eyes, and the redemption of the saint, in body as well as soul, 
be completed. “It doth not yet appear what we shall be ; 
but we know that when He shall appear we shall be like Him, 
for we shall see Him as He is”’ (x Johniii. 2). The highest 
171 


KNOTS UNTIED 


style of Christian is the man who desires the real presence of — 
his Master, and ‘‘ loves His appearing ”’ (2 Tim. iv. 8). 


A WORD OF APPLICATION 


I have now unfolded, as far as I can in a short space, the 
truth about the presence of God and His Christ. I have shown 
(r) the general doctrine of God’s presence everywhere; (2) 
the Scriptural doctrine of Christ’s real, spiritual presence ; 
(3) the Scriptural doctrine of Christ’s real, bodily presence. 
I now leave the whole subject with a parting word of applica- 
tion. 

(x) What do we know of Christ ourselves? We have 
heard of Him thousands of times. We call ourselves Christians. 
But what do we know of Christ experimentally, as our own 
personal Saviour, our own Priest, our own Friend, the Healer 
of our conscience, the Comfort of our heart, the Pardoner of 
our sins, the Foundation of our hope, the Confidence of our 
souls ? 

(2) Let us not rest till we feel Christ “ present ” in our 
own hearts, and know what it is to be one with Christ and 
Christ with us. This is real religion. To live in the habit of 
looking backward to Christ on the Cross, upward to Christ 
at God’s right hand, and forward to Christ coming again,— 
this is the only Christianity which gives comfort in life and 
good hope in death. Let us remember this. 

(3) Let us beware of holding erroneous views about the 
Lord’s Supper, and especially about the real nature of Christ’s 
“presence ’’ init. Let us not so mistake that blessed ordinance 
which was meant to be our soul’s meat, as to turn it into our 
soul’s poison. There is no sacrifice in the Lord’s Supper, no 
sacrificing priest, no altar, no bodily ‘‘ presence ’’ of Christ in 
the bread and wine. These things are not in the Bible, and 
are dangerous inventions of man, leading on to superstition. 
Let us take care. 

(4) Let us keep continually before our minds the second 
advent of Christ, and that real “ presence ’’ which is yet to 

172 


THE REAL PRESENCE 


come. Let our loins be girded, and our lamps burning, and 
ourselves like men daily waiting for their Master’s return. 
Then, and then only, shall we have all the desires of our souls 
satisfied. Till then the less we expect from this world the 
better. Let our daily cry be, “ Come, Lord Jesus.’’ 


NOTE 


Controversy about the Lord’s Supper and the real presence of 
Christ, we all know, is at this moment one of the chief causes of division 
and disturbance in the Church of England. At sucha time, it is impor- 
tant to hear the opinions of some of our well-known English divines 
about the points in dispute. 

I give three quotations from three men of no mean authority. 


(t) Dean Aldrich, of Christ Church, says,— 
“The Church of England has wisely forborne to use the term of 
‘Real Presence ’ in all the books that are set forth by her authority. 
We neither find it recommended in the Liturgy, nor the Articles, nor 
the Homilies, nor the Church’s Catechism, nor Nowell’s. For although 
it be seen in the Liturgy, and once more in the Articles of 1552, it is 
mentioned in both places as a phrase of the Papists, and rejected for 
the abuse of it. So that if any Church of England man use 1t, he does 
more than the Church directs him. If any reject it, he has the Church’s 
example to warrant him; and it would very much contribute to the peace 
of Christendom if all men would write after so excellent a copy.’’—Dean 
Aldrich’s Reply to Two Discourses. Oxford, 1682. 4to, pp. 13-18. 


(2) Henry Philpotts, Bishop of Exeter, in his letter to Charles 
Butler, says,— 

“The Church of Rome holds that the body and blood of Christ are 
present under the accidents of bread and wine ; the Church of England 
holds that their real presence is in the soul of the communicant at the 
sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. 

“In the same manner, then, as our Lord Himself said, ‘I am the 
tvue bread that came down from heaven’ (not meaning thereby that 
He was a lump of baked dough or manna, but the true means of sustain- 
img the true life of man, which is spiritual, not corporeal), so in the sacra- 
ment, to the worthy receiver of the consecrated elements, though, in 
their nature mere bread and wine, are yet given, truly, really, and 
effectively, the crucified body and blood of Christ; that body and 
blood which were the instruments of man’s redemption, and upon which 
our spiritual life, and strength solely depend. It is in this sense that 
the crucified Jesus is present in the sacrament of His Supper, not in, 
nor with the bread and wine, nor under their accidents, but in the souls 
of communicants; not carnally, but effectually and faithfully, and 
therefore most really.”—Philpott’s Letter to Butler. 8vo Edition. 1825. 


Pp. 235, 236. 
173 


KNOTS UNTIED 


(3) Archbishop Longley says, in his last Charge, printed and 
published after his death in 1868,— 

“The doctrine of the Real Presence is, in one sense, the doctrine of 
the Church of England. She asserts that the body and blood of Christ 
are ‘ verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the Lord’s 
Supper.’ And she asserts equally that such presence is not material or 
corporal, but that Christ’s body ‘is given, taken, and eaten in the 
Supper, only after a heavenly and spiritual manner’ (Article xxviii). 
Christ’s presence is effectual for all those intents and purposes for 
which His body was broken and His blood shed. As to a presence 
elsewhere than in the heart of a believer, the Church of Engiand is silent, 
and the words of Hooker therefore represent her views: ‘ The real 


presence of Christ’s most blessed body and blood is not to be sought — 


in the sacrament, but in the worthy receiver of the sacrament.’ ”’ 


T will now conclude the whole subject with the following remarkable 
quotation, which I commend to the special attention of all my readers. 
It is taken from the judgment delivered by the Judicial Committee 
of the Privy Council, the highest Court of the realm, in the famous 
case of Sheppard v. Bennett :— 

“Any presence of Christ in the Holy Communion, which is not a 
presence to the soul of the faithful receiver, the Church of England does 
not by her Articles and Formularies affirm, or require her ministers to 
accept.”” This cannot be stated too plainly. 


174 


Xx 
THE CHURCH 


There is perhaps no subject in religion which is so much 
misunderstood as the subject of the “Church.” There is 
certainly no misunderstanding which has done more harm to 
professing Christians than ‘the misunderstanding of this 
subject. 

There are few words in the New Testament which are used 
in such a variety of meanings, as the word “‘ Church.’ It is 
a word which we hear constantly, and yet we cannot help 
observing that different people use it in different senses. The 
English politician in our days talks of ‘“‘ The Church.”” What 
does he mean ? You will generally find he means the Episcopal 
Church established in his own country.—The Roman Catholic 
talks of “the Church.”” What does he mean? He means 
the Church of Rome, and tells you that there is no other Church 
in the world except his own.—The Dissenter talks of “‘ the 
Church.”” What does he mean? He means the communi- 
cants of that chapel of which he is a member.—The members 
of the Church of England talk of ‘“‘ the Church.” What do 


1 There seem to be four meanings of the word Church in the New 
Testament. (1) It is applied to the whole body of the elect. (Heb. 
xii. 23). (2) It is applied to the baptized Christians of a particular 
place or district (Acts viii. 1). (3) It is applied to a small number 
of professing Christians, in a particular family (Rom. xvi. 5). (4) It 
is applied to the whole body of baptized people throughout the world, 
both good and bad (x Cor. xii. 28). In the fourth sense the word is 
used very seldom indeed. The first and second senses are the most 


common, 
175 


KNOTS UNTIED 


they mean? One means the building in which he worships 
on a Sunday. Another means the clergy,—and when any one 
is ordained, tells you that he has gone into the Church! A 
third has some vague notions about what he is pleased to call 
apostolical succession, and hints mysteriously that the Church 
is made up of Christians who are governed by Bishops, and 
of none beside, 

I believe that to have clear ideas about the Church is of 
the first importance in the present day. I believe that mis- 
takes on this point are one grand cause of the religious de- 
lusions into which so many fall. I wish to direct attention 
to that great primary meaning in which the word “‘ Church ” 
is used in the New Testament, and to clear the subject of that 
misty vagueness by which it is surrounded in.so many minds. 
It was a most true saying of Bishop Jewel the Reformer, 
“ There never was anything yet so absurd or so wicked, but it 
might seem easy to be covered and defended by the name of the 
Church,’ (Jewel’s Apol., sec. xx.) 

I. What is the one true Church out of which no man can 
be saved. : 

There is a Church outside of which there is no salvation,— 
a Church to which a man must belong, or be lost eternally. 
I lay this down without hesitation or reserve. I say it as 
strongly and as confidently as the strongest advocate of the 
Church of Rome. But what is this Church ? Where is this 
Church ? What are the marks by which this Church may be 
known? This is the grand question. 

The one true Church is well described in the Communion 
Service of the Church of England, as “‘ The mystical body of 
Christ, which is the blessed company of all faithful people.” 
It is made up of all God’s elect,—of all converted men and 


1“ The adversaries of the truth defend many a false error under 
the name of the holy Church. 


‘Beware of deceit, when thou hearest the name of the Church. 
The verity is then assaulted. They call the Church of the devil the holy 
Church many times,”—Bishop Hooper. 1547. Parker Edit., pp. 83, 84. 


176 


THE CHURCH 


women,—of all true Christians. In whatsoever we can dis- 
cern the election of God the Father, the sprinkling of the blood 
of God the Son, the sanctifying work of God the Spirit, in that 
person we see a member of Christ’s true Church. 

It is a Church of which all the members have the same 
marks. They are all born again of the Spirit.—They all possess 
“repentance towards God, faith towards our Lord Jesus 
Christ,’ and holiness of life and conversation.—They all hate 
sin, and they all love Christ.—They worship differently, 
and after various fashions. Some worship with a form of prayer 
and some with none. Some worship kneeling, and some 
standing. But they all worship with one heart.—They are 
all led by one Spirit.—They all build upon one foundation.— 
They all draw their religion from one single book.—They are 
all joined to one great centre, that is Jesus Christ. They all, 
even now, can say with one heart, “ Hallelujah !”’ 

It is a Church which is dependent upon no ministers upon 
earth, however much it values those who preach the Gospel to 
itsmembers. The life of its members does not hang on Church- 
membership and baptism and the Lord’s Supper, although 
they highly value these things, when they are to be had. 
But it has only one Great Head,—one Shepherd,—one chief 
Bishop,—and that is Jesus Christ. He alone, by His Spirit, 
admits the members of this Church, though ministers may 
show the door. Till He opens the door, no man on earth can 
open it. Once let a man repent and believe the Gospel, and 
that moment he becomes a member of this Church. Like the 
penitent thief, he may have no opportunity of being baptized. 
But he has that which is far better than any water-baptism,— 
the baptism of the Spirit. He may not be able to receive 
the bread and wine in the Lord’s Supper,—He may be ex- 
communicated by ordained men, and cut off from the outward 
ordinances of the professing Church,—but all the ordained 


1“ That Church which is Christ’s mystical body consisteth of.none 
but only true Israelites, true sons of Abraham, true servants and saints 
of God.’’—Hooker, Eccles. Polity, book iii., sec. I. 1600. 


177 N 


KNOTS UNTIED 


men in the world cannot shut him out of the true Church.* 

It is a Church whose existence does not depend on forms, 
ceremonies, cathedrals, churches, chapels, pulpits, endow- 
ments, money, kings, governments, or any favour whatso- 
ever from the hand of man. It has often lived on and con- 
tinued when all these things have been taken from it. It has 
often been driven into the wilderness, or into dens and caves 
of the earth, by those who ought to have been its friends. 
But its existence depends on nothing but the presence of 
Christ and His Spirit, and so long as they are with it the 
Church cannot die. 

This is the Church to which the titles of present honour 
and privelege, and the promises of future glory especially 
belong. This is the body of Christ.—This is the bride.—This 
is the Lamb’s wife.—This is the flock of Christ.—This is the 
household of faith and family of God.—This is God’s building, 
God’s foundation, and the temple of the Holy Ghost. This is 
the Church of the first-born, whose names are written in 
‘heaven. This is the “holy Catholic Church ”’ of the Apostles’ 
Creed.—This is the “‘ One Catholic and Apostolic Church ”’ 
of the Nicene Creed.—-This is that Church to which the Lord 
Jesus promises “ the gates of hell shall not prevail against it,” 
and to which He says, “‘ I am with you alway, even unto the 
end of the world” (Matt. xvi. 18, xxviii. 20). 

This is the anly Church which possesses true unity. Its 
members are entirely agreed on all the weightier matters of 
religion, for they are all taught by one Spirit. About God, 
and Christ, and the Spirit, and sin, and their own hearts, and 
faith, and repentance, and the necessity of holiness, and the 
value of the Bible, and the importance of prayer, and the 
resurrection, and judgment to come,—about all these points 


1“ A man may be a true and visible member of the Holy Catholic 
Church, and yet be no actual member of any visible Church,” 

‘““Many there be, or may be in most ages, which are no members 
of the visible Church, and yet better members of the true Church than 
the members of the Church visible for the present are.’”—Jackson on 
the Church. 1670. 


178 


THE CHURCH 


they see eye to eye. Take three or four of them, strangers to 
one another, from the remotest corners of the earth. Ex- 
amine them separately on these points. You will find them 
all of one mind." 

This is the only Church which possesses true sanctity. 
Its members are all holy. They are all more or less 
conformed to the image of Jesus Christ. They are all more 
or less like their great Head. No unholy man belongs to 
this Church.’ 

This is the only Church which is truly Catholic. It is not 
the Church of any one nation or people. Its members are to 
be found in every part of the world where the Gospel is re- 
ceived and believed. It is not confined within the limits of 
any one country, nor pent up within the pale of any particular 
forms or outward government. In it there is no difference 
between Jew and Greek, black man and white, Episcopalian 
and Presbyterian ;—but faith in Christ is all. Its members 
will be gathered from north, and south, and east, and west, 
in the last day, and will be of every name, and denomination, 
and kindred, and people, and tongue, but all one in Christ 
Jesus. 

This is the only Church which is truly Apostolic. It is built 
on the foundation laid by the Apostles, and holds the doc- 
trines which they preached. The two grand objects at which 
its members aim, are apostolic faith and apostolic practice ; 
and they consider the man who talks of following the Apostles 


1“ To the mystical and invisible Church belongs peculiarly that 
unity which is often attributed unto the Church.’’—‘‘ This is the society 
of those for whom Christ did pray that they might be one.’”’—Barrow 
on the Unity of the Church. 1670. 


2“ To this Holy Catholic Church, which forms the mystical body 
of Christ, we deny that the ungodly, hypocrites, or any belong, who 
are not partakers of spirtual life, and are void of inward faith, charity, 
and holiness. The most learned Augustine has denied it as well, giving 
it as his opinion that all such should be ranked among the members of 
Antichrist.” —Bishop Davenant’s Determinations. 1634, Vol.ii., p. 475. 


179 


KNOTS UNTIED 


without possessing these two things, to be no better than 
sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. 

This is the only Church which is certain to endure unto the 
end. Nothing can altogether overthrow and destroy it. Its 
members may be persecuted, oppressed, imprisoned, beaten, 
beheaded, burned.—But the true Church is never altogether 
extinguished. It rises again from its afflictions.—It lives on 
through fire and water.—When crushed in one hand, it springs 
up in another. The Pharaohs, the Herods, the Neros, the 
Julians, the Diocletians, the bloody Marys, the Charles the 
Ninths have laboured in vain to put down this Church. They 
slay their thousands, and then pass away and go to their own 
place. The true Church out-lives them all, and sees them 
buried each in his turn. It is an anvil that has broken many 
a hammer in this world, and will break many a hammer still. 
It is a bush which is often burning, and yet is not consumed. 

This is the only Church of which no one member can perish. 
Once enrolled in the lists of this Church, sinners are safe for 
eternity.—They are never cast away. The election of God 
the Father,—the continual intercession of God the Son,— 
the daily renewing and sanctifying power of God the Holy 
Ghost, surround and fence them in like a garden enclosed. 
Not one bone of Christ’s mystical body shall ever be broken. 
Not one lamb of Christ’s flock shall ever be plucked out of His 
hand. 

This is the Church which does the work of Christ upon earth. 
Its members are a little flock, and few in number compared 
with the children of the world :—one or two here, and two 
or three there,—a few in this parish, and a few in that. But 
these are they who shake the universe.—These are they who 
change the fortunes of kingdoms by their prayers.—These 
are they who are the active workers for spreading the know- 
ledge of pure religion and undefiled.—These are the life-blood 


‘i 1“ They are the successors of the Apostles that succeed in virtue 
holiness, truth, and so forth ; not they that sit upon the same stool,”’— 
Bishop Babington. 1615. Folio edition, p. 307. 

180 


THE CHURCH 


of a country,—the shield, the defence, the stay and the support 
of any nation to which they belong. 

This is the Church which shall be truly glorious at the end 
of all things. When all earthly glory is passed away, then 
shall this Church be presented without spot, before God the 
Father’s throne. Thrones, principalities, and powers upon 
earth shall come to nothing.—Dignities and offices and endow- 
ments shall all pass away.—But the Church of the first-born 
shall shine as the stars at the last, and be presented with joy 
before the Father’s throne, in the day of Christ’s appearing. 
When the Lord’s jewels are made up, and the manifestation 
of the sons of God takes place, Episcopacy, and Presbyterian- 
ism and Congregationalism will not be mentioned. One 
Church only will be named, and that is the Church of the 
elect. 

II. The position and value of all visible professing Churches. 

No careful reader of the Bible can fail to observe that 
many separate Churches are mentioned in the New Testa- 
ment. At Corinth, at Ephesus, at Thessalonica, at Antioch, 
at Smyrna, at Sardis, at Laodicea, and several other places ; 
at each we find a distinct body of professing Christians,—a 
body of people baptized in Christ’s name, and professing the 
faith of Christ’s Gospel. And these bodies of people we find 
spoken of as “ the Churches ”’ of the places which are named. 
Thus St. Paul says to the Corinthians, ‘‘ But we have no such 
custom, neither the Churches of Christ’”’ (x Cor. xi. 16). 
So also we read of the Churches of Judea, the Churches of 
Syria, the Churches of Galatia, the Churches of Asia, the 
Churches of Macedonia. In each case the expression means 
the bodies of baptized Christians in the countries mentioned. 

Now, we have but little information given us in the New 
Testament about these Churches ;—but that little is very 
clear and plain, so far as it goes, 

We know, for one thing, that these Churches were all 
mixed bodies. They consisted not only of converted persons, 
but of many unconverted persons also. They contained not 

181 


KNOTS UNTIED 


only believers, but members who fell into gross errors and 
mistakes, both of faith and practice. This is clear from the 
account we have of the Churches at Corinth, at Ephesus, and- 
at Sardis. Of Sardis the Lord Jesus Himself says, that there 
were ‘‘a few,” a few only, in it, who had not “ defiled their 
garments ”’ (Rev. iii. 4). 

We know, moreover, that even in the Apostles’ times 
Churches received plain warnings, that they might perish 
and pass away altogether. To the Church at Rome the threat 
was held out that it should be “ cut off ;”’ to the Church at 
Ephesus, that its “‘ candlestick should be taken away;”’ 
to the Church at Laodicea that it should be utterly rejected 
(Rom. xi. 22; Rey. ii. 5, and iii. 16). 

We know, moreover, that in all these Churches there was 
public worship, preaching, reading of the Scriptures, prayer, 
praise, discipline, order, government, the ministry, and the 
sacraments. What kind of governments some Churches had 
it is impossible to say positively. We read of officers who 
were called angels, of bishops, of deacons, of elders, of pastors 
of teachers, of evangelists, of prophets, of helps, of govern- 
ments (zr Cor, xii. 28; Ephes. iv. rz; Phil. i. rz; 1 Tim. iii. ; 
Rev. i. 20). All these are mentioned. But the particulars 
about most of these officers are kept from us by the Spirit of 
God. As to the standard of doctrine and practice in the 
Churches, we have the fullest and most distinct information. 
On these points the language of the New Testament is clear 
and unmistakable. But as to government and outward 
ceremonies, the information given to us is strikingly small. 
The contrast between the Church of the Old Testament and 
the Churches of the New, in this respect, is very great. In 
the one, we find little, comparatively, about doctrine, but 
much about forms and ordinances. Jn the other, we have much 
about doctrine, and little about forms. In the Old Testament 
Church the minutest directions were given for the performance 
of every part of the ceremonies of religion. In the New Testa- 
ment Churches we find the ceremonies expressly abolished, 

182 


THE CHURCH 


as no longer needed after Christ’s death, and nothing hardly, 
except a few general principles, supplying their place. The 
‘New Testament Churches have got no book of Leviticus. 
Their two chief principles seem to be, “ Let all things be done 
decently and in order ;—Let all things be done unto edifica- 
tion ’’ (i Cor. xiv. 26, 40). But as to the application of these 
general principles, it seems to have been left to each particu- 
lar Church to decide. 

We know, finally, that the work begun by the missionary 
preaching of the Apostles was carried on through the instru- 
mentality of the professing Churches. It was through the 
means of grace used in their public assemblies that God added 
to the number of His people, converted sinners, and built up 
saints. Mixed and imperfect as these Churches plainly were, 
within their pale were to be found nearly all the existing 
believers and members of the body of Christ. Everything in 
the New Testament leads us to suppose that there could have 
been few believers, if any who were not members of some one 
or other of the professing Churches scattered up and down the 
world. 

Such is about the whole of the information the New Testa- 
ment gives us concerning visible Churches in the apostolic 
times. How shall we use this information ? What shall we say 
of all the visible Churches in our own time ? We live in days 
when there are many Churches ;—the Church of England, 
the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland, the Church 
of Rome, the Greek Church, the Syrian Church, the Armenian 
Church, the Lutheran Church, the Genevan Church, and many 
others. We have Episcopalian Churches. We have Presby- 
terian Churches. We have Independent Churches. In what 
manner shall we speak of them? Let me put down a few 
general principles. 

(a) No visible Church on earth has a right to say, ‘‘ We 
are the true Church, and except men belong to our communion 
they cannot be saved.’’ Where is the text in the Bible that 
ties admission into the kingdom of God to the membership 


183 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of any one particular visible Church upon earth ?—I say con- 
fidently, not one. 

(6) No visible Church has a right to say, “‘ We alone have 
the true form of worship, the true Church government, the 
true way of administering the sacraments, and the true 
manner of offering up united prayer; and all others are 
completely wrong.’”’ Where can such assertions be proved 
by Scripture? There is not a text in the Bible which 
expressly commands Churches to have one special form of 
government, and expressly forbids any other. If there is, 
let men point it out. There is not a text which expressly 
confines Christians to the use of a Liturgy, or expressly enjoins 
them only to have extempore prayer. It seems wonderful, 
that in a matter like this, men should not be satisfied with 
the full persuasion that they themselves are right, but must 
also go on to condemn everybody who disagrees with them 
as utterly wrong ! 

(c) No visible Church on earth has a right to say, ‘‘ We 
shall never fall away. We shall last for ever.” There is no 
promise in the Bible to guarantee the continuance of any 
professing Church upon earth. Many have fallen completely, 
and perished already. Where are the Churches of Africa, in 
which Augustine and Cyprian used once to preach ? Where are 
most of the Churches of Asia Minor, which we read of in the 
New Testament ?—They are gone. 

(d) No visible Church is in a sound and healthy state, 
which has not the marks we see in all the New Testament 
Churches. A Church in which the Bible is not the standard 
of faith and practice,—a Church in which repentance, faith, 
and holiness, are not prominently put forward as essential. 
to salvation,—a Church in which forms, and ceremonies, and 
ordinances not commanded in the Bible, are the chief things 
urged upon the attention of the members,—such a Church is in 
a very diseased and unsatisfactory condition. It may not formally 
deny any article of the Christian faith. It may have been 
founded originally by the Apostles. It may boast that it is 

184 


THE CHURCH 


Catholic. But if the Apostles were to rise from the dead, and 
visit such a church, I believe they would command it to repent, 
and have no communion with it till it did. 

(e) Furthermore, no mere membership of any visible 
Church will avail a man anything “ in the hour of death and 
in the day of judgment.” No communion with a visible 
Church will stand in the place of direct personal communion 
with the Lord Jesus. No attendance whatever on its ordin- 
ances is a substitute for personal faith and conversion. It 
will be no answer in the last great day, when the secrets of 
all hearts are revealed, if we can only say that we worshipped 
in the Church in which we were baptized, and used its forms. 

(f) After all, what is the great use and purpose for which 
God has raised up and maintained visible Churches upon earth ? 
They are useful as witnesses, keepers, and librarians of Holy 
Scripture. They are useful as maintainers of a regular success- 
ion of ministers to preach the Gospel. They are useful as pre- 
servers of order among professing Christians. But their great 
and principle use is to train up, to rear, to nurse, to keep to- 
gether, members of that one true Church which is the body 
of Jesus Christ. They are intended to “ edify the body of 
Cirst ~ (Hphes. iv. 12). 

Which is the best visible Church upon earth? That is 
the best, which adds most members to the one true Church, 
which most promotes “ repentance towards God, faith towards 
‘the Lord Jesus Christ,’ and good works among its members. 
These are the true tests and tokens of a really good and 
flourishing Church. Give me that Church which has evidence 
of this kind to show. 

We do well to remember that on the one hand a visible 
professing Church is a true thing, and a thing according to 
the mind of God.—On the other hand, something more is 
needed than merely belonging to this Church, or that Church, 
to take a man to heaven. Are we born again? Have we 
repented of our sins ? Have we laid hold of Christ by faith ? 
Are we holy in life and conversation ?—These are the grand 


185 


KNOTS UNTIED 


points that a man must seek to ascertain. Without these 
things, the highest, the strictest, and the most regular member 
of a visible Church, will be a lost Churchman in the last great 
day. 

Let us look upon visible Churches, with their outward 
forms and ordinances, as being to the one true Church what 
the husk is to the kernel of the nut. Both grow together,— 
both husk and kernel. Yet one is far more precious than the 
other. Just so the true Church is far more precious than the 
outward and visible.—The husk is useful to the kernel. It 
preserves it from many injuries, and enables it to grow. Just 
so the outward Church is useful to the body of Christ ; it is 
within the pale of its ordinances that believers are generally 
born again, and grow up in faith, hope, and charity.—The 
husk is utterly worthless without the kernel. Just so the out- 
ward Church is utterly worthless except it guards and covers 
over the inward and the true.—The husk will die, but the kernel 
has a principle of life in it. Just so the forms and ordinances 
of the outward Church will all pass away, but that which lives 
and lasts forever is the true Church within. To expect to find 
the true Church, and members of the true Church, without 
having an orderly and well-governed and visible Church, 
is expecting that which God in the ordinary course of things, 
does not give. 

Let us seek a right understanding upon these points. To 
give to the visible Church the names, attributes, promises, 
and privileges which belong to the one true Church,—the body 
of Christ ; to confound the two things, the visible and the 
inward Church,—the Church professing and the Church of 
the elect,—is an immense delusion. It is a trap into which 
only too many fall. It is a great rock, on which many, in these 
days, unhappily make shipwreck. 

But once confound the body of Christ with the outward 

1“ The invisible Church is ordinarily and regularly part of the 


visible, but yet that only part that is the true one.’’—Bishop Jeremy 
Taylor, 1670. 
186 


THE CHURCH 


professing Church, and there is no amount of error into which 
you may not at last fall. Nearly all perverts to Romanism 
begin with getting wrong here. 

Once get hold of the idea that Church government is of 
more importance than sound doctrine, and that a Church 
with bishops teaching falsehood is better than a Church 
without bishops teaching truth, and none can say what we may 
come to in religion. 

III. Some Practical Counsels and Cautions for the Times 
in which we live. 

I feel deeply that I should neglect a duty if I did not do 
this. The errors and mistakes connected with the subject of 
the Church are so many and so serious, that they need to be 
plainly denounced, and men need to be plainly put upon their 
guard against them. I have laid down some general principles 
about the one true Church, and about the visible professing 
Churches. Now let me go on to make some particular appli- 
cation of these general principles to the times in which we live. 

(1) First of all, let no reader suppose, because I have said 
that no membership of a visible Church can be the saving of a 
soul, that it does not signify to what visible Church a man belongs. 
It does signify to what visible Church a man belongs ;— 
and it signifies very much. There are Churches in which the 
Bible is practically lost sight of altogether. There are 
Churches in which Jesus Christ’s Gospel is buried, and lies 
completely hidden. Such are the Armenian and Greek 
Churches, and such, above all others in corruption, is the 
Church of Rome. To belong to such Churches is to depart 
from Apostolic Christianity.’ 


1“ For lack of diligent observing the difference first between the 
Church of God, mystical and visible,—then between the visible sound 
and the visible corrupted,—the oversights are neither few nor light 
that have been committed.’”—Hooker, Eccles. Pol., book ili. 1600. 


2‘ Tf it be possible to be there, where the true Church is not, then 
is it at Rome.”—Church of England Homily for Whit-Sunday. 

“ We have forsaken a Church in which we could neither hear the 
pure word of God nor administer the sacraments, nor invoke the name 


187 


KNOTS UNTIED 


(2) Let us not be moved by the argument of the Roman Catholic, 
when he says, ‘‘ There is only one true Church and that one 
true Church is the Church of Rome, and you must join us if 
you mean to be saved.’’ Let no reader be entrapped by such 
miserable sophistry as this. It is a wonderful proof of the 
fallen condition of man’s understanding that so many people 
are taken in by it. Tell the man who uses this argument 
that there is indeed only one true Church, but it is not the 
Church of Rome, or the Church of England, or the Church 
of any other nation upon earth. Defy him boldly to show 
a single text which says that the Church of Rome is that one 
true Church to which men must belong. Tell him that to 
quote texts of Scripture which merely speak of “‘ the Church” 
is no proof on his side at all, and that such texts might just 
as well refer to the Church of Jerusalem, or to the Church 
of Antioch, as to Rome. Point out to him the eleventh 
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, which foretells Romish 
arrogance, and Romish presumption, and the possibility of 
Rome itself being cut off. Tell him that the Church’s proud 
claim to be the one true Church is a mere baseless assump- 
tion,—a house built upon sand, which has not a tittle of 
Scripture to rest upon. 

(3) Let us not be shaken by those persons who talk of “ the 
voice of the Church,’’ and the “‘ Catholic Church,’’ when we 
disagree with them, as if the very mention of these words ought 
to silence us. There are many in these days of theological 
warfare, whose favourite weapon, when the Bible is appealed 
to, is this: ‘The Church says it ;—the Church has always 
so ruled it;—the voice of the Church has always so 


of God as we ought,—and in which there was nothing to retain a pru- 
dent man who thought seriously of his salvation. —Bishop Jewel's 
Apology. 

““Such adherence to the visible or representative Church of Rome, 
as Jesuits and others now challenge, doth induce a separation from the 
Holy Catholic Church, and is more deadly to the soul than to be bed 
fellow to one sick of the pestilence is to the body. —Jackson on the 
Catholic Church, 1670. 

188 


THE CHURCH 


pronounced it.’’ I warn my readers never to be put down by 
arguments of this kind. Ask men what they mean when they 
talk in this vague way about “‘ the Church.”’ If they mean 
the whole professing Church throughout the world, call upon 
them to show when and where the whole Church has met to 
decide the matter about which they speak. Or ask them, if 
the Church had met, what right its decision would have to be 
listened to, except it could be shown to be founded upon the 
Word of God? Or, if they mean by “the voice of the 
Church,’ the voice of the Church of England, ask them to 
show you in the Thirty-nine Articles the doctrine which they 
want you to receive, and are pressing upon you. Point out 
to them that the Church of England says in those Articles, 
that “‘ nothing is to be required of men, as necessary for salvation, 
except it can be read in, or proved by, the Holy Scriptures.’’ 
Point out to them that it says furthermore, that although 
the Church has power to decree rites and ceremonies, and 
authority in controversies of faith, yet ‘ it is not lawful for 
the visible Church to ordain anything contrary to God’s Word 
written, or so to expound one place of Scripture as to make it 
repugnant to another.’’ Show them also what the Church of 
England says when it speaks of the three creeds,—the 
Apostles’ Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Athanasian Creed. 
It does not say they are to be received and believed because 
the Primitive Church put them forth,—but because “ they 
may be proved by most certain warrants of Holy Scripture ”’ 
(Arts. vi., Xx., viii.). 

Tell men, when ‘they talk mysteriously to you about 
“hearing the Church,” that our Lord was not speaking of 
matters of faith at all when he said, “ Hear the Church” 
(Matt. xviii. 17). Tell them that your rule of faith and 
practice is the Bible only, and that if they will show you 
their views in the Bible, you will receive them, but not 
otherwise. 

Alas, that it should be needful to say all this. But I fear 
there are only too many to whom “ the voice of the Church ”’ 

189 


KNOTS. UNTIED 


has been like the fabled Medusa’s head. It seems to have 
petrified their common sense.* 

(4) Let me warn members of the Church of England never 
to take up ground on behalf of their Church which cannot be 
defended from the Holy Scriptures. I love the Church of which 
I am a minister, and I delight to take up high ground on its 
behalf. But I do not call that ground really high which is 
not also Scripturally safe. I think it foolish and wrong to 
take up ground from which we are sure to be driven when we 
come to argue closely with those who differ from us. 

Now there are many in this day who would have us tell all 
Presbyterians and Independents that the only true Church is 
always an Episcopal Church,—that to this belong the promises 
of Christ, and to no other kind of Church at all,—that to 
separate from an Episcopal Church is to leave the Catholic 
Church, to be guilty of an act of schism, and fearfully to peril 
the soul. 

When the Scripture says, ““ Except a man be born again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God,’’—when the Scripture says, 
“Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish,’’—when the 
Scripture says, “‘ Without holiness no man shall see the Lord,” 
—when the Scripture says, ““ He that believeth not on the 
Lord Jesus Christ shall be damned ’”’ ;—when the Scripture 
so speaks, such doctrines cannot be proclaimed too plainly 
by us. But never anywhere does Scripture say, from Matthew 
down to Revelation, “ Except a man belong to a Church 
governed by bishops, he cannot be saved.’ There is not a 


1 The only case in which an appeal to the testimony of the Church 
seems allowable is where it is made in order to establish an historical 
fact. For instance, the Sixth Article of the Church of England says, 
that of the ‘“ Authority of the Canonical Books of the New Testament 
there never was any doubt in the Church,” that is, in the whole body 
of professing Churches. Only let it be remembered that receiving 
the testimony of the Church to a fact does not for a moment imply 
that the Church has any authoritative power to interpret doctrine 
infallibly. A man may be a very competent witness to the fact that a 


book has been faithfully printed, and yet know little or nothing about 
the meaning of its contents. 


190 


THE CHURCH 


text in Scripture which says anything of the kind, from first 
to last. Once begin to require things in religion which are not 
required of men in the Bible, and where are we to stop ? 4 

Let no one misunderstand my meaning in saying this. 
I see more for Episcopacy in the Bible than I do for any other 
form of Church government. I consider the historical fact 
that there were bishops in most of the professing Churches 
at the beginning of Christianity, deserves much weight. I 
believe it is far wiser to have a regular, settled Liturgy, for 
the use of congregations, than to make a congregation depen- 
dent upon its minister’s frames and feelings for the tone of its 
regular prayers. I think that endowments settled and estab- 
lished by law, are a way of paying ministers far preferable to 
the voluntary system. But I never can take up the ground 
that some men do in this day, who say that the Episcopal 
Church is the only true Church in Great Britain, and that all 
outside that Church are guilty schismatics. I cannot do it, 
because [ am sure such ground as this never can be main- 
tained. 

The Church of England asserts that its own ministers are 
Scripturally ordained. But this is a very different thing from 
saying that those who are not ordained in like manner are not 


1 “ You shall not find in all the Scripture this your essential point 
of succession of bishops.’’—John Bradford, Refoymer and Martyr, 
Chaplain to Bishop Ridley. 

“T conceive that the power of ordination was restrained to bishops 
rather by Apostolical practice, and the perpetual custom and Canons 
of the Church, than by any absolute precept that either Christ or His 
Apostles gave concerning it. Nor can I yet meet with any convincing 
‘argument to set it upon a more high and divine institution.’”’—Bishop 
Cosin. 1660. 

“We have found neither any express commandment, nor any 
example, which prescribes as universal and unchangeable one particu- 
lar system for the regulation of the Church and its ministers. Our 
argument consists only of inferences.—The conclusions in favour of 
Episcopacy from the New Testament are intimations rather than proofs, 
—We can produce no single text so clear as to compel us to conclude 
that the Apostles deemed any one peculiar form of government to be 
indispensable, and unalterable in the Church.’’—Discourses by the Rev. 
C. Benson, Master of the Temple. 


I9l 


KNOTS UNTIED 


ordained at all.—It asserts that there always have been 
bishops, priests, and deacons. But this is very different from 
saying that where these orders are not there is no true Church. 
—It calmly asserts that a man must be lawfully called and 
sent, in order to be a minister. But it nowhere says that 
none but bishops have power to call.* 

1 believe the Church of England has been graciously guided 
by God’s mercy to adopt the language of true Scriptural 
moderation. It is a moderation strikingly in contrast with 
the bold, decided language which it uses when speaking in 
the Doctrinal Articles about things essential to salvation. 
Let us be satisfied that our own communion is Scriptural ; 
but let us never pretend to unchurch all other communions 
beside our own. For my own part, I do not believe that men 
like Carey, and Rhenius, and Williams, and Campbell, the 
missionaries, were not real ministers of Jesus Christ. I loathe 
the idea of handing over the communions to which such men 
as Matthew Henry, and Doddridge, and Robert Hall, and 
M’Cheyne, and Chalmers belonged, to the uncovenanted 
mercies of God, or saying that such men as these were not 
really and truly ordained. Hard language is sometimes used 
about them. People dare to talk of their not belonging to the 
“Catholic Church,” and of their being guilty of schism ! 
I cannot for a moment hold such views. I deeply lament that 
any one should hold them. Surely those whom God hath not 
excluded, we should take care not to exclude. 


1“ Tt might have been expected that the defenders of the English 
Hierarchy against the first Puritans should take the highest ground, 
and challenge for the bishops the same unreserved submission, on the 
same plea of exclusive Apostolical prerogative which their adversaries 
feared not to insist on for their elders and deacons. It is notorious, 
however, that such was not in general the line preferred by Jewel, 
Whitgift, Bishop Cooper, and others, to whom the management of that 
controversy was intrusted during the early part of Elizabeth’s reign. 
It is enough with them to show that the government by archbishops 
and bishops is ancient and allowable, They never venture to urge 
its exclusive claims or to connect the succession with the validity of 
the sacraments.’’—Keble’s Preface to Hooker's Works, page 59. 


192 


THE CHURCH 


(5) Let us not set down men as no Christians, because they 
do not agree with us in our manner of worshipping God. In 
saying this, I would have it distinctly understood that I am 
not speaking now of those who deny the doctrine of the 
Trinity, and the sufficiency of Scripture to make men wise 
unto salvation. 

We may regret the divisions among professing Christians 
in our own country. We may feel that they weaken the holy 
cause of Christ’s Gospel. We may feel that people have often, 
and do often, become Dissenters in England from very insuff- 
cient reasons, and from motives by no means of the highest 
order. But, after all, we must not forget by whom the greater 
part of these divisions were primarily occasioned. Who 
obliged the bulk of English Nonconformists to secede ? Who 
drove them out of the fold of the Church of England? We 
of the Church of England did it ourselves, by not properly 
providing for their souls’ wants. We did it by gross neglect 
of the people’s souls,—by the grossly unscriptural kind of 
preaching which prevailed in the pulpits of our churches in 
the eighteenth century. I believe the plain truth is, that the 
vast majority of Dissenters in England did not leave the Church 
of England at first from any abstract dislike to the principle 
of Episcopacy, or Liturgies, or establishments.—But they did 
dislike the moral essays and inconsistent lives of the clergy ; 
and we must confess, with shame, that they had only too much 
reason. Some may think it strange that they did not see the 
beauties of our Prayer-book and Episcopacy more clearly. 
But there was one thing they saw far more clearly,—and that 
was, that men wholly taken up with field sports and the 
world, and never preaching Christ, were not likely to teach 
them the way to be saved. Surely when these things are so 
we have no right to speak harshly about Dissenters. If men 
found out that the Gospel was not preached by the clergy of 
the Church of England, who can blame them if they cared 
more for the Gospel than for the clergy, and went to hear that 
Gospel wherever it could be heard ? 

193 fe) 


KNOTS UNTIED 


(6) In the next place, let me warn men not to be shaken by 
those who say that all visible Churches are necessarily corrupt, 
and that no man can belong to them without peril to his soul. 
There never have been wanting men of this kind, men who 
have forgotten that everything must be imperfect which is 
carried on by human agency, and have spent their lives in a 
vain search after a perfectly pure Church. We must expect 
to find imperfections in every visible Church upon earth. 
There always were such in the New Testament Churches. 
There always will be such now. There is only one Church 
without spot or blemish. That is the one true Church, the 
body of Christ, which Christ shall present to His Father in 
the last great day. 

With regard to the Church of England, I will only remark 
that men ought not to confound the bad working of a system 
with the system itself. It may be quite true that many of 
its ministers are not what they ought to be. It may be true 
that some of its revenues are misapplied, and not properly 
spent. This does not prove that the whole machinery of the 
Church of England is rotten and corrupt, and the whole Church 
an institution which ought to be cast down. 

The Church of England Prayer-book may not be perfect 
and may be capable of many improvements. It would be 
strange if this was not the case,when we remember that its 
compilers were not inspired men. Still, after all, the Prayer- 
book’s imperfections are few, compared to its excellencies. 
The testimony of Robert Hall, the famous Baptist, on this 
subject is very striking. He says,—‘‘ The evangelical purity 
of its sentiments, the chastened fervour of its devotion, and the 
majestic simplicity of its language, have combined to place 
it in the very first rank of uninspired compositions.” 

(7) In the last place, let me advise men to try to understand 
thoroughly the principles and constitution of the Church of 
England. I say that advisedly. I say it to Churchmen and 
Dissenters alike. The ignorance which prevails in our country 
about the Church of England is great and deplorable. There 


194 


THE CHURCH 


are thousands of members of that Church who never studied 
the Thirty-nine Articles of Religion,—who hardly know of 
their existence,—and who have often found fault with the 

very doctrines that these Articles contain, and especially 
the Seventeenth. Yet those Articles are the Church’s Con- 
fession of faith. They show what is the Church’s view of doc- 
trine. No man, I say, is a true member of the Church of 
England who does not thoroughly agree in heart and in truth 
with the Thirty-nine Articles of his own Church. 

So also there are hundreds of thousands who do not know 
that the laity might prevent many improper ministers from 
being ordained in the Established Church. No man can be 
ordained a deacon in the Church of England, without notice 
being read in the parish church to which he belongs, and with- 
out people being invited to tell the bishop if they know of 
any just cause or impediment why he should not be ordained. 


PRACTICAL APPLICATION 


And now let me conclude by saying a few words of 
practical application to the conscience of every one who 
reads it. 

(a) First of all, let me advise every reader to ask himself, 
solemnly and seriously, whether he belongs to that one true 
Church of Christ which I began by describing. 

Oh, that men would but see that salvation turns upon 
this question !_ Oh, that men would but see that it shall pro- 
fit nothing to say, “I have always gone to my Church,” or 
“always gone to Meeting,” if they have not gone to Christ 
by faith and been born again, and been made one with Christ, 
and Christ with them! Oh, that men would understand that 
“ the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, 
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,’—that true religion 
rests on justification and sanctification, on saving faith, 
and new hearts ! 

If we belong to the true Church, let us see that we love all 
its members. Let our principle be, “ Grace be with all that 


195 


KNOTS UNTIED 


love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity ’’( Ephes. vi. 24). If 
we are to be in the same home, let us love each other even 
now upon the road. 

Finally, if we belong to the true Church, let our first care 
be to pluck brands from the fire,—to awaken sleeping souls— 
to rouse those who are in darkness and ignorance, and to make 
them acquainted with Him who is “ the light of the world,” 
and ‘“‘ Whom to know is life eternal.” 


1“ Wherever my Lord has a true believer, I have a brother.”— 
Bishop M’ Ilvaine. 


196 


XI 
THE PRIEST 


“ We have a great High Priest.’’—HEB. iv. 14. 


He that wishes to have any comfort in religion, must have 
a priest. A religion without a priest is a poor, unhappy, use- 
less thing. Now what is our religion? Have we a Priest ? 

We are all such sinful, corrupt creatures, that we are un- 
fit, by ourselves, to have anything to do with God. God is 
so holy a Being that he cannot bear that which is evil, and so 
high a Being that His majesty makes us afraid. We are so 
fallen, and defective, and guilty, that we naturally shrink 
from God, and dare not speak to Him or look Him in the face. 
We need an almighty Friend between us. We need a Mediator 
and Advocate, able, willing, loving, commissioned, tried, 
proved, and ready to help us. Have we found this out ? Have 
we got a Friend? Have we a Priest? 

The Christian religion provides the very thing that man’s 
soul and conscience require. It is the glory of God’s Word 
that it reveals to man the very Friend and Mediator that he 
needs,—the God-man Christ Jesus. It tells us of the very 
Priest that meets our wants,—even Jesus the Son of God. 
It sets Him fully before us, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, as 
the very Person that our longing hearts could desire. To open 
up this great subject is now my simple purpose. 

‘IT think it will clear our way, and throw broad light on the 
matter in hand, if I state three plain questions, and try to 
supply answers to them. 


197 


KNOTS UNTIED 


When we have considered these three questions, we shall 
perhaps be better able to answer the inquiry, Have we a 
Priest ? 


I. WHERE IS JESUS CHRIST NOW ? 


Let us take care that we understand the drift of this in 
quiry. He about whom we are now asking is no common 
person. He is God as well as man, and man as well as God. 
The words of the Creed ought to be carefully remembered. 
Jesus Christ is—‘ God of the substance of the Father, begotten 
before the worlds; and Man of the substance of His mother, 
born in the world: perfect God and perfect Man, of a reason- 
able soul and human flesh subsisting.” This is one of the 
foundation doctrines of Christianity. 

Where is Jesus Christ as God? That is not the question 
I want to consider. As God He is everywhere. He fills 
heaven and earth. There is no secret corner, there is no height 
above or depth beneath where He is not. Wherever two or 
three are met together on earth in His name, there is He in 
the midst of them. I am not asking where Christ is as God. 

But where is Christ, as Man ? That is the point. Where 
is the body that was born of the Virgin Mary ? Where is the 
head that was crowned with thorns? Where are the hands 
that were nailed to the cross, and the feet that walked by the 
sea of Galilee ? Where are the eyes that wept tears at the 
grave of Lazarus? Where is the side that was pierced with a 
spear? Where is the “ visage that was marred more than 
any man, and the form more than the sons of men ?”’ (Isa. 
lii.r4). Where, ina word, isthe Man Christ Jesus ? That is 
the question. 

I answer in the words of Scripture, that “‘ Christ is passed 
into the heavens,’—that He “has entered into the holy 
place,’’—that “ He has entered into heaven itself, now to appear 
in the presence of God for us,’—and that‘ the heavens must 
receive Him until the time of restitution of all things’ (Heb. 
Iveta s. ix) 12-24%" Acts iii; ar). 

198 


THE PRIEST 


Let us mark this well. Christ, as Man is in heaven, and not 
in the grave. If ever there was a fact proved by unanswerable 
evidence in this world, it is the fact that Jesus rose from the 
dead !—That He died on a Friday, is certain. That He was 
buried in a sepulchre hewn out of rock that night, is certain. 
That the stone over the place was sealed, and a guard of 
soldiers set around it, is certain. That the grave was opened 
and the body gone on Sunday morning, is certain. That the 
soldiers could give no account of it, is certain. That the 
disciples themseives could hardly believe that their Master 
had risen,is certain. That after seeing Him several times 
for forty days, they at last were convinced, is certain. That, 
once convinced, they never ceased to teach and hold, even to 
death, that their Master had risen, is certain. That the un- 
believing Jews could neither shake the disciples out of their 
belief, nor show Christ’s dead body, nor give any satisfactory 
account of what had become of it, is equally certain. The 
resurrection of Christ is a great, unanswerable, undeniable 
fact. 

Once more let us mark this point. Christ as man, is in 
heaven and not on the Communion Table, at the celebration 
of the Lord’s Supper. He is not present at that holy sacra- 
ment under the form of bread and wine, as the Roman 
Catholics, and some Anglicans, say. 

It is a point of vast importance in this day, to see clearly 
where Christ’s natural body and blood are. Right know- 
ledge of this point is most essential. 

Let us not be moved, for a moment, by the infidel, when 
he sneers at miracles, and tries to persuade us that a religion 
based on miracles cannot be true. Tell him not to waste his 
time in talking about the flood, or the sun standing still, or 
Balaam’s ass speaking, or the whale swallowing Jonah, or 
the ravens feeding Elijah. Ask him to grapple with the 
greatest miracle of all,—the resurrection of Christ from the 
dead. Ask him to explain away the evidence of that miracle, 
if he can. Remind him that, long before He died, Jesus Christ 


a9 


KNOTS UNTIED 


staked the truth of His Messiahship on His resurrection, and 
told the Jews not to believe Him if He did not rise from the 
dead. Remind him that the Jews remembered this, and did 
all they could to prevent any removal of our Lord’s body, 
but in vain. Tell him, finally that when he has overthrown 
the evidence of Christ’s resurrection, it will be time to listen 
to his argument against miracles in general, but not till then. 
The Man Christ Jesus is in heaven, and not on earth. The 
mere fact that His natural body and blood are in heaven, 
is one among many proofs of the truth of Christianity. 

Let us not be moved by the Roman Catholic, any more 
than by the infidel. Let us not listen to his favourite doctrine 
of Christ’s body and blood being “really present’”’ in the 
elements of bread and wine at the Lord’s Supper. It is his 
common argument that we should believe the doctrine, though 
we cannot understand it ; and that it is a pleasant, comfortable 
and reverent thought, that Christ’s natural body and blood 
are in the bread and wine in some mysterious way, though 
we know not how. Let us beware of the argument. It is not 
only without foundation of Scripture, but full of dangerous 
heresy. Let us stand fast on the old doctrine, that Christ’s 
natural body and blood “ cannot be in more places than one 
at one time.’’ Let us maintain firmly that Christ’s human 
nature is like our own, sin only excepted, and cannot there- 
fore be at once in heaven and on the Communion Table. 
Tell me that my Lord is not really Man, and you rob me of 
one half of my soul’s comfort. Tell me that His body can be 
on earth and yet in Heaven at the same time, and you tell 
me that Heis not Man. Let us resist this mischievous doctrine. 
Christ, as Man, is in heaven, and in heaven alone. 

Miserable indeed is that religion which is content to honour 
Him as nothing more than a moral teacher, who died like 
Plato or Socrates, and saw corruption.—Christ is in heaven, 
and not in the bread and wine at the Lord’s Supper. They 
do Him little real honour who in fancied reverence try to per- 
suade us that His body is a body unlike that of man.—Christ 

200 


THE PRIEST 


is in heaven, alive, and not dead. For ever let us glory in 
His atoning death, and the life-blood that He shed for us on 
the cross. But never let us forget that He was “‘ raised again 
for our justification.” His life is as important to us as His 
death. What saith the Scripture ? ‘‘ If, when we were enemies, 
we were reconciled to God by the death of His son, much 
more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by His life ”(Rom. 
Vv. 10). 


II. WHAT IS JESUS CHRIST DOING NOW? 


That He is doing some great thing for man we need not 
doubt for a moment. The Bible account of all His dealings 
with man makes it impossible to arrive at any other conclusion. 
In abounding mercy and grace He has always been taking 
thought for our poor fallen race, and caring for our. best 
interests. He has been ever caring and working for our souls. 
And “ His mercy endureth for ever.’ He never changes. 

Christ is now carrying on in heaven the work of a Priest, 
which He began upon earth. He took our nature on Him in 
the fulness of time, and became a man, that He might be 
perfectly fitted to be the Priest that our case required. As 
a Priest, He offered up His body and soul as a sacrifice for sin 
upon the cross, and made a complete atonement for us with 
His own blood. As a Priest, He ascended up on high, passed 
within the veil, and entered into the presence of God. “I 
ascend unto my Father and your Father and to My God 
and your God ” (John xx. 17). 

(t) We need not doubt that Christ, as our Priest, is 
ever presenting the merits of His sacrifice for us before God. 
Of course He has no need to repeat that sacrifice. “ By one 
offering He has perfected for ever those that are sanctified ’’ 
(Heb. x. 14). But in some ineffable manner He is ever in God's 
presence as the Bearer of the sins of His people. The atone- 
ment made on the cross for us is kept continually in remem- 
brance by the appearance of Him who made it. Twenty- 
seven times the visions of heaven in Revelation describe 

201 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Christ as the “‘ Lamb.” Twice they call Him “the Lamb 
slain.” Twice they speak of His “ blood.”” The Priest who 
offered the sacrifice is always in heaven : the sacrifice is never 
forgotten in heaven: and so they that trust in it are always 
acceptable in heaven. This is one thing. 

(2) Again: we need not doubt that Christ, as our Priest, 
is ever interceding for us in heaven. It is written, “‘ He is able 
to save them to the uttermost who come unto God by Him, 
because He ever liveth to make intercession for them ’’(Heb. 
vii. 25). It is asked by St. Paul, ‘‘ Who is he that con- 
demneth ? ”’ and one reason he gives why there is no condemna- 
tion for believers, is the fact that “‘ Christ maketh intercession 
for us”’ (Rom. viii. 34). Of the manner of that intercession 
we cannot of course speak particularly : we may not intrude 
into things unseen. But it may suffice us to remember how 
our Lord prayed for His people in the seventeenth chapter 
of John, and how He told Peter He prayed for him, that his 
faith might not fail (Luke xxii. 32). 

(3) Again: we need not doubt that Christ, as our Priest, 
presents the names of His people continually before His Father. 
The Jewish high priest had the names of the tribes of Israel 
engraved on the ornaments he wore upon his head and 
shoulders. That this was the figure of something which Christ 
is ever doing for Christians in heaven, is clear and plain as 
the day. He “ appears in the presence of God for us’ (Heb. 
ix. 24). He acts as the Representative of His people. 

(4) Again: we need not doubt that Christ, as our Priest 
in heaven, is ever doing the work of a Friend, a Protector, 
Counsellor, and Advocate, on behalf of His people. It is not 
for nothing that we are told that He is “ at God’s right hand 
(Rom. viii. 34), and that He “ sitteth at the right hand of 
God” (Col. iti. 1; x Peter iii. 22). These words have a 
deep meaning. They teach that Christ is ever watching over 
the interests of His people, and providing a continual supply 
of all that they need.—‘‘ He that keepeth Israel neither 
slumbers nor sleeps.” ‘““ We have an Advocate with the Father, 

202 


THE PRIEST 


—Jesus Christ, the righteous” (Psalm cxxi. 4; 1 John 
ii. r).—What else can be the meaning of St. Paul’s words 
when he says to the Hebrews, ‘“‘ Let us come boldly to the 
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to 
help in time of need ?’’(Heb. iv. 16). The Priesthood of 
Jesus is the very hinge and pivot on which that whole ex- 
hortation turns. 

(5) Finally, we need not doubt that Christ as a Priest in 
heaven is continually doing the work of a Receiver of sinners 
and a Mediator between God and man. The priest was the 
person to whom the Israelite was bidden to go, when he was 
ceremonially unclean and wanted forgiveness. The command 
was distinct : ‘‘Go to the Priest.”” The Heavenly Priest is 
the person to whom labouring and heavy-laden souls ought 
always to be directed when they want pardon and _rest. 
He that feels the burden of sin on his conscience, and wants it 
taken away, ought to be told that there is One appointed by 
the Father for the very purpose of taking it away, and that the 
first step he must take is to go to Him. When the frightened 
jailer of Philippi cried out in agony of spirit, ‘“‘ What must 
I do to be saved ?”’ he got, to all appearance, a very simple 
answer: “ BELIEVE ON THE LORD JESUS CHRIST 
AND THOU SHALT BE SAVED ”’ (Acts xvi. 30, 31.) 

Yet simple as that answer seems, it contains the whole 
doctrine of Christ’s priestly office. It was as good as saying, 
“ There is a Priest ready to receive, confess, and absolve you: 
Jesus Christ the Lord. Go and put your soul into His hands, 
and you shall have full pardon.’—The power of absolving 
every sinner that comes to Him is one grand part of Christ’s 
priestly office. ‘‘ Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, 
Him hath God exalted with His right hand to be a Prince and 
a Saviour, for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness 
of sins”’ (Acts v. 3I). 

Christ’s Priesthood is the great secret of a saint’s per- 
severance to the end. Left to ourselves there would be little 
likelihood of our getting safe home. We might begin well 

203 


KNOTS UNTIED 


and endill. So weak are our hearts, so busy the devil, so many 
the temptations of the world, that nothing could prevent our 
making shipwreck. But, thanks be to God, the Priesthood 
of Christ secures our safety.—He who never slumbers and 
never sleeps is continually watching over our interests, and 
providing for our need. Start us in the narrow way of life, 
with pardon, grace, and a new heart, and leave us to our- 
selves, and we should soon fall away. But grant us the con- 
tinual intercession of an Almighty Priest in heaven,—God as 
well as Man, and Man as well as God,—and we shall never 
be lost. “‘ Because I live,’ says our Lord, ‘‘ ye shall live 
also’ (John xiv. rg). 

Let us ever beware of any doctrine which interferes with 
the Priesthood of Christ. Any system of religion which teaches 
that we need other mediators besides Jesus,—other priests 
besides Jesus,—other intercessors besides Jesus,—is unscrip- 
tural and dangerous to men’s souls. What greater folly can 
be conceived than to flee to the Virgin Mary or the saints, or 
to put our souls in the hands of clergymen and ministers, 
when we have such a Priest as Jesus Christ in heaven ? What 
can a woman, who herself needs a “‘ Saviour,’ do for the souls 
of others ? (Luke i. 47). What has she done to prove her love ~ 
to sinners, compared to the Great High Priest,—Christ the 
Lord ? What single example have we in all the New Testament 
of any one using a minister as a priest, even in the days of Peter 
and Paul? This modern system, which is not satisfied with 
Christ’s Priesthood, but must have mortal men as priests 
besides, bears the mark of its origin on its face. It is from 
beneath, and not from above. “ There is no office of Christ,’ 
said John Owen, ‘“‘ that Satan labours so hard to obscure and 
overthrow as His priestly one.”’ Satan cares little, compara- 
tively, for Christ the Prophet, and Christ the King, so long 
as he can persuade man to forget Christ the Priest. For ever 
let us stand fast on this point. That Christ is carrying on 
the office of a Priest in heaven, is the crown and glory of 
Christian theology. 

204 


THE PRIEST 


III. THE SECOND COMING 


Last of all, let us consider the third question which 
I propose to examine: What is Jesus Christ going to do before 
the end of the world ? 

I will answer that inquiry in the words of Scripture. In 
speaking of things to come, the safest plan is to go to the Book. 
Let us hear what St. Paul says to the Hebrews: “‘ Christ 
was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them 
that look for Him shall He appear the second time, without 
sin, unto salvation ’’ (Heb. ix. 28). Let us hear what the angel 
said to the Apostles on the Mount of Olives, in the day of the 
ascension: ‘‘ Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into 
heaven ? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into 
Heaven shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go 
into heaven” (Acts. i. rz). Let us hear what St. Paul writes 
tothe Thessalonians: ‘‘ The Lord Himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with 
the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first ” 
(rt Thess. iv. 16). Let us hear what Enoch prophesied 5000 
years ago: ‘“‘ Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousands 
of His saints’ (Jude 14). 

Every eye shall see Him, and every knee shall bow before 
Him, and every tongue which has spoken against Him shall 
be silenced for ever. The great High Priest shall come forth 
from within the veil, and sit upon His throne as a King. This 
is what Christ is going to do before the end of the world. 

How will Jesus come the second time ? Not spiritually 
and figuratively, as some say ; but really, literally, truly, and 
in the body, as He came the first time. He came with a real 
material body, when He came the first time to suffer and be 
crucified. He will come back with a real material body, when 
He returns to be glorified and to reign. There will be a “ real 
presence” at length on earth of that holy body which was born 
of the Virgin Mary and crucified under Pontius Pilate. But 

205 


KNOTS UNTIED 


it will be a very different ‘‘ presence ’’ from that which is now 
ignorantly talked of by the Church and the world ! 

In what fashion will Jesus Christ return the second time ? 
Not as He came the first time, in weakness and humiliation. 
He shall come, as He told Caiaphas in the judgment-hall, 
“in the clouds of heaven,’ with power and great glory. He 
shall come attended by thousands of ministering angels, 
with all the pomp and majesty that becomes the King of kings. 
Before His face the frame of this world shall be shaken to the 
very centre. It was shaken when the law was given on Mount 
Sinai. It was shaken again when Christ offered Himself for our 
sins on the cross. How much more shall it be shaken when 
the throne of mercy shall be taken down, and the great High 
Priest shall return in power to reign ! 

For what purpose is Christ coming the second time ? He 
is coming to set up His throne of judgment, and to wind up 
the affairs of this sin-laden and bankrupt world. He is coming 
to raise the dead, and change the living; to gather all man- 
kind before His bar, and to hold a last assize. He is coming to 
reckon with His professing Churches, and to punish the im- 
penitent, the unbelieving, and the ungodly. They will find 
to their cost that there is such a thing as “ the wrath of the 
Lamb.’ He is coming to bless and reward His own believing 
people, to gather them into one happy home, to wipe away all 
their tears, and to give them a crown of glory that fadeth not 
away (Rev. vi. 16). 

When is the Lord Jesus Christ coming the second time ? 
We do not know the precise season. ‘‘ Of that day and hour 
knoweth no man: no, not the angels in heaven ’’ (Matt. xxiv. 
36). The time is wisely withheld from us in order that we may 
be kept in a watchful frame of mind. We know the fact, 
but we do not know the date, when the iniquity of Christ’s 
enemies is full,—when the number of His elect is complete. 
He will not send the plough of judgment into the field till 
the last sheaf has been gathered into the barn. Come when 
He may, His advent will be a very sudden and unexpected 

206 


THE PRIEST 


one. It will take a sleeping world by surprise, like a thief in 
the night. It will startle a drowsy Church from its slumber, 
and make myriads cry, “ Give us of your oil ; for our lamps are 
gone out” (Matt. xxv. 8). As it was in the days of Noah, 
so shall it be at the second coming of the Son of Man. Blessed, 
indeed, is that servant whom the Lord, when He cometh, 
shall find watching ! 

Great indeed are the things which our great High Priest 
shall do at His second coming. He did great things when He 
came the first time, and spoiled principalities and powers 
by His sacrifice on the cross. He is doing great things now, 
by carrying believers from grace to glory, by His almighty 
intercession. But He will put the crown on all His doings 
for His Church, when He comes forth from within the veil 
the second time, to confound His enemies and reward His 
friends. Never will our Great High Priest appear so glorious 
as when He presents His people before the Father’s throne, 
saying, for the last time, “Of them whom thou gavest Me, 
have I lost none ” (John xviii. 9). 

Let us lean back our souls, if we know anything of sav- 
ing religion, on Christ’s coming again, as well as Christ dying 
and Christ interceding. Let the comfortable thought of our 
Lord’s return sustain us in public troubles, and cheer us in 
private trials. When the governments of the world are reel- 
ing and tottering,—when the air is filled with rumours of wars 
“and revolutions,—when the nations of the earth are heaving 
up and down and ill at ease,—when faith is faint and love is 
waxing cold, and the best of Churches seem running to seed 
and decay,—when men’s hearts are failing for fear and looking 
after the things coming on the earth,—in times like these let 
us fix our eyes steadily on the second advent of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. That great High Priest who died for us and intercedes 
for us, will never forget His people, or allow one lamb of His 
flock to perish. Let us not cast away our confidence, how- 
ever dark the horizon may seem around us. Let us look 
back to the cross. Let us look upward to the right hand of 

207 


KNOTS UNTIED 


God. Let us look forward to the day of the promised return. 
Let experience of the past give lessons for the future. The 
merciful and faithful High Priest who began a work for us on 
the cross, will bring that work to a triumphant conclusion. 
He will never forsake the work of His own hands. “ Yet 
a little while, and He that shall come will come, and will not 
tarry’’ (Heb. x. 37). 


A PRACTICAL APPLICATION 


(1) First of all, have we a Priest in our religion ? Is there 
any one whom we employ as our Mediator and Advocate 
with God? Is the person we employ the one true appointed 
and anointed Priest, Jesus Christ the Lord ? Can we lay our 
hand on our heart and say, “‘ Christ is mine and I am His? 
I have come to Him, poured out my heart to Him, received 
absolution from Him, cast all my burden on Him, placed my 
soul in His hands.” We may be sure, if we have a religion 
without a Priest, or any Priest except Christ, we are in awful 
danger: we are yet unpardoned, unforgiven unfit to die, 
unprepared to meet God. If we die without Christ as our 
Priest, we shall awake to find we had better never have been 
born. It is not enough to talk of “ God,” and “ mercy,” and 
“ providence,” and “ trying all»we can,” and “ saying our 
prayers,’ and “ going to church or chapel,” and being “a 
member,” here and there. It will not do. This will not save 
us. We need far more than this. We must lay hold on Christ 
as our Mediator and Advocate, or else we shall never be saved. 
Have we done this? Is Christ our Priest ? 

(2) In the second place, if Christ is really the Priest of our 
souls, let us use Him regularly, and keep back nothing from 
Him. It is a sorrowful fact that many believers enjoy the 
Gospel far less than they ought to do, for lack of boldness in 
using the priestly oftice of Jesus Christ. They think only 
of the death of Christ, and not of the life of Christ. They think 
of His finished work on the cross, but forget His priestly inter- 
cession. If this be our case, let us turn over a new leaf, and 

208 


‘ THE PRIEST 


change our plan this very day. Let us think of Jesus Christ, 
as a loving Friend, to whom we may go morning, noon, and 
night, and get relief from Him every day. “ Cast thy burden 
on the Lord, and He will sustain thee’ (Psalm lv. 22). Let 
us live the life of faith in the Son of God, and hold communion 
with Him continually. Let us use Him every morning as a 
Fountain of grace and help, and drink freely of that Foun- 
tain. Let us use Him every evening as a Fountain of absolu- 
tion and refreshment, and draw out of Him living water. 
He that tries this plan will find it for the health of his soul. 


CONFESSION 


(3) In the third place, if Christ is the Priest of our souls, 
let us beware of ever giving His office to another. Let no man 
delude us into supposing that we need any clergyman, or 
minister, or priest of any Church on earth, to be our spiritual 
director and soul’s confessor. 

I am sure this warning is greatly needed in this day. One 
of the most mischievous delusions of this age, I firmly believe, 
is the attempt that is widely made to teach the benefit of 
habitual private confession to a clergyman. Occasional 
private conference with a minister is one thing; habitual con- 
fession of sin, with habitual absolution, is quite another. The 
first practice, under proper restriction, may do good ; the last 
is a practice fraught with danger, dishonouring to our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and calculated to do infinite harm to souls. 

(a) Where is the warrant of Scripture for habitual private 
confession and private absolution? I answer, Nowhere at 
all. Not a single case can be shown in the New Testament 
where any one confessed sin in private to a minister, or was 
privately absolyed. Not a single word did Paul say in the 
Epistles which he wrote to his two young friends in the 
ministry, Timothy and Titus, to justify habitual private con- 
fession and absolution. 

(6) Where is the man upon earth who is really fit to be an 
habitual hearer of confessions ? He only is fit for such an office 

209 Pp 


KNOTS UNTIED 


who has perfect knowledge, and knows that the person con- 
fessing is telling all the truth.—He only is fit who will receive 
no damage himself by hearing others constantly confess and 
unbosom their secret sins.—He only is fit who is sure to use 
the knowledge He possesses of others’ sins rightly, and can 
always feel rightly for those who confess.—He only is fit 
who has full power to pardon the sins he hears confessed, and 
to set the conscience of the confessing entirely free.—Where 
shall we find such a man upon earth? I answer boldly 
Nowhere at all! There is but one Person fit to be our Con- 
fessor, and that one is Christ Jesus the Lord. 

(c) Where is the wisdom of ignoring the lessons of history 
and experience ? If there is any fact in Church history which 
is clearly established it is the fact that the confessional has led 
to a flood of wickedness and immorality. I challenge any 
well-informed reader of history to deny this, if he can. He 
that desires to reintroduce the practice of private confession 
into the Church of England may be a devout and well-meaning 
man, but he is ignorantly seeking to bring back among us a 
fountain of the worst kind of sins. 

(d) Where is the sense or reason of going to an earthly 
confessor, so long as we can have the best of all Priests,—the 
commissioned and appointed Priest, the perfect Mediator 
between God and Man, the man Christ Jesus ! 

Let us stand fast in the old paths. Let no man deceive 
us with vain words. Away with the plausible idea that 
habitual private confession tends to “‘ deepen spiritual life.” 
We may be sure it does nothing of the kind. Nothing really 
“deepens spiritual life ’’ which interposes anything between 
our souls and Christ. Ministers are useful just so far as they 
promote private communion between Jesus Christ and our 
souls. But the moment a minister begins to stand between 
our soul and Christ, even in the slightest degree, he becomes 
an enemy and not a friend to our peace. 

Once more I repeat my warning. No priest but Christ ! 
No confessor but Christ! No absolver but Christ! No 

210 


THE PRIEST 


habitual private submission or bowing down in religion to 
any one but Christ! No spiritual director but Christ ! No 
putting of our concience in the power of anyone but 
Christ! If we love peace and wish to honour Christ, let us 
beware of the confessional, or the slightest approach to it. I 
declare I had almost rather hear my sons and daughters had 
gone to the grave, than hear they had adopted the habit of 
going to a confessional. 

(4) In the last place, if Christ isthe Priest of our souls, 
let us live always like men who look for His second coming. 
Let us live like men who long to see face to face the Saviour 
in whom they believe. Happy is the Christian who lives the 
life of faith in Christ’s dying, interceding, and coming again ! 
There is a crown laid up for “ all that love His appearing ”’ 
(2 Tim. iv. 8). Let us give diligence that this crown may be 
ours | 


211 


XII 


WORSHIP 


“God is a Spirit: and they that worship Him must worship Him in 
shivit and in truth.’’—John iv. 24. 

“ We ave the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit.’’—Phil. iii. 3. 

“Tn vain they do worship Me.’’—Matt. xv. 9. 

‘A show of wisdom in wiil-worship.’’—Col. ii. 23. 


We live in times when there is ample provision made for 
public religious worship. English people in large numbers 
go to some church or chapel on Sundays. But it is not enough 
that we worship sometimes. There remains a large question 
to be answered.—‘‘ How do we worship ? ”’ 

Not all religious worship is right in the sight of God. 
The Bible speaks of worship which is “ in vain,” as well as 
worship which is true,—and of “ will-worship,” as well as 
spiritual worship. To suppose, as some thoughtless persons 
do, that it signifies nothing where we go on Sundays, and. 
matters nothing how the thing is done, provided it is done, 
is mere childish folly. The question, ‘“‘ How do we worship ? ” 
is a very serious one. 

I propose to unfold the subject of worship, and to lay down 
some Scriptural principles about it. 

I. Let me first show the general importance of public worship. 

I trust 1 need not dwell long on this part of my subject. 
This book is not likely to fall into the hands of any who do 
not at least call themselves Christians. There are few, except 
downright infidels, who will dare to say that we ought not to 
make some public profession of religion. Most people, what- 
ever their own practice may be will admit that we ought to 

212 


WORSHIP 


meet other Christians at stated times and in stated places, 
and unitedly and together to worship God. 

Public worship has always been one mark of God’s ser- 
vants. Man, as a general rule, is a social being, and does not 
like to live separate from his fellows. In every age God has 
made use of that mighty principle, and has taught His people 
to worship Him publicly as well as privately, together as well 
as alone. I believe the last day will show that wherever God 
has had a people He has always had a congregation. His 
servants, however few in number, have always assembled 
themselves together, and approached their Heavenly Father 
in company. They have been taught to do it for many wise 
reasons,—partly to bear a public testimony to the world,— 
partly to strengthen, cheer, help, encourage, and comfort 
one another,—and above all, to train and prepare them for 
the general assembly in heaven. “As iron sharpeneth iron, 
so doth the countenance of a man his frierid.”” That man can 
know little of human nature who does not know that to see 
others doing and professing the same things that we do in 
religion, is an immense help and encouragement to our souls. 

From the beginning of the Bible down to the end, you may 
trace out a line of public worship in the history of all God’s 
saints. You see it in the very first family that lived on earth. 
The familiar story of Cain and Abel hinges entirely on acts 

1“ To deny God a worship is as great a folly as to deny His being. 
He that renounceth all homage to his Creator, envies Him the being 
of which he cannot deprive Him. The natural inclination to worship 
is as universal as the notion of a God; else idolatry had never gained 
a footing in the world. The existence of God was never owned in any 
nation without a worship of God being appointed ; and many people 
who have turned their backs upon some other parts of the law of nature, 
have paid a continual homage to some superior and invisible Being. 
The Jews gave a reason why man was created in the evening of the 
Sabbath, because he should begin his being with the worship of his 
Maker. As soon as ever he found himself to be a creature, his first 
solemn act should be a particular respect to his Creator. To fear God 
and keep His commandment, is the whole of man (Eccles. xii, 13), 
or is ‘ whole man ;’ he is not a man, but a beast without observance of 
God. Religion is as requisite as reason to complete a man.’”’—Charnock’s 
Works. Nichol’s Edition, Vol.i., p. 182. 

213 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of public worship.—You see it in the history of Noah. The 
very first thing recorded about Noah and his family, when 
they came forth from the ark, was a solemn act of public wor- 
ship.—You see it in the history of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 
Wherever the patriarchs had a tent they always had an altar. 
They not only prayed in private, but worshipped in public. 
- —You see it throughout the whole Mosaic economy, from 
Sinai downward, till our Lord appeared. The Jew who was 
not a public worshipper in the tabernacle or the temple, would 
have been cut off from the congregation of Israel.—You see 
it throughout the whole New Testament. The Lord Jesus 
Himself gives a special promise of His presence wherever 
two or three are assembled in His name. The Apostles, in every 
Church they founded, made the duty of assembling together 
a first principle in their list of duties. Their universal rule was 
“ Forsake not the assembling of yourselves together” (Heb. 
x. 25). Just as you may lay it down, as a certainty, that 
where there is no private prayer there is no grace in a man’s 
heart, so you may lay it down, as the highest probability, 
that where there is no public worship there is no Church of 
God, and no profession of Christianity. 

If you turn now to the pages of Church history, what will 
you find ? You will find that from the days of the Apostles 
down to this hour, public worship has always been one of 
God’s great instruments in doing good to souls. Where is 
it that sleeping souls are generally awakened, dark souls 
enlightened, dead souls quickened, doubting souls brought 
to decision, mourning souls cheered, heavy-laden souls re- 
lieved > Where, as a general rule, but in the public assembly 
of Christian worshippers, and during the preaching of God’s. 
Word? Take away public worship from a land, shut up the 
churches and chapels, forbid people to meet together for 
religious services, prohibit any kind of religion except that 
which is private,—do this, and see what the result would be. 
You would inflict the greatest spiritual injury on the country 
which was so treated. You could do nothing so likely to help 

214 


WORSHIP 


- the devil and stop the progress of Christ’s cause, except the 
taking away of the Bible. Next to the Word of God there is 
nothing which does somuch good to mankind as public worship. 
“‘ Faith cometh by hearing” (Rom. x. 7). There is a special 
presence of Christ in religious assemblies. 

I grant freely that public worship may become a mere act 
of formality. Thousands of so-called Christians, no doubt, 
are continually going to churches and chapels, and getting 
no benefit from their attendance. Like Pharaoh’s lean kine, 
they are nothing bettered, but rather worse, more impenitent, 
and more hardened. No wonder that the ignorant Sabbath- 
breaker defends himself by saying,—‘ For anything I can see, 
those who go nowhere on Sundays are just as good people as 
church-goers and chapel-goers.’”’ But we must never forget 
that the misuse of a good thing is no argument against the 
use of it. Once begin to refuse everything that is misused 
in this sinful world, and there is hardly anything left for you 
that is good, Take a broader view of the question before you. 
Look at any district you like in England, and divide people 
into two great parties,—worshippers and non-worshippers. 
I will engage you will find that there is far more good among 
those that worship than among those that do not. It does 
make a difference, whatever men may say. It is not true that 
worshippers and non-worshippers are all alike. 

We ought never to forget the solemn words of St. Paul: 
“ Forsake not the assembling of yourselves together, as the 
manner of some is; but exhort one another ”’ (Heb. x. 25). 
Let us not care for the bad example of many around us who 
rob God of His Day, and never go up to His House from one 
end of the year to the other. Let us go on worshipping in 
spite of every discouragement, and let us not doubt that in 
the long run of life it does us good. Let us prove our own 
meetness for heaven by our feelings toward the earthly 
assemblies of God’s people. Happy is that man who can say 
with David, ‘‘ I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go 
into the house of the Lord.” 

215 


KNOTS UNTIED 


II. LEADING PRINCIPLES 


I proceed in the second place, to show the leading principles 
of public worship. 

These leading principles are so plain and obvious to any 
thoughtful reader of the Bible that I need not dwell on them 
at any length. 

(a) For one thing, true public worship must be directed 
to the right object. It is written plainly, bothin the Old and New 
Testament : ‘‘ Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him 
only shalt thou serve”? (Deut. vi. 13; Matt. iv. 10). All 
adoration and prayers addressed to the Virgin Mary, the Saints 
and angels, is utterly useless, and unwarranted by Scripture. 
It is worship that is mere waste of time. There is not the 
slightest proof that the departed saints or the angels can hear 
our worship, or that if they did hear it they could do anything 
for us. It is worship that is most offensive to God. He is 
a jealous God, and has declared that He will not give His 
glory to another. Of all His Ten Commandments there is 
none more stringent and sweeping than the Second. 
It forbids us not only to worship, but even to “ bow down” 
to anything beside God. 

(6) For another thing, true public worship must be directed 
to God through the mediation of Christ, It is written plainly, 
“T am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh 
unto the Father, but by Me”’ (John xiv. 6). It is written of 
Christians, that they are a people who “‘ come unto God by 
Christ’ (Heb. vii. 25). The mighty Being with whom we 
have to do, without controversy, is a God of infinite love, 
kindness, mercy, and compassion. ‘ God is love.” But it is 
no less true that He is a Being of infinite justice, purity, and 
holiness, that He has an infinite hatred of sin, and cannot bear 
that which is evil. He who carelessly presumes to draw near 
to Him without an atonement and a mediator, or by any 
other mediator than the one Mediator whom He has appointed, 

216 


WORSHIP 


will find that he worships in vain. ‘ Our God is a consuming 
fire”’ (Heb. xii. 29). 

(c) FOR ANOTHER THING, TRUE PUBLIC WORSHIP 
MUST BE .EITHER DIRECTLY SCRIPTURAL, OR 
DEDUCIBLE FROM SCRIPTURE, OR IN HARMONY 
WITH SCRIPTURE. It is written plainly concerning the 
Jews of our Lord’s time, “‘ In vain do they worship Me, teach- 
ing for doctrines the commandments of men’’ (Matt. xv. 9). 
No doubt there is a conspicuous absence of particular injunc- 
tions about New Testament worship, and thus there is a reason- 
able liberty allowed to Churches and congregations in their 
arrangements about worship. But still the rule must never 
be forgotten; “ Nothing must be required of men contrary 
to God’s Word.” Well says the Twentieth Article of the Church 
of England: “ The Church hath power to decree rites and 
ceremonies and authority in controversies of faith. And yet 
it is not lawful for the Church to ordain anything that is con- 
trary to God’s Word written.” I say therefore that any man 
who tells us that there are seven sacraments, when the Bible 
only mentions two,—or that any man-made ordinance is 
as binding on our consciences and as needful to salvation as 
an ordinance appointed by Christ, is telling us what he has no 
right to tell. We must not listen to him. 

(d) For another thing, true public worship must be an 
intelligent worship. I mean by that expression that worshippers 
must know what they are doing. It is written plainly as a 
charge against the Samaritans, ‘“‘ Ye worship ye know not 
what : we know what we worship ’”’ (John iv. 22). It is written 
of the heathen Athenians, that they ignorantly worshipped 
an ‘“‘ unknown god.” It is utterly false that ignorance is the 
mother of devotion. The poor Italian Papists, unable to read, 
and not knowing a chapter in the Bible, may appear extremely 
devout and sincere, as they kneel in crowds before the image 
of the Virgin Mary, or hear Latin prayers which they do not 
understand. But He who made man at the beginning made 
him an intelligent being, with mind as well as body. A worship 

217 


KNOTS UNTIED 


in which the mind takes no part is useless and unprofitable. 

(e) For another thing, true public worship must be the 
worship of the heart. I mean by this, that the affections must 
be employed as well as our intellect, and our inward man must 
serve God as well as our body. It is written plainly in the 
Old Testament, and the saying is quoted by Jesus Christ 
Himself: ‘“‘ This people draweth nigh to Me with their mouth, 
and honoureth Me with their lips ; but their heart is far from 
Me. But in vain do they worship Me” (Isa. xxix. 13; Matt. 
xv. 8). The heart is the principal thing that God asks man 
to bring in all his approaches to Him, whether public or private. 
There may be abundance of gestures, and postures, and bow- 
ings, and crossings, and prostrations, and grave countenances, 
and upturned eyes, and yet the hearts of the worshippers 
may be at the end of the earth. .Such worship, we may be 
very sure, is utterly worthless in God’s sight. It is even worse 
than worthless : it is abominable hypocrisy. God is a Spirit, 
and He cares nothing for man’s bodily service without man’s 
heart. Bodily service profiteth little. ‘‘ Man looketh on the 
outward appearance; but the Lord looketh on the heart.” 
The broken and contrite heart is the true sacrifice, the sacri- 
fice which ‘‘ God will not despise ” (I Sam. xvi. 7 ; Psalm li. 17). 

(f) In the last place, true public worship must be a reverent 
worship. It is written, ‘‘ Keep thy foot when thou goest to 
the house of God, and be more ready to hear than to give the 
sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they do evil” 
(Eccles. v.r). It is recorded that our Lord Jesus Christ began 
and ended His ministry with two practical protests against 
irreverent worship. On two distinct occasions He cast out 
of the temple the buyers and sellers who were profaning its 
courts by their traffic, and justified His act by the weighty 
words, “ It is written, My house shall be called the house of 
prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves” (Matt. xxi. 13). 
People who call themselves Christians, and go to churches 
and chapels to stare about, whisper, fidget, yawn, or sleep, 
but not to pray, or praise, or listen, are not a whit better than 

218 


WORSHIP 


the Jews of that time. They do not consider that God detests 
profaneness and carelessness in His presence, and that to be- 
have before God as they would not dare to behave before 
their sovereign at a levée or a drawing-room, is a very grave 
offence indeed. Surely even nature, reason, and common 
sense should teach us that there is a manner and demeanour 
suitable to mortal man, when he draws nigh to his Almighty 
Maker. It is not for nothing that it is written, ‘‘ God is greatly 
to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be had in 
reverence of all them that are about Him ”’ (Psalm lxxxix. 7). 

Let us remember, as long as we live, that it is not the 
quantity of worship, but the quality that God regards. The 
inward and spiritual character of the congregation is of far 
more importance in His sight than the number of the wor- 
shippers, or the outward and visible signs of devotion which 
they exhibit. Children and fools, who admire poppies more 
than corn, may think all is right when there is a great external 
show of religion. But it is not so with God. His all-seeing 
eye looks at the inner man. 


Ill. THE ESSENTIAL: PARTS 


I proceed, in the third place, to show the essential parts 
of Christian public worship. 

I freely grant that there is little said on the nature of public 
worship in the New Testament. There is a wide difference in 
this respect between the law of Moses and the law of Christ. 
The Jews religion was full of strict and minute directions about 
worship: the Christian’s contains very few directions and 
those of the simplest and most general description. The Jew’s 
religion was full of types, emblems and figures ; the Christian’s 
only contains two,—viz. Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. 
The Jew’s religion approached the worshipper chiefly through 
the eye. The New Testament religion appeals directly to the 
heart and conscience. The Jew’s religion was confined to 
one particular nation: the Christian’s was meant for the 
whole world. The Jew could turn to the writings of Moses, 

219 


KNOTS UNTIED 


and see at a glance every item of his worship: the Christian 
can only point to a few isolated texts and passages, which 
are to be applied by every Church according to circumstances. 
In a word, there is nothing answering to Exodus or Leviticus 
in the New Testament. Yet a careful reader of the Christian 
Scriptures can hardly fail to pick out of them the essential 
parts and principles of Christian worship. Where these 
essential parts are present, there is Christian worship. Where 
they are absent, the worship is, to say the least, defective. 
and incomplete. 

(a) In complete public worship the Sabbath should always 
be honoured. That blessed day was appointed for this very 
purpose, among others, to give men an opportunity of meet- 
ing together in God’s service. A Sabbath was given to man 
even in Paradise. The observance of a Sabbath was made 
part of the Ten Commandmants. The worship of God on the 
Sabbath was observed by our Lord Jesus Christ Himself. To 
meet together on one day in the week at least was a practice of 
the early Christians, though they met on the first day instead 
of the seventh (Acts xx. 7; 1 Cor. xvi. 2). To assemble 
in God’s house on the Christian Sabbath has been the custom 
of all professing Christians for over eighteen hundred years. 
The best and holiest of God’s saints have always pressed on’ 
others most strongly the value of Sabbath worship, and borne 
witness to its usefulness. It sounds very fine and spiritual, 
no doubt, to say that every day should be a Sabbath to a 
Christian, and that one day should not be kept more holy 
than another. But facts are stronger than theories. Ex- 
perience proves that human nature requires such helps as fixed 
days, and hours, and seasons for carrying on spiritual business, 
and that public worship never prospers unless we observe God’s 
order. ‘“‘ The Sabbath was made for man ’’ by Him who made 
man at the beginning, and knew what flesh and blood is. 
As a general rule, it will always be found that where there is 
no Sabbath there is no public worship. 

(6) In complete public worship there should be a ministry. 

220 


WORSHIP 


I do not for a moment say that it is of absolute necessity that 
it must be an Episcopal ministry. I am not so narrow-minded 
and uncharitable as to deny the validity of Presbyterian or 
Congregational orders. I only maintain that it is the mind 
of God that ministers of some kind should conduct the worship 
of Christian congregations, and be responsible for its decent 
and orderly conduct in approaching God. I am at a loss to 
understand how any one can read the Acts of the Apostles 
and the Epistles to the Corinthians, Ephesians, Timothy, 
and Titus, and deny that the minstry is an appointment of 
God. I say this with every feeling of respect for the Quakers 
and Plymouth Brethren, who have no ordained ministers : 
I simply say that I cannot understand their views on this 
subject. Reason itself appears to me to tell us that business 
which is left to nobody in particular to attend to, is a business 
which is soon entirely neglected. 

(c) In complete public worship there should be the preach- 
ing of God’s Word. I can find no record of Church assemblies 
in the New Testament in which preaching and teaching orally 
does not occupy a most prominent position. It appears to 
me to be the chief instrument by which the Holy Ghost not 
only awakens sinners, but also leads on and establishes 
saints. I observe that in the very last words that St. Paul 
wrote to Timothy, as a young minister, he especially enjoins 
on him to “ preach the Word” (2 Tim. iv. 2). I cannot, 
therefore, believe that any system of worship in which the 
sermon is made little of, or thrust into a corner, can be a 
Scriptural system, or one likely to have the blessing of God. 
I have no faith in the general utility of services composed 
entirely of prayer-reading, hymn-singing, sacrament-receiv- 
ing, and walking in procession. I hold firmly with Bishop 
Latimer, that it is one of Satan’s great aims to exalt ceremonies 
and put down preaching. There is a deep meaning in the 
words, ‘‘ Despise not prophesying ”’ (x Thess. v. 20). A con- 
tempt for sermons is a pretty sure mark of a decline in spiritual 
religion. 

221 


KNOTS UNTIED 


(d) In complete public worship there should be umited 
public prayer. I can find no account of religious assemblies 
in the New Testament in jwhich prayer and supplication do 
not form a principal business. I find St. Paul telling Timothy, 
“T exhort, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions 
and giving of thanks, be made for all men”’ (x Tim. ii. I). 
Such prayers should be plain and intelligible, that all the 
worshippers may know what is going on, and be able to follow 
him who prays. They should as far as possible be the joint 
act of all the assembly and not the act of one man’s mind alone. 
A congregation of professing Christians which only meets 
to hear a grand sermon, and takes no part or interest in the 
prayers, seems to me to fall far short of the standard of the 
New Testament. Public worship does not consist only of 
hearing.1 

(e) In complete public worship there should be the public 
reading of the Holy Scriptures. This was evidently a part of 
the service of the Jewish synagogue, as we may learn from 
what happened at Nazareth, and at Antioch in Pisidia (Luke 
iv. 16; Acts. xiii. 15). We cannot doubt that the Christian 
Church was intended to honour the Bible as much as the 


1 The reader is requested to observe that I purposely abstain from 
saying anything about the vexed question, whether public prayers in 
the congregation should be liturgical and pre-composed, or extem- 
poraneous. I say nothing, because nothing is said about it in Scripture: 
Neither liturgies nor extemporaneous prayers are expressly sanctioned 
or expressly prohibited, in God’s Word. A large liberty is mercifully, 
given to the Churches. I think the Christian (so-called) who ana- 
thematises and excommunicates his brother because he does not use 
a liturgy, is narrow-minded and ignorant. 


My own mind has been long made up. Ifall ministers prayed extempore 
always, as some ministers pray sometimes, I should be against a liturgy. 
But considering what human nature is, I decidedly think it better 
both for minister and people,in the regular,habitual,and stated assemb- 
lies of the Church to have a liturgy. With all its imperfections I am 
very thankful for the Book of Common Prayer. It may have defects, 
because it was not compiled by inspiration. But for all that, it is an 
admirable and matchless manual of public devotion. I would not 
impose the use of it on a brother’s conscience for a thousand worlds. 
But I claim the right to use it myself undisturbed. 


222 


WORSHIP 


Jewish. To my eye St. Paul points to this when he says to 
Timothy, “ Till I come give attention to reading”’ (x Tim. 
iv. 13). I do not believe that “reading” in that text means 
“private study.’ Reason and common sense alike teach 
the usefulness of the practice of publicly reading the Scrip- 
tures. A visible Church will always contain many professing 
members who either cannot read, or have no will or time to 
read at home. What safer plan can be devised for the instruc- 
tion of such people than the regular reading of God’s Word ? 
A congregation which hears but little of the Bible is always 
in danger of becoming entirely dependent on its minister. 
God should always speak in the assembly of His people as well 
as man.? 

(f) In complete public worship there should be united 
public praise. That this was the custom among the first 
Christians, is evident from St. Paul’s words to the Ephesians 
and Colossians, in which he commended the use of ‘‘ psalms 
and hymns and spiritual songs”’ (Ephes. v. 19; Coloss. iii. 
16). That it was a custom so widely prevalent as to be a mark 
of the earliest Christians is simply matter of history. Pliny 
records that when they met they “ used to sing a hymn to 
Christ as God.” No one indeed can read the Old Testament 
and not discover the extremely prominent place which praise 
occupied in the temple service. What man in his senses can 
doubt that the “ service of song’’ was meant to be highly 
esteemed under the New Testament ? Praise has been truly 
called the flower of all devotion. It is the only part of our wor- 
ship which will never die. Preaching and praying and reading 
shall one day be no longer needed. But praise shall go on for 
ever. A congregation which takes no part in praise, or leaves 


1 There is nothing in the public worship of the Church of England 
which I admire so much as the large quantity of Scripture which it 
orders to be read aloud to its members. Every Churchman who goes 
to church twice on Sunday hears two chapters of the Old Testament 
and two of the New, beside the Psalms, the Epistle, and the Gospel. 
I doubt if the members of any other Church in Christendom hear any- 
thing like the same proportion of God’s Word. 


223 


KNOTS UNTIED . 


all to be done by deputy through a choir, can be hardly 
thought in a satisfactory state. 

(g) Finally in complete public ,worship there should be 
the regular use of the two sacraments which Christ appointed 
_ in His Church. By baptism new members should be con- 
tinually added to the congregation, and publicly enrolled in 
the list of professing Christians. By the Lord’s Supper, be- 
lievers should be continually offered an opportunity of con- 
fessing their Master, and continually strengthened and re- 
freshed, and put in remembrance of His sacrifice on the 
cross. No doubt, like every other good thing, they may be 
painfully misused and profaned by some, and superstitiously 
idolized by others. But after all there is no getting over the 
fact that baptism and the Lord’s Supper were ordained by 
Christ Himself as means of grace, and we cannot doubt He 
meant*them to be reverently and duly used. 

I commend these seven points to the serious attention of 
my readers, and invite them to consider them well. I do not 
for a moment say that no man will be saved who does not see 
public worship precisely with my eyes. But I do say that any 
regular system of public worship which does not give a place 
to the Sabbath, the ministry, preaching, prayers, Scripture- 
reading, praise, and the two sacraments, appears to me de- 
ficient and incomplete. 


IV. WHAT TO AVOID 


I proceed in the fourth place to show some things which 
ought to be avoided in public worship. 

I am well aware that there is no perfection in this world. 
The best service in the best visible Church on earth will always 
be infinitely below the standard of the glorified Church in 
heaven. I admit with sorrow and humiliation, that the faith, 
and hope, and life, and worship of God’s people are all alike 
full of imperfections. To be continually separating and seced- 
ing from Churches, because we detect blemishes in their 
administration, is not the act of a wise man. 

224 


“WORSHIP > 


But I cannot forget, for all this, that we have fallen on 
dangerous times in the matter of worship. There are things 
going on in many English churches and chapels in the present 
day so highly objectionable, that I feel it a plain duty to offer 
some cautions about them. Ifthe watchmen hold their peace, 
how shall the city take alarm? ‘If the trumpet give an 
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for the battle >? ”’ 
(x Cor. xiv. 8). 

There are three great and growing evils in public worship, 
which require special watching in the present day. I feel it 
a positive duty to direct attention to them. We have need to 
stand on our guard about these evils, and to take heed that 
they do not infect and damage our souls. 

(a) Let us beware, for one thing, of any worship in which 
a disproportionate honour is given to any one ordinance of 
Christ, to the neglect of another. There are Churches at this 
_ moment, in which baptism and the Lord’s Supper, like 
Aaron's rod, swallow up everything else in religion. Nothing 
beside receives much attention. The honour done to the font 
and the Lord’s Table meet you at every turn. All else, in 
comparison, is jostled out of its place, overshadowed, dwarfed, 
and driven into a corner. Worship of this sort, I hesitate 
not to say, is useless to man’s soul. Once alter the propor- 
tions of a doctor’s prescription, and you may turn his medicine 
into a poison. Once vary the whole of Christianity under 
baptism and the Lord’s Supper, and the real idea of Christian 
worship is completely destroyed. 

(6) Let us beware, for another thing, of any worship in 
which an excessive quantity of decoration and ornament is used. 
There are many Churches at this moment, in which Divine 
service is carried on with such an amount of gaudy dressing, 
candle-lighting, and theatrical ceremonial, that it defeats 
the very purpose of worship. Simplicity should be the grand 
characteristic of New Testament worship. Neither in the 
Gospels nor in the Epistles shall we find the slightest warrant 
for a gorgeous and decorated ceremonial, or for any symbols 


225 Q 


KNOTS UNTIED 


except water, bread and wine. “I fear lest by any means 
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which 
is in Christ ” (2 Cor. xi. 3). Above all, the inherent wicked- 
ness of human nature is such that our minds are only too ready 
to turn away from spiritual things to visible things. Whether 
men like it or not, what the heart of man needs teaching 
is the uselessness of outward ornaments without inward 
grace. 

(c) Let us beware above all things of any worship in which 
ministers wear the dress, or act in the manner, of sacrificing 
priests. There are hundreds of English Churches at this 
moment in which the Lord’s Supper is administered as a sacri- 
fice and not as a sacrament, and the clergy are practically 
acting as mediators between God and man. The real presence 
of our Lord’s body and blood under the form of bread and wine 
is openly taught. The Lord’s Table is called an altar. The 
consecrated elements are treated with an idolatrous reverence, 
as if God Himself was in them, under the form of bread and 
wine. The habit of private confession to clergymen, is encour- 
aged and urged on the people. I find it impossible to believe 
that such worship as this can be anything but offensive to 
God. He is a jealous God, and will not give His honour to 
another. The sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ on the cross 
once offered, can in no sense or way ever be repeated. His 
mediatorial and priestly office He has never deputed to any man 
or any order of men. 

Against the three evils of which I have just been speaking 
I desire to lift up a warning voice. Such worship is not accept- 
able in God’s sight. Sacramentalism, Ceremonialism, Sacri- 
ficialism, will never be found in Bibles fairly read and honestly 
interpreted. 

We should search the pages of English history, and see what 
those pages tell us. Of worship in which Sacraments, Cere- 
monies, Sacerdotalism, and the Mass made the principal 
part,—England has surely had enough. Such worship was 
tried by the Church of Rome in the days of our forefathers, 

226 


WORSHIP 


for centuries before the Protestant Reformation, and utterly 
failed. It filled the land with superstition, ignorance, formalism 
and immorality. It made the priests overbearing tyrants, 
and the people cringing slaves. And shall we go back to it ! 
Shall we once more be content with services in which baptism, 
the Lord’s Supper, the power of the priesthood, the real 
presence of Christ in the Eucharist, the necessity of sym- 
bolical decorations the value of processions, banners, pictures, 
altar lights, are incessantly pressed on our minds ? 


V. TESTS OF PUBLIC WORSHIP 


I proceed, in the last place, to show some tests by which 
our public worship should be tried. 

This is a point of vast importance. Too many are apt to 
cut the knot of all difficulties about the subject before us, 
by referring to their own feelings. They will tell us that they 
are not theologians, that they do not pretend to understand 
the difference between one school of divinity and another. 
But they do know that the worship in which they take part 
makes them feel so much better, that they cannot doubt it 
is all right. 

I am not disposed to let such people turn away from the 
subject of this chapter quite so easily. I cannot forget that 
religious feelings are very deceitful things. There is a sort of 
gentle animal excitement produced in some minds by hearing 
religious music and seeing religious spectacles, which is not 
true devotion at all. While it lasts, such excitement is very 
strong and very contagious ; but it soon comes and soon goes, 
and leaves no permanent impression behind it. 

(a) True spiritual worship will affect a man’s heart and 
conscience. It will make him feel more keenly the sinfulness 
of sin, and his own particular personal corruption. It will 
deepen his humility. It will render him more jealously care- 
ful over his inward life. False public worship, like dram- 
drinking and opium-eating, will every year produce weaker 

227 


KNOTS UNTIED 


impressions. True spiritual worship, like wholesome food, 
will strengthen him who uses it, and make him grow inwardly 
every year. 

(6) True spiritual worship will draw a man into close 
communion with Jesus Christ Himself. It will lift him far above 
Churches, and ordinances, and ministers. It will make him 
hunger and thirst after a sight of the King. The more he 
hears and reads, and prays, and praises, the more he will feel 
that nothing but Christ Himself will feed the life of his soul, 
and that heart communion with Him is “ meat indeed and 
drink indeed.”’ 

(c) True spiritual worship will continually extend a man’s 
spiritual knowledge. It will annually give bone, and sinew, and 
muscle, and firmness to his religion. A true worshipper will 
every year know more of self, and God, and heaven, and duty, 
and doctrine, and practice, and experience. His religion is a 
living thing, and will grow. A false worshipper will never 
get beyond the old carnal principles and elements of his 
theology. He will annually go round and round like a horse 
in a mill, and though labouring much will never get 
forward. His religion is a dead thing, and cannot increase 
and multiply. 

(d) True spiritual worship will continually increase the 
holiness of a man’s life. It will make him every year more 
watchful over tongue, and temper, and time, and behaviour in 
every relation of life. The true worshipper’s conscience 
becomes annually more tender. The false worshipper’s 
becomes annually more seared and more hard. 

Give me the worship that will stand the test of our Lord’s 
great principle, “‘ By their fruits ye shall know them,’’ Give 
me the worship that sanctifies the life,—that makes a man 
walk with God and delight in God’s law,—that lifts him above 
the fear of the world and the love of the world,—that enables 
him to exhibit something of God’s image and God’s likeness 
before his fellow-men,—that makes him just, loving, pure, 
gentle, good-tempered, patient, humble, unselfish, temperate. This 

228 


WORSHIP 


is the worship that comes down from heaven, and has the stamp 
and seal and superscription of God. 

Whatever men may please to say, the grand test of the 
value of any kind of worship is the effect it produces on the 
lives of the worshippers. 

The best public worship is that which produces the best 
private Christianity. The best Church Services for the 
congregation are those which make its individual members 
most holy at home and alone. If we want to know whether 
our own public worship is doing us good, let us try it by these 
tests. Does it quicken our conscience ? Does it send us to 
Christ ? Does it add to our knowledge? Does it sanctify 
our life? If it does, we may depend upon it, it is worship of 
which we have no cause to be ashamed. 

The day is coming when there shall be a congregation that 
shall never break up, and a Sabbath that shall never end, a 
song of praise that shall never cease, and an assembly that 
shall never be dispersed. In that assembly shall be found all 
who have “ worshipped God in spirit’ upon earth. If we are 
such, we shall be there. 

Here we often worship God with a deep sense of weakness, 
corruption, and infirmity. There, at last, we shall be able, 
with a renewed body, to serve Him without weariness, and to 
attend on Him without distraction. 

Here, at our very best, we see through a glass darkly, and 
know the Lord Jesus Christ most imperfectly It is our grief 
that we do not know Him better and love Him more. There, 
freed from all the dross and defilement of indwelling sin, we 
shall see Jesus as we have been seen, and know as we have 
been known. Surely, if faith has been sweet and peace-giving, 
sight will be far better. 

Armed with such hopes as these, let us lift up our hearts 
_ and look forward! The time is very short. The night is far 
spent. The day is at hand. Let us worship on, pray on, 
praise on, and read on. Let us contend earnestly for the faith 
once delivered to the saints (Gal. i. 9), and resist manfully every 

229 


KNOTS UNTIED 


effort to spoil Scriptural worship. Let us strive earnestly to 
hand down the light of Gospel worship to our children’s 
children. Yet a little time and He that shall come will come, 
and will not tarry. Blessed in that day will be those, and 
those only, who are found true worshippers, “‘ worshippers in 
spirit and truth !”’ 


230 


XIII 


THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH, OR 
LORD’S DAY 


“ Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy.’,—Exod. xx. 8. 


There is a subject in the present day which demands the 
serious attention of all professing Christians in Great Britain. 
That subject is the Christian Sabbath, or Lord’s Day. 

It is a subject which is forced upon our notice. The minds 
of Englishmen are agitated by questions arising out of it. 
“Is the observance of a Sabbath binding on Christians ? 
Have we any right to tell a man that to do his business or 
seek his pleasure on a Sunday is asin ? Is it desirable to open 
places of public amusement on the Lord’s Day ?”’ All these 
are questions which are continually asked. They are questions 
to which we ought to be able to give a decided answer. 

The subject is one on which “divers and_ strange 
doctrines’ abound. Statements are continually made about 
Sunday, both by speakers and writers, which plain unsophisti- 
cated readers of the Bible find it impossible to reconcile with 
the Word of God. If these statements proceeded only from 
the ignorant and irreligious part of the world, the defenders 
of the Sabbath would have no reason to be surprised. But 
they may well wonder when they find educated and religious 
persons among their adversaries. It is a melancholy truth 
that in some quarters the Sabbath is wounded by those who 
ought to be its best friends. 

The subject is one which is of immense importance. It is 
not too much to say that the prosperity or decay of English 

231 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Christianity depends on the maintenance of the Christian 
Sabbath. Break down the fence which now surrounds the 
Sunday, and our Sunday schools will soon come to an end. 
Let in the flood of worldliness and pleasure-seeking on the 
Lord’s Day, without check or hindrance, and our congregations 
will soon dwindle away. There is not too much religion in the 
land now. Destroy the sanctity of the Sabbath, and there 
would soon be far less. Nothing, in short, I believe, would 
so thoroughly advance the kingdom of Satan in England, as 
to withdraw legal protection from the Lord’s Day. It would 
be a joy to the infidel; but it would be an insult and offence 
to God. 

I ask the attention of all professing Christians, while I try 
to say a few plain words on the subject of the Sabbath. As 
a minister of Christ, a father of a family, and a lover of my 
country, I feel bound to plead in behalf of the old English 
Sunday. My sentence is emphatically expressed in the words of 
Scripture,—let us ‘‘ keep it holy.”” My advice to all Christians 
is to contend earnestly for the whole day against all enemies,” 
both without and within. It is worth a struggle. Let our 
united cry be, “‘ We do not want the Sabbath law of England 
to be changed.” 

There are four points in connection with the Sabbath 
which require examination. On each of these I wish to offer 
a few remarks, 


I. THE AUTHORITY OF THE SABBATH. 


Let me, in the first place, consider the authority on which 
the Sabbath stands. 

I hold it to be of primary importance to have this point 
clearly settled in our minds. Here is the very rock on which 
many of the enemies of the Sabbath make shipwreck. They 
tell us that the day is ‘‘ a mere Jewish ordinance,’’ and that 
we are no more bound to keep it holy than to offer sacrifice. 
They proclaim to the world that the observance of the Lord’s 

232 


THE SABBATH 


Day rests upon nothing but Church authority, and cannot be 
proved by the Word of God. 

Now I believe that those who say such things are entirely 
mistaken. 

My own firm conviction is, that the observance of a Sabbath 
Day is part of the eternal law of God. It is not a mere tem- 
porary Jewish ordinance. It is not a man-made institution of 
priestcraft. It is not an unauthorized imposition of the 
Church. It is one of the everlasting rules which God has 
revealed for the guidance of all mankind. It is a rule that 
many nations without the Bible have lost sight of, and buried, 
like other rules, under the rubbish of superstition and heathen- 
ism. But it was a rule intended to be binding on all the 
children of Adam. 

What saith the Scripture ? This is the grand point after 
all. What public opinion says, or newspaper writers think, 
matters nothing. We are not going to stand at the bar of 
man when we die. He that judgeth us is the Lord God of the 
Bible. What saith the Lord ? 

(a) I turn to the history of creation. I there read that “ God 
blessed the seventh day and sanctified it ’’(Gen. ii. 3). I find 
the Sabbath mentioned in the very beginning of all things. 
There are five things which were given to the father of the 
human race, in the day that he was made. God gave him a 
dwelling-place, a work to do, a command to observe, a help- 
meet to be his companion, and a Sabbath Day to keep. I am 
utterly unable to believe that it was in the mind of God that 
there ever should be a time when Adam’s children should 
keep no Sabbath. 

(6) I turn to the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. I there 
read one whole commandment out of ten devoted to the 
Sabbath Day, and that the longest, fullest, and most minute 
of all (Exod. xx. 8-11). I see a broad, plain distinction 
between these Ten Commandments and any other part of the 

_Law of Moses. It was the only part spoken in the hearing of 
all the people, and after the Lord had spoken it, the Book of 


233 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Deuteronomy expressly says, ““ He added no more”’ (Deut. 
v. 22). It was delivered under circumstances of singular 
solemnity, and accompanied by thunder, lightning, and an 
earthquake. It was the only part written on tables of stone 
by God Himself. It was the only part put inside the ark. 
I find the law of the Sabbath side by side with the law about 
idolatry, murder, adultery, theft, and the like. I am utterly 
unable to believe that it was meant to be only of temporary 
obligation. 

(c) I turn to the writings of the Old Testament Prophets. 
I find them repeatedly speaking of the breach of the Sabbath, 
side by side with the most heinous transgressions of the moral 
law (Ezek. xx. 13, 16, 24; xxii. 8, 26). I find them speaking 
of it as one of the great sins which brought judgments on 
Israel and carried the Jews into captivity (Nehem. xiii. 18 ; 
Jer. xvii. 19-27). It seems clear to me that the Sabbath, in 
their judgment, is something far higher than the washings 
and cleansings of the ceremonial law. I am utterly unable 
to believe, when I read their language, that the Fourth Com- 
mandment was one of the things one day to pass 
away. 

(d) I turn to the teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ when He 
was upon earth. I cannot discover that our Saviour ever let 
fall a word in discredit of any one of the Ten Commandments. 
On the contrary, I find Him declaring at the outset of His 
ministry, ‘‘ that He came not to destroy the law but to fulfil,” 
and the context of the passage where He uses these words, 
satisfies me that He was not speaking of the ceremonial law, 
but the moral (Matt. v. 17). I find Him speaking of the 


1 The learned Bishop Andrews wisely remarks that it is a dangerous 
thing to make the Fourth Commandment ceremonial, and of mere tem- 
porary obligation: ‘‘ The Papists will then have the Second Command- 
ment also to be ceremonial ; and there is no reason why there may not 
be as well three as two, and so four and five, and so all.’’—‘‘ We hold 
that all ceremonies are ended and abrogated by Christ’s death : 


but the Sabbath is not.”—Bishop Andrews on the Moral Law, 
1642, 


234 


THE SABBATH 


Ten Commandments as a recognized standard of moral right 
and wrong: “ Thou knowest the Commandments ” (Mark x. 
19). I find Him speaking eleven times on the subject of the 
Sabbath, but it is always to correct the superstitious additions 
which the- Pharisees had made to the Law of Moses about 
observing it, and never to deny the holiness of the day. He- 
no more abolishes the Sabbath, than a man destroys a house 
when he cleans off the moss or weeds from its roof. Above 
all, I find our Saviour taking for granted the continuance of 
the Sabbath, when He foretells the destruction of Jerusalem. 
“ Pray ye,” He says to the disciples, “ that your flight be not 
on the Sabbath Day ”’ (Matt. xxiv. 20). I am utterly unable 
to believe, when I see all this, that our Lord did not mean the 
Fourth Commandment to be as binding on Christians as the 
other nine. 

(e) I turn to the writings of the Apostles. I there find plain 
speaking about the temporary nature of the ceremonial law 
and its sacrifices and ordinances. I see them called “‘ carnal ”’ 
and ‘“‘ weak.”’ I am told they are a “ shadow of good things 
to come,’’—‘‘a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,” and 
“ ordained till the time of reformation.” But I cannot find a 
syllable in their writings which teaches that any one of the 
Ten Commandments is done away. On the contrary, I see 
St. Paul speaking of the moral law in the most respectful 
manner, though he teaches strongly that it cannot justify us 
before God. When he teaches the Ephesians the duty of 
children to parents, he simply quotes the Fifth Command- 
ment: ‘‘ Honour thy father and mother, which is the first 
commandment with promise’ (Rom. vii. 12; xiii. 8; Eph. 
vi. 2; 1 Tim.i. 8). I see St. James and St. John recognizing 
the moral law, as a rule acknowledged and accredited among 
those to whom they wrote (James ii. 10 ; 1 Johniii. 4). Again 
I say that I am utterly unable to believe that when the 


1See Bishop Daniel Wilson’s Seven Sermons on the Lord’s Day, 
pp. 60, 61. (Thynne & Jarvis, cloth 2/- net.) 


235 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Apostles spoke of the law, they only meant nine command- 
ments, and not ten.? 

(f) I turn to the practice of the Apostles, when they were 
engaged in planting the Church of Christ. I find distinct 
mention of their keeping one day of the week as atholy day 
(Acts xx. 7; 1 Cor. xvi. 2). I find the day spoken of by one 
of them as ‘‘ the Lord’s Day ” (Rev. i. 10). Undoubtedly the 
day was changed :—it was made the first day of the week in 
memory of our Lord’s resurrection, instead of the seventh :— 
but I believe the Apostles were divinely inspired to make that 
change, and at the same time wisely directed to make no © 
public decree about it. The decree would only have raised a 
ferment in the Jewish mind, and caused needless offence: the 
change was one which it was better to effect gradually, and 
not to force on the consciences of weak brethren. The spirit 
of the Fourth Commandment was not interfered with by the 
change in the smallest degree: the Lord’s Day, on the first 
day of the week, was just as much a day of rest after six days’ 
labour, as the seventh-day Sabbath had been. But why we 
are told so pointedly about the “ first day of the week” and 
the “ Lord’s Day,” if the Apostles kept no one day more holy 
than another, is to my mind wholly inexplicable. 

(g) I turn, in the last place, to the pages of unfulfilled 
Prophecy. I find there a plain prediction that in the last days, 
when the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth, there 
shall still be a Sabbath. ‘“‘ From one Sabbath to another shall 
all flesh come to worship before Me, saith the Lord ’’ (Isa. 
Ixvi. 23). The subject of this prophecy no doubt is deep. 
I do not pretend to say that I can fathom all its parts: but 
one thing is very certain to me,—and that is that in the 
glorious days to come on the earth there is to be a Sabbath, 

*It is only fair to mention that many great and learned divines 
have held that the text (Heb. iv. 9) distinctly teaches the authority 
of the Christian Sabbath. The marginal reading is, ‘‘ there remaineth 
the keeping of a Sabbath.”’ I offer no opinion on the point. I only 


remark that Owen, Edwards and Dwight all held this view.—See 
Bishop Daniel Wilson’s Sermons on the Lord’s Day, pp. 92, 93. 


236 


THE SABBATH 


and a Sabbath not for the Jews only, but for “ all flesh.” And 
when I see this I am utterly unable to believe that God meant 
the Sabbath to cease between the first coming of Christ and 
the second. I believe He meant it to be an everlasting ordi- 
nance in His Church. 

I ask serious attention to these arguments from Scripture. 
To my own mind it appears very plain that wherever God 
has had a Church, in Bible times, God has also had a Sabbath 
Day. My own firm conviction is, that a Church without a 
Sabbath would not be a Church on the model of Scripture. 

Let me close this part of the subject by offering two 


1The following quotations from notable ministers are appended. 
In a day like the present, when we are so often told that learned divines 
deny the Divine authority of the Lord’s Day, it may be well to show the 
reader that there are other divines, and some eminently learned, who 
take an entirely different view. 

LET US HEAR WHAT BAXTER SAYS: ‘It hath been the 
constant practice of all Christ’s Churches in the whole world ever 
since the days of the Apostles to this day, to assemble for public wor- 
ship on the Lord’s Day, as a day set apart thereto by the Apostles. 
Yea, so universal was this judgment and practice, that there is no one 
Church, no one writer, or one heretic that I remember to have read of, 
that can be proved even to have dissented or gainsaid it till of late 
times.” Baxter on the Divine Appointment of the Lord’s Day, 1680, 

LET US NEXT HEAR LIGHTFOOT: “ The first day of the week 
was everywhere celebrated for the Christian Sabbath, and which is not 
to be passed over without observing, as far asappears from Scripture, 
there is nowhere any dispute about the matter. There was controversy 
concerning circumcision, and other points of the Jewish religion. 
Whether they were to be retained or not, but nowhere do we read 
concerning the changing of the Sabbath. There were indeed, 
some Jews converted to the Gospel, who as in some other things they 
retained a smack of their old Judaism, so they did in the observance 
of days (Rom. xiv. 5; Gal. iv. 10), but yet not rejecting or neglecting 
the Lord’s Day. They celebrated it and made no manner of scruple, 
it appears, concerning it; but they would have their old festival days 
too: and they disputed not at all, whether the Lord’s Day were to be 
celebrated, but whether the Jewish Sabbath ought not to be celebrated 
also.” —Lightfoot’s Works, vol. xii., 556. 1670. 

The whole subject of the change from the seventh-day Sabbath 
to the Lord’s Day is one which the reader will find admirably handled 
in the Sermons of Bishop Daniel Wilson, on the Lord’s Day. Those 
sermons, and Willison on the Lord’s Day, are by far the two best works 
on the Sabbath question. 


237 


KNOTS UNTIED 


cautions, which I consider are eminently required by the 
temper of the times. 

For one thing, let us beware of under-valuing the Old Testa- 
ment. There has arisen of late years a most unhappy tendency 
to slight and despise any religious argument which is drawn 
from an Old Testament source, and to regard the man who 
uses it as a dark, benighted, and old-fashioned person. We 
shall do well to remember that the old Testament is just as 
much inspired as the New, and that the religion of both 
Testaments is in the main, and at the root, one and the same. 
The Old Testament is the Gospel in the bud: the New Testa- 
ment is the Gospel in full flower. The Old Testament is the 
Gospel in the blade: the New Testament is the Gospel in full 
ear. The Old Testament saints saw many things through a 
glass darkly : but they looked to the same Christ by faith, and 
were led by the same Spirit as ourselves. Let us, therefore 
never listen to those who sneer at Old Testament arguments. 
Much infidelity begins with an ignorant contempt of the Old 
Testament. 

For another thing, let us beware of despising the law of the 
Ten Commandments. I grieve to observe how exceedingly 
loose and unsound the opinions of many men are upon this 
subject. I have been astonished at the coolness with which 
even clergymen sometimes speak of them as a part of Judaism, 
which may be classed with sacrifices and circumcision. I 
wonder how such men can read them to their congregations 
every week! For my own part, I believe that the coming of 
Christ’s Gospel did not alter the position of the Ten Com- 
mandments one hair’s breadth. If anything, it rather exalted 
and raised their authority. I believe, that in due place and 
proportion, it is just as important to expound and enforce 
them, as to preach Christ crucified. By them is the knowledge 
of sin. By them the Spirit teaches men their need of a 
Saviour. By them the Lord Jesus teaches His people how to 
walk and please God. I suspect it would be well for the 
Church if the Ten Commandments were more frequently 


238 


THE SABBATH 


expounded in the pulpit than they are. At all events, I fear 
that much of the present ignorance on the Sabbath question 
is attributable to erroneous views about the Fourth 
Commandment. 


Il. THE PURPOSE OF THE SABBATH 


The second point I propose to examine, is the purpose for 
which the Sabbath was appointed. 

I feel it imperatively necessary to say something on this 
point. There is no part of the Sabbath question about which 
there are so many ridiculous mis-statements put forward. 
Many are raising a cry in the present day, as if we were inflicting 
a positive injury on them in calling on them to keep the 
Sabbath holy. They talk as if the observance of the day 
were a heavy yoke, like circumcision and the washings and 
purifications of the ceremonial law. 

But the Sabbath is God’s merciful appointment for the 
common benefit of all mankind. It was “ made for man’”’ 
(Mark ii. 27). It was given for the good of all classes, for the 
laity quite as much as for the clergy. It is not a yoke, but a 
blessing. It is not a burden, but a mercy. It is not a hard 
wearisome requirement, but a mighty public benefit. It is 
not an ordinance which man is bid to use in faith, without 
knowing why he uses it. It is one which carries with it its 
own reward. It is good for man’s body and mind. It is good 
for nations. Above all, it is good for souls. 

(a) The Sabbath is good for man’s body. We all need a day 
of rest. On this point, at any rate, all medical men are agreed. 
Curiously and wonderfully made as the human frame is, it 
will not stand incessant work without regular intervals of 
repose. The first gold-diggers of California soon found out 
that ! Reckless and ungodly as many of them probably were, 
—urged on as they were, no doubt, by the mighty influence 
of the hope of gain,—they still found out that a seventh day’s 
rest was absolutely needful to keep themselves alive. Without 


, aoe 


KNOTS UNTIED 


it they discovered that in digging for gold they were only 
digging their own graves. I firmly believe that one reason 
why the health of working clergymen so frequently fails, is 
the great difficulty they find in getting a day of rest. Iam 
sure if the body could tell us its wants, it would cry loudly, 
““ Remember the Sabbath Day.’’ } 

(6) The Sabbath is good for man’s mind. The-mind needs 
rest quite as much as the body: it cannot bear an uninter- 
rupted strain on its powers; it must have its intervals to 
unbend and recover its force. Without them it will either 
prematurely wear out, or fail suddenly, like a broken bow. 
The testimony of the famous philanthropist, Mr. Wilberforce, 
on this point is very striking. He declared that he could only 
attribute his own power of endurance to his regular obser- 
vance of the Sabbath Day. He remembered that he had 
observed some of the mightiest intellects among his contem- 
poraries fail suddenly at last, and their possessors come to 
melancholy ends ; and he was satisfied that in every such case 
of mental shipwreck the true cause was neglect of the Fourth 
Commandment. 

(c) The Sabbath is good for nations. It has an enormous 
effect both on the character and temporal prosperity of a 
people. I firmly believe that a people which regularly rests 
one day in seven will do more work, and better work, in a 
year, than a people which never rest at all. Their hands will 
be stronger; their minds will be clearer; their power of 
attention, application, and steady perseverance will be far 
greater. What two nations on earth are so prosperous at this 
day as Great Britain and the United States of America ? Let 
others account for all this as they please. I say without 


1“ During the excesses of the first French Revolution, at the close 
of the 18th century, Christianity and the Sabbath were abolished in 
France, but the mere necessities of man’s nature compelled the 
Atheistical government to institute a day of rest of their own, which 
they called a decade, occurring every tenth day. What a confession 
of the reasonableness of the Divine command | ”’—Bishop Wilson on 
the Lord’s Day, p, 163. 


240 


THE SABBATH 


hesitation that one grand secret of it all has been the obser- 
vance of the Sabbath. Great Britain and the United States, 
with all their sins, are the two most Sabbath-keeping nations 
on earth. 


“ We are not poorer in England, but richer, because we have, through 
many ages, rested from our labour one day in seven. That day is not 
lost. While industry is suspended, while the plough lies in the furrow, 
while the Exchange is silent, while no smoke ascends from the factory, 
a process is going on quite as important to the wealth of nations as any 
process which is performed on more busy days. Man, the machine of 
machinery, the machine compared with which all the contrivances 
of the Watts and Arkwrights are worthless, is repairing and winding 
up, so that he returns to his labour on the Monday with clearer intellect, 
with livelier spirits, with renewed corporal vigour.’”’—Macaulay’s 
Speech on the Ten Hours Bill. Speeches, pp. 450, 453, 454. 

The famous Blackstone says, ‘‘ The keeping one day in seven holy, 
as a time of relaxation and refreshment, as well as for public worship, 
is of admirable service to a State, ‘considered merely as a civil 
institution.’’—Blackstone’s Commentaries, vol. iv., p. 63. 


(d) Last, but not least, the Sabbath is an unmixed good for 
man’s soul. The soul has its wants just as much as the mind 
and body. It is in the midst of a hurrying, bustling world, in 
which its interests are constantly in danger of being jostled 
out of sight. To have those interests properly attended to, 
there must be a special day set apart ; there must be a regu- 
larly recurring time for examining the state of our souls; 
there must be a day to test and prove us, whether we are 
prepared for an eternal heaven. Take away a man’s Sabbath, 
and his religion soon comes to nothing. As a general rule, 
there is a regular flight of steps from “ no Sabbath”’ to “‘ no 
God.” 

I know well that many say that “‘ religion does not consist 
in keeping days and seasons.’’ I agree with them. I am quite 
aware that it needs something more than Sabbath observance 
to save our souls. But I would like such persons to tell us 
plainly what kind of religion that is which teaches people to 
keep no days holy at all. 

I know well that there are some good people who contend 
that ‘‘ every day ought to be holy ’’ to a true Christian, and on 


241 R 


KNOTS UNTIED 


this ground deprecate the special sanctification of the first day 
of the week. I respect the conscientious convictions of such 
people. I would go as far as any one in contending for an 
“every day religion,” and protesting against a mere Sabbath 
Christianity ; but I am satisfied that the theory is unsound 
and unscriptural. I amconvinced that, taking human nature 
as it is, the attempt to regard every day as a Lord’s Day 
would result in having no Lord’s Day at all. None but a 
thorough fanatic, I presume, would say that it is wrong to 
have stated seasons for private prayer, on the ground that we 
ought to “‘ pray always’’; and few, I am persuaded, who 
look at the world with the eyes of common sense, will fail to 
see, that to bring religion to bear on men with full effect, there 
must be one day in the week set apart for this purpose. 

Whether Englishmen know it or not, their Sabbath is one 
of their richest possessions. It is good for their bodies, minds, 
and souls. Of it the famous words may be truly used, that 
“it is the cheap defence of a nation.” 


III. HOW IT SHOULD BE KEPT 


I propose, in the third place, to show the manner in which 
the Sabbath ought to be kept. 

This is a branch of the subject on which great difference of 
opinion exists: it is one on which even the friends of the 
Sabbath are not thoroughly agreed. Many, I believe, would 
contend as strongly as I do for a Sabbath, but not for the 
Sabbath for which I contend. My desire is simply to state 
what appears to be the mind of God as revealed in Holy 
Scripture. 

Once for all, I must plainly say, that I cannot entirely 
agree with those who tell us that they do not want a Jewish 
Sabbath, but a Christian one. I doubt whether such persons 
clearly know what they mean. If they object to a Pharisaic 
Sabbath, I agree with them; if they object to a Mosaic 
Sabbath, I would have them consider well what they say. 

242 


THE SABBATH. 


I can find no clear evidence that the Old Testament Sabbath 
was intended by Moses to be more strictly kept than the 
Christian Sunday. 

What then appears to be the will of God about the manner 
of observing the Sabbath Day ? There are two general rules 
laid down for our guidance in the Fourth Commandment, and 
by them all questions must be decided. 

One plain rule about the Sabbath is, that it must be kept as 
a day of rest. All work of every kind ought to cease as far as 
possible, both of body and mind. “ Thou shalt not do any 
work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant 
nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is 
within thy gates.’’ Works of necessity and mercy may be 
done. Our Lord Jesus Christ teaches us this, and teaches also 
that all such works were allowable in the Old Testament 
times. ‘‘ Have ye not read,’ He says, “‘ what David did?” 
—‘ Have ye not read that the priests in the temple profane 
the Sabbath, and are blameless ?”’ (Matt. xii. 5). Whatever 
in short, is necessary to preserve and maintain life, whether 
of ourselves, or of the creatures, or to do good to the souls of 
men, may be done on the Sabbath Day without sin. 

The other great rule about the Sabbath is, that it must be 
kept holy. It is not to be a carnal, sensual rest, like that of the 
worshippers of the golden calf, who “ sat down to eat and 
drink and rose up to play” (Exod. xxxii. 6). It is to be 
emphatically a holy rest. It is to be a rest in which, as far as 
possible, the affairs of the soul may be attended to, the busi- 
ness of another world minded, and communion with God and 
Christ kept up. In short, it ought never to be forgotten that 
it is ‘‘ the Sabbath of the Lord our God ”’ (Exod. xx. 10). 

I ask attention to these two general rules. I believe that 
by them all Sabbath questions may be safely tested. I believe 
that within the bounds of these rules every lawful and reason- 
able want of human nature is fully met, and that whatsoever 
transgresses these bounds is sin. 

I am no Pharisee. Let no hard-working man, who has 


243 


KNOTS UNTIED 


been confined to a close room for six weary days, suppose that 
I object to his taking any lawful relaxation for his body on 
the Sunday. I see no harm in a quiet walk on a Sunday, 
provided always that it does not take the place of going to 
public worship, and is really quiet, and like that of Isaac 
(Gen. xxiv. 63). I read of our Lord and His disciples walking 
through the cornfields on the Sabbath Day. All I say is, 
beware that you do not turn liberty into licence,—beware 
that you do not injure the souls of others in seeking relaxa- 
tion for yourself,—and beware that you never forget you 
have a soul as well as a body. 

Iam no enthusiast. I want no tired labourer to misunder- 
stand my meaning, when I bid him to keep the Sabbath holy. 
I do not tell any one that he ought to pray all day, or read his 
Bible all day, or go to church all day, or meditate all day, 
without let or cessation, on a Sunday. All I say is, that the 
Sunday rest should be a holy rest. God ought to be kept in 
view ; God’s Word ought to be studied ; God’s House ought to 
be attended ; the soul’s business ought to be specially con- 
sidered ; and I say that everything which prevents the day 
being kept holy in this way, ought as far as possible to be 
avoided. 

I am no admirer of a gloomy religion. Let no one suppose 
that I want Sunday to be a day of sadness and unhappiness. 
I want every Christian to be a happy man: I wish him to 
have “joy and peace in believing,” and to “ rejoice in hope 
of the glory of God.’’ I want every one to regard Sunday as 
the brightest, cheerfulest day of all the seven; and I tell 
every one who finds such a Sunday as I advocate, a wearisome 
day, that there is something sadly wrong in the state of his 
heart. I tell him plainly that if he cannot enjoy a “ holy ” 
Sunday, the fault is not in the day, but in his own soul. 

I can well believe that many will think that I am setting 
the standard of Sabbath observance far too high. The thought- 
less and wordly, the lovers of money and lovers of pleasure, 
will all exclaim that I am requiring what is impossible. It is 


244 


THE SABBATH 


easy to make such assertions. The only question for a 
Christian ought to be, ‘“ What does the Bible teach ?’’ God’s 
measure of what is right must surely not be brought down to 
the measure of man : man’s measure should rather be brought 
up to the measure of God. 

I maintain no other standard of Sabbath observance than 
that which all the best and holiest Christians, of every Church 
and nation, have maintained almost without exception. It is 
extraordinary to mark the harmony there is among them on 
this point. They have differed widely on other subjects in 
religion :—they have even disagreed as to the grounds on 
which they defend Sabbath sanctification :—but as soon as 
you come to the practical question, ‘“‘ how the Lord’s Day 
ought to be observed,” the unity among them is truly 
surprising. ; 

Last, but not least, I want no other standard of Sabbath 
observance than that to which a calm, rational reflection on 
things yet to come, will lead every sober-minded person. Are 
we really going to die one day and leave this world ? Are we 
about to appear before God in another state of existence ? 
Are these things so, or are they not ? Surely, if they are, it 
is not too much to ask men to give one day in seven to God ; 
it is not too much to require them to test their own meetness 
for another world, by spending the Sabbath in special pre- 
paration for it. Common sense, reason, conscience, will 
combine, I think, to say, that if we cannot spare God one day 
in a week, we cannot be living as those ought to live who 
must die one day. 


IV. WAYS IN WHICH IT IS PROFANED 


The last thing I propose to do, is to expose some of the 
ways in which the Sabbath is profaned. 

There are two kinds of Sabbath desecration which require 
to be noticed. One is that more private kind of which 
thousands are continually guilty, and which can only be 


245 


KNOTS UNTIED 


checked by awakening men’s consciences. The other is that 
more public kind, which can only be remedied by the pressure 
of public opinion, and the strong arm of the law. 

When I speak of private Sabbath desecration, I mean that 
reckless, thoughtless, secular way of spending Sunday, which 
every one who looks round him must know is common. How 
many make the Lord’s Day a day for giving dinner parties,— 
a day for looking over their accounts and making up their 
books,—a day for going unnecessary journeys and quietly 
transacting worldly business,—a day for reading newspapers 
or novels,—a day for talking politics and idle gossip,—a day 
in short, for anything rather than the things of God. 

Now all this sort of thing is wrong, decidedly wrong. 
Thousands, I firmly believe, never give the subject a thought : 
they sin from ignorance and inconsideration. They only do 
as others ; they only spend Sunday as their fathers and grand- 
fathers did before them: but this does not alter the case. 
It is utterly impossible to say, that to spend Sunday as I have 
described is to “‘ keep the day holy” :it is a plain breach of the 
Fourth Commandment, both in the letter and in the spirit. 
It is impossible to plead necessity or mercy in one instance of 
a thousand. And small and trifling as these breaches of the 
Sabbath may seem to be, they are exactly the sort of things 
that prevent men communing with God and getting good from 
His Day. 

When I speak of public desecration of the Sabbath, I mean 
those many open, unblushing practices, which meet the eye 
on Sundays in the neighbourhood of large towns. I refer to 
the practice of keeping shops open, and buying and selling on 
Sundays. I refer especially to Sunday trains on railways, 
Sunday steamboats, and excursions to sea and country and 
the opening of ‘places of public amusement; and to the 
daring efforts which many are making in the present day, to 
desecrate the Lord’s Day, regardless of its Divine authority 
“Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy,” 


246 


THE SABBATH 


On all these points I feel not the smallest doubt in my own 
mind. These ways of spending the Sabbath are all wrong, 
decidedly wrong. So long as the Bible is the Bible, and the 
Fourth Commandment the Fourth Commandment, I dare not 
come to any other conclusion. They are all wrong. 

These ways of spending Sunday are none of them works 
of necessity or works of mercy. There is not the slightest like- 
ness between them and any of the things which the Lord 
Jesus explains to be lawful on the Sabbath Day. To heal a 
sick person, or pull an ox or an ass out of a pit, is one thing : 
to travel in excursion trains, or go to concerts, theatres, 
dances and cinemas, is quite another. The difference is as 
great as between light and darkness. 

These ways of spending Sunday are none of them of a holy 
tendency, or calculated to help us heavenward. No, indeed ! 
all experience teaches that it needs something more than the 
beauties of art and nature to teach man the way to heaven. 

These ways of spending Sunday have never yet conferred 
moral or spiritual good in any place where they have been tried. 
They have been tried for hundreds of years in Italy, in Ger- 
many and in France. Sunday music has been long tried in 
Continental cities. But what benefit have they derived that 
we should wish to imitate them? What advantages have 
we to gain by making a London Sunday like a Sunday at 
Paris or other continental cities. It would be a change for 
the worse, and not for the better. 

Last, but not least, these ways of spending Sunday inflict 
a cruel injury on the souls of multitudes of people. Railway 
trains and steamboats cannot be run on Sundays without 
employing hundreds of persons. Clerks, porters, ticket- 


1The Lord’s Day Observance Society state that a number of Cinema 
owners are launching a National Campaign for the opening of 3,400 
Cinemas on the Lord’s Day and boast that it will bring them in 
£7,000,000. The Society also give a handful of facts for London 
only, viz., 40,000 shops open on Sundays, 86,700 public houses and 
drinking clubs ; half a million people attend cinemas, 900,000 attend 
concerts, and thirteen Sunday newspapers are published.—Editor. 


247 


KNOTS UNTIED 


takers, policemen, guards, engine-drivers, stokers, amnibus- 
drivers, must all work on the Sabbath Day, if people will make 
Sunday a day for travelling and excursions. Museums, 
exhibitions, and cinemas cannot be opened on Sundays 
without servants and attendants to take care of them and 
wait on those who visit them. And have not all these unfor- 
tunate persons immortal souls >? Do they not all need a day 
of rest as much as any one else? Beyond doubt they do. 
But Sunday is no Sunday to them, so long as these public 
desecrations of the Sabbath are permitted. Their life becomes 
a long unbroken chain of work, work, unceasing work: in 
short, what is play to others becomes death to them. Away 
with the idea that a pleasure-seeking, Continental Sabbath 
is mercy to any one! It is nothing less than an enormous 
fallacy to call it so. Such a Sabbath is real mercy to nobody, 
and ts positive sacrifice to some. 

I write these things with sorrow. I know well too, how 
many myriads of my fellow-countrymen they apply. I have 
spent many a Sunday in large towns. I have seen with my 
own eyes how the day of the Lord is made by multitudes a 
day of worldliness, a day of ungodliness, a day of carnal mirth, 
and too often a day of sin. But the extent of the disease must 
not prevent us exposing it: the truth must be told. 

There is one general conclusion to be drawn from the con- 
duct of those who publicly desecrate the Sabbath in the way 
I have described. They show plainly that they are at present 
“without God ”’ in the world. They are like those of old who 
said, ‘‘ When will the Sabbath be gone ? ’’—‘‘ What a weariness 
itis !’’ (Amos viii. 5 ; Mal. i. 13). It is an awful conclusion, 
but it is impossible to avoid it. Scripture, history, and ex- 
perience all combine to teach us, that delight in the Lord’s 
Word, the Lord’s service, the Lord’s people, and the Lord’s 
Day, will always go together. Sunday railway excursionists 
and Sunday pleasure-seekers are their own witnesses. They 
are every week practically declaring, ‘‘ We do not like God— 
we do not want Him to reign over us.” 


248 


THE SABBATH 


It is not the slightest argument, in reply to what I have 
said, that many great and learned men see no harm in travel- 
ling on Sundays and visiting exhibitions. It matters nothing 
in religious questions, ‘‘ who does a thing:” the only point 
to be ascertained is, ‘‘ whether it be right.” 

Let us take our stand on the Bible, and hold fast its teach- 
ing. Whatever others may think lawful, let our sentence ever 
be that one day in seven, and one whole day, ought to be kept 
holy to God. 


A FINAL APPEAL 


And now I wish to address a parting word to several 
classes of persons who may read these pages. I write asa 
friend. I ask for a fair and patient hearing. 

(x) I appeal first to all who are in the habit of breaking the 
Sabbath. Whether you break it in public or private, whether 
you break it in company or alone, I have somewhat to say to 
you. 

I ask you to consider seriously, how you will answer for 
your present conduct in the day of judgment. I put it solemnly 
to your conscience. I ask you to think quietly and calmly, 
how utterly unfit you are to appear before God. You cannot 
live always : you must one day lie down and die. You cannot 
escape the great assize in the world to come: you must stand 
before the great white throne, and give account of all your 
works. These are great realities, and you know they are true. : 
1 repeat it deliberately : unless you are prepared to take up 
some fable of man’s invention, and to be that poor credulous 
creature, a sceptic, you know these things are true. 

Where is your preparedness for meeting God and reckon- 
ing with Him? Where is your readiness for an eternity in 
His company, and the society of saints and angels? Yes! 
I may well ask, Where? You cannot give an answer. You 
cannot give God one single day in seven! It wearies you to 
spend one-seventh part of your time in attempting to know 


249 


KNOTS UNTIED 


anything about Him, before whose bar you are going one day 
to stand ! 

Oh, Sabbath-breaker, consider your ways, and be wise! 
What harm has Sunday done the world, that you should hate 
it so much? What harm has God done you, that you should 
so obstinately turn your back on His laws? What injury 
has religion done to mankind, that you should be so afraid 
of having too much? Look on the heavens above you, and 
think of the mighty Being, who is the eternal God. 

Go to the house of God, and hear the Gospel preached. 
Confess your past sin at the throne of grace, and ask pardon 
through that blood which “ cleanses from all sin.” Arrange 
your time on Sunday so that you may have leisure for quiet, 
sober meditation on eternal things. Avoid the company 
that would lead you to talk only of this world. Take down your 
long-neglected Bible, and study its pages. Do it, do it with- 
out a week’s delay! It may be hard at first, but it is worth 
a struggle. Do it, and it will be well for you both in time and 
eternity. 

(2) I appeal, in the next place, to all who either belong to 
the industrial classes, or profess to take an interest in their 
condition. 

I ask you then, never to be taken in and deluded by those 
who want the sanctity of the Lord’s Day to be more publicly 
invaded than it is, and yet tell you they are “ the friends of 
the working-classes.”” Believe me, they are in reality their 
worst enemies: they are taking the surest course to add to 
their burdens. They do not mean it, very likely, but in reality 
they are doing them a cruel injury. 

Be assured that if English Sundays are ever turned into a 
day of play and amusement, they will soon become a day of 
labour and work. It is vain to suppose that it can be avoided : 
it never has been in other countries ; it’never would be in our 
own land. 

I do trust that all industrial classes in England will not be 
deceived about this Sabbath question. Of all people on earth 

250 


THE SABBATH 


they are the most interested in it. None have so much to 
lose in this matter as they, and none have so little to gain. 

(3) I appeal, in the next place, to all who profess to re- 
verence the Sabbath, and have no wish to see its character 
changed. 

I ask you to consider whether you may not be more 
strict in keeping the Sabbath Day holy than you have been 
hitherto. I am sadly afraid there is much laxity in many 
quarters on this point. I fear that many who have no thought 
of infringing the Fourth Commandment are culpably incon- 
siderate and careless as to the way in which they obey its 
precepts. I fear that the world gets into the Sundays of many 
a respectable church-going family far more than it ought to 
do. I fear that many keep the Sabbath themselves, but never 
give their servants a chance of keeping it holy. I fear that 
many who keep the Lord’s Day with much outward propriety 
when they are at home, are often grievous Sabbath-breakers 
when they go abroad. I fear that hundreds of English travellers 
do things on Sundays on the Continent, which they would 
never do in their own land. 

This is a sore evil, if we really love the Lord’s Day, let us 
prove our love by our manner of using it. Wherever we are, 
whether at home or abroad,—whether in Protestant orRoman 
Catholic countries,—let our conduct on Sunday be such as 
becomes the day. Let usnever forget that the eyes of the 
Lord are in every place and that the Fourth Commandment 
is just as binding on us in Italy, Switzerland, Germany, or 
France, as it is in our own country. Last, but not least, let 
us remember that the Fourth Commandment speaks of our 
‘‘man-servant and maid-servant,’’ as well as ourselves. 

(4) I appeal, in the last place, to all who love the Lord 
Jesus Christ in sincerity, and are zealous in His cause. 

I ask you, then, to consider whether it does not become 
the solemn duty of all true Christians to take far more effectual 
measures than we have done hitherto, to preserve the holi- 
ness of the Lord’s Day ? 

251 


KNOTS UNTIED 


We form societies to defend the Lord’s Day, and propose 
measure after measure in Parliament to stop Sunday trading. 
‘But is that enough? No: it is not! 

The truth must be spoken :—we must begin lower down. 
We cannot make people religious by Acts of Parliament-alone. 
We must teach right as well as forbid wrong: we must try to 
prevent evil as well as repress it. We must strike at the root 
of the evils we deplore. We must endeavour to evangelize 
the masses of men and women who now break their Sabbaths 
every week. We must show them a better way. We must 
divert this fountain of Sabbath-breaking into different channels 
and not content ourselves with damming up its waters when 
they overflow. 

I commend these things to the attention of all who love 
the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Let London, Manchester, 
Liverpool, Glasgow, and other large towns be thoroughly 
evangelized, and you will strike a deadly blow at the root of 
all Sabbath breaking. 

The plain truth is, that the Sabbath-breaking of the present 
day is one among many proofs of the low state of vital religion, 
and the great want of union among British Christians. 

I pray God that we may all learn wisdom, and amend our 
ways before it be too late. We want more work for Christ. 
We want a return to the old paths of the Apostles in every 
branch of the Church ; we want a generation of ministers whose 
first ambition is to go into every room in their parish, and tell 
the story of the cross of Christ. 

Unless our large towns are more thoroughly evangelized, 
we shall never be without a struggle TO KEEP THE 
SABBATH HOLY. 


252 


XIV 
PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


“ Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the 
Pharisees and of the Sadduces.’’—MATT. xvi. 6. 


Every word spoken by the Lord Jesus is full of deep in- 
struction for Christians. It is the voice of the Chief Shepherd. 
It is the Great Head of the Church speaking to all its members. 


THE WORDS OF JESUS 


And every kind of word spoken by the Lord Jesus is of 
the greatest value. We are not merely to hear Him when He 
says, ‘‘ Come unto Me, all ye that labour, and are heavy laden,” 
we are to hear Him also when He says, “‘ Take heed and 
beware.” 

I am going to direct attention to one of the most solemn 

and emphatic warnings which the Lord Jesus ever delivered : 
“Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of 
the Sadducees.”’ Upon this text I wish to erect a beacon for 
all who desire to be saved, and to preserve some souls, if 
possible, from making shipwreck. The times call loudly for 
such beacons. 


I. WHO ARE WARNED ? 


First of all, I ask my readers to observe who they were to 
whom the warning of the text was addressed. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ was not speaking to men who were 
worldly, ungodly, and unsanctified, but to His own disciples, 


253 


KNOTS UNTIED 


companions, and friends. He addressed men who, with the 
exception of the apostate Judas Iscariot, were right-hearted 
in the sight of God. He spoke to the twelve Apostles, the first 
founders of the Church of Christ, and the first ministers of 
the Word of salvation. And yet even to them He addresses 
the solemn caution of our text: ‘‘ Take heed and beware.” 
There is something very remarkable in this fact. We might 
have thought that these Apostles needed little warning of 
this kind. Had they not given up all for Christ’s sake ? They 
had.—Had they not endured hardship for Christ’s sake ? 
They had.—Had they not believed Jesus, followed Jesus, 
loved Jesus, when almost all the world was unbelieving ? 
and yet to them the caution was addressed: “‘ Take heed and 
beware.”’ We might have imagined that at any rate the 
disciples had but little to fear from the “ leaven of the 
Pharisees and of the Sadducees.” They were poor and un- 
learned men, most of them fishermen or publicans; they had 
no leanings in favour of the Pharisees and the Sadducees ; 
they were more likely to be prejudiced against them than to 
feel any drawing towards them, and yet even to them there 
comes the solemn warning: ‘“‘ Take heed and beware.” 
There is useful counsel here for all who profess to love the 
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. It tells us loudly that the 
most eminent servants of Christ are not beyond the need of 
warnings, and ought to be always on their guard. It shows 
us plainly that the holiest of believers ought to walk humbly 
with his God, and to watch and pray, lest he fall into tempta- 
tion, and be overtaken in a fault. None is so holy, but that 
he may fall,—none is so strong but that he or she may for a 
time be overcome. Chosen as believers are by God the Father, 
justified as they are by the blood and righteousness of Jesus 
Christ, sanctified as they are by the Holy Ghost,—believers 
are still only men: they are yet in the body and yet in the 
world. They are ever near temptation: they are ever liable 
to err, both in doctrine and in practice. Their hearts, though 
renewed, are very feeble; their understanding, though 


254 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


enlightened, is still very dim. They ought to live like those who 
dwell in an enemy’s land, and every day to put on the armour 
of God. The devil is very busy: he never slumbers or sleeps. 

I may be allowed to say that none need warnings so much 
as the ministers of Christ’s Gospel. Our office and our ordina- 
tion are no security against errors and mistakes. It is, alas, 
too true, that the greatest heresies have crept into the Church 
of Christ by means of ordained men. Neither Episcopal 
ordination, nor Presbyterian ordination, nor any other ordination 
confers any immunity from error and false doctrine. Our very 
familiarity with the Gospel often begets in us a hardened state 
of mind. We are apt to read the Scriptures and preach the 
Word, and conduct public worship, and carry on the service 
of God, in a dry, hard formal, callous spirit. Our very 
familiarity with sacred things, except we watch our hearts, 
is likely to lead us astray. ‘‘ Nowhere,” says an old writer, 
“jis a man’s soul in more danger than in a priest’s office.” 
The history of the Church of Christ contains many melancholy 
proofs that the most distinguished ministers may for a time 
fall away. Who has not heard of Archbishop Cranmer recant- 
ing and going back from those opinions he had defended so 
stoutly, though, by God’s mercy, raised again to witness a 
glorious confession at last ? Who has not heard of Bishop 
Jewel signing documents that he most thoroughly disapproved, 
and of which signature he afterwards bitterly repented ? 
Who does not know that many others might be named, who, 
at one time or another, have been overtaken by faults, have 
fallen into errors, and been led astray ? And who does not 
know the mournful fact that many of them never came back 
to the truth, but died in hardness of heart, and held their 
errors to the last ? 

These things ought to make us humble and cautious. 
They tell us to distrust our own hearts, and to pray to be kept 
from falling. In these days, we are specially called upon to 
cleave firmly to the doctrines of the Protestant Reformation. 
Let us take heed that we are spiritual men and women as well 


255 


KNOTS UNTIED 


as Protestants, and real friends of Christ as well as enemies 
of Antichrist. 


II. WHAT ARE THE DANGERS ? 


I propose, in the second plate, to explain what were the 
dangers against which our Lord warned the Apostles. ‘‘ Take 
heed, He says, ‘‘ and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees 
and of the Sadducees.”’ 

The danger against which He warns them is false doctrine. 
He says nothing about the sword of persecution, or the open 
breach of the Ten Commandments, or the love of money, or 
the love of pleasure. All these things no doubt were perils 
and snares to which the souls of the Apostles were exposed ; 
but against these things our Lord raises no warning voice 
here, His warning is confined to one single point : “ The leaven 
of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.’’—We are not left to 
conjecture what our Lord meant by the word “ leaven.”’ The 
Holy Ghost, a few verses after the very text on which I am now 
dwelling, tells us plainly that by leaven was meant the “ doce 
trine’”’ of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 

Let us try to understand what we mean when we speak of 
the “ doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.”’ 

(a) The doctrine of the Pharisees may be summed up in 
three words,—they were formalists, tradition-worshippers, 
and self-righteous. They attached such weight to the tradi- 
tions of men, that they practically regarded them as of more 
importance than the inspired writings of the Old Testament. 
They valued themselves upon excessive strictness in their 
attention to all the ceremonial requirements of the Mosaic 
law. They thought much of being descended from Abraham, 
and said in their hearts, ‘‘ We have Abraham to our father.” 
They fancied because they had Abraham for their father 
that they were not in peril of hell like other men, and that their 
descent from him was a kind of title to heaven. They attached 
great value to washings and ceremonial purifyings of the body, 


256 


/ 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


and believed that the very touching of the dead body of a 
fly or gnat would defile them. They made a great ado about 
the outward parts of religion, and such things as could be seen 
of men. They made broad their phylacteries and enlarged the 
fringes of their garments. They prided themselves on paying 
great honour to dead saints, and garnishing the sepulchres 
of the righteous. They were very zealous to make proselytes. 
They thought much of having power, rank, and pre-eminence, 
and of being called by men, “ Rabbi, Rabbi.” These things, 
and many suchlike things, the Pharisees did, (See Matthew, 
chaps. xv. and xxiii. ; Mark, chap. vii.) 

All this time, be it remembered, they did not formally deny 
any part of the Old Testament Scripture. But they brought in, 
over and above it, so much of human invention, that they 
virtually put Scripture aside, and buried it under their own 
traditions. This is the sort of religion of which our Lord says 
to the Apostles, ‘‘ Take heed and beware.’’ 

(6) The doctrine of the Sadducees, on the other hand, may 
be summed up in three words,—free-thinking, scepticism, 
and rationalism. Their creed was one far less popular than 
that of the Pharisees, and, therefore, we find them less often 
mentioned in the New Testament Scriptures. So far as we 
can judge from the New Testament, they appear to have held 
the doctrine of degrees of inspiration; at all events they 
attached exceeding value to the Pentateuch above the other 
parts of the Olid Testament, if indeed they did not altogether 
ignore the latter. They believed that there was no resurrec- 
tion, no angel, and no spirit, and tried to laugh men out of 
their belief in these things, by supposing hard cases and bring- 
ing forward difficult questions. We have an instance of their 
mode of argument in the casewhich they propounded to our Lord 
of the woman who had had seven husbands, when they asked, 
“ Tn the resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven ?” 
And in this way they probably hoped, by rendering religion 
absurd, and its chief doctrines ridiculous, to make men al- 
together give up the faith they had received from the Scrip- 
tures. 257 s 


KNOTS UNTIED 


All this time, be it remembered, we may not say that the 
Sadducees were downright infidels: this they were not. We — 
may not say they denied revelation altogether: this they 
did not do. They observed the law of Moses. Many of them 
were found among the priests in the times described in the 
Acts of the Apostles. Caiaphas, who condemned our Lord, was 
a Sadducee. But the practical effect of their teaching was to 
shake men’s faith in any revelation, and to throw a cloud of 
doubt over men’s minds, which was only one degree better than 
infidelity. And of all such kind of doctrine,—free-thinking, 
scepticism ,rationalism,—ourLord says,‘‘Take heed and beware” 

Now the question arises, Why did our Lord Jesus Christ 
deliver this warning ? He knew, no doubt, that within forty 
years the schools of the Pharisees and the Sadducees would 
be completely overthrown. He that knew all things from the 
beginning, knew perfectly well that in forty years Jerusalem 
with its magnificent temple would be destroyed, and the Jews 
scattered over the face of the earth. Why then do we find 
Him giving this warning about “ the leaven of the Pharisees 
and of the Sadducees ? ” 

I believe that our Lord delivered this solemn warning for 
the perpetual benefit of that Church which He came on earth 
to found. He spoke with a prophetic knowledge. He knew 
well the diseases to which human nature is always liable. He 
foresaw that the two great plagues of His church upon earth 
would always be the doctrine of the Pharisees and the doctrine 
of the Sadducees. He knew that these would be the upper 
and nether mill-stones, between which His truth would be 
perpetually crushed and bruised until He came the second time. 
He knew that there always would be Pharisees in spirit, and 
Sadducees in spirit, among professing Christians; and that 
though the names of Pharisees and Sadducees were no more, 
yet their principles would always exist. He knew that 
during the time that the Church existed, until His return, 
there would always be some that would add to the Word and 
some that would subtract from it,—some that would stifle it, 


258 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


by adding to it other things, and some that would bleed 
it to death, by subtracting from its principal truths. And 
this is the reason why we find Him delivering this solemn 
warning: “‘ Take heed and beware of the leaven of the 
Pharisees and of the Sadducees.”’ 

And now comes the question, Had not our Lord Jesus 
Christ good reason to give this warning ? I appeal to all who 
know anything of Church history, was there not indeed a 
cause ? I appeal to all who remember what took place soon 
after the Apostles were dead. Do we not read that in the 
primitive Church of Christ there rose up two distinct parties, — 
one ever inclined to err, like the Arians, in holding less than 
the truth, the other ever inclined to err, like the relic-wor- 
shippers and saint-worshippers, in holding more than the truth, 
as it is in Jesus >—Do we not see the same thing coming out 
in after times, in the form of Romanism on the one side and 
Socinianism on the other ?>—Do we not read in the history of 
our own Church of two great parties, the Non-jurors on the 
one side, and the Latitudinarians on the other ?>—These are 
ancient things.—In a short chapter like this it is impossible 
for me to enter more fully into them. There always have 
been these two great parties,—the party representing the 
principles of the Pharisee, and the party representing the 
principles of the Sadducee.—And therefore our Lord had 
good cause to say of these two great principles, “ Take heed 
and beware.”’ 

But to bring the subject even nearer at the present moment. 
I ask my readers to consider whether warnings like this are 
not especially needed in our own times. We have, undoubtedly, 
much to be thankful for in England. We have made great 
advances in arts and sciences in the last three centuries, and 
have much of the form and show of morality and religion. 
But I ask anybody who can see beyond his own door, or his 
own fireside, whether we do not live in the midst of dangers 
from false doctrine ? 

We have amongst us, on the one side, a school of men who 


259 


KNOTS UNTIED 


are paving the way into the Church of Rome,—a school that 
professes to draw its principles from primitive tradition, 
the writings of the Fathers, and the voice of the Church,— 
a school that talks and writes much about the Church, the 
ministry, and the sacraments, a school that attaches vast 
importance to the outward form and ceremonial of religion,— 
to gestures, postures, bowings, crosses, piscinas, sedilia, credence 
tables, rood-screens, albs, tunicles, copes, chasubles, altar- 
cloths, incense, images, banners, and many other like things, 
about which not a word is to be found in the Holy Scriptures 
as having any place in Christian. worship. I believe whatever 
be the meaning and intention of its teachers, however devoted, 
zealous, and self-denying, many of them are, that upon them 
has fallen the mantle of the Pharisees. 

We have, on the other hand, a school of men who, wittingly 
or unwittingly, appear to pave the way to Socinianism,—a 
school which holds strange views about the plenary inspiration 
of Holy Scripture,—strange views about the doctrine of sacri- 
fice, and the Atonement of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
—strange views about future punishment, and God’s love 
to man,—a school strong in negatives, but very weak in 
positives,—skilful in raising doubts, but impotent in laying 
them,—clever in unsettling men’s faith, but powerless to offer 
any firm rest for the sole of our foot. And, whether the leaders 
of this school mean it or not, I believe that on them has fallen 
the mantle of the Sadducees. . 

These things sound harsh: but the danger, I believe, is 
far greater than we are apt to suppose. The books that are 
read in many quarters are most mischievous, and the tone of 
thought on religious subjects, among many classes, and 
especially among the higher ranks, is deeply unsatisfactory. 
If we love life, we ought to search our own hearts, and try 
our own faith,and make sure that we stand on the right founda- 
tion. Above all, we ought to take heed that we ourselves do 
not imbibe the poison of false doctrine, and go back from our 
first love. 

260 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


I feel deeply the painfulness of speaking out on these 
subjects. I know well that plain speaking about false doctrine 
is very unpopular, and that the speaker must be content to 
find himself thought very uncharitable, very troublesome, 
and very narrow-minded. Thousands of people can never 
distinguish differences in religion. ; 


THE WARNINGS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 


But I will ask any honest-minded, unprejudiced Bible 
reader to turn to the New Testament and see what he will 
find there. He will find many plain warnings against false 


doctrine; ‘‘ Beware of false prophets,”—‘‘ Beware lest any 
man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,”—‘‘ Be not 
carried about with divers and strange doctrines,’—‘‘ Believe 


not every spirit, but try the spirts whether they be of God” (Matt. 
vii. 15; Col. 1.8; Heb. xiii.g; 1 Johniv. 1). He will finda 
large part of several inspired Epistles taken up with elaborate 
explanations of true doctrine and warnings against false teach- 
ing. I ask whether it is possible for a minister who takes the 
Bible for his rule of faith to avoid giving warnings against 
doctrinal error ? 

Finally, I ask any one to mark what is going on in England 
at this very day ? I ask whether it is not true that hundreds 
have left the Established Church and joined the Church of 
Rome since the beginning of the Oxford Movement. I ask 
whether it is not true that hundreds remain within our pale, who 
in heart are little better than Romanists, and who ought, if they 
were consistent, to walk in the steps of Newman, Manning, and 
others, and go to their own place ?—I ask again whether it 
is not true that scores of young men, both at Oxford and 
Cambridge, are spoiled and ruined by the withering influence 
of scepticism, and have lost all positive principles in religion ? 
Sneers at religious newspapers, loud declarations of dislike to 
“* parties,” high-sounding vague phrases about ‘ deep think- 
ing,” broad views, new light, free handling of Scripture 

261 


KNOTS UNTIED 


and the effete weakness of certain schools of theology, make 
up the whole Christianity of many of the rising generation. 
—And yet, in the face of these notorious facts, men cry out, 
‘“* Hold your peace about false doctrine.” I cannot hold my 
peace. Faith in the Word of God, love to the souls of men, 
the vows I took when I was ordained, alike constrain me 
to bear witness against the errors of the day. 


WJ. THE LEAVEN OF THE—PHARISEES “AxG 
SADDUCEES 


The third thing to which I wish to call attention is the 
peculiar name by which our Lord Jesus Christ speaks of the 
doctrines of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 

The words which our Lord used were always the wisest 
and the best that could be used. He says, ‘‘ Take heed and 
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.” 

Now we all know what is the true meaning of the word 
“leaven.”’ It is what we commonly call yeast,—the yeast 
which is added to the lump of dough in making a loaf of bread. 
This yeast, or leaven, bears but a small proportion to the 
lump into which it is thrown; just so, our Lord would have 
us know, the first beginning of false doctrine is but small 
compared to the body of Christianity.—Jt works quietly and 
noiselessly ; just so, our Lord would have us know, false doctrine 
works secretly in the heart in which it is once planted.—It in- 
sensibly changes the character of the whole mass with which 
it is mingled; just so, our Lord would have us know, the 
doctrines of the Pharisees and Sadducees turn everything up- 
side down, when once admitted into a Church or into a man’s 
heart.—Let us mark these points: they throw light on many 
things that we see in the present day. It is of vast importance 
to receive the lessons of wisdom that this word ‘ leaven ” 
contains in itself. 

False doctrine does not meet men face to face, and proclaim 
that it ts false. It does not blow a trumpet before it, and endeavour 

262 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


openly to turn us away from the truth as it is in Jesus. It 
approaches us secretly, quietly, insidiously, plausibly, and in 
such a way as to disarm man’s suspicion, and throw him off 
his guard. It is the wolf in sheep’s clothing, and Satan in the 
garb of an angel of light, who have always proved the most 
dangerous foes of the Church of Christ. 

I believe the most powerful champion of the Pharisees is 
not the man who bids you openly and honestly come out and 
join the Church of Rome: it is the man who says that he 
agrees on ail points with you in doctrine. He would not take 
anything away from those Evangelical views that you hold ; 
—he would not have you make any change at all ;—all he 
asks you to do is to add a little more to your belief, in order to 
make your Christianity perfect. ‘‘ Believe me,” he says, ‘‘ we 
do not want you to give up anything. We only want you to 
hold a few more clear views about the Church and the sacra- 
ments. We want you to add to your present opinions a little 
more about the office of the ministry, and a little more about 
Episcopal authority, and a little more about the necessity of 
order and of discipline.—We only want you to add a little more 
of these things to your system of religion, and you will be 
quite right.”” But when men speak to you in this way, then 
is the time to remember what our Lord said, and “ to take 
heed and beware.” This is the leaven of the Pharisees, against 
which we are to stand upon our guard. 

I say this because there is no security against the doctrine 
of the Pharisees, unless we resist its principles in their be- 
ginnings. Beginning with a “ little more about the Church,” 
you may one day place the Church in the room of Christ.— 
Beginning with a “ little more about the ministry,” you may 
one day regard the minister as “ the mediator between God 
and man.’’—Beginning with a “ little more about the sacra- 
ments,’’ you may one day altogether give up the doctrine of 
justification by faith without the deeds of the law.—Beginning 
with a “ little more honour to bishops,” you may at last refuse 
salvation to every one who does not belong to an Episcopal 


263 


KNOTS UNTIED 


Church.—I only tell an old story: I only mark out the roads 
that have been trodden by hundreds of members of the Church 
of England in the last century. They began by carping at 
the Reformers, and have ended by swallowing the decrees of 
the Council of Trent. I believe that when we hear men asking 
us to ‘“‘ add a little more ” to our good old plain Evangelical 
views, we should stand upon our guard. We should remember 
our Lord’s caution: “‘ Of the leaven of the Pharisees, take heed 
and beware.” 

I consider the most dangerous champion of the Sadducee 
school is not the man who tells you openly that he wants you 
to lay aside any part of the truth, and to become a free-thinker 
and a sceptic. It is the man who begins with quietly insinuat- 
ing doubts as to the position that we ought to take up about 
religion,—doubts whether we ought to be so positive in say- 
ing, ‘‘ This is truth, and that falsehood,’”—doubts whether 
we ought to think men wrong who differ from us on religious 
opinions, since they may after all be as much right as we are. 
—It is the man who tells us we ought not to condemn any- 
body’s views, lest we err on the side of want of charity.—It 
.is the man who always begins talking in a vague way about 
God being a God of love, and hints that we ought to believe 
perhaps that all men, whatever doctrine they profess, will be 
saved.—lIt is the man who is ever reminding us that we ought 
to take care how we think lightly of men of powerful minds, 
and great intellects (though they are Deists and Sceptics), who 
do not think as we do, and that, after all, “‘great minds are all 
more or less taught of God! ”’—It is the man who is ever 
harping on the difficulties of inspiration, and raising questions 
whether all men may not be found saved in the end, and 
whether all may not be right in the sight of God.—It is the man 
who crowns this kind of talk by a few calm sneers against 
what he is pleased to call ‘‘ old-fashioned views,” and ‘“‘ narrow 
minded theology,” and “ bigotry,” and the ‘‘ want of liberality 
and charity,” in the present day. But when men begin to 
speak to us in this kind of way, then is the time to stand upon 

264 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


our guard. Then is the time to remember the words of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and ‘‘to take heed and beware of 
leaven.” 

Once more, why do I say this? I say it because there is 
no security against Sadduceeism, any more than against 
Phariseeism, unless we resist its principles in the bud. Be- 
ginning with a little vague talk about “ chairty,” and with 
a few high-sounding phrases about intellect and the inner light 
in man, you may end with denying the work of the Holy 
Ghost, and maintaining that Homer and Shakespeare were 
as truly inspired as St. Paul, and thus practically casting 
aside the Bible.—Beginning with some dreamy, misty idea 
about “ all religions containing more or less truth,” you may 
end with utterly denying the necessity of missions, and main- 
taining that the best plan is to leave everybody alone.—Be- 
ginning with dislike to “‘ Evangelical religion,” as old-fashioned 
narrow, and exclusive, you may end by rejecting every lead- 
ing doctrine of Christianity,—the atonement, the need of 
grace, and the divinity of Christ. There is no safety for our 
souls unless we remember the lesson involved in those solemn 
words, ‘‘ Beware of the leaven of the Sadducees.” 

Let us beware of the insidiousness of false doctrine. Like 
the fruit of which Eve and Adam ate, it looks at first sight 
pleasant and good, and a thing to be desired. Poison is not 
written upon it, and so people are not afraid. Like counter- 
feit coin, it is not stamped “ bad: ” it passes current from the 
very likeness it bears to the truth. 

Let us beware of the very small beginnings of false doctrine. 
Every heresy began at one time with some little departure 
from the truth. There is only a little seed of error needed to 
create a great tree. It is the little stones that make up the 
mighty building. We do not tolerate quietly a little dis- 
honesty, or a little cheating, or a little lying: just so, let us 
never allow a little false doctrine to ruin us, by thinking it 
is but a “‘ little one,” and can do no harm. The Galatians 
seemed to be doing nothing very dangerous when they 


265 


KNOTS UNTIED 


‘ observed days and months, and times and years; ” yet St 
Paul says, ‘‘ I am afraid of you” (Gal. iv. Ic, I’). 

Finally, let us beware of supposing that we at any rate are 

not in danger. ‘‘ Our views are sound: our feet stand firm: 
others may fall away, but we are safe!” Hundreds have 
thought the same, and in their self-confidence they tampered 
with little temptations and little forms of false doctrine ; 
in their self-conceit they went near the brink of danger; and 
now they seem lost for ever. They appear given over to a 
strong delusion, so as to believe a lie. Some of them have 
exchanged the Prayer-book for the Breviary, and are praying 
to the Virgin Mary, and bowing down to images. Others of 
them are casting overboard one doctrine after another, and bid © 
fair to strip themselves of every sort of religion but a few 
scraps of Deism. Very striking is the vision in Pilgrim’s Pro- 
gress, which describes the hill Error as ‘‘ very steep on the 
farthest side; and “‘ when Christian and Hopeful looked 
down they saw at the bottom several men dashed all to 
pieces by a fall they had from the top.”—Never, never let 
us forget the caution to beware of “‘leaven;” and if we 
think we stand, let us ‘‘ take heed lest we fall.” 


IV. SAFEGUARDS AND ANTIDOTES 


I propose now to suggest some safe-guards and antidotes 
against the dangers of the present day,—the leaven of the Pharisees 
and the leaven of the Sadducees. 

I feel that we all need more and more the presence of the 
Holy Ghost in our hearts, to guide, to teach, and to keep us 
sound in the faith. We all need to watch more, and to pray 
to be held up, and preserved from falling away. But still, 
there are certain great truths, which, in a day like this, we are 
specially bound to keep in mind. There are times when some 
common epidemic invades a land, when medicines, at all times 
valuable, become of peculiar value. There are places where 
a peculiar malaria prevails, in which remedies, in every place 


266 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


valuable, are more than ever valuable in consequence of it. 
So I believe there are times and seasons in the Church of Christ 
when we are bound to tighten our hold upon certain great 
leading truths, to grasp them with more than ordinary firmness 
in our hands, to press them to our hearts, and not to let them 
go. Such doctrines I desire to set forth in order, as the great 
antidotes to the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 

(a) If we would be kept sound in the faith, we must take 
heed to our doctrine about the total corruption of human nature. 
The corruption of human nature is no slight thing. It is no 
partial, skin-deep disease, but a radical and universal corrup- 
tion of man’s will, intellect, affections, and conscience. We 
are not merely poor and pitiable sinners in God’s sight: we 
are guilty sinners: we are blameworthy sinners ; we deserve 
justly God’s wrath and God’s condemnation. Wrong 
views of the corruption of human nature will always carry 
with them wrong views of the grand antidote and cure of that 
corruption. 

(6) We must take heed to our doctrine about the inspira- 
tion and authority of the Holy Scriptures. Let us boldly main- 
tain, in the face of all gainsayers, that the whole of the Bible 
is given by inspiration of the Holy Ghost,—that all is inspired 
completely, not one part more than another,—and that there 
is an entire gulf between the Word of God and any other book 
in the world.—We need not be afraid of difficulties in the way 
of the doctrine of plenary inspiration. There may be many 
things about it far too high for us to comprehend: it is a 
miracle, and all miracles are necessarily mysterious. But 
if we are not to believe anything until we can entirely explain 
it, there are very few things indeed that we shall believe.— 
We need not be afraid of all the assults that criticism brings to 
bear upon the Bible. From the days of the Apostles the Word 
of the Lord has been incessantly “‘ tried,”’ and has never failed 
to come forth as gold, uninjured, and unsullied. 

Furthermore we must boldly maintain that this Word of 
God is the only rule of faith and of practice,—that whatsoever 


267 


KNOTS UNTIED 


is not written in it cannot be required of any man as needful to 
salvation,—and that however plausibly new doctrines may be 
defended, if they be not in the Word of God they cannot be 
worth our attention. It matters nothing who says a thing, 
whether he be bishop, archdeacon, dean, or presbyter. It 
matters nothing that the thing is well said, eloquently, attract- 
ively, forcibly, and in such a way as to turn the laugh against 
you. Weare not to believe it except it be proved to us by Holy 
Scripture. 

Last, but not least, we must use the Bible as if we believed 
it was given by inspiration. We must use it with reverence 
and read it with all the tenderness with which we would 
read the words of an absent father. We must not expect to 
find, in a book inspired by the Spirit of God, no mysteries. 
We must rather remember that in nature there are many 
things we cannot understand; and that as it is in the book 
of nature, so it will always be in the book of Revelation. We 
should draw near to the Word of God in that spirit of piety 
recommended by Lord Bacon many years ago. ‘“‘ Remember,” 
he says, speaking of the book of nature, ‘‘ that man is not 
the master of that book, but the interpreter of that book. 
And as we deal with the book of nature, so we must deal 
with the book of God. We must draw near to it, not to teach, 
but to learn,—not like the master of it, but like a humble 
scholar, seeking to understand it. 

(c) For another thing, we must take heed to our doctrine 
respecting the atonement and priestly office of our Lord. and 
Saviour Jesus Christ. We must boldly maintain that the death 
of our Lord upon the cross was no common death, It was not 
the death of one who only died like Cranmer, Ridley, and 
Latimer, as a martyr. It was not the death of one who only 
died to give us a mighty example of self-sacrifice and self- 
denial. The death of Christ was an offering up unto God of 
Christ’s own body and blood, to make satisfaction for man’s 
sin and transgression. It was a sacrifice and propitiation ; 
a sacrifice typified in every offering of the Mosaic law, a 


268 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


sacrifice of the mightiest influence upon all mankind. With- 
out the shedding of that blood there could not be—there 
never was to be—any remission of sin. 

Furthermore, we must boldly maintain that this crucified 
Saviour ever sitteth at the right hand of God, to make inter- 
cession for all that come to God by Him; that He there re- 
presents and pleads for them that put their trust in Him ; 
and that He has deputed His office of Priest and Mediator to 
no man or set of men on the face of the earth. We need none 
besides. We need no Virgin Mary, no angels, no saint, no 
priest, no person ordained, or unordained, to stand between us 
and God, but the one Mediator, Christ Jesus. 

Furthermore, we must boldly maintain that peace of con- 
science is not to be bought by confession to a priest, and by 
receiving a man’s absolution from sin. It is to be had only by 
going to the great High Priest, Christ Jesus; by confession 
before Him, not before man; and by absolution from Him 
only, who alone can say, “ Thy sins be forgiven thee: go in 
peace.” 

Last, but not least, we must boldly maintain that peace 
with God, once obtained by faith in Christ is to be kept 
up,—not by receiving the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper 
every day,—but by the daily habit of looking to the Lord 
Jesus Christ by faith,—eating by faith His body, and drinking 
by faith His Blood; that eating and drinking of which our 
Lord says that he who eats and drinks shall find His “ chai 
meat, indeed, and His blood drink indeed.” 


THE HOLY SPIRIT 


(d) One more remedy I must mention. We must take heed 
to our doctrine about the work of God the Holy Ghost. Let us 
settle it in our minds that His work is no uncertain invisible 
operation upon the heart: and that where He is, He is not 
hidden, not unfelt, not unobserved. We do not believe that 
the dew, when it falls, cannot be felt, or that where there is 

269 


KNOTS UNTIED 


life in a man it cannot be seen and observed by his breath. 
So is it with the influence of the Holy Ghost. No man has 
any right to lay claim to it, except its fruits—its experimental 
effects—can be seen in his life. Where He is, there will ever be 
a new creation, and anew man. Where He is, there will ever 
be new knowledge, new faith, new holiness, new fruits in the 
life, in the family, in the world, in the Church. And where 
these new things are not to be seen we may well say, with 
confidence, there is no work of the Holy Ghost. 

I desire to impress the immense importance of these four 
points upon all who read this paper : (a) clear views of the sin- 
fulness of human nature ; (6) clear views of the inspiration of 
Scripture; (c) clear views of the Atonement and Priestly 
office of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; (d) and clear 
views of the work of the Holy Ghost. I believe that strange 
doctrines about the Church, the ministry, and the sacraments 
—about the love of God, the death of Christ, and of punish- 
ment hereafter,—will find no foothold in the heart which is 
sound on these four points. I believe that they are four great 
safe-guards against the leaven of the Pharisees and of the 
Sadducees. 


PRACTICAL APPLICATION 


I now conclude with a few remarks by way of practical 
application. 

(1) In the first place, I willask every reader of this chapter 
to find out whether he has saving personal religion for his own 
soul. This is the principal thing after all. It will profit no 
man to belong to a sound visible Church, if he does not himself 
belong to Christ. It will avail a man nothing to be intellectually 
sound in the faith, and to approve sound doctrine, if he is not 
himself sound at heart. Is this'the case with you? Can you 
say that your heart is right in the sight of God? Is it renewed 
by the Holy Ghost ? Does Christ dwell in our hearts by faith ? 

270 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


O, rest not, till you can give a satisfactory answer to these 
questions ! 

(2) In the next place, let me beseech every reader of this 
chapter who desires to be sound in the faith, to study diligently 
the Bible. That blessed Book is given to be a light to our feet, 
and a lantern to our path. No man who reads it reverently, 
prayerfully, humbly, and regularly, shall ever be allowed to 
miss the way to heaven. By it every sermon, and every 
Teligious book, and every ministry, ought to be weighed and 
proved. Would you know what is truth ? Do you feel con- 
fused and puzzled by the war of words which you hear on every 
side about religion ? Do you want to know what you ought to 
believe, and what you ought to be and do, in order to be saved ? 
Take down your Bible, and cease from man. Read your 
Bible with earnest prayer for the teaching of the Holy Ghost ; 
read it with honest determination to abide by its lessons. 
Do so steadily and perseveringly, and you shall see light : 
you shall be kept from the leaven of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees, and be guided to eternal life. 

(3) In the next place, let me advise every reader 
who has reason to hope that he is sound in faith and 
heart, to take heed to the proportion of truths. I mean by that 
to impress the importance of giving each several truth of 
Christianity the same place and position in our hearts which 
is given to it in God’s Word. The first things must not be put 
second, and the second things must not be put first in our 
religion. The Church must not be put above Christ; the sacra- 
ments must not be put above faith and the work of the Holy 
Ghost. Ministers must not be exalted above the place assigned 
to them by Christ ; means of grace must not be regarded as 
an end instead of a means. Here lies the value of having a 
clear system of Christianity in our minds. Well would it be 
for the Church of England if all its members read the Thirty- 
nine Articles, and marked the beautiful order in which 
those Articles state the main truths which men ought to 
believe. 

271 


KNOTS UNTIED 


TEACHERS OF RELIGION 


(4) In the next place, let me entreat every true-hearted 
servant of Christ not to be deceived by the specious guise under 
which false doctrines often approach our souls in the present 
day. Beware of supposing that a teacher of religion is to be 
trusted, because, although he holds some unsound views, 
he yet “‘ teaches a great deal of truth.” Such a teacher is 
precisely the man to do you harm: poison is always most 
dangerous when it is given in small doses and mixed with 
wholesome food. Beware of being taken in by the apparent 
earnestness of many of the teachers and upholders of false 
doctrine. Remember that zeal and sincerity and fervour are no 
proof whatever that a man is working for Christ, and ought to 
be believed. Peter no doubt was in earnest when he bade our 
Lord spare Himself, and not go to the cross; yet our Lord 
said to him, ‘‘ Get thee behind Me, Satan.”’ The founders 
of the Spanish Inquisition no doubt were in earnest, and in 
burning God’s saints alive thought they were doing God 
service ; yet they were actually persecuting Christ’s members. 
Of all the delusions prevalent in these latter days, there is 
none greater than the common notion that “if a man is in 
earnest about his religion he must be a good man !” Beware 
of being carried away by this delusion. Earnestness is in 
itself an excellent thing ; but it must be earnestness in behalf 
of Christ and His whole truth, or else it is worth nothing at 
all. The things that are highly esteemed among men are 
often abominable in the sight of God. 

(5) In the next place, let me counsel every true servant 
of Christ to examine his own heart frequently and carefully as 
to his state before God. This is a practice which is useful 
at all times; it is specially desirable at the present day. 
We ought to give more time to meditation, self-examination 
and reflection. It is a hurrying, bustling age: if we would 
be kept from falling, we must make time for being frequently 
alone with God. 

272 


PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES 


(6) Last of all, let me urge all true believers to contend 
earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints (Gal. i. 8, 9.) 
We have no cause to be ashamed of that faith. I am firmly 
persuaded that there is no system so life-giving, so calculated 
to awaken the sleeping and build up the Saints, as that system 
which is called the Evangelical system of Christianity. Where- 
ever it is faithfully preached, and efficiently carried out, 
and consistently adorned by the lives of its professors, it is 
the power of God. It may be weakly set forth and defended 
by many of its advocates; but, after all, its fruits and its 
results are its highest praise. No other system of religion can 
point to such fruits. Nowhere are so many souls converted 
to God as in those congregations where the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ is preached in all its fulness, without any admixture 
of the Pharisee or Sadducee doctrine. We are not called 
upon, beyond all doubt, to be nothing but controversialists ; 
but we never ought to be ashamed to testify to the truth as it ts 
in Jesus, and to stand up boldly for Evangelical religion. We 
have the truth, and we need not be afraid to say so. The 
judgment-day will prove who is right, and to that day we may 
boldly appeal. 


273 x 


AV 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, 
because he was to be blamed. 

’ For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles : 
but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing 
them which wer? of the circumcision. 

“And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that 
Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. 

“ But when I saw that they walked not uprighily according to the truth of 
the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew 
livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why com- 
pellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews ? 

“We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. 

““ Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the 
faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we 
might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the 
law: for by the works of the law shali no flesh be justified.’’— 
GALATIANS ii, II-16, 


Have we ever considered what the Apostle Peter once did 
at Antioch ? 

What the Apostle Peter did at Rome we are often told, 
although we have hardly a jot of authentic information about 
it. Roman Catholic writers furnish us with many stories 
about this. But unhappily for these writers, Scripture is 
utterly silent upon the point. There is nothing in Scripture 
to show that the Apostle Peter ever was at Rome at all ! 

But what did the Apostle Peter do at Antioch? This is 
the point to which I want to direct attention. This is the sub- 
ject of the passage from the Epistle to the Galatians, which 
heads this chapter. On this point, at any rate, the Scripture 
speaks clearly and unmistakably. 

: 274 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


The six verses of the passage before us are striking on many 
accounts. They are striking, if we consider the event which 
they describe: here is one Apostle rebuking another !— 
They are striking, when we consider who the two men are: 
Paul, the younger, rebukes Peter, the elder !—They are 
striking, when we remark the occasion: this was no glaring 
fault, no flagrant sin, at first sight, that Peter had committed ! 
Yet the Apostle Paul says, ‘‘ I withstood him to the face, 
because he was to be blamed.” He does more than this: 
—he reproves Peter publicly for his error before all the Church 
at Antioch. He goes even further :—he writes an account of 
the matter, which is now read in hundreds of languages all 
over the world. 

It is my firm conviction that the Holy Ghost means us to 
take particular notice of this passage of Scripture. If Chris- 
tianity had been an invention of man, these things would 
never have been recorded. An impostor, like Mahomet, 
would have hushed up the difference between two Apostles. 
The Spirit of truth has caused these verses to be written for 
our learning, and we shall do well to take heed to their contents. 

There are three great lessons from Antioch, which I think 
we ought to learn from this passage. 


1. GREAT MINISTERS MAY MAKE GREAT 
MISTAKES 


What clearer proof can we have than that which is set 
before us in this place; Peter, without doubt, was one of the 
greatest in the company of the Apostles. He was an old dis- 
ciple. He was a disciple who had had peculiar advantages 
and privileges. He had been a constant companion of the 
Lord Jesus. He had heard the Lord preach, seen the Lord 
work miracles, enjoyed the benefit of the Lord’s private teach- 
ing, been numbered among the Lord’s intimate friends, and 
gone out and come in with Him all the time He ministered 
upon earth. He was the Apostle to whom the keys of the 


275 


KNOTS UNTIED 


kingdom of heaven were given, and by whose hand those 
keys were first used. . He was the first who opened the door 
of faith to the Jews,{by preaching to them on the day of 
Pentecost. He was the first who opened the door of faith 
to the Gentiles, by going to the house of Cornelius,’ and re- 
ceiving him into the Church. He was the first to rise up in 
the Council of the fifteenth of Acts, and say, ‘“ Why tempt 
ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which 
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear ?”” And yet here 
this very Peter, this same Apostle, plainly falls into a great 
mistake. The Apostle Paul tells us, “ I withstood him to the 
face.” He tells us ‘‘ that he was to be blamed.” He says 
“he feared them of the circumcision.”” He says of him and 
his companions, that “ they walked not uprightly according 
to the truth of the Gospel.” He speaks of their “ dissimula- 
tion.” He tells us that by this dissimulation even Barnabas, 
his old companion in missionary labours, “‘ was carried away.” 

What a striking fact this is. This is Simon Peter! This 
is the third great error of his, which the Holy Ghost has 
thought fit to record! Once we find him trying to keep back 
our Lord as far as he could, from the great work of the cross, 
and severely rebuked. Then we find him denying the Lord 
three times, and with an oath. Here again we find him en- 
dangering the leading truth of Christ’s Gospel. Surely we 
may say, “ Lord, what is man?’”’ The Church of Rome 
boasts that the Apostle Peter is her founder and first Bishop. 
Let us remember, then, that of all the Apostles there is not 
one, of whom we have so many proofs that he was a fallible 
man, excepting, of course, Judas Iscariot. Upon her own 
showing, the Church of Rome was founded by the most fallible 
of the Apostles.1 


1 Itis curious to observe the shifts to which some writers have been 
reduced in order to explain away the plain meaning of the verses which 
head this chapter. The truth is that the plain honest meaning of the 
verses strikes a heavy blow at the favourite Roman Catholic doctrine 
of the primacy and superiority of Peter over the rest of the Apostles. 


276 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


But it is all meant to teach us that even the Apostles 
themselves, when not writing under the inspiration of the 
Holy Ghost, were at times liable to err. It is meant to teach 
us that the best men are weak and fallible so long as they are 
in the body. Unless the grace of God holds them up, any one 
of them may go astray at any time. It is very humbling, but 
it is very true. True Christians are converted, justified, and 
sanctified. They are living members of Christ, beloved chil- 
dren of God, and heirs of eternal life. But they are not 
infallible, 

Will not rank and dignity confer infallibility? No: they 
will not! It matters nothing what a man is called. Neither 
the crown, nor the diadem, nor the anointing oil, nor the mitre, 
nor the imposition of hands, can prevent a man making mis- 
takes. He is still a fallible man. 

Will not numbers confer infallibility >? No: they will not ! 
You may gather together princes and bishops by the score, 
but, when gathered together, they are still liable to err. You 
may call them a council, or a synod, or an assembly, or a con- 
ference, or what you please. It matters nothing. Their 
conclusions are still the conclusions of fallibla men. Their collec- 
tive wisdom is still capable of making enormous mistakes. 
Well says the Twenty-first Article of the Church of England, 
“General councils may err, and sometimes have erred, even 
in things pertaining unto God.” 


THE BEST OF MEN CAN ERR 


And who does not see, when he reads the history of the 
Church of Christ, repeated proofs that the best of men can 
err > The early fathers were zealous according to their know- 
ledge, and ready to die for Christ. But many of them 
countenanced monkery, and nearly all sowed the seeds of many 
superstitions.—The Reformers were honoured instruments 
in the hand of God for reviving the cause of truth on earth. 
Yet hardly one of them can be named who did not make some 


277 


KNOTS UNTIED 


great mistake. Martin Luther held pertinaciously the doctrine 
of consubstantiation. Melanchthon was often timid and un- 
decided. Calvin permitted Servetus to be burned. Cranmer 
recanted and fell away for a time from his first faith. Jewel 
subscribed to Popish doctrines for fear of death. The Puritans, 
in after times, denounced toleration as Abaddon and 
Apollyon. Wesley and Toplady abused each other in the 
strongest language. All these things speak with a loud voice. 
They all say, ‘‘ Cease ye from man ; ”—“ Call no man father 
upon earth,” Matt. xviii. 9.—‘‘ Let no man glory in man; ” 
—‘ He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.” They all 
cry, No infallibility | 

The lesson is one that we all need. We are all naturally 
inclined to lean upon man whom we can see, rather than upon 
God whom we cannot see. We naturally love to lean upon 
the ministers of the visible Church, rather than upon the Lord 
Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd, and Bishop, and High Priest, 
who is invisible. We need to be continually warned and set 
upon our guard. 

I see this tendency to lean on man everywhere. I know no 
branch of the Protestant Church of Christ which does not 
require to be cautioned upon this point. 

We all naturally love to have a Pope of our own. We are 
far too ready to think, that because some great minister or 
some learned man says a thing,—or because our own minister, 
whom we love, says a thing,—it must be right, without ex- 
amining whether it is in Scripture or not. Most people dislike 
the trouble of thinking for themselves. They like following a 
leader. They are like sheep,—when one goes over the gap all 
the rest follow. Here at Antioch even Barnabas was carried 
away. We can well fancy that good man saying, “ An old 
Apostle, like Peter, surely cannot be wrong. Following him, 
T cannot err.” 

And now let us see what practical lessons we may learn 
from this part of our subject. 

(a) Let us learn not to put implicit confidence in any man’s 


278 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


opinion, merely because he lived many hundred years ago. 
Peter was a man who lived in the time of Christ Himself, 
and yet he could err. 

There are many who talk much in the present day about 
“the voice of the primitive Church.” They would have us 
believe that those who lived nearest the time of the Apostles, 
must of course know more about truth than we can. There is 
no foundation for any such opinion. It is a fact that the most 
anctent writers in the Church of Christ are often at variance 
with one another. It is a fact that they often changed their 
own minds, and retracted their own former opinions. It is a 
fact that they often wrote foolish and weak things, and often 
showed great ignorance in their explanations of Scripture. 
It is vain to expect to find them free from mistakes. Jn- 
fallibility is not to be found in the early fathers, but in the Bible, 

(6) Let us learn not to put implicit confidence in any man’s 
opinion, merely because of his office. Peter was one of the 
very chiefest Apostles, and yet he could err. 

This is a point on which men have continually gone astray. 
It is the rock on which the early Church struck. Men soon 
took up the saying, ‘‘ Do nothing contrary to the mind of the 
Bishop!” But what are bishops, priests and deacons? Men 
of like passions with ourselves, men exposed to temptations, 
men liable to weaknesses and infirmities ? What saith the 
Scripture, ‘‘ Who is Paul and who is Apollos, but ministers 
by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man ? ” 
(x Cor. iii. 5). Bishops have often driven the truth into the 
wilderness, and decreed that to be true which was false. The 
greatest errors have been begun by ministers. Arius, that 
great heresiarch, was a minister. It is absurd to suppose 
that ordained men cannot go wrong. We should follow them 
so far as they teach according to the Bible, but no further. We 
should believe them so long as they can say, “ Thus it is 
written,” —‘“ Thus saith the Lord; ” but further than this 
we are not to go. Infallibility is not to be found in ordained 
men, but in the Bible. ° 


279 


KNOTS UNTIED 


(c) Let us learn also not to place implicit confidence in 
any man’s opinion, merely because of his learning. Peter was 
a man who had miraculous gifts, and could speak with tongues, 
and yet he could err. 

This is a point again, on which many go wrong. This is 
the rock on which men struck in the middle ages. Men looked 
on Thomas Aquinas, and Duns Scotus, and Peter Lombard, 
and many of their companions, as almost inspired. They gave 
epithets to some of them in token of their admiration, and 
seemed to think that whatever these doctors said must be true! 
But what is the most learned of men, if he be not taught by 
the Holy Ghost ? What is the most learned of all divines but 
a fallible man at his very best? Vast knowledge of books 
and great ignorance of God’s truth may go side by side. 
I will engage to say that the two volumes of Robert M’Cheyne’s 
Memoirs and Sermons have done more positive good to the 
souls of men, than any one folio that Origen or Cyprian ever 
wrote. I doubt not that Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress, written 
by a man who knew hardly any book but his Bible, and was 
ignorant of Greek and Latin,—will prove in the last day to 
have done more for the benefit of the world than all the works 
of the schoolmen put together. Learning is a gift that ought 
not to be despised. It is an evil day when books are not 
valued in the Church, But it is amazing to observe how vast 
a man’s intellectual attainments may be, and yet how little 
he may know of the grace of God. Jnfallibility is not to be 
found among learned men, but in the Bible. 


II. GOSPEL TRUTH MORE IMPORTANT THAN 
TO KEEP PEACE 


The second lesson that we learn from Antioch is, that to 
keep Gospel truth in the Church is of even greater importance 
than to keep peace. 

I suppose no man knew better the value of peace and 
unity than the Apostle Paul. He was*the Apostle who wrote 

280 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


to the Corinthians about charity. He was the apostle who said, 
“ Be of the same mind one toward another ; ”—“ Be at peace 
among yourselves ;’”—‘‘ Mind the same things ; ”—‘‘ The 
servant of God must not strive; ”’ Yet see how he acts here ! 
He withstands Peter to the face. He publicly rebukes him. 
He takes the chance of everything that might be said, by the 
enemies of the Church at Antioch. Above all, he writes it 
down for a perpetual memorial, that it never might be for- 
gotten,—that, wherever the Gospel is preached throughout 
the world, this public rebuke of an erring Apostle might be 
known and read of all men. 

Now, why did he do this? Because he dreaded false 
doctrine,—because he knew that a little leaven leaveneth 
the whole lump,—because he would teach us that we ought to 
contend for the truth jealously and to fear the loss of truth more 
than the loss of peace. 

St. Paul’s example is one we shall do well to cence in 
the present day. Many people will put up with anything in 
religion, if they may only have a quiet life. They have a 
morbid dread of what they call “ controversy.” They are 
filled with a morbid fear of what they style, in a vague way, 
“party spirit,” though they never define clearly what party 
spirit is. They are possessed with a morbid desire to keep the 
peace, and make all things smooth and pleasant, even though it 
be at the expense of truth. So long as they have outward calm, 
smoothness, stillness, and order, they seem content to give up 
everything else. I believe they would have thought with 
Ahab that Elijah was a troubler of Israel, and would have 
helped the princes of Judah when they put Jeremiah in prison, 
to stop his mouth. I have no doubt that many of these men 
of whom I speak, would have thought that Paul at Antioch 
was a very imprudent man, and that he went too far ! 

I believe this is all wrong. We have no right to expect 
anything but the pure Gospel of Christ, unmixed and un- 
adulterated,—the same Gospel that was taught by the Apostles, 
—to do good to the souls of men. I believe that to maintain 

281 . 


KNOTS UNTIED 


this pure truth in the church men should be ready to make any 
sacrifice, to hazard peace, to risk dissension, and run the chance 
of division. They should no more tolerate false doctrine than 
they would tolerate sin. They should withstand any adding to 
or taking away from the simple message of the Gospel of 
Christ. 

For the truth’s sake, our Lord Jesus Christ denounced the 
Pharisees, though they sat in Moses’ seat, and were the 
appointed and authorized teachers of men. ‘‘ Woe unto you, 
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites,’ He says, eight times over, 
in the twenty-third chapter of Matthew. And who shall dare 
to breathe a suspicion that our Lord was wrong ? 

For the truth’s sake, Paul withstood and blamed Peter, 
though a brother. Where was the use of unity when pure 
doctrine was gone ? And who shall dare to say he was wrong ? 

For the truth’s sake, Athanasius stood out against the 
world to maintain the pure doctrine about the divinity of 
Christ, and waged a controversy with the great majority of the 
professing Church. And who shall dare to say he was wrong ? 

For the truth’s sake, Luther broke the unity of the Church 
in which he was born, denounced the Pope and all his ways 
and laid the foundation of a new teaching. And who shall 
dare to say that Luther was wrong ? 

For the truth’s sake, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, the 
English Reformers, counselled Henry VIII, and Edward VI. 
to separate from Rome, and to risk the consequences of 
division. And who shall dare to say that they were wrong ! 

For the truth’s sake, Whitefield and Wesley, in the 
eighteenth century, denounced the mere barren moral preach- 
ing of the clergy of their day, and went out into the highways 
and byways to save souls, knowing well that they would be 
cast out from the Church’s communion. And who shall dare 
to say that they were wrong ? 

Yes ! peace without truth is a false peace ; it is the very 
peace of the devil. Unity without the Gospel is a worthless 
unity ; it is the very unity of hell. Let us never be ensnared 

282, 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


by those who speak kindly of it. Let us remember the words 
of our Lord Jesus Christ: ‘‘ Think not that I came to send 
peace upon earth. I came not to send peace, but a sword.” 
(Matt. x. 34). Let us remember the praise He gives to one of 
the Churches in the Revelation : ‘‘ Thou canst not bear them 
which are evil. Thou hast tried them which say they are 
Apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars ” (Rev. ii. 2). 
Let us remember the blame He casts upon another: ‘‘ Thou 
sufferest that woman Jezebel to teach ” (Rev. ii. 20). Never 
let us be guilty of sacrificing any portion of truth upon the altar 
of peace. Let us rather be like the Jews, who, if they found 
any manuscript copy of the Old Testament Scriptures in- 
correct in a single letter, burned the whole copy, rather than 
run the risk of losing one jot or tittle of the Word of God. 
Let us be content with nothing short of the whole Gospel of 
Christ. : 

In what way are we to make practical use of the general 
principles which I have just laid down ? I will give my readers 
one simple piece of advice. I believe it is advice which de- 
serves serious consideration. 

I warn every one to be very jealous as to the preaching he 
regularly hears, and the place of worship he regularly attends. 
He who deliberately settles down under any ministry which 
is positively unsound, is a very unwise man. I will never 
hesitate to speak my mind on this point. I know well that 
many think it a shocking thing for a man to forsake his parish 
church. I cannot see with the eyes of such people. I draw 
a wide distinction between teaching which is defective and 
teaching which is thoroughly false,—between teaching which 
errs on the negative side and teaching which is positively 
unscriptural. But I do believe, if false doctrine is unmistakably 
preached ina parish church, a parishioner who loves his soul is 
quite right in not going to that parish church. To hear un- 
scriptural teaching fifty-two Sundays in every year is a serious 
thing. It is a continual dropping of slow poison into the mind. 
I think it almost impossible for a man to submit himself to it, 

283 


KNOTS UNTIED 


and not take harm. In the New Testament we are plainly told 
to ‘‘ prove all things,” and “‘ hold fast that which is good” 
(rt Thess. v. 21). I see in the Book of Proverbs that we are 
commanded to “‘ cease to hear the instruction which causeth 
to err from the paths of knowledge ” (Pro. xix. 27). If these 
words do not justify a man in ceasing to worship at a church, 
if positively false doctrine is preached in it, I know not what 
words can. 


THE-DUITY; OF JHE “LALLY: 


There are not a few parishes in England where the religious 
teaching is little better than Popery. Ought the laity of such 
parishes to sit still, be content, and take it quietly? They 
ought not, and why ? Because, like St. Paul, they ought to 
prefer truth to peace. 

There are not a few parishes in England where the religious 
teaching is little better than morality. The distinctive doc- 
trines of Christianity are never clearly proclaimed. Plato, 
or Seneca, or Confucius, or Socinus, could have taught almost 
as much. Ought the laity in such parishes to sit still, be con- 
tent, and take it quietly? They ought not. And why ? 
Because, like St. Paul, they ought to prefer truth to peace. 

I am using strong language in dealing with this part of my 
subject: I know it.—I am trenching on delicate ground: 
I am handling matters which are generally let alone, and 
passed over in silence: I know it.—I say what I say from 
a sense of duty to the Church of which I am aminister. I be- 
lieve the state the of times,and the position of the laity in some 
parts of England, require plain speaking. Souls are perishing 
in many parishes, in ignorance. Honest members of the 
Church of England, in many districts, are disgusted and per- 
plexed. This is no time for smooth words. 

(a) The parochial system of England is an admirable thing 
in theory. Let it only be well administered, and worked by 
truly spiritual ministers, and it is calculated to confer the 

284 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


greatest blessings on the nation. But it is useless to expect 
attachment to the parish church, when the minister of the 
parish is ignorant of the Gospel or a lover of the world. In 
such a case we must never be surprised if men forsake their 
parish church, and seek truth wherever truth is to be found. 
If the parochial minister does not preach the Gospel and live 
the Gospel, the conditions on which he claims the attention of 
his parishioners are virtually violated, and his claim to be heard 
is at an end. 

(6) Divisions and separations are most objectionable in 
religion. They weaken the cause of true Christianity. They 
give occasion to the enemies of all godliness to blaspheme. 
But before we blame people for them, we must be careful that 
we lay the blame where it is deserved. False doctrine and heresy 
are even worse than schism. If people separate themselves 
from teaching which is positively false and unscriptural, they 
ought to be praised rather than reproved. In such cases 
separation is a virtue and notasin. It is easy to make sneering 
remarks about ‘“‘ itching ears,” and “ love of excitement ; ”’ 
but it is not so easy to convince a plain reader of the Bible 
that it is his duty to hear false doctrine every Sunday, when 
by a little exertion he can hear truth. The old saying must 
never be forgotten, “‘ He is the schismatic who causes the 
schism.” 

(c) Unity, quiet, and order among professing Christians are 
mighty blessings. They give strength, beauty, and efficiency 
to the cause of Christ. But even gold may be bought too dear. 
Unity which is obtained by the sacrifice of truth is worth nothing. 
It is not the unity which pleases God. 

(d) Controversy in religion is a hateful thing. It is hard 
enough to fight the devil, the world, and the flesh, without 
private differences in our own camp. But there is one thing 
which is even worse than controversy, and that is false doctrine 
tolerated, allowed and permitted without protest or molestation. 
If the Views that some men hold were correct, it is plain we 
never Ought to have had any Reformation at all! For the 

285 


KNOTS UNTIED 


sake of peace, we ought to have gone on worshipping the 
Virgin, and bowing down to images and relics to this very day ! 
Away with such trifling! There are times when controversy 
is not only a duty but abenefit. Itis a plain Scriptural duty to 
‘‘ contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints ” 
(Jude 3). 

Let men say what they will. They are the truest friends 
of the Church of England who labour most for the preservation 
of truth. 


III. JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 


The third lesson from Antioch is, that there is no doctrine 
about which we ought to be so jealous as justification by faith 
without the deeds of the law. 

The proof of this lesson stands out most prominently in 
the passage of Scripture which heads this chapter. What one 
article of the faith had the Apostle Peter denied at Antioch ? 
None.—What doctrine had he publicly preached which was 
false ?> None.—What, then, had he done ? He had done this. 
After once keeping company with the believing Gentiles as 
“ fellow-heirs and partakers of the promise of Christ in the 
Gospel ” (Ephes. iii. 6), he suddenly became shy of them and 
withdrew himself. He seemed, in a word, to add something 
to simple faith as needful to give man an interest in Jesus 
Christ. He seemed to reply to the question, “‘ What shall I 
do to be saved ?”’ not merely ‘‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ,’’ but ‘‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and be cir- 
cumcised, and keep the ceremonies of the law.” 

Such conduct as this the Apostle Paul would not endure for 
a moment. Nothing so moved him as the idea of adding 
anything to the Gospel of Christ. ‘‘ I withstood him,” he says, 
“to the face.” He not only rebuked him, but he recorded the 
whole transaction fully, when by inspiration of the Spirit he 
wrote the Epistle to the Galatians. 

I invite special attention to this point. I ask men to ob- 

286 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


serve the remarkable jealousy which the Apostle Paul shows 
about this doctrine, and to consider the point about which 
such a stir was made. Let us mark in this passage of Scrip- 
ture the immense importance of justification by faith without 
the deeds of the law. Let us learn here what mighty reasons 
the Reformers of the Church of England had for calling it, in 
our Eleventh Article, “a most wholesome doctrine and very 
full of comfort.” 

(a) This is the doctrine which is essentially necessary to 
our own personal comfort. No one on earth is a real child of 
God, and a saved soul, till he or she receives salvation by faith 
in Christ Jesus. None of us will ever have solid peace and 
true assurance until we embrace with all our heart the doc- 
trine that “ we are accounted righteous before God for the 
merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our own 
works and deservings.” One reason, I believe, why so many 
professors in this day are tossed to and fro, enjoy little comfort, 
and feel little peace, is their ignorance on this point. They do 
not see clearly justification by faith without the deeds of the 
law. 

(6) This is the doctrine which the great enemy of souls 
hates and labours to overthrow, He knows that it turned the 
world upside down at the first beginning of the Gospel, in the 
days of the Apostles. He knows that it turned the world 
upside down again at the time of the Reformation. He is 
therefore always tempting men to reject it. He is always try- 
ing to seduce Churches and ministers to demy or obscure its 
truth. No wonder that the Council of Trent directed its chief 
attack against this doctrine, and pronounced it accursed and 
heretical. No wonder that many who think themselves 
learned in these days denounce the doctrine as theological 
jargon, and say that all ‘‘ earnest-minded people ” are justi- 
fied by Christ, whether they have faith or not ! 

(c) This is the doctrine, the absence of which accounts for 
half the errors of the Roman Catholic Church. The beginning 
of half the unscriptural doctrines of Popery may be traced up 

287 


KNOTS UNTIED 


to rejection of justification by faith. Purgatory, penance, 
priestly absolution, the intercession of saints, the worship of 
the Virgin, and many other man-made services of Popery, 
all spring from this source. 

(d) This is the doctrine which is absolutely essential to a 
minister’s success among his people. Obscurity on this point 
spoils all. Absence of clear statements about justification 
will prevent the utmost zeal doing good. There may be much 
that is pleasing and nice in a minister’s sermons, much about 
Christ and sacramental union with Him,—much about self- 
denial,—much about humility,—much about charity. But 
all this will profit little, if his trumpet gives an uncertain sound 
about justification by faith without the deeds of the law. 

(e) This is the doctrine which is absolutely essential to the 
prosperity of a Church. No Church is really in a healthy 
state, in which this doctrine is not prominently brought for- 
ward, and a Church will not see conversion of souls going on 
under its pulpits, when this doctrine is not plainly preached. 

Why have the Churches of Africa and the East fallen to 
their present state ? They had bishops. They had forms and 
liturgies, synods and councils. But they cast away the doc- 
trine of jusification by faith. They lost sight of that mighty 
truth, and so they fell. 

Why did our own Church do so little in the eighteenth 
century, and why did the Independents, and Methodists, and 
Baptists do so much more ?—Was it that their system was 
better than ours ? No.—Was it that our Church was not so 
well adapted to meet the wants oflost souls ? No.—But their 
ministers preached justification by faith, and our ministers, 
in too many cases, did not preach the doctrine at all. 

If these things be so, the Apostle Paul might well be jealous 
for the truth, and withstand Peter to the face. He might well 
maintain that anything ought to be sacrificed, rather than 
endanger the doctrine of justification in the Church of Christ. 
He saw with a prophetical eye coming things. He left us all 
an example that we should do well to follow. Whatever we 

288 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


tolerate, let us never allow any injury to be done to that blessed 
doctrine,—that we are justified by faith without the deeds of 
the law. 


THE SACRAMENTS 


Baptism is a sacrament ordained by Christ Himself, to 
be used with reverence and respect by all professing Chris- 
tians. When it is used rightly, worthily, and with faith, it 
is capable of being the instrument of mighty blessings to the 
soul, But when people are taught that all who are baptized 
are as a matter of course born again, and that all baptized 
persons should be addressed as “ children of God,” such 
teaching is false and overthrows the doctrine of justification 
by faith. They only are children of God who have faith in 
Christ Jesus. And all men have not faith. 

The Lord’s Supper is a sacrament ordained by Christ 
Himself, and intended for the edification and refreshment of 
true believers. But when people are taught that all persons 
ought to come to the Lord’s Table, whether they have faith or 
not; and that all alike receive Christ’s body and blood who 
receive the bread and wine. Such teaching appears to me to 
darken the doctrine of justification by faith. No one eats 
Christ’s body and drinks Christ’s blood except the justified 
believer. And none are justified until they believe. 

Membership of the Church of England is a great privilege. 
No visible Church on earth, in my opinion, offers so many 
advantages to its members, when rightly administered. But 
when people are taught that because they are members of the 
Church, they are as a’ matter of course members of Christ, I 
believe their souls are in great danger. Such teaching appears 
to me to overthrow the doctrine of justification by faith. 
They only are joined to Christ who believe. And all men do 
not believe. 

Whenever we hear teaching which obscures or contradicts 
justification by faith, we may be sure it is wrong. We should 

289 U 


KNOTS UNTIED 


watch against such teaching, and be upon our guard. Once 
let a man get wrong about justification, and he will bid a long 
farewell to comfort, to peace, to lively hope, to anything like 
assurance in his Christianity. 


BIBLE READING 


(r) In conclusion, let me ask all who read these pages 
to arm themselves with a thorough knowledge of the written 
Word of God. Unless we do this we are at the mercy of any 
false teacher. An ignorant laity will always be the bane of 
a Church. A bible-reading laity may save a Church from ruin. 
Let us read the Bible regularly, daily, and with fervent prayer, 
and become familiar with its contents. Let us receive nothing, 
believe nothing, follow nothing, which is not in the Bible, nor 
can be proved by the Bible. Let our rule of faith, our touch- 
stone of all teaching, be the written Word of God. 

(2) In the next place, every member of the Church of 
England should be acquainted with the Thirty-nine Articles 
of his own Church. They are to be found at the end of most 
Prayer-books. They will abundantly repay an attentive 
reading. They are the true standard by which Churchmanship 
is to be tried, next to the Bible. They are the test by which 
Churchman should prove the teaching of their ministers, if 
they want to know whether it is “ Church teaching ” or not. 
I deeply lament the ignorance of systematic Christianity which 
prevails among many who attend the services of the Church of 
England. But unhappily many persons really know no more 
about the true doctrines of their own communion than the 
heathen or Mahometans. It is useless to expect the laity of 
the Church of England to be zealous for the maintenance of 
true doctrine, unless they know what their own Church has 
defined true doctrine to be. 

(3) Further, let me entreat all who read these pages to 
be always ready to contend for the faith of Christ, if needful. 
I recommend no one to foster a controversial spirit. Always 

290 


THE FALLIBILITY OF MINISTERS 


feeding upon controversy is poor work indeed. But no love 
of false peace should prevent us striving jealously against 
false doctrine, and seeking to promote true doctrine where- 
ever we possibly can. True Gospel in the pulpit, true Gospel 
in every religious society we support, true Gospel in the books 
we read, true Gospel in the friends we keep company with,— 
let this be our aim, and never let us be ashamed to let men 
see that it is so. 

(4) In the last place, let me entreat all members of the 
Church of England who know what real praying is, to pray 
daily for the Church to which they beiong. Let us pray that 
the Holy Spirit may be poured out upon it, and that its candle- 
stick may not be taken away. Let us pray for those ministers 
who now neither know nor preach the truth, that God may 
take away the veil from their hearts, and show them a more 
excellent way. Nothing is impossible. The Holy Spirit 
can make clergymen preach that Gospel which they now 
labour to destroy. Let us therefore be instant in prayer. 


2g 


XVI 


APOSTOLIC FEARS 


I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve by his subtiity, 
s0 your minds should be coryupted from the simplicity that is in 
Christ ’—2 Cor, xi. 3. 


The text which heads this page contains one part of the ex- 
perience of a very famous Christian. No servant of Christ 
perhaps has left such a mark for good on the world as the 
Apostle St. Paul. When he was born, the whole Roman 
Empire, excepting one little corner, was sunk in the darkest 
heathenism ; when he died, the mighty fabric of heathenism 
was shaken to its very centre, and ready to fall. And none of 
the agents whom God used to produce this marvellous change 
did more than Saul of Tarsus, after his conversion. Yet even 
in the midst of his successes and usefulness we find him crying 
out “I fear.” 

There is a melancholy ring about these words which 
demands our attention.—The great Apostle of the Gentiles 
was like his Master,—‘‘ a man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief ’’ (Isa. liii. 3). 


ST PAUL’S BURDENS 


But of all the burdens which St. Paul had to carry, none 
seems to have weighed him down so much as that to which he 
refers, when he writes to the Corinthians,—‘‘ the care of all 
the Churches ” (2 Cor. xi. 28). The scanty knowledge of 
many primitive Christians, their weak faith,—their shallow 

292 


APOSTOLIC FEARS 


experience,—their dim hope,—their low standard of holi- 
ness,—all these things made them peculiarly liable to be led 
astray by false teachers, and to depart from the faith. Like 
little children hardly able to walk, they required to be treated 
with immense patience. Can we doubt that they kept their 
Apostolic founder in a state of constant tender anxiety ? Can 
we wonder that he says to the Colossians, ‘‘ What great con- 
flict I have for you” ?—and to the Galatians, ‘‘ I marvel 
that ye are so soon removed from Him who called you into 
the grace of Christ unto another Gospel ; ”’—‘ O foolish 
Galatians, who hath bewitched you?” (Col. ii. r; Gal. i. 
6; ii. r).—“I fear, lest, by any means, as the serpent be- 
guiled Eve by his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted 
from the simplicity that is in Christ.” 

The text is a deep mine, and is not without difficulty. 
But let us go down into it boldly, and we shall find it contains 
much precious metal. 


I. A SPIRITUAL DISEASE TO BE FEARED 


First then, there is a spiritual disease, which we ought to 
fear: “Corruption of mind.” “I fear lest ... your 
minds should be corrupted.” 

I take “ corruption of mind ” to mean injury of our minds 
by the reception of false and unscriptural doctrines in religion. 
And I believe the sense of the Apostle to be, “‘ I fear lest your 
minds should imbibe erronous and unsound views of Chris- 
tianity. I fear lest you should take up as truths, principles 
which are not the truth. I fear lest you should depart from 
the faith once delivered to the saints, and embrace views which 
are practically destructive to the Gospel of Christ. 

The fear expressed by the Apostle is painfully instructive. 
Who would have thought that under the very eyes of Christ’s 
own chosen disciples,—while ‘the age,of miracles had not, yet 
passed away,—who would have thought that in a day like this 


293 


KNOTS UNTIED 


there was any danger of Christians departing from the faith ? 
Yet nothing is more certain than that ‘‘ the mystery of 
iniquity ” began already to work before the Apostles were 
dead (2 Thess. ii. 7). ‘‘ Even now,” says St. John, “ there 
are many Antichrists ” (rt John ii. 18). And no fact in Church 
history is more clearly proved than this,—that false doctrine 
has never ceased to be the plague of Christendom all down 
the centuries. 

The plain truth is that false doctrine has been the chosen 
engine which Satan has employed in every age to stop the 
progress of the Gospel of Christ. Finding himself unable to 
prevent the Fountain of Life being opened, he has laboured 
incessantly to poison the streams which flow from it. Ina 
word, he has “ corrupted men’s minds.” 

(a) False doctrine soon overspread the Primitive Church 
after the death of the Apostles, whatever some may please to 
say of primitive purity. Partly by strange teaching about 
the Trinity and the Person of Christ, partly by an absurd 
multiplication of new-fangled ceremonies, partly by the in- 
troduction of monasticism and a man-made asceticism, the 
light of the Church was soon dimmed and its usefulness des- 
troyed. Even in Augustine’s time, as the preface to the English 
Prayer-book tells us, ““ Ceremonies were grown to such a number 
that the estate of Christian people was in worse case concern- 
ing this matter than were the Jews.” Here was the corrup- 
tion of men’s minds. 

(6) False doctrine in the middle ages so completely over- 
spread the Church that the truth as it is in Jesus was well 
nigh buried or drowned. During the last three centuries be- 
fore the Reformation, it is probable that very few Christians 
in Europe could have answered the question, ‘‘ What must 
I do to be saved?” Popes and Cardinals, Abbots and Priors, 
Archbishops and Bishops, Priests and Deacons, Monks and 
Nuns, were, with a few rare exceptions, steeped in ignorance 
and superstition. They were sunk into a deep sleep, from 
which they were only partially roused by the earthquake of 


294 


APOSTOLIC FEARS 


the Reformation. Here, again, was the “ corruption of men’s 
minds.”” 

(c) False doctrine, since the days of the Reformation, has 
continually been rising up again, and marring the work which 
the Reformers began. Socinianism, formalism, and indifferent- 
ism in others have withered blossoms which once promised 
to bear good fruit, and made Protestantism a mere barren 
form. Here, again, has been the “corruption of the 
mind.” 

(d) False doctrine, even in our own day and under our own 
eyes, is eating out the heart of the Church of England and 
periling her existence. One School of Churchmen does not 
_ hesitate to avow its dislike to the principles of the Reformation, 
and compasses sea and land to Romanize the Establishment. 
Another school, with equal boldness, speaks lightly of in- 
spiration, sneers at the very idea of a supernatural religion, 
and tries hard to cast overboard miracles as so much lumber.— 
Another school proclaims liberty to every shade and form of 
religious opinion, and tells us that all teachers are equally 
deserving our confidence, however heterogeneous and con- 
tradictory their opinions, if they are only clever, earnest, 
and sincere. To each and all the same remark applies. They 
illustrate the ‘‘ corruption of men’s minds.” 

In the face of such facts as these, we may well lay to heart 
the words of the Apostle,for like him we have abundant cause 
to feel afraid. Never, I think, was there such need for English 
Christians to stand on their guard. Never was there such 
need for faithful ministers to cry aloud and spare not. “ If 
the trumpet give an uncertain sound who shall prepare him- 
self for the battle?” (x Cor. xiv. 8). 

Every loyal member of the Church of England should see 
the peril in which the Church stands and beware lest it takes 
damage through apathy and a morbid love of peace. Con- 
troversy is an odious thing ; but there are days when it is a 
positive duty. Peace is an excellent thing, and unity is a 
mighty blessing ; but it is worthless if it is purchased at the 


295 


KNOTS UNTIED 


cost of truth. Once more I say, Open your eyes and be on 
your guard. 

I deprecate despondency or cowardice at this crisis. 
All I say is, let us exercise a godly fear. I do not see the 
slightest necessity for forsaking the old ship, and giving it up 
for lost. Bad as things look inside our ark, they are not a whit 
better outside. But I do protest against that careless spirit 
of slumber which seems to seal the eyes of many Church 
people, and to blind them to the enormous peril in which we 
are placed by the rise and progress of false doctrine in these 
days. And I call on every member of the Church of England 
to recognize the dangers of the times, and manfully and 
energetically to resist them by united action and by prayer. 
Let us not forget St. Paul’s words ‘‘ WATCH YE: STAND FAST 
IN THE FAITH. QUIT YOU LIKE MEN: BE STRONG ”’ 
(x Cor. xvi. 13). Our noble reformers bought the truth at. 
the price of their own blood, and handed it down to us. Let 
us take heed that we do not basely sell it for a mess of pottage, 
under the specious names of unity and peace. 


Il. AN EXAMPLE TO BE REMEMBERED 


Secondly, the text shows us an example we shall do well 
to remember, as a beacon: ‘‘ The serpent beguiled Eve by his 
subtilty. 

I need hardly remind my readers that St. Paul in this 
place refers to the story of the fall in the third chapter of 
Genesis, as a simple historical fact. He does not afford the 
least countenance to the modern notion that the book of 
Genesis is nothing more than a pleasing collection of myths 
and fables. He does not hint that there is no such being as 
the devil, and that there was not any literal eating of the for- 
bidden fruit, and that it was not really in this way that sin 
entered into the world. On the contrary, he narrates the story 
of the third of Genesis as a veracious history of a thing that 
really took place. 

296 


APOSTOLIC FEARS 


You should remember, moreover, that this reference does 
not stand alone. It is a noteworthy fact that several of the 
most remarkable histories and miracles of the Pentateuch are 
expressly mentioned in the New Testament, and always as 
historical facts. Cain and Abel, Noah’s ark, the destruction 
of Sodom, Esau’s selling his birthright, the destruction of the 
first-born in Egypt, the passage of the Red Sea, the brazen 
serpent, the manna, the water flowing from the rock, Balaam’s 
ass speaking,—all these things are named by the writers of 
the New Testament, and named as matters of fact and not as 
fables. Those who are fond of pouring contempt on Old 
Testament miracles, and making light of the authority of the 
Pentateuch, would do well to consider whether they know 
better than our Lord Jesus Christ and the Apostles. To my 
mind, to talk of Genesis as a collection of myths and fables, 
in the face of such a text of Scripture as we have before us 
in this chapter, sounds alike unreasonable and profane. Was 
St. Paul mistaken or not, when he narrated the story of the 
temptation and the fall? If he was, he was a weak-minded, 
credulous person, and may have been mistaken on fifty other 
subjects. At this rate there is an end of all his authority as a 
writer! It is well to remember that much infidelity begins 
with irreverent contempt of the Old Testament. 


THE DEVIL’S SUBTILTY 


The point after all, which the Apostle would have us mark 
in the history of Eve’s fall, is the ‘‘ subtilty ” with which the 
devil led her into sin. He did not tell her flatly that he wished 
to deceive her and do her harm. On the contrary, he told 
her that the thing forbidden was a thing that was ‘ good 
for food, and pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired to make one 
wise ” (Gen. iii. 6). He did not scruple to assert that she 
might eat the forbidden fruit and yet “ not die.” He blinded 
her eyes to the sinfulness and danger of transgression. He 
persuaded her to believe that to depart from God’s plain 


297 


KNOTS UNTIED 


command was for her benefit and not for her ruin. In short, 
“he beguiled her by his subtilty.” 

Now this “ subtilty,”’ St. Paul tells us, is precisely what we 
have to fear in false doctrine. We are not to expect it to 
approach our minds in the garment of error, but in the form of 
truth. Bad coin would never obtain currency if it had not 
some likeness to good. Popery and infidelity would do little 
harm if they went about the world under their true names. 
Satan is far too wise a general to manage a campaign in such 
a fashion as this. He employs fine words and high-sounding 
phrases, such as Catholicity, Unity, Church order, kindly 
judgment, liberal interpretation of the Scripture, and thus 
effects a lodgment in unwary minds. And this is precisely 
the “ subtilty ” which St. Paul refers to in the text. We 
need not doubt that he had read his Master’s solemn words 
in the Sermon on the Mount: “Beware of false prophets, 
which come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are 
ravening wolves”? (Matt. vii. 15). 

Such is the simplicity and innocence of many Churchmen 
in this day, that they actually expect false doctrine to look 
false, and will not understand that the very essence of its 
mischievousness, as a rule, is its resemblance to God’s truth. 
A young Churchman, for instance, brought up from his cradle 
to hear nothing but Evangelical teaching, is suddenly invited 
some day to hear a sermon preached by some eminent teacher 
of semi-Romish, or semi-sceptical opinions. He goes into the 
church, expecting in his simplicity to hear nothing but heresy 
from the beginning to the end. To his amazement he hears 
a clever, eloquent sermon, containing a vast amount of truth 
and only a few homoeopathic drops of error. Too often a 
violent reaction takes place in his simple, unsuspicious mind. 
He begins to think his former teachers were illiberal, narrow, 
and uncharitable, and his confidence in them is shaken, per- 
haps for ever. Too often, alas! it ends with his entire per- 
version, and at last he is enrolled in the ranks of the Anglo- 
Catholics or the Broad Churchmen ! And what is the history 

298 


APOSTOLIC FEARS 


of the whole case? Why, a foolish forgetfulness of the lesson 
St. Paul puts forward in this text. ‘‘ As the serpent beguiled 
Eve by his subtilty,” so Satan beguiles unwary souls in the 
present day by approaching them under the garb of truth. 

What discerning eye can fail to see that many Churchmen 
expect unsound teachers to be open vendors of poison, and 
cannot realise that they often appear as ‘“‘ angels of light,” 
and are far too wise to be always saying all they think, and 
showing their whole hand and mind. But soitis. Never was 
it so needful to remember the words, “‘ The serpent beguiled 
Eve by his subtilty.”’ 

He that would be safe must cultivate the spirit of a sentinel 
at a critical post. He must not mind being laughed at and 
ridiculed, as one who “ has a keen nose for heresy.” In days 
like these he must not be ashamed to suspect danger. 


PMietre SIMPLICITY THAT IS IN CHRIST 


The last lesson of the text shows us a point about which 
we ought to be especially on our guard. That point is called 
“The simplicity that is in Christ.” 

Now the expression before us is somewhat remarkable, 
and stands alone in the New Testament. One thing at any 
rate is abundantly clear: the word simplicity means that 
which is single and unmixed, in contradistinction to that which 
is mixed and double. The expression means the simple, 
unmixed, unadulterated doctrine of Christ,—the simple 
“truth as it is in Jesus,” on all points,—without addition, 
subtraction, or substitution. Departure from the simple 
genuine prescription of the Gospel, either by leaving out any 
part or adding any part, was the thing St. Paul would have 
the Corinthians specially dread. The expression is full of 
meaning and seems specially written for our learning in these 
last days. We are to be ever jealously on our guard, lest we 
depart from and corrupt the simple Gospel which Christ once 
delivered to the saints. 

299 


KNOTS UNTIED 


THE SIMPLE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST 


If we love our souls and would keep them in 2 healthy 
state, we must endeavour to adhere closely to the simple 
doctrine of Christ, in every jot, tittle, and particular. Once 
add to it or take away anything from it, and you risk spoiling 
the Divine medicine, and may even turn it into poison. Let 
your ruling principle be,—‘“‘ No other doctrine but that of 
Christ ; nothing less, and nothing more!” Lay firm hold 
on that principle, and never let it go. 

(rt) Let us settle this principle firmly in our minds, that 
there is no way of peace but the simple way marked out by 
Christ. True rest of conscience and inward peace of soul will 
never come from anything but direct faith in Christ Himself 
and His finished work. Peace by auricular confession, or 
bodily asceticism, or incessant attendance at Church services, 
or frequent reception of the Lord’s Supper, is a delusion and a 
snare. It is only by coming straight to Jesus Himself, labour- 
ing and heavy laden, and by believing, trusting communion 
with Him, that souls find rest. In this matter let us stand 
fast in “ the simplicity that is in Christ.” 

(2) Let us settle next in our minds that there is no other 
priest who can be in any way a mediator between yourself 
and God but Jesus Christ. The priesthood is Christ’s peculiar 
office, and it is one which He has never deputed to another. 

(3) Let us settle next in our minds that there is no sacri- 
fice for sin except the one sacrifice of Christ upon the cross. 
Listen not for a moment to those who tell you that there is 
any sacrifice in the Lord’s Supper, any repetition of Christ’s 
offering on the cross, or any oblation of His body and blood, 
under the form of consecrated bread and wine. The one sacri- 
fice for sins which Christ offered was a perfect and complete 
sacrifice, and it is nothing short of blasphemy to attempt to 
repeat it. ‘‘ By one offering He has perfected for ever them 
that are sanctified ” (Heb. x. 14). 

(x) Let us settle it in our minds that there are no other 

300 


APOSTOLIC FEARS 


means of grace in the Church which have any binding authority, 
excepting those well-known and simple ones which Christ 
and the Apostles have sanctioned. Let us regard with a jealous 
suspicion all ceremonies and forms of man’s invention, when 
they are invested with such exaggerated importance as to 
thrust into the background God’s own appointments. It is 
the invariable tendency of man’s inventions to supersede God’s 
ordinances. Let us beware of making the Word of God of 
none effect by human devices. 

(5) Let us settle it in our minds that no teaching about 
the sacraments is sound which gives them a power of which 
Christ says nothing. Let us beware of admitting that either 
baptism, or the Lord’s Supper can confer grace “‘ ex opere 
operato,’—that is, by their mere outward administration, 
independently of the state of heart of those who receive them. 
Let us remember that the only proof that baptized people. and 
communicants have grace is the exhibition of grace in their lives. 
The fruits of the Spirit are the only evidences that we are born 
of the Spirit and one with Christ, and not the mere reception 
of the sacraments. 

(6) Let us settle it in our minds that no teaching about 
the Holy Ghost is safe which cannot be reconciled with the 
simple teaching of Christ. Let us not listen to those who 
assert that the Holy Ghost actually dwells in all baptized 
people, without exception, by virtue of their baptism, and 
that this grace within such people only needs to be “ stirred 
up.” The simple teaching of our Lord is, that He dwells only 
in those who are His believing disciples, and that the world 
neither knows, nor sees nor can receive the Holy Spirit (John 
xiv. 17). His indwelling is the special privilege of Christ’s 
people, and where He is He will be seen. On this point also 
let us stand fast in the “‘ simplicity that is in Christ.” 

Finally, the simple doctrine and rule of Christ,—nothing 
added, nothing taken away, nothing substituted—this is the 
mark at which we ought to aim. This is the point from which 
departure ought to be dreaded. Above all, we must beware 

301 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of asserting anything to be needful to salvation of which 
Christ has said nothing at all? I only see one answer to such 
questions as these. We must beware of anything which has 
even the appearance of departure from the ‘‘ simplicity that is 
in Christ.” 

The plain truth is that we cannot sufficiently exalt the 
Lord Jesus Christ as the great Head of the Church, and Lord 
of all ordinances, no less than as the Saviour of sinners. | 
take it we all fail here. We do not realize how high and great 
and glorious a King the Son of God is, and what undivided 
loyalty we owe to One who has not deputed any of His offices, 
or given His glory to another. 


WORDS OF COUNSEL 


And now let me conclude by offering a few parting words 
of counsel. I offer them not as one who has any authority, 
but one who is affectionately desirous to do good to his 
brethren. 

Let us make ourselves thoroughly acquainted with the history 
of the English Reformation. My reason for offering this counsel 
is my firm conviction that this highly important part of 
English history has of late years been undeservedly neglected. 
Thousands of Churchmen now-a-days have a most inadequate 
notion of the amount of our debt to our martyred Reformers. 
They have no distinct conception of the state of darkness and 
superstition in which our fathers lived, and of the light and 
liberty which the Reformation brought in. And the conse- 
quence is that they see no great harm in the Romanizing 
movement of the present day, and have very indistinct ideas 
of the real nature and work of Popery. It is high time that 
a better state of things should begin. Of one thing I am 
thoroughly convinced : a vast amount of the prevailing apathy 
about the Romanizing movement of the day may be traced 
up to gross ignorance, both of the true nature of Popery and 
of the Protestant Reformation. 

302 


APOSTOLIC FEARS 


Ignorance, after all, is one of the best friends of false doctrine. 
Thousands are led astray by Popery or infidelity from sheer want 
of reading and information. Once more I repeat, if men would 
only study with attention the Bible, the Articles, and the 
History of the Reformation, I should have little fear of their 
“ minds being corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.” 
They might not perhaps be “ converted ” to God, but at any 
rate they would not be “ perverted”? from the Church of 


England. 


393 


XVII 


IDOLATRY 
“* Flee from idolatry ’’—1 Cor. x. 14 


The text which heads this page may seem at first sight to 
be hardly needed in England. In an age of education and 
intelligence like this, we might almost fancy it is waste of 
time to tell an Englishman to “ flee from idolatry.” 

. This is a great mistake ; I believe that we have come to 
a time when the subject of idolatry demands a thorough and 
searching investigation. 


I feel that the subject is encompassed with many difficulties. 
We live in an age when truth is constantly in danger of be- 
ing sacrificed to toleration, charity, and peace falsely so. 
called. Nevertheless, I cannot forget, as a clergyman, that the 
Church of England is a Church which has “ given no un- 
certain sound ” on the subject of idolatry. 


I, IDOLATRY: WHAT IS IT? 


Without further preface, let me first of all supply a 
definition of idolatry. Let me show WHAT IT IS. 

It is of the utmost importance that we should understand 
this. Vagueness and indistinctness prevail upon this point, as 
upon almost every other in religion. The Christian who would 
not be continually running aground in his spiritual voyage, 
must have his mind well stored with clear definitions. 


I say, then, that “ idolatry is a worship in which honour 


y IDOLATRY 


due to God in Trinity, and to Him only, is given to some of His 
reatures, or to some invention of His creatures.” It may vary 
exceedingly. It may assume exceedingly different forms 
according to the ignorance or the knowledge, the civilization, 
or the barbarism, or those who offer it. It may be grossly 
absurd and ludicrous, or it may closely border on truth, and 
admit being most speciously defended. But whether in 
the adoration of the idol of Juggernaut, or in the adoration 
of the Host in St. Peter’s at Rome, the principle of idolatry is 
in reality the same. In either case the honour due to God is 


turned aside from Him, and bestowed on that whic od. 
n isi em in 
protessedly stian Churches, there is an ac idolatry. 


It is not neccessary for a man formally to deny God and 
Christ, in order to be an idolater. Professed reverence for the 
God of the Bible, and actual idolatry, are perfectly com- 

atible. They have often gone side by side, and they still 
do so. The children of Israel never thought of renouncing 
God when they persuaded Aaron to make the golden calf. 


“ These be thy gods,” they said (thy Elohim), ‘‘ which brought 
iss up_out of the land of Egyptg’ And the feast in honour 
of the calf was kept as © a feast unto the Lord ” (Jehovah). 
(Exod. xxxii. 4, 5). Jeroboam, again, never pretended to 
ask the ten tribes to cast off their allegiance to the God of 
David and Solomon. When he set up the calves of gold in 
Dan and Bethel, he only said, “ It is too much for you to go 
_ up to Jerusalem; behold thy gods, O Israel (thy Elohim), 
\ which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt” (x Kings 
\ xii. 28). In both instances, we should observe, the idgl was not 
| set up as a rival to God, but under the pretence of being a 
\help= ping-stonéto His ser 
i great sin was committed. The honour due to God was 
given to a visible representation of Him. The majesty of 
Jehovah was offended, the second commandment was broken. 
There was, in the eyes of God, a flagrant act of tdolatry. 
| Let us mark this well. For idotatry ts Hot tmerely a thing 


\ 305 W 


KNOTS UNTIED 


that we may hear of and pity at missionary meetings; nor 
yet is it a thing confined to our own hearts, that we may 
confess before the Mercy-seat upon our knees. It is a pestil- 
ence that walks in the Church of Christ to a much greater 
extent than many suppose. It is a sin that we all need to 
watch and pray against continually. It creeps into our religious 
worship insensibly, and is upon us before we are aware. 

This is that sin which God has especially denounced in 
His word-@ne commandment out of ten is devoted to the 
prohibition of it. Not one of all the ten contains such a solemn 
declaration of God’s character, and of His judgments against 
the disobedient :—‘‘ I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, 
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto 
the third and fourth generation of them that hate Me ” (Exod. 
xx. 5). Not one perhaps of all the ten is so emphatically 
repeated and amplified, and especially in the fourth chapter 
of the Book of Deuteronomy. 

What is the history of Israel under their judges and kings 
but a melancholy record of repeated falling away into idolatry ? 
Again and again we read of “ high places” and false gods. 
Again and again we read of captivities and chastisements on 
account of idolatry. The besetting sin of the Old Testament 
Church was idolatry. In the face of the most elaborate 
ceremonial ordinances that God ever gave to His people, 
Israel was incessantly turning aside after idols, and worship- 
ping the work of men’s hands. 

This is the sin which has brought down the heaviest 
judgments on the visible Church. It brought on Israel the 
armies of Egypt, Assyria, and Babylon. It scattered the 
ten tribes, burned up Jerusalem, and carried Judah and 
Benjamin into captivity. It brought on the Eastern Churches, 
in later days, the overwhelming flood of the Saracenic in- 
vasion and turned many a_ spiritual garden into a 
wilderness. ; 

Idolatry is a subject which, in every Church of Christ 
that would keep herself pure, should be thoroughly examined, 

306 


IDOLATRY 


understood, and known. It is not for nothing that St. Paul 
lays down the stern command, “ Flee from idolatry.” 


II. IDOLATRY: WHENCE COMES IT? 


Let me show, in the second place, the cause to which 
idolatry may be traced. WHENCE COMES IT? 

To the man who takes an exalted view of human intellect 
and reason, idolatry may seem absurd. He fancies it too 
irrational for any but weak minds to be endangered by it. 

To a mere superficial thinker about Christianity, the peril 
of idolatry may seem very small. Whatever command- 
ments are broken, such a man will tell us, professing Chris- 
tians are not very likely to transgress the second. 

Now, both these persons betray a_woeful ignorance of 
hun nature. They do not see that there are secret roots 
of idolatry within us all. 

The cause of all idolatry is the natural corruption of man’s 
heart. That great family disease, with which all the children 
of Adam are infected from their birth, shows itself in this, 
as it does in a thousand other ways. When the Apostle Paul 
tells the Galatians (Gal. v. 20) what are the “ works of the 
flesh,” he places prominently among them “ idolatry.” 

A religion of some kind, man will have. God has not left 
Himself without a witness in us all, fallen as we are. There 
is a dim something engraven at the bottom of man’s heart, 
however faint and half-erased,—a something which makes 
him feel he must have a religion and a worship of some kind. 
The proof of this is to be found in the history of voyages and 
travels in every part of the globe. The exceptions to the rule 
are so few, if indeed there are any, that they only confirm 
its truth. Man’s worship in some dark corner of the earth 
may rise no higher than a vague fear of an evil spirit, and a 
desire to propitiate him; but a worship of some kind man 
will have. 

But then comes in the effect of the fall. Ignorance of God, 


307 


KNOTS UNTIED 


carnal and low conceptions of His nature and attributes, 
earthly and sensual notions of the service which is acceptable 
to Him, all characterize the religion of the natural man. 
There is a craving in his mind after something he can see, 
and feel, and touch in his Divinity. He would fain bring his 
God down to his own crawling level. He would make his 
religion a thing of sense and sight. He has no idea of the 
religion of heart, and faith and spirit. Idolatry is a natural 
product of man’s heart. It is a weed which, like the earth 
uncultivated, the heart is always ready to bring forth. 

It should not therefore surprise us, when we read of the 
constantly recurring idolatries of the Old Testament Church, 
—of high places and hill altars, and groves and images,—and 
this in the full light of the Mosaic ceremonial ? 

It should not surprise us when we read in history how \ 
idolatry crept in by degrees into the Church of Christ,—how 
little by little it thrust out Gospel truth, until, in Canterbury, 
men offered more at the shrine of Thomas 4 Becket than they 
did at that of the Virgin Mary, and more at that of the Virgin 
Mary than at that of Christ. 

Neither should it surprise us when we hear of men going 
over from Protestant Churches to the Church of Rome, in the 
present day. We may think it unaccountable, and feel as 
if we ourselves could never forsake a pure form of 
worship for one like that of the Pope. There is a cause 
for it. 

That cause is nothing else but the deep corruption of man’s 
heart. There isa natural proneness and tendency in us all to 
give God a sensual, carnal ship, and not that which is 
commanded in His Word "Weare ever ready, by reason of our 
sloth and unbelief,to devise visible helps and stepping-stones 
...ln_ our approaches te~Him, and wltieately to give these in- 
ventio own. the honour due to Him. In fact, idolatry 
is all natural, down-hill, easy, like the broad way. Spiritual 
worship is all of grace, all uphill, and all against the grain. 
Any worship whatsoever,is more pleasing to the natural heart 

308 


IDOLATRY 


than worshipping God in the way which our Lord Christ des- 
cribes, “‘ in spirit and in truth ” (John iv. 23). 

Let us not think that idolatry is an old-fashioned sin, 
into which we are never likely to fall. “ Let him that thinketh 
he standeth, take heed lest he fall.”” We shall do well to look 
into our own hearts: the seeds of idolatry are all there. We 
should remember the words of St. Paul: “ Flee from idolatry.” 


III. IDOLATRY: WHERE IS IT? 


Let me show, in the third place, the forms which idolatry 
has assumed and does assume, in the visible Church. WHERE 
IS IT? 

I believe there never was a more baseless fabric than the 
theory which obtains favour with many,—that the promises 
of perpetuity and preservation from apostasy, belong to the 
visible Church of Christ. It is supported neither by Scrip- 
ture nor by facts. The Church against which “ the gates of 
hell shall never prevail” is not the visible Church, but the 
whole body of the elect, the company of true believers out 
of every nation and people. The greater part of the visible 
Church has frequently maintained gross heresies. The particu- 
lar branches of it are never secure against deadly error, both 
of faith and practice. A departure from the faith,—a falling 
away,—a leaving of first love in any branch of the visible 
Church,—need never surprise a careful reader of the New 
Testament. 

That idolatry would arise, seems to have been the expecta- 
tion of the Apostles, even before the canon of the New Testa- 
ment was closed. It is remarkable to observe how St. Paul 
dwells on this subject in his Epistle to the Corinthians. If any 
Corinthian called a brother was an idolater, with such an one 
the members of the Church “‘ were not to eat ” (r Cor. v. TI). 
“ Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of our fathers ” (1 Cor. 
x. 7). When he writes to the Colossians, he warns them 
against “‘ worshipping of angels ” (Col. ii. 18). And St. John 

309 


KNOTS UNTIED 


closes his first Epistle with the solemn injunction, “ Little 
children, keep yourselves from idols” (x John v. 21). It is 
impossible not to feel that all these passages imply an expecta- 
tion that idolatry would arise, and that soon, among pro- 
fessing Christians. 

The famous prophecy in the fourth chapter of the first 
Epistle to Timothy contains a passage which is even more 
directly to the point: “‘ The Spirit speaketh expressly, that 
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils ” (1 Tim. iv. 1). 
Our excellent translators of the Bible are considered for once 
to have missed the full meaning of the Apostle, in their render- 
ing of the word translated as ‘“ devils” in our version, and 
that the true meaning of the expression is, “ doctrines about 
departed spirits.” And in this view, which, I may as well 
say, is maintained by all those who have the best right to be 
heard on such a question, the passage becomes a direct pre- 
diction of the rise of that most specious form of idolatry, the 
worship of dead saints. (See Mede’s Works.) 

The last passage I will call attention to, is the conclusion 
of the ninth chapter of Revelation. We there read, at the 
twentieth verse: “‘ The rest of the men which were not killed 
by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, 
that they should not worship devils ” (this is the same word, 
we should observe, as that in the Epistle to Timothy just 
quoted), “ and idols of gold and silver, and brass, and stone, 
and wood : which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk.”” There 
is the highest probability that these plagues are to fall upon 
the visible Church of Christ; and the highest improbability 
that St. John was here prophesying about the heathen, who 
never heard the Gospel. And this once conceded, the fact 
that idolatry is a predicted sin of the visible Church, does seem 
most conclusively and for ever established. 


IDOLATRY AS A FACT 


And now if we turn from the Bible to facts, what do we 
310 


IDOLATRY 


see ? I reply unhesitatingly, that there is unmistakable proof 
that Scripture warnings and predictions were not spoken 
without cause, and that idolatry has actually arisen in the 
visible Church of Christ, and does still exist. 

The rise and progress of the evil in former days we shall 
find well summed up in the Homily of the Church of England 
on “ Peril of Idolatry.” Even in the fourth century, Jerome 
complains of the introduction of images amongst Christians, 
and the abuse grew to such an extent that the Homily declares 
that for 800 years before the Reformation, clergy, laity, 
women and children “had been drowned in abominable 
idolatry.” 

There can be little doubt the evil began even before the 
time just mentioned by the Homily writers. No man, I think, 
need wonder at the rise of idolatry in the Primitive Church, 
who considers calmly the excessive reverence which it paid, 
from the very first, to the visible parts of religion. I believe 
that no impartial man can read the language used by nearly 
all the Fathers about the Church, the bishops, the ministry, 
baptism, the Lord’s Supper, the martyrs, the dead saints 
generally,—no man can read it without being struck with the 
wide difference between their language and the language of 
Scripture on such subjects. You seem at once to be in a new 
atmosphere. You find that things which in the Bible are 
evidently of second-rate importance, are here made of first- 
rate importance. You find the things of sense and sight 
exalted to a position in which Paul and Peter, and James 
and John, speaking by the Holy Ghost, never for a moment 
placed them. It is not merely the weakness of uninspired 
writings that you have to complain of ; it is something worse. 
You have got into a region where the malaria of idolatry has 
begun to arise. You detect the buds of that huge system, 
which, as the Homily describes, was afterwards formally 
acknowledged, and ultimately blossomed so luxuriantly in 
every part of Christendom. 


3II 


KNOTS UNTIED / 


PRESENT-DAY IDOLATRIES 


But let us now turn from the past to the present. Let us 
consider in what form idolatry presents itself to us as a sin of 
the visible Church of Christ in our own time. 

I find no difficulty in answering this question. I feel no 
hesitation in affirming that idolatry never yet assumed a more 
glaring form than it does in the Church of Rome at this present 
day. 

And here I come to a subject on which it is hard to speak, 
because of the times we live in. But the whole truth ought to 
be spoken by ministers of Christ, without respect of times and 
prejudices, and it is my solemn conviction that idolatry 
is one of the crying sins of which the Church of Rome is guilty. 
I say this in all sadness. I say it, acknowledging fully that 
we have our faults in the Protestant Church ; and practically, 
perhaps, in some quarters, not a little idolatry. But from 
formal, recognized, systematic idolatry, I believe we are 
very largely free. 

(a) To my mind, it is idolatry to have images and pictures 
of saints in churches, and to give them a reverence for which 
there is no warrant or precedent in Scripture. 

(6) To my mind, it is idolatry to invoke the Virgin Mary 
and the saints in glory, and to address them in language never 
addressed in Scripture except to the Holy Trinity. 

(c) To my mind, it is idolatry to bow down to mere material 
things, and attribute to them a power and sanctity far exceed- 
ing that attached to the ark or altar of the Old Testament 
dispensation ; and a power and sanctity, too, for which there 
is not a tittle of foundation in the Word of God. And if this 
be so with the holy coat of Treves, and the wonderfully 
multiplied wood of the true cross, and a thousand other so- 
called relics in my mind’s eyes, I say there is idolatry in the 
Church of Rome. 

(d) To my mind, it is idolatry to worship that which man’s 
hands have made,—to call it God, and adore it when lifted up 

312 


IDOLATRY 


before our eyes. Consequently in view of the doctrine of 
transubstantiation, the elevation and adoration of the Host 
is idolatry. 

(e) To my mind, it is idolatry to make ordained men 
mediators between ourselves and God, robbing as it were, 
our Lord Christ of His office, and giving them an honour 
which even Apostles and angels in Scripture flatly repudiate. 

Men love to shut their eyes against evils which it is dis- 
agreeable to ‘allow. They will not see things which involve 
unpleasant consequences. That the Church of Rome is an 
erring Church, they will acknowledge. That she is idolatrous 
they will deny. 

They tell us that the reverence which the Romish Church 
gives to saints and images does not amount to idolatry. They 
inform us that there are distinctions between the worship of 
“atria” and “ dulia,” between a mediation of redemption, 
and a mediation of intercession, which clear her of the charge. 
My answer is, that the Bible knows nothing of such distinc- 
tions; and that, in the actual practice of the great bulk of 
Roman Catholics, they have no existence at all.’ 

They tell us, that it is a mistake to suppose that Roman 
Catholics really worship the images and pictures before which 
they perform acts of adoration; that they only use them as 
helps to devotion, and in reality look far beyond them. My 
answer is, that many a heathen could say just as much for his 
idolatry ;—but the apology does not avail. The terms of 
the second commandment are too stringent. It prohibits 
bowing down, as well as worshipping. And the very anxiety 
which the Church of Rome has often displayed to exclude that 
second commandment from her catechisms, is of itself a great 
fact which speaks volumes to a candid observer. 


1“Tatria” and “ dulia’’? are two Greek words both meaning 
‘“worship ” or ‘‘ service,’ but the former being a much stronger word 
than the latter. The Roman Catholic admits that the worship of 
“Jatria’? may not be given to saints, but maintains that ‘ dulia’”’ 
may be given, 


313 


KNOTS UNTIED 


They tell us that we have no evidence for the assertions we 
make on this subject ; that we found our charges on the abuses 
which prevail among the ignorant members of the Romish 
communion ; and that it is absurd to say that a Church con- 
taining so many wise and learned men, is guilty of idolatry. 
My answer is, that the devotional books in common use among 
Roman Catholics supply us with unmistakable evidence. 
Let any one examine that notorious book, The Garden of the 
Soul, if he doubts my assertion, and read the language there 
addressed to the Virgin Mary. Let him remember that this 
language is addressed to a woman, who, though highly favoured 
. and the mother of our Lord, was yet one of our fellow-sinners, 
—a woman who actually confesses her need of a Saviour for 
herself. She says ‘‘ My spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour’’ 
(Luke ‘i. 47). Let him examine this language in the light of 
the New Testament, and then let him tell us fairly whether 
the charge of idolatry is not fully made out. 

I know how painful these things sound to many ears. To 
me it is no pleasure to dwell on the shortcomings of any who 
profess and call themselves Christians. I can say truly that I 
have said what I have said with pain and sorrow. 

I draw a wide distinction between the accredited dogmas 
of the Church of Rome and the private opinions of many of 
her members. I believe and hope that many a Roman Catholic 
is in heart inconsistent with his profession, and is better than 
the Church to which he belongs. I cannot forget the Jansen-: 
ists, and Quesnel, and Martin Boos. I believe that many a 
Romanist at this day is worshipping with an idolatrous wor- 
ship simply because he or she knows no better. He has no 
faithful minister to teach him. He has the fear of the priest 
before his eyes, if he dares to think for himself. I remember 
all this; and I say that such an one eminently deserves our 
sympathy and compassion. But all this must not prevent my 
saying that the Church of Rome is an’ idolatrous Church. 

The Church of which I am a minister has spoken out most 
strongly on the subject. The Homily on “ Peril of Idolatry,” 


314 


IDOLATRY 


and the solemn protest following the Rubrics at the end of our 
Prayer-book Communion Service, which denounces the adora- 
tion of the sacramental bread and wine as “ idolatry to be 
abhorred of all faithful Christians,” are plain evidence that 
I have said no more than the mind of my own Church. And 
in a day like this,—when some are disposed to secede to the 
Church of Rome, and many are shutting their eyes to her real 
character, and wanting us to be reunited to her,—in a day 
like this, my own conscience would rebuke me if I did not 
warn men plainly that the Church of Rome is an idolatrous 
Church, and that if they will join her they are “ joining them- 
selves to idols.” 


IV. WHAT WILL END IDOLATRY ? 


And now let me show, in the last place, the ultimate abolt- 
tion of all idolatory. WHAT WILL END IT? 

That heart can hardly be right with God which can think 
of the millions who are sunk in heathenism, or honour the 
false prophet Mahomet, or daily offer up prayers to the Virgin 
Mary, and not cry, “ O my God, what shall be the end of these 
things ? How long, O Lord, how long? ” 

Here, as in other subjects, the sure word of prophecy comes 
in to our aid. Idolatry shall be destroyed at the second com- 
ing of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Then shall be fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, ‘‘ The idols 
He shall utterly abolish ” (Isa. ii. 18).—Then shall be fulfilled 
the words of Micah (v. 13) : “ Their graven images also will I 
cut off, and their standing images out of the midst of thee, 
and thou shalt no more worship the work of thine hands.” — 
Then shall be fulfilled the prophecy of Zechariah (xiii. 2), 
“It shall come to pass at that day, saith the Lord of hosts, 
that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and 
they shall no more be remembered,”—In a word, the ninety- 
seventh Psalm shall then receive its full accomplishment : 
‘The Lord reigneth : let the earth rejoice ; let the multitude 


315 


KNOTS UNTIED 


of isles be glad thereof. Confounded be all they that serve | 
graven images, that boast themselves of idols: worship Him 
all ye gods.” 


THAT BLESSED HOPE 


The second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ is that blessed 
hope which should ever comfort the children of God under 
the present dispensation. It is the pole-star by which we must 
journey. It is the one point on which all our expectations 
should be concentrated. ‘‘ Yet a little while, and He that 
shall come will come, and will not tarry ” (Heb. x. 37). 

Till then our redemption is not perfectly enjoyed ; as Paul 
tells the Ephesians, ‘‘ We are sealed unto the day of redemp- 
tion ” (Eph. iv. 30). Till then our salvation is not completed 
as Peter says, ““ We are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time ” 
(x Peter i. 5). Till then our knowledge is still defective ; as 
Paul tells the Corinthians: “‘ Now we see through a glass 
darkly ; but then face to face: now I know in part; then 
shall I know even also as I am known ”’ (1 Cor. xiii. 12). In 
short, our best things are yet to come. 

But in the day of our Lord’s return every desire shall 
receive its fullaccomplishment. We shall no more be pressed 
down and worn out with the sense of constant failure, feeble- 
ness, and disappointment. In His presence we shall find 
there is a fulness of joy, if nowhere else ; and when we awake 
up after His likeness, we shall be satisfied if we never were 
before (Psalm xvi. Ir; xvii. 15). 

There are many evils now in the visible Church. But a 
day comes when the Lord Jesus shall once more purify His 
temple, and cast forth everything that defiles. He shall cast 
forth the images, and purge out idolatry in every shape. 

Who is there now that longs for the conversion of the 
heathen world? You will not see it in its fulness until the 
Lord’s appearing. Then, and not till then, will that often- 

316 


~ IDOLATRY 


misapplied text be fulfilled: ‘“ A man shall cast his idols of 
silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for 
himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats ” (Isa. ii. 20). 

Who is there now that longs for the redemption of Israel ? 
You will never see it in its perfection till the Redeemer comes 
to Zion. Idolatry in the professing Church of Christ has been 
one of the mightiest stumbling-blocks in the Jew’s way. 
When it begins to fall, the veil over the heart of Isarel shall 
begin to be taken away (Psalm cii. 16). 

Who is there now that longs for a perfect Church—a Church 
in which there shall not be the slightest taint of idolatry ? 
You must wait for the Lord’s return. Then, and not till then, 
shall we see a perfect Church,—a Church having neither spot 
nor wrinkle, nor any such thing (Eph. v. 27),—a Church of 
which all the members shall be regenerate, and every one a 
child of God. 


STUDY PROPHECY 


If these things be so, men need not wonder that we urge on 
them the study of prophecy, and that we charge them above 
all to grasp firmly the glorious doctrine of Christ’s second 
appearing and kingdom. This is the “ light shining in a dark 
place,” to which we shall do well to take heed. Let others 
indulge their fancy if they will, with the vision of an imaginary 
“ Church of the future.” Let the children of this world dream 
of some “ coming man,” who is to understand everything, 
and set everything right. They are only sowing to them- 
selves bitter disappointment. They will awake to find their 
visions baseless and empty as a dream. 

But let our eyes look right onward to the day of Christ’s 
second advent. That is the only day when every abuse shall 
be rectified, and every corruption and source of sorrow com- 
pletely purged away. Waiting for that day, let us eech work 
on and serve our generation ; not idle, as if nothing could be 
done to check evil, but not disheartened because we see not 


317 


KNOTS UNTIED 


yet all things put under our Lord. After all, the night is far 
spent, and the day is at hand. Let us wait, I say, on the — 
Lord. 

Let us all try to realize that the latter ends of the world 
are upon us, and that the abolition of all idolatry is hasten- 
ing on. Is this a time for a man to draw nearer to Rome ? 
Surely we ought rather to be doubly jealous of everything 
of a Romish tendency in religion,—doubly careful that we do 
not connive at any treason against our Lord Christ,—and 


doubly ready to protest against unscriptural worship of every 
description. 


RE-UNION WITH ROME 


The subject I now touch upon is of deep and pressing im- 
portance, and demands the serious attention of all Protestant 
Churchmen. It is vain to deny that a large party of English 
clergy and laity in the present day are moving heaven and 
earth to reunite the Church of England with the idolatrous 
Church of Rome. 

The tendency of Tractarianism and Ritualism has been 
steadily towards Rome. Hundreds of men and women 
have fairly and honestly left our ranks, and become down- 
right Papists. But many hundreds more have stayed behind, 
and are yet nominal Churchmen within our pale. The pomp- 
ous semi-Romish ceremonial which has been inroduced into 
many churches, has prepared men’s minds for changes. An 
extravagantly theatrical and idolatrous mode of celebrating 
the Lord’s Supper has paved the way for transubstantiation. 

A regular process of unprotestantizing has been long and 
successfully at work. The poor old Church of England stands 
on an inclined plane. Her very existence, as a Protestant 
Church, is in peril. 

I hold, for one, that this Romish movement ought to be 
steadily and firmly resisted. Notwithstanding the rank, the 
learning, and the devotedness of some of its advocates, I 
regard it as a most mischievous, and unscriptural move- 


318 


IDOLATRY 


ment. To say that re-union with Rome would be an insult to 
our martyred Reformers is a very light thing; it is far more 
than this: it would be a sin and an oftence against God ! 
Rather than be re-united with the idolatrous Church of Rome, 
I would willingly see my own beloved Church perish and go to 
pieces, Rather than become Popish once more, she had better 
die ! 

Unity in the abstract is no doubt an excellent thing: but 
unity without truth is useless. Peace and uniformity are 
beautiful and valuable: but peace without the Gospel,— 
peace based on a common Episcopacy, and not on a common 
faith,—is a worthless peace, not deserving of the name. When 
Rome has repealed the decrees of Trent, and her additions 
to the Creed,—when Rome has recanted her false and un- 
scriptural doctrines,—when Rome has formally renounced 
image-worship, Mary-worship, and transubstaniation,—then, 
and not till then, it will be time to talk of re-union with her. 
Till then there is a gulf between us which cannot be honestly 
bridged. Till then I call on all Churchmen to resist to the 
death this idea of re-union with Rome. Well says the admirable 
Bishop Jewel, in his Apology, ‘‘ We do not decline concord 
and peace with men; but we will not continue in a state of war 
with God that we might have peace with men !—If the Pope 
does indeed desire we should be reconciled to him, he ought 
first to reconcile himself to God.” 

I know not where we are drifting. But at the rate we are 
going, I think it quite within the verge of possibility that in 
a few years the Church of England may be re-united to the 
Church of Rome. The Crown of England may be once more 
on the head of a Papist. Protestantism may be formally 
repudiated. A Romish Archbishop may once more preside 
at Lambeth Palace. Mass may be once more said at West- 
minster Abbey and St. Paul’s. And one result will be, that 
all Bible-reading Christians must either leave the Church of 
England, or else sanction idol-worship and become idolaters ! 
God grant we may never come to this state of things! 


319 


KNOTS UNTIED 


SOME SAFE-GUARDS 


And now it only remains for me to conclude what I have 
been saying, by mentioning some safe-guards for the souls of 
all who read this chapter. We live in a time when the Church of 
Rome is walking amongst us with renewed strength and 
loudly boasting that she will soon win back the ground that 
she has lost. False doctrines of every kind are continually 
set before us in the most subtle and specious forms. It cannot 
be thought unseasonable, if I offer some practical safe-guards 
against idolatry. What it is, whence it comes, where it is, 
what will end it,—all this we have seen. Let me point out how 
we may be safe from it, and | will say no more. 

(x) Let us arm ourselves, then, for one thing, with a 
thorough knowledge of the Word of God. Let us read our Bibles 
more diligently than ever, and become familiar with every 
part of them. Let the Word dwell in us richly. The Bible 
is the sword of the Spirit ;—let it never be laid aside. The 
Bible is the true lantern for a dark and cloudy time ;—let us 
beware of travelling without its light. I strongly suspect,— 
if we did but know the secret history of the numerous seces- 
sions from our Church to that of Rome, which we deplore,— 
I strongly suspect that in almost every case one of the most 
important steps in the downward road would be found to have 
been a neglected Bible,—more attention to forms, sacraments 
daily services, primitive Christianity, and so forth, and 
diminished attention to the written Word of God. The Bible 
is the King’s highway. If we once leave that for any by- 
path, however beautiful, and old, and frequented it may seem, 
we must never be surprised if we end with worshipping images 
and relics, and going regularly to a confessional. 

(2) Let us arm ourselves in the second place, with a godly 
jealousy about the least portion of the Gospel. Let us beware 
of sanctioning the slightest attempt to keep back any jot or 
tittle of it, or to throw any part of it into the shade by exalt- 
ing subordinate matters in religion. When Peter withdrew 

320 


IDOLATRY 


himself from eating with the Gentiles, it seemed but a little 
thing ; yet Paul tells the Galatians, ‘“‘ I withstood him to the 
face, because he was to be blamed” (Gal. ii. 11). Let us 
count nothing little that concerns our souls. Let us beware 
of tampering with anything of a Romanizing tendency. It 
is foolishness to play with fire. I believe that many of our 
perverts and seceders began with thinking there could be no 
great harm in attaching a little more importance to certain 
outward things than they oncedid. But once launched on the 
downward course, they went on from one thing to another. 
They started with trifles, as many foolishly call them. They 
have ended with downright idolatry. 

(3) Let us arm ourselves, last of all, with clear sound views 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the salvation that is in Him. 
He is the “ image of the invisible God,”’—the express “‘ image 
of His person,” —and the true preservative against all idolatry, 
when truly known. Let us build ourselves deep down on the 
strong foundation of His finished work upon the cross. Let us 
settle it firmly in our minds, that Christ Jesus has done every- 
thing needful in order to present us without spot before the 
throne of God, and that simple, childlike faith on our part is 
the only thing required to give us an entire interest in the work 
of Christ. Let us not doubt that, having this faith, we are 
completely justified in the sight of God,—will never be more 
justified if we live to the age of Methuselah, and do the works 
of the Apostle Paul,—and CAN add nothing to that complete 
justification by any acts, deeds, words, performances, fast- 
ings, prayers, almsdeeds, attendance on ordinances, or anything 
else of our own. 

Above all, let us keep up continual communion with the 
person of the Lord Jesus! Let us abide in Him daily, feed 
on Him daily, look to Him daily, lean on Him daily, live 
upon Him daily, draw from His fulness daily. Let us realize 
this, and the idea of other mediators, other comforters, other 
intercessors will seem utterly absurd. ‘‘ What need is there? ” 
we shallreply : “I have Christ and in Him Ihave all. What 

321 


KNOTS UNTIED 


have I to do with idols ? I have Jesus in my heart, Jesus in 
the Bible, and Jesus in heaven, and I want nothing more! ” 

Once let the Lord Christ have His rightful place in our 
hearts, and all other things in our religion will soon fall into 
their right places.—Church, ministers, sacraments, ordinances, 
all will go down, and take the second place. 

Except Christ sits as Priest and King upon the throne 
of our hearts, that little kingdom within will be in perpetual 
confusion. But only let Him be “ all in all” there, and all 
will be well. Before Him every idol, every Dagon shall fall 
down. 

CHRIST RIGHTLY KNOWN, CHRIST TRULY BELIEVED, AND 


CHRIST HEARTILY LOVED, IS THE TRUE PRESERVATIVE AGAINST 
EVERY FORM OF IDOLATRY. 


The New Evangelical Library 


A SERIES OF STANDARD WORKS BY PAST AND 

PRESENT AUTHORS ON IMPORTANT BIBLICAL AND 

ECCLESIASTICAL SUBJECTS, ISSUED AT POPULAR 
PRICES FOR WIDE CIRCULATION 


EPHESIAN STUDIES. Expository Readings on the Epistle 
to the Ephesians. By Bishop HANDLEY C. G. MouLeE, D.D. 
New Impression of the Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 
gold lettering, 3/6 net. 


COLOSSIAN STUDIES. _ Lessons in Faith and Holiness from 
St. Paul’s Epistles to the Colossians and Philemon. By Bishop 
HANDLEY C. G. MouLe, D.D. New Impression of the Second 
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, gold lettering, 3/6 net. 

Bishop Moule’s Expositions are founded on a thorough study of 
the original text. He is, indeed, one of the most scholarly of New 
Testament Expositors: the Christian Edification of the reader 
being his great aim throughout all his work. 

“We give a hearty welcome and send-off to these attractive volumes. 
All through they are full of sound scholarship and directed to the edification 
of the reader in Truth and Love. If the Churches would pursue the quest 
for Unity after the fashion of chapters nine to twelve we should be in the 
midst of a spiritual Revival ’’—Evangelical Christendom. 

“ Bishop Handley Moule’s method of dealing with the text and of drawing 
from it the special significance which an intimate knowledge of the Greek 
reveals has proved of immense advantage to students of these epistles. 
These editions will give an opportunity of making a new generation ac- 
quainted with the results of the ripe scholarship of one of our Evangelical 
masters. They are a useful addition to the library of theological students 
and of those who are in the early years of their ministry.’”—The Churchman. 


THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY. By J. B. Licutroor, D.D. 

(Bishop of Durham, 1879-90). New Impression. Crown 8vo. 
Cloth, gold lettering, 3/6 net. An Essay which originally appeared 
in the author’s Commentary on the Epistle to the Philippians, 
and is an able vindication of the non-sacerdotal character of the 
ministry. 
“This book . . . is the best corrective we know,of certain doctrines that are 
very popular in some circles and lie at the root of errors prevalent to-day. 
It makes claims on the head as well as the heart. ... Many attempts 
have been made to answer it, and none have been successful. No one who 
reads it can have amy doubt on its main contentions. The kingdom of 
Christ has no sacerdotal system.”—The Record. 


THE NEW EVANGELICAL LIBRARY 


THE ANGLICAN ‘‘ VIA MEDIA.”’ Being Studies in the 

Elizabethan Religious Settlements and in the Teaching of the 
Caroline Divines. By Rev. C. SYDNEY CARTER, M.A., Litt.D. 
Principal of the Bible Churchman’s Missionary College, Clifton, 
Bristol. Author of “‘ The English Church and the Reformation,” 
“ Ministerial Commission,” etc. Foreword by Bishop E. A. KNox. 
Crown 8vo. Cloth, gold lettering, 3/6 net. 
“« An exceedingly able historical work. . . . The thesis of the book is that 
historically the Anglican Church has stood definitely on the side of the 
Reformed Churches of Christendom. The Author contends that the asser- 
tion so often made that the Church of England stands midway between 
Rome and Protestant Christendom is a historical error... . He examines 
in great detail and with a wealth of learning the actual situation at the time 
of the Elizabethan Settlement and later on under the Caroline divines, 
and finds no evidence whatever of a trustworthy kind to support the Anglo- 
Catholic view of history . . . it is good to see the Reformed character of 
the Anglican Church so stoutly and ably maintained.” —Expository Times. 
‘Dr. Carter has established here his reputation as a historian—accurate, 
painstaking and never discursive.’’—St John’s Magazine. 

EVANGELICAL BY-PATHS. Studies in the Religious and 
Social Aspects of the Evangelical Revival of the 18th century, 
and containing many hitherto unpublished incidents and facts. 
By Rev. A. LEEDES Hunt, M.A. Author of “‘ The King’s Table 


of Blessing,” etc. Crown 8vo. Cloth, gold lettering, 3/6 net. 
“Its publication comes appropriately at the time of the celebration of the 
Centenary of the Islington Clerical Meeting. Mr. Hunt, in the course of 
preparation for a Life of David Simpson, incumbent of Christ Church, 
Macclesfield, in the 18th Century, a friend of Wesley, Rowland Hill, the 
Countess of Huntingdon, and the Ryle family has had access to a number of 
contemporary documents from which he has drawn many of the interesting 
points contained in this volume. ... Gladstone’s testimony to the 
Evangelicals is quoted ‘The Church of England at large is profoundly 
and vitally indebted to them for having aroused her from her slumbers 
and set her vigorously about her work.’’—The Churchman. 

“Mr. Hunt retells the story of the Evangelical Revival. Here will be 
found biographical sketches of Grimshaw, Berridge, Venn, Romaine, Top- 
lady, the Countess of Huntingdon and other eminent leaders—a most 
interesting book,’’—St. John’s Magazine. 

KNOTS UNTIED. Being Plain Statements on Religious Questions 
from an Evangelical Standpoint. By Bishop J. C. Rye. 
2gth Edition, Foreword by Bishop F. J. Chavasse. Edited by 
Rev. C. SYDNEY CARTER, M.A. Litt.D. Crown 8vo. Cloth, gold 


lettering, 3/6 net. 


OTHER WORKS IN PREPARATION. 
THYNNE & JARVIS LTD. 


ALL PRICES ARE NET 


Works by Bishop J. C. Ryle, D.D. 


Published by 
CHAS. J. THYNNE & JARVIS LTD. 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS ON THE GOSPELS. 
Designed for family and private reading, with the text of Holy Scrip- 
ture complete, short expositions, a full commentary and many Notes. 

This work is now practically out of print except for a few odd volumes. 
It is contemplated to issue a revised edition, complete in 4 volumes, at 
(if possible) one guinea the set. 

A new edition of “‘ Principles for Churchmen ”’ is in preparation, and will, 
it is hoped, prove of great service in the present condition of the Church of 
England, containing, as it does, clear and Scriptural statements on many 
subjects of Controversy. 

For these publications and others the Publishers will greatly esteem the 
support and co-operation of the Evangelical public. 

Bethany. 
Being Expository Thoughts, with Notes, on the Eleventh Chapter 
of St. John’s Gospel. ‘‘ The heart of the wise is in the house of 
mourning ”’ (Eccles. vii. 4). Small 4to, cloth, gilt, 2s. 6d. 


Uniform Series of the Bishop’s Works 


Light from Old Times; or, Protestant Facts and Men. 
Fifth Edition. Illustrated. Price 5s. With gilt edges, 6s, 6d. 


CONTENTS 
Introduction for Our Own Days. John Bradford, Martyr. 
John Wycliffe. Nicholas Ridley, Bishop and Martyr. 
Why were our Reformers Burned ? Samuel Ward. 
John Rogers, Martyr. Archbishop Laud. 
Jobn Hooper, Bishop and Martyr. Richard Baxter. 
Rowland Taylor, Martyr. William Gurnall. : 
Hugh Latimer, Bishop and Martyr. } James II. and the Seven Bishops. 


And 8 full-page Illustrations. 


Holiness : 
Its Nature, Hindrances, Difficulties and Roots. With Preface, Intro- 
ductory Essays, and Supplementary Extracts from old Writers, 
Fifth and Enlarged Edition. Price 5s. With gilt edges, 6s. 6d, 

The Christian Leaders of the Eighteeenth Century. Being an account 
of the Life and Ministry of G. Whitefield, J. Wesley, W. Grimshaw, 
W. Romaine, D. Rowlands, J. Berridge, H. Venn, W. Walker, J. 
Hervey, Toplady, and Fletcher, together with a sketch of the Con: 
dition of Religion in England in the 18th Century. With Portrait, 
Illustrations. Price 5s. With gilt edges, 6s. 6d. 


o 


ALL PRICES ARE NET 


The Christian Race, and other Sermons, setting forth the great doctrines 
of Sin, Redemption, Regeneration and Sanctification, and the duties 
of the Christian Life. With Prefatory Note by the Ven. Archdeacon 
Madden, M.A., 8vo, cloth, gilt, 5s. 

Each Volume of this Series can also be supplied, bound in half persian morocco, gilt 

top, 7/éd; half morocco, gilt edges, 10/6d ; whole morocco, gilt edges, lis. 


HYMNS FOR THE CHURCH ON EARTH. 
Eighth Enlarged Edition. Containing Four Hundred Hymns, for 
the most part of modern date. Selected and Arranged by Bishop 
Ryle. In large type and on light paper. Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 4s. 
With gilt edges, 5s. Limp roan, gilt edges, 9s. Morocco, gilt edges, 15s. 
“The comfort of invalids and the edification of Christians in private have been the 
two principal objects I have had in view in preparing this collection. I hold strongly 


that holy thoughts often abide for ever in men’s memories under the form of poetry, 
which pass away and are forgotten under the form of prose.” —Extract from Preface. 


KNOTS UNTIED 


BEING PLAIN STATEMENTS ON DISPUTED POINTS 
IN RELIGION FROM AN EVANGELICAL STANDPOINT 


Edited by Rev. C. SYDNEY CARTER, M.A., Litt. D. 
TWENTY-NINTH EDITION 


Cloth, gold lettered, 3s. 6d. 
Half leather, gilt top, 6s. 
Half leather, gilt edges, 7s. 6d. 
Whole morocco, gilt edges, I5s. 
Contents.—Evangelical Religion—One Way of Salvation—Private Judgment 
—The Thirty-nine Articles—Baptism—Regeneration—The Lord’s Supper— 


The Real Presence— The Church—The Priest — Worship — The Sabbath— 
Pharisees and Sadducees—Fallibility of Ministers—Apostolic Fears—Idolatry. 


Is All Scripture Inspired >—An attempt to answer the question with 
quotations from eminent theologians. Fourth edition. Paper boards. ts. 


The Lessons of English Church History. 
An argument against Romanism and Ritualism. With an Appendix 
of Opinions of English Divines on the Lord’s Supper. Paper cover, 9d. 


The First Bishop of Liverpool. Biographical Sketch of Bishop J. C. Ryle. 
By W. F. Machray. With the Bishop’s Farewell Letter to the Diocese 
of Liverpool. Paper cover, 4d. 


ALL PRICES ARE NET 


Home Truths. 
Being the Miscellaneous Writings of Bishop J. C. Ryle. Series 1. 
Cloth gilt, 2s. 


CHURCH REFORM. By Bishop J.C. Ryle. 
Being Papers on the subject, Revised and Enlarged, with full Notes 
and Introduction. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt, 2s. 6d. 


ContTENnTS.—Introduction—Our Dioceses and  Bishops—Convocation— 
Cathedral Reform—Public Worship—The Ministerial Office—The Position of 
the Laity—Practical Conclusions. 


Visitation Charges, Diocesan Addresses, and Special Sermons. Six Triennial 
Charges of the Bishop, and Ten Special Addresses and Sermons. Dark 
blue cloth, gilt, 3s. 6d. 


The Two Bears. And other Sermons for Children. Second Edition, 
Duxeen binding, ts. 6d. 


John Hooper, Bishop and Martyr. Paper cover, 6d. 
George Whitefield. His Life and Times. Crown 8vo, 6d. 
Arehbishop Laud, and His Times. Paper wrapper, 6d. 


“ Light from Old Times ’’ Reprints, No.1. The reign of James II and the 
Trial of the Seven Bishops. Foreword by Bishop Knox. 6d. 


“ Light from Old Times *’ Reprints, No. 2. Bishops Latimer and Ridley. Their 
Lives and their Writings and Martyrdom. Illustrated, 9d. 


“« Light from Old Times ’’ Reprints, No. 3. Why were our English Reformers 
Burned ? Foreword by Bishop E. A. Knox. Portrait of Archbishop 


Cranmer. 4d. 


SMALL BOOKS ON IMPORTANT SUBJECTS 
BY BISHOP J. ©. RYLE. Price 6d. each. 


Thoughts on Baptism. ; 
For the Use of Churchmen and Candidates for Confirmation. 


Thoughts on the Supper of the Lord. 
For Present and Future Communicants. 


Thoughts on Prayer. Second Edition. 
Thoughts on the Prayer-Book and on Church and Dissent. Second Edition. 


Thoughts for Parents. c 
Being a few words on Proverbs xxii. 6. 


ALL PRICES ARE NET 


SMALL BOOKS ON IMPORTANT SUBJECTS 
(Continued). Price 6d. each. . 


Thoughts and Questions about Holiness. ; 
Its Nature, and Questionable Modern Ideas examined. 


Thoughts on Worldly Conformity. 
What it is, and What it is not, 


Thoughts about Sunday. 
Its Institution, Privileges and Due Observance. 


Questions and Answers about the Lord’s Supper. : ; 
Being a Manual of Information for Churchmen about Points in 
Dispute at the present day. 

This work consists of fifty questions and answers about the Lord’s Supper. Itcontains, 
in addition, some valuable extracts from the writings of standard British divines. 


‘Higher Criticism. 
Thoughts on Modern Theories about the Old Testament. 


Thoughts for Young Men. 
From many Points of View (Titus ii. 6). Eighth Edition. Cloth, rs. 6d. 
With gilt edges, 2s. 


ContEents.—Dangers of Young Men—General Counsels—Special Rules—Exhortation. 


Thoughts on Immortality. 
With some Remarks on “ Eternal Hope,’ and Kindred Subjects. 
Cloth, od. 


Simplicity in Preaching. 
A few short Hints on a great Subject. Cloth, od. 


Regeneration. 
What it means; its Necessity, Marks and Evidences, and Objections 
met. With copious Notes. 104 pp.fcap. 8vo. Fifth Edition. Cloth, rs. 


Assurance (2 Timothy iv. 6, 7, 8). The full-grown faith of the believer. 
With Notes and Extracts from English Divines. Ninth Edition, 


Paper boards, ts. 
TRACTS 


What is Evangelical Religion ? 2d 

Rights and Duties of Lay Churchman, 2d. 
What is Real Happiness. 2d. 

What do we owe to the Reformation ? 2d. 
What is Written about the Lord’s Supper? 2d. 
The Holy Communion. 2d. 

The Thirty-Nine Articles. 2d. 


Library Bureau Cat, No. 1187.24 


CINCINNATI BIBLE COLLEGE & SEM. LIBRARY 


Timi 


230.342 R994k 
Ac. #6522 
Bole, Jenc: 


Knots untied 


—— el 


LHE CINCINNATI BIBLHRE *. 


230.342 R994k 
| Ac. #6522 
1 ee ee 


Knots untied 


— 


SEMINARY LIBRARY, 


o>) hho 
tote mates 
eld pg 
ee ie , Z 


ay Ty 


2 


op 
aa ee 
Ae 


Z 
Sa 


wees 


— 
x 
> to Fore 08, 
rs girs 
Sa 
os 

ae 


aaeh oto 


i ate 


